

PRACTICAL
ADVICE
TO
EMIGRANTS
1834








EMIGRATION.
PRACTICAL ADVICE
TO
EMIGRANTS,
ON
ALL POINTS CONNECTED WITH THEIR
COMFORT AND ECONOMY,
FROM MAKING CHOICE OF A SHIP,
TO
SETTLING ON AND CROPPING A FARM.
_____" Avaunt the fear
" Of numbers, crowded on their native soil,
“To the prevention of all healthful growth
“Through mutual injury !”- Wordsworth.
SECOND EDITION.
LONDON:
EFFINGHAM WILSON, ROYAL EXCHANGE.
MDCCCXXXIV.


LONDON:
PRINTED BY JOSEPH RICKER BY,
SUER BOURN LANE.


INTRODUCTION.
The following Letters appeared recently in
the columns of an influential Morning Journal.
Having excited considerable notice, and the
writer having also received, through the Editor,
a knowledge that they have been favourably
spoken of by those whose judgment is flattering
to him, he has been induced again to bring
them before the public.
In so doing he has referred more particularly
to the “ British American Land Company” which,
since these Letters first appeared, has assumed
in some degree that importance in public esti-
mation to which it is so justly entitled.
The establishment of this Company he consi-
ders, from his knowledge of the country, as likely
b 2


to produce the best effects upon the population
and feelings of the Lower Province of Canada,
and at the same time to conduce to the advantage
of the colony, the mother country, and the capi-
talists engaged in its promotion.
No attempts at fine writing or learned disquisi-
tions are indulged in; but the writer has endea-
voured to give sound practical information, in lan-
guage adapted to the classes of persons he ad-
dresses.
In the hope of being useful to his countrymen,
he commits this unpretending work to the public.
London, March 1834.


THE
EDITOR'S INTRODUCTORY NOTICE.
DECEMBER 20, 1833.
It has justly been remarked by an acute and statesman-
like politician,* that “ Britain exists all over the world in
“ her colonies. These alone give her the means of advanc-
“ ing her industry and opulence for ages to come. They
“ are portions of her territory more valuable than if joined
“to her island. The sense of distance is destroyed by
“ her command of ships, whilst that very distance serves
“as the feeder of her commerce and marine.” An able
and valuable correspondent, well acquainted with ‘ Emi-
gration' in principle and detail, having furnished us with
observations and practical information on the subject,
as applicable to our colonies in British America, we
think that we shall be performing a pleasant duty to
our readers by giving circulation to his valuable recom-
mendations, assuring them that they may be most im-
plicitly depended on.
When it is considered that the direct emigration to
Canada alone , within the last three years, amounts to
134,970 persons, and that the market for British manu-
factures has increased in a greater ratio than the popula-
tion ; that during the last year 1,035 British vessels,
amounting to 279,704 tons, navigated by 12,243 sea-
• Rush.


men, have entered the port of Quebec alone—this asto-
nishing trade having increased from 69 vessels and
tons, navigated by seamen, in the year 1805;
and also, that a million and a half of value in British ma-
nufactures has paid duties of import; and that all this
immense and rapidly increased business is connected with
the dearest and best interests of our country, we feel
happy in being the means of communicating the know-
ledge, and seconding the recommendations of the writer.
We have no hesitation in asserting, that the recent sale
of government lands in the province of Lower Canada to
the “ British American Land Company ,” is a wise and
politic measure, from which we augur much good to the
province, as well as individual and national advantage.
It is a measure that ought to have been carried into effect
long since, and simultaneously with the establishment of
the Canada Company. In no part of the British colo-
nics has British capital, intelligence and feeling, been
more required. And in no part of them is more to be ex-
pected in the way of valuable return. The information
of our correspondent tending particularly to this province,
of which so little has been written and so little is known,
we presume to be an additional reason for giving it pub-
licity.
It is not with the wish or intention of recommending or
exciting to Emigration, but to point out to those who have
determined to make the trial, to what quarters, and in
what manner it may be done with the least trouble, the
least expense, and with the greatest prospect of success,
combining at the same time individual happiness with
national benefit.


“ We require
The discipline of virtue ; order else
Cannot subsist, nor confidence, nor peace.
Duties arising out of good possessed,
And prudent caution needful to avert
Impending evil, equally require
That the whole people shall be taught and trained.
So shall licentiousness and black resolve
Be rooted out, and virtuous babits take
Their place ; and genuine piety descend,
Like an inheritance, from age to age.
With such foundations laid, avaunt the fear
Of numbers crowded on their native soil,
To the prevention of all healthful growth
Through mutual injury ! Rather in the law
Of increase and the mandate from above
Rejoice ! —and ye have special cause for joy.
For, as the element of air affords
An easy passage to the industrious bees
Fraught with their burdens ; and a way as smooth
For those ordained to take their sounding flight
From the thronged hive, and settle where they list
In fresh abodes, their labour to renew;
So the wide waters , open to the power ,
The will , the instincts , and appointed needs
Of Britain , do invite her to cast off
Her swarms; and in succession send them forth
Bound to establish new communities
On every shore whose aspect favours hope,
Or bold adventure; promising to skill
And perseverance, their deserved reward.
Change, wide, and deep, and silently performed,
This land shall witness ; and as days roll on,
Earth’s universal frame shall feel the effect
Even till the smallest habitable rock.
Beaten by lonely billows, hear the songs
Of harmonized society, and bloom
With civil arts, that send their fragrance forth,
A grateful tribute to all-ruling Heaven.
From culture, unexclusively bestowed
On Albion’s noble race in freedom born,
Expect these mighty issues : from the pains
And faithful care of unambitious schools,
Instructing simple childhood’s ready ear,
Thence look for these magnificent results !
Vast the circumference of hope and ye
Arc at its centre , British lawgivers ;
Ah ! sleep not there in shame ! ”
The Exclusion, Book fl, Wsrdswortlis Poetical Works.— Ed. 1827. vo’. v. p. • *3.


British American Land Company,
OFFICE, No. 3, BARGE YARD, BUCKLERSBURY.
Capital £300,000, in Shares of £5O each ; with power to
double the same. Of these Shares 1000 reserved for the Colonies
were immediately taken up at Montreal.
Interest at the rate of Four per cent, per annum to be paid to
the Shareholders on the amount of Instalments paid in.
This Company, formed for the purchase of, and the opening,
improving, selling, and settling Lands in the different Pro-
vinces of .British America, has obtained a Royal (farter , limit-
ing the liability ot Shareholders, and an Act of Parliament is
now in progress.
His Majesty’s Government has recently sold 846,000 Acres of
Land in the Eastern Townships and the St. Francis territory,
in the Province of Lower Canada; upon which the Company
is now about to commence its first operations.
DIRECTORS.
George Richard Robinson, Esq. M. P. Governor.
Nathaniel Gould, Esq. Deputy Governor.
Patrick Maxwell Stewart, Esq. M. P.
John P. Boileau, Jun. Esq.
William Petrie Craueurd, Esq.
Alexander Gillespie, Jun. Esq.
William Inglis, Esq.
John Kirkland, Esq.
Edward Wheler Mills, Esq.
John Shuter, Esq.
Lewis Stride, Esq.
James Wilson, Esq.
AUDITORS.
Robert Carter, Esq.
William Pemberton, Esq.
George Wildes, Esq.
Commissioners appointed at Montreal,
The Hon. Peter M‘Gill.
The Hon. George Mofeatt.
Chief Clerk , Mr. John Reid.
Agents will be appointed in all the Out-ports to give information and
advice to Emigrants, Settlers, and others.


EMIGRATION.
LETTER I.
Mr. Editor,
The press has teemed with works upon Emigra-
tion, from the penny pamphlet to the ponderous
quarto; but too frequently they have been mere
compilations and copies of each other, written
more for the purpose of gain than of giving in-
formation. Perhaps “LawrieTodd,”and “Picken’s
Canada,” contain the most real information; but
they are not exactly the kind of books required,
and are more costly than suits the pockets of that
class of persons who are most desirous of obtain-
ing it. To such, Pickering’s “Emigrant’s Guide,”
published by E. Wilson, is the most suitable; his
observations show that they were made upon the
spot, and as they extend from Philadelphia to
Buffalo in the United States, and throughout the
Upper Province of Canada; they embrace a
comparison not only of the soils and prices of
lands and systems of agriculture of the two coun-
tries, but what is of fully equal importance, of


the taxes, political and religious institutions, and
prices of produce; showing from thence the su-
perior advantages which our colonies offer to the
settler and farmer of small means. Of the Back-
woodsman (that inimitable little work) it must be
confessed, that it appears to have been written
for, and is most particularly applicable to the
lands belonging to the Canada Company in the
Upper Province.
The present observations are intended to give,
in as condensed a manner as possible, practical in-
formation and useful advice to persons intending
to emigrate, from the first step of choosing a pas-
sage-vessel to the last of settling themselves on a
farm. So much has been already written upon
the Upper Province, and the extraordinary pro-
gress it has made in population and wealth, render
it unnecessary to say more, that it is my inten-
tion to refer more particularly to the Lower
Province; although, upon most subjects, the hints
and information given will apply to emigration to
British America in general.
My more particular acquaintance with the
“ Lower Province ,” and the operations of the
u British American Land Company ,” now about
to commence in the eastern townships of that pro-
vince, (a section of country within one hundred
miles of Quebec and Montreal, though at present
unknown to the British emigrant,) which offers,
at the same time, the most beautiful scenery, by


far the healthiest climate , and a soil as rich and
productive as any in America, has determined me
to refer more particularly to it; in the hope that
my countrymen may at least be induced to visi
that district before they determine to proceed
onwards eight hundred or one thousand miles,
perhaps, into the United States, from which they
may possibly, after all, retrograde to these eastern
townships , and St. Francis territory , in the more
immediate neighbourhood of the shipping ports of
Quebec and Montreal; where cattle, butter, and
cheese, are always in demand, and where a readier
and better market will be found, whether to sell
the other produce of their farms, or purchase the
imported necessaries for their families.
It is with pleasure I can add, that the establish-
ment of this Company is in perfect accordance
with the general feeling of the population of that
part of the province in which its first operations
are to be carried into effect; and fortunately, too,
among its directors will be found men intimately
connected with the Canadas, and deeply interested
in their welfare.
As it is not my intention to write an elaborate
treatise on Emigration, a history of our North
American Provinces, or a detailed account of the
boundaries and situations of the various districts
and townships; neither shall I fill up your
columns with learned discussions on the emigra-
tions of the nations of antiquity. They were too
frequently undertaken upon a large scale, either


arising from necessity or from oppression ; for the
purposes of conquest, agranclizement, or revenge ;
carrying in their train war, bloodshed, rapine,
and extermination; whilst, in these days, emigra-
tion is the otfspring of peace, by which the great
first law of nature, “ Go forth and multiply, and
replenish the earth,” is fulfilled; and the arts
and sciences, the decencies and the comforts, the
moralities and religion of the highest state of ci-
vilization, are extended throughout the world.
Without referring to any of the writings of
the ancients, I shall at once descend to modern
times, and begin by quoting the writings of the
celebrated JPUliani Penn, the founder of Pennsyl-
vania ; now one of, if not the first state in the
American Union, for population, wealth, and
science. It is not a great many years since he
said, “ I deny the vulgar opinion that plantations
“ (colonies) weaken England; they have manifest-
“ly enriched and strengthened her. The industry
“ °f those who go into a foreign plantation is worth
“ more than if they stayed at home. Again :
“ England furnishes them with clothes, household
u stuff, tools, and the like necessaries, and in
“ grater quantities than at home their condition
“ could have needed, or they could have bought,
“ an d they often return with riches to England ;
“ one m this capacity being able to buy out twenty
“ of what he himself was when he went out.”
I)r. Johnson , of more recent memory, writes,
“ lhat the settlement of colonies, the establish


“ merit of those in security whose misfortunes have
“ made their country no longer pleasing or safe,
“ the acquisition of property without injury to any,
“ the appropriation of the waste and luxuriant
“ bounties of nature, and the enjoyment of those
“ gifts which Heaven has scattered upon regions
“ uncultivated and unoccupied, cannot be consi-
“ dered without giving rise to a great number of
“ pleasing ideas, and bewildering the imagination
“ in delightful prospects.”
Buonaparte, in the height of his continental
conquests, cried out for “ ships, colonies , and com-
merce,” as the only means by which he could de-
stroy Great Britain, subdue the world, and make
France the “ great nation” he fondly hoped.
Prince Talleyrand , who has lived to see France
lose all her colonies in the East and West Indies,
and again establish them on the coast of Africa,*
has remarked that, with the ancient governments,
the predominant policy appears to have been, that
“ bodies politic ought to reserve to themselves
“ the means of placing to advantage, at a dis-
“ tance, a superabundance of citizens, who may,
“ from time to time, threaten their tranquillity.”
“It belongs to our enlightened navigators,”
says he, “ to tell the government what are the
* The French Government has lately decided to hold their
conquests in Algiers in perpetuity, and a large sum has been
voted for that purpose. To what a strange result has our
bombardment of Algiers tended ! The loss of our Carrying
Trade in the Mediterranean, and the establishment of a
French Colony in Africa.


“places where anew country, a salubrious climate,
“a fruitful soil invite our industry, and promise ns
“ richer advantages. In commercial and manufac-
<£ taring states, from the inequality of fortunes, and
“ the fluctuations in trade and population to which
“ such states are liable, colonies would seem to be
“peculiarly necessary.”
Mr. Sherriffe , a very intelligent gentleman, re-
siding at By-town, in Upper Canada, says, “ that
“ emigration is now a movement of the people in-
“ dependent of their rulers ; still its object is legi-
“ timate. Although it may be difficult, perhaps
“impossible, to give it altogether a systematic
“ form, yet it may be for the interests of the coun-
“ try to regulate and encourage it.
“ From various causes the fields of employment
“ have become crowded, and the labouring classes
“ are looking about for more room, and better
“ means of subsistence ; emigration, under such an
“ impulse, resembles a stream from an overflowing
“ fountain, which may be guided, but cannot be
“ stopped.”
And the last, not least, Lord Brougham, has
written with his usual perspicuity : “ That the
“ possession of remote territories, understocked
“ with capital and hands, is the only thing which
“ can secure to the population of a country those
“ advantages derived from an easy outlet, or pros-
“ pect of an outlet, to those persons who may be
“ill provided for it at home.”
With the opinions of these mentally illustrious


personages, I shall conclude this communication,
intending in my next to point out the real and
moral value of these colonies to the mother
country.
LETTER II.
Mr. Editor,
Feeling that the independent tone upon which
your useful journal is conducted, enables you to
cast aside the garb of party spirit, and direct
your vast power solely for the benefit of every
class of this great community; with increasing
confidence, and the humble hope of their utility,
I now continue my further remarks upon the
value of colonies to their mother country.
It cannot be denied, that these mighty wings
of the empire, by which she soared to her proud
pre-eminence, will still prove of inconceivable
value to her; nay, it must be admitted that they
will enable the parent state to continue to exalt
herself for ages, in true political supremacy, over
the surrounding nations of Europe. But woe to
those who, imbued with the abstract theories and
conceits of the new school of “ Political Econo-
my,” should succeed in clipping these wings; for


" England never did, nor ever shall.
Fall at the proud loot of a conqueror.
Until she first did help to wound herself."
Our versatile and talented Lord Chancellor , in
the earlier course of his rapid yet brilliant career,
has further truly observed, that “ The colonial
“ trade is a trade always increasing and capable of
“ indefinite augmentation, while the other branches
“of traffic are of necessity on the wane :itis as
“ beneficial as a home trade ; and is, when rightly
“ understood, a branch of the home trade. Capital
“ taken from the mother country to her colonies is
“ not withdrawn from the empire ;it continues to
“ support the productive part of the community,
“ and besides being an integral though remote part
“ of the state, it directly employs part of the home
“ plantation transplanted thither.
‘‘ The capital invested in the colonial agricul-
“ ture encourages the agriculture of the mother
“ country, as much as the capital employed in the
“ different branches of domestic agriculture encou-
“ rage the operations of each other.
“It is a narrow policy which would consider
“ colonies as separate and subservient appendages
“ of the state ; they are integral parts of the empire
“ which is happy enough to possess them, and they
“ ought to be considered as such. The sophistries
“ and cavils which political sceptics and innovators
“ have founded, partly on a misconception of the
“ theory, and partly on a misstatement of facts,


“ tend directly to a degradation of the system in
“ t^ e e 7 es of superficial reasoners, and may ulti-
u mately renew a state of things from which the
“ unassisted efforts of national heroism may be
“ altogether unable to redeem any one community.
“ The attacks of these men have, moreover, been
“ inconsistent and contradictory.”
Here, then, we start with a conviction that
colonies are a blessing to those nations which are
happy enough to possess them ; that they ought
to be considered as integral , though remote parts
of the empire; that they are useful as an outlet
for the surplus population, as well as the unfortu-
nate —the laborious poor, or the over-enterprising
part of the community ; —that when the produc-
tions of the colonists are protected, the labour of
the settlers and emigrants from the mother coun-
try is worth more, both to themselves and the
parent state, and their consumption of her manu-
factures greater, than if they had stayed at home ;
that the markets they establish for her manufac
tures are continually increasing ones; and that
the sophistries and cavils of political sceptics and
innovators, who aim at a degradation of the colo-
nial system of Great Britain, are the result of
misconception and misstatement, and alike dis-
heartening to national heroism, and dangerous to
national existence. Moreover, that though the
' O
tide of emigration cannot be stopped, it may be
directed.
c


Perhaps the most valuable axiom of the whole
is, that colonies should he considered as integral
parts of the state; for upon this hangs the justice
and necessity of protection in the way of discri-
minating duties. With our colonies alone can
we have such a reciprocity in trade as shall be
beneficial to both, but in which the benefits are
evidently greater to the advantage of the mother
country; as in exchange for timber, ashes, grain,
and furs of Canada , being all either raw articles
or manufactures of the lowest grade, England
sends manufactures in the highest state of finish;
and the extent of her export is limited entirely
by the value of the imports received from the
colony. It is, indeed, a fact, that the exports
from Great Britain greatly exceed the return of
imports , the balance being in debts owing to the
British merchants, and acting as a capital and
circulating medium in Canada.
What the Illinois , Ohio, Indiana , and the im-
mense tracts of wild hack-lands are to the United
States of America , the colonies of Great Britain
might he to the mother country. It is hardly to be
doubted, that with such institutions, and such a
population as has been congregated in the United
States, nothing short of the safety-valve offered
by the wild lands and the back-woods has pre-
served them hitherto in union.
At the present moment, such a hint may not
be altogether foreign to circumstances at home.


Flint, a very competent authority, says, “ that
forty years ago there was not a settlement west
of the Ohio river; in 1832, the state of Ohio
alone contained a million of inhabitants; and the
aggregate of Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, and Missouri,
is not less than 1,700,000, and, if we add the
states of Alabama, Louisiana, and Mississippi,
2,350,000!” Whilst America finds such benefit
from the settlement of wild lands, which, from
their distance over-land, or along the tortuous
routes of rivers, are further in effect from Wash-
ington, New York, or Boston, than many parts of
our own colonies from London, is it not the duty of
our Governors to assist, or, at any rate, promote,
the views and exertions of those who are willing
to take the details of such labours off their hands
as are comprised in opening the forest and con-
verting the silent wild into the cheerful glebe ?
America, as a term, is too frequently applied
to the whole continent; and even with some
otherwise well-informed men, the difference be-
tween the United States and the British posses-
sions is scarcely known: it is not therefore very
sui prising, that among the lower classes, America
and Canada should be considered synonymous
terms. The difference is nevertheless great; and
it ought to be a matter of consideration to a person
leaving Great Britain for America , whether he
is about to transplant himself among a people of
different laws and customs, with whom he can
c 2


have little common feeling; or among his own
countrymen, where he will find laws to which he
has been accustomed, possibly persons with whom
he has been acquainted, manners and customs in
which he can sympathise, and reminiscences of
the glorious achievements of his countrymen in
which he can partake.
It is indeed true, that many emigrants in-
tending to proceed to Canada have taken their
passages in vessels for America , but have been
carried (in perfect ignorance) by the sordid owner
and unfeeling master, to New York, Philadelphia,
New Brunswick, or Nova Scotia; and have there
been landed, and left to take their chance. For-
tunately, a tax upon passengers, or a bond from
the captain, has of late been exacted at New
\ ork, which has had the effect of stopping this
most cruel traffic to a certain extent.
With regard to cheapness of living and high
rate of wages, absence of game laws, stamp duties,
tithes and poor-rates, the United States and the
British Provinces may be pretty much upon a
par: but if, in addition to all this, the emigrant
can be assured (as is the fact) that he can, in our
own colonies , find land cheaper, taxes so much less
as to be considered next to nothing, and a decided
protection upon his labour and agricultural pro-
duce in the home market, it might be thought
that but little consideration would be required to
decide upon the land of his adoption ; and this


will apply to any of our colonies. Thus wheat
imported ( /ro/» our colonies pays 6d. per quarter
duty, when the average is above 675., and ss. per
quarter when below; whilst from the United
States , at that price, it would be 18$. B d. per quar-
ter. And in the same way, upon the imported
manufactures of Great Britain necessary to the
American as well as the Canadian settler, the
duty may be 30 or 40 per cent, in the United
States, whilst it is only 2J per cent, in Canada :
hence English articles costing 102/. 10$. in Ca-
nada, will probably, at the same period, be worth
140/. in the States. So all British manufactures
pay 50 s. upon the value of 100/., in Canada;
whilst in the United States, (up to this time,) cot-
ton manufactures pay from 25/. to 75/., according
to description ; hardware, 25/. to 30/. per cent.;
iron, according to quality and manufacture, from
10/. to 200/.; leather goods from 30/. to 100/.;
manufactures of linen, 25/. ; silk goods, 51. to
40/. ; and woollen goods, from 10/. to 7 51. per
cent, of value.
The cheap government, and the liberal institu-
tions of America, have been so long the themes
of adulation amongst certain sets of politicians,
for party purposes, that it is no easy task to con-
vince the world generally that this vain boasting
is a mere delusion, when brought into comparison
with our own colonial governments. The offspring
institutions of the parent country are naturally
engrafted upon British colonies in every quarter


ef the globe. The freedom which clothes the
sons of Albion fixes upon every honest man the
national character of independence in all our
colonies. In the United States, the wealthiest
and the proudest Englishman must be a denizen
for a continuity of five years, and must abjure
allegiance to all other governments, and the
British in particular, before he can hold heritable
property, or claim the common distinction be-
tween a negro and a white, hut by courtesy.
With this contrast of national liberty, Mr. Editor,
I conclude until the next opportunity ; and am
yours most impartially.
LETTER III.
Mr. Editor,
In my last communication I maintained that
the British colonies should be looked upon as
integral parts (however distant they be) of the
British Empire: and being convinced of their
advantage and security to the mother country,
I presume that their welfare should occupy no
mean place in the attention of those who govern
us. The advantages of settling in a country
whose laws are assimilated to our own; where
the political institutions are the most liberal in
existence among civilized nations; where reli


gious liberty is enjoyed in its fullest extent; taxa-
tion scarcely known; and education within the
means of the poorest; protection to its produce
afforded ; and the lowest rate of duties on British
manufactures imposed, need not be further en-
forced.
In the North American colonies particularly,
the elective franchise, that boasted palladium of
British liberty, is even greatly more favoured
than in England under the Reform Bill.
Among other differences between the United
States and Canada, that of slavery, existing in
the country claiming to itself the title of a “ free
country;” and which, whilst it has declared that
“ all men are horn free ,” that “ all men are
created equal,” and that “ all citizens have equal
rights,” continues to perpetuate slavery in some
of its states ; and even when free to stigmatize
them on account of their colour in every possible
way, refusing to eat at the same table, to kneel
at the same altar, or fight in the same ranks, —
would point out the reason of a preference to our
own colonies. No “ man of colour,” unless for
three years a citizen of the state, and for one year
seized and possessed of a freehold estate of the
value of 250 dollars, and who shall have been
rated and paid a tax thereon, shall be entitled to
vote for a member of the assembly.
It is highly to the glory of Great Britain that
the mere approach to her soil improves the con-
dition of the “ man of colour,” whether nigger


or free; thus whilst in some of the States of the
Union, Education is prohibited to Slaves, and in
others Free Blacks are not permitted to settle
Without security to the state for their good beha-
viour, the writer remembers to have received
the Sacrament at the Episcopal Church at Ro-
chester (near the boundary) at the same time and
on the same cushion as a black woman.
A good deal of misconception also prevails
wit regard to the comparative rate of wages
Canada and the United States. It is not uncom-
mon to hear it stated that Gs„ 75., or Bs. currency
per diem is given in the United States, whilst at
the same time from half a dollar to a dollar, or
, GC " 10 ss ' 18 B' lven “ wages in Canada. This
mwever, is a delusion ; for whilst the dollar is
ivided into Bs. in the state of New York, which
ount s one side of the St. Lawrence, it is divided
into five only in Canada; therefore, in truth, a
°w York shilling is e.qual to 7 id., and one in
ahiax or Canada currency to 1 2d.; or, in other
words ss. m Canada is the same as Bs-. in the
mted States. And it is too common for agents
and Others to quote the rates of wages in cur-
rency, and the necessaries of lifem sterling money ■
thu ; Statm S the value of labour at B*. per day
an expenses ot living at 3s. C d. ; in which the
cnnerence, though startling, is in reality only 8d -
am aware that in stating such facts, and
drawing such conclusions in favour of our own
colonies, that I run some risk of having my state


ments doubted, my intentions perverted, and rny
reasons ridiculed; but I can assert, that in the
United States the citizens are not so overdone
with morbid sentimentality as to recoil from can-
vassing the institutions of England and her colo-
nies ; neither are they backward in taking advan-
tage of the liberality of our colonial governments ;
for a very great proportion of the store-keepers,
tavern-keepers, methodist parsons, and newspa-
per editors in our North American colonies are
of Yankee origin.
I shall preface my further remarks by repeat-
ing, that it is not by any means my intention to
induce Emigration; but since it is now generally
admitted that under some circumstances it can-
not be checked, I shall merely point out the class
of persons to whom it is likely to be beneficial,
and the mode by w 7 hich it is likely to be accom-
plished, when once decided upon, in the simplest,
most economical, and most comfortable manner.
It has been thought by many, (even by some
persons of great intelligence,) that every emigrant
should go out with the intention of becoming at
once a landowner and farmer; as if, where daily
labour-wages are high, a poor man could at once
command the labour of others. This is contrary
to common sense, and would confine emigration
to a class who have not in general the greatest
desire or the necessity to leave their own coun-
try ; whereas the fact that labour is high (so high
indeed as to enable a sober, patient, and indus


trious man to live upon half his earnings) is
sufficient to show, that persons without the means
of purchasing and stocking a farm, (upon which
they must live a twelvemonth before they earn
sufficient for their wants,) may emigrate with
confidence ; certain that with prudence they will,
ere long, by labouring for individuals or on public
works, become equal or superior to many who
purchased and settled too early, with an insuf-
ficient capital and too little experience. This is,
indeed, a matter of every-day observation ;as the
few discontented, grumbling “ne’er do weels,”
who return home in disgust, are men without either
judgment or energy, who having entered on farms
deficient both in means and knowledge, have
reaped the wages of their folly, and endeavour to
make others as unhappy as themselves.
During the whole of the last season employ-
ment might have been found for 100,000 able-
bodied men in either of the two provinces of
Canada, at a rate of wages compared with the
expense of living, that would have formed a
happy contrast to the wages, or roundsmen s pay,
in our own agricultural districts. Besides, every
emigrant is not, and many never can be, fit to be-
come a settler or farmer ; “ hewers of wood and
drawers of water” there must be; men who, so
far from being able to manage a farm, are unable
to regulate their own conduct, economize their
daily earnings, or “provide for a rainy day.”
Thus, then, a labouring man who can transport


himself to Quebec or Montreal\ with a feiv pounds
in his jyocket , need not be afraid of bettering his
condition. To those, however, who have been
brought up to agricultural pursuits, and who,
with a knowledge of the rudiments of farming,
can command from 50/. to 500/. Canada offers
every advantage that the most sanguine person
can rationally hope for. A capital too small to
stock a farm at home, will afford ample and suffi-
cient means both to purchase and stock one there ;
and the mode of commencing such an undertak-
ing (so different from taking a cultivated farm in
England) will be hereafter pointed out.
It may be asked by some, who and what are the
description of persons to whom Emigration offers
advantages worth making a trial at once expen-
sive and trying to the feelings ? I acknowledge,
and every one should consider that some sacrifice
is required ; but at all times some present sacrifice
must be made to ensure future success. I would
say then, that all who have health and strength,
and are desirous of a change, (for a hundred dif-
ferent reasons,) whether to break from bad society ;
to discontinue an unprofitable business, without
seeing any chance of a better; to improve his
condition from an under-paid agricultural la-
bourer, or a small unproductive farm; active
and intelligent mechanics of every description,
whether in wood, iron, stone, or leather, who,
though not skilful enough to get the best wages
at home, are sufficiently so for a new country ;


all such men are sure of doing well, if they allow
themselves a fair chance, by avoiding the be-
setting and besotting sin of drunkenness, alike
destructive to the energies of body and mind.
The retired officer, either of the army or navy,
whose half-pay and small patrimony is insufficient
to enable him to make his way among his own
class at home—all those, in fact, who, with
limited means, and the reality or anticipation of
large families, find a difficulty in “getting along,”
will, by the aid of a farm, find not only a pleasing
occupation, but the means of bringing up a family
in comfort and independence. Those who are
doing tolerably well in their occupation, or have
fair hopes of doing better, should not think of
giving up their present comforts. To the idle, the
dissipated, the drunken, the aged, the physician,
the lawyer, the young gentleman from behind the
counter, the clerk from the desk of the merchant,
or the self-sufficient livery-servant; emigration (at
least to Canada ) offers but little prospect of
benefit. Still it must be confessed that, after all,
individual character has, perhaps, more to do with
fitness than previous education. Of this all may
be certain, that resolution, persevering industry,
frugality, and temperance are necessary for suc-
cess ; without these qualities, ennui, disappoint-
ment and disgust will ruin the prospects of those
who by previous education would seem most fitting
to secure it.
Wild land must always be considered as a raw


material , upon which much labour is required to
bringr it into the state of a manufactured article of
value in the market, or beneficial for the mainte-
nance of a family.
As there are no poor-laws, there is no system
for the support of the idle ; but as “ the labourer
is ” there “ worthy of his hire;' so “he that
worketh not, neither shall he eat."
Infant Emigration has been a good deal talked
of lately by some well-intentioned and well-in-
formed men; and a society has recently been
formed to promote it. Although it is generally
considered that in these colonies a child at seven
or eight years of age is able to earn his own share
of the family meals, I cannot say that I am
competent to give advice on this subject. It
might be made a most efficient mode for the adop-
tion of parishes to keep down poor-rates, and
the increase of surplus labourers; but I think
that, till a system is adopted by which the colo-
nies shall be prepared for their reception, but
little good could result, and possibly considerable
evil would ensue. Should any society set to
work in earnest upon this business, there is little
doubt that the different Land Companies would
readily enter into arrangements to facilitate the
operation.
In Nova Scotia it has been very strongly ad-
vocated by those who are most likely to be judges
of the matter. From what has been here said on
Infant Emigration, it is clear that a man need not


fear that a wife and children will be a burden to
him in our North American colonies; indeed, it
is to the sober married man that emigration offers
fai the most comfort and happiness. Education
is general, and cheap enough to be within the
reach of the poorest settler; whilst the children
will be brought up in such habits as are most likely
to be useful to them in after life. The wife,
however, should be “ one of the right sort.”
Pauper emigration , conducted systematically
by parishes, has engrossed much attention from
country magistrates ; and we know not why those
of the metropolis have not considered it equally
worth their consideration. To the colonies, how-
ever, the difference between a healthy agricul-
tural addition, and the mental and bodily morbid
and disgusting refuse of a metropolis is great;
and for the benefit of our British American colo-
nies, we should hope that the filthy demoralized
paupers of London will never find their way
thither. Some of our Australian colonies would
seem to offer better situations.
The experiments made by Lord Egremont and
the Petworth committee upon Parish Emigration,
have proved highly satisfactory; and to parish
officers, clergymen, and magistrates, the little
pamphlets published for that society by Longman
and Co. are strongly recommended.
The committee has concluded, that for 15/. a
single man, and for 55/. 10.?. a man, his wife,
and three children, can be settled in Upper Ca


nada. It may therefore be fairly considered, that
the same may be settled on the nearer lands of
the “British American Land Company for 12/.
and £SO/.
When a person has resolved to emigrate, let
him turn into money most of his goods and
chatties ; as probably there will be but little worth
the trouble of carrying with him, or adapted to
his new operations in the country of his future
adoption. As to furniture, let him not attempt
to take any : if a labourer, and he have a few
common tools, and the port of embarkation is
near at hand, he may take his spade, and a few
other implements ; if he be a mechanic, let him,
of course, take the articles necessary for the
working of his craft.
As much of an emigrant’s comfort, during his
passage across the Atlantic, depends upon his
prudential arrangements beforehand, and particu-
larly with regard to selecting a ship, in my next
I purpose to point out the means by which they
best may be attained; and, until then,
I am, yours, &c.
LETTER IV.
Mr. Editor,
I concluded my last communication by stating
that much of an emigrant’s comfort during his


passage across the Atlantic depends upon his
prudential arrangements beforehand, and parti-
cularly with regard to selecting a ship : on this
occasion I shall address my hints more particu-
larly to that class of emigrants who go out as
steerage-passengers.
A small portion of common sense, and a little
careful inquiry amongst the numerous respectable
mercantile firms trading with the Canadas , will
soon dictate to this class of emigrants the simple
necessaries to their comfort during their passage ;
and those who have children will do well to at-
tend to the minutiae of these details. Mr. Bu-
chanan, the government agent, gives the following
list of stores for a family of five persons : —4B
stone of potatoes, 2~ cwt. of oatmeal or flour,
56 lbs. of ship biscuit, 20 lbs. of butter in a keg,
one gallon of molasses, 20 lbs. of bacon, 50 lbs.
of herrings in a keg, one gallon of spirits, and
some vinegar. These will cost about 51. in Scot-
land or Ireland, in England ll. —A few pounds
of tea or coffee, and 28 lbs. of sugar, will be
an additional comfort to the females ; where there
are children, a mother’s discretion will point out
a few more simple necessaries. The spirits taken
out should only be used medicinally ; every la-
bouring man must learn to do without liquor.
The time of passage will prove to him the possi-
bility of so doing; and where indulgence in them
has commenced, it may happily prove the means
of breaking so pernicious a habit.


If he have the means, (without cramping his
future resources,) let him take a little bottled ale
or porter, one or two bottles of port wine to a
family, some rice, a few oranges, (if sound,) a
seed-cake or two are pleasant and useful to
children after sickness; also two or three bottles
of milk boiled with sugar, and close corked. A
net to boil potatoes in: some cord and string, a
hammer and turnscrew, with a few nails and
screws, may possibly be found very useful on the
passage. As passengers provide their own bed-
ding, blankets will not be forgotten ; nor a little
crockery and tin-ware.
Cleanliness on shipboard is truly next to godli-
ness ; it should be strictly attended to by the
passengers, and rigidly enforced by the captain.
Every passenger is of course supposed to be upon
deck as much as the weather will permit; and at
all times strictly under the control of the captain,
from whose authority there is no appeal; and it
is absolutely necessary for the comfort and the
security of all on board, as well as of the ship and
cargo, that such should be the case. Among
passengers, civility, good humour, and a strict
attention to the decencies of society, are requisite
to make the time pass pleasantly ; there are fre-
quent opportunities of performing kind offices to
each other.
As there is much unoccupied time on ship-
board, women should take with them some linen
D


to make up, or materials for knitting, and a few
books, if they possess any; by no means forgetting
that book of books, the Bible. Not only on the
passage will it be found a valuable acquisition;
but, under the various trying circumstances and
situations of after-life, it will be found a com-
fort.
It is not usual to pay much attention to the
Sabbath beyond clean dressing and cautious
behaviour; but a hint to the captain would fre-
quently cause some of its duties to be attended
to. Sailors are in general very attentive to the
offices of religion when feelingly and decently
performed, even by their own officers or a re-
spectable passenger.
It is a matter for the emigrant’s choice, whether
he pays for his berth only, and lay in his own sea-
stock of provisions, or agrees for ship’s rations.
In point of expense, there is but little difference
for the same food; but the full seaman’s diet is
more than is absolutely necessary for a steerage
passenger. For comfort, it is undoubtedly best
to agree with the captain to be found every thing.
And some, respectable brokers will contract, for a
certain sum, to provide passage and food on ship-
board, and internal travelling and eating expenses
to Quebec, Montreal, Lennoxville, or York.
The more money and fewer incumbrances the
settler has upon his arrival the better: it is a
rare judgment that can anticipate in England


what experience proves to be useful abroad. Cer-
tain writers would lead one to believe that theo-
retical fancies are superior to practical expe-
rience ; but I would recommend the candidate
for comfort and independence in our colonies, to
leave all his political economy behind him,
whether adopted from the bold but ever chang-
ing anti-providental assertions of Malthus, the
anti-colonial principles of McCulloch, or the more
interesting and insinuating, but not less system-
bound writings of a Martineau.*
I would advise generally, in the first instances,
that the mode of labour, of husbandry, and of
domestic economy, should be copied from the
practice of those among whom he has settled :
experience will teach him when to alter them to
advantage.
D 2
* The abstract theories of Political Economy may be en-
tertaining and satisfactory amusement in the closet of the
philosopher or at the professor’s lecture, where the battle is
fought on blank paper and the result at the will of the player;
but, unfortunately, the natural divisions, inequalities, and
climates of countries, and the artificial state of every
existing society, whether arising from those causes or the
long-established customs, religions, and habits of nations,
present an impenetrable barrier to the cosmopolitan ideas of
the new school. In every country, as in every family, there
are sufficient reasons for deviating in the economy of the
establishment from our neighbours: many things may be
sound sense, though bad philosophy.
An Utopia must be found for the exercise of this “most
certain science."


If he come to London to take his passage, let
him be careful, in the first instance, to place such
money as he intends to emigrate with in the most
respectable hands ; it is far better than attempting
to carry it with him : and Messrs. Smith, Payne,
and Smith ; Thomas Wilson and Company ; the
Canada Company , the British American Land
Company , or the most wealthy houses in the
Canada trade, will, on receipt of his money, give
an order for it either in Quebec or Montreal,
or York, in Upper Canada. The disposing of
money early in this manner is a matter of greater
importance than is seen at first sight. London is
full of sharpers, who are dexterous in the art of
finding out countrymen with money in their
pockets, and getting it from them ; besides which,
the allurements of London are of themselves suf-
ficiently dangerous for countrymen who are ramb-
ling about without employment.
Having disposed of his money in safe keeping,
and thought over all matters connected with leav-
ing the country of his birth and the ties of kindred
and connexions, and coolly determined to look
out for a new settlement, the intending emigrant
should turn his attention to the best mode of
crossing; for on his fortunate or unfortunate
choice of a vessel or captain depends thirty-five
to forty days of comfort or annoyance :it behoves
him, therefore, to look well to this matter. It is
not always the nearest port, or the cheapest offer
that proves the best to select. In most of the


small sea-port towns of the United Kingdom the
vessels are small, and the competition not suf-
ficient to ensure civility, low rates, and good ac-
commodation.
The first precaution of an emigrant is to avoid
being “caught and booked’’ by the numerous
land-sharks, disreputable brokers, shipowners, or
the “ tourers,” who infest all our ports and docks,
as well as not to be taken in by deceptive ship-
bills, advertising their vessels of 300, 400, or 500
tons burden , whilst perhaps they are little more
than 200, 280, or 320 tons register. Apply,
then, to the most respectable agents, brokers, or
owners; and if the accommodations of the vessel
satisfy as to height of cabin or between decks,
and cleanliness, let him strike a bargain as soon
as he can, and prefer the earliest sailing vessel in
the spring; taking especial care, however, to de-
mand from the captain or broker an engagement
in “black and white,” as to the time of the ship’s
sailing, with an agreement, that for every day
that she is detained, he shall live on board at the
ship’s expense, or be allowed J. 9. or I*. Gd. a day
to provide himself; and also, that on arriving at
her port of discharge, he shall be allowed forty-
eight hours, if necessary, for landing. If the
ship carry a surgeon, so much the better ; but a
few shillings laid out in simple opening medicines
can never be ill spent. A little such medicine a
day or two previous to the ship’s sailing, or whilst
going down the river, is often found useful.


Ships for passengers are generally fitted up
for two classes ; namely, cabin and steerage ; the
first having convenient, berths or “ state-rooms'
for families, and being provisioned by the captain :
in regular traders both the accommodation and
fare are excellent, and the rate from 20/. to 30/.
each. Families may, however, make better
bargains.
The steerage, or ’tween decks, is fitted up with
small berths for single persons, or larger spaces
for families, the passage-money being generally
from 3/. to 4/. 4s. ; children under fourteen years
of age are charged one-half; under seven, one-
third, and those under twelve months, free. The
charge for provisions is generally from 3/. to 4/.
for the voyage.
Some vessels of large size and superior build,
which have been heretofore in the West or East
India trade, are fitted up for “ intermediate ” pas-
sengers, who take separate state-rooms, by special
agreement, and find their own provisions: this is
by far the most comfortable and inexpensive
mode of transport for respectable families, to
whom economy is a paramount object, and the
separation from steerage passengers a desirable
attainment.
Although the number of passengers which a
vessel is allowed to take is settled by law, there
is a great difference in the accommodation afforded
in vessels of the same tonnage. By the 9th of
George IV., chap. 21, ships are not allowed to


carry passengers unless of the height of five feet
and-a-half between decks; nor are more than
three passengers for every four tons register per-
mitted. There must be on board at least fifty
gallons of water, fifty pounds of bread, biscuit,
oatmeal, or bread-stuff, for each passenger; and
no part of the vessel’s cargo, stores, or provi-
sions to be carried between decks, if the full com-
plement of passengers is taken on board. Masters
who land passengers at any other port than the
one for which the vessel is destined, unless with
their own consent, are subject to a penalty of
20/. for each, recoverable by summary process
before two justices of the peace, in any of th e North
American colon ies. #
For the first ten days after getting to sea, lands-
men generally suffer a good deal from sickness,
and during its continuance a very little food is
consumed ; weak brandy and water, and occa-
sionally (as it abates) a glass of porter, are very
grateful to the stomach. The sea-sickness once
over, all is health, appetite, and spirits. The vari-
ous incidents of the voyage are very amusing; to
most of the passengers they are even exciting as
* His Majesty’s Governmi& is at this time about to in-
troduce some alterations into the Passenger Act; such as
allowing only two persons to five tons register, a fresh ar-
rangement as regards children, an increase of stores, and the
attendance of a surgeon. These changes will cause an ad-
vance in the charge of passage-money ; and much of the
alteration is considered unnecessary, and likely to drive the
passenger business into the hands ot the Americans.


well as entertaining. After being fifteen or twenty
days out, the ship will probably be within the
influence of the gulf-stream, which will be known
by the large quantity of weed floating in the
current and the increased heat and moisture of
the atmosphere ; a little cooling medicine, or a
jug of salt water, may not be amiss. The ship is
by this time “ half-seas over.”
If going to Quebec, you will now be approach-
ing the banks of Newfoundland; and should the
wind be lulled, will perhaps be catching your own
cod-fish,* and observing occasionally the slimy
track or the spouting of a whale. In fact, when
once the sickness is over, there is much to break
the ennui and apparent sameness of the situation ;
—the rising and setting sun ; the brilliancy of the
night ; falling-stars ; the sporting of schools
(shoals) of bonitos; the occasional falling on
board of a flying fish; land birds settling on the
* There is much diversity of opinion respecting the form-
ation of these banks ; some, among others, Mr. Finch, a pro-
fessor of Geology, who lectured on that Science in many parts
of America, supposes them to be mud carried and deposited
there by the gulf stream in its circuitous sweep. For my own
part, I think it as probable that the banks are the cause of the
sweep, as the sweep the cause of the banks. I have seen
specimens of stones and fragments of rock fished up from the
great bank. The same gentleman says that the cod wait on
the banks until the clams and other shell-fish open their shells,
and then thrusting in their noses, suck them up. I have
several shells taken at different times out of the stomachs of
cod-fish, some recently swallowed, entire , with the fish alive,
and others in various stages of decomposition.


rigging so fatigued as to be caught by the sailors;
dolphins racing as it were with the 'vessel, leaving
their long blue tracks behind them; the brilliant
and beautiful, but yet unexplained phosphoric
phenomena of the waves ; the various curious and
minute animals found in the gulf-weed, when
fished up and shaken into a basin of water, all
these afford pleasure to the inquiring mind.
In the Gulf of St. Lawrence numbers of ‘ fin-
ners,’ a small species of whale, will be seen spout-
ing about in every direction. Perhaps some of
the white porpoises, said to be peculiar to the
gulf, will also play around the vessel.
Moore, with more of the licence of a poet than
the truth of a naturalist, has described these salt
water inhabitants as sporting in the fresh waters
and falls of Niagara !
On sailing up the St. Lawrence the passenger
will be struck with the magnitude of the river,
the boldness of the mountain scenery on the north
shore, and the novelty of the forest-covered land-
scape. The land on this side is the property of
the Crown, and called the King's Posts: it was
found so at the conquest, and is let out as hunt-
ing grounds. Strange to say, it has for some
time been leased to an American; and it is said
that the furs collected, instead of being sent to
Quebec and shipped for England, are smuggled
on board American vessels from Boston; the
Lessee harrowing the means from British mer-
chants, on the expectation of receiving his furs


in payment! The climate on either side is ex-
tremely severe, and the crops very uncertain, till
within 200 miles of Quebec; then the white
houses and long barns of the French inhabit-
tants will be seen almost within hailing dis-
tance of each other. These humble but in-
teresting mansions are the abodes of peace and
content; a more decent, respectable, and happy
peasantry than the “ habitans” of lower Canada
does not exist, when placed away beyond the
reach of agitators. Attached to each house will
be observed an oven erected of stones, and co-
vered with the mud of the St. Lawrence, under
which will probably be found the pig-stye. Here
and there a lofty pole, surmounted with a tin
cock, shews the residence of the officer of militia ;
for even here a “little brief authority” is valued.
To those properties close to the water will gene-
rally be observed weirs of basket-work stretching
along the shore, to catch various fish and eels at
the falling of the tide : occasionally large quan-
tities are thus taken.
Among the many customs peculiar to these
people is one so singular, and at the same time
so amiable, that the writer cannot resist intro-
ducing it to his readers. It is the custom of
“ donneing that is, of parents, as they become
advanced in life, giving up possession of their
house and property to their family, on condition
of receiving, during the remainder of their life,
board and lodging, a cabriolet to take them to and


from church, a certain small allowance of pocket-
money, &c. &c. This is done by a regular deed,
in which all the little necessaries and comforts
to which they have been accustomed are enume-
rated ; and on neglect of such provision, the
young people may be legally sued ; seldom, how-
ever, does such a necessity exist. With much
satisfaction does the writer recollect the hospitality
he received from the family of Richard Rioux,
Seigneur of that “ ilk,” when, in a dismal stormy
night, he was taken out of an open boat, near
Trois Pistoles, by a cart and horse driven to the
boat by the son of the Seigneur, well conversant
with the rocks and holes; in which boat the party
must otherwise have “ borne the pelting of the
pitiless storm,” till daylight. These good people
had been awoke by the firing of our signal-gun,
and instantly prepared fire, food, and lodging for
the benighted strangers, whom they were pre-
paring to rescue.
Pleasant is the reminiscence of the respect paid
to the aged couple who occupied the best apart-
ment of the house, (all of which opened out of
the hall or general family-room,) and still more
the placid look of these “ lodgers’ in their own
house, and among their own children, going
“ down the hill” till they should “ lig thegither at
the foot,” like John Anderson and his wife.
The Catholic churches will now appear at
every distance of six miles, the steeples covered


with tin reflecting with brilliancy the rays of the
sun ; for such is the clearness of a Canadian
atmosphere that the tin does not rust, and, till
lately, it was the universal covering of large
buildings in Quebec and Montreal, in consequence
of being fire-proof, and is decidedly a safeguard
as shutters.
On approaching Quebec, the emigrant should
arrange his trunks and baggage in as small
compass as possible, and get them in order for
going on shore. If the ship goes to a wharf,
the landing is of course a matter of ease, par-
ticularly if they wait for a proper period of
the tide to bring the ship’s side even with the
wharf. If, on the contrary, she anchor in the
stream, settlers should not be in a hurry to get
into the boats:—numerous are the accidents
arising from a foolish haste on these occa-
sions. Especial care should also be taken that
his property of all kinds is in the same boat,
or left on board properly marked, under the care
of some known friend. Should the weather be
wet, foggy, or stormy, remain on board till it
changes. Passengers are allowed to remain on
board forty-eight hours; and this is not unfre-
quently a great advantage, as they may land,
make inquiries, and arrange for further proceed-
ings, and then return and sleep on board. Captains
are bound to land passengers, and their luggage
free of expense.
The same caution as to bad characters and


sharpers, and the allurements of vice, is quite
as requisite on landing at Quebec as in London
before embarking.
The man of small means should never forget
the necessity of husbanding his resources, and of
avoiding all unnecessary expense, particularly
that of riotous and sensual indulgences. It may
be necessary to caution some persons against the
too free use of the water of the St. Lawrence ; it
is particularly pleasant to the palate, after sea-
allowance, but apt to disagree with strangers.
Those in had health , or suffering from accident,
will find immediate care and attention at the
Emigrant Hospital at Quebec or Montreal;
institutions that do honour to the colony.
If English money is required to be exchanged,
they should go either to the banks or most re-
spectable merchants, and trust not the proffered
kindness of some port-lounger, or cunning tavern-
keeper. Money in Canada is reckoned in what
is called Halifax currency , 9s. sterling being
worth 10s. currency; the dollar is the coin in
general circulation, and is reckoned as 55.; besides
this greater value of money in currency than
sterling, there is an exchange when bills of any
amount are drawn on Great Britain , varying
with circumstances, but during the last two years
it has averaged about eight per cent; so that 100/.
lodged in England, if drawn for in Canada , would
command 120/. currency in Canada. The gold
sovereign is therefore worth from 235. 6d. to 245.


£.
s.
d.
The dollar in the currency of New York and North
Carolina, is divided into ....
0
8
0
Of Philadelphia ....
0
7
6
Of Boston ........
0
6
0
A guinea in the currency of New York is worth.
1
17
4
Of Philadelphia
1
15
0
Of Boston ........
1
8
0
there. To bring sterling money into Halifax
currency add one-ninth, and Halifax currency
into sterling money , subtract one-tenth.
In the United States the currency is somewhat
perplexing to a stranger, and difficult to reckon
when passing from one state to another. The
money of accounts is the dollar divided into
cents. The dollar is worth 4s. 6d. British ster-
ling at par, but the rate of exchange varies : at
present it is at 1 per cent, discount, * that is, 991.
sterling in New York is worth 100/. in England !
A cent is just about a halfpenny.
To reduce sterling money into dollars and
cents at par, multiply the sterling money by
forty dollars, and divide by nine pounds, and vice
versa. Gold is not used in circulation, but ge-
* The exchange from New York on England has for
several years averaged nearly 10 per cent, premium. At this
time great distress exists throughout the Union, by the arbi-
trary and impolitic interference of the government with the
banking business of the country, and exchange has fallen
as above noticed : the effect produced has had certain influ-
ence upon Canada, which had recently recovered from a
shock produced by the uncalled for meddling of our home
government with the banking affairs of the colony.


nerally taken as bullion, at the price of the clay.
When it is necessary to carry even a small
amount in dollars, it is very troublesome, 100
dollars being only 2 21. 10s. sterling. With kind
attention to travellers, this trouble is seldom
imposed; as the principal and almost universal
circulating medium is paper, which is issued from
the numerous banks in three various values, from
one dollar upwards. The multiplicity of banks,
and the different degrees of credit they enjoy
with the public, has made it necessary to keep a
kind of price-current of their value, which is
published weekly, and their different notes taken
or refused at certain discounts, from one per cent,
upwards. It is by no means uncommon to see
notices at the money-changers, or by advertise-
ment : “ Notes of broken banks bought here.”
Indeed it has been said, that this system has
been found so profitable as to induce some banks
to break and buy up their own notes.
In Canada this confusion and risk happily does
not exist, though the system of reckoning money
by the New York currency of eight shillings to
the dollar appears to be almost established in the
Upper Province.
It cannot be too strongly recommended to emi-
grants, whether they intend to gain their liveli-
hood by labour, or to become farmers by pur-
chasing lands from the Canada Company , or
the British American Land Company , not to
lengthen their stay at Quebec or Montreal one


hour beyond the time necessary to make proper
enquiries and gain sufficient knowledge to reach
the place of their destination. A greater error
cannot be committed than wasting time, which
necessarily implicates loss of money, at sea-ports
on arrival. Farming land, in the vicinity of such
places, is never likely to be found at a price worth
purchasing, and any wild lands are sure to be in
reality worthless.
In the Lower Province there is plenty of em-
ployment for the hard-working labourer, either
upon public or private works, and many find it
immediately on their arrival at Quebec. There
can be no doubt but that the “ British American
Land Company " will have constant employment,
at good wages, in road-making; * a kind of labour
simple and easy for the newly arrived emigrant, re-
quiring little learning. By the earnings from such
employment, he may shortly be enabled to pur-
chase land of the Company, by paying a small
portion of the purchase-money down, with a
credit of four, five, or six years for the remainder,
by instalments.
To the agent of this Company we would there-
fore recommend application.
I shall continue these remarks in my next.
* Road-making in America is frequently performed by
horses dragging a very large kind of plough-shovel, from the
sides of the road to the centre; thus making a high crown to
the road from which the water runs.


LETTER V.
Mr. Editor,
In resuming my remarks upon the best course for
emigrants to pursue on their arrival out in Ca-
nada, I must forcibly endeavour to impress upon
all new settlers the value of time; not a moment
must be lost; every exertion must be made to
avert the curse and misery of idleness, and the
mind must be fully and resolutely bent on pur-
suing a course of severe labour and some priva-
tion, increased perhaps by the novelty of his
situation and the absence of his accustomed com-
panions ; but he may be assured that in the end
he will meet his reward in plenty, comfort, and
independence.
The opinions which some persons have formed
of the state of Canada, as to its rudeness and the
infancy of its civilization, are so singularly absurd
that it may not be trespassing too much upon the
nature and object of this publication to remark,
that Canada, particularly the lower province, has
not been neglectful of the general interests of
humanity, nor of the advantage ol cultivating
the arts and sciences; the following lists, to
which additions are making annually, will show
E


that there is field enough for the employment of
the mind in this comparatively new country.
Some of these institutions merit particular
notice, which cannot be given in so condensed a
work as the present; among these the Literary
Society of Quebec, and the M'Gill College, and
Natural History of Montreal.
Quebec.
College of Quebec.
Royal Institution for the Advancement of Learning.
National School Society.
District School Society.
British and Canadian School Society.
Quebec Library.
Quebec Garrison Library.
Literary and Historical Society.
Society for the Encouragement of Arts and Sciences.
Mechanics’ Institute.
Medical Society.
Christian Knowledge Society.
Wesleyan Methodist Missionary Society.
Agricultural Society.
Hotel Dieu, or General Hospital,
Emigrants’ Society.
Benevolent Society.
Friendly Society.
Charitable Institution.
Female Compassionate Society
Society of Friends of Ireland.
Jail Association.
Temperance Society.
Savings’ Bank.
Masonic Lodges.
Trinity House.


Fire Society.
Quebec Fire Insurance.
Quebec Bank.
Committee of Trade.
Montreal.
M'Gill’s College for the various Branches of Learning.
College of Montreal.
National Society.
Union School.
Grammar School.
British and Canadian School.
Sunday School Society.
Infant School Society.
Montreal Library.
Advocates’ Library,
Eclectic Library.
Society for the Promotion of Education and Industry.
Ladies' Society for the same.
House of Industry Society #
Christian Knowledge Society.
Bible Society.
Religious Tract Society.
Ladies’ Bible Association.
Glasgow Society, for Promoting Religious Instruction
amongst Scotch Settlers.
Domestic Missionary Society.
Wesleyan Missionary Society.
Medical Institution,
Agricultural Society.
Horticultural Society.
Mechanics’ Institute.
Natural History Society.
Temperance Society.
Savings’ Bank.
Friends of Ireland Society.
E 2


Montreal General Hospital.
Hibernian Benevolent Society.
Orphan Asylum.
Masonic Lodges.
Montreal Bank,
Committee of Trade.
Inland Insurance Company.
Fox Hunt and Jockey Club!
If, from the recommendations of competent
advisers or the settlement of friends, the emi-
grant determines to make his way to Upper
Canada , he should address himself to A. C. Bu-
chanan, Esq., the chief government agent for
emigrants, or to the office of the Catiada Com-
pany ; and having ascertained from them par-
ticulars of the situation, soil, and value of the
lands, in the district he has fixed upon, he will,
of course, proceed up the river St. Lawrence , or
the Ottawa , according to the district he is going
to, or the recommendation those gentlemen may
point out.
Travelling in Canada is generally in steam
boats; the accommodation is excellent, the speed
great, and the rates low. They are well managed,
and are steered from the fore-part of the vessel.
The paddle-wheels are also worked forward inde-
pendent of each other, so that one can be worked
forward and the other backward, thus enabling
the boat to turn on its own centre. However, the
progress upwards from Montreal cannot be
accomplished without occasionally landing and


By the St. Lawrence.
Rates have generally been
for
Miles.
Miles.
Deck Passengers.
Quebec to Cape Sante
3
to Port Neuf .
5
35
to St, Anne
25
60
to Three Rivers
30
90
Steam Boat
to Riviere de Loup
21
111
-
Five Shillings.
to Berthier, and
\24
135
W. H. or Sorel
to LAssomption
24
159
to Montreal . .
21
180-
to La Chine . .
9
189 Stage
to Cascades . .
24
213 Steam-boat
to Coteau du Lac
16
229 Stage
to Cornwall . .
41
270 Steam-boat
Five
to Osnabruck
14
284 Stage
Shillings.
to Williamsburg
10
294
do.
to Matilda
12
306
do.
to Prescott
14
320
do.
to Maitland
7
327 Steam-boat
to Brockville
5
332
do.
to Gananoque
32
364
do.
* Five
Shillings.
to Kingston
28
392
do.
to York . .
180
572
do
to Burlington Bay
to Niagara
45
48
617
665
do.
do.
Irregular.
passing the rapids or other impediments. Up the
Ottawa to By-town this takes place once only, but
oftener on the St. Lawrence to York.
The following are the distances and routes to
various parts of Upper Canada, where the Canada
Company have their lands for sale, the mode of
travelling, and rates generally charged ;


From Buffalo to Green
Bay.
Miles.
Miles.
Quebec to Buffalo about
680
680^.
Buffalo to Dunkirk
40
720
Dunkirk to Portland
14
734
Portland to Erie
30
764
Erie to Ashtabula .
40
804
Ashtabula to G. River
33
837
- Steam-boats.
G. River to Cleveland
30
867
Cleveland to Sandusky .
60
927
Rates uncertain.
Sandusky to Detroit
80
1007
Detroit to Fort Gratiot
80
1087
Fort Gratiot to Micbelmackinack
200
1287
Michelmackinack to Green Bay
300
1587.
By the River Ottawa.
Miles.
Quebec to Montreal 180
St. Eustache . .201
St. Andrews . 225
Miles.
Quebec to Chatham . • 228
Grenville . . 240
Petite Nation . .270
By-town . * 303
Through the Rideau Canal to Kingston 438
The Canada Company’s agents contract for
forwarding parties intending to settle on their
lands at rates considerably lower than an indivi-
dual can accomplish : the same will, no doubt, be
done by the “ British American Band Company
If, however, he intends fixing himself in the
nearer settlements of the Boiver Province , where
as good and perhaps cheaper wild lands are to be
found, he can address himself, as before, either


to Mr. Buchanan, or to the office of the “British
Ame?'ican Land Company and will then be in-
formed how to reach the Eastern Townships and
St Francis Territory by the shortest roads and
the best conveyance; either by striking off from
Quebec, following the Craig road to Ireland, and
then by the Shipton or Dudswell road to the
river St. Francis; or which at the present time is
perhaps more desirable, by taking the steam-boat
to Three Rivers, and thence proceeding by land
along the banks of the St. Francis to Sherbrooke;
the expense being, from Quebec to Sherbrooke
by the latter route about 3/. currency for a family
of six persons, and the time required three days.
But it is highly probable that arrangements
may have been made by the agents of the
“British American Land Company ” for some
shorter and cheaper conveyance ; Lord Aylmer
having had a new route surveyed, by which he
contemplates a much shorter communication with
the Company’s purchase the greater part of the
distance being water-conveyance through a con-
tinuation of small rivers and lakes.
To show the varied surface of the district sur-
veyed, and its aptness for Mill sites, it is suffi-
cient to mention that Black Lake, towards its
centre, is 153 feet above the St. Lawrance : the
waters running out of this Lake, at each end;
after traversing the country both find their way
into the St. Lawrance.
* See Report, in the Appendix.


From Quebec to the “British American Land
Company's" lots and the St. Francis territory may
be stated as from 80 to 100 miles ; but there is every
reason to believe that shorter routes and navigable
rivers will have been marked out by the Company’s
surveyors, for opening better and shorter communi-
cations. Upon these works the labourer can meet
with ready employment at good wages, whereby
he may save enough means, and gain sufficient
knowledge of the habits and agriculture of the
country, to enable him to purchase and settle on
lands under the Company. Wages are generally
agreed for with food also. They vary in these dis-
tricts from 12/. to 36/. by the year, or 255. to 30.?.
per month, exclusive of board, the rate depending
upon character, habits, experience, and abilities:
the newly-arrived emigrant of course, from his
unacquaintance with the mode of working, getting
the low wages ; and the active, laborious, and ex-
perienced workmen from the United States, or
the older British emigrants, securing the higher.
Daily wages about 3,?. 9d. a day, during the best
part of the season, without board, and 2s. 6d.
with board.
To those who have the means of purchasing
and settling at once, either on wild lands or im-
proved farms of the company, Sherbrooke is a
good point to make, as they may immediately
take means for selecting such farms or a location
upon a lot of wild land not far distant from
already occupied farms.


At present the distances into the Eastern
'Townships and the St. Francis Territory are as
follows;
Miles.
From Quebec to Leeds . , .33
Ireland . • . 50
Dudswell . . 85
Eaton , . ,105
Clifton , ,115
Hereford , 132
From Quebec to Richmond . .100
Lennoxville . .102
Sherbrooke . .105
From Three Rivers to Drummond ville . 44
Melbourne . 68
Sherbrooke . 95
Lennoxville . 98
Compton , .108
Hatley . .115
Stanstead . 129
From Montreal to Chambly , 13
St. Cesaire , 33
Abbotsford . 39
Granby . , 43
Shefford , . 62
Georgeville . 91
Stanstead . .104
From Montreal to Richmond . 92
Lennoxville . 100
Having fixed upon a lot, let him examine it
with care as to soil, situation, and timber; and


weigh well its localities before purchasing; and
then be equally careful in deciding upon the
situation of his house, which ought to be upon a
dry soil and elevated situation; as near as possi-
ble also to the road or water communication, if
there be any.
A proximity to markets is not to be overlooked,
but above all, a healthy situation is to be pre-
ferred to a few miles of distance. In some parts
of the United States considered the most healthy,
it is astonishing how many days’ labour are lost
by actual sickness; and in the southern states on
the lines of canals the mortality is frightful.
Even in most parts of Upper Canada the settler
has to go through what is called a seasoning; in
other words, a few severe fits of fever and ague,
or bilious and intermitting fever; by which, al-
though life is not shortened, the constitution is
weakened, and in the aggregate a serious reduc-
tion is made in the number of his labouring days,
during the most active period of the season.
This seasoning continues till the constitution be-
comes what is called “ acclimated to the loca-
tion” Salubrity of situation should be preferred
even at some expense of fertility of soil, or prox-
imity of market. A slight elevation, if attain-
able, is highly useful in admitting a good cellar
to be dug under the floor of the house ;itis a
matter not to be forgotten.
Having provided himself with a few necessary
tools and cooking utensils, (the first consist of a


spade, an axe, a hoe, a set of harrow-teeth, and
a brush-scythe, as will be hereafter more particu-
larly noticed,) the latter, in addition to what he
may have brought with him, being what is called
a spider , or small iron pot, on long thin legs, in
which most of the processes of cooking are
performed ; he must then lay in a stock of food :
the cheapest and best will consist of salted pork,
flour, peas and beans, potatoes, and dry fish.
I would here observe, that as the settler cannot
depend upon a crop the first season, he must be
able in some manner to provide otherwise for his
family, at least until September of the following
year. A method will hereafter be pointed out
whereby this may be partially or wholly effected,
provided the emigrant should have continued
health, of which in the eastern townships and St.
Francis territory he need not be afraid.
He must now (unless able to hire a man for a
few days) get the assistance of some one or more
of his neighbours to put up a log-home, having
previously dug out a cellar to be under the floor,
for preserving roots, &c., from the frost: the
house will be covered with bark, which is taken
from the adjacent trees: two stout men will effec-
tually do this in two weeks, so as to render the
family comfortable.
In the mean time, (should they be found upon
the spot,) a few poles erected and covered with
bark, which can be done in half a day, will screen
them from rain and sun, and will be found suffi


cient protection in that climate for the short time
required.
If an emigrant has no spare cash to pay for this
labour, he will work an equal number of days for
his neighbour; a system of reciprocity not unusual,
and exceedingly valuable.
An oven of stone and clay, which he will find
a common appendage to a house, can be put up
in one day by the farmer without assistance.
After his family are housed as well as circum-
stances will admit, he must, with his axe, which
will cost him Is. 6d. on the spot, (let him by no
means carry an English axe, as they are not to be
compared in material or shape to a Canadian
one,) cut info the forest with all his might and
main. In the first place, cutting down close to
the soil the small trees, and cropping the brush-
wood with a scythe made in the country, called a
brush-scythe, costing ss. The large trees are then
to be cut down as close to the soil as can be done
without much increased difficulty, in general
about three feet from the ground; the limbs must
be cut off, letting them lie as they fall: a little
observation of others will teach him to make
them fall in one direction. Sometimes the large
trees may be made to fall by cutting round the
roots, and thus pulling up the stumps. Here and
there it may be thought worth while preserving a
few trees: if this were more generally done, the
cleared country would be much improved in ap-
pearance. Many of the most fertile spots in both


the Canadas are Beaver Meadows: they have
been formed by the dams which these intelligent
animals build across small rivers or brooks; an
inundation is thus made, sometimes of immense
extent; the earthy and vegetable deposit be-
comes, when drained, the richest soil. The breed
of these animals has been destroyed in the neigh-
bourhood of settlements, in hunting them for
their valuable skins.
If the emigrant settle on his land early, say by
the Ist of June, and the summer be dry, he may
set fire to his chopping in September, which will
burn all the trunks and small timber; the large
logs should then be cut off in lengths of 12 feet,
and hauled or rolled into such heaps as may be
convenient, and burned, excepting those useful
for splitting into rails for fencing, or the purpose
of further buildings. The timber most adapted
for such purposes will easily be pointed out by
the neighbours. White pine is used for the floors
and inside work, as well as for those purposes
where it is actually wet, as water-courses, &c.
Hemlock-spruce is considered strong and durable
if used unsawn ; cedar still more so ; the two last
are particularly in request for fencing, and are
almost imperishable. It may here be mentioned,
that the same prejudice against white pine, which
is so much talked of in this country, does not
exist in Canada, where it is usually worked up
for water-courses or flumes, (or “ dolls” as they
are called,) from saw-mills, A principal cause of


its being obnoxious to dry-rot here is the rapid
manner in which building is carried on, and
houses covered in without regard to proper sea-
soning of the materials; which are immediately
covered with an impenetrable varnish of paint,
preventing the sap from drying outwards , which
therefore commences decomposing the fibre of the
wood itself.
At a public granary in the vicinity of London,
some very extensive buildings have been erected
of this very wood, which, though they have been
standing above 20 years, are still in perfect repair.
The cause of such perfection will be found in their
having remained two years exposed to the wea-
ther so as to get perfectly dry before painting *
The red pine of Canada is now universally
agreed to be the same timber as what is called
Memel or Baltic, and as good in every respect
for every purpose.
The ashes are to be saved for making potash,
unless the price is so very low that it is thought
preferable to keep them as manure for Indian
corn : they will yield on an average ten hundred
weight to an acre, and ought to be worth from
12s. Qd. to 15s. the cwt. on the spot. To convert
these ashes into salts, he will have either to pur-
* At some recent sales of wrecked cargoes of timber, on
the coast of France, the white pine actually sold at higher
prices than the red. The fact is, that the wood is singularly
valuable for those purposes to which it ought to be applied,
and its misapplication ought not to be brought as a charge
against it.


chase for 2/. each, or hire for the season at 10s
one or more large iron kettles called potash-
kettles, and can himself make some back tubs, or
purchase them at 3s. 9d. each. An American
backwoodsman would support his family of six
from the proceeds of the ashes, and save some-
thing in addition; but a European, to whom all
this is new, and to whom such apparently small
matters might be thought hardly worth notice,
could scarcely expect to do this. However, at
the worst, the proceeds would go some way to-
wards providing necessaries for the family. These
ashes are housed, or rather put into cribs made of
logs, and covered with bark ; and being thus safe,
are worked up during the autumn (or fall, as it is
called) and winter, as the emigrant may find time.
It is to be regretted that the use of soda and
other substitutes has so lowered the price of
ashes at this moment as to reduce considerably
the value of the above estimate.
I observe the following notice on ashes in my
commonplace-book when in Canada.
Pot and pearlashes are part of the staple pro-
duce of this country, but the price in England has
for a few years been so low as to offer but little
inducement for extended manufacture in situa-
tions remote from cheap transport. The great im-
provement in chemistry of late years, and the re-
duction of the duty on salt, have offered substitutes
whenever the article rises beyond a certain price.
Potash (so termed from the large pots or kettles


in which it is manufactured) is a substance found
in the ashes of all vegetables growing at a dis-
tance from the sea. It is extensively used for
many purposes in the arts and sciences, being
necessary in the making of glass, in bleaching, in
soap-making, and also in medicine, where it is
employed in many different forms, and under va-
rious modifications. It has been called at dif-
ferent times “ kali,” “vegetable alkali, See. but
is known in commerce and in the operations where
it is most abundantly used as “ potash.
Although found in the ashes of all vegetables
similarly placed beyond the influence of the sea
air, it is, nevertheless, more abundant in some
plants than others. Wormwood and some other
herbaceous plants, such as potato-tops, &c.
furnish a large proportion j next to these, the
leaves of some trees and shrubs contain it in
abundance, and after these, the different kinds of
timber of American forest trees. The following
trees give a progressive increase: maple, oak,
elm, hickory, beech.
In general the ashes of hard wood contain more
Potash than those of the softer kinds. The method
of manufacturing it is as follows : the wood or
vegetables being burnt, the ashes are collected
into large wooden vessels, called “leach-tubs,”
having moveable bottoms at a small distance
from the true bottoms, to admit a portion of
quicklime being introduced between them; the
upper or moveable bottom is placed at a small


Real
Sulphate
Muriate Insoluble
Carbonic
Acid &
Pearl Ashes .
Potass.
754
of Pot.
80
of Pot.
4
Matter.
6
Water.
308
Russian Potashes .
772
65
5
56
254
Dantzic Ashes
603
152
14
79
304
American Potashes
857
154
20
2
119
Potashes of Treves .
720
165
44
24
199
angle with the lower, in order to facilitate the
draining off the fluid. Water is then poured
upon the ashes in the tub, and after being allowed
to stand for some time to dissolve, the saline
matter is drained off by an orifice in the bottom,
A second or third portion of water, generally
hot, is now poured on, and being suffered to
stand as before, is also drained off. In this man-
ner the ablution is continued until it passes off
without taste or colour. The drained fluids are
then mixed together, and called ley, and put into
a large kettle and boiled until the water is eva-
porated. The saline mass remains in the bottom,
and is called “black salts.” In this state the
potash is mixed with a certain portion of vege-
table matter, &c., requiring a further operation to
fit it for market. The impure salts are therefore
put intoaniron pot, or kettles, subjected to a strong
heat, to melt them and burn away such impurities
as are combustible; from whence it is thrown, while
in a state of fusion, into smaller vessels, termed
“ coolers,” where it concretes into hard, solid
masses, and is packed in barrels for market. The
following table of the respective quantities of pure
potash, and foreign substances contained in a
given weight, is by the celebrated Vanquelin:
F


The quantity he used was 1,152 parts, by
which table it appears that the American article
has the greatest proportion of real potash. The
substance called “ Pear lashes” is nothing more
than the potashes as above made, refined to a cer
tain degree, by being put into vessels for the
purpose, and submitted to an intense heat until
melted. They are then thrown on iron plates,
and allowed to cool and harden. This process
burns away such vegetable matter as may remain
after the former process; it improves the colour,
and changes the appearance of the ashes, making
them white, rough, and powdery. The pearling
also diminishes the caustic property ot the pot-
ashes, and is necessary to prepare potash for some
purposes.
With this preparation the land is sufficiently
cleared and fit for the seed the following spring.
As to the stumps of the trees still standing, they
are of little impediment or hinderance to the
cropping, beyond the mere space they occupy,
the various kinds of grain growing luxuriously
between them.
In the course of the winter, seed must be pro-
vided, which is always to be found in the country.
A set of harrow-teeth must be purchased, and will
cost in the vicinity 155.; they should be driven
through a piece of timber formed from the crotch
of a small birch tree. A hoe to each effective hand
at 3s. 9 d. each, and a shovel at 45., will comprise
all the tools necessary at present. As much of


the land as will answer (and it is presumed that
a good dry spot has been selected) should be sown
with Wheat , as this is the most profitable crop.
Surface-draining is not sufficiently attended to in
general, a little care is recommended to it.
// heat should first of all be sown on the driest
ground, before the 15th of May, or as soon as the
ground becomes dry on the surface : it will re-
quire bushels of seed, costing on the spot
7s. 6d. currency the bushel. The harrow will
immediately follow, drawn by a pair of oxen ;
for the labour of which 3s. 9 d. per day will be
paid in cash or otherwise. One acre per day
may well be harrowed, which completes the pro-
cess until cutting.
This crop will be ready for harvesting in
August, when at least 20 bushels per acre may be
expected, worth 6s. 3d. per bushel: 30 or 40
bushels by no means uncommon, even whilst the
stumps are standing.
Any of the ground cleared which may be found
too wet for wheat, may be sown with oats or tur-
nips. Oats may be sown as late as the 20th of
June, but are better earlier. This crop does well
enough among the stumps, but poor watery land
should be avoided. In general, as compared with
English crops, it is very inferior; but as the wheat
is sure to monopolize the best lands, it has scarcely
a fair chance : it will yield at least thirty bushels
per acre, worth Is. 6d. each, and its harvest is
f 2


in September. The same observations apply to
Rye , avoiding clays and wet land.
One acre of the dryer ground should be re-
served for Indian corn , and another for potatoes.
These crops may be planted from the 20th of
May to the 10th of June, and potatoes even some
days later : from four to six quarts of Indian
corn will plant an acre. It suffers but little from
the stumps of trees, and thrives particularly well
where the ashes of the burned trees have been
left. The meal of this corn is much used as por-
ridge or stir-pudding, and in various other ways,
and the cob or ear is considered a dainty when
boiled green: it will produce twenty-five bushels in
September, its general value 35. 9 d. per bushel.
Potatoes are dug up in September, and are
generally worth Is. 6d. per bushel. The produce
is very large.
Barley requires a good mellow soil, but it is
by no means so desirable a crop for a settler to
attempt as wheat or other grain; neither is buck-
wheat, for which, however, the soil is generally
well adapted.
For Turnips the ground should be cleared with
more care than for some other crops : a soil too
moist for wheat or other grain will suit them, and
they will grow well among the logs ; they are
apt to be attacked by the fly, as in this country,
particularly if sown so early in the season as to
present its young leaf before any other sweet
herbage is out to divide the attraction; they


should be sown from the 15th to the 20th of June.
They will be gathered in October, yielding two
hundred bushels, worth Is. each.
It frequently happens that double the quan-
tity of each of these crops is produced, and the
prices vary considerably. From the hitherto want
of easy and cheap conveyance, more grain is
sometimes grown than a market has been found
for :in such cases it is given to the cattle and
swine; but the improvement of roads and waters of
communication will for the future ensure a certain
and constant market at Quebec and Montreal.
The quantities and prices are here given as a
fair average.
Hops grow to admiration along the river St.
Francis ; and were the duty in England moderated
upon those of colonial growth, might be advan-
tageously imported on failures at home : but ex-
cepting upon such occurrences, they could not
bear the heavy charges of inland carriage and
sea transport. Hemp might be grown to any ex-
tent, but that the expense of bracking mills is
too great for the farmers of the district to engage
in. Government too has most strangely done
away with the 'protecting duty , by which it had
been attempted and hoped that we might have
become independent of Russia for a supply.
There is no doubt that beet-roots of different
kinds might be cultivated to the greatest advan-
tage ; but at present the rearing of cattle has
not been taken up to so great an extent as


to have rendered their introduction necessary,
in a country so peculiarly adapted to grazing and
hay farming.
Pease succeed well on light dry soil, and occa-
sionally fetch a high price for export ; the same
may be said of beans. All kinds of garden ve-
getables may be raised to any extent wanted ;
but carrots and parsnips require the earth to be
loosened deeper than suits the convenience of
settlers, and are better deferred till the land is
*
prepared for such culture.
To secure the crops of wheat, corn, and oats,
a log-barn must be erected in the course of the
second summer, laid up and covered like the
house, and at about the same expense of labour.
The root crops will be buried in the earth for
preservation during the winter, except what can
be put into the small cellar under the house.
The oats and corn-fodder will be sufficient for
one or two cows during the winter. All these
are to be accomplished by a settler ol the hum-
blest means, if his heart be in the right place.
Cucumbers, melons , pumpkins , and various
kinds of gourds grow luxuriantly. In summer,
the French Canadians eat a considerable quan-
tity of cucumbers, and the pumpkins are made
into pies.
Here then, sir, I must for the present conclude,
promising that but a few further shoi t remarks
will be all that, on this interesting subject, I pur-
pose to intrude upon your useful columns.


LETTER VI.
Mr. Editor,
I preface my closing hints upon the Dest course
which emigrants to our North American colonies
should pursue, by remarking that political econo-
mists have never truly appreciated the value of
colonies to the mother country. The certain and
extensive field they open for the profitable em-
ployment of her capital and labour, at a period
of a depressing competition at home, and prohi-
bitions or excessive fiscal regulations abroad, can-
not be denied.
Even going no further than this, it must be a
shallow policy which would neglect possessions
of such inestimable value. But I venture to
maintain, that a commercial intercourse with a
colony possesses advantages over one with foreign
independent states. With the former our trade is
secure, and mutually conducive to the common in-
terests of the colony and the parent state ; whilst
the latter is almost wholly at the mercy of the policy
and caprice of foreign governments, who can at
any time prohibit the entry of our vessels and
manufactures or produce into their ports, or load
them with duties, and harass them with vexatious
regulations and port-charges, till both are con-
strained to give way to the vessels and manufac-
tures of that particular country. Reciprocity is a


fine and a fair word, but in the modem accepta-
tion of it, we must not look for its meaning in John-
son or Bailey. With these undeniable reasons
for upholding the advantages of a colonial trade,
I return to the point from whence I have di-
gressed.
I left in my last the settler at the close of his
first humble harvest, from which time he must go
on clearing as much more land as possible, and
the following spring lay down a few acres of
grass to provide for his cattle.
It has been already stated, that the soil and
climate of the eastern townships are peculiarly
favourable to grazing and hay. In a few years
the stumps left on the first clearing for agricul-
ture are easily taken out; (the period varying with
the description of tree ;) and the land then be-
comes most excellent pasture. The supply of
the markets of Montreal and Quebec with live
cattle , butter and cheese is almost exclusively
confined to the township farmers. Beef and pork
are also salted and prepared for the same places.
The raising of live-stock is considered the
most profitable branch of farming, but the Upper
Province is, by its distance from markets, debarred
of much of the benefit.
Here, as in most parts of America, salt is given
to cattle in considerable quantities. In a state
of nature, the cattle of this country have con-
stantly frequented the Salt-licks as they are called;
and the bones of all the original animals are still


found, lying under the soil in the vicinity of these
salt-springs.
If a person going upon land can purchase a
good milch cow and calf, it would be well; the
cost in spring would be 51. ; the calf should be
kept a few days in a pen, which will be an in-
ducement for the cow to come up at night. After
which the calf will be killed and eaten by the
family; the cow will run at large, having a bell
hung round her neck, and will find plenty of food
in the woods : and should no fodder be raised the
first year, she may be sold in the fall at from 3 1.
to Si. 1 5s. A pig should also be kept. This
will comprise all the stock that a farmer with
small means should attempt to keep the first
year. \
He may, shortly after this, commence raising
Horses, as it is called. A very useful description
is bred here in considerable numbers, and find a
vent in both the Canadian and United States’
markets. They are in great request in our West
India islands, and a very profitable colonial trade
in them was established, till the Americans were
allowed free trade with the islands. The justice
and wisdom of this policy has never been under-
stood by our brethren in Canada, who have cried
out loudly against this interference. Indeed, it
does not appear that the Americans had any just
grounds to expect such a boon to be extended
towards them, after the famous correspondence
of the late Mr. Canning, who, of all our minis


Years.
Value of Exports.
Dollars.
TONNAGE.
Domestic.
Foreign.
1821
11,787,200
329,503
6,523
1822
12,473,012
331,059
10,254
20,179
1823
14,109,877
326,439
1824
14,090,289
388,971
19,424
1825
13,400,964
14,157,710
376.328
14,921
182C
388,339
17,638
1827
13,750,256
337,709
21,884
1828
13,081,745
347,775
17,601
1829
11,582,840
322,418
17,722
1830
9,931,827
282,662
20,135
1831
11,646,776
305,585
43,974
1832
12,482,192
323,170
00,250
ters, appears to have most thoroughly appre-
ciated the American character.*'
The long journeys which these horses perform,
would astonish many of our horse-keeping gentry
at home. Sixty, seventy, or eighty miles a day, is
not uncommon in winter, over the snow, in a
sleigh; and their hardihood is equal to their en-
durance, as they may be found standing in the
market-places, or waiting in the open air during
* By the following Tables presented to Congress in January
last, it will appear how suddenly and extensively this Trade
fell off in 1827, and continued to decrease till 1830, and during
the three last of those years, not one English vessel carried
out American produce to the West Indies, and of consequence
nearly the whole of that Trade was inter-colonial; but since
1831, the Trade of the United States with our West India pos-
sessions has increased from less than 2000 dollars to nearly
two millions! and this, too, not at the expeuse of their other
West India Trade, for that has increased from 1830 to 1832
more than two-and-a-half millions. It must, therefore, be our
inter-colonial Trade, which has been victimised. So much for
the actual value of a Trade thought not worth caring for.
Statement exhibiting the total value of the Exports of the United
States in her Trade with the West Indies, and the Tonnage en-
gaged in that Trade departing from the United States, from the
year 1821 to the year 1832 inclnsive.3.


BRITISH WEST INDIES.
BRITISH AMERICAN COLONIES.
Year.
1821
1822
1823
1824
1825
1826
1827
1828
1829
1830
1831
1832
1833
Tonnage.
Year.
1821
1822
1823
1824
1825
1826
1827
1828
1829
1830
1831
1832
1833
Tonnage.
Value of
Exports
Exports.
265,102
452,141
1,627,967
1,771,008
1,647,046
2,110,802
690,575
28,855
6,521
1,901
1,441,253
1,689,276
1,810,494
United
States.
22,083
28,720
68,350
91,637
93,967
99,732
26,796
7,974
5,418
2,395
40,922
66,769
64,562
British.
"hm
8,654
7,567
6,120
8,120
7,775
17,903
19,357
21,773
United
States.
112,223
90,917
52,776
53,951
61,520
76,191
60,378
63,801
93,645
117,171
79,364
65,056
212,328
British.
3,169
11,846
12,023
9,130
10,139
10,103
11,145
10.658
4,409
14,267
94,776
108,671
1 247,953
from
United States.
Dollars.
2,009,791
1,897,559
1,821,469
7,757,241
2,539,964
2,588,549
2.830.674
1.674.674
2,764,909
3,786,373
4,061,838
3,614,805
4,428,185
divine service, with long icicles hanging from
their rough coats. Sheep are not raised to any
great extent, although that dire complaint, the
rot, is unknown; and wool fetches a high price,
for the domestic manufactures of the inhabitants.
Among the French habitans of the seignories, a
great part of their domestic furniture and clothing
is manufactured at home. I have indeed seen
women spinning yarn from wool, which has cost
them 2s. 6d. per lb., whilst Leeds blankets could
have been bought at 2s. per lb. The farmers say
that the women and girls must be occupied; but
they too frequently miss the most useful mode.
Bees thrive well, and a good deal of wild
honey is gathered ; it sells at about 4*d. per pound.
A grand substitute for West India sugar is found
in the juice of the maple-tree. On the first ap-
pearance of spring, when the sap begins to rise,
Statement exhibiting the total value of the Exports of the United
States, in her Trade with the British West Indies and American
Colonies, separately, and the Tonnage engaged in that Trade de-
parting from the United States, from 1821 to 1833, inclusive:


the trees are tapped, and the sap being led into
bowls, is afterwards boiled to a solid consist-
ence, and then clarified; some families make
enough for their entire consumption : it sells from
3 d. to 6d. per lb. Bouchette, in his great work,
states, that 24,329 cwts. is made in the Lower
Province alone.
Very little furniture will be absolutely neces-
sary, more than the farmer may make upon the
spot; and whatever may be found wanting, can
easily be obtained in the country. The buildings
described will answer well for five years; when
sufficient ground will have been cleared to enable
the farmer, from the profits of his produce, to
make any additional conveniences he may re-
quire : with industry and frugality, he will then
have become quite independent.
Those with sufficient means will find that a
good framed house, barn, and out-buildings, well
furnished, may be had in the townships for from
200/. to 500/., according to the situation and
state of the buildings, and the fancy of the per-
son wanting them.
In thus describing the emigrant’s manner of
proceeding, I have presumed him to be possessed
of small means only, even so low as 20/. or 25/.
clear to begin with, if sober, active, and perse-
vering.
On the other hand, should he have plenty at
command, every possible convenience in a new
country may be enjoyed, and his lands may soon


be brought into cultivation. It will be more ad-
visable for a person possessed of sufficient means
to purchase a farm already cultivated, rather than
enter upon so novel and laborious a task as sub-
jecting the forest appears to be, and no doubt
actually is, to a European on his first settlement.
With natives of the United States or Canada it
is altogether different.
There is no doubt but that such farms partially
cleared, will be found among the detached lots
for sale by the British American Band Com-
pany; and settlers should make enquiry respecting
them at the Company’s Offices in Quebec or
Montreal, or of the principal district agent in
the townships.
In the Lower Province the farmer may work
his land from the Ist of April to the Ist of No-
vember. When the snow is once down, much of
the labour of farming ceases. Winter is, however,
in this province, a very healthy season and by the
old inhabitants considered their holiday time.
When not employed in dragging timber or other
heavy articles, the moving of which is materially
assisted by the snow, they drive their hardy
horses incredible distances in sleighs, or sledges,
(as already observed,) the want of roads not being
then discernible; for the snow, once beaten into
a track, becomes by far the best and easiest road
either for horse or driver. —It is a saying among
the Canadians “ heamcoup de neige, bonne re-
colte, the more snow the better crop. In all


cold countries, the snow keeps the soil warm;
so that if it continues long, and slips away
quietly with warm weather, the young blade is
found progressing, which, without this covering,
would either not have appeared, or would have
been cut off; but independent of this, it is sup-
posed, that there is some fertilizing quality in
snow for seed sown after it has disappeared.
On the establishment of the frost , a certain
quantity of live stock should be killed; as they
will keep fresh for many weeks, even for months,
and thus save the, expense of forage.
During the severity of the season, milk may be
carried to market in sacks. And in some parts,
the French population on the banks of the St.
Lawrence break the ice, and catch astonishing
quantities of small fish, called Tommy Cods ,
which freeze the moment they are taken out of
the water, and in this state are occasionally given
as food to cattle. It may appear strange, that
after being in this frozen state for some time, on
being put into cold water and thawed they again
exhibit life.
I have said nothing about Game ; for although
there are deer, bears, wolves, foxes; martins,
moose, and squirrels in the forest, the hunting
them is very different from game sporting in
England: and although it may not be amiss
to possess a fowling-piece or a rifle, a fond-
ness for the use of one is too apt to draw
the farmer away from more useful employment.


Woodcocks and snipes are abundant in certain
situations. Pheasants and partridges (different
from ours) are found; they both roost on trees.
Quails following cultivation are beginning to
appear. Pigeons are at some seasons surprisingly
abundant; flights for miles in length darkening
the atmosphere are occasionally seen.
The rivers, and particularly the lakes, abound
with varieties of excellent Jish, most of which are
different to those of Europe. Trout, as large as
twenty or thirty pounds weight, are not uncom-
mon, and salmon is abundant. Eels too abound,
and are pickled in large quantites for winter
food.
One of the main advantages of settling in the
Lower Province is the remarkable healthiness of
the climate, though that of the Upper Province
and the United States is more pleasing. How-
ever, as the heat of the summer is greater than a
settler from England has been accustomed to, it
may be well to caution him, if he wishes to pre-
serve his health, to adhere to a rigid system o f
temperance. It will require some self-denial in a
country where whisky can be procured at 18o?.
the gallon. Working in the sun without a cover-
ing to the head is to be avoided; and should
a feeling of lassitude be experienced a little
opening medicine and a day’s rest out of the sun,
will bring him round, or prevent an illness.
It is well to have the beds or sleeping berths
well raised from the ground.


To conclude.—lt may appear strange, that
where there are so many pretensions advanced in
favour of the “ Eastern Townships of Lower
Canada a soil bearing the strictest comparison
with Upper Canada as to productions, but with a
surface far more diversified, and therefore capa-
ble of being turned to a better account; far supe-
rior as a grazing conntry, and grazing considered
the most profitable agricultural pursuit; in water
as well if not better supplied than the Upper
Province; offering more available sites for grist or
saw-mills; with taxes less, (road-duty being the
only one,) and laws the same; with register-
offices established, by which all uncertainty as to
titles of land is removed, and the certificate-fee
only one shilling; with schools in every town-
ship having the requisite population ; a surface-
soil admitting of the best roads, at a smaller ex-
pense than the Upper Province ; a distance from
Quebec, not exceeding one-sixth of the districts
to which most settlers find their way; —it may
appear strange, I say, that this fine country
should have hitherto remained unknown to our
emigrating population. The fact is, that till
within three years it may be said to have been
inaccessible.
The frontier on the river St. Lawrence has,
from the time of the occupation of the country by
the French, been constantly inhabited by their
descendants in “ seignory preserving their own
language, manners, customs, and laws; the latter


long since obsolete even in France, from whence
they were derived.* A ruling faction of these
parties in the House of Assembly is said to have
been adverse to the introduction of British emi-
grants and settlers; and perhaps, above all, the
want of roads and water-communications, as well
as of a register-office—all these matters have
presented a barrier through which the unaided
emigrant could with difficulty make his way.
The aid so long required is at length offered by
the establishment of the British American Land
Company ; all obstacles will shortly be removed,
and within a few years this fine country will re-
G
* Perhaps no country was ever so tenderly handled by its
conquerors as Lower Canada. I bear willing testimony to
the simple manners, the kind-heartedness, and the cheerful
contentedness of the habitans, or French farmers; and have
to regret that a small party of vain and factious demagogues
should have been for years endeavouring to make them be-
lieve themselves miserable and oppressed. Upon this point,
an American gentleman. Professor Silliman, of Yale College,
thus writes:—
« It is questionable whether any conquered country was
“ ever better treated by its conquerors than Canada. The peo-
“ pie were left in complete possession of their religion and re-
“ venues to support it—of their property, laws, customs, and
“ manners; and even the defending their country is without
“ expense to them ; and it is a curious fact that (unless there
u were other counterbalancing advantages) so far from being
<c a source of revenue, it is an actual charge upon the treasury
<e of the empire. It would seem as if the trouble and expense
of government was taken off their hands, and as if they were


ceive its due share of British population, British
capital, and British feeling.
The Colonial Office and the governor of
Canada have at length duly appreciated the
value of the operations of this Company, and
are desirous of giving full effect to its inten-
tions.
To this district, then, are invited those who con-
template emigration to our North American pos-
sessions ; and to them we wish the happy results
detailed in the following detached lines extracted
from a beautiful poem, called “ The Rising Vil-
lage,” written by Oliver Goldsmith, a descendant
of the author of “ The Deserted Village,” and
published in 1820, with a Preface by the Bishop
of Nova Scotia, and in imitation of his much-
“ left to enjoy their own domestic comforts without a draw-
“ back. Such is certainly the appearance of the population,
“ and it is doubtful whether our own favoured communities
“ are politically more happy; they are not exposed in a simi-
“ lar manner to poverty and the danger of starvation which
“ so often invade the English manufacturer, and which, aided
“ by their demagogues, goad them on to'every thing hut open
“ rebellion.
“ Lower Canada is a fine country, and will hereafter be-
“ come populous and powerful: especially as the British
“ and Anglo-American population shall flow in more exten-
“ sively, and impart more vigour and activity to the commu-
“ nity. The climate, notwithstanding its severity, is a good
« one, and very healthy and favourable to the freshness and
•< beauty of the human constitution. All the most important
“ comforts of life are easily and abundantly obtained.”


admired namesake, is addressed to the author’s
brother:—
“ When looking round, the lonely settler sees
His home amid a wilderness of trees;
How sinks his heart in those deep solitudes.
Where not a voice upon his ear intrudes —
Where solemn silence all the waste pervades.
Heightening the darkness of its gloomy shades;
Save where the sturdy woodman’s strokes resound.
That strew the fallen forest on the ground.
See from their heights the lofty pines descend.
And, crackling down, their ponderous lengths extend :
Soon from their boughs the curling flames arise,
Mount into air and redden all the skies;
And where the forest late its foliage spread.
The golden corn triumphant waves its head.
His perils vanquished and his fears o’ercome,
Sweet hope pourtrays a happy, peaceful home;
On every side fair prospects charm his eyes.
And future joys in every thought arise.
His humble cot, built from the neighbouring trees,
Affords protection from each chilling breeze;
His rising crops, with rich luxuriance crowned.
In waving softness shed their freshness round :
By nature nourished, by her bounty bless’d.
He looks to Heaven and lulls his cares to rest.
Where the broad firs once sheltered from the storm.
Soon, by degrees, a neighbourhood they form;
And as its bounds each circling year increase.
In social life, prosperity and peace.
New prospects rise, new objects too appear.
To add more comfort to its humble sphere.
Now in the peaceful arts of culture skilled.
See his wide barns with ample treasures filled ;
Now see his dwelling, as the year goes round.
Beyond his hopes with joy and plenty crowned.”
G 2


APPENDIX.
In addition to three Notices addressed to emigrants, and pub-
lished by authority, the writer has thought it might be desir-
able to add a few Tables, showing the nature and extent of the
trade of Canada with the mother country. In these days of
statistical learning they may, by some persons, be thought
worth notice.
ADVICE TO EMIGRANTS TO QUEBEC.
For the Information of Emigrants.
Office of His Majesty’s Chief Agent for the Superintendence
of Emigrants in Upper and Lower Canada.
Quebec, July 16, 1833.
There is nothing of more importance to emigrants, on arrival
at Quebec, than correct information on the leading points
connected with their future pursuits. Many have suffered
much by a want of caution, and by listening to the opinions
of interested, designing characters, who frequently offer their
advice unsolicited, and who are met generally about wharfs
and landing places frequented by strangers. To guard emi-
grants from falling into such errors, they should, immediately
on arrival at Quebec, proceed to the office of the chief agent
for emigrants, in Sault-au-matelot-street, Lower Town, where
every information requisite for their future guidance, in either
getting settlement on lands, or obtaining employment in Upper
or Lower Canada, will be obtained gratis. On your route
from Quebec to your destination, you will find many plans and
schemes offered to your consideration; but turn away from them,


unless you are well satisfied of the purity of the statements: on
all occasions, when you stand in need of advice, apply to the
government agents.
Emigrants are informed, that they may remain on board
ship forty-eight hours after arrival; nor can they be deprived
of any of their usual accommodations for cooking or berthing
during that period ; and the master of the ship is bound to land
.the emigrants and their baggage, free of expense, at the usual
landing places, and at seasonable hours.
Should you require to change your English money, go to
some respectable merchant, or the banks: the currency in the
Canadas is at the rate of ss. the dollar, and is called Halifax
currency:—at present the gold sovereign is worth 245. currency,
in Montreal; in New York Bs. is calculated for the dollar: hence
many are deceived, when hearing of the rates of labour, &c.: ss.
in Canada is equal to Bs. in New York; thus Bs. New York
currency is equivalent to ss. Halifax currency.
Emigrants who wish to settle in LOWER CANADA, or to
obtain employment, are informed that many desirable situations are
to be met with. Wild lands of superior quality may be obtained
by purchase, on very easy terms, from the Commissioner of
Crown-Lands, or the British American Land Company, in va-
rious townships in the province; and good farm labourers and
mechanics are much in request, particularly in the Eastern
Townships, where also many excellent situations and improved
farms may be purchased from private proprietor s. At the
Chambly Canal, many labourers will find immediate employ-
ment In every part of Upper Canada the demand for laoour-
ers and mechanics is also very great. All labouring emigrants
who reach York, and who may be in want of immediate em-
ployment, will be provided with it by the government. The
principal situations in Upper Canada, where arrangements are
made for locating emigrants, are in the Bathurst, Midland,
Newcastle, Home, London, and Western Districts. Settlers
with means, will have opportunities of purchasing crown-lands
in several parts of the province, at the monthly sales; infor-
mation of which may be obtained on application at the crown


land Office, York, or to A. B. Hawke, Esq, the government
agent for emigrants there, to whom they will apply on arrival,
for such further advice as they may require. Government
land-agents are stationed in the
Ottawa and Bathurst Districts, Mr. M‘Naughton, By-town.
Midland District, Mr. M‘Pherson, Napanee.
Township of Seymour, Major Campbell.
Newcastle District, Mr. M‘Donald, Peterborough.
Home District, Mr. Ritchie, Township of Sunnidale.
London Districts, Mr. Mount, Caradoc.
And Mr. Hy. J. Jones, Sarnia, Western District.
Wild lands and improved farms can also be purchased in almost
every district from the Canada Company, and private pro-
prietors.
Emigrants proceeding to Upper Canada above Kingston,
either by the Ottawa or St. Lawrence route, are advised to
supply themselves with provisions at Montreal, such as bread,
tea, sugar, and butter; which they will purchase cheaper,
and of better quality than along the route. They are also
particularly cautioned against the use of ardent spirits or
drinking cold river water, or lying on the banks of the river,
exposed to the night dews ; they should proceed at once from
the steam-boat at Montreal, for Lachine, eight miles above,
from whence the Durham and steam-boats start for Prescott
and By-town daily.
Emigrants will obtain from Mr. John Hays, the government
agent at Lachine, such advice and assistance as they may re-
quire; and they will find there a convenient barrack log-house,
where those wishing may remain for the night, and avoid ex-
posure and the expense of lodgings. Mr. John Patton, the
government agent at Prescott, will render every advice and
assistance to emigrants.
Labourers or mechanics, dependent on immediate employ-
ment, are requested to proceed immediately on arrival into the
country. The chief agent will consider such persons as may
oiter about the ports of landing beyond one week after
arrival, to have no further claims on the protection of his


Majesty’s agents for assistance or employment, unless they
have been detained by sickness or some other satisfactory
cause.
A. C. Buchanan, Chief Agent.
Routes to the principal Settlements, fyc. in Lower Canada.
District of Quebec, south side of the St. Lawrence, town-
ship of Frampton, and Kenebec road, thirty-six miles from
Quebec, by Point Levy.
Craig’s Road and Settlements, &c.— From the market-slip in
the Lower Town of Quebec, ferry-boats go daily, as the tide
suits, to St. Nicholas, twelve miles up the river, on the south
side, where Craig’s Road begins, which leads to Richardson’s
Tavern, in the seigniory of St. Giles, thirty miles from Quebec,
to New Argyle, in the seigniory of St. Croix, eight miles fur-
ther, and to the settlements of Dublin, and Ulster, Yorkshire,
New Hamilton, in the thriving township of Inverness, by the
new road on your right hand, as you pass Richardson’s Tavern.
Continuing on Craig’s Road, twelve miles beyond Richard-
son’s, brings you to the thriving township of Leeds, eight
miles further to New Ireland, thence on to Chester, Dudswell,
Tingwick, and Shipton. Craig’s Road is pretty good about
sixty miles from Quebec, beyond which it is not passable for
carriage transport.
Eastern Townships of Lower Canada, and the St. Francis
Territory . —The present route is by Three Rivers, ninety miles
above Quebec, by steam-boat: here cross the St. Lawrence to
the south side, and proceed to Sherbrooke, by Nicolet, La Baie,
and Drummondville; or you may proceed to Sorel, forty
miles above Three Rivers, on the south side of the St. Law-
rence, and there disembark. A good road leads from Sorel to
Sherbrooke by Yamaska and Drummondville. Sherbrooke is
the capital of the Eastern Townships, and is surrounded by
thriving villages and settlements, where industrious farming
labourers or in mechanics are much request.
Chambly is about forty miles from Sorel, and eighteen from
Montreal, on the south side of the St, Lawrence; this route


leads you to St. Cesar and Yamaska Mountain. Chateauguay
Godmanchester, and Sherington, are from twenty-five to fort
miles from Montreal, south side of the St. Lawrence. Con-
veyances daily by steam from Lachine.
On the north side of the river St. Lawrence, in the district
of Quebec and vicinity, are the settlements of Beauport,
Waterloo, Stoneham, Tewkesburry, Velcartier, Jacques Car-
tier, Deschambault, Port Neuf, &c. and twenty miles further,
that of St. Ann’s.
In the vicinity of Three Rivers and Berthier, farming emi-
grants may settle to much advantage. New Glasgow, in the
seigniority of Terrebonne, lies north of Montreal. Persons
bound to the townships bordering on the Ottawa river, parti-
culaily Hull, Lochabar, Templeton, &c. will take their route
and departure from Montreal and Lachine, and proceed by the
usual conveyance.
In various situations in Lower Canada, on both sides of the
St. Lawrence, there are many excellent farms and lands to be
obtained: the names of the proprietors, &c. may be known on
application at this office.
Routes to the principal places in Upper Canada are as
follows :
Quebec to Montreal, by steam-boats.—Montreal to King-
ston, by Prescott.
From ditto to Kingston, by By-town and the Rideau Canal.
From Prescott, steam-boats and sailing schooners ply
daily to Kingston, the Bay of Quinti, Coburgh, Port Hope,
\ork, Hamilton, St. Catherine’s, and Niagara. From St. Ca-
therine’s you may pass through the Welland Canal to Lake
Erie and the Western Townships : and from Chippawa, above
the Falls of Niagara, steam-boats and sailing schooners
are to be met with, plying to all parts of the shores of Lake
Erie. If you are going to Perth or New Lanark, or the
vicinity, disembark at Prescott, or proceed by way ofßy-towh
on the Ottawa. Emigrants going any where beyond York,
or to the Horae or Western District, will in general find it


their interest to take that city in their route. If for By-town,
Grenville, Horton, or other settlements on the Ottawa river,
you will proceed from Lachine by the usual conveyances.
The total expense for the transport of an adult emigrant from
Quebec to York, and the head of Lake Ontario, will not exceed
from 20-y. to 22 5. 6d. currency, or 18s. or 19s. sterling.
ADVICE TO EMIGRANTS TO NEW YORK.
For the Information of Emigrants arriving at New York, and
who are desirous of settling in Canada.
There is nothing of more importance to emigrants, on
arrival in a strange country, than correct information on the
leading points connected with their future pursuits. Many
have suffered much by a want of caution and by listening to
the opinions of interested and designing characters, who
frequently offer their advice unsolicited, and who are met
generally about wharfs and landing places frequented by
strangers.
To guard emigrants from falling into such errors, these in-
structions have been prepared by His Britannic Majesty’s Chief
Agent for the superintendence of emigrants in Upper and
Lower Canada. At New York, and on your route to your
destination, you will find many plans and schemes offered to
your consideration, by persons assuming the character of land
and emigrant agents, without any responsibility or authority;
(whose object is their own gain,) frequently misleading the
credulous stranger; but turn away from all such persons, unless
you are well satisfied of the purity of their statements. When
you require advice at New York apply at the office of His
Britannic Majesty’s Consul, Law Buildings, Nassau Street,
between the hours of ten and one o’clock, daily, (Sundays ex-
cepted.) Mr. Buchanan, the Consul, will obtain, for all in-
dustrious emigrants who are positively determined to settle in
the Canadas, permission to land their baggage and effects free
of Custom-House duty or inspection. Should you require to


exchange your money, go to a respectable merchant, or the
banks, or be directed by the Consul. The currency in New
York is calculated in dollars and cents, also, in shillings and
pence. One hundred cents is the current value of the American
or Spanish dollar, and cents is equal to what is called a
York shilling, and eight such shillings equal to five shillings,
Halifax currency, or one dollar. The currency in the Canadas*
is at the rate of five shillings the dollar, and is called Halifax
currency: at present, the gold sovereign is worth twenty-four
shillings currency, in Montreal. The American bank-notes
most current in Canada, are those of the United States Bank,
the State Bank of New York, any of the chartered banks of
the city of New York, and the Bank of North America, at
Philadelphia. In sending letters from New York to Canada,
it is necessary to pay the American postage ; and when in
Canada, the postage to the American frontier must in like
manner be paid when the letter is put into the Post-Office.
Until emigrants are thoroughly acquainted with the custom of
the country, it is best that they should apply to the Post-
Master for information on these points. Emigrants wishing
to obtain fertile lands in the Canadas, in a wild state, by pur-
chase from the Crown, on every facility being afforded
them by the public authorities. Extensive tracts are surveyed
and offered for sale in Upper Canada monthly, and frequently
every ten or fourteen days by the Commissioner of crown-
lands, at upset prices, varying according to situation from
7s. 6d., Halifax currency, to 255. per acre. In Lower Canada
the Commissioner of crown-lands at Quebec, puts up lands for
sale, at fixed periods, in various townships, at from 2s. 6d. to
\2s. 6d. Halifax currency, per acre, payable by instalments.
Wild lands or improved farms may also be purchased from the
• In almost every part of Upper Canada, west of York, the New
York currency is more in use than the Halifax or Canada : that is, the
York shilling is worth 7& Canada currency, you will therefore mind the
distinction in your dealings, by asking the Currency meant. Halifax
currency is however the currency recognized by law throughout the
Canadas. The American shilling varies in value in almost every State.


Upper Canada Company, or the British American Land Com-
pany, on very easy terms ; and those persons wanting improved
farms will find little difficulty in obtaining such from private
proprietors. On no account enter into final engagements for
your lands or farms without personal examination , and be
certain of the following qualifications:—
1. A healthy situation.
2. Good land.
3. A pure spring, or running stream of water.
4. In the neighbourhood of a good moral and religious
state of society, and schools for the education of your chil-
dren.
5. As near good roads, and water transport as possible;
saw and grist mills.
6. A good title.
These advantages you can obtain in the Canadas with more
ease to yourself and family, and with prospects of as good
success and sure independence, as perhaps in any other portion
of the American continent: besides, you have the British laws
and constitution to which you have been accustomed, with the
full benefit of all your industry, and that in a country free to
all denominations of Christians, and less burdened with taxes
than any other on the face of the globe. Information can be
obtained respecting the country and the lands to be disposed of
in the several districts, by applying to the different agents, or
the Commissioner of crown-lands in Upper Canada. The
Chief Agent will consider such persons as may loiter about the
ports of landing beyond one week after arrival, to have for-
feited all claims for assistance, or employment, from the public
authorities in Canada, unless they have been detained by sick-
ness or some other satisfactory cause.
When you have arranged all your business at New York,
put up your baggage in as small a compass as possible, marking
each package with your name, and where going; carrying
nothing with you but your personal necessaries, to avoid the
expense of transport, as every thing you may require, including


foreign luxuries, can be purchased in Canada as cheap as in
most provincial towns in England or Ireland. You will pro-
ceed by steam-boat to Alban}', where the great Erie, or Western
Canal commences, on which you will be conveyed as hereafter
stated, to Oswego or Buffalo. The rate of passage from New
York to Albany varies from one to three dollars, exclusive of
food, and according to accommodations. Emigrant families
may get cheaper by some of the steam-boats, as deck pas-
sengers. If you require any advice at Albany, apply to Mr.
Charles Smith, a very extensive forwarding agent to Canada:
he will advise you (gratis) on the most economical plan for
proceeding by the canal-boats or stages which start at frequent
periods of the day.
There are three classes of canal boats by which passengers
may proceed; the first is called packet-boats, which start from
Schenectady (sixteen miles by land from Albany) every morn-
ing and afternoon ; rate of going, four miles per hour, including
stops: passage with board and lodging, gi cents per mile,
(less than two-pence sterling.) The second class is called line-
boats which start from Albany and Schenectady, rate of going
two miles and a half per hour, including stoppages; passage,
1 cent per mile, without board; with board cents and
sometimes, from opposition, less. .Third class are freight-boats ;
rate of going about two miles per hour, in which families may
be conveyed on cheaper terms ; yet I would in general advise
passengers (as their circumstances may admit) to proceed either
by packets or line-boats: the packets are neatly fitted up, and
the fate excellent. Large families and steerage passengers in
genet al go by the line-boats, in which they may victual them-
selves, or are boarded by the captain very comfortably, and on
model ate teims. Stages leave Albany daily, for Oswego and
Buffalo, the charge is about 5 cents per mile, (or from 2±d. to
3d. sterling ;) rate of going, five to seven miles per hour. From
the great confusion and hurry at Albany, Schenectady, Utica
and other places on the route, it behoves passengers to look
sharp after their baggage.


Emigrant families who intend victualling themselves, will
supply themselves at Albany with tea, sugar, bread and butter,
&c. on cheaper terms and of a better quality than along the
route of the canal. Avoid exposure at night, and drinking
cold water when heated, (attetid to this particularly when at
New York,) and be cautious when the canal-boat is passing
wider bridges, as the height from the deck to the arch is seldom
more than eighteen inches or two feet, thereby causing many
serious accidents every season to persons who may happen to
be on deck or to have fallen asleep, by their getting bruised
between the boat and the bridge when passing under. To
those who wish to proceed to any part of Upper Canada west
of Kingston, and bordering on Lake Ontario, or to the Bay of
Quinti, or the districts of Newcastle, York, Hamilton, or
Guelph, or the line of the Welland Canal or Niagara, the route
by Oswego will be the most direct and desirable, when the
steam-boats are calling regularly at the latter place, and which
can be ascertained at the Consul’s office in New York, by a
reference to the New York Newspapers; or at Albany, to Mr.
C. Smith. Those who go by Oswego must proceed no further
by the Erie or Western canal than Syracuse , 171 miles from
Albany, and sixty beyond Utica: at Syracuse they run off to
the right, by a branch canal, to Oswego, distance forty miles.
The steam-boat, Great Britain, calls this season at Oswego once
a week, (Sundays,) for the conveyance of passengers to Kings-
ton, Coburgh, York, or Niagara, and the United States; and
others from Ogdensburg, going up the Lake to York and
Niagara, call three or four times a week. Sailing schooners
depart almost daily from Oswego to Niagara, *-St. Catherine’s
and through the Welland Canal to Lake Erie. At Oswego Mr.
Bronson will give every information emigrants may stand in
need of. Those destined to the Grand River, Port Stanley,
Talbot Settlement, the London district and situations contigu-
ous to Lake Erie and St. Clair, will go on to Buffalo by the
Erie Canal. From Buffalo steam-boats and sailing schooners
ply daily to all the principal landings on the American and
Canada shore of Lake Erie; rate of passage moderate. Those


wishing to cross to the Niagara frontier, Canada side, from
Buffalo, can do so every half-hour at the ferry at Black Rock,
about one mile and a half from Buffalo, and fourteen above the
great Falls of Niagara. From Chippawa two miles above the
great Falls, the British steam-boats, Adelaide and Thames, make
regularly weekly trips to the head of Lake Erie on the Canada
side, calling at Black Rock and Buffalo each way.
Stages are continually going from the ferry on the Canada
side, to the City of the Falls and the town of Niagara on
Lake Ontario; from whence a steam-boat proceeds to York
every day, except Sunday, at half-past twelve o’clock. Steam-
boats plying to all parts of Lake Ontario are to be met almost
daily at Niagara.
Route from New York and Albany, by the Erie Canal, to all
parts of Upper Canada west of Kingston, by the way of
Oswego and Buffalo :
New 'Vork to Albany, 160 miles, by Steam-boat.
Albana to Utica, 110 miles by Canal or Stage.
Utica to Syracuse, 55 do. do. do.
Syracuse to Oswego, 40 do. do. do.
Syracuse to Rochester, 99 do. do. do.
Rochester to Buffalo, ()S do. do. do.
Total expense from Albany to Buffalo by canal, exclusive of
victuals for an adult steerage passenger—time going, about
seven or eight days—three dollars, sixty-three cents. Do. by
packet-boats and found, twelve dollars and a quarter; six days
going.
Do. Do. by stage, in three and a half and four days,
thirteen to fifteen dollars.
Do. Do. from Albany to Oswego, by canal, five days
going, two dollars and a half.
Do. Do. by stage, two days, six and a half to seven
dollars.
No extra charge for a moderate quantity of baggage,
Route from New York to Montreal, Quebec and all parts
of Lower Canada :—


New York to Albany, one hundred and sixty miles by steam-
boat, one to three dollars, exclusive of food.
Albany to Whitehall, by canal, seventy-three miles, one
dollar; stage three dollars.
Whitehall to St. John’s, by steam-boat, board included,
cabin, five dollars. Deck passage, two dollars without board.
St. John’s to Laprarie, sixteen miles per stage, ss. to 7s. 6d.
Laprarie to Montreal, per ferry steam-boat, eight miles, 6d.
Montreal to Quebec, by steam-boat, one hundred and eighty
miles, cabin, found 20s. Deck passage, not found, 7s. 6d.
Those proceeding to the Eastern Townships of Lower
Canada, in the vicinity of Sherbrooke, Stanslead, fyc. fyc.,
will proceed to St. Johns , from whence good roads lead to all
the settled townships eastward. If they are going to the
Ottawa river, they will proceed from Montreal and Lachine,
from whence stages, steam-boats, and batteaux, go daily to
Grenville, Hull, and By-town, as also to Chateauguay, Glen-
garry, Cornwall, Prescott, and all parts below Kingston.
Emigrants can avail themselves of the advice and assistance
of the following Gentlemen:—
At Montreal, Carlisle Buchanan, Esq., or at the office of the
British American Land Company.
Lachine, John Hays, Esq.
Prescott, John Patton, Esq.
A. C. BUCHANAN,
Emigrant Department, Chief Agent.
Quebec, Is/ October, 1833.
LORD AYLMER’S REPORT.
Report on the Survey of the Water Communication between
Quebec and the River St. Francis.
The Governor in Chief, on a tour of inquiry through the
townships on the Craig Road, in the course of last summer,
passed some time in examining the lakes in Halifax and Ire-
land, and the stream which conveys their waters to the River
Becancour.


The settlers residing on the banks of the lakes informed his
lordship that the Indian hunters, who frequent the sources of
these waters, sometimes came down in canoes from the Great
Lake St. Francis, by taking advantage of the smaller lakes or
ponds which lie between the head-waters of the St. Francis
River and the streams which flow into the lakes in Ireland.
They described the route in general as practicable for canoes,
and even for larger boats; but somewhat obstructed by rapids,
and having several portages between the lakes; at the same
time it was represented as being susceptible of great improve-
ment ; and in the popular opinion, it had long been thought an
eligible line for a canal from the Lake St. Francis to the River
St. Lawrence.
The opening of an easy water communication between
Quebec and the unexplored country on the banks of the River
St. Francis being an object of great interest with Lord Aylmer,
the favourable accounts given of this route by the inhabitants
in Ireland, attracted much of his attention. In pursuing the
inquiry, however, it became evident that great part of the
route followed by the Indians passed through a broken and
elevated region, and was too circuitous and difficult to promise
any great facilities in reaching the country on the banks of the
St. Francis, to which it was desirable to penetrate.
It was expected, that in exploring the country below the
discharge or outlet of the Great Lake St. Francis, a more
direct and practicable line would be discovered; and, upon the
whole, the information obtained was so encouraging, that Lord
Aylmer determined on having the intermediate country care-
fully examined and the character of the streams fully ascer-
tained by actual survey.
His lordship accordingly directed a surveyor to ascend the
stream traversed by the Indians, pursuing that route to its
junction with the St. Francis, and to return by the best
channel he might discover between that river and the lakes in
Ireland. Instructions were given to take the necessary levels,
and to form an estimate of the expense of making the streams


practicable for scows, or boats capable of conveying from four
to five tons of loading.
The result of the survey has completely confirmed his lord-
ship’s expectations. It has been ascertained, by the discovery
of a channel through an arm or branch of Lake Aylmer, an
(extension of the River St. Francis,) that a direct, and with
moderate outlay, a very practicable water communication can
be effected from the Falls of the Thames in Inverness to the
Rapids on the St. Francis in Weedon, a distance of more than
82 miles, without any other interruption than a portage of 3|
miles, over the height of land between Black Lake and Black
Creek, on ground which will admit of an excellent road.
The distance from Quebec to the commencement of the
water communication in Inverness is 42 { miles, of which 32
miles are land carriage, on a road running through a level
and practicable country, and of which the last 12| miles only
require to be completed, being already opened and passable for
winter carriages.
The accompanying plan exhibits the whole line of communi-
cation commencing at Quebec and terminating at Sherbrooke,
the details of which are as follow :
Miles.
From Quebec to St. Nicholas—conveyance by water 11
From St. Nicholas to the Falls in Inverness—land
carriage 311
From the Falls in Inverness to Black Lake Portage
—conveyance by water ----- 4g|
From Black Lake, over the Portage, to Black Creek
—land carriage - - - - - 3|
From Black Creek to the Rapids in Weedon—excel-
lent water conveyance - - - - - 25
From Weedon to Sherbrooke—water conveyance,
with some interruption from rapids - - -
When the small obstructions in the rivers shall be removed,
and the necessary repairs to the roads and portages be com-
pleted, the whole journey from Quebec to Lake Alymer can
H


be accomplished by emigrants with baggage in two and a half
or three days; and there is every reason to believe that the
expense will be very light, as it is ascertained that the cost of
conveyance to any point on the contemplated line of communi-
cation which is at present accessible, will not exceed one-fourth
of the rates now paid.
The route to be taken by emigrants will be as follows: —
On leaving Quebec the traveller will cross the St. Lawrence to
St. Nicholas, on the south shore, for which the horse ferry-
boats afford a cheap, safe, and expeditious conveyance;
charging only fourpence per head for passengers, and at the
rate of 6d. a barrel for luggage :—distance 11 miles.
From St. Nicholas to the Falls in Inverness, the journey will
be performed by land, the road for miles running through
a level country, requires only moderate draught, and the single
horse Canadian carts will convey a load of 8 cwt. in one day,
at the cost of about 13s.
The water communication commences at the Falls. It will
be effected in scows or boats carrying about four tons. It will
take two days to reach Trout Lake, in Ireland; the expense
not exceeding P er cwt. for loading, and in proportion for
passengers. At present it is not possible to convey goods
thus far, nor to bring down produce under ss. per cwt. At
this point the settler destined for the townships south of the
Craig Road, and upon parts of that communication, will dis-
embark:—the distance from the Falls is 35 miles.
From the Trout Lake to the Black Creek on Lake Aylmer,
the water conveyance is interrupted by a portage of 3f miles;
but the distance, being only miles, will be accomplished
in one day, at the expense of from 3d. to sd. per cwt.
On reaching Lake Aylmer, there is an uninterrupted navi-
gation, descending by the stream of the St. Francis for 25
miles ; and the communication by water continues, with slight
obstructions, which it is expected can be removed at a mode-
rate expense, to Sherbrooke, at the distance of 68 miles from
the portage, and in the centre of the eastern townships.


On reaching the portage between Black Lake and Black
Creek, the traveller finds himself on the high ground, or height
of land separating the two water communications. The sur-
face of Black Lake is elevated 153 feet above the Falls in In-
verness on the one side, and 43 feet above the waters of Lake
Aylmer, in the opposite direction. Lake Aylmer, in itself, is
situated on a plateau of considerable extent, below the level of
the Great Lake St. Francis, whence it receives its waters by the
river of that name, which rushing impetuously through a
broken and rocky channel, descends 104 feet in a distance of
only six miles. The Lake, which is an expansion of the
River St. Francis, is succeeded by several smaller sheets of
water, all of great beauty, and affording singular facilities for
establishment on the surrounding lands.
It is difficult to estimate the importance of this line of transit
to the city of Quebec and the townships that will be brought
into ready communication with the great shipping port of the
province; the immediate advantage that it presents is the
facility of penetrating into an extensive and fertile portion of
the country, which has been, until this moment, inaccessible,
and almost unknown; thus affording to British emigrants a
field in which they can be located within a few days after
their arrival, without fatigue, and at small expense, enabling
them to husband their means, and profit by the saving of time,
which is so precious to the new settler in his first establish-
ment.
The revolution of a few years will probably exhibit this com-
munication laden with the products of their industry, seeking
their natural vent in the market of Quebec.
Office of Crown Lands,
Quebec, 10th December, 1833.
His Excellency the Governor has ordered the Plan to be
deposited in the Office of Crown-Lands, where it will be open
for the inspection of all persons who take an interest in the
subject.
H 2


IMPORTS.
Articles.
1831.
1832.
1833.
Blacking
1,913
1,363
912
Bricks
276,000
441,000
533,000
Candles.
256
809
1,314
Coals
12,772
24,300
21,108.
Coffee,
Do
67
609
473
Do
387
399
36
Do
50
38
1
Earthenware
. pckgs.
3,561
3,535
3,521
Fruit,
Figs
a
733
2,120
1,292
Almonds .....
a
577
557
427
Raisins
. barrels
1,173
1,213
2,998
Do
11,356
9,511
8,646
Glassware,
Bottles
431
595
573
Do
767
545
566
Window-glass
.. boxes
10,153
10,764
17,306
Grindstones
2,633
920
1,358.
Hemp,
Do
bundles
152
37
0
Do
149
167
213
Indigo
102
86
36-
Iron,
Flat and Round .. tons
954
695
1,538
Flat
230,453
183,000
80,223
Do
bundles
15,182
11,764
4,868
Hoop
(6
12,352
14,253
29,581
Pig
611
750
1,129
Sheet
bundles
1,547
2,174
3,437
Canada Plates
.. boxes
3,182
2,770
13,564
The Official Tables of Export and Import, showing the
value of and duty on the same for 1833 are not yet published.
The value of the preceding year’s operations will be found at
the beginning of this pamphlet. The quantities of the princi-
pal enumerated articles imported by sea to the ports of Quebec
and Montreal to the close of the navigation of 1833 are thus
stated:—


Articles.
1831.
1832.
1833.
Ironware,
Nails
. pckgs.
9,644
s 8,582
12,663
Ovens and Pans ....
6,931
5,857
15,913
Frying Pans ..
bundles
1,034
709
696
Spades & Shovels “
2,715
3,257
2,274
Oil,
Linseed
... jugs
1,581
586
313
Do
32
540
835
Olive
10
182
233
Do
238
496
152
Palm
5
63
248
Pepper
705
906
1,455
Pimento
C(
213
70
76
Pipes
. boxes
3,294
2,178
2,108
Powder
. pckgs.
1,835
2,877
1,490
Salt
10,387
9,083
9,067
Soap
6,314
9,760
14,762
Spirits,
Brandy
&C
476
1,345
1,978
Gin
553
419
1,263
Rum
12,366
9,549
9,000
Starch
1,455
964
1,191
Tallow
240
1,015
881
Tin
5,916
5,531
6,793
Sugar & Molasses,
Muscovado ...
. hhds.
2,830
3,170
2,946
Do
. barrels
4,709
3,801
2,166
E. India
1,471
1,828
4,630
Refined
. .hhds.
1,087
1,081
1,640
Molasses .....
994
1,228
723
Wines,
Port
386
438
493
Do
218
304
193
Madeira
271
188
300
Teneriffe
256
542
291
Fayal
ii
6
0
38
Lisbon
((
118
10
7
Spanish
it
1,246
829
2,465
Sicilian
u
90
179
383
Sherry
u
64
190
329
Malaga
u
21
15
166
French
. hhds.
21
720
321
Do
663
1,006
886
Unspecified pipes ....
213
681
638


Articles.
1832.
1833.
Ashes — Pot
Pearl
16,174
7,93 5
23,116
12,909
Timber—'Deals—pieces
Pine
Elm
Oak
1,673,000
169,882
16,717
20,879
2,100,000
168,674
10,965
23,588
Staves —To the West Indies
C( Other parts
867,000
3,526,000
443,000
4,142,000
Total Staves ....
4,393,000
4,585,000
Wheat —To London .bush.
iC Liverpool
“ Clyde
“ Other ports
122,000
201,000
90.000
66.000
45.000
452.000
130.000
32.000
Total Wheat ....
479,000
659,000
Flour -To London barrel
“ Liverpool
“ Clyde
“ West Indies
“ Other ports and places
12,104
3,831
2,153
4,920
21,878
3,813
26,472
13,258
5,143
43,707
Total Flour ....
44,886
92,393
Beef — To West Indies
“ Other places
2,454
2,703
1,483
3,744
Total Beef....
5,157
5,227
Pork — To West Indies
“ Other places
4,328
3,712
3,520
8,462
Total Pork ....
8,040
12,382
Principal Articles Exported by Sea, from Canada to the close
of the Navigation.


1827
1828
1829
1830
1831
1832
Wine, Madeira
10854
19817
15553
16160
32699
22327
gall.
Port
54887
55236
39394
44809
55619
79592
do.
Teneriffe
35926,
106453
24590
66781
29049
94227
do.
Fayal
16292
21270
1971
2092
532
110
do.
Sicil. & Span.
84755
31804
17991
152049
165172
131718
do.
Other kinds..
. 31759
26215
55122
58366
66011
62376
do.
Brandy
. 69026
129395
86607
81629
64215
183613
do.
Gin
60204
90541
13872
67124
73414
60520
do.
Rum
. 953163
835527
1133158
1449768
1428283
1099578
do.
Molasses
. 48779
73279
90159
86957
102166
127143
do.
Refined Sugar
. 455655
641359
629313
561969
1084889
1655348
lbs.
Muscovado ditto ,
. 2891748
2187617
4739004
4404190
5936196
5777961
do.
Coffee
. 159111
214596
70467
211128
119464
174901
do.
Leaf Tobacco
. 88289
62006
85545
55187
119622
125774
do.
Manufactured ditto..
26418
29324
16819
147109
do.
Tea
. 1054559
660145
12314
73053
587174
983256
do.
Salt
. 190824
181160
433607
245866
284040
287436
do.
Merchdz. paying 2g >
£724,302 £933,02111 7 £841,403 4 6 £1,183,985 7 2 £1,317,950 10 5 £1,327,309
p. c. duty S
[14 R
fCy.
182?
1828
1829
1830
1831
1832
Ashes Pearl
. 9409 csks.
10455 csks.
9548 bbls.
50917 cwt.
19747
139.'!4 Baris
Pot
. 17894 do.
2239!) do.
23993 do.
134506 do.
30512
26344 do.
Flour
. 54003
35713
25689
71976
81057
51170 do.
Biscuit
. 3726
2054
1830
7445
7210
5489 cwt.
Wheat
391420
120112
40462
590101
1329269
657240 mts.
Indian Corn and Meal ...
2345
1144
4315
2422
728
6*59 bbls.
Pease
31830
21164
12971
17769
7124
365 mts.
Flax Seed
1421
1454
4183
895
70
do.
Beef
5003
5793
7208
4393
5415
5125 bbls.
Pork
7007
12850
11622
11800
8461
8187 do.
Butter
74835
74211
142688
152269
35026
15700 lbs.
Codfish
10241
11333
61684
77441
45367
24404 cwt
Salmon
642
487
1092
360
688
591 bbls.
Staves, Std. Hhds. & Bbls.
5376548
4111786
7680442
4550942
5551907
4933275 pcs.
Oak
21736
24695
26460
13213
18654
208041 tons.
Pine
86090
110779
183942
160919
194408
194276 do
Deals, Boards, and Planks
1621648
1518106
1365529
1816714
1862238 1863488 pcs.
Elm, Ash, Maple, &c. ...
10601
10265
182196
12145
13980
20995 tons.
PRINCIPAL IMPORTS OF THE LAST SIX YEARS.
PRINCIPAL EXPORTS OF THE LAST SIX YEARS.
BUILT IN THE PROVINCE k in 1825 6l Vessels, 22636 Tons Register
in 1826 59 17823
in 1827 35 7540
in 1828 30 7272
in 1829 21 .5465
in 1830 11 3059
in 1831 9 3250
in 1832 13 3952
1833—Arrivals 1007—Tonnage 271,147—Emigrants 22,062-
CLEARED OUT in 1825 883 Vessels, 22770? Tons, 9684 Men.
in 1826 801 198848 ... 905? ...
in 182? 678 162094 ... 7523 ...
in 1828 763 191199 ... 8544 ...
in 1829 995 25266? ... H3?2 ...
in 1830 1052 256448 ... 11719 ...
in 1831 1180 225296 ... 12568 ...
in 1832 1094 221653 ... 12611 ...


Ashes,
Pot, 1st sort, per cwt
January 22, 1834.
s. d. s. d.
0 0 a 21 3
Pearl
0
0
a
23
6
Bread,
Pilot, cwt
22
6
a
25
0
Newfoundland
17
6
a
0
0
Crackers, lb
0
a
0
41
Candles,
Tallow, lb
0
s
H
a
d. s.
0
d.
0
Sperm
9
0
a
2
9
Coals,
Newcastle, chaldron
25
0
a
27
6
Liverpool
6
a
25
0
Scotch
22
6
a
25
0
Coffee,
Jamaica, lb
1
1
a
0
0
Inferior
1
0
a
0
0
Copper,
Bolts, lb
6
a
0
0
Sheet
1
2
a
1
3
Cordage,
Russia, cwt
0
a
0
0
Canadian
35
0
a
0
0
Fish,
Cod, dry, cwt
15
0
a
17
6
Herrings, No. 1, brl
0
a
22
6
No. 2, brl
12
6
a
14
0
Smoked, box
4
6
a
5
0
Mackarel, No. 3,
20
0
a
22
6
Salmon, pickled, brl
0
0
a
55
0
Flour and Meal,
Amer. Sup. 196 lbs
0
a
27
0
Can. do
0
0
a
28
9
Fine
0
0
a
27
6
Middling
0
0
a
0
0
The Price Current at the end of the season, and remarks on
the state of markets may not be uninteresting.
PRICE CURRENT.
MONTREAL WHOLESALE PRICES.


Flour and Meal,
s.
d.
s.
d.
Pollards
Rye Flour
0 a
none
22
6
Indian Meal, per 168 lbs. .. ,
0
a
20
0
Oat Meal, cwt
0
a
12
6
Fruit,
Almonds, soft shell, lb
H
a
0
10
Currants, Zante
4
a
0
4*
Fruit,
Figs, lb
4
a
0
0
Nuts, Barcelona
4±
a
0
0
Prunes, French, per lb
0
a
0
0
Raisins, Muscatel, Box
0
a
17
6
Bloom . .
6
a
10
0
Malaga, lb. cask
H
a
0
6
Glass,
Bottles, Beer, gross
0
a
32
0
Wine
0
a
35
0
Window, X 8|, 100 feet .
30
0
a
0
0
7X9
0
a
30
0
8 X 10
6
a
35
0
Grain and Seed,
Barley, bushel
9
a
4
0
Corn, Indian
3
6
a
3
9
Oats
8
a
2
0
Pease, boiling . .
Rye
4
6 a
none
0
0
Wheat, U. Can, per 60 lbs. .
5
6
a
5
7
Mixed
5
3
a
5
4
Red
1
a
5
2
L. C. Minot
0
a
0
0
Gunpowder,
Canister, lb
6
a
1
8
F. 100 lbs
0
a
80
0
F. F. 100 lbs
0
a
90
0
F. F. F. 100 lbs
95
0
a '
100
0
Iron,
Bar, English, ton
£11
0
a
0
0
Russian, O. S
10
a
25
0
Swedes
0
a
0
0
Hoop
10
a
15
0
Pig '
0
a
7
10
Boiler Plates
6
a
0
0


Iron,
s.
d.
,v.
d.
Sheet Iron, cwt
0
a
16
3
Potash Coolers
6
a
20
0
Kettles
16
0
a
17
6
Pots belly
6
a
20
O
Ovens and Covers
18
0
a
20
0
Lead,
Pig
0
a
22
0
Sheet
22
6
a
0
0
Leather,
Calf, Canada, per lb
6
a
5
0
Sole
10
a
1
1
Upper, side
0
a
15
0
Molasses,
W. I. best, gal
10
a
3
0
Inferior
2
6
a
0
0
Nails,
Cut, common, cwt
6
a
25
0
Annealed ..
0
a
0
0
Wrought, 6d. rn.
4
a
0
0
14d
0
a
0
0
28d
0
a
0
0
Spikes, cwt.
6
a
25
0
Oil,
Florence, 30 flasks, box .. ,.
30
0
a
32
6
Olive, gallon
4
6
a
4
8
Linseed, boiled
4
0
a
0
0
Single, raw
3
9
a
0
0
Cod
6
a
2
9
Seal
2
9
a
3
0
Whale
6
a
0
0
Paint,
Black, keg
0
a
O
0
Spanish brown
6
a
6
0


Paint,
s.
d.
s.
d.
Blue, fine, lb .........
0
11
a
0
0
Green
0
9
a
1
3
Yellow
6
9
a
8
9
White Paint, keg
7
6
a
10
0
Lead, dry White, cwt
32
0
a
34
0
Red, dry, cwt.
20
0
a
22
6
Porter,
London, best, doz.
8
3
a
11
3
Provisions,
Cheese, Am. lb
0
5
a
0
6
English
0
9
a
1
0
Beef, Mess, brl ..
SO
0
a
51
3
Prime Mess ..
40
0
a
42
6
Prime
38
6
a
0
0
Cargo
26
0
a
27
6
Butter, Salt, lb
0
8
a
0
81
Hams, Am
0
5
a
0
0
Lard
0
H
a
0
Pork, Mess, barrel
81
3
a
82
6
Prime Mess
67
6
a
70
0
Prime
56
3
a
67
6
Cargo
51
3
a
62
6
Rice, South Car. cwt
0
0
a
23
6
Salt,
Liverpool, bushel
1
6
a
1
8
Lisbon
1
10
a
2
0
Shot,
Patent, cwt
22
6
a
0
0
Soap,
English common, lb
0
3
a
0
3\
Montreal
0
a
0
H
Spices,
Pepper
0
a
0
7


Spices,
s.
d.
s.
d.
Pimento, W. L, lb
7
a
0
n
Spirits,
Brandy, Bordeaux, Gal
4
9
a
5
0
Cognac
5
0
a
5
6
Gin, Hollands
6
a
4
9
Montreal
6
a
0
0
Rum, Demerara, 1 a 4
1
a
4
3
Jamaica 2 a 5
0
a
5
3
Whiskey, Scotch
6
a
0
0
Montreal, 1 a 2 ....
0
0
a
0
0
Steel,
English Blister, lb.
H
a
0
0
Cast, lb
n
a
0
0
Hoop, L
8
a
0
0
Crawley
6
a
0
11
Sugar,
Barbadoes, cwt
6
a
0
0
Jamaica
6
a
0
0
T rinidad
3
a
0
0
Bengal White
3
a
0
0
Mauritius Brown
0
a
49
0
Brazil
0
a
51
0
Refined Glasgow, single ....
0
*i
a
0
6 2
Spades and Shovels,
doz . .
0
a
36
0
Tallow,
American, lb
7
a
0
7 1
' 4
Russian, Y. C
6f
a
0
7
Teas,
Twankay, lb
H
a
2
10|
Bohea
, . . . 1
ii
a
2
0
Hyson
4
a
4
1
Hyson Skin
10
a
2
14
Young Hyson
3
a
4
0


Tin Plates,
I. C. box 225
LX
s. d.
a
s.
45
d.
0
A
I. X. X
a
65
0
Tobacco,
Leaf, U. C. lb
a
0
0
U. S
0
0
5f
7*
Plug
a
u. c
a
0
5
Tobacco Pipes,
T D p box.
a
22
6
Vinegar,
Bordeaux, gal
a
2
0
English
a
2
0
Wines,
Champagne, doz
a
90
0
Claret, hhd
o
oo
a
12
10
Fayal, Cargo, pipe
a
0
0
Lisbon
a
0
0
Malaga
a
0
0
Madeira
£ s.
a
£
80
s. ,
0
Port
a
60
0
Spanish, good-red
a
12
0
Common
a
11
0
Sicilian
a
0
0
TenerifFe, Cargo
a
17
0
Sherry Wine
to
30
0
MONEY.
Exchange at 60 days, Bank
Do. Do. Private
5 per cent.
Do. 30 days, Government ..
At New York
Drafts on New York, 3 days
per cent.
Gold Sovereigns
Montreal Bank Shares


General Remarks on the Montreal Market for the Season 1833.
IMPORTS.
Rum. —-The average consumption of rum in the Canadas is
rather over than under 10,000 puncheons ; fluctuating materi-
ally with a high or low price, and also with the condition in
which the harvest leaves the habitants to make purchases.
The importation of the present year has shown a monthly
deficiency, which has caused a regular advance from 2s. 10 d.,
the opening price of Demerara, to 4s. 3d., its closing price,
small quantities having been sold as high as 4s. 6d.; Jamaicas,
in like manner, have advanced from 3s. 6d. to ss. 4 d. With
this range of prices the short supply will be sufficient for the
year’s consumption.
Sugar. —The average consumption of sugar cannot be ascer-
tained with accuracy, as it is continually increasing with the
increase of the population of British descent in both provinces.
Ten years ago the consumption of Muscovado sugar scarcely
exceeded 1,200 hhds, now it is certainly more than thrice that
quantity. The supply this year is as follows:
West India, (all packages reduced to hhds.) .... 3,250
East India, (bags do. do.) 580
3,830
Now the population of British descent, and consuming cane
sugars, has increased about eight per cent., including immigra-
tion ; hence the supply, to equal last year, should have been
about 400 hhds more. A deficiency which the import of re-
fined, 1,640 casks, more than makes up.
Molasses. —lmport, 723 casks. The import is about 300
casks short of the consumption, but the stock on hand must
have been considerable, as the supply of last year was exces-
sive. Prices have ranged generally high, and the consumption
of the article may be looked upon as increasing.


Coffee.—The supply of coffee by sea has been small, but
a considerable quantity has been imported and smuggled from
the United States, still prices have ranged high. The removal
of the Crown duty of Is. on coffee imported from the colonies
will probably increase both the supply and the consumption.
Pimento.—The importation of Pimento has been short for
two years; the consequence is, that the heavy stock of 1831,
which caused the article to be a complete drug on the market,
has been pretty well cleared off; and in the spring the market
will be bare. The consumption cannot be estimated at more
than 120 to 130 bags.
Pepper.—The demand for pepper has increased very greatly
within the last few years; the present year’s importation of
1,455 bags, though a great increase on all previous years, is
not more than sufficient for the demand, and the price is
accordingly high.
Indigo.—The consumption of indigo in the Canadian
markets is trifling, not being more probably than between 60
to 70 chests: this year’s importation was only 36 chests, but
the stock on hand was large. A small quantity has been sent
to the States, so that the market is now quite bare.
Spirits and Wines. Brandy.—The consumption of
brandy has increased greatly since 1831, but the supply, as
not unfrequently happens, has over-run it. Previous to 1831
the consumption of brandy was about 700 pipes, that is, 3,600
had been consumed in six years in a progressive ratio. In
the spring of last year, owing to the circumstance of a preju-
dice existing in favour of brandy, as a safeguard against con-
tagion, the price advanced enormously in the face of a heavy
import. Under the impression that the paying price of 1832
would be maintained in 1833, a very heavy import took place this
year, and the price has consequently been declining during
the whole season, the importation having nearly reached 2,000
pipes.
Gin.—The consumption of gin up to 1830 was about 550
pipes; in 1831 the import was about equal thereto; in 1832


it was very short; and this year it is greater than ever known.
The stock in the spring must, of necessity, be large.
Port Wine. —The importation fully equals the demand;
owing to the advance at home in the spring this was not an-
ticipated.
Madeira. —Nearly the same remarks apply to madeiras.
A fair supply has been received, but it is deficient in choice
qualities.
Teneriffe. —ls rather scarce, but the demand for it is
materially checked by the immense quantity of low sherries
and other white wines in the market.
Spanish Red. —The supply of Spanish wines is excessive,
more so, in fact, than any other, but being an article of general
consumption in the country, a glut does not long continue.
All Wines. —The following will show the three last years’
supply of all wines, leaving out bottled wines in cases: —
1831 2,682 pipes.
1832 3,432 “
1833 5,2?0 “
Supply of 1833 one-third in excess.
MISCELLANEOUS ARTICLES.
Blacking. —lmport short; but previous stock extremely
heavy.
*. DRY GOODS.— (Manufactures.)
As the season advanced sales became difficult, and scarcely
any one article brought such an advance as the holder consi-
dered he had been warranted in calculating upon. It appears
that the depressed state of the dry goods’ trade is owing much
less to an over supply, than to a check having been given to
the demand. Lower Canada has experienced two bad harvests


in succession ; and this the country shopkeeper feels most sen-
sibly. The non-payment of the officers of government must
also, as stated by the Quebec Gazette , be severely felt in that
city. This must have taken a very considerable demand from
the dry goods’ market generally, and is felt here in an indirect
way. The general stagnation caused by the cholera of last
year, is also to be taken into the account.
If the importation of the ensuing year be guided by care and
prudence, we cannot think there is any thing to apprehend
from the quantity which may now remain on hand.
Earthenware. —The importation has been extremely
steady for the last three years. This year, however, there
has been a check upon the power of the country people to pur-
chase, and prices have scarcely remunerated.
Fish. —There is now a considerable winter trade in fish car-
ried on in Montreal; but we are sorry to say, the dealers have
this year provided too heavy a supply.
Fruit. —Our supply of fruit is now drawn wholly from the
Mediterranean. Our importation last spring was large.
Glassware. —The importation of bottles is under 1200
gross, which is rather short of a consumption decidedly on the
increase. Window-glass is in excess, being upwards of 17>000
boxes, against 20,000 in the two preceding years.
Hemp may be considered as very heavily supplied.
Iron. — A considerable decrease has taken place in the im-
port of bar-iron. Last year 183,000 bars, and 11,764 bundles
were imported : this year, only 80,223 bars and 5858 bundles.
The immense stock left over in 1831 and 1832, prevents our
saying that the supply is deficient; still it must be considered
as a favourable feature in the trade, leading to a fair anticipa-
tion of improvement next year. Of hoop-iron the import is
excessive, being rather over double that of last year. Of Ca-
nada plates the import is five times that of 1832, and four
times that of 1831, prices consequently ruinously low. Other
articles as follows:—Nails, thirty to forty per cent, in excess;
i


ovens and pans, thirty per cent, more than the two previous
years; frying pans, about equal to last year, but below the
consumption.
Salt. —The importation of salt is about equal to that of
1832, but below that of 1831. As far as we can learn, the
stock is sufficient for the demand of the winter.
Soap. —The importation of soap is more than fifty per cent,
greater than that of last year, and above double that of 1831.
This was to save the drawback, which would pnly be granted
for a limited period; as for the future, the excise on soap will
not be charged in England. Considerable quantities of soap
are manufactured here, of a quality superior to that of Liver-
pool, and about equal to London.
Tallow. —The importation of tallow by sea, is rather less
than last year, being 881 casks against 1015 casks of last year.
The deficiency by inland importation is also great, the supply
being 188 casks and 489 barrels against 271 casks and 1101
barrels last year. Considering the high price in England, we
should say the importer is scarcely remunerated.
EXPORT TRADE.
Ashes have been extremely dull of sale, owing to the dis-
couraging state of the trade at home. The quantity of ashes
produced in America has been greatly diminished for the last
three years. The receipts in this market were 7500 barrels
less in 1832 than in 1831 ; and 6700 less in 1833 than in
1832; yet with this decreased export, prices in the English
ports continue in a most languid state. There is no doubt that
the use of soda, from common salt, is interfering most exten-
sively with both pots and pearls; and it is only where those


alkalies cannot be dispensed with, that their use will be con-
tinued at 225. while soda costs only 10s. Every effort should
be made by the producer to render the process of manufacture
as economical as possible, or this valuable branch of our trade
will be entirely lost to us.
Wheat.— The price of Upper Canada white wheat, which is
really a beautiful grain, has ranged from ss. B d. to about 6s. 6d.
The quantity exported of all kinds will be seen by our table.
Our accounts from the interior lead us to anticipate rather a
decreased quantity next year, as the surplus of some parts of
the country will be required to supply a lamentable deficiency
in others. The prices in Great Britain are far too low to he
remunerating.
Flour. —The quantity of flour received, both from Upper
Canada and the United States, has been larger than usual.
Our receipts amount to 139,898 barrels, and our exports to
92,393, giving 47,505 barrels retained for consumption in the
Lower Province. Most of the foreign wheat received here in
the spring was -ground for consumption, and on trial, has been
found to produce a very excellent quality of flour. Should the
accounts of distress in the country parishes below prove correct,
it is not improbable that an advance in flour may be experi-
enced towards the spring.
Provisions have also been well supplied this year: 29,110
barrels of pork having been received against 20,304 only last
year. This does not include the fresh pork received and
packed during the winter, which is sometimes considerable; but
the quantity of which cannot be estimated.
Lumber.— The stock of lumber at Quebec is by no
means heavy; the only articles above an average being oak
and elm. Red pine and staves are especially deficient. Great
exertions, we are told, are about to be made in the forests to
get out red pine, and bring it early into the Quebec market:


still the quantity will be hardly sufficient for the spring demand.
Of staves the stock is exceedingly low, and there appears no
prospect of receiving supplies till the season is considerably
advanced The scarcity of food in some districts of Lower
Canada has driven the people to Lumbering for the means of
subsistence.
In Lower Canada, according to official returns, there are 489
asheries, 857 corn mills, 750 saw mills, 90 carving mills, 97
fulling mills, 121 iron works and founderies, 70 distilleries, 14
oil mills: some of these are, of course, small establishments.
The lumber trade is, after all, the engrossing trade of the pro-
vince ;it is, from the first to the last, a matter of labour. The
cost of labour in cutting it, dragging, and shipping, forming the
whole value, exclusive of duty; and the entire of such value
(and far more) is merely a remittance for merchandize from the
mother country, the entire advantages of which belong to our
own countrymen. Where, it may be enquired, apart from our
colonies, can such reciprocity in trade be found ?
The population of the British Colonies in North America
is estimated, as follows, by Mr. Bliss: —
Lower Canada 542,000
Upper Canada 287,000
Nova Scotia, and Cape Breton 165,000
New Brunswick 100,000
Newfoundland 75,000
Prince Edward’s Island 35,000
1,204,000


SOURCES OF REVENUE.
1832.
1833.
INCREASE.
DECREASE.
Casual and Territorial Revenue
4,451 10
7f
5,990
6
94
1,538
7
74
•Duties under Imperial Acts 14 G. 3.
34,442 14
74
5,209
7
0
766
6
94
Licences under ditto
2,814 0
u
2,922
0
0
108
0
0
Do. for Billiard Tables under Provin-
cial Act 41 G. 3
75 0
0
50
0
0
25
0
0
•Duties under ditto
6,141 12
64
5,872
10
1
269
2
54
Fines and Forfeitures
757 12
1
380
15
11
376
16
2
•Duties under Provincial Acts 33 G.3.
2,851 15
2
3,313
11
9
461
15
7
• Do. under do. 35 do.
33,357 13
114
27,771
0
04
5,586
13
11
Licenses under do. do.
3,122 0
0
3,240
0
0
118
0
0
•Duties under 53 G. 3,, amended by
55 do. cap. 2, and continued by Imp.
Acs 3 G.4., cap. 119
30,938 0
8|
24,678
9
9
6,259
10
iif
*Do. under do. continued by do ....
33,279 0
10
82,543
19
2
735
1
8
Do. under Imp. Act G G. 4., cap. 114
7,381 15
0
8,220
9
5
838
14
5
Do. under do. 6 G. 3., cap. 52
44 6
0
123
17
10
79
11
10
Do. under Prov. Acts 45, 51 G. 3., &c.
3,910 16
1
3,882
8
5
28
7
8
Tolls on the Lachine Canal
4,300 0
,0
5,150
0
0
850
0
0
Duties on Passengers, &c. 2 Win. 4.,
cap. 17 -
6,605 9
2
4,775
0
0
l,83u
9
2
Total Currency £
174,474 16
10
164,124
8
11
4,760 15
04
15,111 2
114
4.760 15
01
Decrease in the Nett Revenue of Lower Canada for 1833 .
£ 10,350
7 ll
The Duties marked (•) are those of the amount of which
, after defraying the expense of
collection, Upper Canada
is allowed one-third.
Gross Amount of Revenue for 1832
£228,461
0
4J
Ditto
ditto 1833
286,635
3
11
'
Increase
£ 8,174
3
Oh
Proportion for Upper Canada, 1832
£ 43,964
60,879
4
6
Ditto
ditto 1833
9
6
Increase.
5
0
Comparative Table, showing the Nett Revenue of Lower Canada
for the Years 1832 and 1833, and the Increase or Decrease thereof
during the last Year.


YEAR.
VESSELS.
TONNAGE.
EMIGRANTS.
1819
613
155,518
12,907
1820
576
148,195
11,239
1821
418
100,646
8,050
1822
586
146,188
10,468
1823
542
131,862
10,258
1824
603
148,581
6,515
1825
762
191,614
9,097
1826
694
178,792
10,731
1827
600
152,764
16,862
1828
701
183,255
11,697
1829
861
234,301
13,356
1830
855
225,138
24,391
1831
1,009
259,878
49,250
1832
961
248,038
51,422
1833
1,007
271,147
22,062
The following will show the comparative statement of
arrivals, tonnage, and emigrants, at the Port of Quebec, since
1818, taken from the Exchange books :
N.B. This table shows only the direct arrivals of emigrants
at Quebec, without including the arrivals through the United
States, by way of New York. The numbers of emigrants
arrived at New York, from all countries, in 1833, were 41,000,
of whom, it is supposed, that 6,000 found their way into
Canada. Upon the subject of population, the following is ex-
tracted from the Settler, a newspaper of extraordinary talent,
edited by Mr. Thom, late principal of a large scholastic es-
tablishment, in the neighbourhood of the metropolis.
Some weeks ago, a statement of the populousness of the
principal states in the modern world appeared in some of the
provincial journals. According to that statement, England is
more densely peopled than any other extensive district, not
even excepting India and China. England, however, is cer-
tainly much less populous than were Egypt and Palestine in


ancient times; and even without comparing her with regions
superior in soil and climate, she cannot be supposed to have
attained her highest amount of population, while she has nearly
three acres of land to every inhabitant. Moderns are apt to
doubt the truth of the ancient records of the populousness of
Egypt and Palestine; but if we take into account the almost
universal prevalence of a vegetable diet, the matchless fertility
and miraculous activity of the soil, the almost exclusive atten-
tion to agriculture, and the abstemiousness of the consumers,
we can believe that the inhabitants jostled each other like
maggots in a cheese. In England every acre might maintain
its man; and in the more highly favoured regions, which we
have named, a family to an acre would not have exceeded the
resources of the soil. Such must have been the actual state
of the population in the most flourishing days of the kingdom
of Judah.
As connected with this subject, the following calculations
may, perhaps, amuse some of our readers.
A square mile contains 3,09-7,600 square yards, and, at
the rate of four persons, large and small, to a square yard,
12,390,400 human beings. Thus the swarming population of
the United States could be crowded, without inconvenience, into
a square mile, and could be walked round in an hour. In like
manner the host of Xerxes, of which the Grecians represent
one end as seeing the sun rise, and the other as seeing him at
the same instant set, could have been ranged in close order on
a field of a hundred acres, and could all have heard the voice
of one speaker. The inhabitants of the whole earth, about
nine hundred millions, would not fill a circle of ten miles in
diameter; it might, therefore, be ridden round in an hour by
Mr. Osbaldiston, and might hear a bell placed in the centre.
These conclusions, we believe, are new to most of our readers,
and incredible to some of them; our principal motive in record-
ing them has been to impress on the young mind in particular
the necessity of bringing all historical numbers to the test of


arithmetical calculation. By such a process, much of what
seems incredible will become simple, and much of what is
plausible will be shown to be false.
In July, 1 833, an attempt was made, at Dublin , to establish
the “ North American Colonial Association of Ireland,” for the
purchase of lands, and themselves carrying out emigrants, &c.
Among much that is good in the prospectus, there are some
things imprudent to attempt, and others impossible to accom-
plish. The objects in view are exclusively Irish, even to the
employment of shipping. Local societies throughout Ireland
were to be formed ; and, through them, subscriptions raised
to assist the general plan, and providing a reasonable poition
of the expenses of the emigrants of its own neighbourhood.
The expenses of passage, provisions, &c. of a family of five, is
calculated at 30 1 The colonial land to be purchased by the
Association, is to be leased only to the settler at a low rate ;
lands are to be prepared, and log-houses erected in readiness
for their customers, &c.
It is clear, that to make the plan practicable, it must be shoin
of much of its present intention.
THE END.
Joseph Kickerby, Printer, Sherbourn Lane.








