



EMIGRANT'S GUIDE
TO
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
CORRECTED AND REVISED TO THE PRESENT TIME.
BY J. C. BYRNE, ESQ.,
AUTHOR OP
“TWELVE YEARS’ WANDERINGS IN THE BRITISH COLONIES.”
Elebenth Edition, with a Map.
LONDON:
EFFINGHAM WILSON,
COMMERCIAL AND COLONIAL BOOKSELLER AND STATIONER,
11, ROYAL EXCHANGE.
LIVERPOOL : WAREING WEBB.
LEEDS : BAINES AND NEWSOME.
MANCHESTER : MESSRS. THOMSON.
BIRMINGHAM : WRIGHTSON AND BELL.
GLASGOW : THOMAS MURRAY.
PLYMOUTH; J. W. N. KEYS.
2849.


PREFACE
TO THE ELEVENTH EDITION.
The Author of “ Twelve Years’ Wanderings in the British
Colonies,” after having laboured long and energetically in
the cause of Emigration and Colonization, feels more than
compensated by the interest evinced by all classes in this
country on the subject, and the tardy recognition of the
fact that Emigration is the great remedy for the increas-
ing pauperism and accumulating difficulties of this country.
But the progress of the cause of Emigration is but one
step in advance; a knowledge of our Colonies must be
acquired by the population of this country, for Britain’s
Colonies are essential to her ultimate security, prosperity,
nay, salvation. In them lie the germs of great nations,
that will in future ages exercise a mighty influence over
the position of mankind. They only want to be known
to be appreciated; and in the furtherance of this great
object, the author of “ Twelve Years’ Wanderings in tbe
British Colonies,” has resolved to give to the public a
series of “Guides” to those British Colonies, favourable
seats for Emigration, at such a price as to be available to
all, and containing the greatest possible extent of con-
densed and valuable information, the result of practical
experience .
The author will at all times be happy to afford every
information, practical advice, and assistance to intending
Emigrants, by parties addressing him by letter, with a
postage-stamp for answer, at 11, Royal Exchange, London.
Jan. ls£, 1849.


CONTENTS.
PA.OE
Chap. I.—The Necessity of Discretion in the Choice of a
Colony—Prospects in Australia for Mechanics and
Tradesmen—Men of Education without Means not re-
quired—The Course that should be observed on resolving
to Emigrate, and in conveying out Funds—Advice as to
Outfit, Conduct on Board, and on First Arrival—The
Emigrant likely to be taken in—Course of Conduct—
Free Passages granted to Australia, and Emigration Com-
missioners’ Rules—Advice on the Choice of a Colony to
Capitalists—Cost of Passage ..... 1
Chap. ll. —South Australia. Original Settlement and
Extent—Early Difficulties—Land Speculation—Gover-
nors Hindmarsh and Gawler—Extraordinary Expenditure
of the latter—Universal Bankruptcy—Appointment of
Captain Grey; Revival of the Colony—Votes in Aid of
it, by the British Parliament—Major Robe’s Adminis-
tration .20
Chap. lll.—Mode of Government—lnternal Communica-
tion—Aborigines— Climate—Mode of Selling Land—
Land Fund—Land under Cultivation—lmports and
Exports-—Produce of Wool—Returns of Stock—Reve-
nue and Expenditure—Estimates for 1848—Population
and Occupation—Number of Houses—Rates of Wages
—Demand for Labour, and Persons required i . 28


PAGB.
Chap. IV.—Adelaide — Places of Worship—Religion—
Markets — Prices of Exports — Freights — Mining and
Minerals—Description of the Burra Burra Mine—Pros-
pects of the Colony 42
APPENDIX.
Exports of Minerals —Sales of Copper Ore at Swan-
sea—Value of Mineral Shares at Adelaide—Master
and Servants’ Act in force in South Australia.... 64


EMIGRANT’S GUIDE
TO
AUSTRALIA.
CHAPTER I.
The Necessity of Discretion in the Choice of a Colony—
Prospects in Australia for Mechanics and Tradesmen —
Men of Education without Means not required —The
Course that should be observed on resolving to Emi-
grate, and in conveying out Funds Advice as to
Outfit, Conduct on Board, and on First Arrival —The
Emigrant likely to be taken in—Course of Conduct —
Free Passages granted to Australia, and Emigration
Commissioners’ Rules—Advice on the Choice of a
Colony to Capitalists—Cost of Passage.
Amongst a considerable proportion of those who
resort to emigration as a means of improving their
position and prospects, the Australian Colonies are
treated of and regarded as one and the same in all
respects, whereas they are distinct and dissimilar as
regards soil and climate, and are widely separated by
distance. The three districts of Australia most to be
recommended, and whither emigration chiefly tends
at present, are New South Wales Proper, Australia
Felix, and South Australia. Legitimately speaking
Australia Felix, or Port Phillip, forms at present a
r 3


portion of the vast colony of New South Wales ; but
it is about to be separated financially and politically,
as it is at present geographically, and erected into an
independent colony.
Between the three colonies there is a considera-
ble scope for choice to the intending emigrant,
who should pause and weigh well the advantages
that each offer before he resolves which to adopt.
This is especially necessary for tradesmen and me-
chanics. In all new countries the demand for those
classes must be limited : squatters in the solitudes,
tending their flocks and herds, do not require or
consume those articles of luxury or expense, con-
sidered by many, in old countries, almost as neces-
saries, and which numerous artisans are taught to
fabricate. What is of luxury and show in Australia
is to he found in Sydney —concentrated in that
youthful city of 50,000 inhabitants; and there all
whose trades depend on appearance, or administer to
luxury, must seek employment. But even in Syd-
ney the demand for this class is small; for the mer-
chant imports and sells all required at a small profit.
There is nothing like substance of production in a
new country. The principal shops to be met with in
Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide, and all the colonial
towns are those occupied by ready-made clothes
dealers (generally Jews,) drapers, haberdashers,iron-
mongers, tailors, shoemakers, and cabinet-makers.


Auction rooms are numerous —remarkably so; and
every description of property is disposed of at them.
The merchants at their wholesale stores supply the
settlers, chiefly without the intervention of retail
dealers, with what they require for their stations, in
the shape of tea, sugar, ironmongery, and slop goods ;
the latter being entirely imported ready made.
The mechanics and tradesmen most in request in
the towns of Australia, and in the interior, are but-
chers, bakers, bricklayers, blacksmiths, carpenters,
cabinet-makers, masons, painters and glaziers, plas-
terers, sawyers, shipwrights, tailors, shoemakers, and
wheelwrights; to this list may be added printers, but
they are already very numerous in the colonies. Even
in those occupations most required, the demand for
labour of a skilful description is not extensive, and
any large arrival of such, would not only have the
effect of reducing the wages of those employed, but
would, in all probability, leave many without engage-
ments. At various periods since the foundation of
the Australian colonies, there has been such an influx
of mechanical labour, so totally disproportioned to the
demand, that, after many hardships, numerous mechan-
ics were compelled to throw aside, at least for a time,
their trades, and adopt pastoral or agricultural pursuits;
and it would be well, in case of emergency, if every
emigrant was resolved and prepared to do the same, for
in new lands all must adapt themselves to circumstances.


The Australian Colonies are completely flooded
with clerks, men of education without means, and
professional persons; for those classes, therefore,
they present no inducement, except that which con-
sists in the cheapness of all the necessaries of life.
The parties really required in the Colonies, and who
would be sure of success, are mere labourers and shep-
herds, farmers with small means, and persons possessed
of sufficient capital to become sheep and cattle pro-
prietors of extent.
When a party, in any position in life, resolves to
emigrate to Australia, the first thing necessary is to
obtain every possible information of the present state
of the colony; this may be done through the means
of the latest works, or through societies which are
being established in London for the gratuitous aid
of the intending emigrant. The next should be to
turn the entire of the worldly goods, household and
other, of the intending emigrant into hard cash ; fur-
niture, beds, and all such things would be cumbrous
and expensive. The purchase of goods for the colonial
market on speculation should be avoided : it is more
than probable that the emigrant would lose money
by the venture, or meet with very considerable delay
in realizing after arrival. The means of all, small or
great, should be conveyed out in a tangible shape—
in money.
British sovereigns pass for their full value in Aus


tralia, the currency being the same as in England ;
hut, if any considerable sum is taken out in gold, care
should he taken to insure it, which can be done at a
small premium. To those who understand the ex-
changes, or, indeed, to any class, the Joint Stock
Banks in London connected with Australia present
every facility for forwarding money to the Colonies,
letters of credit being granted by them to any amount,
and their security being unquestioned. These banks
are—The Royal Bank of Australia, Moorgate-street;
The Union Bank of Australia, in Broad-street; and
The Bank of Australasia, in Austin Friars. There
is also The Bank of South Australia, but this concern
is solely connected with South Australia, and with
none of the other Colonies.
The outfit of the intending emigrant is of import-
ance. No class requires much woollen clothing.
One cloth suit, with a top-coat for men, and cloak
for women, is sufficient. Barragon, fustian, jean,
moleskin are the most suitable. Light linen trousers,
jackets, and waistcoats, with blue shirts, are advisable.
A large stock of clothes, particularly woollen, will be
found cumbrous, and liable to injury. Silks, and
some other kinds of ladies’ clothes, are all but certain
to be spoiled, unless closely packed in tin, afterwards
cased with wood. The personal baggage of emigrants
should, in every case, be reduced to the smallest pos-
sible dimensions, and the boxes containing it be


sound, strong, and water-tight. As, of necessity,
fresh water on board ship must be economized, the
only chance passengers have of procuring water to
wash clothes is when rain falls heavily, which it does
within the tropics, it is then caught in the canvass
awnings of the ship, and preserved in casks; but, as
this is only a matter of chance, it must not be de-
pended on. The average duration of the voyage to
Australia is four months, and, as cleanliness must be
observed for the sake of health, the stock of linen and
underclothing of persons of both sexes, and of every
rank, should be abundant. In the case of persons of
the labouring class of either sex, the following list
might be a guide :• —
Adult Male’s Outfit for Australia:
Eight coloured cotton shirts, six pair grey cotton
hose, two pair worsted hose, six handkerchiefs, four
towels, one pair strong boots, two pair shoes, three
light canvass or duck trousers and jackets, two com-
plete suits of moleskin, lined and strongly made, and
one substantial woollen top-coat, which will be found
most useful in the interior of Australia, especially in
watching and tending sheep.
Adult Female’s Outfit for Australia:
Six shifts, four cotton petticoats, one stuff or serge,
and two woollen ditto; six pair of cotton hose, two
pair of woollen ditto ; four day and four night-caps ;
three pair shoes, six pocket-handkerchiefs, and three


neck ditto; four bed-gowns or night-dresses, one pair
stays, six towels, three gingham or print dresses, one
stuff or woollen ditto; two small shawls or capes, a
warm cloak, and two bonnets at least, one of which
shouldbeastrongcoarsestraw* A less quantity than the
under-linen in the foregoing lists should not be taken.
Besides the above clothing, there are other ar-
ticles of outfit emigrants require : —razors, combs,
and brushes for the hair, shoe-brushes and blacking,
three pounds of soap per adult, two pair sheets, one
pair blankets and coarse coverlet, a strong oblong chest,
to contain the bulk of the clothing, and one of small
dimensions, for the emigrant always to keep at
hand, the other being usually stowed away in the
hold, and access allowed to it at convenient intervals.
Feather or large hair-beds should not be taken ; the
emigrant had better supply himself at the port of
departure with a common flock bed to fit the berth
assigned him, any other description would be de-
stroyed on board.
It is necessary that all steerage-passengers should
supply themselves* also with knife and fork, a strong tin
plate or two, a tin quart and pint-pot, the former having
a crook attached to the front to hang before the fire if
required, a couple of spoons, and a tin two-gallon ves-
* In the Government emigrant ships, parties are supplied
with these utensils, as also bed and blanket, out of the one
pound sterling required to be lodged by all emigrants.


sel to hold one adult’s allowance of water. It would be
useless to attempt to give any detailed list of articles
required by cabin passengers or persons of means, but
they can easily judge of what is necessary from the list
furnished, by comparison. A good stock of coloured
shirts, strong linen jackets and trousers, and a good
supply of under-clothing for ladies and children, are
in all cases advisable ; further, they should not encum-
ber themselves by a provision for years, as clothes are
not considerably dearer in the colonies than at home
and the mildew, damp, and injury they are subject lo
in a voyage of long duration, fully repays the emigrant
for purchasing after arrival in his adopted land.
In the choice of a vessel, all emigrants should be
particular, and if possible secure their passage by
a ship regularly trading to the Colony, and with a
captain who has been some time in the vessel. Few
can imagine, except those who have experienced it,
the excess of suffering that can be inflicted on pas-
sengers by commanders whilst at sea, and they assume
such a different appearance and manner on shore,
that no possible circumspection can guard against the
chance of engaging with one ; the only infallible rule
is, to secure a ship regularly in the trade, and then
the captain, for his own sake, will act well to preserve
a character for his ship.
Once on board, all classes of passengers should
observe the strictest regularity, and submit implicitly


to the directions of the captain and officers, and the
rules enforced for the government of the emigrants.
Under any circumstances, the authority of the captain
should be supported by all, the safety of the ship is
in his hands, and he is accountable for all results.
Vessels bound to Australia with any considerable
number of passengers are compelled by law to carry
a surgeon, and in emigrant ships, under the Land
and Emigration Commissioners, the power of this
officer is supreme in all that respects the passengers.
The quarters of the married emigrants are usually
interposed between those of the single males and
females, for the preservation of morality; and the
steerage passengers are expected to cleanse their
berths, and at convenient opportunities air their beds,
clothes, &c.: all this materially promotes health, and
every assistance should be given by the well disposed
for their own sake in ventilating and purifying be-
tween decks.
In the confined quarters of a ship, where so many
persons of different dispositions are brought together
for the first time, it is but natural that some unplea-
santness will occur; but quarrels should be avoided
with care, all exercising mutual forbearance; other-
wise discord will increase until comfort will be at an
end, the vessel will become a hell afloat, and the
character of her passengers will suffer seriously in
the estimation of the population of the Colony in
c


which they land. Nothing tends to make a voyage
pass rapidly and pleasantly, so much as unity and sym-
pathy amongst the passengers ‘ and it shbuldhe the bu-
siness of all, particularly heads of families, to promote
such a state of things by every means in their power.
The regulations enforced in all ships under the
directions of the Land and Emigration Commissioners,
are excellent; the emigrants afe obliged to rise at
seven o’clock, at Once convey their bedding on deck,
breakfast at eight, clean the decks by nine and the
sleeping berths, prepare the children for inspection by
the surgeon and for school; (a teacher being always
selected from amongst the passengers;) constables
are appointed to preserve regularity; the emigrants
are divided into messes, the chief of which is respon-
sible for its order. No gambling is allowed, and spirits
are strictly forbidden to be brought on board ; no
smoking is allowed below; dinner is taken at one o’clock,
tea at six; all lights, except one general lamp, are ex-
tinguished by eight, p.m.; and all are bound to be
in bed by ten, p.m. A watch is kept at night be-
tween decks by selected emigrants, to preserve order,
assist the sick, and attend to the ventilators. Sun-
day must be observed with decorum, and the surgeon
inspects the emigrants to see that they are cleanly
and decently clad; religious service is performed for
those who wish’to attend it. The following liberal scale
of rations is enforced in all the Commissioners’ ships.


in
>
H
d
a
0
I Friday.
H
W
a
93
CO
t)
3
H
d
2
w
H
d
w
CO
O
Monday
Sunday
H
k!
a
>
wj
;
;
;
CC*S5
ccM
CC|fc3
f<*9
CCjM
*
Biscuit.
d
w
♦OH
:
:
♦OH
•
•
cr
Beef.
;
♦01-
;
♦OH
•
♦OH
I
S'
Pork.
H
I s * -
ft)
kJ
‘
♦OH
«
•
I
»CH
S'
Preserved
Meat.
#4-
-
rfsH
■H—
■P+-
#4-
HH
E?
Flout.
8
to
to
•
to
:
to
6
N
Raisins,
t -1
m
d
H-*
♦OH
£
♦0.-
•OH
O
N
Suet.
:
00H
OH
pint
Peas.
d
ft)
#»»=-
;
•
#*H
I
:
S'
Rice.
5z|
D
H
W
H
: i ~ • : : -
S'
Preserved
Potatoes.
-
I
-
*
*+-
;
-
o
Pea.
‘
♦01-
♦OH
o
IS
Coffee weight
when roasted
o
-•
-
>
H
s*
Sugar.
:
CO
:
CO
o
N
Butter.
oi
CO
CO
CO
co
CO
CO
qrts-
Water.
Half- a-pint
A
'
Vinegar.
Half
an-ounce
•
• •
re
CD
_j£
>
Mustard.
Two ounces
.
Salt.


The provisions are served out daily by officers con-
nected with the ship, in the presence of the constables
selected from amongst the emigrants; and any default
in quality or quantity, is to be represented to the
Surgeon-superintendent.
The personal baggage of one adult emigrant is to
be limited to twenty cubic feet measurement, or half
a ton weight, divided into boxes of two-and-a-half or
three feet long, and twenty inches wide. All extra
luggage pays freight.
s Whether the emigrant goes out at his own private
expense, or at the cost of the Commissioners he is
equally at liberty to engage himself to whom he will
on arrival in the colonies. Emigrants are usually
permitted to live on board and receive rations for
three days after arrival. It is strongly recommended
that all emigrants effect engagements as soon as pos-
sible ; in no case should extra wages be demanded,
for new arrivals, unaccustomed to colonial life, can in
no case be so useful or entitled to such high wages as
those who have been some years in the country.
The great object with all the labouring classes of
emigrants should be, to secure a good master and a
comfortable home within the located parts of the
colonies; emigrants on first arrival are not suited for
shepherds or stock-keepers in the distant interior, be-
yond the frontiers. Families in all cases should cling
together and provide, if possible, against separation ;


and parents especially should endeavour to guard
against their daughters being removed beyond the
reach of their influence. It would be well for me-
chanics and artisans instantly to visit the different em-
ployers in their various trades, and if they fail in
obtaining work, and have no capital to establish them-
selves or remove to another large town, they had
better at once reconcile themselves to accept an
engagement at anything that offers. In Australia,
hundreds of mechanics have at various periods aban-
doned their trades and adopted pastoral or agricul-
tural pursuits with ultimate benefit to themselves.
But it is not absolutely necessary that the mechanic
continue at what he may have been compelled to
adopt for a time; when opportunity offers, he may
return with advantage to the practice of his trade.
Above all things, emigrant mechanics ought not to
hang in idleness or partial employment about the
towns; they soon fall into bad habits, and tend by so
doing to injure their own character and reduce the
reasonable remuneration of labour by forced and un-
healthy competition. In the interior of all the Aus-
tralian Colonies, carpenters, wheelwrights, bricklayers,
and blacksmiths are useful, and in request; and if a
single man of any of those trades push his way into
the interior, he cannot fail of doing well, always pro-
viding that he be ready to turn his hand to any-
thing.
c 3


Emigrants arriving in the colonies with capital
should be particularly cautious as to the course they
pursue; they will meet with many who under the guise
of friendship will he ready to take advantage of them,
and in too numerous instances, the very letters ot in*
troduction that persons usually bear, maybe the means
of placing them in the hands of persons who offer their
advice with apparent candour, in order to induce the
stranger to purchase stock, land, houses, as the case
mav he, holding forth brilliant prospects, when, if the
truth were known, the seemingly disinterested gentle-
man is seeking to secure a customer at a high figure
for something he or some friend of his has to dispose
of. In all cases the new arrival, if he have capital,
should pause and acquire a thorough practical know-
ledge of men and things around him; he can invest
his money at interest in one of the Joint Stock Banks
for six months; and, if he intend to turn sheep-
farmer, cattle breeder, or agriculturist, put a few
pounds in his pocket, settle his family in the capital
for a few months, and wend his own way into the in-
terior, plainly clad. Thus by association and per-
sonal observation, the man of means, great or small,
will acquire knowledge at a small expense that will
prove invaluable to him, and the time and money
thus spent, will be the best expended in his life. If
the emigrant pursue a contrary course, he will pay
dearly for it, perhaps at such a rate as materially to


affect his future prospects. There are a hundred ways
in which he may be deceived in land, in stock, or in
the purchase of a business; for instance, the sheep
bought may be apparently from the best flocks in
the colony, but they may be the refuse of a settler’s
stock, and not worth half what a fair draft would be :
in their dealings in the sale of property of any kind,
the old colonists, especially in New South Wales
Proper, are not scrupulous, their sole object is to pro-
cure by any means —honest or dishonest—the highest
possible price. In the purchase of land, emigrants
should be especially cautious in New South Wales as
respects questions of title, for although the colony has
only been in existence such a short time, yet in some
instances, particular spots of land have changed
hands as many as a score times. All should see and
ascertain by personal observation the real quality of
land before they purchase it, and be certain of a plen-
tiful supply of good water in all seasons: without this,
land otherwise desirable becomes perfectly worthless,
especially for homesteads.
All classes of emigrants who have anything to lose
require the exercise of strict care to preserve their
means from the designs of the many, who they will
find anxious to take advantage of them in New South
Wales, persons who prefer a life of dishonesty to one
of honour and fair dealing. It would be impossible to
expose the many ways parties may be deceived; but.


as a general preservative, it would be well for a newly-
arrived colonist to be excessively careful in all his
dealings. As regards South Australia, and Aus-
tralia Felix, these colonies bear a much better
moral character than New South Wales Proper; but
yet extreme caution is necessary in the dealings of
all men of means, until they have acquired a perfect
knowledge of the country.
There is at present an extensive emigration being
carried out to the Australian Colonies through the
Colonial Land and Emigration Commissioners, of
7, Park-street, Westminster, who grant free passages
to certain classes. As the funds that support this
system are derived from the sale of Waste Crown
Lands in the Colonies, every regard is paid in the se-
lection to secure those persons whose services are most
required in the Colonies, viz. good agricultural labour-
ers, shepherds, female domestic and farm servants, and
dairymaids; a few country mechanics, such as black-
smiths, carpenters, bricklayers, and wheelwrights, are
also forwarded ; but the greatest objection is advanced
against those who, by being long resident in large
towns, become incapacitated for the active duties of
a country life. With a free passage is included provi-
sion and all necessary medical aid.
It is absolutely necessary that all applicants for
free passages be of good character, and be well re-
commended for industry, sobriety, and ability in their


callings, and that they have not been in the habitual
receipt of parish relief. In no case are the ages of
parents to exceed 40, and the ages of single persons
not accompanying them, must not be less than 18,
or more than 35. All persons in ill health or with
any bodily or mental defect are excluded. No family
is taken with more than two children under seven,
or three under ten years of age, and the separation of
husbands and wives, or parents and children, is
strictly forbidden. Single males and females are
taken in about equal proportions.
All applicants for free passages are hound to find
their own outfit, to have not less than the following
quantity of clothes, and before they receive an order
to embark, they are to pay for each adult, the sum of
one pound sterling, and for each child under 14, ten
shillings, towards the expense of bedding and mess
utensils for the voyage, which are furnished by the
Commissioners.
Quantity of Clothes required by a Male.
Two complete suits of exterior clothing, six shirts,
six pairs of stockings, and two pairs of shoes.
For a Female.
Six shifts, two flannel petticoats, six pairs of stock-
ings, two pairs of shoes, and two gowns.
Each person is also obliged to bring two pounds of
soap, and their own towels and sheets.


On the vovage the emigrants in the Commissioners
ships, are victualled in messes of six or eight, two
children under fourteen counting as one adult; wo-
men nursing are allowed a pint of stout per day ; and
a full supply of wine, sago, and medical comforts for
the sick are on board. On arrival in the Colony they
are received by a government officer, who gives them
every advice and information, directs them how to
procure employment, and informs them of the rates
of wages. They are permitted to remain on board
fourteen days at the expense of the Commissioners.
In quitting their native land, in leaving behind
them the Old World, emigrants should also cast aside
all home ideas, all prejudices and passions of the
past and he fully prepared to fall into the ways and
habits of those amongst whom they cast their lot.
Religious prejudice unfortunately runs high in the
Australian Colonies, and ail emigrants should be care-
ful to guard against such; it involves those who take
part in religious disputes in misery of mind, and in
many cases affects their worldly substance: emigrants
should proffer and be prepared to receive the hand of
friendship and brotherhood from all.
A few words of advice to persons of means as to a
place of settlement. The large capitalist will find
employment for his means either in the elder dis-r
tricts of New South Wales Proper, or in the mineral
country of South Australia: in the latter, if he he


inclined to dig for wealth in the bowels of the earth;
but for the person with means under £2,000, who
intends to embark in business, turn sheep-farmer,
cattle-owner, or farmer, Australia Felix and South
Australia are the places to settle im For some rea-
sons the former is preferable, the climate being coolei,
the soil richel*, and the country better watered. Half
the battle in emigration lies in the proper choice of a
colony in connexion with a person s means ; know-
ledge should be sought, and care taken in coming to
a result, which will afiect permanently the future pros-
pects of the emigrant. To the Australian Colonies
the price of passage varies according to the ship and
other circumstances. The price for a steerage pas-
sage is from £ls to £2O. Intermediate passage, £3O
to £4O. Cabin passage, £SO to £7O. In all cases,
provisions included; and in the cabin, wines and
spirits.


CHAPTER II.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Original Settlement and Extent —Early Difficulties—Land
Speculation—Governors Hindmarsh and Gawler—Ex-
traordinary Expenditure of the latter —Universal Bank-
ruptcy—Appointment of Captain Grey ; Revival of the
Colony—Votes in Aid of it, by the British Parliament—
Major Robe’s Administration.
The shores of South Australia were first explored by
the celebrated navigator Captain Flinders, in his Ma-
jesty’s ship the Investigator, in the year 1802. Diffi-
cult of approach, by reason of the numerous islands
and detached rocks that lie off them. Captain Flin-
ders was debarred from visiting many parts of the
main land, but he landed on Kangaroo island at the
entrance of Gulf St. Vincent.
The Colony has its limits defined by Act of Parlia-
ment, and is comprised between the 132nd and 141st
degrees of East longitude, and extends from the shores
of the Southern Ocean inland to the 26th degree of
south latitude. The extent of land within these
boundaries exceeds 300,000 square miles, which is
about three times the size of Great Britain and Ire-
land, but the northern parts of the Colony are barren


and desert, useless for the purposes of man, and
supposed to form portions of a vast internal desert in
the centre of Australia. It was about the year 1833
that public attention was first turned in England
towards the foundation of a settlement on the shores
of Gulf St. Vincent, and in the year 1834, an Act of
Parliament was obtained for erecting the province of
South Australia into a British Colony on the princi-
ples or rather theory, of centralization, as advocated
by Mr. Edward Gibbon Wakefield. According to
the Act of Parliament, constituting the Colony, it was
necessary that £35,000 should be raised in England
by the sale of colonial lands within a limited period;
and as an inducement to original purchasers, the
price of land although fixed at one pound sterling
per acre, was in their favour lowered to twelve shil-
lings per acre, until the necessary sum was raised.
The proceeds of the land fund were, according to the
Act, ultimately to be devoted to the purposes of
emigration.
In 1835 as soon as the £35,000 was raised, com-
missioners were appointed to carry out the provisions
of the Act. These were authorized to borrow
£BO,OOO at ten per cent, interest, for the preliminary
expenses of the settlement, the amount being secured
on the crown lands of the Colony. It was further
provided that a representative legislature be granted
to the colony, when its population would amount
x>


to 50,000 persons, and no land was to be dis-
posed of otherwise than by sale; but all parties were
at liberty to purchase to any extent in fee. On
no account were convicts to be sent into the Co-
lony, and all religious creeds were to stand upon
the same footing, no established church being re-
cognised.
The first ship with emigrants for the settlement
left London in the early part of 1836, and was soon
followed by the Buffalo store-ship, with Captain
Hindmarsh, the first Lieutenant-governor, on board.
This vessel also conveyed out all the materials neces-
sary for a new settlement; Captain Hindmarsh landed
from her on the shores of Holdfast Bay; in the neigh-
bourhood of Adelaide; on the 28th December, 1836,
proclaimed the Colony, and took possession of it in
the name of the British crown.
Besides the Lieutenant-governor, there were sent
out to the Colony the necessary officials of all
kinds, and on behalf of the Commissioners of South
Australia, J. H. Fisher, Esq., proceeded thither to
represent them, under the title of Resident Com-
missioner.
The surveys of the capital, Adelaide, were com-
pleted under the direction of the Surveyor-general,
Colonel Light, by March, 1837, when an allocation
of the town lots to purchasers took place, the re-
maining sections being then disposed of by public


Ruction at prices varying from two pounds ten up*
wards.
The early days of South Australia were times of
difficulty: dissensions arose amongst the officials, espe-
cially between the Governor and Commissioner; the
survey of the country land went on but slowly ; the
population were huddled together at Adelaide, unable
to get possession and cultivate the soil, provisions of
all kinds were exorbitantly dear, and wages high.
The spirit of centralization that had drawn together
a large body of persons in a new land, but precluded
them from tilling, for the time being, the Soil, ulti-
mately led to land speculation and house building on
a most extensive scale in the capital. Land specu-
lation resulted in a mania that affected all the colo-
nists, the most ridiculous prices were given for town
lands, and the speculators counted their gains by
thousands. But whilst thus engaged, the funds of
the colonists, large as they must have been, were
being rapidly drained away to pay for provisions of
all kinds, live stock and other imports; and the inha-
bitants only awoke from their trance of prosperity to
find themselves penniless bankrupts, with lands and
houses they could find none to purchase.
To bring about this result the executive largely
aided ; no proper provision had been made for a cer-
tain supply of necessaries for so considerable a number
of persons ; dependence had in a measure been placed


on private enterprise, and as at the time there was
a scarcity in the neighbouring Colonies, everything
rose to a most extravagant pitch: it was not until
May, 1838, that the settlers first got possession of
their country lands to enable them to commence cul-
tivation, and seed was hardly to be procured for
money; moreover, the spirit of gambling that had
been generated prevented numbers leaving the capi-
tal to proceed to their lands and raise produce. The
differences amongst the authorities led, in June, 1838,
to the recall of Governor Hindmarsh, and shortly
afterwards to that of Mr. Fisher, and the abolition of
the office of Resident Commissioner; Colonel Light
also resigned his post of Surveyor-general, and was
succeeded by Major Frome, of the royal engineers.
In October, 1838, Colonel Gawler arrived at the
colony as successor to Captain Hindmarsh, also armed
with authority as Commissioner. In July, 1838, an
amended Act of Parliament for the settlement of the
Colony was passed, empowering the Commissioners or
their representative in the Colony to borrow all such
sums as might be necessary to carry out efficiently
the project of settlement, the amount to be secured
on the revenue derivable from the sale of waste lands,
and in furtherance of this Act the Commissioners gave
Colonel Gawler power to draw upon them to an un-
limited extent. When the new Governor arrived, he
found the expenditure proceeding at the rate of some


.£33,000 per annum, but this he rapidly increased: in
the quarter ending March, 1839, the expenditure was
<£8,954 ; in the last quarter of the same year it was
£34,291. No regal'd was paid to private interest or
the progress of agriculture ; the most ridiculous public
works were commenced, the labouring classes em-
ployed at the most exorbitant wages to erect build-
ings that an infant Colony could well do without.
Notwithstanding remonstrances from home. Colonel
Gawler continued in his course, drawing bills on the
Commissioners for immense sums, so as to meet the
expenditure, which for the last quarter of 1840 actu-
ally reached £60,155. 14s. 4d. The ability of the
Commissioners to meet Colonel Gawler’s bills was at
length brought to an end, and the bills, dishonoured,
were returned to the Colony. This was all that was
wanting to complete the ruin of the entire population ;
the land mania had been rapidly bringing about a com-
mercial crisis ; monetary distress was becoming gene-
ral ; the value of property of all kinds was reducing ;
but when the government became bankrupt, with a sum
of about £300,000 due to the public, it put a climax
to all, none could meet their liabilities. Then came
a revulsion; the population fled from Adelaide, scat-
tered themselves over the land to raise from the earth
the means of subsistence, for they had now no other
means of procuring it, and from that period may be
dated the real progress and prosperity of the Colony ;
D 3


the band of strained, forced centralization once bro-
ken, the resources of the country soon developed
themselves.
As a necessary consequence of his acts, Colonel
Gawler was recalled, and left the Colony in the May
of 1841, about the same time as Captain Grey, his
successor, arrived with strict instructions to reduce
the expenditure at once. The Board of Commission-
ers in London was also dissolved, as useless and ineffi-
cient; the House of Commons, in March, 1841,
voted the sum of ,£155,000 towards the liquidation
of Colonel Gawler’s dishonoured bills; and in 1842 a
further sum of £59,936, the original amount of
£85,000 borrowed on bond by the Commissioners,
was transferred, with the consent of the bondholders,
to the charge of the consolidated fund, at the reduced
rate of 3| per cent, per annum, on the condition of its
resumption by the Colony, when its revenue had im-
proved, and was capable of bearing the charge, which
already is the case, and the consolidated fund was,
in 1847, relieved from the burden. Over and above
these vast sums, upwards of £30,000 was due in
the Colony by Colonel Gawler’s administration, for
which no hills had been issued. I his sum Captain
Grey was directed to provide for by the issue of local
debentures at the rate of 5 per cent, per annum in-
terest.
At the period of Captain Grey’s arrival, in such a


distressed state was the Colony that he was compelled
to apply to Sir George Gipps, the Governor of New
South Wales, to advance a sum of £3,000 to enable
him to carry on the government of South Australia.
Under the fostering and energetic care of Captain
Grey, South Australia rapidly became prosperous,
agriculture was promoted, the harbour thrown open
as a free port to the commerce of the world, and the
expenditure reduced from £IBO,OOO to <£30,000 per
annum.
Previous to the departure of Captain Grey from
the Colony in 1845, to assume the government of New
Zealand, the extensive mineral discoveries had taken
place, which have since poured such wealth into South
Australia; and when Major Robe succeeded Cap-
tain Grey, the latter had the satisfaction of leaving
the Colony on the high-road to prosperity, and with
the best wishes, but sincere regrets of its population.
The government of Major Robe, which continued
to the early part of the present year, 1848, has only
been signalized by the passing of two measures, on his
proposition, by the legislature of the Colony, which
have met with considerable opposition. The first of
these measures was the imposition of a royalty tax
upon all minerals raised; the Act of Council was
approved of by Lord Grey, but the measure is now
about being abandoned on the strenuous representa-
tions and remonstrances of the colonists.


The second measure referred to is that by which a
state provision is made for all religions and education,
according to the relative numbers of each creed, with
preference for none. Previously, the voluntary system
prevailed as regarded religion and education, and being
found to work w r ell, the change introduced by the
Governor, adopted by the Council, and approved of by
Lord Grey, has not met with the general approbation
of the population ; but as the system has not yet had
time for a trial, it certainly is rather premature to
pass an opinion on it.
The present governor. Sir Henry Young, succeeded
Major Rohe, who removed to another appointment
at the Mauritius: the former has hut lately arrived
in the Colony.
CHAPTER III.
Mode of Government—lnternal Communication—Abori-
gines—Climate —Mode of Selling Land —Land Fund—
Land under Cultivation —Imports and Exports—Produce
of Wool —Returns of Stock —Revenue and Expenditure
-Estimates for 1848 —Population and Occupation—
Number of Houses —Rates of Wages Demand for
Labour, and Persons required.
The Colony of South Australia is ruled by a Lieu-
tenant-governor, with th° aid of executive and legis


lative councils. The members of the former are
the chief officials of the Colony, who are also mem-
bers of the legislative council, together with a few of
the principal colonists. In the case of both councils
all the members are nominated by the Crown, the
Governor for the time being having power to suspend
them pending the approbation of the Colonial Secre-
tary. The legislative council, of which the Governor
is president, has the power of making laws for the
Colony, subject to the approval of the Crown. The
Governor has the initiative of all proposed acts,
financial and other. The laws of the Colony are
similar, in most respects, to those of England, more
especially the criminal laws. No penal statutes are
in force, as is the case in New South Wales and Van
Dieman’s Land.
A mail per fortnight runs between Melbourne and
Adelaide, via Mount Gambier, close to the Glenelg
River. This completes an internal regular commu-
nication between Adelaide and Sydney.
The aborigines of South Australia are fast disap-
pearing before the advent of civilization, notwith-
standing the care of the Protectors and their staff,
supported at considerable expense to the Colony.
The natives are migratory in their habits, cannibals,
and practisers of infanticide. In no material respect
do they differ from the aborigines of Australia Felix ;
therefore what has been said of the latter fully applies


to the former. The climate of South Australia is
nearly similar to that of New South Wales Proper ;
Adelaide itself is situated nearly in the same latitude
as Svdney; but on the southern coast the rains are
more frequent and certain than on the eastern.
South Australia, as far as is known of it, is not
subject to the droughts which at times afflict New
South Wales Proper. According to a rain-gauge,
carefully kept in Adelaide for seven years, it appears
that, in the entire of that period, not one month
elapsed without rain, the greatest quantity generally
fell in June, July, and August, and the mean yearly
average of seven years’ observation was 19| inches,
on 110 days. The climate is, beyond doubt, dry,
and very healthy. Consumption and bronchial
complaints are almost unknown. The thermometer
at times rises to a great height, 102° in the shade j but
this never lasts long, and field labour can always be
pursued. Hot winds occur at times, and inflict,
whilst they blow, considerable damage on delicate
plants, flowers, the growing crops, &c. They seldom
exceed in duration twelve hours, and give place tp
cool refreshing southerly winds, which re-invigorate
the frame. The hot winds blow from the north-
ward.
The crown lands of South Australia are disposed
of by auction in a similar mode to that pursued in the
other Australian Colonies, at not less than one pound


sterling per acre. Since 1843* the last year of commer-
cial distress and difficulty in the Colony, the increase
in the land fund has been remarkable, and evinces
the prosperous condition of the Colony. In 1843
the land fund amounted to .£613.
Acres. £.
In 1844 there were sold 3,428, producing 5,668
„ 1845 „ 69,658, j, 72,902
» 1846 ** 81,000, „ 75,000
The immense increase in the land sales for the two
latter years are* in great part, attributable to the
extensive mineral discoveries that took place during
that period; but there was also in those years, and
in 1847, a considerable quantity of land purchased
for purely agricultural purposes, the soil being su-
perior. The land under cultivation for eight years,
ending 1847, was as follows:
Acres. Acres.
1840 2,503 .1844 26,918
1841 6,722 1845 26,218
1842 19,790 1846 33,292
1843 28,690 1847 42,10
In 1848, the number of acres under cultivation
considerably exceeded 60,000, but there are no
official returns as yet furnished. The produce raised
from the land under cultivation chiefly consisted of
wheat of a superior quality. The land actually ea


closed, according to the last advices, was upwards
of 90,000 acres, and there was a large extent in
process of being fenced in. A considerable propor-
tion of the population having turned their atten-
tion to agriculture, South Australia bids fair to be
a grain-producing country, more especially as the
wheat hitherto raised has been of a character un-
surpassed in the European markets. It is no
unusual thing to meet with samples of South Aus-
tralian wheat weighing sixty-six pounds to the bushel
measure.
The following are the import and export returns
for seven years, to the latest period they have been
officially furnished :
IMPORTS.
In value. tn value.
1841 £229,925 1845 £168,161
1842 169,533 1846 304,321
1843 93,148 1847 410,825
1844 ’. 106,660
EXPORTS.
In value. t n Ta^ue '
1841 £40,561 1845 £131,800
1842 29,079 1846 287,059
1843 66,169 1847 310,348
1844 82,268
The following are the returns of exports, the pro-
duce of South Australia, for the first quarter of
1848


Articles.
Quantity.
Value.
Animals, living, viz.
£
Sheep ......
100
40
100 cwt
60
23
Corn,viz. Barley ....
281 qrs
560
540
24 ditto
30
Pollard ....
3 tons ........
20
Wheat ....
3,267 qrs
5,678
,, Flour
262 tons 12 cwt.
3,138
230 cwt
188
Hides
227
262
Leather
Ore —Emery
68 tons
700
Lead
126 tons 3 cwt. .
1,850
Copper
4,082 tons ....
76,380
360
20
Tallow
1,694 cwt
3,016
435
Wool, bales, 7077
1,726,025 lbs. ..
79,065
£172,592
Abstract Returns of Imports and Exports at Port Adelaide ,
for the First Quarter of 1848. ,
IMPORTS.
£. s. d.
Total Imports 49,913 2 0
Imports re-exported 5,691 16 0
Imports consumed in the Colony.. £44,221 6 0
E


EXPORTS.
£. S. (I.
Total Exports 178,282 16 0
Imports re-exported 5,691 16 0
Exports the produce of the Colony £l 72,592 0 0
The season for shipping wool being the first quarter
of the year, the amount of wool appearing in the
foregoing return is large : altogether wool may, with
copper ore, be considered the main staples of the
Colony. The following return exhibits the increase
in the export of wool during five years, ending
1846:
VALUE OF WOOL EXPORTED TO GREAT BRITAIN’.
£. S. d.
1842 29,749 0 0
1843 45,568 9 8
1844 42,769 5 9
1845 72,235 0 0
1846 105,941 0 0
The decrease apparent in 1844, when compared
with 1843, is not to be attributed to any falling-off
in the production, but merely to the fact of a quantity
of the wool that, in the usual course of events, would
appear in the returns of 1844, being shipped before
the close of the year 1843.
The increase oflive stock has fully kept pace with
the increase in the production of wool. The follow


ing are the returns of stock down to the latest period,
from the year 1838 :
Horses. Homed Cattle.
1838 480 2,500
1839 800 7,600
1840 1,060 15,100
1841 1,650 16,696
1842 1,850 20,000
1843 2,000 25,000
1844 2,150 30,000
1845 and 1846 ....
1847 2,600 38,000
Sheep. Pigs and Goats.
1838 28,000 780
1839 108,700 1,700
1840 200,160 3,400
1841 242,000 6,000
1842 300,000 8,000
1843 350,000 10,000
1844 450,000 12,000
1845 and 1846
1847 620,000 19,000
From being a grain-importing country under the
theory of centralization advocated by Mr. Wakefield,
South Australia rapidly became an exporting one,
when the population were thrown upon the resources
of their land, and dispersed over it. In the year
1841 South Australia imported grain to the value of
,£70,000; in 1842, grain in value, £29,682. os. Od.;
in 1843, the amount had decreased to, in value,
£3,519. 2s. ; and in 1844 the importations of grain
totally ceased, for the population produced wheat at
3s. per bushel, a much lower price than it possibly


could be imported at. Since that period the Colony
has largely exported grain; and in the year 1847
several cargoes were forwarded to Great Britain, the
Mauritius, and the Cape of Good Hope. In the
London market the samples have been unsurpassed
in quality, ajid brought prices equal to, if not exceed-
ing, the best Dantzic wheat. The character of a
considerable proportion of the colonial population is
favourable to the formation of a prosperous and per-
severing agricultural class. There are numerous
German families among them, who turn their atten-
tion altogether to tillage and the growth of the vine.
The following are the Revenue and Expenditure
Returns for seven years, and the Estimates for the
year 1848, for the expenditure of the Colonial Go-
vernment :
£.
1841, Revenue 22,720 Expenditure.... 104,471
1842, Ditto ...... 22,074 Ditto 54,444
1843, Ditto 24,142 Ditto 29,842
1844, Ditto 27,878 Ditto ...... f .., 29,453
1845, Ditto 37,878 Ditto 31,752
1846, Ditto ... •.. 48,015 Ditto ' 36,931
1847, Ditto 66,946 Ditto 67,799
DETAILED ESTIMATES OF EXPENDITURE FOR GOVERN-
MENT FOR THE YEAR 1848. £, s . (t
Governor and Establishment 1,924 0 0
Executive and Legislative Councils 655 0 0
Colonial Secretary’s Department 2,129 0 0
Treasury 835 0 0
Registry 0 0
Audit.. 795 0 0


£. s. d.
Customs’ Department 2,695 0 0
Crown Lands ....... 795 0 0
Survey 3,396 J 5 0
Public Works 1441 13 0
Post-Office 1,727 16 0
Harbour , 2,427 0 0
Colonial Storekeeper .... i............. 200 0 0
Out-Stations and Magistrates ... 1,130 0 0
Country Foot Police 945 0 0
Metropolitan Police 2,786 0 0
Mountfd Police.. 6,819 13 0
Town Surveyor, Inspector of Weights and
Measles,; inspector of Slaughter-houses,
and Office Rent 385 0 0
Aboriginal Protectors, and their Department 1,741 6 8
Medical Department 887 7 0
Lunatic Asylum .' 527 0 0
Judicial and Law Establishments 1,922 0 0
Insolvent Court, ditto 255 0 0
Resident Magistrates’ Court 770 0 0
Bench of Magistrates 155 0 0
Sheriffs’ Department 1,673 0 0
Advocate-General’s ditto 660 0 0
Coroner’s ditto 170 0 0
Colonial Chaplain 350 0 0
Religious and Educational Purposes for dif-
ferent Sects of professing Christians .... 2,221 0 0
The Jewish Persuasion 5 16 0
Public Works and Improvements 9,462 0 0
Maintenance of Destitute Poor 600 0 0
Interest on Colonial Revenue Securities .. 3,003 0 0
Rent of Courts of Law, and Law Offices.... 300 0 0
Expenses of Medical Witnesses 50 0 0
Purchase of two Fire-engines 500 0 0
Purchase of Types and Presses for Govern-
ment Printing 600 0 0
Unforeseen Expenses 500 0 0
Total... £57,766 6 8
E 3


1 •/
Males.
Female*.
Total.
South Adelaide
2,902
2,668
6,570
North Adelaide
929
914
1,843
Milner Special Survey ....
706
493
1,194
North of Gawler Town ....
348
110
458
Wakefield and Hutt Rivers.
631
131
762
Moorunde
38
8
66
W ellington
93
12
105
M oimt Crawford .........
320
210
530
Little Para River
462
369
831
Port Adelaide
816
713
1,529
South-West of Adelaide ..
965
892
1,857
South East of Adelaide
688
584
1,272
East and N, East of Adelaide
526
443
969
Sturt and Onkaparinga Rivers
212
176
388
O’Halloran Hill
392
320
712
South of Onkaparinga
334
248
582
Sources of Onkaparinga ...
780
672
1,452
Meadow’s Special Survey...
301
243
544
Finnis’s and Angas’s Special
167
475
Survey
308
Encounter Bay
158
107
265
Port Lincoln
85
47
132
Kangaroo Island
—
—
70
North of Rivoli Bay
230
21
251
South of Rivoli Bay
248
15
263
Yankalilla
91
47
138
Cape Jervis *..
92
40
132
Total
12,670
9,650
22,390
The ordinary Revenue was calculated to yield a
large surplus over and above the expenditure for 1848,
although the latter was a considerable increase on that
of the previous year.
The population of South Australia, according to
the census taken April, 1846, was as follow. The
different districts, and their population, are set out
separately: —


The following is the number of each religious per-
suasion :
Church of England 11,945
Church of Scotland 1,958
Lutheran Church (chiefly Germans) .... 1,524
Wesleyan Methodists 2,246
Other Protestant Dissenters 2,888
Roman Catholics 1,649
Jews 58
Mahommedans and Pagans 52
The married males amount to 3,847; females,
3,811 ; the single males, 8,823; single females, 0,839.
The adult males, from twenty-one upwards, number
6,814 ; those between the ages of fourteen and twenty-
one, 1,088. The females above fourteen amount to
5,136. In order still further to develope the position
of the population of this interesting and rich colony,
it may be as well to give the occupations as returned
in the census of 1846.
OCCUPATIONS.
Land proprietors, merchants, bankers, and stock-
holders 1,153
Clerks and overseers to the above 162
Professional persons 109
Clerks and assistants to the above 35
Manufacturers, brewers, millers 82
Clerks and assistants to the above 46
Shopkeepers and retail dealers 338
Clerks and assistants to the above 160
Brickmakers 77
Bricklayers 83
Smiths 152
Carpenters and joiners 362
Masons ® 2


Shoemakers 225
Cabinetmakers 24
Plasterers 38
Harness-makers 13
Tailors 32
Tanners....-.- 13
Miners . >. 26!)
Sawyers and splitters 240
Shepherds, and others, in charge of sheep 1,120
Stockmen, and others, in charge of cattle • • 215
Carriers and their assistants • . 134
Gardeners, farm-servants, and persons employed in
agriculture 1,492
Mariners and fishermen 85
Domestic servants • 818
Labourers, not included in the above definitions .. 726
All other persons not included in the above 13,993
The number of houses in the entire colony were,
according to the census,—stone or brick, 1715;
wood, 1,272; temporary dwellings and tents, 1,189;
total, 4,176. From April, 1846, to Jan. 1»49, the
Colony would not have received a Jess accession by
immigration, and casual passengers from Britain and
the Colonies, than fifteen thousand persons. A large
number of these were miners, much required to work
the inexhaustible wealth that discoveries of ores of
the richest quality made every month more apparent.
The rates of wages payable in the Colony are consi-
derable, when the price of provisions is taken into
account. House-rent is only paid in the town ; for
in the country a hut is soon erected. Many of the
pastoral servants live throughout the year in tents, or
under a tarpaulin erected on a few forked sticks;


and they suffer no inconvenience from the weather,
owing to the salubrity of the climate.
The following were the rates of wages general in
the Colony in September, 1847 :
Blacksmiths—3os. to 355. weekly—well employed.
Bricklayers—6s. to 6s. 6d, per day, ditto.
Carpenters—6s. to 7s per day* ditto.
Masons —6s. to 7s. per day, ditto*
Labourers—lss. to 255. weekly.
Shoemakers and Bootmakers earn from 30s. to 455.
per week, and find plenty of employment.
Shepherds are much in request, at wages varying,
according to distance, from 10s. to 12s, per week,
with weekly rations, consisting of 10 lbs* flour, 10 lbs.
fresh meat, 2 lbs. sugar, and lb. tea.
Hutkeepers-—6s. to Bs. per week, with like rations.
Farm Labourers are readily engaged at from 10s. to
14s. per week, according to ability, with rations above-
Inentioned, and opportunities of earning more at har-
vest time*
Tinsmiths find plenty of work; and those who em-
ploy journeymen give them 30s. per week or more.
Domestic Servants are in great request for respect-
able service, at .£l4 to £lB a-year, many being en-
gaged weekly or monthly, at rates varying from ss. to
7s. per week, all with board and lodging, of course.
Cooks, or other male domestic Servants, get £lB
to £25 per annum, with board and lodging. Liveries
are rare, but good living is not so.


Miners employed on owners’ account get 255. to
30s. per week; but really experienced men engaged
upon tribute and tut-work have frequent opportuni-
ties of earning considerably more.
The demand for mechanics and tradesmen is limited,
for a great proportion of the clothes consumed are im-
ported ready made. Those generally in request are,
carpenters, blacksmiths, and shoe and boot-makers;
but the persons really in demand are miners, shep-
herds, farm-labourers, and domestic servants, more
especially strong young females.
CHAPTER IV.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Adelaide —Places of Worship—Religion—Markets —Prices
of Exports—Freights —Mining and Minerals —Descrip-
tion of the Burra Burra Mine—Prospects of the Colony.
The capital of South Australia is Adelaide, situated
in latitude 34° 56' south. The town is built on either
side of the River Torrens, a torrent at one period of
the year, a chain of ponds at another; the land
rises gradually from the river banks, and terminates
in elevated terraces, which command an extensive
prospect. Adelaide is about seven miles from Hold-
fast Bay, a low level plain intervening, flooded at
times; but the port, a free one, in which vessels of
considerable tonnage can lie, completely land-
locked, is more to the north, and about the same


distance from the city. All goods have to be con-
veyed by land-carriage from the port to Adelaide;
but it is proposed to construct a canal for shipping;
this, however, is a thing of time.
The country around Adelaide resembles a gen-
tleman’s park, lightly timbered, and closed in by
elevated ranges of hills; the soil is good, but the
town is badly supplied witii water. Adelaide is
divided by the Torrens into north and south ; the
latter of which is the principal division, containing,
according to the census of 1846, 5,570 inhabitants,
whilst the northern numbered a population of 1,843.
The government offices, some of which are ex-
tensive, and the chief places of business, are on the
south side of the Torrens ; a bridge effects a com-
munication between either side. There are nume-
rous places of worship in Adelaide ; Church of Eng-
land, Roman Catholic, Presbyterian, Baptist, Wes-
leyan, Calvinist, and Lutheran. There is a Bishop of
the Church of Englandresident,and aßornanCatholic
Bishop, besides numerous clergymen of every deno-
mination. All creeds are assisted from the Colonial
funds, according to the number of communicants.
The Adelaide markets are well supplied with pro-
visions ot all kinds, at extremely cheap rates, as will
be found by the following market return.
Adelaide, Farm Produce. —'Wheat, 4s. to 4s. 3d.
per bushel: fine flour, £l2 per ton : seconds, ditto,
£ll ; oats, 4s. 6d. to 55.; English barley, ss. to


ss. 6d.; Cape ditto, 3s. 9d. to 4s. ; pollard,
£6. 10s. per ton, or Is. 6d. per bushel Of 20lbs. ;
bran, Is. 3d. per bushel; malt, 7s. per bushel. The
two-pound loaf, 3d.
Poultry and Dairy Produce. —Fowls, 3s. to 4s.
per couple; ducks, ss. per pair; turkeys, ss. to Bs.
each; geese, 6s. to 7s. each ; pigeons, Is. 6d. per
pair ; butter, lOd. to Is. per lb.; bacon, Bd. to lOd.;
hams, Is. to Is. 2d.; pork, 6d. toßd.; lard, Bd.; sauf-
sages, Bd. perlb.; cheese,Bd.to Is.; eggs, lOd. perdoz.
Butchers' Meat. —Beef, 2d. to 3d. per lb.; mut-
ton, Id. to 2d. per lb ; lamb, Is. 3d. to 3s. per quar-
ter; veal, 4d. to sd. perlb; calves’ heads, 2s. to
2s. 6d. each ; ditto feet, Bd. to Is. 4d. per set; tripe,
6d. per lb.
Vegetables.— Potatoes, Bs. 6di, to 9s. per cwt. or
Id. per lb.; cabbages, Is. 6d. per dozen; green
peas, 3s. 6d. per peck; onions, 6d. per lb.; carrots,
3d. per bunch ; turnips, 4d. per dozen ; chillies, 2d.
to 4d. per dozen; celery, 4d. to 6d. per head;
leeks, 6d. to Is. per bundle.
Hay. —Oaten hay, £2. 15s. to £3.- ss. per ton;
meadow ditto, £2 to £2. 10s.
Cattle.~YdX oxen, 14s. to 16s. per 100 lbs.,
sinking the fat and offal; working steers, £4 to £5 ;
dairy cows, £2 to £4; calves, £l to £l. ss. each ;
sheep, ss. to 7s.
Fruit. —Apples, Is. to Is. 3d. per lb;*, grapes,
4d. to 6d. per lb.; pomegranates, 6d. to 9d. each.


ADELAIDE.
WHOLESALE PRICES CURRENT. 1648.
ARTICLES OF EXPORT.
Bacon... 4 i i * per lb 6d. to 9cL
Bark an per tori.
Barley i. *.... bushel. 6s. 6d. to4s.
Barleymeal ............ 50 lbs.
Beef i . i .... tierCes f»Ss.
Biscuit. 4. a a... ctt. 14s. to 16s<
1 ran . bushel Is. Id.
Bricks 1,000 40s.
Butter, salted per lb. lOd.
Candles, moulds do. sd.
—dips. do. 4|d.
Cheese do. 6d. to lod.
Flour, fine ..... ..4..... per ton £ll
seconds do. £lO
Ci tun. do;
Gum timber............. per load
Hay per ton £2. 10s. to £6.1054
Hides each 6s. to 10s.
Maize per bushel Is. lOd. to 2s. 2d.
Oats do. 3s. to 4s. 6d.
Oxen each £l.los, to £2.105.
Pollard per 20 lbs. Is. 2d.
Potatoes per ton £6 to £8
Sheep, fat each 7s. to 10s.
Slates per 1000
slabs per foot
Starch per lb, 6d.
•Tallow per cwt. 30s. to 40s.
VVheat per bushel 4s.
Wool, Ist quality. per lb. Is. to Is. 4d.
2nd quality do. 7d. to 1 Id.
~— in grease do. 4d. to 7d.
Whalebone per ton,
F


FREIGHTS.
To London.—Ores, 60s. to £4 per ton ; wool, l£d, per lb.}
wheat 2s. 6d. per bushel of 601b5.; oil, £5 to £5. 105.
per ton ; measurement goods, £5.
To Swansea.— Ores, £4. 10s. per ton.
To Mauritius. —Wheat, Is. 6d. per bushel; flour, 50s. per
ton.
To Sydney. —Heavy goods, 15s. per ton ; wheat, 6d. per
bushel; measurement goods, 17s. 6d. to £1 per ton.
To Van Dieman’s Land—From 10s. to 30s. per ton.
Although minerals were known to exist in South
Australia from the period ot its settlement, yet it was
not until the year 1845 that any idea was formed
of the invaluable ore that was plentifully scattered
over the district. The mineral which has been most
worked is copper; but lead, tin, and iron are all
plentiful; gold also exists, and there are two mines
worked about ten miles from Adelaide. Numerous
copper-mines are being opened in various parts of
the Colony, and with great success, the exports of
ore are increasing rapidly, and soon bid fair to re-
duce the price in the English markets, and seriously
affect the mining properties of Great Britain. The
average production of English copper is from 8 to
11 per cent., whilst much of the South Australian ore
yields from 30 to 40 per cent. As yet no coal has
been discovered in this Colony, which is a serious
drawback ; but there is little doubt that coal does
exist in the country. At present the copper ore is
exported in its raw state, chiefly to Swansea.
The first mine opened in the Colony was the


Burra Burra mine, the land on which it is situated
was purchased in a block of 20,000 acres by a body
of Colonists, who after a short time divided the
block into two parts of ten thousand acres each ; on
one of these is the Burra Burra mine, on the other
the Princess Royal mine. The ground for the Burra
Burra mine was first opened in September, 1845;
and it is now admitted to be the most valuable and
productive copper mine in the world, ft is situated
about ninety-six miles from Adelaide, to the northward
of which it lies ; and the employment given to per-
sons in carting the ore to the Port of Adelaide, is
the means of distributing considerable funds amongst
the agricultural population, who engage themselves in
this occupation when disengaged on their farms.
As the Burra Burra mine has been the only one
which has been extensively worked, or has had time to
develope its wealth, it will be well to give the following
Report of the Association who are proprietors of it;—
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN MINING ASSOCIATION.
At the General Annual Meeting of the above Association,
held at the offices of the Company, Rundle Street, Adelaide, the
19th day of April, 1848; Charles Beck, Esq., Chairman,
the following Report and Accounts were submitted by the
Directors to, and approved by the Meeting, and ordered to be
printed.
The Third Animal Report of the Directors of the South Austra-
lian Mining Association to the Shareholders at the Annual
General Meeting, held the 1 Qth April , 1848.
It is with extreme satisfaction that the Directors meet the
Proprietors with their Third Annual Report, particularly as


they are enabled to state to them that, however flattering the
affairs of the Association have hitherto proved, they have at no
time equalled the prospects of the present period.
By the annexed return of ore, it will appear that the quantity
raised during the last six months was 6068 tons, but it is to be
observed that during the summer half year, the loss of a month
is occasioned by the Christmas holidays, which will account for
the apparent decrease when compared with the former six months’ 1
work. The total raisings for the past year were 13,533 tons.
The quantity carted to the Port during the last six months was
9310 tons, averaging 358 tons per week; the largest quantity
carted in one week being 527 tons.
The general appearance of the Mine is very encouraging; the
large raisings of the last year having been produced from within the
limits of the 20 fathom level. All the ore discovered below that
to the 30 fathom level is left for future raising, there being plenty
of good ore ground above the 20 fathom level to employ the
hands for some time to come. The ore produced continues of
good quality, consisting of carbonates and oxides.
On the 31st March last, the establishment at the Mines con-,
sisted of 8 officers, a surgeon, and the following miners, mecha-
nics, and labourers, viz-—223 miners, 35 miners’ labourers, 2
timber men, 8 mining labourers, landers, 60 surface labourers,
123 ore-dressers, 50 boys dressing and picking ore, 14 carpenters,
5 blacksmiths, 5 strikers, 4 sawyers, 2 masons, 13 carters and
stable men, and 7 boyshorsewhim drivers; total, 567-
Since the last Meeting, advices have been received of the sale
of 3122 tons of ore, averaging £23. Bs. per ton; the highest
price being 4-32. 135,, and the lowest £ 15. The last 956 tons
produced an average of £2B. 18s. 7d., being £9. 2s, 4d. per ton
more than the average of the 947 tons reported as sold at the
last Meeting, and exceeding the average price of the 800 tons
reported at the Meeting in April last by £l2. 18s, 7d. per ton,
And the Directors feel much pleasure in assuring the Proprietors
that they are of opinion that the ore shipped this season, and
that yet to ship, will fully realize the highest average above-
mentioned.
The Directors have caused a return of the dividends declared
and paid during the past pine months (amounting to 473,920)


to be prepared and annexed to this Report; and they are desirous,
if circumstances will admit, of making the dividends uniform in
amount, and paying them on fixed days. To this end, the Di-
rectors propose (while the present prospects of the Mine continue)
paying dividends of £2OO per cent, on the capital stock on the
Ist day of every third month.
The Directors refer to the annexed Balance-sheet, which shows
the cash transactions of the Association since the last balancing,
30th April, 1846, to the present period. In explanation of the
items, “Sundry Creditors,” £38,316, the Directors have to observe
that from this amount must be deducted the amount of bills
receivable, Sundry Debtors, and Cash in hand, on the other side,
amounting to £10,755, which would reduce the liability to
£27,561. This amount has been incurred in part payment of
wages on the ore at the Mine, and the wages and cartage on the
ore now at Port Adelaide, and on which the usual drafts have
not been made; but on its shipment the Directors will be in
funds sufficient to relieve this liability, and possess a balance of
£34,000, exclusive of large remittances expectant during the
next two months.
The Directors have much pleasure in stating that the nett
proceeds expectant on the ore shipped, to the period of making
up the statement of the Company’s liabilities and assets, in
September last, as far as yet ascertained, exceeds the amount
therein estimated. At the next Meeting, the Directors will sub-
mit a similar statement of the liabilities and assets of the Com-
pany as that produced at the last meeting, and have no doubt it
will prove equally satisfactory.
It will be necessary to elect five Directors in the place of
Messrs. Beck, Graham, Peacock, Stocks, and Allen, who retire.
CHAS. BECK, CHAIRMAN.
Adelaide , 14 th April, 1848.
F 3


RETURN OF ORE REFERRED TO IN THE ABOVE REPORT, c.v-vULATED AT 21 CWT. TO THE TON.
Rkti rn of the Stock of Ore on hand, the produce of the Burra Burra Mines, at the Half-year ending the 30th day of September,
1847, with the quantity raised since that period, to the 31st March, 1848, showing the quantities sold, shipped, and remaining
on hand at the Port, on the Road, and at the Mines,
1847:
Sept. 30
On hand at Port Adelaide
tons
787
cwt.
10
qr
2
tons
cwt
qr
1847:
Sept. 30
Sold at Adelaide ....
tons
3Wt.
qr
lb
tons.
2528
cwt.
19
qr
3
lb
25
On the road to ditto ....
On hand at the Mines
371
7092
16
14
0
2
8251
20
0
1848:
March 31
Shipped for Sale ....
On hand at Port 1
Adelaide J
On the road to ditto..
4463
742
4
9
2
3
23
0
3104
18
3
8
1848 :
6068
12
On hand at the Mines. 3481
0
0
0
B686
14
1
23
March 31
14320
11
1
14320
11
1
0
Adelaide, 31s< March. 1848.
CHAS. BECK, Chairman.
HENRY AYRES, Secretary.
Return of the Dividends declared by the South Australian Mining Association, from the 24th day of June, 1847, to the 31st day
of March, 1848, inclusive, showing the Amount paid on the several Dividends and the Balances due thereon.
No. of Dividend.
When Declared.
Per centage on Capital Stock.
Amount.
Paid.
To Pay.
24th June, 1847.
Fifty
<£.
6,160
£■
6,052
S .
10
£. s.
107 10
107 10
8 th July,
Fifty
6,160
6.052
10
Third
18 th August,
One hundred
12,320
12,095
0
225
0
1st Dec.,
Two hundred
24,640
22,160
0
2,480
2,640
0
| Fifth..
1st March, 1848.
Two hundred
24,640
22,000
0
0
Totals.... 5
Nine Months.
Six hundred.
73,920
68,360
0
5,560
0
Adelaide. 31st March 1848.
CHARLES BECK., Chairman. HENRY AYERS
Secretary.


CASS BALANCE-SHEET OF THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN MINING
ASSOCIATION.
From 30 th April, 1846, to the 31st March, 1848.
j)rs £■ *■ d. Cr/. 3 ’
To Profit and loss .. 7,606 16 3 By landed property
Capital stock ... 12,329 0 0 with Improve-
Rent of land and o “ ents ,' c ' n ; lrv 15 ’ 718 12 3
buildings 256 0 2 Wages and sundry
Sale of ore 83,106 10 5 accounts con-
land’for*^ 115 ' 69,441 0 7 Mines, including
Unclaimed dividends —
First .. £lO7 10 0 fixed machinery,
Second 107 10 0 horses, tools,
second 215 0 0 implements, &c. 74.030 2 0
Fees received on Cartage of ore .... 44,803 10 7
transfers, &c. .. 45 5 0 Charges, being ex-
Sundry creditors .. 38,316 7 3 penses of este-
J bhshment, offi-
cers’ salaries, &c. 3,565 19 11
Discount & interest 3,047 0 2
Shipping expenses
and port agency 2,944 7 8
Office furniture .. 186 8 1
Third dividend (in
part payment of
12,320 t.) 12,095 0 0
Fourth ditto (ditto,
ditt0,24,640t.).. 22,160 0 0
Fifth ditto (ditto,
ditto, 24,640 L).. 22,000 0 0
Sundry debtors .. 712 18 7
Bills receivable .. 9,840 0 0
Cash in hand .... 202 19 11
£211,306 19 8 £211,306 19 8
CHARLES BECK, Chairman,
HENRY AYRES, Secretary.
JOHN WATERHOUSE,-)
Adelaide, WILLIAM PEACOCK, y Director/.
31 s t March, 1848. WILLIAM PAXTON, )
AUDITORS’ REPORT.
We have compared the entries in the books of the South Australian
Mining Association for the year ending 31st March, 1848, with the vouchers
produced before us, and confirm the above account as a correct abstract of
the balances of that date.
FREDERICK WICKBTEED, 1 ,
GEORGE TINLINB, f^uaiwr/.
Adelaide, IQlh April, 1848.
By order,
Jlundle-street, Adelaide, HENRY AYRES, Secretary.
Wlh April. 1848.


The first dividend of the company was declared in
the month of May, 1847, its amount was 50 per
cent, on the paid-up capital; a similar dividend was
also paid the following month, and several other
dividends have been since declared.
The value of this extraordinary mine, whose
shares, with only £5 per share paid up, bring £l6O
each, in the English market, may well entitle it to a
full description. The following is from the pen of a
party who visited it in the month of December,
1847.
“ The Burra Burra Mines are situated in a kind of
basin, and are surrounded by hills of moderate eleva-
tion on every side, except the Burra Creek, towards
which the ground slopes gradually. Near the creek
is the smelting-house and charcoal stores. The
former, a large substantial building of stone, is at
present occupied by a number of miners, with their
families; and on all sides around the mine are huts,
likewise occupied by miners. The miners have also,
for want of houses, excavated little caverns, di-
vided into apartments, in the steep banks of the
creek. Many of these, which we visited, are fitted
up in the neatest style imaginable, and form cool
and comfortable habitations. They extend for about
three miles on both sides of the creek, and contain a
population of four or five hundred persons. The
township of Kooringa lies over the hill to the south


of the Burra, about half a mile from the mines, with
which it is connected on the side of the creek by the
miners’ cavern-houses. It is pleasantly situated on
the face of a hill, on the western bank of the Burra
Creek; but the miners are in a more open country,
and their locality is preferable for a residence. The
road from Adelaide enters the township by a small
valley to the southward of the mines. The road to
the mine turns the hill immediately at the entrance
to the township ; and there is another road along the
bank of the creek. The first object of attention to
the right is the only inn of the place, kept by Mr.
Abraham Wren. The original extensive premises,
built of wood, were in ten days to be superseded by
a splendid edifice of stone, with the outer walls three
feet, and the inner walls two feet in thickness, built
by Henderson, in his usual thorough style. It is in
form of a square, and contains a travellers’ room
twenty-five feet in length, suites of apartments for
families, bedrooms, and all the usual appurtenances.
Furniture to the value of £I,OOO has been ordered;
no expense will be spared in rendering it fit for the
most fastidious travellers of both sexes; and the
cellars, which are probably unequalled in the pro-
vince, already contain £1,500 worth of choice li-
quors. Along the same line of street occur in order,
the stores of Messrs. Hegarty, Marks, Boord, and
Brown, which supply everything, as the saying is,


from a needle to an anchor. We bought a few arti-
cles, and had much pleasure to find that there was
scarcely an advance on Adelaide prices. Mr. San-
der's baking establishment, Mr. Hill and other
butchers, are in the same street. Already three
dairies, one of which we visited, have been estab-
lished in the neighbourhood of the township, which
supply milk of excellent quality. The only great
deficiency at the mines and township is vegetables,
there being as yet little or no cultivation, though the
soil, like almost the whole of the country between
Kooringa and Adelaide, is abundantly rich and fer-
tile. We were told that some farms have recently
been taken for the purpose of cultivation. We
should remark that twenty or thirty good stone cot-
tages have been built at Kooringa, by the Mining
Association ; and that they intend building an inde-
finite number more in sets of ten, until the whole
demand shall be supplied. A new inn is about to
be established at the lower end of the township.
We should not omit to mention, that there are se-
veral teachers in the township, but none are of a
superior class. We believe that if the Directors of
the Association would give sufficient land for a
school, (which, according to the principle that pro-
perty has its duties as well as its rights, they ought
to do,) there is sufficient public spirit and money to
erect proper premises for a school and master’s


house. It is high time that something were done.
The population of the township and mines, accord-
ing to good authority, is upwards of two thousand ;
and there is as large a proportion of children as in
any part of the world, the greater number of whom
are growing up practical heathens. An efficient
educational establishment is the more necessary, be-
cause so many young boys are early called to work
at picking ore and driving bullocks. It will be ne-
cessary to devise some mode of instructing these
youths, so as to interfere as little as possible with
their precocious labour. So great is the scarcity of
adult labourers, that nearly a third of the drays we
met were driven by boys of from ten to fifteen years
of age.
“ One great improvement in Kooringa we must not
omit to mention —the erection of a Wesleyan chapel,
which was opened on Sunday week. It is doubtless
destined to he of great benefit to the community. It
is the only place of worship at present in the township ;
but we believe it is in contemplation shortly to build
a church in connexion with the Church of England.
“ A brewery has been established on the Burra
Creek, on the Bon Accord mine land, just beyond the
northern boundary of the survey, by Mr. Birrell, who
manufactures excellent ale. Another brewery is about
to he established by Mr. Clarke. Good water is ob-
tained from wells fifty feet deep.


“ Turn vve now to
“THE MINES.
“Proceeding from Mr. Wren’s hotel, we passed
through a gorge of the northern hill> and in a few
minutes found ourselves in view of the ( eighth wonder
o f the world.’ As we said before* the mines are chiefly
in a basin, about fifty acres in extent* nearly sur-
rounded with low hills lying confusedly around ; con-
fused and irregular hills are indeed the prevailing fea-
ture of this district. The workings* however* are
comprised in the space of little more than six acres ;
hut this space* on a working day* is a most animated
and astonishing scene* The first thing that strikes
the eye is immense piles of earth* intersected with
vast of ore laid out in a similar style to the
broken stones on a Macadamised road. Over the
heaps are placed five or six great horse whims, some
t t which ply night and day. One, in particular, at
Kingston shaft, never rests, except on Sundays. Like
Goldsmith’s celebrated article of furniture, it has dif-
ferent employments and uses by day and by night.
During the night it raises ore, and during the day it
raises water for cleaning it. No less than thirty shafts
l ave been sunk, most of them to the water, and of
course the operations downwards must be suspended
till a steam-engine, which has been ordered, arrives.
The deepest shaft is the Kingston, which is sunk
thirty-five fathoms below the surface, and which con


tains ten fathoms of water. Between the shafts are
the sheds for separating and washing the ore. The
ore is washed on a very simple principle. A lever
and rod are suspended above troughs filled with water,
and a sieve containing the ore is attached to the rod.
The cleaner, by jerking the sieve up and down in the
water, causes the ore, the heavier body, to sink, and
the refuse on the surface is then taken off.
“It was stated by a good authority, that there is
sufficient ore now on the surface, independent of what
is on the road, at the port, on shipboard, and in Eng-
land, to pay the shareholders two hundred per cent.
(£25,000) every month till June next. In the last
few weeks the average quantity taken away has been
nearly a hundred tons per day, and as the quantity
brought from the mine to the surface is upwards of
eighty tons daily, very little impression is made on
the accumulations at the mine.
“ We now attempt to relate our labours in thread-
ing the mazes of the vast souterain. We can assure
those who read this that it is not every one who can
do it. The man who attempts such a great enterprise
should be young and active, should be sound and lithe
in limb, and should possess good lungs, and no little
perseverance. Above all, he should not be stout, for
some of the holes are so narrow that not more than
thirteen stone can squeeze through, unless it belongs
to a practical miner. The first process is to divest
G


the ordinary habiliments, and to arm cap-a-pie in a
miner’s working dress; then every man should have
a candle, with a piece of soft clay as a candlestick.
The first step is a teazer—you have to descend a per-
pendicular ladder, carrying your candle, and as }o u
find it rather awkward, you have rather an unpleasant
sensation that some one or two of the half-dozen fel-
lows above you may descend by the run, and take you
along with them a few hundred yards below. You
descend and find it only twenty fathoms; you follow
on through galleries dotted with copper, down little
shafts, and into great vaults, and chambers, and caverns
like Vulcan’s forge, where men are seen with candles in
their hats, or stuck on the rocks, hewing away at the
most splendid copper ores that eyes ever beheld.
Sometimes you go down perilous descents, and creep
on your hands and knees, or, like the snakes, wriggle
and writhe through holes with your head downwards,
all the time perspiring most refreshingly. You then
come upon men who are working upon a great shaft
near the water, and the rocks or earth continually
falling down, dashing upon the wateis, give you a
vivid impression of the disagreeable situation you
would be in if you should tumble in. Ever and
anon we came to beautiful little malachite arbours,
which the miners called their gardens, every side of
which being a bright green, formed delightful spots
in which to rest. A few of the miners grumbled be«


cause they had only Is. 3d. per pound of tribute,
(from which sum the tribute ranges to 2s. 6d.,) and
protested that they did not make quite £lO per
month; but an old Cornish and Columbian captain,
unconnected with the mines, who was present, told
us that the miners w T ere habitual grumblers ; and we
learned afterwards, that some of them made as high
as £4O or £5O per month, and that the superintend-
ent sends as much as £2OO and £3OO in a week
into Adelaide, to invest for the fortunate and indus-
trious. We must, however, mention, for the honour
of the men, that the grumblers were a small excep-
tion. In some of the vast caverns, thirty, forty, and
fifty feet wide, when surrounded on every side with
malachite, red oxide, green and blue carbonates,
mingled in rich confusion the miners, asked our ex-
perienced friend if he had ever seen or heard of any-
thing like the Burra* and evidently were far from sur-
prised at his most energetic negative. After four or
five hours’ hard travel through this labyrinth, we at
last re-ascended, leaving, for want of time, a great
part of the mine unexamined; and here truth and
justice demand that we should announce the conclu-
sion which the experienced mining captain who ac-
companied us, gave in our hearing when he came
up. He had been previously prejudiced against the
mine, having been assured that it would soon be
worked out; but he was of a totally different opinion


after he saw it. He said, the vast quantities seen
on the road, would give the impression that the
Burra must be exhausted; but seeing what is at the
mines, you can scarcely tell that any quantity has
been taken away. There is ore in sight which will
last for two years, independent of the new ground
which the steam-engine will open up. We may here
remark, that, before steam-engines were employed
in Cornwall, they could scarcely go below thirty
fathoms ; now some mines extend to a depth of three
hundred and twenty fathoms.
" We cannot close this brief notice without doing
justice to the great exertions of Mr. Burr, the ta-
lented superintendent, who has introduced a most
admirable and methodical system, and who has
nearly cleared the mine of bad characters. He is
well supported by Captain Roach and Bryan, whose
underground operations are upon an excellent plan.
We remarked that the mine is particularly well ven-
tilated and well timbered.
“ We had almost forgot to mention, that two new
lodes have just been opened at the Burra Burra; one
of them, containing the finest ore, was discovered by
the workmen who were levelling ground for a new
whim. The direction of the lode appeared to be
east of north.
“ The Bon Accord mine, purchased by Mr. More-
head, from Sydney, on behalf of an Aberdeen com


pany, situated close to the north of the Burra Burra
workings, has hitherto been a failure; and at the
time we visited it, the workings were abandoned.
The general opinion at the Burra seemed to be, that
the search for ore was made too far to the west of
north, and that the lodes were easterly. Mr. More-
head went up a few days ago with a Cornish captain,
who we trust will be more successful than Captain
Eye. It is certainly singular that the lodes of the
Burra Burra could not be met with at so short a
distance.
“ There is a scarcity of timber in the neighbourhood
of the Burra Burra mines, which will be most
seriously felt in the course of a few years. This, we
are told, is the chief cause why smelting is not likely
to succeed there. A gentleman further north has
commenced planting gum-trees (600) in the neigh-
bourhood of his chief station, and we recommend
the proprietors of the Burra survey to follow his ex-
ample. A new smelting concern is about to be
commenced, by Messrs. Penny and Owen, at Tot-
hill’s Gap, thirty miles to the south of the mines,
where there is plenty of timber.”
Between the mineral wealth of South Australia, its
agricultural and pastoral capabilities, the prospects of
the Colony may truly be said to be promising. The
wealth flowing from the mines has already given in-
creased activity to every branch of industry. Nume-
g 3


rous new farms were laid out in the year 1847, and
the number of land proprietors in fee increased from
1269 to 1714, an addition in one year of 446 ; each
of which on an average brought into cultivation six-
teen acres, and enclosed sixty acres of land. It will
appear, therefore, that the class of small farmers is
increasing rapidly, and these in reality form the
strength and sinew of a new country. In the sum-
mer months the farmers employ themselves in cart-
ing ore to the coast, and when the rains become
frequent, they return to their farms, being enabled
with their gains in carting to purchase or rent more
land. There are upwards of 750,000 acres of land
surveyed in the Colony; of these, about 400,000 are
disposed of, and there is little doubt hut that the pre-
sent located districts are capable of supporting a very
large population.
Agriculture has in some degree been checked by
the scarcity and consequent high price of labour, and
many contemplated government works have been sus-
pended, not from want of funds, but from want of
hands. In the August of 1846, there was in the trea-
sury of the Colony about £90,000, the produce of land-
sales, besides some £20,000 in England, the greater
proportion of which would be devoted to the promo-
tion of emigration. The revenue for 1846 amounted
to £48,000, the expenditure only to ,£36,000 : that
for 1847 would also exhibit a large increase; and it


was confidently expected that the exports for the
year ending March, 1848, would considerably ex-
ceed the imports, large as the latter had been. And
this has been the result of the exertions of a limited
number of the Anglo-Saxon race, who, for the first five
years of their settlement had to struggle against the
incubus of the theory of centralization, gross misgo-
vernment, and a bankrupt executive: when such has
been the case, what does not the future of this Colony
foreshadow, if well governed, and possessed of all
the advantages of an independent representative local
legislature, which the present colonial minister has
promised to the Colony ?


STATEMENT OF EXPORTS OF COPPER AND LEAD ORES
PROM SOUTH AUSTRALIA, during the year ended the 5th January, 1848,
compiled from the most authentic sources. N.B. The whole are Copper, except
where otherwise specified. Each Mine is particularized,
Ship.
2
3
m
4
fl
I
a
o-
e
C
<
in
"eS
1
£
43
3
S
C
O
£
i
I
I
G, Osmond.
oi
'S
*s
-c
<
Value.
Britannia
tons
398
169
334
tons
tens
tons
tons
t. c. qr.
t. c.
tons
<*£
9480
3944
70(H)
7860
7920
8825
4410
370
6675
6000
8140
8840
600
9880
280
1912
5000
6040
6180
350
6000
2600
550
moo
7630
5000
1600
4820
30
7(HH»
8000
840
3115
800
6400
3000
1600
1200
800
1800
5000
4935
l
Warn tab
394
U 1 ri i nkaM
3594
3524
2004
pj
37*
f|
Bieng
Princess Royal
283
376
421
3(1
449
230
"73
• e
Hritnn
Phantom
128
28*
250
£77
Royal George
272
35*
325
160
62
141
250
60
241
A bouklr
Phantom
28
236
John Bartlett
100
Elizabeth Thomson
Duchess Northum-
3 18*
Rachael
Commodore
Elizabeth Jane
Competitor
Rosetta
Hooghly
Juno
Phantom
Dorset
Henry
Tim bo
Jane Francis
Wm. Parker
352
3784
43
' 4(
290
134
51
GO
4(
9(
225
210
95110
2" 42*
19 3*
324*
204
129
Total in tons of 21 cwt
for yr. ending Jan 1841
Total for the year ending
Jan. 10, 1847
6825
422?
1332
622
331
320
20.
121
101
30(
98 15
117 0
136 8
70 0
281
1
£181,336
APPENDIX.
Exports of Minerals—Sales of Copper Ores at Swansea —Value of
Mining Shares at Adelaide—Master and Servants' Act in force in
South Australia.
• Silver Lead Ore. t In 1846 the export of lead included those fiom Wheal


Coppbr Orb Sales.-
—The following parcels of South Australian Copper
Ore have been sold at Swansea, during the month of September last.
Amount
Date Mines.
21 cwts. Produce
Price.
of each Parcel.
Sept. 7. Kanmantoo
62 .. 16 ..
£9 13
0
.. £598 6
0
„ Ditto ...
15 .. 13f ..
8 3
6
.. 122 12
6
Sept. 21. Burra Burra
73 .. 3l| ..
19 17
0
.. 1449 1
0
„ Ditto ...
60 .. 30J ..
19 9
6
.. 1168 10
0
„ Ditto ...
57 .. 32f ..
20 1
6
.. 1144 5
6
„ Ditto .,.
50 .. 33| ..
21 0
6
.. 1051 5
0
„ Ditto ...
39 .. 29| ..
18 12
.. 725 8
0
„ Ditto ...
48 .. 28 ..
18 0
6
.. 865 4
0
„ Ditto ...
40 .. 28 ..
17 10
0
.. 700 0
0
,, Ditto ...
72 .. 23J ..
14 9
6
.. 1042 4
0
V Ditto ....
72 .. 32J ..
20 14
0
.. 1490 a
0
„ Ditto ....
81 .. 31J ..
20 16
0
.. 1684 16
0
„ Ditto ....
47 .. 34J ..
21 11
6
.. 1014 0
6
„ Ditto ...
48 .. 27J ..
17 1
6
.. 819 12
0 1
„ Ditto ....
18 .. 29J ..
18 15
0
.. 337 10
0
„ Ditto ....
43 .. 28J ..
18 1
6
.. 777 4
6
„ Ditto ....
17 .. 28 ..
17 19
0
.. 305 3
0
,, Kapunda....
50 .. 27 ..
16 17
6
.. 843 15
0 .
,, Australian
12 10
6
.. 501 0
0
Name of Mine or
Company .
No. of
Shares.
Capital.
Paid up.
Present
Price.
£.
£,
£.
s.
d.
Burra Burra
2,464
12,320
12,320
150
0
0
Princess Royal ....
400
20,000
14,800
40
0
0
Mount Remarkable
1,000
25,000
22,500
17
0
0
Adelaide
2,000
10,000
10,000
4
5
0
North Kapunda ..
436
21,800
21,800
15
0
0
Royal Mining Co. ..
10,000
100,000
10s.
0
15
0
Enterprise.. ......
1,000
3,000
2,000
3
0
0
Greenock Creek .,
300
1,000
1,000
6
0
0
Montacute
100
5,500
5,500
55
0
0
Paringa Property
per acre
* *
* *
3
10
0
ADELAIDE MINING SHARE LIST.


MASTERS AND SERVANTS’ ACT.
By this important act (No. 9,1847, passed by the Legis-
lative Council on 23rd July, 1847), servants not entering
into service according to agreement, absenting themselves,
or guilty of neglect or misconduct, may be sentenced, on
conviction by two or more justices, to three months’ im-
prisonment, or the forfeiture of the whole or part of their
wages. Servants obtaining money, under pretence of ser-
vice or advance of wages, beyond the amount actually
earned, may be sentenced to imprisonment with or with-
out hard labour, for any period not exceeding three
months. Servants negligently or wilfully spoiling or
losing property, shall forfeit or pay reasonable damages,
]>ut not exceeding the value thereof, or in any case £2O.
IV.II cases for wages or money due for work, may be heard
and determined by two or more justices. This does not
apply to cases of insolvency. Servants to be entitled to
recover the amount of dishonoured cheques and orders,
with reasonable damages ; also amends for illtreatment.
This ordinance to apply to men contracting for task and
piecework. Penalty for harbouring servants already en-
gaged, not exceeding £2O. Provisions of ordinance to
apply to servants engaging in contracts in other countries,
but not after reimbursement of expense, or in any event
after the servant shall have been one year in the province.
The above are the chief provisions, the others being of a
formal nature. We must not omit, however, to mention
that clause XXIII. gives power to the Governor to nomi-
nate justices with authority to exercise singly the powers
of two justices : under this clause, Messrs. Lang, Koor-
ings; Butler, Guichen Bay; and Sturt, Mount Gambier,
have had this power conferred on them.


Produce.
Quantity.
Value.
tons cwts. qrs. lbs.
£.
S.
d.
Animals, living (469)
595
0
0
Bacon and hams .
7
1 12
68
0
0
Beef and pOrk
6 10
0 0
133
0
0
Bread and biscuit .
b
29 12
0 0
348
0
0
Butter .
2 15
0 0
226
0
0
Bones .
4 0
0 0
36
0
0
Cheese . .
b
2 15
2 18
130
15
0
Corn—Wheat
14,115qrs.
26,021
9
0
,, Flour
1,173 14
3 0
13,648
10
0
„ other Grain
.....
1,108
1
9
Gum
61 17
0 0
969
0
c
Hay
2 11
0 0
15
0
c
Hides
11 10
0 0
155
0
0
Horns (4,224)
26
0
0
Lead, pig . «
10 19
0 24
263
0
0
Leather .
3 2
2 0
266
0
0
Ore, Copper .
9,153 17
3 0
171,883
0
9
„ Lead
144 1C
3 18
2,104
0
0
Plants
32
0
0
Potatoes
3 0
0 0
15
0
0
Reaping Machine (1)
75
0
0
Sundries
706
0
0
Tallow . .
11 8
0 0
406
0
0
Whalebone .
2 13
2 15
507
0
0
Wool* .
1,112,462 lbs.
56,010
17
0
£275,115
12
0
RETURN OF EXPORTS FOR THE YEAR 1847,
THE PRODUCE OF THE COLONY.
* It must be borne in mind that as the period to which
the returns are made up, is in the middle of the export sea-
son, the amounts are large and small in particular years as
the shipments are severally early or late. The wool of 1847
from Adelaide will be at least 10,000 bales.
THE END.
Effingham Wilson, Printer, Royal Exchange.


IMPORTANT PAMPHLETS
Published by
EFFINGHAM WILSON,
MONSIEUR GUIZOT ON DEMOCRACY.
NEW EDITION.
This day is published, price 6d.,
DEMOCRACY AND ITS MISSION.
Translated from the French of M. Guizot, late
Prime Minister to Louis Philippe, with a Prefa-
tory Notice of the Author.
<£ A fair specimen of its author, who, doubtlessly,
ere this, has wished it unwritten again.” —Weekly
Times.
Price 3d.; or 4d. by post,
THE
RIGHT OF THE ARISTOCRACY
TO THE SOIL CONSIDERED,
By John Noakes.
<c A smart, clever, fearless Pamphlet.” —Douglas
Jerrold's Newspaper.
“ Broad as its propositions are, they are fully
borne out.” —London Mercury.
Price 6d.; or Bd. by post.
FINANCIAL REFORM
IMPERATIVE.
Remarks relative to the possibility of an Equitable
Adjustment of the National Debt,


NEW ROYAL EXCHANGE,
INCLUDING AN HISTORICAL SKETCH OF THE FORMER EDIFICES ;
AND a BRIEF MEMOIR OF
SIR THOMAS GRESHAM, Knt.,
Founder of the original Burse in the Reitrn of Queen Elizabeth.
In 1 rot. 12mo. with 18 Embellishments, in cloth, 2s. 6d.
(Commercial Modtg-
Gumersall’s Tables of Interest, &c.
Interest and Discount Tables, computed at2|, 3, S\,i, 4j, and
5 per cent from Ito 365 days, and Irom to o°o, that the
Interest or Discount on any sum,for any number of days, at any
of the above rates, may be obtained by the inspection of one
page only. Each Rate occupies eighty pages: the last five of
which are devoted to the same number of pounds from 1 to 11
months, and from Ito 10 years. They are also accompanied
with Tables of Time and Brokerage, being altogether a vast im-
provement on Thompson and others
By T. B. Gumersall, Accountant, London.
' This work is pre-eminently distinguished from all others on
the same subject by facility of reference, distinctness of type,
and accuracy of calculation. _, , ~ , ,
Seventh Edition, in 1 vol.Svo. (1ip.500), price 10s. 6d. bound in cloth .
Tate’s Modern Cambist.
The Modern Cambist: forming a Manual of E-changes in the
various operations of Bills of Exchange and Bullion; with
Tables of Foreign Weights and Measures, with their Equiya-
lents in English, according to the practice of all Trading
Nations.
By William Tate.
Sixth Edition just Published, 12s. cloth.
Trade with China, in
Chinese Duties.
Schedule Tariff of Duties on the Foreign Trane w.c,
Chinese and Mercantile Currency, Reduced into the Equiva-
lent English Rates in Sterling Money.
By W. Tate, Author of ‘The Modern Cambist,’ on a large sheet
Price Is. •
Transfer Stamp Ready Reckoner; for the use of
Sharebrokers and Investers.
Tables for Speedily Ascertaining the Cost of T l-3 ’ l ®
which are necessary for the conveyance of railw. y, ’ ‘ f
other shares. These Tables show at a glance ™
the Stamp required for the Transfer of any number of Shares
at any price.
iiy Henry Butterworth, of the Stock Exchange.
Price 2s. 6d., bound in cloth.
Ko. 11, South-East Corner,


PUBLISHED BY EFFINGHAM WILSON,
No. 11, ROYAL EXCHANGE, LONDON.
THE LIFE AND TIMES
OP
SIR THOMAS GRESHAM, Knight,
FOUNDER OF THE ROYAL EXCHANGE;
Including Notices of many of his contemporaries, by
John William Bdrgon,Esq.
Now offered, for a limited time, at the very reduced price of 15s.
In two handsome large octavo volumes, embellished with a fine
portrait, and twenty-nine other engravings, elegantly bound in
cloth . Recently published at £1 10s.
Sir Thomas Gresham lived in the reigns of Henry the Eighth,
Edward the Sixth, Mary, and Elizabeth,—Reigns, not exceeded in
interest by any period of our history ; and never was a man’s lif
more actively and usefully spent in benefittingthe land of his bir'
and enriching its metropolis. Commerce in particular then mad
gigantic stride, of which he was by no means an inactive specta
and has been not inaptly styled the “Great Patriarch of Commu
and Commercial Finance.”
With a liberality truly patriotic, he erected for the convent
ence of Merchants, the Royal Exchange; and in addition to hit
other extensive Charities,founded and endowed Seven Lectureships,
for the Gratuitous instruction of the Citizens of London in the seven
liberal Sciences.
It is therefore confidently presumed, that few Merchants,
Bankers, or Members of the Corporation of the City of London,
will be without it.
Very few copies remain for sale of the large paper in 2 vols.
royal Bvo. with proof impressions of the plates, price j£l 65., pub-
lished at £3 .
Partnership <f en Commandite."
Partnership with Limited Liabilities (according to the commer-
cial practice of the Continent of Europe and the United States
of America) for the Employment of Capital, the Circulation of
Wages, and the Revival of our Home and Colonial Trade.
“ The United States are chiefly indebted for her rapid and prodigious rise to this
system of commercial association, especially in tile extraordinary growth ofher manu-
factures, in which 6,000,0001 is now invested, giving employment to more than 100,000
persons, exclusive of those engaged in the cultivation of cotton,” —Douglas Jerrold.
In 1 vol. Bvo., Price 9s. in cloth.
Mr. Doubleday’s Financial and Monetary History.
A Financial, Monetary,and Statistical History of England, from
the Revolution of 1688 to the present time; derived principally
from Official Documents.
By Thomas Dodbleday, Esq.,
Author of “The True Law of Population,”&c. &c.
. ' ‘ Mr. Doubleday’s work is a very able, pains-taking, and useful exposition of the
origin, progress, and evil consequences resulting from our funding system.”— Atlas .
Ini vol. Bvo., Price 12s. cloth.


r uoijionLiJL/ jj i. lii i inunmu ixjoL/iv.
Fenn’s Guide to the Funds.
A Compendium of the English and Foreign Funds, and the princi-
pal Joint-Stock Companies; forming an Epitome of the various
Objects of Investinentuegotiable in London: with some Account
of the Internal Debts and Revenues of the Foreign States and
Tables for calculating the Value of the different Stocks,\ c ’.
By Charles Fenn, of the Stock Exchange.
Third Edition, price ss, bound in cloth,
“ This little volume contains a variety of well-arranged information, indispensable
to every capitalist, banker, merchant, trader, and agriculturist.”— Morning Herald
“ So much useful matter in so small a compass is seldom to be met with.”— Titnet.
Information about the British Funds :
Being an accurate Account of the different Funds and Stocks ; the
Days of Transfer; and Time of Payment of the Dividends of
each.
Small for the Pocket. Price 6d.
Money and its Vicissitudes in Value j
As they effect National Industry and pecuniary contracts ;
a Postscript on Joint Stock banks.
By Samuel Bailev, Esq., Author of “ Essays on the Formate
Public Opinioa ” &c. 234 pp. Svo. Price reduced to 6s. bds
Tuck's Railway Shareholders' Manual;
Or, Practical Guide to all the Railways in the World com-
pleted and iu progress; containing Abstracts of the Railway
Acts; Advice to Shareholders; the Laws relating to Share-
holders and Speculators; Brokers’ Rates of Commission for
, buying- and selling Shares; Table to estimate Railway Divi-
dends; Gross Earnings of all the principal Railways; Table
showing the Price of Shares; Railways open; Railways in
course of Construction; Railways which received ti e Royal
Assent last Session; Foreign Railways; Railway Offices and
Officers, alphabetically arranged. The Accounts and Traffic
corrected to the present time; forming the most complete Rail-
way Synopsis ever compiled.
By Henry Tuck.
Eighth Edition, greatly enlarged, Price 10s. bound in cloth.
Fyxm's British Consul's Handbook.
British Consuls Abroad; their Origin, Rank, and Privileges, Du-
ties, Jurisdiction, and Emoluments; including the Laws, Orders
in Council,and Instructions by which they are governed, as well
as those relating to Shipowners and Merchants in their con-
nexion with Consuls.
By Robert Fynn, Esq., Barrister-at-Law
“This work is written with manifest care ami judgment; its contents are not
only of vital importance to Consuls, but to Merchants, &hipowners. Captains, and
Travellers.”— Mot ning Chronicle.
New Edition. Price 65., neatly bound, dedicated (by permission
to the General Shipowners’ Society.
Royal Exchange.


4
UAIALUUUii Ur USEFUL DUOiVS
Jackson’s Book-keeping.
A New Check-Journal; combining 1 the advantages of the Day.
Book, Journal, and Cash-Book; forming a complete System of
Book-keeping by Double Entry: with copious illustratiors of
Interest Accounts, and Joint Adventures; and a New Method of
Book-keeping, or Double Entry by Single.
By Geokge Jackson, Accountant, London.
Seventh Edition, with the most effectual means of preventing
Fraud,Error,and Embezzlement, in Cash Transactions, and in
the Receipt and Delivery of Goods, &c. price 6s. bound in
cloth.
“ We can conscientiously add our meed of approval to that of the many who have
already preceded us in the same task, and strongly recommend it to general adoption. *
Athenaum.
Walton’s Calculator’s Guide.
Calculator’s Sure Guide; or, the most comprehensive Reckoner
ever published : applicable to all Business Transactions.
By William Walton, Accountant.
Ividends on Bankrupts’ and Insolvents’ Estates.— lt will
ily be perceived that the amount of dividends on such estates
be easily found, by considering the numbers as poundssterling,
1 the price as the dividend per pound ; and the“ fractional parts”
every page are exclusively calculated for that purpose. In the
Production to the work it will be seen that the author considered
this branch of paramount importance.
1 large volume Bvo. (600 pages), bound in cloth.
America compared with England :
The respective Social Effects of the American and English Sys-
tems of Government and Legislation, and the Mission of Demo-
cracy. This is the only book ever published in this country
explaining and contrasting the effects of the Institutions and
Laws of the United States and England upon the social con-
dition of the people. To Emigrants to the United States, who
are exp cted to possess some acquaintance with the Institutions
of their adopted country, this work will be of great service.
“This is an admirable hook. How its impartial and truthful exposures make us
blush for our native land ! ** —Weekly Dispatch.
“The book should have been called ‘a text book of present and future politicians,*
for truly it will be.**—Weekly Times.
“ While we differ totally from many of the doctrines of the book, we ifhust give the
author credit for much diligence and much reading. Travellers,'political writers,
philosophers, are all brought to illustrate the comparative advantages of the Govern-
ment of the United States. Probably ail that can be collected on the subject of any
value he has collected. The style is as neat and perspicuous as the arrangement is
convenient,**—The economist.
“ He compares in a very masterly manner the respective systems of Government and
legislation in England and the United States.**-—T he Law Times.
“ Those who are curious upon the subject will find in his 25th chapter some remark-
able accounts of the experiments already made by Socialists and Communists within
the territory of the United States.”-—The Times.
‘‘This is an admirably- written and excellently well-timed book.—We would espe-
cially recommend the publication before us to the general reader, because it is com-
posed in a calm, fair and most impartial spirit.’*—Standard of Freedom,
In l2mo. (pp 313',closely printed, price 45., or Post free on receipt
of 54 Queen’s Heads.
No, 11, South-East Corner.




