

To the Editor of
EMIGRATION TO AUSTRALIA
Sydney, New South Wales, 15th Dec., 1855.
Sir, Exactly ten years ago, this month of December, I happened to visit the settlement of Moreton Bay
situated about 500 miles to the northward of Sydney, for the first time; and during my stay in that part of our Aus-
tralian Territory, the three following ideas were Very strongly impressed Upon my mind, viz.:
1. That Moreton Bay was pre-eminently calculated for becoming the Head-Quarters of a separate and inde-
pendent colony, and that such an arrangement would be indispensably necessary for the good government of its future
inhabitants.
2. That, from the numerous rivers available for Steam Navigation on that part of the coast, —presenting, as
they do, a vast extent of alluvial land of the first quality for cultivation, in one of the finest climates in the world, •
it was admirably adapted for the settlement of an industrious population from the mother-country.
8. That as the cotton-plant, of the Sea-Island or most valuable variety, grows luxuriantly in that part of Aus-
tralia, there was reason to believe that this great staple of the manufactures of England might be grown to any con-
ceivable extent by a British agricultural population settled on these rivers, and that the monopoly of the American
cotton-planter and slaveholder might thereby be eventually destroyed.
These three ideas I determined at the time to realize as 1 best could.
1 foUnd ’ llowever ’ on mentioning the subject of the separation of the Moreton Bay country from New South
Wales, and its erection into a distinct colony, that the idea was regarded by the Moreton Bay people themselves as, in
the highest degree, utopian and chimerical; for as the Local Government and legislature had, during the preceding
year, set their faces against the separation even of Port Phillip, which was then a rrtere district of New South Wales,*
the supposition that they would ever consent to the separation of Moreton Bay was regarded as utterly hopeless. I
resolved, however, to make the attempt in another quarter.
I proceeded to England, for the sixth time, in the year 1846, and remained there for nearly three years ; and during
that period I addressed a series of letters to Earl Grey, who was then Secretary of State for the Colonies, recommend-
ing, (for reasons which I stated at length), that in the then forthcoming Act of Parliament for the better Government
of the Australian Colonies, a clause should be inserted authorising Her Majesty to separate from New South Wales,
and to erect into a distinct colony, the territory extending northwards from the 30th parallel of latitude, and commonly
called the Moreton Bay District. And to my great delight, as well as to the unspeakable mortification of the Local
Government and legislature, the Act, which was passed in the year 1850, contained a clause to that effect, almost in
the very words I had suggested. The Moreton Bay people were equally surprised and delighted with the unexpected
prospect which was thus opened up to them, and they have ever since been petitioning for its realization, which it is
now confidently expected will take place in a few months hence.
The new colony, (which is still known as the Moreton Bay District of New South Wales, but which it has been
recommended to designate Cooksland, in honour of its illustrious discoverer, Captain Cook,) extends from the 30th de-
gree of south latitude to the Tropic of Capricorn ; being entirely in the South Temperate Zone, and having a coast line,
running due North and South, of about 450 miles on the Pacific Ocean. Its present population is upwards of twenty
thousand ; amHts chief town, Brisbane, which is situated on a navigable river of the same name, contains nearly 5000
inhabitants. The Live Stock, which constitutes the principal source of wealth in the district, comprised on the Ist
January last—-
Sheep ... 2,247,752; Cattle ... 297,920; Horses ... 12,083; Swine ... 4,465.
The present export of the Moreton Bay District, consisting chiefly of Wool and Tallow, amounts to £600,000 per an-
num, or not less than £3O for each inhabitant; and its Revenue is considerably upwards of £lOO,OOO a year. In such
circumstances, there can be no doubt as to its entire fitness for the character and position of a distinct colony.
Of the extraordinary capabilities of this tract of country for the settlement of an agricultural population some
idea may be formed from the fact that, in the space of four degrees of latitude along its coast line* there are not fewer
i , * T , h f C^ lony ?-. S - W i ll f s extended at that time from the Tropic of Capricorn to Bass’ Straits—an extent of country at
least equal to Great Britain and Ireland, France, Spain and Portugal, all united. The leading colonists at the time, however, were
foolish enough to suppose that this vast extent of country could be governed successfully from Sydney, and accordingly resisted
every attempt, on the part of the inhabitants of Port Phillip, to get a separate government of their own. As one of the members
ot Council for Port Phillip, I moved an Address to the Queen in the Legislative Council of New South Wales in the year 1844
praying that Her Majesty would issue the requisite instructions for the erection of that district into a separate colony. All the
six members for Port Phillip were strongly in favour of my motion ; but the only one of the thirty members for New South Wales
Proper who voted for !t was Mr. (now the Right Hon.) Robert Lowe, Member of Parliament for Kidderminster, and Vice-President
tt-tbe Board ot trade, who was then a Nominee Member of the Legislative Council of New South Wales. I suggested, however
granted at o me mbers should petition the Queen in their own name ; which they did accordingly, and the thing was


than seven rivers, all available for Steam Navigation, with hundreds of thousands of acres of the finest land on their
banks ; that is, a navigable river, on an average, every 40 English miles. Three of these rivers—the Clarence, the
Richmond, and the Brisbane—are the largest yet discovered on this coast. They are all navigable for about 70 miles
from their mouths, and they have all navigable tributaries. And on these rivers there is found the finest timber, an
exhaustless supply of excellent coal, and whole hills of limestone. Whether the country contains gold or not in paying
quantities has not yet been ascertained, although there are the usual indications of its presence ; but it has been
ascertained that cotton of the finest quality for the Home Manufactures can be grown to any conceivable extent by a
British population on all these rivers; a specimen, of the Sea Island variety, grown at Brisbane, which I had carried
home with me when I was last in England, being valued in Glasgow in the year 1853 at half-a-crown a pound. In
' confirmation of these statements, I quote the following passage from the conclusion of an admirable Report on the
capabilities of the Clarence and Richmond River District, by Oliver Fry, Esq , J.P., Commissioner of Crown Lands for
that district.—
“On the whole, a four years’ residence in the district has confirmed me in the opinion, that no country ever
came from the hands of its Creator more eminently qualified to be the abode of a thriving and numerous population,
than the one of which I have been speaking ; and in forming this estimate I have been uninfluenced either by preju-
dice, or by interest, being in no way connected with it, save in that arising from my official capacity.”
In the years 1848 and 1849, I was enabled, during my stay in England, to send out three ships with about six
hundred emigrants to the Brisbane River, Moreton Bay. The whole of these emigrants were people of industrious
habits and virtuous character, being all members of Evangelical Churches at home ; but, with only very few excep-
tions, they had nothing in the shape of capital to begin with in their adopted country. Almost all of them, however,
are now comfortably settled and comparatively independent, and not a few of them even wealthy ;* while the moral
and religious influence they have exercised in the district has been salutary in the highest degree. But the men we
had to rule over us at the time, both at home and abroad, —I mean in the Colonial, notin the War department—threw
so many and such insurmountable obstacles in the way of this effort, (which would otherwise have proved the very
making of the country), that it had to be abruptly relinquished for a season, to be resumed under happier auspices on
the first opportunity.
In the year 1850, the Imperial Parliament, desirous to encourage and promote the emigration of persons of the
industrious classes, passed an Act, placing what are called Emigration Societies on the footing of the Friendly Societies
of the mother-country; and as this Act was supposed to be a great boon to the Working Classes, various Societies
of the description it contemplated were formed under its provisions, both in England and Scotland; an Emigration
Fund being created in each case by the periodical payments of the members, from which fund the beneficiaries of the
Society, (to be determined either by lot or otherwise), were to have the cost of their passage, either to Australia or
elsewhere, paid, on condition of their repaying the advance thus made to them by the Society, within a certain period
after their arrival at their destination.
It was soon found, however, that the Act of Parliament afforded no security to the Emigration Society for the
repayment of such advances to its beneficiaries; and it was but too evident that to trust either to the ability or the
integrity of the assisted emigrant for the repayment of these advances was a very precarious and unsatisfactory de-
pendence. It was also found that to establish agencies for the recovery of these advances in Australia or elsewhere
would be greatly too expensive for any Emigration Society in the United Kingdom, and that to resort to legal pro-
ceedings to compel the dishonest beneficiary to pay up his debt to the Society would be ruinous to all concerned. In
this way the Act of Parliament proved a dead letter, being completely inoperative.
Having been in Europe again in the years 1852 and 1853, I was repeatedly applied to on the part of hundreds
and thousands of the Working Classes, both in England and Scotland, as to whether anything was practicable, in such
circumstances, for the promotion of an extensive emigration of these classes to Australia. To all such applications my
uniform answer was that, as there was an Act of Parliament for the disposal of \\ aste Land in Australia, prescribing
that such land should be sold, at not less than a pound per acre, and that the proceeds of such sales should be appro-
priated for the promotion of emigration from the United Kingdom, it appeared to me that if a Colonial Company could
be established for the purchase of extensive tracts of Waste Land with a view to the promotion of immigration, the
unavoidable defects of the Act of Parliament could be easily supplied, while the Society at home would, under the
auspices and guarantee of the Company, have adequate security for the repayment of its advances, without the cost of
a Colonial agency at all. And I pledged myself that if this very desirable object could be accomplished on my return
to New South Wales, I would undertake another voyage to England to organize the requisite machinery for an exten-
sive emigration of the Working Classes, which, there would thus be the means of effecting, without pecuniary loss or
risk in any quarter.
I returned to the Colony from England in November, 1853, During the following year there happened to be
two vacancies in the Legislative Council or Colonial Parliament of New South Wales, for both of which I was simul-
taneously invited to stand. The one was for the City of Sydney, for which I had been twice elected before ; the other
• One of them, (Mr. James Lumsden,) who had settled on the Brisbane River, about 25 miles up, has just been offered
£2500 for his farm by a merchant in Brisbane, which, however, he has refused. Mr. Lumsden obtained the whole of his land on
precisely the same principle as is developed in the sequel of this letter —paying £2O for the passage of each adult ot his family,
and getting the land in addition, at the rate of 16 acres for every £2O of passage money he had paid.


"being for the County of Stanley, in the Moreton Bay District. I preferred the latter, as it would afford me the very
opportunity I wanted of advancing the important object I had so much at heart, and I was elected accordingly. During
the Session of 1854, a Bill was introduced at my instance into the Legislative Council to establish and incorporate
“ The Moreton Bay Immigration and Land Company,” which had been formed, for the carrying out ot the object in
question, during another visit I had paid in the interval to that part of the Territory; but it was thrown out by a
hostile Government majority of two, although it had the warm support of a decided majority of the representative
members present. Determined, however, that the object should not be lost for want of another effort for its accom-
plishment, I introduced the same Bill again, under better auspices, during the present Session, and I am happy to say,
it has at length been read a third time and passed; and having this day received the Royal Assent through Her
Majesty’s Representative, it is now part and parcel of the'Law of the Land. Thus, after an arduous and protracted
struggle of Ten Years, in the course of which I have experienced a species of persecution of the most inveterate and
suicidal character from our Local Authorities, and been subjected to heavy pecuniary sacrifices and to much personal
hardship—including two voyages round the globe, with the prospect of a third—l have succeeded at last, and have
thereby realized once more the truth of a maxim which I was led to adopt very shortly after my first arrival in this
■colony, more than thirty years ago, viz.: “That in any undertaking having for its object the glory of God or the wel-
fare of men, discouragement, opposition and hostility in the outset are the best earnest of success and prosperity in
the end.” The three ideas that were all so strongly impressed upon my mind ten years ago are all now on the point
of realization ; and I have every reason to believe that benefits of inestimable value will be ensured in the process to
myriads of the future inhabitants of a noble country to the end of time.
The Moreton Bay Immigration and Land Company has a nominal capital of a Million Sterling, to be held in
Shares of Twenty-five Pounds each; its general object being to purchase eligible tracts of land, (if possible, at the
minimum price of a pound an acre,) with a view to the introduction and settlement of industrious families and indivi-
duals from the mother-country, who will purchase the land from the Company, in small farms, at a certain advance
upon the first cost, and be credited in such purchases the whole amount they have paid respectively towards their pas-
sage out. In short, the object of the Company is to guarantee to Emigration Societies at home, established under the
Act of Parliament of 1850, and without subjecting them to the cost or trouble of establishing agencies for the purpose
in the Colonies, the repayment of whatever advances they may make to their benefltiaries from their common fund,
as also to secure to the emigrants under these Societies as much land in addition to their passage out as the sum they
have paid towards their passage would purchase on the spot.
Thus, supposing that James Thomson, (say, a small farmer or gardener,) with a wife and three young children,
has joined the Glasgow Emigration Society, as an intending emigrant to Australia; and supposing that the passage for
each adult of his family will cost £2O, his three children being rated as one adult, the whole cost of the passage
out of himself and family will be £6O. Now if he can raise that amount at once, and pay it through the Society, he
will be entitled to his passage out by the first ship, without competing for an Emigration Ticket; and on his arrival at
h:s destination he will be entitled to 40 acres of the Company’s land—as good land in all likelihood as the sun ever
shone on—provided the Company’s rate of sale (for it is not yet definitively fixed,) is thirty shillings per acre. But
supposing that the said James Thomson has only been able to pay £2O, and has drawn an Emigration Ticket, in com-
petition with a number of other members similarly situated, the Society will have to advance £4O towards his passage
from the common fund. In that case he will not get the 40 acres of land, as before, except on lease from the Company,
who will hold it for the Society till he has paid up the difference, with interest from the time of his embarkation.
There will thus be a complete security for the Society on the one hand, and a great encouragement and stimulus to the
emigrant to act honourably, and discharge his obligations, on the other. For if he should act otherwise, and refuse to pay
up, he will forfeit the £2O he has already paid, and get no land, while the Company here will hold the land as a security
for the Society at home.
Without excluding emigrants from England and Wales, who, on the contrary, will be cordially welcomed
by all concerned, the direct operations of the Company will be confined to Scotland and the North of Ireland—the portion
of the United Kingdom with which I am personally best acquainted—and the port of embarkation for the emigrants
will be the City of Glasgow. The parties concerned in the formation of the Moreton Bay Company are Christian men,
and their object is not to make money, but to promote the settlement of an industrious, virtuous and Christian popu-
lation in the noble territory I have described. With this view it is proposed to purchase tracts of land of sufficient
extent to divide into moderately sized farms for communities of one hundred to one hundred and fifty families each ;
and the Company will make the requisite provision, in allotments of land of suitable extent, for the settlement of a
Minister and Schoolmaster, (to both of whom a free passage out will be afforded at the expense of the Company,) as
nearly as possible in the centre of each community, The schoolmaster will have a Government salary from the time
of his arrival; and as it is now confidently expected that all ministers will henceforth have to depend on their people
in these colonies, the Company will, in addition to a free passage out, with land for a church, manse and glebe, give
£IOO for the first year to every such minister till his people can afford to support him themselves.
The prospect which will thus be opened up, under the auspices of the Moreton Bay Company, for the indus-
trious classes of Scotland and the North of Ireland—small farmers, mechanics, shopkeepers, &c., —will therefore be
greatly superior to anything they have ever experienced since the commencement of British colonization ; and I an-
ticipate the happiest results from it for this great country on the one hand, and for our common Protestantism on the
other. When the ancient city and State of Syracuse in Sicily had been almost depopulated through tyranny and civil


war, the famous Corinthian General, Timoleon, after expelling the tyrant,
issued a proclamation throughout Greece, offering an eligible settlement in
emigrate thither : and upwards of 50,000 Greeks, including 5000 from the ■
tion and emigrated accordingly. Now Greece Proper, the country from whi
as Scotland, and its population, in the time of Timoleon, must have been n
present day, while the prospects which were then held forth to Grecian etuig
those that are now held forth to industrious British emigrants on the sevei
shall therefore be greatly disappointed if, in a period of time comparatively
emigrants, principally from Scotland and the North of Ireland, settled, uncU
pany, with their ministers and schoolmasters, and all the other accompaniu
and Christian population, in this splendid Colonial field. Besides, as each <
the cotton plant, to a greater or lesser extent, on his own farm, while the Co
for cleaning and preparing the raw produce for exportation, in some central
parish flax-mill in Scotland, there is reason to believe that a blow will there
monopoly such as it has never hitherto sustained. For it is now universa
cotton, by means of slave-labour, and the monopoly of the article enjoyed
market, that sustain and perpetuate slavery in America.
As soon as possible after the Company shall have been legally organ
Act, (which, it is expected, will be done in a few weeks hence), it is my inti
form a series of Emigration Societies, such as I have described above, in the
North of Ireland, to bring the Company into immediate and extensive opera
cation is simply to give the requisite information beforehand to those who m
amount of funds there may be available in the first instance for the emigrath
to contribute anything towards that object themselves, such as the hand-looi
series of years.
I am, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
JOHN DUNMORE LANG, D.D.,
Minister of the Scots Church, Sydney,
R. Barr, Printer,
io. 7, York Street.
But as soon as Moreton Bay gets a separate government and a constitutional icgisravure, notn oi wmcn are confidently
anticipated in a few months hence, there will be a large and yearly increasing fund available for this purpose for a long
And Member of the Legislative Council of New South Wales.
