

EMIN BEY AND HIS SURROUNDINGS:
GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY OF AUSTRALASIA.
NEW SOUTH WALES BRANCH.
BY
SIR EDWARD STRICKLAND, K.C.B., F.R.G.S.
PRESIDENT OF ROYAL GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY, AUSTRALASIA.
5h* 5—87




Emin Bey and his Surroundings.
By SIR EDWARD STRICKLAND, K.C.B., F.E.G.S.
President of Royal
Geographical Society, Australasia.
Since the lamentable death of General Gordon, few have excited
greater public interest than his brilliant lieutenant and successor
in the equatorial provinces, Dr. Emin Bey, about whose mission,
however, a considerable amount of ignorance prevails. More or
less disjointed allusions have occasionally appeared in the papers
with reference to the mission of Emin Bey, but we question if
one in a hundred could give anything like a clear account of
what that mission is, or of the people among whom for several
years past the doctor’s lot has been cast. Reports concerning his
movements have, to be sure, every now and then seen the light, but
these are mostly confined to the publications of the Geographical
Societies, which are not accessible to the general public, and hence
a good deal of misconception prevails, which we propose to help to
clear away. Thirteen years ago, when General Gordon—at that
time a Colonel and British Vice-Consul of the Delta of the
Danube—accepted the appointment offered by the Khedive of
Governor of the provinces of the equatorial lakes, there was
attached to his standard an Austrian doctor named Emin, or
Emin Effendi, to use the Turkish title, by which he was subse-
quently known. Emin Effendi was not only well versed in the
medical but in almost every other science—geological, geographical,
botanical, meteorological, and anthropological—a remarkable
linguist—and perhaps as well able to deal with the natives as
Gordon himself. Shortly after assuming command Gordon made
Emin Effendi Surgeon-General of the Equatorial Provinces, which
post he held so long as Gordon acted as Governor. During that
period he was employed by Gordon on three diplomatic missions
of importance—two to Uganda and one to Unyaro, which two
extensive territories, as every African geographer knows, are to
the south of the Egyptian Equatorial Provinces, and between the
Albert Kyanza and Victoria Nyanza Lakes. One of the doctor’s
missions to Uganda was to bring back an officer who, acting con-
trary to Gordon’s instructions, but apparently imbued with the
strongest British instincts, had marched with 300 men to annex
the land. As an instance of the wonderful ability in dealing
with the natives, possessed by Gordon’s Surgeon-General, may be
cited his mission to the king of Unyaro, Kabaiega, who was con-
tinually harassing the Egyptian frontier, and whom the Surgeon-
General visited without an escort of any kind, and with whom he
succeeded in concluding a peace which we are assured, on the
sh* 5-87


authority of Dr. R. W. Felken, “ undoubtedly saved Gordon
Pasha and his few soldiers from annihilation.” In 1878, a year
after Gordon had been appointed by the Khedive Governor of
the whole of the Soudan, Gordon, who in the meantime had
been made a Pasha, raised Dr. Emin from the rank of Effendi to
that of Bey, or governor of a district, and gave him charge over
the Equatorial Provinces, which Gordon himself had previously
held. Ever since then the gallant Bey has been carrying on
the good work commenced by Gordon in 1873, and that
without the slightest aid, at any rate for over three years
past, from the outside world. He seems to have been
the first to foresee the approaching crisis of affairs in the
Soudan which followed the uprising of the Mahdi; and had his
offer to personally treat with the “ Prophet” been accepted, we
might perhaps never have heard of the rising which has so utterly
upset the Khedive’s rule, which has deprived Great Britain of her
most famous General, and which has blocked up all communication
with the Bey from the north, and left him to struggle for years
against difficulties of which few but those who have travelled in
these regions can form a just conception.
The Provinces of the Equatorial Lakes.
By glancing at the map the reader will see whereabouts the
provinces of the Equatorial Lakes are. The term is somewhat
misleading, as the southernmost boundary of the province is
formed by the long level stretch of the White Nile, which flows
from the top of Albert Nyanza, parallel with the equator, and
about two degrees north of the Line. The whole of the Albert
Lake is also included in the province, the western boundary, such
as it is, sweeping upwards in a curve from the southern extremity
of the lake to about the ninth degree. Bight through the centre
of the province runs the White .Nile, on the banks of which are
to be found many of the fortified stations scattered over the
province. The northernmost of these is at Lado, where are the
head-quarters of the Bey, and the most southern at Mahelie, on
the top of the Albert Lake, on which, by-the-bye, there are two
steamers, the “Nyanza” and the “Khedive,” as well as four or
five large life-boats, each capable of holding fifty or sixty men.
In a letter from Emin Bey, dated July 7, iBBG, to Dr. K. W.
Felkin, the African traveller, the writer expresses himself as not
without “ some glimmerings of hope that, as Egypt appears to be
unable to send us aid, England may, at some future day, take
advantage of the position in which we find ourselves, to remain
true to her former traditions of a humanitarian and civilising
mission.” It was already known from a letter addressed by
Emin Bey to Dr. S.heweinfurth in December, 1885, that the


troops under his command, “nearly naked and without pay, had
given surprising proof of their devotion to his cause, and had
managed in a truly wonderful manner to cut their way through
the hordes of Mohammed Achmed, and to carve for themselves
a retreat from the station at Amadi to Lado ; that Emin Bey
had also been able, after much bloodshed, to crush a combined
revolt of the Dinkoes and Baris, and that by exercising the
greatest care his ammunition might last for another year, unless a
revolt occurred, in which case, as soon as the ammunition was spent,
he would be left with a mere handful of troops to be butchered by
the rebellious hordes. The letter to Dr. Felkin is encouraging, so
far as it goes, inasmuch as it states that “ all the stations are busily
employed in agricultural work, and at each one, considerable
cotton plantations are doing well; this is the more important, as
it enables us, to a certain extent, to cover our nakedness. I have
also introduced the shoemakers’ art, and you would be surprised
to see what progress we have made. We now make our own soap,
and we have at last enough meat and grain, so that we have suffi-
cient to'keep life going; such luxuries, however, as sugar, &c., of
course, we have not seen for many a long day. I forgot to say
that we are growing the most splendid tobacco.” It is not known
how many Egyptian and Khartoum officials are with Emin Bey
now, as a great many were slaughtered by the rebels under
Mohammed Achmed ; but Dr. Felkin states that, in 1863, there
were some 250 scattered about the province, together with their
wives and families, while the troops under his command are stated
by the same authority at about 40 Egyptians, mostly belonging
to the artillery; 2,000 regular troops (negros), armed with the
Reminton ride, and about 4,000 Besingers (negro irregulars),
armed with double-barrelled muzzle-loading guns. How nobly
these black troops behaved under circumstances of the direst peril
is admirably described by Emin Bey himself in a letter to Mr. C.
H. Allen, of the Anti-Slavery Society, in which he says “ Since
the occupation of the Bahr-Ghazel —I will not say its conquest,
for this province has been taken by treachery—we have been
vigorously attacked, and I do not know how to describe to you
the admirable devotion of my black troops throughout a long war,
which for them, at least, had no advantage. Deprived of the most
necessary things, for a long time without any pay my men fought
valiantly ; and when at last hunger weakened them—when, after
nineteen days of incredible privations and sufferings, their strength
was exhausted, and when the last torn leather of the last boot had
been eaten, then they cut a way through the midst of their enemies
and succeeded in saving themselves. All this hardship was under-
gone without the least arriere pensee, without even the hope of any
appreciable reward, prompted only by their duty and the desire
of showing a proper valour before their enemies. If ever I had


any doubts of the negro, the history of the siege of Amadi would
have proved to me that the black race is in valour and courage
inferior to no other, while in devotion and self-denial it is superior
to many.”
Emin Bey’s mission on the White Nile.
After listening to Emin Bey’s testimony to the value of the
work done by the negro troops, let us hear Dr. Felkin speak of
the value of the work done by Emin Bey. “ When he took up
the reins of Government,” says that distinguished traveller, “ the
only districts in peace and security were a belt of land on
either side of the Nile extending from Lado to the Albert Lake
and the Shuli district to the east of the Nile. By the end
of 1880 most of the stations had been rebuilt, and the whole of
the province, which is almost as large as Europe, had been
reduced to peace and order, while all the stations, then numbering
about forty, were connected by a weekly post. Through his
efforts slavery was permanently abolished, and the district was
cleared of the slave dealers, who had carried on an underhand
but extensive traffic up to the time of Emin Bey’s appointment.
In 1878 the Equatorial Province was maintained only at a deficit
of £38,000 per annum ; three years later Emin Bey had a surplus
of £B,OOO, and this was obtained, not by oppressive taxation,
but by the practice of rigid economy and the suppression of abuses
which had previously existed. Moreover, Emin Bay had taught the
people to work for the sake of work, and not from compulsion.
Good roads were constructed, wagons made, and oxen trained to
the yoke ; the people were instructed in weaving; and in the
cultivation of cotton, coffee, rice, indigo, and wheat was intro-
duced. In addition to the cares of Government, Emin Bey found
time to relieve the physical sufferings of the people. At sunrise
every morning when at Lado he was to be seen in his hospital
either prescribing for or operating upon his numerous patients ;
and at night, when Government duties were over, instead of
seeking well-earned repose, he would be found writing by the light
of candles, made by himself those reports on various scientific sub-
jects which have enriched the pages of so many learned periodicals.
Altogether, in fact, a grand man, of remarkable breadth and
versatility of intellect, brave and gentle, enduring and patient,
conscientious to a fault, refusing to quit his post or to make his
way to the Congo basis of liberty, which he could very easily do,
because that would be to desert both his trust and his men, and
deserving, if ever man was, of the relief that is being thus tardily
sent out. Well might Emin Bey exclaim, as he did over a year
and a half ago, “ We sit here, exactly as if at the North Pole, and
every expectation of a relief expedition is wanting.”


The Austrian-Congo Expedition of Discovery and Relief.
A relief expedition had nevertheless been organized, and, under
the command of Dr. Lenz and Herr Baumann, was proceeding up
the Congo as fast as circumstances would permit in the direction
of the Equatorial Province, with the double object of rescuing
Emin Bey, Dr. Junker, and Captain Casati—all three of whom
were imprisoned in the very heart of the dark continent—and
exploring the country. The latter object appears to have been
fairly well accomplished, but all idea of reaching the men they
were sent out to rescue was abandoned soon after leaving Nyangwe •
indeed, Herr Baumann was compelled to return to the coast long
before that on account of dysentery. Dr. Lenz gives the most
unfavourable account of the Congo climate. The whole of the
Congo valley, he says, as indeed the whole of tropical Africa, is
and always will be an unhealthy and dangerous country for
Europeans, and whoever leaves the land with a whole skin would
be lucky. Dr. Lenz’s party took forty-eight days ascending the
Congo from Stanley Falls to Nyangwe, near both of which places
cataracts are frequent. Dr. Lenz found great changes along the
river since Stanley descended. The natives in many places have
retreated from the banks to make way for Arab trading settle-
ments and enormous rice-fields. The natives live deep in the
forest, are to a large extent cannibals, and make use of poisoned
arrows. The whole of the region traversed by the Austrian
expedition is, in fact, in the power of the Arab traders, by whom
it is becoming thickly peopled, while the cultivation of rice is
everywhere extending rapidly. Since Stanley was there a new
and important trading centre has sprung up, named Kasonge, a
few days to the south-east of Nyangwe, which it has completely
eclipsed. At Kasonge are the head-quarters of the all-powerful
Tippo-Tip, and from thence start the caravans for the Tanganyika
Lake. Kasonge too is the great centre for the ivory and slave
trades. Nyangwe is a cluster of small settlements, outside which
are great rice-fields and banana plantations. The town is said ta
contain some very well-built houses of sun-dried bricks, and as the
caravans are continually coming and going, the population varies
almost daily. Kasonge, on the other hand, is not only most
picturesquely situated, surrounded by hills, like Adelaide, and
with mountains in the distance, but the town has quite a civilised
appearance from the fact that the houses are arranged in streets,
many of them large and handsome, the rice-fields being at some
distance from the town on the neighbouring hills. Dr. Junker,,
whom Dr. Lenz was also instructed to rescue, has since returned
to Europe safe and sound, and after another expedition under the
late Dr. Eischer, fitted out the expense of Dr. Junker’s brother,!
the banker, of St. Petersburg, had failed to reach him, owing to
the hostility of the new King at Uganda.


Recent African Explorations.
It was only after the greatest difficulty that Dr. Junker managed
to escape from the clutches of Meranga, the barbarous potentate
at Uganda, who signalized his accession to the throne by the
murder of Bishop Hannington and over forty followers, in
October, 1885, from a suspicion that the visitors wished to subvert
the throne, and by the wholesale massacre, under circumstance of
the most frightful atrocity, of the Christian converts throughout
the country. This same Mwanga still detains the Christian
missionary, Mr. Mackay, in his power, whom he has repeatedly
threatened to murder the moment he hears of an expedition
sent in relief. Dr. Junker, who had been compelled to pass a
whole year with Emin Bey, on the Upper Nile, did his utmost to
send him assistance from Uganda ; but the $2,000 worth of cotton
goods which he bought for him there, and even paid to be sent on,
probably by this time adorn the backs of Mwanga and his seven
thousand odd wives—at any rate that was the number possessed
by his predecessor Mtesa. Dr. Junker was indignant that so
little had been done to rescue his distinguished friend, and after
stating that the prestige of Europeans was very much diminished
there of late years, added that it would be a lasting shame if
Europe should not do something for his relief.
Before leaving Dr. Junker we may state that one result of his
travels was the discovery of the general navigability of a water
connection between Western and Eastern Africa, he having
descended the Nelle-Makua River from the Marbattu country, as
far as 22° E., or within 150 miles of the point reached in the little
steamer “ Peace,” by Mr. Grenfell. This gentlemen, it may be
remembered, is the famous Baptist missionary and explorer, who
discovered the great northern tributary of the Congo; the
Mobanji—into which flows the Nelle-Makua —about the same
time that Lieutenant Wissmann discovered, on the opposite or
southern side of the Congo, the Kassai, which, with the Ouango,
was found to flow into the main river, in one large stream, at a
point known as Kwamouth, as, indeed, I have already pointed
out in a previous address. While on the subject of African
exploration, it may be mentioned that by a somewhat singular
chance, the sources of the Kassai and Zambesi —the one
flowing to the west, and the other, of course, to the east—
were recently found near a small village to the north-east
of Lake Dilolo, about 11° S. and 23| E.—in the shape of
the Lulua, the principal tributary of the Kassai, and the
Liba, another name for the Zambesi head stream—much in
the same way as the baby sources of the Amazonian, Guapore,
and the Paraquay—two mighty streams flowing in exactly oppo-
site directions—rise within a few yards of each other near
the city of Matto Grosso on the extreme western side of Brazil.


The country where the Kassai and Zambesi take their rise is
noteworthy as rising in the territory of Lunda, nearly equal in
size to Germany, with a climate stated to be particularly suited
to Europeans, and with a population described as more rapacious
than cruel, and rather friendly towards strangers.
Uganda, a wonderful land.
The principal danger in any attempt to rescue Emin Bey will
be met with in the opposition of the new king of Uganda, a very
interesting description of whose kingdom was contributed to the
Scottish Geographical Magazine a short time ago by Dr. Felkin,
already named. “ Uganda,” he says, “is a wonderful land and
worth much study. After passing through the belt of naked
tribes,” to quote his description, “which extends from Fashoda in the
north to the borders of Uganda” —in fact, right through the equa-
torial provinces held by Emin Bey. “Itis a strange and pleasant
change to enter a country which, at first sight, presents an altogether
different aspect. Well-built villages, with broad clean streets,
crowds of good-looking, well-di'essed people, and an amount of digni-
fied order surprise the traveller, and he instinctively feelsthat he has
entered a country far higher in the scale of civilisation than any he
has previously passed through.” That Uganda is a very large and
important kingdom may be inferred from the fact that it has a
population of about five millions, forming the most powerful of
the Central African tribes; although, singular to relate, the
number of the women exceeds that of the men as three and a-half
to one. This extraordinary proportion is attributed by Dr.
Felkin to three causes :—first, more girls than boys are born;
second, the loss of men in war; and third, the fact that in the
numerous raids which the Waganda make into the neighbouring
counties it is their custom to kill all the grown-up men and to take
all the women and children prisoners. The Waganda, by the way,
is the name of the principal tribe, including the inhabitants of the
400 islands, who are described as pure negroes, of dark chocolate-
coloured skin, and with short woolly hair. The men are tall,
well-built, strong, wonderfully clever workmen, and with an extra-
ordinary aptitude for music, says the doctor, while the women in
their youth are very beautiful, with small delicately formed hands
and feet. The next tribe in importance are the Wahurna, a race
of shepherds, probably descended from the original inhabitants of
Abyssinia, and who are found over the whole of east Central
Africa from the equator to the seventh degree south. The men
are tall, with fine looking oval faces, thin lips and straight noses,
speaking their own language and living in out-of-the-way villages
and altogether, apart from the other tribes by whom they are
despised. The women are described by the enthusiastic doctor as


particularly beautiful, and preferred by the Waganda chiefs to
their own women as wives. Another tribe is that of the Wasoga,
with much darker skin than the Waganda, long hair, brave, and
warlike. The doctor’s description of a Waganda town is well
worth quoting. The buildings, it appears, are “all surrounded
by gardens, enclosed, as a rule, by square-built hedges, and
separated from one another by broad well-kept streets. On enter-
ing one of these compounds belonging to a chief, one generally
finds near the door a small hut for the porter. The whole of the
enclosure is divided by fences into gardens and court-yards, and in
each yard are one or more houses ; they are usually round and
have an egg-shaped roof, which is supported by a varying number
of strong poles \ the walls are built of a layer of basket work,
inside and out, a layer of grass being placed between them ; the
floor is beaten with clubs until it is quite firm, and is covered by
layers of fine dry grass this has one great disadvantage, as it is
impossible to keep the house free from fleas. The Waganda are
very particular to have their houses well built, and the chiefs
will often have a house pulled down should any mistake be
made in the pattern of the basket work. Both villages and
towns are connected with each other and with the capital by
good roads, which lead over hill and dale in a perfectly straight
line. Streams are bridged by felled trees, and should a marsh lie
in the way, a dam is constructed across it with bridged, spaces
at intervals to allow of the passage of the water. The villagers
are made responsible for their own division of the road being
kept in perfect order. Messengers from the king make periodical
visits to see that this rule is carried out.” Altogether a remark-
able country, from uncivilised Africa, and apparently equal to the
densely populated Mahommedan kingdoms of T ando and Lockatoo
on the Niger for intelligence, although far inferior to them for
that commercial instinct which more than anything else distin-
guishes a civilized from an uncivilized State. The Waganda people
are mostly engaged in cultivating land, hunting, fishing, house-
building, and war. The women do most of the cultivation, as the
men are said to consider it beneath their dignity. The gardens
of the Waganda, we are told, are as a rule wonderfully well kept,
the various plants being cultivated on separate beds, which are
carefully weeded and divided from each other by broad, straight
walks, the principal things grown being sweet potatoes, beans,
semsen, coffee, and splendid tobacco, which both men and women
smoke in immense quantities. Bananas, which form the staple
food of the people, are grown in plantations. The territory of
Uganda is divided into two nearly equal halves by the equator,
and lies to the N.N.W. and W. of the Victoria-Nyanza lake,
on which there are about 400 islands, many of which are
inhabited. The country is very mountainous, between the hills,


which are covered with splendid timber, being deep marshy
valleys, in which the “ trees are so high that they meet overhead
and cause a continual twilight to reign on the sunniest day.”
The climate is mild and the changes of temperature slight,
owing to the proximity of the great lake, and to the fact that the
country is over 5,000 feet above the level of the sea. Uganda is
described as a paradise for the sportsman, as lions, leopards
elephants, buffaloes, rhinoceri, zebras, antelopes, jackals, foxes,
hyaenas, and monkeys abound. The government of Uganda is
described by Dr. Felkin as a perfect feudal system, about 600,000
fighting men being at the disposal of the king. The singularly
original way in which he collects the men for the varioxis
expeditions which are continually being sent out into the surround-
ing countries for cattle and slaves is well worth relating. The
king, we are told, “ has a war-board covered with numerous holes,
in which pegs are placed of three different colours and sizes,
representing tens, hundreds, and thousands. All the fighting men
that the king has at his disposal are represented on this board.
If he wishes to send out an expedition he takes as many pegs
from the board as will represent the number of soldiers he
requires. These he divides among the chiefs who happen to be
present, and they are obliged to supply the requisite number of
men. After the return of the army from war, the number of
the killed is deducted by the chiefs, and they return the pegs
that remain to the king. The weapons employed are spears,
shields, bows and arrows, and guns. The spears are about
feet long, each man carrying two. The bows are 3 feet in
length; the arrows 3 feet long, and terribly barbed. The
regularity and precision with which their movements are carried
out is surprising.” It should be stated that the chiefs, who
govern the provinces, and receive their honours for great bravery
in war or for other services rendered to the State, are all compelled
to spend three out of the twelve months at the capital, and from
these is formed the State Council, who, with the three hereditary
chiefs and the head cook and brewer, assist the king in the
government of his kingdom. Indeed, according to Dr. Felkin, the
king rules in name alone, the three hereditary chiefs in reality
governing the land. There is also a Privy Council, composed of
the Prime Minister, appointed by the king, the three hereditary
chiefs, and one or two other favourites of the king ; and whatever
the Privy Council decides must be carried out, no king daring to
oppose its decision. All these chiefs are judges, and although they
have no written laws they are said to administer them in a satis-
factory manner. Cases are tried, and appeals can be made.
Punishments are severe, theft being punished with the loss of
hand, nose, or ears, while for grave offences criminals are some-
times slowly bled to death, or tied to a pole and gradually hacked
£


to pieces, while bit by bit is thrown to the novering vultures.
This latter is the sort of death to which the Christian converts
were recently, and, perhaps, are still, subjected in Uganda. The
persecutions commenced a little over two years ago. “On the
first day,” writes the missionary Mackay, “ some dozen were, at
one time, cut into pieces. These were prominent Christians, with
places at court; and, simultaneously, numerous imprisonments
took place, and many Christians throughout the land were killed.
On one occasion thirty-two of our best people were brought
together in a mass and slowly burned. Others were mutilated, and
again, others were killed with clubs, or had one limb after another
hacked off, and then slowly burned. Our remonstrances were
useless ; the King Mwanga mocked our prayers, and we ourselves
only escaped the fate of those martyrs by the special enduring grace
of God.” In burning words the missionary implores Europe to
fix a limit to the cruelty of this blood-thirsty despot, and to bring
freedom and peace to the oppressed people.
It is to be hoped that one result of the interest felt in the fate of
Emin Bey will be the amelioration of the condition not only of the
natives of the extensive province which he has ruled with such
distinguished ability for so many years, but also of those of the
wonderful country bordering on the Equatorial Lakes, a brief
description of which I have just given. The first thing necessary
before any such desired consummation can take place is that the
people should know exactly what the condition of that distant
region really is, and it was with a view of doing my share towards
spreading that knowledge in however small a way that I penned
the above remarks.
Sydney : Charles Potter, Government Printer.—lBBB.




