

FEMALE ARTISTS.
READ AT THE NORTH ADELAIDE INSTITUTE
TIIOMAS WILSON, ESQ.
ADELAIDE:
PRINTED BY HUSSEY AND SHAWYER, KING WILLIAM STREET.
1854.
ON TUESDAY, JANUARY 17, 1834.




EMINENT
FEMALE ARTISTS.
READ AT THE NORTH ADELAIDE INSTITUTE,
ON TUESDAY, JANUARY 17, 1851.
THOMAS WILSON, ESQ.
ADELAIDE:
PRINTED BY HUSSEY AND SHAWYER, KING WILLIAM STREET.
1854.




EMINENT FEMALE ARTISTS.
It inay not have occurred to many here present, why, among the galaxy
of talented artists, more especially in the department of graphic art, with
whose lives and fortunes the records of biography abound, the predomi-
nance of the “lords of the creation” is so great. In answer to this, it
has been insinuated, but I think without sufficient foundation, that the
inspired, intuitive, and even educational abilities of the female are, by
nature, in this respect, more limited than in the other sex.
As I am proposing myself for the champion of the fair on this present
occasion, and expect their encouragement for this lecture of mine, I shall
commence by denying any superior inherent general capacity for excelling
in this particular, such as we males have been prone to arrogate to our-
selves. But lam not able to deny that, among the eminent in art, the
praises of some of whom have been sung even to satiety, the men are
numerically conspicuous; and for this some reasons have often suggested
themselves to my mind. A boy receives early impressions of independence
from the rougher mode of his presumed education and training, leading
him equally early to a wish of exercising that free will which he finds
likely to be allowed him, or which he will allow to himself, as the assumed
attribute of his sex.
Born, it may be, with that intuitive perception of the beautiful, truthful,
and harmonious —common to both sexes when occurring, though never
occurring to all—casual circumstances lead him to the contemplation of
previous excellence in art, or to what he then deems to be such, and the bent
is formed. It does not, however, of course, follow, that this bent is readily
yielded to by those whose natural duty it is to control him. On the con-
trary, like “ true love,” the course of his true bias may not run smooth ;
but after various turnings, twistings, and windings, all of which neither
lessen the stream nor divert its ultimate course to a given outlet, it effectually
works its way;—the boy becomes a “Painter. I his operation ot cir-
cumstances takes place by causes, formerly perhaps more prevalent to the
disadvantage of females than at the present day. r I he boy is driven out


by time and circumstances to a profession; and what profession (as the
parents, perhaps unwillingly, at last admit) so probable to succeed as that
to which, like the divining rod of our forefathers, the twig of the boy’s
genius inevitably inclines.
. female, on the other hand, waits; and aware of her little conven-
tional power to exercise free will in selection, and wanting also many casual
opportunities of contemplation of that which more readily falls in the way
of the boy, with all the same intuitive perceptions, and doubtless as keenly
alive to the same sense of the beautiful, truthful, and harmonious in
art, she seldom arrives at that crisis, which embodies a shape and
practical earnest to her sensations. In the next place, a sanguine idea
strikes parent and child, in the case of the boy, of fortune and fame to be
self-earned; while the female is usually restricted to pause, till the event
of marriage, perhaps, by a powerful diversion, at once alters the course of
the stream ; or till established celibacy, without the power of putting her-
self forward, or being put forward with propriety, deadens those feelings;
the early encouragement of which, not as a recreation simply, but as a
means to fame and fortune, circumstances concurring, might have produced
a splendid artist.
1 am desirous that this lecture should prove of some little interest, not
only to the lady part of my audience, but, by the sympathy of gallantry, to
the gentlemen of the present company. But, alas ! I have no pretty
diagrams, no red and blue bottles, no laughing gas to exhibit; and as I
cannot gratify your sight, must address myself to the indulgence of your
ears.
I am not able, in the space of time usually allotted to these matters, to
do more than give a sketch of the biography and performances of some
eminent female artists, from a long past period to the beginning of the
nineteenth century. On recent examples it will be in my power to say
but little, as a colonial residence of more than fifteen years has shut out
from me (perhaps for ever) the more modern artistic talents and perfor-
mances of the fair.
Most of my hearers of both sexes are aware to what perfection the art
of u wood engraving” has been brought; and how many female hands are
now enabled by that art to earn a respectable livelihood, and acquire repu-
tation, for whom, too often, no course was open to obtain that livelihood
without finding respectability difficult to preserve. But few perhaps are
aware, that for the very earliest pictorial effort in this art, we are indebted
to a female. The facts—for such they are now considered to be—have
something of romance; but, according to the best testimonies, are well
established.
In the year 1285 (568 years ago), lived ALESSANDRO ALBERICO
CUN JO, and his twin sister ISABELLA. These young people, scions
or nobility, the offspring of a certain Count Cunio, of Ravenna, passed
their childhood together in the ardent pursuit of knowledge. They were
highly talented, and at sixteen years of age were accomplished in art, par-
ticularly in drawing. They designed and executed jointly (twins even in
this) a series of eight prints— the first known pictorial woodcuts in
existence. 1 hese represented “ the actions of Alexander the Great,” and
were dedicated to Lope Honorius IV., to whom their noble mother was
related. Ihe dedicatory inscription, is curious, and runs thus, as translated
from the Latin, or rather Gothic Italian :
“ 1 he heroic actions, represented in figures, of the great and magnani-


mens Macedonian King, the bold and valiant Alexander; dedicated, pre-
sented, and humbly offered to the most Holy Father, Pope Honorius the
Fourth, the glory and support of the Church, and to our illustrious and
generous father and mother, by Alessandro Alberico Cunio and Isabella
Cunio, twin brother and sister j first reduced, imagined, and attempted to
be executed in relief with a small knife on blocks of wood, made even and
polished by this learned and dear sister; continued and finished by us
together at Ravenna, from eight pictures of our invention, painted six times
larger than here represented; engraved, explained by verses, and thus
marked upon the paper to perpetuate the number of them, and to enable
ns to present them to our relations and friends, in testimony of gratitude,
friendship, and affection. All this was done and finished by us when only
sixteen years of age !”
There was a memorandum, written probably by one of the twins, “ to
deepen the block, that the paper may not touch that part.” The impres-
sion is stated to appear granulous, as if taken by rubbing with the hand on
paper not wetted, with a material without oil, but some other inky sub-
stitute, and never submitted to the action of a press.
Honcrius held the Papal chair only from 1265 to 1287 —two years. He
was a devoted cultivator of the fine arts; but the library of tbe Vatican,
often plundered, has been searched in vain for the presentation copy of
these singular and most interesting wood engravings; and that series from
which the celebrated Papillon took his description, then in the possession
of a Swiss gentleman, was unfortunately lost sight of; nor is any one of
the set now certainly known to exist !
The fate of the twins is interesting. Alherico followed his father, Count
Cunio, in one of the expeditions against the petty States of Italy; he was
then wounded, and was knighted for his courage and conduct. During
an interval of peace it wa s , that the brother and sister devoted themselves
to the composition and execution of the engravings I have noticed; but in
a fourth expedition to the wars, the brave young knight fell in the field of
battle, covered with wounds; and the affectionate Isabella died not long
after, broken-hearted from his loss.
Some of the writers on wood engraving discredit this account, but its
authenticity has an equal number of partizans.
Thus I have shewn you that a female artist, a lady, was mainly instru-
mental in producing the very first pictorial specimens of an art, not only
fascinating in its highly improved development of 568 years, but of vast
and constantly increasing utility, in an endlessly varied sphere of orna-
mental, artistic, and commercial display, from Isabella Cunio to our own
admirable and delightful Bewick —our quiet English satirist in wood ; and
since, ever progressing in the varied works of the most talented females,
and exhibited also to powerful advantage in that popular periodical, the
“ London Illustrated News.”
r I he next example I wish to place before you is DIANA GHISI, a
lady of a family of artists of that name, natives of Mantua, and from that
circumstance called “ Mantuan A.” This lady flourished in 1583, and
was an engraver on copper, which my female audience probably know is
executed in a manner the reverse of wood cutting. Engraving on copper,
to print from, was discovered in 1452. Diana cut boldly into the metal,
and produced lar> e engravings of various subjects. I possessed, by her, a
Holy Family, and a curious print of a mountebank charming snakes.
Like Isabella Cunio, she assisted her brothers, who were practised engravers,
and in favour with the scholars of the illustrious Raffaelle. Had Diana


lived a little later, some inaccuracy in her drawing would have been cured
by the bright examples rising round her.
I pass to SOPHONISBA ANGOSCIOLA, the admired friend of the
great Van Dyck. She has left us good proofs of her exquisite talents as a
painter. Contemporary with a great artist, her works, which are of rare
occurrence, suffer little by comparison with those of Van Dyck. It is said
the painter himself thought so, for he was her warm eulogist and admirer.
At Althorp, Earl Spencer’s seat in England, is an excellent picture lay her,
which has been well engraved in Dibdin’s “ Aides Althorpianse.” She
represents herself playing on a keyed instrument, beside which stands her
old nurse in an attitude of attention. It is a vigorous performance, full
of truth and apparent individuality, and her round head and good humoured
countenance give us a very favourable idea of her temper.
Let me now introduce you to a lady who has an eminent claim to your
favourable notice, though she herself made no ostentatious pretensions to
mental Bloomerism :
Observe that quiet Dutch female, seated near an open casement window
of large dimensions, in an attitude of thought, with a hook, also open,
resting on her knee. She has no outward and visible sign of beauty. Her
face is round and somewhat heavy; her cheek bones and her nose are
slightly prominent, and her mouth is not small. Her hair is smoothly
drawn together and fastened up behind, and her dress is simplicity itself,
though with perfect neatness; a plain ample white collar covers her throat.
Her apartment does not show either the furniture of a very housewifely
menage , or of a fine lady. There are more books than bandboxes; more
music than millinery; while painting materials, graving tools and sculptors’
chisels, are discernible by the inquisitive connoisseur.
The individual before you is ANNA MARIA SCHUURMANNS (in
her own language called SGURMANNS). This illustrious lady was born
at Utrecht, in 1607. “ From her cradle,” says Descamps, “ she gave pro-
mise of what she would one day become —the Sappho and Cornelia of
Holland.”
At three years old she began to read, and at seven to speak Latin. 1 his
she learned from the preceptor who taught her brothers. Her mother,
anxious for her health, interdicted all close study, and obliged her to
occupy herself with needlework, such as was then customary among girls
of her own sphere. But this did not at all please “ Our Mary Anne,”
who took, in consequence, to cutting out fancy articles with scissors with
marvellous facility. Shortly afterwards, to the surprise of all who knew
her, she was found painting birds and flowers, and all sorts of insects, with-
out the slightest other tuition than her own genius. She was still, how-
ever, passionately fond of study, and the fine arts were her recreation.
Her father, finding this determined bent of her inclinations, yielded up
the spring to its own tension, and furnished her with books. At ten years
of age she translated several of Seneca’s treatises into Flemish and French
(the English language was at a discount in Holland). She acquired a
proficiency in Greek, which astonished all the learned of her time, and was
taught Hebrew by the celebrated Vossius. She could write in that lan-
guage, and in Syriac, Chaldee, Greek, Latin, Spanish, Italian, and German,
and was mistress of her own tongue, in which, and several other languages,
she composed good poetry.
M aria Gonzaga, Queen of Poland, after admiring at a distance the talents
of our deeply learned Mary Anne, made a journey to Utrecht in 1645,
visited Ma’mselle Sehuurmanns, held long conversations with her on art,


and left some flattering testimonies of her esteem and homage. What a
contrast to our own times, in which the chief homage would have been to
her beauty, if she had any; and the question would be then asked— Has
she any Burra shares ?” , , . . . . T
Another Mary Anne, the Queen of Bohemia, and her daughter Louisa,
as well as many of the eminent literati of Europe, were Ma mselle Schuur-
mann’s correspondents, and thought themselves honoured by her letters.
But more to the purpose of our lecture, is the circumstance that artists
themselves were loud in the praises of her paintings. She engraved with
the diamond on chrystal, carved figures most admirably m wood and ivory,
and was an accomplished musician. Her skill in carving was so great, that
she executed portraits of her mother, herself, and her brothers, m palm-
wood- and the excellence of these performances may be estimated by the
price’that the celebrated painter Honthorst ptit upon them, de valued
her own portrait singly, thus executed, at a thousand florins, about
now, and a larger sum two hundred years ago.
She has herself etched her own portrait, and finished it with the graver.
In the lower margin are these Latin verses of her own
Cernitis hie picta, nostros in imagine vultus:
Si negat ars formam, gratia vestra dabit!
Which I shall thus translate for the ladies
See sculptured here my pictured image lives ;
That beauty art denies, your favour gives !
And again, under her own portrait, beautifully modelled by herself in wax,
are these lines :
Non mihi propositum esthumanam eludere sortem,
At vultus solido sculpere in aere meos :
Hac nostra effigies, quam cera expressimus, ecce,
Materise fragili, mox peritura, damus .
Which I will render thus :
I must not think our common lot to pass,
And grave my features upon solid brass.
This effigy in wax expressed you see,
Fragile, will perish soon, and cease to be.
The next example I shall take leave to offer you is the perhaps better
known MARIA SIBYLLA MERIAN, born at Frankfort in 1647.
Ma’mselle Merian’s mother, who treated her with much harshness in con-
sequence of her enthusiastic attachment to painting, endeavoured, when the
child was twelve years old, strenuously, but in vain to tear her away from
the fascinating pursuit of the arts. At last her father-in-law succeeded in
persuading the mother to allow the daughter the free exercise of her talents
and he brought this to bear by the assistance of a most fortunate reminis-
cence on the part of the lady-mother that some time previous y o y
birth, she had felt a continual desire to examine insects objects
of natural history, and had herself made a collection of grubs, butterflies,
shells, and petrifactions, which, during that interesting season, had form
her chief amusement—impressions, she supposed, which had P rod ™*d her
daughter’s bias. Be this as it may, she thus accounted for Sibylks
penchant for imitating the curiosities of nature, and the matter a
Smselle Merian immediately became the pupil of the
Abraham Mignon, the flower painter, and a rapid improvement foHowed
his teaching. She married early, which gave her better opportunities for
the study of her art than could, she thought, be taken by a single woman,


and it is remarked to her honour, that so well was her time managed, in all
respects, that the thorough performance of her domestic duties, g and the
crapulous management of her children and family, were never interfered with
by her studies in art. Though married to aM. Graf, she is known only
y her maiden name; for the marriage was unfortunate, and Graf was
obliged to leave his wife to her own resources. An observer of every branch
ha Sin l h f rJ r She m ° re P art , iculari y attached herself to insect life, its
habits and transformations. She made elaborate drawings of these, to
which she joined very interesting notices, showing deep research; and
these drawings were engraved and published. Some time afterwards,
2™ P f ed her daughter no unworthy rival, she embarked for Surinam,
rpo-fnn bhe e ™P lo y ed two w!loIe years in painting the insects of that teeming
region, and the plants, flowers, and fruits they feed on. The beauty and
accuracy 0l these drawings are beyond all praise; and naturalists in par-
ticular are surprised at the patience with which this charming artist has
tieated every object. All are exquisitely painted on vellum, the forms of
the living subjects scrupulously true to nature; the flowers and fruit
miraculously fresh and tempting. A visit to the British Museum, where a
large portion of her drawings forms part of the collection of Sir Hans
b oane, and one of the great ornaments of this national repository, must,
M t ?m mion T° f any °, f ™y hearers > have confirmed this eulogium.
May I add a wish, that we had more Sibylla Merians.
. . an y sa y s Hr. Duncan, one of her biographers, “ have dis-
tinguished themselves as successful aspirants after distinction in the fine
arts; but none, except the subject of the present memoir, have been cele-
brated for a work so replete with artistic feeling as that of the Insects of
Surinam. In these respects her pictures are not surpassed by any works
of art of a similar description by the moderns, to whom her method of
arranging and combining her figures may serve as a lesson.”
b l lght feather in Holland’s cap is MARIE VAN OOSTER-
.V Y( K, a flower painter, daughter of a minister of the reformed religion,
and born at Delft in 1630. b ’
Ma’mselle Oosterwyck was not only talented but industrious, having
nothing so ardently in view as the exercise of her art. Her love for it was
so early conspicuous, and appeared so insurmountable, that her father forth-
with procured her a master, and that master was De Heem; and but
a short interval passed between her first essays and the works which
have conferred so much fame upon her. She had scarcely left the tuition
ot IJe Heem before her pictures were distributed among foreign courts,
and praised by artists. Louis XIV. was the first sovereign who honoured
her by his patronage, ordering one of her pictures to be placed among the
rarities of the rich collection he was then assembling. The Emperor
Leopold and his Empress commissioned her to paint several pieces for
them, and to the prices of the pictures added their portraits, set with bril-
liants, as marks of their esteem. William 111., of England, gave her £l 00
for a small subject. It seemed, in fact, as if all the monarchs in Europe
were emulous m celebrate her talents and reward them; for the Kino- 0 f
I'mand next became a purchaser of three pf her paintings at large prices,
and these sums were never paid without an added gratuity.
Her amiable disposition, her intellect, and the charms of her conversa-
tion, added much to her extraordinary talents, which did not render her
vain, or c istuib her quiet life and habits. She did not shun society, but
tier pain ting-room was the spot most familiar with her presence. In order
to pursue her profession with advantage, she settled with her grandfather


at Delft, where William Van Aelst, an excellent artist in the same genre,
found his way to her studio under pretence of admiring her performances ;
and after many visits, beaming with love and enthusiasm, he put the
tender and delicate question. But Ma’mselle Oosterwyck was much less
inclined to Hymen than to Flora, and was, besides, too well aware of her
admirer’s character and habits to risk an alliance with a person so differently
disposed. She knew him to be dissipated and idle. Determined, how-
ever, not to dismiss him in a pet, she consented to a marriage, adroitly an-
nexing to it one previous and irrevocable condition, on which only it should
take place.—-Van Aelst, in the ardour of his passion, had hired a room for
his studio opposite to that of Ma’mselle, where, truth to say, he only worked
when he could not help it, and for daily bread, and often idled away his
time in watching his beloved Marie. She now proposed, as a test of his
true attachment, and an earnest for the future, that he should work ten
hours a-day for one probationary year. Van Aelst promised with the readiest
alacrity. For a few days after the commencement of this probation, William
worked like a dragon, looking archly now and then across the street, where
Ma’mselle was always to be seen, pencils and palette in hand, and seeming
to say to her, “ See how industrious we are At the end of a week, he
began to make pauses, and was taken with long fits of yawning; and
ultimately, when the arm of his idol no longer seemed in motion, and he
inferred her absence, he slipped down stairs, turned a corner of the street,
and was seen no more that day. Marie meanwhile scored down every
aberration with a piece of chalk on her window sill.
At the end of the year, Van Aelst, putting out of mind, from her pre-
sumed affection, all the idle days she might have noted, and hoping that
there were many more she had not—sincerely trusting to the absence of a
stringent reckoning, presented himself to his lady-love, more enamoured
than ever.
“ You have yourself released me from my promise,” said she, showing
him the chalky record of his delinquencies. “ Look at the number of idle
days, for I have been very exact: you will find that they exceed greatly
your days of employment, and leave a very unsatisfactory balance against
you.”
Ma'mselle was decided, and the lover pleaded no more !
Her taste, in grouping her flowers was extraordinary; perhaps her
greatest merit where all was great, and her contrasts are skilfully managed
to produce resulting harmony. She died unmarried at the age of sixty-
three.
The person to whom I next introduce you, is JOANNA KOERTEN
BLOCK, the wonder of her age. She was born at Amsterdam, in 1650,
At a very early period she was an elegant penwoman, and her ornamental
writing equalled the finest caligraphy. She modelled fruit and flowers in
wax true to nature, engraved on glass with admirable delicacy, and imitated
to delusion the pictures of some of the earlier masters, in tone, colour, and
touch; but what renders her most remarkable, as the particular example for
this lecture, is her almost miraculous talent for cutting out subjects in paper,
“line is seized with astonishment/' says Descamps, “on examining her
cuttings; all that the burin of the engraver can render she has given with
the scissors—landscapes, sea pieces, animals, and flowers—but most sur-
prising are her portraits perfect resemblances.”
This new method of expressing and imitating objects on white paper
excited the curiosity of all the courts of Europe. Those were for-
tunate times for the arts and female influence; for liberality and patronage


united with gallantry. Money, it is true, Was not in so many hands, or
distributed in so many classes, as in this our utilitarian era. Mammon and
Taste often lodged together ; and Taste, being a lady, was able to influence
her fellow-lodger to a large liberality when a suitable object appeared to
bestow it upon.
No person of consequence went to Amsterdam withont paying a visit to
Ma’mselle Block and her performances. Peter the Great, especially, did
her that honour. The Elector Palatine offered a thousand florins equal
now to more than a hundred pounds of our money), for three small cuttings,
but could not obtain them. The Empress of Germany commissioned her
to execute a trophy, with the arms of the Emperor Leopold the First. In
this elaborate work, all cut out With scissors, the imperial crowns are sup-
ported by eagles, and surrounded by garlands of flowers and other appro-
priate ornaments. For this she received four thousand florins, equal, at
least, to £4OO now. She also cut out the portrait of the Emperor, which
is, or was, in the Imperial Library at Vienna.
Henrietta Maria, of England, and many other princes and princesses
in treated and solicited her works. A small volume of verses in her praise,
in Latin, German, and Dutch, was provided, to place under her cuttings.
To crown all, her peculiar talent procured her the singular honour of
keeping an album or register, in which every great personage inscribed his
or her name; and to every autograph the celebrated Verkolie drew the por-
trait of the person signing—his beautiful vignettes in the same precious
volume forming so many tributes to this lady artists’ talents and glory !
Ma’mselle Block died in 1715, at the age of sixty-five; and no indi-
vidual, male or female, before her time, or since, has evinced a similar
talent at all approaching the perfection in which she displayed it. Faultless
in taste, correct in design, decided, clean and vigorous in execution—the
lines so difficult to divide—are always without confusion, and as clear as if
made with a crowquill or a graver.
At this period, certainly, Dutch wealth and commercial prosperity were
in theascendant,and long continued conspicuously so, tillother nations became
successful competitors in mercantile pursuits. During this apparent mo-
nopoly, pictorial art was liberally fostered, and female talent encouraged by
practical examples, rarely in recent times followed by such draughts on the
pocket.
One of the most illustrious female artists, and of whom Holland may
be justly proud, is RACHEL RUISCII (properly called RUISG), born
at Amsterdam, daughter of a professor of anatomy. She was placed under
the instruction of William Van Aelst, a fruit and flower painter (memorable
in our biography of Ma’mselle Oosterwyck). She very speedilly outstripped
all the best works of her master, and approached so closely to nature as to
become a prodigy.
“ Her flowers and fruit,” says Descamps, “ even surpassed those of
nature, by the choice she made, and by the method of painting, arranging,
and contrasting them.” This may seem exaggerated praise. It has been
my good fortune, moving many years as an amateur in an extensive circle
of the fine arts, to have seen some most exquisite works of Rachel Ruisch ;
and though many other years have passed, where no pictorial specimen of
art of any value has ever made its way, the impress of wonder is not effaced.
While a reputation for splendid talent diffused itself through all the
courts of Europe, the amiable artist remained secluded in her studio, true
to her theory and practice ; “ but not,” as Descamps observes, “ concealed
from Cupid, who contrived to visit her in the shape of Juriaen Pool, a


young painter. They loved, married, and painted on—the wife, however,
retainin'* her maiden name, now famous everywhere. Ihey were soon
after Sntly admitted academicians at the Hague. Madame Rmschs
reception-picture was a white rose, a red one, a plant of artichokes, and a
+’pw other flowers —a picture precious as a jewel.
The Elector Palatine was bewitched by her performances, and sent ler
a diploma as court painter, accompanied by a complete toilet service of
silver of twenty-eight pieces, and six candlesticks of the same metal pio-
mising to stand godfather to her first child; and when the infant was pre-
sented to him by the parents at Dusseldorf, the Elector took from his own
neck a ribbon, to which was suspended a magnificent gold medal, and placed
Jt painted much for this illustrious Macaenas, and never
received the price of her performances without an additional present, cne
the Serf ei g h«y P -six; and it is remarked that her-touchwas so
firm, and her faculties were so unimpaired to the last, that m freshness,
beauty of execution, and every other merit, her pictures painted at eighty
8l 7„™ eia?m a yoS S. for MISS ANNA WASSEIt, a Swiss lady
born at Zurich, in 16T9. Her father was a of some consequence, being
a member of the Great Council and chamberlain. Ma mselle Wasser at
at an early age acquired several languages, and was enthusiastic m literature,
tat”Tw lJaonstn drawing, and the sight of some mtmatnres, detained
her penchant. She was only thirteen when she visited Berne as a scholar
of the celebrated Werner, made astonishing progress in miniature, and
having attempted painting in oil, would doubtless have succeeded pre-
eminently, but was recalled by her parents to Zurich. On her return to her,
native city, where her fame had preceded her, she was soon employed by the
courts of London, Germany, and Holland; and two of the german States
disputed for the possession of her works. It is melancholy to and the
sequel to this little biography. We have seen, m the case of Ma mselle
Merian, the severity and harshness of a mother urging her daughte to
abandon that pursuit in which her whole ardour was absorbed, and for
which her talents especially qualified her. In the case before us the picture
is reversed- and we find a father—alive only to sordid interest, unmindful
of fame and perfection, hurrying, harassing, and worrymg a claugbter,
already too delicate in health, to work beyond her strength m muiu-
plying* her pictures as he required, and eventually senumg her to
untimely grave—unexcused as he was by any consideration other than his
pretended inability to support a large family without overtaxing a taleiite
and dutiful child, and driving her to use an expedition unfavourable to die
very art he wanted to profit by. For a short time an advantageous offer
at a 7 German court restored her from a morbul melancholy into which she
had fallen, revived her taste, and satisfied her desire for perfection.
calm was of short duration. Her besotted father again commanded her
to return. She returned accordingly, but the bow had been stretched too
far, and would now no longer retain its elasticity: her art grew distasteful
to her, from its severe and ungracious exercise; and a fall which she had m
1715 accelerating illness of mind and body, which had long been brooding,
she died in that year, at the early age of thirty-four.
Materials for her life were collected by Sandrart, but have escaped p-
lication. Her portraits in oil, and her miniatures m water colours, at the
a «-e of thirteen are wonderful. Those in miniature, for likeness and mellow
and agreeable treatment, have rarely been surpassed. But her great merit


shines most conspicuously in her small pastoral subjects, which have sur-
prised her contemporary artists by their ingenuity and harmony. Soon
after her, decease, rich merchants and jewellers competed for her best works,
and they consequently bear a high value.
I now pass to a splendid example in HENRIETTA WOLTERS,
born at Amsterdam, in 1692; who, when only seven years of age, gave
indications of an earnest desire to learn drawing; and whose father, finding
this strongly ruling passion—unlike one of the parents whom we have
quoted—provided her with the best instructors. A miniature, by Chris-
topher Le Blond, determined her particular line, by her requesting to become
his pupil. He at first refused to teach her; but seeing a copy of ore of
his own performances of her execution, he was so surprised, that he was as
eager in his desire to instruct, as before in his refusal to do so. I'he
now began to copy the works of Van Dyck, and executed a portrait and a
subject of Saint Sebastian, after that master, which it would not be possible
to approach more closely in correctness of drawing, colour, and touch,
though of a reduced size. Artists and amateurs could never sufficiently
praise these two miniatures. She new began to paint from nature, anti
all the influential persons of the city, honoured her by their sittings.
Peter the Great, then at An s ter dam, who seems to have had a penchant
for female artists, as noticed in the case of Ma’mselle Block, visited her,
was most sincere and unmeasured in his admiration, and used every per-
suasive to induce her to accompany him to the Russian Court, offering her
a pension of 6000 florins, with liberty to accept any commissions for private
emolument; but she politely refused. Peter in his peculiar manner asked
her reasons, “ I cannot, Sire,” said she “ quit my country, the religion and
manners of which would not permit me to live in the whirl and slavery of
a court !” This answer, as cutting as philosophical, struck the Emperor
much, without decreasing his esteem. He gave her a commission to paint
some princesses of his suite, but was too fidgetty to hold out the taking of
his own portrait, as Henrietta often required twenty sittings of two hours
each. Ma’mselle Wolters married, but like many other talented females
is best known by her own name. Soon after her marriage, the Elector
Palatine made strenuous efforts to obtain one of her performances. She
completed a portrait accordingly, on which she. concentrated the best
efforts of her art. This precious specimen was confided to a merchant
for transmission to the prince; but the party conveying it made an un-
satisfactory statement of its being stolen from his travelling carriage.
Henrietta, though a slow worker, took courage and repeated her picture,
but before it was entirely finished the Prince died, most sincerly regretted
by all artists, and by none more than Ma’mselle Wolters, who lost a muni-
ficent patron. In consequence of seme portraits of German nobility, which
she soon afterwards painted, Ma’mselle Wolters received a visit from
Frederick the Great. Travelling in Holland incognito, he was anxious to
see her, whose works he had long greatly admired. His astonishment, on
examining her paintings then in progress, was extreme. He told her “that
he was a person who stood well with the King of Prussia, and could
recommend her to employment far more honourable than painting the
merchants and burghers of Amsterdam.” She answered frankly and
coolly, “that her country was too dear to her to abandon it from vanity,
and for a precarious advantage; and that she had a sincere regard for
merchants, who paid better than courtiers.” The King was a little
chagrined, but assured her she would not repent her removal; and offered
to guarantee all her expences. She replied, “that if she could be induced


to quit her country it would not be to visit Prussia, but she should rather
have been more attracted to the court of London.” “Resides,” added
Henrietta, “I dislike a despotic government, where the people are enslaved,
and forced into military service. It is displeasing to persons free born as
the Hutch; my husband and myself are too simple for a court, from which
truth and liberty are banished—and are too much attached to both to live
in a country from which they are excluded!” The King was not offended
with her plain speaking. Her husband, who stood behind the monarch,
and knew him, tried to silence her by signs, but she did not observe or did
not attend to them, and it was only after the King’s departure from her
studio that she first learned his arrival in Amsterdam. He visited her
again twice, enamoured of her performances. She received him with the
same sincerity, but was more guarded, not allowing him to understand that
she even then knew his rank. She did not, however, paint his portrait, as
his sudden departure prevented it. Her usual price for a miniature, in the
zenith of her time, was about forty guineas of our money. Having
acquired an easy fortune, and being without children, she retired to a
boarding house to avoid the cares of housekeeping; but she died scon after,
rather suddenly, at the age of forty-eight—sung and celebrated by all the
most eminent poets and artists of her period.
Two ladies, and two only, have had the honour of being members of the
Royal Academy of London. These two are— Angelica Kauffman and
Mary Moser.
ANGELICA KAUFFMAN was born in the Swiss canton of the
Grisons, and has made for herself an European reputation. While young
she was taken by her father to Milan, and then visited Rome; where, by
her portraits in oil, she attracted universal admiration, and, according to
Winckelmann (a competent judge of art), excelled her contemporaries in
singing. Of him she painted an excellent portrait, and etched it herself.
He speaks highly also of her proficiency in languages. In 1765 she went
to Venice, and from thence, accompanying Lady Heath cote, to England,
was so flatteringly received, as to be elected one of the thirty-six original
members of the Academy. She married in 1781, but as usual retained her
maiden name. Her pictures of various subjects, sacred and profane, are
graceful and pleasing, and the public taste setting that way, were certainly
admired to the full extent of their talents. It is but justice to observe that
her compositions partook of w'hat is said to have been the staple of a cele-
brated Episcopal divine —“elegant debility.” She etched many of her own
compositions in a tasteful manner. She is said to have been cheated into
into an early marriage by an impostor, who passed himself off as a Swedish
Count. She died at Rome, in 1807. She was a graceful person, of pleasing
features without being beautiful, and was certainly highly accomplished.
It is not much in favour of any diffused knowledge of the graphic arts in
this colony, that I purchased, some years ago, at a sale by auction here,
in Adelaide, for sixpence, one of Angelica’s original drawings, a well-
known subject—“ Love triumphant, accompanied by the Graces”—which
had been engraved in England.
With the next, and only other female Royal Academician, MARY
MOSER, I had the honour of personal acquaintance, and some degree of
intimacy. She was the daughter of Michael Moser, the first keeper of the
Royal Academy. In her early days she was a great admirer of Fuseli, who
was not insensible to her attentions. She afterwards married a Mr. Lloyd,
and became his widow. She was the most distinguished flower painter of
her time, as her reception-piece at the Royal Academy may prove. While


Miss Moser, she decorated a room for Queen Charlotte, at Fvogmorire, near
Windsor Castle, afterwards called “ Miss Moser’s room,” for whhieh she
received <£9oo; a proof that our Third George’s better-half speent her
money on other objects besides snuff and diamonds —her reputed preevailing
favourites. Mrs. Lloyd was a most cheerful and intelligent comppanion;
and though quite elderly when 1 knew her, forty years ago, was the 3 wit of
the company at our tea parties at her own house, or at that of Nobllekens,
the sculptor, with whom we were all on the same terms of intimaacy, and
to which Mrs. Lloyd, knowing my propensity for early art, wouldd bring
me a fragment of some rare print, seldom free from ruthless evidencce of its
ill-usage in an artist’s studio. But she was not a collector, and I tctook the
will for the deed. I well remember the old lady in a modest black c bonnet
w r hich she always wore.
Her flowers have great freshness and good arrangement; and thouughnot
equal to those of Ruisch, Van Huysum, or Mignon, are neverthelesss of un-
mistakable excellence. She was a sprightly letter-writer, of whiiich two
specimens may serve to amuse. In a letter to Mr. Lloyd’s first wi'ife, and
her own great friend, she says: —“Come to London, and admiiire our
plumes. We sweep the skies ! A Duchess wears six feathers, a laddy four,
and every milkmaid one at each corner of her cap. Fashion is ggrown a
monster! Tell your operator that your hair must measure: three-
quarters of a yard from the extremity of one wing to the o tiller!! ”
To Fuseli, she writes strictures on Lord Chesterfield’s Letters to hiis Son :
“If you have read Lord Chesterfield’s letters, give me your opimion of
them, and what you think of his lordship. For my part, I admiire wit,
and adore good manners, but at the same time I should detesst Lord
Chesterfield were he alive, young and handsome, and my loverr, if I
supposed, as I do now, that his wit was the result of thought, and that he
had been practising the graces in the looking-glass.” Speakings of the
Exhibition, in 1770, she says:—“Angelica made a very great addiition to
the shew.”
Fuseli and West, as it is known, never agreed. When the lattter was
re-elected as president of the Royal Academy, in 1803, one vote wars found
for Mrs. Lloyd, said to be Fuseli’s. When taxed with having ggiven it
(as Knowles relates), he said: —“ Well, suppose I did! She’s eligible to
the office is’nt she ? and is not one old woman as good as another ? ’”
The amiable subject of this example died at an advanced age iin 1819,
having ceased since her marriage to practise her art, except as an annateur.
About this period flourished MISS CAROLINE WATSON—an
admirable engraver in the stippled manner, who executed many bteautiful
engravings after Hoppner, Romney, and others, full of colour and e;ffect.
We have also MA’MSELLE MARIA THERESA REBOHJL—a
Parisian lady-artist, celebrated for her beautiful and accurate delineation of
flowers, insects, and shells. Her talents, already known and appreciated on
the continent of Europe, w r ere further rewarded by her election as a member
of the French Royal Academy of Painting.
Our lamented PRINCESS CHARLOTTE was an artist. She drew
and etched well. In a work which I was illustrating, during her lifetime,
I felt a great wish to possess one of her performances, as applicable to
a particular subject. By efforts in an influential quarter, 1 had the pleasure
of receiving an impression of an etched head, executed with much Spirit,
though slight. My work also contained some original etchings by THE
DUCHESS OF RUTLAND and THE MARCHIONESS OF
STAFFORD.


Another amateur lady-artist of nearly the same period was the late
COUNTESS OF ESSEX, by whom I had a volume of etchings, views of
Cashiobury and other places, given to me by a connection of the Earl’s.
These last examples are presented to shew the exercise of art by females,
in quarters and among parties, where probably the innate love of the pur-
suit was the only motive, unconnected with that desire of acquiring fame,
which when coupled with its deserved remuneration, produces a stimulus
leading to perfection.
Many of my hearers may probably remember the eminent reputation
acquired in miniature painting by MRS. MEE; and yet more recently
in portrait painting in general, by MRS. CARPENTER; who have not
been slow to keep up the company of gifted female artists.
The august lady who occupies the British throne has pleased herself in
the exercise of the talents of design in conjunction with her illustrious
consort; but her performances, though more widely diffused than at all
comported with the royal wishes, which courted no display, have never,
I imagine, reached this Colony.
I must draw my examples and my lecture to a close in quoting, as the
last illustration, the beautiful example of MARY, DUCHESS OF WUR-
TEMBURG. This lady, little known perhaps to my hearers, as Princess
Maiie of Orleans, daughter of Louis Phillipe, late King of the French, was
born at Palermo in 1813, during the exile of her father, then Duke of
Orleans. She was educated in early childhood at Twickenham, near
London, and her youth was passed under the care of her mother until 1830,
when her father ascended the French throne. She was an early and devoted
lover of the fine arts and, on her father’s restoration to dignity, had the best
tuition royal commands could procure. Her instructor in painting was the
celebrated Ary Scheffer ; in modelling and sculpture, Pierre David; and
in water colors, Newton Fielding. She married the Duke of Wurtemburg
in 1837.
This lady has designed and executed numerous beautiful drawings ; but
her sculpture has more particularly acquired her an European celebrity.
Remarkable in this art is her statue of Joan of Arc, the size of life; the
eyes fixed on the ground as in deep thought, and the arms crossed on the
bosom. It is now, or lately was at Versailles ; and has been copied of
every size, and in every kind of material. She also modelled “ The Death
of Bayardand the windows of the chapel at Fontainbleau are of her design.
It is painful to add the sequel to this sketch, that the accomplished
subject of it died at Pisa in 1839, not having attained her twenty-sixth
year. Her death was occasioned by injuries suffered in a fire which
destroyed her palace at Stutgard. She was everywhere sincerely deplored,
not only by her own countrymen but all foreign admirers of her most
amiable character and great talents; and her untimely fate threw, for a
long period, a gloom over the society whom she honoured with her friendship.
It seems to be a current opinion that in the higher departments of
painting and music women have never been preeminent; an opinion which
Mr. Chorley, in his work on “ Music and Manners in France and Ger-
many” seems, as to music, ungallantly anxious to confirm.
I think I have proved by numerous examples, which I could multiply,
that these maxims are erroneous with respect to various important branches
of the graphic arts. It certainly has not been given to women to range in
painting the wide area of history in any remarkable degree; and for this
we may find reasons, in considering that the fair sex, however influential


in promoting the great events of past times ; in establishing kingdoms,
fomenting wars, or (more rarely) cementing peace, have seldom been the
actual personal instruments in bringing these events to pass. Such activity
belongs, I should hope, not to woman. She therefore, in her mere
proper sphere, is not conversant in detail with those strong scenes which
constitute the active part of history, sacred or profane ; and consequently,
not only does not incline to overstep that sphere to imitate a George Sand
or a Harriett Martineau ; but even were it so, and endowed with more
masculine developments than would become her, she would not, for want of
actual personal experience, be competent to compose into scenic effect, with
stern severity, those strikingly startling events, on the impressive portions
of which, an historical picture must rest for its reputation ; events or
actions often shocking and disgusting from their very impressiveness.
Such experience, even one of the rougher sex, Bellini, the Venetian artist,
thought hardly desirable. Having painted a decollation of St. John the
Baptist, for the Grand Signor, he was reproached by his Majesty for his
want of fidelity in the delineation, which the monarch condescended to cure,
by decapitating, with his own hands, a slave in the painter’s presence, and
thus shewing him the true pictorial effect of the operation.
In softer scenes, and in more congenial subjects, I have endeavoured to
prove that women occupy a foremost place, and can earn large honours and
reward. Bearing in mind the talents of a Rachel Ruisch and a Henrietta
Wolters, which, though they may yet be rivalled, will hardly be exceeded,
we have no reason to conclude this Lecture with any doubt that we shall
live to see many future bright examples of ’eminent FEMALE
ARTISTS!!
Thus have T shown where female talent dwells,
Woman, in' all she ought to do, excels.
Early inventress of one art, we find
She shines a benefactress of mankind.
Fresh juicy fruits beneath her fingers rise.
Glow with tieh tints, and tempt admiring eyes ;
Gay flowers of every hue, with dews of morn,
Bright from the heavens, her canvas squares adorn ;
Insects of lively colouis add their grace,
And seem to quaff the chrystal drop they trace.
Nor do we wonder less that female fame
In other arts, should wear some honoured name.
Remark! what female scissots learn to do,
How they create resemblances, as true
In feature, as the liveliest pencil drew.
So miniatures, made precious by the touch
Of female hands (those hands were mostly Dutch),
Paid beyond price by numerous costly things,
Find honoured place in cabinets of kings !
See monarehs vie, and states mild warfare wage,
To gain those works; the triumphs of their age.
Alas ! no art on this Australian shore
Is worshipped, but the art of raising ore.
While Mammon rules, ’tis grevious to be told,
“ We want no arts but those of earning gold.”
Yet somewhile hence, when past the age of dross,
Money grows dull, and seems to want a gloss;
When better nature struggles to refine,
Then may the arts in South Australia shine;
Some female Crossland, worthy then may prove,
To paint the features that we dearly love,
And we, who worshipped Mammon, may make suit
To Rachel Ruisohes to preserve our fruit.
Hussey & Shawyer, Printers, Adelaide.




