

Under the Distinguished Patronage of His Excellency the Governor
(Sir George R. Le Hunte, K.C.M.G.), and the Government of South
Australia, the Anglican Bishop of Adelaide, etc., etc.
SOUVENIR
EMPIRE DAY
IMPERIAL
FACTS AND POEMS
FOR
SONS AND DAUGHTERS
OF THE
EMPIRE
‘For King and Empire.’
W ritten and compiled by T. W. Comyns,
and Printed by C. H. Wildy, at 36
Waymouth Street , Adelaide.


Our Prerulsess
: .**■
~OE«V. v
' v »-y ...
~k /X RACE
I n-IIM Plrle Street, City
Our Lines:
PHCENIX Cycle Tyres
Guaranteed 12 Months.
PERSAN Motor Tyres
Reputation Won and Held on MERIT.
MOTOR ACCESSORIES.
Best Assortment in Australasia.
Motor Clothing
Gloves
Caps
Jackets
Ponchos
Aprons
Leggings
Goggles
Leather Coats
Breeches
Rugs
Foot Muefs, Etc.
Volt meters
Motor Horns
Odometers
Valve Parts
Non-Skids
Studded Bands
Clocks
Inflators
Gaiters
Lamps
Chains
And a Host of other Sundries.
COMMONWEALTH RUBBER HEELS
Olbtalnatole at till Bootmakers.
Phoenix Cycle & Motor Tyre Coy., Limited.
R. J. HANCOCK, Manager.


OUR LATE QUEEN VICTORIA.


VICTORIA THE GOOD.
Born 24tft May, 1819.
Ascended the Throne June 2()th, 1837.
Died January 22nd, 1891.
Aged 81 Years 244 Days. Reigned 63 Years 217 Days.
‘Thou hast loved righteousness ami hated iniquity: wherefore God, even thy
Cod, hath annointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.”—
Psalm xlv,, 8.
“ Her Court was pure; her life serene;
God gave her peace ; her land reposed ;
A thousand claims to reverence closed
In her as Mother, Wife and Queen ;
And statesmen at her council met
Who knew the seasons when to take
Occasion by the hand, and make
The bounds of freedom wider yet.
By shaping some august decree,
Which kept her Throne unshaken still,
Broad-based upon the people’s will,
And compassed by the inviolate sea.”— Tennyson
“ The late Queen realised that the essential dignity of the Throne rested on the
dignity of supreme example.”— Karl Rosebery.
“ Her whole life, public and private, has been one great and abiding lesson upon
the paramount importance of character.”—London Times.
T \URING the protracted reign of the late Queen-Empress —
unprecedented in British history—Her Majesty held the reins
of Government with marvellous skill, and her reign surpassed in
magnificence the reigns of all her predecessors. What will lie known
in history as the Victorian Epoch has been pre-eminently the epoch
of advancement. Never in modern times has there been witnessed a
period of such continuous, such uninterrupted and such splendid
progress. During its course the British Empire has been founded
anew, not by the invincible valour of her soldiers and sailors, but bj-
the achievements of statesmanship, science, literature and the arts.
Men and women have been lifted in the social scale. Man has been
enfranchised, and has been given a place in the dignity of the State ;


woman is more respected, and is not now treated as a chattel.
Amongst the teeming millions of our boundless Empire—upon which
the sun never sets—there is not one class or race whose lot has not
been ameliorated beyond all that could have been imagined or
conceived when our late Sovereign ascended the Throne. It is this
redressal of wrongs, this raising of the people intellectually, socially
and morally, which gives to the reign of Queen Victoria its grandest
significance. Her reign was synonymous with good and righteous
Government. Britain, indeed, has made “ the bounds of freedom
wider yet.” The personal virtues of the late Queen-Empress were
known not only to her own people, but to all the world. In the
fierce light that beats upon the Throne she ever shone resplendently
as the emblem of all that is pure in woman. By the unanimous
consent of all the peoples of the civilised world she was chosen as the
model of the perfect Woman, Wife, Mother and Queen. The effect
of her example upon her own people has been incalculable. Under
her influence purity of life and morals increased to such an extent
as to form one of the most striking contrasts of the closing years of
her reign with the habits and customs of sixty years previously. As
a matter of fact, her influence permeated, for good, every sphere of
life and every class of her subjects throughout her vast dominions.
Her influence for good likewise girdled the globe.
What a glorious history is that of Queen Victoria the Good—from
infancy down to ics majestic close—replete with the splendid
characteristics that grace and dignify a throne. Her blessed memory
will ever remain an abiding lesson for good with the British people ;
and the principal motives for celebrating “ Empire Day ” throughout
the British Dominions are a deep sense of gratitude for a co-existence
of religious and political liberty unknown in any other history of the
universe. As an American writer, a few years ago, upon the Queen’s
influence and goodness of life, beautifully expressed it: “ Men will
hold her name in honour through finite time ; and when the prayer
that has arisen in every part of our earth is answered, when the
Saint at the gate shall open the way, and the voices beyond sing
their welcome in harmonies none of us can conceive, still will ring
on that word —
'VICTORIA!'"


Established 1893.
Telephone BS3.
THE ADELAIDE
(Shorthand ant) Staining
ACADEMY,
FLINDERS STREE T.
Wir.I,IAM HOGG, Principal.
Preparation for Business Life, the Civil Service, or any Public
SOME RESULTS
CIVIL SKRVICK, 1905—First, Second, ami Third Positions on Pass List (with
all the Honors awarded).
1906 — Second, Third and P'ourth (with Honors).
1907 First, Third and Fourth (with Honors). Twelve of the
Twenty-live Passes, and the only Passes in Shorthand,
Since 1905 the Academy has won Mine of the Eleven Honors
awarded the most distinguished candidates.
Over Two Thousand Students have received Appointments
since 1893, and Forty during the past three months.
“ Sire Ibral
ffinmnierrtal
fflnlhge
of
Australia.”
®!|r (jHfipßt.
Karnral
anb Mmt
gwnwafttl
Bnsitipsa
(ffnllwjr.
Stenographer.
A Uargr mtb
f-xpmpnrpb
Staff.
Examination.
Academy Students are always preferred by Employers.
Call or Write for Hew Illustrated Prospectus.


HIS MAJESTY THE KING-EMPEROR
EDWARD VII.
Born November 9th, 1841. Ascended the Throne January 22, 1901.
Crowned in Westminster Abber, August 9, 1902.


THE KING-EMPEROR.
his vast dominions His Majesty the King-
Emperor, Edward VII., is as much beloved as the memory of
his august mother. For upwards of twenty years prior to the
death of Queen Victoria there devolved upon him, as Prince of
Wales, much of the cares and duties of the Sovereign, and the
training he thus received proved eminently useful when he assumed the
dignity and the immense responsibilities of Kingship. A past-master
in diplomacy, in shrewdness, and in tactfulness, His Majesty has, on
several occasions since his brief reign of six years, used his powerful
influence to avert European wars, for which he has received the
heartfelt gratitude of all the nations in the civilised world. A wise
and Constitutional monarch, Edward VII., is ably walking in the
footsteps of his predecessor on the Throne, and carrying out all
the traditions of her great and glorious reign. Wherever the
Union Jack flies to-day the “National Anthem” will be sung,
and millions of loyal subjects will heartily acclaim—
“LONG LIVE OUR NOBLE KING I’'
THE ENDS OF EMPIRE.
Where does the realm of England end,
Where are the bounds of England drawn
The lines that the lean, lithe outposts tend,
And the glasses sweep through the frost of dawn.
The utmost reach of the English hand,
The faintest flit of her signal’s glare,
The furthest sound of her son’s command?
Goddess of Nations, tell us where.
Is it the coast of a tiny isle,
Whipped in the van of the Arctic gale.
Where a steady hand and a scornful smile
Meet the Teuton brag and the Gallic wail ;
Where cities tread on cities’ heels,
Where millions jostle and houses spread
From the mountain crests to the clustered keels ?
The Goddess of Nations Shakes her head.


Is it where never the eagle soared—
The ramparts wide of the drifting snow—
Guarding the home of a servile horde,
Checking the charge of the Tartar foe ;
Stabbing the sky with a fury grand,
And circling safe in its jewelled decay
The tinselled crust of a leprous land ?
The Goddess of Nations answers, “ Nay ! ”
Is it the flanking ocean’s roll,
The burrowed ice of a gold ravine,
The glittering stretch to the hidden Pole,
A chain of lakes or a prairie green ?
Does it end with the leagues of the gleaming grain,
A trader’s trail on a slope of snow,
A forest’s worth or a pelt to gain ?
The Goddess of Nations answers, “ No ! ”
Is it the edge of a sun-swept beach,
A bluff’s red rim or a ti-trees’ twine,
Where the tails of the blue-ribbed ranges reach
The grey Gulf gum or the Darling pine ;
The land of the ever-waited shower,
The mine and the vine and the foot-long fleece —
Are these the limits of England’s power ?
The Goddess of Nations holds her peace
Is it the web of a jungle black,
Fringed with the fangs of the assegai,
The rotting span, or the lion’s track,
Hedging the veldt where the English lie ;
Where the carrion croak and the life-blood drips,
The Lyddite numbs and the Maxim’s thrill—
Does England end with her ba3'onet tips ?
The Goddess of Nations’ lips are still.
The Goddess of Nations clears her eyes ;
She flings her veil fo the scented breeze.
Her gaze is thrown where the breakers rise ;
Her finger points to the straggling seas.
“ There are the bounds of the English home.
Where the wavelets lap on the stranger’s strand ;
The broad blue billows the rovers roam
Are held in the grip of the English hand.”
“ The God of the Sea is a suzerain,
Who bows his head to the English host,
The border of England’s wide domain
Is the border-line of the foreign coast.
The proudest province her people claim
Has ever been, and will ever be,
The battlefield, where she built her fame,
The rolling plain of the changeless sea.”-
M.G.


■'“■"'THE EMPIRE.
Rhodes was all his life trying to build an
Empire in Africa. We are building them
every day at our Factory:
25 & 27 HINDMARSH SQUARE,
By Experienced Mechanics.
CALL AND SEE OUR STOCK.
EMPIRE POR & CYCLE COY, LTD,
Builders of Empire Specials, Standards, &c.
Branches : Ml. Barker, Broken Hiil, Moonta, Kudina, Wallaroo, &c.
(Hljr i’mmtga Hank of i>.A.
CHILDREN.
Save your PENCE, and when you have One Shilling
Open an ACCOUNT with the Bank.
HEAD OFFICE - CURKIE STREET, ADELAIDE.
BRANCHES at Mount Gambler, Port Adelaide and Port Pirie.
AGENCIES at all Principal Country and Suburban Post Offices.


HER MAJESTY QUEEN ALEXANDRA


THE BRITON'S LAND.
A LAY OF IMPERIAL UNITY.
Should any ask, Where lies the land
O’er which the Briton holds command ?
In no vain-glorious boast would I
Give to that question this reply :
His is the land where the north breeze
Blows foam across the Orcades ;
Where Donegal’s vock-wall flings back
The foiled Atlantic’s fierce attack ;
Where Dover with its cliffs of snow
Serenely views his ancient foe ;
Where Calpe's (1) warders hold the key
That shuts and opens the Inland Sea ;
Where lies the Isle (2) which monk
knights bold
Against the Moslem held of old ;
Where frowns the Prison Rock (3) where
died
He who now lies the Seine beside :
Where stands the Cape (4), by tempest’s
beat.
Round which De Gama steered his fleet ;
W’here billows from the Antarctic pole
Againgt Cape Pillar’s (5) besalt roll;
Where graze Australia’s myriad flocks,
And shine her golden sands and rocks ;
Where the twin summits of Mount
Cook (6)
The England of the South o'erlook ;
Where lies Ceylon mid pearly seas,
With palm leaves rustling in the breeze ;
Where rolls Hydaspes (7b which of yore
The Macedonian’s galleys bore;
Where, born mid Himalayan snows,
By marble mosques (8) the Jumna flows ;
Where by the Irawadi's stream
Is heard-the elephant’s shrill scream ; (9)
Where Bummer Isles (10) lie in the seas
That wash the golden Chersonese;
Where Hong Kong wtth ship-crowded
bay
Lies at the gateway of Cathay ;
Where mountains clad with mighty pines
Rise steep above Columbia’s mines ;
Where down the cliffs with thund’rous
roar
The waves of St. Lawrence pour ;
Where fishers by Newfoundland reap
The finny harvest of the deep ;
Where on the Caribbean Isles,
Begirt with palms, the ocean smiles ;
Where Demerara’s swampy plains
Exult in wealth of sugar canes.
On Arctic shores, in tropic seas,
The Briton's banner courts the breeze ;
Beneath the palm-tree and the oak
He speaks the tongue that Shakespeare
spoke;
Beneath the Southern Cross and Bear
His children lisp the self same prayer.
Upon his land scarce sets the sun ;
His harvest toil is never done ;
Soon as Columbip’s veiled in night,
New Zealand hails the eastern light ; (11)
When icebergs block Canadian seas,
Grain ripens at the Antipodes.
Each hour his ports throughout the world
Behold his vessels’ sails unfurled,
Or hear the rattle as descends
The anchor when the voyage ends.
Placed side by side the bridal pair
Before the priest and altar swear—
One now we are and shall be ever
Till death the life-long union sever.
No marriage vow can break the doom
That bouuds life’s journey by the tomb,
But nation’s worthy to endure
May immortality secure.
We, therefore, will the vow record
Without one qualifying word,
One now we are and shall remain
Till moons shall cease to wax and wane,
A hundred lands together strung
On this strong cord—one crown, one.
J.D.W.
tongue.
I Calpe was the ancient name of the
Rock of Gibraltar.
2. In the 16th century the knights of
St. John bravely held Malta against the
Turks.
3. St. Helena.
4. Vasco da Gama was the first
European to sail round the Cape of Good
Hope, then called the Cape of .Storms.
5. Cape Pillar is the south-eastern
extremity of Tasmania.
6. Mount Cook, the highest mountain
in New Zealand, has two peaks of pretty
nearly equal height.
7. Alexander the Great launched his
flotilla on the Hydaspes, now the Jheluni,
on his voyage to the Indian Ocean.
8. At Agra and Delhi.
9. In Upper Burma the wild elephants
may be heard trumpeting to each other
across the Irawadi.
10. Penang and Singapore.
11. Columbia is the most westerly, New
Zealand the most easterly (with the
exception of Fiji) of the British possessions.


EMPIRE OF THE SOUTH SEAS UNDER THE
RULE OF BRITANNIA.


$
s
we
U 3
&
H>
I
16
IX
AND
On
The Empire.
'Phis is tlie Palace for
Repairs to any make of
Bicytie and Motor by
experienced mechanics
EMPIRE
Motor & Cycle Coy.,
25 & 27 HINDMARSH SQUARE.
And at Hindley Street; Moonta, Kadina,
Wallaroo, Broken Hill, Mount
Barker, etc,, etc.
a
SCHOOL BANDS
Fitted out Well and Cheaply at
S. MARSHALL & SONS
52 Hu mile Street, Adelaide.


Jengue of the (Empire
(South Australian Branch'.
Patriotic Entertainment,
EXHIBITION BUILDING,
THURSDAY, 23rd MAY. 11)07.
Doors open at r-15 p.m, To commence at 7.45 p in.
Ckairman~His Excellency the Governor, Sir George R. LeHnnle. R.C.M.G.
PROGRAMME.
1. General Chorus—“ God Bless our Native Land”
2. Band Selection .. .. .. East Adelaide School.
3. Ceremony—“ Saluting the Flag ”
4. Sword Drill .. .. .. .. Norwood School.
5. Song— ‘‘The Hardy Norseman ’’ .. Sturt Street School.
6. General Chorus—“ Australia”
7. Physical Exercises .. .. Flinders Street School.
ti. Song— “ Death of Nelson ” .. .. Mr. McCarthy,
9. Presentation of Prizes for Empire Day Essays.
10. Song—“ The Union Jack ” .. North Adelaide School'
11. Recitation—“ The Little Hero ” .. .. Uncle Harry.
12. Song—” The Admiral’s Broom “ .. .. Mr. Barnes.
13. Song—“ The Englishman ” .. Sturt .Street School.
I4> General Chorus— “ Red, White and Blue ”
15. Scotch Dance .. .. .. .. Norwood School.
“ God Save the King."
AXiL. AIfCMHEHS ADMITTED FUEB.


"EMPIRE DAY” SONGS.
God Bless our Native Land.
God Bless our Native Land !
O’ may she ever stand
Strong in Thy might !
Her people keep and bless
With health and happiness
And, in the time of stress,
Uphold the Right !
God Bless our Native Land !
Spread Thy protecting hand
From deep to deep !
When foes would seek to harm,
When anxious fears alarm,
Do Thou stretch forth Thine arm
To save and keep !
Song of Australia.
There is a land where summer skies
Are gleaming with a thousand dyes,
Blending in witching harmonies, in hai monies ;
And grassy knoll and forest height,
Are flashing in the rosy light,
And all above is azure bright,
Australia !
There is a land where floating free
From mountain top to girdling sea,
A proud flag waves exultingly, exultingly ;
And Freedom’s sons the banner bear,
No shackled slave can breathe the air,
Fairest of Britain’s daughters fair.
Australia !
The Red, White and Blue.
Britannia, the pride of the ocean
Beloved by the brave and the free,
The shrine of the sailor’s devotion,
What land can compare unto thee ?
Thy mandates make heroes assemble
With Victory’s bright laurels in view ;
Thy banners make tyranny tremble,
When borne by the Red, White and Blue.
Chorus.
When borne by the Red, White and Blue,
When borne by the Red, White and Blue,
Thy banners make tyranny tremble,
When borne by the Red, White and Blue.
When war wing’d its wide desolation
And threatened our land to deform,
The Ark then of Freedom's foundation
Britannia steered safe thro’ the storm !
With her garlands of victory around her,
Oh ! how nobly she bore her brave crew ;
With her flag waving proudly before her,
The pride of the Red, White and Blue.
Chorus.
The pride of the Red, White and Blue,
The pride of the Red, White and Blue,
With her flag waving proudly before her ;
The pride of the Red, White and Blue.


“EMPIRE DAY,”
AND OUR IMPERIAL FATHERLAND.
“ O, my Country, how I love thee."
Last Words or William Pitt.
" oh. may our fatherland he still
Safeguarded by th’ Almighty will !
May Heaven prolong onr times of peace,
Our commerce bless, our trade increase,
And wider yet the bounds expand
Of onr Imperial Fatherland!’’
DAVAAR.
WHENCE CAME “EMPIRE HAY.”
TTJITH whom the great idea of “ Empire Day ” originated we do
V V not know. The Earl of Meath, however, was the first to give
it any life, by proposing that schools should observe May 24th,
as the Day. He suggested that the children should be “ pleasantly
exercised ” in Empire matters for two hours in the morning, and
then given a holiday.
Directly the proposal of the Earl’s came, in 1902, Canon E. 13.
Boyce, of Sydney, President of the British Empire League in Aus-
tralia, warmly took the matter up, and the League actively seconded
his efforts. He supported the Earl, but also proposed that the day
should be for all citizens, and not for children only'. This he
advocated in journals in New South Wales and in other parts of the
King’s Dominions. The following forceful lines from him appeared
in the London ‘‘ Times ” of 11th April, 19(13 ; —
“ An Empire Day would be essentially a Briton’s Day. It would
be one in which Australia —whence I write —Canada, South Africa,
New Zealand, India and other countries under the one flag would be
especially reminded of their same nationality. In its celebrations
the historical memories common to and the heritage of the whole
would doubtless often be reviewed. The out-lying parts might have
their hearts stirred in contemplating the glorious traditions of
England—the mother of nations —while she, in her turn, would
recognise the vitality and enterprise of her vigorous children. It
would be a day, I feel sure, in which patriotism would be aroused
and a common love for the Empire strengthened. . . I think
most men recognise the value of anniversaries and commemorations
in sustaining action. Often new departures follow in the direction of
higher ideals. There can be no question that the Fourth of July
holiday in the United States has been of immense service in fostering
a love among the people there of their history and country and of
friendliness between the several States. Britons have no such day !
May 24th, the birthday of the late Queen Victoria, stands out as
specially suitable. The great extension of the Empire in her reign
is in itself a fact that links her memory with the object. . . But
with open minds let us rally to any day appointed. . . 1 greatly
hope that the authorities in London will take steps and, in consulta-
tion with the self-governing countries, arrange for a day. I am very
confident that such a national holiday circling the earth with


Britain’s drum beat would be helpful and increasingly so as the years
rolled on in holding the race together. In loyalty to the Throne
and Empire the day would annually appeal to all who loved the old
Flag. Is not sentiment among peoples often much more powerful
than law ? Friends afar ask for action in London.”
Canon Boyce tritely said in another journal ; —
“There is no doubt that an Empire so scattered as the British
needs such a day very much. A nation of a compact country has its
unity ever present; but it is very different with dominions on which
the sun never sets. The brotherhood of the British people can be
realised every year, when, on the same day, all under the Xhiiou
Jack —no matter how distant from one another—can, with one heart,
join in the same celebration. ”
Elsewhere the first celebration, almost wholly by children, was in
1903. There was growth in 1904.
In various ways the matter was pushed forward by the League.
An important step was taken in December, 1904 : At a meeting in
Sydney between some members of the Council, and representatives
of the Women’s Branch (Hon. Bruce Smith, M.P., then President, in
the chair), Canon Boyce moved, and Dr. Grace Boelke seconded a
resolution to ask the Premiers’ Conference, about to assemble at
Hobart, to adopt the Day for the Commonwealth. This was
unanimously passed, and Mr. Coleman P. Hyman (Hon Secretary at
the time) wrote a valuable explanatory letter to each Premier, asking
for action. The Hon. J. H. Carruthers, M.L.A., had anticipated the
letter by placing a motion on the business sheet. The Conference
adopted the Day, hence it began in Australia on the next 24th May.
The idea that the Day should be for all citizens has been largely
adopted, not only in New South Wales, but in other British lands.
Canon Boyce has since, by communications to the Press in New
South Wales and in other parts of the Empire, worked to spread the
movement. The Council of the League, in March, 1907, asked the
League in London to bring the question before the Imperial
Conference. Should that representative body, by common agree-
ment, recognise and approve the Day, it would crown a movement
that has rapidly grown, and it should be extended to every part of
the King-Emperor’s Dominions.
A VAST AND SPLENDID EMPIRE.
The array of a few facts and figures will adequately illustrate the
vastness and the splendour of the British Empire: The area is
between 11 000,000 and 12,000,000 square miles. Half the ships in
the world are British, and the best of them can be converted into
ships of war in 48 hours ! As the sun rises, the British drum beat
follows it round the world. There are 400,000,000 subjects of the
British Empire. “God Save the King” is sung in twenty
languages. The total value of the United Kingdom is
! The Empire owns the largest part of North
America, that is Canada. The house property in the British Isles
is valued at the railways at and the
shipping at^"120,000,000. Olive Schreiner, authoress of “An African
Farm,” declares that if any big misfortune were to happen to
England 60,000,000 of English-speaking people in other countries
would leap to their feet. In the opposite lines of Bryant:
" Ay, let them rail—those haughty ones—
While safe thou dwellest with thy sous.
They do not know how loved thou art:
How many a fond and fearless heart
Would rise to throw
Its life between thee and the foe.”


Two-thirds of the ship-building of the world is done by the British.
As much as £2,500,000,000 sterling have been lent to other nations
by the British. The annual revenue of the British Government is
now /96,000,000 sterling. The British Empire possesses 40 colonies.
The trade of Great Britain is worth £700,000,000 a year. The British
Empire, if cut into a strip a mile wide, would reach round the world
450 times !
A British tinted map of the world in 1800 would show to us, in
place of the present great solid mass marked “ Dominion of Canada,”
which extends from the Atlantic to the Pacific shore, and which
is as nearly as big from south to north as it is from east to west,
merely a few small arrears, that even as late as 1867 were widely
different from the Canada of to-day, both geographically and
politically. The independent British provinces of Nova Scotia, New
Brunswick, Prince Edward Island, and the tiny Canada of 1800, with
Newfoundland, were in North America the representatives of the
British Empire : and to the north and west stretched the vast
regions abandoned to the lonely trappers and fur traders of the
Hudson’s Bay Company—wild regions unknown to civilisation.
In Asia a strip or two down by the coasts of India, and at the
north, represented in 1800 the consolidated India of to-day ; and
these patches, with Ceylon and a part of the present Straits Settle-
ments, were then all that existed of the present British Empire
in Asia.
In Africa there was in 1800 not even the tiny patch on its
southern point that in 1814 marked Cape Colony as British land.
Two or three dots on or near to the Gold Coast did in 1800 represent
the present British Empire in Africa-east, west, south, and central,
without counting what is now very much like a large British
Protectorate in North-East Africa.
In Australasia, the year 1800 showed a little scratch on what
is now New South Wales—at Botany Bay, where England
dumped the convicts. In 1907 a noble continent—which Earl
Rosebery has aptly termed a ‘ ‘ young Hercules ’ ’ —and the large
islands of New Zealand, fly the Union Jack.
A COMPARISON WITH OTHER NATIONS.
British colonies are now 96 times the area of Great Britain.
Those of Germany are only five times the area of Germany ; true,
German colonisation is of recent date. But France has been
colonising as long as England, and her colonies to-day are only 18
times her own area. Comparable with tins has been the increase of
population. In 1800 the population of the British Empire, outside of
the United Kingdom, was about 100,000,000, only 2,000,000 being
white. In 1906 the total is 350,000,000, and about 20,000,000 are
white. At the same time that Britain has thus been planting
great colonies, her domestic population has increased much more
rapidly than that of either of her great rivals. The population of the
United Kingdom has increased during the century from 15,000,000 to
41,000,000, or 173 per cent. ; while that of Germany has increased
from 21,000,000 to 55,000,000, or 162 per cent. ; and that of France
from 27,000,000 to 39,000,000, or only 45 per cent.
The British Empire is 53 times the size of France, 52 times the
size of Germany, i l / 2 times the size of the United States of America,
thrice the size of Europe, with treble the population of all the
Russias. It extends over 11,000,000 square miles, that is 96 times the
area of the United Kingdom ; occupies a fifth of the globe ; contains
over a fifth of the human race, or 400,000,000. It embraces four
continents, 10,000 islands, 500 promontories, and 2,000 rivers. The


whole has been acquired by the people of Great Britain and Ireland,
mainly within the last 150 years, either by adventurous settlement
or by conquest —by the blood of England, Wales, Scotland and
Ireland spilt in foreign wars, incurring a debt of ,£900,000,000,
involving an annual charge of £25,000,000. For this an International
British trade has been secured, upwards of ,£700,000,000 a year, and
is capable of vast expansion, for there is nothing known to man
which cannot be produced from the varied soils and varied climes of
the Empire.
BRITAIN, THE CHAMPION CAMPAIGNER.
It can readily be understood that an Empire so vast, with
responsibilities so far-reaching, requires defensive forces of no mean
extent as a safeguard of our Imperial existence. During the reign of
Queen Victoria, Great Britain was a long way ahead of other nations
in the great game of war. The wars, great and small, which the
Mother Country has been engaged in, number about 60—or almost
one for every year of the late Queen’s reign. It is hardly an
exaggeration, to say that British guns have scarcely ceased to thunder
and British bayonets to strike terror into the enemy in all the 63
years of the reign—sometimes in a ftetid, maismic swamps of West
Africa, sometimes on the icy plains of the Crimea, sometimes on the
sandy wastes of the Soudan, the arid plains of India, or the parched
veldt of South Africa ; but in whatever quarter of the globe, with
honour. All the other Powers are poor seconds to Britain, which
is the champion campaigner of the world. The price of Empire has
often been dear, but our gallant sailors and soldiers have never
grudged paying it in full.
OUR GLORIOUS SEA STORY.
The sea-story of the nation is as glorious as that of her armies
on shore. It is lit up with names of gallant commanders and great
victories that lose nothing in comparison with the great military
names and deeds of history. No romantic record of adventure can
out-vie the thrilling interest of drama it unfolds, and no entry in our
national records can so flatter our pride of race as that which sums
up its chronicles of enterprise and heroism. The story that tells of
the defeat of the “ Invincible Armada,” how Byng was victorious off
Passaro, how Jervis scattered the enemy at Cape St. Vincent, how
Rodney “broke the line” of the Compte de Grasse, how Hood,
Collingwood and Nelson raised the honour of the British flag by sea
as high as Marlborough and Wellington did on land, can never fail of
its appeal to the enthusiasm of the nation, and certainly not at a
time when there is an awakening at the heart of the Empire, and
the King’s Navy and the defences of the nation’s outposts are being
vastly strengthened. The great Naval Review at Spithead in 1897,
on the occasion of the celebration of Queen Victoria’s Diamond
Jubilee, deeply impressed the sons and daughters of the Empire and
our foreign rivals that England’s might was real and tangible, and
fully convinced them that Great Britain has nothing to fear from
war with such a command of the sea, although peace may be, and is,
as Lord Derby once exclaimed, “ the greatest of British interests.”
“EMPIRE HAY” AND PATRIOTISM.
Our security and prosperity are assured to us only so long as the
Empire holds together and Britain remains mistress of the seas.
“ When England gave her Colonies the right of self-government,”
wrote the late esteemed “ Max O’Rell,” author of John Bull and his
Island , “there were not wanting people to prophecy that the ruin
of the Empire must be the result. Contrary to their expectation,
however, the effect of this excellent policy has been to bind but


PHOTO BY HAMMER & Co., ADELAIDE.
His Excellency the governor of South Australia,
Sir George r. le hunte, k.c.M.G.


closer the ties which hold the Colonies to the Mother Counlry. If
England relied merely upon her bayonets to guard her Empire, that
Empire would collapse like a house of cards. It is the moral force—
something far more powerful than bayonets—that keeps it together.”
As the great Irish orator and statesman, Edmund Burke, truly
declared, “It is the spirit of the English Constitution, which,
infused through the mighty mass, pervades, feeds, unites, invigorates,
vivifies every part of the Empire, even down to the minutest
member.” In celebrating the festival of “Empire Day,” we are
fostering a broad patriotism, and training our rising generation to
“think Imperially”—generous sentiments which, if kept alive, will
assuredly safeguard our permanent interests.
PAX BRITANNICA.
BY ALFRED AUSTIN, POET LAURETE.
I.
gEHIND her rolling ramparts England lay,
Impregnable, and girt by cliff-built towers,
Weaving to peace and plenty, day by day,
The long-drawn hours.
11.
In peace Spring freed her flocks and showered her grain,
Summer sat'smiling under peaceful leaves,
And Autumn piled on the unwarlike wain
Her sickled sheaves.
in.
And white-winged keels flew fluttering to her shore.
Laden with Eastern bale or Southern fleece :
And from the fields of far-off labor bore
The spoils of peace.
iv.
Then, seeing her within her waves so blest.
The jealous nations, panoplied alike,
Sa’id, “ Look, she wears no armour on her breast ;
What if we strike ?”
v.
But, she, of their base greed and armed array
Haughtily heedless, moated by her main,
Still across ocean ploughed her peaceful waj-,
In strong disdain.
VI.
Then each to other muttered, “ Now at last
Her splendour shall be ours, and we shall slake
Our enemy. She is pillowed on her past,
And will not awake. ’ ’


STATUE ERECTED ON NORTH TERRACE, ADELAIDE,
TO SOUTH AUSTRALIAN SOLDIERS WHO FELL DURING
THE WAR IN SOUTH AFRICA.


VII.
Slowly as stirs a lion from his bed,
Lengthens his limbs, and crisps his mane, she rose,
Then shook out all her strength, and, flashing said :
“ Where are my foes ?’’
VIII.
Thus to herself she did herself reveal.
Swiftly yet calmly put her armour on,
And, round her Empire sentinelled in steel.
Like morning shone.
IX.
From field and forge there thronged embattled hosts,
And that one struck the anvil, this the lyre,
And from the furnaces of war her coasts
Were fringed with fire.
x.
Dazed and dismayed, they veiled their futile vow :
Some fain would be her friend, and some would nurse
There hate till they could curb the might that now
They could not curse.
XI.
But they who watch from where the west wind blows,
.Since great themselves, proud that their kith are great,
Said : “ See what comes when England with her foes
Speaks at the gate.’’
XII.
Then back to loom and share the people poured,
Chanting peace-paeans as they reaped and gleamed,
While, gazing worldward, on their undrawn sword,
Watchful she leaned.
“EMPIRE DAY” TOAST.
“FOR KING AND EMPIRE."
“Here’s to tlie King—God bless him—and confusion to the
enemies of the British Empire. ”


NELSON :
THE WARRIOR OF THE SEA.
“Thine island loves thee well, thou famous man,
The greatest sailor since onr world began,”
TENNYSON.
ON October 21st, 1805, nearly 102 years ago, “ the hero of the Nile,
the victor of Trafalgar,” taught England’s enemies the might
of England’s fleet ; and during those ten decades there has never
been any occasion to repeat the salutary lesson. When the
contemplative Britisher beholds the boundless, restless sea, thanks
to Nelson’s super!) genius, it is no idle vaunt to say :
“ Far as the breeze can bear, the billows foam,
Survey our Fmpire, and behold our home ”
Just think of this mighty fact; For more than a century Britain has
wielded the sceptre of the seas, which has carried with it the
sovereignty of the world ! The idea is too stupendous to dwell upon
for any considerable time. Yet it was all made possible by the
glorious deeds of one man.
WHAT MIGHT HAVE BEEN.
If the Toulon Fleet had been victorious at the battle of Trafalgar,
there can be no question that over Australia and New Zealand there
would now be flying the Tricolor, instead of the Union Jack. The
fall of Napoleon made it possible for the expansion of the Dominion
of Britain into a world-power. The numerous and important
conquests that followed, and the fact that her Navy dominated all
the seas, without rival, conferred on England a world-ruling
position; she was able at pleasure to expand her territories without
let or hindrance in India, in South Africa, and itr Australasia. It is
an indisputable fact that, owing to Britain’s supremacy on the seas,
foreign designs on Australia were frustrated, and she has thus been
enabled continuously to pursue her development in perfect peace
and absolute security. It is, therefore, the bounden duty of all
Australians —and, in fact, all “ sons of the southern seas”—never to
forget that this happy condition was only made possible by the
superlative victory at Trafalgar. On each succeeding anniversary of
the day when Nelson “ turned his glorious soul adrift,” and, “ dying,
gave us an open sea,” we should celebrate the festival of “ Trafalgar
Day,” in a manner befitting all loyal scions of the Empire, and sing
paeans of praise and return fervent thanks to the Almighty that we
are co-inheritors with Britain in a freedom that is magnificent
and unique.
CAPTAIN MAHAN’S ESTIMATE OF NELSON.
According to Captain A. T. Mahan, U.S.N. (“ the originator and
first exponent of the philosophy of naval history”), Nelson is the one
man who “in himself summed up and embodied the greatness and
the possibilities which sea power comprehends ” —the man for whom
‘‘genius and opportunity worked together to make him the
personification of the Navy of Great Britain." He is not merely a


personality or a career, but a great force and a great era concrete
in a single man, who becomes its “standard-bearer before the
nations.’ ’
THE MISSION OF NELSON.
To Captain Mahan the mission of Nelson was to beat back the
spirit of aggression generated in the fierce frenzies of the French
Revolution, which culminated in the pure despotism of Napoleon :—
‘ ‘ Therein is found the true significance of his career, which
mounts higher and higher in strenuous effort and gigantic achieve-
ment, and the blast of the Revolution swells fiercer and stronger
under the mighty impulse of the great Corsican. At each of the
momentous crisis, so far removed in time and place—at the Nile,
at Copenhagen, at Trafalgar—as the unfolding drama of
the age reveals to the onlooker the schemes of the arch-planner
about to touch success, over against Napoleon rises ever Nelson ; and
as the latter in the hour of victory drops upon the stage where he
has played so chief a part, his task is seen to be accomplished, his
triumph secured. In the very act of dying he has dealt the foe a
blow from which recovery is impossible. Moscow and Waterloo are
the inevitable consequences of Trafalgar ; as the glories of the day
were but the fit and assured ending of the illustrious course which
was begun upon the quarter-deck of the ‘Agamemnon.’ ”
NELSON’S PHYSICAL WEAKNESS AND WOUNDS
Frail though his body was, and racked by disease, he had to bear
the still further strain of severe wounds. In the fighting in Corsica
he lost the sight of his right eye, atTeneriffe he lost his right arm ;
and at the battle of the Nile he was so severely wounded that he
believed for a time that the hand of death was upon him.
HIS SPLENDID TRAITS.
The prospect of battle or danger acted upon Nelson like a tonic.
Inaction to him was insufferable. He was a supremely lovable man,
being always full of admiration and sympathy and gratitude towards
those who served him, whether it be the midshipman or the man
before the mast, or his brother officers. As a result he was idolised
by his men. A notable trait in Nelson’s character was his kindness
and attention to his young officers. When he was in port he would
insist upon always taking one of his midshipmen with him when he
went to dinner. This constant kindness and sympathetic attention
made the young officers adore him. Nelson’s devotion to work was
extraordinary ; and his devotion to fame, or honour, as he called it,
is the most conspicuous note in his career. ‘ ‘ That thing called
honour” was to him the chief end of man—the supreme object of
every naval officer.” “Duty,” he wrote to his betrothed, “is the
great business of a sea officer. All private considerations must give
way to it, however painful it is.”
THE FOUNDATION OF HIS VICTORIES.
Nelson is known and admired for his great victories. But he
gave the best proof of his marvellous genius long before
the opportunity came that crowned him with glory. Captain
Mahan says :
“The magnificent successes of his later career have obscured
the fact that each of his greater battles was preceded by a stormy
period of strenuous uphill work, a steady hewing of his way through
a tangled wood of obstacles ; but patient endurance of disappoint-
ments, a display of sustained or dogged resolution amid discourage-
ments, nobler far than even the moment of triumphant action, into
which he at last joyfully emerges, and freely exerts his extraordinary-
powers.”


THE CHALLENGE OF DANGER.
“Nothing venture, nothing have,” expressed the principal that
ever lay at the back of his mind. “ All, or nothing ” was one of his
maxims. He never shrunk from facing risks. On the contrary, as
he said, when describing how he had insisted upon boarding a
captured American ship, when a mere lad, although the senior
officer shrunk from doing so owing to the heavy sea : “ I know it is
my disposition, that difficulties and dsngers do but increase my
desire to attempt them.” This was very different from mere
foolhardiness. Nelson was never severe to those who came to grief
in running risks, for he was strongly imbued with the idea that risks
should be run, not merely for the sake of victory, but for the sake
of honour. “Our country,” he wrote, “will sooner forgive an
officer for attacking his enemy than for letting it alone.”
NELSON’S VICTORIES.
The story of Nelson’s glorious victories which secured for
England the sea-power of the world have been so often told, that
only brief reference to them is essential here : First in order is the
battle of the Nile. The great victory which Nelson gained in the
Bay of Aboukir over the French squadron that had escorted Napoleon
to Egypt, on the evening of August 1st, 1798, not only frustrated all
the Emperor’s plans about Egypt and India, but restored to England
the preponderance in the Mediterranean, which she had evacuated,
and thus materially modified the political situation ; its moral effect,
moreover, was far-reaching, and strongly influenced the march
of events.
The next great event with which Nelson was connected was the
battle of Copenhagen, fought on April 2nd, 1801. His success there,
says, Captain Mahan, alluding to the negotiations in which some
have accused Nelson of playing a double part, was won by force and
secured by address. Mahan contends that Nelson was indisputably
aware of the advantage the Danes had yielded him by accepting
his terms. “First get the victory and then make use of it,” is said
to have teen Nelson’s motto at the Nile, and if he acted on it at
Copenhagen he was at least consistent.
At the beginning of 1805 Napoleon’s preparations for the invasion
of England were complete in everything but the means of crossing
in safety. This naval part of the programme was by far and more
difficult. On Nelson with his crazy ships, says Mahan, fell the
burden of dealing with the Toulon fleet; and, as we know, he drove
it from the West Indies and back to Ferrol. The attack at Tralfalgar
was commenced at five minutes past noon on October 21st, 1805.
About a quarter past 1, just in the heat of the action, a ball fired
from the mizzen-top of the “Redoubtable,” which, in the then
situation of the vessels was not more than 15 yards from that part
of the “ Victory ” where Nelson was standing, struck the epaulet on
his left shoulder. He fell upon his face, and informed Captain
Hardy that his backbone had been shot through.
NELSON’S LAST PRAYER.
The following is the touching prayer penned by Nelson on the
eve of his last great victory : —
“May the great God whom I worship grant to my country and for the
benefit ot Europe in general a great and glorious victory. May no misconduct in
any one tarnish it; but may humanity, after victory, be the predominant feature
of the British Fleet. For myself individually I commit my life to Him who gave
it. May His blessing light upon my endeavours for serving my country
faithfully. To Him I resign myself and the just cause it is entrusted to me to
defend. Amen! Amen 1 Amen!”


ALL WOOL
BUSINESS SUITS
n,
TO MEASURE,
55/-
Write tor Patterns.
London Tailoring Depot,
27 & 29 Bundle Street.
: j(
C. H. WILDY,
General Printer and Stationer,
56 WAYMOUTH STREET.
’Phone 1364. Prices Right.


THE NELSON COLUMN.
Trafalgar Square, at Charing Cross, London, lias been pronounced the “ finest site
in Europe." In the centre is the magnificent fluted Corinthian column, 145
ft. in height, erected in honour of Horatio Viscount Nelson. It is surmounted
with a collossal bronze statue, 17 feet in height, of England’s immortal hero,
by Bailey: the pedestal is decorated with bronze sculptures in high relief, the
figures being larger than life. At its base there are four gigantic lions, which
were modelled for it by Sir bid win Eandseer. The column was raised in 1843
by voluntary contributions in commemoration of Nelson’s engagement with
and glorious victory over the combined Frenph and Spanish Fleets, off Cape
Trafalgar, on October 21, 1805. Nelson was wounded in the engagement, and
died just as victory was assured. .


“ THANK GOD, I HAVE DONE MY DUTY.”
When Nelson lay dying in the cockpit of the “Victory,” his
thoughts ever turned to the two subjects which had long engrossed
all his heart and soul—his duty to his country and his devotion to
Lady Hamilton. “Remember,” he said, “that I leave Lady
Hamilton and my daughter Horatia as a legacy to my country—
never forget Horatia.” This injunction he frequently repeated.
Then, as pain grew more intense, he said distinctly, “Thank God,
I have done my duty.” This he repeated at intervals as long as the
power of speech remained. The last words caught by Dr. Scott,
who was bending closely over him, were, “ God and my Country.’ ’
Nelson expired at half-past 4 p.m., three hours and a quarter
after he had received his wound. Not until an hour later did the
last 18 prizes strike, and firing cease altogether ; but the substantial
results were known to Nelson before he lost consciousness.
NELSON’S IMMORTALITY OF FAME.
In the concluding lines of his monumental work on “The Life
of Nelson : The Embodiment of the Sea Power of Great Britain,”
Captain Mahan pays this splendid tribute to the man and his work :
“ Sharer of our mortal weakness, he (Nelson) has bequeathed to
us a type of single-minded self-devotion that can never perish. As
his funeral anthem proclaimed, while a nation mourned, ‘ His
body is buried in peace, but his name liveth for evermore.’ Wars
may cease, but the need for heroism shall not depart from the earth
while man remains man, and evil exists to be redressed. Wherever
danger has to be faced or duty to be done at cost to self, man will
draw inspiration from the name and deeds of Nelson. . . . The
coincidence of his death with the moment of completed success has
impressed upon that superb battle (Trafalgar) the stamp of finality,
an immortality of fame, which even its own grandeur could scarcely
have insured. He needed, and he left, no successor. To use St.
Vincent’s own words, 1 There is but one Nelson.’ ”
“NEVER MUST NELSON’S FLAG BE FURLED.”
“Trafalgar Day”—the 21st of October—should be honoured
every year, not only in London, where the magnificent monument
to England’s hero stands, but throughout the length and breadth
of the British Empire. The beautiful lines written by Harold
Begbie, a few years ago, to commemorate “ Trafalgar Day,” should
be taken to heart by every son and daughter ot the Empire. The
two last verses are as follows : —
“ Treasure ye all the Flag that streams
O’er the sundering deep where the foeman schemes,
Guard it, England, from all the world,
Never must Nelson’s flag be furl’d ;
Thy life, thy honour, thy fame, thy star
Hang on the banner of Trafalgar !
Sailor of England ! year by year
Whisper this day in England’s ear,
Whisper thy Name, O sacred dust,
Lest England swerve from her mighty trust,
Lest the whirlwind come and the jealous States
Sweep with the flood thro’ our shattered gates.”


“OU R NEL.”
’TWAS IN TRAFALGAR SQUARE.
[Written on the Home-coming of the Crew of H.M.S. “Powerful”
from South Africa.]
NELSON smiled. Alone in the clouds he saw the good folk of
London surging along a hundred avenues. Round the lions
that crouch below him they swept in waves towards the Abbey.
But the grave sailor gave small heed to the human tide that poured
along 'Whitehall.
He gazed steadfastly towards St. Stephen’s, where the Union
Jack floated majestically on the tower. And when the English
wind flung out the folds of the English Flag, the stern stone face
wrinkled into a sweet, proud smile.
“My flag !’’ he murmured.
The May sunlight danced on the Thames, and as the glint of the
water caught his glance, Nelson turned his head seaward and saw
the peeping masts of tall ships. He smiled again.
“ My ships !” he whispered.
And now they had made a path along Whitehall for the arrow
of his eye. Black banks of Englishmen and Englishwomen on
either hand enclosed a river of (lusty road. He looked along the
empty channel, swept clean for the passage of England’s darlings.
And as he looked he smiled once more.
And out of the cold, weather-beaten eves came hot tears which
none saw, save, mayhap, the Spirit of England, hovering around
her hero in the clouds.
And as through a mist of old and valiant memories Nelson gazed
along the dusty channel, he heard a sound that sent a tremor
through his stony limbs. It was an English cheer, faint and far,
but clanging stridently on the breeze.
And he began to think of the hours when he lay a-dying in the
cockpit of the “Victory.” It was then that he heard for the last
lime the voice of Englishmen. For “as often as a ship struck, the
crew of the ‘ Victory ’ hurraed; and at every hurra a visible
expression of joy gleamed in the eyes and marked the countenance
of the dying hero.”
The old joy shone out again as he listened. Faint at first came
the cheers of the soft May air, faint as they fell on his dying ears
on that day of days. Then, as the shouting swept forward, Nelson
peered intently into the distance.


C H. WILDY,
General Printer,
Stationer,
Etc.,
3 6 Way mouth Street,
ADELAIDE.
All Office Requirements kept in stock.
’Phone 1364. Good Work at Right Prices.


Suddenly, round the right-hand corner of Parliament-street, into
the gullet of that black avenue of Englishmen, the sailors swung,
with the lithe, long stride learned on the sloping decks scoured by
the winds and the seas of the world.
Nelson clapped his telescope to his eye. He saw Lambton, lean,
alert, fine drawn. He saw the mighty midshipmen, with England’s
safety on their childish shoulders. He-saw the bronzed and bearded
tars, deep-chested, with necks like towers, grim, unsmiling, silent,
stern of jaw.
He smiled once more.
“ My men !” he sobbed, and hardly could help stepping down to
meet them.
On they came, a blue and white bulwark trailing on the dusty
road. And as the gunners loped elastically along, towing their
twelve-pounder behind them like a toy, the echoes of his last great
cannonade filled Nelson’s ears, and the immortal warrior of the sea
thought he saw once more the “ Royal Sovereign ” steering right
for the centre of the enemy’s line, cutting through it astern of the
‘' Santa Anna,” three-decker, and engaging her at the muzzle of her
guns on the starboard.
“See,” cried Nelson, “how that noble fellow Collingwood
carries his ship into action !”
And as the little column of sailors and marines, straw hats and
white helmets, swung into the Horse Guards, a passion of music
rent the air, and “the hero of the Nile, the victor of Trafalgar,”
the supreme Sailor of England, doffed his hat, murmuring softly ;
“ Thank God, they have done their duty !”
ELOQUENT APOSTROPHE TO ENGLAND.
BY DANIEL WEBSTER.
[Daniel Webster was the Chatham of the new world, and Chatham could not have
pronounced a more glowing eulogium on England than fell from the lips
of this Western Republican.]
ur\UR fathers raised the flag against a Power to which, for
w purposes of foreign conquest and subjugation, Rome, in the
height of her glory, is not to be compared—a Power which
has dotted the surface of the whole globe with her possessions and
military posts, whose morning drum-beat, following the sun in his
course, and keeping pace with the hours, circles the earth with one
continuous and unbroken strain of the martial airs of England.”


C. H. WILDY, PRINTER,
36 WAYMOUTH STREET, ADELAIDE.


HOWARD’S
COMMERCIAL
I
COLLEGE
GRENFELL ST.
ADELAIDE,
and st PorfAde/aic/e.
• •
BOYS GIRLS •/
£ ADULTS • • •*
prepared for
Business or for
University , Civil -
Service, Actoun ton
cy & other Exams.
LESSONS BY POST
for those who cannot oftend\
personalty .
THISCiLLicf isahsofute |
!y the largest of its hind
and the foremost in the I
Slate and the Staff the
most h/ph/j qualified.
WRITE or CALL
FOR
PARTICULARS
JE.Paul Howard, a.i as a
