

EMIGRANT TRACTS.—No. XIV.
EMIGRANT MANUALS.
No. III.
Employment on the Voyage.
BY
WILLIAM H. G. KINGSTON, ESQ.
AUTHOR OF "HOW TO EMIGRATE.”
Published under the Direction of
The Committee of General Literature and Education ,
appointed by the Society for Promoting
Christian Knowledge.
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR THE
SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN
KNOWLEDGE;
SOLD AT THE DEPOSITORY,
GREAT QUEEN STREET, LINCOLN’S INN FIELDS,
4, ROYAL EXCHANGE;
AND BY ALL BOOKSELLERS.
Price Fourpence.




EMIGRANT TRACTS, No. XIV.
EMIGRANT MANUALS.
No. III.
Employment on the Voyage.
BY
WILLIAM H. G. KINGSTON, ESQ.
AUTHOR OF “ HOW TO EMIGRATE.”
PUBLISHED UNDER THE DIRECTION OF
THE COMMITTEE OF GENERAL LITERATURE AND EDUCATION,
APPOINTED BY THE SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING
CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE.
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR THE
SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE;
SOLD AT THE DEPOSITORY,
GREAT aUEEN STREET, LINCOLN’S INN FIELDS,
AND 4, ROYAL EXCHANGE; AND
BY ALL BOOKSELLERS.
1851.


LONDON
E. CLAY, PKINTEE, BREAD STREET HILL.


PREFACE
ADDRESSED TO EMIGRANTS.
You find yourselves, for the first time in
your lives, probably, on board a ship,
crowded together in a narrow space, with
two or three hundred persons, most of whom
are perfect strangers to each other; and it
must be very clear to you that, without
very strict regulations for your government,
and unless you conform to them, and exercise
great forbearance towards your fellow-pas-
sengers, great confusion and disorders of all
sorts must prevail, and that the time of your
voyage will pass very wretchedly and mise-
rably away.
If, however, you attend strictly to the
orders of those placed in authority over you.


(and when you accept a passage in the ship,
you bind yourselves to obey them,) —if you
live as Christians should live, in charity
with each other,—if you do your utmost
to improve your minds, to listen to the
religious instruction which is afforded you,
to keep yourselves thoroughly occupied, to
learn all that you can of religion, of book-
learning, and of handicrafts, not only will
the voyage be the happiest time of your
existence, but it will be the most valuable
and important. Let me entreat you not to
throw that time away; you will never
again, probably, have so much leisure in the
whole course of your lives; never such an
opportunity in every respect of improving
yourselves.


COPY OF LIST OF MATERIALS
Put on hoard the Emigrant Ship
Capt. hound to
Date. 185
Cocoa-nut Fibre Junk, Pieces.
Wood Frames for Brushes.
„ Backs for ditto.
Patterns of ditto.
Pattern of Mat, No. 1.
Ditto ditto, No. 2.
Ditto ditto, No. 3.
Ditto ditto, No. 4.
Wire (fine) for Brushes, yds.
„ (stout) for Models, yds.
Patterns of Brooms.
Deal Planks, feet long,
wide, in. thick, No.
Stout bits of Wood.
Jar of Pitch for fastening in
Fibre to Brooms.
Pitched Twine, for Brushes.
Shears, for cutting Fibre.
Bits of Canvass, for Mats.
Bits of Carpet, for ditto.
Twine, for making ditto.
Packing-needles, for making do.
Hanks of Netting-twine.
Netting-needles and Pins.
Pattern of Nets.
Cobbler’s Boards, complete.
Old Shoes, in parcels.
Bundles of Old Clothes.
Bolls of List.
Patterns of Slipper.
„ Cap.
„ Waistcoat.
Straw, for plaiting.
Pattern of Plait.
„ Hat.
Saw.
Hammer.
Gimlet.
Bradawls.
Nails,
Files.
Pieces of Cloth, for tailoring.
Leather, for cobbling.
Marling Spikes,
Sand Paper.
Bagsto hold Cocoa-nutFibre
and other Materials.
Sword for Mat-making.
Any other Models and Materials may be added.
A 2




MANUAL
OF
EMPLOYMENT DURING THE VOYAGE.
THE VOYAGE.
The pain of parting from the land of our
birth and from those we love is great; but re-
member that you can still keep up a constant
communication with your friends, as letters
are as regularly sent to and from the colo-
nies as from one part of England to the
other. Well, then, you are on board—the
between-decks is divided into three compart-
ments ; the centre is for the married couples
and their children, the fore-part for the
bachelors, and the after-part for the unmar-
ried women. The sleeping places are ar-
ranged on each side, and before them are
two rows of tables, which are let down
during meal times or when the passengers
wish to write; but at other times are slid
up the stauncliQpns, which support them
close to the deck above.
As soon as the emigrants get on board, their
proper berths will be pointed out to them.


The first thing they must do is to hang up
their bags, their great coats, and cloaks, in
their proper places, and to stow their chests
where they will be able to find them, and to
secure everything, so that when the ship
begins to tumble about they may not move.
Again, I must urge on you the duty of at-
tending to the regulations of the superin-
tendent. Your safety, health, and comfort,
depend on your obedience to orders. Regu-
larity is everything. Think what confusion
there would be if 250 people chose to do
exactly as they wished. These regulations
are for the good of all, as every man of sense
will at once see.
At last the passengers, and their luggage,
and provisions are got off, the pilot comes on
board, the sails are set, and the gallant ship,
with her freight of nearly three hundred
human beings, glides out of the harbour.
The white cliffs of Old England are seen for
the last time, and the broad ocean is around
you. Now commences the life you must
lead for four months. The regulations of
the Commissioners will show some of your
duties. I should advise all to find occupa-
tions, and to learn something of as many
new trades as they can; —none will come
amiss. Give what knowledge you have, and
get what you can in return. By all means
teach those to read and write who cannot,
and perfect yourself; —the schoolmaster will


advise you bow best to set about it. The
library will be of great use ; read all the
books through and through. The women,
as well as the men, should learn how to
make baskets and mats in different ways. You
will find the baskets very useful in keeping
your cottages neat, instead of having every
thing tumbling about, as is too often the
case. A little knowledge of tailoring will
also be very useful to men and women. The
men and boys should get the ship’s carpenter,
or any carpenters on board, to teach them
how to use the common tools, the hatchet
and saw. Every man should know how to
build his own hut; and to put up its door
and windows securely enough for a warm
climate. Also they should learn how to knot
and splice, and to secure a rope in a variety
of ways; this knowledge will be of service
on many occasions. The young men should
also learn from the seamen the names of all
the ropes and sails; why the sails are set in a
particular way; how the rudder acts on the
ship, &c. &c.: they may find the knowledge
very valuable, and perhaps occasions may
arrive when they may be of the greatest
assistance to the crew. They should, if
allowed, go aloft and lay out on the yards;
indeed, many would soon become useful
hands. All should exercise their arms every
day by hanging on to ropes, or a spar slung
across the deck. Even the weak will quickly


find their muscles strengthened with such
exercise, aided by good food and fresh air.
They should also, when allowed, run round
the decks and keep their legs in use. Let
them also look at the map every day, and see
whereabouts they are on the surface of the
globe. Those who can write should keep an
account of what happens every day; of what
they think, of what they learn. I might
mention fifty other things you may do on the
voyage; but if you do as I have already told
you, a voyage of a year would pass quickly
away.
One important point to be observed for the
happiness and comfort of all, is to bear with
the faults and tempers of your shipmates.
Few men are perfect, and sea-sickness does
not improve a person’s temper.
You must be prepared for all sorts of
weather. Generally the sky will be bright,
the sun warm, and the sea smooth ; but storms
may come, —the wind may howl, the waves
may rise, and the ship may tumble about as
if she was ready to fall to pieces; but you
need not be afraid; trust in God; the cap-
tain is a good seaman, the crew are brave,
and the ship is sound. Storms seldom last
more than three days, and the sea will be
again calm as before.
Now look at the map. After passing out
of the Channel between England and France,
we cross the Bay of Biscay, and at a distance


run past the coast of Portugal, then a bit of
Spain and Gibraltar, at the entrance of the
Mediterranean; then we are off the sandy
coast of Africa. We shall perhaps come in
sight of the lofty cliffs of the island of Ma-
deira, which is celebrated for the wine pro-
duced there. We may then put into the
harbour of Porto Pray a, in St. Jago, one of
the Cape de Yerde islands; both belong to
Portugal. Here we shall get fresh water,
fresh provisions, and oranges as many as a
man can carry for sixpence.
We shall probably be two months before
we round the Cape of Good Hope. The
weather has been growing gradually warmer
and warmer, and will continue so for some
time after we have crossed the Line, when
the sun will be directly over our heads. We
may also see St. Helena, the little rocky
island where Napoleon ended his days. Two
or three weeks after passing the Line, we
shall find the weather growing cooler, till at
last we shall gladly put on our thick coats
again. At last we round the Cape of Good
Hope. This is the time to expect storms
and rough seas ; but sometimes the wind is
moderate, and the ocean calm, and I have
known voyages made from Australia to Eng-
land with the sea as calm as the Thames.
If we are bound for the Cape, we steer for
Cape Town; but if not, we continue our
voyage towards Cape Leuwin, the western


most point of New Holland, and the chances
are that no land is seen till we make it.
Sometimes voyages are made from England
to Australia without once even seeing land.
You sail on, on, on, for four months, till you
are surprised that the captain is able to find
his way without a land-mark to guide him.
He discovers his way on the map or chart
by calculating how far and in what direction
the ship has sailed each day. But he trusts
rather to seeing with his instrument how
high the sun is each day at noon ; and he
knows that when it is so much higher than
it is in England, he is so much further from
England, or rather so much further south.
We can all tell by the almanack when the
sun will rise; well, he has an almanack, and
a clock which goes very correctly. The sun
rises in the east, and attains a certain height
in the heavens at a different hour as places
are more to the east or west. By means of
his sextant he sees how high it has got; and
by looking at his clock he sees the hour it
is in London. If the sun is higher than it
would be in London, at that hour, he knows
that he has got further to the east; if lower,
to the west. Thus, when he passes the
Cape, though the clock says it is eight, by
the sun it will be past nine; and when he
reaches Australia, at that hour it will be night.
The sun, the moon, and stars are to him
quite as certain marks to guide his course,


as are the church steeple and the chimney of
the manor-house to those on shore. And in
cloudy weather, when he cannot see them,
he still knows by the compass the direction
he is going, and by his log-line the rate at
which the ship sails. This description will
give you some idea of the principles of
Navigation, by which the captain guides the
ship across the ocean. Thus you see there
is nothing to be afraid of in making a voyage,
and generally people are almost sorry when
it is over.
If you are bound for the Swan River, you
will meet the land further north than Cape
Leuwin; but if for South Australia, you
will coast along at a considerable distance
from the coast of New Holland, which in
that part, for many hundred miles, is very
barren and uninviting, and only one enter-
prising traveller has ever passed by land
from Adelaide to King George’s Sound, not
far from Cape Leuwin. Look now at the
map, the gulf you see is the Gulf of St.
Vincent, with Kangaroo Island at its mouth,
and on its shore stands Adelaide, the capital
of South Australia. Further on are Bass’s
Straits, Port Phillip on the left, and Tasmania
on the right, and then round to the left is the
long coast line of New South Wales. When
you land at any of these places, you do not feel
that you have landed on a foreign shore; you
see English men and women, and hear English
B


spoken, you observe English houses, English
shops, English carriages, and English boats;
in fact, it is difficult to persuade yourself that
you have sailed half round the world when
you see so slight a difference. It seems
rather a dream, or that you have only gone
from one English county to another. I
wish that the change had been greater, and
that all the vices of the old country had been
left behind; but unhappily it is not so, and
I therefore advise you to quit the towns as
fast as you possibly can. The real change is
when you get into the country, and then
I assure you the change is for the better.
There you will have plenty of room, plenty
of work, and plenty of food. Make up your
minds to get there as quickly as possible,
even to go two or three hundred miles up
the country. Remember, if you dig deep
enough into the earth you are sure to find a
full pot of gold, whether in Canada, the Cape,
New Zealand or Australia. No man ever
grew rich who waited till he could find gold
on the ground. The great difference between
England and her colonies is, that here industry
does not always meet with a reward, there it
never fails to put food into the mouth, plenty
of clothing on the back, and a cottage roof
over the head.


THE SHIP.
You are on board ship. All seems confu-
sion and disorder. Below, there is what
you would call a long, narrow, low room, with
very little windows, and small bed-places,
and posts, and tables without number; and
trap-doors over-head, and trap-doors beneath
your feet. On deck, in the open air, as you
look up, you see a confused collection of
poles, and ropes, and sheets of canvass, of
which it puzzles you, or any other landsman,
to conceive the use. Now, let me assure
you, that, in what seems to your eye a
confusion of ropes, a seaman perceives per-
fect order and regularity ; and, moreover,
each of those ropes, and spars, and sails,
has its proper name, which he knows right
well, and can run to at a moment’s notice.
I think that, as you are to spend three or
four months on the ocean, you should know
something of the wonderful machine which
carries you from one country to the other.
I shall, however, give you merely a slight
description of it, and you can learn more
from the seamen on board.
Think of the immense amount of labour
which was expended in building it; the vast
quantities of wood and iron which it required,
and the science and practical experience
which was necessary to mould it, and put it


together in a proper form. Centuries upon
centuries have passed away before men have
learned to build ships of the beautiful form,
and the vast size and strength they now pos-
sess. Think what a change there has been
since the days when our ancestors crossed the
channel in boats hollowed out of the trunks
of trees, or in wicker-work baskets; but,
within the last half century, the improve-
ments have been still more rapid, not only
in the building of ships, but in the way of
navigating them; and it is within the recol-
o o '
lection of many, not old seamen, that the
voyage which you will probably perform in
between three and four months, rarely took
less than six or seven to make, and often
still longer.
The foundation of the ship is the keel,
composed of a number of stout pieces of
timber bolted together, running from one
end to the other. At the fore-part rises the
stem, which enables the ship to cut her way,
as it were, through the water; at the after
end is the stern-post, to which the rudder is
fastened by which she is guided. The object
of the keel is to prevent the ship from going
sideways through the water. Projecting up
on either side along the keel in a curve, are
the timbers, or ribs, so called because they
look like the ribs in the human skeleton.
They are placed close together, and form the
frame-work of the bottom and sides. To


the outside of them is bolted the planking,
which, when caulked and pitched, prevents
the water from getting in. In the inside are
fastened thin planks, which form the lining
of the ship. The beams fasten the upper
part of the ribs on the opposite sides to-
gether, to prevent the sides from falling out;
and on these are nailed the planks which
form the decks. What people call the floors
and roofs of a house, are called alike decks in
a ship, and are distinguished by the name of
upper, lower, or main-deck, poop-deck, and top-
gallant forecastle. The sides of the ship
above the deck are called the bulwarks; the
square holes pierced in them are called the
ports . What landsmen would call the traps
in the deck by which you descend below, are
called the hatchways; and are distinguished
by the after, main, and fore hatchways. The
raised deck in the after part of the ship is
called the poop-deck; and under it are the
cabins, in which the captain, chief officer,
surgeon, chaplain, and cabin passengers live.
The poop-deck is their property, and the
steerage passengers have no right to go
there.
One of the most important parts of a ship
is the rudder. It is fastened, by what may
be considered hinges, to the stern-post; and
although a narrow piece of timber, as it is
turned on one side or the other of the ship
when she is in motion, the water pressing
b 2


against it makes the after part move from it,
and, consequently, the head inclines to the
side on which the rudder is turned. The
rudder-head rises through the deck, and on
it is fastened a tiller, a stout piece of timber,
or iron, which is connected with ropes to the
wheel; these ropes go round the axle of the
wheel, and thus the man at the wheel is able
to guide the ship. A ship has three masts;
the one nearest the stern is the rnizen-mast,
the centre the main-mast, and the other the
fore-mast; above these are the top-mast, top-
gallant-mast, and royal mast. The spars on
which the sails are spread are called the
yards, and are distinguished, as are the sails,
by the masts to which they belong. The
stout ropes with ladders to them on either
side, are there placed to support the masts,
and are called the shrouds. Supposing a
person is looking towards the head of the
ship, the side which is on his right side is
called the starboard side; and all the things
on that side, the guns, shrouds, braces, are
distinguished by being called the starboard
guns, starboard shrouds, &c. The left is
called the port side, and the guns, and
shrouds, the port guns, &c. When sailing
at sea, the side on which the wind strikes is
called the weather, or windward side, and
the other the lee, or leeward side. Thus,
the guns, shrouds, &c. are spoken of as the
weather guns, the weather shrouds; and on


the other side, the lee guns, or lee shrouds;
though, if she tacked, that is, if her head
were put in an opposite direction, the order
would be reversed. It is difficult to explain
how a ship sails, unless directly before the
wind ; but frequently the wind comes from
the direction towards which she is bound, or
on one side of her, and yet she is able to
proceed.
The fact is, a ship is built of a narrow and
deep shape, with her head in a wedge form ;
thus the water offering a great resistance to
her sides but a slight one to her head, a
pressure on any part makes her move in the
latter direction more than in the former.
The sails are stretched out like boards
between the yards, and the wind striking
against them gives the pressure I speak of,
and thus forces the ship through the water.
If the wind comes from aft, the pressure is
great; if it strikes the sails in a slanting
way its force is decreased, and the more
slanting it is the more it lessens, till it
comes ahead, and the ship cannot progress in
the proper direction. You will see the sails
trimmed so as to catch the wind from what-
ever point it blows, till it comes too much
ahead, and then it becomes necessary to
alter the ship’s course, and to steer in a
direction either on one side or the other
of that whence the wind comes. The wind
is then said to be foul or ahead. However,


I am not writing a treatise on navigation,
nor can I expect you at first to understand
what little I have attempted to explain, but
by making inquiries of the seamen and by
using your own observation and judgment
you will soon comprehend what now appears
a mystery. You will learn even, perhaps,
how the captain and his mates, by taking
observations with their instruments of the
sun and stars as they rise and set, are able
to guide the ship over the trackless sea.
You may learn to mark the ship’s course off
on the chart, so that years afterwards, when
you are settled in your happy homes in
the new Colony to which you are bound,
you will be able to show your children the
road by which you reached it, and the lands
near which you passed. You can easily
draw a rough chart to answer this purpose,
from the maps with which you are supplied.
ROPES.
HOW TO SPLICE, KNOT, HITCH, AND BEND.
A person on numberless occasions, on
shore as well as at sea, will find it very
useful to know how to handle a rope pro-
perly, so as to make a correct splice, knot,


&c.; and an ignorance of this art may cause
serious and oftentimes fatal accidents.
Ropes are formed of several threads of
hemp twisted together by means of a wheel
in the rope-walk. These threads are called
rope-yarns.
A proportion of yarns are first twisted
together. This is called a strand; three or
more of which being twisted together, form
the rope; and according to the number of
these strands, it is said to be either hawser-
laid, or cable-laid.
Splicing. —Ropes are joined together for
different purposes, by uniting their strands
in particular forms, which is termed splicing.
A splice is made by opening and separating
the strands of a rope, and thrusting them
through the others which are not unlaid.
The instruments used for this purpose are
fids and marling-spikes. Among the various
descriptions of splices are a short splice, a
long splice, and an eye splice.
Knotting. —There are numerous sorts of
knots; some at the end of a rope like a wall
knot, and a double wall knot, or a Matthew
Walker’s knot. Others again are in various
parts of a rope, like a diamond knot, a
double diamond knot, a stopper knot, a
shroud knot; but the most useful sort of
knotting to learn is that by which two ropes
are fastened together, or a loop, called by
seamen a bight, is formed, or a rope is tied


round any thing. I cannot expect to explain
clearly by words how to do this, without the
use of expensive plates, and even then a sea-
man in a few minutes would make you under-
stand the matter far better than they would.
In learning you must remember that the
standing part of a rope is that part nearest
the end secured to any thing, and that the
other is the end you turn about. Knotting
and bending should be done briskly and
sharply, and the arms kept well open.
First learn how to make an over-hand
knot, then a bowline knot, and next a running
bowline knot, which is very useful, as is a
reef knot. In learning the latter take care
not to make a granny’s knot. A bowline
knot is a fixed bight or loop; a running
bowline, Avhen the bight can be compressed.
W e next come to bending , which is fasten-
ing two ropes or cables together, or one on
to a timber. There is a sheet bend, a fisher-
man’s bend, and a carrick bend.
Hitching is fastening the end of a rope in
a variety of ways to a timber. There is a
timber hitch, a rolling hitch, a black-wall
hitch, and a midshipman’s hitch. There is
also what is called a half hitch, and a clove
hitch, which is used for securing a boat’s
painter, to a post for instance.
Seizing a rope is binding the two parts
together with spun-yarn, marline or small
cordage.


There are various methods of seizing
ropes, and distinctive names given to each;
such as, round-seizing, and throat-seizing.
Stopping a rope is fastening two parts
together without crossing. Nippering is
making fast the two parts of a laniard, or
tackle-fall.
The proper way to secure the ends of
ropes from untwisting is by pointing them,
or by whipping them.
All the things I have named take a con-
siderable time to learn to do properly, but
you will find them very amusing and very
useful, if you can get some of the seamen to
teach you. You may do them slowly at
first while learning, but afterwards rapidly,
as things at sea must be done. The wind is
a customer who requires being quickly
attended to, or he will take the masts out of
the ship without ceremony. You will ob-
serve that every thing, and every way of
doing a thing, has a name on board ship,
to the most minute point; and the art of
a good seaman consists not only in knowing
how to do every thing, but when to do it.


MAT-MAKING.
OPEN WORK MAT.-PATTERN 1.
There are numerous sorts of mats. The
easiest made, most useful, and prettiest, are
those of open work. They are made as fol-
lows : —Unlay the junk; take ten yarns, put
two together, and make a plait of Jim. Plait
as much as you may think necessary for a
mat, say about twelve yards. The mats may
be made square, round, or oval.
The outer side of the mat is made by sew-
ing together with twine two plaits side by
side. The narrowest edge should form the
upper and lower part of the mat.
If the mat is to be square, it will then


appear like a square frame; if oblong, (the
more usual form,) like an oblong frame.
Two bars must next be added, also formed of
two plaits fastened side by side. Lastly, the
lace-work is put in. This is formed of sin-
gle plaits ; that is, of a plait of five with two
yarns each. A strong packing-needle and
twine is used. The work when done is like
Pattern 1. The size should be about two
feet four inches, by one foot eight inches.
A variety of patterns may be made.
ROUND MAT.-PATTERN 2.
The round mats must be commenced in
the centre, by first making a small flourish-
ing cross—that is to say, four rounds in the
c


shape of a cross ; and then bending the plaits
twice round, and then the flourishing again,
and then two more turns round, and so on,
till the mat is of full size.—See Pattern,
No. 2.
MAT WITH BRUSH ON TOP.-PATTERN 3.
The above described mats serve for the foun-
dation. The brush is made with fine yarns
of cocoa-nut fibre. The yarns are passed
over the thumb, and through the upper yarn
of the gaskett, with a packing-needle. The
bights or loops thus formed, are then cut and
opened out. They thus form the brush. If
the gaskett is well plaited, it holds them per-
fectly tight. —See Pattern, No. 3.


SWORD OR WOVE MAT.-PATTERN 4.
To make this mat, a piece of wood, called
a sword, is used. This is put alternately
between the parts of the spun-yarn, or sennit,
stretched over two pieces of Hambro’ line.
The warp of spun-yarn is placed through the
parts which the sword has opened, and jam-
med by it close to the head; a piece of spun
yarn is put slack through the same divisions
at the opposite end, and left there. The
sword is taken out, passed under and over
the other parts, as before, and each end of
the warp passed and jammed taught. To
thrum the mat, the yarns should be put in
between every lay, and knocked home with
the sword. The piece of spun-yarn which
was left at the opposite end is now lifted up,
and brings the parts as they were first divided
by the sword. The warp is passed as before,
and the work continued till the whole is
completed. A border may be made by put-
ting in thrums of some other material.


By the same method as the above, a mat
may be made of cocoa-nut fibre yarn. It
should afterwards be bound round with a
piece of neat plait of three yarns. —See Pat-
tern, No. 4.
BRUSH MAT-THRUMS SEWED ON CANVASS.-PATTERN 5.
The materials required are strong packing-
needles and twine, a piece of canvas, or
carpet, about two feet four inches long, to
one foot eight inches wide; and tufts of
unlayed cocoa-nut fibre yarn, or hemp, or
wool from old mops, and some line, or list,
for binding. Cut the canvas into the shape
and size required, and fasten on the tufts or
thrums with twine, in rows, close together.
Each tuft or thrum is secured with a back-
stitch beneath. Turn down the edge when


the whole is complete, or bind it with line.
The under part should be lined with canvas,
or cloth of some sort. A border will look
better, if made of a different material to the
centre. Indeed, any pattern may easily be
worked on it.
BAG-WRINKLE MAT.-PATTERN 6.
This mat is well known to seamen on board
Indiamen. I am uncertain of the correct
orthography. A stick, about two feet long,
and two inches in circumference, with a
groove in it running from one end to the
other, is required.
Two persons are employed in making this
mat. Five yarns are used. The ends are
fastened together, and secured to the end of
the stick, the groove in which must be held
c 2


downwards. One person holds the stick with
his left hand, and with his right he passes
a turn round the stick with two yarns, and
holds them on the top of the stick. The
other person, who sits opposite at the other
end of the stick, has charge of the three other
yarns. He passes one of his yarns between
two of the others, and pulls them tight.
The thumb of the man who holds the stick
presses them tight, and the operation is con-
tinued till the stick is full. The plait thus
made is called by seamen a wrinkle. With
a knife the turns, except the last, are cut
through at the groove; the last is left to
continue making the wrinkle. From sixteen
to twenty yards are required to make a mat.
The wrinkles are then sewed together with
a yarn of the same description, either in one
or two parts. A palm and packing-needle
are used.
If to make a round mat, they are sewed
from the first in a round, beginning very
small, and bending one circle round the inner
one till the mat is large enough.
If a square mat is to be made, the wrinkles
are bent backwards and forwards, measuring
the first bend for the width it is intended to
make the mat.


HEARTH-RUG.-PATTERN 7.
A good and very neat hearth-rug may be
made of red or any other list, in the same
way that the sword-mats are made. There
should be a border made of thrums sewed on
with needle and twine. Wool from old worn-
out mops, pulled and washed thoroughly,
serves very nicely for the border. Many
of the condemned stores from barracks, and
other public establishments, serve admirably
for these purposes.
SCRUBBING BRUSHES.
MATERIALS REQUIRED. WOOD FOR FRAME AND BACK.—
FIBRE. WIRE. PITCH. TOOLS. SHEARS. A CARDINS
MACHINE.
The frame of the brush is of wood. This
has round holes bored two-thirds of the way


through, of the size of a small pea; the other
third has a very small hole just to admit a
wire. The stouter parts of the fibre are
picked out and carded.
The carding machine is formed of six or
eight upright bits of steel spikes, fastened in
a piece of wood and secured to a table. The
fibre, after being carded is placed in small
bundles of about three inches in length,
before the person who is to secure it to the
frame. In his left hand he takes the wood,
and with his right he doubles one end of the
wire, and passing it through the end hole he
slips into the noose a bundle of fibre, which
being doubled he draws into the hole and
gives the wire a turn to secure it. He now
again doubles the wire and draws in another
bunch of fibre ; and thus he goes quickly
on, drawing in bunch after bunch till all the
holes are full; at last the end of the wire is
secured. The ends of the fibre are now
smoothed down with shears. The back,
(a thin slice of wood to cover the Avire) is
secured with pegs, and the brush is com-
plete.
Brooms and dusting brushes, and spoke
brushes are made by boring holes in the
wood and fastening in the tufts of fibre with
pitch. Deal will serve for the purpose.
Take any bits you can procure, and bore the
holes with gimlets or bum them.


CLOTHES-BRUSHES.
Very nice clothes-brushes may be made
with cocoa-nut fibre, by using a finer gimlet
to bore the holes, and by using the finest
fibre; thus making the tufts smaller.
BASS BRUSHES AND BROOMS.
Bass is a strong black fibre; a South
American production. It makes excellent
scrubbing-brushes, and coarse brooms. The
bunches must be fastened into the frames
with double twine, pitched. From the hard-
ness of the bass, wire cuts it; neither from
its thickness will pitch hold it tight in the
frames.
It is cheaper than cocoa-nut fibre, and as
coarse brooms are more likely to be useful
in the colonies, a greater number should be
made with it. A hole should be made in
the frame of the long brooms for the handles,
but they, of course, must be put in on arrival
in the colony.
BASKETS.
A pretty and useful description of basket
may easily be made with cocoa-nut fibre
yarns, rope-yarns, grass, or rushes of any


description. Bass, or some stout pliable ma-
terial, is required to make the shape. Com-
mence at the centre of the bottom of the
basket. Take the stout stuff in the left
hand, and make three turns with it. Take
the thin stuff which is to form the basket in
the right hand, and pass it over and under
the stout turns, exactly as the herring-bone
stitch is made; then add circle after circle,
continuing the stitch. When the round for
the bottom is sufficiently large, the circle of
the stout stuff is compressed to form the side,
and brought up, when the herring-bone
stitch is continued.
The top is made in the same way. The
handle, made of a yarn, is spliced in. A loop
to lift the top should be put on. The lid
should fasten with a button and a loop.—See
Pattern.
It is very simple, and a very pretty style
of basket.
SHEEP NETS OF COCOA-NUT FIBRE.
Sheep nets are very valuable in Australia.
They should be made three feet six inches
in depth, and one hundred yards long. They
are made with a needle and pin like ordinary
hemp nets, but the knot is different. The
yarn comes from India in skeins. Secure
the line and make a loop. To make a mesh
the line is passed over the pin, then brought


under and through the previous mesh; it is
then held under the thumb of the left hand,
and the needle is passed under the upper
mesh, and brought up on the left side of it,
between it and the slack line which proceeds
from under the thumb; the line is drawn
tight and the knot is made. To make a net
three feet six inches deep you work on, in-
creasing every line till nine meshes are
made. Say the right is to be up and down,
or the depth. You then take in one mesh
every line on the right, and add one on the
left for length. This will give a double line
for edge all round. If the meshes are six
inches each, you can easily calculate the
length. You observe I give nine meshes for
depth of three feet six inches. Two meshes,
it must be remembered, go for the outside
edge. All round the edge the meshes will
be a long and a short. The joins are made
with a reef knot and the ends spliced in. A
man may carry a hundred yards of this
netting.
A small model of it is sent complete.
WOOD WORK.
A number of useful small articles for
household purposes may be manufactured
and stowed away easily. I suggest some,
and you may think of others.


Soap-dishes. —These are made to fasten
by a nail against the wall. It may be de-
scribed as a trough, four inches long, three
wide, and one and a half deep, with a high
back, and a hole in it. It can be made of
any small bits of wood.
Salt-boxes. —Made to fasten against the
wall. One side is higher than the other, like
the roof of a house, and it has a top with a
hinge on the higher side. It is about nine
inches long, five wide, and six on the higher
side.
Stands for cruet-bottles. —Take two boards
about six inches square, and secure them at
the corners with uprights or sides about three
inches apart. In the upper board make four
round holes for the bottles. You may fasten
a twisted wire handle for the centre.
Bottle-drainers. —They should be made to
admit the neck and shoulders of a bottle
reversed.
Flat rulers. —Mark the inches on them.
Every man, whatever his calling, will find a
measure useful in the Bush.
Boxes. —Make them of various sizes ac-
cording to the material at your disposal;
such as money-boxes, writing-desks,—or
rather boxes to hold writing materials. Fit
up the interior for ink-bottle, pen-tray,
paper-drawer, &c.
Knife-trays. —They are made generally
with a partition in the centre, in which is a


hole for a handle. Make them from twelve
to fourteen inches long, and about eight
wide.
Work boxes. —These you may make of all
sizes, and fit them up to hold cotton, scissors,
&c. with a tray. The hinges you may make
of wire, which is supplied to you.
Winders. —For twine, or small for cotton.
Make them of four cross pieces neatly fitting
into each other. You may make them of
single pieces of wood, but remember to
economise your material as much as possible.
Watch-stands. —These you may make of a
variety of fanciful shapes. The simplest is
in shape like an upright wedge, with a
chamber for the watch to rest in ; but I
should advise you to exercise your ingenuity,
and to make church towers with the face of
the watch to look like the clock, or any other
device you can think of.
Netting-pins and needles. These you
should cut out of the hardest wood supplied
to you. You will be supplied with models
in abundance.
BONE WORK.
A variety of very beautiful articles may
be manufactured from the meat-bones saved
from your meals. Bones from fresh meat are
the best. The French prisoners during the
D


last war used to make most elegant models of
ships and other objects, many of which exist
perfect to the present day. The only topis
they had were their knives, some of which
they turned into saws, to cut up the bones
more easily. Save all the bones at dinner,
and first scrape them thoroughly, and get all
the marrow out of them. They should,
where it is practicable, be boiled in turpen-
tine to get all the greasy particles extracted.
When this cannot be done, hang them up
to dry in the sun, but not long enough to let
them crack.
I suggest some of the articles you may
manufacture, but you must use your own
discretion in selecting the bones most fitted
for the purpose, and you may also think of
other things to make.
Knife-handles. —You may put new handles
to your common clasp-knives, or you may
make a set of handles for dinner-knives, to
which you may put blades when you have
settled in the country.
Paper Knives. —For cutting the leaves of
books, &c. The handle should be about
three inches long, and the blade five. You
may carve on the handle any device you
fancy. A ship, or a name, or an anchor, or
cable. The blade should be thicker in the
centre than at the edges, which should be
sharp. Nicely polish the blade with sand-
paper.


Heads to walking-sticks or whip-handles. —
For these select heads of birds or fish for
models, and carve them as neatly as you can.
The whip-handles should be very strong,
with fangs to fix into the stock, and should
be of the shape of a hammer.
Rings may be made of various sizes ; some
for purse rings, and others for curtains.
Rulers, with the inches marked out on
them; get one for a copy from the carpenter.
Letters, both large and small, can very
nicely be cut out of bone. They will be
very useful in teaching the children to read.
They should be preserved in sets in boxes.
Spoons. —Mustard or marrow-spoons with
long handles, and salt-spoons with short
handles and round bowls. Larger spoons
may also be made, and forks for salad.
Salt-cellars. —These may be cut out of
bone in any shape you fancy, and carved
with various devices.
DIARY OF THE VOYAGE, OR JOURNAL.
I wish particularly to impress upon your
minds the advantage and amusement to be
derived from keeping a journal of the oc-
currences of each day. I should particularly
advise you when you get on shore to con-
tinue the practice. If your trade or occu-
pation will not allow you to keep it every


clay, at least write up on Saturday evening
what you have done during the week. Re-
solve that nothing shall hinder you from this
practice, and depend on it you will often
find it assist you in keeping good resolutions
and in avoiding bad habits. I mean, how-
ever, that the journal of the voyage should
be written up every day. If the weather
is very bad, and you cannot have the ink-
bottle out, write it up in pencil.
You may keep your journal somewhat in
the following way ; but you may enter what-
ever observations you like, and the more
you put in the more amusing it will be, but
never write down ill of your companions:—
2 6th July, 1850.—At a.m. left Deptford, and went
on board the emigrant ship, of tons,
bound for ; , Captain; , Esq.
Surgeon- Superintendent. The Rev. , Chaplain;
Mrs. , Matron. Emigrants on board.
At a m. dropped down the river ; reached Gravesend
at p.m. liemainded there hours.
Describe the scenery on the banks of the
river; note the observations the Rev. Mr.
Holderness, or any other Clergyman or Mis-
sionary, makes to you.
2Sfh— At a.m. sailed from the Eiver Thames.
Wind —.
Say whether blowing strong or light. Ob-
serve whether you pass many ships ; their


different appearances. Describe how your
companions are employed. Note down your
own feelings ; what you purpose doing.
Describe the appearance of the land. Look
at the chart or map of the English coast, and
see the places you are passing. Note down
where you are at such an hour ; thus :—At
p.m. passed through the Downs with the
wind N.E. Describe your first night at sea,
how you think and feel.
Remember that a.m. means the twelve
hours before midday, and p.m. the twelve
hours after midday. Thus, instead of writing
9 o’clock in the morning, you putdown 9 a.m.,
and instead of three o’clock in the afternoon,
you write 3 p.m. Capital letters are used to
show which way the wind is. N.E. stands
for north-east; S.W. for south-west. You
thus write, wind N.E., or wind S.W.
l.s£ Aug. —At 6 a.m. passed the east end of the Plymouth
Breakwater, and at 7.20 let go our anchor in the Sound,
about a mile from the shore.
Describe the scenery which you cannot
fail to admire. Then mention who comes on
board ; what is done, and what you do. In
the same way you will note down when you
sail again. Make a point of noting down the
observations of the Chaplain, or religious
instructor. Note what trades you learn, and
how you occupy yourself. Observe what
fish or birds you see, and describe them.
d 2


Learn all about them and their habits from
the books you have on board. Note down
every day where you are ; what coast the
ship is off; and describe it minutely if seen.
Learn what sort of a country it is; its in-
habitants, and the animals which live in it.
Indeed, let me assure you, that if you look
about you properly you will every day find
something of interest to note down in your
journal.
GYMNASTIC EXERCISES.
Constant exercise will keep a man in
good health better than all the physic on
board. It is generally from want of it, and
from over-feeding, that sickness occurs at
sea. Make a point of walking the deck as
much as possible; but you require to use
your arms also. For this purpose, get a spar
fastened athwart the deck, as far above it as
a man can reach. Grasp it with both hands,
and lift yourself up till your chin can touch
it. Go on practising till you can lift your
whole body above it with your arms straight.
Then learn to throw yourself completely
round it. The boys at the Naval School
will turn round and round on a spar in this
way several times. It is a fine exercise to
strengthen the muscles, and you will feel
yourself all the better for practising it.
Get a stout rope secured in the upper


part of the main rigging, and brought down
to a ring-bolt on deck. Let a sail, or a bit of
a net, be stretched under it, to catch any one
falling; and now learn to climb up it, hand
over hand, first with the help of your knees,
and then with your hands alone. Continue
practising till you can go right up to the
top.
Long Rope. —One person holds one end of
a rope, and one the other, and they turn it
round while two or three skip in it. If the
feet of either of the skippers touch the rope,
he has to go out and turn.
A Swing. —In calm weather, before the
trade wind, a swing may be put up between
the main-mast and the shrouds. Take a flat
piece of board for the seat, and fasten it
securely to the ropes. It will afford amuse-
ment and exercise.
Single Stick and Sword Exercise. —If there
are any Somersetshire men on board, they
will probably know the first, and any old
soldiers will know the second. Make hilts
to shield your hand, and remember always
to play with temper. A man who cannot
keep his temper, if he is obliged at any time
to fight in earnest, will always get the worst
of it.
Boxing. —You must manufacture some
good well-filled boxing gloves in the first
place. You must remember in playing, that
a heavy fall on the hard deck is likely to


injure a person ; however, if you keep your
temper, no great harm can be done, and it
affords good exercise. On no account box
without the gloves.
Music. —Those who have musical instru-
ments should practise them, and teach
their companions; but especially, all of you
who have voices should learn to sing. The
German peasantry of the very poorest classes
learn to sing together as they return home
from their work, and very beautiful harmony
they make. First learn to praise God for
all the blessings He bestows ; and that
seems, to a thoughtful person, the most
proper employment for the human voice.
Thus are the angels employed. You may
also learn to sing other songs, with which the
instructor will supply you; but let me urge
you to avoid singing any frivolous, much
more indecent songs; and if any of your com-
panions commence any ribaldry, stop them
at once ; stop them by every means in your
power. Do not let such sounds pollute the
ship. Remember, that on that very night a
fearful storm may arise, and you may all of
you be called into the presence of your
Maker. Think how awful it would be to
stand before that great Being with such
sounds still ringing in your ears—sounds
hateful and detestable to Him.
While I am on the subject, let me urge
you to avoid using bad language, and to do


your utmost to prevent others from using it.
Nothing so much tends to pollute the soul.
The horrible habit steals on you by insensible
degrees* till your lips are taught to utter,
without fear, the most dreadful imprecations.
Nothing is so terrible as to hear a swearer in
a fever senselessly imprecating the most blas-
phemous curses on his own head, and on all
around. Remember the Divine precept,
“ Let your conversation be yea, yea; and
nay, nay and the moment you find your
tongue saying more than this, check yourself,
and remind your companions also.
Game at Ball. —Make some balls of list, or
any rags there are to spare. Place your-
selves in different parts of the deck, and see
how many balls you can keep going at once,
A large number may play together in this
way. Say, A, B, C, D, E, F, G, stand in a
row; A may throw to E, Bto F, and Cto
G, and so on. This makes the game more
amusing and difficult, as each must throw to
his proper man, or he has to go out. You
may devise for yourselves a variety of games
with balls.
Dancing. —There is not much space for
dancing on deck; you may dance, however,
Irish jigs, or Scotch reels; or better still, the
Scotch sword-dance. Place two pieces of
wood, of the size of swords, in a cross, on
the deck, and then dance in and out in the
squares. I dare say some one on board will


be found to show what I mean. Perhaps
there may be room for a country dance ; but
remember, in dancing it, to treat your part-
ners with proper respect; and let me assure
you that true manhood always treats a woman
not only with respect and courtesy, but will
suffer anything rather than allow her to be
injured. Of course, in all this, I suppose
that dancing is allowed by the authorities of
the ship. It must not be attempted without
permission.
Drilling. —You will find it amusing and
useful for many reasons, if there is an old
soldier on board, to be regularly drilled, and to
learn the platoon exercise. It gives strength
and grace to the figure, and also conduces
much to the health. The natural position of
a man is to be perfectly upright; and that
slouching gait, which is common to so many
countrymen, arises from a careless and idle
way of setting about their work when they
were boys. A slouching looking fellow is
generally to be seen loitering on the road, or
when moving, going at a slow pace, with his
nose towards the ground, as if he was look-
ing for something there. If these observa-
tions hit any of you on the back, do not take
them ill: but if there is any body on board
capable of drilling you, learn to be men in
form, as I dare say you are in heart. Tou
may make some wooden muskets for the
purpose.


I do not pretend to dictate; I merely
throw out the above suggestions in case they
may prove of service to you, and my wish is
that they may add to your comfort and
amusement; and let me beg of you, at all
events to avoid idleness, for depend upon
this, that it is the parent of all mischief.
MODELS,
When any of you wish to make a model of
any sort, you must describe it to the in-
structor, and mention what materials you re-
quire ; and if he thinks they can be spared,
with due justice to your companions, he will
supply you.
Model of the Ship. —Few of you are likely
to be able to make this model, though you
have the materials in the wood, bone, wire,
and twine. Well-made models are very pretty
ornaments, or they may serve as toys for
boys; but as they can be of no use to you,
I do not recommend you to employ much of
your time on them.
Hoofs of Houses. —Carpenters, and those
accustomed to builder’s work, should make
these. Suppose the house two feet square ;
form a roof to fit it, of thin deal, at the pro-
per angle. Show how the couples are dove


tailed into the rafters, and add trusses to
strengthen it in various ways, as if it was the
roof of a large barn, for instance.
Wagons and Carts, and Wheelbarrows.
You may make models of these for the use of
the young men who may wish to learn some-
thing of the art. Remember, that up the
country it will be important to know how to
make a wheelbarrow, and to mend a, dx'ay,
when, perhaps, no regular carpenter is to be
found within twenty, or even fifty miles of
you; therefore, to those of you who under-
stand carpentering, I say, impart as much of
your knowledge to your fellow-passengers as
you possibly can. You need not be afraid,
as you might in England, that they will com-
pete with you ; depend upon it, that they are
much more likely to prove of direct assist-
ance to you.
Models of Houses.—l spoke before of roofs
of houses, but if you have materials sufficient,
vou may make models of whole cottages and
barns, of various descriptions.
The following description from Mr. Earp’s
Hand-book, for New Zealand, of two me-
thods of building cottages, may be of great
use to some of you;
“ Colonial houses are generally of brick, or
wood; but there are two other modes of
building, which, for economy, durability, and
appearance, if skilfully constructed, are equal


to either. The first method is called cohb
building, and is extensively practised in De-
vonshire, and the southern counties generally,
even for houses of a superior class ; the other
method is called pise , and is commonly em-
ployed in Italy, and other parts of the Con-
tinent. These houses are also fire-proof, and
when coated with cement, or rough-cast,
neatly white-washed, present a very agree-
able appearance. The cohb walls in Devon-
shire are two feet in thickness, and the ma-
terial employed in their formation, is earth,
mixed with chopped straw, to give it tena-
city. These, after having been well beaten
together, are laid upon a stone or brick foun-
dation, raised from three to four feet from
the ground : upon this is laid the prepared
earth, a layer of which is enclosed in a frame
to about the same height, and well trodden
down; this layer must be carried all round
the building. This is allowed some time to
settle and acquire consistence. Another
layer is now laid on, but of less thickness,
each succeeding layer diminishing in thick-
ness as it increases in height. As soon as
the second layer is completed, the first is
pared down by a cobb-parer, (an iron instru-
ment, resembling a baker’s peel,) so as to be
even with it, and so on of the others; the
walls will thus, when finished, present an al-
most imperceptible slant, agreeable rather
than otherwise in appearance, and sufficient
E


to throw off any wet which might damage
the walls.
« At all the openings of doors and win-
dows, lintels of wood are introduced, of suffi-
cient length, width, and thickness, to support
the wall above, when the openings are cut
out after the building is covered in. The
windows and doors being cut, the reveals are
pared down to an even face, and then dressed
with fine plaster; after which the frames are
properly bedded, and the whole stopped and
finished off.
“ This is all the process requisite; and any
two farm-labourers, with an eye sufficiently
practised to form a good wheat or hay-stack,
can build the house. For garden-fences,
out-houses, pig-styes, &c. eobb forms the most
durable and economical material, and a couple
of layers in height are amply sufficient for
most of these purposes. Nothing can exceed
the neatness of a homestead thus constructed.
Pish is a concrete, and is erected with a
frame. The best earth is clay, mixed either
naturally or artificially with fine gravel; any
earth which will sustain itself with a small
slope, may, however, be used. After being
thoroughly beaten, the earth must be passed
through a screen, and all stones beyond the
size of a hazel-nut must be taken away. If
the earth be not moist, it must be watered,
and turned with a shovel till it has acquired
such a consistence as that, if a handiul


of it be thrown on a board, it will retain
its shape. A sufficient quantity should be
prepared at once to suffice for the whole
building. Pis£ walls, twenty-four inches
thick, formed in the spring, will be suffi-
ciently dried by the end of summer to cover
with a coat of plaster, which should not be
applied too early, or it will not adhere pro-
perly.
“ Concrete , formed of lime, coarse gravel,
sand, and water, may be used in the same
way, and will form walls equal to stone; but
the box or frame in which the walls are
formed must be very strong, or it will not
resist the expansion of thematerials. Fine sand
should be used in the proportion of ordinary
mortar. When the materials are thoroughly
w orked, the lime combines with the fine sand
only, and cements the pebbles of the gravel
together. The gravel itself possesses no qua-
lities of adhesion, otherwise than as it is
cemented by the mortar with which it is
mixed. Brick chimneys should be used with
all the above methods.
“ The following description will enable a
common carpenter to make a frame which
will answer for all the above materials. Ten
or twelve-feet deals should be used, their
joints being ploughed and tongued, and fur-
ther strengthened with clamps, fastened by
clenched nails on the outside. Four deals,
of three feet in height, will be the best.


When these sides or frames are used, they
should rest on cross pieces, which pass en-
tirely through the thickness of the wall. The
ends of these must project so as to allow a
mortise in each to receive the uprights ne-
cessary to hold the sides in their places.
These timbers, four inches square and five
feet long, form the tenon, and should be
sufficiently high above the sides to be secured
by ropes; when they are placed in the mor-
tise, they must be secured by a wedge, driven
also into the mortise beside them, ihe sides
are now secured at the top by a strong rope,
made tight to the uprights over the frame,
and twisted by passing a piece of wood through
the two sides of the rope. If this be pio-
perly done, the wall will be as firm as a
rock. .
“ The earth is now thrown in, after wet-
tin o- the parts about the timbers, to enable
them to be separated, and the cross-pieces
drawn out of the wall with greater facility. A
rammer of sound wood is used, ten inches
high, and six inches by five in the middle,
diminishing in thickness downwards till it
terminates in a rounded edge ; into this a
handle is inserted, four feet in length. When
the rammer is used, the workman should turn
it round at every stroke, and thus the earth
is solidly united. Shingle, such as is found
on the beach in Wellington, would answer
admirably. Six parts of this, with sifted


sand, and one part of well-burnt lime, fresh
from the kiln, would make a substantial
building, as would also equal quantities of
properly compounded mortar, and clean
gravel. A variety of materials may, how-
ever, be used, so that in few places are they
wanting when required.
fC The following observations are worthy
of strict attention, be the emigrant’s cottage
formed of what material it may. His house
should be placed upon gravel, sand, or loam,
as these soils are most easily drained; and
drainage is an object in a well-watered coun-
try like New Zealand, where the rankness of
the vegetation is such as to cause dampness
and putrefactive gases, if not properly guard-
ed against. Streams abound in New Zealand,
and such a locality as will command one may,
in almost all cases, be chosen. But the emi-
grant should not suffer himself to be so
enamoured of the beauty of these streams as
to place his cottage immediately on the bank
of one. By choosing a convenient elevation,
all the uses of the stream are retained, and
the air is better than in the bottom of the
valley. Another important point, too, is
gained—the sewerage is more easily drained
off; the light, too, is better, and a more
cheerful prospect is obtained. These essen-
tials have a greater influence on health and
spirits than may commonly be believed. A
northern or north-eastern aspect should also
E 2


be chosen; the warmth of such a position is
greater, and the light more abundant. The
reader must recollect, that, in Australia, or
IS'ew Zealand, the sun is to the north,
not to the southward, as in Europe. The
garden and homestead of every cottage should
be perfectly cleared of timber, with the ex-
ception of ornamental shrubs, which abound,
and may either be left standing, or trans-
planted to such spots as good taste may point
out. No English garden, however expen-
sively kept up, can "for a moment vie with
the beauty of a garden in new
Zealand in the elegance of its shrubs, to say
nothing of the vines, melons, Cape goose-
berries!’ peaches, all English, and many tro-
pical fruits, which will grow anywhere in the
greatest luxuriance.
« The ventilation of the house, the want
of which forms the great defect of English
houses, should be strictly attended to ?< as
conducive, not only to health, but in a high
decree to comfort also.”
O
MISCELLANEOUS OBSERVATIONS.
Never forget your prayers —I mean your
private prayers —and always attend public
service when it is held in the ship.


Follow the golden rule of “Waste not,
want not.” Make the most of the materials
at your disposal, for when you have used up
wdiat you have got, you are not likely to be
able to procure any more.
Cocoa-nut Fibre. —The part which you can-
not use to make into mats, brushes, or brooms,
should be picked very fine, and it will serve
to stuff pillows, the ticking for which the
will make. You will have a bag
provided, into which to put it till it is
wanted.
Netting. —You will be provided with a
supply of netting-twine, and netting-needles
and pins. No verbal description could teach
a man how to net. Some of you will have
learned before you sail, and those must teach
the rest. Cabbage-nets are the easiest made,
and are useful; the pattern you have. Large
nets to cover fruit-trees are also valuable.
They should not be less than twenty feet
square. A great deal of skill is required to
make a fishing-net of any description, but if
any one is found on board capable of making
one, let him instruct some others by all
means. Probably some of you may know
how to make bird-nets ; they may provide
you with a dinner on occasion. There is no
use attempting to make them unless you
understand perfectly how to do so.
Bird-cages. —These you can make with
the wood and wire with which you will be


provided, but as they occupy much space, a
few only can be made.
Mouse-traps. —As these are useful things,
and occupy but a small space, you may make
as many as you fancy of them, of various
descriptions, always remembering to econo-
mise materials.
Ink-stands. —An ingenious person might,
with the wood and bone, manufacture some
very pretty stands to hold ink-bottles, pens,
wafers, &c. They might be ornamented
with bone carved in various devices.
No litter to he left about. —You must make
as little litter as possible while you are at
work, and directly you have done, you must
clear up every thing and stow your materials
carefully away. The officers of the ship are
certain to be annoyed if you leave a litter
about, besides which a mass of dirt would
soon be collected, which would prove very
injurious to your health. Cleanliness in
your berths as well as in your persons, is
absolutely necessary to preserve health ; and
the sickness which occurs on board some
ships, is owing to the neglect of the rules
laid down by the Emigration Commissioners
to enforce it,
Reading. —You will be well supplied with
books, and I should advise you to make as
much use of them as you can, and to take
full advantage of the lessons the instructor
is ready to give you, remembering always


that you may never again have so excellent
an opportunity of improving yourselves as
you now enjoy.
Those who can read the best should teach
their companions who cannot. While some
are occupied with manual works, others may
read to them, and this is a very pleasant way
of gaining knowledge. Parents may instruct
their children with the bone or wooden
letters I have before described. Numeral
figures may also be made in the same way.
The following is a good way of teaching a
person arithmetic. Cut out a number of
little square bits of wood; arrange the
numeral figures in a row; against each put
the proper number of square bits. That
is to say, against 1 put one bit, against 3
put three bits, and so on. Let the" learner
count the numbers. To teach addition, tell
him to put the bits against 3 with those
against 5 and 6, and then see how many
there are. To teach subtraction, let him
take the same number he sees against 4, and
then count how many remain. For division,
let him put all the bits together, and see how
many parts with 7 each they will divide
into. For multiplication, take 25 bits, and
multiply by 3; that is, make up three 25
bits, and then let him count how many there
are.
This is an amusing way of learning arith-
metic ; however the Multiplication Table


should also be learned by heart; it is most
convenient.
In case of fire or shipwreck, let me
earnestly advise you to be cool, and to
obey the officers of the ship. The lives of
you all may depend on this. Accidents are
of very rare occurrence, but still you should
bear in mind that they may occur. On board
a man-of-war, at the beat of drum, according
to the number of taps, every man flies to his
station, and knows exactly what he has to do.
The same plan might be followed on board
emigrant ships, with advantage to all. Di-
rectly you get to sea, it would be well if you
were all drilled to hurry to your assigned
posts at an arranged signal, to be ready
should any accident occur, or to guard
against any accident. I have seen a whole
ship’s company roused up at night, and
every preparation made for fighting, and
yet no one grumbled, though every one
knew that not an enemy was near ; but a
seaman knows the necessity of being pre-
pared for the moment of action when it does
arrive. In the same way I have seen a
ship’s company prepare to put out a fire, when
they all knew that the ship was not really
on fire. Therefore, in case you are required
to drill as I propose, do so with cheerfulness,
and remember that it is for your own benefit.
Let me particularly caution you against any
careless act which may set the ship on fire.


Tailoring and Cobbling. —You will have
old shoes and leather, and old clothes and
cloth; and some persons will be found on
board to teach you how to mend your shoes
and clothes. Let me advise you to take
great pains to learn, for it is very probable
that you will settle a long way from either a
tailor or a cobbler, so that, if you have not
got the required knowledge, you will have
to go barefooted, and with your clothes in
tatters. Let me tell you, that there is
scarcely an officer or man in her Majesty’s
navy who does not know how to mend his
clothes, and to sew on buttons ; and many
even can cut out jackets and trowsers.
WOOD WORK.
Dies. —You may cut bread-stamps out of
pine wood, and mark them either with the
initials of your name or some fancy die, by
which you may know your own loaf when
you send it to the baker’s. You may make
in the same way butter-dies, and stamps of
various sorts. It would be well if each
person carved his name on the articles he
manufactures.
Almanac Boxes. —They may be made in
various shapes. The commonest are like a
watch-stand, with a round hole in front, at


which the day of the month appears, while
at the back is placed the month and the day
of the week. A number of cards are re-
quired on which to write the dates and days;
namely, sixteen for the days of the month, as
a number may be written on each side of a
card; three for the months, as a month may
be written at each end and both sides; and
two for the days of the week. Cards should
be saved up for the purpose. Most of the
cards you wull get will be printed on one
side, and thus of course twice the number
will be required; but you may scratch off
the printed letters. These are very useful
articles, and every family should have one.
They should be set the first thing every
morning when the master of the house gets up.
Paper Plaiting. —Few people are aware
what nice hats, bonnets, and baskets may be
made out of paper. Take common news-
paper, and fold it in long strips four or five
times. Use four plaits. When you have
made some yards of plaiting, sew it together
in the shape you require. A hat made in
this way will keep oft‘ much sun.
Tailoring. —You may make strong and
warm waistcoats and caps out of list, by
sewing strips of it together on a lining.
Book-Binding. —There will be plenty of
pamphlets and unbound books on board, and
if any one understands book-binding, the
necessary materials may be found on board,


viz.:—wood for making a press, twine, paper,
and flour for paste. They can be covered
with cloth or canvass.
Drawing. —Some of you may have a talent
for drawing, or at all events you may be able
to copy prints. You will be provided with
pencils and paper. Never mind making mis-
takes at first. Copy any drawing or prints
out of books, or sketch objects before you.
You may copy your mess-kids and other
mess utensils, or the figures of your com-
panions, or the whole scene below ; and when
on deck, you can copy the scene at either
end of the ship; or if near land, the outline
of the coast. To do these things requires
some experience; but there is nothing like
trying.
Figures of Animals. —You may amuse
yourself by cutting out in wood figures of
animals with which you are well acquainted
—horses, cows, pigs, sheep, &c. &c.—as the
Swiss peasants are accustomed to do in their
walks. When not employed more usefully,
they generally have a sharp knife and a bit
of soft, fine-grained wood in hand, and with
them cut out very beautiful articles. I, how-
ever, would advise you, when you have the
materials, to employ yourself rather in mak-
ing things which are likely to be useful to
you.
F


PLAN FOR IMPROVING THE CONDITION OF
EMIGRANTS.
The following plan for the general im-
provement of the condition of Emigrants has
come into partial operation, and it is much
to be desired that no ships should sail with-
out fully benefiting by it.
Each ship should be supplied with a chap-
lain, or superior lay instructor, who should
be furnished with a cabin passage, and with
books and materials for affording employment
to the male emigrants during the voyage.
A superior matron, with a cabin passage,
should have especial charge of the single
females.
Various kind people always put materials
on board to employ and instruct the women
and girls.
Her Majesty’s Emigration Commissioners
on board their ships send a school-library,
with a small supply of slates, pens, paper,
maps, &c.; and also a w r ell-selected library
of entertaining and useful works.
The Society for Promoting Christian
Knowledge are anxious, when made aware
that a ship is going, to send a supply of
Bibles and religious works, as also of in-
structive and amusing books, maps, and
pictures.
In many ships there are chaplains whose
duty it is to attend to the Emigrants


during the voyage. On their arrival at the
Colonies, they are welcomed by Chaplains
on the spot appointed by the respective
Bishops, as also by officers, gentlemen of
education, appointed by Government to
watch over their interests; while the single
women are removed to an establishment
superintended by a matron, who warns them
if other than respectable persons come to
engage them. This is a very great improve-
ment on the system of almost total neglect to
which emigrants were subject formerly; but
still there is much to be done. 1 hope my
readers may go by ships in which it is in full
operation; but there are some Government
ships, and many private ones, in which a con-
siderable portion of it is too often neglected,
as inferior persons alone are found to carry it
out. When such neglect occurs, I trust that
all the passengers will endeavour, by their
own personal exertions, to make amends for
the deficiency, by their own industrious
habits and attention to the regulations of the
ship. Some few books you are certain to have.
Lend them to each other, and make the most
of them. Learn bits of poetry or passages
from them, and recite them to your com-
panions. You may get bits of wood from
the carpenter for making models, and scraps
of old rope from the boatswain, or one of the
mates, to learn to knot and splice. Then
you may mend and strengthen your old


clothes, to fit them for bush-work; and you
may cobble up your old shoes, patching one
pair with another; you will probably also
have paper, with which to plait. In truth,
if you seek for occupation, you are certain to
find something to do. lam supposing that,
though you have this book, you have not the
patterns and materials spoken of.
REGULATIONS
FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF PASSENGERS ON BOARD ALL SHIPS
SAILING TO DISTANT COLONIES.
The Regulations are admirable, and if
proper persons are selected to carry them
out, they cannot fail to secure the comfort of
the emigrants. They must understand that
these regulations are as stringent as any laws
of the land, and that emigrants are as much
bound to obey them. They are made for the
good of all on board, as laws are made for
the good of all on shore, and they will
equally be liable to punishment if they in-
fringe them.
For the Government ships, the Commis-
sioners endeavour to select none but well-
qualified surgeons.
The provisions are of the best quality, and
fresh meat and soft bread are given whenever
opportunity offers.


Cleanliness is enforced in the person and
berths of the emigrants.
O #
Great attention is paid to securing a proper
degree of ventilation.
Constables are selected to assist in keeping
order.
There are two hospitals, one for the
women in the after-part of the ship, and one
forward, where the surgeon’s dispensary is
now situated.
No spirits are allowed, and none are
allowed to be sold on board. No smoking is
allowed below.
The dietary scale is abundant. It is hung
up in various parts of the ship, as are the
rules and regulations for the maintenance of
order.
In order to encourage attention to the wel-
fare and comfort of the emigrants, the follow-
ing gratuities will be allowed to the officers
of the ship; viz. to the master, 25.; to the
first mate, Is.; and to the third mate, or the
person who serves out the provisions, Is., for
every emigrant adult or child landed in the
Colony, provided the Governor be satisfied
of the attention, humane, and orderly con-
duct towards the emigrants of those officers
respectively.
The constables receive at the end of the
voyage 21., and the surgeon’s assistant and
cook’s assistant 3/. each.
By these regulations, it will be seen that
f 2


the Government do all they can to secure the
well-being of emigrants on hoard ship.
The directions to the surgeon, to the
chaplain or lay instructor, and to the matron,
are very strict and explicit. The duty of the
surgeon is to visit the people between decks
daily; to see that the ship is kept properly
clean and ventilated ; to listen to complaints,
and see that the medicines and comforts in-
tended for the sick are properly distributed;
as also, in the absence of an instructor, to
read prayers, and to amuse and instruct the
people to the utmost of his power. The
duty of the instructor is to perform the offices
of religion; to teach both men, women, and
children who are willing to learn; and to
encourage and superintend the industrial
operations. The duty of the matron is to
watch carefully over the young women and
girls; that of the sea-officers to navigate the
ship, but also to attend to the comfort and
convenience of the passengers; and ot the
constables, to maintain order, and to report
any incorrect conduct they observe. The
duty of the passengers is to obey cheerfully
and readily all orders; if anything wrong
takes place, if the officers do not perform
their duty, it is theirs at once to complain to
the superiors, explicitly and respectfully;
lastly, to the master, the heart ot all; but
if he is in the wrong, or refuses to hear
their complaint, let them at once, at the first


port they reach, make their depositions before
the authorities, and they may rest assured
that those who are guilty will be punished.
And now, my friends, I must bid you
farewell. I wish that I could have spent a
longer time on the composition of this little
book, and have made it more worthy of your
acceptance; but still, I trust that, taking it
in the spirit in which it is written, you will
not find it altogether useless. And at all
events, if you do unto others as you would
be done by—if you live in Christian love
and charity with all, and cheerfully follow
the regulations laid down for your comfort,
and obey the officers placed over you, I can
promise, with nearly a certainty, as I hope
most sincerely, you will enjoy a pleasant
and prosperous voyage, and success and hap-
piness in the new land to which you are
bound.




APPENDIX.
The following is a list of models and materials
put on board a ship bound for Australia, with the
usual number of emigrants. Many of the models,
such as the mats, brushes, baskets, should be left
incomplete, to show the mode of proceeding with
them :— ■
MODELS.
1 Knife-box.
1 Salt-box.
1 Cruet-stand.
1 Soap-box.
1 Watch-stand,
1 Almanac-case.
1 Cabbage-net.
1 Wooden ladle.
1 Spoon.
1 Fork.
1 Scrubbing-brush, of cocoa-nut fibre.
1 Clothes-brush, of ditto.
1 Hand-broom, of ditto.
1 Sweeping-broom.
1 Scrubbing-brush, of bass.
1 Sweeping-brush, of ditto.
1 Sword mat.
1 Bag wrinkle-mat.
1 Open-work mat, square.
1 Ditto, round.
1 Ditto, with brush.
1 Mat sewed on canvas.
1 Basket.


MATERIALS FOR BRUSHES AND BROOMS.
3 Bundles of cocoa-nut fibre.
3 Bundles of bass.
100 Yards of iron wire, very thin,
2 Skeins of twine,
60 Frames for brushes.
60 Backs for ditto.
12 Feet by 9 inches wide and 3 thick deal
wood, for brooms.
6 Feet of beech wood, for spoons and models.
1 Packet of tacks.
1 Jar with pitch and resin.
4 Different sized gimblets.
1 Pair of shears for clipping brushes.
MATERIALS FOR MATS.
10 Pieces of fibre.
7 Yards of canvas.
4 Skeins of twine.
3 Palms.
1 Piece of bees’-wax.
3 Packing needles.
1 Sword.
1 Bag wrinkle-stick.
Old gunny bagging for backing mats,
OTHER MATERIALS.
| -inch board for models; 36 feet, or more,
9 inches wide, |-inch thick.
6 Sheets of sand-paper.
1 Packet of brads.
1 Bradawl.


1 Netting-needle and mesh.
6 Skeins of netting twine.
100 Yards of stout wire for models.
6 Sail-needles.
8 Small canvas bags, made with about 1 yard
and 3 inches of stuff. The object of
them is, that each class may put away
their things in them on board.
1 Large ditto, of about 2| yards ; for holding
tools or materials on board.
1 Chest for packing models.
Bundles of list, say 500 yards, lining for
waistcoats, &c., needles and thread,
thimbles, cloth, old (say about 12 suits)
clothes.
2 Cobblers’ boards, complete ; 3 or 4 dozen
pairs of old shoes, and leather.
The models pack into the chest.
The bass is done up in one bundle.
The cocoa-nut 'fibre, and all materials for mats
and brushes, are sent on board in the bags.
The old clothes and shoes make a fourth package.
They are put under the charge of the Instructor,
who selects four or six of the emigrants, to super-
intend the industrial classes.
Any of the materials above mentioned will be
thankfully received at the Emigrant Employment
Depots at the principal ports of England.
At London, care of Mr. Waller, Emigrant Em-
ployment D6p6t, 1, Czar-street, Deptford.
Plymouth, care of the Rev. T. C. Childs, Emi-
grant Employment Depot, near the Government
Emigrant Depot, Plymouth.


The following materials might be sent from
barracks, and other large public establishments;—
Wool out of old mops, well washed.
Old tub-staves.
Backs of old brushes.
List from the cloth of which soldiers’ clothing
is made.
Old canvas, from hammocks, &c.
Ticking from old beds, well washed.
Bits of old carpet.
Everything must be well washed and cleaned
before sent to the Depots. Books and papers,
cards and pasteboard, are very useful.
The services of gentlemen of education proceed-
ing to the Colonies, and about to follow any secular
pursuit, as lawyers, farmers, merchants, architects,
are much required to take charge of emigrants on
board. All such persons are requested to apply
to the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel,
79, Pall Mall, London, as of course also are
clergymen intending to emigrate.
The Colonies are already supplied with school-
masters, as far as there is a demand for them, and
therefore no encouragement is given to their going
out in the capacity of teachers on board emigrant
ships. The Bishop of Melbourne, however, requires
a few masters and mistresses, well trained, like
those employed in the National Schools.
FINIS.
R. CLAY, PRINTER, BREAD STREET HILL.




