

END
THIS
COLOSSAL
WASTE
A NEGLECTED PALLIATIVE
FOR UNEMPLOYMENT
by
The Rh Hon. VISCOUNT SNOWDEN
with a
FOREWORD
b y
The Rt Hon. DAVID LLQYD GEORGE O.M.M.P


INTRODUCTORY
“End This Colossal Waste” was first published in 1936
by the United Kingdom Alliance, London.
By the courtesy of that organisation, the Social Service
Department of the Methodist Church (Victoria and Tas-
mania Conference) has been given authority to reprint it.
It is one of the most powerful indictments of the liquor
traffic ever written from an economic point of view. It
places beyond controversy the fact that “expenditure on
drink is economic waste.”
GEORGE A. JUDKINS.
Melbourne,
July, 1938.
CONTENTS
The Wage Earners and Spending Power.
The Expansion of the Home Market.
The Nation’s Drink Bill.
Taxation of the Liquor Trade.
Results of the Reduction of the Beer Duty.
Economists and Liquor Taxation.
Is Drink Expenditure Wise.
Alcohol and Industrial Efficiency.
Drink and Crime and 111-health.
Drink and Under-nourishment.
How Agriculture Suffers.
Drink and the Social Services.
Employment in the Liquor Trade.
Some Striking Comparisons.
What a Transfer of Expenditure Would Do.
Relation of Drink to Other Problems.
An Appeal to Business Men.


FOREWORD
By the
Rt. Hon. DAVID LLOYD GEORGE, O.M., M.P.
The abuse of alcohol presents what is beyond question one of the
gravest social problems of the Northern races. It is a problem for the
Churches, and for all those agencies concerned with the moral and spiritual
regeneration of their fellows; for the medical profession, which finds
alcoholic excess working perpetual evil to human health and physical
fitness; for the forces of law and order, which recognise it to be one of the
most frequent causes of crime; and not least, for the State, since alcoholic
indulgence diverts to unprofitable ends a vast expenditure which might
otherwise stimulate national progress and beneficial activity. And this
expenditure also finances a very powerful trade organisation that exerts
far-reaching influence upon political affairs.
The fierce controversies which rage round the drink problems engender
a great deal of heat, but not always much illumination. The great value of
this brochure by the Rt. Hon. Viscount Snowden is that it throws a clear
and searching light upon the issue by its massed assembly of the real facts
and figures. The truth is given plainly and dispassionately, without appeal
to sentiment or prejudice. The arguments based on them are unchallenge-
able in their logical soundness, and impressive by their clarity.
To those who are ardent Temperance reformers, this pamphlet will
make its own unquestioned appeal, and will prove a treasured arsenal for
the munitions of their warfare. But it is equally worthy of frank and
unprejudiced study by those who have no friendly relations with the blue
ribbon. It gives the facts which no one can afford to ignore who has the
wellbeing of his country at heart, and honestly desires its social and
economic progress.
The case which Lord Snowden makes against the Drink Traffic as a
drag upon the nation and one of the potent causes of unemployment is not
one that can be cheaply brushed aside. It deserves the serious study of
business men, for it directly affects their prosperity, just as it affects the
happiness of the employed classes. I can speak with some knowledge on this
issue, because during the Great War I found that drink was rotting our
national effort at equipment in a deadly fashion. It became indeed a
choice between alcohol and victory. Only by taking stern and revolutionary
measures to restrict the use of liquor were we able to maintain the industrial
activity which carried us through those terrible years to a final triumph.
One of the results of our wartime legislation was to reduce the consumption
of absolute alcohol by 50 per cent.
What was true in war is no less true in peace, although the threat to
national safety is less clearly visible. It does not rain death from the skies,
or mow down our manhood on the battle-field. But it sefids our manhood
to swell the hopeless shuffle of the unemployment queue, and herds mothers
and children, sickly with under-nourishment, into the miasma of the slum.
Our enemy to-day is not a foreign foe, but under-nourishment, and the
lack of means to earn a sufficient and honourable livelihood in the homes
of the land. In that struggle, drink still plays its old part as the most
dangerous ally of the enemy forces. It is well worth our while to take
thought how best this menace can be dispelled.
Lord Snowden does not enter upon the vexed controversy as to what
would be the most feasible and satisfactory way of dealing with the evil. It
is the part of wisdom, first to understand the size and urgency of the
problem; when that is clearly recognised, we may hope that there will be
enough good business sense in the community to enable it to be dealt with
in a businesslike fashion.
D. LLOYD GEORGE.


END THIS COLOSSAL WASTE
A Neglected Palliative for Unemployment
By the Rt. Hon. VISCOUNT SNOWDEN.
During the last six years Great Britain, in common with the
rest of the world, has been suffering from unparalleled trade
depression. The number of workmen out of employment in Great
Britain has averaged considerably over two millions. For the
year 1935, British exports were £358 millions below the figure of
1929, though there had been some improvement in that year on
the figures of the previous year.
There is no reasonable ground for the expectation that our
foreign trade will recover its pre-depression volume for many
years.
In these circumstances we must look to the development of
the home market for a substantial reduction of unemployment.
Some time ago the President of the Board of Trade said the home
market had probably reached saturation point. The Chancellor
of the Exchequer has recently expressed the opinion that the
boom in house building is likely to decline.
Building activity in recent years has been the main influence
in causing a general improvement in the home market. It is not
the building trade alone, in its many branches, which benefits
from house building. Innumerable other industries are stimu-
lated —furnishing, decorating, electricity, gas, radio, etc.
But it is a strange statement to say that the home market
is nearing saturation point, and that housing needs are nearly
satisfied. This assumes that the present standard of living of
the working classes has reached its maximum, and no improve-
ment can be expected. With our present productive capacity, a
power which is continuously increasing, there should be no limit
to the expansion of the home market if distribution is organised
and spending power wisely directed.
WAGE EARNERS AND SPENDING POWER
The staple industries of the country depend for their
prosperity mainly on the purchasing power of the working class.
The wage earners constitute three-quarters of the population,


and their limited incomes, if wisely expended, must of necessity
be devoted largely to the purchase of food, clothing, housing, find
other essentials.
The wage earners cannot afford to spend any part of their
inadequate wages on things which do not contribute to their
health and their moral and intellectual improvement. It need
not be argued that if every penny of working-class incomes is
spent on necessaries and reasonable comforts they fall far short
of providing a desirable standard of living. The fact is
universally admitted.
Low wages means small purchasing power, and small pur-
chasing power means bad trade. It is worth noting that the
depressed industries are mainly those which supply primary
needs—agriculture, the textile trades, and coal. Shipbuilding is
another depressed industry, but that is due to the slump in
overseas trade.
THE EXPANSION OF THE HOME MARKET
Assuming then that we must for a considerable time to come
look to the expansion of the home market to provide more
employment for our people, we must turn our attention to ways
and means of increasing demand for the output of our productive
industries.
There are three prime conditions of trade prosperity—(l)
Efficient and economical production; (2) an effective purchasing
power in the hands of consumers, and particularly among the
wage-earning class, who are the great majority of the adult
population; (3) the elimination of waste both in production
and consumption.
Misdirected spending power is harmful both to the indi-
vidual and the community. When any part of a small income is
spent on things which are not essential there is, of course, less
to spend on things which are necessary. Not only should attention
be given in domestic economy to spending on commodities which
promote health and comfort, but to the effect of expenditure on
the employment of labour.
THE NATION’S DRINK BILL
One of the largest items of national expenditure is the
aggregate sum spent by individuals on DRINK.


For the year 1935 the National Drink Bill amounted to the
colossal figure of £237,732,000.'*
This is the aggregate of the retail price of Beer, Spirits, and
Wines consumed in Great Britain in the year. The expenditure
per head of the whole population was therefore £5/4/3, as against
£5/1/- in the previous year. The average adult expenditure, on
a population of approximately 311 million persons of 20 years
and over, including total abstainers, was about £7/10/-, and it
seems probable that the average expenditure of the working
class family on drink is from ten shillings to twelve shillings
per week.
But these averages, based on the whole adult population, do
not reveal the full seriousness of the case. We do not know the
number of total abstainers and very occasional drinkers, but their
percentage of the adult population must be very large. That fact,
therefore, raises the average expenditure by the regular drinkers
to a much higher figure than twelve shillings a week per family.
But a still more serious feature of the expenditure is that
it is contributed mainly by the wage-earning classes. It would
be a reasonable calculation to put two-tliirds of the drink expen-
diture down to the working class. We therefore arrive at the
conclusion that the regular drinkers among the working classes,
a very considerable minority of the whole, spend a very large part
of their inadequate wages, on drink. With the result of this
mis-directed expenditure we will deal later.
TAXATION OF THE LIQUOR TRADE
It is true that about 41 per cent of the total expenditure on
liquor is taken in national taxation. But so far as the total
expenditure is a drain on the incomes and wages of the con-
sumers this makes no difference. From the purely fiscal point
of view the taxation on liquor is indefensible. It violates all the
recognised canons of taxation. It does not tax a man according
to his means, but on his vices. If the liquor taxes were not in
existence it would be an idiotic proceeding on the part of the
Exchequer to encourage a wasteful individual expenditure of a
pound that it might take eight shillings in revenue.
The taxation on liquor has long been a part of our fiscal
system, and if the taxation were abolished or reduced the
remission would be a gift to the brewers and distillers. That is
*These figures are taken from "Britain’s Drink Bill,” by G. B. Wilson, B.A.
N.B.—The British Drink Bill for’ 1936-7 was £248,000,000.


not the way to deal with the objection to liquor taxation as a
fiscal instrument.
On the contrary —though increased taxation takes more out
of the consumers’ pocket it has the salutary effect of reducing
consumption. The severe increases on beer and spirits made
during the war had a very great effect in lessening consumption,
particularly of spirits, with a striking increase of general
sobriety. The number of proceedings for drunkenness in England
and Wales fell from a figure of 212,350 in 1914 to 35,407 in 1932.
Every increase in the duty on beer and spirits has been followed
by a reduction of consumption.
On the other hand, a reduction of the duty invariably leads
to an increase of consumption.
THE RESULTS OF THE REDUCTION OF
THE BEER DUTY
The results of the reduction of the Beer Duty made in 1933
are very instructive. The duty was lowered by a sum which
permitted a reduction of one penny per pint in the retail price
of beer. The brewers agreed to pass their reduction on to the
consumer. This was generally regarded as a magnanimous act
on the part of the brewers. But they knew their business. They
knew that they would more than recoup themselves by the
increased sales.
What has happened ? The consumption of beer has increased
by over three million barrels a year. The brewers’ profits have
risen by over £3 millions a year. The market value of the shares
in brewery companies has risen by many millions of pounds.
Some idea of this great increase in capital appreciation in
brewery shares since the beer duty was reduced in 1933 may be
gathered from the following short list of the market quotations
of brewery ordinary shares in 1932, the year before the duty was
reduced, and the prices to-day—May, 1936:
Highest Price 1932. Price in May, 1936.
Bass, Ratcliffe . . . . 61/- . . 135/-
Courages 47/9 . . 92/6
Guinness 89/- . . 160/-
Ind Coope 58/- . . 126/-
Mitchell & Butler. ... 47/3 . . 98/6
Threllfalls 50/- . . 72/-
Watney, Coombe 84/- .. 103/-


The nominal value of the ordinary shares in these seven
brewery companies is £2O millions. Since the beer duty was
reduced in 1933, the market value of these shares has risen by
about £SO millions.
On the other side of the problem it may be pointed out that
since the reduction of the duty in 1933 the Exchequer has lost
about £4O millions of revenue; the total expenditure on beer has
risen; and convictions for drunkenness have increased by over
37 per cent.
There can be no doubt as to who has got the best of the
bargain Mr. Chamberlain made with the brewers in 1933.
ECONOMISTS AND LIQUOR TAXATION
To turn again to the general question of the taxation of
liquor, it may be pointed out that the policy of reducing the
duties to encourage increased consumption is thoroughly unsound
from the social point of view. All experience has shown that
the liquor trade is one which in the public interest should be
discouraged. It is wise policy to reduce the duties on necessary
articles, such as tea, coffee, cocoa, sugar, fruits, and foodstuffs,
so as to make them cheaper and thus encourage consumption.
But not in the case of drink. High duties on this article should
be maintained to discourage purchase, and to turn expenditure
into more useful channels. But the best of all ways to stop the
expenditure on drink is for the individual himself to stop
wasting his substance upon it.
If the revenue now obtained from liquor were lost it follows,
of course, that the deficiency would have to be made good from
other sources which did not take so large a sum from a section of
the working classes. That would be by no means a difficult
problem. The transfer of £237 millions a year of spending power
to useful and remunerative trades would so advance national
prosperity that the yield of all the other taxes would automatic-
ally increase. There would be a great saving to the State and
the local authorities in having to deal with crime, ill-health, etc.
The late Mr. William Graham, a former Financial Secretary
to the Treasury, and President of the Board of Trade, once dealt
very clearly with this point. He said, “Let it be urged as a
simple economic truth that no amount of subsequent revenue
which is derived from the liquor traffic will ever compensate for
the original misdirection of the outlay. Remembering my brief
experience at the Treasury, I can speak for every earnest student
on this question when I say that we would willingly abandon


every copper of the revenue in the sure knowledge that the saving
to the State on the transaction would be immediate and substan-
tial. Be it remembered that this outlay involves considerable
expense on police, in the provision of poor-houses, and asylums,
and innumerable other directions in the social services. There is
therefore not the slightest validity in the that the
revenue derived is for one moment important. We could
abandon every copper of it to-night and, regarded only as a plain
business proposition, earn a substantial social and financial
profit. ’ ’
The Royal Commission on Licensing gives support to these
views. It says: “It is our belief that the benefits to be derived
from the diminution of the present excessive expenditure on
alcohol would progressively compensate for any loss on taxation
yield from that source. ’ ’
IS DRINK EXPENDITURE WISE?
Let us now consider if this great expenditure on Drink is
necessary; if it is useful from the social point of view; if it is
beneficial to the individuals who consume the liquor!
The Liquor Trade is spending enormous sums in advertising
the virtues of beer. The trade has embarked on this advertising
campaign, in the words of Sir Edgar Sanders, the Director of the
Brew r ers’ Society, “to get the beer drinking habit instilled into
thousands, almost millions of young men who do not at present
know the taste of beer.”
These brewers’ advertisements make claims which are with-
out foundation. The Report of the Royal Commission on
Licensing strongly condemned these advertisements. It says:
“Many advertisements contain statements which amount
to palpable scientific untruths, and make use of anonymous
medical testimony in a way which seems to us to be open to
strong objection. We understand that the British Medical
Association shares our views in this matter.”
It is claimed that beer has a very considerable food value.
This claim is not supported by medical and scientific authority.
It can be countered by the admissions of the trade itself. Dr.
E. R. Moritz, when Chief Adviser to the Country Brewers’
Society, told the Beer Materials Committee that “the food value
of beer is very small directly.” Sir Daniel Hall, late Chief
Adviser to the Ministry of Agriculture, a great authority on
food values, has said: “Without going so far as to say that beer


possesses no food value, it has certainly not half that of the
materials which could have been grown from the land used for
the production of drink.”
The most recent medical testimony that alcoholic beverages
are not necessary or beneficial comes from a distinguished Com-
mittee of the British Medical Association, which has recently
published a Report on Physical Education. The Committee was
set up at the suggestion of the Ministry of Health in 1934. In
regard to alcohol the Committee states:
“ Alcohol —that is alcohol in beverages—is not necessary
in physical education and training, nor to the growing child,
and may be harmful. Alcohol, whether in beer, wine or
spirits, is not. essential to keep an adult person fit, nor can
it add to bodily strength.”
Even if there were some food value in beer, it is the most
expensive form of obtaining nutrition which could be employed.
But the presence of alcohol in beer makes it a most undesirable
thing for getting nutritive matter. It is now established beyond
all doubt that even a small quantity of alcohol has the effect of
impairing the mental and physical faculties.
ALCOHOL AND INDUSTRIAL EFFICIENCY
The Liquor Control Board, which was set up during the war
because of the havoc which drink was playing in the restriction
of output, made through scientific investigators a close examina-
tion of the effect of alcohol on physical efficiency, and arrived at
this conclusion:
“A moderate use of alcohol lessens the efficiency of the
workman by about 15 per cent.”
A very valuable Report has just been issued by the British
Medical Association on the part played by alcohol in the causes
of road accidents. The association was asked by the Ministry
of Transport to undertake such an inquiry, and it appointed a
committee of fifteen very distinguished medical men and
scientists to undertake the inquiry.
The Committee reports that ‘.‘Alcohol in an amount less
than is customarily regarded as sufficient to render a person
‘under the influence of alcohol to such an extent as to be incap-
able of having proper control of the vehicle’ has definite effects
on the human body. The effect of alcohol corresponding to three
ounces of whisky has been shown by. psychological tests to
diminish attention and control; to reduce capacity to learn and


to affect reasoning powers adversely. The subjects of such
tests frequently believe —quite erroneously—that they have
performed their tests more efficiently as a result of taking these
amounts of alcohol. This adverse effect generally occurs, even if
alcohol is taken in moderate quantities some hours before
driving. ’ 7
These effects of alcohol have a general application to all
human effort, and not only to the drivers of motor cars. In view
of the widespread and excessive consumption of alcohol, it
follows that there must be a great amount of physical and
mental inefficiency from this cause, with the consequent loss of
productive power.
There is a mass of scientific data bearing on this question
of the effect of alcohol on the physical and mental powers,
collected from experiments which have been made in various
countries. The effects, of course, vary in individual cases, but
the incontrovertible conclusion is that there, is in every case
some loss of physical and mental power, though it may be
imperceptible to the individual concerned. In extreme cases it
is obvious to everybody.
It is impossible to estimate the total loss of productive
energy due to this cause; but if we take a much lower figure
than that given by the Liquor Control Board, namely, 15 per
cent, and apply that to the number of habitual drinkers (not
drunkards) we get an appalling figure of loss of national wealth
production from this cause. There are about 31 million persons
over twenty years of age in Great Britain. If we take the low
figure of five million adult consumers of alcohol, and the average
loss of only 5 per cent of efficiency, we have an annual loss of
efficiency of not less than £IOO millions.
DRINK AND CRIME AND ILL-HEALTH
We have produced sufficient evidence to prove that the
expenditure on alcoholic beverages is not only not necessary for
physical nutrition, but is positively harmful. The expenditure
is absolute economic waste. The loss of productive efficiency is
by no means the whole loss to the community from drink con-
sumption.
The connection between drink and crime, disease and under-
nourishment, and poverty is too obvious to everybody to need
elaboration. In the financial year 1934-35 there were in England
and Wales 41,688 convictions for drunkenness. This was an
increase of no less than 38 per cent, on the figures of two years


previous. But these convictions by no means cover offences due
to drink, or offences in which drink is a factor. Drink is very
often associated with crime of a serious nature—robbery,
assault, sexual offences, manslaughter, and murder.
There is a close connection between drink and ill-health and
disease. It is not claimed that drink is the main cause of these
troubles. But it is a fact beyond controversy that drink greatly _
aggravates ill-health and disease. Where any part of the*
inadequate wages of the working classes is spent on drink the
family is deprived of adequate nourishment, and this leads to
an enfeebled physical condition which predisposes to disease and
ill-health.
In an address to the Royal Society of Edinburgh, the late
Archibald Hewart, an eminent Edinburgh actuary, said: “It was
popularly said that tuberculosis, commonly called.consumption,
was the main cause of early death. In his experience as an
actuary, the most deadly form of consumption he had come
across w T as the consumption of whisky and other alcoholic
liquors. ’ ’
DRINK AND UNDER-NOURISHMENT
More scientific attention is now being given to the grave
problem of under-nourishment in relation to sickness. It is not
generally realised how enormous is the amount of working time
lost by the industrial population through sickness. It amounts
in a year to no less than 250,000 years of work, calculated upon
that part of the population who come within the scope of the
National Health Insurance Scheme.
Investigations have brought out the appalling fact that about
40 per cent of the people in our country are not properly
nourished. These people belong in the main to the poorly paid
industrial classes. It has been pointed out already that if every
penny of the income of these people were spent wisely and
economically it would not be sufficient to provide the minimum
of sustenance for healthy existence.
This state of things is having a devastating effect on the
stamina of the rising generation. Public health administration
has done much in the last two generations to combat the ravages
of insanitary conditions. But the effect of this is being largely
neutralised by the inability of the family to get sufficient
nourishment, and in a great many cases to the unwise expendi-
ture of a part of the small income.


Working class families do not consume milk in sufficient
quantities. It is estimated by the Milk Marketing Board that
the consumption of milk in Great Britain in 1935 amounted to
802 million gallons. The price paid for the milk was approxi-
mately £B3 millions.
In that year the drinking part of the population of Great
Britain consumed 817,560,000 gallons of beer. In this they spent
£149,800,000. Nearly twice as much was spent by drinkers of
beer as the whole population spent on milk.
According to a classification adopted by Sir John Orr in his
recent important study on •“Food, Health, and Income,” 13|
million persons at one end of the social scale, with incomes of 30/-
and over per head per week, drank 400 million gallons of milk
per year; whereas 13-| million persons at the other end of the
scale, with incomes under 15/- per head per week, drank only
about 155 million gallons; while these comparatively poor people
drank on the national average 240 million gallons of beer.
The moral of these figures is obvious. The money which
should be spent on milk for the children is going to the public
houses. The wrong direction of this expenditure on the part of
the working classes is depriving the children and young persons
of necessary nourishment. Not only that, but it is depriving the
farmers of a market for the sale of a greatly increased output,
which they could supply if there were the demand.
Earl De La Warr, Parliamentary Secretary to the Ministry
of Health, recently put this point in these words: —
‘'The annual value of our milk output to agriculture is
over £60,000,000 —more than a quarter of our agricultural
output—used for stock raising, manufacture into butter
and cheese, but most important for sale for drinking in
liquid form. It is here that there lies the greatest room for
expansion to the mutual benefit of the farmer and the
consumer. ’ ’
HOW AGRICULTURE SUFFERS
It may be said that the brewing trade provides a market
for the agriculturists’ output of barley and hops. That is so,
but to a very small extent indeed. The barley and hops, which
were home-grown, consumed by the brewers and distillers last
year* amounted in value to only £6,500,000. As Earl De La Warr
pointed out in the above extract, agriculture got £60,000,000
from milk alone. The selling value of agricultural products in
*1935.


Great Britain in 1934 was estimated at £220,000,000, so that
the liquor trade is the farmers’ customer for less than 3 per cent
of his output.
If one quarter of the money spent on drink were devoted
to larger purchases of milk, the farmers would get ten times
more value than they now get from hops and barley.
But by the diversion of expenditure from drink to food the
agriculturists would benefit still more. The working classes
could with.advantage consume a larger quantity of other kinds
of foodstuffs besides milk—e.g., potatoes, meat, eggs, vegetables,
etc. After allotting one quarter of the annual expenditure on
drink to increased purchases of milk, there remains about £l7O
millions of expenditure on drink which might with advantage
from every point of view be diverted to the purchase of other
commodities of a useful kind.
DRINK AND THE SOCIAL SERVICES
It might be interesting to compare the expenditure on
housing in the last five years with the expenditure on drink. In
these five years, according to the Ministry of Health figures, the
number of houses of a rateable value not exceeding £7B (£lO5 in
Greater London) completed in England and Wales during the
last five years was £1,179,000. If we take an average cost of £SOO,
the total expenditure amounted to £590 millions. In the same
five years the expenditure on drink amounted to £1,180,000,000-
in other words, twice as much was spent on drink as on housing.
It is true that about 40 per cent of the drink bill represents
national taxation, which may have been spent by the State more
or less usefully. But the remainder of the drink expenditure,
namely, about £7OO millions, is sheer economic waste. There is
nothing to show for it except the devastation it has wrought.
But the expenditure on housing has given the nation a perma-
nent asset represented by over a million new houses.
We may now compare the drink bill of £237,732,000 with
the sum spent out of national and local taxation on some of the
essential public services. The latest complete figures apply to
the year 1933. In that year the country spent £101,703,000 on
education. The cost of non-contributory old age pensions was
£36,618,000, and of hospitals and the treatment of disease under
the public health acts a sum of £13,000,000 was spent. On the
important work of maternity and child welfare the expenditure
was only £3,374,000. On these essential social services—educa-
tion. old age pensions, hospitals, and the treatment of disease,


maternity, and child welfare —the country spent out of public
funds in the year a sum of £154,674,000, or £83,000,000 less than
was spent on drink.
EMPLOYMENT IN THE LIQUOR TRADE
The argument is often put forward that the liquor trade
employs a large amount of labour, and thus serves a useful social
purpose. It is true that the trade employs labour; but the
question is, To what purpose ? Are the men usefully employed ?
If the money spent on drink were diverted to other kinds of
expenditure, would the same or less or more employment be
given, and would it be more socially beneficial"?
We will answer these questions. But first let us point out
that employment is not in itself desirable. It all depends on the
nature of the employment. There is a large amount of labour,
which is necessary, but which is very undesirable. For instance,
burglars and other law-breakers employ a large amount of labour.
They employ policemen, jailers, judges, lawyers, etc. But who
would maintain that law-breakers are a useful social institution
because they find work for a large number of persons?
The first questions, then, we have to answer are: Are the
persons employed in the liquor trade usefully employed? Are
they serving a useful social purpose? Does their employment
contribute to the well-being of the community? Does it add to
the real wealth of the community?
We have given enough facts already to show conclusively
that the answers to all these questions are in the negative. The
drink trade wastes natural resources; it diverts a large part of
the national income from useful to injurious purposes; it impairs
the public health and aggravates poverty and other social evils.
The drink trade costs the community vast sums to deal with its
consequences. As a financial proposition it would be a saving to
the country to pay those now employed directly in the trade
their wages to do nothing—not that such a thing would be
necessary, for, if the money spent on drink were diverted to
other useful trades, there would be such an expansion of these
trades as would far more than absorb the workers now employed
in the drink trade.
The question of the actual number of persons employed in
the liquor trade is a matter of acute controversy. The trade
makes excessive claims as to the number employed. The Brewers’
Society puts figures before the Royal Commission on Licensing


which asserted that 613,000 persons were employed in the manu-
facturing and distributive branches of the trade.
The Final Report of the Census of Production for Great
Britain for 1930 gives figures which are much more reliable.
This report gives the following table of employment on the
manufacturing and distribution sides of the trade:—
Manufacturing. Great Britain.
Malting and Beer Breweries 80,952
Cider and Perry 1,643
Distilling and Rectifying 9,817
Bottling and “other” 6,123
98,535
Distributing.
Dealers (wholesale and retail) 24,791
Hotels, Public Houses, etc 267,087
291,878
Total: Distribution 291,878
Manufacturing 98,535
390,413
Males 253,294
Females 137,119
These figures, it will be noted, include persons engaged in
licensed hotels. A large number of these, of course, are not
directly employed in the distribution of liquor, but on the
catering and residential side of the business, and would be
required if the sale of liquor was not associated with hotel life.
SOME STRIKING COMPARISONS
The Census of Production Report for 1930 also gives figures
of the value of the output per person employed in various trades.
In “Brewing and Malting” the value of the output works out at
£2335 per person employed; in cotton spinning the value is £412
per person employed; in cotton weaving, £401; in woollen and
worsted, £499; in hosiery, £374; in building and contracting,
£428; and in coal mining, £179.
It will be seen from these figures that on the production side,
computed from the value of the output, cotton manufacture


employs six times as many workers as the brewing trade to get
the same value of output. Similar figures apply just about the
same to the other useful trades mentioned, except coal mining,
where about fourteen times as much labour is employed to get
the same value of output as in the brewing trade.
These figures refer only to the employment in the productive
‘side of the respective industries. We have no statistics of the
employment given by the' distribution of cotton, woollen, and
hosiery goods, nor could the figures be obtained, because the
merchants and retailers of these goods deal in a great variety of
articles.
But some idea can be obtained of the large amount of wage
labour employed in the distributive trades (including food, but
excluding drink) from the fact that there are over two million
persons insured against unemployment in the distributive trades.
From the statistical facts furnished by the Census of Pro-
duction, quoted above, the startling fact stands out that if the
money spent on drink were spent on clothing and other useful
and necessary goods, six times more employment would be
provided.
As was stated in the earlier pages of this pamphlet, the only
hope of materially reducing unemployment is to expand the
home market. No greater contribution to that object could be
made than by diverting the vast sums of money now wasted on
drink to more useful channels of trade.
The urgent need for a stimulus to be given to the home
market is shown by the figures of unemployment furnished by
the Ministry of Labour. In April of this year (1936) the
number of unemployed persons in certain trades largely depen-
dent on the home market were given as follows:
Mining > 218,000
Pottery 14,250
Textile . . 152,000
Clothing 47,880
Food Industries 60,000
Building and Contracting 260,000
Distributive Trades . 223,600
In these seven industries alone there are a million unem-
ployed workers. If employment'could be given to them, by
diverting the £237 millions a year from drink expenditure, every
other trade would be stimulated and the back of the unemploy-
ment problem would be broken.


It may be objected that in the figure of £237 millions a sum
of £9B millions taken by taxation is included. That is so. But
this taxation is none the less a deduction from the spending
power of the drink consumers; and if not spent on drink would
be available for other purposes. If the Exchequer lost this
revenue it would be made good by other means which did not
take so large a proportion from the working classes.
WHAT A TRANSFER OF EXPENDITURE
WOULD DO
We have the authority of such an eminent economist as Sir
Josiah Stamp that a transfer of expenditure from drink would
have its beneficial effects on trade which we have claimed. In
his exhaustive paper on “Alcohol as an Economic Factor,”
published in 1930, he estimated that 13 per cent of our national
wages fund went in drink, or 14/- to 1.5/- per family per week
in a family of regular consumers.
A transfer of such expenditure would, in Sir Josiah Stamp’s
view, mean—
1. More and better food for the children.
2. Additional clothing and home amenities.
3. Increased permanent assets in the home, such as furniture.
4. House purchase.
5. General savings. .
RELATION OF DRINK TO OTHER
PROBLEMS
We submit that the argument that expenditure on drink is
economic waste is beyond controversy. Moreover, there is a
relation between drink and poverty, lunacy and crime, disease
and ill-health. But we do not maintain that these evils are
wholly due to drink. It cannot be denied that indulgence in
alcohol aggravates all these evils where the primary cause may
be other. Expenditure on drink does not stimulate a man to be
self-respecting and to have ambition for a higher standard of
living.
There used to be a lot of controversy as to whether drinking
was th£ cause of poverty or poverty the cause of drinking. But
students of the drink question and of the social problem now
agree that there is truth in both these contentions. In indi-
vidual cases excessive expenditure on drink aggravates poverty,


and in some cases reduces a man or a family from fairly com-
fortable circumstances to abject poverty.
But no student of social problems would contend that the
poverty problem can be summed up in the one word —drink. The
causes of poverty, in the wide sense of the word, are too complex
to be explained by one simple cause; but the abolition of the
drink traffic would render the solution of the social problem
much more easy. The diversion of the present expenditure on
drink would lead to a higher standard of living. The backbone
of the democratic political movement in this country is among
the abstaining working classes. They make the best of their
present condition, and are always striving to improve it.
AN APPEAL TO BUSINESS MEN
It is an amazing thing that, in view of the loss to the general
manufacturing industries and the shopkeepers by tbe transfer
of so much spending power to the drink trade, these classes are
so complacent and indifferent about it. One seldom hears any
reference to the waste on drink in the speeches of commercial
men. It is the same in regard to unemployment. Among the
schemes and proposals for dealing with that evil one never hears,
or very seldom, any reference to drink expenditure as a factor
in the problem.
A great deal is being written to-day about malnutrition and
the under-consumption of food. On the same day (21st May,
1936) the “Times” gives two columns to three reports of
different bodies which had been discussing this subject—namely,
the Conference of the Women’s Labour Party, the Conference
of Women’s Institutes, and the Annual Report of the Federation
of Chambers of Commerce. The conclusion of each was that there
is an immense unsatisfied need for food. But not one of the
reports had a word to say about satisfying this need by turning
expenditure from drink to food.
If we do recognise the tremendous economic waste of the
expenditure on drink; if we are anxious to do something to
stimulate useful trade and employment; and beyond that to
raise the moral tone of the nation, to improve the physical con-
dition of our people, and to give a better chance to the children,
so that when they are grown to be men and women they may be
better fitted to take an intelligent interest in and to solve the
other grave social problems which perplex us to-day, we should
take a deeper interest than in the past in this most important
question of the national waste in our expenditure on drink.


Reprinted with the authority of the United Kingdom
Alliance, London, by the Social Service Department
of the Methodist Church (Victoria and Tasmania
Conference), 288 Little Collins Street, Melbourne, C.T
July, 1938.
Price —3d. per copy, postage added.
3/- per dozen, post free.
Spectator Publishing Co. Pty. Ltd., Printers, Melbourne.
