

i England and Her Colonies
ESSAYS ON
IMPERIAL FEDERATION.
SELECTED BY
ANTHONY FROUDE, PROF. J. R. SEELEY,
and SIR RAWSON W. RAWSON,
IN THE PRIZE COMPETITION OF
London
SWAN SONNENSCHEIN, LOWREY & CO.,
PATERNOSTER SQUARE.




ENGLAND
AND HER COLONIES
THE FIVE BEST ESSAYS
IMPERIAL FEDERATION
Submitted to the London-Chamber of Commerce for their Pri
Competition, and recommended for publication by the Judges :
J. ANTHONY FROUDE,
AUTHOR OF “OCEANA,” ETC., ETC.
PROFESSOR J. R. SEELEY, M.A.
SIR RAWSON W. RAWSON.
3Lont(on:
SWAN SONNENSCHEIN, LOWREY & CO.,
PATERNOSTER SQUARE.


Butler & tanner,
The Selwood feinting Works
frome, and London.


PREFACE.
CONVINCED of the growing interest in the Imperial
Federation question, both in official and unofficial
circles, the Council of the London Chamber of Commerce,
which has always given a strong support to the Federation
movement, early in the year 1886 offered a prize of fifty
pounds, to be awarded to the writer of the best essay
“ formulating a practical working plan for the federation
of the colonies and the mother-country.”
The Council of the Chamber believed that the offer of
the prize, and the publicity given thereto, might induce
those qualified to draft a scheme upon which practical
rather than theoretical discussion could proceed in the
future.
This anticipation was realized to its fullest extent.
The judges who had, at no small personal inconvenience,
undertaken to adjudicate upon the competitive manu-
scripts, were confronted, on the expiration of the date
fixed for sending in essays, with the heavy and excessive
work of examining 106 papers, many of which fell little
short of the 75 pages of foolscap at which the limit was
drawn. This will give some idea of the amount of labour
thrown upon the judges, Mr. J. A. Froude, Sir Rawson
W. Rawson, and Professor J. R. Seeley, and their report
conveys evidence of the completeness of their perusal.


The report is appended. In placing it, together with
the winning essay, and those other essays which it re-
commends for publication, before the public, it is the belief
of the Council of the London Chamber of Commerce that
the choice of judges of such high personal status and
special knowledge must give exceptional value to the
essays, which, through the kindness and co-operation of
those gentlemen, they are now in a position to publish.
At the same time it must be remarked, in order to
prevent misconception, that the judges in recommending
the publication of five essays, in addition to the one to
which they awarded the prize, have not intended to pro-
nounce them absolutely superior in merit to all other
essays submitted to them, except the prize essay. They
have pointed out in their report that they held it desirable
that the public should have an opportunity of seeing the
problem attacked in different ways. Accordingly these
essays have been selected not simply for their merit, but
as expressing the opinions of the different sections into
which the advocates of Federation appear to be divided.
AWARD AND REPORT OF THE JUDGES.
“ Gentlemen, —We have the honour to lay before you the
following report. There have been submitted to us 106 essays.
We call attention to the number, partly in order to explain any
delay which may seem to have occurred in our award, and partly
in order to congratulate you upon the great and wide interest
which your offer has excited. The quality no less than the
number of the essays submitted seems a matter for congratula-
tion. They have come to us from all parts of the empire,
apparently in larger number from the colonies than fiom the
mother-country \ and when we remember the nature of the


problem proposed for solution, we are much impressed by the
grasp and practical knowledge of the subject which many of them
display. We are agreed in awarding the prize to the essay which
has the motto, ‘ Auspicium melioris cevi ’ (to be carefully dis-
tinguished from another essay which has the same motto, but
coupled with another, viz. ‘ E pturibus unum ’). By making this
announcement, we acquit ourselves, strictly speaking, of the com-
mission with which you have honoured us. We cannot, however,
refrain from adding the following suggestion, founded upon your
published statement, that you reserve to yourselves the right of
publishing the successful, or any, or all of the essays. Con-
sidering the magnitude, difficulty, and delicacy of the question,
we are of opinion that more than one view of it should be pre-
sented to the public. We take the liberty, therefore, of naming
five essays, which either as containing noteworthy suggestions or
information, or as representing lines of thought, or methods of
procedure, which appear in many, if not in the majority, of the
essays submitted to us, we consider worthy of publication. These
are the essays which have the following mottoes :—Quotation
from Adam Smith’s ‘ Wealth of Nations,’ ‘ Auspicium melioris cevi
—E plurihus unum ’ (omitting pp. 60-68), ‘ Civis Romanus sum'
‘ Vincit amor pairicej and ‘ Causa non prcemia.' We desire it to
be understood that we by no means intend to endorse all the
suggestions contained in these essays, or indeed in the essay to
which we adjudge the prize. Finally, we desire to express our
opinion that many valuable suggestions and intelligent reflections
are to be found scattered through the large number of essays
which we do not recommend for publication.
“ We have the honour to be, gentlemen,
“Your obedient servants,
“J. A. Froude,
“ Rawson W. Rawson,
“ J. R. Seeley.”
An examination of the envelopes containing the real
names of the competitors (after the placing of the competi-


tors by the judges according to mottoes) showed that the
mottoes above referred to were adopted by Wm. Greswell,
late Professor of Classics at the Cape University, Stowey
Court, Bridgwater, Somerset ( Auspicium melioris cevi),
winner of the prize ; C. V. Smith, barrister, late Fellow of
King’s College, Cambs. (quotation from Adam Smith’s
“Wealth of Nations”); the Rev, Canon Dalton, The
Cloisters, Windsor (. Auspicium melioris cevi—E pluribus
unum)\ F. H. Turnock, Winnipeg (Mani.), Canada ( Civis
Romanus sum) ; W. J. Bradshaw, Richmond, Melbourne,
Australia ( Vincit amor patriae ) ; and J. C. Fitzgerald,
Wellington, New Zealand ( Causa non prcemid).
Canon Dalton’s essay is not included in the present
volume ; it will be considerably amplified, and published
separately by its author.


CONTENTS.
I. Prize Essay. Wm. Greswell, Somerset . . . i
11. J. C. Fitzgerald, Wellington, New Zealand.
111. W. J. Bradshaw, Richmond, Australia ... 73
IV. F. H. Turnock, Winnipeg (Manitoba), Canada
V. C. V. Smith, Cambridge 127




IMPERIAL FEDERATION,
No. I.—PRIZE ESSAY.
By William Greswell, M.A., Oxon.
(“Auspicium melioris cevi .”)
THE rapidity with which the movement in favour of Imperial
Federation has arisen within the last few years is one of
the most remarkable features of the age, and justifies its ad-
vocates in claiming for it, as they claimed recently from Lord
Salisbury, the deepest public attention. The movement is the
offspring neither of temporary excitement nor of irrational en-
thusiasm ; it is deep-seated, and founded upon fact no less than
feeling, sense no less than sentiment. A united empire may be
regarded as the logical outcome of a united kingdom. Federa-
tion has been the natural result of free institutions in our colonies,
Imperial Federation may be a step again beyond this, until the
goal of administrative and legislative unity throughout the length
and breadth of our empire is reached.
The British system of colonisation is en evidence ; on all sides we
are met by signs and tokens of its material results, its opulence,
power, and world-wide success. Contrasted with the attempts of
our European neighbours, it stands out in striking magnificence.
To quote a well-known aphorism, “ the French have colonies but
no colonists, the Germans colonists but no colonies,” whilst Spain
and Portugal lie as effete and worn-out colonising powers, holding
on precariously to limited areas of country and scattered posts of
commerce. England’s life grows young and strong beyond the


seas, and De Tocqueville has struck the note of its prosperity
and strength when he wrote: “Les colonies anglaises, et ce fut
Pune des principals causes de leur prosperity ont toujours
joui de plus de liberte interieure et de plus d’independence
politique que les colonies des autres peuples.” How to unite
these free peoples in Canada, Australasia, and South Africa, and
elsewhere, under one flag and under one Parliament, without
sacrificing any part or fraction of their liberty and rights, this is
the practical question we have to face. French, Spanish, and
Portuguese colonies send representatives to their National Legis-
latures at Paris, Madrid, and Lisbon respectively; can we follow
their example, and call colonists to Westminster?
Adam Smith thought that the assembly which deliberates and
decides concerning the affairs of every part of the empire ought
certainly to have representatives from every part of it; and fifty
years afterwards, Burke (1775) £t g rea t floods” and
the “ eternal barriers of the creation ” seemed to him to be the
only real objections to colonial representation in an Imperial
Parliament. But steam and the great circle sailing have altered
previous ideas about distance, and brought us all nearer together,
so that the Canadian can reach London more quickly now than a
Highlander could fifty years ago. The revolution which science
has brought about is equally fatal to John Stuart Mill’s objection,
when he wrote that “ Countries separated by half the globe do
not present the natural conditions for being under one Govern-
ment or even members of one Federation ” (“ Representative
Government ”).
But we have to deal, in limine , with another class of objec-
tions. To a certain number of politicians, Imperial Federation
conveys the idea of a rampant and crusading imperialism, jingo-
istic displays and wars all over the earth. The word federa-
tion implies a menace, in their judgment, however much defensive
reasons may enter into it, as in the case of the FEtolian and
Achaean leagues of old and the German Confederation in recent
times. It may be briefly answered here: that a federation of
England and her colonies would be the best guarantee for peace
everywhere; and with regard to the proper definition of the terms
“ empire ” and “ imperial,” there can be nothing offensive about


them if the ideas of vanity and aggression are eliminated from
them, and they are associated with bona fide occupation, reclama-
tion, and the natural expansion of our race. Professor Seeley has
pointed out clearly enough that British colonisation is the over-
flow of our population into foreign lands, carrying laws, customs,
and the whole machinery of the State with them.
Upon the platform, therefore, of a purged and revived im-
perialism, the advocates of Imperial Federation appeal to the
nation. These advocates belong to no particular creed or party
in English political life. As our colonial life has not been the
result of bureaucracy or bureaucratic arrangements at home, but
a voluntary life, free and progressive, so with this desire for Im-
perial Federation. It has come to men by unbiassed conviction
and after spontaneous and anxious reflection. It seems to be a
way of national salvation. The late Right Hon, W. H. Forster,
Mr. Goschen, Lord Rosebery, on one side, and Mr. W. H, Smith,
Right Hon. C. Stanhope, and Lord Dunraven on the other, prove
that the question is no exclusive property of Liberals or Con-
servatives ; whilst such adherents as Mr. J. Cowen, the Marquis
of Lome, Lord Wolseley, Professor Seeley, Lord Tennyson, Sir
Alexander Galt, etc,, indicate the catholicity of the movement
amongst men of “ light and leading.” This array of names alone
may be a sufficient answer to those “ parochial politicians ” to
whom a British Empire extending its formal organization over
the world is inconceivable and impracticable. But the question
of Empire and Imperial Federation of some sort is so thrust
before the Demos of England that they cannot refuse to consider
it. If they disregard the legacy of a Colonial Empire, they will
prove yet once again that democracies cannot be trusted with
empire. But it will not be for lack of warning or advice. In
this matter we may quote the words of two illustrious statesmen,
now dead and gone, but immortal in the living wisdom they have
left behind them, viz. Lord Beaconsfield and the Right Hon W,
H. Forster. The latter, in a well-known address delivered in
Edinburgh in 1875, stated with full knowledge and prescience
the case of Imperial Federation, and has been more than justi-
fied by time. Lord Beaconsfield, however, has left behind these
imperishable words ; “ In my opinion no minister in this country


will do his duty who neglects every opportunity of reconstructing
as much as possible our Colonial Empire, and of responding to
those distant sympathies which may become the source of in-
calculable strength and happiness to this land” (1872).
The practical question, therefore, is how to re-construct ? How
can we bring forward any workable scheme which will be opposed
neither to ancient precedent nor to the spirit of our institutions ?
How can we seize the enthusiasm of the age, and, whilst hearts
are warm and sympathies soft, direct it along fruitful channels ?
It would be impossible at the present moment to put forward
a scheme of Imperial Federation which, having due regard to
legislative and administrative details, would satisfy the require-
ments of our wide Colonial Empire. Paper constitutions are
possible but not practicable, and a cut-and-dried scheme might
share the fate of such an ineffectual document as John Locke’s
“ Constitution of Carolina,” which was drawn up by the famous
philosopher for Lord Ashley in 1669, but doomed to early ob-
livion. The spirit of British colonisation rebels against precise
forms and prosaic plans of administration, and prefers a kind of
political development, which, like the growth of the British Empire
itself, is wayward in its beginnings, poetical in its aspect, and, to
the outward eye and logical mind, somewhat inconsistent. It has
been proved, over and over again, that Britons, wherever they
live, dislike bureaucrats and bureaucratic methods. No modern
Lycurgus can step forward, and with the stroke of a master hand
fix indelibly a form of government upon his countrymen, and
bind them to the spirit and to the letter of his political instruc-
tions ; no Solon can devise, offhand, a lasting reform or a supreme
national council. In our complicated machinery of constitutional
government we have long passed the age of heroic legislation of
this kind. We cannot create, we can best interpret. “Oceana”
is before us, with areal history and a real greatness, as Mr. Froude
has pointed out. Shall we suffer it to pass away as a wraith upon
the waves ? Shall we allow the vision of consolidated greatness
to glide for ever from our eyes, after catching only a brief and
tantalising vision of its outlines? Are we to succumb to the
charge of being dreamers and visionaries because we aspire to
raise a structure of empire upon the undoubted loyalty, wealth,


good sense, and patriotism of the British race? No ; this species
of idealism should not be divorced from the sphere of practical
politics. Aet xnroTVTrCxrcLi to o\ov, as the Greek sage wrote when
he ventured to sketch his ethical system ; so with our political
system of a federated empire. We must sketch its outlines and
draw its structural shape, even though this age may not see its
fulfilment nor living architects fill in the details. A central
chamber of Westminster and administrative unity from the heart
to the extremities of the empire are what we want.
To obtain a view of what is best to be considered upon this
question, the following scheme has been adopted in this paper.
I. The general state of the question itself of Imperial Feder-
ation—as presented to ( a ) Britons at home, (p) Britons abroad,
(e) natives and native states —is discussed.
11, The various schemes which have already been formulated
upon the subject of Imperial Federation are briefly enumerated
and commented upon,"
111. From a comparison of these schemes, which are examined
in detail, the idea of a Central Chamber at Westminster, working
and co-operating with the subordinate legislatures of the realm
under the Crown, is sketched.
India is regarded as a crown dependency sui generis , and the
subject of Ireland is kept as distinct as possible from the ques-
tion of Imperial Federation. Ireland may be pacified by some
kind of autonomy and provincial government given her under a
scheme of federation, but the federationist leaves this problem
outside his discussion.
The audience to which this question appeals is of a vast and
unprecedented character. Imperial Federation concerns, prima-
rily, the thirty-five millions of Britons in the mother country,
and, secondarily , the eight millions of colonists who live under
free institutions and responsible government in Newfoundland,
Canada, New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia, Tasmania,
Queensland, and New Zealand. The latter are concerned only
secondarily because, in the event of the disintegration of the
empire, the various groups in North America, Australasia, and
South Africa would be less interested, comparatively speaking,
than the mother country. Their future lies before them with


boundless prospects, undeveloped resources and infinite power of
expansion ; but within the narrow limits of these northern islands
the great struggle is by means of thrift and economy to utilize
to the utmost the circumscribed area we possess, and, in the face
of pauperism, competition, and the evils of a rapidly growing
population, hold our position amongst the nations of the world.
Moreover, it is rapidly becoming clear, that as a manufacturing
nation we are becoming day by day more dependent upon colo-
nial support and colonial purchasers. The fact that an Austra-
lasian buys £8 a head of our manufactures, a Canadian £ 2,
whilst a Frenchman buys gs. 3d. a head, and a German 85. 4 d,
speaks volumes. Another fact of equal if not greater importance,
is that we import two-thirds of our corn supply from foreign coun-
tries, and a very large part —about one fourth —from our colonies
across the seas.
Again, this question concerns that class of colonies which,
although not absolutely in the enjoyment of responsible govern-
ment are, like Natal, Mauritius, and even Jamaica, winning their
way, from one constitutional privilege to another, in the direction
of the desired ideal. In the case of these colonies the introduc-
tion of the federal principle at home will not arrest, but if possible
further, their aspirations for local and provincial autonomy under
a central form of government.
Last, and perhaps not least, Imperial Federation will arouse the
keen interest, even if it does not affect the status, of those teem-
ing millions of native subjects who, in every part of the world,
from the Caribbean Sea to the Pacific Ocean, own allegiance to
the British sovereign. From Burmah to the Bermudas, from
Canada to the Cape, from Malta to Malaya, from Vancouver to
the ancient Van Diemen’s Land, the proposed scheme of world-
wide consolidation will sweep sea and land. Not only the gor-
geous rajahs of the East and the feudatory princes of India, but
the humbler Kaffir headman of South Africa, the Maori chieftains
in New Zealand, the Polynesian Islander, and the Red Indian of
the far North-west will know that the Great Mother of Nations,
the Queen of the Sea, is gathering her forces together in one im-
pregnable whole. Hindoo and heathen, buddhist and barbarian,
the worshippers at Mecca, as well as the disciples of Confucius,


will perceive that a great Christian empire is riveting the bonds
of a peaceful empire along the highways of the world.
In a certain sense it is an appeal which, in its far-reaching con-
sequences, may be said to be ad mundum. Whether we regard
England as a great Christian empire carrying in her hands to
remote regions the torch of Western civilization, or whether we
regard her in the light of a greater Carthage or a more powerful
Venice, spreading over the world a network of commercial posts,
the issues are equally stupendous. The confederation of the
British Empire would affect the history of the world to a greater
extent than any other event we can conceive of; for if this con-
federation proved strong and durable, it would be, in all proba-
bility, a guarantee, as above stated, of peace everywhere. With
one-sixth of the habitable part of the globe in our possession, we
should scarcely wish for territorial .aggrandisement. Moreover,
the rate of our progress in the colonial world has been so great
along the whole line, within the present century, that we are
entitled to assume that in a hundred years’ time the proposed
confederacy would overshadow the nations of Europe and curb
continental rivalries. In the days of the Roman Empire the
Syrian, Pannonian, Briton, and Spaniard uttered the proud boast
of Civis Romanus sum. But we look farther afield than to the
■ultima Thule of the Romans or the columnar Herculis of Greek
or Phoenician,
The Britannia civitas is a far wider, and we may be allowed
to believe a far more honoured, privilege. It is a civitas built
upon freedom not despotism, upon tolerance rather than upon
force, upon voluntary effort and individual enterprise rather than
upon bureaucratic orders and state diplomacy. England is the
“ Mother of Nations,” in the phrase of Claudian —
“ In gremio victos qine sola recepit
Matris non dominse ritu civesque vocavit.”
The confederacy of the British race is a problem so pecu-
liar in itself that we can scarcely refer for guidance to ancient or
modern confederacies. The confederacy of Delos, with its assess-
ment of men and money for defence purposes, under the hege-
mony of Athens, furnishes us with an example which it may be


useful to follow, considering that the daXacrao-KpaTia is as essen-
tial to us as to ancient Athens. But, obviously, the parallel is
not complete, neither is that of the ZEtolian or Achaean leagues.
The German and Swiss confederacies are recent examples of the
success of political consolidation, but the purely military aspect
of the one and the republican form of the other make them differ
essentially from our own case.
We may best look for enlightenment, mutatis mutandis , to the
example of the United States. Granted all the differences be-
tween us in the matter of the geographical distribution of our
states, and in the form of government, there is great similarity of
ideas between us. The future history of the world will rest much
upon the agreement of Britons and Americans. However this
may be, we need be in no fear of Americanising our institutions if,
in the study of the question of federalism, we turn to their annals
-with the best expectation of enlightenment. American public life
is, after all, colonial life writ large upon the face of the earth, and
represents what Canadian, Australasian, and South African life
may be in their main political? structure.
It is clear also that we must not forget to examine how the
question of Intercolonial Federation is being solved in our own
dependencies. The Canadian Dominion is a ready-made example
of a successful system of Provincial Governments under the
supreme Parliament at Ottawa ; Australasia is cautiously following
her example, and by the concurrent wish of many of the great
settlements there, now actually engaged upon the work of con-
struction. New South Wales and New Zealand, who have hitherto
held aloof, cannot long continue to do so, and in the fulness of
time we may expect to see the most important questions of the
Pacific settled by a Parliament resembling closely that of Ottawa.
The meeting at Hobart, in Tasmania, is surely indicative of the
future history of our Pacific colonies. Turning to the West
Indies and South Africa, we shall see that in the former the
principles of central government have been illustrated for some
years past in the Leeivard and Windward Islands ; whilst in the
latter the meaning and the advantages of confederation, although
not yet accepted by the heterogeneous South African states, have
been made familiar to the mass of intelligent colonists in the


Cape Colony, Natal, Free State, and Transvaal. In course of
time those exceptional circumstances which made confederation
impossible and Lord Carnarvon’s scheme abortive in 1875-7,
may have disappeared, and a united South Africa under the
British flag become a reality. In all our colonies the lesson is
that federation grows slowly ; and this lesson may be useful to us
in treating the general question of Imperial Federation. In the
Dominion of Canada, the maritime provinces of Nova Scotia,
New Brunswick, and Prince Edward Island rejected the unionist
resolutions of the Canadian legislature in Quebec (1865) with
scorn and contempt; but time has taught them the value of
unity. So in Australasia and South Africa, the objections of
anti-unionists may be best answered by leaving the process
of conviction to time, and by constantly bringing before their
notice the substantial advantages of co-operation in trade and
commerce, war or peace. Even such violent anti-unionists as
Professor Goldwin Smith have learnt to change in time their
ideas upon our imperial position, and to perceive that when one
limb* of an empire is severed from it, the whole body must suffer.
But the Professor’s conversion is not complete yet, if we may
judge from his recent article in the Nineteenth Century , in which
he accentuates the local disagreements in the maritime provinces,
Upper and Lower Canada, and the eastern provinces from the
lakes to the Pacific seaboard, refusing to believe in the solidifying
effect of such an enterprise as the Canadian Pacific Railway. As
he has always under-rated the loyalty of Canadians, so he has
always misinterpreted the most wholesome signs of colonial life,
and attached more importance to the centrifugal than the centri-
petal forces at work in the empire.
The declaration of the Imperial Federation League is, “ That
no scheme of federation should interfere with existing rights of
local parliaments as regards local affairs”; and this declaration
may be taken as embodying the true spirit of federation. Burke,
moreover, has described that attitude of mind and thought which
is the only possible one in approaching a vast question like the
present, and recommends itself to insularists and anti-unionists
and anti-imperialists of every description in every remote province,


outpost, and settlement, too much in love with individual liberty.
He says., with much force and justice, that in a great empire
we must, to reap the fruits of empire, “ balance inconveniences
and remit some right that we may enjoy others”; and, “as we
must give away some natural liberty to enjoy civil advantages, so
we must sacrifice some civil liberties for the advantages to be
derived from the communion and fellowship of a great empire.”
This advice is particularly applicable in our own case, where we
are, if possible, hyper-sensitive on the subject of local liberties,
and too ready, in many instances, to mar our imperial prospects
by indulging in commercial jealousies of secondary importance.
Never, however, have the vision and realities of empire burst
upon a race so little prepared to receive them as oiy: own. The
British Empire has grown abroad whilst men slept at home.
Until quite recent times indifference on this subject was popular
and fashionable not only with the rank and file of the nation, but
even with the heads of our official departments. We have all
heard of the mythical and anecdotal period of our colonial history,
when geographical ignorance was fashionable with our Colonial
Secretaries and heads of departments. But this period is past,
and the laches of the Colonial Office are not so easily forgiven.
Our queen and our princes have led public opinion here.
The Romans, whenever they made additions to their empire,
thought fit to impress the nature of the extension upon the in-
habitants of the metropolis by those wonderful processions to
the capital, in which captive kings, garnered wealth, and all the
spoils of war were displayed in picturesque confusion. But there
has been nothing sensational or spectacular about our colonial
empire of this sort, although with us the Temple of Janus is
seldom closed. The Colonial and Indian Exhibition has been
the first public attempt to popularise a knowledge of our imperial
and colonial wealth. But this exhibition is of a thoroughly peace-
ful nature. Moreover, our colonies have advanced principally by
quiet and unostentatious labour in bush and prairie, veldt and
forest. That huge mountain of Australasian gold, as displayed
in the exhibition, has been won by patient digging, not by armed
violence and the spoiler’s hand. Individual adventurers have
gone forward whilst departments at home vacillated and called


back. When a few stragglers from Van Dieman’s Land wished
to settle at Port Phillip (now Victoria), in 1836, Lord Aberdeen
first of all, and then Lord Glenelg, forbade them to do so with the
voice of official authority. But the colonists persisted, and the
result is a magnificent colony, with a capital of 320,000, a popula-
tion of a million, and a revenue of six millions.
All this has been done in fifty years, and we cannot wonder,
therefore, that comparatively few amongst us at home should
realize accurately the momentous change throughout the Colonial
Empire. Just as the mushroom city springs up in the midst of
the desert, like Ballarat or Kimberley, upon unexpected spots,
and with marvellous rapidity, so it has been with our empire.
Yet it would seem as if a very large percentage of Englishmen at
home, although they hear of this growth, regard it with doubting
faith. It needs a journey round the world, and a visit to the
places themselves, to convince the untravelled denizen of these
islands of the reality of his heritage. Mr. Howard Vincent has
left it on record, that after he had travelled round the world and
seen the progress of the Canadian Dominion and of Australasia,
he found it right to alter some of his most cherished convictions.
In other words, from being what we may describe as an “insu-
larist,” Mr. Howard Vincent became an “imperialist.” The
secret, again, of Lord Rosebery’s success as a minister, is not
to be' found in his political partnership with men of the Dis-
unionist type, but in his own cordial sympathy with our colonial
expansion acquired during a personal visit to the settlements
themselves. Thus it was that the late Foreign Secretary could
understand the soreness and vexation of Australians on the New
Guinea and Pacific questions far better than Lord Derby.
In England herself there is much to be done, even now, for
popular enlightenment upon our empire. How many private
citizens, living at ease at home, realize the character of some of
our colonial undertakings. Last year a railway of more than
3,000 miles across the Canadian Dominion was opened with com-
paratively little ceremony and flourish of trumpets when we con-
sider the scope and bearing of the enterprise in a commercial,
strategic, and imperial sense. This railway, connecting the two
imperial stations of Halifax and Esquimau! , and running through


British territory every mile of its course, may, in time, help to
bring about a revolution in our European policy, by proving to
the world that we have solved the question of a north-west pas-
sage to the Indies in a way of our own, and may therefore attach
less importance to the Suez Canal as a route to the East. Yet, if
such a revolution is brought about, it will have been begun with-
out the connivance, nay, even almost without the knowledge, of
the average British elector. In former days the solution of the
north-west passage difficulties would have excited popular enthu-
siasm of an unprecedented description; but in the England of
to-day the feats of the surveyor and engineer pass almost un-
noticed, although they may in the future guide our destinies more
than the sensational discoveries of those bold mariners who
glided into unknown seas for the first time. The Diaz, Vasco
di Gama and Columbus of the present day is the engineer and
constructor, who, with the aid of steam, finds the quickest w r ay to
the most profitable markets, and learns to distribute his cargo
quickest. Thus, in a brief survey of the British Empire, and in
a statement of the broad question of Imperial Federation, it is
important for us to know that there are, to quote the statistics of
Mr, Jeans brought forward at a recent meeting in the Conference
Room of the Kensington Exhibition, 30,000 miles of railway in
the British Empire. Out of this total there are 7,000 in Austral-
asia, and 10,700 in India. Even in unprogressive South Africa
a railway of 700 miles has been constructed within the last few
years, and the regions of the Zambesi and the valleys of Equa-
torial Africa brought near to our harbours at Capetown and Port
Elizabeth and Natal. These engineering feats are at the basis
of our calculations, whether we wish to mobilise our troops in any
quarter of the Empire—either in Bechuanaland, Burmah, or else-
wffiere, as the case may be —or whether we wish to distribute our
merchandise in the required markets. Railways and telegraphs
are essential for quick federal action in every instance; for easy
transit and rapid information are the first considerations which
occur to all those who wish to federalise our fleets, our armies,
our chambers of commerce, and our post offices.
But if the stay-at-home Briton is ignorant of the precise nature
and extent of our engineering enterprises in the colonies, does


Canada
.
Newfoundland .
333,575
New South AVales
21,632,459 (1883)
Victoria
28,325,112 (1884)
Queensland
14,917,850 (1883)
South Australia .
13,891,900 (1883)
Tasmania .
2,385,600 (1883)
New Zealand
(1884)
Cape Colony
. . 20,810,000
he realize how deeply England is interested in them from a
pecuniary point of view ?
The public debt of our nine Parliamentary Colonics is
However, it has just happened that, by some undesigned coinci-
dence in the evolution of political life, a fully enfranchised demo-
cracy at home have been brought face to face with this great
vision of extended empire, and therefore extended responsibili-
ties. Across the seas this full civic enfranchisement has been no
new thing for some time past, and manhood suffrage is practically
the custom in the Dominion, Australasia, and the Cape Colony.
The colonial democracies, therefore, have had a longer political
training than the English democracy, and have for some years
past been in the habit of discussing and handling intricate ques-
tions of finance, religion, and law generally. It can be easily
understood, therefore, that the treatment of imperial questions
will be more familiar to them than to the recently enfranchised
“ Hodges ” of Suffolk or Somerset, to whom a vestry meeting and
a board of guardians have been the sole repositaries of official
power.
Again, relatively speaking, a colonist is of far greater import-
ance in his political world than the average stay-at-home Briton
in his, and, as Sir Julius Vogel has truly pointed out, as a rule
is better educated. We may claim for the colonist what Thucy-
dides claimed for the Athenian citizen, that he could idi err’
av elSrj koI /xera jxdkuTT av evrp avreAws to creo/m avrapKes


7 In the colonies religious difficulties are less acute,
and the quarrels on the subject of a State Church practically un-
known. In Canada the “ Clergy Reserves ” grievance has been
long abolished. Sectarian differences have less fertile ground
in the colonies, and men live under less straitened circumstances
and a freer atmosphere than at home in tradition-haunted and
ancestral England. All this is natural, and just what we should
expect. The poetry, the passion, and the struggles of our bur-
dened land are unknown in veldt, bush, and prairie.
Moreover, to the Briton at home a state department is a
mystery, and a state officer an unseen deity issuing mandates
through a formidable medium of clerks —who take care to observe
the strict decorum of their order, —and through offices which are
not inaptly termed “circumlocution offices.” But the colonist
is not so burdened with officialdom and tradition. His method
of official communication is somewhat like that of his system of
conveyancing, both simple and easy, according to which he
boasts that landed property of any value can be transferred from
one person to another in as many hours as it takes weeks or even
months in England, The society in which he lives not being so
complex as that of the mother-country, he is brought into closer
personal contact with public men and their departments. Even
the Governor, the representative of royalty, is accessible to all,
and is interviewed at no more. stiff a ceremony than a garden
party or a dinner at Government House. In the actual arena of
politics the Demosthenes or the Pericles of the settlement is
constantly heard and seen, and upon the occasion of an exciting
debate in such a centre as Capetown, where the policy of a Kaffir
war is arraigned, or at Melbourne, where a debate takes place
upon some important point in fiscal policy, the average colonist
is well versed in the details of parliamentary procedure, and
brings a great deal of shrewd perception and common sense to
bear upon the complexities of the question. Such nimbleness of
wit and dexterity of judgment cannot be expected in England.
But whilst there is no question as to the superior political
foresight and judgment of colonists who have so long used the
suffrage, in comparison with the British elector who is only just
emancipated and combating with many prejudices, colonial


history tells us that colonial life is by no means purged of the
taint of “provincialism.” The raison d'etre of the animosities
between Free Trade Sydney and Protectionist Melbourne, the
rivalries of the island communities of the West Indian group, the
jealousies between Cape Colonists and Natalians, and in the Cape
Colony itself between men of the Eastern and Western Provinces,
the split between North and South Queensland and the men of
Brisbane and Townsville, the recently expressed reluctance of the
Nova Scotian Legislature to accept the Dominion Government
as an accomplished fact* are all somewhat unintelligible to the
ordinary Englishman, who may in all these cases retort with
justice the charge of provincialism upon colonists who have
rebuked him with “ insularisra ” and “ separatism.”
To all, however, whether in the mother-country or the colonies,
the question of Imperial Federation and the problem of a Central
Government at the heart of the empire comes with a pacifying
and unifying power, the more so because in a wide scheme of
federalism there may be a better chance of allaying provincial
jealousies by delegating provincial autonomy. The utmost
possible freedom is consistent with centralization if a proper
subordination is found and the terms of a mutual compact arranged
in the spirit of Burke’s suggestions. But it is at home that the
greatest enlightenment is needed. Here, too, the constitutional
initiative must in the first place lie. As Lord Carnarvon pointed
out in the course of his official correspondence upon South African
Confederation, the Home Government, however ready to wait
for colonial development and the ripeness of time, must take the
first step. For some time past there has been an historical pre-
paration for confederation. The fully representative Parliament
at Ottawa , the partially representative meeting at Hobart Tozvn, are
signs of the tendency of our colonies towards a Central Govern-
ment. This tendency began,
1. In 1839, when Lord Durham sent in his well-known report
upon Canadian affairs. The idea of provincial legislatures with
local powers, but subordinated to a central authority, began then.
The Dominion Act of 1867 was a logical sequel of Lord Durham’s
policy.
2. It found further development in Lord Grey’s Administration


(1840-1857), when the principle of local government and provin-
cial automony was extended to the Australasian colonies.
If we consider, then, only the two above-mentioned epochs in
colonial history during the reign of Queen Victoria, and recollect
how the colonists have been brought face to face with the
federal principle, we may realize the fact that Imperial Federation
involves no unusual and extraordinary departure in our national life.
It is really a generous interpretation of Intercolonial Federation ,
although, in adopting Imperial , we need not wait for Intercolonial
Federation in every instance.
The insularist , therefore, as opposed to the imperialist , need not
be alarmed at the introduction of the federal principle into more
purely English politics. It has been done in 17°? !8oo, and
also abroad. It is the climax and outcome of those laws and
customs and principles which we cherish in England. It means
both freedom and centralization.
Schemes and Ideas already put forward.
I. To begin with one of the earliest and perhaps the least
practicable ideas upon the subject of Imperial Representation in
a common legislative chamber, it has been suggested that the
colonies should appoint a Member of Parliament at home to be
their agent, just as New York appointed Edmund Burke. Such
an expedient might have suited the case in earlier days, when the
care of the plantations was regarded as unimportant, and scarcely
deserving the attention of a State department j but even then, such
nominated members as Burke were always open to the charge
either of knowing little from personal knowledge of the dependency
which placed its interests in their hands, or to the charge of being
paid and untrustworthy advocates. A certain instance, however,
of the good done by a nominee of the Colonial Government
occurred in the history of Australia, when the Port Phillip electors,
wishing to draw attention to certain grievances of their own,
rejected their local members and plumped for Earl Grey, in 1848.
The strange occurrence of the election of an English nobleman
by a colonial electorate, aroused attention in England, and Earl
Grey was asked jokingly when he intended to sail for Australia.


However, the result of choosing him as their representative and
nominee was a good one for the Port Phillip electors. They
gained what they wanted, viz. a separate constitution, and loyally
called their settlement “Victoria.” In this case there was a
pleasant termination to the struggle with that departmental apathy
and torpor which has, until quite recent times, clung to our
Colonial Office.
But the days of colonial nominees of this particular description
are over. In the new Parliament we have several men who,
although they are chosen by a British electorate at home, are
thoroughly representative men from the colonies, such as Mr.
J, Henniker-Heaton, Sir A. McArthur, and others now in the
House of Commons ; and travellers, such as Hon. Finch Hatton,
Baden Powell, Lieut.-Colonel Howard Vincent, who have made
colonial questions their especial study. Moreover, the class of
officials known as “The High Commissioner of Canada,” and the
“ Agents-General of the Colonies,” are able to interpret in every case
the wants and necessities of their respective settlements. If they
are not elected representatives, and do not change with each
successive colonial administration, they are none the less able to
report faithfully upon the political aspects of their settlements, with
which they have, in each case, a most intimate knowledge. But
of course we must have some official acquainted with the rapid
changes and current history of the colonies. The Right Hon. H.
Childers was an Australian legislator himself once ; but so quick is
the progress of our colonies, that political knowledge and observa-
tion actually garnered in the colonies themselves, soon becomes
obsolete, and we may therefore hesitate to accept the political
reminiscences of this eminent financier as trustworthy now.
11. It has been suggested that colonists of distinction should
be elevated to the peerage at home, with a view to securing
a kind of colonial representation and a better hearing upon
colonial politics. But they would be too few in number to be
of any real good, and would be, in all probability, a class of men
ill-spared from the colonies. Nor would the colonists them-
selves be content that such representatives should sit in the serene
atmosphere of the Upper House, without a chance of participating


in the discussions of the Lower House where public questions
are most eagerly threshed out. However eloquent and learned
the debates of the peers, they do not affect greatly the decision of
the Commons. A policy is begun in the Lower House before it
is criticised in the Upper.
HI. It has been proposed to have a Colonial Council of Advice,
to assist the Secretaries of State. They would be made Privy
Councillors, and would form a committee of the Privy Council.
Governors, ex-governors, and the agents-general of the colonies
would be a representative class of men from whom such a council
might be selected. But the Privy Council is not a public body,
and the mode of selection, unless controlled in every case by the
colonists —and this would be difficult—savours too much of the
nominee system, for which colonists have no love. It has been
pointed out by the Duke of Manchester, that the existence of
such a body, although merely a consultative one, might increase
irresponsibility in the House of Commons, colonial affairs being
delegated to them, and excluded as far as possible from parlia-
mentary discussion. -Moreover, such a council might become
too numerous, as each small island or settlement would demand
representation in it. Successive Colonial Secretaries would have
to be instructed upon growing and separate interests in every part
of the globe. The members of the council also, unlike the
Indian Council, would have to instruct one another upon their
respective settlements and colonies. For instance, the delegate
of the Cape would be teaching the intricacies of the Basuto
question and the Transkeian difficulties to the Ceylon or Hong-
Kong delegate, and the Queenslander be pouring his especial
grievance on separation or the New Guinea question into the ears
of the reluctant Canadian. In fact, each delegate would have
his hobby or his grievance which he would feel bound to air to all
his fellow-councillors, with the view of obtaining from them,
collectively, some decision. In a certain sense this importunity
would be reasonable, because one colonial question, be it of
sufficient imperial value, must affect all colonists. The distinc-
tion between local and imperial legislation not being clearly
defined just yet, the functions of the consultative body would be


shadowy also. As regards India, the Indian Council are in a
different position. They have to deal with a distinct class of
questions, more or less intelligible to the whole board through
their official experience.
Again, a colonial delegate, be he the agent-general or any
other representative on the Council of Advice, may speak with
uncertain sound if he represents the varying stages of colonial
opinion on any particular policy. A change of Ministry at the
Cape, for instance, may alter the lines of a native policy at any
moment. The “ Sprigg ” Ministry, which carried out a forward
policy in South Africa, was upset by a “ Scanlen ” Ministry, which
reversed every measure its predecessors had endorsed. In such
a case of fluctuating opinion, the advice of an agent-general as
the accredited mouthpiece of his colony would go for little.
What, also, would be the position of the Governor? Little
by little his judgments and decisions would be set aside by the
Board in London, and he would be regarded as a useless and
costly appendage of the Home Government. The colonists might
begin to consider that Government House, with its expenditure of
to out of the public chest, was scarcely worth
while enduring on their part; and so in course of time Governors,
representing the majesty of the Crown, and constituting in their
own persons the sole constitutional links between the mother-
country and the colonies, might disappear. On all hands this
would be a subject of regret. This constitutional link would be
snapped, the agents-general become as foreign consuls, and the
best field of proconsular dignity and activity be taken from the
British statesman. It is advisable, on the contrary, to strengthen
this constitutional position, and to enhance the dignity of Colonial
Governors by every expedient in our power. It has been de-
monstrated, again and again, that the courtly customs and military
displays, and even the viceregal magnificence of Government
House, are popular and acceptable in the busy and practical
sphere of colonial life.
Again, in any trying crisis in the history of our country, and
when the threats of war were surrounding us, the position of a
Council of Advice would, even if they spoke and counselled with
irresponsible voice, be awkward and embarrassing.


Supposing a casus belli were to arise between the Australasians
and French on the convict question in the Pacific, or between
the South Africans and Germans on a sovereignty claim, or
between Canadians and the Americans on the “ fisheries rights,”
how would the Council of Advice speak? Would they all agree
upon certain points of foreign policy to be maintained at the
risk of war for all ? Would the Canadian delegates support the
Australasians against the French, and the Australasians uphold in
return the Canadian rights ? Unless the main lines of a foreign
policy were fixed upon beforehand, the Council of Advice would,
in all probability, be a small and irresponsible Cabinet within the
Privy Council, divided against itself, and speaking with uncertain
voice. The agents-general would reflect colonial sentiment upon
the subject before them, and this sentiment is not harmonious
even in one group.
For instance, in the Pacific colonies, New South Wales and
Victoria take somewhat different views of the character of the
French occupation of the New Hebrides. A Monro doctrine
has more attraction for one set of colonists than it has for
another. Again, the affairs of New Guinea are regarded with
far greater interest and solicitude by Queensland than by South
Australia, and the recent occupation of part of this island by
the Germans was viewed with far greater indignation in one
quarter than in another of our Australasian settlements. A
Federal Council in each group may help to define the position
of our colonies with regard to the outside world on questions of
right and sovereignty, but at present there is chaos and disagree-
ment. If the Australasians differ amongst themselves on Aus-
tralasian questions, would they be more unanimous on Canadian,
West Indian, or South African questions ?
The fact is that a foreign policy has never been thrashed out
in the popular assemblies of our colonies. Engaged in the work
of colonisation, and busily employed in increasing their, wealth
and resources, they have scarcely imagined that they have any
foreign policy at all. In the early days of Nova Scotia, Newfound-
land, and New Brunswick, our colonists knew and felt that they
had a foreign policy when they fought in the basin of Annapolis
and along the Cape Breton coasts against the French. But since


the downfall of France as a colonising power, there has been
little to remind them of the stern necessity of war. But it has
been proved, again and again, that colonists have wished to make
the foreign policy of England their own by their numerous offers
of help. In the Boer war the South Australians volunteered
their help to the British Government, just as Canada has proved
her loyalty over and over again in similar cases of danger. The
New South Wales contingent was, however, the most striking
proof of the desire of our colonists to share the dangers, as well
as to participate in the prosperity, of the British Empire.
But we want it to be settled in a Federal Council, or in some
supreme legislative body with a strong executive, that a free passage
via the Suez Canal, the imperial boundaries in the north-west of
India, along the St. Lawrence and the Canadian frontier, and the
inland frontiers of South Africa, will be maintained with the con-
current wish of all British subjects and by means of the united
force of the empire. It will be easily seen, therefore, that a mere
consultative council of advice falls infinitely short of the require-
ments of the case. Such a council can simply be a provisional
one, useful doubtless to advise, but perfectly powerless to fulfil,
or even aid in fulfilment. However good their advice, it might
be overridden by party considerations, either at home or in the
colonies themselves.
IV. Constitutional reforms of a wide and sweeping order being
despaired of by some, it has been deemed advisable to approach
only one side of the Imperial Federation difficulty. Economists,
strategists, geographers, are aware that England’s position, as a
maritime state, and dependent upon foreign supplies, demands
what even the peaceful Cobden claimed for her, viz. an over-
whelming naval force. The briefest examination of the character
of our trade, our exports and imports, the means of communication
and the facilities we possess for the distribution of our wealth and
manufactures, impresses upon us the necessity of uniting with our
colonies upon the subject of naval and military preparation.
Trade, they argue, must be left out of sight for a time, and that
zollverein which was supposed to have been the only possible
bond in the British political system, abandoned. Love of country


and a desire to share in common dangers may make men unite
in warlike operations, although they differ on trade principles.
In America, the ill-assorted customs union does not interfere
with the love for the political union. In Australasia, colonists at
Melbourne and Sydney may differ on trade, and draw a tight
customs cordon along their barriers, but federalise their fleets and
unite in repelling foreign attacks all the same.
Strategy and strategic requirements are all in all to this class of
Imperial Federatlonists, and accordingly lecturers and enthusiasts
like Captain Colomb take us along the highways of the world,
speak of oceanic quadrilaterals, posts of vantage, forts and muni-
tions of war in every part of the globe, and claim most deservedly
from all of us the deepest attention. They would carry the spirit
and tradition of our conquering legions and victorious navy into
every part of the world, and seek for recruits from Newfoundland to
New Zealand. Training ships like the Britannia , military schools
like Sandhurst, should be multiplied over our colonial world,
and depots established at the needful points. Colonial ships are
to fly the imperial ensign, and there is to be no distinction in the
services. The appeal to the martial ardour of Britons, which, it
may always be expected, will be exercised in the cause of peace,
is not likely to be in vain. It has been proved that we have lived
for some time in a position of false security, and that our trade
may pass away from us. Defeat at sea would be an unmeasured
catastrophe and a national ruin. We should be prepared at all
points against an aggressive power like Russia. Captain Colomb
has reminded us that the sea trade of India alone is about equal
to that of Russia, and that the trade of the mother-country has
five times, and that of Australia twenty times, as much interest in
the*security and prosperity of India as they had thirty-five years
ago. Our outlying empire has 400 millions’ worth of goods on
the sea in a year; and is it wise to neglect any precaution, how-
ever costly, to insure this? The sea commerce of Australasia
alone exceeds by tens of millions the sea trade of the United
Kingdom when Nelson triumphed at Trafalgar. Moreover, two-
thirds of our wheat supply comes from abroad; so, if we are not
able to maintain our supremacy at sea, we may be brought face
to face with national starvation. Those who wish to federate our


forces by sea and land have, therefore, a powerful array of facts
and arguments on their side. Although the consummation of
their ideas does not mean a scheme of constitutional union
throughout the empire, it will help a long way towards it.
The same may be said of those who wish to federalise our
Chambers of Commerce and our Post-offices. In each case the
identity of our interests and the advantages of co-operation will
be illustrated. Nothing, perhaps, will tend more to bring about
a common fiscal policy throughout the empire than a closer con-
nection and a more frequent interchange of opinion between the
Chambers of Commerce. The adoption of a universal postage
rate would appeal to another class of people, and be a priceless
boon to the poor emigrants.
A common Emigration Office in London, the ideal of some
social reformers, if it could be arranged without offence to the
Colonial Governments and without pauperising the poorer classes
at home, would be an unmixed advantage in these days of over-
pressure and want. Lord Brabazon has pointed out how terribly
the evils of over-population are weighing upon our state, how
hopeless individual effort is to cope with the task of relief, and
how eagerly any opening in the colonial world is grasped at by
our despairing mechanics and agriculturists.
As subsidiary measures to the great constitutional union per-
haps in store for us in the future, these schemes of co-operation
cannot be too highly valued. The great consummation of im-
perial unity waits upon their success, and if in each case we
obtain a class of public men accustomed to deal with their especial
subjects in a broad and imperial spirit, we shall possess so many
additional nuclei of talent which will find their place at last in
some great Imperial Council or Parliament.
V. Another scheme is to regard the House of Commons still
in the light of an Imperial Parliament, but to bring in a redis-
tribution bill, by which, without increasing their numbers, one-
fourth of the representation would be handed over to the ten
millions of our colonists abroad. The Upper House would
also be recruited largely from the colonies. By this scheme, it
is argued, no great revolutionary or organic change would be


required—simply a transference of seats and a transference of
power.
In the case of the nine parliamentary colonies, the transference
might be effected without a great constitutional wrench; but the
Crown colonies would cause a difficulty. For instance, from
Natal, Jamaica, Ceylon, and Mauritius, etc., the Crown might
claim the right of nominating members for the Imperial Parliament,
and we should have the anomaly of a composite chamber at
Westminster—partly elected, partly nominated. Moreover, India,
a possession sui generis , and standing outside the pale of the
franchise, would claim a voice in these assemblages.
The existence of these two chambers, with express functions
of their own, opens up the question of provincial legislatures in
the United Kingdom. The people of England, Scotland, Ireland,
and Wales, perhaps, might be content with one legislative chamber
for all, or they might cling to the bi-cameral system; or they
might wish in each case for a provincial legislature. It is clear
that in all the contingencies there must be a distinct and organic
remodelling of our Constitution; so that a scheme like that just
given, apparently involving a redistribution bill, in reality involves
in its consequences much more. It is impossible to carry out
any federal ideas in our empire without some great change in
our present Constitution. One question is whether the supreme
Imperial Parliament should consist of one or two chambers.
Considering that in our case, which is different from that of other
federal states, the powers which will be delegated in the first
instance to this Imperial Parliament will be less wide than those
generally conceded to such a body (it is agreed generally that
the control of a fiscal policy throughout the empire should be
excluded at present from the programme, and each autonomous
state allowed to pursue its own rules in this matter), and con-
sidering that the class of questions to be submitted to this Imperial
Parliament, such as the general lines of a native and foreign policy ,
postal arrafigements , defence plans, etc., are not in their own nature
controversial, and do not involve such a complete thrashing out
in party debate as matters relating, for instance, to trade, endow-
ments, education, and such others—it seems advisable to content
ourselves with one supreme council or chamber in our federal


system, with a strong executive at the head. Of its possible con-
stitution more will be suggested later on in this paper. This
single Imperial Chamber seems less likely to disturb our present
political world than a composite assembly made up of members
from our different colonies and chosen in different ways. More-
over, the present bi-cameral system, which is well-known and
popular with us for every reason, will be left as it is. The House
of Lords and the House of Commons will exist constitutionally }
and although dominated by another power called up to adjudicate
upon a large class of imperial subjects, will be still supreme on
the most burning and interesting questions in these islands. If
there is any wounded sensibility or hurt feeling that the ancient
Parliament of England has been degraded from its position and
lowered in its functions, there is the consolation that the Imperial
Council or Assembly itself affords a peculiar and illustrious opening
of its own to all those statesmen who have distinguished them-
selves in the provincial legislature, whether in the Upper or Lower
Houses. The Imperial Council will be the goal of all and the
ambition of all, and admission within its ranks the prize of
politics.
But the very fact that there are reasonable grounds for doubt-
ing whether our supreme Imperial Parliament should consist of
one or two chambers proves to us the enormous difficulty of the
constitutional question involved in schemes of Imperial Feder-
ation.
In close connection with the above scheme, an ingenious and
clever proposal has been suggested by some to secure the co-
operation of the colonists in the defence of the empire. It is
argued that sentimentally federation exists throughout the empire,
and that there is no further need to appeal to patriotism. But
this patriotism must be strengthened and confirmed by identity of
interests in material ways. The question of imperial defence and
the due apportionment of imperial expenditure in this direction
puts patriotism to the test. It seems difficult to ask the colonies
to perform the very first duties of federal states, and provide fixed
sums for vessels, fortifications, strategic railways, and munitions of
war. It would be certainly most profitable and useful if some
scheme could be arranged by which, with the least possible fric-


tion, colonists could contribute their quota on a fair and equit-
able basis.
At present all the colonies come to the English money market
for the loans they require, and pay interest thereon, in some cases
2 per cent., and in every case i per cent., higher than that on
which the Imperial Government raise their loans. If, therefore, the
Imperial Government would in future lend the colonies whatever
money they may require, a saving of at least i per cent, would
be effected. This saving might go into an imperial defe?ice fimd,
to be administered, independently of the action of Parliament, by
a special board sitting in London for imperial defence purposes,
and consisting of representative men from the United Kingdom
and the colonies, who, from their professional knowledge as
officers or skill as financiers, would know best how to apply the
money. Needless to observe, such a body of men would form
a most important element in any future federal council in their
character as administrators of a growing imperial fund.
No extra taxation would accrue either to the tax-payer of Great
Britain or to the tax-payer in the colonies, inasmuch as the latter
w r ould pay no higher rate of interest than they do now; the only
difference being that the saving in interest of x per cent, and
upwards would go into the defence fund instead of into the
pockets of the money-dealers in the city.
A question might be raised as to the security which the Im-
perial Government would have for the loans so made. If the
security which the colonies give is sufficient for the public
creditor, it must surely be ample for the Imperial Government,
who have a deep interest in the colonies, upon all colonial loan
bills.
The public works constructed in colonies by means of these
loans would become, in a sense, imperial public works , and
would, therefore, be available for defensive measures in any part
of the empire. The interest in the loans and public works would
become a common interest throughout the empire, and tend to
federate it financially. The colonies which raise the most money
must, as a matter of course, be the wealthiest, and therefore
require a larger scale of protection for their security and property
than the colonies which borrow less and are consequently not


so rich. Their contribution would be larger in a proportion,
which would recommend itself to all as intrinsically fair.
With twenty years of peace this defence fund would accumulate
money enough to construct a large fleet if necessary; but even
supposing that so long a period of peace could not be reckoned
upon, the saving of interest at 1 per cent, would, as the usual
amount of annual loan raised by the colonies, give in the first
year something like 0,000.
If war were to break out in the first year, the trustees of this
fund would be in a position to raise and pay the interest on
sterling, which sum maybe taken to be about as much
as would be found necessary to expend upon defensive measures
in one year. In the second year a similar operation might be
repeated, and provision made for a sinking fund to pay off, at the
usual rate of say 1 per cent, per annum, the money which would
have to be raised by the trustees of the defence fund, to meet
emergencies.
No constitutional changes would be necessary. All that would
be required would be an Imperial Act empowering Her Majesty’s
Government to guarantee or to make such loans to colonies as
they may require. The interests of present holders of Colonial
Stock would not be damaged, as the value of existing Colonial
Stock would be greatly enhanced by such an arrangement, and
amply compensate the public creditor.
Further, there are bolder and more adventurous spirits, who have
drawn up the outline of a complete constitutional union of the
United Kingdom and the nine parliamentary colonies— Canada ,
Newfoundland , The Cape Colony, New South Wales, Victoria,
Queensland, South Australia, Tasmania, New Zealand. These
nine colonies are distinguished from (a) colonies with representative
legislatures and Crown executives, as Natal, Western Australia,
British Guiana, and the Leeward Islands, (p) Crown colonies
governed by officials under the control of Her Majesty’s Secre-
tary of State for the Colonies, as Ceylon, Mauritius, Hong Kong ,
Labuan, and Fiji.
For confederation purposes the first nine are regarded as on
the same footing as the United Kingdom, so far as their internal
policy it concerned. But on all great national and fundamental


subjects, on the supreme questions of peace and war, foreign
policy, diplomacy, and consular agencies, etc., colonists are looked
upon as aliens.
It is proposed at once to remedy this by taking the statistical
returns of the area, population, revenue of these nine colonies,
and giving them representation in an Imperial Parliament of
two chambers for the whole empire. Such a Parliament would
correspond to the Senate and House of Representatives of
the United States, whilst the local Parliaments would be in the
position of the separate State Legislatures of the Republic.
Another parallel is found in the present German Empire*, which
besides its Imperial Council and Diet, has local legislatures in
each of the monarchies, principalities, and free cities which form
the empire.
By such an arrangement a certain class of subjects would be
withdrawn from the control of the present Parliament of the
United Kingdom, and handed over to the Supreme Parliament.
These would be—
i. Revenues and expenditure for extra local purposes.
2. Defensive forces of the monarchy.
3. Intercolonial, home, and foreign trade.
4. External and foreign communication, postal, tele-
graphic, etc.
5. External and foreign affairs generally.
6. Coinage, currency, moneys of account, weights and
measures.
7. External and maritime affairs and courts of appeal.
8, Naturalization.
9. National lands.
10. Census.
11. National and other public debts.
In order to find out the proper scale of representation in an
Imperial Parliament, it is necessary to consult such an authority
as the Colonial Office list and the statistical abstracts for the
colonies by the Board of Trade.


Area in Square
Miles.
Population.
Revenue.
Newfoundland .
Canada. . .
Cape Colony .
New South Wales
Queensland . .
Victoria . . .
South Australia .
Tasmania .
New Zealand . .
40,200
3.470,392
222,308
310,700
668,224
87,884
900,000
26,205
104,000
161,374
4,324,810
720,984
751,468
302,090
945,703
304,515
115,705
552,507
£
273,949
6,669,023
3, 2 99> OI 7
6,470,341
2,383,859
5,934,240
2,060,139
562,189
3,871,267
5,829,913
8,179,156
In addition to these statistical facts, it would be interesting to
know the form of the Government scale of representation, and the
kind of franchise already existing in these parliamentary colonies.
In all of them the bi-cameral system has been adhered to. The
Canadian dominion has a Senate and a House of Commons over
Canada . . .
72 . .
. . . 181
Legislative Council.
Legislative Assembly.
Newfoundland .
. . 21 . .
• • • 33
New South Wales
• 55 • •
... 113
Victoria . . .
42
... 86
New Zealand .
25 . .
••• 95
South Australia
24
... S 2
Tasmania . .
. 16 . .
... 32
Queensland. .
• ~ 34 • •
• • • 55
The Cape Colony
. 22
... 74
Canadian dominion has a Senate and a House of Commons over
and above the local legislatures in the various provinces. The
Canadian Privy Council is a reproduction of the English proto-
type. The Government of the Dominion is more complex and
therefore more interesting a study to us than the rest of the
colonies. Here the federal principle seems to have been grafted
upon our monarchical institution with the greatest success. The
idea of subordinate and provincial legislatures sounds novel to
English ears, but it has been elaborated with the greatest care
for ancient precedent, procedure, and even political phraseology.
Leaving the local legislatures of the Dominion out of consider-
ation, the following are the Colonial Legislatures :
The Senate. House of Commons.


If we take the whole total of our colonial population, as given
above, in the nine parliamentary colonies, we shall find that the
scale of representation is, to speak approximately, one member of
the upper chamber to every 35,000 of the population, and one
member of the lower chamber to every 15,000 of the popula-
tion.
In a scheme of imperial representation in a Council or a Par-
liament at home, it would appear that the colonists, as they
number about 8,000,000, in comparison with the 35,000,000 of
these islands, would be entitled to a fractional representation of
the whole.
The adjustment of a proper scale of representation throughout
the empire, together with the question of a uniform franchise, are
not the smallest difficulties in detail which an Imperial Federal
tionist would have to meet and solve. He might also have to
consider not only the population of a particular colony, but its
revenue and indebtedness , and the general question of its solvency.
Roughly speaking, however, the class of federationists to whom
we are now referring will claim the numerical basis as the best,
and demand, therefore, for the whole mass of colonists a pro-
portionate share in the government of the whole empire.
Judge Haliburton’s words, that the colonies “should be integral
parts of one great whole, and as counties of Great Britain,” are
accepted literally, and upon the strength of this their scheme of
Constitutional Union is elaborated. It is argued that the great
changes in the Constitution of the United Kingdom which took
place in 1707, 1800, and 1832, are a convincing proof that the
three estates of the realm are not mere bigoted adherents to exist-
ing conditions when reasonable alterations are required.
With much of the above we may be inclined to agree, but the
worst of this precise and rather mathematical scheme is, that it
ignores some difficulties in the way. For instance, it takes it for
granted that the Federal Parliament will be entitled to legislate
upon intercolonial, home, and foreign trade. But it is upon this
question that Imperial Federationists may wreck their reputation,
if they do not approach it cautiously and discreetly, and with the
utmost diffidence of success. Some will tell us that a customs
union must be left out of sight altogether for the present, and


that we must federate upon every conceivable subject before we
allude to a fiscal policy.
Again, there is no hint given as to the method of representation
which should be pursued in Crown colonies, or in the case of
India. Nor are there any suggestions thrown out how the mem-
bers of the Imperial Parliament are to be elected, whether by
direct popular vote , or by election through elective bodies. However,
as a complete scheme, which reveals to us some facts and lays
before us a distinct and uncompromising modus operandi, it de-
serves notice.
There are a certain number of persons who cannot look upon
this question of Imperial Federation through any but fiscal
spectacles. It becomes a question of Free Trade or Protection
throughout the empire in their judgment. If we make Imperial
Federation dependent upon the adoption of a uniform fiscal
policy throughout the empire, our cause is nearly hopeless. In
course of time, British colonists may be Free Traders by con-
viction; but the question is so intricate, and so many interests
are involved, that we cannot hope that it will be so just yet. As
above hinted, the federation of the British colonies may exist for
all practical purposes of defence alongside of a diversity of method
in raising revenue. New South Wales and Victoria , the champions
respectively of Free Trade and Protection , must always be united,
nevertheless, on defence measures and a foreign policy. It is
difficult, moreover, to define what a Free-trading community
really is; and the dispute going on at the present moment in
the New South Wales Parliament on the measure of Sir Patrick
Jennings, for the imposition of a five per cent, ad valorem duty
on imports to the colony, proves that, after all, our only colony
which pretends to be Free-trading is hesitating in its belief.
In South Africa, the interests of the colonists of Natal and the
Cape Colony must always be identical, however tight the customs
cordon is drawn between them. The truth is, that young com-
munities have, in comparison with old manufacturing countries,
few ways of raising revenue. It has been said that, when Eng-
land parted with Crowrf control over her colonies, and handed
over the Crown lands, she ought to have insisted upon the
principles of Free Trade. But this insistance upon a principle of


finance would probably have brought great friction with it, and
checked colonial progress. As it has happened, the sale of
Crown lands, although by no means unaccompanied with evil
results and monopolist principles, has formed a valuable asset
upon which the colony might draw in each case. It is no good
speculating as to what value these Crown lands may have been as
an opening for emigrants, or as a means of guiding or controlling
a colonial fiscal policy. They are gone irrevocably from imperial
control in all the parliamentary colonies.
The West Indian group illustrates to us the most puzzling
difficulties of an imperial fiscal policy. These beautiful and
productive islands are brought to the verge of ruin by the free
importation into England of bounty-fed sugar from France,
Germany, Austria, and elsewhere. Their purchasing power is gone,
and in their distress they are turning to Canada and to the United
States for some reciprocity treaty which will help them out of
their difficulties. Against such a treaty the Imperial Government
raises objections.
In their distress, the planters ask for a countervailing duty at
English ports, which will put them upon an equality with the
beet-sugar manufacturers of other countries. But they are un-
able to gain even this point. The answer is, that the British
public have become accustomed to cheap sugar, and are quite
willing to let the foreigner tax himself with bounties to give
them what they want. But this is not all the case. Against it
they have to place the prospect of a ruined industry in the
West Indies, Natal, Fiji, Queensland, and elsewhere, and a cor-
responding diminution of purchasing power in our colonies,
which is really more essential to us in the long run than that
of foreign countries.
The general and fully acknowledged truth is, that the British
colonies are far more necessary to British traders than they were,
and all trade legislation should proceed upon this assumption.
Moreover, the British Empire is so wide and varied, that every
possible product of the earth is grown within its limits, and there-
fore it should be self-sustaining with regard to the rest of the
world. Such articles as wine, tobacco, and sugar should come
exclusively from our colonies, with proper skill and care on the


part of the growers. Possibly imperial legislation should foster
young and struggling industries.
With our control over Indian, Malayan, and other native
markets, in which Australasians are now taking so deep an interest,
we possess exceptional conditions for impressing our views upon
the colonists with reference to a broad and statesmanlike policy.
But although fiscal union is an admirable phrase, it is a dangerous
one, and in a united British Empire it will be, in all probability,
the last consummation of all. The Latin monetary system was
supposed to be the precursor of greater unity amongst the Latin
races than has actually followed. In our case, the advantages of
a customs union throughout the empire may be too highly rated
in its power to consolidate politically.
We must leave trade and trade regulations to the last, recollect-
ing how we lost our first colonial empire by tampering with them.
Meanwhile we must cultivate and nurse that sentiment which
lives in imperial gatherings such as the meeting at Montreal, the
London Exhibitions, so poetically described in the living poet’s
Tyrtean strain:—
“Britain’s myriad voices call.
Sons, be welded, one and all,
Into an imperial whole —
One life, one flag, one fleet, one throne.”
Such was the note which Longfellow struck in his “ Building of
the Ship ” of State —
“ Thou, too, sail on, O Ship of State ;
Sail on, O Union, strong and great! ”
and we know how powerful sentiment was in welding the Disunited
States into the United States. Fiscal union was not the first union
here.
In the midst of all these schemes and propositions, it is difficult
to find the germ of our Federal Council. Yet if Imperial Federa-
tion is to come about, some such body must be called into
existence; and to be real, this body must be representative and
include a powerful executive. Small councils called into existence
with certain powers to carry out certain specific objects, would
not suffice for the wants of the empire. We are not seeking for


a provisional, but for a permanent, arrangement. Nor does it
seem possible to turn by a stroke of the pen, either the House of
Lords or Commons into an Imperial Assembly which would com-
mand the sympathy and co-operation of the colonial world. Such
an assembly would still be of a composite and puzzling character,
charged with double functions and a doubtful mission, now and
then distracted by imperial, and now and then by provincial
questions. The Irish difficulties alone might suffice to render it
powerless, if party rivalries again handed over the balance of
power to a small and turbulent minority clamouring for the dis-
integration of the empire.
What we want is an independent body, to whom the manage-
ment of that large and important class of questions known and
recognised as the purely imperial, as opposed to provincial, may
be handed over. It should be constitutional in its origin, repre-
sentative in its character, and supreme in its decisions. Now there
is only one such body in the United Kingdom which may answer
all these requirements, and this is the Privy Council. The origin
of this council lies far back in English history. The King’s “Con-
tinual,” i.e. Permanent, Council exercised enormous powers.
Besides advising the Crown in all ordinary matters, it claimed a
right of judicial interference. Sir Harris Nicolas observes, in his
“Proceedings and Ordinances of the Privy Council,” preface,
p. 11, that “ there was scarcely a department of State which was
not, in a greater or less degree, subject to its immediate control.
No rank was too exalted or too humble to be exempt from its
vigilance, nor any matter too insignificant for its interference.”
In the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council we recognise a
survival of their powers, albeit much diminished and checked,
which is recognised in every law court throughout the empire.
If there be a dispute between theologians in South Africa, or a
quarrel between merchants in Bombay, the -final appeal on the
question of justice lies with this learned and august relic of the
King’s Permanent Council.
In course of lime we know that the Privy Council was sup-
planted by the Cabinet Council, of which the latter is in reality
a committee, and little by little the two bodies became distinct.
Clarendon, in Charles IL’s reign, tried to revive the power of the


Privy Council, as a set off against the popular assembly, and
proposed a subdivision of it into four committees, the beginning,
in reality, of our system of public departments; but these very
committees proved the downfall of the whole body, as the public
business became concentrated in few hands. Macaulay has
clearly put the difference between the Cabinet and the Privy
Council. He says: “ Few things in our history are more curious
than the origin and growth of the power now possessed by the
Cabinet. From an early period the kings of England had been
assisted by a Privy Council, to which the law assigned many im-
portant functions and duties. During several centuries this body
deliberated on the gravest and most delicate affairs. But by
degrees its character changed. It became too large for despatch
and secrecy. The rank of Privy Councillor was often bestowed
as an honorary distinction on persons to whom nothing was con-
fided, and whose opinion was never asked. The sovereign, on
the most important occasions, resorted for advice to a small
knot of leading ministers, whose name of Cabinet was derived
from the circumstance of their deliberations being conducted in
an inner room or cabinet of the council apartments in the palace.
The advantages and disadvantages of this course were clearly
pointed out by Bacon, with his usual judgment and sagacity ; but
it was not till after the Restoration that the interior Council began
to attract general notice. During many years old-fashioned poli-
ticians continued to regard the Cabinet as an unconstitutional
and dangerous board.”
It will be gathered, therefore, that if the Privy Council, as at
present constituted, have little constitutional power, they may
claim more on the grounds of their historical position. In one
sense they represented the outside view of politics as opposed to
the king’s arbitrary will, who preferred to deal with a few of his
councillors instead of all of them together in full conclave. In
former days the Cabinet was regarded as dangerous, because it
claimed for itself powers which belonged to many others besides
themselves, and posed, therefore, in the attitude of a despotic
clique.
The Privy Council as at present constituted is one of the most
representative bodies in the world. Its members are chosen from all


sides, irrespective of party considerations, and no sovereign would
dream of impairing its catholicity. So far, therefore, the body is
constitutional. Its purity and honesty are unimpeachable, the
members being selected upon the ground of their merits, and not
by means of any unworthy electioneering devices. If a member
is disgraced by his own crimes, his name is struck off the list of
Privy Councillors by the Queen’s command. As this has rarely
happened, it proves that there has been little occasion for this
necessary censorship. If we should look for a reproduction of
such an august body as that of the Roman Senate in its best days,
we might find it in the 200 or 300 members who compose Her
Majesty’s Privy Council. If we glance through the names, we
shall be impressed with the fact that the names are the best that
we can think of in every department of State and every profession
of life. The old charge that the body was cumbrous, and con-
sisted of useless nominees, is no longer to be alleged with justice
now.
Cannot, therefore, the ancient functions of this body be re-
vived ? Cannot it rise, phoenix-like, from its ashes, and become
again, under altered conditions and in a constitutional and
representative manner, a supreme council, “ deliberating on the
gravest and most delicate affairs ” ? In the colonial world, and
in fact wherever the British authority extends, it appears as the
incarnation of imperial justice. Why not enlarge its sphere, and
give it control, not over the courts of law, but over the main
question of an imperial law ?
But it might be asked, How would this council be constituted,
and how would its members be elected ? It has been already
pointed out that there is little fault to be found with the selection
of Privy Councillors in the United Kingdom itself. They are
really representative men, not exactly placed there by a popular
vote, but in the majority of cases finding their way there indirectly
through the popular vote. Their elevation to the inner sanctum
of constitutional privilege is a corollary of their popular success.
In the colonies and India the case is different. If the Privy
Council is taken as the germ of a Federal Council, or as a Federal
Council in itself, colonists will claim representation in some
clear and definite way. They will ask that just as in the mother-


country, so in the colonies, a seat in the Supreme Council of the
empire shall be the result of popular success and of political
elevation in the colonial world. Earl Grey has countenanced
the idea of the admission of colonists and colonial politicians
within the magic circle of the Privy Council by suggesting that
the agents-general should be selected and made a committee or
department, as it were, of the whole body, with consultative
powers. But there was no reason to suppose that these agents-
general would be anything more than a consultative body of a
provisional character, doing mainly what the governors in our
respective colonies were accustomed to do, i.e. inform our public
secretaries upon the opinions and attitudes of the various colonial
Governments.
But if a Federal Council grew out of the Privy Council, and
was invested with especial powers of its own, it would be necessary
to select colonists upon some scale of representation. The nine
parliamentary colonies, in proportion to their wealth, population,
and political responsibilities, would demand their share on the
Council as a matter of right, if the administrative unity of the
empire was to be attained. How far would this demand as a
matter of right, and as a claim for just representation, be in
harmony with the wishes of the sovereign ?
Considering the loyalty of colonists to the throne, which has
been displayed on many and notable occasions, there could
scarcely be any objection to their admission. Colonists have
been men whom royalty has recently been delighted to honour.
The task of selection from amongst so many loyal candidates
would be difficult, but it would become simplified, and introduce
a truly representative principle, if the cabinet ministers of our
parliamentary colonies were regarded as ex officio members of the
Supreme Federal Council.
The Queen’s Privy Council existing in Canada, the appointment
of such colonists as the Right Hon. W. B. Dailey, in New South
Wales, and the general favour with which royalty has regarded
the British colonies, are all facts tending to prove that legislative
ability of a high order is acknowledged fully at home. If South
Africa and Australasia were confederated, we should probably
see Privy Councillors there as well as in Canada. The materials,


therefore, of a Supreme Council of the empire are at hand in
profusion : —•
i. In the nucleus of the present Privy Council.
2. In the Canadian, and possibly a South African and Aus-
tralasian Privy Council.
3. In the ranks of Colonial Governors , ex-Governors, Agents -
General, and Ministers.
4. In the Defence and Loan Board of the empire, as described
above.
5. In the heads of a possible Imperial Emigration Bureau
Federalised Post-office, Federalised Chambers of Commerce, and
all other distinguished and representative men acquainted with
the wants of the empire.
Such an assembly would be extremely powerful, both from its
constitution and from the eminence of its members. Would it
be too powerful ? Could there be found any sufficient constitu-
tional check upon it ? The Americans have elaborated a system
of checks upon their powerful federal system. The written con-
stitution of the United States is subject to amendment at any
time, by consent of two-thirds of both representative bodies; or
by a convention specially called by the legislatures of two-thirds
of the several States for the purpose.
The supreme judicial authority which forms the final court of
appeal on constitutional and legal questions, consists of a chief
justice and eight judges. As the wit of man has been equal to
devising checks upon a federal form of government in one in-
stance, so may it succeed in another. In our own case the Crown
has a constitutional veto, and the Crown therefore might be the
guardian of our imperial liberties, acting through some such
judicial committee as that of the United States. There seem to
be at any rate two or three distinct advantages about a federal
farm of government, and a federal council for the British Empire.
(1) They would protect us from the danger of the one-man tyranny
to which open democracies and veiled democracies alike are liable.
(2) The Council would be strong, and representative of all interests.
It would devise and carry out a foreign policy better than our
present party government. (3) A confederated empire of Great
Britain and her dependencies would, after the manner of all


federations, be content to organise and consolidate the resources
at hand. Probably it would seek to internationalise law, and
carry out the ideas of the Geneva arbitration.
In conclusion, it may be worth while to call up the form of our
political “Utopia,” as foreshadowed in the above remarks, which
are necessarily inadequate, brief, and naturally too general to deal
with the great issues involved.
At the head of our empire will be the Ancient Monarchy of
England, the fountain of honour and justice, acting through its
responsible Ministers and Parliaments upon multitudinous races in
all parts of the world. Next in authority, and bound to the
throne by the closest ties, will be the Federal Council of the
empire, sitting at Westminster, the old historic seat of Govern-
ment, and dealing with high matters of State. In this supreme
council, however formed, whether it will be an enlarged Privy
Council, changing its character from a close to an open chamber;
or whether it will be a perfectly new institution , consisting of
members elected by elective bodies, there must be fair and equitable
representation of all the parts of our Colonial and Indian Empire.
Not only will the best of British statesmen at home, but their
colonial compeers, full of world-wide experience and imperial
sympathies, the feudatory princes of India, and the rajahs of
the East, find a place suitable to their rank and importance. A
United Empire will follow upon our United Kingdom. Abroad
Her Majesty will be represented personally by her Governors-
General and Governors, as she is now. There is no reason why
viceregal appointments and colonial governorships should dis-
appear before a Federal Council. They will remain as visible
links of our empire. If the occupiers of these exalted posts
could be chosen from the members of the royal family, so much
more lustre and glory for the ancient monarchy of England.
Instead of presidents we should have princes, who might hold
delegated powers, and represent in themselves the fountain of
honour and justice. Such powers delegated to governors are no
new thing in our colonial history. The Governor of Maryland
used to have power to grant patents of nobility; the “Baronets
of Scotland and Nova Scotia” (1621) were an especial Colonial
Order created by the sovereign. In the whole of our colonial


history the throne has been regarded as the fountain of honour;
and when a dispute recently arose in the Canadian Dominion,
whether the Lieutenant-Governor of the Provinces or the Go-
vernor-General of the Dominion should appoint Queen’s Counsel,
it was decided that the selection should rest with the former, as
the more direct representative of the Crown.
But what is still more to the point, we have in Canadian
history an instance of the delegation to a governor of the
queen’s power of conferring honour. In 1879 the Marquis of
Lome was authorised to hold an investiture of the “ Most
distinguished Order of St. Michael and St, George,” and six
Canadian Privy Councillors were created Commanders of the
Order.
The monarchy lives in the hearts of all emigrants, and is
cherished with affectionate interest. During the Rebellion an
asylum was offered to King Charles by loyalists in Nova Scotia
and Newfoundland, and had a refugee English king landed on
the shores of North America, and lived there, he might have
influenced the history of the New World. Ruined monarchs
have often looked across the seas from the Old to the New
World, and dreamt of transatlantic realms. Even Sertorius
dreamt of an Elysium in the western waves. Had Napoleon
escaped to America, a new France might have arisen under new
auspices and with a new destiny. Portugal might certainly have
lived again in the magnificent Empire of Brazil had she known
the true secret of successful colonisation, which is to give colo-
nists liberal institutions and the chances of free development.
But Portuguese kings never thought that a constitutional
monarchy could exist in the colonies, and Portugal remains an
effete and nerveless power. English sovereigns have recognised
the rights of colonists to free Ic-cal development ever since it
was stipulated in Queen Elizabeth’s patent to Sir Walter Raleigh
that his comrades in adventure should have all the rights and
privileges of Englishmen at home.
Colonists have repaid the sovereigns of England with loyalty,
and never more so than at the present time. In Newfoundland,
the most ancient of our colonies, the fact is recorded with loyal
pride tlrat a sovereign of England was once a Newfoundland


magistrate. His Royal Highness Prince William Henry, after-
wards King William IV., when in the British navy, commanded
a ship at that station, and was during his commission a justice
of the peace and surrogate. There can be no doubt that if any
of our queen’s descendants ever became, not simply a magistrate,
but a “governor” in our colonies, he would be welcomed with
open arms and with chivalrous devotion. In a scheme of
Imperial Federation suited to our wants we need the monarchical
principle with its cohesive power. Without it we shall drift away
into w r eak and disorganized atoms. It gives us that central point
to which all society looks, even in the most advanced republics.
When it disappears
“it dies not alone ; but
Like a gulf doth draw
What’s near it, into it: it is a massy wheel,
Fixed on the summit of the highest mount,
To whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things
Are mortised and adjoined.”
The future is in gremio Join's, and we cannot see what will be
the end of our “ Second Colonial Empire ”; but this we know,
that we alone amongst the nations of the earth have elaborated
a system of government in which the exercise of the greatest
local independence and provincial autonomy is consistent with
loyalty to a throne and fealty to a sovereign. There are grada-
tions, but not chasms, in the Imperial Government; and against
chasm, ruin, and disintegration we as a nation must fight.
“ For government, though high, and low, and lower,
Put into parts, doth keep in one consent ;
Congreeing in a full and natural close,
Like music. ... I this infer,
That many things, having full reference
To one consent, may work contrariously;
As many arrows, loosed several ways,
Fly to one mark ;
As many several ways meet in one town ;
As many fresh streams run in one self sea ;
As many lines close in the dial’s centre;
So may a thousand actions, once afoot,
End in one purpose, and be all well borne
Without defeat.”
—King Henry V. , Act 1., sc. 2.


No. II
By J. C. Fitzgerald,
of Wellington, New Zealand,
(“ Causa non prcemia.”)
IN the prospectus calling for the best essay on the subject of
Imperial Federation, which was published by the London
Chamber of Commerce, it is stated that “the object of the
Chamber is to obtain the best essay formulating a practical plan
for the Federation of the colonies and the mother-country,” and
that “ the essay should only treat with practical suggestions, in-
cluding such alterations of the Constitution and other parts of the
Government of the empire, and its constituent portions [as may
be] adaptable to parliamentary and representative institutions.”
The difficulties involved in any attempt to construct or amend
institutions of Government are never fully realized until it is
endeavoured to express in the form of a statute the means by
which the desired object is to be accomplished. For this reason,
and not in the idle presumption that my powers are equal to the
task, especially in the brief time allowed to competitors in distant
colonies, I have attempted to draft the skeleton of an Act which
may serve as a rough sketch or outline of a plan for effecting the
federation desired, and which may be expanded by more skilful
hands so as to cover all the various matters for which provision
will doubtless be required.
Some notes explanatory or in defence of the several clauses of
the proposed Act will more conveniently follow the text; but a
few remarks on the need of a federation of some sort of the
British Empire may appropriately precede it.


Two primary questions underlie all others in relation to the
subject: First, is it desirable that the unity of the empire should
be maintained ? Secondly, is it believed that, under the existing
relations of its component parts, that unity will be maintained ?
As to the first question, many will be inclined to answer that
there can be no difference of opinion; that the answer must of
course be in the affirmative. And yet I well remember a speech
delivered at a colonial dinner in London more than twenty-five
years ago, by a noble lord, who had been but shortly before the
Colonial Minister, in which his lordship described the natural
and necessary development of Colonial Government through
three stages, as that of parental government in infancy, greatei
freedom in adolescence, and, finally, entire independence. Ido
not, of course, recall the actual expressions, but it is well-known
that, in propounding that doctrine, his lordship gave utterance
to opinions which were held by no small number of the public
men and parties in England at the time. But public opinion has
much changed since then. The instinct of great empire has
revived in England, co-ordinately with the tendency displayed in
Europe, in the direction of consolidating in large states races
having common language, parentage, traditions, interests, and
sympathies. But as the call for this essay assumes that the unity
of the empire is desirable, and confines us to practical suggestions
for its maintenance, further argument on this point would be
superfluous.
On the second question —Is it likely that that unity will be
permanent under existing conditions? —more is to be said.
Before attempting an answer, it will be well to give a short
notice of the present relations of Great Britain to her colonies
in respect to their comparative populations, revenues, and trade.
The following table, although perhaps not absolutely accurate,
or presenting figures derived from the most recent returns, is
sufficiently near the truth to support the arguments for which
it is here used; and any error will be found to lie in its giving
too great preponderance to British over colonial numbers; a
preponderance which the rapid increase of the colonies in popula-
tion, as compared with that of the United Kingdom, must tend
year by year to diminish.,


44
Imperial Federation.
The following table shows approximately the relative population
and importance of the United Kingdom and its dependencies.
Population.
Revenue.
Public Debt.
Exports and
Imports.
United Kingdom .
North American
Colonies .
Australsn. Colonies
West Indian Colo-
nies, including
Guiana, etc. . .
African Colonies .
Other Possessions.
Asiatic Possessions
36,400,000
4.650.000
3.500.000
1,610,000
2,350,000
3 7 5 3 000
267,000,000
£
88.000.
8,000,000
22.000.
2.050.000
6.250.000
755, 000
83.000.
£
740.400.000
51.000.
105,000,000
2,500,000
23.000.
630,000
167.800.000
£
685.985.000
42,650, OOO
1 12,000,000
19,050,000
X7,260,000
3,000,000
196.075.000
Total . .
315,885,000
210,055,000
1,090,330,000
1,076,020,000
The proportion which the population, revenue, ettc., of the de-
pendencies bear to those of the United Kingdom is as follows : —
Population.
Revenue.
Public Debt.
Exports and
Imports.
United Kingdom .
lOO'OO
100-00
ioo-oo
ioo-oo
North American
Colonies . . .
1277
9-09
6-88
6-21
Australsn. Colonies
9-61
25'
14-18
16-32
West Indian Colo-
nies, including
Guiana, etc. . ,
4‘4
2 ‘33
*33
277
African Colonies ,
6'45
7-1
3 - i
2-5I
Other Possessions.
1-03
•85
•08
'43
Asiatic Possessions
733‘5 r
94 - 32
22 ‘66
28-58
Total . .
76777
138-69
47-23
56-82
It appears, then, that for every hundred inhabitants of the
United Kingdom,
there are seven hundred and
sixty
dwelling
in her dependencies; that the combined revenues of these de
pendencies are greater by nearly one half than those of the
mother-country; and that their trade amounts to more than one


Population.
Revenue.
Debt.
Trade.
The United Kingdom
The Colonies
36,400,000
8,150,000
£
88.000.
30.000.
£
740.000.
156.000.
£
685.000.
154.000.
*
That is to say, their population
is nearly one-fourth, their revenue
half, and their public debt to nearly one half respectively, of the
trade and debt of the parent State.
Many of these dependencies, however, are not colonies, for
many of them contain populations of foreign races, as especially
is the case with India; and such dependencies are not subject to
the same condition of expansion, by immigration and settlement,
as those which are distinctly British in their origin and character.
Hence it will be more pertinent to the present inquiry to confine
out attention to the latter.
Taking, then, the two groups of colonies, those of British
North America and Australasia, we gather the following facts: —
That is to say, their population is nearly one-fourth, their revenue
more than one-third, their debt nearly one-fifth, and their trade
considerably more than one-fifth, of those of the United Kingdom.
From the same figures it would appear that the amount of trade
per man of the population is—
£ s. d.
For the United Kingdom about . 18 16 10
For the Colonies . . . 18 19 6
indicating so far an average equality in the wealth and prosperity
of the two, but a slight advantage in favour of the colonies.
Again, if we calculate from the above figures the rate of taxation
per head, and the annual charge per head of the public debt, and
assume the difference between those two to be the rate per head
of the burden of maintaining the government and defence of the
respective countries, we have the following result


Taxation.
Debt.* Government.
The United Kingdom
The Colonies
£ s. d.
284
3 IS 7
d. P s - d.
12 2 1 16 2
IS 3 3 0 4
It thus appears that not only is the taxation of these colonies con-
siderably heavier per head than that of the United Kingdom, but
that, after deducting the debt charges, which are also heavier, the
remainder, which represents the cost of the government and of de-
fence, approaches an amount double that of the mother-country
per head of the population.
I would again say that it is not pretended that the above figures
are those resulting from the most accurate or recent statistics;
but it is believed that they sufficiently approach correct results
to establish the relative conditions of Great Britain and what may
be called her specially English colonies, in those peculiarities
which bear on the problem propounded for solution.
Bearing these facts in mind, we return to the question whether
the unity of the empire, under the existing relations between its
component parts, is likely to be maintained.
Looking at the proportionate rate of increase in the population
of the mother-country and her colonies, and at the enormous
tracts of land in the latter still unoccupied, and being rapidly
peopled, it would seem to call for no prophetic power to predict
that, even within the lifetime of persons now in their infancy, at all
events within a period which is but a span in the life of a nation,
the colonies, even those of our own race only, will equal, if not
surpass, the United Kingdom in population, wealth, and import-
ance. The United States had a population of three millions
at the time of their revolt a century ago; their population has
increased fifteen-fold since that time; but they had all Europe
as a reservoir from which to replenish their population. On
the other hand, the masses of Europe are more than ever in
need of room for, expansion, and the facilities for locomotion
* The interest on the British debt is taken at 3 per cent., and on the colonial
debt at 4 per cent, on the capital.


by land and water are immeasurably increased and still increas-
ing. It would therefore be hard to speculate on the limit to
the possible expansion of the colonies in the not very distant
future.
Can it then be reasonably expected that the present position
of the supreme legislative authority, vested in the mother-country
alone, will be permanently palatable to the other communities of
the empire ? Does any future destiny present itself as possible
for the British Empire but, on the one hand, a federation upon
fair and equitable grounds; or, on the other, its final disrup-
tion ?
What causes may operate to bring about the latter it is impos-
sible to foresee; one at least suggests itself to every mind. It is
true that the power of internal taxation of the colonies by the
British Parliament has been long abandoned, nor is it likely that
the insane policy which resulted in the loss of the American
colonies will ever be repeated; but it is not impossible that dis-
content might be excited by hostile tariffs and vexatious restric-
tions on trade. Again, the power of imperial legislation in
colonial affairs is rarely exercised, and then, not in restraint,
but generally at the instance, of the colony affected. In such
matters it is not likely that any dangerous strain on the bond of
union will be experienced. But in the question, of all others
imperial, involving the policy of the Imperial Government in the
direction of peace or war, the colonies have an interest at least
as great as, if not greater, than the mother-country itself. The
outlying portions of a great and widely distributed empire are
not the parts least likely to be attacked. It was by successful
assault on the colonies of France that her power was crippled
in the eighteenth century. It was by the revolt of her colonies
that Spain irrecoverably lost her position as one of the first States
of Europe; and the vast increase of her colonies and possessions
in other parts of the world enabled England to maintain her
position after the revolt of the American provinces.
Can it then be believed that, as the colonies approach nearer
to the mother-country, or, it may be exceed it, in wealth and popu-
lation, they will submit, or ought to submit, to the dictation by
one portion only of the empire, on questions in which they have


an equality, if not a preponderance, of interest; or that they should
continue to have no voice in the determination of questions which
may involve them in tremendous sacrifices—no voice in the main-
tenance in or dismissal from power of the statesmen to whose
hands their destinies are committed ? Or can there be, it may well
be asked, a more favourable time than the present for making such
changes in the constitutional system of the empire as prudent
foresight may suggest —a time when the loyalty of the colonies
is deep and strong, and no questions have yet arisen to disturb
the harmony of their relations with their parent state? In any
practical scheme for the federation of the empire, two con-
siderations must be kept in view; First, the change should be
as little as possible; Secondly, that it may be acceptable to
the parties interested, any federation must be voluntary, not
forced. It may indeed be doubted whether any federation at
all is possible under existing conditions; whether the colonies
may not say—“We are as well off as we can be under present
arrangements, what should we get by any change ? ” The feeling
of nationality is a sentiment, and in certain circumstances one
of the most powerful which inspires human action. But such a
feeling—a nationality controlling action, superseding self-interest,
involving the sacrifice of lower to higher objects—is a plant of
slow growth which may be killed by forcing. The history of the
United States has taught us how slow is the process by which it
acquires the strength of a dominant passion in the sentiments of
a people. How great was the danger, even under the guidance
of the great statesmen who have from time to time moulded the
institutions and trained the thought of America, of the disruption
of that great nation into a community of isolated and jealous
States! Nor was it without a terrible convulsion that the final destiny
of America was determined. The partial success, up to the present
time, of the endeavour to form a federal union of the Australasian
colonies, and the threatened separation of one colony from the
Dominion of Canada, are pregnant warnings of the futility of all
endeavours to force a nascent sentiment beyond the period of
growth at which it has arrived. Better were it that existing ties
should remain for a time to bear the normal strain to which they
are exposed, than that they should be subjected to rash experi-


ment designed to elicit their strength, but which may possibly
fracture their fibres.
It is, then, with full recognition of the difficulty, it may be the
impossibility, of the task, and in the belief that, if possible, the
experiment can only succeed by the adoption of a plan which may
win general consent, and above all to test the possibility of con-
verting an abstract proposal into a concrete form, that I have
endeavoured to sketch out in the following outline an Act for
effecting a federal union of the component parts of the British
Empire.
An Act for the Reform of the Imperial Parliament , and for
providing for the Representation of the Colonies therein.
WHEREAS the colonies of Her Majesty in various parts of
the world have in these late years greatly increased in population,
wealth, and importance, and continue to increase, not only by their
natural and internal progress, but also by the emigration and re-
sort thereto and the settlement therein of great numbers of Her
Majesty’s subjects of Great Britain and Ireland ; and whereas , to
the end that the feeling of loyalty to Her Majesty’s throne and
person, and of attachment to their mother-country and the free
government thereof, which have ever been displayed by the in-
habitants of the colonies, may be maintained and fostered, it is
right and expedient that they should be enabled to participate in
the legislative government of the empire by their representatives
in the Imperial Parliament; and so consolidate in a closer political
union Her Majesty’s subjects in all parts of Her dominions; and
whereas the Imperial Parliament has ever had, has, and of right
ought to have, full and supreme power and authority to make laws
binding upon Her Majesty’s subjects in all parts of her dominions
in all matters touching the general weal of the empire and the
maintenance and defence of the same, and it is right and expe-
dient that representatives of the colonies should have seats in
both houses of the Imperial Parliament, and that the Constitution
of the said houses should be amended for such purpose in the
manner in this Act provided ;
Be it therefore enacted, etc.


1. The short title of this Act is the Imperial Federation Act.
2. This Act shall come into operation on the . . day of . .
18 . . ; and a copy shall, immediately on the passing thereof,
be sent to the Governor of each colony, who shall cause it to
be forthwith published therein.
Part I.
Of the House of Lords.
3. The House of Lords shall consist only of the Lords of
Parliament elected or appointed as by this Act provided.
4. The Peers of the United Kingdom shall elect .... of their
number 3 and the Peers so elected shall be Lords of Par-
liament.
5. Such elections shall be conducted in the same manner as that
heretofore in force for the election of the Representative
Peers for Scotland and Ireland.
6. It shall be lawful for Her Majesty from time to time, by her
royal letters patent, to appoint such persons as she thinks fit
to be Lords of Parliament to represent the colonies in the
House of Lords 3 but so that not more than .... persons
so appointed shall have seats therein at any one time. Such
Lords shall hold their seats on the same conditions and for
the same period as other Lords of Parliament, and shall,
whilst holding such seats, rank as Barons in the order of
their patents.
7. Except as otherwise herein provided, every Lord of Parliament
shall vacate his seat after ten years from the day of his election
or appointment, but may be re-elected or re-appointed there-
to as the case may be.
8. Upon any vacancy of the seat of an elected lord by death,
resignation, or lapse of time, a fresh election shall be held
by the Peers of the country in whose representatives the
vacancy has occurred.
9. The Sons of the Queen being of full age, and every Peer hold-
ing or having held the office of Lord High Chancellor of
England, and every Lord of Parliament holding or having
held office as one of Her Majesty’s Cabinet Ministers, shall be


a Lord of Parliament, and shall hold his seat for life, unless
he resigns the same.
10. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to affect in any
manner the royal prerogative to create privileges or titles of
rank or honour.
Part 11.
Of the House of Commons.
11. The House of Commons shall consist of ... . members;
and the numbers of members to be returned for the several
parts of the United Kingdom and for the several colonies
respectively shall be those set down in the First Schedule.
12. The members for Great Britain and Ireland shall, until other-
wise provided, be returned for the several electoral districts
described in the Second Schedule; in the manner and by the
constituencies for the time being in force for the election of
Members of Parliament.
13. The members for each colony shall be returned in the manner
provided by any Act in that behalf to be passed by the legis-
lature of the colony ; or, until any such Act is passed, then in
the manner provided by orders of the Governor in Council.
14. Any such Act or Order in Council may be amended from time
to time, as the authority making the same thinks fit; but no
such amending Act or Order in Council shall affect the seat of
any member for the time being, until otherwise vacated.
15. Every member of a colony shall, upon a dissolution of Par-
liament, take his seat as a member for the same constituency
in the new Parliament, until the return of the writ certifying
the return of a new member in his place.
16. The writ for the election of any member for a colony shall be
addressed to and shall be returned by the Governor.
17. Any petition against the return of a member for a colony
shall be addressed to the Governor, who shall cause the
same to be heard and determined in the colony, in the
manner provided by any Act in that behalf to be passed by
the legislature thereof; or, if no such Act is in force, then
in such manner as may be prescribed by Order of the


Governor in Council; and the Governor shall withhold the
return of the writ until such matter is determined.
Part 111.
Of the Contribution of Colonies to Imperial Expenditure,
And whereas it is of ancient usage and right that no tax or
tallage should be imposed on Her Majesty’s subjects, except
by their consent thereto by their representatives in Parlia-
ment, but that they should, of their free will and pleasure,
give and grant to Her Majesty supplies for the maintenance
of her royal dignity and government and for the defence of
her dominions by land and sea;
And whereas power has from time to time been delegated by
the Imperial Parliament to various colonies to make laws,
by legislatures representing the inhabitants thereof, for the
peace, order, and good government of the same, and to raise
revenues for the maintenance of Her Majesty’s Government
therein, and for the defence and protection thereof; and it
is right and expedient that Her Majesty’s subjects inhabiting
the distant colonies of her empire should contribute towards
the maintenance and defence of the same, and that the
Parliament of each colony should of its free will give and
grant to Her Majesty for the charges of the Imperial Govern-
ment, and for the defence of her empire by land and sea,
such supplies as may be found to be fair and reasonable,
regard being had to the comparative wealth and population
of the United Kingdom and of each colony severally, and
regard being also had to the cost of maintaining Her
Majesty’s Government in each such colony and of the de-
fence of the same, which are borne by the inhabitants
thereof,
Be it therefore enacted, etc.
It shall be lawful for Her Majesty to recommend to the
Parliament of each colony in which a representative legis-
lature is established, to appropriate so much of the revenues
thereof as may be found to be fair and reasonable as the


contribution of such colony to the purposes above set forth,
regard being had as aforesaid.
19, The Governor of each such colony shall lay such Her
Majesty’s recommendation before the Parliament of the
colony; and all supplies which may be appropriated in
accordance therewith shall be paid from time to time into
Her Majesty’s exchequer, and shall form part of the Con-
solidated Fund of the United Kingdom.
20. It shall be lawful for Her Majesty from time to time to
appoint a Commissioner or Commissioners to inquire, in
concert with the Government of each such colony, and to
report to Her Majesty the amount of the contribution which
may be found to be fair and reasonable, regard being had as
aforesaid, which should be paid by each such colony to the
exchequer.
21. It shall be lawful for any such colony, instead of paying
any sums by way of such contribution, to agree with Her
Majesty to maintain, at its own cost and charge, for the
service of Her Majesty, such forces by land and sea, with
the proper armament and equipment thereof, as may be set
forth in any such agreement.
22. It shall not be lawful for any representative of a colony in
the Imperial Parliament to vote, or otherwise take part in
any question before the same, whereby any tax, rate, or
charge may be imposed upon the inhabitants of the United
Kingdom.
23. Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to alter or in any way to
affect the power or right which Her Majesty or the Imperiaj
Parliament have heretofore had and exercised, and ought
to have and exercise, for the government of the colonies,
possessions, and dependencies of the empire not possessing
representative institutions, and not being represented in the
Imperial Parliament.
24. In every case unprovided by this Act, and in all matters
relating to Parliament and to the members of either House
thereof, and to its and their powers, rights, privileges, and
immunities, all laws, orders, rules, customs, and usages now
in force in respect to the Parliament of the United Kingdom,


shall apply and be in force in respect to the Imperial Parlia-
ment, except in so far as they are contrary to or inconsistent
with the provisions of this Act.
Schedule I.
Countries sending Representatives to Parliament.
Number of Members.
England,
Scotland.
Ireland .
Etc., etc., naming the
several Colonies
Schedule 11.
Description of the Several Electoral Districts in England,
Scotland, and Ireland.
The Number of Members
for each Electoral District.
The Preamble. —Preambles have gone out of fashion in modern
bill drafting. Although inoperative as a part of the statute, not
the less were they formerly thought of value for the purpose of
setting forth the objects it proposed to effect, or the abuses it
was designed to remedy, and still more the spirit in which it was
intended that the law should be administered. In drafting a bill,
therefore, for effecting a great change in the national polity, I
have ventured to follow earlier rather than later examples.
Sections 3-B.—lt may be objected that the reform of the
House of Lords is foreign to the subject under consideration;
and it is only after realizing to their full extent the conditions
involved in federation, that we are led to the conclusion that an
alteration in the constitution of the House of Lords is essential
to a complete solution of the problem. For a primary condition
of a successful and permanent consolidation of the empire must
be that its citizens, all those at least who are possessed of the full


rights of citizenship, wheresoever domiciled, shall feel that they
are on an equality in the enjoyment of political power and poli-
tical privileges—an equality even more real than that which was
expressed in the Civis Romanies sum , of the world-wide empire
of the past. At the same time, when we consider the extent to
which the question of a reform in the House of Lords has be-
come the subject of public discussion, indicating a growing dis-
satisfaction with its present constitution and attitude as a branch
of the legislature, and that some change in its form appears
inevitable at no very distant period,—it seems to be a fitting oc-
casion, when dealing with the constitution of the representative
chamber, to incorporate into the scheme such an alteration in
that of the Upper House, as may at once deal with the demand
for its improvement made on other grounds, and at the same
time carry into complete effect the special object which we are
now advocating.
In the proposals described in the draft bill, it has been en-
deavoured to introduce as little change as possible, to leave the
state and privileges of the nobility untouched, except only as
regards their legislative functions; and even in this respect to
place the whole of the peerage upon the same footing as that
upon which a part of it now stands.
The scheme of representative peers for Scotland was adopted
at the Union by mutual treaty between the two kingdoms, in order
that the peerage of England might not be swamped in the House
of Lords by the proportionately more numerous peerage of the
smaller and poorer State. The same reason suggested the adop-
tion of the same machinery in the Irish union. But surely, had
it not been for the necessity of avoiding offence to the jealousies
and susceptibilities of the parties to those treaties, it might well
have been asked, as it is well now to ask, why should the peerage
of one part of the United Kingdom sit in the House of Lords in
right of their peerage, and of other parts only by representatives ?
That all should equally exercise their legislative functions by re-
presentatives of their order, is surely the more reasonable and
logical conclusion. The plan proposed of limiting the Lords of
Parliament to those who may be likely to take an interest in its
proceedings, excluding those who indicate by habitual absence


the small value they place on their privileges, and of limiting
the time for which a member shall hold his seat, and thus pro-
viding the means of introducing new blood into the chamber,
would not only raise the character of the House of Lords as a
legislative body, but would open the door to the creation of an
order of peers holding their seats and titles for a limited time,
with a view to incorporating members having large interest in and
extensive acquaintance with the various colonies, without at the
same time unduly enlarging the number of the hereditary nobility.
A few years ago the right of the Crown to create peers for life,
having seats in the House of Lords, was successfully opposed by
that body; and an Act to bestow such power on the Crown, in
favour of a limited number of the judges, failed to pass the Lower
House. It was admitted by the peers, who passed the measure,
that, for a specific object, it was politic that the constitution of
the Upper House, as the hereditary counsellors of the Crown,
should be modified. The present proposal, therefore, is not so
much a constitutional innovation as the extension of a principle
already admitted. Given that some change in the constitution
of the House of Lords is demanded, and is impending, and that
the object is one of sufficient importance to justify the change,
the proposed reform may be admitted to be as slight an inter-
ference with the constitutional status and privileges of the peerage
as will at once provide for that object and correct an abuse
which is universally recognised.
It may be questioned whether the members of the Upper
House representing the colonies should be appointed by the
Crown instead of being chosen, as other Lords of Parliament, by
the peers. In favour of the latter, it may be said that the elective
system being adopted, it should be uniform. But, on the other
hand, as the proposed lords are not to be of the order of the
hereditary peerage, there is no reason why the latter should con-
trol their election. The creation of peers is a prerogative of the
Crown, as the fountain of honour; and in the creation, as it
were, of a new order of peerage, for a limited period and for a
special purpose, it is more in accordance with ancient constitutional
usage that the nomination should rest with Her Majesty. There
is nothing in the proposed scheme to limit the power of the


Crown to elevate a colonist to the peerage; but the object has
been to make no further innovation in the existing order of things
than is sufficient to accomplish the end desired, and that is to
render the imperial legislative federation as complete as possible
by introducing into the Upper House men who have distinguished
themselves in the government of the colonies, or by their special
interest in and acquaintance with colonial matters, and who have
acquired a recognised social position both in the colonies and in
the mother-country, fully fitting them to be associated with the
peers in the work of legislation.
I am far from saying that this proposal is essential to any
scheme of federation; but I submit that it would not only be
a graceful concession to the colonies, but would be of great
practical utility; it would induce the House of Lords to take a
greater, better informed, and more beneficial interest in the con-
cerns of the outlying portions of the empire, whose welfare so
strongly re-acts upon that of the mother-country.
Section 9. —Under the present system of party government it is
indispensable that there should be representatives of the Govern-
ment in the Upper as well as the Lower Chamber. Under a wholly
elective constitution for the former, it might possibly happen that
the most eminent leaders of a party might for a time be excluded
from the House of Lords, and much embarrassment might arise
in the construction of a Government. It is proposed to overcome
this difficulty by providing that peers who have filled high office
as Ministers of the Crown should continue to hold their seats for
life, nor is this an undue concession to men who, in addition to
the high rank in which they have been placed by birth, have
achieved personal distinction by services to their country in the
councils of the sovereign. That the sons of the royal blood
should hold a similar position will not, I think, raise an objection
so long as a crown and a peerage remain integral parts of our
Constitution,
Of the House of Commons, Sections 11-17. —The operation
of the eleventh section will depend on the numbers with which
the blanks will be filled, and on the details specified in the
schedules. It may be presumed to be undesirable that the
number of members of the House of Commons should be


materially increased. The introduction, therefore, of a fair
proportion of members for the colonies will involve a reduc-
tion in the number of representatives for Great Britain and
Ireland, and a redistribution of seats will be unavoidable. Many
important questions will arise in filling in the figures in the first
schedule. For example :Is representation to be confined to
colonies possessing representative institutions ? or is it to embrace
the Crown colonies ? In the case of the North American colo-
nies, shall its number of members be allotted to each province ? or
shall the Dominion be treated as a whole, and its Parliament be
deft to determine how the numbers allotted to the whole shall be
divided amongst the several provinces ? In the latter case, might
not the larger provinces grasp an undue share of the representa-
tion ? Again, if any Crown colonies or groups of Crown colonies
are to return members, are the latter to be returned by the exist-
ing nominated Governments, or is a representative system to be
introduced into each ? And if such a system is possible for the
election of members of the Imperial Legislature, why not for
members of the local Parliaments ? And, above all, is the vast
empire of India to have a voice in the senate which rules its des-
tinies ? or are its inhabitants, manyfold more numerous than the
population of the rest of the empire, to be unheard in the;
Supreme Council? All these questions will sooner or laterr
demand answers. In the meantime, it is sufficient to say that if,,
in striving to effect a radical and desirable change, embodying
a distinct principle, we are deterred by finding that the proposedl
ameliorations will not embrace all cases, no reform can ever bej
effected. A man does not go naked because he fails to find!
clothes which exactly fit him.
The question seems to resolve itself into this : Is it the colonies?
we desire should be represented in the Federal Parliament, or the?
people of the colonies ? In the latter case we must rememberr
that the whole of the inhabitants are, in no colony, directly re-
presented, because nowhere does universal or manhood suffragee
completely obtain. It is the constituent body in whom the rightt
of election is vested in trust for the whole; and where the suf-
frage is most contracted, we still consider all the population to bee
represented in the local Parliaments; and with the same consti-i-


tuency the elected members would represent the colony in the
federal councils. But where the local legislature is partly or
wholly nominated by the Crown, or the officers of the Crown in
the colony, can we say that the people are in the same sense
represented in their legislatures, or, that if it were entrusted to
the latter to determine in what mode members should be returned
to the Imperial Parliament, the colonies would be represented in
the same sense as where the right of popular election existed ? If
then no members are to be returned from the Crown colonies, the
colonial representations must be confined to those of the colonies
of British North America, Australasia, the Cape of Good Hope,
and perhaps one or two others. Were that so, the scheme would
hardly be said to deserve the name of a federation of the whole
empire.
It must, again, be borne in mind that it is no part of a feder-
ation scheme to alter the existing forms of local governments, or
provide that the population in the various dependencies of the
empire shall be granted electoral privileges which they may,
under their present conditions, be incapable of using with any
benefit to themselves. We can but apply the existing political
organization of each community to the possible scheme for
federation—to a general plan which will include all the colonies
which are at present conformable to its requirements, leaving
those still incapable of its application to the work of time, when,
by natural growth in social and political development, they too
may be brought into the common fold.
Nor must it be forgotten that the genius of the British Consti-
tution has ever regarded the members of the legislature, not as
delegates of parts, but as representatives of the whole—as trustees
of the interests equally of their immediate constituents as of
those who have no direct voice in their election. The object of
federation is not to enunciate new principles in the Constitution,
but to adapt to new circumstance those which have the sanction
of ancient usage j to expand rather than to innovate. That
members for the colonies will assume the attitude of delegates to
a greater degree than is the case with those of England, is not
unlikely; but they can hardly do so more distinctly than do the
Irish members at present.


I have not attempted to fill in the names of the colonies
which should return members to the House of Commons. To do
so will demand much consideration and a very wide acquaintance
with the circumstances of the various colonies and dependencies
of the empire. It may be deemed right that those of our own
race, and whose inhabitants are trained in the use of political
privileges, should at all events be more fully represented than
those under less favourable conditions; but it would be a matter
for much regret if it were found necessary altogether to exclude
many which do not as yet enjoy representative institutions, or
in which, as in the West Indian Islands, large interests are in-
volved. At the same time it is idle to ignore the difficulties
which present themselves; not the least arising from the con-
sideration that where the members of the local legislatures are
nominated wholly by the Crown, or the officers of the Crown in
the colonies, it is not impossible that they might become close
boroughs in the hands of the Government of the day, giving it,
in the case of a general election, a dangerously large influence
in the House of Commons,
Of India, and how far it would be right or wise to incor.
porate it into the scheme of general federation, I can only speak
with the utmost diffidence. It would be impossible not to regret
that the voice of so many millions of men under our rule should
be wholly silent in the assembly in which questions affecting their
happiness or misery are discussed and determined; but I must
leave it to others, more competent than I humbly feel myself to
be, to deal with the complications of that great question, and to
forecast the issues of any policy which may be adopted for the
improvement of the government of India. One feeling only I
cannot but express : a conviction that the present relation of the
races in India cannot be other than transitional; that unless we
succeed in identifying their interests more closely with our own,
the British Empire in India cannot be permanently maintained.
But whatever may be the conclusion arrived at, as to the
extent to which, or the manner in which, dependencies largely
peopled by alien races may be incorporated into the general scheme
of federation, such a difficulty should not be permitted to estop
the great object in view, or debar the rising kindred communities


of our own brotherhood from taking their due share in moulding
the destinies of the empire of which they are proud to form a
part. If the object be right and just, and, looking to the future,
necessary, let not those who are fitted to share its advantages be
deprived of the privilege because others are at present incapable
of enjoying them.
Sections 13-17. —It is proposed to leave to each colony full
liberty to make such provision for returning its members as it
may think most effectual for securing its fair representation in the
Imperial Parliament, not only because such a plan will probably
be most acceptable to the colonies, but because it will relieve the
authors of the Federation Act from the necessity of dealing with
a mass of details on local matters, with which they would find
themselves very imperfectly able to deal. It cannot be doubted
that the English colonies at all events would make the requisite
provisions far more readily than the present Parliament; and the
clause providing for this being done by Order in Council is only
necessary as a temporary expedient, in case the local Parliament
should have failed to pass the necessary measure in time. The
suggestion that disputed elections should be settled in the colony
is made to provide against the cost and delay which must involve
a reference of such matters to England; and the provision that a
sitting member should, after a dissolution of Parliament, retain his
seat until the return of his successor, is only another expedient
to remedy the evils which might otherwise arise and are insepa-
rable from any plan involving the representation in one Parliament
of communities scattered over the whole surface of the globe.
The second schedule will provide for the representation of the
United Kingdom, the number of whose members is proposed to be
considerably diminished, in order to make room for those of the
colonies without materially increasing the strength of the House.
This will involve a redistribution of the electoral districts,
and would probably be most conveniently effected, at all events
at the outset, by uniting existing districts, and, so far as possible,
leaving the electoral boundaries unchanged. It would be im-
possible to regard such an arrangement as permanent, for the
whole question may be largely affected by coming events. We
cannot ignore the possible consequences of the vital question now


before the country as to the establishment of a local government!
for Ireland, nor the utterances of public men of the most opposite
parties, indicating that the time is not very remote when a measuree
may be passed establishing such local legislatures in England ancd
Scotland, as well as in Ireland.
Without entering on a discussion of matters which are withoutt
the range of our present inquiry, it is clear that in any schemee
for a Federal Parliament, such possibilities of the future must bte
taken into account. The conversion of the present Parliament
of Great Britain into what would practically be a Federal Parliav-
ment in its relations with subordinate local legislatures in Engp
land, Scotland, and Ireland, would pave the way to larger fede-
ration to embrace the whole empire. There is one point im
which questions which will then demand discussion and settle-
ment should influence any practical scheme for federation alt
present: it is as to the division of power between the federal and
local bodies, especially as regards the electoral law; whether
the powers herein proposed to be delegated to the colonial
legislatures of determining the machinery by which the members
for the colonies shall be elected to the Imperial Parliament
should be similarly committed to the provincial Parliaments
if established in the United Kingdom. A uniformity in the
electoral law for the same assembly is desirable but not essential.
The mode of election involves not only such important points as
the areas of electoral districts and the principles on which they
should be formed—whether, for example, on a rigid rule of equality
of population, or with regard to old-established county and muni-
cipal divisions, —but also the still more important question of the
franchise. The franchise in any colony, is, though similar, not
identical with that in any other or in the United Kingdom ; and
yet there would be great difficulty in working any measure
for a Federal Parliament which did not accept the electoral law in
each colony as the basis for a federal constituency. And yet if
this power is to be vested in the colonial Parliaments, it can hardly
be denied to the provincial Parliaments of the United Kingdom
should they come into existence. Nor has there been such an
absolute uniformity in the franchise in different parts of the
United Kingdom as to present any formidable obstacle to the


acceptance of the principle that the settlement of the electoral
law in all parts of the empire should be delegated to the subor-
dinate legislatures. But if, on the other hand, the Imperial
Parliament retains that power in its own hands as regards the
United Kingdom, it would be right to exclude colonial members
from voting on any question affecting the electoral laws for that
portion of the empire.
Finance , Sections 18-22.—The most difficult part of the subject
to deal with is that relating to finance. It is not to be denied
that there is a growing feeling, on the one hand, that the colonies
ought to contribute somewhat towards the defence of the empire,
the benefits of which they share, —a duty which, if not generally
recognised, seems to have been admitted by some leading
colonists; whilst, on the other hand, whatever feeling of distrust
in or antagonism to any scheme of federation may exist on the
part of the colonies, arises out of the fact that representation will
carry with it the power of taxation, and that it may open the door
to the imposition of burdens by the Imperial Legislature which
the colonists may be unwilling and possibly unable to bear.
To bring these apparently opposing ideas into harmony will
probably be the key to any successful solution of the problem of
federation.
That in time of war the English colonies would strain every
nerve to resist all assaults by the enemies of their country is
universally felt, and needs no further proof. From all attacks by
land forces, except on the southern portions of the dominion of
Canada, and the northern frontier of India, should unhappily any
calamity embroil us in war with the United States or Russia, the
colonies are comparatively, if not perfectly, secure. Their safety
consists in the difficulties of transporting by sea any force of
sufficient strength to reduce and permanently hold any maritime
dependencies. The principal colonial ports and harbours being
in, or being rapidly placed in, a state of defence, no great danger
is to be apprehended from attack by sea, except by fleets of
sufficient strength to have attracted the attention of the British
navy. The principal question, then, appears to be that of the
command of the ocean. But the fact that the British navy is
constructed, equipped, and manned at the sole cost of the British


taxpayer is that which gives point to the arguments of those wiho
maintain that the colonies, which rely so largely on the navy ffor
their safety, ought to bear some share of its cost; and were theire
no other side to the question, it would be difficult not to adrmit
the claim. But there is another side.
When a deputation of Australian colonists once waited upcon
the late Sir John Packington, who was then the First Lord of tlhe
Admiralty, to request that Australia should be constituted a
separate naval station —it having been up to that time included
in the South American Pacific station—the late Mr. Wentwortth,
of Sydney, the spokesman on the occasion, laid great stress con
the fact that the banks, the shipping, even the gold exported, were
almost all the property of English owners. The Minister very
naively but courteously replied, that he had expected that tlhe
deputation had come to advocate colonial interests, but if they
only rested their claim on those of England, he did not perceive
that it was any particular business of theirs; England could look
after her own interests. And there was much truth in the reply.
The colonies are to an enormous extent the property of the
English people. Their railways and their public works have been
constructed mainly by English money; shares in banks and
in financial and other companies are held to a great extent in
England; and British capital has been sunk to a vast amount in
mortgages on colonial land, and expended in its reclamation and
cultivation. The whole of the colonial public debts have been
borrowed in the English money market. The interest on these
vast investments is paid by the colonists, and swells the income
of residents in England, where it is subject to taxation, and thus
the colonies do substantially, although indirectly, contribute to
the imperial exchequer and the charges which it bears. I have
shown above that the relative wealth of the inhabitants of Great
Britain and her specially English colonies, per head of the popu-
lation, so far as it is indicated by the export and import trade, is
nearly on an equality, and that the taxation in the colonies, per
head, is considerably the heavier of the two. Any fair estimate,
therefore, of the contribution which ought to be paid by the
colonies towards imperial expenditure can be arrived at only by
a careful investigation of all the elements which should be taken


into account, especially that of the actual contributions of the
colonies at present. So far as a superficial observation of the facts
can guide us, it seems far from improbable that it may turn out
that the colonies are now paying their full share of the cost of the
government and defence of the empire.
In dealing with this, the most critical part of the subject, it
would be surely wise that any Act should set forth, as is attempted
in the draft given above, in the form of a preamble, a declaration
of the constitutional doctrine now generally accepted as to the
relations between the Crown and its subjects in respect of taxation.
This was the course taken by Lord Chatham in the bill which
he introduced into the House of Lords in the vain endeavour to
heal the breach between the mother-country and her colonies in
America ; and no more fitting occasion can occur for an authorita-
tive declaration of the same principles than in an Act intended
to bring the colonies into new and closer relations to the mother-
country.
It will no doubt be urged that by the introduction of colonial
representatives into the Imperial Parliament, the right of taxation
follows, and may be exercised to any extent without violating
the principles laid down in the preamble. That might be
admitted if applied to an empire in which all taxation were
decreed by the central authority, all its proceeds flowed into one
exchequer, out of which were paid the whole cost of government
and defence in all the communities of which the empire was
composed. But it is idle to discuss conditions which are beyond
the range of practical legislation. Our task is not to construct
a paper constitution of theoretic symmetry, but to deal with
existing elements, and combine them if possible so as to pro-
duce the desired result; and it may be broadly stated that no
federation of the component parts of the empire is within the
range of what is proposed, which does not recognise the full
independence of the Colonial Parliaments in the taxation of
the communities in which they exist, and does not absolutely
disavow the intention, and even the constitutional power, of the
Imperial Parliament to invade their exclusive authority. With-
out this we may be fully persuaded no federation will ever take
place, and were any attempt made to force it, the lesson of the


revolt of the American States would have been taught in
vain.
Nor can it be hoped that any federation will be successfully
accomplished except by a voluntary acceptance of its terms by
the public opinion of the colonists. It cannot be said that there
is as yet any strong public feeling in the colonies on the subject,
or any distinct perception on their part of definite advantage to
be gained by it. Such a feeling must, as was said above, grow
in the course of time and under circumstances favourable to its
development. But under any circumstances we cannot hope tlhat
it will be acceptable unless it results from mutual negotiation.
In the cases of Scotland and Ireland, the union was brought
about by treaty. England, Scotland, and Ireland were thiree
separate realms, although under one crown. Hence in each erase
a distinct treaty was entered into by the respective Governmemts,
whose terms were incorporated into Acts passed by the respecttive
Parliaments, setting forth the conditions on which the union vwas
agreed to be established. The relations of the colony to Ithe
mother-country are different from those of which I have been
speaking. The Parliament of the colony never had an inde-
pendent existence. It is the creation of the Imperial Par-
liament, having no powers but those delegated to it by its
author. Nevertheless, in the public feeling and sentiment it has
an individuality as strong as the old legislatures of Scotland and
Ireland, The sentiment has grown with usage, and cannot be
ignored without danger. To these local assemblies the people
look for all the practical legislation which deals with the interests
and needs of society, with the protection of life and property,
the administration of the law, the settlement of the lands, the
development of their country. It is their inquest of the nation
for the correction of abuses and the guardianship of rights. It
is to the colony what the Imperial Parliament can never be.
Hence it is not to be expected that any federation will be
accepted which proposes to remove, or may tend to the removal
of, powers once delegated to and enjoyed by them to a distant
and to them far less responsible authority. They must be satis-
fied that the integrity of the local legislatures will remain un-
impaired. They must be taught to realize that federation means


something else; that it means the power of influencing by their
representatives the policy of the empire at large, which, although
at ordinary times unfelt, may at any moment precipitate them
into a situation involving great sacrifices and much calamity.
The moral effect of such a federation on the colonies would be
immeasurably beneficial, enlarging the circle of their political
interests, awaking and satisfying that instinct which is latent in
all great and energetic races —the love of great empire and the
pride of forming a part of it. But if, in endeavouring to evoke
that underlying sentiment, the equally potent feeling of loyalty to
local institutions is offended, the experiment of federation must
fail.
But it may be asked whether, in case it is found that a direct
money contribution from the colonies is fairly payable, it is likely
to be paid ? The answer may be found in another question : By
what method is it most likely to be paid? By taxes imposed
by the Imperial Parliament, or by revenue raised by the local
legislatures? Were the colonies unrepresented in the Supreme
Council, the experiment tried in the American provinces in
the last century would afford a conclusive reply. But even,
when so represented, it may be assumed as a basis of any
settlement, that the colonies would not consent to any restriction
on the power which has been delegated to them, and which they
have so long enjoyed, of taxing themselves only through their
local assemblies. And that they would do so need not be
doubted. What stronger contrast between the two systems can
be displayed than that shown by the conduct of the American
colonies in the war with France, and that which they exhibited
within a few years after in their struggle with England, volun-
tarily undertaking greater burdens in the imperial cause in the
one case, than they would accept as a forced imposition in the
other ?
The New South Wales contingent to the Egyptian campaign
was not a momentary ebullition of patriotic ardour; it was the
outcome of the sentiment of the people, and may be taken as
a fair indication of the response which would never be wanting
on the part of the English colonies to any reasonable appeal
made to their instinct of nationality. Nor is that sentiment


feebler now than it was shown to be by the colonial contributions
to the Patriotic Fund during the Russian war; nor can it be
otherwise than strengthened by the sense of more complete
identification with the interests and fortunes of the mother-
country which would spring from the consciousness of sharing
her responsibilities by taking part in her councils.
But if on the one hand the Imperial Parliament foregoes its
right to tax the colonies for imperial purposes, on the other the
colonial representatives must be excluded —as has been provided
in the draft bill —from taking any part in questions involving the
taxation of the mother-country.
A few words may be said on the executive relations between
the central and local governments. The points of contact may
be limited to three; first, the appointment of the Governor by
the Crown; secondly, the power of the Crown to veto Acts of
the Colonial Parliament; and thirdly, the revision of decisions
of the supreme courts of the colony by the Judicial Committee of
the Privy Council. In none of these has any general dissatis-
faction found expression in the colonies; in none therefore is
there any call for change.
Except in the Crown colonies, the political relations of a
Governor to the popular assembly are the same as those of the
Queen to Parliament. The Governor is supposed to be guided
by instructions from the Colonial Office, and thus he is indirectly
responsible to the Imperial Parliament. But the Colonial Office
has no longer a policy which it endeavours to carry out in any
particular colony, at all events in matters which affect the in-
terests of the colonists. The days of great colonial pro-consuls
are of the past ; Governors’ despatches are now for the most part
narratives of events, and Colonial Ministers’ replies I'ttle more than
criticisms of their contents. And so it should Except with
those who are in love with the name rather than the reality of
a republic, there is no demand for any change in the existing
system. In times of war, indeed, or of internal disturbance, as
in New Zealand formerly, and at the Cape frequently, questions
have arisen, and may no doubt again arise, as to the employment
of the British army and the expense attending its operations.
But it is not easy to see how any alteration in the constitutional


pDOsition would get rid of the difficulties which have arisen from
tlhis cause. With that exception, matters of imperial concern,
which are within the personal control of the Governors, have
mever in recent times interfered with the interests of the colonists,
o)r created any conflict between his relations to the Crown and to
tlhe colonial government. But apart from his active duties, the
hrigh social standing of the Governor has an appreciable effect on
tlhe feeling of loyalty which exists in the colonies towards the
nnother-country, or at all events on the expression of that feeling;
amd hence the need of great care in the selection of men to fill
tlhe office. But of this the Home Government has now for a long
tiime perceived the importance, and very unpopular Governors
aire not often heard of.
The veto of the Crown on Acts of the Imperial Parliament has
fcbr two centuries disappeared from the Constitution as a personal
prerogative of the sovereign. It exists as regards the colonies,
mominally as an act of the Crown, really of the Secretary of State
fcbr the Colonies; but its exercise has fallen into disuse as regards
allmost all local matters. It is only put in force when the statute
itt affects is inconsistent with Acts of the Imperial Parliament, or
wvhen the colonial legislature has inadvertently exceeded its legal
poowers. No complaints have been made of the abuse of this
prerogative, and therefore change is unnecessary.
Still less is any feeling of opposition or jealousy awakened by
the appeal to the Privy Council. Its obvious utility seems to be
recognised, of infusing into the administration of the law through-
out the whole empire a community of spirit and uniformity in the
principles of interpretation.
What may be called a new institution in the practical relations
between the governments of the mother-country and her colonies
has been, it may be said, rather developed than created in the last
few years in the offices of Agents-General resident in London,
holding virtually the same position as ambassadors from foreign
states, and representing the opinions of the colonies to the Home
Government more fully and effectually, viva voce , than can be done
through the medium of letters. That the recognition of their
position by the Government has been of some utility, both to the
colonies gnd the mother-country, cannot be doubted- But still it


is a position of courtesy, not of right; although their office is a
closer bond of union between the colonies and the parent state
than previously existed, yet their influence is too indirect. They
represent their respective Governments, and the latter represent
the people. Representatives of the colonies in Parliament would
not only more directly express the feelings of their fellow-colonists,
but they would be in a position of power. In such questions, for
example, as those at present occupying the attention of the colonial
world —the North American fisheries, the deportation of convicts
to the Pacific, the occupation of the islands of the Pacific by
European powers—in all such questions the voice of the colonies
heard directly in the Houses of Parliament, extorting information
directly from the Ministers, and pressing the interests of the
colonies on the attention of the Government and the public by
speeches and motions, would have a weight which can hardly be
exerted by conferences and conversations in the Minister’s room.
In one way, indeed, it may be said that the institution of political
agencies is incompatible with that federation which is sought to be
obtained; for the latter aims at a complete political unity, whilst
the existence of agents or ambassadors implies a separate auto-
nomy on the part of the states thus represented.
Again, it was thought a few years ago that the bonds between
the mother-country and the colonies might be somewhat strength-
ened by the distribution of honours and titles to distinguished
colonists. The wisdom of the scheme may be doubted. Titles
and decorations, even without the substantial power and pecu-
niary rewards with which in ancient times they were associated,
and of which they were but the outward symbols, to a certain
extent doubtless captivate the minds of the multitude. But the
creation of a separate order of a lower class than that which would
be bestowed on eminent men in Great Britain must tend rather to
distinguish than to identify the relative merits of men in different
parts of the empire. Colonists receive decorations for colonial
services which they would never have acquired had their career
lain in England, and the title and the star fall to men far inferior
in merit and ability to numbers in the home-country and other
colonies, of far greater pretension to public honours than those on
whom they are bestowed, If it be desirable to prolong the fashion


(of distributing these decorations, at least let them be dispensed
with regard to some standard of merit common to all subjects of
tthe Crown, instead of being bestowed, as at present is often the
(case, to equalize the favours to different colonies, or different
parties in a colony, with little respect to the merit of the indi-
widual whom the chance of colonial politics may have placed for
a time in a leading position. The enlargements of the Orders of
St. Michael and St. George, and its utilization as an order to be
tbestowed on leading colonists, was rather an appeal to the snob
tbish than a reward to the loyal feelings of colonists, and wilt
rrather retard than help all that is valuable in the idea of Imperial
In conclusion, the main principles which have been kept in
wiew in this essay may be briefly stated as follows :
i. That the incorporation of the outlying communities of the
empire into its legislative system is desirable at present, and, if
tlhe unity of the empire is to be maintained, will be indispensable
im the fast approaching future.
2. That such incorporation should be as complete as possible,
amd should therefore embrace both Houses of Parliament.
3. That no further constitutional change should be made than is
mecessary to effect the object in view.
4. That all such change should be made in the direction of,
amd so as to be consistent with, alterations which are now de-
nnanded on grounds wholly independent of federation, and are
liikely to be made in the existing machinery of the Constitution;
siuch as a reform in the House of Lords, and the creation of
smbordinate Parliaments in several parts of the United Kingdom.
5. That the Imperial Parliament as proposed to be reformed
slhould be regarded, not as a newly created legislature, but as the
amcient Parliament of the British nation as handed down from the
pjast, extended on the old lines so as to embrace the extended area
off the nation.
6. That the right of self-taxation which has been conferred on
thie colonies should be maintained inviolate, and that their contri-
biutions to the imperial expenditure should be left to their free
spirit of loyalty. That there is no reason to doubt that they will
litberally respond to any demands which are shown to be fairly due


from them for the maintenance of the common empire, of which
they will, under a federal legislature, more than ever feel that they
are a part.
7. That any scheme of federation should be at once applied
to the English colonies in America and Australasia which enjoy
representative institutions; and to the other dependencies of the
empire so soon and to such an extent as may be compatible with
its safety and with benefit to themselves.
Those who may be startled at what they may regard as rash
and needless change, would do well to consider whether any
alteration now proposed is greater than those which Parliament has
from time to time undergone since its first appearance on the page
of history; and whether when England, abandoning her insular
position and policy, launched on the career of creating a vast
colonial empire, she can now shrink from the responsibilities in
which her success has involved her, or from such a modification
of the machinery of her government as has become necessary to
consolidate and preserve the mighty fabric which it is her pride
and glory to have called into existence.


No. 11l
By W. J. Bradshaw,
Of Richmond, Melbourne.
(“ Vincit Amor Patrice .”)
TO the average Briton it is no doubt satisfactory to find that
the great question, how to draw together the various
British communities into some kind of effective union, is begin-
ning to attract the attention of leading men in all parts of the
Queen’s dominions. The latest instance of the growing import-
ance of the question of Imperial Federation is the determination
of the London Chamber of Commerce to offer a prize for the best
essay on the subject.
The programme of instruction issued by that body for the
guidance of competitors, states that the object is to obtain the
best essay formulating a practical working scheme for the federa-
tion of the colonies and the mother-country, and instructs that
essays should only treat with practical suggestions, including such
alterations of the Constitution, etc., of the various portions of the
empire, as are adapted to parliamentary and representative institu-
tions. This limitation of the subjects to be treated, of course pre-
supposes that the desirability of Imperial Federation is felt and
acknowledged in each of the self-governing communities entitled to
take part therein. Such limitation is no doubt wisely intended as a
means of providing that the various competitors shall be placed on
a level, and of preventing the introduction of merely local matter,
and is so far salutary; but having regard to the fact that probably
more than one of the essays will be printed for circulation, it is to
be regretted, as much valuable argument, which would go far to


convince the gainsayers, will be kept back in consequence. For
instance, here in Victoria we have not only at least one daily
journal, but also a considerable number of persons who condemn
the project altogether.
We have also a much more to be feared class of press writers
and public men, who, while honestly and hopefully looking for-
ward to the federation of the empire, insist that it must be pre-
ceded by the at present hopeless scheme of local federation, and
this latter class are apparently oblivious of the fact that the delay
of the greater scheme, caused by such insistence, is fraught with
the gravest consequences. For convincing such as these, a page
or two of arguments in favour of an early development of Imperial
Union from some of the eminent writers who will doubtless enter
this competition, would be of immense value. Take for instance
the late narrow escape from a quarrel with France over the New
Hebrides. How easy to show that the taxpayers of the United
Kingdom will not for long consent to run the risk of embroilment
with foreign powers in order to conserve islands for Australia,
while Australia bears no share of the expense of the naval and
military armaments necessary to maintain the prestige of the em-
pire and to enable Great Britain, as its guardian, to speak forcibly
in such matters. On the other hand, essayists on this side might
endeavour to convince their fellow-colonists of the wisdom of
Imperial Union, by showing that in this case of the New Hebrides
local federation, even if attained, would have given us no greater
power than that of protest, and we should still be asking our fellow-
countrymen at home to do something for us, in the cost and risk
of which we bore no share. Again, for the benefit of those
among us who maintain that as soon as these young communities
are sufficiently powerful to stand alone, separation is the only
natural solution of the problem of government, what powerful
pages might be written by able men, showing that if separation
in some distant future is so natural, Imperial Federation would be
powerless to prevent its taking place, but that during the time
which must elapse before we can attain such maturity, some sort
of Imperial Union would certainly enable us better to retain our
hold on what we here in Australia consider our natural heritage.
Or to put it briefly, if when we grow older we must of course set


upp for ourselves, a preceding period of Imperial Federation will
imost decidedly enable us to have more to set up with.
And here the question may fairly be asked, What is intended to
bee understood by Federation of the Empire? it being of the highest
iimportance that this question shall at the outset be fully and fairly
amswered. There is no doubt that much of the opposition of the
ememies to the measure, and the lukewarmness of its friends, may
bee traced to a want of knowledge of what is intended to be the
result of such federation, what are its necessary preliminary con-
diitions, and what the scope and limits of its jurisdiction when
atttained.
And this want of knowledge is not confined to the class which
miay fairly claim an excuse for their ignorance. Many prominent
statesmen in this and the neighbouring colonies have apparently
giiven so little attention to the idea of imperial unity as to be
uttterly unaware of what is intended by it, or what would be the
reflations of the various portions of the empire to each other were
thiis unity an accomplished fact. A remarkable illustration of this
occcurred quite recently. In an Argus telegram of the 31st May
lanst, we read that in London, on the 28th of the same month, a
paaper was read before the Colonial Institute by Mr. Francis
Laabilliere, advocating Imperial Federation; and we are told that
ini the discussion which followed, the late Sir Alexander Stuart, ex-
Pr'remier of New South Wales, told his hearers that “the colonies
wcould not permit any interference in the matter of their fiscal
poolicy, but that each colony ought to have liberty to arrange its
owwn tariff as it liked.” Now, unless the scheme propounded by
Mir. Labilliere was unlike anything which has preceded it, such
remarks were quite unnecessary. For, at least so far as I have
beeen able to grasp their meaning, no such interference is contem-
pldated by the advocates of a closer union of the autonomous
poortions of the empire. It is perfectly true that in the less com-
pnrehensive but much more difficult scheme of Australian federa-
tioon, it has constantly been insisted that such must be preceded
byy an assimilation of tariffs ; but this certainly does not apply to
a f federation of the empire.
; But the Times takes up the same erroneous idea of the aims
of f Imperial Federation, and, as we in Australia are informed by


telegram, assures its readers “that the absence of a universal
tariff throughout the empire is the chief obstacle in the way of its
closer union.” With all deference to so great an authority, I can
assure the Times , that if absence of a common tariff is an obstacle
to Imperial Federation, an obstacle it will remain ; and if it should
become a settled conclusion that we must wait for closer union
until that obstacle is removed, we may as well at once cease to
hope for it, and resign ourselves as best we may to the prospect
of a gradual disintegration.
But I am prepared to assert that tariffs have nothing to do with
the matter. I have read the speeches of many public men in
Great Britain and Canada, and I have in this colony listened to
the expressed opinions of some of our foremost men on this great
question, but I have not, in either speeches or writings, detected
any expressions conveying the idea that the form of federation
these gentlemen were advocating necessitated a common tariff.
No ; so far as my knowledge of it extends, the scheme has been,
to quote from the manifesto of the Imperial Federation League,
“ A federation which should combine on an equitable basis the
resources of the empire for the maintenance of common interests;
and that no scheme of federation shall interfere with the existing
rights of local Parliaments as regards local affairs.” My answer
then to the question, “What is intended to be understood by
Imperial Federation ? ” is : A union of the various self-governing
portions of the empire for the purpose of offence and defence,
and for the furtherance of all objects which affect the empire as
a whole, but reserving the fullest rights of autonomy in all matters
which are now legislated for by the local Parliaments. Under
such a system each province would be called upon to provide its
fair and proportionate share of the military and naval expenditure
of the whole empire, of the cost of administering the government
of new acquisitions of territory, such for instance as New Guinea,
and of all objects which tend to uphold the prestige and security
of the empire as a whole.
And as a matter of course such proportionate subscription to
the expense would carry with it the right to a proportionate voice
in its disbursement, in the right to declare war or make peace, in
the acquiring of new territories, and what is of supreme import-


amce to outlying dependencies, a voice in the prevention of such
aicquisitions by foreign powers, in undesirable proximity to any
piortion of the empire.
Before venturing to propose a scheme for the realization of
what a vast number of Britons in all parts of the empire believe
to be desirable, it is well to ask, Would closer union, such as I
have described, in any way detract from the material prosperity
of its component parts ? It may safely be asserted it would not.
Take, for example, this island-continent of Australia : under such
an imperial rule the various colonies would continue to raise
their revenues, to educate their children—in short, to conduct their
own affairs—precisely as now, and they would simply have to pay
a certain sum of money into an imperial treasury for imperial
purposes, and no questions would be asked as to how they raised
it. On the other hand, the advantages they would receive would
be properly authorised representation at head-quarters, efficient
protection from foreign invasion or interference with commerce,
a voice in the settlement of such questions as the control of the
Suez Canal, and above all a voice, far more powerful than mere
protest, in the disposition of the still unannexed islands of the
Pacific.
The objects, then, to be attained are surely most desirable;
the difficulty, How shall we attain them ?
“ Send representatives to the British Parliament ” has been pro-
posed in some quarters ; but such a scheme, though apparently
simple, on consideration will be found to carry with it almost
insurmountable objections. First of all, it is well-known that
the House of Commons, the real governing chamber, is already
overburdened with work ; that the constantly accumulating ques-
tions affecting the vast empire over which the British Parliament
holds more or less control, are now discussed at the expense of
domestic legislation. Sending colonial representatives to such
a Parliament would simply increase the evil, so far as the British
taxpayer is concerned, by increasing the difficulty the House of
Commons now experiences in dealing with the local affairs of the
United Kingdom ; and on the other hand, a position might easily
arise under such a system, where a question which the Greater
Britain beyond the seas considered of vital consequence would


have to stand aside to allow the discussion of subjects of import-
ance only to the United Kingdom.
The idea, then, of carryingjon Imperial Federation by the House
of Commons of Great Britain must be abandoned, on the broad
ground that no system of federation would be absolutely fair in
which imperial functions were exercised by what is after all
merely the local Parliament of one of its constituent parts. The
example of the United States may in this case be studied with
profit. The supreme governing body of that country is entirely
distinct from any local legislature, and as such gives satisfaction to
the whole; but we can readily conceive the many disintegrating
circumstances which would have arisen in America if the supreme
government had been vested in the legislature of any one of its
constituent States, however well the founders of the constitution
had provided for the representation of the other States in that one
legislature.
No; it seems perfectly plain, and certainly only reasonable, that
if we are to have Imperial Federation, we must of necessity create
some imperial chamber to carry it on. lam aware that some-
thing of this kind has already been proposed. Ardent advocates
of imperial unity have considered the advisability of constituting
an Imperial Council, which, being composed of representatives
from the various self-governing portions of the empire, should
have the right of tendering advice to the existing so-called
Imperial Parliament in all questions affecting the collective
interests of the empire. But such a scheme, though much to be
desired as a present expedient, would only be a preliminary. It
would certainly not be real federation, for under it the actual
power would still be vested in the British Parliament, and there
only; in other words, though the various colonies would have
the right to advise, Great Britain alone would have the right to
act upon or reject such advice. But some will possibly say,
Well, Great Britain would be entitled to such pre-eminence in
control by virtue of her greater population, and the consequent
larger share of the expense which would be borne by her. lam
quite willing to admit that she is entitled to a greater voting
power; but the constitution of an Imperial Council of advice,
such as I have seen proposed, would give to the colonies no such


piovver whatever; and in my opinion, any scheme of federation
likely to prove acceptable to the colonies, must confer upon
them at least the beginning of a voting power commensurate
with their population and contributions to the imperial revenue.
For Imperial Federation, worthy of the name, must suppose a
future as well as a present; and although certain lately promul-
gated theories of the future colonial population have been proved
to be much exaggerated, the time is certainly not far distant
when the population of the outlying portions of the empire will
approximate very closely to that of the United Kingdom. The
body or chamber, then, which must be created in order to ad-
minister a Federal Government, must, by whatever name we
choose to call it, be really an Imperial Executive. The repre-
sentatives entitled to a seat therein must possess the confidence
of their respective legislatures to an extent which shall enable,
or rather I would say empower, the whole of them, sitting as one
body, to administer the affairs of the federated empire in all matters
for which the federation was formed. And upon consideration, it
will be found that the formation of such an executive chamber
is not so difficult as it would at first sight appear. In each of
the self-governing portions of the empire there is at the present
time a body of men who are entrusted by their respective legis-
latures with the precise control they would be called upon to
exercise were they welded into one whole ; I mean Her Majesty’s
Ministers in Great Britain and the various colonies.
In order properly to explain my scheme, I will take Great Britain
first. The supreme control in that country is exercised by the
Cabinet, subject of course to the directing influence of the legisla-
ture. Ministers declare war, make peace, annex territories, conduct
treaties with foreign powers, and in short control the affairs of the
empire, and, it is important to remember, are swayed in their de-
cisions on some of these matters by the opinion of the colonies
without forfeiting the confidence of the House of Commons
which created them. On the other hand, the colonies possessing
self-government have also their Cabinets, which provide for the
defence of their respective countries, incurring frequently heavy
expense and weighty responsibilities in so doing; and these
Cabinets are even now the only recognised mouthpiece for bring-


ing pressure to bear on the British Ministry in questions which
affect the welfare of the colonies.
If then we can, by some scheme of representation, federate or
combine these several Cabinets, we shall, in my opinion, have
attained at once a working scheme of Imperial Federation suffi-
cient for all cases where federation is pressingly necessary. And
such a scheme possesses many and weighty advantages to recom-
mend it for adoption. First, it does not run counter to, but
simply advances on the lines of, our present received notions of
Constitutional Government, and is consequently easy of attain-
ment ; and second, it is, as I shall endeavour to show later,
elastic enough to meet the requirements of increased numbers
and consequent voting power of the communities outside the
United Kingdom,
In addition, the scheme has this one great recommendation,
that it does not create any actually new institution or governing
body. Former schemes for the initiation of an Imperial Council
have intended, or rather I should say have proposed, that re-
presentatives from the various portions of the empire should
be empowered to meet together, and in some sort legislate for
imperial purposes. But the office of a representative in such a
council would be an innovation. Its duties and powers would have
to be defined by statute, and such statute would require the assent
of each of the many legislatures to render it operative. In fact it
would for these reasons be difficult to establish such a council;
and even if established, its authority would be in constant danger
of being weakened by the circumstance that its members might
not possess the confidence of the Ministry for the time being of
the province they were supposed to represent.
But the scheme I have set forth of a united executive proposes
that the executives of the various provinces of the empire shall
administer unitedly, and for the benefit of the whole empire, the
same powers which they now exercise each in their respective
portions. The plan I advocate is that the British Ministry of the
day shall, for all purposes which are strictly imperial, be empowered
to call to their aid, in council, the Ministries of the self-governing
colonies.
Of course in the case of the colonies this would certainly not


mnean that the entire Ministry should have a vote, as apart from
otther inconveniences, that would mean that the ten millions of
Blritons outside the United Kingdom would have a greater voice
tHran the thirty-five millions within. No ; under this system lam
proposing, the Ministries of the various colonies would allot a
portfolio to some gentleman of their party, who would be known
ass the Minister for Imperial Affairs, and his duty would be to
piroceed to England and represent his ministry’s views and wishes
mot to, but in, the Imperial Cabinet. Of course in proposing this
sccheme I am prepared for much hostile criticism and possibly
scome ridicule.
It will be said, Suppose such a combined executive to be formed,
iss it conceivable that the House of Commons would consent that
thhe deliberations of gentlemen enjoying its confidence should be
liaable to be swayed by outsiders ? I would ask such to consider
fcor a moment a circumstance which has just happened. The
Blritish Ministry, in order, as was supposed, to placate France,
\were known to have intended to allow that power to annex the
N'Tew Hebrides. Australians protested, Australian Premiers gave
thhe British Ministry to understand that such annexation was
ccontrary to the wishes of their people, Canada added her
poowerful voice to the general protest; and now we hear that the
BSritish Ministers, admittedly yielding to Australian interference,
haave decided not to entertain the French proposals. Has the
ITlouse of Commons withdrawn its confidence from the Ministry
inn consequence of such yielding ? Certainly not; and how then
caan it be said they would do so if such interference come
thhrough a properly constituted and certainly less noisy channel.
But it may be urged : Oh, yes, the British Ministry yielded,
ar.nd may yield again, to mere protest; but that is a very different
thhing to consenting to admit a possibly hostile vote from colonial
representatives. It will be well to bear in mind that the colonies
wvill not always consent to government by protest. Some safer
annd less irritating means of at least trying to enforce their wishes
wiull have to be discovered, and the sooner it is done the better.
There is another probable objection to be considered. Would
tine colonies consent to such a scheme ? Would they not hesitate
tor commit themselves to a scheme which might involve a large


outlay for warlike purposes ? My reply is that the same may be
said of any scheme which can be proposed, and that the hesitation
will certainly not be on the score of any reasonable and fairly
proportioned expense.
The doubts which are at present felt in some quarters as to the
advisability of Imperial Federation arise from the fact that it is
feared it will in some way interfere with local administration.
That being so, the scheme most likely to prove acceptable to the
colonies will be the one which the most clearly shows that no
such interference is either intended or possible; and which at the
same time provides sufficiently for the one great object of such
union, viz. “ Combination for the maintenance of common
interests.”
But on the question of warlike expenditure, the colonies have
already shown a laudable desire to provide liberally for their own
defence, and at the present time the Australian Governments have
under consideration certain proposals laid before them by Admiral
Tryon, whereby if adopted they will bind their respective colonies
to maintain a number of armed cruisers, which will be, to all
intents, a portion of the imperial navy, and which to the extent of
the subsidy they provide will lessen the imperial burdens. And
so far as I am aware no objection has been made to the principle
of such a subsidy, but merely to the amount.
In other words, the leading statesmen of Victoria, New South
Wales, Queensland, etc., have signified their willingness to assist
in protecting imperial interests in these seas, and have so far only
hesitated to adopt the precise amount of the burden sought to
be laid upon them. This being so, I cannot believe they would
object to a plan by which they would have some voice in the
disposal of their contribution. On the contrary, I have a firm
conviction that should the colonies assent in any degree to the
admiral’s proposals, it will not be long before they will ask for the
adoption of some such control as the scheme I am propounding
proposes to give them. Again, I think it is highly probable that
under some scheme of a united fund for general defence, the
proportion to be borne by the outlying provinces of the empire
would not in any case exceed that which is now spent on what is
called local defence by each separate colony.


But some will say, Why not let matters remain as they are ?
\We have hitherto managed well enough; each colony has looked
affter her own interests in her own borders, and Great Britain has
prrovided for the rest.
I reply, that the state of affairs which rendered such a haphazard
control possible is fast passing away. Great Britain has asked
the colonies to assist in maintaining the prestige of the empire,
amd she is undoubtedly right in so doing; and colonists are
beeginning to feel a real interest in imperial matters, and are
ewincing a willingness to share the burdens and responsibilities
off empire.
This being so, any comparison with the past, any attempt to
trrade further on our present unsatisfactory relations, is purposeless
amd out of place. But opponents of my proposals may possibly
urrge : The scheme you propose does not give sufficient representa-
ticon to each province. It is not likely that a colony such as, for
imstance, Victoria, would allow the control of its imperial affairs to
bee concentrated in one man. I reply, that by my plan Victoria
wcould certainly be represented by one voter, and one vote would
for the present be about what she would be entitled to on the
baisis of her population, but the gentleman having that vote would
rejally be representing the imperial opinions of the entire Ministry
of which he formed a part. His position would be precisely that
of the political head of any of the departments of the State. Take
the case of the customs in this colony of Victoria: a gentleman
called the commissioner is said to administer that department,
and he does really attend to and control all the lesser details of
its policy; but it is well understood that in all important matters
of fiscal policy he is really not carrying out simply his own ideas,
but the united opinion of the ministerial cabinet of which he forms
a part, and that cabinet simply carries out the opinions of the
parliamentary majority for the time being. Under these circum-
stances it will be seen that one man, viz. the commissioner, is
actually giving effect to the fiscal opinions of the majority of the
people of Victoria. And in like manner, under my scheme, the
imperial convictions of the majority of the people of any one
province would be equally well expressed by its one Minister for
Imperial Affairs, resident for the time in England, but holding


office as a Minister of the Crown, and responsible to his colleagues
in his own particular colony for his ministerial actions.
If it should further be objected that the possession by any
single province of only one vote would give little real power, let
me point out that the executive body in which that vote would
be used would itself be numerically small. Such an imperial
executive as I am proposing, consisting as it would of the entire
British Ministry, with representatives of the Ministries of the
three groups of self-governing colonies, would not exceed forty in
number; and if to the thirty-five millions in the British islands we
add the ten millions of British colonists, it will be seen that at
least on the basis of population the proportion of representation
is quite as much as any single colony is entitled to at the present
time, and moreover is capable of easy adjustment in the future,
as the population and growing power of the Greater Britain
required it. I may as well add here, that in this connection
the great Dominion of Canada is really a group of colonies,
and would be entitled to proportionate representation as such.
I now come to the consideration of another possible objection
to such a system of Imperial Government as that I have proposed,
viz. that it is too bureaucratic; that any form of federation to be
successful must provide not only an executive, but some kind of
Imperial Parliament. My reply to this objection .is, in the first
place, that the creation of an Imperial Parliament would of
necessity lower the status and, in certain cases, decrease the
powers of the House of Commons, which at once raises an almost
insuperable difficulty, and puts off federation to a time when the
House of Commons shall consent to such a lowering of its status
and powers, which is certainly not likely to occur just yet.
What is required is a scheme of federation which shall involve
so little change in existing institutions, and which shall by the
very nature of its constitution be so plainly incapable of interfer-
ence in merely local matters, as to be capable of application at the
present time, when a large proportion of the adult population of
the various colonies are natives of one soil, Great Britain, and are
bound to each other and to the empire by the ties, not merely of
race, but of a common birthplace and common memories. Again,
federation does not require an Imperial Parliament for the reason


that federation will not have to discuss ways and means and raise
resources ; it has, or should have, merely to provide for a com-
bination, on an equitable basis, of resources which already exist,
or at least are already legislated for, but which lack that combina-
tion which would adequately provide for an organized defence of
common rights.
The question is then, Does the scheme of a united executive
propounded in this essay provide such a combination ? If it
does, then in my opinion it is all that is required to constitute
a present scheme of Imperial Federation. But the conditions of
the London Chamber of Commerce state that essayists are to
formulate a practical working plan for the federation of the
colonies and Great Britain. In order to test the practicability of
the plan of a united executive, let us briefly consider the state
of affairs which would obtain under our present disjointed system
in event of a great war, and then contrast it with the system
under which we should be governed were some such plan adopted.
Suppose the aggressive tendencies of some of the great powers
to be no longer endurable; in that case the British Ministry
w’ould declare war. They would be loyally supported by the
British people, and intrusted by the legislature of the United
Kingdom with full powers to carry such a war to a successful
issue. Having once launched into war, the real governing power
during its continuance would be the British Ministry, They
would augment the land forces, increase the fleets, detach
squadrons to what in their opinion were the likely points of
attack ; and in all these, unless convicted of disgraceful blunder-
ing, ■would have the support of the British legislature. And in
the self-governing colonies what would happen ? Although having
no voice in the control of the warlike operations, or in the issues
of the war itself, their respective Ministries would be intrusted
with the entire control of the local defence, regardless of any
reasonable expense. The one recognised fact would be that Great
Britain was at war, and that the colonies were liable to attack,
and must be defended. Who then, throughout the whole British
Empire, would be carrying on the war ? Practically and actually
the few men included in the British and Colonial Ministries;
upon the shoulders of these men would lay the whole blame of


administrative blunders, or praise for success. Why not then
allow these men, trusted representatives as they are of the various
portions of the empire, to federate, to unite by a fairly-balanced
scheme of representation into one body, in order that by unity
of purpose and a union of the resources under their control, they
might be able to carry out one comprehensive scheme, instead of
each fighting merely for his own hand? Under such a plan, the
present isolated and wasteful system of colonial defence would be
a thing of the past; we should hear no more of such points of
vantage as Albany and Vancouver being undefended, of our com-
merce open to attack and plunder; for under such a scheme
Australia and Canada would be represented in the executive
which had declared war, would have paid their fair share into a
common fund, and would have a voice in the disposal of the
ships and war material so provided. lam convinced, then, that
in some such simple scheme as that I have propounded will be
found all the present possibilities of Imperial Federation.
To enter into elaborate calculations of proportionate representa-
tion in some Imperial Parliament, which must in the outset be
constituted for the purpose of overriding or setting aside in certain
cases the authority of existing legislatures, would serve no better
purpose than to still further relegate a much-needed union into
the dim futurity of improbable attainment. For the present the
great colonies of Canada, Australasia, and even South Africa are
each working out their own destinies in their own way and after
their own fashion, untrammelled by the interference of the other
portions of the empire. The pressing need of union lies in the
fact that these great colonies have no means of enforcing their
wishes in those truly imperial concerns which lie outside their
own immediate borders. Briefly stated, we federationists want,
the empire only needs, political unity in those matters in which
there is already unity of sentiment. In the truly great questions
of peace or war, in the enforcement of treaty obligations on foreign
powers, in all that goes to uphold the honour and prestige of this
grand Anglo-Saxon empire—in these we are already of one heart
and one mind. And throughout our world-wide dominions there
is not a local legislature which upon any one of these questions
could not safely be trusted to legislate for, and speak out the


sentiment of, the whole empire. Unite then the mouthpieces
of these various legislatures in the persons of their respective
Ministries, and we shall have set the official seal of authority to a
sentiment which needs only that seal to give it force and vitality.
Here, then, is my plan for Imperial Unity. I propose a united
executive; but I merely formulate the principle, I give few
details, because I believe it to be unnecessary to do so. Let the
British Ministry take the initiative, let them send out circulars to
the various colonies, inviting the attendance at a conference of a
ministerial representative from each, at the same time clearly de-
fining the limits of the federation sought to be established; let
these representatives meet together, and decide to adopt the
principle of such a united executive, and they could speedily
settle the details. They w T ould have but little difficulty in ap-
portioning the number of votes to be possessed by each province,
in deciding upon the amount of contribution for imperial purposes
to be paid by each (by the way, Victoria’s defence vote for the
present year is p£i 10,000), and in deciding upon the practical
routine of such a governing chamber. And such a chamber,
every member of which by the very nature of his selection and
appointment would possess the confidence of the parliamentary
majority of the province he represented, would be thoroughly
capable of carrying out the details of a political, as distinguished
from a commercial, federation. To those who prefer to wait
and dream till they can attain to both, I would respectfully but
earnestly point out that “ half a loaf is better than no bread.”
Such a political federation as I have briefly outlined, “ for the
purpose of combined defence and the maintenance of the interests
of the whole empire against the encroachments of the foreigner,”
would, in addition to the feeling of security which would result
from it, serve these two great purposes : it would enable the various
provinces of our widely-scattered dominions to keep touch of the
centre, and it w r ould give a tone of reality to our British citizen-
ship, which at least to the Canadian or Australian-born Briton
would be simply invaluable. And are such far-reaching results
to be despised because they do not include all that some, judging
from a remark of the Times , may possibly have set their hearts
upon ?


I think not. Rather I believe they are grand enough, and com-
prehensive enough, to inspire in the heart of every Briton a deter-
mination to do his utmost to attain them. If then on this great
question of Imperial Federation the Times has a following, if there
are those in our dear old motherland who are hoping for some-
thing beyond all this, who as their ideal of federation are looking
for, and hoping for, a customs union, I would say to them with
all earnestness : You hope for union; cease then to look for that
phase of it which is impracticable, and you may then do much
to bring about a form of Imperial Union which from a patriotic
view should satisfy your highest aspirations.
In conclusion, let me say I am fully aware there are in Great
Britain, as I have previously stated there are in the colonies,
those who consider that Imperial Federation of any kind is a
chimera, who profess to believe that the present condition of our
political relations will last for a long time yet, and that when the
present so-called silken, and certainly most unsatisfactory, ties
which bind the empire together are no longer strong enough for
the purpose, then disintegration is the only natural and satis-
factory solution of the destinies of our Anglo-Saxon race. And
these men have too long had the course almost to themselves;
but I rejoice to see that the friends of unity are bestirring them-
selves, and I trust that some satisfactory solution of the problem
of what form of federation is best suited to our requirements may
be the outcome of their labours. And believing as I do, that the
breaking up of the British Empire would be an act of treachery to
the best interests of Britons everywhere, I say of those who wish
for it, in the words of the laureate, —
“ Hands all round,
May God the traitor’s hope confound.”


No. IV
By F. H. Turnock,
Of Winnipeg (Manitoba).
(“ Civis Romamcs Sum.")
WHEN we look back into the past and note the present con-
dition of the various empires that have from time to time
held the foremost positions in the world’s history, we are tempted
to ask ourselves the question, What position will the British
Empire occupy one hundred years hence? Is she, as some
pessimists would have us believe, destined within that period to
meet the fate that has befallen so many mighty empires, to dis-
appear like Assyria and Persia, or decline like Spain ? or will she,
as we hope, continue to hold, if anything, in a greater degree than
at present, the proud position which so becomes her, of leader of
civilization, the mother of commerce and the seas, to which, as in
Joseph’s dream, all her contemporaries shall bow and make obei-
sance ?
We believe that the solution of this question rests mainly with
the present generation, and that the action of her subjects for the
next quarter of a century will decide whether she is still to pursue
her onward course, or whether the summit of her greatness has
been reached and the period of her decadence is at hand.
Those historic empires seemed in their day as prosperous as
the British Empire appears now, —yet they fell ; and, as history
repeats itself, it is not improbable that the empire which is to-day
the most exalted, may to-morrow be humbled in the dust. How-
ever, the page of history is spread open before us, and it is for us
to examine into the circumstances which operated in causing the


downfall of these nations, and apply the conclusions we arrive at
to our own. If we find we are suffering from the same weak-
nesses that undermined their strength, let us at once seek to
remedy them, lest a like evil come upon us.
What then, for example, was one of the chief causes of the
overthrow of the great Roman Empire? One by one those
possessions which had been obtained by the expenditure of so
much blood and treasure were allowed to lapse into such inde-
pendence as to league themselves with those barbarians who sub-
sequently overthrew this great empire. We read that one of these
colonies, a little island in the Atlantic Ocean, after Rome had
withdrawn her protection, implored her in the following pathetic
terms: “The barbarians drive us into the sea. The sea throws
us back on the swords of the barbarians ; so we have nothing left
but the wretched choice of being either drowned or butchered.”
This appeal met with no response, and the unlucky colony had to
shift for itself. By the irony of fate that despised little island
to-day occupies the exalted position that Rome did then, and it
will be well for her if she profits by the mistakes, lest she meet
the fate, of her great prototype.
With this object in view, it would perhaps be as well that we
should take a glance at the relations existing between Great
Britain and her colonies and dependencies at the present time,
and see if they are those that are most likely to conduce to the
stability and well-being of the empire.
Born in the mother-land, with many strong ties yet binding us
to it, and living now in one of her colonies to which we have
come with the intention of remaining, and where we have con-
tracted ties of almost equal strength, we feel that we can approach
this subject in an unprejudiced manner.
In the United Kingdom we find amongst the mass of the
population a great amount of ignorance on colonial affairs.
There is, it is true, a vague sort of idea that England has posses,
sions somewhere in the Antipodes, comprised under the general
term Australia, where people find gold or go sheep-farming; that
there are possessions in America, where snow is on the ground
nearly all the year round, where people go about muffled up in
furs, and the noble red deer reigns in all his glory; and that in


the south of Africa there is territory which is a great source of
trouble, occasioning now and then an inglorious war, for which
the British workman complains that he is taxed ; —but beyond this
not much is generally known. There is no very definite idea as
to how these colonies are governed, or their geographical extent.
In fact the errors made in this latter subject, even by some of
the leading newspapers, are quite amusing. Of course the
learned few, and those whose business requires that they shall
know something concerning the colonies, are better informed;
but even persons who are on most subjects well informed, show
surprising ignorance on colonial matters. This ignorance is,
however, happily being overcome to some extent by the dis-
semination of maps, pamphlets, and information by the emi-
gration agents of the various colonies. The Colonial and Indian
Exhibition also served greatly to draw the attention of the public
to the extent and resources of the colonies, and induced more
to take an interest in them and in their welfare than have done
so previously.
With this ignorance prevailing in the old country in respect of
colonial matters, it is scarcely surprising that the average colonist
does not form a very favourable opinion of the British public, nor
is it to be wondered at that the colonists feel themselves slighted
and are annoyed that they are not appreciated at their true
value. This unfavourable opinion, we regret to say, the majority
of emigrants from the old country to the colonies do not tend to
remove. It generally takes them some time to get rid of their
old-country habits and adopt those of their new neighbours,
which are in the colonists’ eyes much superior. So the British
public has a reputation for being slow and unprogressive, and,
generally speaking, “away behind the times.” As a matter of
fact there is not quite that brotherly love existing between the
colonists and the old country that some enthusiasts would have
us believe. Colonists who have visited the old country have of
course a more favourable opinion of Britishers, but these are the
exception, not the rule. The average colonist has, however, a
better idea of England than the Englishman has of the colonies.
He is well acquainted with its geography and history, and has a
fair conception of events that are transpiring there. His views


on British politics cannot be said to be very reliable, but con-
sidering he has not much interest in them, he is fairly well
informed. Though the colonist is as a rule a very loyal subject
of Her Majesty, and unites with his old-country cousin in common
admiration of the prowess and achievements of their ancestors,
a careful observer will not fail to have noticed a certain amount
of friction in their intercourse. So far, socially, things are not
quite so satisfactory as they might be. Politically, they are worse.
The old-country man looks at the matter in this wise.
Of what benefit to England are her colonies ? Virtually they
are so many independent States over which she exercises merely
a nominal suzerainty, so far at least as their internal government
is concerned. There is continually some danger of their em-
broiling her in a war with her neighbours, the expenses of which
falls solely upon her; and for this protection, what return do they
make her? They relieve her of her surplus population to some
extent, it is true; but the people that England wishes to dispense
with are the ones that the colonists do not at all care to receive,
and as a certain amount of emigration is bound to go on from
districts where the population is congested, it is questionable
whether the flow of emigration would experience any check if
they were totally independent of England. Commercially they
offer her no advantage, imposing as they do prohibitory tariffs
against her exports, whilst all their products are received by her
duty free. They would be equally valuable as fields for thr
investment of capital were the last link that binds them to
England severed, as they are now. Why then need we hesitate
to grant in name what they have in reality, “colonial indepen-
dence,” and save the expense of their defence, for which we
receive nothing in return? To this suggestion, however, we
trust the patriotic Englishman will never lend an ear. Mani-
festly disadvantageous as are at present the relations existing
between England and her colonies, such a course would be in-
finitely worse. It would be nothing short of political suicide,
for the moment wherein such an act is consummated will be the
death-blow to her greatness. For what is England without her
colonies? Has she been for so long striving to obtain them, has
she been for so long pouring forth her blood and treasure to


secure, retain, and defend them, in order that she may at last
create them into independent kingdoms which will one day over-
shadow and dwarf her into insignificance ? No, surely not. True
it is that the present state of things cannot long continue; but is
colonial independence the alternative ? We believe not. There
is another course open for our consideration, which, although
not absolutely perfect, is, we believe, preferable to either. This
course, after glancing briefly at a colonial view of the empire as
at present constituted, we will proceed to consider.
If the old-country man is dissatisfied with the state of things at
present existing, the colonist is almost equally so.
While it is true that the colonies, and we are now speaking
more especially of the colonies as distinguished from the de-
pendencies, have all the self-government one would imagine they
required, they are not exactly happy. As a Canadian, we will
look at the question from a Canadian point of view.
Since the confederation of the British North American colonies
nineteen years ago, a “ national ” spirit has been manifesting
itself, and is each year on the increase. The Canadians glory in
the fact that they are British subjects; but it is pointed out that
at the same time they have not all the rights and privileges
of British citizens. Though they have extensive self-governing
powers, they have not a voice in the making of their treaties.
However just their cause might be, they have no means of de-
claring war, neither can they prevent a war by which their
country might be overrun and desolated. It is true at the same
time that they are not put to the expense of a standing army,
and that the moral protection of England has averted for them
much trouble that otherwise might have befallen them. But it
must also be remembered that whenever any trouble has occurred
between England and the United States, Canada has always been
the battle-ground, and should any matter occur in the future be-
tween these two powers which would necessitate recourse to arms,
it would be Canada again that would bear the brunt of the battle.
This ‘‘national spirit” that is springing up is nothing but
natural. It is her national spirit that has made England what
she is, and it would be strange indeed had her colonial children
become so degenerate that they did not inherit this from her


This spirit may be for good or it may be for ill. If it is fostered
and directed into the right groove by England, it cannot fail to
be a source of mutual strength to her and her colonies; but if it is
repressed and trampled on, she must beware of the consequences.
When her New England colonies exhibited this same spirit and
asked that they might have representation in the British Parlia-
ment, to which as British citizens they were entitled, their request
was contemptuously ignored, and eventually they left the parental
roof in anger; whereas, had their request been met in a fair and
common-sense manner, possibly the whole of North America
would to-day acknowledge the sovereignty of Queen Victoria. It
therefore remains to be seen whether England has learned a
lesson from past experience and is willing to give her colonies a
chance to exercise this spirit in a legitimate manner. There are
various channels into which this sentiment may run, and it is for
England to decide which it shall take. Canada cannot long
continue as she is at present, this spirit is now too strong to
admit of that. What then is her future ? Independence;
annexation to the republic to the south of her; or a readjust-
ment of her relations with England? There is not much doubt
that the first is analogous to the second, for were independence
granted her, she would not remain in that condition long. With
the metal and earthenware pots floating in the same stream, it is
easy to judge the result; in short, independent Canada would
soon become part of the American Union. In that Union she
would enjoy equal privileges and rights with American citizens.
Her national spirit would here find an opening and merge into
that of the Americans, for she would then have full enfranchise-
ment and be an active instead of a passive part of a great nation.
The Americans are doing everything in their power to accomplish
this result. Is England prepared to offer Canada the same as the
United States does ? Is she prepared to confer on her colonial
subjects the full rights and privileges of British citizens? If she
is, there is not the least question as to which Canada will adopt.
She is loyal to the British Crown, and is, we believe, capable of
fulfilling the new duties that would devolve upon her. And what
may be said of Canada may be said, we believe also, of the other
colonies. We have instanced Canada because she is the oldest


and most advanced in self-government of all the colonies, and
is, perhaps, the least English of them, having a great deal in
common with the United States. Australia would perhaps be
in a better position to maintain fTer independence, were it granted
to her, on account of her geographical position; but would she
prefer independence to being placed on an equal footing with
the United Kingdom? We greatly mistake if she would.
But, it may be asked, is such a scheme practicable, and if
practicable, is it not too radical to obtain the acceptance of the
English people ? And even suppose it were accepted by them,
is it certain that such an arrangement will satisfy the national
aspirations of the colonies? We will see.
We are, it gives us pleasure to say, a strong English Conser-
vative, and are much opposed to any interference with the time-
honoured British Constitution. But the colonies now present a
problem that could not have entered into the minds of the
statesmen who have been instrumental in developing the Consti-
tution to its present form. It would be the height of folly for
a man who found his business greatly increased in volume to
refuse to enlarge his premises and staff in order adequately to
transact it, simply because in his father’s time the size of his
buildings and the number of his staff were amply sufficient for
the business of the firm. Besides, we believe the true conser-
vative is he who looks ahead and endeavours to turn the stream
of progress into the proper channel, instead of trying to check
it. Instead of trying to confine steam, and so causing an
explosion or revolution, the engineer uses it for the purpose of
propelling the steam engine. And thus an element which im-
properly treated will cause fearful destruction, is, under proper
management, made to minister to the wants of mankind. We
hold that a scheme which will tend to consolidate and make
firmer the foundations of our empire is essentially conservative,
and will be more in accord with a conservative policy than the
abandonment of the colonies.
As we propose to make the old-country man and the colonist
equal, and give the colonist the same voice as the old-country
man in the management of imperial affairs, there should be scope
sufficient to satisfy the most exalted aspirations of the colonists.


We believe that with a scheme that accomplishes this they will be
perfectly satisfied. More they cannot expect, and any proposition
offering less we do not believe they would seriously entertain.
But how, it may be asked, is*'this to be accomplished? We
reply, by federation. We cannot take up and examine all the
schemes that have been enunciated under that name, but will
proceed to the consideration of one that we think might without
any serious difficulty be adopted, and produce good results. Of
course fault may be found with any measure that has for its object
the changing of the existing order of things, however well it may
be prepared; but we believe that whatever may be the imper-
fections of our scheme, it will be better than the present state
of affairs.
In the consideration of this matter we have no precedent to
guide us. A number of contiguous States have frequently joined
themselves into a confederacy for the purpose of mutual pro-
tection and defence or for commercial advantages; but as far as
we are aware, no attempt has ever been made to federate com-
munities thousands of miles apart from each other, varying in size
from a very small island to a continent, and scattered throughout
all parts of the world.
While we do not make it a sine qua non , we believe that
colonial federation is a necessary adjunct to Imperial Federation,
and for convenience in the consideration of our scheme, we shall
divide the empire up into groups, each group composed of colo-
nies which, from their geographical position and otherwise, we
believe might advantageously confederate amongst themselves.
The various component parts that we have to federate fall
into the following classes : i. The United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Ireland. 2. Those of the colonies who have self-
government accorded to them, and are practically independent.
3. Crown Colonies; and, 4. Dependencies. It is, as we have
before said, our object to secure for every British subject, no
matter m what part of Her Majesty’s dominions he may reside,
his fair share in the government of the empire. In fact, if we
do achieve less than this, we shall not have established an abso-
lutely perfect federation. Nevertheless, however much we may
strive to make our scheme conform to this principle, it will be


approximate population
of the various
groups is as follows :—•
Group I.
. 36,000,000
55
II. .
5> 2 5°> 000
55
III.
3)5 00 ) 000
55
IV. .
. 1,750,000
55
V.
. 1,500,000
55
VI. .
. 260,000,000
55
VII. .
. 2,074,000
310,074,000
strange if some flaw cannot be found therein. In a work of
such magnitude, with so many different interests to be taken into
account and considered, it will be indeed a marvel if every one
is satisfied. But we would remind objectors that the present state
of affairs is exceedingly far from being perfect, so that a scheme
in itself much short of perfection might nevertheless be worthy of
consideration. We do not mean to say, however, that any plan
should be adopted simply because it is better than the present;
on the contrary, it is as well, if a change be made, that it should
not take place until every possible scheme has been fully can-
vassed and the one that most nearly approaches the criterion
decided upon. We are tempted to interpolate these remarks be-
cause we do not wish it to be considered that the various con-
federations which we shall form for the purpose of argument and
illustrating our plan are vital points, and intended to be forcibly
put into effect whether the component parts are willing or no.
We are well aware, for instance, that colonial federation is a
question involving local issues which would not be affected by the
larger question of Imperial Federation, though we believe the two
go hand in hand. Also we would say, that though we believe the
figures we may have to quote are fairly approximate, we do not
guarantee them to be absolutely correct, and only use them, as
in the previous case, for the purpose of illustration.
We will proceed to divide the empire into seven groups.
The first consists of the British Isles; the second, the American
system; the third, the Australian system ; the fourth, the South
African system; the fifth, the West Indian system; the sixth, the
Indian Empire; and the seventh, the remaining portions of the
empire which, from their natural situation or comparative unim-
portance do not combine with any of the previous systems. The


The groups or systems are comprised as under: —
Group I.
England Wales
Scotland Ireland
and Islands.
Group 11.
Quebec
Ontario
Prince Edward Island
Manitoba
New Brunswick
Nova Scotia
Newfoundland.
Group 111.
New South Wales
Victoria
Tasmania
West Australia
Fiji Islands
New Zealand
South Australia
Queensland
New Zealand.
Group IV.
Cape Colony
Natal and other South African possessions.
Group V.
Jamaica Leeward Islands
Windward Islands Bahamas
British Guiana Honduras
Trinidad Bermudas.
Group VI.
India and Burmah
Ceylon.
Group VII.
West African Settlements Perim and Aden
Straits Settlements Gibraltar
Gibraltar
Mauritius Labuan
Cyprus St. Helena
Hong Kong Heligoland
Malta Falkland Islands.
The Dominion of Canada, consisting of the following:
British Columbia and the
North-west Territories.


Group I. consists of the oldest, the wealthiest, and most im-
portant parts of the British Empire; in fact, until a comparatively
recent date, it was all of which the empire proper consisted.
The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland possesses
the finest form of government the world has ever seen, and it is
on this form that the government of her colonies is for the most
part modelled. The British Constitution as it now exists is the
product of time. It has been gradually evolved and brought up
to its present state of perfection by succeeding generations, and
judging by the past, this process of evolution is likely to continue.
For although there are many who will tell us that the Constitution
has been preserved from time immemorial, and must continue to be
preserved inviolable, as a matter of fact the Constitution, or rather
the form of government, has been the subject of continual change.
A glance at the past will fully show this to have been the case.
Still, through all its transitions it is true that the same principles
have remained fresh and vigorous, and in one sense it is the
same. As Macaulay puts it: “The change, great as it is, which
England’s polity has undergone during the last six centuries, has
been the effect of gradual development, not of demolition and
reconstruction. The present constitution of our country is to the
constitution which flourished five hundred years ago, what the
tree is to the sapling, what the man is to the boy.” Though we
propose to take another onward step, the change we contemplate
is by no means violent. It will doubtless be one of the most
important , though not the most radical, that has for a long time
taken place in our administrative system. The Parliament of the
United Kingdom will remain exactly as at present; there will
be no occasion to disturb existing arrangements in that respect.
Queen, Lords, and Commons will, under our scheme, occupy the
same position as they do now, and perform almost the same
functions. But inasmuch as Parliament has from time to time
relieved itself of several duties, notably by the establishment of
colonial legislatures, we propose still further to relieve it by the
establishment of a superior council, which will have control of
all matters of an imperial nature —that is, which affect the empire
as a whole, and not the British Isles in particular,—and whose
composition and duties will be found hereafter fully described,


leaving the Parliament to legislate on such subjects as solely
affect the United Kingdom. We shall not define.the compo-
sition and powers of this council until we have reviewed the
various component parts of the empire, and pointed out certain
alterations in their forms of government that we consider neces-
sary for the more efficient working of our scheme. When we
have, as it were, laid the foundations, we shall be in a better
position to erect the superstructure. We deem it necessary,
however, to state at this juncture that such a council is contem-
plated in order that the reader may not remain too long in the
dark as to our ultimate intention.
Group 11. consists of the oldest of the British colonies, and,
except of course Group VI., is the next in point of population
to the United Kingdom. If the form of government has been
frequently modified in the motherland, changes equally great have
been made in the constitution of this colony, or rather this con-
federation of colonies. The old provinces of Upper and Lower
Canada have had the greatest changes. Many schemes for the
harmonious working of the French and English provinces had
been tried and foiled ere the British North America Act formed
the great Dominion of Canada. This Act has now been in
operation for over nineteen years, and the success that has
attended the federation of the British North American provinces
has eclipsed the most sanguine expectations of its originators.
Each succeeding year appears to knit closer the ties that bind its
various members, and although one of the provinces has recently
indulged in some wild talk about secession for the purpose of
securing better terms for itself from the Dominion, the emphatic
stand that all the other provinces have taken against any attempt
to break up the union proves conclusively the firm root that
Canada’s constitution has taken in the affections of her people.
Admirable however as this constitution is, there is one thing
lacking. Ample as are the self-governing powers which it
accords, Canadians have a natural and laudable desire to take
the stand among nations which the size and importance of their
country entitles them to. It is felt that although from a mer-
cenary point of view the arrangement by which Canada enjoys
the moral and practical protection of being a part of the British


Empire at the cost of the British taxpayer is not one that
Canadians can grumble at, the present state of things cannot last
for ever, and that soon Canada will be called upon either to
provide for her own defence or pay her fair share towards the
maintenance of the British army and navy. The former, to a
young nation like Canada, would be a heavy and serious responsi-
bility to shoulder, and one that Canada, owing to the extent of
her territory, cannot possibly assume for many years to come;
and in respect to the latter, Canada is not at all likely to submit
to taxation without representation. It would be manifestly unjust
that a territory having at present a population larger than either
Scotland or Ireland, and which is rapidly increasing, should con-
tribute its due share to the imperial revenue and be deprived of
any voice as to how that revenue should be expended. Besides,
what security would Canada have that Britain’s power would
be exerted in her cause when she judged it necessary? Suppos-
ing that a quarrel between Canada and the United States should
occur, such as has recently been in progress respecting the fisheries
question, it is not improbable that England would, if need be,
allow Canadian interests to suffer rather than enter into a war
of such magnitude as one with the American republic would be.
Yet if Canada were contributing her fair share towards the im-
perial revenue, she would have a right to demand that her
interests be not allowed to suffer any more than those of the
United Kingdom. This right she would not be in a position
properly to insist upon unless representation in the Imperial
Parliament were accorded her, and her representatives allowed to
take a part in the conduct of Imperial government. This would
open for her the door which she finds shut against her. A
Canadian statesman, if possessed of the necessary ability, might
then wield the destinies of the great British Empire in the same
manner as an Englishman, Scotchman, Irishman, or Welshman.
What higher ambition than this could be open to her sons ? Then
truly would she be able to take her place amongst the nations of
the world, and occupy a more exalted position than it would be
possible for her to attain as an independent State. This it is
that is necessary to complete her otherwise admirable constitu-
tion, and this right and privilege we propose to confer on her.


We have already said that we consider colonial confederation the
handmaid to Imperial Federation, and while we wish it to be
most distinctly understood that we do not wish in any way to
force the various colonies into any arrangement of this kind that
would be distasteful to them, we feel that we ought to submit to
them a plan of colonial federation, in case they should be dis-
posed to take advantage of it. We shall therefore give a brief
sketch of the constitution conferred on Canada by the British
North America Act, believing that it will serve, with various
local modifications, as a model upon which the other groups can
confederate. This is not an experimental scheme, but one that
has borne the test of experience, and has succeeded in satisfying
seven provinces, nearly all with different, if not conflicting, interests,
the inhabitants of some being of an entirely different language,
laws, customs, and religion to the others. One British American
colony still stands aloof from this union, namely, Newfoundland,
but there are indications that it will not be long ere she also ap-
plies for admission, especially if the scheme of Imperial Federation
herein proposed is wholly, or in part, carried into execution.
The Parliament of Canada consists of the Queen, an upper
house (the Senate) and a lower house (the House of Commons).
Her Majesty is represented by a Viceroy, styled the Governor-
General, who is appointed by the Imperial Government, and paid
by the Parliament of Canada, and who is also commander-in-
chief of the military and naval forces in the dominion. The
Governor is advised by the Queen’s Privy Council of Canada, or
rather a committee thereof, the Cabinet, which is responsible to
Parliament. The Senate is composed of members appointed for
life, each province having a fixed number of representatives there-
in, and answers very much to the British House of Lords. The
senators are appointed for life by Her Majesty. The House of
Commons is also similar to the British Lower House, and is com-
posed of representatives from the various counties and cities in
all the provinces. The Commons have the sole right to intro-
duce money bills, and any bill to become law must pass both
Houses, and receive the assent of Her Majesty through his Excel-
lency the Governor-General. Originally the franchise for the
election of members was the same as that in use in each pro-


vince, but an Act has been recently passed making an uniform
and very liberal franchise for the whole Dominion. A session of
Parliament must be held once at least in each year, and the
maximum duration of a Parliament is five years.
The subjects respecting which the Dominion Parliament may
legislate are :
1. The public debt and property.
2, The regulation of trade and commerce.
3. The raising of money by any mode or system of taxation,
4. The borrowing of money on the public credit.
5. Postal service.
6. The census and statistics.
7. Militia, military, and naval service and defence.
8, The fixing and providing for the salaries and allowances of
civil and other officers of the Government of Canada.
9. Beacons, buoys, and lighthouses,
10, Navigation and shipping.
11. Quarantine and establishment and maintenance of marine
hospitals.
12, Sea-coast and inland fisheries.
13. Ferries between a province and any British or foreign
country, and between two provinces.
14. Currency and coinage.
15. Banking, incorporation of banks, and issue of paper money.
16. Savings banks.
17. Weights and measures.
18. Bills of exchange and promissory notes.
19. Interest.
20. Legal tender.
21. Bankruptcy and insolvency.
22. Patents of invention and discovery.
23. Copyrights.
24. Indians and lands reserved for Indians.
25. Naturalization and aliens,
26. Marriage and divorce.
27. The criminal law, except the constitution of courts of
criminal jurisdiction, but including the procedure in
criminal matters.


28. The establishment, maintenance, and management of
penitentiaries.
29, Such classes of subjects as are specially excepted in the
list of subjects assigned by the British North America
Act to the legislatures of the provinces.
In addition to the above, the Dominion Parliament may legis-
late in respect to agriculture and immigration. Copies of all
enactments made by the Dominion Parliament are, after receiving
the assent of the Governor-General, forwarded to the Secretary of
State for the Colonies, and her Majesty may, within two years
from receipt thereof, disallow any such enactment.
The Ministry is composed as follows :
Minister of the Interior.
„ ~ Finance.
„ „ Justice.
„ „ Public Works.
~ „ Railways and Canals.
„ „ Agriculture.
~ ~ Customs.
~ „ Militia.
~ „ Marine and Fisheries.
Postmaster-General.
Minister of Inland Revenue.
Superintendent-General of Indian Affairs.
Secretary of State.
Besides the Federal Parliament, each province of the Dominion
has its local legislature.
The representative of Her Majesty is the Lieutenant-Governor,
appointed for five years, and paid by the Federal Government.
The Lieutenant-Governor is advised by a Cabinet responsible to
Parliament. The legislatures of Ontario, Manitoba, and British
Columbia consist of only one house, an elected assembly ; those
of Quebec, Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, and Prince Edward
Island of two, an upper and lower. The upper, except in the
case of Prince Edward Island, where it is elective, consists of
members appointed by the Crown, and analogous to the Canadian


Senate; the lower, of members elected by the various counties
and cities in each province Each province has the right of
enacting as to who shall exercise the franchise in provincial
elections, and a legislative assembly cannot sit for longer than five
years.
The subjects on which the legislature of each province may
exclusively make laws are as under ; —•
1. The amendment from time to time, notwithstanding any-
thing in the British North America Act, of the Constitution of the
province, except as regards the office of Lieutenant-Governor.
2. Direct taxation within the province, for the raising of revenue
for provincial purposes.
3. The borrowing of money on the sole credit of the province.
4. The establishment and tenure of provincial offices, and the
appointment and payment of provincial officers.
5. The management and sale of the public lands belonging to
the province and of the timber and wood thereon.
6, The establishment, maintenance, and management of public
and reformatory prisons in and for the province.
7. The establishment, maintenance, and management of hos-
pitals, asylums, charities, and eleemosynary institutions in aid for
the province, other than marine hospitals.
8. Municipal institutions in the province.
9, Shop, saloon, tavern, auctioneer, and other licences for the
raising of revenue for provincial, local, or municipal purposes.
10. Local works and undertakings other than such as are in
the following classes, which are under Dominion jurisdiction :
(a) Lines of steam and other ships, railways, canals, and
other works and undertakings connecting the province with
other or others of the provinces, or extending beyond the
limits of the province.
(I) Lines of steamships between the province and any
British or foreign country.
{c) Such works as, although wholly situated within the
province, are before or after their execution declared by
the Parliament of Canada to be for the general advantage
of Canada, or for the advantage of two or more of the
provinces.


ii. The incorporation of companies with provincial objects.
12. The solemnization of marriage in the province.
13. Property and civil rights in the province.
14. The administration of justice in the province, including the
constitution, maintenance, and organization of provincial courts,
both of civil and of criminal jurisdiction, and including procedure
in civil matters in these courts.
15. The imposition of punishment by fine, penalty, or imprison-
ment for enforcing any law of the province made in relation to
any matter coming within any of the classes above enumerated.
16. Generally, all matters of a merely local or private nature m
the province.
17. Education.
Provincial Parliaments may also legislate respecting immigration
and agriculture, provided their enactments are not repugnant to
any Act of the Parliament of Canada in regard to these subjects.
Copies of all enactments made by each local legislature must
be forwarded to the Governor-General, who may, if he see fit
within one year of its receipt, disallow any provincial Act.
The appointment of judges, whose salaries are fixed and provided
for by the Parliament of Canada, is vested in the Governor-
General.
Each province receives from the Federal Treasury a fixed sub-
sidy, payable half-yearly in advance, for the support of its govern-
ment and legislature ; and also an annual grant equal to 80 cents
per head of its population as determined by a decennial census.
Though Canada has established a protective tariff upon nearly
all her imports, the British North America Act provides that all
articles of the growth produce or manufacture of any one of
the provinces, shall from and after the union be admitted free
into the other provinces.
There is one part of Canada that has no representation in the
Dominion Parliament, and no provincial legislature; the north-
west territories, consisting of the provisional provinces of Assiniboia,
Alberta, Saskatchewan, and Athabaska. The population of these
vast territories, ceded in 1870 by the Hudson’s Bay Company to
Canada, is yet too scattered to admit of each provisional province


having its separate legislature. The government of the territories
is administered by a Lieutenant-Governor, assisted by a council,
partly appointed and partly elected; but if the stream of immigra-
tion continues to flow into them as rapidly as in the last five
years, there is no doubt that the same form of government that
the older provinces enjoy will be accorded them at an early date.
Already an Act has been passed by the Federal and approved
by the Imperial Parliament, giving them representation in the
Dominion House of Commons, which will come into force at the
next general election.
The harmony which exists between the Provincial and the
Dominion Legislatures, and the Dominion and the Home Govern-
ment, affords ample proof of the wisdom of England in acqui-
escing in the scheme of Canadian Confederation. Before confede-
ration, British North America was composed of provinces divided
by sectional jealousies and hostile tariffs, and each a source of
weakness to the empire. Before a union could be effected,
countless prejudices had to be combated and old feuds set at
rest; but through the wisdom and conciliatory spirit manifested
by the leading statesmen of the contracting provinces, and the
laying aside of party strife, these differences were at length over-
come, and to-day Canada is becoming a bulwark of strength
rather than a source of weakness to the mother-land, as is prac-
tically demonstrated by that magnificent undertaking, the con-
struction of the Canadian Pacific Railway, which has opened a
safe and speedy road to India passing wholly through British
territory, the importance of which, from a military as well as a
commercial point of view, cannot be over-estimated. If then
such good results are apparent after nineteen years of Colonial
Federation, have we not good grounds for assuming that equally
beneficial results would accrue were we to apply the same principle
to tie empire ?
"We trust we shall be pardoned for dwelling at such length
upoi the Constitution of Canada, and that we shall not be
consdered to have done an injustice to the other self-governing
coloiies by not having devoted a like consideration to their
intenal modes of government. We have allowed the Constitu-
tion )f the Dominion to occupy so much of our attention, because


it is similar to that which we propose for the empire, and because
we have urged all the other colonies to accept it in principle.
Group 111., consisting of the Australasian colonies, almost
rivals Group 11, in importance and population. In this group
the progress of interfederation has been marked, although not to
such an extent as in those we have just been speaking of. We
are aware that many prejudices must be overcome before we
can expect such a comprehensive scheme to be adopted as we see
working so well in British North America, but we do not despair
of seeing it finally consummated.
The principle has been practically accepted in the Act recently
passed by the Imperial Parliament authorizing the establishment
of an Australian General Council, and by the co-operation of the
various colonies for defensive purposes. These measures, how-
ever, we do not consider as final. The geographical position of
the colonies we have included in this group, and the similarity of
their interests, both commercial and political, seem to demand their
more complete unification. It is our belief that ere long they will
find this a necessity. We do not believe they desire independ-
ence ; but should independence be granted them, they would find
in order to retain their independence that they would be compelled
to effect a union of some sort. Divided, they would find it im-
possible to obtain any consideration from other States. Should
any one of them enter into a treaty with a great foreign power, and
that power see fit to break it, how would it be possible for the
aggrieved colony effectually to obtain its enforcement? Neither
could they successfully resist the encroachments of any power in
Australasia, and we know that two at least of the great powers,
even with the colonies under the potent protection of England,
are striving hard to obtain a foothold in that part of the world.
With that protection removed, and the colonies divided amongst
themselves, it would no longer be necessary for them to veil their
designs, and from annexing small and comparatively unimportant
territory, they would turn their eyes to the acquisition of posses-
sions of some real value. Under these circumstances, would the
colonies disunited enjoy independence for long ? Does any one
suppose that the American colonies who threw off England’s yoke
in 1776 would have developed into the magnificent empire to-day


known as the United States of America unless they had confede-
rated? Had they not done so, they would have either one by one
been reconquered by England or other nations, or have deterio-
rated into the condition of the petty republics of Central and
South America. We are no great admirer of American institu-
tions, but even a prejudiced observer cannot but admit that the
progress and success of the United States as a nation has been
phenomenal, in spite of the disadvantages and weakness of some
parts of their Constitution. This is accounted for by the fact that
they have always shown a bold and united front to the world.
So important did they deem their unity that they underwent one
of the most sanguinary internecine struggles of modern times for
the purpose of maintaining it.
But, it may be urged, although confederation would possibly be
a necessity in the event of independence being granted—which is
not only an unlikely thing, but a thing that Australians by no
means desire—it is not so under the present condition of things.
We would reply, however, that even should the existing relations
with England remain unchanged, which they certainly cannot do
for ever, the argument in favour of interfederation loses none of
its force. Would England prefer her Australian colonies to re-
main as they are now rather than consolidated into one dominion,
with a common militia, marine, tariff, and postal system? Not only
would they when consolidated be rendered much easier of pro-
tection, not only would her diplomatic intercourse with them be
much facilitated, but commercially they would be much more
valuable. They would be enabled to undertake national works
foi the better development of their resources; these works
would offer fields for the investment of British capital; their
facilities for attracting immigration would be enlarged: and it would
this be found that not only would confederation benefit the
mcther-country, but the prosperity of the colonies themselves
■weald be largely increased thereby.
from another point of view colonial federation is equally impor-
tart. If the Australian colonies desire Imperial Federation and
representation in a supreme council, will not their interests be
lik-ly to receive greater consideration and attention if their repre-
sertatives are the representatives of united Australia, and not


simply of each individual colony ? Will not the extra responsi-
bilities which Imperial Federation will bring, be better borne by
one dominion than by seven or eight colonies? These few
reasons we commend to the Australasian colonies for their con-
sideration ; not from any selfish interests, but from a desire to see
them in a position where they will add not only strength to them-
selves, but also to the other colonies of the British Empire, who
view with pride and admiration the remarkable progress they have
made and are still making as an integral portion of one great
family, having the same ancestors, language, traditions and institu-
tions, and which we hope to see ere long united by political as
well as sentimental ties.
Group IV. consists, also, of possessions geographically adjacent
and having very similar interests. It is not necessary again to
adduce arguments in favour of Colonial Federation, but we believe
it might be adopted by this group as well as the previous one, and
for similar reasons. And in connection with this group, we would
say that it will be noticed that in our grouping we have included
some possessions that are not yet sufficiently advanced to warrant
self-governing powers being conferred upon them. Thus, in the
previous group we have included, for instance, New Guinea. Now
it need not be inferred from this that we intend to make New
Guinea an equal member of the Australian Confederation. And
in the group now under consideration, it is not to be supposed
that the native states are to be granted responsible government.
It is our intention in such cases that the government of these
dependencies shall be administered by the group of selfigoverning
colonies with which they are classed, in much the same manner
as that of the north-west territories is administered by Canada.
Most of these dependencies, though sparsely settled by white
people, offer under proper management either desirable fields for
immigration, or are valuable for natural products and commercial
purposes; consequently they could not be looked upon as a
burden by the group with whom they are associated. We shall
perhaps be pardoned if we again refer to Canada. The north-
west territories, before the cession of them by the Hudson’s Bay
Company to Canada, were looked upon as absolutely valueless
except for hunting. After their transfer to Canada, they were


found to consist of some of the finest agricultural lands in the
American continent, if not in the world. Canada immediately set
to work to make these lands accessible to immigrants by building
a railway from the Atlantic to the Pacific Ocean, and went to
great expense in developing the country. But although much
expenditure was incurred, and one of the political parties of the
Dominion was greatly opposed to this policy, the acquisition of
the north-west, and the amount paid in developing it, has been
one of the best investments ever made by Canada,
Such we believe will be found to be the case of some of the de-
pendencies that we have placed under the control of our various
sub-federations. Emigration will still continue from the Old World,
and as the available fields to which at present it is directed will in
course of time become filled up, new fields must be provided, and
the group that has the largest area of unoccupied land, and is most
successful in attracting immigrants, will become the most important.
Group V. comprises the West Indian possessions of Her
Majesty. It may seem at first sight, owing to many of its com-
ponent parts not having—in some cases not being sufficiently
developed to have —responsible government conferred upon them,
that our plan of Colonial Federation is not easily applied to this
group. We admit that it cannot be so perfectly carried out as
in the former groups, but it can be done enough to answer our
purpose. Our object is to get a central legislature representing
the West Indian possessions. This it would not be difficult to
do. The various possessions would send representatives to this
Parliament, which would legislate on much the same subjects as
the other Federation Parliaments, and, in all eases where practic-
able, they would have their local assemblies to legislate on local
matters. Where it might not be practicable, there is no reason why
the Government of the dependencies should not be administered
by officers appointed by the West Indian Federal Parliament, in-
stead of by the Colonial Office as at present. No injustice would
be done to any of the possessions by this means, and some of them
would be made much more self-governing than they now are.
We may remark that Jamaica, the most important of the group,
not long ago applied for permission to enter the Dominion of
Canada, which shows the value she sets upon the Federal Consti-


tution, and we do not anticipate that much objection would be
raised to the plan we propose, by her at any rate.
In the last two of our groups, the federal system cannot be
employed, for obvious reasons. In the Indian Empire the native
population is quite unfit to exercise the franchise, and the posses-
sions in the last group are mostly either military or coasting
stations, which do not call for any change in the form of their
government. The machinery of government now existing in the
Indian Empire will very well accord with our proposed Imperial
Federation scheme. Each province has its governor and council,
and over these again is the Viceroy and superior council. The
difference between this and the proposed Colonial Federation is
that we intend the latter to be, as far as possible, elective. Sub-
sequently we shall treat more fully of the relation of India to the
empire. We might say, however, that it would be more conve-
nient to our scheme were Ceylon made a province of the Indian
Empire, in the same manner as Bombay, Madras, or Bengal.
Having thus, as it were, laid the groundwork in a reorganization
of the colonial system of government, we judge it time to proceed
to the federal constitution. We would say, however, that should
this latter and most important part of our plan fail to meet with
general approval, we have not the least doubt that the British
Empire would be greatly strengthened and systematized were the
colonies merely united into groups in the manner here indicated.
It will be seen from what we have said, that the colonies, gene-
rally speaking, will have, as they now exist, a Government, repre-
sentative or otherwise, legislating on local matters. Colonies
contiguous to one another, or having a similar interest, will unite
and have a central Government, whose duties have been previously
indicated. It is our proposal that above these central Govern-
ments, or sub-federations, a still superior legislature should be
placed, in which each group should have proportionate repre-
sentation, whose province it should be to legislate on all matters
of imperial concern, and such matters as are not delegated to the
other legislatures.
The representation in this council, which will consist of one
chamber, will be divided amongst the groups according to the
amount of population each has jurisdiction over.


We will presume that each group is entitled to one member for
100,000 population. The number of members that each would
have would be therefore, approximately :
Great Britain 360
Canada and Newfoundland . . . ,52
Australasia 35
South Africa 17
West Indies 15
Of the representation of India and the scattered dependencies
we shall have to speak later.
The manner in which these representatives shall be selected
by the various groups is the next subject that demands our con-
sideration.
Several modes of selection have presented themselves to us,
none of which, we must candidly confess, are quite free from
objections. The principal of these are :
-Ist. That each group should be divided into as many con-
stituencies as it is entitled to representatives, and that each con-
stituency should elect its own member.
2nd. That the Federal Parliament of each group should elect
the representatives of that group.
3rd, That the electorate of each group should elect repre-
sentatives who would meet in convention and select from among
themselves the number of members that each group is entitled to
in the supreme council.
Whilst the first mode is the most in accord with the English
idea of representation, and would work admirably so far as Group I.
is concerned, its adoption in respect of the other parts of the empire
is totally impracticable, on account of the immense area of some
of the constituencies that would be created, and their scattered
population, the expense of securing returns, and the almost im-
possibility of inducing any candidate to contest an election in
such cases.
That the Parliaments of the various sub-federations should select
from their members the representatives to the superior council at
first appeared to us the most feasible plan, but upon consideration
we found many grave objections to it. The Colonial Parliaments


are elected on purely local issues, and the party that might repre-
sent the people on home questions would not necessarily reflect
their views on imperial matters ; in fact, at present a man fre-
quently votes for one party in provincial and for the opposite in
federal questions, being of opinion that Toryism is best for the
latter and Liberalism for the former, and vice versa. Indeed, the
party lines are differently drawn in the colonies and in the United
Kingdom. Because a man may be a Conservative or a Liberal
in colonial politics, it does not follow that he will support a party
of the same name in the Imperial Council. But there are other
objections. The representatives to the Imperial Council, for
obvious reasons, should not be allowed to remain members of
their local Parliaments. Hence new elections would have to take
place to fill the vacancies created by their removal, and in the
event of a dissolution of the Colonial Parliament the imperial
representatives would, if not re-elected, lose their seats in both
the imperial and colonial house. Moreover, this would create
so much confusion that the colonies would never submit to it,
neither do we think would Great Britain; for consider what it
would be to take 360 members out of the British, 52 from the
Canadian, or 35 from the Australian Parliaments. If these were
selected from the really best men, and those most qualified to sit
in the Imperial Council, we are inclined to think that what was
left would not be of very high calibre. No Home Government
could exist under such circumstances. Our acquaintance with
colonial politics leads us to suspect that as the members of the
superior council would soon become the nominees of the colonial
federal governments, it would become a receptacle for broken-
down party hacks, whose days were gone by in the local political
arena. These are a few of the objections; space forbids us
dealing more fully with them; but others will, we fancy, suggest
themselves to those who give the matter a little consideration.
The third mode may be objected to as an innovation, but,
failing the first, is the only true way to secure fair representation
for the colonies in imperial matters. It calls for little new ma-
chinery. The electors in each constituency sending members to
the Colonial Federal Parliament will elect one representative in
the same manner as they elect their ordinary Members of Parlia-


ment. These representatives will then assemble in convention,
and select from among themselves the number of members the
group is entitled to send to the Imperial Council. The cost of
such election should be defrayed by the constituency, not includ-
ing, of course, the personal expenditure of the candidates seeking
election ; and each member should be entitled to receive from
the federal government his travelling expenses in going to and
from the convention, and a certain amount, to be fixed by law,
for each day the convention is in session. Members of the
Federal Parliaments might be elected to the conventions; but in
the event of their being elected to the Imperial Council, they
should forfeit their seats in the federal house, except in the case
of peers of the United Kingdom, who would continue to hold
their seats in the House of Lords.
As population is dense in the United Kingdom, and 360 con-
stituencies of moderate size might easily be created, there would
be no objection to Group I. electing its representatives directly,
without the aid of a convention, if the latter method of election
proved distasteful. We are convinced, however, that some sort
of convention system must be adopted by the colonies. In
any scheme of Imperial Federation, the problem how to give
the colonies proper representation must be solved, and we are
of opinion that this is one of the fairest and least cumbersome
methods that can be devised ; we have not yet, at least, seen any
other suggestion more feasible.
As the representatives of the outlying parts of the empire would
be put to considerable expense to reach London, at which place
the superior council would of course hold its sittings, the various
Federal Parliaments should defray the travelling expenses of their
representatives. They might also, if they deemed it advisable,
pay them a certain indemnity during the time the Council was in
session.
The Council should be dissolved at the end of either five or
seven years —we are inclined to favour the shorter period—and
should hold a session at least once each year. Her Majesty
would, of course, retain her prerogative of dissolving it when she
deemed fit, at any time before the expiration of that period. Any
British subject, upon subscribing the usual oath, should be eligible


to sit as a member, and members should not be subject to
any property qualification. The privileges of the Council should
be the same as those of the British House of Commons, except
that members of the House of Lords should be eligible for election
thereto.
The superior council—or, rather, we should call it the Imperial
Parliament of the British Empire—being supposed to be consti-
tuted, on what subjects shall it be competent to legislate? Being
more of an advisory and deliberative assembly than a legislative
body, its legislative functions will not be very onerous. The
Queen would retain the prerogative of making peace and war,
the right of sending ambassadors, of making treaties, and of
regulating and raising fleets and armies ; and would, as now, be
guided in such measures by the advice of her Cabinet Council.
But those members of the Privy Council advising her on these
points would be members of, and be responsible to, the Imperial
Council, or, as we shall now call it, the “ Imperial Parliament,”
in contradistinction to the Parliament of Great Britain and Ire-
land.
The Cabinet might consist of the following officers, viz,
The President of the Council.
„ Chancellor of the Exchequer.
„ Secretary of Slate for Great Britain.
„ „ » Canada.
„ „ „ Australia.
„ ~ South Africa.
j 5 }f „ the West Indies and Dependencies.
„ „ » India-
„ ~ „ Foreign Affairs.
„ » » War -
~ ~ » Admiralty.
Each group of the federation would thus have a department to
look after its particular interests, in the same manner as in the
British Parliament there is a Secretary for Scotland, Ireland,
Indian, Colonial, and Home Affairs. The President of the Coun-
cil would probably be the Premier ; the Secretary for Foreign
Affairs would fulfil the functions which the minister of that titlq


in the British Parliament now performs ; the duties of the Secre-
taries for War and the Admiralty would be similar also to those of
the Minister of War and the First Lord of the Admiralty ; and the
finances of the empire would be under the control of a Financial
Minister, or Chancellor of the Exchequer. The Ministers of War,
Admiralty, and Foreign Affairs would no longer be required in
the British Cabinet.
The Cabinet would be, as we have said, responsible to the
Imperial Parliament, as the present British Cabinet is to the
British Parliament.
The army and navy, and everything connected therewith,
would hereafter be under the control of the Imperial Parliament.
All vessels of war, arms, accoutrements, and everything connected
with the management of the military and naval service, ■would be
handed over to the Imperial Government; and the latter would
assume a proportion, say two-thirds, of the National Debt. On
this we shall speak further at a later stage of our paper. The
relations of any part of the empire with foreign States, and the
making of treaties, commercial or otherwise, would pertain solely
to the imperial authority.
The manner in which the Imperial Parliament shall raise its
revenue is another point for consideration. The various Federal
Parliaments, including that of the United Kingdom, will have it
in their power to impose tariffs, or to adopt whatever fiscal policy
they may deem most suitable to their interests. They may,
subject to the approval of the Imperial Parliament, enter into
commercial treaties one with another, for the better interchange
of their various products, though treaties with foreign States will
be made by the Imperial Parliament. We consider it chimerical
to expect that it is possible for the present, at any rate, to form a
commercial federation of the empire, and for this reason have
left the various federations free to adopt whatever regulations
they may think will conduce to the most satisfactory development
of their resources and industries, and the general well-being of
their population. We have no doubt that it will be found ad-
visable and desirable to have as uniform a system as possible
amongst all portions of the empire ; but this is a matter that will
right itself, and cannot be regulated by legislation, for the colonies


will be sure to resent any interference with the fiscal policy they
have rightly or wrongly chosen for themselves ; and so we think
would the United Kingdom also.
Since the empire will be deprived of any revenue that might
accrue were this matter under its control, some other means must
be found to provide for carrying on its government. The best
means is, we think, for the Imperial Parliament to assess the
population of each of the federations at so much per head,
which amount will be paid into the imperial treasury by the
respective Federal Parliaments. The Imperial Government
would bring down its estimates; and when it was found how
much would probably be required for the year, a uniform rate
could be struck, based on the population each federation had at
the time of the taking of the last census. The census would be
taken decennially by the Federal Parliaments, under the super-
vision of an officer appointed by the Imperial Government; and
if the population of any group had increased sufficiently, they
should be entitled to proportionate additional representation in
the Imperial Parliament; and if it had decreased, their repre-
sentation would be proportionately diminished.
The maintenance of the royal family should be divided
between the British and Imperial Parliaments. -We are not pre-
pared to state the relative proportion that each should payp but
whilst Her Majesty would be the head of the empire, she would
also be Queen of Great Britain and Ireland; and while all the
other parts of the empire would be governed by her viceroys,
she would still maintain the position she now holds in respect
to the British Isles. It would be only fair, therefore, as all the
other parts of the empire would pay for the maintenance of their
viceregal courts in addition to what they paid for the support of
Her Majesty as head of the empire, that the British Parliament
should be required to contribute to the support of Her Majesty
as Queen of Great Britain.
The Imperial Parliament would be able to borrow money for
imperial purposes, and, as we have suggested, assume a propor-
tion of the National Debt of Great Britain. As a great part of
this debt was incurred in acquiring and protecting the colonies
and dependencies, they cannot complain if they are asked to


liquidate part of it. Besides, the empire would receive valuable
assets in the shape of the British navy, the dockyards, arsenals,
etc., which have cost the British taxpayer a vast amount of
money. We do not say the empire should assume the whole of
the debt, as some of it was incurred for purely British purposes.
What exact proportion each should bear would be the subject of
mutual arrangement, although we have suggested, for the purpose
of illustration, that the Imperial Parliament should bear two-thirds
and the British one-third.
Our remarks on the proposal to levy a rate per head on the
population of the various sub-federations is intended to apply
only to groups 1,2, 3,4, and 5. India and the dependencies
must be treated separately. The interests of India are so great
that they certainly should have representation in the Imperial
Parliament; but, as we have pointed out, it is impossible to give
India representation on the same basis as the others. We must,
therefore, make an arbitrary distinction, and we propose that, say,
twenty members shall be sent to the Imperial Council by the
Government of India. As India will not thus have representa-
tion by population, she should not be taxed according to her
population. We would, therefore, suggest that she pay into the
imperial treasury a percentage upon her revenue, and maintain
her own army. The dependencies will be governed by the
Imperial as they are now by the British Government, Should
any dependency have the requisite number of inhabitants, it may
be permitted, on signifying its desire, to send a representative or
representatives, as the case may be, to the Imperial Parliament,
and shall then pay its share of taxation like the rest.
Having thus shown, in a very crude and rough manner, the
groundplan of our scheme, we will glance at the elevation. We
will reverse our previous order, and commence from the top
instead of from the foundations.
Above all we see Her Imperial Majesty, the ruler of the
greatest of ancient or modern empires, assisted and advised in
the conduct of the affairs of that empire by a Cabinet respon-
sible to an Imperial Parliament, which Parliament is composed of
representatives from each component part of the empire. The
empire is divided into groups, each group comprising certain


parts which are geographically adjacent, and whose interests are
similar, and having a Parliament supreme in all matters outside
those of imperial concern. The majority of these groups are
sub-divided into provinces, such provinces having local legisla-
tures dealing with matters of purely provincial interest.
Is there anything in such a plan that is repugnant to common
sense ? are the principles of constitutional government violated in
any manner. Is it not far more logical, consistent, and equitable
than the present cumbersome, incongruous and inequitable system?
• —if, indeed, anything so utterly unsystematic may be termed a
system ? We would ask that all sectional and petty feelings and
prejudices be laid aside, and this scheme be discussed on its
merits. We regret that space will not allow us to enter more
fully into details, because we know that a scheme, though theo-
retically reasonable, may be condemned as not practically work-
able, Some objections we have been able to anticipate and
consider; many will doubtless be raised that we have not dis-
cussed. These, however, we are prepared to meet and answer.
We do not say that the scheme we have propounded may not be
advantageously amended in some minor details; but in our opinion
any scheme of Imperial Federation to be successful and give
satisfaction must be based on the general principles here laid
down.
We have heard it proposed by some that it would be sufficient
to give representative colonists seats as life peers in the House of
Lords; by others that Agents-General of the several colonies should
form an advisory board in London, and be consulted on all
matters in which the colonies were interested; and by others that
the colonies should send representatives to the British House of
Commons, who would sit and vote only on imperial questions.
We do not desire to go out of our way to disparage any scheme
that has for its object the closer connection of the colonies and
the mother-country, but we would venture to point out that none
of the above proposals really solves the question of Imperial
Federation. When a man moves from one part of the United
Kingdom to another, he does not lose his privilege of taking part
in directing the affairs of the nation ; why then should a man when
he moves to the colonies, where he is still a British subject, be


deprived of any voice in the management of affairs which still
affect him as much as when he remained in the United King-
dom? This is one of the anomalies which Imperial Federation,
if it really be federation, must remove. The idea of a few colo-
nists sitting in the House of Lords, is to a colonist absurd.
What the colonies, if they contribute to the revenue of the em-
pire, will expect and demand, is representation in the House that
controls the public purse. In regard to the second proposal,
the Agents-General, although doubtless first-class men, cannot
really be said politically to represent in imperial matters the
colonies whose business they are sent to transact. True they are
usually appointed by the colonial governments from amongst their
political supporters, and thus doubtless represent public opinion
on colonial matters. But from this it does not follow that they
would echo the voice of their respective colonies on imperial
subjects. Even if they were able to give advice according to
the opinions of the majority of their fellow-colonists, there is no
guarantee that such advice would be acted upon ; in fact, if by
following it a Ministry would be likely to render itself unpopular
to the British public, it is exceedingly probable that it would be
disregarded.
As to the proposal to allow representatives from the colonies
to sit in the British House of Commons, the difficulties in the way
of having such a class of members in that assembly have been
fully shown in the recent debates on Mr. Gladstone’s Bill for the
future government of Ireland, and it is not necessary for us to
recapitulate them. Not only would the House of Commons be
increased to an unwieldy size if the colonies were granted their
proportionate share of representation, but deadlocks would con-
stantly occur. The colonial members as a body might doubtless
approve the imperial policy of a Government whose home policy
was condemned by the British members. In this case, the
Government would find themselves able to command a majority
on imperial matters, but would be in a minority on home matters,
or vice versa. It is very difficult, too, to decide under such cir-
cumstances where the line of demarcation between imperial and
other subjects should be drawn. Take for instance a motion for
the abolition of the House of Lords. It might be urged, on one


side, that this was an imperial subject, and on the other that it
simply affected British interests. Under our proposed system
this question would not come up, as it would clearly be for the
British group to say whether they preferred two Houses or one,
and the decision would in no way alter or affect the imperial
policy. The scheme to give the colonies representation in the
present British Parliament is, however, so beset with difficulties
that we will not further consider it. From such as we have
indicated our plan is at least free. By separating the conduct
of imperial affairs from that of matters simply affecting the United
Kingdom, we leave the British Parliament entirely free to regulate
its own internal matters as seems best to it. It would, as we
have before stated, be in fact the same as at present, consisting
of Queen, Lords, and Commons, and might amend or change its
constitution in any manner that suited it, without interfering in
any way with imperial matters. We should certainly regret to see
such things done, but it would really make no difference to the
colonies or the Imperial Council if the United Kingdom chose
to disestablish the national Church, abolish the House of Lords as
a part of the legislature, or carry out any of the violent changes
that demagogues are fond of agitating. If it were deemed advis-
able in the interests of the United Kingdom to constitute a sepa-
rate Parliament for Ireland, or in fact for each of the three king-
doms, after the model of the federal and provincial houses which
we intend the groups of colonies to have, it is not at all likely
that the Imperial Parliament would disallow any Act or Acts
passed for that purpose if it were clearly the desire of the United
Kingdom. It is obvious, however, that the Imperial Parliament
could not initiate such measures.
We refrain altogether from expressing an opinion as to whether
it would be for the advantage of Great Britain to adopt a Consti-
tution similar to that we have outlined for the colonies, believing
that this is a question she must decide for herself. It certainly
is immaterial to our scheme of Imperial Federation, whether she
does that or retains the mode of government under which she has
prospered in the past. We are aware that any attempt on the
part of colonists to dictate to the mother-land as to her own
internal affairs would be as much resented as any attempt on ha.'


part to interfere with colonial autonomy. And the difficulties in
the way of Imperial Federation are already sufficient, without,
creating unnecessary opposition.
Having outlined our scheme, we may probably be asked what
steps should be taken to carry it into effect ?
In our opinion an invitation should be sent from the British
Government to all the other Governments comprising the British
Empire, inviting them to send delegates to a convention to be
held in London, for the purpose of considering the condition of
the empire, and devising, if possible, a scheme for the federation
of it. No cut-and-dried scheme should be forced upon this
convention, but the matter should be fully discussed, and a
committee appointed to draft a series of resolutions; these resolu-
tions would be submitted to the convention, who would discuss
and probably amend some of them. Before dissolving they
would adopt certain resolutions setting forth the results of their
deliberations and, if they found Imperial Federation feasible,
containing the basis of a scheme for its consummation, upon
which they were all agreed. The delegates would then return
and induce their legislatures to adopt the same resolutions as had
been passed by the convention. Upon this being done, an Act
in accordance with these resolutions would be passed by the
British Parliament, and, on proclamation by Her Majesty, the
scheme provided by it would come into force.
In the meantime, public opinion must be educated and prepared
for the change. Our opinion is that this can best be done by
submitting to the public, through the press and otherwise, any
schemes that may be propounded, having for their object the
federation of the empire. It has been urged that as yet no
schemes should be brought forward; that the public should be
brought first to consider the desirability which exists for such a
federation. We have asked many people the question, What do
you think of Imperial Federation ? The reply has almost in-
variably been, “Well, Imperial Federation is all right if it is
practicable. If you can prove that to us, we have no objection to
it.” As a matter of fact, most people admit in the abstract that a
closer connection between England and her colonies is desirable.
The days when it was the fashion to regard the colonies as a dead


weight on the mother-country, and to advocate their abandon-
ment, have gone by, and quite the contrary feeling is now
manifested.
The plan of Imperial Federation which will eventually meet
with general acceptance must be evolved. The only way to do
this is to have the possible plans thoroughly ventilated and
criticised, and their weaknesses and imperfections unsparingly
pointed out. From the ruin of these plans will arise others more
perfect, which will pass through the crucible of public criticism
and come forth defecated and freed from their dross and impuri-
ties, By these means the defective schemes will one by one drop
out, until the public choice is narrowed down to perhaps one or
two ; the time for the convention will then have arrived, and
we may trust that by it the best possible plan will be selected.
If in our essay we have advanced but one idea that may
be grasped by a master hand, and welded with others into a
complete whole, we shall have good cause for self-gratulation ;
for, as we have said, it is impossible for any one individual to
devise a perfect scheme, and it should be the duty of every true
Briton, instead of insisting upon his own particular crotchet, to
assist to his utmost in bringing about a result that will give as
nearly as possible universal satisfaction.
We know we need not appeal to British patriotism in vain.
There is a tide in the affairs of nations, as well as in the affairs of
men, which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune. That tide is
now on the flow for us; shall we let it ebb without taking advan-
tage of it? Is this jubilee year in the reign of the greatest and
best of England’s sovereigns, a year when distinguished represen-
tatives of our transoceanic possessions are flocking to our metro-
polis to gaze upon the concentrated proofs of our empire’s great-
ness —is this year, we say, to pass without a step, and a very long
step, being taken to effect a political as well as a sentimental tie,
a tangible instead of an invisible union between Britain and her
colonial children ?
By a long step we do not necessarily mean any legislative
action—legislative action, if premature, will defeat the end it has
in view—but rather a renewed activity on the part of the advocates
of Imperial Federation, a vigorous crusade to educate public


opinion both in England and the colonies, and a plentiful sowing
of the good seed which, if judiciously and carefully cultivated,
will bring forth such a glorious harvest.
In the patriotism and good sense of the colonies we have equal
confidence. With them rests chiefly the consummation of this
great scheme. They may rest assured that England will not
attempt to force any measure of this kind upon them. Imperial
Federation, to be a success, must be a real federation, and not
a hollow, artificial union of unwilling and lukewarm members.
Such a union would be mischievous to the best interests of all
parties concerned, and the surest way to ruin the empire. Fede-
ration, to be a success, must be brought about by spontaneous
action on the part of the colonies and the mother-country. Public
opinion in the colonies absolutely needs education on the subject;
and this education must be undertaken by colonists themselves.
Already the opponents of Imperial Federation in the colonies are
stating to the public that it is but a dream of British politicians
and Downing Street officials; that it is but a scheme to ease the
British taxpayer at the expense of the colonist; and that it is but
another name for a Zollverein of the British Empire, whereby
colonial industries will be ruined for the benefit of British manu.
facturers. The objectors are not insignificant, and a very great
portion of the colonists have not yet given the matter serious
consideration. To refute the objections raised by the first class,
and to present the subject so that the latter must take cognizance
of and develop an interest in it, must be the work of its advocates
for the present: and their motto must be “ suaviter in mode ,
foriiter in re." When the colonies fairly consider the matter, we
have no doubt as to the result. The average colonist, though
opposed to innovation simply for the sake of change, is ever
ready to grasp any scheme for improvement. Whilst truly
Imperial Confederation will confer advantages on England, the
advantages to the colonies will be equally great. It will not be
for them, as some near-sighted and narrow-minded individuals
allege, a scheme by which they will give all and receive nothing.
They will enjoy all the advantages of independence in the
management of their own affairs, combined with the benefits
yvhich accrue from being integral parts of the greatest of nations.


As independent States they would each have to maintain military
and diplomatic establishments, costing them far more than the
contribution they will be required to pay to the imperial ex-
chequer, to which they cannot reasonably demur, —for surely
no English colony desires to shirk the duty of providing for its
defence. We might, were we so disposed, continue to enumerate
the advantages of Imperial Federation to both the old and young
portions of the empire ; but as it is our object simply to set forth
a scheme which we think workable should the whole of the empire
decide in favour of Federation, we forbear.
In this scheme we have endeavoured to maintain whatever
parts of the present system can safely be retained, to introduce
nothing but what experience has proved to be in accordance with
British constitutional government, to give to each part of the
empire perfect autonomy in its local affairs, at the same time
uniting them into one imperial whole; and to strengthen and
solidify an empire which transcends all others, of ancient or
modern times, in grandeur and magnificence ; to be a citizen of
which will be a passport throughout the whole world, securing
for the fortunate possessor all, and more than all, the homage
and privileges accorded to the ancient Roman when he made the
proud boast, “ Civis Romamis sum


No. V.
By C. V. Smith,
Barrister; late Fellow of King’s College, Cambridge.
IMPERIAL FEDERATION.
(See Motto , next page.)
Contents.—Part I.
Federation or Incorporation.
Statement of the Question. —Conditions of the Problem. —Characteristics of
a Federal Constitution : (5.) The Sovereign Power; (ii.) The Federal
Tribunal ; (iii.) Rigidity of the Constitution. —Characteristics of the
English Constitution: (i.) The Sovereign Power; (ii.) The Supreme
Tribunals; (iii.) Flexibility of the Constitution.—lnsuperable Obstacles
to Federation. —Feasibility of Incorporation.—Objection as to Time and
Space.—Objection as to Multiplicity of Business.
Part II.—Mode of Effecting Incorporation.
§ i. Machinery to be Employed. —Action of the Imperial Parliament. —
Addresses from the Colonial Legislatures.—Gradual Development of
Imperial Unity.
§ 2. Preliminary Measures. Delegation of Jurisdiction in Local Home
Matters. —The Irish Difficulty.—The Established Churches of England
and Scotland.
§ 3. Act of Incorporation. —Reform of the Lower House of Parliament. —■
Admission of Colonial Representatives. India and Crown Colonies.
—The Imperial Franchise,
§ 4. Subsequent Measures. —Completion of Imperial Unity.—Reform of the
Upper House of Parliament. —Imperial Finance.—lmperial Defence.—
Imperial Intercommunication. —Imperial Control over Certain Railways,
etc. — Fiscal and Commercial Arrangements.—Resumption of Certain
Powers Delegated to Colonial Legislatures.—The Imperial Executive.—
Administration of Justice,—Conclusion.


IMPERIAL FEDERATION:
SUGGESTIONS AS TO THE MODE IN WHICH IT CAN BE
CARRIED INTO EFFECT.
“ There is not the least probability that the British Constitution would be
hurt by the Union of Great Britain with her Colonies. That Constitution , on
the contrary, would be completed by it, and seems to be imperfect without it.'’ —
Adam Smith, “Wealth of Nations,” bk. iv. chap. vii.
Part I.
Federation or Incorporation.
Statement of the Question.
THE political problem, which is popularly known by the
name of Imperial Federation, has, during the last few
years, advanced by rapid strides from stages in which, first, its
expediency, and then its practicability, were moot points, to a
position in which these are all but universally conceded, and the
only question remains as to the best means of carrying it into
effect. The popular name of the problem, though unavoidable
in the absence of a more appropriate, succinct designation for it,
is unfortunate, as tending to disguise the real object which it is
desired to attain. That object is, in the first place, the admission
of the colonies to an adequate share in the direction of the
affairs of the British Empire as a whole, and in the burdens and
responsibilities, as well as the prestige and privileges, which that
direction involves ; and in the next place, as the end and purpose
of this admission of the colonies, the permanent security of the
empire against attack from without and disruption from within.
This admission of the colonies, however, can be accomplished in
one of two ways : either ( a ) by Federation, which would involve
the construction of a new Imperial Constitution, of what is
technically known as the rigid type; or {I?) by Incorporation of
the colonies into the existing English Constitution, as contem-
plated by Adam Smith in the passage which has been prefixed
as a motto to the present essay. This Incorporation would in-


volve a further alteration of our present Constitution, which has
been already many times modified, and is capable of indefinite
additional modifications; but it would not require the creation
of any new political organism, and, after the operation had been
performed, the Constitution would remain of the same flexible
type as it is at present. The first point, therefore, to be decided
in the present inquiry, is whether the desired object can best be
attained by Federation or Incorporation. In determining this
point, we are bound to consider not only which process will most
perfectly effect the purpose which we have in view, but also which
process can be carried out with the least amount of friction and
difficulty. A little consideration will satisfy us that, while there is
very little, if any, difference between the two methods as regards
their capacity for achieving and maintaining the desired con-
solidation of the empire, the method of Incorporation is by far
the most obvious to adopt and the most easy to accomplish.
Conditions of the Problem.
The question before us, like all other political questions, is one
which it is idle to discuss in the abstract. If we did so, we should
probably come to a conclusion diametrically opposite to that
which is warranted by the facts. We must take into account
and give due weight to all the various circumstances of the case.
We must have regard to the physical conditions of the problem
on the one hand, and to the peculiar characteristics of the English
race on the other; and, above all, to the existing political organi-
zations which it will be necessary either to supplant or to alter.
If we had a sheet of white paper before us, if the field was
unoccupied and ready to be included in a brand-new Imperial
Constitution, it would be comparatively easy to draw up a scheme
which would be faultless in theory and workable in practice.
We should probably propound something after the model of the
Federal Constitution of the United States of America, with an
hereditary monarchy in place of an elective presidency, and with
such other improvements as experience would suggest. But our
sheet of paper is not blank, our field is not unoccupied. The
existence of the various cqloqial Constitutions which have, during


the last fifty years, been created by Parliament, would afford no
great obstacle to the introduction of an entirely new organization,
and they could even be incorporated in almost, if not quite, their
present shape into a scheme of Imperial Federation. But the
great and, in the opinion of the present writer, insuperable barrier
to the adoption of any such scheme is the English Constitution,
and particularly the position and power of the Parliament of the
United Kingdom under that Constitution, In order to appreciate
this, it will be necessary briefly to notice the distinctive character-
istics of a Federal Constitution on the one hand, and the English
Constitution on the other. We shall then see the difficulty,
amounting well-nigh to an impossibility, of effecting a transfor-
mation from the latter to the former.
Characteristics of a Federal Constitution.
The characteristics of a Federal Constitution may be best
understood by observing its working in the cases of Switzerland
and the United States. A Federal State was defined by the late
Mr. W, E. Forster as a State which, in its relation to foreign
countries, formed but one nation, but in its internal relations
consisted of many nations. This definition is not absolutely
correct. Neither the Cantons of Switzerland nor the States of
the American Union have unfettered control over their internal
affairs. Until the alteration of the Swiss Federal Constitution,
which was effected in 1879, no Canton had the power of im-
posing the penalty of death for the commission of any crime,
however heinous; and at the present day no American State
is at liberty, under the Constitution of the Union, to establish
slavery within its borders. It is, however, true that a large,
though not complete, autonomy on the part of each constituent
State, in the regulation of its home matters, is an essential
characteristic of a Federal nation. But the main distinguishing
features of its Constitution are: (i.) that the Federal Assembly is
not possessed of sovereign power; (ii.) that the Supreme Tribunal
of the Federation is invested with the power and duty of judg-
ing as to the legality of the measures enacted by the Federal
Assembly, and of disregarding them if it considers them illegal ;


amd (iii.) that in consequence of the two features just mentioned,
amd of the provisions in the Constitution by which they are
supplemented, the Constitution, though not absolutely unalter-
able, is, as has been already observed, of a rigid type.
((i.) The Sovereign Power. —As regards sovereign power, it is of
the essence of a Federation that this should not be vested in the
Federal Assembly. Although, as we have seen, the federated
Staites do not remain absolutely independent as regards the man-
agement of their internal concerns, they yet retain their autonomy
to ;a large extent. But besides this, they remain as integral and
comstituent factors in the Federation. That expression implies,
etyimologically, a treaty or compact between the States which are
uniited under it; and this treaty or compact is not a mere nominal
one;, but lies at the root of the Federal Constitution. Con-
sequently, if it is desired to alter the Constitution, or, in other
worrds, to vary the compact of which it is the embodiment, the
partties to the compact must be consulted and their consent
obtained. The representatives of the different States in the
Fedieral Assembly are not deemed qualified to give consent on
behialf of the States for this purpose. It can only be obtained by
a reference to the States themselves in their corporate capacity,
or tco the aggregate population composing the States. In Switzer-
land! the latter practice is adopted; and if an alteration of the
Constitution is desired, the proposal is referred to the decision of
a diirect vote of the whole population. It was thus that the change
in itt was effected as to the penalty of death, to which allusion has
beem already made. The Constitution of 1874, which is that now
existting in Switzerland, had abolished that penalty; but in May,
18799, it was decided by a majority of 195,000 against 180,000
that each Canton should have liberty to re-enact its infliction
withiin the cantonal limits. In the American Union, on the
otheir hand, any proposed amendment of the Constitution, while
it mmst in the first instance receive the approval of both Houses
of Congress, can only become law if it is ratified by a majority
of tlnree-fourths of the States, acting through their legislatures,
or thirough conventions specially summoned together for the pur-
pose of accepting or rejecting the amendment. The consequence
is that in each country the Federal Assembly or Congress is not


a sovereign body, but can only act and make laws within the
limits of the existing Constitution. The absolute sovereign
power resides in the one case in the people at large, and in the
other in the aggregate of the States, but so that it can only be
called into action in the one case by a referendum or reference
from the Federal Assembly, and in the other by the votes of a
two-thirds majority in each House of Congress.
(ii.) The Federal Tribunal. —As a necessary accompaniment of
this absence of sovereign power in the Federal Assembly, the
Supreme Federal Tribunal must be invested with the preroga-
tive of sitting in judgment on the proceedings of the Federal
Assembly, and deciding as to the legality or illegality of its
measures. While, therefore, the position of the supreme court
of justice, and of the judges who sit in it, is one of great
importance and responsibility in all large States, it is doubly
so in States where the Constitution is federal, since in these
it is charged with the duty not only of interpreting the law as
between individuals and between the Government and an in-
dividual, but also of determining whether a particular law of
the federal legislature has been constitutionally enacted or not.
It has also, of course, the function of determining disputes as to
jurisdiction between the legislatures of the different constituent
States, and between any one of these and the federal legislature;
but a parallel to this function may be found in non-federal States,
in the duty of the courts to decide on the validity of the bye-laws
and proceedings of local bodies which have been invested with
limited authority. It is needless to say that in both Switzerland
and the United States the greatest care is exercised in the selec-
tion of the judges of the Supreme Court or Federal Tribunal.
In Switzerland, so great is the jealousy felt respecting their office,
that they are elected by the Federal Assembly for the limited
period of six years.
(iii.) Rigidity of the Constitution. —It follows from the inability
of the Federal Assembly to alter the Federal Constitution, that
this Constitution is of a rigid type ; that is to say, that alter-
ations in it can only be made with great difficulty. That such
is the case in the United States of America, is evident from the
special difficulties which, as has been stated, have been design-


edly placed in the way of its amendment, by requiring the assent
of substantial majorities of the parties and bodies interested in
it, before any alteration can become law. And it may be added,
that the individual States have copied the example of the Federal
Constitution, and have placed artificial difficulties in the way of
changes of their own State Constitutions. But experience has
shown that the difficulty of altering the Constitution is no less
great in Switzerland, where a plebiscite is required to effect it.
As already mentioned, an alteration was effected in 1879 ; but
several others, the adoption of which might have been expected,
have been rejected by the popular vote; and it is not, upon
reflection, surprising that such should have been the case.
Approval of a principle is one thing, and approval of the pre-
cise formula or mode by which it is proposed to carry it out,
is another. When it is not the former but the latter which is
put to the vote, and the people are required to say “aye” or
“no” to it, without the power of changing one letter of the exact
proposition submitted for their approval, the maximum of opposi-
tion to the proposal is distinctly courted; while only those will
support it who recognise in it their own particular shibboleth.
Characteristics of the English Constitution.
The English Constitution, as it prevails at present throughout
the whole British Empire, stands out in marked contrast to
Federal Constitutions in every important particular. It did not,
like them, originate in a compact between equal independent
States, but developed slowly and, it may almost be said, spon-
taneously with the growth of the English nation. It is true that
twice in its history it has been modified by a treaty between the
Supreme Legislature for the time being, and a co-ordinate inde-
pendent Parliament; but each of these treaties resulted in the ex-
tinction of the independent body, and the absorption of it and of
the country under its jurisdiction into the Parliament and political
organization which represented the English Constitution. Under
this Constitution (i.) the deposit of the sovereign power, and (ii.)
the position of the supreme tribunals, are essentially different from
what we have seen them to be in the case of Federal States, and,


in consequence, (iii.) the Constitution is endowed with unlimited
flexibility.
(i.) The Sovereign Power. —Under the English Constitution
the sovereign power is absolutely vested in the Parliament of
the United Kingdom, or, to speak with more technical accuracy,
in the king (or queen) in Parliament. Theoretically there are
no limits .to the exercise of this sovereign power by Parliament,
except those which are imposed by the physical laws of nature
and by the metaphysical conditions under which all human affairs
are conducted. Parliament, of course, cannot alter the order of
the seasons. We do not require to be reminded of that. But
the impossibility of infringing metaphysical laws is not so obvious ;
and our Parliament has in past ages attempted to do what, as
the result has shown, was beyond its power, namely, to place
irremovable fetters upon the exercise of its own supreme
authority, while still, by virtue of our Constitution, retaining that
supreme authority intact. Thus it has attempted to enact that a
certain statute, which it had passed, should be incapable of repeal
for all time. It was, however, long ago perceived and enunciated
by Sir Edward Coke, that such an enactment was beyond the
power of Parliament to make, and that its existence in our
statute book was no bar, in the very slightest degree, to the
power of Parliament at any future period to alter or repeal at
pleasure the statute to which it had reference. The Irish Govern-
ment Bill of the late Administration lay open to the same
charge of attempting the impossible. It proposed, while re-
taining the sovereign power of the Parliament at Westminster
intact, to render the provisions of the Bill unalterable by that
Parliament except with the consent of the new Irish Legisla-
ture, or after Parliament had for the nonce been swelled by
a contingent of Irish members. The theoretically unlimited
authority of the Parliament of the United Kingdom extends to
every part of the British Empire ; whence it is popularly known as
the Imperial Parliament. It has never yet, however, been authori-
tatively dubbed with that name, though this was proposed to be
done by the Irish Government Bill. It has theoretically, by virtue
of this authority, absolute power to alter to any extent and even
repeal, not only all laws made by any of the colonial legislatures,


but also the very statutes which created those legislatures and
gave to our large colonies their present local autonomy. This
power of altering the colonial Constitutions has, at the desire or
with the consent of the colony interested, been more than once
actually exercised. And lest any doubt should exist as to the
concurrent power of the Imperial Parliament to make laws which
should be binding on a colony, although relating to a subject upon
which the colony had been expressly authorised to legislate for
itself by the local Constitution with which it had been endowed,
this power was expressly affirmed by an Act passed in 1865,
during the last year of Lord Palmerston’s life and administration.
Practically, however, there are, of course, other limits to the
sovereign power of Parliament. For instance, it cannot enact
that which the majority of the members of either House are reso
lutely, under all the circumstances of the case, unwilling to enact,
or deliberately judge, to be inexpedient for the country; and in
neither House would the majority be willing or judge it expedient
to enact for any part of the empire a law which they believed
would arouse the armed resistance of the part in question as a
whole. These practical limits form the real safeguards for the
working of our Constitution. Since the terrible lesson as to the
danger of overstepping them which we were taught in the last
century by the revolt of our Atnerican colonies, they have been
found sufficient for the security of the empire, and the danger of
their being infringed is at the present day very remote.
(ii.) The Supreme Tribunals. —Owing to the absolute supremacy
of our Parliament, the supreme tribunals in the British Empire
occupy a very different constitutional position to that which they
hold in Federal States. In questions respecting Acts of Parliament,
their function is limited to determining the meaning of the Act or
group of Acts, the effect of which is in dispute, and the point as
to whether the Act or Acts be valid and constitutional cannot be
raised before them or determined by them. They are bound to
treat every statute, however opposed to natural justice or to the
pre-existing theory or practice of our Constitution, as valid and
binding upon themselves- and upon all affected by it. As a conse-
quence of this, the composition of these tribunals, although prac-
tically excellent and possessing the confidence of British subjects


throughout the empire, is not technically as perfect as it would
doubtless have been made under a Federal Constitution. The
fact that there is one ultimate Court of Appeal for the United
Kingdom (namely, the House of Lords) and another for the other
parts of the empire (namely the judicial committee of the Privy
Council), is in itself an anomaly. Besides this, the members
composing the two courts are still, though to a less extent than
formerly, a fluctuating body; and there is no absolute certainty
before what judges any particular case will be tried.
(iii.) Flexibility of the Constitution. —The effect of the deposit
of supreme sovereign power in Parliament is to render the English
Constitution in the highest degree flexible; that is to say, capable
of alteration and amendment. A measure vitally affecting the
political organization of the United Kingdom, or of any other
part of the empire, can be passed with the same formalities, neither
more nor less, as are required for the passing of an Act authorising
the construction of a tramway or establishing a close time for
young eels. The absolute power of Parliament extends not only
to all our other institutions, but also to the duration, composition,
and functions of Parliament itself. Thus in the last century a
Parliament elected for three years under the Triennial Act, passed
the Septennial Act, and continued in session under its authority
for seven years. During the century of its existence, the Ameri-
can Constitution has received but fifteen amendments, of which
ten were made during the first five years, and two more during
the next fifteen, leaving only three during the remaining eighty
years. It would be difficult to enumerate the various Acts of
Parliament passed during the same period, by which, in various
modes, through enfranchisement, alteration in the conditions of
registration, change in the property qualification or oath of
members of Parliament, modifications in the Acts of Union with
Scotland and Ireland, concession of local constitutions to colonies,
and many other ways, amendments have been made in the English
Constitution in its bearings on different portions of our empire.
Insuperable Obstacles to Federation.
It is obvious, then, that to transform such a Constitution into
one of a federal character would involve a change of the most


radical and sweeping description. Not that on that account alone
all idea of it ought necessarily to be abandoned. Could it be
proved that such a change was desirable, and was capable of being
accomplished, the most determined Conservative amongst us would
not hesitate to support it, even though it would entail the
annihilation of the world-renowned English Constitution and the
extinction of the mother of all modern representative assemblies.
But it may be safely affirmed that it is idle to expect that so vast
a change will be acquiesced in and permitted to be carried out
unless conclusive reasons are shown in its favour. The teaching
of history does not warrant us in the conclusion that the formation
of a Federal Constitution is an easy or natural matter. It was
not until 1848 that the Swiss Cantons, which had previously been
united in a league, as independent States, agreed to a Constitution
which transformed them into a Federal State. And in America
the adoption of federation may almost be said to be due to the
energy and ability of one man. The form which the political
organization of our revolted colonies would ultimately assume,
hung for some time in the balance; and it was mainly, if not
entirely, by the writings and eloquence of Alexander Hamilton,
that in 1787 the present Constitution of the United States of
America was acquiesced in by the different constituent States. If
federation was found to be a difficult process where there were
no previous national institutions to be displaced, and where cir-
cumstances pointed to it as the only safe and feasible course to
take, how much more difficult of accomplishment would it be
where it would involve the overthrow of a Constitution which has
had a gradual growth of a thousand years,—a Constitution to
which the English people, and, it is not too much to say, through
them the rest of the civilized world, owe whatever political freedom
and privileges are now to be found existing among them, —a
Constitution, moreover, which is diametrically opposite in its
fundamental characteristics to a federal organization, which in its
origin resulted from the natural opposition of the genius of the
English race to the political rigidity which is involved in federa-
tion, and has by its successful development tended to confirm and
intensify that opposition. It may be safely affirmed that nothing
but a great catastrophe, or a sense of the most imminent danger,


would induce the English people to consent to a step so contrary
to their national instincts and prejudices. But it is precisely the
occurrence of such a catastrophe, and even the imminence of such
a danger, which the advocates of what is called Imperial Federa-
tion desire to avert. It appears clear, therefore, that if they
would accomplish their object, they must seek some other method
of doing so than that of federation, strictly so called.
Feasibility of Incorporation.
The solution of the problem lies, as the present writer believes,
in the direction of Incorporation; that is to say, of the inclusion
of the colonies into the existing English Constitution, the necessary
modifications being made in the Constitution for the purpose. It
is evident that there is no inherent difficulty in this. Nearly two
centuries ago, the Constitution was modified for the purpose of
incorporating into it the kingdom of Scotland, and again, nearly
a century ago for the purpose of incorporating Ireland. It is
perfectly capable of further modifications for the purpose of
incorporating the trans-oceanic dominions of our sovereign;
though, as we shall see, the modifications would require to
be of a more serious character than in the two former cases.
Is there, then, any insurmountable practical difficulty in the
way of its accomplishment? Two, and two only, can be sug-
gested ; and of these one has been removed in anticipation by
the achievements of science during the present century, and the
other appears to be on the eve of being removed by the course
which political affairs are at present taking in the United King-
dom. It is scarcely necessary to say that the difficulties alluded
to are (i.) the distance in point of space, and length in point of
time, which have to be surmounted in the transit of persons and
transmission of intelligence from different parts of the empire to
the metropolis • and (ii.) the impropriety as well as impossibility
of all the matters which at present engage the attention of the
Parliament at Westminster, as well as the additional affairs which
the change would inevitably bring under its consideration, being
dealt with by a Parliament composed of representatives from all
parts of the empire. We shall find upon consideration that the


first difficulty is purely chimerical, and that the second is in a fair
prospect of being speedily removed by the natural development
of events.
(i.) Objection as to Space and Time.
The difficulty as to space and time is one which, it may be
observed at the outset, if there is any force in it, stands in the
way of federation just as much as of incorporation. Before
proceeding to show its utter groundlessness in the present day, it
may be well to see what was thought of it by such a great authority
as Adam Smith in the last century, before steam and electricity
had revolutionised the means of transit and communication.
Writing before the revolt of our American colonies, he says : —•
“. . . There is not the least probability that the British Constitution
would be hurt by the union of Great Britain with her colonies. That Consti-
tution, on the contrary, would be completed by it, and seems to be imperfect
without it. The assembly which deliberates and decides concerning the affairs
of every part of the empire, in order to be properly informed ought certainly
to have representatives from every part of it. That this-union, however, could
be easily effectuated, or that difficulties, and great difficulties, might not occur
in the execution, Ido not pretend. I have yet heard of none, however, which
appear insurmountable. The principal perhaps arise, not from the nature of
things, but from the prejudices and opinions of the people, both on this and
on the other side of the Atlantic.
“We on this side the water are afraid lest the multitude of American
representatives should overturn the balance of the Constitution, and increase
too much either the influence of the Crown on the one hand, or the force of
the democracy on the other.”
Inasmuch as no such fear would be entertained in the present
day, we need not be detained by Adam Smith’s proof of its being
illusory.
“The people on the other side of the water,” he proceeds, “are afraid lest
their distance from the seat of Government might expose them to many
oppressions. But their representatives in Parliament, of which the number
ought from the first to be considerable, would easily be able to protect them
from all oppression. The distance would not much weaken the dependency
of the representative upon the constituent, and the former would still feel that
he owed his seat in Parliament, and all the consequence which he derived from
it, to the goodwill of the latter.”
The facilities for the transmission of persons and documents


from the most distant parts of our empire—from New Zealand
and Fiji—to London are greater in the present day, and the time
occupied in it shorter, than from the American colonies in the
days of Adam Smith, and from the extremities of England when
our representative institutions were first created. Moreover, by
means of the electric telegraph, intelligence can be transmitted to
and from every part of the British dominions with a speed the
conception of which never entered into the wildest dreams of our
ancestors in the last century. As a matter of fact, if our North
American colonies were to send representatives to Parliament in
London, they would, according to the present computation of
time by the local solar day, be informed of the sayings and acts
of their representatives at an earlier hour than those sayings and
acts were recorded as having taken place. The physical difficulty
as to the incorporation of the colonies into the English Constitu-
tion may, therefore, be said to be non-existent.
(ii.) Objection as to Multiplicity of Business.
There remains, however, the difficulty that the introduction of
colonial representatives into Parliament would entail tire imposi-
tion of further business upon that already overburdened assembly,
and would involve their having a voice in the internal affairs of the
United Kingdom, with which they have no right to intermeddle;
besides which, the House of Commons has already in point of
numbers attained unwieldy dimensions, and could not bear any
further considerable increase. This difficulty is one which cannot
be extenuated or overlooked. It would be impossible to make any
substantial addition either to the business or to the numbers of
our present House of Commons, without entirely destroying its
efficiency. To admit colonial representatives to a share in the
administration of the purely local business of the United King-
dom would not and ought not to be tolerated; while, on the other
hand, to allow them to sit and vote when Imperial matters were
under discussion, and exclude them when the internal business
of the United Kingdom came on for consideration, would be a
most objectionable and unworkable feature. A similar plan was,
no doubt, mooted with respect to the presence of Irish repre-


sentatives at Westminster during the late debates on Mr. Glad*
stone’s Irish Government Bill, but the plan met with general and
well-merited condemnation. Two conditions are, therefore, es-
sential to the admission of the colonies into the existing English
Constitution ; first, the withdrawal of the purely local concerns of
the United Kingdom from the direct cognizance of the Imperial
Parliament; and secondly, a diminution of the number of repre-
sentatives from the United Kingdom in the House of Commons.
It would probably be vain to expect that the assent of the people
of England, Scotland, and Ireland could be obtained to these
measures merely for the sake of rendering possible the introduc-
tion of colonial members into Parliament. But their own felt
wants appear likely to induce them to carry the former of their
own accord and for their own benefit; and when that has been
achieved, their acquiescence in the latter will be, comparatively
speaking, easy and natural. The Irish Home Rule Bill of the
late Government has met with the fate which it deserved. It has
been slain and buried beyond the possibility of a resurrection.
But the principle of Home Rule, in some form or other, survives,
and is tolerably sure before long to find some practical embodi-
ment. Mr. Chamberlain and his friends are notoriously in favour
of creating separate local assemblies in the different parts of the
United Kingdom for the management of local affairs. Evidence
is not wanting that Lord Salisbury and his Cabinet are of the
same nind. At the banquet given to her Majesty’s Ministers at
the Mansion House on the nth of August, 1886, Mr. Edward
Stanhipe, speaking as Secretary of State for the Colonies, and one
of the responsible members of that Cabinet, declared that he and
his coleagues were in favour of Home Rule within the lines of
the Uiion, though they were opposed to any scheme which would
transgess those lines. We may confidently, therefore, affirm that
the establishment of subordinate legislative bodies in the different
parts «f the United Kingdom for the administration .of local
affairs s a measure within the field of practical politics, and is
likely b be shortly accomplished in the interests of the people of
the oh country. And when it has been effected, a diminution
in the lumber of representatives in the Imperial Parliament from
England, Scotland, and Ireland alike will appear to the people of


those countries not only to be unobjectionable, but to be an ob-
viously expedient proceeding in the interests of the economy alike
of time and energy and money.
Part II. — Mode of Effecting Incorporation.
§ i. Machinery to he Employed.
Action of the Imperial Parliament. —The choice of Incorporation
in preference to Federation will be found to have freed us from
all embarrassment as to the machinery to be employed in effecting
the object at which we aim, and to have left us free to concen-
trate all our energies on overcoming the various obstacles which
inevitably meet us in arranging the details of the plan itself.
Were we to resolve on Federation, it would be necessary to sub-
mit these details to all the various colonial legislatures, since
Federation implies a mutual formal compact between the different
Federated States. And when we reflect on the difficulty of get-
ting the members of a single legislative body to agree on all the
details of a long and complicated measure, w T e can form some
estimate of the almost inseparable difficulties which would beset
the endeavour to obtain the consent of our various colonial
assemblies in both hemispheres to the language and particulars of
an elaborate Act of Federation. In proceeding, however, by In-
corporation, no such attempt is necessary. The measure, or series
of measures, by which it is accomplished, need only be passed by
the Imperial Parliament at Westminster, and straightway, by virtue
of the supreme sovereign power of that body, it will become law
throughout the British Empire.
Addresses from the Colonial Legislatures. —Of course it is not
pretended that any such measure or series of measures should be
passed against the will or even without the full consent of the
colonies. But the veriest tyro in politics will at once perceive
that the obtaining of the consent of the colonial legislatures to
an Act passed or to be passed by another body is a far easier
matter than the attempt to carry an Act, intact in all its clauses
and provisions, through every one of those legislatures. Besides,
according to the plan about to be proposed, the consent of the


loloniees through their several legislatures will only be required
to the first step in the scheme. All its further details will be
elaborated in Parliament, after that body has become imperial in
fact as well as in name; and these details will be assented to by
the colonies through their representatives sitting in Parliament,
and not through their local assemblies. No doubt, however, the
consent of the colonial legislatures will virtually be essential to
the passing of the initial measure through the Parliament at West-
minster. But it will be observed that, inasmuch as these legisla-
tures are subordinate to and not co-ordinate with that Parliament,
no formal consent to the measure is necessary on their part, as
was necessary on the part of the independent Parliaments of
Scotland and Ireland to the Acts of Union with those countries
respectively. Neither will it be proposed, as in the case of those
Acts, to swallow up or abolish the existing legislatures of the pro-
vinces which are to be incorporated. The requisite consents may
therefore be given in an informal manner. It will be better that
they should precede the passing of the Act, rather than that the
Act should be passed provisionally, to take effect only if it ob-
tained certain specified consents; and they might conveniently
be tendered in the form of addresses to the Sovereign from the
colonial legislatures, praying for the passing of an Act which
should incorporate the colonies into the Constitution of the United
Kingdom.
Gradual Development of Imperial Unity. —Mention has already
been made of the advantage which the proposed plan of Incor-
poration possesses in rendering the assent of the colonial legisla-
tures necessary only to the initial stage in the process. It
possesses the further and still greater advantage that after the first
step has been taken, the process can be worked out gradually, as
circumstances permit and as growing experience shows to be
best, instead of our being at the outset irretrievably bound to a
hard and fast system, which may prove in its working to be in
many respects faulty and inexpedient, but from which it is im-
possible to recede, and which can only be altered in some of its
minor details with infinite difficulty and at the cost of great fric-
tion. It will be remembered that the Federal Constitution of the
United States was amended twelve times within the first twenty


years of its existence. Each of these amendments could only
be effected by means of an elaborate process. The next amend-
ment was not achieved till after the bloodiest and most costly
civil war which has ever occurred in the history of mankind.
Under the plan of Incorporation which is proposed in these pages
the unity of the empire as regards its constitution, its defences,
its finance, and its common interests, will be gradually developed,
and amendments and alterations in the development will be as
easy as they have hitherto been in the Constitution and affairs of
the United Kingdom.
§ 2. Preliminary Measures.
Delegation of Jurisdiction in Local Home Matters. —It has been
observed that, in order to clear the way for the admission of
colonial representatives into Parliament, and for the transaction
by Parliament of the common business of the empire, a pre-
liminary measure is necessary, and one which appears likely to be
brought about for other reasons and with another object; namely,
the delegation of the home affairs of the United Kingdom to the
jurisdiction of some subordinate body or bodies. When we
proceed to discuss the details of this delegation, as well as the
details of the consolidation of the empire which is to follow it,
we must, of course, bear in mind that principles are one thing,
and the precise methods of carrying them out are another. The
details suggested in the following pages are only essential to the
whole proposed plan of incorporation, so far as that plan cannot
be carried out with the substitution of any other details for them.
Objections to any particulars of the scheme here put forward
are not valid objections to the scheme itself, unless it is clear that
no unobjectionable particulars can be inserted into the scheme as
an alternative for them. After premising this much, the follow-
ing suggestion is made for the local self-government of the
different parts of the United Kingdom. There might be created
three separate councils for England, Scotland, and Ireland, each
consisting of a Lower House composed of representatives elected
by the same constituencies and in the same manner as the


English, Scotch, and Irish members of Parliament are at present
elected, but holding office for a definite period of five years. It
may be observed, by way of parenthesis, that throughout these
pages “ England ” is used in its statutory sense, as inclusive of
Wales. The Upper House in each council might consist of repre-
sentatives chosen for the same period by the municipal councils
of the boroughs and quarter sessions of the counties, or whatever
form of county boards may hereafter be substituted for the latter.
To these councils might be entrusted the management of trie
local affairs of the respective parts of the United Kingdom.
Their powers would naturally be very similar to those which are
vested in the legislatures of the different provinces of the
Dominion of Canada by the British North America Act, 1867.
Each council would have jurisdiction in the country for which
it was constituted in the following matters, (a) Direct taxation,
and imposition of charges on various licences for the local
requirements of the country, {I) Borrowing for the same re-
quirements on the exclusive credit of the country. (<r) The
establishment and regulation of offices, and appointment and
payment of officers for local purposes, (d) Municipal and other
local institutions. ( e ) Local public works, except those under-
taken for or connected with the common defence of the empire
or intercommunication between its different parts. (/) Educa-
tion. (g) Property, and civil rights. (//) The administration of
justice in the country, in both civil and criminal proceedings, and
the imposition of punishments, but exclusive of the appointment
of the judges; and (i) Generally, all other matters within the
country of a local or private nature. It might be enacted that
the Acts of these councils should come into force on being
approved by an order of the Privy Council. They would, of
course, be at all times liable to be altered, repealed, or super-
seded by an Act of Parliament; it being the essence of the
present proposal that the local councils should be in all respects
subordinate bodies ; so that Parliament should have theoretically
the same power of interfering with and, if necessary, abrogating
all the proceedings of the councils, and even the councils them-
selves, as it has in theory at present with regard to each of the
colonial legislatures. This theoretical power would in practice


only be put forth when an evident necessity for its exercise arose.
The power of the central executive or government of the day
to prevent any inexpedient measure of the local councils from
coming into force, by withholding the confirmatory order of the
Privy Council, would probably be more frequently called into
action; especially at first, before the new councils had acquired
wisdom and prudence by experience.
The Irish Difficulty. —The foregoing scheme of local self-
government for the United Kingdom has, of course, been pro-
pounded on the assumption that it would be worked loyally and
honestly, and in the same spirit as that in which a similar auto-
nomy has been carried on in our large colonies. It will, however,
at once be objected that in the present state of feeling in Ireland
such an assumption is utterly unwarrantable. Inasmuch as we
are engaged in a practical inquiry, and must take into consider-
ation all the actual circumstances of the various parts of the
empire as they at present exist, we are bound to give full weight
to this objection. The answer to it is twofold. In the first place,
the Irish council would be in a position of subordination to the
Parliament at Westminster, which would render it easy for the
latter at once to check any tendency on the part of the council
to abuse its powers, either in the direction of local injustice or ol
injury to the interest of the empire at large. The misuse of its
powers would be further restrained by the control and authority
which is reserved by the scheme to the central executive. In
both of these respects the scheme differs widely from that con-
tained in Mr. Gladstone’s Irish Government Bill; since under
that Bill the new Irish legislature was to have been in a sense
co-ordinate with and independent of the Parliament at West-
minster, and there was to have been an independent Irish
executive. But in the second place, the scheme here advanced
is only proposed as a necessary part of the plan for consolidating
the empire by admission of colonial representatives into the Im-
perial Parliament. If this should be accomplished, the work
of dealing with a recalcitrant Ireland would thenceforth be very
different from what it has hitherto been. Instead of having to
cope with Great Britain alone, the sister island would find the
united force and weight of the whole British Empire arrayed


against her if she attempted to act disloyally to or unworthily of
the great civilised and orderly entity of which she formed a part.
The Established Churches of England and Scotland. —lt is im-
possible to pass over without notice the effect which the proposed
delegation of local affairs in the United Kingdom would have
upon the Established Churches of England and Scotland. No
change would, in the opinion of the present writer, be justifiable
which would in any degree compromise the position of those
Churches. The Church of England, at any rate, deserves no
such treatment at our hands. She lies at the very root of all the
institutions of the country, it having been mainly through her that
the English succeeded, a thousand years ago, in forming them-
selves into an united nation ; and Parliament was formed upon
the model of the ecclesiastical assemblies which were held long
before it came into existence. The proposed change, however,
need not prejudice the Established Churches in Great Britain.
It might be enacted that no measure should be passed by the
English council affecting the Church of England except with the
consent of the convocations or other future ecclesiastical assem-
bly of that Church, nor by the Scotch council in respect of the
Church of Scotland except with the consent of the General
Assembly. The royal supremacy would be preserved by the
necessity of an Order in Council to ratify all ecclesiastical as well
as all civil acts of the new legislative councils.
§ 3. Act of Incorporation.
Reform of the Lower House of Parliament; Admission of Co-
lonial Representatives. —The way having been thus cleared for
the incorporation of the colonies into the existing Constitution of
the United Kingdom, this incorporation would be effected by the
simple process of summoning representatives from the colonies
to sit in the Commons’ House of Parliament. After the estab-
lishment of the legislative councils in the United Kingdom, it
would be a ridiculous waste of power to maintain the representa-
tion of that kingdom in the Lower Plouse at its present figure.
If for the purpose of returning members to the Imperial Parlia-


ment, the present constituencies were massed together with an
average of five in each group, it would give an ample representa-
tion to the population of the United Kingdom in the assembly
which was charged with the concerns of the whole empire.
Absolute and rigid uniformity would be inexpedient. It does
not exist under the present representative system of the United
Kingdom, and no one but a mere theorist would desire it in the
future. For instance, it would be right that the city of London
should by itself return one member to the re-modelled Imperial
Parliament. But the general effect of the reform should be that
one member should in future have a seat for every five who are
now returned. The English Universities, which now return five
members in all, might be united into one constituency for the
return of a single member. The whole result would be that
whereas now one member represents, roughly speaking, a popula-
tion of 50,000, each member would in future represent 250,000 ;
or, in other words, there would be four members to every million
of the population. This would give 104 members to England,
15 to Scotland, and 21 to Ireland, or 140 to the whole United
Kingdom. The representation of the self-governing colonies
should then be framed upon a similar basis. We should in this
way obtain an Imperial House of Commons of 188 members,
returned in the following proportions from the various parts of
the empire, and representing the population of each on a toler-
ably uniform scale :


Imperial Federation.
149
Province of Empire.
Population.
No. OF
Members.
United Kingdom :
England .......
25,974,439
104
Scotland .......
3,735,573
IS
Ireland .......
5,174,836
21
140
Canada:
Prince Edward Island ....
108,891
I
Nova Scotia . . . . . .
440,572
2
New Brunswick
321,233
2
Quebec .......
1,359,027
6
Ontario .......
1,923,228
8
Manitoba, British Columbia, and Territories
171,859
1
— 20
Newfoundland
161,374
1
Guiana .......
252,186
1
West Indies and Bermudas . ,
Tj-
OO
rh
ro
VO
4
Cape Colony
1,121,648
5
Natal
424,495
2
New South Wales
921,300
4
Victoria .......
961,276
4
South Australia
313,322
2
Queensland ......
309,913
2
Tasmania .......
130,540
I
New Zealand ......
564,304
2
Total ....
45,625,500
l88
This is a small House when compared with its present numbers,
but it will evidently be better to- err, if at all, on
the side of
defect rather than of excess in its size.
It will not be desirable
to bring over more colonists from their homes and
from their
home occupations to attend the Parliament at Westminster than
are absolutely required for a due representation of the colonies.
Moreover, this number is only a starting-point, and will be con-
tinually liable to increase from two causes. In the first place, a
progressive increase is going on in the population of our great
colonies, of which account will have from time to time to be
taken by granting to them additional representatives in the
House.


India and Croton Colonies. —Bat in the second place, no posi-
tion has been assigned in the above scheme to India or any of
our Crown colonies, except such of them as are included in the
West Indies. They cannot as yet be considered ripe for joining
in the proposed representation of the empire, though they might
be given a voice in the Imperial Parliament, by the elevation of
some of their leading men—the great native princes of India, for
instance, and any specially prominent men in the Crown colonies
—to the imperial peerage, and thus affording them a seat and a
vote in the Upper House. But who shall say how long this imma-
turity for the franchise will continue? It will be well rather to
anticipate than to be behind the time of its passing away, in
giving to India and to the Crowm colonies such a representation
in the councils of the empire as will make them feel that they
are indeed integral parts of it, and that their welfare and safety
are inseparably bound up with its prosperity and security.
The Imperial Franchise. —For the principle of an equable
representation in Parliament of all parts of the empire to which
representation can be properly accorded, does not by any means
necessitate a uniformity of franchise throughout the different
provinces. It is only within the last two years that the franchise
has been made uniform throughout the United Kingdom, and the
Universities franchise still remains as an exception and contrast
to the rest. The right of voting for members of the House of
Commons of the Dominion of Canada depends on different
franchises in the various provinces. Manhood suffrage for the
local legislative assembly has been adopted in some of the Aus-
tralasian colonies, but not in others. It is open to discussion
whether, after the imperialization of the Parliament at West-
minster, the election to the Lower House should be direct or
indirect. A direct franchise would, however, probably be insisted
on; and in that case it would be well that, instead of being
uniform throughout the empire, it should be identical in each
province with the local franchise in vogue in the province for the
right of election to the Lower House of the local legislature. And
if this principle be adopted, there is no reason why a very cir-
cumscribed franchise should not in the first instance be created
in India and in certain Crown colonies. They might thus be


given representation in the Imperial House of Commons at a far
earlier stage in their development than if we were to wait until
they were ready for the franchise on a similar scale to that on
which it exists at present in our self-governing colonies.
Subsequent Measures.
Completion of Imperial Unity. —By the practical recognition
which the admission of colonial representatives on an equable
basis jointly with the representatives of the United Kingdom
into the Lower House of the Imperial Parliament would give to
the principle of the participation by the colonies in the control
and the burdens of the empire, the problems with which we
started would be virtually solved. The subsequent measures by
which the principle would be carried out to its complete and
logical conclusions would be gradually elaborated in Parliament
by the combined counsels of the home and colonial representa-
tives. It is vain to speculate upon the precise form which these
measures would take. The present essay, however, would be
incomplete if it did not attempt a sketch of the course which
might be adopted in the direction of consolidating the empire
internally, and rendering it secure from external attack.
Reform of the Upper House of Parliament. —Nothing has been
said as yet about any alteration in the composition of the House
of Lords, beyond a hint that it might receive an accretion from
some of the native princes of India as well as leading colonists.
Although the reform of the House is neither requisite for, nor a
necessary consequence of, the incorporation of the colonies into
the English Constitution, yet probably it would either accompany
or speedily follow that event. The nominal size of the House,
though never approximately reached in its actual sittings, would
be theoretically incongruous beside the greatly reduced House of
Commons. We may anticipate, therefore, that the number of
peers who would receive summonses to attend Parliament would
be in some way limited We are not however, concerned to
suggest how the limitation might be best effected. The Lower
House is at the present time the key of the Constitution. The
composition of the Upper House is, comparatively speaking, of


little moment. No serious fault can be found with its present
practical working; and the risk which must be carefully guarded
against in attempting its reform is that of developing defects from
which it is at present free. As the lineal successor, in an un-
broken line, not only of the Great Council of the Norman kings,
but also of the Witenagemot of England before the Conquest—
nay, more, of the Witenagemot of Wessex, whose existence dates
from the foundation of that kingdom, in a.d. 576, by Cerdic, the
lineal ancestor of our present gracious sovereign—it is entitled to
our enlightened respect, and should be handled with care and
caution. It is at present accessible to every genuine expression
of the popular will. If its members be artificially limited, if the
peers who obtain a seat in it owe their position to election by
their fellow-peers, let us beware lest, instead of, as now, regarding
themselves as sitting to represent the whole nation and legislate
for its benefit, they consider themselves in the light of what they
would actually be—representatives of a limited order, and deem
it their duty to act with an exclusive regard to the interests of
that order.
Imperial Finance. —We pass on to the practical matters of
business which will occupy the attention of the imperialized
Parliament, First and foremost among these, as being that on
which all the rest will depend, is the subject of finance. What
sources of revenue from the various parts of the empire will be
under the control and at the disposal of the Imperial Parliament?
We have three precedents to guide us in suggesting an answer to
this question. There is first that of the United States of America.
In that Federation, nine-tenths of the common revenue is pro-
duced by customs duties on imports and excise duties on distilled
spirits, fermented liquors, and tobacco, and on banks. The re-
mainder is derived from miscellaneous sources, including the
profit on coinage, sales of public lands, and fees on patents and
public appointments. As the revenue is largely in excess of the
expenditure, and a considerable portion of it is devoted yearly
towards liquidating the national debt, there is no necessity to
contemplate any levy of contributions to it from the constituent
States. It is otherwise in the next case to which we shall refer —
that of the German Empire. There the revenue from customs


and excise, posts and telegraphs, suffices to defray only about nine-
fifteenths of the annual imperial expenditure. The governmental
receipts from railways and certain other items make up another
fifteenth ; but the remaining third is supplied by contributions
from the various States of the empire, in proportion to the popula-
tion of each. Our last precedent is that of the Dominion of
Canada. We find here a state of things exactly the reverse of
that which exists in Germany. The Dominion revenue is derived
from customs and excise and the post-office, and from various
miscellaneous sources, and it is assumed that it will in each year
considerably exceed the expenditure. If it does not, an excess
must be provided by borrowing; for, by the British North
America Act, 1867, which gave to the Dominion its legal status,
the Dominion is required to make annual payments to the several
provinces for the support of their governments and legislatures.
The amount so paid in the financial year ending June 30th, 1884,
was no less a sum than 3,600,000 dollars, or about
There can be little doubt that in the consolidated British Empire
of the future the German model would be followed. The im-
perial revenue would consist of the proceeds of certain customs
and excise duties, and of all the stamp duties and posts and tele-
graphs throughout the empire, and of other miscellaneous items.
Any deficit in it would be reasonably required to be supplied by
the different provinces of the empire, according to their popula-
tion —exclusive of India, as long as it had a separate military
establishment and was not proportionately represented in the
Imperial House of Commons. The national debt of the United
Kingdom would properly remain a charge upon the imperial
revenues. It has been created in acquiring and maintaining
the position which Great Britain at present occupies among the
nations of the world, with the material advantages which flow
from it; and every portion of the empire has derived, and still
derives, a benefit from that position, and has partaken of those
advantages. The imperial revenues would also bear the charges
of the Crown and the civil list; but as a set-off to these, the
income of the Crown lands in the United Kingdom would be
carried to the credit of these revenues, instead of swelling the
funds at the disposal of the local councils.


Imperial Defence. —The main purpose to which the imperial
revenues would be devoted, as being the main object of the con-
solidation of the empire, would be that of imperial defence, in its
three branches of the land forces, the navy, and fortifications.
As regards the first and third, India would probably for a time
be separately administered; but it may be anticipated that she
would ultimately be incorporated into the same organization as
the rest of the empire. With this exception, the whole control of
the land and sea forces of the empire and of the imperial fortifi-
cations —using the last word in its widest sense, to include
arsenals and dockyards as well as fortresses and coaling stations—
would naturally devolve on the Imperial Parliament and the im-
perial executive. In allotting them to the different parts of the
empire, due regard rvould of course be had to the comparative
wants of each; but it would be of the essence of the scheme,
in the interests both of safety and of economy, that the whole
machinery of imperial defence should centre round one pivot,
and should be organized on one harmonious plan. This was one
of the first results of the imperial unification of Germany, effected
in 1870-1; and the earliest efforts of our imperialized Parlia-
ment would undoubtedly be directed in the same direction.
With regard to the measures, to a certain extent retrograde, which
will be necessary to carry out this policy, something will be said
hereafter.
Imperial Inter-communication. —The imperial executive and
legislature would likewise assert exclusive control over the posts,
and ultimately also over the telegraphs, throughout the empire.
This would be essential in time of war for the conduct of belli-
gerent operations, and hardly less expedient in time of peace in
the general interests of the inhabitants of the empire. One of
the first practical results of the step might be expected to be the
establishment of an uniform penny post between all parts of the
British dominions.
Imperial Control over Certain Railways , etc. —It would be
found further necessary that the central imperial authority should
exercise active control over such of the railways, canals, and
roads within the empire as were possessed of special strategic
importance for defensive purposes, or formed the means of com-


munication between contiguous provinces, or between the empire
and any foreign country, and also over certain lines of steamships.
An instructive precedent on this point is supplied by the British
North America Act, 1867. That Act excepts from the local
works and undertakings which are to be under the control of the
Government of the province in which they are situate, the follow-
ing classes of enterprises : — (a) Lines of shipping, railways, canals,
telegraphs, and other works connecting the province with any
other province, or extending beyond the limits of the province;
(p) Lines of steamships between the province and any British or
foreign country; and ( c) such works as, though wholly situate
within the province, are at any time declared by the Parliament
of Canada to be for the general advantage of the Dominion or
of two or more of the provinces. The excepted enterprises were,
by the Act of 1867, placed under the control of the Dominion
Parliament; but after the imperialization of the Parliament at
Westminster, works and undertakings of a more than local cha-
racter and importance will properly be controlled by the central
legislature of the empire.
Fiscal and Commercial Arrangements. —lt is not easy to fore-
cast the fiscal and commercial changes which w r ould result from
the admission of colonial representatives into the Imperial Parlia-
ment. They may be divided into two classes : (1) Those which
would necessarily follow from the measure, and (2) those which
might be expected sooner or later to be brought about in conse-
quence of its having taken place. The first heading would not
embrace any large or important number of particulars. Each
province of the empire (except, for the present, India) would be
bound to send up to the imperial exchequer all the income re-
ceived within its limits in respect of the customs and excise duties
on certain articles, say alcoholic liquors and tobacco, and a
further contribution, if necessary, proportionate to its population,
to supply any deficit in the imperial revenue. The collection
of the duties, however, might either be undertaken by imperial
officials or be left in the hands of the provincial Government.
The course adopted would probably not be uniform, as there
would be no necessity for its being so. In the United Kingdom
the customs and excise officers would probably be imperial In


colonies which levied additional customs duties for their own
local purposes, the organization of, at any rate, the customs
would probably remain in the hands of the provincial Government,
and the province would deduct a sum in respect of cost of col-
lection and management, before remitting to London the proceeds
of those duties to which the imperial exchequer was entitled.
The further provincial contribution, if any, to the imperial re-
sources would, of course, be raised as part of the revenue of the
province by such local means as the provincial legislature might
determine upon. These would appear to be all the fiscal
measures necessarily consequent upon the unification of the
empire in the way proposed in . these pages. The second head
of inquiry, on the other hand, as to what further fiscal and com-
mercial changes might be expected to result from it, opens up a
wide field for speculation, but one which is not very pertinent to
the present purpose. Suffice it, therefore, to say that the unifica-
tion of the empire might not improbably lead to some modification
in the present resolute free-trade attitude of the mother-country,
and in the stiff protectionist attitude of some of our leading
colonies. It would be strange if it did not eventually result in
the adoption of the most free and unfettered commercial inter-
course between all parts of the empire which could be permitted
consistently with the necessary financial requirements of the
imperial exchequer and the local Governments.
Resumption of Certain Rowers Delegated to Colonial Legislatures
—lt will have been observed that the foregoing scheme contem-
plates the resumption by the central legislature and executive ol
some of the powers and functions at present exercised by local
colonial Governments. The case of the control over the postal
service and over the great lines of communication by land and
sea, which was entrusted by the British North America Act, 1867,
to the Dominion Government in Canada, has already been
specially mentioned. The new imperial fiscal arrangements,
simple as they would be, would yet necessitate a certain inter-
ference with the existing local autonomy of the great colonies.
The most serious curtailment of the present semi-independent
status of these colonies would, however, take place in connection
with the new provisions for the defence of the empire. The


control over the militia, military, and navy service, including the
volunteers, and generally over the arrangements for defensive pur-
poses, which is now vested in the Dominion Government of
Canada, and in the Governments of our other great colonies,
would require to be surrendered into the hands of the central
Government. But this is, of course, an essential condition of
any plan for the consolidation of the empire ; and unless the
individual colonies are prepared to make this concession for the
general public weal, it is idle to discuss the subject at all. The
extent of authority which should be left to the local legislatures
over such matters as currency and coinage, including the issue of
paper money and legal tender, patents and copyrights, would be
a subject for future consideration. It is evident that the infusion
of colonial representation into the Imperial Parliament would
give to that Parliament a moral right, in addition to the legal
power which it possesses even at present, to interfere in colonial
affairs to an extent beyond the narrow limits which the mere
stability and security of the empire required, if that interference
could be shown to be for the general welfare of the empire
at large ; and the same infusion would, of course, induce the
colonies to acquiesce in such interference to an extent which,
under existing circumstances, they would not tolerate.
The Imperial Executive. —Nor would the concessions required
by the new arrangement be all on our side, and be demanded
from the colonies alone. The colonial representatives in the
Parliament at Westminster would acquire a larger share in the
management of the domestic concerns of the United Kingdom
than would be gained by the home representatives in that
assembly in the management of local colonial affairs through the
resumption of powers which are at present entrusted to the
colonial legislatures. These legislatures would be left, after the
resumption had taken place, with greater self-governing functions
than would have been entrusted to the local councils in the
different parts of the United Kingdom. The scheme advocated
in these pages docs not contemplate the creation in England,
Scotland, or Ireland of any such local executive as is possessed
at the present time by the great colonies. Executive officers
must, of course, be attached to the local councils of these


portions of the United Kingdom, but they would occupy a wholly
subordinate position; and the imperial executive attached to the
Parliament at Westminster, and dependent for its continuance in
office on the will of that Parliament, would remain the executive
of the United Kingdom. It would be desirable that the altera-
tions in this part of our Constitution should be very slight. The
functions of the President of the Local Government Board and
the educational functions of the Vice-President of the Privy
Council would be superseded by the new order of things; but
with these exceptions there would be little material change in the
home duties of the central Government of the day. The practical
advantages of avoiding the necessity of creating a new adminis-
trative machinery of a semi-independent character for each part
of the United Kingdom are obvious; and any sentimental ob-
jections which might at the first blush of the matter be raised
against the admission of colonists to a share of the control over
the administration of the home business of the United Kingdom
will, upon consideration, vanish. The local affairs of the United
Kingdom, as the heart of the empire and the seat of the central
Imperial Government, concern, in a sense, the inhabitants of
the whole British dominions. The United Kingdom derives
enormous substantial benefit from the position which it thus
occupies; and it is not unreasonable that its people should be
asked to give up some amount of privilege in return for that
position, especially when it is proposed that the burden of their
national debt shall be shifted to the shoulders of the whole
empire. But after all, the amount of privilege which would be
surrendered would exist in idea rather than in reality; for the
preponderance which the United Kingdom would retain in the
parliamentary representation would preserve to it for some
generations to come the virtual control over the central executive.
Moreover, if sacrifice of autonomy there be, it is one which has
been made twice before in the interests of true patriotism. The
share which the colonists would acquire in the management of
the affairs of the mother-country under the proposed arrangement
is less than that which was conceded to Scotchmen in English
affairs by the Act of Union of 1706, or to Irishmen in the affairs
of Great Britain by the Act of Union of 1800.


Administration of Justice. —The scheme under consideration
would not necessarily require any alteration in our existing courts
of justice either in the United Kingdom or in the colonies. As a
matter of fact, it is, however, probable that, independently of any
action in the direction of imperial unity, and still more if such
action is taken, an amalgamation of the two present ultimate
Courts of Appeal, the House of Lords and the Judicial Com-
mittee of the Privy Council, will ere long take place. After our
scheme came into force, such of the judges of the final courts or
court of appeal as held office by appointment, would, of course,
be appointed by the central executive. That executive would
also appoint the judges of the supreme courts of judicature and
of the inferior courts in the United Kingdom. The judges in
the colonies and in India, and the law officers of the Crown in
the different parts of the empire, would continue to be appointed
as they are at present: the Lord Chancellor of Great Britain, the
Lord Chancellor of Ireland, and the law officers for the United
Kingdom being members of the central executive.
Conclusion. —The foregoing proposals for the consolidation and
unification of the British Empire are submitted as being within
the range of practical politics and capable of being carried into
effect in the natural course of development of the English Con-
stitution, and without any violent dislocation of our institutions.
They make no claim to be of a brilliant or ambitious character;
but they claim to be workable, and to entail, if adopted, no break
in that continuous political history of more than a thousand years,
of which members of the English race are so justly proud, and
which has been to them a source of such untold blessings. They
would be rejected by foreign jurists as incongruous, inadequate,
and imperfect; but for that very reason they are, as the present
writer believes, in harmony with the genius of the people of our
empire, and adapted to their wants. British politics have ever
been carried on in the past, not under the hard and fast letter of
an elaborate and formal paper constitution, but in a spirit of
mutual compromise and good understanding. In the conduct
of our public affairs we have ever kept in mind the truth ex-
pressed in that eternally wise line of Hesiod :


vrjTTLOL , ovS’ Icracrw ocrco tt\lov rifucrv tvo.vto'S,
“ Alas, man knows not, simple fool,
How much the half exceeds the whole.”
If we would bring to a successful issue our attempts at the
unification of the empire, we must proceed in them in the same
spirit. We must labour not for any grand and heroic measure,
but for such adaptations of our existing institutions as can be
most naturally and readily effected. Above all, we must take
care that no premature step is taken which would destroy the
absolute sovereign supremacy of Parliament—that essential factor
in our Constitution which, as long as it exists, preserves to us the
possibility of unlimited modifications and adaptations of our
political system to meet the ever-changing phases of human
affairs, without recourse to any revolution or coup d'etat , but
which, if it is once extinguished, will probably never be found
capable of being replaced.
LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
Butler & Tanner, The Sehvood Printing Works, Frome, and London.


THE IMPERIAL PARLIAMENT BEI
Edited by SYDNEY BUXTON, M.P.
In Uniform Crown Bvo Volumes, neatly bound in red cloth , lettered on hack
and side. is. eacfy.
IMPERIAL FEDERATION. By the Marquis of Lorne.
, . At this moment Lord Lorne intervenes especially opportunely with his contribu-
tion of a volume on the subject (of Imperial Federation) to Mr. Sydney Buxton’s ‘lmperial
Parliament series/ ” — Times . # . .
“Itdeals with one of the most important questions of future politics, and we cordially
welcome its appearance at the head of a series that we hope will be a widely circulated poli-
tical library for the people.”— Pall Mall Gazette .
REPRESENTATION. By Sir John Lubbock, Bart, M.P.
t( The volume is also written in a calm, judicial spirit, and although warmly advocating its
particular proposal, may be said to be entirely free from party bias. It well deserves the
wide circulation it has already attained.”— Liverpool Mercury .
LOCAL ADMINISTRATION. By William Rathbone, M.P.,
Albert Pell, Esq., and F. C. Montague, M.A.
", . ; The authors have grappled with this complicated question most skilfully, with
the result that they have produced a little book of some 150 pages in which a vast amount of
information on the whole subject of local administration and local taxation is presented in a
most readable form. . . — Daily News.
ENGLAND AND RUSSIA IN ASIA. By Right Hon. W. E.
Baxter.
“No calmer, more temperate or more judicious pages could ever have been written.’’— Echo.
WOMEN SUFFRAGE. By Mrs. Ashton Dilke, and William
Woodall, M.P.
“ Appearing as it does on the eve of a general election, and written with conciseness and
argumentative force, the little work is one that cannot fail to prove a timely addition to the
political literature of the day.”— Daily News.
LOCAL OPTION. By W. S. Caine, M.P., William Hoyle,
and Rev. Dawson Burns, D.D.
“In the course of this work many of the most common objections to the proposed measure
are stated and answered in a very clear and capable manner.”— Literary World.
LEASEHOLD ENFRANCHISEMENT. By H. Broadhurst,
M.P., and R. T. Reid, M.P.
“A vigorous exposition of the evils of the present leasehold system I—Academy.
DISESTABLISHMENT. By H. Richard, M.P., and T.
Carvell Williams, Esq.
“ Your little book is admirable alike in regard to facts and argument. I have read nothing
on the Church question so complete and so calculated to influence public opinion in the right
direction.” — Mr. Bright on the Church Question.
REFORM OF THE HOUSE OF LORDS. By James Bryce,
M.P. [ Shortly .
REFORM OF LONDON GOVERNMENT AND OF CITY
GUILDS. By J. F. B, Firth, Esq. [ Shortly.
LAND REFORM. By Right Hon. G. J. Shaw-Lefevre, M.P.
[ Shortly.
London : SWAN SONNENSCHEIN, LOWREY AND Co.,
Paternoster Square.


■I I
A WONDERFUL MEDICINE.
BEEGHAM’S PILLS,
Are universally admitted to be
_ _ _ _ worth a Guinea a Box for Bilious
OIT IT ffM SJ f| |SfS| *C* Oil I O and Nervous Disorders, such as
■sPl® I ■ Irl fefi IW| % p|| I \ wind and pain in the Stomach, Sick
■ULLi w I 818 111 w I ILL v Headache, Giddiness, Fulness and
Swelling after Meals, Dizziness, and
Drowsiness, Cold Chills, Flushings
nPPAII ■Bl FA All I A of Heat, Loss of Appetite, Shortness
EJ L L | l l| II fe| 'V UEI I V ot Breath, Costiveness, Scurvy,
OE- IT IJ) fiP ft iwl ttl I ILLu Blotches on the Skin, Disturbed
w ■ ■ ■■" Sleep, Frightful Dreams, and all
Nervous and Trembling Sensations,
_ _ „ _ etc. The first Dose will Give Belief
Ob ■ Oil M flii *C* Bill I O in Twenty Minutes. This is no
ol*ra » rf H 111 \ rll I \ fiction . for the y ha ' r 0 done in
LLW 11 al 111 W I ILL W countless cases. Every sufferer is
earnestly invited to try one Box of
these Pills, and they will be ac-
BEEGHAM’S PILLS »^a«»aabok
Vllfllll w I Ifcfcw For Females of all ages these Pills
are invaluable, as a few doses of
them bring aboutall that is required,
IT ft 11 ■AHJ 2% |*| 111 A No female should be without them.
Mil h I BeS n \ I# i I I There is no medicine to be found to
ULLU ll H Ilf O IILLO equal BEECHAM’S PILLS for re-
moving any obstruction or irregu-
larity of the system. If taken ac-
■%■■■■ ■amßn t a 11 ■ a cording to the directions given with
DLL |l U n ||fi| |J I I I each Box, they will soon restore
DCCuimlVI o rILLo “ geato “ d
For a Weak Stomach, Impaired
Digestion, and all Disorders of the
Fa |_ LOII R Sl’ *ft ftll | ft Liver, they act like magic, and a few
Hirlantlili m 11 I X doses will be found to woik wonders
ULL W 11 f» 111 W I ILL if open the most important organs in
the human machine. They strength-
en the whole muscular system, re-
■■ mm • ■ m mmsm* store the long-lost complexion, bring
ll LITjiLI H mH O IJ 11 I O back the keen edge of appetite, and
nr I I9fl mm iWi «% w I I I arouse into action, with the rosebud
mm la !■ Wll ll ill W I llblbw of health, the whole physical energy
of the human frame. These are facts
testified continually by members of
ft ft A1 1 H■M FA All I A all classes of society; and one of the
II PPi I*ll II fHi \ Vll I V be&t guarantees to the nervous and
Qrrllll ft If I «J I ILL «J debilitated is BEECHAM’S PILLS
w 1 * ■■■■ w ■ aMaaw p ave th e largest sale of any Patent
Medicine in the world.
ft r r II H O Rll I O directions given with each Box,
Kf*P|j if H Iff fll I«\ Sold by all Druggists and Patent
™ mm ** l * * " ■ ■■■ " w Medicine Dealers in Boxes at Is. lsd.
and 2s. 9d. each.
