

“England, Home, and Beauty.”
SKETCHES OF
CHRISTIAN LIFE AND WORK IN
ENGLAND IN iB7B.
BY THE
REV. H. B. MACARTNEY, Jr., M.A.
INCUMBENT OF ST. MARY’S, CAULFIELD, VICTORIA,
AUSTRALIA.
LONDON:
JOHN F. SHAW AND CO.
48 PATERNOSTER ROW.




“England, Home, and Beauty.”
SKETCHES OF
CHRISTIAN LIFE AND WORK IN
ENGLAND IN iB7B.
BY THE
REV. H. B. MACARTNEY, Jr., M.A.
INCUMBENT OF ST. MARY’S, CAULFIELD, VICTORIA,
AUSTRALIA.
LONDON:
JOHN F. SHAW AND CO.
48 PATERNOSTER ROW.
[A ll rights reserved. ]




Bote*
It may be well to state that the writer of the follow-
ing pages is the son of the Very Eev. Hussey Borgh
Macartney, D.D., Dean and Archdeacon of Melbourne,
who emigrated with Bishop Perry to Australia in 1847.
Mr. Macartney graduated at Trinity College, Dublin,
about twenty-one years ago, and returning to Victoria,
became in 1873 the editor of a paper which has a wide
circulation in the Colonies, entitled, The Missionary at
Home and Abroad.
In February, 1878, Mr. Macartney’s health having
completely failed, the result of an injury to the spine
in early life, and of a subsequent sunstroke, he obtained
a year’s leave of absence from Dr. Moorhouse, the pre-
sent Bishop of Melbourne, and it was during these
holidays that the following letters were addressed to
his friend, Mr. W. E. Morris (editor pro. tern.), for inser-
tion in the Missionary.




OBrtract of a Letter from tfje author*
“ I borrow the title from the Trafalgar hattle-song,
because in one short sentence it expresses and compre-
hends all my feelings both before and since my visit to
Great Britain, ... I suppose 1 call England ‘ Home ’
because I am Irish, and for the same reason I call
home Home because I dwell in the uttermost parts of
the earth; but though England is neither my birth-
land nor my place of rest, I love her for her beauty—
that beauty which surpasses all the collective loveliness
of art, and literature, and science—of earth, and air,
and sea —the beauty of Christ’s features in Christ’s
people; glimpses of the King’s face and of the King’s
character in the heaven-born thoughts, the gracious
words, the patient, lowly, loving lives of His blood-
bought waiting Church. There is no beauty like the
beauty of holiness, and there is no holiness away from
Christ, of whom it may be said in a loftier sense than
it was said of poor lost Absalom, ‘ln all Israel there
was none to be so much praised for his beauty; from
the sole of his foot even to the crown of his head there


was no blemish in him.’ The fascination, the charm
of the Heavenly One is not gone from the earth, hut
should rather he strengthening, as *' the life of Jesus ’is
more and more manifested ‘in mortal flesh;’ and we
look for the day when our enemies in the world shall
he compelled to confess to the marked divine likeness
in every child of God, *As Thou art, so were they; each
one resembled the children of a King.’ ”


Content#,
LETTER I.
THE SHIP 1
LETTER 11.
THE VOYAGE 3
LETTER 111.
THE RED SEA —THE SUEZ CANAL —THE MEDITERRANEAN —
FIRST DAYS IN ENGLAND 7
LETTER IV.
HAMPSTEAD —THE NYANZA MISSIONARIES —CHISELHURST —
TUNBRIDGE WELLS INDIAN FEMALE INSTRUCTION
SOCIETY REV. T. P. HUGHES ON THE AFGHANS —
BOURNEMOUTH —C. M. S. ANNIVERSARY . . • l 7
LETTER V.
MAY MEETINGS BIBLE SOCIETY —MISSIONARY LEAVES
PASTORAL AID —JEWS —RELIGIOUS TRACT, COLONIAL
AND CONTINENTAL —SUNDAY SCHOOL INSTITUTE —TO
IRELAND —LONDON AGAIN —REV. W. H. AITK.EN . . 31
LETTER VI.
CHELTENHAM —TUNBRIDGE WELLS —MILDMAY CONFERENCE
—MR. BLACKWOOD CONFERENCE ADDRESSES —COLO-
NIAL INSTITUTE 44
LETTER VII.
MALVERN —FATHER IGNATIUS —EVANGELISATION SOCIETY—
KESWICK CONFERENCE —AMANDA SMITH . . -57
LETTER VIII.
MR. COWPER-TEMPLE’S CONFERENCE AT BROADLANDS —THEO-
DORE MONOD— ANDREW JUKES —REV, G. BODY —MISS
SMILEY —F. CHARRINQTON 73


LETTER IX.
SWITZERLAND —GENEVA CONFERENCE, ETC. . . • 9 1
LETTER X.
SWITZERLAND CHAMODNIX GRINDELWALD BISHOP OP
OHIO —RIGI —PARIS —THE BIBLE KIOSK —MR. M I ALL —
MISS DE BROEN —GRANVILLE—GUERNSEY —TO IRELAND
—MOUNT MELLERAY —DUBLIN 108
LETTER XL
ST. HELENS —REV. W. HASLAM —MRS. AURIOL BARKER —GLAS-
GOW — MR. SOMERVILLE GLASGOW CONVENTION MR.
SWAN —DISCUSSION ON THE BAPTISM OF THE HOLY GHOST 1 24
LETTER XII.
DUNDEE—M‘CHEYNE—THE KILSYTH REVIVAL—EDINBURGH
HUDDERSFIELD —COFFEE-HOUSE AND BRITISH WORK-
MAN—LEICESTER *3B
LETTER XIII.
CAMBRIDGE MR. AITKEN’s MISSION REV. J. BARTON —
IPSWICH —BELSTEAD —BIRCH 149
LETTER XIV.
LONDON DRAWING-ROOM MEETINGS —STAFFORD ROOMS —TO
CANNES —MEETINGS THERE 160
LETTER XV.
CANNES MEETINGS —PARIS —THEODORE MONOD —CHELTEN-
HAM CONFERENCE —WESTON-SUPER-MARE . . . 169
LETTER XVI.
ROBERT CHAPMAN OP BARNSTAPLE 177
LETTER XVII.
george muller’s orphanages—mark’s tay—bedstead
—MEETINGS IN LONDON 1 85
LETTER XVIII.
A SUNDAY IN LONDON —DR. PARKER —CHURCH MISSIONARY
COLLEGE —CANON LIDDON AT ST. PAUL’S—HOME OP
INDUSTRY —ANNIE MACPHERSON 193
LETTER XIX.
CHRISTMAS IN LONDON —SIR A. COTTON AND LADY HOPE —
FAREWELLS —ON BOARD THE “GARONNE”— VOYAGE
OUT —CAPE TOWN —ZULU WAR —CAULFIELD ONCE MORE 204


ENGLAND, HOME, AND BEAUTY.
better jfirst.
THE SHIP,
Adelaide, Tuesday, February 12 th, 1878.
0 U know that we were to have sailed from
Hobson’s Bay in the “ Stad Amsterdam 11 at
&***& eleven a.m. on Saturday last, February 9, and
many kind friends came on board early in the day to
say farewell, amid torrents of rain; but a slight accident
occurred to the machinery, causing a delay of twenty-
three hours : consequently we did not get away from
the anchorage until Sunday morning about ten o’clock,
and steamed to sea with thunder pealing and lightning
flashing all around. It was not possible to hold service
in the forenoon, but we had more than an hour of
sacred music around the piano in the beautiful deck
saloon, which looks down through green plants into
the dining saloon, and which will form a kind of gallery
and choir when we meet for divine service below. At
seven in the evening the deck saloon was quite filled;
the Eev. G. Bourdillon read the evening service; we had
nice singing, and I gave a short address. lam thank-
* A


ful to say that Captain Boon is quite favourable to
every kind of religious ordinance, and we are to have
prayer every day at half-past ten. We have about
three hundred souls on board altogether, including
forty marines, who have been serving in the Pacific on
board the “ Beagle,” under the command of Lieutenant
Crawford Caffin, whose father is a distinguished Chris-
tian naval officer, and takes a lead in every good work
in the mother-country. I have just left the ship and
come to Adelaide by a steam launch and train, again
in a downpour of rain—the welcome fruit of and answer
to our prayers after so long a drought. As we are to
sail at two, I cannot add anything further; so that I
will now bid you a loving farewell. I am far from
strong, and I look forward to rest with real joy, though
the Church of God in Melbourne still forms the home
of my heart next to the one above. Mr. and Mrs.
Kermode, of Mona Yale, Tasmania, are going home
with us, and occupy the adjoining cabin, so that we
are quite a large family party.


SLettn* -Scconlf.
THE VOYAGE,
On hoard the “ Stad Amsterdam," in the Red Sea,
March 12th, 1878.
fERMIT me in the first instance to convey,
through you, our heartfelt thanks to all the
readers of The Missionary, who have during
the last month remembered us in prayer. The passage
from Adelaide to Aden has been indescribably fair-
no storm, no angry billow, and hardly a breath of
contrary wind. Within the ship, moreover, we have
had a memorable calm—no excitement, no death, no
sickness, and our fellow-passengers have given an all
but unanimous consent to the daily worship of God.
Our course has been briefly thus: Melbourne to
Adelaide, Sunday, February 10th, to Tuesday, February
12th. I landed at the Semaphore very early on
Wednesday to post letters, &c.; called on the Bishop,
who was most kind, and first showed me a beautiful
view of Adelaide, which lies, as the Holy City will lie,
four-square, a mile every way, belted with green
reserves; and afterwards we went together to the new
cathedral. The city is nothing in size compared to
Melbourne, but the hills in the background, the plenti-
ful wooding in the suburbs, and the street scenery,


convey the idea of taste and beauty, and of solid
national wealth.
The new Governor, Sir William Jervois, embarked
at three o’clock; we weighed anchor at nightfall,
passed Cape Borda at break of day on Thursday
(February 14th), caught sight of the Lighthouse at
King George’s Sound just as we were going to service
on Sunday evening, and on Monday afternoon we took
a long but not a last farewell of the Australian land
off Cape Leuwin. Then taking a right line bearing
north-west to Socotra, we commenced making one long
foaming furrow through the Indian Ocean. Cutting
the tropics obliquely, we were well nigh overcome with
so many days of heat, until the equator was passed on
Sunday morning, March 3 r ch All that afternoon we
were in sight of pretty wooded coral islands belonging
to the Maidive group. Waving palms and a few
canoes attracted every one’s attention ; but I could not
ascertain whether the glad tidings of the first advent
of our adorable Lord Jesus had ever been carried there.
On Friday afternoon (March Bth) African land came
in sight. The island of Socotra is wild and barren, fifty
miles long, with ranges 5000 feet high, and a few Arab
residents. It was once a coaling station before the
English took possession of Aden. On Saturday (March
9th) we skirted the north shore of a second island, Abd
el Kari, then came Cape Gardafui, and then the calm
blue waters of the gulf. At two a.m. on Monday
(March nth) two thundering guns announced that we
had reached our moorings opposite the extraordinary
fortress of Aden—exactly 254 days from Adelaide, and
a distance of 6180 miles. We were nearly all ashore
by seven o’clock, and experienced no common pleasure


in surveying this remarkable rocky peninsula, with its
wonderful Oriental sights and all-world nationalities.
We drove through the port, and across a savage moun-
tain, by a beautiful road, to the old city of Aden,
visited the wonderful reservoirs which supply the
thousands of inhabitants with water in this almost
rainless land, and returned to breakfast in the “ Prince
of Wales’ Crescent” before ten. Of all I heard and
saw and felt in this, my first experience of a Bible
land, I must not speak in a private letter. Suffice it to
say that people, beasts, birds, buildings, fruits, mer-
chandise, dress, manners, customs, and climate ga\o
me a commentary on Scripture in a few short hours
more precious to the mind and heart'than the most
costly volumes of travel or research. A visit to the
post-office, the church, and the English chaplain, Rev.
A. Walsh, exhausted ray remaining hour, and at twelve
we were again under steam, making the Straits of
Babelmandeb in ten hours, a beautiful revolving light
shining right across the narrow passage. The rocks on
our right acquired a rich significance when we remem-
bered that it was the “ uttermost part of the earth,” or
“ Land’s End ” of Asia, from whence the Queen of Sheba
came to hear the wisdom of Solomon “ concerning the
name of the Lord.” And now (Tuesday), as I sit on
deck, the glorious sun is shining out of heaven on a sea
of sumptuous blue, picked out with myriad patches of
white tumbling foam; big brown rocky islets are lying
close between us and the Arabian shore, and three great
steamers are coming down upon us from the North.
Our work on board has been of a very simple yet
constant kind. The Rev. Mr. Bourdillon is Ravy
chaplain,” and conducts a short service at half-past


eight A.M. among the blue-jackets. At half-past nine,
immediately after breakfast, we meet in the deck saloon,
and have a hymn, reading, exposition, and prayer.
The same every evening on the deck forward at a
quarter-past six, except that the exposition is mainly
evangelistic; and books are exchanged afterwards from
a little circulating- library given me by Mr. H. Cooke
before leaving Melbourne. Morning prayer is largely
attended; the evening meeting, about sunset, is always
crowded. On Sundays we have a united service aft
at half-past ten A.M., and two services simultaneously
on Sunday evenings: of fruit I cannot yet speak
positively.
You will be thankful to know that though I anti-
cipated and experienced much suffering from the cease-
less beating and throbbing of the screw, I am not
worse than on leaving home. I have conscientiously
rested the whole of each day between the services ; and
the services themselves, with so many helpers, have
been a delight and not a toil. My dear wife and
children are wonderfully well, and it is generally felt
and expressed on board that such a succession of
beautiful and prosperous days has seldom been known
at sea.
March * 13 are opposite Mecca to-day, and
within two days’ run from Suez, where I must post
this. My next letter will, I trust, tell of all dangers
past, and the great joy of communion with the people
of God in England, commenced for a season —if indeed
that “ little while ” does not expire ere then to make
room for fadeless pleasures in an eternal day.


THE RED SEA —THE SUEZ CANAL —
THE MEDITERRANEAN —FIRST DAYS IN ENGLAND.
Hampstead, England, April Bth, 1878.
SEFORE entering upon any detailed account of
the many joys and mercies which have attended
our arrival in London, I must retrace my steps
to the date of my last letter, and give you a few ex-
tracts from my voyage journal.
Wednesday, March 13th. —We are now in the Red
Sea the hottest climate in the world—a basin of clear
blue water, lined for 1200 miles with lovely coral; a
valley of brine between the highlands of Africa and
of Arabia, into which scarcely a drop of rain descends,
and into which no river flows. We are over against
Mecca to-day, and our captain tells us how often the
homeward-bound Dutch ships from Java are crowded
with Mohammedans as far as Jeddah, the seaport of
the sacred city. They live on deck, victual themselves,
spend a few weeks in Mecca, and return to their native
country, having attained the position and character of
saints by reason of their pilgrimage, and henceforth
claiming to be maintained by the free-will offerings of
the faithful. Besides these multitudinous beggars from
the East, a fleet of ships is constantly busy in trans-


porting pilgrims from the African coast to the number
of 20,000 annually.
Saturday, March \6th. —We entered the Gulf of Suez
late last night. Though the nights were bitterly cold
I was still sleeping on deck, and at the first dawn
of day the chief officer called me to show me Sinai. I
instantly wakened some of our fellow-passengers who
wished to see the mountain on which the feet of God
had rested, and soon ladies and gentlemen in every
variety of wrapping stood upon the upper deck gazing
towards the east. Before us lay a long line of rocky
heights, of one deep sombre colour, with rounded or
jagged summits sharply cut against the dawn. The
highest of all was “Jebel Katharina,” 8630 feet, and
immediately over its northern slope the eye caught
sight of the head of Sinai. It stands 7450 feet above
the sea, behind Mount Katharina, in a north-easterly
direction, with a crown like the crown of Mont Blanc.
And now the dawn was melting into day, and the
peaks of the great red Egyptian mountains behind us
on the other shore were catching the rays of the rising
sun, and the lovely light was stealing round the
shoulders of the distant hills, and all the sky was
becoming like a thin veil of gold over a depth of delicate
green and blue; and then it was that these everlasting
hills appeared to us at their very best —their base in
the gloomy sea on which we sailed, but their topmost
limit, which seemed to bind the scattered mountains
together by one irregular but romantic line, was all
tinged with an exquisite mixture of gold from the sun
behind and of azure from the sky. This was the time
for thought, or rather for meditation on God’s written
and remembered Word. The Book of Exodus has now


received an eternal illumination in our feyes. With
what freshness we look at chap. xix. 18—“ And Mount
Sinai was altogether on a sniokej because the Lord
descended upon it in fire; and the smoke thereof
ascended as the smoke of a furnace, and the whole
mountain quaked greatly.” And again (chap. xxiv.
10, 17) —They saw the God of Israel; and there was
under His feet as it were a paved work of a sapphire
stone, and as it were the body of heaven in his clearness.
. . . And the sight of the glory of the Lord Was like
devouring fire on the top of the mount in the eyes
of the children of Israel.” But how thankfully this
morning the stream of thought flowed on from Sinai to
Calvary; from thunder-clouds, and curves, and death
penalties, to the cross and to the tomb of the Lamb.
“ Ye are not come,” the Spirit seemed to say, u unto the
mount that might be touched. . . . But ye are come
unto Mount Sion, and unto the city of the living God,
and to Jesus, and to the blood of sprinkling” (Heb.
xii. 18-24).
Though we could not know the exact spot, we
certainly crossed, this afternoon, over the grave of
Pharaoh and of his magnificent army. There “ the
depths covered them; they sank into the bottom as a
stone.” I thought of the words of Charnock—“ It was
a great, real, and typical victory, in the womb of which
all the deliverances of the Church are couched.” It was
almost sundown when we reached Suez —such a con-
trast to Aden, that Gibraltar of the South, in people
and in situation—a low flat shore, and a town that
looked like a confusion of mud buildings after a bom-
bardment. A few boats with grave, fine-looking Turkish
officials came off, together with one broad boat, piled


with oranges, dried fruits, and cigars; and lastly the
agent’s steam launch, on hoard of which, to our great
surprise and joy, we recognised Mr. E. C. Kermode, who
had come to join us after his five months’ visiting
among the missions and missionaries of India. He
told us that we had just missed a surprising spectacle.
The day previous (March 15th) had been Mohammed’s
birthday, and was celebrated in Suez after the strangest
fashion. About two o’clock p.m. the narrow street
leading to the principal mosque was thronged with
about two thousand people, one third of the whole popu •
lation. A body of men soon appeared, accompanied by
singers and trumpeters, and brandishing bright swords.
They occupied the centre of the street, and when the
elder brother of the chief priest arrived on the scene,
they knelt in a long close line, with their heads towards
the mosque, and at the same time holding their swords
across their shoulders, with the sharp edge uppermost.
Upon the backs of these worshippers, and on this sharp
and glittering track, the brother stepped barefoot,
passing at each stride from sword to sword, the blade,
fortunately for him, yielding to a flat position at the
first pressure. Those whom he passed over rose and
ran before to complete this pathway of human flesh
for the holy man all the way to the mosque. Next
came the priest himself upon a horse shod with iron.
Instantly a number of devotees from the crowd offered
themselves to form a living pavement. Prostrating
themselves in the dust, they were closely packed by
the bystanders, and over this bed of bodies Mohammed’s
minister rode to the house of prayer amid the groans
and cries of the wounded. Those who escaped unhurt
hastened to the front to earn brighter honours in


paradise, but those who were, or pretended to be, dis-
abled, were carried to the mosque, where it was said
that they instantly recovered. Public prayer and even-
ing illuminations brought this unworthy celebration to
a close.
Sunday, March iyth. —At sunrise two “P. and 0.”
boats led the way into the Canal, the “ Stad Amsterdam ”
closing the procession. This wonderful work, which
severs two continents and unites two oceans, has no
lock in all its length of 87 miles. It is cut sheer
through shallow lakes and a howling desert, with a
surface width of 320 feet, a depth of 26 feet, and a
floor of 72 feet. The cost of it may be roughly esti-
mated from the revenue, which amounts to about one
and a half millions a-year, and yet yields but a slender
interest. About five steamers pass through on an
average daily, and we paid toll to the amount of nearly a
thousand pounds. A second and much smaller canal
conveys fresh water from the Nile, not only to Ismailia,
but to Suez and Port Said. It was a hallowed Sunday
to many of us, though labour was going forward on the
banks of the canal, and dredges and postal steam-packets
were tasting no rest. The morning sermon was on Philip
and the Eunuch—a desert address ; and we knew that
somewhere, we knew not where, we crossed the path
of the rejoicing Ethiopian, and the path of Abraham
and Isaac and Jacob when going down into Egypt,
and the path of Joseph and Mary, and of God’s holy
Child Jesus when He fled from Herod. We were
moored all night in the Canal, and some of the pas-
sengers went ashore to carry away a little sand or heath
as a memorial of our Sabbath in the wilderness.
Monday, March 18th.—Drenched with dew, and en-


compassed with fog, we lay still this morning till it
was safe to move onward, and about two o’clock w r e
dropped anchor immediately in front of the magnificent
“Netherlands Hotel” at Port Said. While the ship
was coaling we all went ashore into this human hive
Arabs, Egyptians, English, French, Greeks, Italians,
and Maltese—about 7000 in all. It is, I fear, a god-
less place—no chapel or chaplain for the British, and
no one to carry on loving labours amongst so many
men, and women, and children. Like Suez and Aden,
it is not a God-forgotten, but it is a Church-forgotten
town. It owes its existence wholly to the Canal, and
its shores lie so bare and low that they cannot be seen
by a ship at a distance of three miles. Port Said
fattens on the mercantile decay of Alexandria and
Cairo.
Thursday, March We are ploughing our way
to-day through vast billows in the Mediterranean. We
have suddenly emerged from great heat into winter’s
cold, and from great calms into troubled waters. Lut
it is fine overhead, and as it is the equinox we are
thankful that we have only gales, and not storms.
This morning we had a good view of “ Clauda (Acts
xxvii. 16), and in the afternoon we saw the snow on
the highlands of Crete. Had our ship been like the
one in which St. Paul sailed, our experience would have
been like his—“ exceedingly tossed with a tempest,”
Friday, March 29th— We saw the lights of Malta
and Gozo on Saturday evening (23rd); passed close to
the vine-clad hills of Pantellario—a convict settlement
belonging to the Italian Government —early on Sunday
last. Cape Bon was cleared about noon. On Tuesday
{26th) we looked full into the Bay of Algiers, and got


a lovely view of the capital; and equally early on the
following morning we were gazing on the beautiful hills,
and bays, and promontories of Spain. Almeria, with
its population of 28,000, lay along the base of the
nearer ranges of gold-coloured mountains ; and above,
the “Sierra Nevada” stretched for miles, all white with
snow. As we neared the gates of the Mediterranean,
sailing-ships and steamers dotted the ocean on every
side; and at midnight we cleared Gibraltar, and got
out into the Atlantic. The equinoctial gales have so
increased in violence that we have run for shelter into
Lisbon, and are now anchored in the quarantine ground
opposite Belem Castle, in the mouth of the river.
Saturday, March 2,oth. —We have been'delighted with
our day on shore. Lisbon is quite unique—a city of
high houses, and steep ascents, and china-plated walls,
and streets inlaid with rough mosaic, bright on either
hand with fruits and delicately-wrought jewellery. My
personal joy, however, lay outside these things, for one
of the oldest and dearest friends I have in the world—
the Rev. Godfrey Pope—is English chaplain here, and
is engaged in Reformation work both for Spain and
Portugal. When Mr. Kermode and I had, with con-
siderable difficulty, made our way to the chaplaincy,
we found him engaged instructing a Portuguese, once
a Romish priest, now a pastor of a Lisbon Protestant
congregation; and he is only one of three in a like
position. Everything was done by Mr, and Mrs. Pope to
promote our happiness. We went first to the English
cemetery, where we saw not far apart the tombs of two
men who were buried here about the year 175 L an d
who were in their work as far asunder as the poles
Fielding the novelist, and Dr. Doddridge. Then we


went into the chaste and beautiful chapel, where some
350 English assemble every Lord’s day; and after
dinner we drove to Belem (Bethlehem) to see the only
cathedral of importance in the capital, built on the spot
where three and a half centuries ago a farewell service
was held for Yasco di Gama before he went that first
great voyage round the Cape of Good Hope. We
returned to see what we could of the streets, shops,
and squares of Lisbon before re-embarking at three;
and then we parted from our beloved friends, who are
full of hope concerning the popularity and spread of
gospel truth far and wide throughout the Peninsula.
Mr. Kermode left us here to visit the Protestant
missions and great sights of Spain.
Saturday, April 6th. —We could not get away from
our anchorage at Lisbon till daylight on last Sunday.
We got into Plymouth Sound on Wednesday, April 3rd,
after a rough passage across the Bay of Biscay; but we
were filled with thankfulness to find that while we had
been lying in the Tagus, secure from harm, an awful
storm had prevailed off the coast, so much so that the
“ Stella,” a Dutch packet, twin sister to our own, had
lost spars, boats, and deck-house, and had reached port
only a few hours before ourselves. At daylight on
Thursday we passed the Isle of Wight, close to the
scene of the terrible disaster which had overtaken the
“ Eurydice ” only a few days before. The coast was
radiant with April sunshine all the way round to the
mouth of the Thames, and yesterday morning we
reached Gravesend, and were docked at half-past two.
We were met by Mr. F. Lack worthy, an old and much-
valued Australian friend, and now managing director
of the Bank of New Zealand, who with the most


thoughtful kindness had a large private omnibus await-
ing our arrival within ten yards of the ship’s side ; and
before the sun was down we found ourselves welcome
guests in a bright and Christian home, facing Belsize
Park, on the slope of Hampstead Hill. This seemed
all the more delightful, as we had made preparations
to go to an hotel in the first instance.
Wednesday, April 10 th. —I attended service at Christ
Church, Hampstead, on Sunday last, and had the great
pleasure of meeting the vicar, Eev, E. H. Bickersteth,
after the celebration of the Lord’s Supper, and of hear-
ing him preach in the evening. On Monday I called
at the Church Missionary House, and spent a most
interesting half-hour with Mr. Eugene Stock, the editor
of the C. M. Gleaner, who, with his brother secretaries,
lay and clerical, had just received the melancholy tidings
of the murder of Lieutenant Smith and all his party on
an island of savages in Lake Victoria Nyanza, after
a most triumphant reception from King Mtesa on the
northern shore. I next called on Mr. S. W. Partridge
the publisher, of 9 Paternoster-row, and afterwards
on Mr. Morgan, the editor of the Christian. Then a
brief visit to the London Young Men’s Christian Asso-
ciation in Aldersgate Street, and at half-past seven that
evening I found myself at their great anniversary, and
on their platform at Exeter Hall. A great war-debate in
the House of Parliament deprived us of some distin-
guished speakers, including Lord Shaftesbury ; but the
addresses were good, and, though oratory was lacking,
the audience seemed intensely to appreciate three things
—humour, doctrinal soundness, and personal Christian
character.
Friday, April 12 th. —The mail closes this evening


and I must briefly close this month’s correspondence.
Bishop Selwyn died yesterday, leaving a mighty blank
in the Church and nation. I spent two hours in the
forenoon with our beloved Bishop Perry. His heart
is as full of God’s work in Victoria, and of personal
friends there, as when he lived and moved among us.
In the afternoon I spent half an hour with the lay and
clerical secretaries of the Church Missionary Society in
Salisbury Square. Nothing could exceed their cordi-
ality, and I was much struck with the healthy, decided,
and yet spiritual tone which characterises their inter-
course. With such men at the helm, the good old
Society may count on a future of increased and ever-
increasing glory.


( I? )
JFourtfb
HAMPSTEAD —THE NYANZA MISSIONARIES —CHIBELHURST—TUN-
BRIDGE WELLS INDIAN FEMALE INSTRUCTION SOCIETY
REV. T. P. HUGHES ON THE AFGHANS —BOURNEMOUTH —
C. M. S. ANNIVERSARY.
S Ravens/ell, Bromley, Kent, April 26th, 1878.
E came here from Hampstead just at the
blush of spring. It is the sweetest of Kentish
scenery, and a thousand birds are filling the
air with music from garden and from wood. We are
bathed in sunshine. God Himself seems to be irra-
diating the season when His children gather to
celebrate His praise and to stimulate each other’s zeal.
The great religious meetings have just begun, and much
is hoped for as the issue. The following are notes
from my journal since last mail:—
Sunday, April 14 th. —Attended St. John’s Chapel,
Hampstead. The sermon was by the incumbent, Eev.
Henry Wright, one of the secretaries of the C. M. S,
a man of considerable private fortune, of devoted piety,
and whose children one by one are deciding for Chris-
tian service abroad. He was pleading for the venerable
Society, bleeding afresh as she was from the wound so
recently inflicted at Victoria Nyanza.


Tuesday , April 15 th. —An engagement to breakfast
this morning with Bishop Perry was interrupted by
Bishop Selwyn’s funeral; but nevertheless I attended
the meeting at Salisbury Square, to which the invita-
tion had reference. I found myself at noontime in the
library of the Church Missionary House, and in the
midst of a group of young men who were pacing up and
down, and anxiously conversing with each other. They
were candidates for Victoria Kyanza in the room of those
who had perished. The committee were engaged within
electing four out of these seven. I learned from one
of them, whose name was Hall, that the four uppermost
on the list, and who were finally chosen, were—Mr.
Pearson, leader, who had been a first officer in the
South African Mail Service ; a young medical student,
Dr. Eelkin; a Mr. Litchfield, from the City, and Mr.
Hall himself. He, like the leader, had spent years
upon the sea, and after his spiritual awakening had
gone to Islington College. He beguiled nearly an hour
of our waiting, telling me of the effect on the Church
of England of D. L. Moody’s visit to London. Mr.
Henry, he said, now at Mpwapwa on the track to
Uganda, was one of the fruits of his ministry; and
both the rector and the curate of the parish to which
he belonged were thoughtless young barristers before
they heard the Word of Life from Moody’s lips. About
one o’clock the young men were called into the com-
mittee-room, and received their solemn charge from
the Rev. H, Wright and Sir William Hill. They were
instructed to be ready in a fortnight to proceed to
Uganda, via Suez and Khartoum, where Colonel Gordon
would meet them and send them on their way to King
Mtesa, and to Rev. C. Wilson, the only survivor of the


first mission to Central Africa. After fervent prayer
had ascended on their behalf, we adjourned to a simple
luncheon of bread-and-butter and coffee, in the library;
and then the members of committee resumed their
sitting, to deal with other work in other fields, while
the accepted candidates hastily departed to make ready
for the march into a deadly land.
Good Friday, April igth. —A sermon was preached
this morning in the Bromley Church by Mr. Blyth, an
Indian chaplain on sick leave; and in the afternoon
our kind host, Mr, John Pdchardson, took me through
the loveliest park scenery to Chiselhurst, where on
high and beautiful land stands the house where
Napoleon 111. pined away and died,'and where
Eugenie, the ex-Empress, still lives, feeding on bitter
memories connected with her husband, and on eager
hopes connected with her son. Gazing through that
gilded iron gate and on that green lawn, and treading
on the ground that Louis Napoleon trod on, a voice
seemed to say again, “ It is finished ! ” —earth’s vain
glory finally dying out just where Christ’s solid glory
began to be manifested, in the deep cold darkness of
the hour of death.
Faster Sunday, April 21 st. —The sermon which I
heard this morning from Mr. Woolley, of Shortlands
Church, parish of Beckenham, was as good and beauti-
ful as the evening sermon in the superb church of
Bickley was extraordinary. Prebendary Plumptre,
the incumbent, was not present, and a zealous young
man preached on three sovereign remedies against
indwelling sin—l. Earnestness; 2. The Holy Supper; 3.
The sign of the Cross. He ended by eulogising the
“passion plays,” of which so much has been heard


lately in Germany, hoping that they would soon be
produced upon the English stage and performed in
English churches!
Easter Monday, April 22nd.— On my way to Hastings
this morning to visit old family friends who were in
sickness, I got out at Tunbridge Wells, and made my
way at a very early hour to the Parsonage. I knew
that the incumbent of Christ Church was amongst the
number of those who, following the example of good
old Archbishop Sumner, thought that the first hours of
the day were the best hours, and therefore the best for
communion with God. Everything was as I remem-
bered it when Bishop Perry sent me to this favoured
spot, some fifteen years ago, to learn pastoral work from
Canon Hoare. The man who has exercised so holy and
so evangelical an influence over the whole English
Church was there in his study, and welcomed me with
all his warmth. His hair has turned silver-white since
last we met, but his spirit seemed fresher, and his
heart more full than ever. The work of God at
home and abroad still prospers in his hands, and his
eldest son is preaching Christ amongst the millions
of China.
Returning from Hastings that evening, I made my
way to Abbey Wood, and spent the evening at Westheath
with Rev. P. B. Power, the author of the famous tracts,
and the founder of the Seaside Home for London City
Missionaries. _
Power came to the Colonies in broken health in
1873, and it was our great privilege to have him often
at our quiet Parsonage. Moreover, on the last day of
the same year I had the delightful pleasure of cele-
brating a marriage, in our pretty little church, betv cen


his eldest daughter and my very dear friend and near
connection, Mr. W. A, Kermode, of Mona Yale,
Tasmania, where my own marriage had been celebrated
the previous year.
Tuesday, April 23rd. —This afternoon I had the great
joy of spending a few minutes at Streatham with Mrs.
Bayly, the authoress of Ragged Homes and how to Mend
Them. She was, I believe, the first in the empire
to embark in that blessed scheme which combines
temperance and domestic reformation with gospel
lessons, and which has so signally developed and pro-
spered under the care of such women as Miss Marsh,
Mrs. Wightman, and Miss Cotton. Mrs. Bayly has
now half retired from the front of the battle on account of
personal and domestic trial, but the poor in her neigh-
bourhood know the power of the Lord whom she serves
unceasingly; and “British Workman Public-houses ” all
over the land constitute an imperishable monument to
the efficacy of a woman’s work and a woman’s prayer.
Wednesday, April 24 th. —This afternoon I attended
a meeting of the “ Indian Female Normal School and
Instruction Society.” Pity that the name should be
so overpowering: far better call it “ India Female
Mission,” and then strangers would remember it better,
and love it none the less. We met at St. George’s
Hall, Langham Place, and on the platform I was
delighted to recognise the face and conspicuous form
of the beloved Bishop of Sydney. Though in the
midst of fresh trial, consequent on the dangerous ill-
ness of Mrs. Barker, he wore that expression of peace
and happiness in God, which I observed years and
years ago when, with my dear father, I went to Hob-
son’s Bay to give him the first welcome to Australia.


The report was read by Major-General Sir William
Hill, who sketched the field of the Society’s labour—
ONE HUNDRED millions of Indian women, of whom at
least one-third were hidden away in seclusion, and
consequently lay outside the range of ordinary Chris-
tian effort. The pieces of machinery brought to bear
upon this mass of raw material were manifold—Train-
ing schools, bands of English ladies, female medical
missionaries, seminaries for little girls, and native
Bible-women. Eev. T. P. Hughes, of Peshawur, was the
first speaker. He has come back to England for a
little season, after fourteen years of heroic labour on
the north-west frontier, covered with renown. He is
full of enthusiasm about his Afghans. They are bold,
hardy, hospitable, fond of humour, music, and religion,
affectionate, passionate, and revengeful. All the great
assassinations of North India, he said, were perpetrated
by Afghans. He mentioned the case of a young girl
whose father was basely murdered. The law required
that the next of kin should act as the avenger of blood;
she was his only child j they hesitated to ask her;
but she claimed her right, and rushing into the room
where the murderer was, despatched him with a dagger.
Another girl was betrothed to a man whom she could
not love, and would not marry. She waited till the
morning of the wedding day, and then tangling her
hands behind her in her long flowing hair, she flung
herself into the river. He pleaded especially for the
young, because of their horrible surroundings. Imagine
little boys and girls listening while the most impure
story that he ever heard of in the Persian language
was publicly read in the mosques !
Eev. W. T. Satthianadan, an eminent native Chris-


tian, from Madras, spoke next, and narrated in clear,
muscular, and idiomatic English the work carried on
by his wife and daughters in his own parish. Colonel
Davidson, from Bengal, said that he had been ten
years in India and never knew an Indian lady. He
would continually receive a native gentleman as a
visitor on his verandah, but he dared not even ask
after his wife and family—it would be considered a
breach of etiquette. “An Indian lady,” he said, “ can’t
write, or work, or read. Their sole occupation is dress-
ing their hair and putting on jewels; when they are tired
of sitting down in one place, they go and sit in another.
I remember years ago a lady came to me to entreat me
to indicate some way in which she could commence
Christian work amongst them, but there was no open-
ing whatever. Now I rejoice to say that some forty or
fifty English ladies are fully employed. The need for
the sympathy of all true Christian women was mani-
fested by this graphic epitome of the condition of every
Indian female— ‘ Unwelcome at birth, untaught in
youth, enslaved in marriage, degraded in widowhood,
unlamented in death.’ ”
Thursday, April 25 th. —We had an invitation this
evening from the Rev. E. H. and Mrs. Bickersteth to
meet Rev. T. P. Hughes at Christ Church Vicarage,
Hampstead. A very large company of the principal
parishioners assembled for tea about eight o’clock, and
then we all adjourned to the celebrated “ iron room ”
which is attached to the house, and is capable of seat-
ing over two hundred persons. It was now arranged
somewhat in drawing-room fashion, with nice matting,
cheerful fire, gas lamps, piano, harmonium, a round
table covered with books and pictures, comfortable


seats and chairs, choice texts and memorials on the
walls, and the whole space foreshortened for a small
meeting by a thick curtain, which concealed from view
the elegantly laid-out creature comforts with which
the enjoyments of the evening were to close. Mr.
Hughes occupied an hour and a half in a conversational
account of his work in India; he said that he lived
within six miles of the celebrated Khy her Pass—the road
by which the Russians would enter Hindustan, if ever
they got so far. Here he was questioned as to his
political views by Mr. Bickersteth, and with some
hesitation he expressed his rooted conviction that the
Eastern question could be settled by an Anglo-Russian
alliance, and by that alone. He believed that Russia
had already gained a great ascendancy over men’s
minds in Central Asia, but had no design on India.
Describing the openhanded liberality of the Afghans,
he observed that genuine hospitality habitually died
down before the advance of civilisation. In order to
retain a necessary influence, he had been obliged to
open a guest-house in Peshawur, to which numbers
came from whom he had accepted kindness when itine-
rating through the country; but he could entertain
them to a sumptuous dinner for about threepence or
fourpence a head, Mr. Bickersteth, whose eldest son
lias recently gone as a missionary to India, brought the
evening to a close with reading and prayer. I was
much struck with this “ iron room; ” it serves a hun-
dred purposes; it is the missing link between the
drawing-room and the school-room; it combines the
cheerfulness of the one with the capacity of the other.
How good for prayer-meetings, teachers’ meetings, con-
firmation classes, evangelistic gatherings, and such


like ! I wish that every clergyman in the colonies had
an “iron room,” or something to correspond. He
would not be long in giving it some pre-eminence as a
“ means of grace to his parishioners.”
Saturday, April 2jth. —Hearing that Mr. Somerville
Learmonth, so lately my own parishioner, and such a
staunch friend of the Church in Melbourne, had been
seriously ill, I took the train early this morning for
Bournemouth. In a pretty villa, in the midst of the
pine groves for which this watering-place is celebrated,
and in a chamber from which he had hardly moved for
five months, I found the friend whose faithful steward-
ship of the wealth God entrusted to his care often made
our Bishops’, our clergy’s, and our widows’ hearts to
sing for joy, I was distressed to find that the disease
from which, humanly speaking, he cannot recover, had
made great headway since he left Melbourne in Janu-
ary 1877. I saw Lord Cairns’ beautiful residence
before leaving ; got a glimpse of the Isle of Wight;
heard of the great Hugh M‘Heile, who is spending the
evening of his life here, face to face with that ultra-
Kitualism and Anglo-Eomanism against which all the
power of his eloquence was so long directed; and
retraced my steps to London in company with Mr.
Thomas Learmonth, who made the long railway journey
delightful with records of great and good men and
women who are filling London with their words and
works, and heaven with rescued souls. Being a
Presbyterian, he attends a church at Hotting Hill,
ministered to by the Eev. Adolph Saphir, a convert
from Judaism, a man weak in body, but satisfied with
favour, and full with the .blessing of the Lord. Mr.
Learmonth tells me that the work at Dorking has in


no wise suffered by the absence of his niece, Miss
Cotton; that, on the contrary, it prospers more and
more ; while her recent marriage with Sir James Hope
has conferred on Scotland a new and invaluable benefit.
He, further, has promised to introduce me, on my return
to London, to some of those City organisations on which
the Divine Spirit seems to pour the most plentiful
showers of His grace.
Monday, April 29 th. —We said farewell to our most
kind friends, Mr. and Mrs. John Eichardson, this after-
noon, and came to lodgings in London. I had barely
time to reach the Church Missionary House by five
o’clock, where I found the committee-room and passages
filled with some of the best men in England—the
champions, lay and clerical, of our great Society. The
wives of the secretaries attended to make tea behind
a line of plentifully furnished tables. Introduction
followed introduction until an hour had flown by.
Then we moved across Salisbury Square to St. Bride’s,
where we had a delightful service, and responses made
grand by the voices of hundreds of the clergy. The
Bishop of Cashel preached the anniversary sermon, and
eloquently pressed home the duty of proportionate and
systematic giving. It was a great joy to me to find
that some who in my college days were only distin-
guished as pastors, and as men of great personal piety
in the Irish Church, had come to the front since Dis-
establishment. Achilles Daunt, Pakenham Walsh, and
Maurice Day (the preacher) were household words twelve
years ago in every Christian family, and now two of
them are deans, and one is on the bench; and I saw
them all together this evening, held in high, honour by
the English sister Church. In the aisle of St. Bride’s I


found myself close beside Canon Goodman, who had
only arrived shortly before us in the “ Cuzco.” He was
quite at home, though unseated, in the crowd, having
been for six years curate of the parish of St. Bride’s.
Tuesday , April 30 th. —The field-day of the Church
Missionary Society. The anniversary breakfast was
held at Exeter Hall at half-past eight, and a paper was
read by Dean Fremantle. It was pure and good, but
lacked the intensity and ardour that one looked for from
the only speaker on such a great occasion. lam inclined
to agree with what was said in the course of the day—
that bad speaking is better than good reading. We mus-
tered on the platform in the great hall about half-past
ten; Lord Chichester took the chair at eleven, and gave
an address full of spiritual tone and heartiness. Eev. H.
Wright, one of the kindest and best of men, read extracts
from the annual report, bringing the Victoria Hyanza
disaster into special prominence, and clearing the mis-
sionaries from all blame in their protection of the Arab
Songoro. The Bishop of Sydney followed, and dealt
with the great question that had arisen regarding the
Society and colonial bishops in a way that must have
commanded universal respect. Every one seemed struck
with the extraordinary wisdom which he displayed in
handling so thorny a matter. Canon Miller, Vicar of
Greenwich, came after our Primate, and Major-General
Sir William Hill was followed by Eev. T. P. Hughes, of
Peshawur, who gave an interesting account of the rise
of the mission, after the conquest of the Punjaub, under
the auspices of that great Christian soldier Sir Herbert
Edwardes. He drew a picture of a dinner-cloth laid on
the floor of his guest-house, and continually surrounded
by wild Afghan chiefs, before whom he was able to spread


the glorious things of the gospel, when the meal, and
the snuff-box, and the calumet had paved the way
for friendly intercourse.
The Bishop of Saskatchewan came next—a vigorous
man with a clear ringing voice and ardent for the
truth. He is never tired of telling about his dear Eed
Indians—his “Crees” and his “ Blackfeet; ” and he
has always something fresh to narrate or to describe,
though he speaks many times a day. He caused
immense amusement when he described an offertory at
Eev. Henry Budd’s mission, five hundred miles from
his own home, with the thermometer ranging from
20° to 40° below zero. As the Bishop sat in the chan-
cel he saw a little table placed in front of the com-
munion rails; and after io 6 persons had partaken of
the Lord’s Supper, he counted up the collection. First
—seventeen plugs of tobacco, four looking-glasses,
two teaspoons, one tablespoon, three bunches of beads,
two brooches, three finger rings, one piece of braiding,
one piece of honey-soap, and 19s. o£d. in cash. Basing
on this and on other incidents of real personal sacrifice
among the converts a fervent appeal to Christians, the
Bishop ended thus—“ Oh ! the cold chill of horror that
will come through some of you when you see the angry
frown beginning to darken the loving face of the Judge,
as it points you to what you might have done, if only
you had had more thorough consecration to God and
to Christ.”
Eev. W. T. Sattianadhan rose next, dark as the sun
could burn him, wearing his native turban and deep
purple dress. He called down rounds of applause as he
praised and blessed the Society by which he had been
drawn to God, and to which he was still attached in


many departments of joyful and successful labour.
Closing, he added—“ It has been said that India is the
brightest gem of the British Crown. Let us spare no
pains till we see that India is the brightest gem in the
crown of our Royal Emmanuel.” A cheque from a lady
for came in at this moment, as though she for
one would like to present Hindoostan as a pure offering
to Christ.
The evening meeting was a greater success than the
morning. The speakers seemed full of heart, and the
audience were cheered and delighted. The Right Rev.
Rowley Hill, Bishop of Sodor and Man, was in the
chair, and seemed a great favourite; but the most
captivating speech of all was delivered by a young
officer, Major Y. F. Morton, 55 th Regiment, who took
the meeting by storm in his graphic and straightforward
simplicity. He said —“ Soldiers come back from India
and say that missions are a failure, for they have never
seen results. I have been ten years in India, and I
never saw a tiger. If you want to see a tiger, you go
into the jungle. If you want to see a mission, you
don’t look for it just close by our cantonments; you
must look for it elsewhere. ‘The works of the Lord
are great —sought out of all them that have pleasure
therein.’ ” He then described a mission among the hill-
tribes, one of the fruits of John Gossner’s unquenchable
love for souls. The work of grace had there taken such
hold that men would come seventy miles to service on
Sunday; but, hot and tired, they would sometimes fall
asleep on the church floor. A neighbour would nudge
them to waken them up; and if that didn’t succeed, the
pastor would ask the slumberer a question from the
pulpit, and make him stand up to answer it. He said


—“ When I was in Lucknow, some of my men who
were Christians asked me what they could do for the
converts, and we decided to give them a tea meeting.
We had lots of tea, and cake, and flowers; and at the
appointed hour natives and Europeans came together,
greeting each other, and laughing, and talking, and
shaking hands, and we didn’t understand each other one
bit! Then we had prayer, singing, and addresses alter-
nating in Hindustani and English: and the last thing
my men said to me was ‘ When shall we have
another ? ’ ”
May 9 th. —Time and space fail me. There are some
glorious things to be told of other Societies—Bible,
Tract, Jews, Irish, Continental, &c.; but I must forbear.
We have been since yesterday the guests of the Bishop
and Mrs. Perry.


jftftfj*
MAY MEETINGS BIBLE SOCIETY MISSIONARY LEAVES PAS-
TORAL AID —JEWS —RELIGIOUS TRACT, COLONIAL AND
CONTINENTAL —SUNDAY SCHOOL INSTITUTE —TO IRELAND
LONDON AGAIN —REV. W. H. AITKEN.
London, June 6th, 1878.
Y last letter concluded with some account of
u the Church Missionary Anniversary on Tues-
day, April 30th. I must now tell you about
other Societies. Wednesday was May Day, and the
seventy-fourth anniversary of the British and Foreign
Bible Society. We met in Exeter Hall at eleven a.m.,
and the addresses were most encouraging. Think of
3,000,000 of Bibles, Testaments, and portions circulated
in 1877, making a total dissemination of 82,000,000 since
the Society was founded in 1804. Colporteurs are now
busy the whole world over, selling the Scriptures in 220
languages. Ho less than 160,000 copies were disposed
of at the seat of war, in prisons, hospitals, and on the
battle-field. Bishop Ellicott, though his voice is not
strong, made an eloquent speech, in the course of which
he said—“A power exists in God’s Word that speaks
to our hearts. We may not be able to define it, but it
is as real and as certain as anything in this world or


even in the world to come; because God’s Spirit dwells
in our hearts, and God’s Spirit wrote God’s Word.
God’s Word is a living Word, and it is the living Voice
in the Word speaking to the living voice in the heart.
‘ Deep calls to deep,’ and we realise this in the mysteries
of our personal experience.” He added—“We can
hardly ever reverently take God’s Holy Word in our
hands and read even the most familiar portions without
some new light seeming to break upon us—some com-
bination of events unmarked before, some rays from
the blessed Beyond streaming over the page. And
many a one of us, I am certain, has closed that Book
of Life, knelt down, and then thanked God for that
unspeakable gift.” The most delightful part of the
time that May morning was, however, during the
address of the Eev. E. Herber Evans, who had come down
from the mountains of Wales full of genial and yet of
godly enthusiasm. He advocated collections on the
spot for this reason—“l have always found that the
collections in Wales were largest when I could get to
tell my countrymen their indebtedness to the Word of
God in every relation of life. But sometimes, when
the collections had not risen, I found that they had
been postponed for some three, or four, or six months
after the meeting was held, and even fervent Welshmen
can cool down in half a year!” He added—“ The
Home Secretary is now able to abolish half the county
prisons in Wales, because there are more prisons than
prisoners. Dolgelly prison has been closed for months.
I have heard that the Beaumaris prison (Anglesey) was
about being closed. It has had only one prisoner for
six months, and she did not speak a word of Welsh.
We owe it all to this Book. We owe it to this Book


that there is not a single infidel book published in the
Welsh language. We owe it to this Book that Popery
lias hitherto failed to make any progress in Wales.
What this Book has done for us, it can do for other
countries. There are three Bibles that tell on the
formation of character. First of all comes the Family
Bible. We believe a home can never be made without
a Bible. With her first earnings a new servant-girl
buys a Family Bible ready for the home to come. The
first morning in their new home, though a prayer may
not be forthcoming, the young husband will take the
Bible, and feeling the great responsibility of beginning
a new home, will breathe a silent aspiration that they
know will be understood. Then there is the Teacher's
Bible. . . . Then comes the Mother’s Bible. It
placed in the box when the young boy was leaving
home, laid there by the mother, while a prayer was
breathed over it. ‘ I cannot go with my child,’ she said;
‘0 God, Thou didst go with Joseph to Egypt, with
Daniel to Babylon ; go with my child wherever he may
wander!’ The Book is afterwards found, perhaps in
London, when her son opens the box. There is a
charm about that Book. It brings up memories of
home. The trembling handwriting reminds him of the
trembling heart that mourned over him. The Book
may be laid aside for years; but wait a bit; when that
mother is a saint in heaven, its words will speak again,
and come back to him with power. . . . Host after host
of books has been sent forth against this Book, and has
afterwards passed to the cobwebs on the shelf, while the
old Book itself, with a self-conscious power, says—
“ Books may come, and books may go,
But I go on for ever.”
* 0


These are specimens only, gleams from one or two
of a series of really grand defences of the faith. But
space and time fail. I passed into a lower room about
three o’clock, and spent two hours with the Missionary
Leaves Association, presided over by Bishop Eyan, with
an income of A 3 300 i n 1 &77- Es object is to “render
private assistance to the native clergy in Africa and the
East, and other parts of the mission-field occupied by
the Church Missionary Society.” It is, in fact, very
similar to our own Indian Mission, maintaining children
in mission schools, and providing for missionary students
and Bible-women, besides sending relief for special cases
of need, and forwarding quantities of clothing to the
colder latitudes. In the evening I was the guest, at
Islington, of Mr. Eugene Stock, Editorial Secretary of
the Church Missionary Society, and had the great
pleasure of meeting there Captain Eussell, who had held
the command at Erere Town until death removed his
beloved wife and sickness laid him low. I saw also
the last memorials of the martyrs of the Victoria
Nyanza Mission—drawings, etchings, journals, and
private letters, which had just reached London.
On Thursday, May 2nd, I attended the annual meet-
ing of the London City Mission, which is doing a grand
work; and in the afternoon I went from Exeter to St.
James’s Hall to hear Lord Shaftesbury make his cele-
brated annual “ statement ” at the anniversary of the
Pastoral Aid Society. It is thought by some that he is
the raven, the disheartened and dispirited Jeremiah of the
Church —a pessimist, who sees and who fears the worst;
but I think it well to have such a man on the watch-
tower, warning us of evil, and repressing the levity that
often accompanies success which God bestow T s in certain


directions. On tin's occasion he was full of one theme
—the decay of truth among evangelicals. Hear what
he says :—“ What I gather from the admirable speeches
which we have heard, and from the strong and deep
sentiments which have been expressed, is that the great
and leading fear of the Evangelical body is the fear of
Popery—the fear of those who dress in gorgeous vest-
ments, and make gesticulations in the chancel. But
should this be our only or principal fear ? Against
such open and visible evils we can be on our guard.
But is there not another danger which is much greater ?
I am afraid of men who do not light candles or make
gesticulations in the chancel; lam afraid of professed
Protestants; lam afraid of Broad Churchmen; lam
afraid of those who profess to love our Lord, and who
betray him with a kiss. ... I am very much
alarmed at this, because it would lead to the total de-
struction of spiritual life in the Church of England in
the first place, and in the second to the dissolution of
the Church as an Establishment. I am not talking of
the heretical doctrines often vomited forth from the
pulpit. lam talking of the teachings in publications
which are extensively circulated, being written with
power and ability—books of science—sanctioned by all
the Bishops and many leading personages in the Church
of England, I say that those books, without exception,
do not teach men to believe, but lead men to doubt.
They teach distrust, and not faith. We don’t need an
array of great dignitaries and of the parochial system
to lead us to doubt; we are quite ready enough to do
that of ourselves. We want something to teach us to
cherish that belief in Scripture which has been handed
down to us by our forefathers —faith—faith—faith.


. . A lady told me the other day that she heard
a young girl say to her mother, ‘ Mother, where does
the Bible begin to be true?’ She might have said,
‘lt is true, my girl, from the first verse in Genesis
down to the last verse in Revelation.’ But lam quite
sure that the question which may soon be put by very
many persons in these days is— ‘ Where does the Bible
cease to be false ? ’ That is the issue to which we are
coming; and it is a frightful issue to think of. lam
sorry to say—you will, I think, feel I am justified in
expressing what I feel—l am sorry to say that these
broad principles have crept very much into the Evan-
gelical body. I looked for a time for comfort and relief
to the mass of the Evangelical body, because I thought
that I should find support among them ; but of many
Evangelical men I may now say—
* Friends of my youth, where are they ?
And echo answers, Where are they ? ’ ”
These, of course, are the impressions made on one
man’s mind—a representative man, however. And yet
there are others who say that Evangelical men in our
beloved Church never had such clear views, and never
so vigorously propagated them. I should have men-
tioned before that the Pastoral Aid Society is pre-
eminently sound, has a revenue exceeding £ 50,000 a
year, gives grants to 838 lay and clerical agents,
provides for upwards of 3000 religious services, and
extends the benefit of systematic pastoral visitation to
over 5,000,000 of souls.
The evening of this day w r as spent with our beloved
Bishop and Mrs. Perry, at whose hospitable house w*e
met Canon Auriol, the Bishop of Sydney, a married


daughter of Bishop M’llvaine, and Lady Hotham; and
as the latter drove us home to our quiet apartments
in Manchester Street in her carriage, it awakened the
memories of my youth, and of Victoria in her palmiest
days, when Sir Charles lived at Toorac as the represen-
tative of our Queen.
On Friday, May 3rd, my wife and I found ourselves at
Exeter Hall, at ten o’clock, listening to the dear Hebrew
children singing Hebrew psalms and English songs of
Zion. It was very sweet and touching. The meeting
which followed an hour later was, I should judge, below
the average in point of that thrilling interest and
burning eloquence which used to characterise this
anniversary in the best days of Marsh, M'Neile, and
Goodhart. Canon Hoare, of Tunbridge Wells, had lost
his voice and could not come; but we had the Bishop
of Sydney, Rev. H. W. Webb-Peploe, and Rev. F. G.
Kleinhenn, a missionary from Bucharest, who was
simply overflowing with the success of the work on the
Continent. The Society has an income of
a year, and employs 140 agents, half of whom are con-
verts from Judaism; some lay, some ordained, some
medical missionaries; some school teachers, Scripture-
readers and colporteurs; occupying four stations in
England, twenty-three on the Continent, three in Asia,
and six in Africa.
I came again to the great hall in the evening to see
and to hear some very distinguished men. It was the
Tract Society meeting, and was very hearty. Sir
Charles Reed was chairman, and led the way. Dr.
Manning, the secretary, followed, showing an income of
nearly ;£ 150,000, and a circulation, in 1877, of 63
million tracts—making a total of 1 billion and 783


imillions since the Society was founded. Next came
f‘ Rob Roy ” Macgregor, who gave a very lively account
of the manner in which tracts were born into the world
and the good they did, especially in his favourite sphere
—the Open-Air Mission. He is a fine-looking, athletic
man, with dark skin and greyish hair—a fearless
preacher, and every inch a Christian. Then came
Theodore Monod, who had crossed that day from Paris,
and from the opening of the Great Exhibition. He
drew a touching picture of his native land recovering
from her national sorrows, and putting on a festive
dress again; and then brought forward a marvellous
mass of evidence to show that a rebound from infidelity
and superstition towards primitive Christianity was
taking place in the minds of distinguished Frenchmen.
Newman Hall came next, full of thought and feeling, of
narrative, eloquence, and poetry; and after him the Rev.
T. P. Hughes, of Peshawur, spoke, and drew a memorable
contrast between his visit to a Mohammedan book-shop
at Lahore—with its Koran on the top shelf, its folios
of traditions below, and its gloomy volumes of practical
and dogmatic theology still further down—and his visit
to the depot of the Religious Tract Society in the same
city, with everything to enliven the eye and to enlighten
the understanding.
Saturday, May 4 th, was a day of rest from meetings.
In the afternoon I went to Kensington to the house of
Mrs. M'Lachlan, an old colonist, where I found the
widow of our beloved friend and correspondent, Rev.
Ralph Barker of Geelong, who was just returning to
Victoria. And while there, in the special providence
of God, I met with one of Mrs. Barker’s visitors, Mr.
John White, who was able to give me the very informa-


tion I was craving to obtain concerning the men in the
Church of England who were systematically seeking to
promote the spiritual health of all believers by means
of meetings, essays, and addresses on the subject of
Scriptural holiness. On the way home through Hyde
Park I saw for the first time the very beautiful Albert
Memorial, and passed through that marvellous admixture
of human and animal beauty, of style, vanity, and ex-
travagance, which every one knows as “ Rotten Row.”
On Sunday, May 5 th, I went to hear Mr. Maclagan,
the celebrated evangelical High Churchman of St.
Mary Abbot’s, ere his removal to the see of Lichfield;
but as he was not to preach, I wandered on to Hotting
Hill, and with some difficulty found the church occupied
by the celebrated Adolph Saphir. I was more than
compensated for my previous disappointment. It was
a rich theme—the perfect love of God transplanted and
made to grow in the believer’s breast; and richly was
it handled. At night I went to Westminster Abbey to
hear the Queen’s great favourite, Canon Duckworth.
The service was singularly unostentatious for so re-
nowned a cathedral, and the sermon, as far as it pro-
ceeded on Scripture lines, was admirable.
Monday, May 6th, called me out again for meetings
—not, however, till the afternoon, when I found myself
at St. James’s Hall at the annual meeting of the
Colonial and Continental Church Society. The platform
was crowded: the speeches and feeling very earnest
indeed. The Bishop of Sydney was there, with all his
point and wisdom; and Canon Wilkinson, the Rector
of Birmingham, the brother of our lamented friend, Rev,
G. Wilkinson, of Williamstown; and the Bishop of
Saskatchewan was simply splendid, picturing his


episcopal cariole made of parchment; his team of dogs
who were fed only once a day—and that was at night!
his archdeacon, who made a fur bag for himself to sleep
in during their winter journeys ; the clearing the snow
for camp, the pine-wood fire at one end of the bedding
of green branches, the stars looking down on the sleepers
through the tall dark trees with almost unnatural
brilliancy, and the “ Keeper of Israel,” who never
slumbered and never slept, watching them through
the long cold hours, when the thermometer was 40°
below zero.
This Society is worthy of all praise and of all sup-
port. It has £ 39,000 a year, employs 267 agents in 27
colonial dioceses, opened 45 permanent and 76 summer
chaplaincies on the Continent last season, and engaged
the services of 250 licensed clergymen. It makes
itself known to the world by a quarterly publication of
more than usual merit, called Greater Britain.
That evening was spent in Lady Hotham’s new and
beautiful house in Queen Anne Street, the centre of
her labours for Christ in the City; and at her table we
had the happiness of meeting Canon Cook, of Exeter,
the celebrated preacher, and Mr. Harvey, under whose
father our present Bishop first laboured as curate, and
who now acts as London treasurer to the Melbourne
Cathedral Fund.
Tuesday, May yth, was the day set apart as the anni-
versary of the Church of England Sunday-school Insti-
tute. Breakfast was laid for about two hundred persons
at the Cannon Street Hotel, and the Conference lasted
in the large hall below from ten to one, and was
resumed again from two to four, and the general meet-
ing was held at Exeter Hall in the evening; but I can-


not possibly tell you about it, except to say that no
Society, with the single exception of the Church Tem-
perance Society, put forth such remarkable energy to
ensure success.
On Wednesday, May Sth, we lunched with our rela-
tives, Sir Leopold and Lady M'Clintock, at Palace Gate,
and saw many mementoes of the “ Fox/’ and of the
frozen North; in the evening we went to stay with the
Bishop and Mrs. Perry, where we spent three delightful
days, during which I called on Canon Goodman and
his family, and attended a meeting for the promotion
of spiritual life at the Stafford Booms, Edgeware Koad,
where I fell in with some well-known leaders of
Scriptural thought on this subject—such as Eev. J. B.
Figgis, of Brighton; Eev. E. W. Moore, of Brunswick
Chapel; and Mr, Henry F. Bowker, the great promoter
of the cause, who at once gave me the right hand of
fellowship, and laid plans for my future in regard to
meeting with men of like mind, and for attending
Coming conferences. Before leaving Avenue Eoad I
had the great pleasure of conversing at dinner with
the Eev. Mr. Cadman and Eev. Mr. Goe, who gave me
valuable information concerning the practical working
of their immense parishes.
On Sunday, May 1 2th, we attended Portman Chapel
in the morning, where we heard the venerable Canon
Eeeve; St. Paul’s in the afternoon, to hear Canon Light-
foot; and Brunswick Chapel in the evening, to hear
Eev. E. W. Moore; a prayer-meeting, largely attended,
closing the day. On Tuesday morning, by a great effort,
I reached the London Young Men’s Christian Associa-
tion Booms, in Aldersgate Street, by six o’clock, four
miles on foot, but was well repaid; a crowded breakfast


and an enthusiastic meeting lasting till nine. That
evening I crossed to Ireland to spend a few days with
my bereaved and sorrowing brother-in-law, Mr. W.
Watson, of Salem Place, Dublin, and with my little
nephew and niece, his motherless children, and a few
more, with my beloved father’s only sister, Mrs. H.
Brougham, Senr., and with her son, Eev. John E.
Brougham, at his home in Killarney, the very bosom
of beauty.
On Saturday, May 25 th, I left Dublin. Spent a
delightful Sunday with a very dear friend, Mrs. Willink,
at Dingle Bank, on the Mersey, just above Liverpool,
and attended service at Hugh M‘Keile’s old church,
morning and evening, proceeding to Kendal on Mon-
day, and remaining until Thursday “in a delightful
place and among delightful people,” as Mr. Bowker,
who got the invitation for me, expressed it. I here
heard the Eev. Evan Hopkins, Vicar of Holy Trinity,
Eichmond, for the first time, and had the privilege of
attending ten of his meetings for Christians during my
short stay. I was the guest of Mr. and Mrs. Braith-
waite, and was shown the most exceeding kindness by
them, as well as by a large circle of their immediate
relations. I spent one morning on the banks of the
lovely Windermere, returning to London on Friday,
May 31. In the evening we attended a meeting of
the Victoria Institute, and heard Eev. Principal Eigg
and Lord Shaftesbury speak on the needless hostility
of men of science towards religion.
Saturday, June Ist, was spent at Windsor until five
o’clock, when I attended a very large drawing-room
meeting at Lancaster Gate, in connection with Bruns-
wick Chapel, at the house of Mrs. Seton Karr, a devoted


lady. And on Sunday, June 2nd, I had the great joy
of hearing Rev. W. H. Aitken preach three times —
morning and afternoon at Brunswick Chapel, and in
the evening at Eaton Chapel, Belgravia—grand sermons,
deep, rich, powerful, spiritual. An after-meeting at
Eaton Chapel lasted till half-past ten; and we have
reason to believe that many anxious souls saw the face
of God before we parted.
On Monday evening, June yrd, I was privileged to meet
some very earnest men at the house of Mr. Edward
Denny, where Mr. Aitken was staying, and with whom
Moodv resided when in London—Mr. Anthony Denny,
Hon. Thomas Pelham (youngest son of Lord Chichester),
the Master of Kinnaird (Lord Kinnairil’s eldest son),
Mr. Paton, Mr. Moore, Mr. Aitken, and Mr. Shipton
(of the Y. M. C. A.), who assembled at dinner to talk
over a projected mission to young men in autumn. At
half-past eight we broke up to attend a drawing-room
evangelistic service, held for aristocratic young men at
the house of Mr. E. Smith, 118 Eaton Square. Mr.
Aitken addressed nearly two hundred of them, com-
mencing at ten o’clock.
On Tuesday, June 4th, I had such a happy day at the
house of Mr. and Mrs. J. W. Armitage, Southgate, an
all-day gathering of such men as W. Haslam, Hay
Aitken, Webb-Peploe, E. W. Moore, and H. E. Bowker.


letter Sixty.
CHELTENHAM TUNBRIDGE WELLS MILDMAY CONFERENCE
MR. BLACKWOOD CONFERENCE ADDRESSES COLONIAL
INSTITUTE.
2 Oakley Square, London, N. W-, June 27 th, 1878.
SHE day after I concluded my last letter to you
(June 7th), I joined my wife and family at
Cheltenham, and remained in that charming
and beautiful town until Monday, June 17th. While
there, I had the great pleasure of making the acquain-
tance of Canon Bell and Rev. J. A. Aston, who are active
and earnest labourers in the kingdom of God. Mr.
Aston has a special work among believers, and on every
Thursday afternoon about a hundred who desire entire
conformity to the will of God assemble in the “ Parish
Room ” —a building of a kind now very common in
England—separate from both church and school, with
manifold and manifest uses.
On June 1 yth I returned to London, and became the
guest of a truly kind friend whom I mentioned before,
Mr. John White, of Oakley Square, who has for the
last ten days done everything to make my sojourn in
the City delightful. After dining with him and with
his Christian wife, I took train the same evening from
Camden Town to Canonbury, and at a quarter-past


eight found myself in the midst of a prayer-meeting
in a large room on the basement story, beneath the
celebrated Mildmay Conference Hall. The attitude of
those who led the worship was that of fervent pleading
and expectant praise; and when Mr. Blackwood gave
out the hymn,—
“ I am Thine, 0 Lord ; I have heard Thy voice,”
it called up the sweetest memories of the One above,
and of my own dear home, where a friend (M. H.
Sandiman, a cousin of Sandiman the missionary) first
recommended the words and music to my notice. At
nine we broke up, and after a few words with Captain
Moreton, who had been exceedingly kind in finding me
out, and in forwarding me a platform ticket for the Con-
ference, and a few more with Mr. Blackwood, I walked
on to the house of the Eev. M. Baxter, whose wife had
just returned from evangelistic work in Switzerland, full
of good news about the healing of a great number of the
sick, by the prayer of faith and by the laying on of hands.
A Swiss pastor, Otto Stockmayer, has had, and is con-
stantly having, signal blessing in this line of things,
and his success is attracting the attention of believers
on every hand. Mrs. Baxter lives under the settled
conviction that sickness in the body of the believer is
directly the work of Satan, and is only permitted by
God to gain an end which might more easily be
attained by obedience or by surrender of the will (Ex.
xv. 2 6); that the Lord Jesus did as really “ take our
infirmities and bare our sicknesses” (Matt. viii. 17)
as He took and bare our sins; and that the way out of
sickness, when it comes, is prescribed in James v. 15,16,
with special stress laid on confessing and forsaking sin.


Tuesday, June 18 th. —Leaving Charing Cross at ten
o’clock, I reached Tunbridge Wells at twenty minutes
to twelve, and quickly joined myself to the great body
of Kentish clergy and godly laity whom Canon Hoare
had invited to his annual clerical meeting. Bishop
Perry was among us the greater part of the time, and
we had a beautiful paper on “ Reconciliation ” from l\lr.
Dearden, and another from Canon Garbett on “The
Argument from Prophecy,” discussing Maitland’s Theory,
and then a most useful and practical debate on Sunday-
schools. Closing at three o’clock, we dined (at least
about eighty of us) in the City Hall and took tea at the
Vicarage; and at seven we assembled again, with a con-
siderable congregation, in Christ Church, and had a
special address from Rev. W. Hay Aitken on “ Prepara-
tion for Service,” based on Isaiah’s experience in chap-
ter vi. It was very grand and solemn. We shall not
soon forget how the same manifestation oU God’s holi-
ness evoked at the same time “ the chant of otc seraphim
and the groan of the sinner.”
Wednesday, June igth. —Canon Hoare, with extreme
kindness, had made me lodge at the Vicarage the previous
night. My candle was, I think, one of twelve or four-
teen which I counted in the hall of that most hospitable
house. Leaving the Vicarage very early next morning, I
reached Mildmay Conference Hall shortly before eleven,
and was, through Captain Moreton’s kindness, provided
with a seat (to which my name was attached), just
beside Lord Cavan, and close behind the Chairman. 1
watched with much interest the vacant chairs as they
were filled up one by one with men eminent in the
Church of God. The Hall itself is the very best of its
kind—broad, lofty, beautifully clean, airy, and open to


view—seating 2500 comfortably, with room for 3000
under pressure. Mr. S. A. Blackwood occupied the
chair. He was so imperative throughout the Conference
that no praise should be given to man, that I am afraid
to say how much I liked him. A born gentleman,
of commanding stature, with a soldier’s bearing and
multiplied graces of mind and body, he has a sim-
plicity of conversation with God and men that marks
him for a leader on such an occasion as this. As the
clock struck eleven, he rose to call us to silent prayer;
and read and expounded Exodus xxiv., after audible
prayer had been offered by Prebendary Wilson, the son
and successor at Islington of Bishop Wilson, of Calcutta.
Then Dr. Herdman, of Melrose, prayed again, and a
hymn was sung; and Mr. Mackray, of Torquay, intro-
duced the subject of the day—“ Christ and Christians the
light of the world.” His address was written, which
rather tied his hands, but it was good and on a high
level. “ I believe,” said he, “ there is no form of matter
which, if sufficiently rubbed, will not become self-
luminous and give forth rays of light. Brethren, let us
be set on fire by the Holy Ghost.” Mr. Mackray was
followed by the venerable Horatius Bonar, full of poetry
and prophecy, as well as of practical godliness. “ The
evening and the morning were the first day ; the even-
ing first, and then the morning; the night, and then
day. We are here in the night, but we are looking for
the day. We are the lesser lights shining now in the
night; we are looking out for the rising of the greater
light which is to rule the day.” Then he asked, “ How
are we to shine ? By contact with that light. It shines
first into us, then out from us. Ask we again, What
hinders this light from shining ? Worldliness, fickle-


ness of opinion in doctrine, inconsistency, low spiritual-
ity, prayerlessness. ‘ Arise, shine, for thy light is come,
and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee.’ ”
We broke up at one o’clock after a happy morning.
Two speakers each sitting are considered quite enough
in order to give time for worship, and praise, and quiet,
and for the chairman’s guiding remarks. This is an
admirable rule. Now came outside pleasures—an
enfolding stream of 3000 Christians, meeting, greeting,
parting for a while: some going to the vast dinner-tent
on the green lawn ; some to the tea-and-coffee tent; some
to the mulberry-tree, with its circular sittings, in
Captain Moreton’s garden; some to their own lodgings
some to the houses of hospitable friends residing near,
who have room for from ten to thirty; and some to
engagements in the City. Thus two hours pass, and at
three o’clock special meetings begin on a smaller scale
in the six basement rooms and in the great hall, where
fervent speakers and earnest workers speak to closely-
packed audiences about India, China, London, Paris,
and about the return of our blessed Lord. I was only
able to come in at the close of Mr. Hudson Taylor’s
meeting for the China Inland Mission, as I had been
engaged with a select party of friends in making a
friendly though critical inquiry into the news brought
by Mrs. Baxter concerning the marvellous efficacy of
the “Prayer of Faith” in Switzerland. Mr. Taylor’s
work has prospered so exceedingly that he has now
fifty-two labourers, male and female, in the interior
of the Chinese Empire.
Later on, I heard Rev. Melville Pym give some
account of his winter missionary tour in India, and at
half-past five went to tea with my kind friends, Mr.


and Mrs. Albert Head, of Highbury Hew Park, where
I had the great pleasure of meeting Miss Hanbury, who,
some fourteen years ago, took George Brealey from his
trade as a ladies’ bootmaker in Exeter, and gave him
work as an evangelist in the Blackdown Hills, where
he has had the wonderful experiences related in that
admirable series called the “Blackdown Tracts.” I
found, also, that Miss Hanbury lives close to, and is
intimately acquainted with, the eminently holy Eobert
Chapman, of Barnstaple, who rises every morning at
four, though seventy years of age, who spends all
Saturday alone with God, and who fills his house with
such persons as care to become his guests for a week
or a month for the good of their souls of their bodies.
A great mass of people filled the hall again at seven,
and Mr. Blackwood introduced to us one of the brightest
lights of the Conference —Eev. James Wilson, of the
Tolbooth, Edinburgh. In the course of a rich address,
where his heart was evidently following hard upon his
understanding, he said, “ What is the thing which the
people of the world need ? Is it light on the blessed
felicities of a Christian’s peace ? Is it light on the
unspeakable glories of the Christian’s heaven ? Hay,
rather, it is light on the gulf into which men are
stepping; it is light on the ruin to which men are
hastening; it is light on the loss that man has realised
in leaving God and turning away from Him.” Mr.
Finlay Gibson followed with a most fresh and vigorous
address. “We need constancy,” he said; “perhaps
at a meeting my light will be tremendous, and then
when I get home I turn the light down so low that
people begin to wonder whether there is any light at
all. We use our light as if we feared it would fail at
* n


the main. That irregular kind of light, manifest to-day
and hidden to-morrow, is not the kind of light which
glorifies God.” Mr. Hudson Taylor pleaded lastly for
light in China. “Within a circle,” he said, “with a
radius of 1200 miles, in a population of nearly a
hundred millions, there are more than one hundred
Roman Catholic priests, but there is no Protestant
missionary, except a young gentleman of independent
means, lately gone from Scotland, and the Society’s
agent, Mr, Broumton, in the city of Kwei-Yang. Say
not, ‘Waft, waft, ye winds, His story;’ they will not
do it. Ye must tell it out yourselves among the
heathen that the Lord is King.”
Thursday, June 20th. —The subject for to-day was,
“ Christ the Branch—Christians the branches.” The day
was lovely, the hall crowded, the peace and quiet perfect.
Mr. Blackwood took us from Exodus xxiv., the Mount
of Communion, to Exodus xvii., the Mount of Prayer.
His expositions are beyond comparison the best every
day. They live in the memory, or revive when the
passage is referred to, which is a good test of merit.
Rev. J. B. Figgis, of Brighton, unfolded the subject.
He dwelt with peculiar beauty on the unity between
Christ and His people: such unity as exists between
the head and the body, between bread and the eater,
between the bridegroom and the bride. “ Oh,” he
said, “ how close, how near, how dear this union must
be! It is not merely that we are to grow near Christ,
as the osier or the woodbine may grow near the oak;
it is not merely that we are to grow upon Christ, as
the mistletoe, still of a different nature, may grow upon
the oak; it is that we are to grow up into Christ—
into Christ in all things, being made partakers of the


divine nature.” Changing the subject, he said further
on, catching the thought from one of Moody’s converts
who had been a drunkard, “ Christ in a man will not
drink, and Christ in a man will not swear, and Christ
in a man will not steal. And may we not carry it to
the other side—the fruitful side ? It is not hard for
God’s Lamb to be patient. It is not difficult to Him
who is incarnate Love to love all things and to bear all
things. It is not difficult to the Truth to tell truth.”
After Mr. Figgis came Eev. W. H. Aitken; and his
address was luminous and instructive, and heart-search-
ing to the last degree. “Itis by the branches that the
tree is observed and judged,” he said; “so while he is up
there, we are entrusted with the character of the living
O
Son of God; and oh ! how solemn to live with such
a responsibility! If we are His branches, and if it be
true that from Him is our fruit found, so, on the other
hand, from us is His fruit found.”
Soon after one o’clock we separated to tents, writing-
rooms, or the houses of friends, and reassembled in
various apartments to hear about work in Ireland,
medical missions, Miss Whately’s mission at Cairo,
evangelistic work on the Continent, and labour amongst
the Jews. My part was again with inquirers about
the Faith-cure in Mrs. Baxter’s drawing-room. The
question drew quite a crowd of clergy and others.
Several who had been healed in Switzerland were
present, and Miss Sarah Smiley, the eminent authoress,
gave some very wonderful instances of what God had
wrought in America upon others and upon herself.
Mrs. Gordon, the well-known authoress, the daughter
of Sir David Brewster, was there also to confirm the
news from abroad. There were some rather sharp


questions asked, but a ready answer was always fur-
nished either from experience or from the Word of
God. Before this meeting I had heard a remarkable
address on the Advent of Christ, from the Eev. H.
Grattan Guinness, but was obliged to come away
before Dr. Mackay or Rev. H. Brooke rose to speak.
The great hall was filled again to overflowing at seven
o’clock, and we had well finished by nine. Eev. H.
W. Webb-Peploe gave the first address; and Eev.
William Rainsford, son of the well-known minister of
Belgrave Chapel, made his maiden speech at Mildmay,
full of naive expressions, but with admirable points,
giving us a general feeling of amusement, courage, and
gratification. After the meeting I returned to Mr.
Head’s, where I had taken tea, and spent a delightful
half-hour with Major Malan, grandson to the great
Caesar Malan of Geneva, and author of those two
delightful books—“ South African Missions,” and “ A
Soldier’s Experience of the Love of God,”
Friday, June 21 st. —To-day’s theme was a glorious
one, “ Christ the King and Priest—Christians, Kings
and Priests.” It was opened by Eev. James Wilson,
of the Tolbooth, and I thought that the most striking
passage in his address was when he came to ask what
was the effect of Christ’s royalty on His priesthood.
“ That royalty dignifies and elevates that priesthood.
His royalty is an eternal, undivided element, and in
this alliance the eternity of His priesthood is lifted
high above the level of the priests who lived and died
in Old Testament story. But chiefly (and it is the most
important aspect of all) the royalty guards the sanctity
of tlie priesthood of Christ. There can be only one
king in a kingdom, and, in view of this alliance, may


I not say confidently there can be only one priest ?
It is something to see the seal of royalty guarding His
priesthood from the assumption and presumption of
mortal men.”
Dr. Herdman, of Melrose, closed the morning meet-
ing by a full and eloquent address, and some 2500
believers gathered at three in the afternoon to com-
memorate the dying love of Christ with bread and
wine, with prayer and praise. Numbers were unable
to obtain admission, as the doors were closed when the
last seat was filled to ensure quiet and order. The
service was ended by half-past four, and then there
was a missionary prayer-meeting in one room, prayer
for Israel in another, a father’s prayer-meeting and
conference on the training and education of children
in a third, and a mother’s meeting of like kind in a
fourth apartment, presided over by Mrs. Pennefather,
who still abides the life and soul of the work at
Mildmay. Then came the hour for refreshment,
and at seven we met again for the final meeting
in the great hall. The Eev. Evan Hopkins spoke
first, and brought out with great beauty and clear-
ness the claims of Christ as King, ruling supremely
in the heart of every believer who resigns his own
will to the will of God; and after him came that
most remarkable man, Dr. Mackay, of Hull, whose
dress, appearance, manner, and voice made me wonder
how he ever got a seat on the platform, but who soon
found his way to the sympathies of his audience,
commanding both their attention and their respect by
the force of his genius, and by the lofty aspect of the
truth which he presented to view. His subject was,
“A priest after the order of Melchizedec,” and his hand-


ling of it was simply grand. Speaking, towards the
close, upon resurrection life, and insisting on consecra-
tion so thorough that we should be ready to strike off
every trinket or valuable that would in any way assist
the cause of God, he said—“ It is not that we are earthly
men, wishing to go to heaven ; we are heavenly men
sent back to the earth to witness for Him; —for, mark
you, before I can get into a place I must be out of it.
‘ As Thou hast sent Me into the world, even so have I
also sent them into the world; ’ this strikes at the
root of all our worldliness. There are some who shut
up their title-deeds to heaven, like a musty parchment
in a Milner’s safe, fire-proof, judgment proof, hell
proof, and hope to get to heaven in the long run. Is
that resurrection life ? Is that the meaning of a ‘ sent ’
man ? The cross of Christ takes us out of the world,
and the resurrection of Christ sends us back into the
w r orld with motives, principles, aims, ambitions, hopes,
and joys which they cannot understand.” His words
of warning are worth being put on record before I
close. “There is a subtle danger-attendant on such
conferences as these—the danger of being taken up
more with the blessings that we get than with the
blessed Lord Himself—more with the little cup so
cracked that it cannot hold the stream, than with the
great fountain from whence the stream flows. Mr.
Moody used to say, ‘ The only way to keep a broken
vessel full is to keep it always under the tap.’ It must be
with us as with the disciples on the Mount of Trans-
figuration, ‘They saw no man save Jesus only.’ ”
Saturday, June 22nd, was an extra conference day, a
day of praise. Major Malan had a special meeting for
■South Africa and Java under the mulberry-tree at


nine. At eleven a great number assembled in the
large hall for a general thanksgiving; at three there was
a select meeting for those who were interested in the
Scriptural ordinance of healing by the prayer of faith
and by the laying on of hands; and at five there was a
crowded meeting in room Ko. 6, for prayer, and for a
practical address on holiness. This was the last of all,
and of all the days it seemed to me the best.
Sunday, June 23 rd. —I ventured to accept an invita-
tion from the excellent and devoted incumbent of St.
Jude’s, Mildmay, Rev. B. D. Hankin, and preached this
morning to his congregation of 1500 —an effort made
for the first time in seventeen years without subsequent
suffering.
Tuesday, July 2nd. —l remained in London until the
close of last week, visiting friends and preparing for
the Australian mail. On Thursday night, through the
kindness of Mr. Philip Smith, an old Tasmanian friend,
I received an invitation to the annual meeting of the
Royal Colonial Institute. We went to the South
Kensington Museum at about nine o’clock, and were
received by the President, the Duke of Manchester, in
a splendidly-prepared apartment leading to other beauti-
ful and brilliantly-lighted rooms, where we saw the
Trojan treasures and other things of great antiquity,
and conversed with such friends as we could recognise
and reach—such as the Bishop and Mrs. Perry, Sir
Edward and Lady Eyre Williams, Judge and Mrs.
Stephen; Mr. Foster Fitzgerald, our ex-Premier; Sir
Henry Barkly; Mr. Blackwood, of Toorak; Sir Archi-
bald Michie; Rev, C. P. Greene, of Caggeshall; and
Canon and Mrs. Goodman. The following day I joined
my wife and children at Malvern, and we are all now


on a visit which promises to be of some duration with
Admiral and Mrs. Dorville our Father’s smile above
us, and the most complete kindness and beauty reign
around. Some news of a Gospel Tent, Father Ignatius,
who promises a visit this month, and perhaps some
items from the Keswick Conference, may give me
matter for my next letter.


letter Scbentlj.
MALVERN —FATHER IGNATIUS —EVANGELISATION SOCIETY
—KESWICK CONFERENCE —AMANDA SMITH.
Broadwas Court, Worcester, July 1 8th, 1878.
S PROMISED in my last letter to give you some
account of evangelistic work in Malvern. A
fortnight has passed since then, and I have
seen remarkable results from the preaching of two
remarkably different men. Soon after reaching this
lovely mountain town, I was confronted at every
hoarding with a placard containing an invitation from
the celebrated Father Ignatius to attend certain of his
services. The Father drew immense crowds some
months ago, when a locum tencns was in charge of the
Priory, and attended at his services; but on this occasion,
the vicar, Rev. Gregory Smith, had so earnestly warned
his people against him, that the audiences were com-
paratively small. As a stranger and as a learner, I felt
myself at liberty to go wherever I liked; and having
once heard him, I found it hard to stay away. Opinion
all over England is fiercely divided regarding him; but
you will best form an opinion from the narrative of his
work as I myself witnessed it. I could not attend the
first afternoon meeting, on Monday, July Bth, being


absent in tlie country, but reached Malvern just in
time for the evening address. As I went up the stairs
to the concert-room, I saw a small card on the door-
handle, with “ Come to Jesus ” —in Old English letters.
Entering, I found them singing, “Come unto me, ye
weary,” led by Father Ignatius. He was sitting on the
platform behind a harmonium, so that I saw only his
head and face. His face was lifted upwards with a
kind of ecstasy upon it. A line of dark close-curling
hair ran round his head, like a coronet—all within the
line was cut short with scissors, all below was shaved.
His complexion was sallow, and his features regular,
and when lighted with expression were, to my mind,
beautiful. His voice was most engaging. He seemed
quite a master in reading, in speaking, or in song. The
hymn over, he rose to pray, and I saw the monk’s
dress—made of dark cloth, fitting close round the
throat, with a hood projecting behind, and the rest
falling straight to the ground. A polished silver cross
hung from his neck, catching and reflecting the light
every now and then like a mirror, while a chain and
crucifix hung half concealed on his left side, and a
knotted rope, the end of his waistband, hung on his
right. Then he kneeled down and prayed—“ Loving
Father, we approach Thee in the name of the Lord Jesus,
We thank Thee for Him, the gift of Thy great love,
and that we have had nothing to do but just to receive
Him and to live for ever.” So he went on —and for its
fervour and evangelical simplicity, his prayer might
have been uttered by Simeon of Jerusalem, or by
Simeon of Cambridge. Then he read the Scriptures
from 1 John v., beginning, “‘Whosoever believeth that
Jesus is the Christ, is born of God,’ whether he he a


Protestant or a Catholic. No power in earth or hell
can alter that ‘ whosoever ’ —God put it there; and He
has made believing in Jesus the one and only condition
of salvation.” He made no further comment, but read
on as I have never in all my life heard Scripture read
before. He reads and speaks as if he had authority, like
a man come from God. Then we sang again. His chosen
hymn-book is that arranged for special mission services
by Rev. Sholto Douglas, one of the best evangelists in
the Church of England; and his choice of hymns is as
appropriate as the music to which they are set. He is
himself a composer, and some of his sweet tunes I
must procure that we may have them sung in Mel-
bourne. Then he rose to his full height—he is not tall,
but slight, with a graceful Roman-like figure; and
when he began to open up i John v. 19, “ We know
that we are of God, and the whole world lieth in the
wicked one,” I felt myself in the company of a most
gifted man. He has the most sharply-defined views of
Christ and of the world, of the sinner and of the saint;
and he makes them stand apart or together with extra-
ordinary skill—the skill of an accomplished theologian
and of a devout student of God’s Word. Now and then
a thin vein of his peculiar and erroneous views would crop
up; but only in this form—“l love the Virgin as
much as any man; I love the saints and the angels,
and the martyrs and the sacraments as much as any
man; but ” (with great vehemence) “ they have nothing
to do with salvation So eager is he to strip men
naked of every rag of self-righteousness, and to bring
them into the presence of Christ alone for safety, that
you would think that he had come hot from the Epistle
to the Romans, or from the study of some great Puritan j


and yet, why go so far? I do not question that on
this point he is powerfully and pre-eminently taught
of God.
On Tuesday , July gth, he addressed believers on their
“Calling”—at 3.30— and began by making a fiery
search throughout the audience, simply by his words,
as he sat on a chair, to find out whether any who had
not received Christ were present. So penetrating was
his appeal that several in the gallery got up and went
away ; and when silence was restored, he gave a resume
of yesterday’s address on election, proclaiming God’s
absolute sovereignty in a way fearless beyond descrip-
tion. The preaching of God’s electing love has almost
died out in England. Evangelical men seem to have
yielded that point in deference to the Broad and High,
and this is indubitably a source of weakness. But is it
not strange to find the truth so boldly confessed by an
outlaw from the Church ? And as to the calling of the
saints—he said it was a call (1) made by Christ, (2) to
Himself, as the soul’s eternal centre, and (3) out of the
world as the abode of death—the kingdom and dwelling-
place of Satan. He pleaded for entire heart-separation
from the world, without in the least suggesting such
retirement from the world as he and his twelve brethren
at Llanthony Abbey have deemed desirable. His object
with the monastery, and with his like-minded followers,
is to establish a kind of “ Aaron-Moses-and-Hur ” power
on the top of a Welsh mountain, continuing in prayer
night and day, until England is flooded with blessing.
He will have none about him but truly converted men.
He said that a few days ago a young man presented
himself at the Abbey-gate, seeking admission to their
order—but with what motive ? to save his own soul I


which he had found it impossible to save in the tumult
of the world below ! Ignatius told him that his was a
house full of saved souls ; and then presented the Lord
Jesus to him as the gift of God’s love with such effect
that the young man returned home rejoicing. I was
unable to be present at the evening service, as I had
been kindly invited to the Malvern monthly clerical
meeting; but friends who were present said that his
treatment of “ The Church of the Nineteenth Century ”
was wonderful, laying bare the infidelity of Church
dignitaries, eminent Nonconformist ministers, popular
authors, and Christless communicants in every con-
gregation.
On Wednesday, July 10 th, I made niy escape from
“ Speech - day ” celebrations at Malvern College, just
in time to avoid those semi-theatrical representations
which are, alas ! becoming so common in our public
schools ; and just in time to enjoy a clear and beautiful
address on “The Believer’s Acceptance”—his accept-
ance in Christ; whom alone, he said, it was possible
for the Father to receive on the ground of merit. My
growing interest in this dear but erring child of God,
made me so full of sorrow concerning him, that after
much prayer I determined to seek an interview with
him, and to beseech him for Christ’s sake to reconsider
his monastic system, and the system of ultra-ritualistic
worship which he has introduced into his abbey. I had
to wait nearly an hour before he was free from others
who desired to speak with him. He did not know my
name, nor does he know it now, but he received me
with the most gentle courtesy. He seemed deeply
pained when I observed that “ idolatry ” was the awful
sin committed in ornate celebrations, and said that the


adoption of these views on worship, which seemed scr
inconsistent with elementary Gospel truth, had cost
him a struggle beyond what words could express. I
pressed him close but kindly, for I saw that his was a
tender, though a brave spirit, and he has had and still
has the rudest assaults from within and from without
the Church. He did not advocate his own principles
for me. He said that I had chosen the best path of
holiness I knew, and that he was treading the best
path of holiness he knew; that the Spirit of God must
be our guide, and that we should pray for each other.
So I left him—a man gloriously right in his gospel,
awfully wrong in his religious habits, with a feeble,
worn-out frame, and yet with a lion-heart against any
enemy who would deface any letter of the Scriptures,
or hold the sinner back even for a moment from the
waiting outstretched arms of the risen Son of God.
In the evening he spoke on the “ Widow of Nam's
son.” His description of the scene was as vivid as
Farrar’s, but far more spiritual. He seems to know
Christ well, and to make Him the Person Present on
all these occasions, and he always presses home the sin
of refusing God’s Gift, until every one who knows that
they do not possess Christ is made to feel the utter
hollowness of this life. I missed the afternoon meeting
on Thursday, July nth, but heard his oration on the
sinful woman of Sychar in the evening. I knew the
passage well, had preached on it often, had heard
eminent men open it up before, but this was all new.
The woman’s utter heedlessness about the Gift of Life
before her conscience was awakened—the Saviour’s
touching the sore point in her experience—her strug-
gling out of conviction by seeking to engage in con-


troversy—the Saviour’s revelation of Himself—the
powerful work of the Spirit, causing her to “ leave her
water-pot,” and to go through that city where she was
so well known for her evil life, as Messiah’s first chosen
missionary there, crying, “Come! Come ! Come to Jesus!
Come and see,” —this was all given to us in the calm
yet passionate confidence that the speaker was God’s
messenger, delivering God’s message. The after-meet-
ing was peculiarly sweet —a few words to the twenty-
two who remained behind—a hymn sung on our knees
—a hearty Gospel prayer, and when we rose, he was
gone, by a side door. There was no attempt to do the
work of the Holy Spirit. In the course of his last
address he had said—“ Suppose I had these two-and-
twenty hearts gathered together, and were about to
present them to the Lord Jesus, to be His wholly and
His for ever, which of you would rise to arrest me, and
say, ‘ Not mine ! not mine ! let Him have all the rest,
but not mine to-night! ’ ”
Friday, July 12 th. —This afternoon’s address to
believers on “ Sin ” was to my mind the most profitable
of all. He said that sin was part of our present being,
and must be recognised as such. God had given it
leave to dwell in us, and it was a powerful preventive
of pride; but were we as a consequence to commit sin ?
were we to love it, or to practise it ? The question
called out a torrent of holy eloquence against besetting
sins. He pictured the great cloud of witnesses—spec-
tators of our race and conflict —the on-look of God and
of His holy angels ; but he specially painted the glad-
ness that rang like a chime of horrible bells through
hell whenever a child of God, long beset, yielded at last
to temptation. He closed with an entreaty that each


of us should discover our besetting sin, face it in the
strength of Jesus, and drag it out like Achan, to be
stoned to death. I was at the Gospel Tent in the even-
ing, so did not hear his sermon on “ The Lion and the
Bear;” but on Saturday afternoon (July 13th) I was
there again to hear his last special address to believers
on their “Punishment.” “All sin is punished,” he
began ; “it is impossible with God that the smallest
offence should go unpunished, but the sins of believers
have all been punished in the person and by the suf-
ferings of the Lord Jesus, so that they have no guilt
whatsoever. But God in love chastises. Sin cannot
ruin us, but it ruins our joy and our peace.” Then
came a grand passage on “ idols in the heart; ” and the
practical lesson was, that when under chastisement we
should by prayer immediately ascertain the reason why,
with a view to putting away the sin which has brought
the need for correction. “ Thus,” he said, “ oh, my God,
even Thy Bod comforts me ! ” The closing address
in the concert-room was on “The Pharisee and the
Publican.” I never heard human pride laid so low—
human righteousness so utterly laughed to scorn—the
robe of Christ in its beauty and pureness so mag-
nificently dwelt on. The preacher led us about the
porches and courts of the Temple as though he had
actually been there beholding its glory and costliness
in the days of Herod ; and when he asked the world to
view the esteemed man of piety engaged on the steps
in prayer, and the despised tax-gatherer in a corner in
the distance, and inquired, “ Now, which of these is
justified ? ” he mocked them, as he answered, in their
name, “ Why, the Pharisee, of course; ” and then brought
down God’s answer —“ The Publican went home justified.”


On Sunday afternoon, July 14 th, he addressed chil-
dren on 1 Samuel ii. 18: —“Samuel ministered, girded
with a linen ephod,” explaining that the ephod was
symbolical of Christ’s righteousness, and that acceptable
•service was impossible until we had put off our filthy
rags, and put on Christ Himself as our claim on God,
and our beauty in His presence. After evening service,
and after a magnificent eulogy on the power of the Cross
of Christ, or rather of the power of Christ upon His
cross to attract men, illustrated by the “ iron that did
swim,” I was given a second and last opportunity of
pleading with him about his dangerous views. It was
nearly ten o’clock at night, and he was fairly exhausted;
but nothing could exceed the sweetness'of his manner
as he expressed his deep sympathy with all true wor-
shippers—though he had chosen a path which very few
true worshippers tread, and fewer still tread with peace.
The only thing that went clean against the grain was
his urgency that those who derived benefit from his
mission should bring offerings as a recompense—first,
to defray the cost of the mission; and, secondly, to sup-
port the Abbey. Though it was always gracefully done,
it was never lost sight of; and a great many did receive
blessings, and did lay costly offerings at his feet. Those
who believe him to be a really Apostolic though mis-
guided man, attribute the eccentricities of his religious
system to insanity. High Churchmen abhor him for
his Calvinism, and for his Wesleyan fervour on the
subject of conversion. Low Churchmen, on the other
hand, dread his influence, and his wild extravagance
in ritual. He is now about forty years of age. His
sister was with him all the time, and neither of
them made any mystery about his habits or convic-
* e


tions. I confess that I was uncomfortable through-
out his mission, but I got from him both light on
Scripture, and light on my own life. I am still per-
plexed about him, but I follow him with anxious
prayer, and cannot judge him yet, as many do, to be
wholly false.
I now turn from this doubtful subject to a theme
about which no doubt can possibly exist—the work
done during the last fortnight by Mr. Cleworth in the
Gospel Tent. Here it may be well to speak a word
about the active and useful association with which Mr.
Cleworth is connected. It consists of a company of
those who believe that there are thousands in England
who are completely ignorant of the Gospel message,
and who, therefore, have a first claim on our sympathies.
They believe in the Scriptural character of the office
of “ Evangelist,” as distinguished from that of Bishop,
Pastor, Teacher, or Missionary, and so they invite the
services of godly laymen, who have themselves received
the abundant grace of God, to aid them in proclaiming
the tidings of salvation throughout the island on un-
denominational lines. The band of labourers at present
consists of above two hundred, forty of whom are paid
agents, and who are constantly employed; the others
taking work when and where they can. They consist
of two distinct classes—“ gentlemen ” and “ working
men ” —and are asked for, advertised, and treated as
such in accordance with wise but stringent regulations.
When any good man wants a series of services for the
unawakened, he sends his application to Captain
Smith, the wise and devoted secretary, stating exactly
his requirements, and a suitable man is at once chosen
and sent. He is not to disclose to what denomination


he belongs; he is to sojourn with people of his own
rank in life; he is to promote unity among men of
different views; he is to superintend the circulation of
notices from house to house; he is to establish a daily
prayer-meeting for believers; he is to aim at the
conversion of the soul, or at the uplifting of the soul,
without a long wilderness delay, into its high place
with the glorified Saviour; he is to leave the converts
to he guided by the Holy Spirit as to what ministry
they shall attend, and in his own life he is to be lowly,
content, prayerful, hopeful, and in his addresses not
too low, not too loud, and above all not too long, even
though he has travelled a thousand miles to give but
one address. Such are their instructions; and, moreover,
the more experienced amongst them have the added
duty of training young evangelists who travel with
them, to take lessons in these glorious acts of proclaim-
ing Christ, and of winning souls.
Mr. T. E. Cleworth is a young man, and I should say
one of the most promising of all their staff. He is an
educated gentleman, with a marvellously clear head, a
clear, ringing gospel, an unfailing stock of anecdote and
illustration, a fund of grand sentences and aphorisms
from the best authors, and a voice that can be heard
half-a-mile away, and yet is easy and pleasant to the
ear within the tent. I cannot pause to sketch his
mission, or to give you some idea of his style. He told
one evening with great effect Kingsley’s story of the
little chimney-sweep who got by mistake into a bed-
chamber where a lovely child was lying asleep on a
snowy pillow, and who shook his fist in righteous
indignation at another little boy of ragged, dirty, and
disgraceful appearance whom he saw just opposite, and


who he thought had no right to be present in such a
sanctuary. It was himself that he saw in a mirror!
He never knew his own utter uncleanness until that
moment. So, said Mr. Cleworth, we behold ourselves
as we are in the mirror of God’s Word, and it takes
away all conceit. On another occasion he drew a
powerful picture of a sinner under sentence of death
delivered by the dying of the Substitute, illustrated by
Barabbas, who was condemned for sin, but was freed
by the lot falling on Jesus as a victim instead of upon
him. I heard him again quoting from Luther, “ I like
to live as if Jesus Christ died yesterday, and as if He
were coming to-day.” A fortnight of teaching like this
near the Memorial Church, and a fortnight more near
Trinity Church, close to Highcroft, Admiral Dorville’s
beautiful little home where we were staying, brought to
a close a season of Gospel appeals and of Gospel instruc-
tion which has led a considerable number of sober,
thinking men and women into the way of peace, and
into true and holy fellowship with God.
On Monday, July 22nd, I left Malvern early, and pass-
ing through Kidderminster, where Richard Baxter flour-
ished long ago, and through Wellington, where good Dr.
Cranage flourishes now, I reached Keswick in Cumber-
land by six o’clock. Canon Battersby and Mr. Robert
Wilson, the Conveners of the Conference, were on the
platform to meet the train, which had brought represen-
tatives, I may say, from various parts of the world; —
Rev. W. Haslam and his family from London, Miss
Sarah Smiley and Mr. and Mrs. Eli Johnson from
America, myself from Australia, with others from New
Zealand and India. I soon found myself in the most
delightful quarters at St. John’s Parsonage, and sitting.


at tea among some twenty friends whom Canon and
Mrs. Battersby had gathered round their table. You
know how beautiful Keswick is, in the very midst of
the Cumberland mountains, on the shores of Derwent-
water, only three miles from the falls of Lodore, and
in the very centre of the lake scenery. The spot has
been well chosen as a yearly rendezvous for Christians
who love God’s works, God’s words, and God’s people,
and who can have them here in all their beauty at one
time and in one place. The convention opened at 7.30
that evening in a spacious marquee, pitched in a green
field, well lighted, floored, and seated, with a large plat-
form for speakers, reporters, and singers,, and capable
of holding 1000 persons. Canon Battersby occupied
the chair throughout the convention—a man to love,
and respect, and admire; still, calm, and always acces-
sible in the middle of the week’s heavy responsibilities;
wise, prudent, and without partiality. The arrange-
ments were perfect—a secretary to find accommodation
for visitors in hotels or lodgings; an inquiry office;
cloak-rooms and refreshment-rooms; a book-stall at the
gate; easy-chairs for invalids; reserves for the deaf;
and last, but not least, the constant and careful atten-
tion of Mr. E. Wilson, a wealthy, warm-hearted, single-
minded Christian man, with great business capacity,
who made everybody’s wants his own.
I cannot, so late in my monthly letter, go into details.
We had a delightful meeting, largely attended, from
seven to eight each morning. Then came breakfast,
the residents entertaining visitors as far as possible.
At 9.30 there was a ladies’ meeting in the lecture-hall,
and at the same hour an inquiry meeting in the tent,
presided over by Mr. H. F. Bowker, a gentleman of
great influence and tact. Written questions were


handed in, bearing on doctrinal or on practical diffi-
culties, and were for four mornings most skilfully
dealt with by Revs. Evan Hopkins, W. Haslam, G. R.
Thornton, and Dr, Boardman. Then there was a general
meeting in the marquee from 11.30 to 1; then social
dinners; then a general meeting for ladies at 2.45 ; a full
meeting from 4to 5-30 f° r both sexes; tea afterwards;
and a final mixed meeting at 7. No one could attend
all these, nor was it meant or encouraged ; but people
suited themselves as to time, the names of the appointed
speakers being concealed, to prevent the soul anticipat-
ing either pleasure or disappointment in connection
with man. I cannot touch on the truth brought to
light in these six delightful days. I can only introduce
my readers to a few of the servants of Christ whom it
was my privilege to hear and to hold communion with.
There was Dr. Boardman, calm, solid, strong, earnest,
kind, but not in word or presence the fiery torch you
would imagine him to be from his glowing writings.
And Mr. Haslam, freed from his labours at Curzon
Chapel, and now one of England’s greatest Home
Missionaries, his bright eyes nearly blind, but quoting
text and chapter and verse as if his Bible were open
before him, and dispelling with easy power the mists
that Satan makes to gather round the Cross, and around
the life of faith, and around the life beyond. Rev. Evan
Hopkins, the editor of the Pathway of Power, quite a
young man, was there in his happiest frame, unravelling
difficulties, removing misapprehensions, and stating such
truths as concerned Christians with singular exactness.
Rev. G. R. Thornton, of Bengeo, Herts, was the latest
arrival, but he came full of good things, and with a singu-
larly clear and sweet voice he opened out many Scrip-
tures bearing on perfect peace and on full deliverance.


I obtained permission to attend a few of the ladies’
morning meetings, and certainly it was most edifying.
Miss Smiley teaches from the mountain-top, looking
down. She surveys the whole land of promise. She
can point you to any truth or groups of truth in Scrip-
ture —separating, combining, applying. She is both a
Hebrew scholar and a woman of science, and she lays
the world of nature under tribute to supply her with
illustrations for the world of grace. She is American
without Americanism, and spends her life in teaching
Christians what they have, and unbelievers what they
may have, in Christ. Mrs. Baxter, on the other hand,
teaches from the valley, looking up. Her voice and
manner are persuasive and entreating. She is constantly
on the theme of Jesus; how He lived with the Father,
and how we may live, as He lived, by the Holy Spirit’s
power. She is always pruning and dressing her audi-
ence with a sharp pruning-knife, that they may bring
forth fruit unto perfection; but the knife is so sharp,
so polished, so utterly without the jags or flaws of
temper or unkindly judgment, that you are thanking
her all the time. Her words make you bleed, and yet
they do not irritate. She was healed of a form of suf-
fering, that had for two-and-twenty years greatly hin-
dered her usefulness, on Christmas Day last—by her
own prayer of faith; and ever since her life has been
more than ever a life of listening to the voice of God.
She was a favourite pupil, in divine things, of the
sainted Aitken, and loves to tell how he used often to
spend ten hours a day alone in prayer, interceding for
his own flock and for England generally. He knew
the spiritual condition of every soul in his parish, and
watched and prayed accordingly; and then he used to
emerge from his retreat in Cornwall to convey bless-


ing to vast congregations in other parts. His life is, in
part at least, being reproduced in the friend of whom I
am speaking. I heard also “ Amanda Smith,” a wholly
black African woman. She was born in slavery. Her
father purchased her with his own money to set her
free. She was, as she said, “ definitely, manifestly,
and tremendously converted to God” in 1856; and two
years later—after inward anguish and terrible legal
strivings against the dominion of sin—she entered into
the fuller knowledge of Christ’s victorious power, and
has risen from the wash-tub to be one of God’s most
remarkable servants in America. Her teaching is
simple, natural, homely, richly spiritual, intensely prac-
tical, and now and then sublime. She came over to
Keswick all the way from the States on the invitation
of Mr. and Mrs. Eli Johnson, of whom I meant to have
spoken last of all, but time and space fail me. Suffice
it to say, their work is Gospel Temperance. Their
wealth was all burnt in the great Chicago fire; and
now they are on the world with small means, but
fervent hearts, to proclaim to poor drunkards, and to
the slaves of so-called “ moderation,” a full and glorious
deliverance from the power and love of drink by Christ
Jesus. They work their cause with the Bible, with
prayer, and the pledge, but they never associate with the
unconverted in advocating the Temperance cause. It is
quite possible that they may visit Australia early in 1879.
August Ist, 1878. —I returned to Malvern from
Keswick on Saturday last, July 27th, and hope to be
at Mr. Cowper-Temple’s private Conference at Broad-
lands on Monday next, August sth, and to leave Eng-
land on August 12th for the Geneva Congress. Of
both these most interesting gatherings I hope to give
some account in my next letter.


letter CEicjTjtfj.
MR, COWPER-TEMPLE’S CONFERENCE AT BROADLANDS —THEODORE
MONOD —ANDREW JUKES —REV. G. BODY —MISS SMILEY
F. CHARRINGTON.
Holyhead Island, September "Jth, 1878.
*YERY few days after I had posted my July
letters, I found myself on my way to the
Broadlands Conference. Perhaps some of my
readers may like to know who the Convener of the
Conference, Right Honourable W. Cowper-Temple, is.
He is the only son of the late Lady Palmerston, who,
when a widow, became the wife of our great statesman ;
but having no children by him, her son by her first
husband became Lord Palmerston’s representative, and
the heir of all his property. But better than his good
blood and his fair estate is his gentle Christian char-
acter, and his great love for the children of God. He
does not, however, trouble himself to discriminate
between those who love the Lord, holding truth, and
those who love Him, holding error; so that earnest
men of all shades of thought find a ready welcome
to his annual gatherings. Mrs. Cowper-Temple is a
daughter of Lord Tollemache, and throws the charm of
high culture and exceeding kindliness around the circle
which her husband summons together on these delight-


ful occasions. But to return: I left Malvern early on
Monday, August sth, and travelling by way of Wor-
cester, Oxford, Beading, Basingstoke, and Bisliopstoke,
reached Eomsey early in the afternoon. Leaving the
railway station, I was joined by a young man who,
like myself, was excluded from the omnibus by the
crowd of lady guests on their way to Broadlands, and
soon found that he was an officer lately retired from
the army, was now studying at Cambridge, knew
Australia well, was Mrs. Cowper-Temple’s nephew,
had recently and with great joy received the truth,
and was quite familiar with my name through a
mutual friend at Adelaide, so that the sense of strange-
-7 O
ness at the Conference was immediately taken from
me. Mr. E. Leycester, my new-found friend, then
guided me through the little town of Eomsey to the
demesne. It was a public holiday; the temperance
societies were enjoying the privilege of an afternoon
in the grounds, and the whole place was gay with
banners, decorated vehicles, and crowds of people in
summer dress. A long avenue led us to the house,
where we found Mr. Temple welcoming his friends,
and making ready for the first prayer-meeting. A
walk over mown grass, among bright flowers, and by
a large springing fountain, led us to the orangery,
which has become, since 1874, essentially a place of
prayer. As yet but few had arrived, so that our party
was exceedingly small. A judge from Germany and
his own pastor, whom he had brought with him on a
visit to England; Mr. Edward Clifford, a very talented
young artist, a great worker in the Tower Hamlets
Mission in London, and one of the mainsprings of
the Conference; Eev. Andrew Jukes, that gentle,


loving, peaceful, anxious, inquiring, gifted man, whose
writings have sown so much discord in the Church —
these, with Mr. Temple and myself, assembled, first,
to ask what the Church of God wanted most; and
then to ask, how its need was to be met. We all
agreed, I think, that there was a profound need for
confession and humiliation, and for the putting away
of sin and selfishness, and for the greater manifestation
of the Holy Spirit’s power, that the world might not
be left without its proper witness in truly loving and
sanctified lives.
When our requests had been spread out before the
throne of grace we scattered where we pleased. I
walked among the beech-trees by the side of the rapid
river with Rev. J. Mountain, the editor of the well-
known Hymns of Consecration and Faith, who spends
his life in Evangelistic work among English Independ-
ents, and who had come to Broadlands to conduct the
musical portion of the Conference. Guests now began
to arrive in greater numbers—Lady Huntly came, and
Mrs, Charles, the authoress of those delightful volumes
which take their name from the Schonberg-Cotta Family;
Rev. Evan Hopkins, the editor of the Pathway of
Power , came; and Theodore Monod, from Paris; but
after tea, when it fell dark, and the rain was coming
down in torrents, omnibuses, carriages, and all kinds
of conveyances kept driving up, until the house was
full; and not only was the house filled to its utmost
capacity, but Mr. Temple had taken the two principal
hotels in Romsey to accommodate bachelors, and such
married men as came without their wives. I was
driven to the “ Old White Horse,” where we sat down
to dinner about eight or nine o’clock; Mr. Clifford did


the honours. Mr. F. Charrington, elder brother of the
celebrated brewer, and director of the Tower Hamlet
Mission; Mr. Mowll, a most earnest and gifted young
evangelist from Cambridge; Eev, W. S. Walford, of
Bucklesham Eectory, Ipswich, a most excellent man;
a son of the Eev. Andrew Jukes, in holy orders, very
loving and amiable, but more than High Church ; Mr.
Swan, a young iron-master, from Glasgow, who holds
Dr. Mahan’s doctrine of perfection, but who gave £ 1000
to help on Moody’s work; Mr. Henry Hope Morley, a
son of the M.P.; young Mr. Eainsford, a son of the
eminent Christian minister of Belgrave Chapel, and
who has himself achieved great gospel triumphs in
Canada; a younger brother of my friend Mr. Ernest
Leycester; and the Hon. Hamilton Tollemache, an
eloquent and successful worker in connection with the
Evangelisation Society—such were some of the com-
pany at our first sitting. Dinner was nearly over
when another arrival was announced; the Hon. Eon
Keith-Ealconer, son of Lord and Lady Kintore, an
earnest Christian like both his parents, rode up on
his bicycle, dripping wet, having travelled the whole
distance from Cambridge to Eomsey—that is, 120
miles—in the one day. A most stirring appeal from
Mr. Eainsford closed the evening of the day before
the Conference.
Tuesday , August 6th. —The rector and his curates
administered the Lord’s Supper to a large company this
morning at eight o’clock, in the fine old Norman Abbey.
Breakfast was laid at the house and at the hotel from
9 to 10, and at 10.30 Theodore Monod conducted family
prayers in the smaller dining-room. He read from
John v. 1 to 14, and noticed three divisions, each of


which had a central point:—(i.) “Wilt thou be made
whole ? ” (2.) “ Rise, take up thy bed and walk.”
(3.) “ Sin no more.” His words flow from a sanctified
understanding, and from a full heart, and spoken as
they are with great distinctness, and with a nice foreign
accent, a great charm and impressiveness is given to
all he says.
When the long retinue of male and female domestic
servants had withdrawn, a conversational meeting was
held in the same room. Rev. A. Jukes presided, and
read from John ii. He said:—“Man’s lest always
comes first, whereas God puts His worst first, just
because we are not at first able to receive His best;
God must create, a sense of need. This forming of a
sense of emptiness is always the precursor of blessing.
Christ cured various sorts of maladies, that those who
felt conscious of corresponding spiritual maladies might
come to Him for cure. The leper was healed to give
comfort to those who find themselves unclean; the
palsied man for those who are helpless; the case of
fever for those who are restless; the case of death for
those who feel lost and condemned already .” He
noticed how the vessels at Cana were Jewish vessels,
and just like Jewish types, empty and void in them-
selves, but which the Spirit fills with meaning. Speak-
ing of the Virgin Mary, he beautifully observed that
she gave proof of being a soul living very near God, in
that she first of all told the want which she perceived
to the Lord Jesus, and afterwards said to the servants,
“ Whatsoever He saith unto you do it,” —teaching us
that the first thing is the unburdening of any matter
in prayer, and then the perfect carrying out of the will
of God, whatever it may be. He also noticed by a few


examples that the third day in Scripture is a day of
finding.
The great meetings of the day were held at 12 and
at 3.30, in the orangery. Eev. E. H. Hopkins took
the morning address, and Eev. H. W, Webb-Peploe the
afternoon. I have preserved no notes of either, though
both these men are distinguished in the Church, and
their theme was a glorious one—“ The promises of which
the realisation may now he expected.”
Wednesday , August yth. —There was a prayer-meet-
ing in the orangery at eight this morning, as well as the
Lord’s Supper in the Abbey at the same hour. At half-
past ten, Theodore Monod again conducted family prayer,
reading Isaiah xi. along with Luke iv. His theme was
“ The Spirit resting on Jesus, and on us.” He said that
if we are in Christ we must have the Spirit upon us,
just as a feather dipped in oil is anointed with the oil,
has the oil upon it as a matter of necessity. He also
said that as a glass was used that we might be able to
see a distant object with it, and was not a thing merely
to be gazed at, so the grand aim of the Holy Spirit was
not to draw attention to Himself, but to reveal the
Lord Jesus; and there was no doubt that just as if we
were full of Christ we were full of the Spirit; even
so, if we were full of the Spirit we would be full of
Christ.
Eev. Andrew Jukes took the chair at the conversa-
tional meeting which ensued. I cannot attempt to
follow the wonderful stream of thought, of Scriptural
allusions, and of Scriptural combinations which flowed
from his lips. I remember that he said the “ Spirit of
Power ” was the Holy Ghost, the " Spirit of Love ” was
God the Father,” the “ Spirit of a Sound Mind ” was


the Lord Jesus. He said that as there were only three
original colours, and yet seven colours in the rainbow,
so there were Three Persons in the Holy Trinity, and
yet “ Seven Spirits ”of God. Some one had said, “He
commands Nature who obeys Nature; ” just so, obedi-
ence is the pathway to power with God. He asked,
“ How much can you bear without complaining ?
This is the true test of power.” “ The great test of
love,” he said, “is sacrifice, as shown by the case of
the two mothers who came before Solomon. The true
mother is a type of the True Church. Let there be no
division. The pretended mother is a type of the False
Church. Cut it up.” “ Knowledge,” he said, “ deals with
things as they are. Wisdom deals with things as they
appear,and detects shams. .. . When Christ was baptized,
the Spirit was given to man, and yet man had it not.
Plenty of people knew Him carnally. This is usually
the first knowledge men have of Christ, afterwards
they come to know Him spiritually. There were
many different stages in the life of Christ—before His
birth, at His birth, then infancy, boyhood, manhood,
ministry, death, resurrection, ascension. These stages
are found in believers still, according as they possess
much or little of Christ and of His Spirit. . . . The
spirit of fear,” he said, “ brings in all kinds of dreadful
evils. If we are afraid of accident, we can’t travel;
if we are afraid of fever, we can’t visit, and so on.
The great remedy for fear is to receive the Spirit in
such a way that we come to the apprehension of things
as they are. . . . All who received the Spirit in early
days could minister the Spirit. The laying on of
hands in the Old Testament generally implied the lay-
ing on of a burden or curse, whereas in the New Testa-


ment it always implied a blessing. The Gospels are
the books where Christ was known after the flesh. In
the Acts, He was known after the Spirit.”
Throughout this exposition of 2 Timothy i. 7, there
was a vein of originality which kept one anxious all the
-while lest the kind, loving, old man should drift into
heresy, and especially as he neared the close; I must
say that he came critically near, in many passages,
both to mystic and to Eomish error. But the time was
up, and we moved off to the orangery to hear the great
missioner, the ritualistic Mr. Body, give the address of
the day on “ The conditions that assist, and the hin-
drances that impede, the reception of the promised
blessings.” Mr. Body is a very remarkable man, as
you well know. He is the son of a Devonshire
physician, and has a broad provincial accent. He ex-
perienced a real conversion to God some years ago, and
suffered great persecution in consequence. He holds
and vehemently preaches the truths on which his own
soul rests for salvation, but —he is a ritualist. His
gospel is not quite so pronounced as that which Father
Ignatius preaches, and yet far as he has gone in ritual,
he has not gone so far as the enthusiastic monk of
Llanthoney Abbey. Here are some points in the
address of the man who holds the Real Presence, Con-
fession, Absolution, and Prayers for the Dead:—con-
ditions that assist in obtaining Pentecostal blessings.
(1.) Forgiveness of sins, as the first gift of the Christian
covenant, (2.) Assurance of salvation. (3.) Self-oblation
to God in one great initial act, and in daily repetition
combined with the belief that the Spirit of God is in
us, His laws not being imposed by constraint from with-
out, but accepted willingly by the Spirit within. (4.)


Fidelity to the leadings of the Holy Spirit in constantly
separating us from evil; loyalty to conscience; yielding
ourselves up to the Spirit’s guidance in prompt, full, and
generous obedience ! rejecting all doubtful literature ;
refusing to go to places of worldly amusements, where
the spiritual life is enervated ; not conforming in any
point to the world against the teachings of the Spirit
in the conscience. (5.) Humility, the highway to real
power, because it is unselfish power. Here the creature
prevails with the Creator and obtains grace to touch
human hearts, to mould stubborn wills, and to hush
unquiet consciences to rest. Power without humility
is highly dangerous. We may get safe over Jordan
and safe into Canaan, only to fall. Before conversion,
our sorrow about sin is more about the consequences
and wages of sin; now, our humility and grief and
sorrow is about forgiven sin. We are no longer anxious
about sin. We are saved, but we are in sympathy with
the heart of God about it. This works humility. God’s
generous forgiveness implants in the heart of the for-
given a generous gratitude, (6.) We must cultivate the
spirit of stillness and inner repose. “God works in the
silence of God.” A true Sabbath is not cessation from
toil, but rest in toil—lying on the bosom of Jesus, like
angels on outstretched wings, ready to fly when He bids
us. “ Semper agens, semper quietus .” We must have
time for communion with God. “Tu Primus, Tu
Ultimus.” The world is restless, and the Church is
partaking of that restlessness. We must read the
Bible much. Chew the cud of Scripture and medi-
tate. You can only give with power what in stillness you
receive. (7.) The spirit of thanksgiving. Rejoice in the
Lord; joy is strength. Triumph over miserable ex-
* f


periences. Swim in the ocean of Divine Love. Sing
songs in the night. (8.) Dwell together in unity (Isa.
xxxiii.). “ I believe,” said he, “in visible unity, because
lam a very High Churchman. Then why am I here
among the representatives of various bodies, and various
modes of thought, and various forms of worship ? Be-
cause I believe the time has come when, under the pres-
sure of antichrist, we are forced together. The nearest
approach to the highest possible unity is found in the
possession of tender , loving hearts. And in this per-
suasion I stretch out my hands to all and to any who
truly love Christ.”
Such are some fragments from the vigorous, weighty,
and spiritual address of this great representative
preacher. What shall we think of men who so highly
magnify Christ, and yet who idolise bread and wine ?
When speaking of the search after blessing, he cried in
vehement disapproval, “ Thy God is in thee ! ” and I was
told that had he been pressed, he would have answered
that God was in us by the sacrament. He dealt with
the “ Hindrances to blessing ”as he went along, Mr.
Keith-Falconer took down his address in shorthand, so
that it may yet be printed, and I may succeed in intro-
ducing it into Australia.
An hour in the open air and some refreshment in the
house was followed by another hour with Miss Smiley
on the types in the Tabernacle. I can only give one or
two illustrations or anecdotes from her most interesting,
profoundly deep, and delightful expositions. She said
that when in true unity each member of Christ should
take as much care of other members as the right hand
would take care of a finger on the left hand if it was
suffering pain and needed binding up. She said that if


a circular bowl is broken into pieces, each part may
hold a small supply of water in and by itself; but if you
gather together the scattered fragments and make the
bowl complete again, the bulk of water contained in the
whole will be out of all proportion greater than the
quantity contained in the pieces when apart. So with
the unity of the Spirit. She said that a dear friend had
given her a beautiful spot of land at Saratoga Springs
where she built a house. Hither she retired annually
for three months, after other nine months of gospel
labours. She was particularly fond of flowers, and
spent especial care on one bed of verbenas. She meant
it to be the pride of her garden. It had the best soil,
the best cuttings, and the best situation, and she watered
the plants with her own hands, morning and evening,
with water fresh from a beautiful spring. But instead
of flourishing, they stood still; they neither died nor
lived; they looked worse than any other flowers in
the garden, though she tended them and watered them
more assiduously than ever. At last, one day a friend
arrived, to whom she told her disappointment and
perplexity. He asked her at once about the watering.
“Oh yes,” she said, “ twice a day, cold from the spring.”
He went to the spring, put his hand in, felt how chill
it was, and repeated, “ Cold from the spring, cold from
the spring, that is the secret; no wonder that they do
not prosper ! ” So she took the hint, and filled her cans
with water in the early morning as before; but instead
of pouring it cold on the perishing plants, she stood it
out in the bright, warm sun, till it was nearly hot, and
then she watered her bed of verbenas, and they at once
revived and blazed into glorious colours, “ So,” she
said, “light without heat, labour without love, God’s


Word without God’s Spirit, how it chills the souls
of men, and hinders instead of helping.” Speaking of
the Urim and the Thummim, she said, “ God gives
wondrous light from his Word, but He also gives us
guidance without the Word. If you want to know
anything, inquire immediately from God. I was once
lost on a dark night in a forest in Virginia, The driver
got off the track and told me so. However, he went on,
and I sat anxiously within. I had nothing to look at
in the thick blackness, but his form against the front
pane of the carriage window ; then, to my great alarm,
I discerned that instead of attending to the horses he
was staring up into the air. I became frightened, put
my head out, and asked him why he was not mind-
ing where he was going. He replied, ‘Tm looking at
the path in the sky ,’ and sure enough he was. It was
too dark to see the horses, or even the ground, or the
timber, but as I raised my head I could just see above
us, where the branches of the trees nearly met, a thin
lon» line of bluish light. This is known to travellers
O o
in the forest —as long as they look up at that pathway
they can knock against no tree. Their feet are safe
while they gaze on high. It was not long before we
reached home; and I learned this lesson, that when my
way is hidden, I consult the Urim and the Thummim,
and I find perfect guidance!'
An evangelistic service in the orangery followed
upon this, as on the previous evening, at 7.30, and the
room was thrown open to the public; but I was not able
to be present on this occasion. I had, however, the
great joy of reading with and addressing the young
men after dinner at the “ White Horse Hotel,” on the
subject of “ Christ made unto us sanctification.”


Thursday , August Bth. —The usual prayer-meeting at
eight was followed by breakfast at nine, and by family
devotions at 10.15. These I unfortunately missed
owing to a private conversational engagement with a
very dear young man, the son of an English nobleman,
who lives in the fullest enjoyment of the indwelling of
the Holy Ghost. His great concern is that he and a
few other Christians should be so very happy, while
thousands of fellow-believers go mourning all their
days. After prayers, however, our beloved friend, Mr.
Temple, who moved among us as if he were nothing
but just some lowly friend of the family of God, and
not the lord of the manor, expressed a wish for any
kind of “ testimony ” —that is, for some direct personal
acknowledgment of what God had done for our souls.
My dear friend from Glasgow spoke first, and his words
would have carried great weight, only that he went too
far, wrongly concluding that when the soul is filled
with God, and occupied with God rather than with sin,
sin is not present in the soul, because its presence is
not felt.
I have learned from my visit to England, and especi-
ally from this Conference, that the devil, with marvellous
sagacity, is making a hundred times more use of good
but mistaken men in the present day than ever he did
before. He cannot take from them foundation truth,
but he gives them a lie, and makes them jealous about
it, and their holy lives act like sledge-hammers to
drive the error home. Bad men do not propagate error
successfully.
A dear old clergyman rose next, a convert from
Judaism, and melted us all down by a confession of
years of shortcoming. He said that the oil for the


light in the sanctuary was made out of olives, very
young and slightly unripe, teaching us that youth was
the time for the Lord to make us His own, and to
make us give out the fullest radiance—that our whole
career from youth to age should be burning and
shining, but that it was not too late for old people like
himself to cultivate the childlike spirit, and to be
young and fresh in heart towards God. A stranger imme-
diately arose, and said that it was the same with wheat
as with the olive, —that what was reaped just before
maturity made the best flour and the whitest bread.
The general meeting was held in the orangery at
11.30. Mr. Body was again the chief speaker; the
subject of the day being—“ The use to he made of the
gifts of the Spirit.” I had other work at this time to
which I was obliged to attend, but they said that he
had not at all the same power as yesterday. The
general meeting in the afternoon was considered as
final. It was held at 3.30, under some grand old
beech - trees, the day being bright and clear. The
audience sat on permanent seats, the speakers stood on
a little platform. When I arrived, the meeting had
commenced, and Mr. F. Charrington was giving the
address. He of all others had a right to be heard, and
he spoke out manfully concerning work in the Tower
Hamlet Mission, and made no secret of the fact that it
was evangelical truth which actuated him and his
companions in labour, and the mighty lever by which
they had raised so many of the fallen up to the life of
God. His story is worth telling. His father, who was
a very wealthy brewer, sent for him one day, said that
he had realised all that he required, and offered him
his entire business, worth just then a-year.


The young man had, I believe, learned the truth only
about twelve months before, but his mind was made
up in a moment. He refused this splendid fortune,
because of the source from whence it was derived,
incurred his father’s displeasure, saw the wealth which
he had declined given to his younger brother, endured
much persecution for Christ’s sake, and was wholly
disinherited. But his father sent for him again near
his dying day, and speaking to him, in the midst of the
assembled circle, said —“ My son, you have chosen the
good part which shall not be taken away.” He also
left him enough to make’ him independent of a profes-
sion, and his noble boy’s life is now devoted to that
self-denying, wonderful, glorious work in the east end
of London, of which I may be able to speak more
particularly at another time.
After Mr. Charrington had done, Theodore Monod
spoke most beautifully. Oh! I wish I had time and
space to commit to paper something of what he said.
Then my turn came. I had spoken briefly in the
morning, and was asked to give it over again. Some-
thing of what I said has assumed a permanent form in
a little tract entitled “ E|r their Sakes,” which is to be
published by my dear friend, Mr. H. F. Bowker, on
October Ist. It is to follow a beautiful essay by Kev.
W. Haslam (the ninth of a series), which I did not read
until mine was written, but of which I would rather
have one than a thousand of No. X. It is entitled “ A
Personal Christ,” and should be asked for in the
colonies. After I had concluded, Mr. Body presented
our thanks to Mr. Cowper-Temple in an eloquent
speech, and sought, by the way, to overthrow, in one
damaging sentence, the doctrine I had sought to estab-


lish—that Christ is given to the believer, in the first
instance, as One entirely Holy, and is intended by God
to he the entirely Holy One within the believer’s heart,
in order that the believer may make true progress, and
grow in real grace, “He didn’t believe,” he said, “in
short cuts to holiness ; ” nor do I, —but I believe in the
Holy Son of God, whose holiness is complete, and who
dwells within, and who never makes self holy, but who
by His Spirit mortifies the fleshly members, who fills
us daily with Himself and with His Father’s fulness,
and makes us conscious temples of the Holy Ghost.
This may be a short cut, but it leads home to truth
and to a quiet mind—the Holy Christ of God in our
hearts to-day, and more of His indwelling understood
and felt to-morrow.
The Eev. A. Jukes closed with a remarkable and
comprehensive prayer (it nearly comprehended the
blessed dead), and then we scattered from beneath the
beech-trees, and I spent an interesting but sad half-hour
with dear Mr. Jukes alone. He has so much light and
so much love, and yet has done so much harm! He
was very kind to me. He is as simple as a little child,
sorrows over his position in, or rather outside, the
Church, has published his book on Restitution, much
against his will, at the urgent instance of friends,
and believes that he is generally misunderstood. He
seemed much grieved at what I said about the incal-
culable mischief his doctrine had done, and would do,
in making sin more common, and sin’s penalty less
dreaded; and he wholly denied that one single act
of sin could naturally ensue from his teaching. He
asked me to call and see him when I next visited
London that we might talk these matters over, and I


must say that, considering his years, his reputation, his
shining abilities, and his extraordinary penetration, I
never met any one more humble or less dogmatic.
After tea we had a season of retirement, and at 7.30
three meetings were held in three different rooms of
Broadlands House. One was conducted by a Mrs.
Macpherson, who speaks for two hours together, and
whom nobody seems to understand. Another was
addressed by a London tradesman—a locksmith—who
lias a remarkable head and remarkable genius, who
vigorously teaches universal restitution. The third
was a select meeting of those who believed that the
prayer breathed by St. Paul in Ephesians iii. 14
to 19 has a fulfilment of a literal kind, and who
desired its fulfilment in their own experience. It
was a blessed hour, not of waiting for God, but of
waiting on God. I need not say that I was there;
so were Mr. Temple and Theodore Monod, and Mr.
Tollemache, and Rev, Evan Hopkins, and Mr. Clifford,
and Miss Sarah Smiley, besides one or two others
who thirsted after a fuller knowledge of that king-
o o
dom which is righteousness and peace and joy in
the Holy Ghost. Meanwhile, Mr. Body was conduct-
ing an evangelistic service in the Romsey Town Hall.
It was now late, and I had to take a hasty farewell of
our most kind host and hostess, and of a very few
other friends whom I was able to discover in the dusk.
While awaiting the breaking-up of the meeting in the
Town Hall, and the dinner which was to ensue about
9 o’clock, Mr. Swan came to my room and detailed
some remarkable manifestations which God had made
to humble young Christian men whom he knew in
Glasgow. He said the effect on their whole demeanour


and religious work was as permanent as it was won-
derful. After family prayers this evening, each one
present was invited to speak, and we had a happy time,
concluding the Conference with special prayer for and
yearnings after the Love of God shed abroad in our
hearts by the Holy Ghost.
Friday, August gth. —An early train conveyed Mr.
Morley, Mr. Walford, Mr. Tollemache, and myself
from Romsey to London. We got the guard to lock
us in, and we had a most delightful Bible-reading on
the typical character of the life of Jacob and of Joseph,
as far as Waterloo. Mr. Walford’s suggestions and refer-
ences were of the highest possible value. A few hours’
business in London, a visit paid to the Bible Society’s
splendid new mansion, and to Mr. W. S. Partridge’s
show-room in company with Mr. Tollemache, an hour
with Mrs. M. Baxter at Mildmay, who like myself was
preparing for a visit to the Continent, and was full of
good news of faith-work and faith-life in many depart-
ments of the Redeemer’s kingdom, a hurried visit to our
dear friends at Hampstead, with whom our books, papers,
and goods remain until the outward voyage —all this,
and four hours’ rail from Paddington to Malvern
brought me to the end of this strangely-new, and
mingled, and delightful Conference experience, and
back to my own family again; only, however, to take
such rest as parting from many kind and many suffer-
ing friends could give; for after one Saturday and
Sunday our circle was again broken up, and Monday
saw our children on their way to apartments in
Cheltenham, and ourselves en route for the Continent,
Of our experiences abroad I must tell you in another
and separate letter.


Setter JJiutfj.
SWITZERLAND —GENEVA CONFERENCE, ETC.
Kingstown, Ireland, September 26th, 1878.
MyN Monday, August 12 th, I left Malvern early in
the afternoon, accompanied by my wife and
* '~ r ® ) Miss Kermode, and reached London before
dusk. We had then the melancholy pleasure of calling
upon Judge and Mrs. Stephen, and of hearing from
their lips the touching story of the last illness and
joyful entrance into rest of their second daughter,
whose pastor I had been for nearly ten years. And it
seemed very strange that, driving from their door, we
should go directly to a house in Cavendish Square
where another of my parishioners had died but a few
days previously. I allude to Mr. Somerville Lear-
month, whose soul now dwells in eternal sunshine,
whose bodily weakness is all forgotten, and whose
memory is fragrant in Australia as that of a good
steward of one of the manifold gifts of God. We could
only hear a few particulars of his death, and of the
removal of his remains to Scotland, from the lips of
strangers who knew him not as we knew him; and
then we passed on to Victoria Station and to Dover,
and crossed the Straits by the glorious light of the
moon, just before her eclipse. We slept that night at


Calais, visited the town and the ramparts on Tuesday
forenoon, took the afternoon express to Paris, crossed
the city without a moment’s delay, and caught the
night mail to Geneva.
Wednesday , August 14 th. —Eapidly as we travelled,
our train was late, and I missed the opening ceremonies
of the Young Men’s Christian Association World Con-
ference. Having, however, taken up our quarters at a
beautiful hotel, almost overhanging the lovely English
gardens, and close beside the waters of the blue lake, I
hastened to the “ Salle de la Eeformation,” and intro-
duced myself to the Committee, who received me with
the greatest cordiality. I was at once presented with
a carte de logement, which not only contained the
name of the gentleman who was prepared to receive
me as his guest, but was embellished within by a
beautiful map of the city and a directory for strangers.
I found that Mons. Max Perrot of Coligny, an eloquent
Christian layman (who lives in the beautiful country
chateau where Lord Byron spent a year of his life,
and wrote a considerable part of Childe Harold ), had
invited me to share his hospitality, along with Mr.
Shipton of the London Association, and with his
daughters; but as I was expected to occupy the poet’s
room, en garqon, and had unexpectedly brought ladies
with me, I was obliged to surrender my privilege, and
remain in town at the “ Hotel Metropole.” I was
immediately given, as a guide to one or two places
where I wished to call, a young Scotchman, from
whom I heard all about the morning meeting. It was
of a public character, was held in the great hall, which
seats three thousand people, and after prayer and the
singing of a splendid hymn of welcome, had been


addressed by the president. Then came the presenta-
tion of the delegates, who numbered in all about two
hundred. Then one from each nation spoke as his
country’s representative, and conveyed messages of love
and congratulation from his fatherland. By one of
these addresses the whole audience was greatly moved.
A young Spaniard heard his own name called out,
together with that of another, of whose existence, or of
whose Young Men’s Christian Association, he had never
even heard. The latter rose to speak, and as he warmed
up about Spain, and about the Lord Jesus, and about
religious liberty, the other was observed to creep noise-
lessly to the seat from which his young fellow-country-
man had risen, and when he had finished, they were
clasped in each other’s arms.
One of my visits was to the house where the late Dr.
Merle wrote his great History. His widow
is a connection of ours by marriage; but she was, to
my great regret, spending the summer in Ireland. At
two o’clock we met in the debating room; and after some
new delegates had been introduced (there was tremen-
dous cheering for Australia), we set to work on the
question of The Creation of Effective International Ties
and of a Central Permanent Committee. Two members
held out strongly and steadily against some 198, and
threw us sadly out of time; but ultimately, before
the Conference broke up, a strong committee was
formed. Money was raised on the spot, amidst great
enthusiasm, to cover expenses, and a unanimous call
was given to my dear and valued friend, M. Ch.
Fermaud, president of the Conference, to forsake his
worldly calling—that of a banker —and to throw him-
self into this world-wide cause as our paid secretary,


and as our trusty friend. For such a post he is admir-
ably well qualified. He combines good business habits
with the most earnest piety. He has excellent health ;
possesses great power in ruling an assembly, though he
is only twenty-three years of age; is sustained in all
his Christian labours by a sympathising and praying
mother, and speaks three languages fluently—French,
German, and English. His decision will not, however,
be given till towards Christmas.
About four o’clock we broke up, made our way to the
railway in a torrent of rain, and about five o’clock
found ourselves under shelter at the house of Mons.
Adolphe Perrot, a wealthy and excellent man, whose
charming villa almost adjoins Baron Rothschild’s magni-
ficent estate, and looks across from the north shore to
his brother’s villa on the south. All the delegates had
been invited to this “ Soiree d la campagne chez M. Ad.
Perrot, d ChamUsy; ” but the rain spoilt our open-
air enjoyment; the old house and the new together
were hardly sufficient to hold the throng; the hymns
that were raised every now and then were not well
sustained by the scattered choirs ; the Chinese lanterns,
with which the beautiful trees on the hillside were
profusely hung, could not be lighted; and every one of
us was wet; so we just stayed to partake of our host’s
bountiful supper, which was carried about by men-
servants on trays for nearly one hour and a half, and
then got home by road or rail. I had, however,
a delightful hour with Mr. William J. Smith, of
Brighton, who gave me most cheering accounts of
the work with which he was immediately connected,
and of the reviving effects of the great Brighton Con-
ference in 18/5*


Thursday, August \sth.— The Congress began at 9
a.m., a little too early for our English and American
brethren; but we had a good time nevertheless. The
subject was an important one—“ How our Associations
may establish a Link between themselves and the Sunday-
schools.” We had an excellent paper on this subject
from Mr. M. H. Hodder, a warm-hearted, earnest
Christian man. Then came a good deal of experience
and suggestion; and I rose near the end to propose a
kind of occasional mission on the part of our Associa-
tions to Sunday-schools, with a view of keeping
before the minds of pastors and teachers the appalling
fact that by far the greater number of our children pass
out of our hands in an unconverted state, and,'therefore,
are not as ripe as they should be to attach themselves
to more advanced Christian Societies. Every address
had to be translated twice for English, German, and
French delegates. Nothing was let pass in an “un-
known tongue; ” but we were fortunate in possess-
ing the services of Pastor Cook, of Nancy, whose father
was an Englishman, and of Mons. H, Eidenbenz, of
Zurich, both of whom were conversant with the three
languages.
Erom two o’clock to half-past five we had a delight-
ful discussion on the question of “Agencies for Informa-
tion.” After an exhaustive paper had been read by a
Swiss delegate, experience began to be given, and
showed an amount of care bestowed upon, and pains
taken with, individual cases of young men, that rivals
the zeal and alacrity of the detective-office. It
became evident that there were spirits at the centre
and head of these Associations to whom the soul of a
young man—of any young man —was precious; who


would spare no pains to trace a wanderer from house
to house, from city to city, from country to country,
that he might be rescued from present harm and from
coming wrath; who would make any personal or official
sacrifice to get employment, or food, or lodging, for
such as were in need; who would watch the sick till
health or death had come, and give them burial when
death was passed. The Boston Association has even
purchased a special plot of ground “to bury strangers
in,”
At eight in the evening we had a public meeting in
the great hall. The addresses were wholly in Trench,
so that I missed much of the benefit which others
derived from the great and powerful eloquence of such
men as Pasteurs T. Coulin, Tophel, and Ed. Barde.
The subject was “ The Call to the sacred Ministry ,” and
was grandly dealt with, as we learned from a resume
given us on the following day by Mans. Cook. I saw
a man sitting on the platform with a peculiar stillness,
and light, and inquiring upward look in his eye, who
took no part except that he closed in solemn words
of prayer. This was Pasteur Stockmayer, who treats
such sick as send for him by the laying on of hands,
and by the prayer of faith. I must speak of him
again.
Friday , August 1 6th. —We met at nine, and con-
tinued till half-past twelve. The subject was “Bible
Study, and Bible Lessons .” Mr, Pobert Orr, of Pittsburg,
Pennsylvania, read the opening paper, which was
printed and circulated in all the languages, and was
full of matter. Eighteen delegates spoke after him,
and their evidence went to show a perfectly prodigious
impetus that has of late years been given to the study


and teaching of God’s Holy Word. Secretaries and
representatives seemed to say with one consent that
their Bible-readings, Bible-meetings, and Bible-classes
were, under God, the spring, the attractive power, and
the spiritual cement of every prosperous association.
There was failure where the Bible was not given its
right pre-eminence; success where it occupied the front.
I ventured to plead hard with the young men them-
selves for at least one hour with God and with His
Word before beginning the duties of the day, to secure
which it might be well, I thought, to form an “ Early-
rising Band.”
In the afternoon a public meeting was held in the
Hall of the Reformation, and Pasteur Barde gave a
most able, eloquent, and deeply spiritual address on the
subject of “ The young Christian in View of Marriage.”
I can only mention that he was very strong about the
necessity for prayer that God Himself might choose
the wife, and might not leave the choice to the random
of the young man’s erring affections, to love and to
marry as he liked. This meeting did not last long, so
I took the opportunity of driving with my wife into
the country, of calling on our kind host and hostess of
Wednesday, and of visiting the enchanting spot where
Baron Rothschild spends, I suppose, some of his happiest
hours, away from the chink of money and the diffi-
culties of European loans.
About seven o’clock the same evening we repaired to
the Casino de St. Pibrre, close under the shadow of the
old cathedral. We had all been invited to another
Soiree d Campagne, by M. Gam pert, of Monch oisy,
but his grounds had become so utterly soaked with
recent rains that he gave his entertainment at this
* G


Casino instead. It was a great success. Two large
rooms were densely crowded. Good things in the
greatest variety were piled upon tables against every
wall, and servants were kept busy for three hours in
supplying tea, coffee, and stronger drinks. A splendid
band was engaged, and the noise from seven o’clock to
ten o’clock was wonderful, I made several new acquaint-
ances on this occasion; among others, Mons, Alexander
Lombard, an old man of considerable wealth, an earnest
Christian, and the President of the European Interna-
tional Lord’s Day Association. I was surprised and
delighted to find that God had His own people abroad,
who were vigorous for the defence of the Fourth Com-
mandment, in the face of almost universal Sabbath
desecration. You may imagine the state of public
feeling if I tell you that when Jean Jacques Eousseau’s
anniversary fete was lately celebrated (it was celebrated
on a Sunday), the hours of service were altered in the
Protestant Cathedral, and the Sunday-schools were
entirely closed to facilitate the attendance of persons of
every age.
I also fell in with a divinity student, who interested
me in many ways. He was by birth a Hungarian, and
a Jew; had been instructed in the ways of the Lord
Jesus in Constantinople; was now residing at Yevey
as agent on the estate of Mr. Samuel de Pury (so well
known as a friend of the Church some years ago at
Lilydale, in Victoria), and was expecting ordination in
the Swiss Free Church in the course of a few months.
This was Mons. Emile Sage, who, by his brief narration,
wove together Australia, and Hungary, and Turkey, and
Switzerland, and Ur of the Chaldees, into one chain of
living, present interest. Delegates from other nations


I also met, whose faces I knew, and who conversed
with me in the most animated way, but not a word of
whose conversation I was able to understand. Unlike
English custom, our host and hostess, as on a previous
occasion, were nowhere to be seen. I was much
alarmed at the quantity of beer and wine which the
young men drank. Fortunately it was not strong.
Saturday, August 17th.— We met again at nine
o’clock to-day, and the subject before us was one of all-
absorbing interest— “ How to Augment the spiritual Life
of the Members of the Association.” I think that more
delegates rose to speak on this subject than on any
other, and some of the suggestions made came very
near the vital point—“ strengthened with all might by
the Spirit in the inner man,” and “ Christ dwelling in
the heart by faith.” There was also a good deal that
was practical, and prayer-meetings were urgently re-
commended as essential to success. Soon after twelve
o’clock we found ourselves again at the Casino de St.
Pierre. The broken weather had a second time inter-
fered with a kind invitation from IVIr. l\dax Perrot to
Dtjetiner en plein air, so we had to content ourselves
with a meal in town ; but as it was fine at two o’clock,
we either drove, or walked, or went by steamboat to
Cologny to spend part of the afternoon at our host’s
private residence. The day proved lovely. Mons. and
Madame Perrot had made great preparations for our
enjoyment. Flags hung from every tree, a brass band
filled the air with the best music, and the views of the
lake, which lay beneath us, and stretched far on the
right hand and on the left, were very lovely. We
went to see the room which I was to have occupied
had I been alone. It was Byron’s own apartment, and


a likeness of this unhappy, gifted man, hung upon the
wall above the bed. A previous engagement called me
and several other delegates away at an early hour, to
reach a beautiful place in a different direction. Another
of those wealthy, single-minded, earnest men, with
whom Geneva seems to abound, had made a dinner for
his friends. Mons. Neckar is a man of gigantic size
and stature, and yet with the voice and kindliness of a
woman ; a childless man, who has lost both his first and
his second wife, and who now spends his time and his
fortune in doing good. He speaks English fluently,
having spent two years of his youth in Edinburgh, and
he believes that he owes a debt of gratitude to the
Church of Scotland which he never can repay. So on
this occasion he singled out all the Scottish delegates,
and brought them to his own chateau first of all, and
then to his brother’s, hard by, where the entertainment
was given. We had a delightful evening, for, by Mons.
ISTeckar’s special courtesy, I was reckoned among the
guests. Before dinner I made the acquaintance of a
high-born, charming young man, Pastor Louis Lucien
Eochat, of Geneva, who was also an accomplished
English scholar. He is chiefly remarkable as the head
and front of a Total Abstinence Society which is mak-
ing quiet way in the very midst of a wine country, and
which has startling and terrible figures to produce as
the raison dCetre of its existence. He gave me papers
to show how utterly fallacious is the idea that drunken-
ness is uncommon in Switzerland. You may imagine
how difficult it must be for him to be on friendly terms
with the great wine-growers; yet by the two Mons.
Neckars, whose vines clothe the hills on every side, he
seemed both beloved and honoured. I told him about


the manufacture of good, unfermented wine in Hungary,
in America, and in Australia, and it seemed a relief to
his mind that in protesting against the fermentation of
“ the blood of the grape,” he might be able to suggest
an alternative by which these hundreds of thousands
of acres of valuable vines might yield a beverage as
delicious as before, and robbed of all its sting. At table
I sat beside Mr. John Laing, the Glasgow secretary,
who gave me much information concerning the vast
work in that vast city; and next but one on my right
sat Dr. Delaharte, a grand old man, who carried off a
Hebrew prize from amongst three hundred competitors
years ago in the Edinburgh University, who has long
laboured without pay in the Eree Church College at
Geneva, who has published for the students an entirely
new translation of the Hebrew Scriptures in French,
the result of thirty years of study, and who has, in com-
pany with Caesar Malan, Merle D’Aubigne, and others,
sent out some four hundred enlightened ministers into
various parts of the world. These illustrious divines
conducted their classes for nearly half a century in a
place little better than a vault; but this morning some
good men of Geneva met, and resolved to erect a suitable
Divinity School, at a cost of £BOOO. Those present at
the meeting put down their names at once for £6O OO,
Mons. Heckar giving £ 1000 as his own donation.
Sunday , August 18th. —We met from eight until half-
past nine in the debating-room for prayer and mutual
help. At half-past nine M. le Pasteur Tophel preached
a truly great sermon in French, and the Lord’s Supper
was afterwards administered to a large body of com-
municants. We attended the Church service later on
in the day; the English-speaking delegates assembled


still later for special prayer and encouragement. Warm
and hearty words were spoken by some of the more
advanced Christians till about three o’clock, and at four
o’clock I had the great joy of a long, private, quiet
meeting with the man of all others whom I longed to
know —Pasteur Stockmayer. I had spoken with him
briefly twice before, but only as we went along the
street together; but now we had an hour of leisure, and
I listened eagerly to all that he had to say. Our special
subject was —The Lord's relationship to the Believer's Body ,
though the conversation took other turns. He is the
man whom God has more signally honoured, I suppose,
than any other man living, within the last few years,
in successfully dealing with the sicknesses and infir-
mities of afflicted Christians. He was himself healed
of an awful disease by the prayer of faith, though his
recovery was by no means rapid.
I asked him for his judgment in my own'case. When
I had told him all, and as he knew about it previously
through the kindness of a very dear friend who had
written to him fully on the subject, he spoke very
solemnly, in broken English, and yet with wonderful
emphasis, something as follows:—“ You must under-
stand that the Lord’s hand is on your body. He has
a message for you. There is something on His heart
about you; you must find out what it is. If you
pressed Him too hard just to make you well for your
own comfort, He might do it; and then you would be
well without having learned your lesson, and that
would be a pity. It would be better not to be well so
soon, but to understand perfectly what are your Father’s
wishes. You must know that you have died with Christ
a dreadful death, an ignominious death. You have


died shamefully. You have also risen up with Christ.
You are a member of His body, of His flesh, and of His
bones. He is your Head, the Head of your body, the
Saviour of your body. You are entitled to the health
of His body. He does not love sickness; it is the
work of Satan. The Lord chases it away. But when
you are ill, it is permitted. He speaks by it. It is His
voice. You must listen. You must be obedient.
Health lies in obedience (Ex. xv. 26, &c.), and in con-
fession of sin (James v. 16). Do notask yourself what
you shall say when I am gone, or what you shall feel,
or think. Say nothing; but learn God’s will from the
Scriptures and from Himself. I had returns of pain
for three years after the laying on of hands, but it never
interfered with my appointed work, and before that I
could do nothing. How I never have pain at all. You
will have strength sufficient for all God wants you
to do before you go back to Australia. You will
have strength sufficient for all your life. You will
get quite well. Only, don’t go back from trusting
God.”
I say all this for the sake of others, and for the
truth’s sake. I would rather have spoken of any one
else than of myself; and though I have had letters
since my return to England joyfully announcing the
recovery of those for whom prayer was specially and
recently made, still no one has had such a wide experi-
ence as Pasteur Stockmayer, and I am thankful to
have had his calm, moderate judgment. He believes
(from Matt. viii. 17) that Christ has already “ taken our
infirmities, and borne our sicknesses ” —and that we
enter into the blessings of preservation or of recovery
from illness by using the appointed means (James v.),


by confession of sin, and by such a close walk with
God as makes disobedience impossible.
At half-past five in the afternoon all the delegates
met for united prayer, and after the various evening
services, such of us as were not worn out with the
many engagements of the day assembled in the bright
and cheerful rooms of the Geneva Young Men’s Chris-
tian Association for special dedication of ourselves to
God. Mons. Fermaud, our young and gifted President,
seemed foremost in his desires after entire surrender
to the will of God,
Monday, Avgust 19 th. —The scene is all changed to-
day. No more meetings in the great hall or in the
debating-room. Business is practically over, and we
must let the Swiss Christians demonstrate their love.
A steamer, decorated with flags, lies just in front of
our hotel. Her decks are crowded by eight o’clock
a.m. The delegates who cannot go with us come down
to the quay to bid us farewell, and cheer us as we depart.
We have a lovely morning, and steam onwards along
the northern shore till we are abreast of Lausanne, and
still onwards, till now we have got up among the
glorious hills at the eastern end of the lake, and are
made fast to a pier at Yevey. A really beautiful
chateau stands almost immediately upon the water’s
edge, and nearly 250 persons enter by handsome gates
into a green and lovely garden. This is the town-
house of Mons. and Madame Couvreu, the representa-
tives of an ancient family, and the loyal servants of
God. They stand, with their dear and highly-culti-
vated sons and daughters, just within the entrance to
make us all welcome, and then we are scattered over
.the grounds, or gather ingroups in the reception-rooms


until breakfast is announced. Young and unmarried
men fill an immense hall, that reminds me of the
orangery at Broadlands ; while married men with their
wives and daughters fill two large rooms within the
house. Breakfast over, we join together in one place to
hear the orators speak : and then we are photographed,
take farewell of our most kind friends, who have pro-
vided the steamer as well as the entertainment, and ac-
companied by their eldest son, a very fine young man, we
re-embark. We pass by Montreux, and Chillon, and
the mouth of the Rhone, and return to Geneva by the
south shore of the lake, only just in time to get ready
for the last of these large hospitalities—a final dinner
at the Hotel Belle Yue—where we assembled in great
numbers, and where, at about ten o’clock, we parted—
with many new friendships formed, with many new
joys born out of our recent communion, and with many
regrets that we should see each other’s faces again no
more.
It is time that, in conclusion, I should tell you some-
thing more in detail concerning the delegates themselves
and the countries from whence they came, Germany
sent us five, conspicuous amongst whom I may
mention Professor Klug, of Elberfeld, and Pasteur
Krummacher, the nephew of that holy man who wrote
Elijah the Tishhite. Alsace sent three. America sent
no less than forty-one, headed by Rev. Richard Morse,
general secretary of the International Committee; Mr.
Robert M‘Birney,. the distinguished secretary of the
New York Association; Rev, J. P. Hubbard, an Epis-
copalian minister, represented Shepherdstown, West
Virginia; and Mr. Russell Sturgiss, a man of consider-
able power, stood for Boston. England, Ireland, and


Scotland sent 47 delegates, amongst whom I may men-
tion Mr. E. Shipton, the London secretary; Mr.
Williams, of St. Paul’s Churchyard, the happy, genial,
intelligent friend of our cause, and the real father of
all Young Men’s Christian Associations; Mr. Hodder,
whom I noticed before; Mr. Hind Smith, from
Manchester; Mr. W. J. Bain, from Birmingham ; Mr.
W. J. B. Patterson, from Liverpool; Mr. John Laing,
from Glasgow; and Mr. John Tawse (writer to the
signet), from Edinburgh. France sent in 16—from
Paris, and Nimes, and Luxembourg, and Montpellier,
and Bordeaux, and Lyons, and St. Etienne, and Montau-
ban. Some of these Frenchmen were most eloquent.
One especially thanked us with thrilling earnestness
because our country had sent such a man as Mr. M'All
to Paris, not only to create new work, but to stimulate
the whole band of Christian workers in the great and
gay metropolis. The Cape of Good Hope sent us Mr.
John Cartwright; and you know who represented
Australia. Two brethren came from two associations
in Spain; Copenhagen sent Captain Keyper; Amster-
dam, Mr. J. C. Kemp; Florence, Signor H. Eibetti;
Stockholm, Mr. Alfred Testuz ; Li&ge, in Belgium, sent
M, Theophile Durand. German Switzerland sent 22
delegates, principally from Berne, Basle, Zurich, and
Schaffhausen. The Canton Vaud sent in 35, and
Heuchatel, Geneva, and Jura 30 others. All these
represented associations, some of which are exceedingly
small, but which, when taken altogether, give a sense
of weight, and force, and dignity to the whole move-
ment which may well make our brethren in Australasia
feel that, though we live in a far country, we belong
to a confederation full of power, and fitted to shake


llie world. We are regiments belonging to a divine and
royal empire. We are studded, at various distances,
all over our Lord’s dominions. We have received the
command to march against the enemy, and we are
daily moving to that great central point where we shall
dethrone the usurper, and crown our David King.
Then, not till then, shall we want no more of these
Triennial World-Conferences. The first was held in
Paris, in 1855. It may be that this of 1878 has been
the last; but if the Lord come not, it is proposed to
meet again in London in 1881. There are now 2200
Young Men’s Christian Associations in the world, with
a roll of one and a half million of members. This is
no ordinary federation, and there is yet room for endless
increase.
I forgot to say that in giving some account one day
of the work in Melbourne, I was acknowledging our
indebtedness to America for the gift of so valuable a
secretary as our dear friend W. G. Marsh; whereupon,
at the mention of his name, several of the delegates
from the States cried out—“ We know him, we know
him!” It was gratifying to learn that his services
were recognised all the way across the Pacific.
How we visited Chamounix when the Conference was
ended, and how we travelled from Chamounix to
Interlaken, and thence to Lucerne and Paris, and
home by Jersey and Guernsey, I must tell you, if I
am spared, in another letter.


better STcntfy*
SWITZERLAND —CHAMOUNIX —GRINDELWALD—BISHOP OF OHIO
—RIGI —PARIS —THE BIBLE KIOSK —MR. M‘ALL—MISS DB
BROEN — GRANVILLE —GUERNSEY —TO IRELAND —MOUNT
MBLLERAY —DUBLIN.
Drumcar, DuvZeer, County Lowth, Ireland,
B October 15 th, 1878.
Y last letter was dated from Kingstown. Since
then we have been in the midst of most
beautiful scenery in the County Waterford and
in Kerry, and spent one week in Dublin. We arrived
here this evening to spend a few days with my mother’s
cousins, Lord and Lady Eathdonnell, before going on to
Belfast, and thence to Liverpool and Glasgow.
I must fulfil my promise and tell you more about
our visit to Switzerland and France. The Geneva
Conference, you will remember, broke up on Monday
night, August 19th. The next morning, in company
with Mr. John Tawse, writer to the signet, and with
young Mr. Plenderleith, the secretary of his immense
Bible-class in Edinburgh, we set off, five in number, for
Chamounix in a private carriage. The day was threaten-
ing, but became finer and finer as we drew towards the
mountains, and when we had passed along the magni-
ficent road which leads from Bonville to Sallenches,


Mont Blanc stood before us in all her splendour. The
drive from Sallenches to Chamounix was slow and
long, all up hill, but while the light lasted, the walk
up the incline—with heights above and depths below,
with foaming torrents and bold bridges, and pine
forests and peaceful chalets, and now and then a snowy
peak—was simply grand. Kain came with the dark-
ness, so that we lost nothing and suffered nothing
within a closed carriage, and reached a most comfort-
able hotel by eight o’clock.
Wednesday , August 21 st, was a really glorious day.
No one could have had a more exhilarating air or a
clearer morning sky. I set off immediately after
breakfast accompanied by my daughter, Mr. W. J.
Bain, of the Birmingham Young Men’s Christian
Association, and Mr. Plenderleith, and by two o’clock
we had climbed the Montanvert, crossed the Mer de
Glace, got safely over the Mauvais Pas, pic-nicked at the
Chapeau, and rejoined the senior members of our party
for a carriage drive to Argentiere and the neighbouring
glaciers at the head of the valley, and near the passage
of the Tete Noir.
On Thursday, August 22nd, we re-entered our travel-
ling carriage at an early hour, and descended the fifty
miles to Geneva more rapidly than we had ascended;
stayed the night there, and caught the 7 o’clock train
next morning {Friday, August 23 rd) for Interlaken,
passing beautiful Lausanne, picturesque Berne, and the
lovely Lake of Thun on the way, arriving at sundown.
On Saturday, August 24 th, we engaged a carriage to
Grindelwald {l2 miles), and had a most romantic drive
along a road which lay at the foot of precipitous moun-
tains on either hand, following the course of a wildly-


rushing river, sometimes leaping it by an elaborate
wooden bridge, with the Jungfrau standing in giant
strength beyond. While luncheon was preparing, I ran
over to the chaplain’s house, and had the great pleasure
of meeting there the Eev. Mervyn Clare, an old college
friend whose health had failed in the work which he
most loved, and who is now compelled to live abroad
both winter and summer. After luncheon my wife
was carried in a chaise d joorteur, and we walked along
one of the most filthy paths I ever trod to see the ice
grotto, wdiich has been cut by human hands out of
the Grindelwald glacier. It was well worth seeing;
and we heard, moreover, that Alpine horn which Dr.
Somerville has immortalised by comparing its coarseness
to the human instrument, and its glorious echoes to the
voices of God, proceeding from unclean human lips in
undefiled and unimpaired vitality. Cannons also, fired
off at intervals along the tortuous, muddy path, gave
the idea of tumbling avalanches and crashing moun-
tains ; and, last of all, a thunderstorm with vivid
lightning and torrents of rain concluded a day of great
pleasure and great variety. The hostess of the “ Aigle
d’Or” provided the ladies with everything requisite
after the rain, asking that they might be sent back by
post! and I followed the carriage on foot to Interlaken
to get warm and dry in another fashion.
Sunday, August 25 th, was a still, hot, beautiful day,
and most of the English from the various hotels repaired
to service at 10.30. Such a mixture of worship! Eoman
Catholics in the body of the church, English Church-
men in the chancel, and Scotch and French Presbyterians
in adjoining apartments. We had a great feast in a
sermon from the Bishop of Ohio. He preached on the


Resurrection, and having dealt with the question
philosophically in a most luminous, masterly, and
Scriptural way, he came to its practical bearings; and
here his soul expanded, and he grew most impressive
and eloquent. He called up to view the great works
of the mighty dead—their imperishable monuments of
good and evil—and he said, “ Shall the work live, and
the workman die ? Ho ! the workman must face his
work” And then he drew a picture of the minister
of the gospel confronting his sermons, and his conversa-
tions, and his failures, and the souls to whom he had
been a blessing, or those to whom he had been a curse;
and he portrayed in like manner the lawyer, and the
editor, and the author, and the merchant, and the
peasant, and the husband, and the mother, and the
child, indicating such salient points in the possible life
and character of each as would leave indelible marks
in eternity ; —and having gathered this wondrous group
around the Judgment Seat, he said so earnestly, so
affectingly, so simply, “ You will need the Lord Jesus
then; and if you will need Him then, you need Him
now ! ” and then he gave the welcome to Christ in words
which have gone from my memory, but which I must
supply with other words which I read this morning
from an unknown author in a most precious little book
called the King of Love. “ See, His hands are nailed,
they cannot strike thee; His feet also, He cannot run
from thee; His arms are wide open to embrace thee;
His head hangs down to kiss thee; His very heart is
open, so that- therein, see, l6ok, behold, and thou shalt
see nothing but love, love, love to thee.”
The preacher at afternoon service was the Bishop of
Central Pennsylvania, and the sermon was good, though


not like the morning. Would to God that a prayer for
God’s messengers like that in the ordination service
was more fervently pleaded at every family altar—
“ Clothe them with energy divine.”
Monday, August 26th, was wet, but we pursued our
journey, notwithstanding, by rail, and steamer, and
diligence, passing the lovely falls of Giessbach, climb-
ing the Brunig Pass, embarking on the Lake of the
Four Cantons in rain and cold, but reaching Lucerne
safe and well before it fell dark.
Tuesday, August 27th. —We spent the forenoon among
the sights and curiosities of this dear old town, and
embarked at two, in lovely sunshine; touched at several
places of resort on either side of the blue, charming
lake, and returned from Fluelen at its furthest end to
disembark at Yitznau, and to ascend the Kigi in that
most wonderful railway in the world, which rises to a
height of 4500 feet above the lake in an ascent of four
and a half miles. One engine pushes up but one
carriage, made as light as possible, with open sides and
sloping seats. The ascent is accomplished by means
of cogs, and the steeps climbed every now and then
are simply amazing. It was thick dark ere we reached
the summit, but the magnificence of the hotel, the blaze
of light, the crowd at table-d’hote at eight o’clock,
made us soon forget the rain and cold that had
prevailed since sunset.
An Alpine horn was sounded to our great joy at 4.20
A.M. on Wednesday {August 2&th), and about 300
persons soon assembled on the Rigi Kulm to see the
sun rise. When the sky is clear, this is one of the
most glorious and beautiful sights in Switzerland. The
land of lake, and peak, and snow, and glacier lies before


the spectator, all bathed in rosy light; but ours was
not a good morning. Before the sun appeared the
Eigi was darkened by clouds that swept by us on the
rapid wings of a piercing wind; but suddenly the land
lay again clear at our feet, though the sun itself was
muffled in the far east. Even as it was, the prospect
was grand and magnificent in the extreme, as the
colourless light grew stronger and stronger and lay on
the mountain-tops, or stooped into the lakes and valleys
below. Once we got the rosy light—only once—when
the clouds seemed to melt just beneath the sun, and to
let a flood of fire perpendicularly down upon a very
distant mountain. It looked just like a conflagration—
as if the mount was altogether in a red-hot smoke.
Then we returned to a hurried breakfast, and to the
wonderful railway, in bitter cold and rain and cloud,
and on by steamer to Lucerne; thence by rail to Berne,
where we stayed two hours, and thence to Neufchatel,
and up the splendid gorge of Pontalier, and so on all
the night on our way home, reaching Paris in less than
twenty-two hours from the Eigi Kulm.
Thursday, August 29 th. —We arrived this morning
very early, and made our way down the Seine and past
the Exhibition to Passy, the “ West End ” of Paris.
We had an introduction to Mr. Steinberg, who assists
the secretary at the kiosk of the “ Monthly Tract
Society,” and who takes in Christian people as lodgers;
but the arrival at his house of Mr. and Mrs. Eussell
Gurney, and of several delegates from Geneva, made it
impossible for him to receive us. He is himself a very
godly man, a Eussian by birth, and speaks nine
languages, so that he renders invaluable service in the
distribution of Christian literature. He very kindly
* H


took us on to another house. Leaving the ladies to get
o O
rest and refreshment, I made my way (four miles) to
the post-office, and with some difficulty secured my
letters (twenty-three in number) from Australia and
elsewhere, and returned to read all the good news of
my own home and parish, and of the work of God in
the colonies. Soon after two o’clock we went in a cab to
the Bible kiosk, and had the great joy of meeting with
the Eev. E. W. M‘All on the pavement opposite. The
work carried on by this simple-hearted, loving, zealous
servant of God is most remarkable. Think of twenty-
two mission stations in various parts of the capital,
with accommodation for 5300 persons, with an average
weekly attendance of adults amounting to 8000, and of
juveniles to 2500 more. All this was in progress before
the opening of the Salle KvangSlique, which lies just
in front of the Trocadero entrance to the Exhibition,
which holds upwards of six hundred people, and where
evangelistic services are held twice every day in French.
You may imagine how this good man has made his
presence felt, when I tell you that he has received two
medals from French secular societies as an acknow-
ledgment of his labours for the enlightenment of
o o
the people. Entering the kiosk after parting with Mr.
M'All, we were able to watch the proceedings. At one
window Bibles and Testaments were sold in all lan-
guages ; at another window portions were being very
actively given away. It was wonderful with what
rapidity the distributors discerned the nationality of
each person who presented himself at the window—
Italian, Frenchman, Spaniard, Dutchman, Englishman,
Swede, got the Scriptures handed them in their own
tongue without saying a word. I was surprised to see


priests applying, and heard that some thirty had called
for the Trench Scriptures since the kiosk was opened,
and that some of them had come again and again,
making the most friendly inquiries about the work.
We spent from three o’clock to six o’clock in the
Exhibition. I will not pause to describe what I saw,
as it has occupied so large a space in the secular press.
A hundred thousand people visit it daily, and Sunday is
the most crowded day of all, and the busiest day for
the workers at the kiosk. I was glad to learn that
Mr. M‘Call, the exporter of Australian meat, is a most
thorough Christian man, and one of the notable Five
who carry on this special branch of Bible distribution.
They are in concert with the Bible Society, but form no
integral part of it whatever. In the evening I went
with a good young man, a Mr. Finch, whom I had met
at Geneva, to see something of Miss de Broen’s work
at Belleville. We were more than an hour crossing the
city, but at last found ourselves seated in the midst of
a Communist congregation. A very nice little building
was well filled, and on the platform, amongst French
and English workers, I was delighted to recognise the
face of Eev. Digby Berry, who had spent a fortnight
with me at Caulfield some years ago, and who is now
doing an important work among the students of St.
John’s Divinity College, Highbury. He spends all his
vacations in Paris in order to help Miss de Broen. He
was kind enough to ask me to give a short address, and
as I feared to speak in French, a dear lady who was pre-
sent volunteered to translate for me ; so, breaking up
what I had to say into short sentences, she repeated it
word for word. After the meeting was over, I spoke
with several of the true converts, some of whom have


quite a gift for proclaiming the gospel to others. Mr.
Berry showed me a man who was given over for dead,
but when he received the gospel in the last stage of his
illness, he was healed body and soul. He is a strong,
healthy man now, rejoicing in the Lord. Then followed
a few words with dear Miss de Broen, whose work is
assuming immense proportions, and then home near
midnight.
Friday, Aug. 30 th. —I wrote briefly for the Australian
mail before breakfast, and then we started to see some-
thing of the city. We saw the panorama of Paris dur-
ing the German siege, where paintings and natural
objects were mingled with such skill and artistic effect
that it was almost impossible to discern where the one
began and the other ended. Oh, that ruined city! those
wounded men! those ghastly faces ! those shattered
cannon ! those fearful shells ! It makes one pray, “ Give
peace in our time, 0 Lord! ” Then the Place de la
Concorde, and the Madeleine, and La Sainte Chapelle,
and Notre Dame, all draped in black to commemorate
the anniversary of the death of Mons. Thiers, which was
to occur the week following. We did not go to see the
relies, but I heard afterwards that they show three skulls
of John the Baptist. A visitor was perplexed by ob-
serving that one skull was considerably smaller than
the others, and remarked on it. The showman imme-
diately answered “ Oh, that was John the Baptist’s head
when he was a hoy ! ” Then we drove to the Hotel des
Invalides, and saw the great Napoleon’s mausoleum of
red granite, and the tattered banners that he had taken
in his inglorious victories all standing round, with the
name of the battle let into the pavement; and then we
revisited the Bible kiosk, and heard a touching story of


a young Russian nobleman of great wealth, who has
received Christ with such love and childlike simplicity
that he thinks he cannot do enough for the Lord who
laid down His life for his sake, and so he has placed his
entire fortune upon God’s altar. He has engaged Mr.
Steinberg to go with him this winter to Russia to estab-
lish several Bible kiosks and to organise some Bible
wagons. His own estates are to be visited first, and he
is going in person to attend these travelling Arks for
six months, in order to give the full weight of his
influence and position to this glorious enterprise. His
liberality in all other useful directions is co-extensive
with his means. What could be said more ? How few
Christians have so learned Christ!
Saturday, August 31 st. —We took farewell of Paris
to-day at noon, and travelled to Granville, on the sea-
coast, opposite the Channel Islands, where we also
spend Sunday, September 1 st. I went out after break-
fast, and though there is a population of ten thousand,
and although a good many Protestants, both French
and English, are in residence, I could only hear of a
French Protestant service conducted here once a month.
I was quietly distributing Scripture portions as I had
opportunity, when I came on a body of soldiers engaged
in idle talk with a group of civilians at the corner of
the barracks. I stood against the wall, told them
what I had in my hand, offered a gospel to any one who
would step forward, but no one stirred; so I made the
forward move myself, put the little book up among
them, when immediately a sheaf of hands was thrust
out to grasp it, and my pockets were soon emptied.
What a field, I thought, for a missionary! How much
some delicate lady might accomplish in this dark place,


with faith and prayer, just by “ going about doing good.”
I think I had only one refusal all that day. The people
seemed both grateful and surprised.
Monday , September 2nd. —We crossed early to Jersey,
and spent the day in seeing what we could of the
island. Attended a very interesting meeting of the
“Additional Curates Society” in the evening (it was
illustrated by photographic scenes of London life),
and on Tuesday, September 2nd, we sailed again for
Guernsey. We were met on the pier by my wife’s
uncle, Mr. George Pidcock, a dear and aged child of
God, who has been long identified with every leading
Evangelical society in England, and who has for years
entirely supported a London city missionary, thus effec-
tually conveying gospel blessings to the poor as if he were
at work himself. How wonderful that by setting aside
ABo or £ 100 a year, a godly man may more than double
the influence of his own life. I don’t think that indi-
viduals in the Church have half entered on their privi-
lege of laying out money on the entire maintenance of
men to represent them in the home or in the foreign field.
We spent two most enjoyable days in Guernsey, and
saw the greater part of the island, and met some of its
best men. Mr. Pidcock fell in with Dr. Duff when he
was here for his health last year, and heard him tell
with deep interest how that on his first voyage to India
the ship in which he sailed was wrecked, that he was
in great grief at the loss of his most valuable library,
which he had packed with the greatest care to comfort
and refresh him in his work; but that just then a box
was floated in from the wreck, and when it was broken
open, it was found to contain his large Bible and
several Books of Psalms, so he concluded that God had


cut him off from his great store of human learning to
shut him up to more diligent study of His own Word.
He believed that this had exercised a powerful influ-
ence over his whole career.
On Thursday, September sth, we sailed from Guernsey
to Southampton, got as far as Basingstoke that night,
rejoined our little children at Cheltenham on Friday
(September 6th), and travelled with our whole party to
Holyhead on Saturday, September yth. We remained
with my beloved brother-in-law, Mr. W. Watson, and
with his little motherless children for ten days in a
beautiful house by the seaside, and I occupied my
mornings in preparing the tract for the press which I
had promised for Mr. Bowker’s series on the subject of
“Personal Holiness” Mr. R. C. Kermode, who has so
often written letters to The Missionary during his
wanderings in foreign lands, came to spend a few days
with us ere his departure for Texas, where he resolves
to settle. He brought with him that remarkable and
beautiful tract by Mr. Haslam, “ A Personal Christ,”
and another of great value by Mr. S. A. Blackwood,
entitled “ The Acceptable Life.”
Tuesday, September iyth.— Our happy party broke
up again to-day. My wife and I took farewell of our
children to pay our promised visit to Ireland, and
remained with my very dear aunt, Mrs. W. Hardman,
until after the departure of the mail for Melbourne.
Having seen w T hile with her a good deal of Christian
life and work in Kingstown, we travelled south to
Lismore, in the County Waterford, on Friday, September
2 yth. Here we paid a most delightful visit to my
cousin, Rev. Henry Brougham, D.D., who is rector of
the parish and sub-dean of the Cathedral, remaining


until Wednesday, October 2nd. On the Monday we
made a most interesting expedition to the Mount
Melleray Monastery. The monks and lay brethren in
this strange institution are Benedictines, hut belong to
the stricter order founded by St. Bernard, who imposed
three rules upon his followers—a life of prayer, of
manual labour, and of perpetual silence. They are
variously called Cistercians or Trappists. They were
banished from France, in 1831, in the troubles that
arose about Louis Philippe, and obtained a grant of
wild mountain-land from Sir Eichard Keane near
Cappaquin. A little while ago they numbered 130.
They dress in yellow-brown cloth, sleep in berths
arranged like ship cabins along an immense dormitory;
they rise at two a.m., and go into chapel till eight; then
the lay brothers go into the fields, while the priests do the
washing. They dine at 2.30 (the only meal of the day)
on bread and milk, or sometimes on vegetable soup,
and work again till prayer at six, and bedtime at eight.
They have a guest-house where they are willing to
receive any priest or layman for a whole fortnight free
of charge, providing them with the usual meals of the
world, and with tea and wine and flesh, requiring only
conformity to the rules of prayer and public worship,
wdiich are hung up in every little apartment. Such
persons are said to be in “ retreat,” and many avail
themselves of this temporary refuge from society,
temptation, or care. Archbishop Cullen does not quite
approve of their total silence, so that he has required
them to open two schools, one classical (where about
130 young fellows receive an excellent education) and
one common. The schoolroom for the latter is bright
and beautiful, full of birds of the gayest wing, flowers


of the brightest hue, and animated pictures published
by the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge.
The cleanness here contrasts singularly with the
uncleanness of the brethren, who never wash further
than the hands and face. Persons engaged in teach-
ing, &c., are of course for the time being released from
the vow of silence, but the abbot may call them into
his presence at any moment and seal their lips for ever.
On October 2nd we travelled to Killarney, and on
to the chaplain’s house in the beautiful demesne of
Muckross, the sweet home of my father’s second nephew,
Eev. Canon Brougham. Here we remained in the
greatest joy, and in the midst of surpassing beauty,
until Tuesday, October Bth, when we retraced our steps
to the capital. We remained a week in Dublin
amongst dear friends and relations, visiting places of
historical and religious interest, and meeting with some
of the best of God’s people. On Sunday, October 13th,
I turned in with my brother-in-law, Mr. W. Watson,
to see the Townsend Street Eagged Schools, where I
used to teach twenty years ago, and found the work of
the Irish Church Missions going steadily forward
amongst the old and young, and the labourers still
labouring with undirainished zeal. When I addressed
the school, and asked a few questions, I found that
some of the grey heads amongst them remembered
Canon MacCullagh of Sandhurst, and Mr. Love, and
warmed at the mention of their names. On Monday,
October 14th, I visited the celebrated D’Olier Street
Tract Eepository, which has been purchased from the
executors of the lamented Samuel Bewley by the Earl
of Garrick, and is now carried on so as to be self-sup-
porting. Then I called on good Mr. Smithson, who is


the life and soul of the Dublin Convention, at which
600 ministers of the gospel, chiefly Episcopalian,
gather from year to year to meet thousands of fellow-
believers. Next month they are to assemble in the
“ Christian Union Buildings,” which are in course of
erection, and are to cost about £ 17,000, —one of the
fruits of Moody’s visit. The Dublin Young Men’s
Christian Association is to be accommodated here in
about three months, and to be allowed the use of their
splendid hall for evangelistic purposes. I saw the
secretary afterwards, and though they number now only
about 120, still they are strong in gospel zeal, and
expect great things from the change into a better build-
ing. The Church of Ireland Young Men’s Christian
Association is very flourishing indeed, possessing 624
members and 21 affiliated societies, and a devoted
man, Eev. James Keene, as chaplain and secretary.
Its object is worth recording :
1. To unite its members in the bonds of Christian
sympathy, and enlist their energies in works of Christian
usefulness at home and abroad.
2. To promote the spiritual, intellectual, and social
improvement of the young men of Dublin.
Saturday, October 19 th. —We left Drumcar yesterday,
and came to this beautiful spot (Stanley, Holy wood) on
Belfast Lough, where we are spending two days with
the widow and daughters of my uncle, the late Dr.
Binney, Eector of Bangor, County Down. Just across
the road lives Eev. G-. E. Wynne, with whom I spent
a singularly happy year (i 860) in Trinity College, a
distinguished scholar, and a man eminent for his walk
with God. He is a Eector now, and turning grey, but his
heart is still the same. While at Drumcar we spent an


afternoon with my father’s cousin, Mrs. Dunlop, a daughter
of the late Lord Massereene and Ferrard, and she drove
us to visit the wonderful stone crosses at Monasterboice.
We leave this, please God, on Monday next, October
21st, see Mr. Kermode off to Texas on Thursday,
October 24th, and on Friday, Mrs. Macartney goes
south, please God, to Cheltenham, and I go north to
Glasgow for the Convention to be held there on October
29th and 30th, and to which I have received a warm
invitation from the Secretary, Eev. James Scott, and
from dear old Dr. Somerville, who arrived safely on
Saturday last, October 12th. After that I hope to
move southwards towards Cambridge and London to
make arrangements for our departure at Christmas.
Since writing the above I have found the following
memorandum concerning the Eussian of whom I spoke.
His name is Prince Galitzin: his estate is ten days’
journey from Moscow. He is going to build thirty Bible
kiosks and to equip seven Bible carriages; he has en-
gaged Mr, Clough, Paris Secretary of the Monthly Tract
Society, to travel with some of these carriages in Eussia,
and will go with him for seven months to lend prestige
to the work. His words of consecration were —“ Since
Christ laid down His precious life for me, I will give
my whole life and time and fortune to His service.”
This grew out of the Paris kiosk. Did I mention to
you that the delegates from Elberfeld at the Geneva
Conference spoke most cheerfully and thankfully of the
success which was attending their Christian Inns ? What
a boon one would be to Melbourne, Sydney, Adelaide,
Hobart Town, Dunedin, or Christchurch! Cannot some-
body set the good work going ? It would yield profit in
the life that now is, as well as in that which is to come.


ILcttcr (gkbtuHj.
st. Helen’s rev. w. haslam mrs. auriol barker —
GLASGOW —MR. SOMERVILLE —GLASGOW CONVENTION —MR.
SWAN —DISCUSSION ON THE BAPTISM OF THE HOLY GHOST.
4 Park side, Cambridge, November 13 th, 1878,
m was on my way from Dingle Bank to St.
H George’s Landing Stage, Liverpool, in company
®** • with Mr. R C. Kermode, when I posted my
last letter to you on Thursday, October 24th. The “ City
of Eichmond ” carried our dear brother from the shores
of old England that afternoon, and then I made my way
to the hospitable house of Mr. and Mrs. Stephen
Menzies, near St. Helens. Mr. Menzies was a Hew
Zealand settler, who returned to Lancashire to become
a manufacturer a few years ago, but, falling into ill-
health, he retired from business, and is now, with his
devoted wife, wholly given up to gospel labours.
Evangelistic work, under his personal superintendence,
has been carried on for some time past close to his own
residence with most wonderful success, and Mrs. Menzies
has taken a mansion in Liverpool, called “ Mildmay
House,” as a home for young shopwomen of a superior
class, and as a centre for all kinds of Christian useful-
ness, She is now widely known as the editor of a little
monthly, called Fragments that Remain; or notes,


parallels, and hints for earnest students of God’s
Word. She is spreading the system of “Homes” for
young shopwomen in all directions, and hopes to
enclose vast portions of that community in a Gospel
net.
Friday, October 25 th. —I left St. Helens early, and
returned to Liverpool to see my wife and daughter
safely off to Cheltenham hy the Midland Eailway,
and transacted business during the day until evening-
time, when a large party of Mr, and Mrs. Menzies’
friends and fellow-workers assembled at Mildmay
House for tea, and were afterwards addressed by the
Eev. William Haslam, whom I have learned to regard
as one of the most remarkable men of "the day. Cut
off from his Bible by six years of partial blindness,
he moves about like a living epistle, teaching, expound-
ing, and explaining the Scriptures with inexhaustible
freshness and energy. He spoke this evening on the
ring given to the Prodigal Son, and opened out the
doctrine of the “ fulness of blessing ” in a very clear
and graphic way. He holds all the great truths that
centre round “ God for us ” and “ God with us ” with a
grasp that is common to few; but for the believer his
strong meat is “ God in us,” and he both tells and lives
the life.
Saturday, October 26th. —I had the privilege of two
hours with Mr. Haslam this morning before we separated
—he for a mission at Leeds, I for the North. One
anecdote of old time I must tell. He had gone to Bath
to hold services among the beggars of the town. Find-
ing a large room full of hearses in which John Wesley
used to preach, he dragged an old pulpit out of a
corner and began to work. One day he saw a lady and


gentleman among the audience, and as they turned
away when the address was over, the husband said
with characteristic humour, “ Hurrah for the sinner !
There’s no chance for us / ” His wife quietly added,
It seems so. ’ Mr. Haslam was close by, and spoke
to them. The gentleman said, “ You’re just the kind
of man I want to see; come and lunch with us to-
morrow/’ handing his card. Mr. Haslam accepted the
invitation without looking at the card, but when they
were gone, he found that he was engaged to a young
nobleman of very ancient family. He went to
luncheon as he had promised, and two bright Christian
careers dated from that. hour. Mr. Haslam is very
firm on the necessity for conviction of sin before Christ
can be truly prized by the sinner, so that his mis-
sion services are generally marked by awfully fearless
teaching, and by equally awful inward experiences.
He objects altogether to what he calls “ sugar-stick
preachers, who proclaim the love of God, and suppress
the terrors of the Law.
The train carried me away from Mr. and Mrs. Haslam,
and from my much-valued friends, Mr. and Mrs!
Menzies, about noon-time, and northward to Carnforth,
and round the beautiful coast of Cumberland as far as
Seascale, where I was met in the afternoon by Mrs.
■Auriol Larker, a lady known and beloved by many
readers of The Missionary for her Christ-like spirit, and
for her recent labours in Hew South Wales. We drove
togethei into Gosforth, a little town prettily situated
not far from Wastwater, where we called on the new
Hector, a grandson of the poet Wordsworth, who was
once quartered at Sydney when an officer in the army.
We then drove on to Bolton Hall for dinner, and


returned to Gosforth to hold a mission service in the
large upper room of a public-house which Mrs. Barker
purchased a year or two ago, as soon as she was able
to obtain a guarantee that no licence would be issued
for another in its stead. The rest of the building is
being converted to Christian and philanthropic uses, so
that the enemy is fairly dislodged. The meeting was
crowded. The Rector took the chair, gave a deeply
interesting account of the way by which God had led
him at the camp at Aldershot to decide in a moment
for Christ, and, after another address, and more singing
and prayer, we got home in the clear starlight to wait
for the Sabbath.
Sunday , October 2 yth. —Early Sunday-school, morning
service, afternoon classes, and evening service were
followed by a special after-meeting in Mrs. Barker’s
Mission Hall. Churchmen and dissenters flowed in till
the room was filled. The Rector again occupied the
chair, and all was over before nine o’clock. It was
delightful to see the faces of many in that assembly,
chiefly young men, who owed their present joy and
eternal liberty to the means of grace provided for them,
for years past, on week days and on Sundays, by this
Christian lady and by her devoted daughter.
Monday, October 2SHI. —A delightful little Bible-read-
iug after breakfast, and then farewell to this peaceful,
happy home. The train carried me along the coast as
far as Maryport during a terrific storm, which raged
from the west; then came Carlisle, and Glasgow at
six o’clock. Mr. W. F. Somerville discovered me in a
moment, took me to a cab, and then to his father’s
house, where the kindliest welcome awaited me from
Dr. and Mrs. Somerville and their elder sous, and from


other friends who had gathered round him on the eve
of the great Convention. The dear old evangelist is,
like St. John, as full of love as ever, and his heart and
lips are just overflowing for the kindness shown to him
in Australia. Our first evening was spent in goino-
over again the leading features and incidents of his
colonial tour. He looks worn since his last illness in
Melbourne, but his eye is as bright and his voice as
strong as ever.
Tuesday , October 29 th. —The sun rose on my window
this morning in perfect beauty, ushering in Convention
weather. We met at half-past eight for family prayer,
and I was delighted to find (for the first time in my
life beyond my father’s house) that the Scriptures were
opened out catechetically, all present being expected to
answer in their turn. Eev. J. E. Somerville, minister
at Broughty Ferry, Mr. Alexander Somerville, a
merchant from Calcutta, together with the servants
and remaining members of the family, were questioned
in regular turn. Moreover, a hymn is always sung at
the commencement of morning and evening worship,
as well as after dinner. If God and God’s Word are
thus generally honoured in Scotland, no wonder at
Scotland’s pre-eminence.
Going out into the sunshine after breakfast, I met
with Captain Moreton, the managing director of the
Mildmay Institutions in London, and we turned aside
from the highway to walk and commune together in the
Public Gardens till noon, when we entered the Crystal
Palace and took our seats on the platform. We found
ourselves in a beautiful circular building, all of glass,
with statues and greenhouse plants picturesquely placed
around, with sitting accommodation for about two thou-


sand, and a promenade to hold one thousand more.
An excellent choir led the singing. Dr, Andrew Bonar,
a man full of the Holy Ghost, followed in fervent
prayer, and Eev. George Wilson, of Cramond, filled up
the first hour with a glowing address on “ The Exalted
Saviour, the Source of Spiritual Power.” The substance
of it was that we receive from Christ “ the power of
perfect self-suppression, the adequate instrument of
life, the omnipotent energy of God’s Holy Spirit, an
absolute certainty of ultimate triumph, and the hope
of His coming again,”
At one o’clock we began another subject—“ Prayer-
meetings: how to make them interesting and profitable?”
Eev. J. S. Fletcher, from Dublin, led' the way, and
when the meeting was thrown open, many valuable
suggestions were made from the body of the Palace.
Eev. M. M‘Millan said, with great truth, that before
they got people to prayer-meetings it was necessary to
create in the churches a firmer belief in the power of
prayer. It was not only philosophers and scientific
men, he said, who disbelieved in prayer; it was the
Church of the living God at the present day which
practically denied its efficacy. One evening of the
week, he thought, should be set apart for purposes of
prayer in all the Churches.
From two to four o’clock our subject was—“ The
world for Christ.” Mr. Smithson, of Dublin, presided
and spoke admirably. Among a thousand and one
good things which he said, I remember his laying
particular stress upon the want of enterprise in the
Churches. A tramway secretary in Dublin said to him
one day—“ Do you see that spirit-shop ? That fellow
gave us a subsidy of £5OO to get the tram-cars to
*1


stop opposite his door.” There was enterprise! Eev.
James Eobertson, of Newington, followed, and was
most impressive and eloquent. He said that as
Napoleon knew nothing of the word “difficulty,” so the
Christian should know nothing of the word “doubt,”
The golden threads of truth would soon draw the world
to Christ, if only they were entwined with the silken
threads of love. He appealed to us to cultivate a
missionary spirit. God had only one Son, and He gave
Him to illuminate the world. Eev. J. Hudson Taylor
rose to speak on “China for Christ.” He said there
were now 13,000 communicants in various Chinese
Christian churches. That number, large as it was,
only increased our responsibility to do more for those
hundreds of millions who, as yet, knew not the Lord.
At four o’clock the meeting separated, and we went
home for dinner and rest until half-past seven o’clock,
when a grand missionary meeting was held in the same
place, presided over by Captain Moreton, who spoke
most heartily, and was followed by Eev. J. Wilkinson,
the enthusiastic friend of the Jew, and by Eev. J.
Hudson Taylor, the prayerful, trusting, laborious friend
of China.
Wednesday, October 30 fh. —We were all up early this
morning to attend the Convention breakfast in the Cor-
poration galleries, Sauchiehall Street, on the invitation
of Mr. Alexander Allan (the owner of the Allan Line of
steamers), who is president of the Evangelistic Associa-
tion of Glasgow. Mr. Allan mentioned that the noon
prayer-meeting, which commenced in January 1874,
had been continued daily ever since. Eev, James
Scott, the secretary of the Association, who seemed to
be “ the darling ” (as Dr. Somerville said) of both rich


and poor in Glasgow, gave a most interesting address,
summing up the work of the year, and taking farewell
of his friends for a two months’ trip to America, —the
Allans, by the way, defraying all his expenses. Then
came Lord Provost Collins, who gave the delegates
from other parts a hearty welcome; and the Hon.
James Balfour gave a most admirable summary of Dr.
Somerville’s work in the colonies. Dr. Blaikie, from
Edinburgh, and a few other speakers, brought this
happy gathering to a close.
At noon the Crystal Palace was well filled. Eev. C.
Graham gave the opening address on that glorious
theme—“ The fulness of the Spirit; how attained and
retained ? ” Another speaker followed o'n the same sub-
ject, and then we went into “ methods and expedients ”
for combating prevalent evils. The speakers dealt
with intemperance, the circulation of unclean literature,
and the want of integrity in business; for which last
it was said there was one grand remedy—a bold reitera-
tion of the teaching of the law, of the Ten Command-
ments, of the Epistle of James, of the Proverbs of
Solomon, and of the Shorter Catechism—to which so
much of their former national intelligence and probity
was due. Mr. T, E. Cleworth stood up to tell what
the Evangelisation Society was doing in Britain. He
said it had so grown in eleven years, that last year
13,000 meetings were held by 170 different preachers,
and, taking a low estimate, the attendances numbered
3,000,000, chiefly of the non-church-going class. Mr.
Cleworth gave us the five “ E’s ” which form the basis of
their gospel addresses—Man’s Euin, God’s Eemedy,
the sinner’s Eeception of the great salvation, Eegenera-
tion—the new life which must result, and the Eesponsi-


bility of those who hear, either to accept or to refuse
Christ.
At three o’clock the way was cleared for our beloved
Dr. Somerville, who gave the concluding address. It
is printed verbatim in The Christian TVeeh for November
6th, and will doubtless be republished and widely read
in the colonial religious papers. It is full of nerve,
fire, and story, and shadows out new fields of work for
the Society, which has already sent him to Canada, and
India, and Australia as the herald of heavenly peace.
Dr. Somerville’s hospitable table was crowded that
evening with numbers of eminent men, and we set off
for the final meeting at half-past seven. Mr. Balfour
was in the chair, and spoke on the work of God among
the aborigines of Victoria. I never heard him speak so
well. He quite carried the people away, and closed
with a beautiful and personal application of the gospel.
Christian workers were then admirably addressed by
Mr. V. J. Charlesworth, and Rev. D. E. M‘Nab, of
Saltcoats, closing with an appeal to the unconverted on
“ Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian.
Imagine my surprise when Dr. Somerville, being
called upon to pronounce the final benediction, stepped
forward and waived the privilege in my favour ! Indeed,
I may say that this extreme courtesy was only part of
a series of acts of thoughtful love and kindness which
were showered upon me while I remained in Glasgow.
I was made to see and enjoy everything as a child of
the house, as if both he and his family were anxious
to concentrate on one stranger the manifestations of
their loving remembrance of all the Christian people
who had helped them in Australia.
Thursday, October 2,lst.— After getting through a good


deal of correspondence, I moved this afternoon to the
residence of my kind friend, Mr. F. G. Swan, whom I
had met at Keswick and Broadlands ; and with him I
remained for several days, according to a former promise.
About four o’clock we dined together, and friends came
in by his invitation at tea-time, who gave the most
clear and astonishing testimony to their having received
what they term the “ Baptism of the Holy Ghost ” at
a particular time. I could not disbelieve the evidence
of honest, faithful, and, moreover, rejoicing witnesses,
who said, that after years of seeking for inward purity
they had found such an abundance of strength and
cleansing in Christ as surpassed their highest expecta-
tions. But when they came to say that because old
tempers had been cured, and old appetites destroyed,
and because the river of the love of God was pouring
in a resistless current through their souls year after
year, that therefore they were restored to Adam’s state
before the Fall, and had only temptation from without
—here we divided, and I became the object both of
their prayer and of their pity; for I maintained that
sins of ignorance were sins indeed, and that sins of
omission were sins, and that anything short of Divine
perfection had the nature of sin. But all Scripture
seemed thrown away upon men who, but for this
awful error, might have turned the city upside down.
Their love is wonderful, their peace perfect, their com-
munion with God unbroken. Their prayers flow like
torrents, and they delight in God’s Word, though they
misinterpret it.
Friday, November ist. —Mr. Cleworth came in after
we had spent two hours or so in the city and on the
Clyde, and we opened up the Perfectionist controversy


for three and a half hours with dear Mr. Swan, till it was
time to keep an engagement to dine at four o’clock with
Mr. W. Govan, who made the early part of the evening
most delightful to me by narrating those wonderful
events in Port-Glasgow, many years ago, which drew
crowds of anxious and godly men to hear the
Macdonalds and others speak with strange tongues, and
to see the persons who had been suddenly raised from
sickness by the prayer of faith. Mr. Govan says that
there are some still living who then possessed the
power of speaking with tongues, or rather who were
irresistibly compelled so to speak; but that, while they
mourn the apathy of the Church which failed to perceive
that this was the special working of the Holy Ghost,
they have no sympathy whatever with the errors of
the Irvingite body.
It seemed strange to pass from this narrative of the
past, as we did at about eight o’clock, into a meeting of
some one hundred living, earnest enthusiasts, who held
equally strong views with the Macdonalds about the
exceeding nearness and energy of the Holy Ghost, and
His power to move the frame and to act on the physical
being, though their phraseology, doctrine, and experience
were widely different. Mr. Swan occupied the chair
in a large hall in the city, and after singing and prayer,
he threw the meeting open for the narration of Christian
experience. It was most surprising: people of all ages,
sexes, occupations, unknown in many instances to each
other, got up in rapid succession to declare that, after
various periods of seeking first for inward cleansing, a
mighty change had come. The manner of its coming
was different in every case, but all harmonised in this,
it came after the soul had ceased from struggling; it came


when they were reduced to a state of utter self-despair;
it came when the sense of sin within amounted to
anguish; it came with absence of all previous feeling,
though it was followed by unutterable delight; it came
by means of a text of Scripture in every case, and, best
of all, it came in permanence. The language used by
some very poor people—their expressions of adoring
love to God, and of joy in Christ, the way in which
they described the tangle of good and evil in their life
since conversion, and their clear delineation of their
new exuberances of peace and trust —was to my mind a
sure indication that the Spirit of God had taught them
in some wonderful way —as far as their experience went.
Here some of them stopped short, and those first few
minutes of praise for deliverance from old chains, from
old besetting sins, and from what seemed like immovable
habits of thoughts, were really grave and edifying; but
it was a deep grief to me to hear others proceed to
argue on doctrinal subjects—and to get quite out of
their depths—concluding most dogmatically that the
presence of Christ in the soul in His fulness was incom-
patible with the presence of sin.
The chairman had to cut the meeting short after
some seventeen or eighteen had spoken, and I came
away under the most fresh and powerful impression
that if such a blessing as they described, such personal
delight in God, was attainable, it ought to be sought
most vehemently by those among us who explain expe-
rience by Scripture, and not Scripture by experience.
Saturday, November 2nd, was spent partly with Dr.
Somerville (who introduced me to some leading men
in the city, and to Mr. Glass, the godly publisher),
and partly with Mr. Swan, who took me in the evening


to the house (or rather “ flat ”) of a working man,
where many were gathered together praying, with
special reference to this theory of the Baptism of the
Holy Ghost. Some of them on its reception appear to
have been quite bereaved of bodily strength, others have
received equal blessing without excitement of any kind,
and some are learners still, waiting for the descent of the
Holy Ghost to give them clearer views of God, and to
bring them to the end of selfishness. The evening was
quiet, but most remarkable—poor men quoting “Alford,”
their Bibles worn black, some marked with red ink; all
of them tremendously in earnest. Those who spoke
had a sort of eloquence about divine things that made
me think what God might yet do in the Churches, if
all our ministers and helpers were “ filled up unto all
the fulness of God.”
Sunday, November 3rd. —Up in the cold, dark morn-
ing, and off to the “ free breakfast ” three miles away
by eight o’clock. Oh, what a sight! The Evangelistic
Hall which Moody started was crowded with the ragged
and the wretched—among whom are sometimes recog-
nised gentlemen, clerks, barristers, and ministers who
have fallen through drink. Two thousand five hundred
of these, young and old, filled the floor and the galleries,
and a crowd outside the door waited for the crumbs.
A choir of ladies and gentlemen generally sing to them
during breakfast, and then fifteen minutes of a gospel
address is given. Dear old Dr. Somerville was there
from a great distance at that early hour to introduce
me, and to try and secure a hearing—no easy matter
with such an audience; but I think I managed to be
heard.
Monday , November 4 th, —Mr. Swan took me early to


visit the Cathedral. We saw John Knox’s monument in
the Necropolis without, and stood on Edward Irving’s
grave within—two memorable men. How much greater
the latter would have been had he had the stability of
the first! How much greater Knox would have been
had he had the tender spirit of Irving! At noon we
attended the mid-day prayer-meeting, and heard “ re-
ports ”of work done. At one o’clock I was introduced
by Dr. Somerville to the Committee of the Scottish
Bible Society; at half-past two we attended the meet-
ing of the Ladies’ Auxiliary, and at eight the “ workers’ ”
weekly meeting for “ fellowship.”
Tuesday, November s th , was a day of delightful rest
and enjoyment, spent with Dr, Somerville at a lovely
place belonging to a distinguished Christian family
near Dumbarton, ending with a visit to Dr. Andrew
Bonar at his own residence, and with an evening among
Mr. Swan’s relations to meet the leading Church of
England minister in Glasgow.


ILettcr Cfadftfj.
DUNDEE —M'CHEYNB —TUB KILSYTH REVIVAL —EDINBURGH —-
HUDDERSFIELD COFFEE-HOUSE AND BRITISH WORKMAN
LEICESTER.
32 Avenue Road, Regent Park, London ,
December 19 th, 1878.
|TOOK my final farewell of Glasgow on Wednes-
day mornin g> November. My most kind
and affectionate friend, Mr. P. G. Swan, my
host for the last few days, accompanied me to the early
train, and to the very end maintained the Perfectionist
position which he had assumed all along. Looking
back from a distance on the remarkable experiences
which I referred to in my last letter, I feel better able
to judge them dispassionately. The following extract
from the writings of one of the most remarkable men
of the day seems to set the whole matter in its clearest,
truest light. He says —“ It is of all-importance not to
separate the Spirit from the Word of God. It is of all-
importance not to separate the Word from the present
power of the Holy Ghost. To use the Word by the
power of the human mind is really rationalism—to
speak plainly, infidelity. And taking the power of the
Spirit apart from the Word leads men often to take
every wild imagination of man, and even an evil spirit,


for the Holy Ghost, as the Word plainly shows. Those
who know the early history of Friends know the excesses
to which some ran. It will be said—You cannot attri-
bute this to the body, or to those who were esteemed
leaders among them. I admit it; but I do attribute
it to the principle adopted by them —that the Spirit in
them was superior to the Word ”
My memories of the Perfectionist party in Glasgow
will, I hope, stimulate me to reckon myself dead
indeed unto sin—dead to sin with Christ; but will
never, I equally hope, delude me into reckoning sin to
be dead in my soul.
Passing by Stirling, that wonderful granary of reli-
gious truth scattered world-wide by the eager hands of
the late Peter Drummond, the train set me down at
the Bridge of Allan, where I remained several hours
with Mrs. Patrick Stevenson, of Chelsworth, near
Melbourne, one of our earliest and dearest Australian
friends. This was but a few days before she became a
widow.
It was amongst the Chelsworth family, when a boy,
at the old Church of England Grammar School on the
Eastern Hill, that I used to spend some of the happiest
days of my life. That circle of five is now scattered
and broken; death had entered it once, and death was
just entering it again; and how inadequate my few
words of comfort seemed, even by way of recognition,
in comparison with the kindnesses of thirty years !
In the afternoon I travelled onwards to Dundee,
reaching it about sundown; and as I walked across
the town my thoughts were occupied with M'Cheyne,—
the poetic, gifted, saintly M'Cheyne, who used to walk
these very streets, leaning on the arm of his Beloved.


I seemed, from my recollections of his life, to be
treading on holy ground.
A second train took me in about half an hour to
Broughty Ferry, a beautiful and fashionable suburb of
Dundee, where Rev. J. E. Somerville ministers in the
Free Church. A cab awaited me, and took me to the
manse, the most perfect of its kind, I should think, in
all Scotland, built in great part by the generosity of
Mr. White, of Overtoun, the father of Mr. Somerville’s
dear and devoted young wife. I arrived just in time
to join a large party on their way to the Town-hall,
where Mr. Somerville’s third anniversary was to be
celebrated that night by a public tea-meeting. Every-
thing was beautifully arranged, the tables laden, the
seats crowded, the singing good, the addresses hearty,
the tone spiritual. About nine o’clock, Dr. Somerville,
who had just arrived from Glasgow, stepped on the
platform, and as this was the first time he had visited
Broughty Ferry since his return from Australia, he
was received with great enthusiasm. His first words
were to introduce me to the meeting; and when I had
finished, he rose to delight us with one of those lovely
visions of theoretical and practical Christianity with
which the lifelong study of Christ Himself has made
him so familiar.
Till midnight that evening he was the life and soul
of the circle in the manse dining-room, and then I
retired to rest—still thinking of M'Cheyne, who had
preached his last sermon on this very spot on Sunday
evening, 12th March 1843, from the words, “Arise,
shine” (Isaiah lx. 1). He died on Saturday morning,
25th March, and after his death a note was found un-
opened, referring to that sermon in these words—“ I


heard you preach last Sabbath evening, and it pleased
God to bless that sermon to my soul. It was not so
much what you said as your manner of speaking that
struck me. I saw in you a beauty of holiness that I
never saw before.” M'Cheyne was in a fever when
this note reached his house. He was spared the pain
of the last clause; the pleasure of the first clause he
will taste above. I told the people, in my address,
that one day wdien I was seated beside Dr. Cameron
in an omnibus in Melbourne, I inquired of him if he
had ever met M £ Cheyne. “Oh yes! ” was his reply;
“ I have heard him preach, I have heard him speak, I
have heard him talk, I have heard him pray —he was
a seraph ! ”
Thursday , November yth. —After family prayer and
breakfast, Mrs. James Somerville invited all her guests
to join in the hard and delightful exercise of giving
chapter and verse from memory for each text quoted
for that day of the year in Daily Light; and when
that was ended, she gave us the chapter and verse, and
asked us to repeat the text. I was well-nigh lost. Dr.
Somerville was quite in his element, and his two sons (the
second a Calcutta merchant) were close to their father
in accurate knowledge of almost every text referred to.
At ten o’clock we went together into Dundee by rail.
We first visited Mr. Keiller, the son of the late
celebrated manufacturer, whose elder brother had come
to reside in Caulfield just before our departure for
England. We then went to St. Peter’s Church, the
place of all others which I most wished to see, the
place where Christ had been so gloriously uplifted in
years gone by, the place where the Holy Spirit had
been so plentifully poured out.


M'Cheyne had received his first license to preach as
a divinity student on Ist July 1835* began his
labours at Larbert and Dunipace, near Stirling. On
Sunday, August 14th, 1836, he preached for the first
time at St. Peter’s, and his evening sermon on “ Ruth ”
was blessed to the conversion of two souls. Before
leaving his flock at Dunipace he sought and found a
successor in Rev. A. N. Somerville, whom his biographer
describes as the “friend who had shared his every
thought and feeling in former days, and who, with a
sharp sickle in his hand, was now advancing towards
the harvest-field.” He was ordained on November 24th,
1836, and continued his ministry there until his death.
He was eminent as a preacher. He prepared diligently
for the pulpit. “ Beaten oil,” he used to say—“ Beaten
oil for the lamps of the sanctuary” (Ex. xxvii. 20).
It was his wish to arrive nearer at the primitive mode
of expounding Scripture. “ I am just an interpreter,
he said, when asked if he was never afraid of running
short of sermons—'l am just an interpreter of Scrip-
ture ; and when the Bible runs dry, then I shall.” But
if he was eminent in the pulpit, he was pre-eminent in
prayer. “ What would my people do,” he said, “if I
were not to pray ? ” “In general, it is best to have
at least one hour alone with God before engaging in
anything else.” “Above all,” he wrote to a young
student in 1840—“ Above all, keep much in the presence
of God. Never see the face of man till you have seen
His face who is our life, our all.”
In 1839, being greatly broken in health, he undertook
a visit to the Holy Land, in the interests of the Jews,
accompanied by Dr. Black, Dr. Keith, and Dr. Andrew
Bonar. At Beyrout, at the foot of Lebanon, he was


smitten down with fever; and it was while waiting
there in utter helplessness for a vessel to carry him to
Smyrna, that the arm of the Lord began to be revealed
in Scotland, On July 23rd the great revival took
place at Kilsyth. “Mr. W. C. Burns,” says Dr. A.
Bonar, “ the same who was supplying Mr. M/Cheyne’s
place in his absence, was on that day preaching to his
father s flock; and while pressing their immediate
acceptance of Christ with great solemnity, the whole
of the vast assembly was overpowered. The Holy
Spirit seemed to come down as a rushing, mighty wind,
and to fill the place. Very many were that day struck
to the heart; the sanctuary was filled with distressed
and inquiring souls. All Scotland heard the glad
news. The Spirit in mighty power began to work
from that day forward in many places of the land.”
On Bth August Mr. Burns returned to Dundee, and
two days after the Spirit began to work at St. Peter’s,
at the time of the prayer-meeting in the church, in a
way similar to Kilsyth. M'Cheyne knew nothing of
this till November, when within sight of home, and,
“ full of praise and wonder, he set his foot once more
on the shore of Dundee.”
I thank God that I ever read his memoir and studied
his sermons. Now I have to thank God still more
that I have stood at his tomb with the friend of his
youth, the now bright-eyed, fervent, silver-haired old
man, who was at his decease chosen to preach one of
the funeral sermons. I thank God that I have been
in his church, and in his vestry, and in his pulpit;
for “ the memory of the just is blessed.” How few of
the justified have been like this young minister of
Dundee, out of whom “ flowed rivers of living water.”


Even when silent, the near intercourse he held with
God left its impression on those around. His constant
holiness touched the conscience of many. During the
last years of his short life he walked calmly in almost
unbroken fellowship with the Father and the Son.
He was horn on May 31st, 1813, and died on
March 25th, 1843. All through his delirium he was very
happy, either praying to God or preaching to his people,
until that morning, when, lifting up his hands as if to
assume the attitude of benediction, the spirit fled. It
became true of him as of his Royal Master : “ It came
to pass while He blessed them, He was parted from
them, and carried up into heaven” (Luke xxiv. 51).
From the midst of these hallowed local associations
I had to hasten to the Tay Bridge Terminus, and to
take my last farewell of Dr. Somerville. About four
o’clock I reached Edinburgh, and was met on the
platform by Mr. James Balfour’s eldest son, who
accompanied me to the Edinburgh Tract Depot, where
I had the great pleasure of meeting the Rev. Wm,
Gillies, the devoted Secretary of the Society, who not
only took considerable pains to show me the kind of
Christian literature in which they dealt, but gave me
hope of some day being able to connect their depot
with a central depot in Melbourne. They have pecu-
liar facilities for gleaning the best of everything from
the teeming presses of Great Britain. Their work is
not printing, but selection, which makes them highly
desirable as agents and correspondents. Mr. Balfour
himself arrived about dark, and having greatly helped
me in collecting specimens of books and tracts for
Victoria, he took me home with him to 25 George
Square, the home of his widowed sister, who, with her


orphan boys and with the sister of her husband, the
late Dr. George Eainy, M.D., of Glasgow, occupies the
spacious and beautiful house where Sir Walter Scott
lived from the age of four until the time of his
marriage. Mr. James Balfour, my host’s namesake
and cousin, a writer to the signet, and a man well-
known in Christian circles, dined with us; and after
dinner we went, in a torrent of rain, to Eev. Eobert
Balfour’s prayer-meeting, not far distant. It was ex-
ceedingly well attended in spite of the weather; and
on our way home we called in at 19 George Square,
to see Mr, Balfour’s mother, a venerable Christian lady,
rejoicing in the memory of past mercies and in hope
of eternal life. It was in this house years ago, when
Christian life and energy was at its lowest in Scotland,
that the Haldanes used to meet with a few others to
confer together about the work of God, and especially
about missions in India.
The snow was falling when we assembled for break-
fast at nine o’clock next morning {Friday, November Bth),
and we took our meal by gaslight. At ten o’clock I was
at the Waverley Station, accompanied by Mr. Balfour,
who did everything in his power to make my brief
visit to his native city enjoyable. On the platform we
fell in with Mr. William Peterson, whose colonial
residence is in the parish of Caulfield, and a few
minutes afterwards we met with the recently-bereaved
widow of my beloved friend and parishioner, Mr. S. L.
Learmonth; so that we formed quite an Australian
group, and, with the exception of Mr. Balfour, travelled
together through the snowstorm as far as York. There
I left the “ Plying Scotchman,” and branched off for
Huddersfield, which was reached at five, and here I
* K


became the guest of Mr. Thomas Allen, who, during a
recent visit of one or two years to Victoria, had been a
member of my congregation, and a liberal and devoted
helper in the work of the Lord. All that Christian
love could do was done for me here, although, owing to
her serious illness, I missed seeing Mr. Allen’s mother,
the “ elect lady ” of that town.
Saturday, November gth. —A frost in the night had
acted like an Australian hot wind, and had dried up the
streets and all the country round; so that Mr. Allen
took me out immediately after breakfast to see two of
the temperance institutions of Huddersfield. The first
was wholly secular and commercial, the “ Huddersfield
Coffee-house Co., Limited.” This establishment stands
near a conspicuous corner, and, having two entrances,
connects at the back. One entrance is from the beast
market, and is meant for the poorer classes; has eating-
room, reading-room, bagatelle, chess, draughts-room, and
a room for females. Tea, coffee, and cocoa are provided
at from a halfpenny a cup upwards, bread costs a penny,
butter a penny, a plate of meat threepence ; ajtid this is
paying well. The second entrance is from Lord Street,
and leads to exceedingly nice apartments, billiard-
rooms, lavatories, and cloak-rooms; and the prices are
very little higher than those I have mentioned, except
in the case of warm liquids, which are all at one figure
(twopence), and of the best quality.
From this we passed on to the British Workman
Public-house —rather out of the way, and soon to give
place to a worthier edifice in a better situation, but
doing an immense business by supplying workmen with
coffee in the very early morning. The superintendent
gave me the following directions to communicate to


practical Christian philanthropists in Australia :—Pro-
cure a patent ten-gallon tea or coffee-pot for £4, 4s.
from Sugden, 49 and 51 Thomas Street, Manchester.
(These pots will keep the contents hot in the open air
for twelve hours in the very coldest weather.) Then,
having mixed coffee with chicory in the proportion of
five to three, take lbs. of the mixture, put it in three
bags, put each bag in a strainer and pour boiling water
over each into the pot; add 4J lbs. of sugar and three
quarts of boiled milk, and the coffee is ready to he sold
in the street at a halfpenny a cup. The coffee should
be roasted fresh every morning. Each quart has six
cups, so that a ten-gallon pot has 240 cups. A thou-
sand cups are sold in Huddersfield every morning
by this one man before six a.m., and a slice of bread
or a bun may be had at the stall for an extra half-
penny.
After this inspection Mr. Allen drove me into the
country; and then taking farewell of him and of the
kind lady who had been my hostess in his mother’s stead,
I passed on that afternoon to Leicester, vid Wakefield
and Sheffield. Here I was met by my old and beloved
college friend, Rev. Robert Guinness, the Vicar of St.
Andrew’s, who took me home at once with all his Irish
warmth, and introduced me to his wife (the daughter of
the well-known Dr. Butler, of Wantage) and to his dear
children.
Sunday, November 10th. —I accompanied Mr. Guinness
this morning to St. Leonard’s, a new church at which
he was engaged to preach, and on the way we looked
into All Saints’, to which the Rev. P. B. Power was
appointed curate in 1846, and which he filled by his
preaching with eager multitudes. The mother and


sisters of the good Dr. Vaughan, of the Temple Church,
live close by, and assist the present incumbent, Dr.
Wray, an old college don, in his devoted labours among
the poor. In the afternoon we went together and held
service in the infirmary, and visited the children’s ward
—a place like fairyland. In the evening I preached to
a large and most interesting congregation at St, Andrew’s,
and next morning said farewell to my dear friends at
the Vicarage, and proceeded on my way to the eastern
counties.


ftjjirtcentff.
CAMBEIDGE —MR. AITKEN’S MISSION —REV. J. BARTON —
IPSWICH —BELSTEAD —BIRCH,
BOND AY, November nth, 1878— From Leicester
I travelled to Peterborough, partly in search
of an old college friend—Rev. John Woodroffe,
who is now chaplain to Bishop Magee—and partly
to see the splendid cathedral. Prom Peterborough
the train carried me on to Ely, and thence to Eccles
Road in Norfolk, where I found intimate Australian
friends, Mr. and Mrs. Arthur Brown, awaiting me with
a carriage from Brakefield, the pretty and secluded
residence of Mr. and Mrs. J. C. Whitty, also old
friends and colonists, who are doing their utmost to
make the power and joy of the gospel known in a most
benighted neighbourhood. In the midst of this united
O O
circle I remained until Wednesday , November 13 th,
when I took train again, and reached Parkside, Cam-
bridge, late in the afternoon. My host and hostess,
Mr. and Mrs. Ernest Leycester, did not arrive from
London until two hours afterwards. They had been
hurriedly summoned to attend the funeral of a beloved
cousin, Mr. Arthur Leycester, who had been suddenly
cut off. He was, like themselves, a near relation of
Mr. Cowper-Temple; was the heir of a splendid fortune;


was firm in the faith of the Lord Jesus; and when he
was with us at the Broadlands Conference, seemed full
of health and vigour. While her husband was at the
funeral, Mrs. Leycester had spent the day in London
with her friend, the eminent Miss Marsh, whom I had
greatly longed but was not destined to see. However,
it was good even to hear about her from one who knew
her so well. Her health is greatly broken. She is
continually suffering from an overtaxed brain; and
yet her writing goes on, her influence goes forth, her
prayers go up, just as if she were hale and strong. I
had hardly received my first welcome to Cambridge,
when Mr. W. R Mowll, of Corpus Christi College,
arrived, full of town and University tidings. Eev. W.
H. Aitken’s Eight Days’ Mission to the undergraduates
was in full progress, and many undergraduates had
already, it was believed, been brought under the power
of God. The Christian men of Mr. Mowll’s own college,
fifty in number, had invited Mr. Aitken to breakfast on
the Monday, to encourage him by this manifestation of
their sympathy, as well as to hear him speak. The
meeting was characteristic of the place. It is said that
to send a young man to Corpus Christi College is to
send him to heaven or to hell, —that the best and the
worst are found there, . Eifty decided men out of a
total of 150 was no mean proportion. Mr. Mowll also
brought the news that a few of the more earnest under-
graduates had just completed the purchase of the only
theatre in Cambridge. The price was fixed at £1650.
A strong appeal was made to friends throughout the
country, and when all the contributions came to be
added up, they had sufficient over and above to put it
thoroughly in repair as a gospel hall. Mr. Mowll then


held up the advertisement—a long, narrow, but bold
placard, which he had been carrying to shops and
public-houses all over the neighbourhood, giving a list
of the inaugural services, headed with—“ Theatre Royal,
Cambridge, to be opened on Sunday next under new
management! ” The excitement about this coup d'Uat
was immense.
Dinner over, we went together in a torrent of rain
to the University church, “ St. Mary the Great.” Mr.
Aitken was in the pulpit, and a large body of under-
graduates were singing just before the address. It was
on Repentance—wonderful, solemn, and heart-searching.
It lasted an hour at least. A good many retired when
it was ended, during the singing of a hymn, but many
more remained on their knees in prayer at the request
of the missioner. He, with a few other ordained and
chosen men, moved noiselessly among them, the silence
being every now and then broken by the music of some
sweet hymn. I was between the wall and the pillars,
a good deal away from the central congregation ; but I
observed a faithful man taking the side aisle as his
sphere of work that night, pleading with and praying
with young fellows, till at last he came to me. His
name—Rev. John Barton—is still well known and well
beloved all over Southern India. He holds one of the
proudest places among the pastors of Cambridge, preach-
ing from Simeon’s pulpit; and we had often exchanged
letters in bygone years. But of course he did not know
me, as we had never met; and as he rose from the seat
where he had been dealing with some one in distress
close by, he gave me such a kind, earnest look, and said,
“ Are you a Christian ? ” My heart bounded as I said
“ Yes.” Ido not remember ever having been asked that


question before. Would to God that we were mure
faithful. A direct question, when prompted by the
Spirit, is sure to bring truth to the surface. It elicits
either the joyful “ Yes,” or the timid “ I hope so, or
the yearning “ I wish I were,” or the wondering “ Can
anybody know ? ” or the sacramental boast, or the angry
« What is that to you ? ” The answer will generally
indicate the whereabouts of the answerer. Mr. Barton
was in search of seekers after God, and so he passed
on, and between ten and eleven we separated and got
home. „ ,
Thursday, November i\th. —After breakfast I called
to see my dear old friend, Eev. J. W. G. Bishop, in
Emmanuel Hoad. After his return from Australia he
had been for some years tutor in the house of the
Maharajah Dhuleep Sing, and was now ministering in
Simeon’s Church as Mr. Barton’s curate. He has been
in a very weak state of health, but is full of joy. At ten
o’clock I found myself in the drawing-room of Trinity
Parsonage, Brookside, on the written invitation of Mr.
Barton, who, with his wife and Miss Elliott, his wife’s
sister (grand-nieces of the celebrated author of the
Horce Apocalypticae), were doing all in their power to
make Mr. Aitken’s visit to Cambridge of the widest
possible benefit. Men of mark belonging to the Uni-
versity, young men of special promise, invalid ladies,
and clergy from the country round, were invited to
meet Mr. Aitken at these morning gatherings. When
we were all assembled, he opened out Isaiah xxxv. with
the most unaffected simplicity, but with a wealth of
language, thought, imagination, and Scriptural know-
ledge, that was as good for our understandings and our
.hearts as it was amazing for a young man who, for


weeks together, was toiling from breakfast-time right on
till midnight without a pause. He left us about eleven
o’clock to hold a series of private interviews with
undergraduates until two, when he attended and spoke
at the daily prayer-meeting. At half-past two he
preached in the University church to a mixed congre-
gation, and again to young men at night. I went out
from the parsonage after prayer to find my way to a few
Australian friends—Mr. Alexander O’Reilly, of Sydney,
Mr. William Stawell, son of our Chief Justice, and Mr.
Pelham Chase. I was sorry to learn that the latter
had been compelled by ill-health to return to Melbourne;
and Mr. W. Stawell was only just holding his ground.
The country lies so very low, however, that it does not
afford a fair specimen of the English climate. The rain
fell in torrents during the greater part of my brief
visit, and the damp was all-pervading.
Friday, November 15 th. —After breakfast this morning
I called to see Mr. Hector Campbell (brother of our
beloved friend, Kev. T. R. C. Campbell), but failing to
see him, I went on to visit the most celebrated colleges
—King’s, Trinity, and John’s —with their beautiful
chapels and “backs,” as the river, garden, and small
parklike scenery behind is called. By one o’clock I
had removed from my kind friends, Mr. and Mrs. Ernest
Leycester, to Trinity parsonage. Afternoon service
being ended, a large and influential party assembled to
meet Mr. Aitken at five o’clock dinner, including the
venerable Mr. Lang, one of the committee of the
Church Missionary Society, and his devoted son, a
college don, and the rector of an important parish in
the town. The mission went forward, as before, at
eight o’clock. A good deal was seen and known about


the progress of the inward work, but for obvious
reasons very little was said at the time. Mr. Barton,
however, believed that large accessions were being
daily made to the Church. I must not omit to mention
one peculiar element in Mr. Aitken’s strength. He
has not only the blessings that descend continually in
answer to the prayers of his saintly and sainted father,
but he has still alive a praying mother —sister to that
pre-eminent winner of souls, Hay M’Howell Grant. As
the widow of the one, and as the sister of the other,
she links together the interests of the far north and of
the far south, and follows her son with her intercessions
wherever he goes. She has a written list of all his
engagements, and when he ascends into the pulpit to
preach, she retires into her own room to pray. He is
best known on earth ; she is best known in heaven.
Saturday, November 1 6th. —I called early this morn-
ing on Mr. C. Bulstrode (brother to Mr. James Bul-
strode, of Prahran, Victoria, who has so kindly filled
my place as secretary of the India Mission), passed
on to breakfast with Mr. Bishop and his sister, and
returned to Mr. Aitken’s reading at ten. His subject
was the three crucifixions of Gal. vi. 14 —the cruci-
fixion of Christ, of the world to the believer, and of the
believer to the world. Prayer over, I had the great
pleasure of meeting Mr. Sharp, the devoted agent of
the Church Missionary Society in Masulipatam, of
whom we have often heard in the Missionary . I was
also introduced to the Eev. Charles B. Snepp, Vicar of
Perry Barr, near Birmingham, whose book, “Songs of
Grace and Glory; or, Hymnal Treasures of the Church
of Christ from the Sixth to the Nineteenth Century,” I
had long regarded as the most valuable collection in


the world. Rev. T. E. C. Campbell first introduced it
to my notice. I mentioned to Mr. Snepp my own
church’s great need of a new hymn-book, and was at
once met with the most generous offer, not only on my
own behalf, but on behalf of any other three churches in
Australia that might be willing to take the initiative
in adopting it.
Early that afternoon I left Cambridge, and reached
Ipswich at four. A brougham met me at the station,
and took me a few miles into the country. It was
after dark when the coachman drew up at the door of
an old English farmhouse. Beautiful creepers, not yet
quite bared by winter cold, covered the wall and part
of the roof. The butler helped to set me free of my
many travelling wraps, and showed me into a very
spacious and elegantly-furnished drawing-room, lighted
by a splendid fire. The lady of the house met me as I
entered—small in stature, but very erect; with silver
hair and a fine forehead, and a face beaming with
intelligence and love. We sat for an hour together
quite alone. We had much to speak of, for we had
much in common. Everything was quite still. I
could hardly think that the house, which seemed so
small and quiet, contained the darlings of some five
and twenty well-born or high-born families. But so it
was. A servant now showed me across a field to a
little cottage, where two or three charming little rooms
are set apart for the occasional use of God’s ministers
under the same roof with the Christian housekeeper,
who seems to make them her special care. When I
returned to the drawing-room about eight o’clock, all
was changed. The room was brilliantly lighted, and
upwards of thirty young ladies, simply but very taste-


fully attired in evening dress, rose in groups on every
side to welcome me as I entered. A table was given
me, with a lamp and a Bible, the domestic servants
took their seats, and our first Bible-reading commenced.
Seldom in my life have I had such an audience. All
their hearts seemed tender, and many were full to
overflowing. So ended that Saturday evening. My
readers will ask —Who is this lady, and who are these
her precious charges ? Well, I need not give her name,
though it is well known in Christian circles in England.
Happy the mother who can get her child a place under
that roof by application years and years before. The
lady of the house was born there early in the century.
She has not taken down the old fabric, but she has
largely added to it. She lives in the centre of the
family estate, and nearly all she loved are dead father,
mother, husband, sons. One daughter is left her; but
she is married to a French gentleman, and resides
abroad. Forty-two years ago she returned to this
house a widow, and began to teach. For the first
twenty years the work grew and prospered. Every
now and then a soul was given to her labours and to
her prayers. But during the last twenty years things
have been different. The whole establishment has
come under the very wing of God. Whatsoever is done
there, He is the doer of it. The dew of heaven seems
to rest on all within and all without. There is power in
the internal administration —iron power; but it is all in-
stinct with love. The education is of a high order; the
discipline is perfect; characters the most diverse have to
be dealt with, yet liberty and unity reign together. There
is no schoolroom; there is no punishment. The dis-
pleasure of the principal is regarded as the worst pain.


Such is the government. The young ladies come
from all parts of England and from the colonies.
Their fathers are baronets, governors, bishops, merchant-
princes, landed gentry, Christian leaders, and suchlike.
Some of them come from the most attractive social and
domestic enjoyments to this lone farmhouse. They are
welcomed as by a loving mother, and introduced into a
loving sisterhood; and prayer ascends for each new
sister day and night, till the joy of God and of fellow-
ship with the Lord Jesus fills the heart, and the cup
runneth over. Nothing is reckoned as having been
done until this has been done. Yet there is no visible
pressure. There is much solid teaching from God’s
Word and a little private conversation; but none know
so well as that dear lady and her dear young friends
that they cannot do the work of the Holy Ghost. All,
all is left with the Lord, and He undertakes all. As a
consequence, few ever leave that seminary without the
love of God shed abroad in their hearts. With some
the work of grace is very rapid, with some it lingers,
with almost all it abides.
Sunday , November 1 yth. —l had breakfast alone
to-day in the genuine “ Prophet’s Chamber,” and did
not meet any of my new-found friends until eleven
o’clock. Ipswich was a long way off, so that the
drawing-room was used for worship. After service I
found a mission chapel just across the garden, where
sometimes hundreds of the country people gather to
hear the gospel. It was a great question with Mrs.
some time since as to whether she should introduce
evangelists into her neighbourhood or not. She felt
the burden of the people’s souls, and help of this kind
seemed to lie within her reach. But she was told that


to have her name in any way associated with evange-
listic effort would ruin her reputation and her school.
“ Then,” she said, “ let my reputation suffer, and my
school decline; I must obey the call of God.” The
call was obeyed. Evangelists of the first order came
at her invitation for a day or for a week together, and
numbers flocked to hear. Eaith came by hearing, and
hearing by the Word of God ; and thus not only were
many saved-, but she became more trusted than ever,
“ and the blessing of the Lord was upon all that she
had, in the house and in the field.”
Monday, November 18th. —I drove away from this
peaceful, honoured home at an early hour, and taking
the train from Ipswich to Mark’s Tay, I walked a few
miles through a brisk, bright, frosty air to Birch
Eectory, where I was most kindly received by Canon
Harrison, a man of rich Christian experience, and the
author of a volume of very beautiful sacred poetry.
I was introduced to him by my much valued friend,
Mr. George Guillaume, of the Melbourne Treasury,
who used to derive inestimable benefits from his
ministry. While I was sitting in his study his curate
entered, and recognised me as the son of the Dean,
under whose guidance he had done a good deal of
ministerial work in Australia years ago; and Canon
Harrison added that he was daily looking for the return
of a former curate of his own, Rev. May, who had
"one forth from Essex to labour in the diocese of Goul-
O • •
burn. The ends of the earth and the varied interests
of such far-separated branches of the Church seemed
strangely and suddenly brought together in the space
of forty minutes. That was all the time I had to
spare. An hour’s walk back and a few miles of railway


brought me to Kelvedon and Coggeshall, where I had
the great pleasure of spending all the afternoon and
evening in the parish and at the vicarage of my cousin,
Eev. Charles P. Greene, who, it may be remembered,
removed from St. John’s, Hobart Town, at the urgent
request of the late Governor of Tasmania, Sir Charles
Du Cane, the patron of the English living. Mr. Greene
has a large church, and the cure of several thousand
souls, and with the aid of two active curates is carry-
ing on many important works for the temporal and
religious welfare of his people.
Tuesday , November igth. —The early express took me
from Coggeshall into the heart of London at an early
hour, there to make arrangements for 'our passage
back to Melbourne, and to witness new forms of re-
ligious life and activity, of which I hope to be able to
speak in another letter.


jFourteentjj.
LONDON DRAWING-ROOM MEETINGS —STAFFORD ROOMS —
TO CANNES —MEETINGS THERE.
fUESDAY, November igth. —A “ Great Eastern ”
express brought me early this forenoon into
London. The first part of the day was spent
between various shipping-offices and the South India
Docks, as the time for our return voyage was drawing
near. In the afternoon I visited our old friend and
fellow-colonist, Mr. E. Larkworthy, at the Bank of New
Zealand; Mr, Williams, of the firm of Hitchcock,
Williams, and Co.; and Mr. Hodder, of the firm of
Hodder, Stoughton, and Co., who had shown me much
Christian kindness during the Conference at Geneva.
Towards evening I travelled by the underground railway
as far as South Kensington, and reached my destination
at Onslow Gardens soon after dark. Here I was given
the most cordial welcome by a lady whom I had first
met at the Keswick Convention, who is well known as
a most active and successful worker, and whose life is
ordered on the principle of Joshua, the great Hebrew
conqueror—" As for me and my house, we will serve
the Lord.” One special branch of her work is among
domestic servants from the fashionable houses in the
south-west quarter, who assemble in her library on


Sunday afternoons to the number of seventy. On
Tuesday evenings young women from fashionable shops
and dressmaking establishments assemble in the same
manner, but not until after nine o’clock, when their
wearisome duties are ended. It was my great happi-
ness to take the meeting on this occasion.
Wednesday , November 20th. —I was introduced to a
lady this morning—l will not say where—very young,
very lovely, very intellectual, and very rich; but her
heart had an aching void that the world could never
fill. She was daily drinking at the fountain of earthly
pleasure, just because others drank there. She knew
it did not satisfy; but as those who seek to quench
their burning thirst by one draught of salt water can-
not refrain themselves from drinking on and on, till
delirium issues in death, so she, and thousands of
English ladies with her, continue in a career of God-
banishing gaiety, which can only lead to its legitimate
and certain conclusion—banishment from God. The
afternoon of to-day was solemnised by a call at the
residence of a greatly-beloved friend and namesake,
at whose house I used to be a constant visitor years
ago, close to Tunbridge Wells. The servant met me
at the door, to say that he had just died and was
buried.
Our second evening was spent in planning the
drawing-room meetings which had specially brought
me to London, and in deliberation concerning a press-
ing invitation I had received to hold a few meetings
O O
among English-speaking residents at Cannes, in the
south of France.
Thursday, November 21 st. —The visit to Cannes having
been decided upon, I was early astir - breakfasted at
* L


Belsize Avenue, Hampstead, with Mr. Larkworthy and
his family; obtained a tourist’s ticket at Cook’s office
in the city; engaged our passages to Melbourne by
the “ Garonne; ” wrote a number of letters in a beauti-
ful room at the Bank of New Zealand, where, for the
time, I was as much retired from the stream of human
life as if I had been on the banks of the Waimakiriri;
and returned to Onslow Gardens to prepare for the
important meeting which was to be held in the drawing-
room after dinner. I need only give the outline of a
London drawing-room religious meeting, as a guide to
those of the wealthier classes in Australia who may
wish to open their houses to some of their friends and
neighbours in a manner as delightful and profitable as
it is certainly novel. Guests are invited by printed
cards, their names filled in with pen and ink, several
days beforehand, in numbers perhaps three times as
many as the room will hold. They accept or decline
as they would accept or decline any ordinary invitation.
Tea, coffee, and refreshments are provided in the dining-
room downstairs, as they enter, about eight o’clock ;
and conversation is general till a quarter to nine, when
the meeting commences. Hymns are sung, prayer is
offered, and one address is delivered by a chosen man,
whose name has been mentioned in the card of invita-
tion. His address may be to Christians only, or it may
be missionary, or evangelistic. Those who filled the
drawing-rooms on the occasion of my visit were chiefly
professing Christians; all of them were moving in
high circles, and some of them belonged to the aris-
tocracy. Rev. H. W. Webb-Peploe, minister of St.
Paul’s Church, Onslow Gardens, where the eloquent
Capel Molyneux used to preach, opened with prayer.


The only daughter of my hostess, herself a devoted
child of God, led the singing beautifully; and the
subject of the address was—“ Union with Christ in His
death and in His risen life.”
Friday, November 22nd. —To-day was mail-day, and
was occupied until two o’clock in writing for the
Missionary, &c.; then crossing Hyde Park, I reached
the Stafford Rooms, Tichborne Street, Edgware Road, by
half-past three, where a very select circle of seekers
after “ fuller blessing ” assemble every Friday afternoon
during the winter months. The room was crowded in
every part, and I recognised among the audience many
familiar faces from the Australian Colonies. A delight-
ful walk across the park, accompanied by my beloved
friend, Rev. E. W. Moore, of Brunswick Chapel, brought
me home again to Onslow Gardens in good time to
prepare for another and larger meeting to be held that
night in the same drawing-room as before. I had the
pleasure on this occasion of meeting Captain Baring,
an officer of high birth, a most determined and uncom-
promising evangelist; Rev. Pelham Stokes, and Revs.
Darwin Fox (who are intimately associated with the
work of the Rev. Hay Aitken); Mr. Hudson Taylor of
the China Inland Mission ; Mr. and Mrs. Trotter, inti-
mate friends of the late Rev. W. Pennefather; and
Miss Woods, sister of the present Mrs. Barker, of
Bishopscourt, Sydney —her parents’ beautiful house
being but a few doors distant. The subject of the
address was—“ Christ dwelling in the soul.”
All the time I have been away I have never lost my
love for Australia, nor my care for my own parish; but
if there is one thing above another that lends a charm
to the old country, it is the free, warm-hearted Christian


intercourse and hospitality 'which abounds almost every-
where, but most especially in the metropolis. The
cordiality, the heavenly joy, the grateful affection
towards God, the interest in souls which is manifested
when meetings such as I have described are just break-
ing up, make Great Britain inexpressibly dear. Though
the Canaanites dwell by millions in the land, still
England is the Canaan of the nineteenth century.
Saturday, November 23 rd, was spent in making pre-
parations for the journey to Cannes.
Sunday, November 24 th. —The Hon. Hamilton Tolle-
mache, a devoted evangelist whom I had met at
Broadlands, and Mr. Pelham Burn, a young officer of
great promise and a very decided Christian, came this
morning and accompanied us to St. Paul’s, Onslow
Gardens, where we heard Mr. Webb-Peploe preach.
We had a delightful walk together in the afternoon,
and I had also the great privilege of conversing towards
evening with Mrs. Woods, a lady of rich Christian
experience, sister to Canon Goodman, of Geelong, and
mother to Mrs. Barker, of Sydney.
Monday, November 25 th. —l was up before five, and
reached the Victoria Station soon after seven. The Lon-
don, Chatham, and Dover express hurried us through
Kent. The Straits were crossed in ninety minutes.
It rained all the way from the seaside until Paris was
reached at six. The city was rapidly crossed in a cab,
the Lyons railway reached, and a fresh start made
about half-past seven that evening for Marseilles by
the “ Grande Vitesse.”
Tuesday, November 26th. —Lyons was but dimly seen
this winter morning. We paused for half an hour at
Marseilles, and started again about half-past eleven


to complete the last section of the journey, arriving
at Cannes before four, thus travelling through from
London with perfect ease in about thirty-two hours.
I was met and welcomed by Mons. F. Vaßs, a French-
man by birth, a devoted and single-minded child of
God, who with his most earnest wife had invited me
to their house, and had made every arrangement for
a series of Believers’ Meetings before the following
Sunday. A pair of ponies from the cab-stand took us
up in a beautiful little hooded basket-carriage to the
Villa TOlivette, the lovely spot where I was to stay
during my visit. We drew up for a moment that I
might be introduced to Mr, Cheyne Bjady, whose
admirable tracts have had such a wide circulation from
the D’Olier Street Repository; and as we ascended a
little hill, we passed Mr. I. P. Dickinson, a negro by
birth, who came to England some time ago as one of
the Jubilee singers, and was enabled, by the bounty of
Lord Gifford, to study three years in Glasgow and one
year in Edinburgh, with the view of becoming an
evangelist either in Scotland or on the Continent. His
lungs, however, proving delicate, he had been ordered
abroad; and he told me so great is the prejudice in
America against the coloured race, that if he resolves
to preach and to live by the gospel, he must become an
exile from the States for ever. The way to the villa
led by pretty residences on the hillside and through
terraced gardens. Madame Vaßs was on the steps to
greet me, and I was at once made to feel that they
reckoned me a brother in the very fullest sense of the
word. One of the strongest ties between us was, that
Madame Vaßs is the only daughter of that remarkable


lady in Suffolk, of whose name and of whose extra-
ordinary influence over the young I spoke in an earlier
letter.
Wednesday, November 27th, was as wet as several of
its predecessors. The French custom is to have a light
breakfast at eight o’clock, to have a very substantial
breakfast at twelve, corresponding with our early
dinner, and to have a meal almost the same in character
about six or seven o’clock. Thus were our days at
Cannes divided. Mr. Cheyne Brady arrived with his
wife and daughter before noon this Wednesday, and we
walked down from the hills together, and reached the
German church in Cannes by half-past two. The
meeting was very still, and lasted for about an hour:
the subject was—“ Walking with God.” I was told
that among those present were Dr. Williams, a very
eminent physician, from the west end of London; one
of the Ladies Campbell, a daughter of the Duke of
Argyll, who has a beautiful villa at Cannes; and Mr.
and Mrs. W. T. Berger. I mention Mr. Berger’s name
because it is worthy of especial honour. He is a
manufacturer of Uue at Bromley Bow, near London,
and actually lays out £ 20,000 a year on the cause of
God!
The meeting over, the Rev. William Brookes, whom
I had known intimately when spending the winter
some years ago at Hyeres, took me in a cab to pay
some visits. We first called on Bishop Oxenden, who
had resigned the Metropolitan See of Canada because
of failing health, and had accepted the chaplaincy of
the principal church in Cannes for one or two seasons.
I was greatly disappointed not to see this eminently


good and useful man. We next called on Mr. and
Mrs. Eobinson Woolfield, to whom, I believe, next to
Lord Brougham, Cannes owes its popularity among the
English. They have spent thirty-three years on the
one spot; and in the days when visitors were few,
they were enabled, by means of their considerable)
wealth, to show personal kindness and attention to
every invalid whose name was mentioned to them, or
who would receive kindness at their hands. It was
in this way that the Eev. C. S. Isaacson, lately incum-
bent of Camberwell, near Melbourne, made their
acquaintance, and subsequently married their niece.
It seemed strange not only to have this connecting
link between us, but to meet in their drawing-room two
young ladies recently come from Australia, who seemed
to know well my family name.
Thursday, November 28 th. —Black skies and rain still
continued, and became rather worse than better. Eev.
W. Brookes and Eev. Charles Watson, a Presbyterian
minister and a great friend of Dr. Somerville, came to
our mid-day repast, and we joined with them in prayer
for Cannes, and for these special gatherings. The
meeting this afternoon was in the French church, and
the subject was —“ Dead with Christ,” as bearing on the
question of our death unto sin. It had cleared a little
by four o’clock, so I walked eastward with Mr, Cheyne
Brady till we reached the point of land that stretches
out towards the neighbouring Island of St. Marguerite,
celebrated in history as the abode of the “ Man with
the Iron Mask,” and more recently as the prison of
Marshal Bazaine.
Our evenings throughout the week were spent in
privacy, partly in seeking to disentangle truths in


which we were all three intensely interested, partly in
listening to the sweetest sacred music, and partly in
hearing Mons. Yal&s recount the marvellous, and, in
some cases, almost miraculous, instances of God’s assist-
ance experienced by his father’s family during the wars
of the first Napoleon.


JHfteentfj.
CANNES MEETINGS —PARIS —THEODORE MONOD —
CHELTENHAM CONFERENCE —WESTON-SUPER-MARE,
&“|p|IUDAY, November 29 th, 1878.—While staying at
Cannes I endeavoured to learn as much as
possible of the actual work undertaken by
Christian people for the conversion of the thousands of
Roman Catholics in the town. I ascertained that there
was but one mission-room in the whole place set apart
for this work, but that it, though small, w r as kept inces-
santly occupied. On Mondays, Tuesdays, and Fridays
it was used as a night-school for men, the Bible being
the only text-book; the same for women on Wednesdays.
On Thursday and Sunday nights Mons. Vaßs and others
conducted a public evangelistic service in French, and
on Saturday night the addresses were in Italian. Be-
sides this, there was a day-school for children under
seven, both Protestant and Roman Catholic, and another
for children over seven, numbering in all about three
hundred. Though these are the only spiritual and
aggressive organisations in existence, it would be im-
possible to compute the amount of good done by indi-
vidual travellers and residents by means of conversa-
tion, tracts, and portions of Scripture. This Friday


threatened to be as wet as all other days had been since
my arrival; but it brightened up beautifully about two
o’clock, and the effect of the “ clear shining after rain ”
was magical. We had a delightful meeting in the
German church at half-past two; the subject was
“ Putting on Christ.”
Saturday, November 30 th. —I was awake all night, I
know not why. Prayer seemed an indescribable luxury.
There was time, in imagination, to visit every corner of
the world, to gaze on familiar scenes, and to make re-
quest for friends by name. There was no restlessness,
and no exhaustion next day. The sun rose in great
splendour, and I climbed the hills after our early
breakfast and got a view eastward as far as Nice, along
the wooded, mountainous, and bay-indented shore.
After dinner we walked to the beautiful cemetery, a
place consecrated to my dear host and hostess as the
last earthly resting-place of their only child, and where
a cross, cut square and massive from the quarry, stands
over the mortal remains of the great Lord Brougham.
At half-past two we met for the last time in the
French church, the subject being—“ The Fulness of
the Holy Ghost.” After a long walk with Mr. Cheyne
Brady on the road towards Nice, I called upon a cousin
of my own, the wife of a resident physician, who was
laid low with serious illness, but whose whole soul
seemed full of God. I had never met her, nor even
known of her before, but I was astonished at the
measure of grace and truth given to one so frail. I can
remember little of what she said, except her rendering
of 1 Cor. viii. I—“ Knowledge puffeth up, but love
buildeth up.” Nevertheless the teaching of the inter-
view remains. Where God is, all is. Where God is not,


nothing is. It was after sundown when I left her, but
I took the liberty of an old friend, and called by moon-
light on Colonel Ward, who, after retiring from the
Melbourne mint, has built a beautiful villa at Cannes
in which to winter with his wife and family.
Sunday, December Ist. —A brilliant day. Advent
Sunday, Sacrament Sunday, and the Day of Intercession
for Missions all coming together, made it notable. Eev.
W. Brookes had asked me to preach in Holy Trinity,
the most fashionable church in Cannes, where Earl and
Lady Warwick, and other English grandees, habitually
attend; and when all was over, he very kindly asked
me to preach again in the afternoon. There are no
evening services, the congregation being chiefly com-
posed of invalids, afraid of the night air.
Monday, December 2nd. —We were all up before five
o’clock this morning, and at twenty minutes past seven
I said farewell to my kind friends at the railway
station, and pursued my journey westward as far as La
Pauline, accompanied by a young French officer, who
spoke a little English, and who flashed fire when he
spoke to me of Metz. At twenty minutes past eleven
I was met by a beloved young friend, Mr. James Gordon
Oswald, who had driven several miles from the Medi-
terranean coast to bring me back to Hyeres, where he
was spending the winter with his young wife, and with
his father and mother, who had shown me unbounded
kindness, when I also was wintering at this very
place many years ago. The revival of old Christian
friendships, and the revisiting of these familiar scenes,
was very refreshing, and I remained with them until
dark, when I again set off in a torrent of rain for
Marseilles and Paris. The journey north was rendered


bitterly cold by falling snow, and the gay and brilliant
metropolis of France was not reached until the even-
ing of
Tuesday, December 3rd, at about six o’clock. Here
there was no snow. The night was sharp and clear, so,
as I was nearly white with cold, I set off on foot to find
No. 23 Quai D’Anjou, the residence of the celebrated
Theodore Monod, the loveliest writer and preacher in
the French Protestant Church. I had met him in Lon-
don and at Broadlands, so that we were no strangers.
After much misguidance, I found the great outer door,
entered an irregular courtyard, ascended to the first
landing, and rang. A young Frenchman opened, and
after taking in my card, he led me through a room in
which dinner was already laid into a drawing-room on
the same flat, full of Pasteur Monod’s motherless chil-
dren, and through this salon into his own study, where
I found the pale, refined, intellectual, spiritual foreigner,
in the midst of papers, writing by a lamp. This distin-
guished and remarkable man keeps his beloved France
always under his eye. Peformation in the Church and
country is the object for which he lives. Moreover,
the Establishment to which he belongs is brimful of
doctrinal error, and Sister England is always sending
for him to preach or to speak on “ Righteousness and
“Holiness.” Yet his life, though intensely busy, is
intensely peaceful. He is small in stature, youthful in
appearance, a father, and a widower. He is the nephew
of the great Adolphe Monod, and is, perhaps, the most
guarded and the most glowing teacher of the doctrines
of the higher Christian life in his native land. Our
interview was necessarily brief. His dinner was wait-
ing, and I had to catch the train; but I rejoice to have


been under his roof, to have entered the room where
he meets with God for France, and where, I presume,
he wrote that little book of books, called Looking unto
Jesus.
I had still time to walk through Paris, threading my
way amid streams of human beings by dazzling lights
and along stately boulevards. Another journey by rail
to Calais and across the Straits of Dover brought me to
London early on
Wednesday morning, December 4th. —A happy meet-
ing at breakfast-hour with my dear friends in Onslow
Gardens, a cab to Paddington, and rail again to Chelten-
ham, which I reached at two p.m. Late jn the after-
noon I went out to inquire about the Annual Conference
which had commenced on Monday, but was this year
confined in great measure to the congregation of a very
devoted man, Eev. J. A. Aston, and was being held in
his mission church, at some little distance from the
centre of population. I found that I was on the list of
speakers for that night; and though it was a December
evening, and the place exceedingly out of the way, the
attendance was splendid. Mr. H, P. Bowker and Eev.
Evan H. Hopkins gave the chief addresses.
Thursday, December 5 th. —Eev. J. Figgis, from Brigh-
ton, gave a most beautiful address at the forenoon con-
ference on “ The hidings of God’s power,” and Eev. H.
W. Webb-Peploe in the evening on “ Eest.”
Friday, December 6th. —The Eev. J. Figgis spoke again
this evening, to our great delight, on the words—“ Jesus
Christ Himself; ” and another address was delivered on
“ The Fulness of the Holy Ghost.”
Saturday , December yth. —The Conference being ended,
this morning was devoted to a “praise-meeting,” direct


from which I had to go at an early hour to catch a train
from the Midland Station to Bath. There Lady Eyre
Williams, one of our oldest and most valued friends
from Australia, met me on the platform, and showed
me the Abbey Church and many other places of interest
before going home to luncheon with Sir Edward. He
seemed to me particularly well, and has purchased a
house in a beautiful situation in Bath, with a view to
permanent residence. At half-past three o’clock I
travelled from Bath to Bristol, wandered about the city
for an hour or more, and then took train for Weston-
super-Mare, where my wife’s uncle and aunt, Rev. David
and Mrs. Wheeler, were expecting me for the Sunday.
Sunday, December Bth, was a cloudless, brilliant day.
Before service I got up on the pine-clad hills which
overlook the water, and got a good general idea of this
very lovely and favoured place. A quarry in the
mountain-side yields the most beautiful stone, with
which long lines of splendid terraces of detached villas
and of large family mansions are built, tier after tier,
from the water’s edge up the steep declivities of the
hill. The taste, the order, and the freedom from any
eyesore are perfect. Ho shop, no humble dwelling what-
ever, intrudes into this east end of Weston, where
Christian people in search of health, army and navy
officers, and a mixed multitude of rich and quiet people
love to congregate. At eleven o’clock Holy Trinity was
crowded. Very few ventured to be late. The incum-
bent, Rev. W. Hunt, a healthy, venerable-looking, dear
old man, who used in olden times to he curate to
the renowned Archdeacon Law at the Parish Church,
preached an admirable sermon. Every sentence seemed
to expand itself in gold, and was tipped with a spark-


ling diamond from the Word of God. It is said that
he never visits, that the pulpit is his strength, that he
keeps himself for the one thing. I think, however, that
his people would prefer less lofty diction in his style on
the Sunday, and more of his presence on the week-day.
Strange to say, the lady beside whom I sat in church
proved to be a near relative of one of my own
parishioners, and introduced herself to me. I went
home with her after service, and found that she was,
moreover, cousin to Mr. T. M. Croome, of Cains Cross,
Stroud, a very devoted layman in our communion, and
of whom I had been particularly anxious to hear. In
the afternoon we walked on the hills with Eev. W.
Burdett, of Clare College, Cambridge, an old friend of
Bishop Perry’s; and coming home we met with Captain
W. B. Eobinson, a Christian soldier, who makes the
sick in Weston the great care and object of his life.
Friends or strangers, it matters not to him; he calls
upon them at once, and never slacks his attention while
they remain by the seaside. He will be hardly able to
deny in glory the well-merited words of recognition,
“ I was sick, and ye visited Me.” Then we called on
the widow of a very godly labourer in the foreign field,
and on two ladies. Miss Wilsons, whose “ life-work ” is
a mission-room at Folkestone, with coffee-room, &c.,
attached ; and after service we spent the evening with
Mr. Alfred Mason, my wife’s cousin, who has the con-
duct of several useful religious agencies, and especially
of the weekly prayer-meeting, which for numbers and
influence has few equals in the west of England.
Monday , December gth. —Another most lovely but
bitterly cold day. Mr. Wheeler took me out early to
see some friends whom he thought worth seeing; among


others, the Incumbent of Christ Church, whom I might
have known —even without an introduction —from his
own appearance, as well as from the photographs which
lay on the table and hung on the drawing-room wall,
to be the brother of Canon Chase, of St. John’s, Mel-
bourne. We also called on a Mr. Newbery, who, I
believe, was once a tradesman, but who devoted his
spare hours to a comparative analysis of the Hebrew
and Greek words used throughout the Bible, with such
assiduity that Bagster has thought it worth while to
publish the result of his labours in two expensive
volumes. We were unfortunate in failing to see Colonel
Elphinstone, a man of sterling Christian character, who
spent thirty years in India, afterwards became equerry
to the Duke of Connaught, and has now retired from
the Queen’s service, to confine himself to the service of
God. We looked into the parish church on the way
home, where Archdeacon Law used to deliver with such
fervour the fiery terms of the first covenant, and the
gracious invitations of the second; and I was grieved
to learn that the present rector, though an earnest, is
not a like-minded man. At half-past seven I was on
my way to Taunton, leaving the people of Weston sadly
disturbed at the sudden failure of the West of England
Bank. The ground was all white with snow as I walked
from the station to visit the principal churches of this
ancient town. Proceeding westward, I was joined at
Norton Fitzwarren by my most kind friend, Miss
Charlotte Hanbury, of the Blackdown Hills, and we
travelled together to our destination at the house of one
of the most remarkable and enlightened Christian men
in England, of whom I must tell in another number—
Eobert Chapman, of Barnstaple. J


better .Sixteenth
ROBERT CHAPMAN OF BARNSTAPLE.
evening, December gth, 1878. —One
m afternoon, during the progress of .the Hobart
& Town Mission in December 1875, a colonel
in the army, a God-fearing man, called upon me to
express his sympathy in the work, and to place in my
hands a little book called Choice Sayings, by Robert
Chapman. I little thought that that day three years I
should be Robert Chapman’s guest. On returning to
Melbourne, I heard that this little volume had been
published at first without his consent or revision, so
that he was not responsible either for the title or for
the contents; but that, for the truth’s sake, subsequent
editions had passed under his hand. I learned also
that he was pre-eminently holy; a man who rose early,
and prayed much, and always walked with God. I was
told that he always spent Saturday apart; that the day
was passed in communion; that no exercise was taken,
except indoors at his lathe ; and that a visitor, who had
once been obliged to break in upon his solitude, beheld
his face as it had been the face of an angel. After
reaching England I heard of him again through my
dear friend, Miss Charlotte Ilanbury, at Mildmay, and as
* M


she lived in the neighbourhood, she promised, if possible,
that I should see him in his own home. Months passed,
and we were within a fortnight of sailing, when the
long-looked-for visit was accomplished.
Leaving the railway station at about six in the
evening, Miss Hanbury and I took our little bags and
trudged over the hard snow into the narrow streets of
Barnstaple. Passing the parish church on our right, we
took two sharp turns and found ourselves in a quiet,
humble little street, and facing the church again. The
houses on either side were just two-story cottages in
regular line, whitewashed and slated. We stopped at
the last door, at a little house on the very brink of the
churchyard, and entered without knocking. I followed
Miss Hanbury up a short, narrow stair, and one step
brought us into a good-sized room, warm and well
lighted, and full of people. There was a meeting that
night, so they had gone to tea; but Mr. Chapman and
his old friend, Mr. Hake, had not yet come in from
visiting the sick. A young evangelist, by Miss Hake’s
direction, took me to my little room in another house
across the street, and returned almost immediately with
me, holding me up lest I should slip on the narrow, icy
pavement. I took my place at the table, and looked
around. Mr. Hake’s daughters presided at either end.
I was introduced to the wife of the young evangelist, to
a Mr. Chesterman (who had just returned from arduous
Bible-work in Spain, and was taking a holiday with his
bride), and to a young lady who had come for change
of air. These, with a baby and ourselves, made a party
of ten. The meal was simply but abundantly provided
white bread, and bread made from the entire produce
of the wheat, cold meat, butter and jam, tea and cocoa.


I was watching the door; at last Mr. Chapman entered,
a strong-built man of about seventy, with grey hair,
beard, and moustache, the very image of Moses; and
Mr. Hake followed, taller, but more bent, old and thin
and suffering. He reminded me of “ Aaron, the saint
of the Lord.” Such a kindly welcome from both the
brothers; and then I listened to know how a man with
such a reputation for holiness would converse—how he
would differ from other men. But immediately the
baby, who was in her mother’s arms, and next but one
to me, began to cry and would not stop. “ Dear me,”
I thought, “ how provoking ! I have come all this way
to hear Mr. Chapman speak, and I can’t,hear a word
for the baby ! ” This evil thought had scarcely passed
through my mind ere I was reproved and instructed.
Both Mr. Chapman and Mr. Hake spoke to the mother
with the greatest concern and tenderness. “ Poor little
child ! there must be something wrong; she’s the best
baby in the world.” The young mother was calmed by
their thoughtfulness, and soon her baby slept. This
was my first lesson there in the art of love. Everything
went on thenceforth brightly and cheerfully. Mr.
Chapman, who had taken his tea earlier, waited like a
lover on Mr, Hake, who sat by the fire, eaten up with
rheumatic pains in every part of his body; and the
language of Canaan spread like a silver veil over the
whole body of their conversation. After tea we wrapped
up again, and went out to a cottage meeting, and for
the first time I heard Eobert Chapman expound the
Scriptures. Deep called to deep as he warmed into his
subject—the relationship existing between God and
Christ ere He bore our sin, and while He was bearing
it, and since; and the believer’s relationship to God,


as determined by Christ’s relationship now. It was all
very simple, and even slow, but as touching as
Kutherford’s “Letters,” and as grand as Charnock on
the “ Attributes of God.” The impression made on my
mind is almost all that I can remember, as I took no
notes; but as his Bible closed, I felt but an infant in
the knowledge of God, compared with a giant like this.
Returning home I was confounded to find that he, in-
stead of I, was taking the place of infant as we walked
together. He sought to know all that I knew of God,
and so I believe it is always with him, as if his visitors
knew more and loved more than he. Thus I was taught
another lesson in the way of holiness. He who knew
most had attained to the knowledge that he knew next
to nothing.
Tuesday, December 10 th. —We all retired to rest about
nine o’clock last night; for the hours at “New Build-
ings ” are particularly early—breakfast at seven, dinner
at noon. Mr. Chapman always retires at nine, and rises
at four. From four o’clock until twelve he is princi-
pally occupied with God. It was laid on his heart very
soon after his affections had become fixed on better
things, that the world stood in great need of intercession,
and that intercession was to be peculiarly his vocation;
therefore his first and best hours are given to prayer.
Devotion does not, however, in any way interfere with
the energies of life. He preaches to 800 souls every
Sabbath; he undertakes all the pastoral work connected
with this congregation; he attends to the minutest
bodily and spiritual wants of a stream of visitors, some
of whom stay for an hour, some for a month; he is the
mainspring of a great evangelistic and Bible work in
England and in Spain; he corresponds with men like


George Muller, and with seekers and workers in various
parts of the world. Nor is he shut up during those first
eight hours. For instance, having (if I remember rightly)
only one servant for the two little houses, it was his
practice, till quite recently, to go round to every door
and take away the boots of his guests, to clean them
with his own hands. He called me at my own request
at five. I was awake, and waiting for his step. He put
his venerable head in at my door just at the hour, light-
ing my candle, and giving me for my morning portion—
“Hs for God, His way is perfect.” A little after he
came to guide me to a little sitting-room, where a chair
and warm rug were placed beside a table furnished with
a reading-lamp, and just in front of a lovely fire. At
six o’clock I heard him calling one of the married
couples in an adjacent room, with the words, “I will
fear no evil,” and yet again giving orders that the young
father and mother whom I mentioned above should not
be disturbed at the hour they had named, for the baby
had been restless at night.
We breakfasted by lamplight at seven o’clock, and
Mr. Chapman, who had prepared his own breakfast
earlier, joined us at eight o’clock for family worship.
We then separated for the forenoon, and Miss Hanbury
took me for a long walk over the bridge, and through
snowy fields, telling me many incidents about Charles
Kingsley, who loved this neighbourhood; and about
Mr. Chapman’s gospel wanderings in Spain ; and about
George Brealey’s work on the Blackdown Hills, where
she herself resides ; and about Mr, and Mrs. Penne-
father’s summer visit to her home—“ The Firs,” —and
about George Muller’s work in Bristol. Thus the
morning passed pleasantly by under a lovely winter


sun; and after dinner at twelve o’clock I explored the
neighbourhood a little, till it was time for the Bible-
reading at half-past three; the Song of Solomon occupied
our thoughts till nearly six o’clock, when we had tea,
during which fresh visitors from a distance came in,
intending to stay for the night. But at seven 0 clock,
Mr. Chapman, according to promise, took me away with
Mr. Hake to a little room at the end of the courtyard,
which I had not seen before, and for two hours unfolded
to me his thoughts and researches on prophecy; and
with the gentlest, and with what it almost seems pre-
sumption to call the most teachable spirit, sought to
know my mind. This is what strikes me most of all in
the retrospect: that a man so well born, so well educated,
muscularly so strong and vigorous, such a traveller, so
much sought after, one who knows the Lord face to
face, should be so lowly. But the last characteristic
accounts for it all—communion with God makes him
childlike.
Wednesday, December nth. —A text was given me,
and my candle and fire lighted yet earlier this morning.
Prayers and breakfast ended, I visited Mr. Chapman s
workshop; carried away a bread platter, cut by his own
lathe, took farewell of good old Mr. Hake and some of
the other guests, and while a large party accompanied
Miss Hanbury to the train, we walked together by a
lonely road to the station. This was the most profitable
time I had yet had. I asked him many questions about
the Christian life, and got the broadest, most compre-
hensive answers. I told him of a dear friend of mine,
a Perfectionist, who said that he had got back to
Adam’s state —no sin in him, but only the possibility
of sinning if he did not watch. “ Adam's state ! ” he said


with vehemence; “ hack to Adam's state ! I would not
change places with Adam before the fall for a hundred
thousand worlds ! ” Speaking of prayer, he said, “ When
I bow to God, God stoops to me.” Speaking of whole-
hearted service, he said, “ As the father and child do all
they can to please each other, so I do all I can to please
God, and God does all He can to please me.” On the
subject of gaining the mastery over besetting sins he
was very positive. He said, “ Give yourself to attack-
ing the filthiness of the spirit more than the filthiness
of the flesh—pride, selfishness, self-seeking, &c., —these
are the ringleaders; aim at them. Fight ye not with
small or great, save only with the King of Israel. While
you are occupied in gaining the victory over little sins,
great sins will be occupied in gaining the victory over
you. When great sins are overcome, little sins fall with
them.” Another time he said, “As the serpent was
wise to destroy, so Christ is wise to save.” And again,
hearing of a heavy disappointment, he observed,
“ Happy to become thus richer: let us count every
loss gain.” Thus we reached the train—in falling snow
and bitter cold, but our hearts were full. He could
not help thinking how much better off he was than
Adam, and referred to the Christian’s knowledge and
privileges again and again, notwithstanding the in-
dwelling of sin. “ There it is, there it is ! ” were his
thoughts concerning inward corruption, if not his
words; “ but what of that ? There He is in whom
God delights; and God has given Him to me, and me
to Him.”
Mr. Chapman was born in Denmark early in the
century. His father, Sir George Chapman, was at that
time English Consul at the Court of Copenhagen. He


was educated as a barrister, but abandoned his profes-
sion after his conversion, to serve God first in Spain,
and afterwards in England. It will be one among the
countless joys of those of my readers who love the One
whom He loves, that they shall meet with and converse
with Eobert Chapman under the leaves of the Tree of
Life in the midst of the Paradise of God.


i&e&enUentfj.
geokge holler’s orphanages—mark’s tay—belstead
—MEETINGS IN LONDON.
»EDNESDAY, December ii th. —A * little over
three hours brought us from Barnstaple to
Bristol, where we took a suburban train to
Montpellier, from whence we walked through half-
finished streets and over open spaces to the Ashley
Down Orphanages. The road runs between Asylum
No. 3, which lay on our right, and Nos. i, 2, and 4,
which occupy large spaces of ground on the left. The
snow was gently falling as we rang at the gate of No.
3, which was opened by a very plain, but pious old
woman. There was hardly a tree or a shrub between
the lodge and the building, which rises from gravel and
grass to the height of three stories, sombre, solid, and
unadorned. We were shown into the visitors’ room
on the right of the small entrance hall, where lay a
Bible, a few reports and Christian books, and in a few
minutes Mr. Wright (Mr. George Muller’s son-in-law)
entered to make us welcome. He took us upstairs to
his own office, where was sufficient furniture, a warm
fire, a Bible, and a desk, but not a paper was to be
seen. For all the appearance of business, he might


have been a commission agent without a commission,
or a barrister without a brief. His face wore the
expression of most perfect cklm—pale, but peaceful
and intelligent. He told us that George Muller was
away evangelising and teaching, and that things went
on just as usual. There were 2500 orphans being
daily clothed, fed, and educated by accomplished
Christian teachers, and that money for all the great
agencies connected with Ashley Down flowed in by
post, as it had done for years. We knew it was the
wrong day for seeing the asylums, and no exception
could be made in our case. The rules concerning visits
and visitors are never broken under any circumstances,
so we had to content ourselves with what was manifest.
The dinner-bell rang to the minute at one o’clock, and
Mr. Wright rose to go,—most cordially, however, otter-
ing us refreshment. Miss Hanbury had, however,
made abundant provision for our own wants, so we
remained upstairs till dinner was ended, when Mr.
Wright returned, and told us more about Mr. Muller’s
work abroad.
It may interest our readers to know that this most
remarkable man (who, like Miss Havergal, has trusted,
and continues to trust God to the very letter of His
promises) first arrived in England about forty years
ago. He was born in Prussia in 1805, and up to his
twentieth year led a very profligate life. He experi-
enced the great inward change while at the University
of Halle, and sought from that time forward to honour
and serve and glorify God. He at first thought of
becoming a missionary to the Jews; came for this
purpose to London in 1829, and joining himself to a
college, close to the metropolis, he spent “ twelve hours


a day in studying the Hebrew, Chaldee, and Eabbinical
languages, often breaking off to kneel down and implore
a blessing on his labours.” Two months of such work,
however, speedily broke him down. He was sent to
Teignmouth, in Devonshire, for change. Here he fell
in with some very godly men, and met for the first
time Henry Craik, a young Scotch minister, whose
life ran for thirty years in the same current with his
own. “ I returned to London,” he says, “ much better
in body ; and as to my soul, the change was so great
that it was like second conversion.” After this Mr.
Muller settled down at Teignmouth, and was, in 1830,
married to Miss Groves, sister of a remarkably devoted
man, who went out to the East to labour as a missionary
alone, and who laboured with much success. Mr,
Muller had only one child, a daughter, who is now the
wife of our friend Mr. Wright.
On April 21st, 1832, Mr. Muller paid a short visit
to Bristol, at the request of Mr. Craik. Crowds came
to hear them, and after a fortnight they were urgently
requested to remain as joint ministers of one congre-
gation. After a season of retirement for prayer and
deliberation, they decided to accept this offer, and finally
and permanently moved to Bristol in May 1832. On
March sth, 1834, was founded “ The Scriptural Know-
ledge Institution for Home and Abroad ,” which had for
its objects the education of the poor on Scriptural prin-
ciples, the circulation of the Scriptures and religious
tracts, and the assistance of missionaries at home and
abroad. Among other things “it was determined to ask
for no pecuniary assistance from unbelievers, to employ
none but Christian men and women in the work, and
never to enlarge the field of labour by contracting debts.”


Eighteen months after this the Orphan House work
began in connection with the institution. In ten years
an income of .£2OOO a year was flowing in; ten years
more, and .£12,000 was received in one year, which
rose in iB6O to £ 20,000. When all figures came to be
counted up at the end of the first quarter of a century,
it was found that Mr. Muller had received altogether a
grand total of .£183,000, and all this on the determined
principle of not asking any one but God. Upwards of
AS 0,000 of the above was spent on education, mission
work, and Christian literature; the remainder on the
orphans and orphanages.
Mr. Muller is now about seventy-five years of
age. His son-in-law, Mr. Wright, is entrusted with
the entire care of the orphanages, while he himself
travels from place to place, preaching the gospel and
reviving the people of God. He is shortly to visit
America, and to come as near to us as San Francisco,
and if Christian people in New Zealand and Australia
have their own way, he may be with us some time
in 1880.
His appearance as a public teacher and evangelist so
late in life is one of the most remarkable features of
his career. It would seem as though God were permit-
ting Christians to see with their own eyes the man of
whom they had heard so much. Miss Hanbury says
that he is tall and thin, grey-headed, very gentle and
simple, and that he laughs most heartily. Truly he is
bringing forth fruit in old age, and doubtless God has
not finished with him yet. He has more for him to
learn and more for him to do. It was “ when Abram
was ninety years old and nine (that) the Lord appeared
unto Abraham and said unto him, I am the Almighty


God; walk before Me, and be thou perfect” (Gen. xvii. 1).
Let younger men take courage.
We walked about the road after we had taken fare-
Avell of Mr, Wright, getting different views of the
asylums, until it was time to take the train again for
Bristol, and then I parted with good, kind Miss Hanbury,
who turned back to the Blackdown Hills, while I pro-
ceeded to Cheltenham. In the train I fell in with a
Mr. Powell, an excellent young clergyman, who had
been curate to the Eev. George Everard at Wolver-
hampton, and was now Incumbent of the parish where
John Wesley commenced his labours.
Sunday, December isth. —Preached for Eev. J. Aston
at St. Luke’s church, Cheltenham, this morning, on the
future destiny of believers and unbelievers ; walked far
among the Cotteswold Hills in the afternoon, and took
farewell of many kind friends and relatives after even-
ing service at Canon Bell’s.
Monday, December 1 6th. —Left Cheltenham finally
with the heavy luggage at half-past seven a.m. Peached
Paddington alone and late, in consequence of the snow;
but, by means of the underground railway, caught the
noon train on the Great Eastern line, and leaving London
steeped in one of the worst fogs I ever remember, got
into the country again, and alighted at Mark’s Tay, near
Colchester. A carriage met me at the station, and took
me a few miles to a country seat, where a lady, who in
the days of her health was eminently active and signally
blessed in her work amongst the poor, now lies in a
beautiful house in the midst of lovely grounds, a widow
and desolate; unable to do any service for the Lord
she loves, except that of giving to His people’s need
with open hand, and of witnessing, notwithstanding


great and hourly distress, that “ He doeth all things
well.”
The afternoon was spent in her boudoir upstairs, and
as the evening drew on, the carriage took me back to
Mark’s Tay, when I caught the train to Ipswich. Once
again I was permitted to meet with the young ladies
belonging to the private seminary of which I spoke in
a former letter. Rev. S. and Mrs. Walford had driven
to Belstead from Bucklesham Rectory through the bitter
cold, and we had a crowded drawing-room meeting, and
a Bible-reading on the Second Advent.
Tuesday, December i yth. —My beloved friend, Mrs.
U , the lady of the house, who rises at all seasons
of the year at six o’clock, was awaiting me at the break-
fast table at seven o’clock. Her carriage took me as
far as Ipswich, and a train to Kelvedon, from whence I
walked over deep snow about three miles to Coggeshall,
to take farewell of my cousin, Rev. C. P. Greene, the
Rector, and of Mr. William Stawell, who was with him
for Christmas. Crossing the snow to Kelvedon again
on foot, I reached London early in the afternoon, trans-
acted some business in the city, met the several members
of my family at Paddington station at half-past four,
and divided them into “two bands,” the younger members
going to Mr. and Mrs. Larkworthy’s, at Hampstead, and
the elder to the Bishop and Mrs. Perry’s, in Avenue
Road, where we had a most affectionate welcome. I
had to hurry from dinner to get into the underground
railway for South Kensington, to fulfil an engagement
for a drawing-room meeting at the house of my most
kind friend, Mrs. Leigh Bayly, where a great many—
some of rank and fortune, some of eminence in Christian
labour—were assembled together. The chair was taken


by the Eev, Carr Glyn (a man of true eloquence and of
earnest piety), who has succeeded Dr. Maclagan at St.
Mary’s, Kensington ; and the subject of the address was
—“ The sequence of events at our Lord’s appearing.”
Wednesday, December I Sth, was spent mainly in pack-
ing and in unpacking at Hampstead, and in moving our
things into apartments for Christmas week, closing with
a delightful evening, quite alone, at Avenue Road,
Thursday, December igth, was occupied in the city,
partly in arranging for our passages, &c., and partly in
visiting the best publishers in Paternoster Row in order
to get specimens of tracts and little books for friends
in Melbourne and Hobart Town. I purchased from
Partridge, Hodder & Stoughton, Shaw (who publishes
Word and Work), Hunt, Morgan, & Scott, Snow, and
others, and then moved on to the Church Missionary
House, in Salisbury Square, and to Tweedie’s in the
Strand. In the evening we dined with several friends
whom the Bishop had specially invited to Avenue
Road, among others, Rev. W. H. Barlow, the Principal
of the Church Missionary College, Islington,
Friday, December 20 th. —The outgoing Australian mail!
Then a meeting by appointment with Mrs. Umphelby,
who was on her way from Belstead to Cannes to spend
the winter holidays with Mons. and Madame Vaßs.
Then a return to the West End, to the Stafford Rooms,
Edgware Road, where I was engaged to give an address
on the “ Heart of Pity—pity for the doom of the un-
godly.” Then a little meeting of a more private nature
at 15 Melbury Square, the house of my very dear friend,
Rev. E. W. Moore ; and then a happy domestic evening
with my wife’s old Tasmanian friends, Sir Thomas and
Lady Gore Browne, at Kensington. Sir Thomas is brother


jg 2 Preparations for Embarking.
to Bishop Harold Browne, the author of the cele-
brated exposition of the Thirty-nine Articles.
Saturday, December 21st. —The Bishop and Mrs. Perry
were making preparations to-day for leaving town, so
that we moved into our old lodgings in Manchester
Street, and were occupied till about midnight in making
preparations for embarking all our baggage early on the
following Monday morning. Of the eventful Sunday
I must write in another letter.


lEettrr (Blq fjtecntjj.
A SUNDAY IN LONDON DR. DARKER CHURCH MISSIONARY
COLLEGE CANON LIDDON AT ST. PAUL’S HOME OF
INDUSTRY —ANNIE MACPHBRSON.
UNDAY, December 2 2nd. The dismal old
t burial-place on which we gaze from the back
windows of our London apartments was this
morning overspread with the softest crape—the crape
of snow. The streets, too, as I walked along at an
early hour from Manchester Street to Oakley Square,
were almost untrodden, and whiter with the dust
of heaven than any fuller on earth could white them.
I breakfasted with a friend whose kindness increased
more and more as the time of our departure drew
on, and to whom the Young Men’s Christian Asso-
ciation of Melbourne are indebted for a complete
and valuable tea-service, now in use at all their social
meetings. Parochial and domestic ties prevented Mr.
John White from accompanying me on my Sabbath
expedition, so that, taking farewell of him, I pushed on
to Oxford Street, Holborn, and to the “ City Temple,”
where the celebrated Dr. Parker was to preach. The
moment I entered I was waited upon by a deacon, and
shown to a comfortable seat. My next neighbour
* N


supplied me with a hymn-book, and so I waited—
watching a large congregation assemble, and settling
themselves, after their passage through the snow, which
was now falling thick and heavily without. The sit-
tings were not straight across from side to side, but
hooped in segments of a very large circle, and the floor
inclined from the main doorways to the foot of the
pulpit. The gilding and decorations of the ceiling were
well brought out by brightly burning sunlights. People
talked a good deal, but not irreverently, until Dr. Parker,
the great Congregationalist, entered—thick in body,
with a large massive head, clean-shaved face, and jet-
black, curling hair, effectively thrown back from a broad
forehead. We began with a hymn. He then read
Isaiah ix., which was followed by an anthem. Then
Luke i., a chant, and prayer, comprehensive and very
striking; another hymn, and then the sermon on Phil,
ii. 7:“ He made Himself of no reputation.” He grasped
the subject with great originality and vigour. For a
time the display of mental power produced sensations
akin to the sensations produced in the presence of
spiritual power. The doctrine was clear and sound,
and grandly stated. He so preached that he left
no room to conceive of a better or nobler subject for
that occasion, or to conceive of the possibility of its
being better handled. It was only towards the close,
when the theological portion of his address was over,
that he manifested tinges of Americanism and a leaning
towards vulgarity. It was now that his want became
apparent; he was not preaching under the Almighty
power of the Holy Ghost. He closed with a very
cogent appeal on behalf of the poor, and a good collec-
tion was taken up ; but I went away inwardly sighing


at the absence, as it seemed to me, of spiritual efficacy.
Great gifts sink like lead in the mighty waters, unless
they are buoyed up with great grace. When they are,
they are irresistible. Copies of Dr. Parker’s weekly
periodical, the Fountain, were given away gratuitously
as we separated in the street.
It was not yet one o’clock, so I made my way north
by the “Angel ” at Islington, and on to Milner Square,
to the house of my valued friend Mr. Eugene Stock,
the Editorial Secretary of the Church Missionary
Society. Besides several of his own relations, I met
at table a Palestine missionary, Rev. Franklin and Mrs.
Bellamy, and from their lips I heard of n remarkable
work which Mr. Pritchett, a London architect, carried
on at his own expense for four years past at Gaza. It
assumed such dimensions that a converted Jew has
recently had to be sent to take the oversight, and to
extend the operations of the mission.
At half-past two we rose from dinner, and Mr. Stock
took me directly to the Church Missionary College, a
little distance off. It was holiday time, and nothing
was to be seen but the halls and the empty benches,
and vacant sleeping apartments; but my eyes feasted
on the paintings, prints, and photographs of dead and
living missionaries, whose lives were all laid on God’s
altar, that by these “ the preaching might be fully
known ”to earth’s remotest bound. The groups were
classified according to the sphere of their labour in
America, Africa, or Asia, and as nearly as possible, if
I remember rightly, into two hosts—those who have
crossed the waves of Jordan, and those who are labour-
ing still. Portraits of two of the most distinguished
Principals—Mr. Green and Mr. Childe (whose devoted


son, Eev. Stephen H. Childe, is now at Waverley, New
South Wales) —hang in the dining-hall. Every visitor
must be struck with the -poverty of this most glorious
institution. The land is valuable, the walls are strong,
the work is effectual, the results, both present and
eternal, cannot be numbered for multitude; and yet on
that cold, dark winter’s day the empty college had an air
of want end austerity that made me deplore the Church’s
neglect and unfaithfulness. The great nursery of our
great society ought to have new flooring, new tables,
new chairs, new paperhangings, and everything bright
and beaming. Some lordly proprietors in England
would do well to unfurnish some one of their apartments,
and to send their furniture here. To the praise of the
C. M. S. Committee be it spoken, that not a farthing of
the money entrusted to their care has been spent in
luxury; that they have aimed at spiritual triumphs in
the training of their soldiers at home and in their main-
tenance abroad, and these triumphs they have achieved.
Mr. Stock then led me through a private door into
the apartments of the Principal, where I had the
pleasure of again meeting Mr. and Mrs. Barlow, who
are most deservedly beloved by the forty-four students
now in training. From them I heard a good deal of the
interior working of the college, of the city labours of
the young men, of their studies, exercises, and habits
of prayer.
Then out again on the street, and back to High
Holborn and St. Paul’s, where Dr, Liddon was preach-
ing a series of Advent sermons. His text was, and
had been, “ Prepare to meet thy God.” He was deal-
ing with the motives which should actuate the soul
towards a fitting preparation for death. His first


sermon was on the “ prudence ” of such a course ; the
second dealt with the “justice” of it; the third with
what he termed the “ reverence ”of it. The last which
I heard was a rtsumt, adding “desire,” or “love,” as the
fourth and highest motive of all, constraining to the
preparation of the soul in view of dissolution. His
words were beautifully chosen and eloquently set, but
there seemed a blindness upon his soul about the
Advent itself. He never once alluded, even in the
most remote way, to the returning of the Lord Jesus.
Had he done so, had it been his star of life, it would
have acted like magic on himself and on his audience.
The brilliant preacher would have surpassed himself
had he known that men were converted to God not
only “to serve ” Him and to die, but “ to wait for His
Son from heaven.”
It was dark as I passed along Cheapside and the Bank
of England towards the East End of London. My
destination was “The Home of Industry,” 60 Com-
mercial Street, Spitalfields. With the help of a few
friendly policemen, who seemed to know all about it, I
found myself at the door shortly after six o’clock. A
long row of illustrated papers ran along the wall on
either hand, to be read by passers-by, and bold texts of
Scripture filled the windows, I was quickly admitted,
and, on asking for Miss Annie Macpherson, was led up
a rough, zig-zag staircase in one corner of the huge
building, till we reached the top. It was meant for a
warehouse, but was tenanted first of all by cholera
patients, and was taken in 1869 as a refuge for street
children. Eleven years ago Miss Macpherson began,
she says, to gather in and care for “ precious little lives ”
from that “never-ceasing tide of human woe,” —first


renting a room, then a house, then four houses; and
then she took the final plunge of consecration in
February 1869, going herself to live in the Home of
Industry. This extraordinary edifice has now become
the centre of innumerable agencies. Nearly three
thousand children have passed through all its purifying
processes. Some go to English homes, but the great
majority to a model farm and to private farms in
Canada, where the Dominion Government report that
ninety-eight out of every hundred are doing well, A
band of “ lone widows ” meet at the Home every
Monday afternoon, and work at the children’s clothes
for three hours, at twopence an hour, and, after a free
tea, go away rejoicing. Hundreds of pale-faced match-
box makers come in here on Sundays and week-nights
for instruction, and the converts from amongst them
become fervent little missionaries in their own sphere.
On winter nights the poor parents gather in to listen
with delight to the singing and recitations of the mem-
bers of the Band of Hope. Eighty women attend a
mothers’ meeting every Tuesday. Adults of both sexes,
to the number of one hundred and fifty, attend for a
Bible lesson every Sunday afternoon from three to five
o’clock. An experienced Bible-woman belonging to the
Home not only spends her whole time in visiting the
sick and dying, but trains younger women for similar
service. On Wednesdays and Thursdays several ladies
assemble at eleven o’clock from their suburban homes,
and visit the surrounding hospitals, workhouses, and
infirmaries, distributing bouquets of flowers, with texts
attached, to the number of three or four thousand every
week. Before issuing forth they join in a prayer and
Bible meeting, to obtain strength and guidance for the


way. Members of Miss Macpherson’s evangelistic band
visit numerous lodging-houses in the vicinity of the
Home, and are permitted not only to distribute tracts,
but openly to preach in the crowded dens. In the
Home itself are several tiny chambers, where ladies and
others of proved devotion are permitted to come and
dwell for a season, that they may train and qualify for
isolated toil in after days, in home or in foreign fields.
Some of these are now in China. A coffee-house is also
connected with the Home, and one lady, of extraordi-
nary tact and courage, has gathered around her a noble
body of reclaimed drunkards, who constitute a “ Medal
and Blue Bibbon Band,” meet on Monday, Thursday,
and Saturday evenings, and most solemnly admini-
ster the pledge to others whom they are seeking to
reclaim. This lady is also accustomed to train other
ladies in the method of “ gin-palace visitation,” stating,
as she moves from one public-house to another, the true
method of deliverance from the “ devil’s chain.” This
branch of the work is called “ gospel temperance.”
Then, again, a lady has held a “ mothers’ sewing-meet-
ing,” exclusively for Jewesses, for the past seven years,
on every Thursday afternoon, and has kept a Bible-
woman to visit amongst them; and every day there is
a kind of “ council of advice and comfort,” to distribute
hospital tickets, to help the poor into situations, or to
bury their dead, or to put on a little bit of crape without
coin" in debt. Then there is a mission to the “ mari-
O O
ners of the world,” and a charming mission-house for
their special benefit, where the Gospel is proclaimed,
night after night, in nine or ten European languages;
where bales of tracts and of second-hand Christian
literature are continually arriving for circulation the


world over. Then there is a Sabbath embassage to
ü ßird Fair/’ the worst place, sailors say, in all the
universe. Two young city men, moreover, have a
mission of their own—an offshoot of the Home with
ten distinct agencies all at work; and last, but not
least, there is the now-celebrated “workers’ meeting,
which was instituted some years ago by Lord Kadstock,
and is continued on the third Wednesday of every
month. All labour is laid aside on this occasion. The
day is observed as a day of prayer, of rejoicing, of fresh
dedication, and of strengthening from on high. Miss
Macpherson’s mottoes are—“ Nothing without labour,
and “No debt incurred.” “Our supplies,” she says,
“flow in from time to time as required, and without
solicitation,” and her correspondence is principally
“ with ladies all over the world, and with those whose
hearts God has made tender towards the widow, the
fatherless, and the destitute.
Such was the house at the top of which I stood, such
the lady whom I was about to meet, A few paces
from the head of the stairs I was met by Miss Caroline
Stock, who works devotedly by Miss Macpherson s
side, and to whom her brother had most kindly intro-
duced me. She led me into a long and narrow room,
where the Sabbath “ workers ” were all at tea, between
their afternoon and evening labours. They all seemed
immensely happy, and some were reading extracts
from letters and giving little bits of information from
all parts of the world. Miss Macpherson was at the
far end, but made a seat for me beside herself, and
though she knew nothing of me, took it for granted
that I was quite one of themselves, and conversed with
me accordingly. Her great characteristic, as far as I


could judge, was love. It constrained her; it con-
strained others. It sometimes melted her as she
spoke. She made nothing of herself; it was all “ the
Lord,” and His goodness, and His faithfulness, and the
goodness of the brethren and sisters by whom she was
surrounded. A much-to-be-remembered half-hour
passed rapidly away; then she said it was about time
for the workers to disperse, and I rose to go; but she
had not done with me. First of all, I was to address
the workers, and when that was done, I was not to
return to Australia without seeing some of the “ sights.”
So she put on her bonnet and warm shawl, and
explained the building as we went down. On the
highest flat, the tea-room, one or two private rooms, the
laundry, and the kitchen; then next below, the girls’
training department, off which opened the ladies’ rooms
mentioned before, and beneath that, the boys’ depart-
ment, with the “ gentlemen’s cabins ” adjoining, and
the printing office; and on the groundfloor, parlour,
office, class-rooms, and gospel hall.
Now the street. A turning into a sharp lane, and
on that holy Sabbath evening this was what Miss
Macpherson showed me.—We entered, first of all, a
horribly black, dark room without knocking—it is not
the custom to knock in the East End—where a number
of persons, old and young, were engaged in fixing
artificial berries on holly branches for the approaching
Christmas. Next we entered by an open door a good-
sized place with beds or bunks on two sides, and people
lying in them, and a fireplace on the third side; and
this is where people, old and young, perfectly sound
in body, are bandaged up and dressed as cripples, and
from whence they go forth, morning by morning, to


deceive the wealthy inhabitants of the West End.
Further on, Miss Macpherson put her hand on a latch,
and entering, we stood amongst a gang of thieves, cook-
ing, eating, drinking, smoking. They all knew her,
and were silent in a minute, or greeted her with some
token of respect. Next we went into a women’s lodging,
where we occupied a clean bench, and Miss Macpherson
gave a beautiful little address from the Scriptures,
some heeding and gathering round, some heedless, and
one continuing her scrubbing of the floor at our very
feet.
Thence we proceeded to a mission chapel, where I
was introduced to George Holland, a man of whom I
have much to say, but cannot say it now, save only
that, thrust into the work by one who knew his capa-
bilities better than he knew them himself, he has now
no less than thirty agencies for God in full operation;
and his face bears marks, as visibly as any face I ever
beheld, of constant uplifting towards the light of God’s
countenance. He showed us a young man at the door
inviting in the passers-by and distributing hymn-books.
“ That,” said he, “is the son of a clergyman, and the
heir to £ 2OOO a year. This evening fortnight he was
passing by, ruined and despairing, to cast himself into
the Thames, when he was invited in, and heard the
Gospel of God’s tender love for sinners. He is now
taking his place at the door that he may save others
as he himself was saved.” We hurried on to the
“Strangers’ Rest” in Ratcliff Highway, and saw the
reading and writing rooms where seamen of all nations
congregate, and where they are given material for their
letters home, and tracts to enclose in any language that
they may indicate ; and upstairs we saw the nine rooms


for nine European nations, with wall-texts, and Bibles,
and tracts to correspond, and where Christians who
have the gift of languages meet with the foreigners to
tell them about Jesus. Lastly, the office and workshop
where canvas or cloth bags are manufactured in thou-
sands, and filled with the best literature ; so that every
sailor may have his little library ere he goes again to
sea. Finally, we visited two night-lodgings, one con-
taining about one hundred and fifty men, and another
three hundred ; none of them gone to bed ; all of them
standing about and moving like a restless sea, till Miss
Macpherson began to sing, and then all was hushed,
and men listened as they seldom listen in church.
Then back to the Home of Industry by a short cut,
which no policeman dares to pass alone, but where I
was safe, because I was with Annie Macpherson, the
good angel of Spitalfields.
As I walked home late that night by Holborn and
Oxford Street, the great thought in my mind was the
city’s need of Christ, and Christ’s need of consecration
in His people. Had Annie Macpherson lived away
from the Home of Industry, as she might have done,
visiting it only to correct, to inspect, and to advise, its
growth would have been small indeed. Its astonishing
proportions, its world-wide influence, all date from the
hour when she made her choice of this people to be her
people, and decided to dwell among them. This was
following close in the footsteps of Emmanuel, “ God
with us.” And this “ following fully ” is what God
wants.


letter Jlnieteentff.
CHRISTMAS IN LONDON SIR A. COTTON AND LADY HOPE
FAREWELLS ON BOARD THE “GARONNE” VOYAGE OUT
CAPETOWN ZULU WAR CAULFIELD ONCE MORE.
SON I) AY, December 23rd. —A great day for the
farriers ! The forges were crowded from the
earliest morning, for it had frozen hard in
the night, and no horse could move about until he was
roughed. Our carrier was, in consequence, very much
behind time, and we had the suspense of knowing
that, as it was Christmas week, a few minutes’ delay in
reaching the docks might make our luggage altogether
O o 00 o o
late for the “ Garonne.” It did arrive, indeed, long
after the hour for closing the gates, and yet, to our
great joy, the carrier brought back word that it had
been taken in and carefully shipped. After lunch I
went to Netting Hill, to take farewell of our dear
friends, Mr, and Mrs. Arthur Brown, of Queensland;
then to Kensington, to call on Mrs. General Lake, a
delightful and experienced Christian lady from the
Bunjaub; and then to Mrs. M‘Lachlan, of Melbourne,
who was residing close by, and whose daughter, Mrs.
Basden, had just returned from India, Back again by
underground railway to Baker Street, just in time to get


ready for a very happy evening at Mr. H. F. Bowker’s,
of St. John’s Wood Park, where I had the pleasure of
again meeting Mr. Hopkins, Mr. Kitchen, Mr. Fox, Mr.
Moore, Mr. Sharpe, and Mr. J. White, some of them for
the last time. Our subject was that one of never-fail-
ing interest, from John xv.—“ How it was possible con-
tinuously to abide in Christ.”
Tuesday, December 24 th. —Mrs. Charles Griffith (whose
husband will ever be remembered in this colony in con-
nection with our magnificent water-supply, and who
filled for many years the office of Chancellor of the
Diocese of Melbourne) came to breakfast with us this
morning on her way from Dublin to her new home near
Sevenoaks in Kent. Afterwards, with an order from a
friend, I went to the celebrated Army and Kavy Stores,
Victoria Street, where I saw the long line of noblemen’s
and gentlemen’s carriages ranged along the front, and
mingled with a wondrous crowd of old and young, rich
and poor, who were paying cash for every description
of merchandise, from Christmas cards to Christmas
turkeys. Thence to the City, to close a banking
account, to remit money to India, to pay bills in
Paternoster How, and to say farewell to a few godly
business men who had shown me much kindness dur-
ing my stay. It was dark when I reached Hereford
Gardens, near the Marble Arch, where I spent a few
minutes with my father’s grand-niece, Guilford
(now Lady Clanwilliam), a daughter of Sir Arthur
Kennedy, Governor of Queensland; and then, hardly
five minutes distant, a few more mirpites with Judge
and Mrs. Stephen, who had but just returned from the
Continent, and were soon to follow us to Victoria.
Wednesday, December 25^.—The London Young


Men’s Christian Association always have a breakfast
on Christmas morning. We sat down, a very numerous
party, at half-past eight; and as I was obliged to
leave at half-past nine, I was called upon to speak
first, I little thought, as I worked my way from
Mr. Williams’ chair to the door through a sea of
ladies’ dresses and gentlemen’s outstretched hands, that
they would so soon be according a welcome to another
Australian—our Melbourne Secretary, Mr. W. G. Marsh.
I reached home again in time for morning service at Port-
man Chapel. The Eev. Neville Sherbrooke preached;
and after partaking of the Lord’s Supper for the last
time on English ground, I walked to Hampstead, to
•wish Mr. and Mrs. Larkworthy and their children a
happy Christmas, returning in a heavy fall of snow to
the Stafford Eooms, where a small but very select circle
of Christians are wont to meet one another on the
afternoon of every Christmas day. Eev. E. W. Moore,
Eev. N. Sherbrooke, and I, were the speakers on this
occasion, and, wet and miserable as was the day, we
had a most interesting audience.
Thursday, December 26th. —Boxing Day ! —Spoiled,
however, for pleasure by heavy rain, which penetrated
through the hard layers of filthy snow, and made the
streets into a perfect slough. It was quite dark when
I left home at seven a.m., and Australian mud could
hardly be worse than was the mud on the walk to
Victoria station. I took train at eight; reached Car-
shalton at forty minutes past eight; breakfasted with a
large family party at the house of an old friend and
connection, Mr. James Brougham; took the train on to
Dorking, and there I had the great joy and gratification
of spending half an hour with my wife’s beloved old


friends, Sir Arthur and Lady Cotton. Miss Cotton, the
prime-mover in that wonderful story told in Our Coffee
Room, was married and away, so that I had to leave
England without seeing her; nor could I even see her
institutions at Dorking, from press of time and from
the rain which continued to fall in torrents. To the
genius of Sir Arthur Cotton, as displayed in his wonder-
ful irrigation works, India, Victoria, and Tasmania are
all indebted for supplies of water which would other-
wise have run to waste ; and in his daughter, now Lady
Hope of Carridon, he has given to the Church of God
a treasure which puts it under perpetual and still
higher obligation. Lady Cotton is sister to the Messrs.
Learmonth of Ercildoun.
I was back again at Manchester Street soon after
one o’clock, thoroughly wet; and at four o’clock we
drove to the house of Mr. Arthur Stanley, at Lancaster
Gate, where a party of friends were assembled for
another address, and to take farewell. It proved
afterwards that Mrs. Stanley was nearly related to
Mrs. Henry Ricketson, a friend and parishioner of
my own at Caulfield, though we knew nothing of
it at the time. At this most hospitable and delight-
ful home we met Mr. Thomas Learmonth, Captain
Baring, Mr. Pelham Burn, Mrs. Auriol Barker and
Miss Barker, Mr. and Mrs. Arthur Brown, and Miss
Waldegrave, a most tried and devoted Christian, sister
of the eminent worker and evangelist, Lord Eadstock.
The meeting broke up about six, but we stayed to
dinner, and had yet another domestic Bible-reading at
nine.
Friday, 'December 27th. —This was now our only day
in London. I had still a little business to finish in the


city; and Mr. John White and Mr. Eugene Stock were
the friends I saw there last of all. One more hurried
visit to the Army and Navy Stores, and on to Redcliffe
Gardens, where I took luncheon with our very old
friend, Mrs. Badcock, who then drove me to the train,
by which I hurried home, to find Rev. P. B. Power and
several relations and friends awaiting my return. At
half-past three I was away again to bid farewell at
Hampstead ; then, at five, with my wife, to the house of
Mrs. Seton Karr, at Lancaster Gate, where a few friends
had assembled after the meeting at Stafford Rooms, to
see us really for the last time. Mr. Bowker, Mr. Fox,
and Mr. Moore commended us to God in prayer; and
with the thought of Christ’s own “peace” (John xiv.
27), Christ’s own “love” (John xv. 10), and Christ’s
own “joy” (John xv. 11), being our portion in all
climes, and in every changing scene, we passe4 out
from the circle of our beloved friends into the shadows
of a winter’s evening. We called before going home on
Captain and Mrs. Stanley, our own parishioners, who
had but a few weeks previously arrived from Melbourne
by the “ Garonne.”
Saturday, December 28 th. —We got away from our
lodgings with considerable difficulty by noon to-day,
and reached the “Garonne” by three o’clock, vid
Charing 'Cross and Gravesend, We lay in the cold
damp river all night. My cabin was well forward, as
far from the screw as possible. My companions in
travel were a Shropshire farmer, and the son of a dis-
tinguished physician at Chiselhurst.
Sunday Morning, December 29 th. — This day was
beautifully still, and the sun was actually shining on
us as we went below to divine service at eleven; and


as the words “ The peace of God, which passeth all
understanding,” were being spoken, we felt a throb and
a trembling all through the saloon, which told us that
our voyage had commenced. It was mild and lovely
all the way to Dover, but making down Channel the sea
became very rough.
Monday, December loth.— It was blowing a gale all
day. We made but slow headway, and only reached
Plymouth Eoads at eight P.M. Fresh passengers came
on board at nine.
Tuesday, December 31s*.— We steamed out of Ply-
mouth Eoads at twelve o’clock, with 400 passengers on
board, in the face of a hard south-westerly gale. There
was a heavy beam sea, which became worse and worse
as the new year dawned upon us in the Bay of Biscay.
“On Friday, January 3rd” (says the nautical corre-
spondent of the Argus for 29th February), “ the gale
raged with hurricane force and in furious gusts. There
was a tremendous sea running, in which the steamer
rolled heavily, and speed was reduced to three and a
half knots, while the sea made clean breaches over her.
During the worst of the gales a fearful sea struck the
vessel and smashed the starboard-side light, besides
carrying away the foremost davit of the port dingy \ as
the weather was altogether too violent to enable the
boat to be secured, it was cut adrift.” Five days of
lovely weather after this brought us to St. Vincent,
one of the Cape de Verdes, on 9th January, where we
took in 480 tons of coal. When a passenger from
Melbourne to Liverpool, in the old “ Great Britain, in
1859, on my way home to college, I had spent a day or
two on this island, and I thought it very remarkable
that at the identical spot on the shore where, twenty
* 0


years ago, I had experienced a great deliverance, I
should now chance to meet with an English resident,
apparently the only man in the whole community who
made any effort to keep alive the memory of God in
that most abandoned place. He took us to his own
house, introduced us to his wife and family, gave us a
basket of magnificent St, Antonio oranges, thankfully
accepted a small supply of Christian literature, and, had
time permitted, he would have collected the English
for a week-evening service. There are about 2500
Africans at St. Vincent, with 200 Portuguese and 53
British; and of all it may be truly said, that “no man
careth for their souls.”
From the 10th to the 25th January, we steamed over
lovely seas to the Cape, having service at ten a.m, daily
in the saloon, and an evangelistic service at seven p.m.
every evening on the fore-deck, besides the usual Sunday
services. Mr. G. J. Stewart, a most accomplished stu-
dent of the Word of God, and a speaker of remarkable
vigour, gave me valuable assistance in the work on
deck, but the opposition to God’s truth from stem to
stern of the “ Garonne ” was beyond anything I have
ever experienced before. The question of “ separation
from the world ” was not left an open question. The
passengers decided it by word and look, and would have
decided it by violence had it been possible. It was
noticeable that after leaving the Cape, and on the very
evening of the day when the captain requested me, for
my own safety, to discontinue the evening service, bad
weather set in, making the fore-deck unfit for any
amusement whatever.
Table Bay was reached on Saturday, January 25th,
and Cape Town lay before our eyes, as we went down to


breakfast, under her magnificent mountain—a city of
40,000 souls—Hottentots, Malay, English, Bushmen, and
Hutch. Boats came off to us at once, bringing appalling
tidings from the seat of war. The Wednesday previous,
January 22nd, will long be remembered as one of the
darkest days in South African colonial history. The
morning’s newspapers had filled the residents with grief
and horror, giving the first particulars of the slaughter
of several companies of the ist-24th regiment in Zulu-
land. It may be remembered by my readers that Lord
Chelmsford had sent one of his five columns, under
Colonel Hurnford, with 3300 native troops and a few
Europeans, to strengthen the hands of Colonel Pulleine,
who, with a portion of the ist-24th, was posted on the
main line of road between Lord Chelmsford and Natal, a
few miles on the Zulu side of Eorke’s Drift. Almost
immediately after this reinforcement, they were attacked
by 15,000 Zulus, who swept all before them by sheer
weight of numbers, the native troops fighting and run-
ning,—the British fighting to the death.
We landed about eleven a.m., and drove at once to
Government House. Sir Bartle Frere was, of course,
absent, but we saw Miss Frere, who told us that her
mother was quite overwhelmed with the tidings they
had just received, but wished us to call again in the
evening. So we visited about the town, and having
driven out a few miles to the celebrated “ High Con-
stantia” vineyard, at Wynberg, we returned at half-
past five to Government House, and heard from Lady
Frere a great many particulars about the disaster of the
previous Wednesday, and about officers, her intimate
friends, who had fallen in the fray. As we left the
drawing-room we met Major Nixon, known, we believe.


to many of our Tasmanian readers as the son of the
late Bishop. He was one of several who had chafed
considerably at their detention in Cape Town, while
their more fortunate comrades, as they then deemed
them, were called to the war.
We had to get 750 tons of coal on hoard ; and as the
labourers refused to work on the Sabbath, we lay at
anchor all Sunday, January 26th. Several of the pas-
sengers landed—some to attend service at the cathedral,
some to ascend Table Mountain, the latter failing alto-
gether ; but on the following morning I joined a fresh
party at a very early hour, and, starting without guides,
we got into most dangerous ground,—most of us, how-
ever, reaching the glorious summit by various routes,
not much more than three hours after we had left the
ship’s side. The height was, I think, about 4000 feet.
The air was. perfectly delicious, transparent for miles
and miles to seaward and landward. Water to quench
our dreadful thirst was found in tiny little basins, worn
in the flat rocks close to the awful precipices that over-
hang Cape Town; and as for flowers, they grew in
marvellous beauty. Two hours on the plateau, and two
hours more in the descent by a well-defined path (which
none of us had heard of before), brought us to the post-
office by one P.M., laden with the most splendid speci-
mens of leaves, ferns, and mountain flora. We had just
time to post letters by an outgoing English steamer, and
to get comfortably on board with the rest of the pas-
sengers after a forenoon of immense delight,—in such an
atmosphere,—so near the heavens. We got to sea towards
evening, and steamed away (January 27th) for Adelaide,
which we reached on Sunday evening, February 16th,
and dropped anchor at nine p.m., as the words of benedic-


tion were being spoken, just as we bad weighed anchor in
the Thames seven Sabbaths before. The next morning
(Monday, February 17th) two bodies were carried ashore
for burial—one that of Mrs. Nicolle, who had fallen
down dead suddenly just as we were going to breakfast
on Thursday morning, February 13th; and the other
that of James Dickson, a steerage passenger, of Thurso,
Caithness, who died a few hours after our arrival. Both
were believers taken from the evil world, while hun-
dreds of the ungodly on board were left to profit by
further days or years of grace. James Dickson attri-
buted his conversion to one visit paid by a Presbyterian
minister, who called on him immediately on his reach-
ing Glasgow from the country, and to a tract which he
left behind him, entitled Learning to Float.
A visit to Eev. W. B. Andrews, at Upper Norwood,
to the beautiful Botanical Gardens, and to Government
House, to see Sir William Jervois, who had gone home
with us in the “ Stad Amsterdam,” exhausted the time
left after the burial of dear Mrs. Nicolle at the Wood-
ville Cemetery; and after a long delay we got to sea
at a quarter-past nine that evening. At three p.m. on
Wednesday, February 19th, we entered the Heads, and
received our first greeting from our old friends, Dr.
Williams, the health officer, and Captain Paseo, of
Queenscliff. About half-past seven we reached the
Bay, and were met just as it fell dark by my beloved
father, mother, and sisters ; Rev. C. Kingley, my locum
tenens; Mr. Bardwell, a trustee of St. Mary’s, Caulfield ;
Mr. W. E. Morris, my coadjutor in the Missionary ; Mr.
R. Mackenzie, superintendent of our Sunday-school; Mr.
j jj Davies, who had returned from the Ellore Mission
in broken health; and Mr. T. H. Armstrong, of Tiinity


THE END.
TAfp -
ty&lJO
College. We landed on Thursday morning in an open
boat (thus more exposed to danger, owing to a very
high wind, than w r e had been all the voyage), and
reaching Sandridge were met by the Rev. H, A.
Langley, who had come into the diocese since our
departure. That evening, after an absence of a year
and ten days, we had the great joy and privilege of
holding a thanksgiving service in our own church,
among our own people. They had been faithfully
watched over by a minister of uncommon judgment
and fidelity; and he had the rare grace given him of
endearing himself to the parishioners, and, at the same
time, of cherishing their love for the pastor who was
far away. We had abundant reason to reckon the
affectionate welcome which awaited us at home as
among the chiefest of the many mercies which had
sprung up like fresh and fragrant flowers all along our
pathway since we steamed out of Hobson’s Bay on
Sunday morning, February 10th, 1878.


WORKS BY REV. ADOLPH SAPHIR, P.T).
New Edition, Crown Bvo, Cloth, 3/6
Our Life-Day, Thoughts on John ix. 4. “I must
work the works of Him that sent Ale.”
“ A more seasonable book could hardly be supposed. It is a treasury of happy
and helpful thoughts.”— Edinburgh Daily Revie w.
New Edition, Crown Bvo, Cloth, 5/-.
The Hidden Life.
Thoughts on Communion with God.
“Full of rich, pure thought, and characterized by an earnestness and power
of expression seldom met with.”— Glasgow Herald.
“Quite worthy to take its place beside ‘Goulburn’s Thoughts on Personal
Holiness.”— New York Christian World.
New Edition, Two Vols., Cloth, 13/6.
Expository Lectures on the Epistle
to the Hebrews.
“ Singularly independent in his line of thinking, and unconventional in his
way of expressing his thoughts, the author has succeeded in throwing much and
varied light upon the high argument of the apostle. The book is a rare outcome
of sanctified genius. Readers of it will mark many a favourite passage as they
pass along, and return to dwell on it.”— Daily Review.
Small Bvo, Cloth, 2/6.
The Life of Faith : Its Nature and Power, ns
Illustrated in Hebrews xi. Republished from the Author s
Exposition of that Epistle.
11 Practical, deeply experimental, and replete with Biblical instruction.”
Divine Life.
Price TWOPENCE each ; Six Copies post-free for 1/-.
With Jesus Now and for Ever.
“Be of Good Cheer'd
The Christian's Memory.
The Early Days of the Pentecostal Church.
The Pearl of Great Price. A Bible Story for the Children.
Price ONE PENNY each. A large Reduction for Distribution.
“ Come Unto Me ; ” or, The Glory of Jesus in His Invitation.
The Open Door ; or, Come and Welcome.
JOHN F. SHAW & CO., 48, PATERNOSTER ROW. EC.


Every Thursday, Price Id., Monthly, 6d.
WORD AND WORK
A WEEKLY RECORD OF
anti JUJffori
Published with a view to further the work of Evangelisation, and the
building up of the children of God on their most holy faith.
Together with Accounts of Christian Work in all Parts of the World.
Rev. W. IT ay M. H. Aitken’s Mission Sermons, revised by himself,
appear in its pages.
“I think Word and Work looks well and reads well. Let ‘Word’
be as prominent as ‘Work.’ It is just what is wanted—more food,
more instruction than is usually found in papers which seek to
chronicle work. I wish it great blessing.” J. Denham Smith.
London.
“ I read Word and Work with deep interest, and believe it is being
used for much blessing.” —Home of Industry. Annie Macphekson.
Price Twopence Monthly.
SERVICE FOR THE KING.
IN CONNECTION WITH MILD MAY CONFERENCE HALL
uted bt Mrs, PENNEFATHER.
y fy Subscription, 2/6, post-free.
< _ W
O ¥. SHAW/fe CO., 48, PATERNOSTER ROW, E.O.
% *




