

bj r ut- ■» P?cri*.tJ-- > * So «-« Le, ’“vr iSy./ . » fc. 4.
ENGLAND AND HER COLONIES
CONSIDERED IN RELATION TO THE ABORIGINES, WITH A
PROPOSAL FOR AFFORDING THEM MEDICAL RELIEF.
The Aborigines who may be termed British, amount,
at a low estimate, to one Million inhabiting Australia;
one Million in the South Seas, including New Zealand ;
half a Million still surviving in North and South America ;
and two Millions in Western and Southern Africa; with
several Millions of the more barbarous tribes in British
India and its borders, and in the Eastern Archipelago
and Indian Ocean; it may therefore be safely said, that
our extensive possessions bring us in contact with more
varieties of the human race than is the case with any
other power; it is to England, therefore, that the world
looks for an example in the treatment of the coloured
races; but whether we regard the past or the present,
the history of these people is a subject of mournful
reflection. Instead of efforts to check the progress of
oppression in our colonies, we have allowed the spirit of
the early Spaniards to keep pace with emigration, and to
justify oppression the monstrous doctrine has been pro-
mulgated that the coloured tribes are not only an inferior
race by nature, but totally incapable of improvement—-
and there are some who consider them the connnecting
link between the monkey and man. Many who do
not subscribe to this doctrine, have fallen into a delusion
of another kind. They are inclined to the belief that the
extinction of the Aborigines is inevitable, that it is an
appointment of Heaven, and that every attempt to arrest
their doom, must of necessity be unavailing. In fine,
to use an Indian metaphor, that “ the coloured man must
melt before the white man like snow before the sun.”
Those who argue in favour of the general inferiority


of the coloured races, must have seen the aborigines only
in their degraded and debased condition— a people fallen
under the infliction of injuries and the exercise of oppres-
sion—cruelties which we have committed, causing deso-
lation and utter ruin to those who once composed the
most noble of our race. We have only to look at home,
and we find men of all capacities, from the greatest
statesman down to the man of the most shallow intellect.
If in surveying the globe in an ethnographical point of
view, intellectual power be the object of our search, we
shall not look in vain amongst the uncivilized; and if we
are in quest of physical superiority we must altogether yield
the palm to the coloured man. Is it to be wondered that
men habituated to a roving life should, in the first instance,
refuse to engage in pursuits altogether foreign to them?
To expect to bring the coloured man to lay aside his
erratic habits, and at once adopt the plough and the
harrow is inconsistent with past experience and the
records of history. If we refer to the period when
Rome was in all her greatness, we shall find that the
process of civilization among the barbarous hordes—a
class to which the British then belonged—was by no
means rapid. Step by step man has advanced, nor must
we now look for the instantaneous adoption by the un-
civilized races of the habits and manners of civilized life.
No rational mind will expect a change of such magni-
tude to be effected at once, but if time be given, their
improvement is certain. Civilization has effected, is
effecting, and will effect all that can be expected under
the circumstances in which they have been, are, and
may be placed ; and if the coloured tribes, instead of
being extirpated, were encouraged to locate themselves
and become civilized, there is no doubt, of their pre-
servation from extinction, and of their ultimate greatness.
This observation is borne out by the advancement in
civilization which the Creeks and Cherokees had made
prior to their removal from their patrimonial territory.


That the coloured man must retire before his white
invader, or in other words, that he is devoted by Provi-
dence to destruction, is an assertion as atrocious as it is
impious—impious, since it calls into question the bene-
ficent and merciful character of the Most High. To
crush in its bud the first indications of such a doctrine,
must be the wish of every Christian. War, pestilence,
and famine, and abridgement of territory are surely suffi-
cient causes for the decline of the coloured man, without
having recourse to mysterious agency: but we have
yet another—intoxicating liquors—the accursed “fire
water,” —that poisonous draught which plunges the
coloured man with headlong infatuation into the most
horrid scenes of riot and bloodshed—that fiend which
causes to flow with equal indifference, the blood of friend
and foe, and even severs the dearest ties of affection by
acts of violence at which the wretch himself trembles.
The same acuteness of feeling—the same pangs of
remorse which embitter the last moments of the white
murderer, accompany the coloured man to his igno-
minious grave.
Painful in themselves, indeed, are such reflections, but
they are still more painful when we consider how far these
acts are tolerated by ourselves, and that the amelioration
of the coloured man’s condition would inevitably flow
from a plan of conduct and treatment based upon sound
principles. Such a plan it is the fervent hope of this
Society, at an early period to lay before the Government,
feeling assured, that through it alone, really effectual
measures to this end can be carried out. With the
Gospel let us introduce comfort and happiness; let the
arts of life be associated with our religious precepts.
Since the first edition of this pamphlet was printed,
the Society has learned with great pleasure, through the
Sydney Monitor, which contains Sir George Gipps’ Ad
dress to the Legislative Council of New South Wales,
that the late Colonial Secretary, Lord John Russell, had


expressly directed liberal provisions to be made for the
protection and civilization of the Natives of Australia.
The following is an extract from Lord John Russell’s
despatch:—
“ I have not yet touched on the application of the Land Fund to
the protection of the Aborigines. It is my opinion that fifteen per
cent, of the yearly produce of sales should be so applied. It will be for
you to consider the details of the appropriation. But 1 must for the
future require, that on or before the 15th of January, in every year, a
report should be made to you, for the information of Her Majesty and
of Parliament, stating all the transactions of the past year, relating to
the condition of the Natives, their residence at any particular spot, the
changes in their social condition, the schools, and all other particulars,
including the state and prospects of the aboriginal races.
“ I shall transmit a copy of this despatch, with some other remarks
in reference to the same subject, to the Lieutenant-Governors of Port
Phillip, Western Australia, South Australia, and New Zealand.”
It was doubtless under the influence of the same enlightened bene-
volence which dictated the foregoing paragraph, that Lord John Russell
so readily acquiesced in the proposal for sending out a Commissioner
selected and approved by this Society, to investigate the condition of
the Australian Aborigines, and on the spot devise appropriate measures
for their benefit, and the common security of themselves and the colo-
nists. Had not the projected plan been rendered abortive by the
Western Australian Company, (for full particulars see Appendix to
Fourth Annual Report,) we should soon have had the satisfaction
of seeing devised and brought into execution a practical system of
civilization, the funds requisite for which Lord John Russell had, as it
now appears, already amply provided.
The Society's operations embracing, as they do, an
extensive correspondence at home and abroad, the pub-
lication of documents and papers, public meetings to
advocate aboriginal rights, interviews and communications
with different departments of the state, the presentation
of petitions to the Crown and to the legislature, neces-
sarily require considerable time and labour. But while
engaged in summing up the evidence that has been from
time to time laid before it; while the Government has yet
to be aroused to a sense of duty, long neglected ; and
while other important duties claim the Society’s atten


tion, whole tribes—nay nations, are being swept from the
face of the earth by diseases both of a demoralizing and
contagious nature —diseases introduced by Europeans—
poisons, destroying life at its very source, administered
by whites without an attempt at an antidote.
If we turn our attention to America, we find in the
early part of the sixteenth century, on the occasion of
an epidemic small pox, that “ the hand of God fell
heavily upon the natives, with such a mortall stroake
that they died on heaps as they lay in their houses,
and the living that were able to shift for themselves
would runne away, and let them dy, and let their carkases
ly above the ground without buriall. For in a place
where many inhabited there hath been but one left
alive to tell what became of the rest, the living being not
able to bury the dead : they were left for crowes, kites,
and vermine to prey upon ; and the bones and skulls
upon the several places of their habitations made such
a spectacle, that as one travelled in the forest, near
Massachusetts, it seemed to be a new found Golgotha.”
(New English Canaan, by T. Morton, 1637.)
From the census of 1699, just sixty-two years from
the settlement of Virginia, we discover, that the. natives
inhabiting that colony, were reduced to one-third of the
former numbers, small pox being assigned as the prin-
cipal cause. (Jefferson's Notes on Virginia, p. 153.)
It is stated by Humboldt, that a plague called Mat-
lazahuatl prevailed among the Indian race in Mexico,
in 1545, which carried off 800,000, and in 1576,
2,000,000.
Mr. Beale, the talented author of a work, entitled
“ The Natural History of the Sperm Whale, and a Sketch
of a South-Sea Whaling Voyage,” witnessed at Monta
Christa, in 1831, on the coast of Peru, a “ dreadful
scene of sickness and lingering deaths, and not a single
medical man of any kind resided among them, to relieve
their pains, and therefore stern disease, of which there


existed a great variety, took its painful course un-
checked.”
If we turn our attention to New Holland, a portion
of the globe to which both the rich and the poor are
now looking with the most anxious attention, we find
similar results.
“ In 1789, the natives of Port Jackson were visited by
the small pox, and the number that it swept off was in-
credible. A native, who at that time resided in Sydney,
on going down to the harbour to look for his former com-
panions, was described by those who witnessed his emo-
tions, as suffering the extreme of agony. He looked
anxiously into the different coves that they visited; not
a vestige on the sand was to be found of human foot;
the excavations in the rocks were filled with the bodies
of those who had fallen victims to the disorder; not a
living person was any where to be met with. He lifted
up his hands and eyes in silent agony for some time; at
length he exclaimed, ‘ All dead ! all dead!’ and then
hung his head in mournful silence. The disease was not
confined to Port Jackson, On visiting Broken Bay, the
path was in many places covered with skeletons, and the
same spectacles were to be met with in the hollows of
most of the rocks of that harbour. To the disorder the
natives gave the name of Gal-gal-la. Two elderly men,
a boy and a girl, affected with the disease, were received
into the colony, and nursed by the native above mentioned,
whose attention to them during their illness excited the
admiration of all. He took the disorder, and in eight
days fell a victim to his own humanity, to the infinite
regret of every one who had witnessed how little of the
savage was found in his manner, and how quickly he was
substituting in its place a docile, affable, and truly amia-
ble deportment.” —Collins’s New South Wales, p. 57.
Notwithstanding this, it was not until May, 1804,
“ that the blessings of vaccination were introduced into
the settlement. The virus was, however, almost imme


diately lost, and the colony once more left without a pro-
tection from that most dreadful of all disorders the small
pox.”—Mann’s Present Picture ofN. S. Wales, p. 14.
In 1829, when Capt. Sturt penetrated into the interior
of New South Wales, he found the small pox carrying off
the natives on the banks of the Darling in great numbers.
The following year on the Murray, he found raging in all
its fury that dreadful malady—the offspring of immorality.
Nor were the youngest infants exempt from the disease.
Indeed, so young were some whose condition Capt. Sturt
describes as truly distressing, that he had no doubt they
had been born in a state of disease. Sir Thomas Mitchell
has noticed the same deplorable state of the natives in
parts of the country which he visited. Mr. Beale found
the disease depopulating the natives of Polynesia; at Bo-
labola, in 1832, many laboured under the effects of gun
shot wounds, for which they have to thank the whites,
who taught them the use of powder and shot, but more
from the effects of a demoralizing intercourse with
foreigners. Men, women, and even little children in
arms, were suffering from the dreadful malady, for the
cure or alleviation of which they possessed neither know-
ledge nor means. “ These wretched people, who have
suffered torments of various kinds, without a prospect
of relief,” says Mr. Beale, “ looked upon me as an angel
sent from heaven to administer to their wants, and relieve
the poignancy of their pains. How is it that proper per-
sons are not sent out for this purpose ? If a small portion
of the immense sums that are annually expended upon
missionaries were devoted to such real usefulness, the
poor natives would indeed feel grateful for such bless-
ings, and their minds would be rendered more susceptible
of being impressed with a belief in the Christian faith.”
Not content with recording these appalling facts in
his Journal, this gentleman last year published a well
digested system for affording medical relief to the suf-
fering inhabitants of the South Seas. With much good


feeling, however, he has laid. aside his own immediate
views of a distinct and independent plan, and has now
thrown his talent and experience into the scale of this So-
ciety, hoping that, sooner or later, the suffering inhabi-
tants of Polynesia may be blessed with- the presence of
one of its medical agents. It would be well for man-
kind if their advocates were to follow Mr. Beale’s
example, in practically 'recognizing the motto that
“ Union is strength,” instead of forming themselves into
many separate societies, and exemplifying, in the words
of Berkley, that a “ divided force is a rope of sand.”
With these facts before us, we cannot doubt that
Government is bound to do, on behalf of the Aborigines,
all that humanity and justice demands. But if humanity
and justice appeal in vain, policy may prevail. The cry of
distress is at home ; to assuage the calamity we are na-
turally directed towards Colonization; but that Coloni-
zation will not prosper —will not he well pleasing to the
Most High, if, in taking nine tenths, we turn not to the
best advantage for our wards, like honest guardians, the
remaining tithe. The application of this tithe for the
benefit of the coloured races is engaging the attention of
the Society ; but if measures be not taken, and that
immediately, to arrest the progress of disease, famine
amongst many tribes must consummate the fate which
pestilence has advanced, and thus the efforts of the
Society may be rendered unavailing.
The Society therefore appeals for pecuniary aid to
carry out its views, and without waiting to perfect ope-
rations strongly indicated by necessity, it will, on an
increase of income of £3OO, send out to some portion of
the globe where unchecked disease is spreading desola-
tion, a medical man to administer relief, and as far as
possible, instruct the natives in the practice of his pro-
fession. At the same time it aims at extending its
operations as the success of this experiment, and the
means placed at its disposal, may sanction.
