

ENGLISH INSTITUTIONS
AND THE
IRISH RACE
:mi. toipb
Reprinted from the ? Melbourne Review ?
PUBLISHED FOR THE AUTHOR
MDCCCLXXXI


ENGLISH INSTITUTIONS AND THE IRISH RACE.
Everyone knows what is meant by the terms orthodoxy and
heterodoxy when applied to religious and moral questions. Though
the dividing line between them is always fluctuating, yet, roughly
speaking, we may say that the views held by a more or less
powerful majority constitute orthodoxy, and those held by a more
or less weak minority constitute heterodoxy. It is, however, not
so generally recognized that there is also such a thing as political
orthodoxy; that there are certain political doctrines which it
requires a considerable degree of courage to dissent from, so firmly
are they held by the great body of the community. Among the
doctrines which have already acquired this character of orthodoxy,
and are held almost with the strength of a creed, is that of the
natural equality of races, or, at all events, of the civilized- European
races, and more particularly the belief that, as far as the
English-speaking peoples of the British empire are concerned,
they are all on much the same level of intelligence, social
fitness, and morality. This doctrine also affirms the equal
suitability of English institutions to all of these races, and
rejects with indignation the view that, not merely the Con-
tinental nations, but an important branch of the English-
speaking peoples are utterly unfitted for them, and can best be
governed on totally different principles and by a totally different
method. As far as the Welsh and the Scotch?the latter of whom,
however, are, with the exception of the Celtic Highlanders, a purely
Anglo-Saxon race?are concerned, it may at once be admitted that
they have long since merged their nationality in that of the
dominant race, have adopted a similar religion and morality, and
are in every way as patriotic and well adapted for English
institutions as the natives of Kent or Yorkshire. With the Jews
the case is somewhat different; but their number is so small, and
their brethren of the same race are so scattered throughout the
world, that, though they have a distinct religion and a different
moral standard from the Englishman, they have no independent
national feeling, and can always be relied on to cast in their lot with
the country where they have taketi up their abode. No question


has ever arisen, or is likely to arise, as to the thorough patriotism,
and loyalty to the institutions of their country, of the English and
colonial Jews. With' the Irish, however, it is far otherwise. It is
only with regard to them that the question of race becomes
important. Only as to them can any doubt arise concerning the
loyalty and benefit to the empire of any of the races that have
acquired the English tongue and are allowed the rights and
privileges conferred on its citizens by the institutions of the English
people. Yet, so strongly has the liberal creed of the equality of
races taken root amongst us, that it is almost impossible for anyone
to obtain a hearing who ventures to assert the contrary.* In
Victoria, so numerous are the Irish, and so important an element do
they form in our social and political life, that, though a good many
Englishmen can see how baneful is their influence on our
institutions and our public and private morality, no one has hitherto
cared openly to proclaim what he believes to be the truth of the
matter. In view, however, of the important practical development
which the question has recently attained, both here and in Great
Britain, the time seems to have come when all temporizing should
be brought to an end, and Englishmen, alike in Victoria and
throughout the empire, should learn what is the truth. It is the
bounden duty, then, of any man who believes that he has arrived
at the real state of the case, and can plainly and clearly expound it,
to put forward his views, unwelcome and unpopular though they
may at first seem to be. It is the intention of this article to lay
down and establish, as far as the limited space at the writer?s
disposal will permit, the following doctrines :
That the Irish people as at present governed are a purely
baneful influence in an English community; that they are, as Lord
Lyndhurst strongly but truly put it, ? aliens in feeling, in religion,
and in blood,? and are, as a race, distinctly inferior, morally,
socially, and intellectually, to Englishmen; that they have corrupted
* Mr. J. A. Froude, the well-known historian, is, perhaps, the solitary example
of an English writer who has had the courage to raise his voice in opposition to the
orthodox doctrine of the similarity of Englishmen and Celtic Irishmen, and their
equal fitness for free institutions. He deserves the highest praise, and the cordial
support of every true Englishman, for the bold and fearless manner in which he has
propounded his opinions on the Irish question. Yet it is to be feared that he is
looked upon by the large majority of his English readers as more or less eccentric
in his views on this important subject. They are certainly far from having gained
that general acceptance which ought to result from the clear and convincing way
in which they are set forth by one of the most distinguished writers of the day.


and are ever corrupting our political institutions and our public
and private morality; that they have no patriotic feeling towards
the empire to which they belong; that they alone cling to a
religious organization that is year by year falling more behind
the aims and needs of advancing civilization; that our only
hope is to destroy the power of this organization and assimilate
this alien race; and that, as far as Victoria is concerned, the
simplest and most efficacious means of doing this is by firmly and
consistently carrying out the Education Act as by law established,
and strenuously resisting all attempts to check its operation or
defeat its purpose by conceding anything to the persistent demands
of an alien and hostile body and its unwitting and shortsighted
allies among the English and Protestant portion of the community.
It may be thought that it is neither a safe nor an easy matter
thus to frame an indictment against a whole people. It is, however,
an imperative necessity that Englishmen should be brought to know
and to realize what is the noxious influence that is slowly but
surely sapping the strength and degrading the tone of the nation,
ruining the noble institutions that have been gradually built up by
generations of their race ; and more than any other cause tending
to bring about a steady disintegration of the body politic alike in
England, the United States, and the Australian colonies, and, if not
checked, a fatal disruption of the British empire.
Before proceeding, however, with the argument, it should be
clearly understood what is meant by the terms Irishman and Irish
race, and how they are to be distinguished from the other English-
speaking members of a British community. By the words Irish
race, then, is meant, throughout this article, the Celtic population,
the descendants of the rude tribes that inhabited the island before
the English conquest, and also the offspring of these, wherever
they are to be found in English communities all over the world.
The man of English or Scotch descent, though born in Ireland, is
not here included under the name Irishman. The Protestant
population of Ulster is as much English as the people of Ayrshire
or Lancashire, and so are the men of English blood who are more
or less thickly scattered over the island. From the Englishry, as
they used to be called, of Ireland have come many of the great
men of whom all Englishmen are so justly proud. The names
of Swift, Berkeley, Goldsmith, Burke, Hamilton, Tyndall, in
literature and science; and of Wellington, Wellesley, Lawrence,
Napier, Cairns, Wolseley, Dufferin, among men of action, rank


high in the muster roll of England?s worthiest sons.* But
no one ever thinks of them as other than Englishmen, though,
by the accident of birth and the settlement of their ancestors
in Ireland, they escaped being natives of the larger island. In
the essentials of blood, and of all that that implies, in mental
moral, and social qualities ?in religion, and whatever goes with a
higher civilization, they are Englishmen as much as the most
typically English characters that the island of Great Britain has
produced. To them, and to such as them, these remarks must not
be taken to apply. It is with the Celtic Irishman, the true
Hibernian only, that we are here called upon to deal.-f*
It may be asked, however, as the dividing line between the two
races of Ireland is by no means fixed, since a certain number of the
English settlers intermarried with the Celtic inhabitants of the
island, and consequently some really distinguished natives of the
Emerald Isle may have had Celtic blood in their veins, by what test
are we to distinguish them, and to whom is the term Irishman pro-
perly to be applied ? The answer is clear and simple. A test exists,
which is easily discoverable, and which is for all practical purposes
complete and certain. That test is religion. Those natives of
Ireland, whether of purely English blood or of mixed English and
Irish blood, who hold to any form of Protestantism, may for all
practical purposes be classed as Englishmen. With them, as a class,
no political difficulty can now arise. Whenever they are
transplanted to a British colony, they show themselves as much
Englishmen as any others. Their social and moral characteristics,
* In our own community the names of Stawell, Molesworth, Hearn, and
Higinbotham will always, and justly, be honoured; but not as representatives of
our Irish fellow-citizens.
t Sir Charles Gavan Duffy, in his recent work on ?Young Ireland,? has some
remarks on the subject which are worthy of notice, considering their source:?? The
Anglo-Irish differ from their Celtic countrymen in not being a precocious race.
Swift obtained his bachelor?s degree speciali gratia ; Sheridan was pronounced by his
schoolmaster to be * an incorrigible dunce ; ? Goldsmith could not graduate ; and
Curran, when he reached early manhood, was known as ? Orator Mum.?? Thomas
Davis, perhaps the ablest and most distinguished of the ?Young Ireland? party,
was an Anglo-Irishman, being descended from an old English and Protestant family,
and, according to Sir C. G. Duffy, he was characterized by ?a simplicity and
manliness that unfitted him for wordy and aimless contests.? It is a remarkable fact
that, excepting O?Connell, all the most notable leaders of the Irish movement down
to Parnell have been Anglo-Irishmen and Protestants. The Celts have only formed
the rank and file of the party ; and, without the leadership of Anglo-Irishmen, who,
to their shame, have become Celtic in their sympathies and aspirations, Irish agitation
would probably never attain a higher dignity than that of faction fights and isolated
acts of personal violence.


and capacity for civilizing influences, are in no respect different from
those of the natives of England and Scotland. There is no occasion to
specify them in any discussion that may arise as to the attitude
towards the empire of the various races it contains. With the
Roman Catholic Irish it is entirely different. Broadly speaking,
there can be no doubt that the Church of Rome in Ireland is
composed of none but Irish Celts. Broadly speaking, there are
no Irish Celts outside the pale of that church. It is because the
Irish have clung so tenaciously to that church that they have never
been assimilated with the English nation. It is because they still
cling to it that they are an evil and a menace to every
English community where they have settled in large numbers.
Politically, socially, morally, and intellectually they are a distinct
and alien race. It is chiefly because no English government has
ever thoroughly realized this fact, and acted towards Ireland
accordingly, that, instead of being a loyal and prosperous
part of the empire, it has always been a source of weakness,
and may at some future day become a source of danger to its
integrity and independence. These may seem harsh words to
say of fellow-subjects and citizens with whom we are all more or
less brought into contact from day to day. But that they are
strictly true will not be doubted by those who have lived long in
Victoria, mixed much with the Irish, and studied their character,
motives, and modes of action. Nor must it be supposed that this
view of the question is prompted by any bigoted hostility to the
Church of Rome. Every student of history will readily admit that
that church has conferred great benefits on mankind in times past,
and was once perhaps the greatest civilizing agent in Europe. But
it has outlived its day, and is becoming more and more an incubus
and a hindrance to a higher form of belief for all who are
unfortunately born into its fold, and have not been subjected to
influences destructive to its power and subversive of its yoke.
More than anything else is the prevailing form of religion the
dividing line between the nations into whose hands the world?s
future is now delivered, and those who must henceforth belong
more and more to the dead and buried past. Hear what a
distinguished French writer, M. Edmond Scherer, writing in the
Contemporary Review for June, 1880, on ? The French Republic
and the Catholic Church,? has to say on this subject;?
? It is worthy of remark that a politician like M. Jules Fay re, though born a
Roman Catholic, should have come to the conclusion that the chief cause of


the evil destinies of France was its resistance to the Protestant Reformation.
The fact is, that the weight of an unsolved question seems to lie on those
European states which, three centuries ago, shut themselves up against
spiritual emancipation. They have to break off, in their turn, with theocracy,
to disengage themselves from the trammels of a dead tradition. The nine-
teenth century will complete the work of the sixteenth, and the nations which
are found unable to accomplish that revolution will fall into the rear of
civilization. ? ,
This is both strictly true and powerfully expressed, and all the
facts of recent years tend to confirm its truth. No one can study
the history of the Franco-German war of 1870-71 without seeing
how far France has fallen behind Germany in discipline, organiza-
tion, truthfulness, intelligence, morality?in short, in every quality
that distinguishes an advancing from a declining nation, a people
that must continue to march to an ever-widening dominion, from
one that can at best only hope to retain by great efforts what it
still holds. But, though this difference is, no doubt, directly trace-
able to the fact that, three centuries ago, one race broke with
Rome, and launched itself upon the path of progress, while the
other clung to an old and worn-out system, it was the deeper
question of race that determined why, when the broad-flowing
stream of European history broke into two ever-diverging currents,
the Celt should have elected to take that which leads only to
barren flats and shallow marshes, while the Teuton boldly entered
upon the one that widens out into the deep, open, and illimitable
sea. Though the Celtic race was the first swarm of the great
Aryan hive to advance into Western Europe, and had thus the
advantage of being able to take possession of the splendid terri-
tories of Gaul, Spain, Britain, and Ireland, it has ever shown itself
unable to hold its own against the more stable and moral races
whose destiny it has been to overcome and impart to it the civiliza-
tion and social order that it has never been able to arrive at by its
own unaided efforts. Rome, Germany, England, are the names
that denote the great forces against which no Celtic people has
ever been able to hold its ground. The Celts of Gaul were saved
from the yoke of the Germans only to fall beneath that of Rome.
When they had been completely assimilated by their first
conqueror, and had adopted his language and religion, it required a
second conquest?this time by the Germans?to impose upon them
order, stability, and civilization. It was a German dynasty and
aristocracy that led them on to the greatness which they subse-
quently attained. And since the Revolution, which in its deepest


historical meaning was an upheaval of the Celtic element and a
casting off of the Teutonic, they have been unable to set up a
stable and lasting government. The Celts of Britain and Ireland
had to yield to the Anglo-Saxon tribes that came over from low
Germany and took possession of lands that the inhabitants were
unable to hold against such powerful enemies.
Perhaps the best picture of the Celtic character ever given is
that by Mommsen in his ? Roman History,? book 5, chap, vii., in
which the greatest of living historians shows how strongly the
Celts of Gaul, on the eve of their conquest by Csesar, resembled the
modern Irish. It deserves to be read carefully just now, when
the condition of Ireland is daily becoming the most urgent question
for English statesmen. His admirable picture of the Celtic
character requires only some slight modification to make it more
closely applicable to the Irish of to-day. For instance, Mommsen
has hardly sufficiently dwelt upon what is one of the greatest
distinctions between the Celt and the Teuton, that deep ingrained
untruthfulness which is such a marked characteristic of the Celtic
Irishman, It is not so much that he wilfully and deliberately says
?the thinor that is not,? as that he seems to have an inherent
O '
inability to perceive what is true and what is false. The
boundary line between the two is in his mind for ever blurred and
confused. Hence, doubtless, comes the Irishman?s love of rhetorical
exaggeration and empty phrases, and his inability to make a plain
matter-of-fact statement, or to appreciate one when made by
another. For this reason, doubtless, it is that no Irishman has ever
made any important addition to the world?s knowledge. Another
marked feature in the Irish character is its strong tendency to petty
scheming and intrigue. This broadly distinguishes it from the frank,
open nature of the Englishman, to whom anything of the kind is
naturally repugnant, and is only rarely acquired by diligent
practice. While even the most cultivated Irishman seems unable
to rise to a large policy or a really profound diplomatic combination,
the most ignorant has an innate faculty for low cunning. Instead
of trying to obtain his object by straightforward means, an Irish-
man naturally prefers craft and crookedness. Unable to meet an
opponent in open combat, he tries to outwit and overreach him by
wheedling and ?blarney.? Connected with this peculiarity, as
perhaps at once its cause and effect, is the total lack of moral courage
(a quality quite distinct from mere physical bravery), which has
always characterized the Irish people individually and collectively.


As long as a weak attitude is shown towards them, they prove them-
selves to be aggressive and domineering; but, when met with
boldness and decision, they have no real heart for resistance. It is
in a great measure from not understanding this that the English have
failed so lamentably in their government of Ireland and the Irish.
No people is so easily ruled by a display of firmness and authority.
None is so turbulent and difficult to manage if allowed the liberty
and freedom from restraint that can safely be accorded to Englishmen.
A recent example of this is shown in the changed behaviour
of the Irish since the Gladstone Ministry came into office. As
long as the Conservatives were in power, and it was known
that nothing would be yielded to agitation and disturbance, the
Irish kept quiet. As soon, however, as the party comes in
that is believed to be favourable to a consideration of their
supposed grievances, and that, when formerly in office, passed
several measures that all Liberals fondly hoped would tend to make
the Irish worthy and well affected members of the empire, a
violent agitation is started, accompanied by the usual terrorism and
assassinations. The reason, of course, is, that the Irish have
never been able to believe that Liberal legislation is prompted by a
sense of justice and fairplay. They think it is extorted from the
Government by fear, and that disloyal demonstrations will result in
further concessions. It is both a weak and a cruel policy that is
being adopted towards the unfortunate country and its loyal
population, as, sooner or later, England must rouse herself and
crush the crime and disaffection that has lately broken out over the
island; and the longer she postpones doing so, the more severe will
the process be when it does come. Instead of stamping out enemies
that cannot be conciliated, the Government temporizes with them,
and alienates its truest allies, the Protestant inhabitants of Ireland.
To sum up : the Irish, in common with the Celts generally, have for
ages been in the position of a subject and inferior race, and have,
therefore, acquired the vices that always come from a servile
position. Now, when they are treated according to modern liberal
notions, they become a standing difficulty and danger to the more
advanced English people with whom they are mixed or connected.
Such is the mischief that comes of ignoring the cardinal truth
that, of all possible distinctions among men, difference of race is the
most vital and deep-seated. As a further proof of the inferiority
of the Irish Celts to the other European races, it may be noticed
that they have never produced a really great man in the


domain either of thought or of action. Their greatest public man is
Daniel O?Connell; but, estimating the character and abilities of this
Hibernian hero by a European standard, he makes a small and
poor figure. He can in no sense of the term be called great, unless
a combination of low cunning, boundless effrontery, a wide
command of the language of bluster and abuse, a faculty for
coarse Billingsgate humour, a considerable aptitude for rhetoric,
a glib fluency of tongue, and large physical bulk constitute a claim
to such a title. What really distinguishes O?Connell from every
great public man known to history is the low morale, the utter
want of principle, shown throughout his whole career. In every
quality that goes to make a great man ?judgment, foresight, prudence,
veracity?he was utterly wanting. He cannot even be allowed to
have shown such qualities as firmness and courage, with which he
is largely credited by his admirers; since he well knew that he ran
very little risk from a government that in our day has always shown
itself, in its treatment of avowed traitors, weakly tolerant and long
suffering.
It may be added that it is more the absence of principle
than the possession of ability that enables so many Irishmen to rise
to high positions in English communities. For, though a high
morality must in the long run be a source of strength to a people,
yet men who disregard the moral rules of a community obtain a
certain temporary advantage by so doing. An honest and truthful
man is placed for a time at a disadvantage in dealing with
one who is neither. So is it with the Irish. Deprive them of
this source of advantage, and the clan feeling that keeps them
together and gives to every Irishman a large body of supporters,
and they would remain what the great majority always have
been?the hewers of wood and drawers of water for the rest of the
community.
In asserting, then, the essential inferiority of the Roman Catholic
Irishman, his religion is used merely as a test of race, and not as
in itself a necessary source of mental and moral degradation.
With the few English and Scotch who still cling to the old faith
there is no quarrel; though there can be little doubt that their
religion has largely cut them off from the social and intellectual life
of their more fortunate countrymen, and to that extent has entailed
upon them a certain mental and moral inferiority. It is, however,
the Irish element in our population that gives such exceptional
influence to the one or two really great leaders of the Catholic Church


in England and the colonies. Without this such men as Cardinal
Manning, and Archbishop Vaughan, of Sydney?who, it should be
remembered, are Englishmen?would never have become the
important personages they are. It is because they direct the
actions of a vast number of unintelligent, unquestioning Irish
voters that we are compelled to admit their claim to be considered
a distinct power in the community. The baneful effects of a strong
organization like the Church of Rome in the midst of a people, the
majority of whom have been emancipated from its sway, have long
been recognized. How to deal with it, whether to leave it alone
altogether, as is done in England, in Australia, and in the United
States, or to seek to control it by the power of the Government, as
is the case in Germany, is one of the great problems of modern
politics, and has been discussed perhaps more than any other question.
The object here, however, is to draw attention to the bearing upon
it of the deeper question of race, which throws quite a new light upon
the subject. The difficulty that English communities have to face
arises from the fact that with them the vast majority of the members
of the Catholic Church are not Englishmen at all, but belong to an
entirely different race, though speaking our language, whose power is
greatly increased through the organization to which they belong;
while, at the same time, it keeps them from amalgamating with the
English and Protestant portion of the community. The question,
therefore, of controlling this church involves the further question of
assimilating the race that mainly composes it. Our difficulty is thus
far greater than that of the German Government, whose Catholic
subjects are nearly all of the same race as the Protestant majority.
Thirty-five years ago, this special source of trouble was non-
existent. The great Irish exodus, however, which has now been
going on for a generation, has brought hundreds of thousands of
Irishmen into every English community, filling the large towns in
England, the United States, and Australia with a class poorer and
more ignorant and bigoted than the lowest English labourers.
Wherever they are to be found in large numbers, they exert a
sensibly deteriorating effect upon the community. For though it
may be true that their numbers, and the low rate of wages which
they are compelled to take, have enabled much work to be done
that might otherwise have remained undone, this temporary benefit
is far more than counterbalanced by the evil they have inflicted
on the English workman by lowering the rate of wages, and,
consequently, bringing him down to their own low standard of


existence; and, to the entire community, by the corruption and
turbulence they have introduced into our social and political life.
We could easily have dispensed with the addition to our material
wealth produced by the railways and public works they have
enabled us to build, but we may never free ourselves from the
national deterioration and political difficulties that have been
brought upon us by the reception into our midst of these multi-
tudes of an alien and only partially civilized race. In Ireland,
England has at length found her Nemesis. She is now reaping the
inevitable fruits of centuries of feeble, ill-considered, and inconsistent
government, and non-recognition of the vital truth of racial distinc-
tions, It cannot be too strongly impressed upon the minds of
Englishmen that the Irish are not a mere variety of their own
race, that they have had no share in the civilization and progress of
our nation, that their sympathies are invariably with the enemies of
the empire, and that they are ever hoping for, and secretly aiming
at, its subversion and destruction. The patriotic feelings of an
Irishman may be fairly gauged from O?Connell?s most characteristic
utterance?? England?s difficulty is Ireland?s opportunity.? Lord
Lyndhurst?s well-known estimate is merely another way of putting
this, as ?England?s difficulty? can only be looked upon as an
? opportunity ? by a people who are ? aliens in feeling, in religion,
and in blood.? That it is strictly true will not be doubted by
those who have mixed much with Irishmen, and have noticed
the eagerness and delight with which, with few exceptions,
they welcome the news of any misfortune to England?s arms or
difficulty to its Government. It is no exaggeration to say that
there was scarcely a Homan Catholic Irishman in the empire who
did not secretly, or among his fellows, gloat over the disasters of
Isandula and Maiwand, and that would not hail with delight a
danger that threatened the independent existence and national
prosperity of a country that employs and rewards in its service,
and admits to the full rights of its citizenship, such an alien and
imperfectly assimilated people.
Another crisis is clearly approaching in the relations between
the two islands. It remains to be seen how much longer the English
will tolerate and connive at a state of murder and outrage that is
scarcely surpassed in the most lawless parts of the Turkish empire.
If they cannot make up their minds to put an end to it, they may
as well descend at once from their height as a ruling and imperial
nation, and let their place be taken by one that will know and act


upon the prime duty of a governing power ?the enforcement of order
and the supremacy of the law.
The fatal blunder made by England in her government of the
Irish has been in giving them English institutions. The Liberal
part} T especially has always fallen into the mistake of thinking that
a system quite local and exceptional in its character, which grew up
under peculiar circumstances, and which has never taken root save
among English people, is equally suited for nations of an entiiely
different character, and with quite a different history. It has
accordingly, given the Irish institutions altogether unsuited to
them ?parliamentary and municipal government, trial by jury,
and freedom of speech and of the press. These, through the
failure to work them properly, have simply intensified the evils
from which Ireland has always suffered ; whereas under a
firm and untrammelled executive which sternly forbad the
impassioned appeals of demagogues and agitators, and a judicial
system administered altogether by judges, it would probably have
been by now in a fairly settled and prosperous condition. How can
we expect the jury system to work properly among a people where
such a state of terrorism exists that jurors are afraid to convict, and
witnesses to give evidence ? It is simply a mockery of justice, and
while it exists Ireland will never have peace and prosperity. Again,
parliamentary government presupposes a national character that
has long been moulded to habits of obedience and self-restraint, and
that has had a gradual training in the art of administering public
affairs. Even in England and Scotland the suffrage has only been
extended by slow steps to wider masses of the population. It
could not have been given with safety to recently-emancipated
serfs; whereas it may fairly be hoped that the middle classes and
skilled working-men of to-day will show themselves able to work
the system with safety and advantage to the whole community.
It should always be borne in mind that in England, mainly owing to
the Norman conquest, an event that has no counterpart elsewhere,
parliamentary government slowly grew up and established itself in
the face of great opposition, and after centuries of strife?a process of
political training and education which even the staunchest Liberal
will, doubtless, admit to have been in the highest degree beneficial.
But in Germany, France, and Italy it is a pure exotic, and will
probably never displace the centralized and bureaucratic form of
government that has always, except in one or two minor states, such
as Holland and Switzerland, existed on the continent, and that seems


best adapted to the character and habits of the continental nations.
If Englishmen had not been deceived as to the distinction of race by
the fact that the Celtic Irish have learned to speak our language, they
would never have thought of giving English institutions to a people
whose national character and history is so utterly different from their
own. Mr. Gladstone some years ago proclaimed his intention of
governing Ireland according to ? Irish ideas.? To do this, it would
be necessary first to withdraw from that country institutions that
are quite alien to the character of its people, and that they would
certainly never have evolved if left to themselves. An Irish
national government, if it ever got beyond a state of chronic
anarchy and civil war, would probably be most akin to the despotic
military governments of Mexico and the South American republics.
We should see absolute and unchecked tyranny, varied occasionally
by violent outbreaks of the mob, ? Despotism tempered by assas-
sination? seems to be the highest form of government attainable
by the Celt, save when he has been brought under the yoke of the
conquering Koman or Teuton.
This is how the question stands, then, as regards the
relations between England and Ireland. If we cross the ocean
to the United States, we find indelibly written upon the pages
of their recent history the baneful and deteriorating effect
upon their institutions of the great Irish influx of the last
thirty or forty years. None more readily admit and lament this
fact than the genuine Anglo-Americans. They dread and detest
the alien and half-civilized hordes that have been poured in
limitless numbers upon their all-embracing shores, and to whom in
their innocence of heart they have granted, almost upon arrival,
the full rights and privileges of American citizenship. All thinking
men among them see clearly that it is the Irish influence that is
sapping the vitals of the great republic that their forefathers
fondly hoped would have been a shining light and an example to
all the world of what could be achieved by a free, industrious, and
self-governed people. What a contrast to the thrifty, hard-working,
intelligent German who settles upon the land and at once takes his
place as a true American citizen and a worthy member of the great
republic do we see in the Irishman, who, as soon as he lands,
naturally finds his place in the lowest and unhealthiest backslums
of the great cities! Congregated together in misery and squalor,
they form an ? Irish Quarter,? which becomes at once a hotbed of
crime and disorder. The members of it are, as soon as possible,


placed on the electoral roll, and forthwith become tools in the
hands of political wirepullers, corrupt municipal rings, and an
unscrupulous ecclesiastical organization. Wherever they go they
carry with them the same turbulent lawlessness, low, treacherous
cunning, lazy and thriftless habits, and degraded standard of
material comfort and social well-being. Against their countless
numbers and power of reckless propagation, what chance of
holding his ground has the native American workman, with his
higher ideal of existence to which he must attain or perish ?
It may seem a hard thing to say, after fifty years of beneficial
liberal legislation in England, but it is difficult, with the experience
we have since gained, to avoid saying it, that the great act of
Catholic emancipation has been a disastrous failure, and would have
been better resisted, even at the cost of civil war in Ireland. If the
people of England had known as much then as they do now, they
would never have given a vote to the Catholic Irishman. They
would have put down their foot firmly, and said?? We are
an English and a Protestant people, and no alien, or Catholic,
shall have a voice in the government of our empire.? Such
a course, though opposed to the liberal doctrine that has now become
orthodox and creedal, would have saved them from many of
the troubles and difficulties of the last fifty years. The
fact is beginning slowly to dawn upon us that Liberalism,
though it has been the means of working great and beneficial
reforms among a people like the English, fails altogether when
called upon to deal with the Irish. Liberal governments have
shown themselves even less able than the Conservatives to govern
Ireland. The unfitness of Irishmen for parliamentary institutions
has been proved recently, by the way in which the Irish members,
by availing themselves of the forms of the House of Commons
which have always worked admirably with Englishmen, have
checked the progress of business, made themselves by-words of
scorn and reproach to all English inhabitants of the empire, and
done their best to bring parliamentary government into contempt
before the whole world. The mere fact that there is an ? Irish
party,? a ? Catholic vote ? in every English community is sufficient
to condemn our whole system of government, as applied to the
Irish people. We never hear of a ?Scotch party,? or a ?Welsh
party,? or a ?Jewish party;? and yet, wherever the Irish are
settled in great numbers, there is an ? Irish party??a collection of
more or less crafty, scheming, priest-ridden, and thoroughly disloyal


men, whom, nevertheless, we admit to all the rights and privileges
of English citizenship. Should the time ever come when the whole
scheme of Liberalism, and the institutions it has shaped and
modified, if not actually constructed, fall to pieces, it will be because
we have allowed the deadly poison of Irish Catholic influence to course
unchecked through our system, corroding and eating into the heart
of a healthy, and noble political fabric. It is a sad and mournful
thing to every Englishman throughout the world who reveres the
institutions of his country to think that they are being undermined
and destroyed by an alien people that have been generously, but
thoughtlessly, welcomed to a share in the working of the most
complex and delicate political mechanism that the world has ever
seen.*
And now let us ask ourselves how are we in Victoria, our
institutions and our morality, affected by this noxious and
corrupting blight ? That it exists amongst us in its most intense
and virulent form, the political experience of the last few years
startlingly attests. The Irish Catholics have shown that here, as
well as in England, they are utterly unfit to have the political
rights and powers of Englishmen. They have used their voting
strength, at the dictation of their priestly leaders, to render any
stable and lasting government impossible. Regardless of ordinary
party distinctions, they have helped to defeat any ministry that
was not prepared to subvert, at the bidding of a priest-ridden sect, a
system of education established and maintained with the sanction,
and at the earnest desire, of the great mass of the Victorian people.
But this is only the open and visible manifestation of their corrupting
influence. Ever since our present constitution was framed, they
have been, by their want of principle and their incessant intriguing,
deteriorating both our public and our private morality. Nor is it
merely in the sphere of politics that they have made their noxious
influence felt. In our community there is no lack of that detestable
class who subordinate public to private ends, and who prominently
* It is a question deserving of more consideration from the historian than it has
hitherto received, how far the great nations of the world that have decayed and
vanished have fallen through the blood of the original conquering race becoming
deteriorated by admixture with that of a large inferior population. It may with
much show of reason be held that the downfall of ancient Rome, however long
postponed, was the certain and inevitable result of the small Roman nucleus, the
finest that the world has ever known, mingling with and leavening a vast population
of diverse and inferior races. If the doctrine of heredity be true, we can scarcely
reject this hypothesis ; and it also suggests the view that possibly the qualities that
have made the English one of the ruling peoples of the world, may dwindle and
disappear from a similar cause.


interest themselves in our benevolent and charitable institutions
simply for their own personal profit; and for such men, whatever
be their nationality, our Celtic fellow-citizens have a strange
affinity, and are ever willing to accord them support.
It may, in fact, be said that the idea of duty towards others is very
imperfectly developed in the Irish mind. Their morality is of such
a primitive and rudimentary character that they cannot get beyond
the view of personal or family aggrandisement. Even in their own
cliques and parties they are unable to be straightforward and true
among themselves. Although they are always ready and willing to
combine together against the outside public, they are never averse
to overreach and obtain unfair advantage of one another whenever
they have a chance of doing so. Morality, as Englishmen know it,
is almost a sealed book to the Hibernian Celt. This, if it were all,
would be quite bad enough. To have in our midst an alien people, of
different religion, and with such a primitive morality, could not fail
to be productive of great evil to the community, and to furnish
ample reasons for the serious consideration and interference of the
statesman. But, unfortunately, the evil does not stop here. So
frail is our human nature, and so imperfectly rooted in us even now
are sound moral habits, that contact with people of a lower morality
invariably corrupts our own. That this is the effect the Irish are
having upon the morality of Englishmen there can be little doubt.
It has often been remarked that the old English type of character
is becoming rarer and rarer. The man who conscientiously does
his duty in whatever position he may be, and never thinks of
claiming more than is fairly due to him, who invariably tells the
truth and can be strictly relied upon in any engagement he may
make?a type of man who used to be regarded as the normal form
of the Englishman ?would seem to be fast becoming extinct. And
we can only attribute this to constant contact with men of an
inferior morale. Before all things else, then, is it the prime duty of
rational statesmanship to devise some means of checking this ever-
growing deterioration. It is not too much to say that the assimila-
tion of the Irish is the first necessity to every English community.
Fortunately, we in Victoria have a means to our hand which
though not consciously devised for this purpose, is partially adapted
to effect it. This is the Education Act. By means of it the youth
of the Catholic population is gradually passed through the State
schools, and mixing, as it therefore does, with the young of other
sects, it must inevitably cease to retain any strong feeling of


bigotry or exclusiveness. At the same time, the Catholic priesthood
loses its hold over the most susceptible part of its flock, who grow
up with the knowledge that there is a whole world outside its own
sect which cannot be ignored, neglected, or contemned. *
Feeling, as they must, that their power is gradually slipping
away from them, no wonder the Roman Catholic clergy are doing
their utmost to overthrow the system that is so hostile to their
claims and pretensions. That the operation of the Act has this
effect there can be no doubt. The violent opposition to it on the
part of the Catholic priesthood is proof conclusive. It is clearly,
then, our duty and our interest to maintain the system at all costs.
The Education Act may be defective in many respects, and is,
undoubtedly, a great expense to the community. It may even be
thought by doctrinaires to be going altogether beyond the proper
functions of the State. But if, in the course of a generation, it
enables us to eliminate the baneful and corrupting influence of
Irish Catholicism, no cost that may be paid for it can be considered
too great. That the community is firmly resolved not to allow any
tampering with the Education Act is undeniable. But it is deeply
to be regretted that there are a few amongst us who are opposed to
it, and have, therefore, become important allies to the Catholic
clergy. Foremost among these is Bishop Moorhouse, who seems to
think that the Act is injurious to the interests of religion generally.
The great majority of the people, however, fail to see how a system
that teaches reading and writing to the whole population, leaving
religious instruction to be imparted at home by the children?s
parents and by the clergy of the various denominations, can in any
way be regarded as inimical to religion. It can be thought so only
by those who believe that knowledge is in itself destructive of
religious belief?an opinion that is surely not held by Bishop
Moorhouse. The one denomination that is really bitterly opposed
to the Act is the Roman Catholic, and its opposition should be our
strongest possible reason for maintaining it. Unfortunately, neither
the Bishop of Melbourne nor the other Protestants who go with
him are at all aware of the true character of their Irish allies.
With that characteristic English inability to enter into and really
* As an illustration of the effect of a high-class secular education, it is noteworthy
that the young Irish Australians who pass through the prescribed course of study at
the Melbourne University show an aptitude for adopting the English standard of
morality, and an aversion to clerical influence, which fits them to be worthy members
of a free state. In this respect the Melbourne University has done an incalculable
good to the community, and we can only hope that the State schools will produce
similar effects upon a more extended scale.


understand foreign modes of thought and action, they think that
they are supporting a number of their own countrymen who are
suffering some sort of oppression. As a matter of fact, however, the
bulk of the Irish laity show no hostility to our educational system,
and, wherever they are not prevented by the priests, they gladly
avail themselves of it. It is the clergy, who know that it is
destructive of their influence, that desire to prevent their flocks
from imbibing the knowledge and civilization of the rest of the
community, and strive hard to keep them apart from it. On the
other hand, every well-wisher of his country should aim at destroying
all sectarian differences, which are the greatest evils that can afflict
any community. The Education Act, more than anything else, con-
tributes to this end, and it should therefore be upheld at all hazards
and in spite of all opposition.
In conclusion, should it be objected that the views here
propounded are indicative of religious bigotry and a non-recognition
of the doctrine of toleration, it can be answered that there is
something more important even than toleration, and that is the
peace and happiness of the people. Before toleration can work
beneficially for any community, all its members must have attained
a certain uniform level of intelligence and morality; otherwise the
toleration is all on one side. The less advanced part of the
community gets the benefit of it, without having either the desire or
the ability to reciprocate. The primary aim of a ruling people should
be to raise the subject races to its own level. Then, and not till then,
can it safely entrust them with the full rights and privileges of
citizenship. The English, however, have hitherto failed to under-
stand this principle and apply it to the Irish. They have given
them their language, without in any way making them patriotic and
well-affected citizens. Religion has for centuries remained a line of
demarcation between the two races. They have thus committed
the grave error of giving to the Celtic Irish the power of influencing
the policy of the government that should rightly belong only to the
loyal members of the empire. The evil effect of this policy is now
becoming apparent. A large population has been allowed to grow
up in a state of wretchedness and barbarism, and with a chronic
hatred and disaffection to the government and the English people.*
* A most appalling, and evidently truthful, picture of Irish life and character in
all its primitive savagery, is given ir/?Mrs. Houston?s recent book, ?Twenty Years
in the Wild West,? which should certainly be read by those well-meaning, but ill-
informed, persons who attribute the woes of Ireland to absentee-landlordism or any
other merely local cause.


A. M. Topp.
1 .
3 1508 002A6157 7
This population has now invaded England itself, and every
community of English origin. Mixing but not amalgamating with
us, exercising all the rights of citizenship, but without any true
sense of its duties, no wonder the Irish are a grave political
difficulty and a constant source of anxiety to the statesman and
well-wisher of his country. No wonder he is impelled to ask the
question, how is the evil to be remedied ? That only by really
assimilating them can we radically cure it is clear enough. What
are the best means of doing this may not be so certain. But
at least we know that in Victoria we have in operation a system
of public education that is calculated in course of time to greatly
lessen the evil. Let us by all means, then, give it a sufficient trial.
Should it fail, it may then bec6me necessary to think of other
remedies.
Walker, May, and Co., Printers, g Mackillop Street, Melbourne.
