

ENGLAND
UNDER
, PROTECTION.
J
“ They do say we be puktected. If we be purtected we be
3TAABVED.”—(Lucy Simpkins, a poor Wiltshire working woman, who often spoke
> at open-air meetings of the distressed agricultural'labourers in the forties).
Attempts have been made to represent England as having been more prosperous
under Protection than it is now, and the working classes as having been better off
then than they are under Free Trade. The position of England under Protection,
especially the condition of the working classes, should be compared with the posi-
tion of England, under Free Trade, information as to which is set forth in leaf-
lets Nos. 2,9, and 14.
In this year, three years after the conclusion of the great war, the follow-
-1818, lug facts were brought before Sir R. Peel, then Mr. Peel, by the
Warrington Cotton Spinners.
“ The principal cotton mills here work from half-past five in the morning
till half-past eight at night, so that the poor children are called out of bed at five,
and it is nine at night when they get home, some of them being under six, many
under eight years of age We understand Mr. is intending to
send a petition against the Bill, though his factory has not worked ten hours per
day upon an average for the last three years, sometimes stopping two or three days
in a week, sometimes a week or a fortnight at once, and at other times working
eight hours per day, just as he finds a market for his goods. When the trade goes
well, he compels them to attend 14 to 15 hours per day. ..... He has now
V; 27 persons, from six to twenty-one years of age, for 275, per week, that is one
shilling each upon an average.” ( Parker's Peel, 259).
“ In Lancashire the weavers are divided into different classes ; and wages
1820. vary from 6s. to 12s. a week for 15 hours’ labour a day. They are nearly
destitute of fuel and clothes ; their bedding consists only of sacks filled
with straw and chips ; and their food is at once deficient in quantity and of the
coarsest and least nutritive kind.—But the condition of the children is chiefly
. calculated to excite sympathy and compassion. The necessities of their parents
f has occasioned their being employed in factories from the tenderest years; and
at this moment a very large proportion of the half-starved children of the
manufacturing districts, are shut up for 12 or 16 hours a day, to the irreparable
injury of their health and morals, for a recompense of not more than 2s. or Bs. a
week The distresses of the cloth weavers of Yorkshire, are, if possible, still more
severe than those of the cotton weavers of Lancashire ; and the combined opera-
j tion of taxation and the poor’s rates, has reduced the smaller proprietors and
* farmers nearly to the same hopeless condition as the manufacturers.


Perhaps, however, the silk weavers of Coventry and other places, and the
frame-work knitters of Nottingham, have sunk the lowest in the scale of degrada-
tion. Last May a petition was presented to the House of Commons by Mr. Moore,
from the Mayor and Corporation of Coventry, stating that the poor’s rates on the
landed property in the district contiguous to the town, amounted to 455. per acre
and to 19s. per pound on the rents of the houses within the town, but notwith-
standing this enormous assessment, the weavers were in a state of the greatest
distress. Many thousands were absolute paupers, and depended entirely fqr sup-
port on the rates. Of those in employment, such as had frames of their own, and
who worked 16 hours a day were only in the receipt of 10s. a week ; the second class,
whose frames were furnished by the master manufacturers, earned in all about 6s.
6d.; and the third, or inferior class of workmen, only from 2s. 9d. to Is. 6d. a week,
or from s£d. to 3d. a day ... It is universally admitted, that a falling off in the
foreign demand for British manufactured produce, is the immediate cause of the
present want of employment, and, consequently, of the low wages of the manufac-
turers.”—(Edin. Rev., May, 1820).
“ The distress which was prevalent in the manufacturing districts had
1826. already led to universal discontent. Every description of trade was dull.
The imports and exports were largely reduced. Thousands of working
men were thrown out of employment, and thousands of of others were compelled
to accept lower wages.” ( Spencer Walpole's History of England, 11, in').
Peel wrote to Goulburn (July 22), “At home the prospects are
gloomy enough. The great cause of apprehension is not in the disaffection,
but in the real distress, of the manufacturing districts. There is as much
forbearance as it is possible to expect from so much suffering.”—( Parker's
Peel, 415).
“ In Barnsley the wages of the working classes averaged only twenty
1829. pence a week. In Sussex the labourers were employed on the roads at
fourpence and threepence a day. In Huddersfield the people did not on
an average earn more than twopence daily. Labour was so cheap and so abun-
dant that the men were employed to do the work of horses and oxen. In Hamp-
shire and Cheshire peasants could be frequently seen harnessed to waggons,
‘ degraded to the labour of brutes.’” ( Walpole's History of England, 11, 531).
“ The manufacturing operatives of Lancashire and Yorkshire were, in many
instances, receiving only 3d. and 4d. a day for more than 12 hours’ labour,”
“ The people of this country had for some time past being suffering
1830. cruelly. . . . Statements of agricultural distress, miuing distress, and
manufacturing distress were made, echoed and re-echoed. Sometimes they
were met bj r qualified assent, sometimes by vehement contradiction ; but they
still continued to be made. But let governments and members of parliament
say what they would, there was distress, and very serious and terrible distress too.
Agricultural labourers were found starved to death, having tried in vain to support
nature with sorrel and other such-like food. In vain did landlords abate their rents,
and clergymen their tithes ; wages continued to fall, and had at length reached such
a point of depression that they did not suffice to support existence.” ....
and the quartern wheaten-loaf was lOd. (Molesworth’s History of England, 1830
to 1874, pp. 32, 51).
On March 16th a motion was made to consider the petitions concerning
“the Distresses of various classes of the Community,” and an amendment
to refer the matter to a select committee spoke of “ the national Distress.”
In his speech on the occasion, Mr. Huskisson acknowledged “ the intensity of
suffering and misery,” which had been endured and the “ frequent occurrences
of public embarrassment.”
In these years the wheat harvest had been very good. “The
1832-1835. agricultural labourers, though receiving very low wages, were more
comfortable than usual, from the cheapness of provisions. They
found themselves in easier circumstances with Bs. a week, and wheat at 355. than
with 12s. per week, and wheat at 775. As for all other working classes of the


•2i- 9- <7 v
kingdom, it was a time of high prosperity for them.
The prosperity reached
its height towards the close of 1835, when wheat was at Bss. 4d.” But while every-
body else was prospering the farmers suffered. The speeches from the throne
commiserated them, and Parliament discussed their case. Such was the usual
position under Protection to British agriculture. The farmers suffered under a
Corn law, “ which made them rich in bad seasons, and prepared for their
impoverishment in abundant years.” —(Harriet Martineau's History of the Peace ,
bk, v. ch. xiv).
Mb. Chaeles Pelham Villiers [to-day (1897) at the age of 95, the
1838. “ Father” of the House of Commons], in his speech in first bringing for-
ward the question of the Repeal of the Corn Laws (March 15th), said: —
“ At this very moment there are thousands of persons suffering the greatest priva-
tions from no other circumstance than from their trade having passed into the
hands of foreigners. ... In Nottingham, for instance, how many are now
enduring the greatest distress from the loss of the Hosiery trade, of which they
have been successfully deprived by the Germans ? . . There is hardly a branch
of our trade that has not been affected by foreign competition. We find from
authenticated returns that all the countries that we have compelled by our re-
strictive system to engage in the cotton manufacture are, after several years’
experience, not only able to maintain their ground, but are also making progress.
. . . Whole branches of the Hardware Trade have left Sheffield, and are now
carried on in the provinces of Rhenish Prussia.”
In the following year referring to the competition of Switzerland, among
1839. others, Mb. Villiers, said, (House of Commons, February 19th, 1839). —
“We find that though formerly we supplied her with goods and yarns,
she now takes but little from us, and only the finest description of goods ; and
that not only does she supply herself, but that she also exports three-quarters of
what she produces, and meets us successfully in the Italian, Levant, and North
American markets.”
This year was one of bad harvest. The position of the people was des-
-1841. cribed by Mb. Macaulay in a speech at Edinburgh on the 2nd
December, 1846 :—“ In 1841 the capitalist was doubtless distressed. But
will anybody tell me that the capitalist was the only sufferer, or the chief sufferer?
Have we forgotten what was the condition of the working people in that unhappy
year 1 So visible was the misery of the manufacturing towns that a man of sensi-
bility could hardly bear to pass through them. Everywhere he found filth and
nakedness, and plaintive voices and wasted forms, and haggard faces. Politicians
who had never been thought alarmists began to tremble for the very foundations
of society. First the mills were put on short time. Then they ceased to work at
all. Then went to pledge the scanty property of the artisan ; first his little luxu-
ries, then his comforts, then his necessaries. The hovels were stripped till they
were as bare as the wigwam of a Dogribbed Indian.”
“ The distress had now so deepened in the manufacturing districts as to
1842. render it clearly inevitable that many must die, and a multitude be
lowered to a state of sickness and irritability from want of food ; while
there seemed no chance of any member of the manufacturing classes coming out
of the struggle at last with a vestige of property, wherewith tq, begin the world
again. The pressure had long extended beyond the interests first affected, and,
when the new Ministry came into power, there seemed to be no class that was not
threatened with ruin. In Carlisle the Committee of Inquiry reported that a
fourth of the population was in a state bordering on starvation—actually certain
to die of famine unless relieved by extraordinary exertions. In the woollen
districts of Wiltshire, the allowance to the independent labourer was not two-
thirds of the minimum in the workhouse, and the large existing population con-
sumed only a fourth of the bread and meat required by the much smaller popula-
tion of 1820. In Stockport, more than half the master spinners had failed before
the close of 1842 ; dwelling-houses to the number of 3,000 were shut up, and the
occupiers of many hundreds more were unable to pay rates at all. Five thousand


s [Af-y?
f i«3Uo
persona were walking the streets in compulsory idleness; and the Burnley
guardians wrote to the Secretary of State that the distress was far beyond their
management; so that a Government commissioner and Government funds were
sent down without delay. . . . At Leeds, the pauper stone-heap amounted to
150,000 tons ; and the guardians offered the paupers 6s. per week for doing nothing,
rather than 7s. 6d. per week for stone breaking. The millwrights and other
trades were offering a premium on emigration, to induce their ‘hands’ to go
away. At Hinkley, one-third of the inhabitants were paupers; more .than a fifth of
the houses stood empty ; and there was not work enough in the place to employ
properly one-third of the weavers. In Dorsetshire, a man and his wife had for
wages 2s. 6d. per week and three loaves ; and the ablest labourer had 6s. or 7s.” —
(Harriet Martineau's History of England during the Thirty Years' Peace , ISIG
to 1846—London 1850. Bk. vi. ch. v.)
At Hereford (July 26th, 1843), Mb. Cobden said:—“Two or three years
ago we were in great distress in the North of England ; the townspeople
were all turned paupers or beggared, and the poor-rates were raised 100 per
cent, throughout those districts. In the borough which I represent one-half of
the manufacturers failed, and the remainder were paying £7,000 a week less last
year than they did in 1836. Think of that! £7,000 a week less in wages, or
£360,000 a year less in 1842 than in 1836.”
Peel wrote to Croker (August 3rd.) —“Without improvement; we are on
the brink of convulsion, or something very like it.”
On October 30th Peel wrote, “The danger is not low price from the
tariff, but low price from the inability to consume—from the poor man giving up
his pint of beer, and the man in middling station giving up his joint of meat.”
—(broker Corr., 11., p. 391.)
1R44 a s P eec h Oovent Garden Theatre Mb. Daniel O’Connell said:—
i 044, “What is the meaning of ‘Protection’? Protection means an additional
sixpence for each loaf ; that is the Irish of it. . . . Protection is the English for
sixpence; and what is worse it is the English for an extorted sixpence. The real
meaning of ‘ protection’, therefore, is robbery, robbery of the poor by the rich. . .
1 speak from my own knowledge of Ireland, and as one of the representatives of
Ireland, and, I say that if the Corn Law was of any use anywhere, it would be
valuable in Ireland, which is essentially an agricultural country. If that enactment
raised wages anywhere, it would do so in a country purely agricultural. But are
wages raised in Ireland in consequence of its existence ? Oh no, for, unhappily,
you can get men to work there for fourpence a day. The labourer there thinks he
is a bountiful benefactor who pays him sixpence a day ; and he feels supremely
blessed if he gets eightpence a day. . . What is worse, there is very little employ-
ment for the labourer even at these rates.”
By the Corn Law Repeal Act of 1846, Protection as a system ceased,
though some remnants of Protection were left for about twenty years longer.
LEAFLET No. 15, ISSUED BY
£bc jfrcc Grabe league of IDictoria ( DECEMBBIf L 394.)
The objects of the League are to disseminate a knowledge of the
principles and advantages of Free Trade, and to procure by constitutional means
the ultimate abandonment of a protectionist policy.
The annual subscription is not less than 2s. 6d,, and is due on the Ist of
January every year.
T. G. Ramsay <fe Co,, Printers, 87 King Street, Melbourne.
