

UNDER
FREE TRADE
f^~?S^OU3U
& ' 7 Q\j
M J?SS/ // $
ENGLAND ’’
“ Protection ” —as our present policy of restricting trade is called—is
recommended to the working classes of Victoria as the means of protecting them
from having to work extremely long hours for an extremely small wage, in com-
petition with the “ pauper labour ” of Europe. Passing by the fact that, under
our present high tariff, employment is difficult to find, while wages are exceedingly
low, it may be pointed out that in the mother country, since she renounced so-called
“ Protection,” wages have risen and the hours of work have decreased, while the
condition of the general mass of the people shows a great improvement. Not
only leading statisticians like Mb. Giffen but Radical Politicians and
Labode Membees of Pabliament have borne testimony to this effect.
In the United Kingdom the experience of half a century has been so
favourable to Free Trade that Protection has been declared to be dead. Protection
does not protect the working man, and if he does not destroy Protection, Pro-
tection will destroy him.
The following opinions on the condition of England under Free Trade
should be carefully considered by every man, even if he regard only his own
interests.
MR- GLADSTONE, speaking of the change from Protection to Free
Trade, said:—“The result of that has been, that instead of ruin and
destruction, the trade of the country has been multiplied about five times over;
that the population of the country since that time has fully doubled, and it has
not only doubled in numbers, but has been enormously raised in material condition
and I rejoice to think in social, political and moral condition.” —(1890).
MR. H. H. ASQUITH (Home Secretary in the present Liberal Govern-
ment): —“ The principle of Free Trade is deeply rooted in reason and abundantly
justified by experience. There is no class in the community . . . which has
profited more largely in the growth of its national comforts, and in the rise of its
real remuneration, than the labour class from the policy of Free Trade.” —(1894)
SIR LYON PLAYFAIR (when Liberal member for South Leeds) said that
during the last fifty years “ working men, as a whole, have had a rise in wages
ranging from 20 per cent, in most cases 50 per cent., and in some cases 100 per
cent. Their hours of labour have been shortened, and the necessaries of life,
except in meat and house-rent, have declined in price. Their life has been
extended three years by lessened mortality. Education has been greatly extended,
and is now free. Pauperism and crime have greatly diminished. Thrift is steadily
growing, for there is a vast increase of depositors in the savings banks. Chief among
the conquests of the people is the emancipation of labour from State protection.
Free Trade has given great stability to all our industries, because it has founded
them on the natural advantages of the country, and the practical aptitudes of the
people, instead of resting them upon artificial regulations of Parliament, formerly
made in the interests of some of us, and not upon those of all of us.” (1891).


Suiuo ,
M 00/;^
f MR. THOMAS BURT, M,P. (Secretary to the Board of Trade in the present
Liberal Government, and for 27 years Secretary of the Northumberland Miner’s
Association) —“ It was stated that Ihe social inequalities of our country were
on the increase, that the rich were getting richer and the poor poorer. But that was
all nonsense. Though there were many evils still existing, there was less pauperism
more well-to-do people than probably at any time in our history.” (1890.)
*
This opinion, expressed in times of prosperity, Mr. Burt repeated in 1892,
when he said that Protection had been suggested as a remedy for the then
existing trade depression, but he honed working people would have nothing
to do with it.
CHARLES BRADLAUGH :—« The improvement in this country was
marvellous. The dwellings of the great mass of the workers, the education and
the general tone of the people was, as comparedwith the time when he was a lad,
something of which every inhabitant of the United Kingdom might be proud.”—
(House of Commons, 1890).
MR. J. H. WILSON, M.P.(National Sailors’ and Firemen’s Union): —“ Hav-
ing travelled in all parts of the world he had not found that Protection had benefited
the workmen of other countries, and he did not believe that it would in any way
benefit the workmen of this country.”—(House of Commons, 1893).
MR. RILEY (Herefordshire Agricultural Labourers’ Union): —“ Both the
town worker and the agricultural labourer had made up their minds that the remedy
for the depression, not only agricultural but industrial in every sense, did not lie in
the lines of Protection at all.”—(Agricultural Conference, 1892).
„ A meeting of Gladstonian Liberal Members of Parliament con-
nected with Agriculture resolved that: —“ A return of Protection in any
form would be injurious to the country at large, and, in face of the opposition of
consumers, is wholly impracticable.”—(lB92).
MR. PRENDERGAST, M.L.A. (late President of the Melbourne Trades
Hall Council): —J udging by the hours of labour and rate of wages obtaining on
all works within the jurisdiction of the London County Council, “ the status of the
English workman was much in advance of that of the workman of this country. ,
. . As to the union rates of wages in London . . 10 Jd. an hour was paid to
plumbers, the maximum hours of labour per week in that trade being 47 in summer
and 42 in winter. Carpenters receive 9£d. an hour, and watermen and lightermen
from 6s. to Bs. a day. These wages were almost equal to those paid in the most pros-
perous times that Victoria had ever seen , and were now obtaining in various parts of
England, Ireland, and Scotland.”—(February 11th, 1894).
“Under Free Trade England’s productions become more diversified every ten
years, and she depends less and less upon a few great branches of industry.”—
(.Economist , 1893).
“THE REAL MEANING OF ‘PROTECTION’ IS ‘ROBBERY.’”—
fiANIEL O’CONNELL (1843.)
LEAFLET No. 2 ISSUED BY
£he jfree £rafce Xeaoue of IDictona
(FOUNDED DECEMBER, 1894).
The objects op the League are to disseminate a knowledge of the
principles and advantages of Free Trade, and to procure by constitutional means
the ultimate abandonment of a protectionist policy.
The annual subscription is not less than 2s. 6d., and is due on the Ist of
January every year.
T. G. Ramsay & Co., Printers, Melbourne.
