

■pfi'TVf PPUvt
C \ OU'O'.—
ENGLAND H,X
t4s, J
AND THE N.
NEW ZEALANDERS.
PART I.
REMARKS UPON A DESPATCH FROM
THE RIGHT HON. EARL GREY,
Governor Grey, dated Deo. 23. ]B4G-
BISHOPS’ AUCKLAND :
PRINTED AT THE COLLEGE PRESS.


CONTENTS.
I. Proof that Earl Grey’s instructions involve a breach
of the National Faith of Britain.
11. Proof that Earl Grey's instructions involve a vio-
lation of established Earn.
111. A Protest against the general doctrine put forth by
Earl Grey, as the principle upon which Colonization should
be henceforward conducted by Britain.
Together with an Appendix of practical considerations.


ENGLAND AND THE NEW ZEALANDERS.
I. Proof that Earl Grey’s instructions in volve a breach of
the National Faith of Britain.
1. The circumstances under which our connection with New
Zealand commenced are clearly stated in the following words
of Sir Robert Peel. *
“ In 1834 there had been a strong feeling on the part of the
public of this Country, that England was chargeable with in-
justice in its treatment of the Aborigines. —Sir Fowell Buxton
moved in 1834, in this house, an address to the Crown to this
effect: “ That deeply impressed with the duty of acting on
the principles of justice and humanity with the Native Inha-
bitants of British Colonial Settlements, we call upon the
Crown to adopt different principles from those which have
been heretofore acted upon in some of our Colonial Establish-
ments.”
“In 183(1, a Select Committee was appointed at the instance
of the same Sir Fowell Buxton ; evidence was taken in that
year, and a Report was made in 1837 —a most full and able
document detailing the result of our relations with the na-
tives in some of our Colonial Settlements, which made a deep
impression on the Country. This is one of their observations.
“It may be presumed that the Native Inhabitants of any land
have an incontrovertible right to their own soil—a sacred right,
which however, appears not to have been understood by this
Country.” t
• Debate on N. Z. June, 1845, p. 239. f Report, p. 5.


“That Report was made in 1837) and in 1839 arose the
question whether we should form new relations with New
Zealand. The Marquis of Normanby was acting under the
influence of the recommendations contained in that Report.
“The first Despatch which Lord Normanby wrote, referred
expressly to the Report of your Select Committee and your
adoption of the principles of that Report, which had made a
deep impression on the public mind, with regard to the rela-
tions you should establish with the Aboriginal Natives, of
any Country in which you might form a Settlement.—\ ou
agreed to the address praying the Crown to protect the rights
of the Aborigines ; You are responsible for the appointment
of these Committees ; and you are responsible for the doctrines
laid down in their Reports, for you adopted them.”
“Lord Normanby says : “The ministers of the Crown have
deferred to the advice of the Committee appointed by the
House of Commons, in the year 1836, to inquire into the state
of the Aborigines residing in the vicinity of our Colonial Settle-
ments ; and have concurred with that Committee in think-
ing that the increase of national wealth and power, promised
by the acquisition of New Zealand, would be a most inadequate
compensation for the injury that must be inflicted on this
kingdom itself by embarking in a measure essentially unjust,
and but too certainly fraught with calamity to a numerous
and inoffensive people, whose title to the soil and sovereignty
of New Zealand is indisputable, and has been solemnly recog-
nized by the British Government.” X The Report of the
Commitee had said that the right of the Natives to their Coun-
try is incontrovertible, and Lord Normanby, in establishing
his relations with New Zealand, refers to the Report of the
Committee and states that the right of the people of New
* Pari. Pap. April, 1846. p. 87-


Zealand to the soil and sovereignty of the Islands is indispu-
table.
“Then you acknowledged New Zealand as a Sovereign and
Independent State. Now I think that you were wrong in
doing so.' —These however are the engagements which we
formed, and by which we must be bound.”
“Look at the instructions that were given in 1839 to Captain
Hobson.§ “ The Queen in common with her Majesty’s pre-
decessor disclaims for herself every pretence to seize on the
Islands, or to govern them as a part of the dominions of Great
Britain, unless the free and intelligent consent of the Natives
expressed according to their established usages be obtain-
ed. Her Majesty’s Government authorize you to treat with
the Aborigines for the whole or any part of those Islands, which
they may be willing to place under Her dominion.” Lord
Normanby writes, “The Natives may probably regard with
distrust a proposal which may carry on the face of it the ap-
pearance of humiliation on their side and of a formidable en-
croachment on ours.—These however are impediments to be
gradually overcome by the exercise, on your part, of mildness,
justice and perfect sincerity in your intercourse with them.
You will, I trust, find powerful auxiliaries among the Mis-
sionaries who have won and deserved-theirconfidence.” Lord
Normanby went cn to say,]) “ Having by these methods ob-
viated the danger of the acquisition of large tracts of Country
by mere land-jobbers, it will be your duty to obtain, by fair
and equal contracts with the Natives, the cession to the
Crown of such Waste Lands as may he progressively required
for the occupation of Settlers resorting to New Zealand. ”
There is then no claim here on the part of the Crown to.
§ Pari. Pap. April, 1840. p. 38. || Ibid. p. 3!).


possession of the territory in consequence of sovereignty.
“ But Captain Hobson is not merely directed to treat with the
Natives, according as the wants of the settlers might arise,
for lands not actually enjoyed or occupied by them, but for the
waste Lands of the Islands, with the express admission that
those lands were of no value to the natives ; for Lord Nor-
manby proceeds .* * “ r f o the Natives or their Chiefs much of
the land of the Country is of no actual use, and in their hands
it possesses scarcely any exchangeable value.” Is it not clear
then that Lord Normanby’s Instructions to Captain Hobson
were to take the lands, not by any prerogative of the Crown,
but by cession from the Natives.-You must hear the qualifica-
tions and reserves under which the Natives of New Xealand
entered into this engagement. Observe what the treaty was
that was framed under these Instructions to Captain Hobson
“Captain Hobson reports to the Authorities at home that in
pursuance of Ms instructions he summoned the Native Chiefs.
—He goes on to say : “ When I had finished reading the
Treaty, I invited the Chiefs to ask explanations on any points
they did not comprehend, and to make any observations or re-
marks on it they pleased. Twenty or thirty Chiefs addres-
sed the meeting, five or six of whom opposed me with great
violence, and at one period with such effect, and so cleverly,
that I began to apprehend an unfavorable impression would be
produced. Rewa, while addressing me, turned to the
Chiefs, and said, “Send the man away —do not sign the paper :
if you do, you will be reduced to the condition of slaves, and be
obliged to break stones for tthe roads. Your land will be taken
from you,and your dignity as Chiefs will be destroyed.
Ibid, 39.


“That was the language of the opposing chief. At the first
pause Nene came forward and spoke with a degree of natural
eloquence that surprised all the Europeans, and evidently
turned aside the temporary feeling that had been created
against us. He first addressed his companions. “ Reflect,” he
said “on your condition, how much you have been exalted
by European intercourse. How impossible it was for you
to govern without frequent wars and bloodshed ; ” and he
concluded by saying “ they should receive us, and place con-
fidence in our principles.”
“This, remember, is a dry official report.”
“You must,” he continued, “be our father. You must not
allow us to become slaves-” “You must preserve our customs,
and never permit our lands to be taken from us.”— Can
you resist such an appeal to your equity and honour ? Do not
hastily renounce that character for honour and good faith to
which this Native Chief appealed in his eloquent address.
“He said to the surrounding audience, “Rely on British
honour;” and to the British Representative, “You must be
our father —take care our lands are not seized on against our
mill." —
“One or two other Chiefs who were favorable followed him
in the same strain.—The consequence was that the Treaty was
signed. These were the circumstances under which this in-
convenient Treaty was made ; and I ask, will you commence
your relations with the Colony by an abandonment of the
obligations you have entered into ? ”
So far was the Colonization of New Zealand from being un-
dertaken by the British Government for any purpose of terri-
torial aggrandizement or of providing waste lands for the peo-
ple of Great Britain, that Lord Normanby in the same despatch,


declares, + “It can no longer be doubted that an extensive
settlement of British subjects will be rapidly established in
New Zealand, and that, unless protected and restrained by
necessary laws and institutions, they will repeat unchecked,
in that quarter of the globe, the same process of war and spo-
liation, under which uncivilized tribes have almost invariably
disappeared, as often as they have been brought into the im-
mediate vicinity of emigrants from the nations of Christendom,
To mitigate, and if possible, to avert these disasters, and to
rescue the emigrants themselves from the evils of a lawless
state of society, it has been resolved to adopt the most effective
measures for establishing among them a settled form of civil
government. To accomplish this design is the principal object
of your mission.”
And so far was it from being intended to seize any portion
of the lands of New Zealand, that Captain Hobson was fur-
ther instructed by Lord Normanby, as follows, j. “ All deal-
ings with the Aborigines for their lands must be conducted
on the same principles of sincerity, justice, and good faitn, as
must govern your transactions with them for the recognition
of Her Majesty’s Sovereignty in the Islands. Nor is this all.
they must not be permitted to enter into any contracts in
which they might be the ignorant and unintentional authors of
injuries to themselves. You will not, for example, purchase
from them any territory, the retention of which by them
would be essential or highly conducive to their own comfort,
safety, or subsistence. The acquisition of land by the Crown
for the future settlement of British subjects must be confined
to such districts as the natives can alienate without distress
or serious inconvenience to themselves.”
f Ibid. p. 37. $ Ibid. p. 39.


Lord Normanby’s successor in office, Lord John Russell,
in a Despatch of July 17th. 1840, * to Sir George Gipps,
after acknowledging the receipt of papers including Captain
Hobson’s report of his proceedings at Waitangi, says. “ Her
Majesty’s Government, entirely approve of the measures
which you adopted, and of the manner in which they were
caried into effect by Captain Hobson. ” And afterwards, in
his Despatch of December 9th. 1840, t speaking of the New
Zealanders, he says “ They have been formally recognized by
Great Britain as an Independent Stale ; and even in assum-
ing the dominion of the Country this principle was acknow-
ledged, for it is on the deliberate act and cession of the
Chiefs, on behalf of the people at large, that our title rests.”
The Royal Instructions to Governor Hobson, || on this point
run thus ;
“ And it is our further will and pleasure—-that you do es-
pecially take care to protect them, (that is, ‘the. native inhabi-
tants of our said Colony, or of the lands and islands thereto
adjoining,’) in their persons and in the free enjoyment oj their
possessions, and that you do by all lawful means prevent and
restrain all violence and injustice which may in any manner
be practised or attempted against them.”
And shortly afterwards the same Minister in a Despatch
dated January 28th. 1841, * states: “Her Majesty, in the
Royal Instructions under the sign manual, has distinctly es-
tablished the general principle that the territorial rights of the
natives, as owners of the soil, must be recognized and respect-
ed ; and that no purchases hereafter to be made shall be 'valid,
unless such purchases be effected'by the Governor of the Ca-
S Pari. Pap. Hay, 1847. p. 27- 11 Part Pap. 11th. May, 1841, v■ 43
• Pari. Pap. 1841, p. 42.


lony on her Majesty's behalf.—The Surveyor General should
be required from time to time, to report what particular tract
of land it would be desirable that the natives should perma-
mently retain fur their own use and occupation. Those re-
ports should be referred to the protector of Aborigines ; and
the lands indicated in them, or pointed out by the protector as
essential to the well-being of the natives, should be regarded
as inalienable even in favour of the local Government. ”
Does not this imply, that the lands not essential to the
well-being of the natives were to be at their own disposal ?
In the preceding month, the Under Secretary, Mr. R. V.
Smith had, in a letter to Mr. Somes, dated December 2nd.
1840, thus stated the general principle by which the Crown
proposed to be guided in its measures for the Government
and Colonization of New Zealand ;
“With regard to all lands in the Colony acquired under any
other title than that of Grants made in the name of, and on
behalf of, Her Majesty, it is proposed that the tit.es of the
Claimants should be subject to the investigation of a Commis-
sion to be constituted for that purpose ; the basis of that in-
quiry will be, the assertion on behalf of the Crown of a title
to all lands situate in New Zealand, which have heretofore
been granted by the Chiefs of those. Islands according to the
customs of the Country and in return for some adequate con-
sideration. ”
It is to be remembered that Captain Hobson was sent to
New Zealand not as Lieutenant Governor, but as her “Ma-
jesty’s Consul at New Zealand. J
The New Zealand Company having, in November 1842,
attempted to disparage the weight and authority of Lord
•f- Ibid- P- 37.


Normahby’s Despatch, that Document and the proceedings
taken under it were rac ig.iizel and affirmed by the succeeding
Government and by a third Colonial Minister. Mr. Under
Secretary Hope says ( 10th January 1813,) t.“ Lord Stanley has
received this .intimation with' extreme astonishment. The let-
ter to which reference is made had been presented to Parlia-
ment and printed in the Session immediately preceding the
date of the agreement with the New Zealand Company. In
that letter Her Majesty distinctly recognized tire proprietor-
ship of the Soil in the Natives, and disclaimed alike all terri-
torial rights and all claims of sovereignty which should not be
founded on a free cession;!))- them. Lord Stanley cannot allow
the Company to plead ignorance of a document thus formally
and authoritatively communicated to the public ; or permit them
to assume that in entering into the arrangement with them,
Her Majesty could contemplate deliberately violating the faith
which she had publicly pledged to the natives , in conveying to
the Company rights which, on the part if the Crown, one had
solemnly disclaimed. ”
The New Zealand Company also professed to doubt the va-
lidity of the Treaty, as being made, (as they alleged) “ with nak-
ed savages,” and suggested, that “ it might be treated by law-
yers as a praiseworthy device for amusing or pacifying savages
for the moment. ” This attempt had only the effect of elicit-
ing from Lord Stanley his confirmation of the Treaty. Mr.
Hope, writing to the Company, Ist. February 1843, § says
“ Lord Stanley is not prepared, as Her Majesty’s Secretary of
State, to join with the Company in setting aside the treaty of
Waitangi, after obtaining the advantages guaranteed by it,
even “though it might be made with naked savages, or though
+ Pari. Pap. July 184-1. App. p. 21. § Ibid. p. 36.


it might be treated by lawyers as a praiseworthy device fur
amusing or pacifying savages for the moment. ” Lord Stanley
entertains a different view of the obligations contracted by the
Crown of England ; and his final answer must be that, as long
aa he has the honor of serving the Crown, he will not admit
that any person or any Government, acting in the name of
Her Majesty, can contract a legal, moral, or honorary obliga-
tion to despoil others of their lawful or equitable rights. ”
And Sir Robert Peel in the New Zealand Debate
of June 1845, || referring to the suggestion made by the New
Zealand Company, said “ I believe there are a good many law-
yers in the New Zealand Company, andjdiis may,be the lan-
guage of lawyers.—But what was the language of statesmen.”
After citing Lard John Russell’s Despatch abovementioned,
Sir R. Peal proceeded to say, “ That was the language held
by statesmen. That Treaty was entered into with as much
formality as their usages permitted ; and are you now prepa-
red because you find the engagements onerous and inconve-
nient—inconvenient to yourselves but injurious to the Natives
even—are you prepared to disclaim and repudiate the act of
Statesmen, and to concur with the lawyers, that the Treaty
is a mere praiseworthy device for amusing and pacifying sa-
vages ? " * “ I aslc, will you commence your relations with the
Colony by an abandonment of the obligations you have enter-
ed into ? I will say, if ever there was a case where the stron-
ger party was obliged by its position to respect the demands
of the weaker, if ever a powerful country was bound by its
engagements with a weaker, it was the engagement contracted
under such circumstances with the Native Chiefs. ”
|| p. 243. • P . 2 J 5.


Lord Stanley wilting to Lieutenant Governor Grey, June,
13. 1845, says, “I repudiate with the utmost!possible ear-
nestness the doctrine maintained by some, that the Treaties
which we have entered into with, these people are to he con-
sidered as a mere blind to amuse and deceive ignorant savages.
In the name of the Queen I utterly deny, that any Treaty
entered into and ratified by her Majesty’s .Command, was or
could have been made in a spirit thus disingenuous, or for a
purpose thus unworthy. You will honorably and scrupulously
fulfil the conditions of the Treaty of Waitangi. ” t
Governor Grey, in a Despatch dated Bay of Islands, 24th.
November, 184”, j; says, “ I have agreed to receive upon
Thursday next, the 28th. instant, a deputation of the princi-
pal chiefs, who are anxious to address me upon the subject of
their lands, and upon the state of affairs generally. I shall
not hesitate at once to relieve their apprehensions regarding
their lands by assuring them that her Majesty has directed
me scrupulously and honourably to fulfil the conditions of the
Treaty of Waitangi.
On the 10th. December, 1845, Governor Grey transmitted
home copies of an Address which he made to a number of the
northern chiefs upon Friday the 28th. November. The address
begins thus, || “ Friends, Chiefs of New Zealand, the Queen
has heard of the difficulties iu which New Zealand is involved,
and has therefore sent me here for the purpose of settling
them. With a view to the arrangement of these difficulties, I
have already instituted .inquiries into the state of this coun-
try, and I shall continue to make these inquiries, and to as-
certain the disposition of each tribe, and whether or no they
have assisted the Government in putting down those who en-
t Pari. Pap. May 18,“1816. p. 70. $ Pari. Pap. 1846. p. 10.
|| Ibid. p. I.'!.


gaged in prosecuting the present disturbances In the mean
time, I assure the whole of the Chiefs, that it is the intention
of the Government, most punctually and scrupulously to fulfil
the terms and promises of the treaty which was signed at
Waitangi on the arrival of Governor Hobson. 1 have heard
that some persons, evil disposed both towards the Queen of
England and the Chiefs of this ,Country, have told you that
by your signing that paper y®u lost your lands. This I deny.
By that Treaty you have the protection of the Queen, and
your possessions are made sure to you. Your lands shall
certainly not be taken from you without your own consent. You
cm sell your lands to the Queen or not sell them, just as you
think proper ; but remember that, when once you do sell
them, they must be promptly given up. ”
In a Despatch of 10th. December, 1845, * Governor Grey
writes “ 1 think it only necessary to add in reference to the
natives, that I have in the most public manner , in the strongest
terms , and upon repeated occasions, assured them that I had
been instructed by Her Majesty, most honourably and scrupu-
lously to fulfil the terras of the Treaty of Waitangi; that
their welfare and happiness was an object of the most lively
concern to the Queen, and that it would be my most earnest
desire to carry out her Majesty’s most gracious wishes in their
favour ; and I am satisfied that these declarations on my part
have produced a very favourable impression upon many of the
most influential of-the Chiefs."
In answer to these Despatches, the fourth Colonial Minis-
ter, Mr. Gladstone says, (26th. May 1846) “I have likewise
the satisfaction of apprising you that Her Majesty’s advisers
Ibid. p. 18.


highly approve of your declaration with respect to the main-
tenance of the faith of the Crown in regard to the treaty of
Waitangi.” +
The title then of Great Britain to this Country rests entire-
ly upon a voluntary cession of the Sovereignty of the country
to the Queen. Therefore, according to established principles
of law, all private rights of property existing in the country
at the time of the cession remain unaffected. By that ces-
sion, Great Britain has not acquired any land of any sort m the
country, if that land have an owner among the natives, accord-
ing to their own customs. Whether the land be actually oc-
cunied by its owner is not the question ; but only, rvhelhe j it
have an owner.
2. The above would have been the state of the case, even if
the Treaty had not contained any reference to the rights and
property of the Natives. But in fact it did contain an express
guarantee, and that in the strongest and amplest words.
By the 2nd. Article of the Treaty “ Her Majesty the Queen
of England confirms and guarantees to the C.niefs and Irioes
of New Zealand, and to the respective families and individuals
thereof, the full, exclusive, and undisturbed possession of their
lands and estates, forests and fisheries, and other properties
which they may collectively or individually possess, so long as
it is their w’ish and desire to retain the same in their posses-
These large and unrestricted words were introduced by us.
We, and not the natives, drew and prepared the Treaty.
-f- Ibid. p. 37-


In pursuance of Lord Xonnauby’s suggestion, Missionaries
both of the Church of England and of the Wesleyan Mission
were requested by Captain Hobson to obtain signatures to
the Treaty in various parts of the country, “ first explaining to
them its principle and object, which, ” he said, “they must
clearly understand before you permit them to sign.” \
All the Missionaries so employed by Captain Hobson, with-
out one exception, have protested against the construction
now attempted to be put upon the Treaty. They affirm,that they
explained the Treaty to the natives in its natural and obvious
sense—that they have since repeatedly silenced objections on
the part of the natives to the British Government by reference
to the Treaty as so explained—and further, that it is their be-
lief, that by no other explanation canid they have obtained the
signature of a single chief throughout the country.
Major Banbury also was employed by. Captain Hobson for
the purpose of obtaining signatures. In the discharge of this
duty he visited the southern Island, and the principal chiefs
of that Island also became parties to the Treaty. He pro-
ceeded even to Stewart’s Island ; and, in Foveaux Straits, he
.gave the following explanation of the Treaty :—“ The Treaty
guarantees the full and exclusive possession of their lands and
other properties to the Natives. ” §
Lord J. Russell writes to Captain Hobson, 30th. March
1841, “I have received your Despatch No. of the 15th.' of
■October last, inclosing reportsfrom the various gentlemen whom
you had commissioned to treat with the native Chiefs for the
purpose of effecting their adherence to the Treaty of Waitangs;
I have to convey to you the approval of Her Majesty's go-
vernment of the measures which you adopted throughout these
negotiations.” ||
t Pari- Pap. 1841. p. 17- § Ibid. p. 107. j| Ibid. p. 112.


In a translation of a letter, in the -New Zealand language,
which Governor Hobson “ addressed as a Circular to the Chiefs
generally,” and transmitted to Lord J. Russell 15th. October
1840, is the following passage:—“And although the many
white people say, The natives will be intentionally cast back;
their country, lands, and sundry property will be taken from
them for nought ; I say peaceably, civilly, This is false. Be-
lieve not these sayings. Presently you will see the truth of
what I have said and done.” *
In answer, Lord J. Russell says I7th. April 1841. “I have
read with much interest the specimens which you have trans-
mitted of your correspondence with the native Chiefs, and I
approve in every respect tkcjone and tenor of those commu-
nications.” t
Governor Grey, on the 12th. December 1847, addressed
the Legislative Council in these words : —“ I feel it to be due
alike to the interests of both races of Her Majesty’s subjects
within this Colony, to take this the first public opportunity
which has been afforded me of stating, in the most explicit
terms, that I have been instructed most honourably and scru-
pulously to fulfil the conditions of the Treaty of Waitangi, by
which the full, exclusive and undisturbed possession of their
lands and estates, forests, fisheries and other properties which
the chiefs and tribes of New Zealand and the.respecti ve families
and individuals thereof may collectively or individually possess,
was confirmed and guaranteed to them so long as it may be
their wish and desire to retain the same.
In February, 1846, Governor Grey, in answer to a letter
addressed to him by 15 of the most influential chiefs in the
District of Port Nicholson, wrote thus : “ Maories and Euro-
Ibid, p, 113, t Pari. Pap. 1845—0. p. 23.
c


peans shall ha equally protected, and live under equal laws.
Both of them are alike subjects of the Queen, and entitled to
her favour and care. The Maories shall be protected in all
their properties and possessions, and no one shall be allowed
to take any thing away from them, or to injure them. The
Europeans shall be protected in their property and possessions,
and no one shall be allowed to take any thing from them, or
to injure them. ” %
The Cession of Sovereignty—the assurances accompanying
it—the words of tire Treaty and of numerous subsequent
affirmations of that Treaty-could have but one meaning. The
natives could not nmderstand by them any thing else than this ;
that whatever they, camongst themselves, cailed and considered
their own, should be ;as much their own after our coming as it
was before.
On our part we used on every occasion the largest and most
comprehensive terms, without a single word of exception or re-
servation: and we are not free now to narrow and limit those
terms, by putting upon them a private construction of our own.
In conformity with the assurances so given, the territorial
rights of the natives have been repeatedly recognized by Acts
of the Colonial Governments :
1. By the Inquiries conducted by the Commissioners of
Land Claims, Mr. Spain, Major Richmond, and Colonel God-
frey ; who (one or other of them) held Courts of Inquiry at
a great number of places in both Islands from the North Cape
even to Otakou, and who proceeded always upon the principle
that the Ownership of the Soil (whether waste or not) is vest-
ed in such persons as, according to native custom and under-
standing, are deemed to be the owners thereof. ||
+ Pari. X 3 ap. August, 184 G. p. 10. 1! Reports of Commissioners.


2.| By purchases of large tracts of land, in various parts of
the country, without making any distinction between land al-
ready subdued by man’s labour and unsubdued.
The native right'of property in wild land has been ac-
knowledged quite as strongly by the acts of the New Zealand
Company, as by those of the Colonial Government. For the
Company also bought, or professed to buy, land, without any
distinction as to its’character or condition at the time.
In fact the territorial rights of the natives had been most
distinctly asserted iu the following extract from the Prospectus
of the New Zealand Association of 1837 ; which Association
was afterwards merged in the New Zealand Company of 1839.
“A recent change of opinion in this country on the subject
of the rights of uncivilized nations now forbids the invasion
and confiscation of a territory which is as Indy the property
of its Native inhabitants us the soil of England belongs taker
landlords ; and though it were as easy now to pursue the old
course of substituting might for right, yet this would defeat a
main object of the present undertaking; with our views, it
would be a folly, as well as a crime, to do violence to any in-
clination of the Natives ; and it follows, that in all our pro-
ceedings the national independence of the New Zealanders
already acknowledged by the British Government in the ap-
pointment of a Resident and the recognition of a New Zealand
flag, must be carefully repeated ; and especially that we should
not attempt to convert any part of their country into British
territory without their full, free, and perfect understanding,
consent, and approval.”


The result then is that, by solemn and repeated words and
deeds, our national faith is pledged to the following rule :
All lands in New Zealand which owners accord-
ing to native custom, do still belong to those owners : whilst
all lands which have no owners, fall to the Crown, by virtue
of the Cession of Sovereignty.


ENGLAND AND THE NEW ZEALANDERS.
11. Proof that Earl Grefs instructions involve a vio-
lation of established Lair.
Even if there had been no Treaty—no Acts or declarations
on the part of the Queen —yet we should have been bound to
the rule just stated., by our own Colonial Law.
From the commencement of English Colonization in North
America, the territorial rights of the native race, as owners of
the soil, have been asserted and protected by the Law.
“ The original Indian nations were regarded and dealt with
as proprietors of the soil which they claimed and occupied,
but without the power of alienation except to the Govern-
ments which protected them, and had thrown over them and
beyond them their assumed patented domains. Those go-
vernments asserted and enforced the exclusive right to extin-
guish Indian titles to lands inclosed within the exterior lines
of their jurisdictions, by fair purchase, under the sanction, of
treaties. —The Colonial and State Governments and the Gov-
ernment of the United States uniformly dealt upon these
principles with the Indian nations dwelling within their own
territorial limits.” *
Kents’ Commentaries 111. 385. (Lecture 51.)


“ The Supreme Court of the United States, in the case of
Worcester (in 1832,) reviewed the whole ground of controversy
relative)to thejcharacter and validity of Indian rights within
the territorial dominions of the United States. They declared
that the right given by European discovery was the exclusive
right to purchase, but this right was not founded on a denial
of the right of the Indian possessor to sell. Though the right
to the soil was claimed to be in the European Governments,
as a necessary consequence of the right of discovery and assump-
tion of territorial jurisdiction, yet that right was only deemed
such in reference to the whites; and, in respect to the Indians,
it was'always understood to amount only to the exclusive right
of purchasing suck lands as Ike natives were willing to sell.
The royal grants and charters asserted a title to the country
against Europeans only, and they were considered as blank pa-
per so far as the rights of the natives were concerned. ” +
Accordingly it was the general practice to extinguish the
native title by fair purchase. Thus “ The people of all the
New England Colonies settled their towns upon the basis of a
title procured by fair purchase from the Indians with the con-
sent of Government, except in the few instances of lands ac-
quired by conquest, after a war deemed to have been just and
necessary. ” J
Amongst the Instructions issued to Endicot, the first
Governor of the Colony of Massachusetts Bay, in 1629, were
the following:
“ If any of the salvages pretend right of inheritance to all or
any part of the lands granted in our patent, we pray you en-
deavour to purchase their tytle, that we may avoid the least
scruple of intrusion. ” §
+ Ibid. 383. J Ibid. 391. § Bancroft Hist, of U. S. Vol. I. p. 346.


“ Such ” says Bancroft, “ were the Orders long and uniform-
ly followed in all changes of Government, and placed on record
more than half a century before William Penn proclaimed the
principles of peace on the borders of the Delaware.”
In a letter of Governor Winslow (1676) of the Plymouth
Colony, he states, that, before king Philip’s war, the English
did not possess one foot of land in that Colony, but what was
fairly obtained by honest purchase from the Indian proprietors,
and with the knowledge and allowance of the General Court.” ||
So in New York : “ While the Dutch held and governed the
Colony, the Indian titles were always respected, and extinguish-
ed by fair means with the consent of the natives. This policy
was continued by their conquerors. *“1 n New Jersey , the
proprietaries very early secured all their titles by Indian pur-
chases. ” t “ In 1758 the Indians, at a treaty at Easton, re-
leased, for a valuable consideration, all claims to lands in New
Jersey. ” J
“ The legislature of Pensylvania, in 1783, asserted it to
have been their uniform practice to extinguish Indian titles by
fair purchase.” “ Governor Culvert, in 1633, planted Mary-
land after fair purchases from the Indians. ” §
“ There are also repeated proofs upon record of purchases
from Indians which covered a considerable part of the lower
country of Virginia; and Mr. Jefferson says (notes on Vir-
ginia, p. 153.) that the upper country was acquired by purchases
made in the most unexceptionable form. The cases of un-
authorized intrusions upon Indian lands happened in the ear-
ly settlement of Viginia ; for laws were very soon made in
Virginia to protect Indiana in their territorial possessions and
rights from the frauds of the whites. ”
|| Kent. p. 391. * Ibid. p. 302. -|- Ibid. p. 304, + Ibid. p. 395.
§ ibid. p.


“ Georgia was settled under similar good auspices, and
Savannah with a considerable tract of land, was purchased
from the Creek Indians by Governor Oglethorpe in 1733 and
1738 under the sanction of solemn treaties. ”
“ The government of the United States , since the period of
our independence (says Mr. Chancellor Kent) has never insist-
ed upon any other claim to the Indian lands than the right of
preemption upon fair terms. ” f|
For the purpose, mainly, of obtaining cessions of territory in
consideration of annuities and other payments the United States
of America have, in the course of sixty years, made 218 treaties
with the various native Tribes of North America. QSee
“Treaties between the United States of America, and the se-
veral Indian tribes from 1778 to 1837- ” Printed by the
Direction of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs. Washing-
ton, 1837-3
The following is an extract from “ The Kings Proclama-
tion of October 7th. 1763, for erecting the four new Govern-
ments of Quebec, East Florida, West Florida, and Granada.”
“ And whereas it is just and reasonable, and essential to
our interest and the security of our Colonies, that the several
nations or tribes of Indians with whom we are connected and
who live under our protection, should not be molested or dis-
turbed in the possession of such parts of our dominions and
territories, as, not having been ceded to us, are reserved by
them or any of them, as their hunting grounds : We do there-
fore with the advice of our Privy Council declare it to be our
royal will and pleasure, that no Governor or Commander in
Chief in any of our Colonies of Quebec, East Florida, or West
Florida, do presume upon any pretence whatever, to grant
II Ibid. p. 398.


warrants of survey, or pass any patents for lands beyond the
bounds of their respective Governments as described in their
Commissions : and also that no Governor or Commander in
Chief of our other Colonies or Plantations in America, do pre-
sume, for the present, and until our further pleasure be known,
to grant warrants for survey, or pass patents for any lands be-
yond the heads or sources of any of the rivers which fall into
the Atlantic Ocean from the West or North West; or upon
any lands whatever, which, not having been ceded to, or pur-
chased by us as aforesaid , are reserved to the said Indians,
or any of them.
And we do further declare it to be our royal will and plea-
sure for the present as aforesaid, to reserve under our Sov-
eignty protection and dominion, for the use of the said Indians,
all the land and territories not included within the limits of
our said three new Governments, or within the limits of the
territory,granted to the Hudson’s Bay Company; as also all
the land and territories lying to the westward of the sources
of the rivers, which fall into the sea from the West and North
West as aforesaid : And we do hereby strictly forbid on pain
of our displeasure, all our loving subjects from making any
purchases or settlements whatsoever, or taking possession of
any of the lands above reserved, without our especial leave
and license for that purpose first ordained.
And we further strictly enjoin and require all persons
whatsoever who have either wilfully or inadvertently seated
themselves upon any lands within the countries above describ-
ed, or upon other lands which, not having been ceded lu, or
purchased by , us, are still reserved to the said Indians as afore-
said, forthwith to remove themselves from such settlements.
And whereas great frauds and abuses have been committed
iu purchasing lands from the Indians, to the great prejudice


of our interests, and to the great dissatisfaction of the said
Indians; In order therefore to prevent such irregularities for
the future, and to the end that the Indians may be convinced
of our justice and determined resolution to remove all rea-
sonable cause of discontent, we do, with the advice of our
privy council, strictly enjoin and require that no private per-
son do presume to make any purchase from the said Indians
of any lands reserved to the said Indians, within those parts
of our Colonies where we have thought proper to allow Set-
tlements : but if at any time any of the said Indians, should
be inclined to dispose of the said lands, the same shall be pur-
chased only for us, in our name, in some public meeting or
Assembly of the said Indians, to be held for that purpose by
the Governor or Commander in Chief of our Colony respec-
tively within which they shall lie : and, in case they shall lie
within the limits of any proprietaries, conformable to such di-
rections and instructions as we or they shall think proper to
give for that purpose. *
The subsequent conduct of the British Government has
been in conformity with the foregoing proclamation.
Sir Howard Douglas, in the [New Zealand Debate, June,
1845, thus described ‘ the policy and practice of Great Britain
in the Canadas. ’
“ There the soil has been obtained by compact with the In-
dians. Every part of the vast region now settled, has been
obtained by regular conveyances and compacts, from the na-
tive tribes. I have been a party to such compacts as a Com-
missioner to treat with numerous and extensive tribes, in
what were then remote and unsettled parts. ” IF
It is true that the policy which anciently guided the Colo-
nizing operations of Britain was practically abandoned in the
Collection of Commissions etc. by Francis Maseres, London, 1772,
p. 89.-91. p. 125.


colonization of Australia; but, at any rate, it was abandoned
tacitly. It does not appear that any servant of the Queen
was found openly to deny or disavow that policy. And the
atrocities, which were consequent upon the course taken in
Australia, were amongst the chief causes of the national re-
assertion of the old and righteous principle in the case of
New Zealand. +
Further, the principle thus recognized in the case of
North America, has been expressly and solemnly asserted by
the Supreme Court of New Zealand, as directly applying to
the rights of the native people of this land. Queen against
Symonds (June, 1847-)
The Chief Justice, after laying down the general rule of
law as to the dominion of the Crown over the Soil of British
Colonial Possessions, said,
“Now at the very commencement of the Colonization of this
Country, the same principle was distinctly enunciated. The
2nd. Section of the Land Claims Ordinance of June 1841,
(Sess. 1. No, 2.) ‘declares and enacts that the sole and abso-
lute right of preemption from the Aboriginal inhabitants rests
in and can only be exercised by Her Majesty, Her heirs and
successors, and etc. ’ In fact, if we pass in review the various
provisions of this Ordinance, both as to the limitations and re-
strictions under which grants are to be made in any case, and
as to the express directions that lands of certain descriptions
shall not be granted to any claimant whatsoever, we see
throughout the Ordinance a distinct recognition and assertion
of the doctrine just now stated. It is every where assumed
that, where ike native owners have fairly and freely parted
f N. Z. Debate, p. 210.


with their lands , the same at once vest in the Crown and be-
come subject wholly to the disposing power of the Crown.”—
« So soon as the right of the native owner is withdrawn, the
soil vests entirely in the Crown for the behoof of the nation.
.« This rule then does in substance and effect assert that
whenever the original native right is ceded in respect of an i)
portion of the soil of these Islands, the right which succeeds
thereto is not the right of any individual subject of the Crown,
not even of the person by whom the cession was procured
but the right of the Crown on behalf of the whole nation, on
behalf of the whole body of subjects of the Crown—that the
land becomes, from the moment of cession , not the private pro-
perty of one man, but the heritage of the whole people, *
« The practice,’ said Mr. Justice Chapman, ‘of extinguishing
native titles by fair purchases is certainly more than two cen-
turies old. It has long been adopted by the government in
our American colonies, and by that of the United States. It
is now part of the law of the land; and although the Courts
of the United States, in suits between their own subjects, will
not allow a grant to be impeached under pretext that the na-
tive title has not been extinguished, yet they would not he-
sitate to do so in a suit by any of the native Indians. In the
case of the Cherokee nation, v. the State of Georgia, the Su-
preme Court threw its protective decision over the plaintiff-
nation against a gross attempt at spoliation, calling to its aid
throughout every portion of its judgment the principles of
the common law as applied and adopted from the earliest
times by the Colonial Courts. (Kents Commentaries, Vol.
hi. Lecture 51.) Whatever may be the opinion of jurists as to
the strength or weakness of the native title, whatever may
J Government Gazette, July 6, 1847.


be their present clearer and still growing conception of their
own dominion over land, it cannot be to>o solemnly asserted
that it is entitled to be respected, that it cannot be extinguish-
ed (at least in times of-peace) otherwise than by the free con-
sent of the native occupiers. But, for thteir protection and for
the sake of humanity, the Government its bound to maintain,
and the Courts to assert, the Queen’s exclusive right to ex-
tinguish it. It follows from what has Ibeen said that in so-
lemnly guaranteeing the native title , and in securing what is
called the Queen’s preemptive right, the Treaty of Waitangi,
confirmed by the Charter of the Colony, does not assert, either
in doctrine or in practice, any thing new or unsettled. ”
“ The existing rule then contemplates the native race as
under a species of guardianship. Technically, it contemplates
the native dominion over the soil as inferior to what we call
an estate in fee: practically it secures to them all the enjoy-
ments from the land which they had before our intercourse,
and as much more as the opportunity of selling portions useless
to themselves affords. ”
It should be observed that the above rule was originally
laid down, and has since been maintained, in favour of per-
sons who were not British subjects.
“ The several local governments, before and since our revo-
lution,” says Mr. Chancellor Kent, || “never regarded the In-
dian nations within their territorial domains as subjects or
members of the body politic and amenable to their jurisdiction.”
Now the New Zealanders are British subjects.
By Article 3. of the Treaty : “ Her Majesty the Queen of
England extends to the natives of New Zealand, Her royal
protection and imparls to them all the rights and privileges of
British subjects. ”
|| Ibid. p. 384.


Ao-ain, all the natives, whether parties to the Treaty or not,
have been declared British subjects :
“ All the territories comprised within the Commissions for
the Government of New Zealand, and all persons inhabiting
those territories , are and must be considered as being, to all in-
tents and purposes, within the dominion of the British Crown.”
[[Lord Stanleys Despatch, June 21, 1843.] ||
Also, during the military proceedings in the North and in
the South, all natives found in arms were without further
inquiry, alike uniformly described in Proclamations and pub-
lic documents as rebels : And one was executed a.s guilty of
‘ High Treason. ’
Much more then are the rights of the New Zealanders to be
respected, who have at least all the claims which the North
American Indians possessed, with the additional title of
British subjects.
And especially when those general rights of British subjects,
clear in themselves, are further defined, in respect of the
territorial rights of the New Zealanders, by Article 2. of the
Treaty.
No right of any British subject can justly be, or in practice
ever is, taken away from him, even hy a Legislature in which
he is represented-, without compensation for the loss of that
right.
11 Report, July 21), 1844. Appx. p. 475.


Therefore, (1) by National Compaicts and Assurances on
the part of Britain,,
(2) by the Common Laxw of the British Co-
lonies, and
f 3) by the Constitutiional rights of British
subjects,
the New Zealanders are entitled to rettain against the Crown
all lands in New Zealand which are owned-, according to na-
tive custom ; whilst all lands not so owned fall to the Crown.
We now come to Earl Grey’s recommendations.
In the “Instructions” of 28th. December, 1846, § Chapter
Thirteen, it is provided that “ The Protector of the Aborigines
or any officer appointed to act in that capacity by the Governor
or Lieutenant Governor of the province shall transmit to the
Registrar of the district, a statement of the extent ( as nearly
as it can be ascertained) and of the locality of all the lands si-
tuate within 1 the same, to which any such natives, either as
tribes or as individuals, claim either a proprietary or a pos-
sessory title, which claims shall also be provisionally registered.”
“All lands not so claimed or provisionally registered by the
time so to be limited as aforesaid, shall thenceforward he and
he considered as vested in us , and as constituting the demesne
lands of us in right of our Crown, within the New Zealand
Islands. ” *
Ths substance of these enactments is simply this :
That to an Officer, to be appointed by the Governor, shall
be entrusted, and confined, the registration of the claims of the
native people to their lands. The natives are to have no con-
§ Section 5. * Section G.


trol or right of interference in any way in respect of the ap-
pointment of this Officer, or of his conduct when appointed.
Yet, if he shall fail to cause any claim to be registered, whether
the default arise from oversight, error, or any worse cause, the
lands not registered shall .be confiscated. And this confis-
cation is to be final, and without appeal :
For, though by the following sections a Land-Court is con-
stituted and an appeal therefrom provided, yet the jurisdiction
of the Land Courts, ( and consequently the Appellate juris-
diction) is limited to “investigating and deciding on the ac-
curacy and validity of such registrations : ” and the registries
of the several districts, when revised and corrected by the
Land Court and Court of Appeal, are to be “ received as final
and conclusive evidence of the title to any lands comprised in
such registries, and as fnal and conclusive evidence of our title
in right of our Crown to all lands not comprised therein. ” f
Moreover Claims registered provisionally on behalf of the
natives are to be rejected, unless it be established that, “either
by some Act of the Executive Government of New Zealand as
hitherto constituted, or by the adjudication of some Court of
competent jurisdiction within New Zealand, the right of such
Aboriginal Inhabitants to such lands, has been acknowledged
and ascertained , Or, that the claimants, or their progenitors,
or those from whom they derived title, have actually had the
occupation of the lands so claimed, and have been accustomed
to use and enjoy the same, either as places of abode, or for til-
lage, or for the growth of crops, or for the depasturing of cat-
tle, or otherwise for the convenience and sustentation of life by
means of labour expended thereupon.”
Now, without noticing minutely the vagueness and uncer-
t Sections 6 & 7. + Section 9.


tainty of the wording of the Rule thus laid down, and the
questions which may be raised upon it, it is enough to say
that it is not the rule of the Treaty of Waitangi : —that it is
something different from the plain and simple rule to which
we are already bound.
But it should be particularly observed that, even supposing
the new rule to admit of a construction which should render
it identical in substance and effect with the old one, yet, in
the application of the two rules, there is a wide and essential
difference. For, the old rule was universal and absolute :
the proposed one is partial, and subject to a condition pre-
ceding. The old rule applied at once to all the lands of the
country : the new one, to the residue only ; that is to say,
to such portion only of the lands as shall have escaped the
preliminary process of confiscation.
These Instructions then amount to a breach of national faith,
because they are incompatible with our existing obligations
under the Treaty.
Accordingly we find that the Instructions are so* under-
stood by persons at home, who are known to have the strong-
est interest in the question and the best means of information
about it. By them it is avowed, that the measures of Earl
Grey are in effect a repudiation of the Treaty.
In the Colonial Gazette of January 2nd. 1847, in an Ar-
ticle on c The New Zealand Charter, ’ we read,
“ Having hinted these doubts, we take our leave of the
subject for the present, by expressing our admiration of the
humane, equitable, and judicious manner in which the subjects
of the Aborigines and their land rights have been dealt with.
Every care has been taken to protect the natives that true
humanity could desire. But the absurd notion of attributing


to a few thousand straggling barbarians a right to exclude
from lands they cannot use, and never possessed, civilized men
who both can and will turn them to account, is repudiated.
This idea has been put forth by landsharks to cover their dog-
in-the-manger acquisitions, and has been turned to profitable
account by certain wily savage chiefs. The dominion of the
lands is vindicated to the Crown as a derivative right of the
right of sovereignty, and the humbug treaty of Waitangi very
properly laid on the shelf. ”
And to the same purpose, the “ Spectator ” of the 2nd. of
January, 1847,
“Earl Grey has promulgated his Constitution for New Zea-
land. Though by no means faultless, the measure seems cal-
culated to be a fair opening to the true history of our great
Southern Colony, after the preliminary chapters of tragi-
comic blundering. It sweeps away the whole system of official
machinery, and self-impeding sophistry established by Lord
Stanley — nil the “ Treaty of Waitangi" nonsense , and all
the past Downing-Street plans for hindering the settlement
of the islands ; and it plants local self-government. ”
But this breach of faith is at present only a matter of pro-
posal and recommendation : It is not as yet completed in fact.
The mode in which it may be completed hereafter is shown
in the next Section, which provides that
u For ensuring the observance of the preceding rules re-
specting the preparation of the Charts, and the keeping of the
registries aforesaid—and otherwis afar carrying into full effect
these our instructions' respecting the several matters aforesaid ,
the Governor in Chief of Nerv Zealand shall by proclamation
to be by him for that purpose issued, make and establish all
such rules as, in pursuance of the powers in him in that be-


half vested by the said recited Act of Parliament and Charter
and by these Our Instructions, it maybe competent to him
so to make and establish, and so far as it may not be com-
petent to such Governor-in-Chief to estalblish such rules, it
shall he his duly to propose to the respeclivec legislatures of the
said respective provinces , the enactment off all such lans as
may he necessary for that purpose. ”
Now, as the recited Act of Parliament (' St. 9 and 10 Vic-
toria, c. 103, “An Act to make further provision for the Gov-
ei nm.'nt of tne New Zealand Islands, ) contains no enactment
relative to the lands of New Zealand, it will remain for the
Governor in Chief to invite the Provincial Legislatures to
complete this breach of faith by their acts. So that it is in
effect recommended,
1. That the faith of Britain directly and solemnly pledged
to the New Zealanders shall be violated, by an indirect and
circuitous mode, and through the action of the Provincial As-
semblies of the Colony : and
2. That Legislatures, in which the New Zealanders will
not be represented, shall confiscate the lands of the New Zea-
landers, which the Queen has expressly and repeatedly gua-
ranteed to them : and
3. That, as a necessary step in order to attain to the Breacli
of a Treaty, the provincial Legislature shall begin by repeal-
ing (in the special case of the New Zealanders) the Common
Law of the British Colonies, by which lands within the Co-
lonies are secured to their native owners.


It is believed that no Legislative Assemblies in these
Islands would listen to such an invitation as the above, even
if we could suppose it to be made. But it is not the less to be
•remembered and seriously considered that the above proposals
in substance —are suggested, and that in the Queen’s name,
by the Colonial Minister to the Provincial Assemblies of New
Zealand.


ENGLAND AND THE NEW ZEALANDERS.
111. Protest against the general doctrine put forth by
Earl Grey, as the principle upon which Colonization should
he henceforward conducted by Great Britain.
It is not intended to enter into any argument as to the
merits of the theory itself, hut simply to protest against it, on
the several grounds following :
1. It is hardly necessary to protest seriously against re-
ceiving any one man’s authority as conclusive, in any matter of
mere theory.
But, if one man’s authority could he so received, certainly
not Dr. Arnold’s. Few men have put forth more theories;
and few men’s theories have won, hitherto, less acceptance.
The one theory upon which he reflected most (that of Church
and State) appears not to have been accepted by any one of
the friends whose judgment he himself most highly valued.
QSee Life of Dr. Arnold, lw Stanley.]
2. If any writing of Dr. Arnold’s could possess such
authority, certainly it would not be the writing which Earl
Grey quotes.
The passage cited occurs in an article written for a News-
paper. (Englishman’s Register, No. 6. June 11th. 1831.|
The article begins thus,


“ T!ie Labourers of England. ’
“ Since the publication of our last Number , I have happened
to meet with some other writings upon this subject, which pro-
fess indeed to remedy the distresses of the poor in a manner
sufficiently summary. According to them, etc.” Dr. Ar-
nold then enters into an argument, of which the passage cited
by Earl Grey forms a part.
That “last number”—No. s—was published June 4th.
1831. The writings then were met with, considered, and
answered—and the answers published—within the course of
one week at the longest. )|
Earl Grey remarks, by way of a reason for accepting the
passage cited by him as of authority, that “it was written not
with reference to passing events or to any controversy which
was at that time going on, etc. ” Does not the very first sen-
tence of the Article, as just quoted, show the contrary to have
been the fact ?
The hastiness of the composition further appears from this,
that the only statement made in the course of the Article, as
of a matter of fact, is erroneous. It is not true, as Dr. Arnold
assumes, that “ our fathers took possession of the hunting
grounds of the Indians. ” It has been shown above that they
bought, and did not take, those hunting grounds.
3. This theory itself is expressly rejected by one author
(at least) of not inferior authority, in a work written deliber-
ately. Paley says, “We now speak of Property in Land:
and there is a difficulty in explaining the origin of this proper-
ty consistently with the law of nature :—Moralists have given
many different accounts of this matter ; which diversity alone
perhaps is a proof that none of them are satisfactory. One tells
|| Arnold’s Miscellaneous Works, p. 143.


us that, etc, —Another says that each maul’s limbs and labour
are his own exclusively ; that, by occupyimg a piece of ground,
a man inseparably mixes his labour with iit ; by which means
the piece of ground becomes thenceforward his own, as you
cannot take it from him without depriviing him at the same
time of something which is indisputably his. —But this will
hardly hold in the manner it has been applied, of taking a
ceremonious possession of a tract of land,, as navigators do of
new discovered islands, by erecting a stamdard, engraving an
inscription, or publishing a proclamation to) the birds and beasts,
or of turning your cattle into a piece of ground, setting up a
landmark, digging a ditch or planting a hedge round it. Nor
will even the clearing, manuring, and ploughing of a field give
the first occupier a right to it in perpetuity, and after this
cultivation and all effects of it are ceased.—Another, and
in my 'opinion a heller, account of the first right of ownership
is the following : etc. " *
4. The theory, whether sound or unsound in itself, was not
intended by Dr. Arnold to be applied to a case like this of
New Zealand. When Earl Grey transfers it to the case of
New Zealand, he does so contrary to the express words of the
author or propounder of the Theory itself.
Dr. Arnold limits his doctrine to “countries which have
been hunted over hut never subdued” —to “mere hunting-
grounds”—to “lands on which man had hitherto bestowed no
labour.
Earl Grey himself says
“It is true the New Zealanders, when European settle-
ments commenced among them, were not a people of hunters ;
Moral Philosophy, Bk. 3. c. 4.


they lived, .in a great measure at least, upon the produce of the
soil', (chiefly perhaps fits spontaneous produce,) and practised
to a certain extent a nude sort of agriculture. i
In fact, a large part! of the surface of these Islands—by far
the larger part of the surface of this Northern Island has
been cleared and suhdiued by the labour of the native people.
5. This theory has Ibeen disclaimed, by solemn and repeated
acts and declarations, in the name and by the authority of
Kings and Queens o)f England, during the Colonization of
North America. Thiis has been shown above.
And it is to be remiarked that, not only were those acts and
declarations inconsistent with the theory ; hut that, precisely
the same theory was (distinctly propounded more than a hun-
dred years ago, and mas rejected by our fathers.
Dr. Arnold and Eairl Grey were anticipated by the Revd.
Mr. Bulkley of Connecticut in 1724. “ But ” says Mr. Chan-
cellor Kent, “ whatever loose opinions might have been enter-
tained, or latiludinar) doctrines inculcated in favour of the
abstract right to possess and colonize America, it is certain
that in point of fact the Colonists were not satisfied, or did
not deem it expedient, to settle the country without the con-
sent of the Aborigines, procured by fair purchase under the
sanction of the civil authorities. j.
6. The New Zealanders, being British subjects, are entit-
led to the protection of British law.
+ “ Mr. Banks saw some of their plantations, where the ground was
as well broken down and tilled as even in the gardens of the most curious
people amongst us. In these spots were sweet potatoes, cocoos or eddas,
which are known and much esteemed both in the East and West Indies,
and some gourds. The sweet potatoes were placed in small hills, some
ranged in rows and others in quincunx, all laid by a line with the greatest
regularity. ” (Cooks First Voyage, 11. p. 313.)
However, rudeness or the contrary cannot have any thing to do with the
theory, which rests upon labour only, not on skill.
J Comm. 111. p. 388.


Now, by British law, certain rights of property are recog-
nized and maintained, which are based, not (on labour expend-
ed, but simply on the custom or law of the (country. This is
the case with many moors arid wastes in Eingland and Scot-
land, used for sporting only. The persons, whom the
Law regards as proprietors of those tracts, (can only be called
such in a lower sense than that in which tlhe term might be
applied to the North American Indian raniging over his fo-
rests. The acts of dominion or ownership aire fewer in num-
ber, and less important, on the part of the Englishman than
of the Indian : the Indian's game being his food, whilst the
Englishman’s game is only his sport. Yet this lowest of all
kinds of property is protected by English laws, under severe
sanctions.
By the new principle, every labourer has a natural right to
occupy any uncultivated land in any country.
7. The old principle having been nationally re-asserted and
applied to the case of New Zealand by a tresaty in the Queen’s
name, by express recognitions and confirmations by four suc-
cessive Colonial Ministers in the name of successive Govern-
ments (to say nothing of words and deeds rn the Colony it-
self) ;
Is it possible to admit an after-thought rf a fifth Colonial
Minister, on the supposed authority of Dr. Arnold ? Is it not
too late, when the Colony has been founded on a principle di-
rectly opposite to the doctrines now propomnded ?
8. What would be the practical result of the applica-
tion of these new principles to New Zealand, may be inferred
from the following brief statement of the actual position of
the natives, in respect of the soil of their comntry.
A few centuries back, the forefathers of tthe present native
people reached this country. In order to (cultivate, they he-
v


gan to clear away, by the aid of fire, the forest which then
covered nearly the whole of the land. Every year a fresh
strip of forest was burned off, and a fresh strip of soil culti-
vated. So the different parties of immigrants advanced in-
land : some from the sea ; others, who happened to have ex-
plored a river or discovered a lake, from the banks of the
river or the lake.
In this way a very large portion of the surface has been
cleared : in this Northern island, probably not less than two
thirds of the whole. That the process has been such as is
here described, is made apparent to a person travelling across
the country, by charred and broken stumps of trees remote
from any existing forests—by forest trees still growing in
patches on spots inaccessible to cultivation, or in belts along
the very edges of watercourses, etc.
At such points of the cleared portion as are eligible for
purposes of defence, of fishing, etc., permanent villages have
been established : but the natives are generally met with in
temporary dwellings on the borders of the forests. For ex-
ample, near Auckland are a few villages on the sea coast.
Travelling thence inland for 20 miles over an open country,
you find at Papakura a piece of forest (rapidly decreasing)
and a native village. Ten miles further, over fern hills, bring
you to a second village (Tuimata), at the edge of a second
forest. After some miles of forest, broken at intervals by old
clearings, you enter upon cultivations, which extend upwards
from the valley of the Waikato.
Again at Tauranga, in the Bay of Plenty, there are several
|1 There are in some parts of the country large grass plains, as to which
it is doubtful whether they ever were covered with wood. These have been
already, to a great extent, let to colonists as Cattle-runs ; a regular money
payment being made yearly to the owners.


Tillages on the sea coast. Travelling inland, towards the
South for about 12 miles, you reach natives villages on the
skirt of the forest. After about 15 miles, jyou emerge from
the wood, and meet a party of cultivators, of another tribe, who
have worked upwards from the lake of Rotorua.
The same appearance presents itself to an observer standing
on the height of the Wairere, looking Westward across the
upper part of the plain of the Thames to Matamata with its
forest and two pas, and thence to Maunga Tautari, with its
scattered villages, where the cultivators are again settled a-
lonsr the borders of the wood.
O
Indeed, the same state of things recurs, on a larger or smal-
ler scale, in all parts of the country.
In this position the natives are uniformly found. Behind
them lies the tract which they or their progenitors have sub-
dued ; before them is the forest, into the heart of which they
continue to work year after year.
To the natives both tracts are of value; but th 6 value of
the unsubdued land is far higher than that of the other. The
cleared land affords fern root and runs for their pigs; the
swamps yield raupo for their houses, and flax for clothing
and for trade ; the streams supply ducks, eels and other fish.
But the woodland iathe source of fuel,—and of timber for houses
and pas, and for canoes, and for the demands of the timber
trade. It supplies harbour and breeding places for their
pigs ; but above all, it is that portion of the soil by the year-
ly appropriation of which they mainly subsist. It is, in their
present state of agriculture, the very bread in their mouths.
They are now to be told that the land already cleared be-
longs to them, but that the forest land belongs to the Queen :
that to the latter they have no right at all, because they
have expended no labour upon it; but that the Queen, who


also has expended no labour thereon, has an absolute right.
That, from which they and their forefathers have derived
substantial benefit, and which they have been by daily labour
evincing their determination to subdue, is to be yielded up
at the command of a distant power; that command, moreover,
being issued in violation of solemn promises and assurances
to the contrary, proceeding from the same power. They are
to be required to sit down and starve, in order that in years to
come (in some parts of the country, probably, not within a 100
years at the earliest,) a stranger may appropriate to himself
that, which they are at this moment putting forth their hands
to appropriate to themselves.
Can we expect any human beings to acquiesce in a claim
like this ? especially, men so shrewd ofhead and strong of hand
as the New Zealanders ? and that too, when they have been in
the habit, for generations past, of wagipg deadly wars in de-
fence of the least of these their rights.
9. But the new theory involves yet more serious conse-
quences, and calls for a yet more solemn protest.
It is not confined to New Zealand. It enunciates a ge-
neral principle, viz.
That we may enter into any other Country similar to New
Zealand, and, without any reference to the usages or customary
rights of the people of the country , may lay down our own de-
finition of right, and confiscate the soil of the country in con-
formity with that definition. Nay, that we ought to do this
by preference,-that, even though the natives may be willing to
yield to us quiet possession upon receiving some compensation
for that which they cede to us, yet we ought always to seize
rather than to buy. We are to “avoid, as much as possible, any
surrender of the property of the Crown.”* Now, if the Queen
* Earl Grey’s Despatch, 29th. Deer, 184(j.


were to buy, and pay for, that which is declared to be her pro-
perty, she would clearly by the very act of purchase surrender
her property, and acknowledge it to belong to another.
llritish Colonization will spread in time.over a large part of
Polynesia, and the case of New Zealand will occur over and
over again. As applied then to the whole Polynesian race,
there is now asserted on behalf of Britain a right of invasion
or seizure, subject only to such restrictions as we may be wil-
ling to impose on ourselves. To thejpractical working of such
a doctrine we do not advert, though there has been abundance
of recent experience in various parts of the Pacific. Eveiy-
where, the assertion of a right to take has been met by a not
loss vigorous assertion of the right to keep. But it cannot be
too seriously considered, that now, for the first time, it is an-
nounced by a Minister of the Crown of England, that, in the
guidance of British Colonization hereafter, the old national
principle of Colonization by fair purchase shall (so far as m
that Minister lies) be abandoned, and, in its stead, the new
principle of Colonization by seizure shall be adopted.




Practical Considerations.
1, The comparative populousness of New Zealand and of
North America, in respect of the native races inhabiting those
countries, will appear from the following statement.
Bancroft says,
“ Very great uncertainty must indeed attend any estimate
of the original number of Indians, east of the Mississipi and
south of the St. Lawrence and the chain of lakes. The di-
minution of their population is far less than is usually suppo-
sed: they have been exiled, but not exterminated—We shall
approach, and perhaps exceed, a just estimate of their num-
bers two hundred years ago, if to k the various tribes of the
Algonquin race we allow about ninety thousand; of the etc.
etc. in all, it may be not far from one hundred and eighty
thousand sonls. ” t
The area of this tract, “East of the Missisipi, and South of
the St. Lawrence and the lakes,” is about 824, 000 square
miles. This gives 4| sq. miles for each person. Now the
surface of the New Zealand Islands is about 121, 000 sq.
miles: out of which, about 54, 000 belong to the Northern
+ Hist, of U. S. Vol. 111. p. 253.


Island. This gives, fur the whole country together, about
j i S q. m ;ie for each person : and, for the Northern Island ta-
ken separately, about seven tenths of a sq. mile for each per-
son. _ .
Therefore, comparing New Zealand with North America
generally, the population of New Zealand is, for any given sur-
face, three times as great as that of North America.
Confining the comparison to this Island,-the population of
the Northern Island is, for any given surface, more than six
times as great as that of North America.
Again Bancroft says
“ On the discovery of America, the number of the_ a scattei -
ed tenants of the territory which now forms the States of Ohio
and Michigan, of Indiana and Illinois, and Kentucky, could
hardly have exceeded eighteen thousand.” §
The five States mentioned by Bancroft contain 228, G5O
sq. miles. This gives 12| sq. miles for each person.
Therefore, comparing New Zealand with these five States,
the population of New Zealand is, for a given surface, more
than eight times as great as that of those five States.
Confining the comparison to this Island,-the population of
the Northern Island is, for a given surface, eighteen times as
great as that of the five States.
The ratio would be still higher, in every case, if a deduc-
tion were made (as in fairness it ought to be) for the large
extent of mountainous and desolate country, utterly unavail-
able for man’s use, in the centre of the Northern, and in the
Western parts of the Southern, Island. No tract of like
nature exists in that part of N. America, to which the com-
parison here instituted applies.
§ Ibid, p. 241.


Yet of this thinly scattered Indian population the territo-
rial rights have been recognized and respected (as has been
already shown) by our forefathers, and by the United States.
2. So far as yet appears, the whole surface of these Islands
or as much of it as is of any value to main, has been appro-
priated by the natives, and (with the exception of the parts
which they have sold) is held by them asi property.
The Commissioners, who were appointed to investigate
Land Claims, travelled, in the course of their inquiries, from
the North to the South of these Islands, holding Courts from
place to place. The Claims, examined by them, extended
from the North Cape to Foveaux Straits.. Nowhere was any
piece of land discovered or heard of, wJhich was not owned,
according to native usage, by some persson or set of persons.
There might be several conflicting claimaants of the same land ;
but, however the natives might be divided! amongst themselves
as to the validity of any one of the several claims, still no man
doubted that there was in every case a riight of property sub-
sisting in some one of the claimants.
In this Northern Island at least, it masy now be regarded as
absolutely certain, that (with the exception of lands already
purchased from the natives) there is not ;an acre of land avail-
able for purposes of Colonization, but has an owner amongst
the natives according to their own customs.
The natives are scattered over the fasce of the country, in
parties varying in numbers from a few persons to several
hundreds.
In this Island a journey of a thousud miles may be taken,
(from Auckland to Wellington. ami be.- Ik again bj ,a die'. . it
route, so as to visit the lake district and Taupo,). travelling at


the average rate of 20 miles a day, without sleeping more than
one night at an uninhabited spot: and, in such a journey, the
traveller will often in the course of one day pass several vil-
lages.
In the Southern Island also the natives are greatly scat-
tered. The population has ,J>een reduced, partly by disease
and partly by invasion and exterminating wars. Yet the re-
lics of a tribe retain the claims of their fathers. Much the
same state of things occurs there, as the United States found
in Illinois.
See Treaty with Kaskaskias Indians, August, 1803. [ln-
dian Treaties, p. 100.]
“Art. 1. Whereas, from a variety of 'unfortunate circum-
stances, the several tribes of Illinois Indians are reduced to a
very small number, the remains of which have been long con-
solidated and known by the name of the Kaskaskia tribe, and
finding themselves unable to occupy the extensive tract of
country which of right belongs to them, and which was pos-
sessed by their ancestors for many generations, the chiefs and
warriors of the said tribe—for the considerations hereinafter
mentioned —relinquish and cede to the Ij nited States, all the
lands in the Illinois territory which etc. ”
For the most part, the boundaries of property are well de-
fined.
In the immediate neighbourhood of such Pas as are at pre-
sent inhabited, land is often minutely subdivided; each sepa-
rate piece belonging to some one person, who cultivates eitnsr
alone or jointly with some members of his family.
The same is the case in the neighbourhood of old Pas, even
though they may have been abandoned for many years. The
titles of the former cultivators are remembered, and maintain-
ed, by their descendants.


When the acts of appropriation, in somtn past generation,
were of a less public nature, or took place a ilong time ago, the
titles of the present claimants are of course much more diffi-
cult of proof. Out of cases of this kind, tihe greater part of
the existing disputes have arisen.
Each of the claimants endeavours to proves some act of own-
ership, exercised without opposition by ome of his ancestors.
Acts commonly alleged are: —cultivating—building a house
or catching rats on the land—setting an teel-wear —cutting
down a Totara tree in the forest for a canoe, etc.
These claims in the ordinary course of things, become suf-
ficiently complicated; but are rendered much more so by the
introduction of another set of claims, which arise out of rights
of conquest, enforced in very different degrees in different
cases. Boundaries between different pieces; of property, have
been often indicated by the natives incidentally, without any
question jnit or any previous reference to tine subject, in spots
now remote from any habitation of man : for example,
On the edge of the forest between the- Whanganui river
and Tongariro ;
On the highest peak of the Aroha ;
At a stream in the heart of the wood between Tauranga
and Rotorua.
JJut, between territories of different tribes, there are often
found tracts of land which are called “kainga tautolie” or
(literally) “debateable lands.”
The lands of a tribe do not form one unbroken district,
over which all members of the tribe may wander. On the
contrary, they are divided into a number of districts, apper-
! lining to the several sub-tribes. Each sub-tribe consists of the
descendants of a common ancestor, (whose name it generally


bears,) wlio was, in former time, the conqueror, or in any other
way the recognized owner, of the district. These smaller dis-
tricts are, in many cases, numerous ; and for the most part
they are sufficiently well defined.
Within each of them, the families or members of the sub -
tribe are free to range, both to take the natural products of
the soil, and to cultivate for themselves such portion of it as
they may choose. There is no paramount or controlling
power, either in the tribe or in the sub-tribe, to restrain or to
direct the exercise of this right of appropriation. Each fa-
mily or freeman may use and appropriate, without leave of
any. It is indeed a rude form of property,-a natural stage in
the progress toward the more complete appropriation of the
earth’s surface in the way familiar to ourselves. But, still,
every right which exists, whether in one person or in more, is
truly a right of property; and there does not, in this state of
things, exist any thing which can be correctly likened to a
right of Sovereignty, as understood amongst us.
Mr. Spain says, in describing the Port Nicholson district,
“ There are seven divisions or families of a tribe, each claim-
ing separate lands of their own, and certain rights and privi-
leges, which are sometimes wholly denied and at others only
O 7 J
partially admitted by the rest. ” j
And again, speaking of the same district, “ In a place so
thickly populated as I have before described this to be, the
boundaries of the parts of the district belonging to each tribe
or family are generally pretty well ascertained and admitted
between them. As a proof of this, I may mention that, in
the case of native reserves, great difficulty has been found in
getting natives belonging to one family to go on a reserve
made within the boundary of the land belonging to another
X General Report, p. 806.


family ; although it has been fully explaiined to them that the
reserves are made for the benefit of the motives generally, and
not for any particular tribe or family. 'They cannot under-
stand this; and, in several instances that have fallen under my
notice, they have positively refused to ocultivate a native re-
serve so situated, although at the time im actual want of a spot
to grow their potatoes upon. ” *
3. The New Zealanders have been in the constant habit of
resisting, even to blood, any encroachment npon their territo-
rial rights. They are not less disposed ito resist now.
For their determination on this point, there are two reasons:
1. That these rights (whatever names our lawyers may give
them) are of great value to the natives, as has been shown a-
bove. They, like other men, are naturally disposed to retain
by force (if necessary) that which they know to be a benefit
to themselves ;
2. That every tribe sees, in any successful encroachment
upon its territory, a peril to its own independence and even to
its existence as a distinct tribe. An extreme jealousy on this
point appears to be the natural result of their condition, and
may with truth be described as the “passion” of this people.
This has been a main cause of desolating wars. There is a
common proverb, “he wahine, he oneone, i ngaro ai te tanga-
ta “’[“woman and land are the destroyers of man.”] The pride
of each tribe centers in its power to maintain its own posses-
sions against aggression.
i o tua»i a &io‘
This spirit in the native people is closely akin to one which,
if we were speaking of ourselves, we should describe as pa-
triotism.
* Reports, April Bth. 1!!46. p. 7.


In the year 1846, a dispute between two tribes touching a
piece of what would be called ‘ waste land,’ at ‘ Te ihu taroa ’
on the Waikato, led to a conflict in which 23 men were killed.
4. Yet the natives have always been and still are, not only
willing, but eager to sell their land to the English.
Captain Hobson, shortly after his arrival in the Colony, re-
ported to the Marquess of Normanhy, “ This mania for land-
jobbing is by no means confined to Europeans ; but nas extend-
ed to the natives, who have proved quite as ready to sell then
lands as the Europeans were to buy. )|
By a Return laid before the Legislative Council, 14th. of
October, 184(5, it appears that the number of acres of land
granted to the original land-claimants, out of lands validly
purchased by them from the natives, was
in 1842 10,000
3 ~ - - , 707
_ 4 „ .. 193, 364
5 „ _ ~ 26,600
making a total of 230, 651 acres. §
This total does not include, either lands reserved to thel
Crown under the Land Claims’ Ordinance, or the lands trans-j
ferred to the Crown by way of exchange, under the arrange-
ment sanctioned by Lord Stanley in 1843.
That system of exchange was in operation in the Colony
from Deer. 1843 to (at least) July 1845. It may therefore
safely be presumed, that those claimants who chose to keep|
their claims, when they had an opportunity of exchanging
them for -lands purchased by the Crown itself, could enter-
tain no doubt of obtaining quiet possession of the lands com-
prised in their claims. v
II Pari. Pap. May 1841, p. 12. g Government Gazette, 1840. Appx. U


By a similar return October 14th. 1846, iit appears that
the estimated number of acres of land purchased by the
Crown from the natives in the Northern Disterict, up to the
end of 1844, was 284, 939 acres. *
These two items alone yield a quantity of Hand more than
sufficient for the population of all the British Settlements to-
gether : and of this quantity (with very trifliing exceptions)
undisputed possession appears to have been ohltained.
On the 26th. March 1844, Governor Fitzßoy issued a pro-
clamation notifying that he would consent to waive the Queen’s
right of pre-emption over limited portions of land, upon cer-
tain conditions. A fee of 10 shillings was required to be paid
to the Colonial Government for every acre of land which
should be purchased and granted in pursuance of that pro-
clamation.
On the 10th of October following, by proclamation, the fee
was reduced to the rate of one penny an acre.
So great was the eagerness of the natives to sell, that the
Government, which had given this lioerty of sale, in October
1844, found it necessary, in January 1845, to chide, the na-
tives for availing themselves of it too freely, by coming to
Auckland in great numbers to hawk their lands for sale up
and down the streets. [Native Gazette, January 1845.
Kua kite matou i te tiui o koutou e haereere ana, e tohe ana ki
nga Pakeha kia hokona o koutou whenua, a he maha etc. J
It appears that under the latter of Governor Fitzßoy’s
proclamations, and between 14th. October 1844, and 17th.
November 1845, (both included) the Crown’s right of pre-
emption was waived over 90, 016 Acres, together with two
Islands of which the area is not stated, t
* Ibid. Appx. C. •)- Government Gazette, June 10, 1040.


The readiness of the natives, generally, to sell their lands
and even to do so at the sacrifice of their own permanent in-
terests—is assumed as a known fact in the judgment of Mr.
Justice Chapman in Queen against Symonds above cited. %
« The legal doctrine as to the exclusive right of the Crown
to extinguish the native title, though it operates only as a re-
straint upon the purchasing capacity of the Queen’s European
subjects, leaving natives to deal amongst themselves as freely
as before the commencement of our intercouse with them, is
no doubt incompatible with that full and absolute dominion
over the lands which they occupy, which we call an estate m
fee. lint this necessarily arises out of our peculiar relations
with the native race, and out of our obvious duty of protect-
ing them, to as great an extent as possible, from the evil con-
sequences of the intercourse to which we have introduced them
or have imposed upon them, To let in all purchasers-, and to
protect and enforce every private purchase, would be virtually
fo confiscate the lands of the natives in a very short time.
The rule laid down is, under the actual circumstances, the
only one calculated to give equal security to both races. Al-
though it may be apparently against what are called abstract
or speculative rights, yet it is founded on the largest human-
ity ; nor is it really against speculative rights in a greater de-
cree than the rule of English law, which avoids a conveyance
to an alien. In this colony, perhaps, a few better instructed
natives might be found, who have reduced land to individual
possession and are quite capable of protecting their own true
interests; but the great mass of the natives would, if sales
Were declared open to them, become the victims of an appar-
ently equitable rule. So true is it, “that it is possible to op-
press and destroy under a show of justice. ”
$ Government Gazette, July 0, 1017-


The following letter of the Commissioners tof Land Claims
[Colonel Godfrey and Major Richmond,] sttates the result
of a very extensive experience in reference to> this subject.
Auckland, Slay 4th. 1843.
In reply to the memorandum of his Excellency the Officer
administering the Government, addressed to ms this day, de-
manding,
'lf the conduct of natives, in the investigation! of land claims,
has caused a great alienation of feeling between the parties,
and a disposition in some cases lias been manifested to get re-
turned to them, lands which they formerly sold : ”
We have the honour to report, that we have now examined
more than half of all the claims, yet have never remarked such
n consequence in any of our investigations.
In cases wherein the boundaries have been loosely describ-
ed in English, nay, frequently confessed to have been inserted
by the purchasers after the signature of the deeds by the no,
tives; then indeed, the natives, although admitting as ', f
some portion, have boldly, and in every instance, wrl,
rent truth, denied the extent of land alleged t(
lienated; upon these occasions they have dec!.., J, tli.-t
though they do not and never did understand the boundaries
there read to them from the deeds, they' can however, and wil-
lingly will, point out to the surveyors the lands they actually
sold.
Me have examined some natives more than ordinarily dis-
sipated, and corrupted by habits of intoxication; still even
these never made any unjust attempt to repossess themselves of
their lands; witness the examination of Pom are upon the sale


of Russell, which took place upwards of a year after its pur-
chase from Mr. Clendon by the Government, and was well
known by Pomare to have then become of a vastly increased
value.
We do, however, believe, that pretty generally the natives
have required some presents to induce them to undergo our
examinations; and that, in a very few instances, where they
had been seduced by the temptations offered to them by Eu-
ropeans to sell the same land to two different parties, they
would perhaps give their evidence in favour of the greatest
bribe, although offered to them by the later purchaser ; but
such cases have been most rare, and only occurred when the
morality of the buyers appeared quite as questionable as that
of the sellers. . ,
Except on such an occasion, we can scarcely recall to mind
a single investigation in which the testimony given to us by
the natives was not deserving of the most entire credioi ny.
We have &c.
( Signed! Edward L. Godfrey. 1 Commissioners
M. Richmond. j
The Hon. the Colonial Secretary.
5. What has been asserted of the willingness of the natives
to sell, and of the facility of obtaining quiet possession of
the land sold, is not disproved by the state of the Company’s
Settlements.
There also the same willingness existed at first. It even
continued after much dispute had arisen, and after direct
aggression had taken place.
Mr. Commissioner Spain say&r
« Now here is a case (with the natives feeling as e
« Pari. Pap. July 1844. Appx. p. 334.


described it to be, rather to press fur •payment for their land
than to retain it* or force the Europeans frtom those parts of
which they are in possession,) that might easily be settled by
carrying out the compensation system.” +
Amongst the causes of the New Zealand! Company’s want
of success are, in the first place, their unduie haste in the ne-
gotiating of purchases, and the incompetency of the inter-
preters employed for that purpose.
In New Zealand the claims to land are numerous—the clai-
mants often live far apart from each other—.and the people are
especially slow and deliberative in settling the terms of a bar-
gain. To make a good bargain there are needed, length of
time—publicity —and knowledge of the native language.
When these requisites are found, purchases of land in New
Zealand may be, and, in a large number of cases, have been,
made as safely at least as in England.
— j - o
Colonel Wakefield, writing to the Secretary of the Company,
“ The Court is not ignorant of the duties which devolved
upon me in the early days of the Company’s existence ; of the
necessity of acquiring a territory on which to locate the emi-
grants destined to follow me from England with so little delay-,
without the sanction, if not in direct opposition to the wishes
of the Government; of the difficulty of obtaining in a limited
period a clear and indefeasible title to sufficient land to enable
the Company to meet its engagements in a country where
such confusion as to proprietorship existed as I found here. ” J
Mr. Commissioner Spain says,
“ It appears to me, as far as the evidence has gone, that all
the Company’s purchases were made in a very loose and care-
■j- General Report, p. ‘5OO. £ 12ih. Report of N. Z. C., Appx. 62 E.


less mannner ; that the object of the Company’s agents, after
going through n certain form of purchase, seems to have been,
to procure the insertion in their deeds of an immense extent
of territory, the descriptions of which were framed from maps
and by obtaining the names of ranges of mountains, headlands,
and rivers, and mere not taken from the native vendors ; and
that such descriptions were generally written in the deeds be-
fore the bargain for the purchases was concluded : that these
parcels contained millions of acres, and in some instances de-
grees of latitude and longitude : that the agents of the Com-
pany were satisfied with putting such descriptions in their
deeds, without taking the trouble to inquire , either at the lime
of or subsequently to the purchase, whether the thousands of
aboriginal inhabitants , occupying the surface of these vast
tracts of country, had been consenting parties to the sale. ”
u I am further of opinion, that the natives did not consent co
alienate their pas, cultivations, and burying grounds : that
the interpretation between the aborigines and the agents of the
Company in the alleged purchases was exceedingly imperfect ,
and tended to convey, in but a very slight degree, any idea to
the former of the extent of territory which the latter, by those
purchases, pretended to have acquired: and that the explana-
tion by tire interpreters of the system of reserves was pc, feet-
ly unintelligible to the natives.
« A comparison of the native evidence given in the Com-
pany’s cases, with that given in most of the cases of private
claimants which I have investigated, will show a marked dif-
ference. In the former, with few exceptions, it goes to deny,
or only partially to admit, the sales: while, in the latter , it tends
generally io admit the sale and the receipt of the consideration,
and usually to describe clearly the boundaries of the land
sold-”§ _
§ General Report, p. 305.


It will be observed, that Mr. Spain’s croncluding statement
is in accordance with that made by the oother Commissioners
in their above cited letter of May 4th. 11843.
“ I have shown, ” says Mr. Spain, “ tthat many tracts of
these vast territories are now in the peacesable and unquestion-
ed possession, in the strictest meaning ®f the term, of large
bodies of natives, who may be divided, into three classes:
those who seized on and had retained possession of portions of
the conquered territory ; those who have returned from cap-
tivity, and now from long sufferance are fairly repossessed of
their lands; and those who, as was the case at Whanganui,
having escaped to the mountain fastnesses in the interior on
the approach of the invaders, returned on their departure, and
have ever since retained unmolested occupation of their an-
cient possessions: and finally, personal investigation has con-
vinced me that these resident natives had never been in the
remotest degree parties to,—many of them never heard of, —the
transaction by which the land they dwelt on, the soil they
tilled, was sought to be disposed of to another, by the pretend-
ed possessor of some imaginary rights of territorial sovereign-
ty-” 11
The extent and purpose of the ‘ native reserves ’ were not
properly explained to the native sellers.
■ Barrett, the interpreter in the transaction at Port Nichol-
son, is asked, “Did you tell the natives, who signed the deed,
that one tenth of the land should be reserved for the use of
themselves and their families, or simply that the Europeans
should have one portion of the land and the natives the other
portion? He answers as follows: No; I did not tell them
that they would get one tenth; I said, they were to get a
|( Reports, April Bth. 1846. p. 40.


certain portion of land, without describing what that portion
was. ” *
Again, as to the transaction at Whanganui, the same wit-
ness says, “ What I stated to them was, that there, was one
part for the white people, and one for them : I did not say
the proportion. ” And being requested to state (as nearly 7 as
he could recollect,) the very words which he used, he gave
the following ; +
“ I say to you all, —when the white people come, they will
put a part for you to cultivate with the white people. ” “ 1
say to you all, natives, when the white people arrive here, they
will lay apart one side as a seat for you: the land is large
enough to grow food for you all. ”
A further cause of the failure of the Company’s operations
was, the badness and insufficiency of such reserves as were
made.
“ In a Report recently submitted to Government on the na-
tive reserves, by the Government Surveyor, he says, ‘ That of
the 4300 acres reserved for the natives in the district of Port
Nicholson, only 1550 acres can be considered at all available
for cultivation. ’ We believe that the Surveyor appointed by
the Company to go over this estimate, reported that 1700 or
1800 acres were fit for native cultivation. ” [(Letter to the
Directors of the New Zealand Company, from the resident
Land Purchasers. Wellington, 1846. p. 26.]
A further, and a most material, cause, was the seizure, or
attempted seizure, of lands without the consent of the owners,
“ I speak, ” says Mr. Commissioner Spain, “of the natives
of Te Aro or Taranaki, and Pipitea. The evidence goes to
deny their consent to the sale in any way, or their participa-
Ibid. p. 8. -f Ibid. p. 74.


lion in the proffered payment; while Barrettt has distinctly
stated that he told Colonel Wakefield that tlhe natives of Te
Aro and Pipitea were not so willing to sell their land as the
natives were at Petoni; and he also states; in his evidence,
“ I know that there were some part of the natives not inclin-
ed to sell their land, namely, the natives belconging to Te Aro
and Pipitea; ” and when he went to visit tihose living at Te
Aro, they told him, "that they had not had any payment for
the land, and that Wharepouri and the other natives had no
business to sell their land. ”
“ On a subsequent visit, accompanied by Colonel Wakefield
and Dr. Evans, the natives of the same pa told him, ‘ that they
had never recived any payment for their land; and after-
wards, when blankets were offered in payment for their land,
they declined to accept them. ” J
Yet lands of these people form part of the site of the town
of Wellington, and were sold, as such, by the Company, in
London. )| And in August 1840, an attempt was made to
get possession of part of those lands by without suc-
cess. §
In like manner at the W r airau, “The survey” says Mr.
Spain, “ was commenced only two months before the affray
took place; the agent to the Company being well aware that
the natives had always disputed the sale of the district. ” t
Yet the Commissoner found, when the time for inquiry came,
not only “ the positive denial by Rauperaha and Rangihaeata
of the sale, ” but also “ the absence of any proof by Colonel
Wakefield of its purchase. ” *
“ Owing to the small surveying-staff (consisting of a prin-
cipal surveyor and three assistants,) originally sent out by the
+ Reports, p. 6. || General Report, p. 296. § Pari. Pap. May, 11th. 1841.
*|- General Report, p. 301. * Reports, April, Bth. 1848. p. 41.


Company, followed, as it immediately was by the Settlers,
there were neither the means nor time for exploring the
country. Land was taken and surveyed wherever it could
most easily he found, without any reference to its quality, ac-
cessibility, or proximity to the town, and without any regard
being had to the numbers and feelings of the native population.”
to the Directors etc. Wellington, 1846. p. 27-]
6. In the course of British Colonization, fair purchase has
almost invariably been followed by quiet possession, but ag-
gression and invasion have always led to the contrary result.
The secret of successful and undisturbed colonization is
indicated by Mr. Chancellor Kent, in the following passage.
“ The Minesink valley on the Delaware, was settled by
Dutch emigrants as early as 1644; and, being an industrious,
quiet and pious people, and having purchased the lands from
the Indians, they lived in uninterrupted peace and friendship
with them for upwards of 100 years. ” t
“ The massacre of the whites in Virginia, is asserted by
Governor Winthrop (who wrote from contemporary infor-
mation which came from the Indians,) to have been ‘because
the Indians saw the English took up all their lands, and would
drive them out of the country.’” % Precisely where, as we
have already seen, “ the cases of unauthorized intrusion upon
Indian lands happened, ” there also happened the only mas-
sacre we read of in the history of our early colonization of
America. ||
Bancroft says, “From the first landing of Colonists in Vir-
ginia, the power of the natives was despised.", § —“The plan-
tations of the English were widely extended, in unsuspecting
confidence, along the James River and towards the Potomac,
+ Commentaries 111. p. 392.(n) + Ibid. p. 398,(n) || Ibid. p. 396.
§ Vol. I. p. 180.


wherever the rich grounds invited to the culture of tobacco. ”
—“ Should the native occupants of the soil consent to be
driven from their ancient patrimony ? Should their feeble-
ness submit patiently to contempt, injury, and the loss of
their lands’ ? The desire of self-preservation, the necessity of
self-defence, seemed to demand an active resistance; to pre-
serve their dwelling-places, the English must be exterminated ;
in open battle the Indians would be powerless ; conscious of
their weakness, they could not hope to accomplish their end
except by a preconcerted surprise. The crime was one of
savage ferocity; but it was suggested by their situation." *
The feebleness of the Indians of Virginia is strikingly
shown by the following statement:
“ Smith once met a party that seemed to amount to seven
hundred; and so complete was the superiority conferred by
firearms, that with fifteen men he was able to withstand them
all. ” t
Again, of the same tribes, Bancroft says, “So weak were
the natives, that, though the careless traveller and the strag-
gling huntsman were long in danger of being intercepted, yet
ten men mere considered a sufficient force to protect a place of
danger. ” f
The weakness of the Indians induced them to have recourse
to treachery, to defend themselves against aggression; the
strength of the New Zealanders prompts them, in the like
case, to an open and resolute resistance.
“It appeared ” says Mr. Spain, “ that the Officers of the
Company, who had arrived in the first expedition, had fixed
upon Petoni as the site of the Town, where the early settlers
landed and commenced erecting their houses. This part be-
Ibid. p. 181. f Ibid. p. 180. $ Ibid. p. 208.


longed to E Puni and his tribe, by whom the sale to the
Company had always been admitted, and consequently the
settlers experienced no opposition from them. After the ar-
rival of another vessel from England with settlers, it was, af-
ter considerable discussion, ultimately determined to change
the site of the town from Petoni to Lambton Harbour, which
was accordingly done. The new site was upon land belong-
ing to the natives of Tiakiwai, Pipitea, Kumutoto, and Te
Aro, who, having always denied the sale, offered every op-
position to the settlers, and have firmly retained possession of
their pas from that time to the present. ” H
“ Porirua and Wairau—in both instances the opposition to
the surveys and occupation has been, from the first, systematic
and determined. ” §
So far as the N. Z. Company’s dealings with the natives
were what they professed to be, namely, good and complete
purchases, the natives have acquiesced and all has gone on
quietly. In so far as those dealings partook of a different
character, the contrary has been the result.
7- The cost of obtaining land in New Zealand, by purchase
from the natives, will appear from the following facts.
The number of acres bought by the Crown up to the end
of 1844 was 284,939. The consideration paid for the same
was £5285. *
Thus the average number of acres obtained for every £1
of purchase money was between 53 and 54: making the ave-
rage price of an acre about 4\d.
It should be stated that Mr. Spain’s Report here cited, has been twice
confirmed : first, by Governor Fitzßoy ; secondly, by Governor Grey.
Both Porirua and Wairau have been subsequently purchased by Governor
Grey.
(I General Report, p. 295. § Reports, April, Bth. 1848.
• Government Gazette, 25th. Nov. 1846. Appx. C.


Much oi this land was purchased after its value had been
raised by the establishment of the Town of Auckland.
It may be safely assumed that the average price of land
purchased from the natives will not exceed 3d. an acre.
Recent transactions in New Zealand will have furnished to
the Government at Home some means of estimating the pro-
bable cost of attempting to get possession of land in New
Zealand otherwise than by fair purchase. That cost may be
better calculated in England than here.
Besides, all such attempts must involve other losses more
serious by far and deplorable than any outlay, however vast,
of mere money.
8. ihe suspicions which have been entertained by the na-
tives as to our policy and designs, with regard to their lands,
have, from the beginning, formed one of the main difficulties
in the Colonization of New Zealand.
Partly from hearsay, partly from actual observation, the na-
tives have become well acquainted with our doings in Austra-
lia. Suspicions, necessarily flowing from that knowledge,
.were (as we have seen) avowed, and strongly urged at Wai-
tangi.
Major Bunbury found them equally prevalent even in the
Southern Island.
“We arrived at Cloudy Bay Mr. Williams, Captain
Stuart and myself, landing the same evening at Gore’s Cove,
where we found several European residents, and-the brother
of the Chief of Kapiti Island (Rauparaha) with two or three
chiefs of inferior note, his nephews ; the whole of these refus-
ed to sign the Treaty, under the impression that, if they did
■so, their lands would be taken from them; in other respects


they received us civilly; the old man, the brother of Raupa-
raha, promised however to come off the following morning to
the ship.—On the morrow following our arrival, we were in-
vited by some chiefs from other coves adjoining that which
we had visited the preceding evening : these did not hesitate
to sign the treaty, when it was explained to them : a young
chief, of the name of Mauipu we found particularly intelligent;
he Spoke a little English, and told me he had been at Hobart
Town, and on board H. M. S. “Conway.”—When told, af-
ter he had read the treaty, of the difficulty we had experien-
ced at the neighbouring cove, he said, that tribe was not sin-
gular, and that most of the natives imagined that we asked
them to sign in order that the Queen might afterwards take
their lands from them. Both Mr. Williams and Captain Stuart
were surprised at the very clear manner in which he explain-
ed to another chief the nature of the second article of the
treaty, which relates to the land and property of the natives ;
and, as he offered to return on shore to them, we accompanied
him. The old chief, named Nohorua, (brother to Raupara-
ha,) on condition that his signature was witnessed by his Eng-
lish son-in-law Thornes, agreed to sign, in order that, (as he
said,) should his grandchildren lose their land, their father
might share the blame; the others, his three nephews, said
they would see us on board.—To show how much these people
have been harassed about their lands, and how jealous they
are in preserving this species of properly, —they all objected
to receive presents after signing, lest by some quibble I might
construe it as a payment for its surrender, until they were
again assured to the contrary. ” |]
These natural apprehensions slumbered for a season after
the commencement of the Colonization of the Country.
|| Pari. Pap. 11th. May 1841, p. 108.


They were waked up again, in the north, mainly by cer-
tain effects of British Sovereignty which the natives had not
foreseen; in the South, mainly, by the proceedings of the
New Zealand Company.
Governor Grey arrived in New Zealand in November, 1845.
Shortly after his arrival he wrote to Lord Stanley from Auck-
land, November 21 st. 1845, as follows:
“Terms of peace having been proposed, (previous to my
arrival,) to the rebel chiefs, which were made conditional up-
on their surrendering certain tracts of land, I found that an
impression was still prevalent that the Government desired to
get possession of their lands from the natives; and even some
of those chiefs who have hitherto been in alliance with the
Government, were so apprehensive on this point, that they
would not rest satisfied, until they had an opportunity of per-
sonally conversing with me, and thus assuring themselves of
my future intentions with regard to them. This interview
has just been concluded ; and I explained to them that Her
Majesty was aware of the various difficulties which now ex-
isted in New Zealand, and that I had been sent here for the
express purpose of inquiring into, and adjusting these difficul-
ties ; and that, until I had had an opportunity of making the
necessary inquiries, and of satisfying myself which were the
best means of removing the present evils, I could give them
no information upon the line of policy I might think it proper
to adopt; that, in the mean time, they might rest assured, that
the Queen’s only object was to promote their welfare; that
the British Government did not entertain the idea of depriv-
ing them of their lands ; and that under no circumstances
would the services of those chiefs, who had so actively and
energetically assisted the Government, be overlooked. They
expressed themselves perfectly satisfied with these assurances


on my part; but added, that they feared that I should find that
the evils, which disturbed the country, were much greater than
I had been led to suppose; and that they were much pleased
to hear that I was about to inquire for myself, and to obtain
information upon the state of affairs here. They concluded
by stating, that the assurances they had received were so sat-
isfactory that I might rely on their affording every assistance
in carrying out my views. Their whole demeanor satisfied
me that every suspicion was removed from their minds. " *
In a despatch of November 22nd. 1845, Governor Grey
says, t
“ The only means by which I can hope to secure the alle-
giance of the chiefs, who have naturally no abstract sentiments
of loyalty, is to attach them to the Crown by permanent be-
nefits, which may convince them that Her Majesty’s intentions
to them are benevolent in the highest degree, and that the
Queen entertains no idea of despoiling them of their property. ”
Governor Grey proceeded immediately to the Bay of Islands,
from which place he wrote further, on the 24th. November ;
“I find that great distrust regarding the intentions of the
British Government, upon the subject of claiming all lands of
the natives not actually in occupation and cultivation, exists
among many of the most influential and hitherto friendly chiefs
in this quarter. They are tolerably well acquainted with the
details of the discussion which took place in the house of Com-
mons at the end of June last, regarding the state of New
Zealand, and their apprehensions are avowedly based upon
what transpired during the debate to which I am alluding.” J
In consequence, Governor Grey gave to the natives the as-
surances mentioned above, which, he was satisfied, “ produced
Pari. Pap. 1846. p. 2. Ibid. p. 3. $ Ibid. p. 16.


a very favourable impression upon many of the most influen-
tial of the Chiefs.” ||
As to the South, Mr. Commissioner Spain says, in Septem-
ber 1843, of the conflict at Wairau :
“ This fatal business put an end to all confidence on the
part of the natives in the Europeans, and they came to the
conclusion that the British Government had suddenly altered
its policy towards them, and intended to take away from them
all their land by force.” §
Again, in March 1845, Mr. Spain says.
“ It was my painful duty to act as a Magistrate during the
proceedings immediately consequent on the melancholy catas-
trophe at Wairau ; which has done so much towards the es-
trangement of the two races, and from which may be dated
the existence in the native mind of a feeling of jealousy and
animosity towards the European stranger, but little calcula-
ted to strengthen the bonds of friendly intercourse betwixt us
or to promote the advancement of civilization.” *
In this way, from time to time, the old suspicions have re-
vived and gathered strength. It has been conceived by some
of the natives that the Missionaries have been, from the be-
ginning, parties to a plot, jointly with the Government, for
seizing the native lands ; and that they were employed to pre-
pare the way for the execution of that purpose.
This supposition or suggestion has naturally found favour
with some of the leading heathen chiefs. It has often been
avowed.
So high has the feeling risen at times that, in one part of
the country at least, it was made a subject of serious discus-
sion whether it was not necessary to combine for the purpose
1| Ibid. p. 18. § General Report, p. 300. * Reports, p. IR,


of driving the English wholly out of the Country. Nor bus
this notion been made a secret : it has been openly men-
tioned.
Still confidence has on the whole prevailed; because no act
of aggression has been committed by the Queen’s Govern-
ment. Acts of injustice committed by others have only ac-
customed the natives to appeal for redress to the Queen : and
have ended in strengthing their confidence, that the Queen
would always cause justice to be done.
So long as the British Power presents itself to a native
tribe as friendly and just, every tribe is anxious, and is in-
duced by the strongest motives, to make that Power its ally
and protector.
The importance of maintaining in the minds of the natives
a favourable disposition towards the English authority, may
be seen from the following remarks of Governor Grey, in a
Despatch dated 11th. December, 1845;
“ The friendly chiefs will now be able to bring into the
field a much larger number of men than they have previous-
ly donel ought also, perhaps, to state to your Lordship,
that in many operations in the field, such as occupying a wood,
lining the banks of a river, etc., these native troops aiford the
most essential assistance to Her Majesty’s forces; indeed I
do not think that our operations could be successfully conduc-
ted without their co-operation. ” t
If then, in warring against a small part of the native peo-
ple, our success has been so dependent on the co-operation of
native allies; what result can we expect when, by our unjust
policy, we shall have united against us the entire native po-
pulation ?
The conduct of the British Government in this country has
p Pari. Pap. 1845—0. p. 29 .


hitherto been such as to produce amongst the natives general-
ly a considerable degree of reliance on British justice, and to
remove, or greatly diminish their natural and reasonable ap-
prehensions.
In particular, those who have received Christianity are dis-
posed to look up to us for guidance and government.
But, let the plan of confiscation or seizure be once acted on
and all this will be at an end. The worst surmises of the na-
tives will have become realities. To them we shall appear to
be a nation of liars.
All our means of exercising a moral influence over this peo-
ple will have ceased, together with all the hopes, (which we
have nationally professed to hold most dear) of success in the
work of civilizing and Christianizing them.
The Christian faith itself has, from the necessity of the
case, been received mainly upon our credit ; that is, in the
belief that the Pakeha who proclaimed it, was a true man,
honestly seeking to benefit, in every way, those whom he in-
jZmr dishonesty shall be seen, the Christian re-
ligion will be abandoned by the mass of those who now re-
ceive it. That such will, in that case, be the result, may
be shown,) as far as any result yet contingent can be foreshown
at all, from the language and conduct of the natives since the
contents of Ear! Grey’s Despatch became known.
This consideration can scarcely he deemed a slight matter,
in the judgment of any Englishman: certainly it cannot ap-
pear so, in the judgment of any Christian man.


;
A
J
■
*


Addenda.
Extract from a letter, dated 22nd. October, 1847, from
Mr. Hobbs, Wesleyan Missionary at Hokianga, to the Chief
Justice of New Zealand.
u When Captain Hobson had obtained as many signatures
as he could at Waitangi, he came overland to Hokianga for
the same purpose. We were honoured by his Excellency’s
presence at our Mission Station, and I became his interpre-
ter. Great excitement had for some time existed in conse-
quence of the prevalence of reports, that the Queen had sent
her officers to take this country as they had done New Hol-
land, and that the chiefs would thereby lose both their dignity
and their country.
“Captain Hobson’s object was announced to a large meeting,
composed of the principal natives and most of the Europeans
resident in the District. Many speeches were made, and
questions'proposed by the natives, and I interpreted His Ex-
cellency’s most solemn assurance that, if they signed the treaty,
truth and justice would always characterize the proceedings
of the Queen’s Government. Considerable opposition was
offered by several influential natives, lest the land should be
taken from them, and repeated assurances were given by His
Excellency that the Queen did not want the land, but merely


the sovereignty, that she, by her officers, might be able more
effectually to govern her subjects who had already settled
here, or might hereafter arrive, and punish those of them who
might be guilty of crime. That, if the Queen wanted land,
she would purchase it of them, and that it should never be for-
cibly taken from them. After many reiterations of such
pledges as these, (for the negotiation was unremitted from
breakfast time till nearly six in the evening) one of the prin-
cipal Christian chiefs turned to me and my colleagues, and
asked, “ what is your opinion as to our signing the document ?
will it be for our good ? ” We replied that we thought it
would. ”
A Letter from Sir. Maunsell, of the Church Missionary
Society, to Governor Grey.
Waikato Heads, October 18th. 1847-
Sir, —That a Clergyman should have but little to do with
politics, is a remark of which I fully admit the propriety.
Still, when principles opposed to religion or justice are ad-
vanced—or when there is growing through the community a
dangerous feeling of which others cannot obtain as accurate
knowledge, he would, I consider, he unfaithful to his country
and cause, if he were to decline expressing his sentiments, or
giving a warning. It is for these two reasons that I venture
thus to trespass upon your attention.
Your Excellency is no doubt aware of the prominent part
that the Missionary body took, on the arrival of Captain Hob-
son, in inducing the Aborigines to acknowledge the Sovereign
power of the Queen. For those efforts we received public
acknowledgements from Captain Hobson and his Officers.


Since then, it will, I trust be admitted that we have been
the firm advocates of British rule, and the watchful promoters
of peace. We have not, I trust, deserted the interests of our
people, but in maintaining those interests, we have ever (and
to a larger extent than is generally known), urged them to
the duty of obedience.
The late Despatches, from Earl Grey, with the Instruc-
tions accompanying them, will, if acted upon, compel us, I
fear, to assume, at least in appearance, a somewhat different
position in future. Reports and surmises are now spreading
through the country —Every visitor to Auckland brings back
a confirmation, —and the question is then put to us, “is it
true ? ”
To such a question, I find it difficult to answer. Silence
is interpreted into assent. To answer in the negative I can-
not. These Instructions and the Despatch are, we see, the
carrying out of the resolutions and report presented by the
Select Commitee of the House of Commons, July, 1844, (of
which also, Earl Grey was I believe the chief author ; ) and
they all indicate an uniform, preconcerted plan, a plan which,
though rejected by the then Colonial Secretary, is now reviv-
ed with authority, and furnished with machinery for being
carried into operation.
In these documents we see indeed the maintenance of the
Waitangi Treaty ostentatiously put forward; but we detect
throughout the whole, what far counterbalances such aver-
ments. Not only do we miss the kind spirit of paternal in-
terest that was evinced by the former Colonial Secretaries
towards the aborigines; but we see also a strong inclination
also to censure that treaty ; and, if not a plain disclaimer, at
least a plain attempt to evade its force.


This being the case, we find our position most perplexing.
Our people have heard us repeatedly affirm the high honour
and justice of our government, and the interest it has always
taken in the protecting and fostering aboriginal races. They
now ask us, —“Why is the Treaty of Waitangi thus virtually
broken ? why for the sake of a few useless spots, that could
have been purchased for a comparative trifle, is a train laid
for involving the whole country in a flame ? ”
If it were merely the honour and interest of the British
government that were concerned in .the question, we might
fairly decline engaging in such discussions. But unfortunate-
ly we are too deeply involved to be allowed to be silent. “ For
you, ” say they, “ urged us to acknowledge the sovereign pow-
er of the Queen. We did so on your assurances that our
lands should not be touched. It appears now that the Queen
is dissatisfied with that agreement, and is preparing to take
our lands by force. Thus have we been deceived by you,
into feeding the child, until he becomes a man, and strangles
us. ’’
This, Sir, is the only point in which I have been as yet ac-
cused, (and that by some of the leading men of the district,)
with having betrayed their interests.—How to answer, I know
not. It is not very gratifying to one’s feelings to have to
fasten a charge of breach of faith upon one’s country —a coun-
try also confessedly the most noble spirited that has yet been
recorded in the pages of history. Neither, on the other hand,
would it appear wise to bear such assertions without offering
an explanation. For we cannot but feel that our influence as
religious teachers, as well as our very residence among them,
is most intimately connected with the confidence they repose
in us as their friends and advisers.


-The only course that some of our body have seen out of the
difficulty is, to leave the country as soon as you begin to act
upon those instructions; and others will, I hope, remain; but
if they do remain, they will have no other alternative left
than to set the whole matter fairly before their people ; to
shew that we never contemplated such measures on the part
of our government, when we induced them to sign the treaty,
and that though we were guilty of a mistake, we were not at
least guilty of an attempt at deception.
I trust Sir, that I may never see the day in which English-
men will forget that national honour is an essential part of
national dignity. The greater the power, the more striking
will be an act of meanness. From the day on which the Treaty
of Waitangi was signed, the conduct of the New Zealanders
toward the British has been marked by a spirit of chivalry, of
friendship, and of good faith. They have cheerfully ceded
the rights of sovereignty, and pre-emption ,■ and for a very
small compensation have willingly endured fatigue, and faced
death against their own relatives, in defence of that authority
thus ceded.
What, I would ask, has been given by the British Govern-
ment to them in return ? It surely cannot be considered an
equivalent that a powerful nation, that has already subdued
and destroyed so many aboriginal tribes, has settled on their
shores. It has been by all parties admitted that this colony
has not been founded by force, but by compact. A compact
implies advantages given as well as received, What has been
received by the British government is visible to all ; what has
been given to the New Zealander it is difficult to discover.
Former Colonial Secretaries did indeed give something. They
gave us approbatory sentences and kind recommendations.
These were encouraging: we took the will for the deed, and


were thankful. Earl Grey seems only to regard this people
as being' not far from the lowest in the scale of human exis-
tence, and unworthy of the little they now retain.
His Lordship will, I hope, recollect that if the civilized
man has claims, he has also duties ; and that to those beneath
us in the degree of advancement, we should shew our eminence,
not merely in skill and power, but in the more exalted qua-
lities of benevolence and truth.
The bill lately brought forward by your Excellency for the
Education of the Aborigines, I regard as the only practical
acknowledgement as yet made hy the government, of the va-
lue of those influences, by means of which it has so peacefully-
established itself in this island. Whether that bill will be
permanent and successful in its operation, experience alone
can decide. Still, considering the opinion which is now tak-
ing hold of the native mind, that the English nation delights
in usurpation aud war, I cannot but hail such a measure as
most beneficial. If it be effectual, it will be a boon to the
country : and a boon, that I am sure, you will regard as much
an offering to justice, as to philanthropy.
It will perhaps be urged that the aborigines have received
the privileges of British subjects. What those privileges
are, I have yet to learn. They contribute upwards of £lO,OOO
per annum to the revenue of the colony, while they have no
one in the Legislative Council to represent their interest, or
to raise his voice in their name against an act of injustice.
Controul over the sale of their lands they must, it seems,
be considered to have entirely surrendered. The British
government not only firmly grasps all thus ceded : hut now
demands more. Waste, Unclaimed, Unoccupied, are, in the
vocabulary of Earl Grey, all one and the same in meaning.
Those mystic words, Sovereignty and Pre-emption, are then


called into requisition ; and made; to serve the same purposes
as did the ox hide in hands of a pivoto-colonist of former times.
They are to he stretched into siuch convenient lengths, as to
enclose just as much as the more; powerful‘and more crafty
are pleased to determine.
England has her unoccupied territories: and no doubt Earl
Grey lias his unsubdued lands ranged over by nothing else
than the deer and the pheasant.
So has also the New Zealander Ibis bird preserves, his ‘runs’
(the grand sources of supply to our colonial markets,) his use-
ful timbers, his valuable plants, Inis fisheries, and localities sa-
cred in his regards as having beem the abode of his forefathers,
the scenes of their triumphs, or the resting place of their
bones.
Why then does the statesman off such a wealthy nation seek
to confiscate these the guaranteed! possessions of our friends
and allies ? Why does he not pomder before he advances ar-
guments so palpably weak ? b effort; he proceeds to trample
upon the acknowledged rights of :a people that commands the
admiration of our Captains, —of a people most deeply interest-
ing to the thoughts of the philanthropist ?—before he thus
exposes to the contempt and ridicule of their own converts,
his fellow subjects, who risked their lives in the benevolent
mission of the grand Christian bodies of the mother country,
who risked their influence and success in obtaining for their
Sovereign the bloodless cession of the most promising Islands
in these seas?
A reference to Captain Hobson’s communications will show
that I took a large share in these proceedings. I tiling, there-
fore, I have a right among others, to be heard in this an-
nouncement of these new measures. Captain Hobson record-
ed my letter to him of April 14th. 1840, in which I expressed
L


my sense of the responsibility I ha_d incurred, and strong con-
fidence in the honour of the British government, (which letter
I take the liberty to forward for your inspection.) I trust I
am not asking too much if I beg your Excellency to forward
this my protest against those instructions and that despatch ;
so that if my country will be unjust, I may at least enjoy the
gratification of having made it known that it was not for such
a purpose that I consented to become her instrument.
I remain, &c.,
R. Maunsell.
[^Signed]
To His Excellency, Governor Grey,
&c., &c.
Extract from a letter to the Colonial Secretary.
(Referred to in the foregoing.)
April 14th. 1840.
“In forwarding the accompanying document, I would beg
to observe, in reference to ourselves, that cordially as we de-
sire to co-operate with Governor Hobson in all measures con-
sistent with our principles, we cannot hut state, that we feel,
strongly the responsibility incurred in the eyes of the natives,
by the steps we are now adopting.
“ I would beg therefore with all deference to add, that hav-
ing put ourselves thus prominently forward in obtaining an
acknowledgement of the Sovereign power of the Queen, on
the part of the natives, so we trust, that that acknowledgement
will never be made, even apparently, the basis of any measure
that may hereafter result in their prejudice.
“The steps we have taken have been taken in full depen-


dence on the well known lenity annd honour of the British
government, and we rest assured, t that we shall never here-
after find ourselves to have been in thliese particulars mistaken.
[Signed]
B. Maunsell.


• • *
