





f Ep
EPHRAIM:
OR THE
IDENTIFICATION
OF THE
lost (Ten bribes
OF ISRAEL
BY AN ISRAELITE OF 1873.
Par sit fortuna labori.
LEE & ROSS, STEAM PRINTERS, 231 CASTLEREAGH-ST.
EIGHT DOCKS SOUTH OF MARKET STREET.




s of, anb |nbc* to, Chapters
—♦—
19.1^3
CHAPTER I. Pa?e-
The everlasting Covenant between God and Abraham. Saxons, if
Israelites, should be found to retain its observances. Wherein
they resembled Israelites in their customs. Nature of the
Covenant, and its consequences 5 to 8
CHAPTER 11.
The Babylonian captivity of the Jews, and St. Peter’s mission.
Origin of the Saxons, from the testimony of ancient authors.
Probable loss of cutoms and language by Israel. Two streams
of prophecy, one being to the Israelites, and one especially to
the Jews. The Jews after their return from Babylon offer-
sacrifices for the Twelve Tribes 8 to 11
CHAPTER 111.
Ephraim especially alluded to by the Prophets. God’s Judgments and
Promises. The lost Ten Tribes must be looked for to the
north-west of Assyria. Prophecy resumed. Its bearings on
the Saxon race and English nation
CHAPTER IV.
Improbability of the Israelites being lost through annihilation, or by
absorption into other nations. God’s command to Israel to go
forth of Babylon, and not to stand still. The west the only
course open to their migration. The special covenant between
God and Israel. Signification of the name England and English-
man. The prophecy of Moses respecting the house of Joseph,
and of Ephraim in particular
11 to 15
CHAPTER V.
(Conditions of the old and new Covenant compared. Admission of the
Anglo-Saxons into the new. England’s Mission. Balance of evi-
dence goes to prove that the Tribe of Joseph, or Ephraim is
in England. The remaining Tribes—where supposed to be,
Ephraim’s blessing realized by the English nation
15 to 21
CHAPTER VI.
Implements of war, armour, and fortresses of the Anglo-Saxons and
Assyrians compared. They obtained a knowledge of maritime
and commercial transactions from the Assyrians, if descendants
of the Israelites. Glory of the Saxons, &c
21 to 23
CHAPTER VII.
23 to 29
All disciples of our Lord have a direct interest in the blessings promised
to the Israelites, though not necessarily connected by birth.
Concluding observations 29 to 33
APPENDIX 34 to £6


Jews now found in the vicinity of the place of their original banish-
ment, though they have lost all knowledge of their history, are not said
to have forsaken the Mosaic law.—Layard Nin. and Bab. ch. viii. p. 200,
abd. ed. p. 194. They have their Talmud. The same also is said of
those found in China. The Jews have always been noted for their firm
adhesion to the customs of their forefathers. This, therefore, is a strong
jyrinia facie argument against the Saxons being the lost Ten Tribes, when
coupled with the other circumstances we have referred to, unless the
Israelites were in this respect alienated from the common faith of the
followers of Moses. The following customs observed by the Saxons,
however, go to prove that in some inspects they accord with those of the
Israelites. They disallowed usury.—Lev. xxv. 36. There were four
degrees of rank amongst them, viz., nobles, freeborn, freedmen and slaves.
Adultresses were scourged.—Lev', xix. 20. Polygamy was not practised
except amongst the nobles, as evidence of their wealth and state.
Whoredom was punished with death to both parties.—Lev. xxi. 0.
Virgins only allowed to marry, and that only once.—Lev. xxi. 14.
They divided their land equally among their sons. Twelve nobles
were appointed to administer justice by monthly visitations.—Numbers
vii. 2. Each class married those of their own degree of rank. To be
without children, was to be without reputation.—lsa. iv. 1. “They
thought it unseemly to pourtray their gods in the likeness of men, or
having a natural regard to that demand of the Lord ; ‘ To whom will
ye liken me saith the Lord.’”—(l. Speed His. of Eng. p, 203.) Doubtful
matters were decided by lot.—Lev. xvi. 8 ; Num. xx. 56. They were
given to hospitality; and they held the performance of vows as most
sacred, accepting no ransom money, or redemption for such of their
captives as were devoted to sacrifice by vow to Woden.—Leviticus
xxvii, 28, 29 ; (Speed bk. 7, p. 201 ; R. Verstigan, p. 80, ed. 1673.)
These national characteristics approximating so closely as they do to
those of the Israelites, is remarkable, if they never had any connection
with them by natural descent or intercommunication. Although they did
not observe circumcision, they were idolaters, but so were the Israel-
ites. The term covenant, according to its legal meaning, is an express
contract, made between two parties, which, though liable to be broken,
cannot be so without inflicting an injury upon one of the contracting
parties. The party guilty of the infraction becomes liable to the con-
ditions imposed, or penalty due to the breach. In studying this subject
we must take into consideration the ‘relative position and condition of
the contracting parties. In the case under consideration, it was a cove-
nant between God and man, and if the Israelites were the party who
violated the conditions, it follows as a consequence, that they placed
themselves at the entire mercy of God, who had the right and power to
dictate the terms of reconciliation, or enforce the penalty. It becomes
us therefore to notice the course pursued by the Divine Being, and its
influence on the destinies of the Israelites. We find that its (the cove-
nant) terms were very explicitly made known by Moses in the land of
Moab, and entered into by the captains, officers, and elders, and all the
men of Israel, with their little ones, their wives, and the stranger in
their camp, from the hewer of wood to the drawer of water, it was a
covenant ratified by God with an oath. —Deut. xxix. 10-12, 14. The
conditions of this solemn engagement were violated by the Israelites,


and drew upon them the Divine retribution. They were, as predicted,
rooted out of their land, in anger and wrath, and great indignation, and
oast into another land. — Dent, xxviii. 3G, 37, 49, (53, b.cv, 1451,
xxix. 28. Where there are several parties to a covenant, such as in the
ease under consideration, and some break the conditions, while others
observe them, the covenantee has the power to make a distinction in
the enforcement of the penalties incurred, and justice requires it. This
distinction God observed in his treatment of the Jews and Israelites.
The former having forsaken idolatry after their return from Babylon,
were under the covenant till the advent of the Messiah, rejecting whom,
they still stood to the old covenant, and are, at this time, suffering the
penalty due to their cruelty and unbelief. The Israelites on the other
hand, never returned to their allegiance under the old covenant, and
suffered all its penalties, being entirely removed from off their land.
They however were open to the offer made under the new covenant,
which was, in fact, founded upon one of the conditions of the old, and
shows in a remarkably clear light, the inviolability of God’s promise to
Abraham, and his great mercy. The especial promise to which we
allude, is “ In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed.”—
Gen. xxii. 18. A promise renewed to Jacob.—Gen. xxviii. 14. If the
Saxons are the Ten Tribes, then, by embracing Christianity, they are
under the conditions of the promise made by God to Abraham and his
seed; and that of the new covenant, founded upon his promise, that He
would establish an everlasting covenant with Isaac’s posterity.—
Gen. xvii. 18. This was done in the time of Moses, and has been
■carried out in its penalties on the Israelities, and is being carried out at
this moment on the Jews. The covenants being broken, and the penal-
ties enforced, God has inviolably made good his word, and shewn that
He “is not man that He should lie, neither the son of man that He
should repent.”—Num. xxiii. 19. The conditions binding upon God
were contingent upon the Israelites keeping his commandments, and
walking in his ways, (Deut. xxviii. 29,) and his release, on their refusing
to hearken to Him, and non-observance of his statutes.—Deut. xxviii. 15.
It is evident that there can be no bargain, stipulation, or covenant,
without there is more than one person interested, and that, whichever of
the contracting parties breaks the terms, injures the other parties thereto,
and is responsible for all the consequences. The covenants having been
broken by the Israelites, we have now only to look to the fulfilment of
God’s promises. The covenants were failures, being entered into by the
Israelites, in all sincerity of purpose, but in entire ignorance of theii
inability to resist temptation. Self-reliance, was, in their experience, a
remarkable failure, and an example to all generations, of human weak-
ness, ingratitude, and depravity, and, at the same time, of God’s justice,
severity, and inviolable integrity, and that faith in Him can never be
misplaced. God has shown Himself to be as merciful as he is just, in
the execution of his threatenings. Joshua told the Israelites that they
would not serve the Lord, for He was a holy and a jealous God, who
would not forgive their transgressions nor their sin; if they forsook
Him and served other gods, He would turn and do them hurt after that
He had done them good ; {Joshua xxiv. 19-22,) they, however, in self-
confidence and good intention, replied —“ Nay, but we will serve the
Lord.” Joshua told them they were witnesses against themselves, that
they had chosen the Lord to serve Him,” and they replied, “ we are wit-


nesses.” Therefore to the promises, and the promises only, we must look.
It is also worthy of remark, that when their great lawgiver predicted the
result of their disobedience, he intimated that there were secret things
which belonged to their God, independent of those then revealed to
them.—Deut. xxix. 38, 29, also see whole chapter. These, then hidden
things, were probably those subsequently made known by the prophets.
Did God at any time intimate prophetically that they should lose their
nationality, forget their original language, and divinely instituted laws ?
If so, and all other things agreeing, it is possible the Anglo-Saxons may
be the descendants of the lost Ten Tribes, and the mystery of their
ancestry be solved.
On searching the records contained in the Sacred Scriptures, we
find numerous instances recorded of the Israelites being charged with
forgeting and forsaking God, and God is represented as being forgotten
and forsaken. —Isa. Ixv. 11; Jer. xxiii. 27 ; Ex. xxii. 12 ; Judges ii. 12;
Hosea ii. 13, iv. 6, viii. 6, 14. Prophecy too foretold such would be the
case.—Deut. xxxi. 16 ; xxxii. 18. Forgetfulness of God -was one of
their great national criminal characteristics, as well as forsaking the
statutes and commandments of their God. They chose also a monarchi-
cal form of Government, and rejected a theocracy, thus significantly
declaring they would not have God to reign over them. God Himself
declared that, since the day that He brought them up out of Egypt to
that day, on which they demanded a king, they had forsaken Him and
served other gods, (1 Sam. viii. 7,8,) and “ had rejected Him that He
should not reign over them and in return they were rejected of God.
On consulting the pages of history we find that the first formidable
inroad made upon the Israelites, was by Tiglath-pileser, (2 Kings xvi. 9)
who invaded their country, and so entirely routed them that he took
from them the larger part of their kingdom. He added Galilee and
Napthali to his empire, and left them only the province of Samaria. He
placed his captives on the banks of the river Kir, which flows into the
the Caspian Sea, in latitude 39° north, b.c. 753. Shalmaneser
(the Thaimau of Hosea), followed him, and invaded Samaria,
the remaining portion of the Kingdom of Israel, subdued it after
three years, and earned away all the chief men of the Ten Tribes,
and located them in Halah and Gabor, on the river Gozon, (b.c. 722,
2 Kings xvii. 6, 23 ; xviii. 11,) and in the cities of the Medes. Sena-
cherib (the Jaber of Hosea) his successor, who completed the conquest,
carried away the remaining inhabitants, b.c. 720. The question presents
itself thus—Could the Hebrew captives be the ancestors of the Anglo-
Saxons 1
CHAPTER 11.
The Babylonian captivity of the Jews and St. Peter’s Mission.
Origin of the Saxons from the testimony of ancient authors.
Probable loss op customs and language by Israel. Two
STREAMS OF PROPHECY, ONE BEING TO THE ISRAELITES, AND ONE
ESPECIALLY DIRECTED TO THE JEWS. THE JEWS AFTER THEIR RE-
TURN from Babylon offer sacrifices for the Twelve Tribes.
The Jews who were carried captive by Nebuchadnezzar, about 120 years
after the captivity of the Israelites, returned to their own country after
seventy years, and therefore cannot be confounded with the Ten Tribes.


We have good ground for the belief, that about 800 years from the first
carrying away by Tiglath-pileser, St. Peter, to whom the preaching of
the Gospel was committed to the circumcision, went to Babylon to
preach Christ to the Hebrews there, who were in considerable num-
bers at that time —(1 Peter v. 13). We do not however find any
certain record which proves that these Hebrews were either exclusively
Israelites or Jews, unless we are by the term, the circumcision ,
(2 Gal. i. 7-8) to understand that the Jews were especially alluded to,
indeed there does not appear to be any absolute certainty, as to who
they were at Babylon to whom St, Peter makes especial allusion, as
sending their salutation to their fellow Christians. From this time,
a.d. 60, all trace of the Ten Tribes, (even upon the supposition that
St. Peter met with any of them in Babylon,) is lost sight of, unless the
Sacea alluded to by “ Arminus Marcellinus,” as a nation inhabiting
places overgrown and commodious for cattle, at the foot of the mountains
Ascinima and Comedus, as set down by Ptolemy are the same. Ptolemy
places the Sacea, in his geographical description of Asia, as living
between the mountains Alani and Tapuri,—(J. Speed’s Hist, of Eng. 197.)
T. Albinus states that the Saxons take their name from these Sacea, who,
he says, came from Persia ; in which opinion Henry Ferrars, a learned
and noted antiquary, and John Speed coincide.—(J. Speed, a.d. 1623,
book 7, chap. ii. p. 197 of his History of England.) This view is supported
by “ Occa Scarlensis,” who says the Saxons came from Saxo, a prince of
India, who with two brothers w’erc sent abroad to seek their destinies,
by lot, their natural country being overburdened with people, and that
they followed Alexander the Great, in Greece ; their names were Frisco,
Saxo, and Bruno. Seranzious derives them from the Phrygians.
F. Albinius thinks them to be descended from the Sacea, a people of
India. Strabo says the Sacea made incursions in countries being far off,
as Armenia, where they appear to have been called Sacacena, from
which parts of Asia (Sythia) one band, chiefly of their youth, came by
degrees into Europe and possessed the Cimbria Chersonesus of the
Romans (mrw Denmark) in a.d. 110; and lastly, Ptolemy places the
Saxons in Inner Sythia.—(J. Speed, p. 598.) All these authorities go to
prove that the Saxons came from Asia, and that too from those parts
where it is understood the lost tribes were settled by their captors. It
is evident that none of the writers we have quoted, on the authority of
Speed and Yerstigan (both writers of considerable learning and repute
in the time of James the First, to whom they dedicated their works),
speak with absolute certainty, but with a concurrent testimony, which
must be admitted greatly favours the hypothesis that the Saxons migra-
ted from Persia into Europe, and favours the conclusion that the Saxons
are the descendants of the Israelites, especially when so many of their
customs correspond with those observed by the Hebrews. Any physiolo
gical differences which may distinguish the Jews from the Saxons may
be accounted for in various ways not inconsistent with natural causes, as
for example, differences in countenance, complexion, colour of the hair,
in the original progenitors of the several tribes, habits of life and change
of climate, to say nothing as to inter-marriage with females of other
nations—a practice known to have been indulged in by the Israelites
and Jews (Ezra x. 17), and which not only tended to the production of
an altered physiognomy, but also to a change, if not the entire loss, of


the mother tongue, of which, a remai-kable illustrative instance is given
by Nehemiah (Neh. xiii. 24), who states, that the children of such of
the Jews who had married women of other nations, could not speak the
language of their fathers, hut according to the language of each people
to which the mothers belonged. Ezra also gives the names of 111 heads-
of families who had taken strange wives by whom they had children,
whose number probably amounted to between two and three hundred.
—Ezra x. 18-44. One of these was son to the high priest, and others
were priests and Levites. Having taken a review of the testimonies of
sacred and profane history, we shall enter upon those of prophecy, and
endeavour to ascertain howfar they apply to the subject in hand, comment-
ing upon their bearing as we proceed. It is evident that there are two
distinct streams of prophecy, one of which embraces the destinies of the
kingdom of Israel, and the other that of J udea ; or in other words, the
Israelites and the Jews. That which includes the Israelites is divided
into two branches, one, a bloodstained stream flowing through a nation
steeped in ingratitude and crime, visited by divine justice and retribu-
tion. The other pure and limped, flowing from God's mercy seat,
abounding in promises of glorious times and affectionate recognition,
through a rich and fragrant region of joy and gladness.
It is evident that if there is any truth in prophetic predictions,
they apply to an existing people, yet nowhere do they distinctly point
out their particular locality, but represent them as scattered amongst
the nations, from amongst whom they are to be separated, and with
their brethren, the Jews, to be restored to their now desolate land of
promise, which is to be renewed in all its pi’istine riches and gi’andeur,
•with many additional glories. It is worthy of remark, that the Jews
after their return from the Babylonian captivity, when the offering for
sin was made, and the burnt offering to God, it was for all Israel, and
consisted of one young bull, one he goat, and eight rams for each of the
Twelve Tribes, and seventy and seven lambs, or seven lambs for each of
Eleven Tribes, the total number being twelve young bulls, ninety and six
rams, seventy and seven lambs, and twelve he goats. —Ezra viii. 35. This
was independent of those sacrificed at the dedication of the Temple,
which consisted of one hundred young bulls, two hundred rams, four
hundred lambs, and to which we invite particular attention, for a sin
offering for all Israel, twelve he goats, according to the number of the
tribes of Israel, (Erza vi. 17) thus including the supposed lost Ten Tribes,
stud proving beyond all dispute that the Jews at that time entertained
no doubt as to the existence of their brethren, who had been in captivity
two hundred and sixty-four years, B.c. 519. This offering for all the
Twelve Tribes, as narrated by Ezra, was a kindly act of sympathy, love,
and recognition manifested by the Jews towards their captive brethren.
We are of opinion it goes strongly to prove that during the seventy years
captivity of the Jews, they had both seen and held friendly relations
with their brethren of Israel. It is probable these sacrifices were
offered from a knowledge that the Israelites could not observe the
Mosaic rites in the land of their captivity, without drawing upon them
the displeasure of their conquerors. It goes to establish the fact that at
this time the Ten Tribes were still in Assyria, and had not lost all
recollection of their religion and laws. It was a noble expression of
faith in God’s promises by the Jews, and brotherly sympathy, brought about.


probably, by their own sad experience and resr oi t 01 ‘ their disobedience
against God. Up to this period, «*<> Ten Tribes could not have passed
southward,' either into Abyssinia or to the Continent of Africa, neither
could they have done so for the next 527 years (which carries us forward
to the destruction of Jerusalem by Titus) without the Jews being
cognizant of the circumstance, because they must have passed through
the land of Canaan, or its immediate vicinity, unless they went by way
•of the Persian Gulf, and thus by sea, which is by no means probable.
CHAPTER 111.
Ephraim especially alluded to by the Prophets. God’s Judg-
ments and Promises. The Lost Ten Tribes must be looked
FOR TO THE NORTH-WEST OF ASSYRIA. PROPHECY RESUMED.
Its bearings on the Saxon Race and English Nation.
Prophecy points more especially to the Tribe of "Joseph or Ephraim as
that upon which the divine blessing shone with the greatest refulgence.
This mark of God’s favour is traceable from those earliest blessings pro-
nounced by Jacob and Moses on the house of Joseph, till the last of the
prophets, who shadow forth the restoration of Israel to the land of promise.
The name of Ephraim occurs nearly three times as often as that of
Israel in the prophetic writings, while the other tribes are scarcely
alluded to. From this we infer that it is to this particular branch of the
Israeliteish family we are to look for the especial fulfilment of the
divine blessing. Ephraim was to become a multitude of nations. —
Gen. xlv. 19, 20. Israel was to bless in the names of Ephraim ami
Manasseh. It was by the ten thousands of Ephraim, and the thousands
of Manasseh, that the nations were to be pushed to the ends of the
earth, as with the horn of an unicorn,-—Ueut. xxxii. 17.
We shall now endeavour to trace those predictions which illustrate
God’s dealings with the Ten Tribes, without trenching upon those
especially devoted to the Jews. We are especially indebted to Mr.
Hine for our attention being drawn to the double line of prophecy to
which we have, and shall, have occasion to refer. We shall commence
with the prophets, and follow the order in which they occur in the Bible,
at the same time noticing their respective dates, without confining our-
selves to that especial rule, but deviating as the subject may naturally
lead us. By Jeremiah, Israel is assured he is not forsaken of God,
though his land had been filled with sin against him (Jer. li. 5, G, 50),
he is commanded to flee out of Babylon, and thus save his life, ere the
Babylonian power was destroyed, and they had escaped the sword of her
destroyers, to “go away,” not to stand still, and when afar off to
remember the Lord, and bring Jerusalem to mind. This was b.c. 595.
This suggests the question, Where was this far oft’ land 1 Was it
England 1 By Hosea, the Israelites are told by the exemplification of
the word or name, “ Loammi” (Hosea i. 9, 10) that they are not God’s
people, and he would not be their God, yet their “ number would not be
numbered, nor measured for measure,” and that the place where he told
them they were not his people it should “be said to them that they
were the sons of the living God.” It appears from this, that they were
to be rejected, or disowned, and while in this forsaken condition they
should become a great multitude, and be lecoguized as the “ sons of


God.” Here we are Wi again to enquire, In what part of the world
were they located and increastd + 0 so wonderful an extent 1 It must
have taken place during a prosperous, if not a peaceful period, an d a
rich and productive country. Does this apply to England 1 Again, the
Israelites are told by the same prophet (Hosea ii. II to 23), under the-
similitude of a wife who has been forsaken by her husband, that God
would speak comfortably to his people, and become reconciled to them,
and would betroth them for ever in righteousness, judgment, loving-
kindness, and mercy ; that he would say unto them “ that were not his
people, thou art my people, and they should say thou art my God.”
They were also told that they should be many days without a king,,
without a prince, without a sacrifice, without a standing, and without a
ephod and teraphim (Hosea iii. 4), that afterwards they should return
and seek the Lord, and fear him and his goodness in the latter days.
This was uttered 780 years before Christ. Does this state of things apply
to the Saxons during the early part of their history I With the yearn-
ings of affection God asks of Himself the question, “ How shall I give
thee up, Ephraim f how shall I deliver thee, Israel 1 (Hosea xi. 8) ; and
then declares his heart is turned within him, and his repentings are
kindled together ; then, as if acting in accordance with his feelings, he
says, I will not execute the fierceness of mine anger, I will not return
to destroy Ephraim. They shall walk after him; he would roar like a
lion ; when he shall roar, then the children shall tremble from the west ,
God also declares he will heal their backslidings, in consequence of his
anger being turned away, and that he would be to him as the dew, in
consequence of which he would blossom as the lily, strike forth his roots
as Lebanon, his branches spread and his beauty be as the olive tree, and his
smell as Lebanon—in evident allusion to the cedar, for which the moun-
tains of that district were so celebrated, and which were not only large,,
but yielded an agreeable fragrance. Not content with this glowing
illustration of his favour, God further says that they who dwell under
his shadow shall return , thus clearly indicating an absence from his pre-
sence, and on returning to it they should revive as corn, and blossom as
the vine, and the scent thereof as the wine of Lebanon.—Hosea xiv. 4-7.
'These promises appear to us to indicate two conditions. First, absence
in a western land, where they should increase and flourish, in conse-
quence of his withdrawing his anger ; and secondly, a return on the part
of Ephraim to the God of Israel as their sovereign, under the type of a
large and shady tree, under whose protection they should flourish to a
still greater extent, in a state of quiet repose. The same type was
applied to Nebuchadnezzar when in the zenitli of his glory, under the
shadow of whose boughs the beasts reposed, on whose fruit all flesh fed,
and under whose branches the fowls of the heaven dwelt.—Daniel
iv. 10, 11, 12. Would this condition of quiet and prosperity, when
absent in a west country, apply to England and its people 1 That is,
supposing the inhabitants to be the lost Ten Tribes, or a particular-
branch of them ? Zechariah declares “ that God will save his people-
from the east country, and from the west country, and bring them, and
they shall dwell in the midst of Jerusalem” (Zech. viii. 7,8) ; and
further, that he would save the house of Joseph, and bring them again
to place them, and they should be as though he had not cast them off;
that Ephraim shoidd be a mighty man, and their heart rejoice as through.


•wine; yea, their children should see and be glad, and their heart rejoice-
in the Lord.—Zech. x. 6, 7- Here we have the west country alluded to
again, from whence he would bring them. It is also worthy of remark,
that this bringing away and placing is applied especially to the house of
Joseph in the tribe of Ephraim under the metaphor of a “mighty man.”
Is this west country England, and are the Ephraimites the present’ in-
habitants 1 God is said to saved Israel from the east country. A tribe
of Jews has been discovered in China, and another on the River Zab, on
the south of Lake Wan or Yan, besides some scattered families more to
the west (Layard’s Nineveh, pp. 191, 201), and it is remarkable that
while they retain a knowledge of the Mosaic law, they have no history,
and are ignorant of those events which brought them to their present
localities. It does not appear, however, that they are numerous in the
■east. They are, probably, the descendents of a few isolated and scattered
families. It is therefore, we think, manifest that it is to the west we
must look as the present abode of the Israelites. If they are not in
existence at the present time, and that, too, in vast numbers, we think
there can be no meaning in the language of the prophets, and no truth
in the historical records of their dispersion after their captivity and
settlement in the northern parts of the Assyrian Empire by Shalmaneser,
his predecessor and successor. The Mediterranean Sea to the west, and
the powerful and warlike nations inhabiting its shores, would present an
unsurmountable barrier to migration in that direction, and as the
Israelites were carried to the north, the north-west is the direction we
must look to as the course which would naturally be followed by the
Ten Tribes in escaping from Babylon, as directed by the Prophet
Jeremiah at the command of God.—Jer. xv. 50. They must be existing
now, as a vast body of people not to be “ numbered or measured ” for
number somewhere in the west.
We shall now turn our attention to those prophecies which are most
likely to throw light upon this important subject, and then sum up the
■evidence, and in so doing endeavour to arrive at a sound conclusion,
humbly praying the Divine Being will condescend to guide us aright,
and preserve us from error. Isaiah says (Isa. xxiv. 13-15), “There shall
be in the midst of the land amongst the people, as the shaking of an olive
tree, as the gleaning of apples when the vintage is done. They, the
people, shall lift up their voice, they shall sing aloud for the majesty of
the Lord, they shall cry aloud from the sea. Wherefore glorify the
Lord in the valleys, even the name of the Lord God of Israel in the
isles of the sea.” A very important question is here suggested—Does
this pi’ophecy apply to Tyre or Israel ? If to the latter, they must be
residents in the isles alluded to, and accustomed to traverse the sea in.
ships. Now, since the Tyrians were a maratime people, it would be
strictly applicable to them, and not to the Israelites, who never were a
seafaring people. We are, therefore, as the chapter in which passages
quoted has especial reference to the destruction of Tyre for a period of
seventy years, compelled to conclude that this does not allude to Israel,
hut is a display of the universal sovereignty of God over all nations.
Again, Isaiah says (li. 4,5), “ Hearken to me my people, give hear to
me, O my nation, for a law shall proceed from me, and I will make my
judgments to rest for a light of the people. My righteousness is near,
«ny salvation is gone forth, and mine arms will judge the people ; the


isles shall wait upon me, and on mine arm shall they trust.” These-
passages form part of an address to Abraham and Sarah’s posterity, and,
therefore, can have no reference to any other people than the Israelites,
who, being in the isles, should wait upon God, and trust upon his arm
for support, for in the following verse (li. G), the Lord says, “ The
heaVens shall vanish like smoke, but his salvation shall be for ever, and
his righteousness shall not be abolished towards his people.” Here we
are naturally led to ask, What isles are alluded to I Does the prophet
refer to the British Isles, or islands in general in which the Jews may
be scattered ? Wo are of opinion that the Israelites are especially re-
ferred to, and not the Jews, since the prophecy was delivered eight years
after the Israelites were carried away by Shalmaneser, and 124 years
before the Jews were removed to Babylon, and therefore some isles,
which were to be the especial abode of the Israelites are alluded to.
The view taken by the prophecy is prospective.
We now turn to Isaiah xlix. This is a remarkable chapter. There
appears to be some confusion in the arrangement of the passages, which
require considerable study to unravel; we, however, (perhaps rashly)
attempted this, and, to our own mind, satifactorily. We will illustrate
our views by the following series of propositions First, Who are to-
listen 1 Secondly, Who is called from his birth 1 Thirdly, In whom is
God to be glorified ? Fourthly, Who, though he laboured in vain, w r as
to be glorified ? Fifthly, Who was to bring Jacob, and gather Israel to
God? Sixthly, What was the light thing to be done 1 ? Seventhly, Who
was to be a light to the Gentiles? Eightly, Who was the despised, and
who did the nations abhor? And, Ninthly, Who are those who come
from afar ? As the passages are too voluminous to quote, the reader is
referred to the chapter, and requested to compare it with the foregoing-
nine piopositions, and the following solutions. Our answer to the first
is—The islands and the people afar off; to the second —Jesus Christ; to
the third—God was to be glorified in Israel; to the fourth—Jesus-
Christ laboured in vain amongst the Jews, and was glorified; to the
fifth—Jesus Christ was to restore the kingdom in his own person, and
gather Israel; to the sixth—The light thing was the raising up and pre-
servation of the tribes of Jacob ; to the seventh—Jesus Christ was to be
the light of the Gentiles; to the Bth—Jesus Christ was the despised
and abhorred or rejected of his own nation. From the seventh to the
eleventh verses, the prophet describes the circumstances attendant upon
the restoration, which brings us to the ninth proposition, to which we
reply—The tribes of Israel who shall come from afar off, from the north
and the west, from the land of Sinim.—lsaiah xlix. 12. If the Ten
Tribes are settled in Great Britain, they w'ould be both far off and north
and west of their own promised land, the country of their forefathers.
Will this apply to the Saxon or the English people? This allusion to
the far off, the north and west, it must be noticed, is made without any
allusion to the cast or south, thus pointing exclusively to Israel, and not
the Jews, who are well known to be distributed amongst all nations of
the earth, and, therefore, it does not apply to them. In reference to the
third verse, Israel could not be, at one and the same time, the deliverer
and the delivered. The land of Sinim we are ignorant of its locality.
Nothing can be decided respecting the west so frequently alluded to,
upon which to found a decided opinion, unsupported by corroborative


evidence, since it is left unrevealed in the Bible. We propose, there-
fore, to examine such testimonies as may tend to throw light upon this
important and highly interesting subject. In reference to Israel’s com-
pliance with God’s invitation to return to Him, and walk no more after
the imagination of their evil heart, Gods says (Jer. iii. 18), “In those
days the house of Judah shall walk with the house of Israel, and they
shall come together out of the land of the north to the land I have given
for an inheritance to their fathers.” —Jer. xxiii. 7, 8. The prophet also
says, “ I will no more say the Lord liveth which brought up the children
of Israel out of the land of Egypt; but the Lord liveth which brought
up, and which led the seed of the House of Israel out of the north
country , and from all countries whither I have driven them, and they
shall dwell in their own land.” Again, Isaiah (xliii. 6) says, “ I (God)
will say to the north give up, and to the south keep not back my sons,”
speaking of Israel. These passages add to the probability that the
Israelites are to be found in a noi’th and western direction from the
meridian of their own country. It is also remarkable that where Israel’s
return only is alluded to, it is from the west and north more especially,
but when the Jews and Israelites are spoken of conjointly, three quarters
of the compass are mentioned (Isa. xliii. 5,6), for example, “ I will
bring thy seed from the west, the north is to give up, and the south not
to keep back.”
We have now gone through all the evidences we deem conclusive as
to the locality of the Israelites. The fact of their present identity is one
of the highest moment. It involves consequences which stagger the
understanding. They are no less than the validity of the sacred writings
as a revelation from God to man, that book on which all Christians of
all creeds, during eighteen hundred and seventy-three years, have built
the hope of a future life, and eternal happiness. It involves the fate of
countless millions. Well may it be said, “ Let God be true, and every
man a liar.” That the Bible is the record of truth every discovery of
ancient and lost cities has established, independent of any other evidence.
That it is true, and God’s word, there is no doubt. Israel then does
exist. The Ten Tribes are note a vast multitude. Where are they ?
Who are they 1 The Ten Tribes were transported by their conquerors
to that identical spot from whence we have traced the migration of the
Saxons. Where then must we look for them if not in England, and
amongst the nations of Saxon origin 1
CHAPTER IY.
Improbability of the Israelites being lost through annihila-
tion, OR BY ABSORPTION INTO THE OTHER NATIONS. God’s
COMMAND TO ISRAEL TO GO FORTH OP BABYLON AND NOT TO
STAND STILL. TIIE WEST THE ONLY COURSE OPEN TO THEIR
MIGRATION. THE SPECIAL COVENANT BETWEEN GOD AND ISRAEL.
Signification of the names England and Englishman.
The prophecy of Moses respecting the House of Joseph,
and of Ephraim in particular.
Is it probable, nay, is it possible, that every prophecy contained in the
Bible concerning Tyre, Sidon, Moab, Egypt, Nineveh, Babylon, Greece,
Jerusalem, Judea, Samaria, and Jesus Christ, not to say anything ot


the flood, and many other events, should be so very remarkably and
literally fulfilled, and those relating to the Israelites, that is to say the
Ten Tribes, be the only ones not so 1 Is such a supposition consistent
with present known facts 1 Is the everlasting covenant abrogated, and
its conditions nullified ? The thing is not to be credited. The Ten
Tribes can neither be annihilated nor absorbed amongst other nations,
they must he in existence, they may have lost their primitive tongue,
their physiognomy may be changed, they may, from adverse circum-
stances, have lost their histoiy, the national records having been des-
troyed, their manners and customs become changed, but lost as a people
they cannot be, without invalidating the truthfulness of a book, the
inviolability of whose prophetic writings up to the present time, has
stamped it above all other records as one of Divine origin, of unsurpassed
sublimity of expression, and profundity of wisdom. While we ask
where are the Ten Tribes 1 we feel assured they are in existence, and
cannot but be found. After a lapse of 2600 years we know the localities
to which they were transplanted, we are told that “ the very places
where it is most probable where the Israelites were deposited, we find
that the very name is recorded in Scripture, so little changed in the
lapse of centuries, it is only reasonable to suppose we have ascertained
the locality in which the captives of Samaria were placed.” Another
argument in favour of this theory, is the probability that the conqueror
would exchange the captives for the people of his own country, as he
would thus have vassals on whom he could rely, at distant parts of his
empire, while the malcontent foreigners would be more immediately
under his own eye, and more likely to become incorporated with the
Assyrians. — Bonomi’s Ninevah, sec. 2, chap. i. p. 48. Mr. Layard
states, “ that we learn from the inscriptions, that the Assyrian con-
querors established the -worship of their gods in the countries they sub-
dued.”—Bayard’s Niv. and Bab. p. 378 Upon this fact he remarks,
“ that the vast number of families thus sent to dwell in distant coun-
tries, must have wrought changes in the physical condition, language,
and religion of the people with whom they intermixed.” The same may
be said of those nations whom they transported from their own lands
and carried into Assyria, one grand object of the Assyrian monarchs
probably being, to compel uniformity of religious observances, or at
least the worship of their gods, and oneness also of language. The
Israelites were placed precisely in this position, and, during the many
centuries of their captivity, caused them to change their native
tongue for that of the part of the empire in which they were placed.
The Israelites “ appear to have existed as a separate people, till they
disappear from the page of history all at once, and the country they
occupied was taken possession of by the Cuthseans.”—(History of Jews,
published by Murray, vol. 1. p. 306.) From this it is evident they had
emigrated elsewhere. They had been prophetically warned to go forth
of Babylon before its conquest and destruction—“ My people, go ye out
of the midst of her, and deliver ye every man his soul from the fierce
anger of the Bord.”—Jer. li. 45, 49, 50, Babylon hath caused the
slain of Israel to fall, so at Babylon shall fall the slain of all the
country. Ye that escaped the sword go away, stand not stilt: remember
the Bprd afar off, and let Jerusalem come into your mind.” There is no
record of any compulsory removal. That they did quit the country at


the time alluded to is evident, or the Cuthseans could not have become
possessors of the soil without a contest, in which the Ten Tribes must have
been involved, and violently expelled, a circumstance which would
scarcely have escaped the notice of some contemporary historian. We
look then to the fact of their migration, as being established, both his-
torically and prophetically. The Israelites cannot then be lost, and we
again ask—Where are they, by what name are they to be met with, and
in what country 1 They could not lie hidden for ever, the time of their
discovery must have arrived, or cannot be far distant.
Let us now consider the words made use of by the prophet, they
are few, but very significant, and most important—to “go away.”
This implies freedom of action, and consequently choice of direction.
They are not to stand still, which indicates constant progression and
promptness of action, and from the admonition, to remember the Lord
afar off, there can be no doubt they were to move on till they came to a
distant country, in which, when settled, they were mot to forget either
their God or their holy city. This prophecy, though given in the form
of a command, to persons then existing, was uttered several centuries
before it could possibly have been carried into execution, and was pro-
bably never known to those to whom it was addressed, it may therefore
bo read thus—“ My people shall go out of Babylon, and deliver every
man his own soul from the fierce anger of the Lord.” As Babylon
caused the slain of Israel to fall, so “at Babylon shall fall the slain of
all the country.” Those that thus escape the sword “shall yo away and
not stand still, and shall remember the Lord afar off, and Jerusalem
shall come into their mind.” Though written in the present tense, it
has evidently reference only to future events, and we feel justified in
transposing it into the future, as giving it a more direct and clear bearing
on our subject. In fact, part of the original sentence is in the future
tense, viz., “so at Babylon shall fall the slain of all the country.”
In the fulfilment of prophecy, the actors in the events predicted,
are generally ignorant of the foretelling. They act according to circum-
stances which appear to originate in a natural manner, and deal with
them without any idea that they are fulfilling a divinely predicted and
foreordained event. So it was pi’obably with the Ten Tribes, they did
what they did without regard to the expressed will of God, but as acts origi-
nating in their own free will and the necessity of the occasion. It is, we
think, highly probable that at this time the northern part of Europe was
either very thinly peopled, or not at all, and thus would present but
little impediment to its occupation by an enterprising and energetic
people. That the country they would be naturally led to select, must
have been one which presented inducements from its extensive pastures
and richness of soil is only reasonable to suppose. In this respect they
were in the same position as our immigrants who have settled in the
wild of America, and those of Australia. We also think that if there
were any aboriginal inhabitants on the north of the River Danube at
that time, they were neither powerful, nor much advanced in civilization.
These conclusions, if the Ten Tribes went westward, are supported by
the testimony of Arminus Marcellinus, who says the Sacae inhabited
“ over grown places commodious only for cattle,” a people which he places
in Asia, and who, as we have before remarked, in the opinions of Speed
and Ferrer'S, emigrated from Persia, and were the progenitors of the


Anglo-Saxons. The expression “ commodious only for cattle points so
plainly to a country in its primaeval and uninhabited condition that it
scarcely admits of a doubt that our conclusion on this point is the correct
one. If we estimate the time from the overthrow of Babylon, which is
the time the Israelites would be most likely to take their departure from
the land of their captivity, till the arrival of the Saxons in Britain, we
find a period of nearly eight hundred years elapsed, and from their first
captivity under Shalmaneser, nearly twelve hundred years, which would
allow ample time for their great increase in strength, number, and wealth.
See Bayard’s Nineveh and Babylon, iii. p. 294. It is highly improbable
that the Israelites would select a country where it must have been knoAvn
the inhabitants were hostile to their progress, especially at the com-
mencement of their undertaking, or that they would venture into a
region of which they possessed no previous knowledge, either obtained
from other people or pioneers of their own, or what in the colonies
would be termed exploring parties, sent for that express purpose. Not
to have done this would have been opposed to the dictates of common
sense, and to the known practice of other people upon like occasions.
The time, too, is singularly opportune. Babylon at the predicted time
was, no doubt, in a state of disorganisation, and her rulers not in a
position, and, therefore, deemed it most prudent to offer no resistance to
such a movement, but were probably disposed rather to encourage it
than detain a discontented and numerous population opposed to their
rule. Their progress to the east, to the south, and the south-west would
have been opposed by great, war-like, and powerful nations, while to
the north and west n# such impediments presented themselves.
It is therefore certain that no other course was open to them but
that to the north-west of the Black Sea, thus avoiding the Grecian States
and the Roman Provinces. The probabilty—nay, we think, the cer-
tainty—that with the loss of their original language (as we have
elsewhere shown, founded upon the fact recorded by Nehemiah), coupled
with the practice of idolatry, to which they were notoriously addicted, it
is remarkable, that with the full knowledge of all this, God, through His
prophet, tells them when “ afar off to remember the Lord ” and not
forget Jerusalem, but that, when they had reached the farthest extremity
to which they could go, some event would arise which would have the
effect of reminding them of their God, their holy city, and consequently
of their origin and history. It seems to infer that forgetfulness on these
subjects would continue till they attained a fixity of residence, and a
period of calm and quiet repose. That they should forget and not follow
the Mosaic law, is not at all extraordinary ; their history is little else
than a record of such forgetfulness and ingratitude. There is, therefore,
nothing contrary to history, or opposed to probability, in the supposition
that the Anglo-Saxons are at least a portion of the Ten Tribes of Israel;
but, on the contrary, it is consistent with facts, so far as they are known.
What was the condition of the Ten Tribes prior to their captivity and
the coming of the Messiah ? A backsliding and rejected people ! Prior
to and after they left Egypt they Avere a people under a special covenant,
entered into between God and themselves, the conditions of which are
reciprocal. God undertook to give them many special privileges, powers,
and immunities, upon condition that they, on their part, rendered to
Him strict obedience in the performance of certain duties, offerings, and


gifts—the neglect to perform these conditions rendering them liable to
certain pains and penalties. This was solemnly ratified B.c. 1451 years.
—Dent. xxv. 16, 17, 18, 19. The terms were publicly made known, in
the presence of and to all the people. The Israelites were not more than
twenty-five years before they broke their part of the covenant, by the
transfer of their allegiance to other gods.—Judges ii. 11, 12, 13. For a
long time God refrained from carrying to the extreme all the penalties
due to the infraction of their part of the conditions, but exacted some
and refrained from others.
Upon contrition He frequently and graciously received them again
into favour, until at last they so persistently and frequently violated all,
that God terminated the contract and exacted full payment, and then
declared the covenant at an end. He ejected them from the land He
had given to them for a perpetual possession, took it from them alto-
gether and gave it to others. In this forsaken condition they remained
for a period of 750 years, when He offered to all who thought fit to
accept and comply with its conditions, a “new covenant,” not of works,
but of grace, the terms of which were, on the part of God, fully per-
formed in the person of the Messiah, and which was a full and literal
redemption of the promise made to Abraham. This covenant has now
been in full force for 1873 years. The condition of Israel at this time
was that of an utterly rejected people, in which condition they had been
for nearly 750 years. During this period they neglected or entirely
forgot the worship of “ Jehovah ” as their Sovereign and their God, lost
their language, and nearly every trace of their former customs and
religious observances. Upon the introduction of the new covenant God
sent special messengers to make known its conditions and offer it for
their acceptance. Four hundred and forty nine years were occupied in
its dissemination, before it became generally known, to those who were
removed afar off" to the uttermost part of the earth as a penalty for their
infraction of the old and broken covenant. Ai’e these circumstances
such as are recognizable in the history of the English nation, and such
as would naturally apply to them if they are the lost Ten Tribes of
Israel 1 The following reasons appear to justify a reply in the affirma-
tive. Our Saxon ancestors came from the East into Britain, and no
satisfactory account can be given of them, which does not place them
originally in Asia, and there, in the locality where the Ten Tribes were
planted by the Assyrian monarchs, and, as we have endeavoured to show,
and we venture to think, satisfactorily, in the only direction open to the
emigration of a large and powerful body of people such as the Ten
Tribes must have been when this even is supposed to have taken place.
The name Israel given to their progenitor Jacob, signifies
“ a Prince of God,” thus originating that of “ Israelites.” This
name was to be changed “ and a new name given to them.”—
Isa. Ixv. 15. This is remarkably verified, if the Anglo-Saxons are a
portion of Israel, in the name English, which originally signifies an
angel, and Englishman an angel-like-man, (R, Yastigan, 153, 161, 162)
which, when applied to the Ten Tribes, will not appear incongruous or
strange, the old name signifying “ Princes of God.” This can scarcely
be deemed an accidental occurrence, when a new name was pre-ordained
of God, and when the term angel signifies a “ messenger,” or one sent,
and we take into consideration how fully the English, as a people, have


literally sustained this character of God’s messengers, in the dissemination
of the Gospel, and the circulation of the Bible throughout the whole
world. The English are, undoubtedly, above all other nations, God’s
angels or messengers on earth,where is there any part of our globe to
which they have not or are not carrying God’s preached or written
Word. The British and Foreign Bible Society alone having circulated
sixty-eight millions, four hundred and seventy-seven thousands, and
thirty-one copies of God’s Woi'd, and has now printing, seventy-eight
editions, in thirty-two different languages of the earth (69 Report of B.
and F. Bible Society, 1873), which, supposing each copy to be accessible
to ten human beings, would convey the knowledge of the true God to
nearly seven hundred millions of mankind. Truly, the English are,
above all other nations, “ God’s angels ” or messengers on earth ■ for
where is there any accessible part of the world to which they have not
carried the Bible ? Are they not still sedulously circulating it not only,
by the Bible Society, but through the instrumentality of Missionary
Societies, and Sunday schools? We now turn to consider Moses’
prophetic description of the future of the house of Joseph, which is
made especially to centre in the tribe of Ephraim. The heaven, the
dew and rain of heaven, the sea, the sun, the moon, the mountains and
hills, were all to render their contributions towards his prosperity;
here, however, dees not tenninate the fulness of the bounty of God, he
is to become both powerful and glorious above all his brethren. He is
to glory, not only like the young bull, who, fat, sleek, and strong, is
I'eady for any display of physical power, but he is to be furnished with
horns like those of a unicorn, and with them to push the people together
to the ends of the earth.—Dent. liii. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. The great
lawgiver and prophet does not leave any doubt to be entertained as to
the signification of this metaphorical figure of speech, but plainly tells
us that these horns are the ten thousands of Ephraim and the thousands
of Manasseh.
Can this in any way apply to the superior manner in which tire
English in war make use of the bayonet, and which has made their
infantry when charging with that instrument irresistible? Not one of
the Twelve Tribes stand out so prominently as Ephraim, and none, as
we have before remarked, is so often alluded to in the Bible. Over
Ephraim God utters the language of paternal grief, of affectionate, of
repentant kindness and forgiving mercy. “ How,” says God, “ shall I
give thee up, Ephraim ? My heart is turned within me, my repentings
are kindled together. I will not execute the fierceness of my anger ; I
will not return to destroy Ephraim.”—Hosea ix. 8, 9. In tracing the
early history of the Isx-aelites, we find nothing which strictly verifies this
remarkable power of pushing people together to the ends of the earth.
Their conquests were confined to a very limited area, such as by no
means fulfils this prediction. If however, we turn to the English or
Anglo-Saxons, and apply it to them, it is fully verified, and goes strongly
to indicate that these people are the descendants of Ephraim.
What conquests have not been achieved by the English with
the aid of the bow and bayonet ? In the fruitfulness of the British Isles,
—in the abundance of their agricultural and mineral wealth—in her
vast maritime, military, and naval resources—in her vast colonial pos-
sessions—she has no rival. In all these things the great blessings


predicted by Moses are found wonderfully to harmonize, and go strongly
to confirm the supposition that Ephraim, of all the Ten Tribes, is to be
found located in Great Britain. The greatest extent to which the old
kingdom of Israel ever attained was from Eziongiber, on the Red Sea,
by a line running north-east along the western boundary of Arabia-
Deserta to the River Euphrates, in latitude 34° north, and 41° east
longitude ; thence along the bank of that river to about 35° 15' north
latitude; thence by a line west to the Mediterranean or Great Sea ;
on the west by that sea to latitude 31° north ; and thence by a line south
to the Red Sea, a little south of Elath • —an extent of territory far
exceeded by several English colonies of a third class. From this it will
be seen how very far short of the fulfilment of the Mosaic prophecy, of
“ pushing the people to the ends of the earth,” was realized by the
Israelites of old, when in the meridian blaze of their ancient glory, prior
to their being carried away and transplanted in Assyria. This prophecy
then could not have been fulfilled prior to that event, and must be looked
for subsequently. To what people, and to what part of the world, are
we to look for its realization 1 The eye involuntarily turns to England
and to Englishmen. To what other country or people can the mind
turn, and trace so many resemblances to the Mosaic picture, so many
realizations of prophetic announcements !
CHAPTER Y.
Conditions of the New and Old Covenant compared. Admission
op the Anglo-Saxons into the New England’s Mission.
Balance of Evidence goes to prove that the Tribe of
Joseph or Ephraim is in England. The remaining Tribes
—where supposed to be. Ephraim’s Blessing realized by
the English Nation,
Let us again briefly direct our attention to the covenants established
between God and his people. A covenant to be perfected, requires rati-
fication and sealing. God confirmed his part of the first covenant by
the symbol of his personal presence in the Holy of Holies, over the
mercy seat, and by fire from his presence consuming the sacrifice upon
the altar, and the Israelites there by the act of circumcision. The
second covenant was confirmed on God’s part by the descent of the Holy
Ghost, on the part of the believer by the act of baptism. Under the old
covenant, all persons who submitted to the rite of circumcision, whether
Israelites by birth, strangers, or bond servants, were admitted to its
privileges, and so in the second, or new covenant, Israelites, Jews, and
all other nations, are permitted to participate alike in its advantages,
and all are liable to its penalties who are baptised. Under the first
covenant, remission of breaches could only be atoned by the shedding of
blood, so under the second, that remission can only be purchased
through the bloody sacrifice of Jesus Christ. Under the first covenant,,
faith was required from the person who offered the sacrifice for atone


meat, in the promise of God’s acceptance of the animal’s life as a substi-
tute for that of the transgressor, so in the second, this act is required in
the full belief of God’s acceptance of Jesus Christ as our substitute.
The first covenant was made with all who accepted the Lord God as
their divine and supreme head, and who submitted to the rite of circum-
cision in connection with his chosen people, or visible church; and so is
the last made with all those who, in connection ■with the church of Christ,
are admitted to membership through right of baptism. As in the first,
so in the second, holiness of life is an inseparable condition to securing
God’s blessing, for “ without holiness no man shall see God.”—
Heb. xii. 14.
We see, then, that the Saxon forefathers of the English nation, on
embracing the Christian religion, became the recognized people of God,
and participators in all the privileges and blessings of God’s covenants
as much as the Israelites of old were in the first, male in the wilderness.
The English, then, are under the covenant of grace, pre-figured by the
first covenant of works. There is, so far as we see, nothing to militate,
in a religious point of view, against the admission of the English being
the people of Israel and the true descendants of the Patriarch Abraham ;
at the same time it cannot be denied that all who profess Christianity,
and have received the ordinances of baptism, are equally under the
covenant of grace, as were those who were prositites under that of works,
though not of pure Abrahamic stock. The Anglo-Saxon race are then,
we conceive, fulfilling, or rather in them is fulfilled, the promise of God
to Abraham, that “in his seed should all the nations of the earth be
blessed,” being literally Christ’s “angels,” (R. Yastigan pp. 161,162)
or messengers, employed in carrying the tidings of salvation to all the
ends of the earth. In whatever light the question is looked at, whether
prophetically, historically, or religiously, the balance of evidence leads
to the conclusion that the present English nation are of Israelitish
origin. That they constitute the whole of the lost Ten Tribes, is another
question. We are inclined to the belief that they do not ; but they are,
if we are correct in our conclusions, the descendants of Ephraim and of
the tribe of Joseph. We are of opinion the other nine tribes ai’e to be
met with in those European nations who speak the German language, or
are of Teutonic oi-igin. If we are correct in our conjectures, we have
thus the whole of the lost Ten Tribes fully accounted for, and, as in past
ages, the Ephraimites are the leading people and pride of Israel. Again,
look at the territorial area of the British Empire ; her vast and
numerous colonies ; her teeming millions of people of all nations; her
immense naval and military power and resources ; her enormous wealth ;
her grand, commodious, ard well-organized charitable institutions ; her
missionary and Bible societies ; her political and i-eligious freedom ; her
learning and scholastic institutions ; her scientific societies ; her suppres-
sion of slavery; her mineral resources; her wonderful manufactories,
her railroads, her electric telegraphs ; her unrivalled mercantile marine,
which equals that of all other nations put together ; her postal arrange-
ments ; the fertility of her soil, the superiority of her breeds of horses
and cattle of all descriptions ; her administration of justice ; the growing
spread of her language in the physiological development of her sons, and
where shall we find the blessings of Ephraim so abundantly developed
and so eminently enjoyed 1 ?


CHAPTER VI.
Implements of war, Armour, and Fortresses, of the Anglo-Saxons-
and Assyrians compared. They obtained a knowledge op
MARITIME AND COMMERCIAL TRANSACTIONS FROM THE ASSYRIANS,
IF DESCENDANTS OF THE ISRAELITES. GLORY OF THE SAXONS, &C.
It would bo unreasonable otherwise than to suppose that a numerous
body of men, migrating with their families and wealth, would attempt
to penetrate an unknown region, where they were liable to opposition
from its possessors, or formidable beasts of prey, and not go well
provided with weapons of defence and offence. Again, it is only
reasonable to conclude that such instruments would be those they were
most skilled in the use of, and of the best quality procurable. If we
turn to the page of history, we find the Israelites and Jews were expei’t
archers, consequently, the bow and arrow would be the most valued of
their weapons. Of Jonathan, the son of Saul the first King of Israel,
we read, “ From the blood of the slain, from the fat of the mighty, the
bow of Jonathan turned not back ” (2 Kings, i. 22), from which the
inference is clear, that he was an archer of great celebrity, although it is
evident that the Israelites wei'e defeated through the superior dexterity
in the use of that weapon by the Philistines, whe slew' Jonathan and
his two brothers, and so severely wounded the king, that he preferred to
complete his own destruction with the aid of his own favourite weapon,
the sword. We also learn that, in consequence of this disastrous defeat,
David issued instructions to his officers to teach the children of Judah
the use of the bow, and a record of these instructions was kept by
“ dasher,” a writer whose work has not been handed down to us. The
earliest notice of this weapon we find is where Israel called Esau to take
his quiver and bow and go out to the field and take venison.— Gen.
xxvii. 3, b.c. 1760. We next find Jacob bestows upon Joseph a position
above his brethren, which he took with, his sword and his bow, from the
Amorites (Gen. xlviii. 22), which proves that this instrument of war
was known and used by the great progenitor of the Israelites. — (b.c.
1689). We also learn from sacred history that Abraham came froiji
Haran, in Mesopotamia, which formed a part of the Assyrian empire.
It will from this be perceived that Abraham’s family formed part of a
nation where the bow was known as a common weapon, used both in
war and the chase.
Amongst the Assyrians there appear to have been three kinds of
bows made use of, of which the long bow was chiefly used by the infantry,
also by warriors fighting in chariots and on horseback. After examining
and measuring the bows made use of by the Assyrians and nations with
whom they were at war, as represented by Layard and Botta, we find
the long bow to correspond, in length and shape, as nearly as possible
with that used in England before they gave place to firearms, and by the
use of which the Anglo-Saxons subdued the Britons. In support ot this
view, we place great confidence in the following statement, made by
Rodger Ascham, the learned preceptor of Queen Elizabeth, in his treatise
on the use of the bow and archery in general, entitled “ The School of
Shooting.” Ascham observes —(J. Bennett’s edition of Rodger Ascham,
published in 1761, and written in 1544; pp. 111-112) :—“Now, by my
judgment, the artillery of England far exceeded that of all other realms


Taut one thing T doubt, and long have surely on that point doubted, -when
-and by whom shooting was first brought into England ; and for the same
purpose, as I was once in company with Sir Thomas Eliot Knight, which
surely for his learning in all kinds of knowledge, brought much worship
to all the nobility of England—l was so bold as to ask him if he at any
time had marked anything as concerning the bringing in of shooting into
England. He answered me gently again he had a work in hand, which
he nameth, De rebus memorahilibus Anglise, which I trust we shall see
in print shortly, and for the accomplishment of that book he had read
and perused over many old monuments of England, and, in seeking for
that purpose, he marked this of shooting in an exceedingly old chronicle,
'which had no name, that what time the Saxons came first into this
realm, in King Yortigus’ days (a.d. 438-454), when they had been here
awhile, and at last began to fall out with the Britains. They troubled
and subdued the Britains with nothing so much as with their bows and
shafts, which weapon, being strange and not seen before, was wonderful
trouble unto them, and this beginning I (R.A.) think very well to be
true.”
He then goes on to say Edward 111. won the Battle of Cressy only
with his archers ; that at the Battle of Poictiers all the French nobility
were taken, and 30,000 men slain, and very few Englishmen, by reason
•of their bows ; and that the Battle of Agincourt was gained by 7,000
men, many of whom were sick, on which occasion over 40,000 men slain,
and only 26 Englishmen, the archers being composed mostly “of men
who would draw the bow one yard.” In this latter instance more than
fufilling the promise to Israel that “ one hundred should put ten thou-
sand to flight,” there being nearly six Frenchmen slain for every English-
man engaged. This suggests the question, When did the Saxons acquire
so great a proficiency in the use of the bow 1 If, for the sake of argu-
ment, we admit them to be the descendants of the Ten Tribes of Israel,
our case admits of an easy solution. It was the weapon their fore-
fathers were particularly skilled in using, and was the chief weapon
made use of, both in war and in the chase, in the country to which they
were carried captive by Shalmaneser, of which numerous representations
are to be seen in Layard’s and Botta’s works on the monuments of
Assyria. It is a circumstance worthy of remark that, the Ten Tribes,
were transported and incorporated amongst the inhabitants of that part of
the Assyrian Empire from whence their father Abraham first migrated.
The fact is, the Assyrians and Israelites are of the same generic stock, and
are prophetically destined to here-united after a severance, dating back to
the time when Abraham left Mesopotamia at the command of Clod.—
Isa. xix. 23, 24, 25.
We must now direct our attention to another remarkable coinci-
dence in respect to weapons of war. The Saxons “ had short steels, and
these they could throw very forcibly and right at their enemies in war,
and at wild beasts in hunting”—(R. Yustigan, p. 82), on the authority of
John Pomarius. This was a species of boomerang. We find that just
such an instrument is represented on the Assyrian monuments, and is sup-
posed to have been made use of as far back as the time of Nimrod, and
to be represented on his monument as discovered at Nineveh.—See Layard
or Botta. Thus tracing back this remarkable weapon to the great founder
•of the Assyrian Empire, who was a mighty hunter before the Lord


(Gen. x. 8, u.c. 2218), and it would scarcely be presumed to be unknown
to Abraham, the Assyrian ancestor of Israel. It was a weapon
peculiarly adapted to the capture of wild animals, and therefore invalu-
able to a people penetrating a wild district during migration, when the
procuration of food and the subjugation of formidable and ferocious
beasts of prey became a matter of general importance. An instrument
of this nature was known and in common use “ by the pastoral tribes of
the Desert between the Nile and the Red Sea, and likewise by the
Egyptians.” “ Nimrod is represented strangling a young lion, and in his-
right hand he holds an instrument that we infer to be analogous to the
boomerang of the Australians, the raunga munga of the South Africans,
the tombash of Central Africa, and the sillem of the Beesharum, says
Bonomi. The universality of this weapon is sufficient to establish the
fact of its being found in such widely separated continents, and as an
evidence of its high antiquity, we refer to the representation taken from
an Egyptian basso-relievo at Thebes, where it is commonly seen in the
hands of hunters. (Bonomi p. 135.) It is worthy of remark that it is
not noticed as used by any people North, West, or East of Assyria,
except the Saxons, which goes far to establish their Assyrian origin, and-
of Israel in particular, as a people, who, from their connection with
Egypt and Ethiopia, could not but be w r ell acquainted with its use as a-
weapon used both in war and the chase. It is also worthy of remark
that, while its use is unknown in modern times amongst European
nations, it is still in Africa. We have no knowledge of the boomerang
having been used by the Greeks, Romans, Chinese, or other nations,
although we by no means presume, from limited knowledge, to affirm to
the contrary. The Saxons also used the speai’, sword, “ hatchet, which-
they called bills,” the cross-bow and shield, and a curved knife, which
they termed seaxes, from which latter weapon some authors have sup-
posed the name Saxon to be derived. In these respects they
resembled the Assyrians, if we except the cross-bow and the seaxes, of
which we have observed no example in the representation from the
remains of Assyrian sculptures. We shall now direct our attention to
the armour worn by the early English or Saxons, which so closely
resembles that of the Assyrians as to be fairly pronounced identically
the same, if we except some very slight differences in the ornamental
part, and these are so insignificant as not to be worthy of serious remark.
The helmet, chain, and scale armour represented in basso-relievo, copied
by Bonomi (p. 279), would pass without challenge for that of an ancient
English knight. The chain armour represented on the great seal of
William 1., as worn by that monarch, is one and the same as that repre-
sented by Layard, and discovered by him in the ruins of the South-West
Palace of Nimrod.—Bayard’s Nin. and Bab., p. 26. The same remark
will apply equally to that of Stephen. From w hence did our English
ancestors obtain a knowledge of this particular form of body armour I
It is not Roman, it is not Grecian, it is Assyrian, and points to that
country as the source from whence its use and manufacture were derived,
and brought into Europe by a people who came from thence.
If we turn to the old baronial castles and ancient fortresses, we find
they closely resemble those pourtrayed on the walls of the palaces of
Nineveh. They at once remind the observer of those castles represented,
in old records, such as that of Froissart and others. Could this ‘veiy


remarkable resemblance originate in mere accident ? No, but from a
knowledge derived through those who were familiar with them from
personal observation. These, too, speak an Assyrian origin. They must
have been handed down traditionally, or in works long lost. It we divert
our attention from monuments of feudal times, which speak of war and
bloodshed, to the appliances and luxuries of domestic life, we still find
remarkable traces of the same Eastern origin. The chair, stool, and
table are singularly significant, “ for the Assyrians used armed chairs,
and ate like us off tables ; the representations of the banquets allows of
no doubt with respect to this.” (Bonomi, p. 313.) Can this be a mere
accidental coincidence ? No Eastern nations have adopted these conve-
niences, and have produced no records of their use amongst their
ancestors, if we accept the Chinese; from whence then did the Saxons
obtain a knowledge of their construction and use 1 They were not
likely to have derived them from the Greeks or Romans, with the latter
of whom they were constantly at war, and held no social intercourse.
The Saxons were a maritime people, so were the Assyrians, the
latter carrying on commercial relations with other Eastern nations and
countries bordering the Caspian and Euxine Seas by ships of their own.
To the East by way of the Euphrates aud Tigris rivers, which cornuni-
cated with Asia and Africa, by way of the Persian Gulf. The Israelites,
during their sojourn in Assyria, had every opportunity of acquiring a
knowledge of naval architecture and navigation. The oldest representa-
tion of Saxon ships strongly resemble those represented in the sculpture
of the Assyrians, while they had but little to those of Rome and Greece.
■“ At a very early period,” observes Bonomi (p. 332), “ the textile fabrics
of Assyria were celebrated all over the civilized world; the raw material
required for this manufacture, viz., flax, cotton, wool, and perhaps silk,
was either not the production of their own soil, or certainly not in
sufficient quantity for their own consumption.” This fact alone implies
the existence of a very extensive shipping trade in the east. Accord-
ingly, we find the prophet Isaiah (xliii. 14) alluding, in the eighth
century before our era, to the maritime power, says “Thus saith the Lord,
your Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel, for your sake I have sent to
Babylon, and have brought down their nobles and the Chaldeans, whose
cry is in their ships.” And again, the poet Aeschylus says, “The Persians,
Babylonians, too, that abound in gold, send forth a promiscuous multi-
tude, who embarked in ships, and boast of their skill in archery.” We
ask, Were none of the captive Israelites employed as seamen or soldiers
on board the Assyrian ships 1 Quoting from Professor Heeren, Bonomi
{p. 335) further remarks, “ Situated between the Indus and the Mediter-
ranean, it was the natural staple of such precious wares of the East as
were esteemed in the west. Its proximity to the Persian Gulf, the great
highway of trade, which nature seems to have prepared for the admission
of seafaring nations of the Indian Seas into the midst of Asia, it must
be reckoned as another advantage, especially when taken into connection,
as it were, of this great highway, and opening a communication with
the nations dwelling on the Euxine and Caspian Seas. Thus favoured
by nature, this country necessarily became the central point where the
merchants of nearly all the nations of the civilised world assembled,
and such we are informed by history it remained so long as the inter-
national commerce of Asia flourished.”


When we take into consideration that Israel was despoiled amongst
the Assyrians for centuries, it is utterly impossible but they must have
acquired a full knowledge of these things, and participated in their
accomplishment. From their acknowledged skill in the management of
ships, and their daring exploits on the sea, against the power of Rome,
which the Romans were never able to suppress, we are naturally led to
enquire, from whence did the Saxons acquire this knowledge of naval
superiority so damaging to Rome 1 If they originally came from
Assyria, and are the progeny of the lost Ten Tribes, we reply that they
learnt it from their captors in the land of their captivity, and have
retained it from that period to the present, being at this moment the
greatest commercial and maritime people the world has ever yet seen.
If, lastly, we turn to the supreme deity worshipped by the Assyrians, as
represented by Layard and Botta, it agrees in all its essential details
with that of the Saxons. The Assyrians worshipped the sun, and so
did the Saxons. He was the ancient Baal of the Israelites. The Saxon
god is represented as a man holding a wheel immediately before him,
from which radiate rays of light. The Assyrian deity represents a
wheel, in the centre of which is a human figure, and on each side of the
wheel are rays of light, or what Mr. Layard terms wings ; they, how-
ever, from his drawings, appear more like the former than the latter,
neither do they agree in shape with the wings represent in any other
sculptures.
We have thus, from the natm*e of their weapons, their armour,
their fortresses, their maritime knowledge, and the worship of the same
god, shown strong grounds for believing that the ancestors of the English
came from Assyria. We have previously ventured to suggest that the
northern pari of Europe was destitute of inhabitants when first
entered upon by the Saxons on their migration from the East, that is,
ii] ton the presximption that they were the lost Tribes, We think R.
Verstigan’s remark is strongly corroborative of this (Rest, of Int. p. 47)
when he says, “ The Saxons were the only possessors of their country
(Germany), and that it was never inhabited by any other people, no
antiquary ever having been able to show to the contrary.” Some his-
torians are of opinion that the Saxons fii’st entered Europe in the time
of Alexander the Great (Speed, p. 198), a period which, from the dis-
turbed state of the Assyrian Empire at that time, might apply to that
e})Och in its history when God prophetically told the Israelites “to go
forth, and stay not,” which, if we are correct in our inferences, and the
authority is reliable, would place their departure about 330 years
before the birth of Christ, or 779 years before their entry into Britain.
It is not unreasonable to suppose that during this long period they had
found the subdivision of tribes, under separate chieftains, requisite for
the preservation of order and discipline of their warriors. If the
Saxons are the identical Ten Tribes of the children Israel, and the
northern portion of Europe was uninhabited at the time of their
migration, the period of 779 years would be quite sufficient to allow of
the occupation of all that part of Europe of which they were supposed
to have been the only and original occupants. Other nations may have
followed in consequence of the dissolution of the Assyrian Empire, and
so closing up their rear as to have prevented their return, or rendered
the attempt too hazardous. Under such circumstances, a progressive


movement would not only be wise, but necessary, and thus led by
degrees to the conquest of Britain. It was a period when “ all Europe,
and a large part of Asia, was one great encampment, not of armies only,
but races on the march.” — lona, by the Duke of Argyle, p. 10.
The conclusion at which we arrived is, that the Israelites after their
transportation from Samaria into Assyria, remained in that country
between three and four hundred years, from whence they extracted
themselves and migrated to the North-West, leaving the Danube on
the South, thus avoiding the great military nations of Greece,
Macedonia, and Rome. That the country to the North of the Euxine,
and along the banks of the Danube, was then a vast tract of unoccupied
country, containing within its limits immense forests and an almost
•unlimited area of fertile soil, fit for both agricultural and grazing pur-
poses ; that during a period of near eight hundred years, the various
tribes retained possession of the richest portions of the country, and as
they increased in numbers, riches, and power, they penetrated as far as
the English Channel and German Ocean ; here they were stopped till
they acquired a navy, and in course of time became a formidable naval
and military power, and made incursions on the territory of Rome
both by sea and land, and finally that a portion of them crossed over to
Britain, conquering and driving its aboriginal inhabitants before them
into the fastnesses of Wales and Cornwall, possessed their land, and
after the lapse of many centuries, and many vicissitudes, but one stream
of onward progress, became the most important naval, commercial,
manufacturing, and military nation the world has yet seen—under the
denomination of the British Empire, which embraces within its grasp
an immense territory in every part of the world, over which the sun
never sets, and rules millions of men of all nations, all languages and
all creeds. Should these conclusions prove to be correct, and they have
not been arrived at hastily, but after many grave doubts, much thought,
And considerable study—then, the glories of the Anglo-Saxon race are
built upon the “ Rock of Ages ” and will defy the assaults of the most
powerful and inveterate foe, and will “be the head and not the tail ”
of the nationalities of the world.— Deut. xxviii. 13. To the tribe of Joseph
as represented in Ephraim (See Appendix) we assign the highest pinnacle
of imperial supremacy, as identified in the English nation, while we are
disposed to recognise the other portions of the lost Ten Tribes in the
various European nationalities speaking the German language, and who
must consequently be participators in her glory. While admitting that
the distinctive physiognomy and language of the English seems to jK)int
to a people distinct from the Israelites, on the supposition that the
Israelites must necessarily resemble their brethren the Jews, or that
they must, for like reasons, be deemed a distinct race from the Germans,
is untenable. The Twelve Tribes were all the descendants of one parent,
yet possessed individual peculiarities, or perhaps to speak more correctly,
distinct national qualifications, a distinction particularly pourtrayed
in the terms of the Patriarchal blessings as we find them recorded in
the Bible, where the distinction is singularly marked, and shows that in
a nation composed of many tribes, originating from numbers of one
family , the parental peculiarities are perpetuated in their posterity,
whether these relate to mental qualities or physiological differences.
Wliile the conclusions we have arrived at are such as are forced upon us


by the balance of evidence, we feel their grandeur and glory stagger us.
The thing seems to surpass belief, it overshadows the glory of all the
other nations of the world. It brings the English, as a people, into-
such close connection with the Supreme Ruler of the Universe as strikes
us with awe. What immense responsibilities does it lay us under—to
love, honoui', and obey God as our Father and Sovereign. We cannot
get away from our conclusions, yet we hesitate to admit them. If the
English are a portion only of Israel, and that portion is Ephraim, the-
heavens, the dew, the sea, the sun, the moon, the mountains, the hills,
and earth shall all minister to his wants, and crown him with glory, the
goodwill of God shall rest upon him.—Dent, xxxiii. 14, 15, 16. We
admit we may be in error, and therefore ask every man to judge for
himself, and act accordingly. If our conclusions are the true and only
legitimate ones_ which can be arrived at, we are indebted to Mr. Hine-
for their initiation. We may have been fascinated and led astray by
the greatness and grandeur of the subject, but we have endeavoured to
judge for ourselves from the evidence before us, and striven to arrive at
a sound conclusion. We trust others will take up the subject from a
conviction that truth can never be subverted by investigation, but only
strengthened and confirmed when it is undertaken in honesty of purpose,
and in firm reliance on the guidance of God. If we and Mr, Hine are-
in error, the sooner that error is exposed and committed to oblivion the
better; but if, happily, we are the exponents of the truth, let it be
spread throughout the length and breadth of the British Empire to the-
honour and glory of God, who keepeth truth for ever, and has redeemed
and exalted his people Israel.
CHAPEER Yll.
Ann the Disciples of our Loud have a direct interest in the;
Blessings promised to the Israelites, though not neces-
sarily CONNECTED WITH THEM BY BIRTH. CONCLUDING OB-
SERVATIONS, «fec.
The conclusion arrived at, as set forth in the preceding chapter, is, if
correct,[of absorbing interest. Every true Christian possesses a personal
interest in the events, past and prospective, which have been brought
under review, since he is an Israelite by adoption, no matter to what
nationality he may belong by birth, having been engrafted into the
Abrahamic stock through faith in Christ. He is made a participator in
every national benefit, as well as adorned with eveiy spiritual grace
promised to the seed of Abraham, in whom all the nations of the earth
were to blessed, and of which blessing some have participated, others
are enjoying, and the rest will be possessed. Our Lord said, alluding to
his brethren of the Israel it ish family, “ Other sheep I have which are not
of this fold : them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice :
and there shall be one fold and one shepherd.”— John x. 16. Who are
the other sheep % The Gentile nations, between whom and the Israelites
the middle wall of partition was broken down (Eph, ii. 14), and there
was no difference between the Jew and Greek (Rom. x. 12), all being
baptized into one body, whether Jews or Gentiles, whether bond or free
(I Cor. xii, 13), and though many members, yet one body.—l Cor.
xii. 20, 27. Like to an engrafted limb, which becomes so completely


united to the tree into which it is inserted that it partakes of all its
nourishment, derived through one system of roots, and one circulating
medium, as completely and thoroughly as though there never had been
any severance, notwithstanding the external distinguishing features of
both stock and graft remain unimpaired (Rom. xvi. 16-24), thus most
clearly and beautifully illustrating the fact that the converted Gentiles
were in the Lord Jesus so closely united in one body with the Israelites
and Jews in their blessings and promises, as to be equal participants in
the “ root and fatness ” of the original plant, or in other words, in all
the privileges and glories of the promises made to Abraham. Whatever
difference there was previous to the advent of the Messiah, was abolished
by him, and all who believe in him are one people. Our Lord Jesus
Christ was the first to announce the grand fact of the union of all the
families of the world in one body who accept salvation in and through
him, so that, in the language of St. Paul, “ there is neither Jew nor
Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female,
for all are one in Jesus Christ.”—Gal. iii. 28. So perfect is the resem-
blance in the sight of God in all his chosen people, that even physiologic
differences are unnoticed. By the expression made use of by the apostle,
“ neither male or female,” he appears metaphorically to declare there was
no distinction whatever in the sight of God between believing Gentiles
and Israelites. A more striking illustration of oneness could scarcely l>e
imagined. As if, however, to make the matter clearer, and place it beyond
all doubt, he tells the Colossians there is neither Greek nor Jew, circum-
cision, barbarian, Scythian, bond nor free, but Christ is all, and in all.
—Col. iii. 11. There is no distinction whatever made, either in spiritual,
temporal, religious, or civil privileges promised by God to Israel from
which the converts to Christ are debarred. Every blessing conferred
upon [the one is equally conferred upon the other. Is there then no
■cause for rejoicing? Can it possibly be a matter of indifference to any
man ? Is not every member of the human family interested in the fate
of Israel 1
No one, we presume, will be bold enough to dispute the confir-
ment by God of special privileges and blessings upon Israel, and thus
even the sceptic, who disputes our conclusion, as to the English nation, if
a true disciple of Christ, must feel that he is deeply interested, and closely
connected with all that concern Israel. He must feel that, till the lost
Ten Tribes are found, and in the enjoyment of their promised blessings,
his own are unrealised and prospective ; while, on the other hand, if we
are correct, they are in the actual course of fulfilment, partially, if not
fully, realised, and that he is, at this moment, a participant in their
glory, and benefitted by their influence.
With respect to the promises, the language of Scripture is clear,
and admits of no dispute. It does not say to whom is the promise, as
if speaking of a special, particular, and single benefit; but to whom
“ pertain the promises .”—(Rom. ix. 4.) We are, therefore, led to
examine as to what particular promises the Apostle refers, and we find
them thus specially alluded to—My kinsmen according to the flesh ;
who are Israelites ; to whom pertaineth the adoption and the glory, and
the covenants, and the giving of the law, and the services, and the pro-
mises.”—Rom. ix. 3, 4. The adoption, the glory, the covenants, the
law, and the services, were all integral portions of the Abrahamic pro-


mises. To what does lie so definitely point when he says —“ And the
promises 1” Certainly to something beyond all he had enumerated and
mentioned by name. To what then does he refer ? To Gospel promises ?•
The Old Testament promises had then been partly fulfilled, abused, and
despised ; but those of which Christ was the originator were new and
are included in what we term the New Testament, and not inaptly
termed, by way of eminence, “ the promises.” Can anything be more
copious, or couched in plainer language than that of St. Paul. These
promises, covenants, and blessings include all that is spiritual, temporal,
present, future, and eternal. What then is the natural inference ?
What ! that the Gentile Christians being ingrafted and adopted Israelites,
they become, equally, with Israel, participators in all his privileges,
blessings, and honors. We cannot get away from these conditions. St.
Paul says, “ Jesus Christ was a minister of the circumcision for the
truth of God, to confirm the promises made unto the fathers, and that
the Gentiles might glorify God for his mercy.”—Gal. xv. 9. Other
passages might be adduced in support of our views, these however, we
deem sufficient and conclusive.
It appears to us that God determined upon the restoration, or
perhaps, more properly speaking, the re-construction of the families of
Adam upon a new basis, of which Jesus Christ is the grand foundation-
stone. They will be raised into one majestic structure without any
division of interests, though distinguished by physiognomatical differ-
ences and national customs. They may be compared to stones which,
though raised from the same quarry, and of the same generic character,
yet differ in shade and texture, differ in the shape given to them by the
workmen, in their ornamentation, in their utility, and their place in the
structure, in accordance with the will and design of the architect. Some
nations are dying out in an extraordinary way, and giving place to the
Anglo-Saxon race, which is spreading in all directions, carrying with it
its influence, its language, its religion, its institutions, and its commerce
throughout the world. It looks as though the Divine Architect was
removing them out of the way to make a clear space for the grand
edifice he is constructing. It appears as if the Supreme Being designed
to re-establish one uniform language on the earth, and that the confusion
of tongues should give place to one simple method of expressing thought
and conveying intelligence. These ideas may, to some minds, appear
romantic, but what has not God wrought 1 Since there is to be but
“ one body, one spirit, one hope, one Lord, one faith, one baptism, and
one God and Father of all,” (Eph. iv. 4-6) may there not also be ultimately
but one language? When men conspired and united in rebellious
designs against God He confounded their language, and scattered them
over the face of the earth, may He not, when men are united in loyalty
to his person and government, restore to them the privilege and felicity
of one uniformity of speech, and thus be conferring a boon which cannot
be too highly appreciated, or too ardently desired ? May not the Anglo-
Saxon language become universal ? Is it not known and cultivated now in
all parts of the world where the commerce of England and America has
found its way, and English colonies exist? We admit that these latter
views are speculative. Do we not live in times full of development in
everything which relates to man’s future, and is this beyond the
bounds of probability or those of possibility ? W T e think not.


Look abroad ! What meets the eye ? Visit the great Capitals of
the World, walk through the great centres of Commerce, of Mining
and Manufacturing industries; ramble amidst the Agricultural Dis-
tricts ; glance in at the Ball Rooms; enter the Theatres ; attend.
Reviews; watch the sailing Flotillas of War; board the Merchant
ships laden with Earth’s treasures; meditate upon modern Engines of
destruction; enter Railway Trains; study Electric communications,
girdling the world and annihilating distance ; listen to the deliberations
of Senates ; study industry in all its multifarious branches ; the beauty,
variety, and intricacies of machinery; behold the richness and variety
of costume, its varied shapes, colours and material; enter the abodes of
wealth and destitution; contemplate the munificence of benovelence
and the loving displays of mercy; meditate upon the gigantic and
wonderful discoveries and appliances of science, and the facilities for
education, what has been accomplished, and what is still in progress ;
with solemn tread visit the temples expected to the honour and worship
of God; listen to the varied dogmas of various sects of religionists;
note the decadence of many people and the growing importance of the
Anglo-Saxon x-ace, its overwhelming power and mighty influence ;
behold the Bible, tx-anslated into all languages and distributed over the
whole woxid, and the humanising influexxce it is exex-tixxg on the savage
nations, who people its sux-face, and the teachixxg of missionax-ies; and
what is seexx 1 What is heard 1 What enex-gy ! What progx-ess ! Like
the vast oceaxx, here dashing its mighty waves against the rock-bound
shox-e ixx bootless foxy, there ixx calm peace reposing in the light of a
mid-day sun, like burnished gold, or under the paler light of the full
moon, like a polished mirror of silver, or, gently uxxdulating under the
influexxce of a genial bx’eeze, sustaixxing oxx its peaceful bosom the
freighted ship ; or, it may be lashed into fury by the x-elexxtless blast,
overwhelming in its unfathomable depths, the gigantic merchantman
with its livixxg freight and x’ich merclxandise. All is grand, but still
it is the same to-day as it was thousaxxds of years loxxg since departed ;
the impotexxt fury of the waves are still the same, the divine comnxand
is still obeyed. “ Hithex-to shalt thou come but no fax-ther.” Not so
is the scene on which you are invited to gaze, its enex-gy, its agitation,
its px-ogress, its gx-andeur xxxay be like the xxxighty oceaxx, but it diffex-s in
this, it is not as it was ixx ages past, it is px-ogressing, it is incx-easing. The
thixxg of yestex-day is sxxrpassed by that of to-day, and that of to-day is
destined to be surpassed by that of to-mox-row. In what depax-tment
of domestic life, of Litex-atux-e, of Science, of Theology of discovery, of
blessed peace, of cux-sed war, is there either calm x-epose or retrogression 1-
Man has xxot only learnt, that “ all meix ax-e alike free by nature,” bent
upon assei’ting their x-ights, but, he is fixxding out that all are not alike
fitted by nature to exex-cise these x-ights, that educatioxx is requisite to
tx-ain him to use them with. advantage to himself and for the good of
othex-s, that he is but axx atoxnic pox-tion of a gx-eat whole, with which
lie must be contexxt to be amalgamated in all the relationships of life
and social ox-der, in ixxtelligent and useful employment of mind and body,
or, like a disintegrated atom with othex-s of a like nature, carried by
the blast of an ixxjux-ed comnxunity into pex-petual oblivioxx. All is
onward, there is no standing still, progress is stamped upoxx every object.
The whole of human society is oxxe agitated mass of intellect rolling


onward through endless channels, towards some grand culminating
point. Where is this terminal point 1 There must he a point; beyond
which things now in progress cannot go, there must be maturity and
full growth some-n here. Where is it 1 The world has but a limited
area, it can support but a limited number of animals in life and
health. Wo think all indicate the approach of the Millennial reign of
Christ and the end of the world. All we see, all we know, all we hear
and all we read, point to this grand realisation of prophecy. All is
rapidly progressing towards the consummation of God’s magnificent
and benignant design, the final happiness of the human race, and its
purification from all evil. The personal reign of Christ is, we think,
at hand. Nothing can stay it. It is rapidly approaching. Look for
it, prepare for it. Rest assured He that ruleth the universe is working-
out his own wondrous plans. All his agents are at work, ignorantly,
perhaps, on their part, in many instances, but not in all. The culmi-
nating point is looming in the distance, like the rising sun when his
rays ax*e visible above the horizon. The shades of night are fleeing ;
the mountain tops are glittering with light; the mists are dispersing ;
full day will soon burst upon the Gentile world, and before
the blaze of noon the Jewish night will have departed for ever.
The rays of the Sun of Righteousness in meridian splendour will
cause the world to rejoice, “the desert to blossom as the rose”
—lsaiah xxxv. 1 ; plenty to glad the heart, and peace like a frag-
rant flower to fill the air with sweet perfume. “ The wolf shall sleep
with the lamb ; the leopard shall lie down with the kid ; and the calf,
and the young lion, and the fatling together, and a little child shall lead
them.”—lsaiah xi. 6, 9. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my
holy mountain ; for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord
as the waters cover the sea. Paradise shall be restored.


APPENDIX
APPENDIX, No. 1.
The tribe of Joseph naturally includes Ephraim and Manasseh, these two me
being his only sons. Ephraim is in two or three instances mentioned as a tribe,
and Manasseh many times by the sacred historians ; but when speaking of Israel
as a whole, they invariable make use of the numeral twelve, whereas where
Ephraim and Manasseh included, there would be fourteen, or excluding Ephraim,
thirteen. Ephraim and Manasseh, properly speaking, constitute the tribe of
Joseph, but divided into two princely family divisions. These sons of Joseph
were the objects of a special blessing, one of the essential elements of which was,
that they should become two people. When their grandfather Israel blessed them,
he used these remarkable words, “ He (Manasseh) should become a people, and he
also shall be great, but his younger brother (Ephraim) shall be greater, and his
seed shall be a multitude of nations.” —Gen. xlviii. 19. A prophecy verified only
in the English people, from whom have sprung the Americans, Canadians, Vandi-
monians, Queenslanders, Victorians, South Australians, Western Australians, New
South Welshmen, New Zealanders, Newfoundlanders, Natalites, South Africans,
Mauritians, East and West Indians, Ceylonese, &c., <ic. Amongst the Israelites
the descendants of Ephraim and Manasseh became so numerous, powerful, and
influential as to rank as tribes, thus Ephraim is called a tribe, so also is Manasseh.
—Num. i. 33, 35. David also says, in Psalm Ixxviii. 35, “ Moreover he (God)
refused the tabernacle of Joseph, and chose not the tribe of Ephraim.” In
Num. i. 35, and Josh, iv, 7, Manasseh is spoken of as a tribe, also in 1 Chron.
xxvi. 32, and in Rev. vii. 6. Ephraim is more frequently spoken of as a people,
and Manasseh as a tribe. It could not, however, be intended by either of these
expressions to convey the idea of an addition to Israel in a national point of view,
or there would be thirteen tribes, and not twelve, as is universally maintained
throughout the Bible, and that, too, by Jesus Christ Himself, than whom there can
be no higher authority. Moses is very clear on this point (Num. i. 32, 33, 34, 35),
when giving the number “of males able to go to war,” he says, “Of the children
of Joseph, namely, of the children of Ephraim, 32,200 ; of the children of
Manasseh, 40,500” —being a total of 72,700, a number which exceeded that of any
other of the children of Israel by 10,000; thus, at a very early period of their history
verifying the truthfulness of Israel’s blessing, and its early realization, and proving
beyond all doubt that though each is called a tribe, they reckon as only one
family. In enumerating the princes of the tribes of their fathers, Moses also uses
these words, “Of the children of Joseph —Of Ephraim, Elishama; of Manasseh,
Gamaliel. It is clear, therefore, that they counted but as one of the twelve
national division of tribes. —Num. i. 10. The following list includes all Jacob’s
sons who were assembled round his death-bed to hear his last words, and to whom
they were especially addressed, viz. :—Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah, Zebulun,
Issachar, Dan, Gad, Asher, Naphtali, Joseph, and Benjamin. They appear to
follow in their respective order of age, from the eldest to the youngest, and of
whom the sacred historian says, “ These are the twelve tribes of Israel —
Gen. xxix. 28. In this enumeration no mention is made of Ephraim and Manasseh,
or any other of Jacob’s grand-children. This we deem is conclusive evidence of
the correctness of the conclusion we have arrived at. In the grand military
division of the Israelite’s camp, one division of the family of Joseph occupied the
place of the tribe of Levi, which was exempted from military duty, Ephraim
carrying the standard of the third army, of which Manasseh and Benjamin formed
the second and third sub-divisions. Ephraim, therefore, may be said to represent,
In a military point of view, the tribe of Joseph in right of seniority. Seeing
therefore they were so closely united by family and by national ties, it is not
improbable that Manasseh may be blended with Ephraim in the English nation,
which is thus enjoying all the blessings bestowed by God on the house of Joseph,
which were to extend “unto the utmost bound of the everlasting hills” (Gen.
xlix. 26), which was equivalent to saying, to the utmost limit of the habitable


parts of the earth’s surface ; they also included those “ from heaven above, from
the deep (ocean) that lieth under,” and from fertility.—-Gen. xlix. 26. In what-
other nation is this blessing recognisable, if not in the English ? From the utmost
limits of the east and west, and from the north to the south pole, England’s power
is felt, and the resources of nature have contributed to her wealth and greatness.
APPENDIX No. 2.
What would be the first course of action adopted by a people about to re-occupy
a territory long since laid waste, and to rebuild and inhabit cities which had been
lying ruined, wasted, and destroyed, presenting to the eye nothing but desolate
and confused heaps of stone ? Would it not be to cause it to be minutely examined,
and carefully surveyed ? Such has been the condition of Palestine for centuries,
and still is so. From the following prophetic statement, it is evident that Pales
tine is to be re-occupied, and its cities re-built and inhabited. “ Thus saith the
Lord, God ; in the day that I have cleansed you from your iniquities, I will cause
you to dwell in the cities, and the wastes shall be budded. And the desolate land
shall be tilled, whereas it lay desolate in the sight of all that passed by. And
they shall say, this land that was desolate, is become like the garden of Eden ;
and the waste and desolate cities fenced, and are inhabited. Then the heathen
that are left round about you, shall know that I, the Lord, build the ruined
places, and plant that which was desolate. I, the Lord, have spoken, and will do.
Thus saith the Lord God ; I will yet be enquired of by the House of Israel to do
it for them ; and I will increase them with men as a flock. As the holy flock, as
the flock of Jerusalem in her solemn feasts’; so shall the waste cities be filled with
flocks of men: and they shall knowthatl am the Lord.” — Ezek. xxxvi. 33-38, b.c. 587.
Again, “ In that day I will raise up the tabernacle of David that is fallen, and close
up the trenches thereof ; and I will raise up his ruins, and I will build it as in the
days of old. Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that the ploughman shall
overtake the reaper, and the treader of grapes, him that soweth seed ; and the
mountains shall drop sweet wine, and all the hills shall melt. And I will bring
again the captivity of my people Israel, and they shall build the waste cities and
inhabit; and they shall plant vineyards, and drink wine thereof ; they shall also
make gardens, and eat the fruit of them. And I will plant them upon their land,
and they shall no more be pulled up out of their land which I have given them,
said the Lord God.’’—Amos ix. 11, 13, 14, 15, b.c. 787.
It is a remarkable fact that the wastes thus alluded to are, probably, by this
time nearly all surveyed, and the many ruined cities identified. The Committee
of the Palestine Exploration Fund report that the survey of Palestine was under-
taken in 1871 by a party consisting of Captain R. W. Stewart, R.E., and two
non-commissioned officers, Sergeant Black and Corporal Armstrong, both experi-
enced surveyors, who, with their superior officer, Captain Stewart, had been for
many years previous employed on the Ordnance Survey of England. These were
joined in Palestine by Mr. C. F. Tyrwhitt Darke, an Arabic scholar, naturalist,
archeologist, and interpreter. No time was lost, and proceedings were commenced
by the measurement of a base line, four miles long, near Ramleh, at the close of
the year 1871. The base line was measured, and the triangulation carried out
vigorously. At this juncture Captain Stewart was compelled, from illness, to
return to England, and resign his appointment. Mr. Tyrwhitt Darke, in the
absence of Captain Stewart, assumed charge of the survey for eight months, dur-
ing which several towns were identified and sketches of ruins made, while the
mapwork, up to October 17, 1872, extended over upwards of 880 square miles, the
scale being 1 inch to the mile. Lieutenant Claud R. Conder, R. E., an accomplished
artist, succeeded Captain Stewart. The Committee appears to have already pub-
lished a large map of Palestine, which was commenced by Captain Stewart, a
work which will never have to be done again.-—Work in Palestine, p. 335, 336,
337. Who, according to the prophets we have quoted, is to build the waste cities ?
God. Who are his surveyors ? The Royal Engineers of England. It is mani-
festly God working out his own plan through the instrumentality of the Anglo-
Saxon race. The sites of ruined and waste cities being once clearly identified,
and accurately laid down, their re-construction is a matter of no great difficulty
to any party in full possession of the country ; the materials are there on the spot,
in the shape of hewn stone, and the requisite supply of timber easily obtainable.


Next in importance to an accurate survey is any adequate supply of good water.
Here again we trace the hand of God. While almost all the surface structures
have been levelled to the ground, those beneath have been found to be remarkably
preserved. Large reservoirs are met with, though tilled with the accumulated
sediments of ages and portions of ruined edifices, yet contain much water, and
only require cleansing to be as ready for use as the day they were first completed.
Underground reservoirs, tanks, cisterns, and wells are met with in abundance
enough to secure water to workmen, or are capable of easy repair and restoration.
Aqueducts and conduits are also to be met with, connected with former irrigation
and water supply. Surely this is a remarkable fact, for without water the work of
restoration would be impracticable till it was procured. In the land of Bashan
numbers of towns are so perfect in their houses, streets, &c., that, though of per-
haps over 3000 years of age, they might be occupied by inhabitants in a few hours.
The Rev. J. L. Porter, M.A., says, “ Salcah is one of the most remarkable cities
in Palestine. It has been long deserted, and yet, as nearly as I could estimate,
five hundred of its houses are still standing, and from three two four hundred
families might settle in it at any moment without laying a stone, or expending an
hour’s labour on repairs.”—Giant Cities of Bashan, p. 75, p. 80. No less than
eleven of the old cities I saw from Salcah, their ramparts, their houses, their
streets, their gates, and doors are nearly all perfect. Here let us enquire, By
whom is all the work we have alluded to, and discoveries made, been effected ?
By Anglo-Saxons. The Committee of the Palestine Exploration Fund, referring
to the expedition under its auspices, say, “The Committee of the English Society
made arrangement with our friends in America by which we have left them the
east of Jordan, and reserved to ourselyes the west. It is fair that the two great
Anglo-Saxon peoples, who, above any other race read and delight in the Bible should
share this work between them.”—Work in Palestine, p. 27. “ Surely this is
God’s doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes.” Are they not God’s people of
Israel ? Who are to be the workmen employed in the resuscitation of Palestine ?
Israel. God says, “My people of Israel: they shall build the waste cities, and
inhabit them.” —Amos ix. 15. The first step towards this work is now taken by
the Anglo-Saxons, who, above every other race, delight in the Word of God, thus
in a most striking manner identifying them as God’s people of Israel. The days
shall come when it shall be said, “ The Lord liveth which brought up and led the
seed of the house of Israel out of the north country, and from all countries whither
I have driven them, and they shall dwell in their own land.”—Jer. xxiii. 8.
Should the English from any at present unforeseen circumstances, become pos-
sessed of Palestine, and commence to re-build the ruined cities, their identity as
Israel will be complete, there can be no gainsaying it. In the meantime, after the
lapse of ages of banishment from Palestine, it would be utterly impossible for the
Israelites to identify that country ; they would, as a body, know as little of its
localities as the aborigines of New South Wales. A survey was, therefore, an
absolute necessity, coupled with the identification of towns. The fact of an
accurate survey and identifications of towns in process, and near completion, is a
most remarkable, circumstance in connection with the fulfilment of prophecy, and
Israel’s return to their long-lost ancient inheritance.
Lee & Koss, Steam Machine Printers, 231 Sydney.




