

EPSOM, 1872
SIR ROGER TICHBORNE’S
TIPS,
PROFITS ON SALE OF THESE WILL BE APPLIED TO ASSISI’
THE CLAIMANT
IN HAVING A FAIR TRIAL.
If I was born at Wapping —my Mother’s darling joy,
If my Father was a butcher, and I a butcher boy,
There must many live who as a child and butcher knew me,
For I had grown a man before I went across the sea.
When in Australia I said, “De Castro is my name,” —
In this admit that I did wrong, but many do the same:
I am Sir Roger Tichborne, —the Estates belong to me;
And this my sure defence will prove for all the world to see.
I was some time with the Carbineers, the Colonel knows me
well,
Brother Officers and Privates too just the same story tell;
How I used to dress, to walk, to ride, to- spea.k, to wink my
eye,
And how I now doq'ust the same, —do all those persons lie ?
When in Australia, &c.
I was on board the “ Bella ” when she sank beneath the waves,
And almost all who were with us met with watery graves;
But I escaped with life—yet did not let my family know,
I thought I’d battle with the world, and still did travelling go.
When in Australia, &c.
I at last reached Wagga-Wagga, where, at a butcher’s shop,
I earned my living manfully by cutting steak and chop;
I kept my wife and children, and mean to keep them still,
As England’s gentry are all kept, for have my own I will.
When in Australia, &c.
I have not been tatooed with the letters R. C. T.,
Nor was the anchor , heart , or cross ever marked on me;
I admit I’ve been a wanderer, and have rambled from my fold,
But now that I’ve returned, I don’t belong to them I’m told.
When in Australia, &c.
Tho’ my Mother when she met me said “It is my long lost boy,
Come back at last to claim his own, and prove a Mother’s joy;
Thank Heaven the prodigal has safe returned to me,” she
cried, —
Her joy too great, it broke her heart, alas for me! she died.
When in Australia, &c.
Who dares deny a Mother's right to recognise her own ?
Who will insult her memory, or say she has not shown
That true maternal instinct known but in a mother’s breast ?
She called me Son—she kissed my brow —then died in peace
to rest.
When in Australia, &c.
There are friends , tenants , servants who all remember me;
The working men on my Estates all say that it is he;
They have seen me ride, and hunt, and shoot, and fish, and
with the poor
I never was too proud to speak, nor yet to enter door.
When in Australia, &c.
I’ve been asked lots of questions, what I did when but a child,
Such as no one c,an remember, ’twas enough to drive me wild,
To be asked if I sucked lollipops, and if I liked hardbake, —
Nine-tenths of the said questions were asked for asking sake.
When in Australia, &c.
I have a hundred witnesses who all swear unto me
As being the right Sir Roger,—that I am they will yet see;
Tho’ a section of my family—some Lawyers too —say “ No,
Sir Roger’s dead,” —but I live still; what do they to me
owe?
When in Australia, &c.
They well know that I’m Sir Roger ; but then you know
they see,
If they admit the fact, the Lands and Rents belong to me;
That Tichbome House and Upton are mine they know right
well,
So hang me, if they can, they will, or any falsehood tell.
When in Australia, &c.
People of Old England, I ask you all to stay
Until you hear my case out, before one of you say
That I am not the right man, which no Jury yet has found, —
I’ts un-English to kick a man when he is on the ground.
When in Australia, &c.
THE DERBY TIP.
Sporting men who love fair play, our Country and its
Crown,
Put money in your purse the day to Epsom you go down :
Prince Charlie is the right horse to stay the Derby pace;
Sure as I’m the right Sir Roger, he like me will win his race.
