

illiHlliMBiilHM
“R” PATTERN WINDMILLS
n‘ £f‘ <?y iO’fsHLL'o OSL F!?orM Cf?e l/Hd
MARK RF 17f1.:
Stroke 7in. Standard
Sin. Special
MARK RG —2lft.:
Stroke SJin. Standard
10in. Special
MARK RH —2sft.:
Stroke 9£in. Standard
12in. Special
MARK RK 30ft.:
Stroke 12in. Standard
15in. Special


Read This Instruction Manual and Follow it
carefully during Erection of your
Tower or Windmill
Foreword
The Southern Cross “R”’ Pattern Windmill is designed
for long life and heavy duty performance, but, to get the
best service from it, the erection and maintenance in-
structions is this manual must be carefully followed.
Your Windmill outfit has been supplied for a specified
capacity, and if, at any time it is x desired to install a
larger pump at the same depth in the bore, or to deepen
the bore to maintain the same output, it is advisable to
consult our nearest Sales Office regarding the effect the
variation in loading would have on your mill.


ERECTING INSTRUCTIONS
For Southern Cross “R” Pattern Windmills
On Standard Southern Cross Towers
SOUTHERN CROSS “R” Pattern Direct Acting Windmills are soundly en-
gineered and carefully built.
SOUTHERN CROSS “R” Pattern Windmills are made to standards and toler-
ances which are usually set for much more delicate mechanism. Rigid inspections give as-
surance that there is no deviation in quality.
The SOUTHERN CROSS factories are fully equipped with modern machine
tools and are operated by efficient methods. Every possible margin of error is held to a
minimum.
7S9Bjl^M
7]54 McD&R.


Stages of Erection


Page Three
SOUTHERN CROSS “R” PATTERN WINDMILLS
Stages of Erection


Three Post Towers Four Post Towers
HE!CHT\ Hah] OWER HEICHTl NaSftJbwER
OF . it Mills. of .3J.M/lls.
tower R B tower R B
20' 6~Qi“ 3 L 6% 20' 5-2" 3-8%
25' 7 L Q% Q-5% V-5%
0O' Q'-Z S~3% 3Q_. 7-4%" 5 L 3%
'35' ~I0 l 5%~1cRM -3 5 ' 16-0%
~a0' IHI" 6'~/0£ 6W
45 ; I0 L 6“ 7-7-jf
W-6' 6 L 5£ _50' 11-10" S L 5&
55 /5-//% &-a% 55 9 L Sj"
60' IT'-S"\ f 60 I I4 L 0%\ I0 L 0K
Four Post Towers
HfiCHT\ No. 6A Tow£-/?|/Vo, 7/> Tower
OF '«■ E5 'Mills 36' Mills
jo**' a fg-"7? Tb\
lS> A-/*, 3-q&
SO s'-3% 2-9* 5-JlS, 3-/oj
S3 6 -a' A-6% b-5%A-7&
30 p'-B' s'-s£
33 d-fikb-'-Z e-at b-s4
ao 9-a% b-/>4 s'-/ok s- o-j
as -/d-s-k /o-/o% 7 si
50‘ //-!/■% 8-6%/# o% Q-71*
53 i3-oJf 9-3% /A-/ j*
60\/A-S% /o' *M\/4 /6-s $,
vs ur\ No- i> Tower |/Vo. 7 Tomer
OF gi*g5 ‘Mill- 30'Mills
tvub R B A ~3
l£ 3-tlk S-//4. s\3 3-0%
.3.0' b-B% 5Sj 8 -8% J-/o4
s H T-fe* A-&i. & '-oS
30 S : 3% 5 : 4j* 5-5.Z 3-3%
35 /o- B-f% fo si a
4 0 /5-/" b-/‘/£ /5-zi> P-o%
45. /Jvftfr 7’-6% /5-6% 7-si‘
5 d /4 -/o a - 6% /A -//i a-? 5
55 /& -/5 s'-jsj/B-sM 9-*%
60'\/7- 7 /Q-/% /F-&4 /0-&4
Check over all parts to make sure that the complete outfit is on the ground.
There are separate bags of bolts for the Tower, Mill Engine, Wheel and Vane. The
bags for the Mill Engine, Wheel and Vane have a list in them showing the bolts they contain
and also where the bolts are used.
When assembling, take care that each bolt is used in its correct place
The Wheel Arm Bolts are High Tensile Steel.
FOUNDATIONS
1. Refer to illustration, “Position of Foundation Holes,” to get dimension “B” for the size and height of the tower to
be erected. The heights shown are measured from ground level. For towers over 60ft., a special sketch will be sent.
position of Foundation Holes
1 7ft. Mills only.
Position of Foundation Holes
21 ft., 25 ft. and 30ft. Mills.
2. Make a loop of wire which will encircle the end of the bore casing or pump pipe. Fix a stick to the wire at the correct
radius, “B” and describe a circle. On this circle mark the position of the foundation holes by marking off dimension
“A.” The points obtained by this measurement are the centres of the holes.
3. Sink holes (4ft. lOin. deep for 17ft. and 21ft.; 6ft. 6in. for 25ft. and 30ft.) sloping the sides outwards so the
bottom of each hole is about 4ft. diameter. For Towers over 60ft. high, special instructions will be supplied for the
foundations.
4. The bottom of the holes should be approximately to the same level. If the site is
on a hillside or a slope, the shallowest hole should be to the depth shown above,
and the others of a sufficient depth to bring them level.
5. Drive a stake into the bottom of one hole so that it projects about 6in. from
the bottom. A simple method of doing this is to drive a nail into the stake at a
point 6in. from the top, then stand in the hole, hold the stake upright between
your feet and drive it in up to the nail, using the ramming end of a crowbar.
Take another stake and do the same in one of the other holes.
6. Cut two pieces of timber exactly the same length and about 6 feet long. Stand
these pieces on top of the stakes in the two holes and across the top lay a
straight piece of timber of even thickness.
7. With a spirit level on the straight piece of timber, check for level. If it is not
level, drive down the high stake until it is.
8, Repeat the above procedure for each hole until all the tops of the stakes are
level.
9. Mix a batch, about I yard, of concrete, using 6 of stone or rubble, 3 of sana
and one of cement. Ram concrete into the bottom of the holes until it is level
with the tops of the stakes, i.e., about 6 inches deep.
10. The reinforcing rods which are packed with the Tower Anchor Polsts are placed
in the concrete so that they project from it. Keep the rods to the edge of the
holes so they will not foul the anchor posts when the tower is being erected.
These rods ensure that the concrete, which is put on later, will make a secure
joint.
Anchor Post.


SIZES OF BOLTS
|2|ft. 'R'l “
17 ft. R 25ft. 'R SOrr. R
MILL MILL MILL
r~==> TOWER TOWER TOWER
—ifxg Hx 4‘xg
!, fflXX 2 x X x a|'x §"
«j.„ kh— 2 SM-\ X |i' y g ol*y T 7177
BOTTOM 3JFI X fejjj. 2 2, X f. 2 2 X '„
tIRT /aC X N 11 y 1 r *3 y I p-y 5
c \ X 2 . U x 2 2X «
17 FT Iffin’l ! 4 X 2 i x B
FORM ~3'‘ I" 3 I' 1 %
{ 4*2 2 “ x i*
GIRT 4 ; f.
GIRT 6^^y4X^4X S 4 X 8 ix 2
21,25,&30FT, / il'v I" .I'v 1 ilv?
PLATFORM / /IK X 2 U x 2
4 X li 2 2 x ?6
i," I4X 4
a/ r ~^ir£ x £ »4 X 2 l 2 X I”
GIRTQ [Jl f' U X \ 2?<^
—■■ j "~*~~ *• * h ' 1 "***' i *" /i *f*r
•■'mif 1 STEEL ANCHOif|ffi''
ItED wJgL
Jsiii&w
11. The concrete should be allowed to stand for at least 12 hours to let it set. In the meantime, proceed with the unpack-
ing of the mill engine and assembling it as described on Page 11.
ERECTING THE TOWER
1. Next day proceed with the erection of the tower.
2. Cut the wires on the tower bundles and remove the bag of bolts.
Sort out the bolts into their various sizes and for convenience later,
screw the nuts off the bolts.
3. Sort the tower legs. There are three special 10ft. sections for the
top to take the tower castings, and these must be set aside. They
may be distinguished by the large holes at one end.
4. Pick out the three sft. anchor posts. On 35ft., 45ft. - and 55ft.
towers, six sft. leg sections are supplied. Three are anchor posts
and the other three are the bottom sections of legs immediately
above the anchor posts.
5. Bolt the foundation plates to the anchor posts. On 35ft., 45ft. and
55ft. towers, bolt the sft. leg sections to the anchor posts. For other
towers, bolt a 10ft. leg section to each anchor post. There is a top
and bottom end for all leg sections. The top end is the end with the
STAY FOR BOTTOM;
GIRT /
NOT TO BE USED ON LADDEfy
SDF TOWER/
GIRT
_ GIRT
M GIRT
GIRT
GIRT
Assembled Tower.
For Bolt Sizes for 30 ft. Mill Towers refer also to Page 17.
Bottom of Tower.
corner cut away. Refer to illustration,
“Assembled Tower” on this page for bolt
sizes. Stand one of these assembled legs
in each hole.
6. Take the three longest tower girts, which
will be recognised from the braces, as
they are of heavier material, and bolt
them to the holes in the tower legs above
the joints on the anchor posts.
7. On 35ft., 45ft., and 55ft. towers, bolt a
10ft. leg section to the top of each leg.
8. For all towers, bolt the next shortest set
of girts to the next set of holes in the leg.
On 35ft., 45ft, and 55ft. towers the holes
are above the leg joint. Leave all nuts
loosely screwed up except on leg joint
and anchor posts to leig bolts.
9. For all towers, take the longest set of
braces. Bolt one end to the left hand
end of the bottom girt, looking from out-
side of tower. The braces fit outside the
legs. The middle of the braces is bolted
to the middle of the second girt. Screw
nuts on loosely.
10. On 40ft., 50ft. and 60ft. towers, take
three more 10ft, leg sections and bolt
one to each leg. One man stands on the
uppermost set of girts and holds the leg
up while the other inserts the bolts and
tightens them up. All leg joint bolts
are to be tightened right up.
11. For all towers fit further girts and
braces. Continue adding leg sections,
girts and braces until all these parts are
in position and the top of the tower is
reached. Don’t forget to keep the three
special 10ft. legs for use at the top.


1.
k
».W
> 2.
1 V Xv"
•! 'rts \
Page Six SOUTHERN CROSS “R” PATTERN WINDMILLS
On towers for 21ft. and 25ft. “R” Mills, the second girt from the top is fitted outside the legs.
On towers for 30ft. “R” Mills, the 3rd and 4th girts from the top are fitted outside the legs.
12. Go over the tower and tighten all the nuts.
NOTE: After the mill has been in operation 6 months, check all bolts and nuts to see that they are still screwed up
tightly.
13. Assemble the sections of the ladder. Place the side rails on a block of wood with the slotted flange downwards and
drive the rungs in with a piece of wood. Then drive the other side rails on. See Section “E” on illustration “Assembled
Tower.”
14. Bolt the ladder in position outside the tower, using 2iin. x 5/16 th Hex. bolts and 13in. x iin. pipe distance pieces.
If there is a sft. section of ladder use it at the bottom. The top of the ladder attaches to the fourth girt from the top.
15. Fit the stay for Bottom Girt between the middle of the bottom two girts. A stay is not fitted on the ladder side of the
tower. See section “C” of illustration, “Assembled Tower,”
16. Before anything further is done a derrick should be erected
ERECTING THE DERRICK
(Refer to illustration on this page.)
The derrick should be of such a length that the top will be 12ft.
higher than the top of the tower, and not less than 4in. casing
for a 17ft. mill, sin. casing for 21ft. and 25ft. mills, or 6in.
casing for 30ft. mills.
Screw the casing together and lay it along the side of the
tower. The middle of the derrick should be about the middle
of the side of the tower.
Using a wire rope sling, fix a snatch pulley block to the top of
one of the legs above the top girt. Using another rope sling,
attach a single pulley block to the bottom of one of the tower
legs or the top of the bore casing.
Fit a pair of Steel Clamps to the top of the derrick, leaving
about Gins, of the derrick above the clamps. Where clamps
aren’t available, drive a solid forked piece of bush timber into
the end of the casing. Also drive a piece of timber into the
bottom of the derrick to stop it digging into the ground.
Using a steel sling, fix a treble pulley block to the derrick im-
mediately above the clamps. Also secure four guy lines to the
derrick immediately above the treble block sling.
Secure the winch to a tree or firmly set posts as shown in the
illustration, “Erecting the Derrick.”
Pull the wire cable free from the winch and reeve it through
the single pulley block on the bottom of the tower leg, up outside
the tower through the snatch pulley block attached to the top
of the tower, then through the treble pulley block at the top
of the derrick, through a double pulley block which can be
laid anywhere along the derrick, back through the treble pulley
block, through the double pulley block, through the treble pul-
ley block and finally secure the end firmly to the eye of the
double pulley block.
Tie the double pulley block to the derrick with wire so that it
will not swing about when the derrick is being raised.
Pull on the rope from the pulley block on the top of the tower
and pull through a few yards of rope and tie it securely round
the derrick at a point a little above the centre of balance,
which will be found by trial. Judge the centre of balance for
a start and tie the rope. Then wind the winch and take the
weight of the derrick. If necessary, lower the derrick and re-
tie the rope until when the derrick is lifted, the top rises first.
Raise the derrick with the winch until it comes approximately to
its correct position. Then pull the bottom over to the middle of
one side of the tower and as close in as it will go.
Pull the guy lines to their correct positions at right angles to
each other and secure them to posts or suitable trees.
Untie the rope around the derrick and take the snatch pulley
block down from the top of the tower. Undo the single pulley
block from the bottom of the tower leg and attach it to the
bottom of the derrick.


FITTING TOP TOWER CASTING
1. Tie a rope sling around the top tower casting and hook it to the double pulley block. Raise it by hand by pulling on
the rope till it is above the top of the tower. Lower it into position and bolt it up tightly, using spring washers under
the nuts.
ASSEMBLING TOWER PLATFORM
1. Lay out the platform boards on the ground in the same way as it will sit on the tower. See illustration “Tower Plat-
form” below. When looking at the platform from the outside, the boards should be under on the left-hand side,
and on top on the right-hand side. Bolt the boards together. There are also three short pieces supplied in the bundle.
Bolt one across underneath the middle of each side of the platform.
FITTING THE TOWER PLATFORM
1. Undo the three bolts which will hold the platform brackets to the tower. See illustration, “Assembled Tower” on Page 5
2. Put the bottom bracket in position on each side and screw
nut loosely on bolt. On 21ft., 25ft. and 30ft. mills the
platform brackets fit under the end of the second angle
brace.
3. Hang the platform by one corner through the hook on
the double pulley block. Raise it by hand by pulling on
the fall of the rope till it is higher than the tower. Then
lower it, one man guiding it over the tower, so that it
will come into its correct position on the bottom brackets,
with the short cross boards to the bottom.
4. Put the top brackets in position and mark the holes on the
platform. Shift the platform slightly and bore the holes.
Then bolt the platform in position.
Tower Platform.
PLUMBING THE TOWER
1. Lay a piece of wood on the top tower casting. Attach a plumb line to the piece of wood so that it hangs inside the
tower from the centre of the opening in the tower casting. The tower must be adjusted so that the plumb-bob will
come over the centre of the bore, and so that each tower leg is exactly the same distance from the plumb-bob.
2. To adjust the position of the tower it is best to put a sling around one tower leg below the top tower casting, and,
using the winch, take the weight of the tower on the derrick so that it can be moved readily.
3. First set the legs to the same distance from the centre of the casing. If the plumb-bob is not then hanging centrally
over the casing, raise whichever leg is low until it does hang centrally.
4. Then concrete the legs as described below.
CONCRETING THE LEGS
3. Make sure that the surface of the concrete already put in is clean
so that the new concrete will set on to it.
2. Mix concrete, using 6 of stone or rubble, three of sand
of cement.
3. Ram about 12 inches of concrete into each hole. Then get some
kerosene tins, cut the ends out, and slit them down one corner.
Slip them around the posts, bringing the top to ground level. A
piece of wire bent around the tins will prevent them from open-
ing out. Fill the tins with concrete, rounding the top so that it
will shed water away from the legs. Ram earth around the outside
of the tins.
TOWER CASTINGS
1. Bolt a suspension strap No. 71 to the point where the
braces cross on each side of the tower.
CONCRETE MUST
COVER FOUNDATION
PLATE TO PREVENT
FOUNDATION FROM
PULLING OUT
Concreting the Legs.
2. Remove the bottom nut and spring washer off each suspension strap and screw the other nut up as far as it will go.
Put a turntable stop, No. 36, on each suspension strap and tie it there temporarily with a piece of wire or string. The
flanged end of the turntable stop should be to the top.


3. Place the turntable and pivot near the bore casing in the inside of the tower. Pass a hemp rope down through the top
tower casting, tie to the turntable and pull it up. When pulled up, tie the rope round a tower leg. Do not remove wire
binding turntable together.
4. Put centering Jacks, No. 117, in the holes in the turntable, No. 15, and a Thrust Block, No. 17, on each Jack. See
illustration “Top Section of Tower” on Page 12.
When fitting 21ft. and 25ft. “R” Pattern Mills on Four Post Towers, the Centering Jacks, RGIIS (for four post
towers) may be too long, and it will be necessary to cut them to suit. If so, cut the end not screwed. These centering
Jacks are made long because the distances from the turntable to the legs vary for different makes, and it is better to
cut the Centering Jacks than have to send for longer ones.
5. Push the turntable up on to the suspension straps, being careful to see that the boss to take the oil return pipe is imme-
diately below the tapped hole to take lin. pip© in the top tower casting. Replace spring washer and nut on each sus-
pension strap and screw on the width of the nut. Cut th e wire round the turntable and pivot and also cut the wire or
string round the stop pieces.
6. Put Thrust Block Supports on tower legs, underneath the Thrust Blocks.
7. Lift Pivot, No. 19, off the turntable and make sure that the rollers are placed correctly. See illustration, “Turntable
Roller Race” below. Rollers must be placed alternately, as illustrated. Then replace Pivot on Turntable. This is
held down by Turntable Stop Pieces. See illustration, “Adjusting Suspension Straps.” on Page 10.
Rotating Platform
Note: All bolts on the rotating
platform must be fitted from the
top, so the heads are on top and
the nuts underneath.
1. With main casting lying on
the ground, bolt on the plat-
form angle bearers, Nos. 125
and 126, to the studs in each
side of the main casting, using
spring washers under the nuts.
2. Bolt the platform angles, Nos.
121 and 122 to the bearers.
At the same time bolt on the
diagonal platform support,
No. 143. Then attach plat-
form ladder support, No. 142.
See illustration, “The Mill
Engine” on Page 9. Use
spring washers under all the •
nuts.
3. Bolt the check chain bracket,
No. 124, and reefing pulley
bracket stay, No. 77, to the
platform angles, Nos. 121 and
122. Use spring washers under
the nuts.
4. Bolt on the platform boards.
6. Bolt the check chain stay, No.
78, to the check chain bracket,
No. 124, and to platform
angle, No. 122, and platform
angle bearer, No. 126. Use
spring washers under the nuts.
Note: The end of the stay, No.
78, fits underneath the end
of the bracket, No. 124, and
a pipe distance piece (liin.
long for 17ft. mills, and
liin. long for 21, 25 and
30ft. mills) is fitted between
them. Leave this bolt loose
until the check chain is fit-
ted later.
Turntable Roller Race.
6. Fit the pipe distance piece between the two sides of the reefing pulley bracket, No. 123; bolt it to the stay, No. 77, and
tie the loose end of the bracket to the stay temporarily with a piece of wire or string. The pipe distance piece is li ins.
long for 17ft. mills and 2 l/16th inches long for 21, 25 and 30ft. mills.


„ 142.
J& PLATFORM x
l?7 li^--J28B
f/ \„ QD (k _ v HARDWOOD STAY^^|^7^nK-l43
-I28B -X FDR 30 ft. MILL- y
ONIY tK. 1--x Mh
METHOD OF BOLTING //
LADDER STAY TO 78 -v/ X EsBBfl „
PLATFORM LADDER S ' ■ -- tl -X
118- (=, *T24
I4~ —— ASSEMBLED PLATFORM
11= := l&^f 4 (Wl^-7^?V 21
* 122 / W/f t28B x
is arrangement 1 / l\74 I
FOR 17ft MILLS onlv / IMl I
NOTE! BOLTS MARKED X' ARE ' //\\ \
TO HAVE SPRING WASHERS '1' 1
Pulling Up The Main Casting With Rotating Platform
Assembled To It.
1. Make sure that the oil ring is in the top tower casting. Oil it and see that it turns easily.
2. Attach a wire rope sling through the holes in the main casting and hook in the bottom pulley block. Take the weight
with the winch and see that the mast pipe hangs vertical. If it does not, readjust the sling.
3. Lift it until the end of the mast pipe can be swung across into the opening in the top tower casting,
4. Smear the top section of the Pivot with oil so that the Mast Pipe will slide on easily.
5. When lowering the Main Casting, guide the Mast Pipe on to the Pivot so that the drilled hole in the bottom lines up
with the tapped hole in the Pivot. Also it is very important that the oil ring in the top tower casting, No. 18, is turned
until the key on it is immediately below the recess in the top tower casting cover on the main casting.
METHOD OF BOLTING
LADDER STAY TO
NOTE* BOLTS MARKED* X* ARE
TO HAVE SPRING WASHERS
The Mill Engine.
6. Before undoing the sling on the main casting, try the oil supply pipe which fits between the Top Tower Casting and
the Crankcase, and aiae that it can be screwed into the oil ring in the Top Tower Casting. Insert the pipe through the
hole in the Main Casting and Top Tower Casting Cover and try to screw the Pipe in. IF THE PIPE WILL NOT SCREW
IN, IT WILL BE NECESSARY TO LIFT THE MAIN CASTING AGAIN AND CORRECTLY ENGAGE THE KEY IN
THE RECESS AS IN (5) ABOVE. THEN TRY THE PIPE AGAIN. THIS PIPE MUST SCREW IN BEFORE ANY
FURTHER ASSEMBLING IS DONE, After having made sure that the pipe will screw in, screw it out. It will be put
in position after the Crankcase is lifted on.
7. Screw in the setscrew to secure the bottom of the Mast Pipe to the Pivot.
PLUMBING THE MAIN CASTING
1. Screw up the nuts on the suspension straps by half a turn at a time until the weight of the main casting is taken on the
pivot and then continue to tighten the nuts until the main casting is raised about another Hn. in the tower. This quarter
of an inch can be determined by measuring the distance between the lip of the top tower casting cover, No. 23, and the
top face of the boss which takes the overflow pipe from the top tower casting to the turntable body.
2. Check the measurement between the underneath machined portion of the pivot and the machined surfaces on the turn-
table, and if necessary slightly adjust the nuts on the suspension straps until the measurement is the same all round.
Tighten up the top nuts on the suspension straps to hold the turntable stops down. Then re-check the measurement
all round. Also tighten the Thrust Block Supports in position under the Thrust Blocks.


SUSPENSION —J MAST
STRAPS 71 PI PE 133 I
turntable VttJ r J ~i
STOPS 36 J r~
t \ PIVOT 19 I
DIMENSION 7TT —n v V >C —7 —I I N
TO BE EXACTLY I — 7Z? I X 'T *4=^
THE SAME ON v! ~T ~ [X. BOSS FOR
EACH BOSS ii if CENTERING
w JACK
Adjusting Suspension Straps.
3. Plumb the Mast Pipe by holding a spirit level against it in different positions around it and adjusting the nuts on the
Centering Jacks.
4. Check over the settings made in 1, 2, and 3 again, to see that they have mot altered. These three settings MUST BE
CORRECT, otherwise adjust until they are.
It iis important that the weight of the mill engine and main casting be taken on the Pivot No. 19, and not on the oil
ring in the Top Tower Casting. The correct adjustment in (1) will ensure this.
5. Rotate the main casting by hand to see that it turns freely on the turntable.
6. Bolt on platform ladder, No. 127, and stays, No. 1288, to angles, Nos. 142 and 121 respectively, using spring washers
under the nuts.


— @
ASSEMBLING THE MILL ENGINE
1. Remove the Crankcase Cover from the Crankcase
2. Clean all grease from Crosshead
and Slide Bars, as grease will in-
terfere with the free flow of lubri-
cating oil from the Crankcase up
the Slide Bars and Crosshead, and
thus starve the Crosshead Pin of
oil.
3. Put the big end of the Connecting
Rod on the Crankpin, replace the
Washer and Crankpin Bolt, and put
the Cotter Pin back.
4. Bolt the Slide Bars and Crosshead
in position on the studs in the
Crankcase, fitting spring washers
under the nuts. The clearance be-
tween the Crosshead and Slide Bars
has been correctly adjusted in the
Factory and must not b© altered.
5. Put the Connecting Rod Small End
Bush in position on the Crosshead
and bolt it to the Connecting Rod
with the “U” bolt. There is only
one correct position for the Con-
necting Rod Small End Bush. The
“Pip” in the seat for the bush in
the Connecting Rod MUST fit
into the groove in the Small End
Bush.
REEFING CHAIN 109
PASSES DOWN RUMP
ROD 137, AND COMES
OUT THROUGH BOTTOM
OF PUMP ROD.
SPRING WASHERS
UNDER ALL NUTS
REEFing Chain / |i I \
PASSES THROUGH HOLE X/ |\ i \
IN CRANKCASE COVER XX
SPRING WASHER rQ* *— f /^S
\ (' SPRING WASHER
NOTE: After the mill has been in „f Mill Engine.
operation six months check all
bolts and nuts to see that they are still screwed up tightly. Especially check the Con. Rod Small End Bolt.
6. Bolt the Oil Splash Guard in position on the Crankcase.
7. Bolt the Vane Hinge Bearing, No. 14, in place on the Crankcase, using spring washers under the nuts.
PULLING UP THE MILL ENGINE
1. Attach a wire rope sling around the Wheel Hub and Vane Hinge Bearing,
2. Hook in the bottom pulley block and take the weight, using the winch. If the mill engine will not hang in a horizon-
tal position readjust the sling until it will. If the mill engine tends to tip one way it may be necessary to use an addi-
tional sling around the bottom of one of the slide bars to hold it steady.
3. Pull up the mill engine and swing it over the main casting. Remove the nuts from the studs under the crankcase.
4. Guide the mill engine down slowly being careful to see that the studs underneath enter the main casting correctly. If
the studs foul the edges of the holes the threads will be damaged. Also see that the Vane Hinge Bearing on the Crank-
case is directly above the Vane Hinge Bearing on the Main Casting.
5. Bolt the Crankcase to the Main Casting, using spring washers under the nuts.
6. SCREW IN THE OIL SUPPLY PIPE BETWEEN THE TOP TOWER CASTING AND THE CRANKCASE. INSERT
THE PIPE IN THE HOLE IN THE BOSS IN THE CRANKCASE AND SCREW IT FIRMLY INTO THE TAPPED
HOLE IN THE OIL RING. If this pipe is not screwed in, oil cannot be pumped up to the mill from the ground. Now
screw the elbow and oil spout on to the pipe.
7. Pull up the crankcase cover and lower it into position, making sure that the felt seal is in place on the Crankcase. Bolt
it down tightly. On 25ft. and 30ft, mills, make sure the felt seal is in place between the two halves of the cover.
8. On 17ft., 21ft. and 25ft. mills, insert the Vane Hinge Bearing Oil Pipe through the hole in the Crankcase Cover, fit the
Gasket and the Collar, and screw the pipe into the Vane Hinge Bearing. When the Pipe is screwed in, the cut-away
section of the pipe must be to the top to catch oil drips from the Crosshead. Shift the Collar and Gasket up against
the Crankcase Cover and lock in position with the setscrew.
9. For all mills carry the pump rod, No. 137, up the tower, remove the swivel flange, No. 9, oil the swivel and insert the
pumprod down through the hole in the Crosshead, No. 8, and then replace the swivel flange. See illustration, “Top Sec-
tion of Tower” on Page 12.


*v1AST PIPE 133
FURNTABLE SUSPt
STRAPS 71
PIVOT 19
TURNTABLE BODY 15
fURNTABLE CENTERING
JACKS 117
THRUST BLOCK 37
3 UMP ROD BARS 75
RDWER REEFING CHAIfc
jUIDE ASSEMBLY 139
REEFING WIRE
OIL SUPPLY PIPE TO-
TOP TOWER CASTING
FROM PUMP ON
BOTTOM OF TOWER.
THRUST BLOCK -
SUPPORT 179 GEE A
PUMP RODGUID^
PUMP ROD CONNECT
•lONS 51 (SEE B)
REEFING CHAIN 09
OIL OVERFLOW PIPE FROM
TOP TOWER CASTING
TURNTABLE SUSPENSION
STRAPS 71
-TOWER REEFING CHAIN
GUIDE ASSEMBLY 139
■REEFING WIRE
Top Section of The Tower.
Spring Washers are Used on the Following Bolts and Studs:
VANE HINGE BEARING (14) TO CRANKCASE (2).
PUMP ROD GUIDE BOX (22) TO TURNTABLE (15).
SWIVEL FLANGE (9) TO SLIDE BARS (16).
CRANKCASE (2) TO MAIN CASTING (1).
PUMP ROD U-BOLT (100) TO PUMP ROD (137).
PLATFORM LADDER (127) TO ROTATING PLATFORM
ANGLE (Vane Side) (122).
PLATFORM LADDER (127) TO LADDER STAYS (128).
FRONT AND BACK BARS OF WHEEL ARMS (84 and 85)
TO WHEEL HUB (4).
PLATFORM ANGLES (121, 122, 125 and 126) TOGETHER
CHECK CHAIN BRACKET (124) TO PLATFORM ANGLES
(121 and 122).
REEFING
REEFING PULLEY BRACKET STAY (77) TO PLATFORM
ANGLES (121 and 122).
CHECK CHAIN BRACKET STAY (78) TO PLATFORM
ANGLE (122).
REEFING PULLEY BRACKET STAY (77) TO REEFING
PULLEY BRACKET (123).
REEFING PULLEY BRACKET (123) TO CRANKCASE (2).
CHECK CHAIN BRACKET STAY (78) TO CHECK CHAIN
BRACKET (124).
VANE STAY AND CHECK CHAIN CLIPS (28 and 29)
TOGETHER.
PUMP ROD GUIDE (21) TO PUMP ROD “U” BOLT.
CHAIN
1. Put the top reefing pulley spindle No. 72 in position in the top of the slide bars, fit the top reefing pulley, No. 24, and
put the cotter pins in place.
2. Untie the loose end of the reefing pulley bracket, No. 123 and bolt it to the crankcase.


3. The reefing chain, No. 109, is made with two lengths of chain joined together with the reefing swivel, No. 161. The
end which has the eye bolt fitted to it is the top end. Oil the swivel.
4, Take the bottom end (end not fitted with the eye holt) of the chain, thread it through the reefing pulley bracket,
through the hole in the crankcase cover, round the small reefing pulley at the bottom of the slide bars, over the top
reefing pulley and lower it carefully down inside the pump rod.
The top end is allowed to hang loose until the vane is in position and it can be connected.
5. The Sheet Iron Cover can now be put in position. For 25ft. and 30ft. Mills the sheet iron cover is supplied curved
and edged ready for assembling, and it will be necessary for the erector to join up the sides and double edge the top.
VANE
1. The vane pipe, No. 134, has four holes drilled in it. One set of holes is close together and on the same side. The
Check chain clip, No. 29, and vane stay clip, No. 28, are attached to the pipe with the pips of the vane stay clip casting
locating in these holes. At the same time attach the check chain, No. 112, and vane stay, No. 111. The vane stay is
on top.
The other two holes (which is really one hole drilled right through the pipe), are at right angles to the check chain clip
and vane stay clip bolts, and are for the eye bolt on the end of the reefing chain.
2. The vane pipe is attached to the vane hinge, No. 12, with the hole for the reefing chain nearest to the hinge. Screw
up nuts on the vane stay, No. 111, until the tension is well taken. Tie the end of the check chain to the Vane Hinge
for convenience later.
3. Build the vane on the ground. Refer to illustration, “The Mill Engine,” Page 9.
4. Bolt the vane sheets to the vane ribs. On 17ft. and 21ft. mills, the distance from the end of the vane sheet to the near-
est vane rib is different at each end. Fit the vane sheets so the shorter end is nearest the mill engine.
5. Attach the vane to the vane pipe, keeping it as near to the end as possible. Use vane clip castings, No. 27, for 21ft.,
25ft. and 30ft. Mills.
6. Put a sling around the vane at the point of balance, and lean the derrick, by altering the guy lines, so that the vane
will be lifted to the correct position on the mill.
7. Lift the vane up to its approximate position. Then turn the mill engine at right angles to the vane so that the vane
is on the left when looking from the wheel hub.
8. Lift the vane high enough so that the vane hinge can be pushed down and with the vane hanging at an angle, the vane
hinge will slide into its bearings.
9. Undo the sling.
10. Bolt on the vane hinge stop, No. 10.
11. Attach the other end of the check chain between bars Nos. 78 and 124, using pipe distance piece, No. 136.
12. Bolt the eye bolt on the end of the reefing chain to the drilled hole in the Vane Pipe.
13. Grease the exposed links of the reefing chain and run the chain backwards and forwards several times to see that lit is
working properly. This enables the vane to swing hack freely when the mill is unreefed.
OIL PIPES AND PUMP ROD GUIDE BOX
1. Screw the lin. pipe elbow into the hole in the top tower casting, and screw in a 4ft. 6in. length of iin. oil pipe. Screw
the iin oil pipe spring bend to the end, screw on a lin. backnut and then the joint, No. 164. See illustration, “Arrange-
ment of Oil Pipes” on Page 18.
2. Bolt the Pump Rod Guide, No. 21, to the Pump Rod, No. 137, using spring washers under the nuts on ther U-Bolt. A
small pip on the guide locates in the hole in the pumprod. When the pumprod guide is bolted on, refer to illustration,
“Pump Rod Guide Box and Turntable,” on Page 14, and check the measurement referred to in the NOTE.
3. Screw the lin. overflow oil pipe spring bend into the pumprod guide box, No. 22, so that the bend will point to the
nearest corner of the tower when the Guide Box is put in position. See illustration “Arrangement of Oil Pipes” on
Page 18.
4. Lift the guide box with the guide rods, No. 62, inside, up over the pumprod, making sure that the guide slides over
both ends of the rods. Then slip the guide box into position, and before bolting it into place, fit the felt strips be-
tween the top of the guide box and the turntable.
5. Attach pumprod connections and pumprod bars to the bottom of the pumprod by means of the U-Bolts and clamps
provided. See that the U-bolts are pulled up tightly, and that the connections fit snugly around the pumprod. Spring
washers ana used under the nuts.
6. Fit the tower reefing chain guide assembly, No. 139, with the shorter angle placed so that it is between the pumprod
bars and the leg to which the reefing winch is to be attached. See illustration, “Top Section of Tower” on Page 12.
Attach the assembly to the girts by means of four hook bolts and set it so that the reefing chain just fits into the
pulley when the chain hangs down free.
On four-post towers two extra extension pieces are supplied to extend the shorter angle to the length required, and
these are bolted on with extra bolts supplied in the tower casting box.


, _ ,MAST PIPE 133
ROLLER -r3
OIL LEVELw IT PIVOT 19
overflow Wrir Jv fhlL
PIPE COVERS© ‘ \,
: 1
PUMP ROD
GUIDE BARS 62 y ~ BOX 22
PUMP ROD / Jr I
GUIDE H| = LEVEL
note: this dimension is importanti
& MUST BE AS SHOWN BELOW EVEN I F
IT MEANS DRILLING ANEW HOLE IN THE
PUMPROD FOR THE PUMP ROD GUIDE
l7fT.8l'T 0 8i‘ 2l&25fT.I2i'rot2l" 30f T .I5|toI5s
(gjji
tnn\J
'it - ’
Pumprod Guide Box and Turntable.
TURNTABLE
ROLLER RACE
TURNTABLE
BODY 15
FELT STRIP 189
UMPROD 137
IMPROD GUIDE
Arrangement of Oil Over-
flow Pipe from Turntable
to Guide Box —2l ft., 25 ft..
and 30 ft. Mills only.
7. Screw the cover, No. 50, on to the long thread of the lin. oil overflow pipe from the top tower casting, No. 17, as far
as it will go, and put that end of the pipe into the hole in the turntable, No. 15. The bolts in the bottom end of
the top flat braces need to be loosened to do this. When the pipe is screwed in as far as it will go, screw the
cover, No. 50, down firmly on to the turntable body.
8. Connect up the oil overflow pipe from the turntable to the pumprod guide box on 21ft., 25ft. and 30ft. mills. Refer
to illustration, “Arrangement of Oil Overflow Pipe from Turntable to Guide Box” above.
9. Screw a lin. backnut and special overflow pipe joint No. 165, on to the spring bend in the pumprod guide box,
10. Fix the oil pump to the bottom girts of the tower in the corner under
the pipe spring in the pumprod guide box, No. 22. Before the first
overflow pipe is screwed in, clip the oil pump lever fulcrum, No. 163,
over it and attach the oil pump lever. Then screw on lengths of
pipe until the special cast iron joints are reached, using 4ft. 9in. or
9ft. 6in., lengths to correspond with the tower legs.
The last length of tin. pipe, which screws into the cast iron joint, is
special. It is: 9ft. 6in. for 17ft. mills; 7ft. sin, for 21ft., and 25ft.
mills, and 4ft. 9ins. for 30ft. mills,
MAKE SURE THAT THE BACKNUTS SUPPLIED ARE SCREWED
UP TIGHTLY AGAINST THE CAST IRON JOINTS.
11. The oil pipes are held in the tower by brackets. See illustration, “Oil
Pipe Bracket.” One bracket fits on the second set of girts above the
pump, and one on every second set after that.
REEFING WINCH AND
PULLOUT WIRE
1. Attach the winch to the tower leg nearest the shorter angle of the
Tower Reefing Chain Guide Assembly, No. 139. See illustration, “Top
section of the Tower” on Page 12.
Oil Pipe Bracket.


/“N AS YOU STAND ON THE THE FRONT RING IS
l'r\\\ I '\ PLATFORM AND LOOK AT fg ft \\\V ENTIRELY REVERSED THE
I I V'l 1 THE BACK OF THE WHEEL //fM \V\V EXTENDED END TO THE
111 J . j | THE END COT THE BACK U/n M RIGHT AS SHOWN.
V’V 'ly I -j RING, OR THE RING V|)\ IN ALL RINGS DISTANCE
V,l[/ \J|y NEAREST THE TOWER /fl/r W|\ A TO FIRST HOLE FOR
I IS PLACED TO THE ffflg WHEEL \A\ SAIL BRACKET IS
| /A LEFT AS SHOWN ARMSALWAYS LESS
| // AND THAN DISTANCE
i // THEENDOFTHE 1 B TO NEXT HOLE.
Wheel Arm. Section of Wheel.
SOUTHERN CROSS “R” PATTERN WINDMILLS Page Fifteen
2. Fasten one end of the pullout wire to the lower end of the reefing chain by means of the rope thimble and rope
clips supplied.
3. With the vane in the unreefed position (i.e., in line with the mill engine) unwind the rope off the winch and attach it
to the pullout wire by means of the rope clips.
4. Reef the mill.
WHEEL ARMS AND RINGS
1. Pull the wheel arms and rings up with the rope on the derrick, or for 17ft. and 21ft. mills, sling a single pulley block
from the angle on the edge of the Rotating Platform, and pull them up, using a hemp rope which is passed through
the block.
2. Pull up an arm and bolt it to the bottom of the wheel hub, on the back of the flanges. The heavier side of the arms is
to be fitted nearest the mill engine. To bolt the arm on after it is pulled up, one person stands on the tower platform
and holds it while another person bolts it in position. Leave the bolts loosely screwed up. Make certain that the special
High Tensile Steal Bolts which are packed separately in a bag labelled, “Wheel Arm to Wheel Hub Bolts” are the bolts
you use, and also make certain that you fit spring washers under the nuts.
THE HEADS OF THE WHEEL ARM BOLTS FIT AGAINST THE CAST IRON FLANGES, AND SPRING WASHERS
MUST BE FITTED BETWEEN THE NUTS AND THE WHEEL ARMS.
3. Turn the wheel hub around half a turn by hand so that the wheel arm fitted, is now directly on top. Pull up another
arm and bolt it on the bottom of the wheel hub, leaving the bolts loose.
4. Turn the wheel hub until the two wheel arms fitted are almost horizontal, and fit another arm on the bottom of the
wheel, leaving the bolts loose.
5. Turn the wheel hub another half turn, and fit another arm, leaving the bolts loose. Follow this procedure of balanc-
ing the wheel until all the arms are fitted.
6. Pull up all the outside rings and lie them through the corner of the tower on the third top girt. The outside set of
rings is the longest of the three sets, and is fitted furthest out from the wheel hub.
7. Bolt on the rings as shown in the illustration, “Section of the Wheel,” leaving the bolts loose.
8. Then fit the intermediate
set of rings and the inner set of rings, leaving all the bolts loose. They will be tightened
up after the fans are put on.
Section of Wheel.
LOWERING THE DERRICK
1. There is no further use for the derrick so it can be lowered,
2. If treble and double pulley blocks are used for pulling up the mill engine, etc., take the rope out of one side of each,
so that they are, in effect, only double and single pulley blocks.
3. A rope should be tied between the bottom of the derrick and the bottom of the leg, which will be nearest the derrick
when it is lowered. This rope will stop the bottom of the derrick from fouling the tower as it is lowered.


4, Put a wire rope sling around the top of one of the tower legs and hook the single block to it.
5. Slacken off the guy lines, release the pawl on the winch and lower the derrick. Use the brake on the winch to pre-
vent it going too fast and guide it with the guy lines.
FITTING FANS TO WHEE
1. While the fans are on the ground, rivet the curved angle iron brackets to the fans with the rivets supplied. It is im-
possible to assemble these parts wrongly, provided every hole is used, and no extra holes are made in the fans or
brackets.
2. To rivet the brackets on, place a washer against the head of the rivet, insert it through the hole in the fan, drive it
through the hole in the bracket and rivet it over. One or two blows with a heavy hammer should be sufficient. Always
Rivet the centre holes first.
3. Attach a single pulley block to the vane pipe and pass a hemp rope through it.
4. Pull the fans up one at a time and bolt them on. By bolting on a fan and then fitting the next fan on the opposite
side of the wheel the wheel can be kept balanced.
5. When all the fans are on, go over the whole wheel and tighten up the bolts. Don’t forget the bolts holding the wheel
arms to the wheel hub.
NOTE: AFTER THE MILL HAS BEEN IN OPERATION SIX MONTHS, CHECK ALL BOLTS AND NUTS TO SEE
THAT THEY ARE STILL SCREWED UP TIGHTLY.
6. The wheel runs clockwise as you look from the tower and counter-clockwise as you look at the front of the wheel.
OILING THE MILL
The initial oiling of the mill is carried out as follows:
1. Using the rope sling and pulley block on the vane pipe, pull up the required amount of oil to the mill engine. The
mill will require:
(1) 17ft 4 gallons
(3) 25ft 8 gallons
(2) 21ft 6 gallons
(4) 30ft 12 gallons
The recommended oil for use wi th this Windmill is Southern Cross Windmill Oil for “AG” and “R” Pattern Windmills
2. Fill the top Vane Hinge Bearing Spout with oil. Oil the Connecting Rod Small End, Slide Bars and Swivel
3. Pour oil into the Crankcase until it overflows down the hole through which the oil supply pipe, No. 132, protrudes.
When oil is noticed flowing into the container attached to the oil pump near the ground, it is an indication that all
parts of the mill requiring oil have been lubricated.
4. Turn the wheel over a few times by hand, and it will be noticed that the crank will displace a certain amount of oil,
which will flow down to the oil container. Fill the oil container to about three-quarter full only.
5. Work the oil pump until oil begins to flow back to the oil container. This may take some time, as the oil supply pipe
up to the mill engine will have to be filled by the pump before any oil flows into the mill engine.
6. When the oil flows back to the oil container, turn the mill over again a few times by hand to displace excess oil in the
crankcase. When the overflow to the oil container has ceased, check the oil level in the container, and, if necessary, pour
oil into the container to bring the level to about three-quarter full.
7, Remove the inspection plate from the guide box to see that the guide dips into the oil.
8. Oil the reefing pulleys on the platform bracket .and tower reefing chain guide assembly.
9. The mill is now fully oiled.


CROSSHEAD PIN BEARING H M
CONSTANTLY LUBRICATED ■Pi OIL
MAIN BEARING OIL \ B H / UPPER VANE HINGE
CHANNEL \»- Mfd BEARING IN OIL BATH
CRANKPIN VANE
DIPPING INTO MAIN OIL /mBHP HINGE
MAIN OIL RESERVOIRS gflHKBHff \\BATH
OIL BATH G BEAR,NG ,N|// I® I'll] 'OIL
f I II11 \ [m
CROSS I || H \ 11 OIL RETURN
“R” PATTERN j I I [Ml \ 14 PIPE
II I If Ji ■ tl ROLLER BEARING
The arrows indi- 111/ I | \ I TURNTABLE
cate the path of f |l '*11 \U I IMMERSED IN
the oil from the | H| —OIL
pump on the ifajy .flSf^SSo
tower near the jBHGkizijw PUMP ROD
ground to the P y jfl ||||j|j l |j ipWLl| GUIDE ON
crankcase, thence I I || iH WJBRIGHT STEEL
to the working flS[ IS H I' 'J BARS IN OIL
parts and the jf T Mg BATH
overflow back to »■
The Southern Cross
“R” Pattern Mill
Oiling System.
The Southern Cross System of Lubri-
cating the “R” Pattern Windmill ren-
ders climbing the tower for the pur-
pose of oiling the windmill un-
necessary. There is no other windmill
in Australia so thoroughly and posi-
tively oiled.
OILING PROM THE GROUND is ac-
complished by means of a hand pump
attached to the tower near the
ground, and oil is pumped from there
into the crankcase reservoir in the
mill engine. The oil in the reservoir
can thereby be replenished (which is
only necessary once every twelve
months) without climbing the tower.
From this reservoir the oil is picked
up at each revolution of the crank
and is carried automatically and posi-
tively to all the moving parts of the
engine, which consist of the Main
Shaft, Crankpin, Crosshead and Gud-
geon Pin, Pumprod Swivel, and Vane
Hinge. The Neck Bearing at the top
of the tower and the Turntable and
Pump Rod Guide at the bottom of the
Mast Pipe are also arranged so as to
be continually running in an oil bath,
as they, too, are in the automatic oil-
ing circuit.
The arrows in the diagram at left
illustrate this, and it will be clearly
seen from the illustration that every
moving part, without exception, is fed
by the Oiling System.
This Oiling System is just as positive
as that of a motor car engine, and is
definitely years in advance of that of
other Direct Action windmill oiling
systems.
ONCE EVERY FIVE YEARS, DRAIN THE OIL OUT OF THE CRANKCASE, TURNTABLE, GUIDE
BOX, ETC., AND CLEAN THE MILL DOWN THOROUGHLY TO REMOVE ANY ACCUMULATED
SLUDGE, AND THEN REFILL WITH “SOUTHERN CROSS” WINDMILL OIL, FOLLOWING THE
SAME PROCEDURE AS SET OUT ABOVE.


■B&8; ‘^H|
CONNECTING UP TO PUMP
A wooden pumprod connects between the pumprod of the mill and the pumprods of the well or bore.
Lift the pumprod in the bore lin., (7 inches for Southern Cross ‘AE’ and ‘CJ’ Pattern Draw Plunger
Pumps), and then with the mill at tne bottom of the stroke, cut the wooden rod to the correct length and
connect up. Grease the pumprod where it goes through the wooden pumprod guides.
note/oil pipes into
CRANKCASE MUST BE
PUT IN BEFORE THE
VANE HINGE BEARING 14
IS BOLTED IN POSITION
OVERFLOW PIPE FROM
TOP TOWER CASTING
SECTION OIL
SUPPLY PIPE
FOR 21ft. and 25ft. MILLS
THIS GIRT FITS ON
OUTSIDE OF TOWER.
OVERFLOW
PIPE SPRING
SUPPLY
BACKNUTS
SPRING
PUMPROD
OIL PIPE JOINTS
ARRANGEMENT OF OIL PIPES, ETC., FOR 17ft., 21ft., AND 25ft. MILLS


gj / l2 x i BOLT^
note/ oil pipes into
CRANKCASE MUST BE
PUT IN BEFORE THE
VANE HINGE BEARING I A
IS BOLTED IN POSITION
OVERFLOW f
TOP TOWER
PIPE FROM
FOR 30 FT.' R ' MILLS
ONLY, THE 3RD AND
4TH FLAT GIRTS ARE
TO BE ASSEMBLED
ON THE OUTSIDE OF
THE TOWER LEGS.
" 5‘
2 x g BOLT
FOR SOFT. ’R
ONLY, A l'x
MILLS
GALV.
PIPE DISTANCE PIECE
IS CLAMPED BETWEEN
THE STH. GIRT AND
THE ANGLE BRACE
2 x 2 BOLT
Arrangement of Oil Pipes, Etc., for 30 ft. "R” Mill .
KQTE: Use 2|in. x 5/16 in,
Bolts to bolt top of ladder to 4th Flat Girt.


/ I \ BALANCE
/ / V WEIGHTS
DAI AKJ<~IKJ/0 rur UIUCCI
BALANCING OF SOUTHERN CROSS “R” PATTERN DIRECT
ACTING WINDMILL WHEELS.
We supply Balance Weights with all Southern Cross Direct Acting Windmills to balance the Weight
of the Pumprods.
If Balance Weights are not used, then the Mill, besides having to lift the water, will have to lift the
Pumprods on each upstroke.
This extra load of Pumprods can be counter balanced by attaching Balance Weights to the Cross Stays
on the Intermediate or Inner Rings of the Wheel. Determine the number to use by trial, placing them directly
opposite the Crank, BUT WITH NOT MORE THAN ONE BALANCE WEIGHT ON AN ARM, AS SHOWN IN
THE ILLUSTRATION, “BALANCING THE WHEEL.”
When properly balanced the Wheel should stop in almost any position, tending rather to become sta-
tionary when the Crank is well past half-way on its upstroke rather than in any other position of the Crank.
DON’T PUT THE WEIGHTS ON THE CROSS STAYS ON THE OUTSIDE RING OF THE WHEEL, BUT ON
THE INTERMEDIATE OR INNER CROSS STAYS.
To balance, first see that the pump piping is full of water, so that the loss of weight due to the rods
being in water is allowed for, and then attach the Balance Weights as stated above.
It is found an advantage generally to attach a Leading Weight as shown, to assist in carrying the Mill
over the end of the stroke.
A Mill connected to a Syphon Pump will probably need only one Balance Weight.
DO NOT OVERBALANCE THE MILL.
To give some idea of the weight of rods to be balanced, a 21ft. “R” Mill working on a 400 ft. lift, using
iin. Pipe Rods, with Mark CB-E Galvanised Steel Quick Action Joints, would have an effective weight of rods to
lift equal to about 5001b.
This extra load on the Mill will seriously overload it, and make it sluggish to start in light winds. But
if Balance Weights are attached they counter balance the 5001b. weight, and the Mill has only to pump water.
BALANCING THE WHEEL
NEVER tie the wheel to the tower, as this will prevent the Mill from
turning on its turntable should the wind change, and could result in
serious damage if the wind change was violent*


Pump Troubles.
This section has been written with a view to assi sting in diagnosing and remedying pump troubles. It
should be read right through carefully before commencing to attend to a Pump. Everyone should be careful when
a Pump is not working, or working indifferently, to observe it while the Mill or Engine is working, before com-
mencing to pull it up. This observation of the symptoms will most usually enable the trouble to be seen imme-
diately.
The most usual signs of trouble encountered with Well or Bore Pumps are
(1) Pump not delivering any water.
(2) Pump delivering a steady supply but less than previously.
(3) Pump delivering a fulLsupply when started, but output gradually diminishing as pumping is continued, occa-
sionally accompanied by:—
(4) Pump making slight knocking noise and water splashing out over the Spill Piece.
(5) Or loud knocking noise on down stroke, causing whole Mill to resound accompanied by diminished supply, or
none at all.
(6) Water receding in pipes when Pump is stopped, and needing some strokes before water reaches the top when
it is started again.
(7) Spasmodic action, Pump delivering full supply at times and abruptly ceasing, and perhaps starting again just
as abruptly.
No. 1 may be caused by;—
<a) Broken Pump Rods or Joints.
(b) Worn-out Leathers.
(c) Plunger Valve holding up.
(d) Bottom Valve holding up.
(e) End of suction above water, or hole in Suction Pipe above water level,
(f) Leakage in Discharge Pipe between Pump and T-Piece.
(g) Suction Pipe completely blocked.
■(h) Suction Pipe too long; that is, Pumn too far above water level.
(a) If the Rods are broken and there is no other defect, the Pipes will stay full of water to the T-Piece. Usually
it can be decided that Rods are broken by turning the Windmill by hand. The absence of any appreciable
resistance to the turning will indicate broken Rods.
<b) Worn Leathers do not usually cause a complete cessation but rather a steadily diminishing supply. Know-
ledge of the length of time the Leathers have been in use is a guide to their condition. It is advisable to
study the other symptoms and if they can be eliminated it may be decided that worn Leathers are the cause
of the trouble; that is to say, that if the diminution has been continuous over a period and there is no knock-
ing or splashing of water over the Spill Piece and the Pipes stay full when the Pump is stopped, worn
Leathers are certainly the cause.
<c) When the Plunger Valve is held up by some obstruction, the water in the Discharge Pipe will stand at the
level of the T-Piece with practically no movement when the Pump is working. A few sharp blows on the
rods while it is working may cause the Valve to seat correctly and commence pumping. This, however, is
not a permanent remedy and it is advisable to get the Pump up and fix the Valve at the first opportunity.
<d) If the bottom Valve is held up the water in the pipe will rise and fall with the Rods. The remedy is to get
the Pump up and remove the obstruction.
•(e) A hole in the Suction Pipe above water level or the suction being completely above the water will cause the
Pump to deliver air instead of water.
(f) A leakage in the discharge is not usually so large as to cause complete stoppage in delivery but rather a re-
duction. A split pipe will be indicated by diminished output from the Pump and when the Pump is stopped
the water in the Pipes will recede. (See Case 2c.)
(g) If the Suction Pipe is choked no water at all can enter the Pump.
(h) No Pump should be more than 20 feet vertically above water level; less if possible. If a Pump has a long Suc-
tion Pipe and the water level recedes to 25ft., or 30ft. below the Pump, the delivery will cease completely
or partially and symptoms will be as in Case 5 on Page 22.
Case No. 2 may be caused by;—
(a) Worn Leathers.
(b) Worn Valves.
(c) Leakage in Discharge Pipe.
(d) Diminished supply in bore.
(a) If, when the Pump is stopped, the water stands at the top of the Pipe, the cause of a diminished supply is
most usually worn Leathers, or a worn Plunger Valve, or both. Pull the Pump out and renew the Leathers
and examine the Valves. See cases (b) and (c).
(b) If the Leathers are good and the Valves only are leaking, then the water will recede when the Pump is
stopped.
(c) A leakage in the Delivery Pipe will probably take the form of a split pipe, and in this case the water will
recede when the Pump is stopped. A split pipe is sometimes difficult to locate. All pipes should be examined
carefully as they are pulled up. It is advisable to replace a split pipe with a new one, but if no new one is
available, the split may be repaired by cleaning the pipe thoroughly with a file, if necessary, over the whole
length of the split and binding stout galvanised wire tightly round the pipe, continuing beyond the end of the
split and then soldering this wire to the pipe over the split.


Pumps.
Cases Nos. 3 and 4 will be caused by a failing supply in bore or well. After Pump has been stopped
for some time it has a body of water to start on which has accumulated while it has not been working. When this ac-
cumulation has been exhausted and the supply coming into the bore or well is not sufficient to fill the Pump at each
stroke, then part air and part water is pumped, and it is the bubble of air rushing up the pipe under pressure
which causes the splashing of water over the Spill Piece. The failure of the supply can be definitely proved by
pouring a plentiful supply of water into the bore or well while the Pump is working and immediate alteration
will be seen in the amount of the discharge.
Case No. S will be caused by either too long a Suction Pipe, too small a Suction Pipe, or the Suction
Pipe being partially choked. What happens is that the water does not flow into the Pump Barrel behind the
Plunger when it is on the up stroke sufficiently fast to fill the space left vacant by it, which tends to cause a
partial vacuum below the Plunger. On the commencement of the down stroke of the Plunger the whole of the
water above the Plunger falls with it through the partial vacuum until the Plunger meets the water imprisoned in
the bottom of the Barrel. Water is practically incompressible and the resounding knock which occurs is water
hammer, set up by the sudden arresting of the long column of water which is above the Plunger. This water
hammer is very often mistaken for a knock in the Windmill itself. Certainly it can sound as if it is. The knock
will not do as much damage as might be expected, but will probably cause split Pipes or split Pump barrel ulti-
mately. To avoid any possibility of this happening a sound rule is to have not more than 18 feet of Suction Pipe
below the Pump and see that it is at least half the diameter of the Pump, and see that the Strainer and Check
Valve, if any, give a waterway the full size of the pipe.
Case No. 6 will be caused either by leaking Valves or leaking Delivery Pipes, See No. 2 (b) and (c).
Case No. 7: This is not unusual in old Pumps. It is caused by scale and rust from the inside of the
Pipes falling down and holding up the Plunger Valve. See No, 1 (c) on Page 21.
Care of
Testing Valves for Leaks
The following notes will be of assistance to those not familiar with pump repairs
(1) When renewing Buckets several points need care:—
(a) Soak the Leather Buckets in water to allow them to swell before fitting, and when fitted to the Plunger
see that it works freely in the Cylinder.
(b) When cutting out the centre of the Buckets be careful that the hole is concentric with the outside of the
Bucket. To do this place the Cage inside the Bucket so that it is even all round and mark the circle of
the inside of the Cage with a pencil.
(c) When assembling or dissembling the Pump do not use pipe tongs on the Cylinder—one on each of the
hexagon ends will do.
(d) To unscrew the plunger, place the cage in a vice so two of the webs sit against one jaw and two against
the other jaw. Allow the cage to sit loosely between the jaws and do not usd any pressure or the cage
may be damaged. If a vice is not available, hold the cage by inserting a bar through it. The plunger
follower may be unscrewed by holding a short piece of bar against the lugs provided, and tapping it with
a hammer.
(e) When reassembling screw everything up tight.
(2) Leaking Valves are not difficult to locate; test the bottom one by filling the Barrel and watching underneath
the Valve for leakage. The Plunger Valve can be tested by inverting the Plunger and holding the Valve
against its seat with the fingers. (See illustration.)
Fill the inside of the Plunger with water and watch for leakage between the Valve and its seat.
If the Valve is held up it may be caused by an obstacle between the Valve and its seat or by the Valve
itself jamming against its Cage. When testing Valves it is well to see if it is possible for the Valves to jam
by trying to make them do so by hand.


r.* •*>
Air Chamber
An air chamber is used to keep the water flowing evenly through the delivery pipe instead of being de-
livered as separate surges after each up-stroke of the pump. Due to the even flow of water in the delivery
pipe, the pump does not have to make a big increase in the rate of flow on each up-stroke, and consequently there
is less wear and tear on the pumping plant.
The air chamber should be fitted to the delivery pipe as close as possible to the
pump. Where the pump is down a bore, fit the air chamber as close as possible to the
top of the bore. A check valve must be fitted on the delivery side of the air chamber
to prevent water in the pipe running back when the plug in the air chamber is opened
for draining. It is also advisable to fit a check valve on the inlet side of the air
chamber in order to relieve the pump valves of the pressure of the chamber.
The air chamber will only be effective while there is air in it to cushion the flow
of water. THE AIR CHAMBER IS USELESS IF IT IS FULL OF WATER. Due to
pressure in the delivery pipe, the air in the air chamber is gradually absorbed by the
water and the air chamber becomes ineffective.
A plug is fitted to the bottom of the air chamber to drain the water from it,
and the chamber should be drained periodically. Periods between draining will vary
with different installations, and experience will indicate how often it is necessary.
Suction Chamber
The purpose of a suction chamber is to provide an even flow of water in the
suction pipe to Syphon Pumps instead of ,a flow which stops on the down-stroke of
the pump. The suction chamber also acts as a reservoir and helps supply water which
will flow immediately behind the plunger on the up-stroke, and so prevents water
hammer. During the downstroke of the pump the water in the suction pipe keeps
flowing and replaces the reservoir of water in the suction chamber.
The suction chamber has a cushion of air as in an air chamber, but unlike the
air in the air chamber it is not absorbed by the water—instead the size of the air
Fitting Air Chamber
CVIX 111 WIC All Vliai 11WVA iU w uwuvi. tt - _ , .. ~
cushion increases. The top should be screwed off the suction chamber periodically and water poured in until tne
chamber is three-quarters full, leaving one quarter of the chamber as an air cushion. Periods between fillings
will vary with different installations, and experience will indicate how often it is necessary.


PARTS LIST FOR “R” PATTERN WINDMILLS
IT IS IMPORTANT WHEN ORDERING A PART TO GIVE THE MILL NUMBER AND SIZE, AND THE
PART NUMBER AND NAME. THE NUMBER OF THE MILL IS STAMPED ON THE WHEEL HUB END OF
THE MAIN SHAFT AND ALSO AT THE BOTTOM OF THE MAST PIPE, JUST ABOVE THE TURNTABLE.
17ft.
RF
21ft.
RG
25ft.
RH
30ft.
RK
No. Off
Name of Part.
RE IB
RF 2B
RF 3
RF 4
RF 5
RF 8C
RE 9
RE 10
RF 11D
RF 12
RF 13D
RF 148
RE 158
RE 17
RE 188
RE 19C
RF 20
RE 21
RE 228
RE 23
RF 248
RE 28
RE 29
J 29
RE 30
RE 31C
RF 32
AT 34
RE 36
AS 378
RF 39
RF 43
RF 44
E-E 49
RE 50
RE 51C
RF 52
RF 53
AV 54
AV 55
RF 568
RF 57
RF 58
RE 608
RE 618
RE 62
RE 64
RE 658
RF 66
RE 678
RF 688
RF 72
RE 73
DH 75
RE 75
RF 77
RE 78
RFIOO
AT 95
RG 1
RG 2B
RG 3B
RG 4B
RG 5B
RG 8C
RE 9
RE 10
RG 11D
RG 12
RG 13D
RG 148
RG 15C
RG 17
RG 188
RG 198
RG 20
RG 21
RG 228
RG 23
RG 24C
AV 26
AV 27
RG 28
RG 29
J 29
RG 30
RG 318
RG 32
AT 34
RG 36
AV 37
RF 39
RG 438
RG 44
E-E 49
RE 50
RG 51C
RG 52
RG 53
AV 54
RG 568
RG 57
RG 58
RG 60
RE 618
RG 62
RE 64
RG 658
RG .66
RG 678
RG 68C
RG 72D
RG 73
DH 75
RG 758
RG 77
RG 78
GC 88
RG 1
RH 2B
RH 3B
RH 4
RH 5
RH' 6 B
RH 8B
RE' 9
RE 10
RH 11C
RH 12
RH 13C
RH 148
RG 15C
RG 17
RG 188
RG 198
RH 20
RG 21
RG 228
RG 23
RG 24C
AV 26
AY 27
RH 28
RH 29
J 29
RG 30
RG 318
RG 32
AY 34
RG 36
AV 37
RF 39
RH 43
RG 44
E-E 49
RE 50
RG 51C
RH 52
RH 53
AV 54
RH 568
RH 57
RH 58
RG 60
RE 618
RG 62
RE 64
RH 65
RG 66
RH 67
RH 688
RG 72D
RH 73
DH 75
RG 758
RH 77
RH 78
GC 88
RJ 1
RJ 2
RJ 3
RK 4
RJ 5
RJ 6
RJ 7
RK 8
RE' 9
RJ 10
RK 118
RJ 12
RK 138
RJ 14
RJ 158
RJ 17
RJ 188
RJ 198
RJ 21
RJ 22
RJ 23
RG 24C
AV 26
AEW 27
RJ 28
RJ 29
J 29
RG 30
RJ 318
RG 32
AY 34
RJ 36
RK 37
RJ 43
RK 44
E-E 49
RE 50
RG 51C
RK 52
RK 53
AV 54
RK 568
RK 57
RK 58
RK 60
RE 618
RJ 62
RE 64
RJ 65
RK 66
RJ 67
RK 68
RG 728
RJ 73
DH 75
RK 75
RJ 77
RJ 78
RJ 88
3-3-4
1
1
1
3 Pair
3 3 Post
4 4 Post
3 —3 Post
4 4 Post
1
1
1
16-14-14-16
1-1-1-2
Main Casting with Mast Pipe.
Crankcase.
Crankcase Cover.
Wheel Hub.
Bottom Half of Main Bearing.
Front Bearing Cover.
Top Half of Rear Main Bearing.
Crosshead.
Swivel Flange.
Stop for Vane Hinge.
Connecting Rod (Short Stroke).
Vane Hinge Casting.
Crank (Short Stroke).
Vane Hinge Bearing.
Turntable Body-—3 Post.
Top Tower Casting—3 Post.
Top Tower Casting Oil Ring.
Pivot.
Top Half of Main Bearing.
Pump Rod Guide.
Pump Rod Guide Box.
Top Tower Casting Cover.
Large Reefing Pulley (on Top of Slide Bars).
Reefing Pulley (on Platform Bracket and Tower
Chain Guide).
Vane Clip Casting.
Vane Stay Clip.
Check Chain Clip.
Top Reefing Pulley Spindle Washer.
Small Reefing Pulley (on Bottom of Slide Bars).
Turntable Roller Race.
Pump Rod Guide Box Inspection Plate.
Balance Weight.
Turntable Stop.
Thrust Block.
Vane Hinge Bearing Oil Pipe Collar.
Thrust Collar.
Wheel Hub Key Back.
Oil Pump Packing Washer.
Cover for Oil Overflow Pipe.
Pump Rod Connection.
Connecting Rod (Long Stroke).
Crank (Long Stroke).
Reefing Winch Clip.
Small Sheave Pulley (on Platform Bracket and
Tower Chain Guide).
Main Spindle.
Slide Bar—Right Hand.
Slide Bar—Left Hand.
Turntable Roller.
Reefing Pulley Spindle (on Bottom of Slide Bars).
Pump Rod Guide Rod.
Pump Rod Swivel Washer.
Crankpin Washer.
Slide Bar Tie Rod.
Big End Connecting Rod Bush.
Small End Connecting Rod Bush,
Top Reefing Pulley Spindle (on Top of Slide Bars).
Crankcase Dowel.
Reefing Winch Washer.
Pump Rod Bars.
Reefing Pulley Bracket Stay.
Check Chain Bracket Stay.
Pump Rod “U” Bolt.
Vane to Vane Hinge “U” Bolt.


SOUTHERN CROSS “R” PATTERN WINDMILLS
Page Twenty-five
PARTS
LIST
(Continued)
17ft.
AY 97
AY 98
AY 99
ATIOOB
RFIO2B
RFIO3
RFIO4
RFIOS
RFIOB
RFIO9
RFlll
RFII2
REII3
RGII4
REII7
RFII6
REII7
RFIIB
RFII9
REI2IB
REI22C
REI23
REI24
RE1258
RE1268
REI27
REI2BB
AT1298
REI3I
RFI32
RF1348
RE 13 6
REI36
RFI37C
RFI3B
RE'l39
REI4OB
REI4I
REI42
REI43
RFI4S
REI46
REISO
REISIB
RE 152
REIS4
REISS
REIS6
REIS7
REISB
REIS9
RE 162
REI63
REI 64
REI6S
REI67
REI69
REI7O
REI7I
REI72
REI73
REI74
RE 175
REI76
RE 177
REI7B
RFI79
21ft.
AY 97
AY 98
AY 99
RGIO2B
RFIO3
RFIO4
RFIOS
AWIOB
RGIO9C
AVI 10
RGIII
RGII2
AVII3
RHII4
RGIIS
RGII6B
RGII7B
RGIIB
RGII9
RGI2I
RG1228
RGI23
RGI24
RGI2S
RGI26
REI27
RGI2BB
AVI29
REI3I
RGI32
RG1348
AVI3S
AVI36
RGI37C
RGI3B
RGI39
REI4OB
RGI4I
RCI42
RGI43
AWI4S
RGI46
RGISO
RGISIC
RGIS2
REIS4
RGISS
RGIS6
RGIS7
REISB
REIS9
RE 162
REI63
REI 64
REI6S
REI67
REI69
REI7O
REI7I
REI72
REI73
REI74
REI7S
REI76
RGI77
RGI7B
RHI79
25ft.
RH
AY 97
AY 98
AY 99
RHIO2B
RFIO3
RFIO4
RFIOS
AXIOB
RHIO9B
AXIIO
RHIII
RHII2
AXII3
RJII4
RGIIS
RHII6B
RGII7B
RHIIB
RHII9
RHI2I
RH1228
RHI23
RHI24
RHI2S
RHI26
REI27 i
RGI2BB
AXI29
REI3I
RHI32
RHI34C
AVI3S
AVI36
RH1378
RHI3B
RGI39
REI4OB
RHI4I
RHI42
RHI43
RH1458
RHI46
RGISO
RGTISIC
RGIS2
REIS4
RGISS
RGIS6
RGIS7
REISB
REIS9
REI62
REI63
REI 64
REI6S
REI67
REI69
RE 170
REI7I-
-
REI73
RE 174
REI7S
REI76
RGI77
RGI7B
RHI79
30ft.
RK
AY 97
AY 98
AY 99
RKIO2
RFIO3
RFIO4
RFIOS
AEWIOB
RKIO9
AEWIIO
RJIII
RJII2
AEWII3
RKII4
RJII7B
RKII6
RJII7B
RJIIB
RJII9
RJI2I
RJI22
RJI23
RJI24
RJI2S
RJI26
REI27
RJI2B
RK1298
REI3I
RJI32
RKI34
AVI3S
AVI36
RKI37
RJI3B
RJI39
REI4OB
RJI4I
RJI42
RJI43
RKI4S
RJI46
RJI47
RJISO
RJISIB
RJIS2
154
RJISS
RJ1568
P-T157
REISB
REIS9
RE 162
REI63
RE'l64
REI6S
REI67
REI69
PEI 70
REI7I
REI72
PEI73
RE 174
REI7S
REI76
RGI77
RGI7B
RK1798
No. Off
16-20-24-30
16-20-24-30
16-20-24-30
16-20-24-30
16-20-24-30
16-20-24-30
16-20-24-30
8-10-12-15
5-5-6
3-S-3-4
S-4-5-5
S-4-4-5
3 3 Post
4 4 Post
Name of Part.
Section of Sail Ring—Outer,
Section of Sail Ring-—lntermediate.
Section of Sail Ring—lnner.
Vane Sheet “U” Bolt.
Angle Fan Bracket—Outer.
Angle Fan Bracket—lntermediate.
Angle Fan Bracket—lnner.
Wheel Arm.
Reefing Chain.
Vane “U” Bolt.
Vane Stay.
Check Chain.
Check Chain Spring.
Small End Bush “U” Bolt.
Turntable Centering Jack (4 Post).
Reefing Winch Wire Rope.
Turntable Centering Jack (3 Post).
Sheet Iron Cover.
Oil Splash Guard.
Rotating Platform Angle (Wheel Side).
Rotating Platform Angle (Vane Side).
Crankcase Reefing Pulley Bracket.
Check Chain Bracket.
Left-hand Rotating Platform Bracket.
Right-hand Rotating Platform Bracket.
Platform Ladder.
Platform Ladder Stay.
Vane Rib.
Spout Pipe for Oil Ring to Crankcase Oil Pipe.
Oil Ring to Crankcase Oil Pipe.
Vane Pipe.
Distance Pipe for Reefing Pulley Bracket.
Distance Pipe for Check Chain Bracket.
Pump Rod with Swivel.
Stand Pipe in Crankcase.
Tower Reefing Chain Guide Assembly.
Oil Stand Pipe in Top Tower Casting,
Long Rotating Platform Board.
Platform Ladder Support.
Diagonal Platform Support.
Vane Sheet.
Short Rotating Platform Board.
Rotating Platform Stay (H’wood).
4 Post Top Tower Casting.
4 Post Turntable Body.
4 Post Extension for Tower Reefing Chain Guide.
Oil Supply Pipe Spring.
Oil Overflow Pipe Spring.
Oil Overflow Pipe from Top Tower Casting.
Top Section of Overflow Pipe.
Oil Pump Lever.
Oil Pump Lever Rivet.
Oil Pump Connection.
Oil Pump Lever Fulcrum.
Oil Supply Pipe Joint.
Oil Return Pipe Joint.
Oil Pump Body.
Oil Lid.
Oil Container.
Oil Pump Plunger,
Oil Container “U” Bolt.
Oil Pump Pipe.
Oil Pump Packing Nut.
Oil Pump Reducing Bush.
Oil Pump Valve Seat.
Pump Rod Clamp Plate.
Pump Rod Connection “U” Bolt.


PARTS LIST
(Continued)
17ft.
RF
21ft.
RG
25ft.
RH
30ft.
RK
No. Off
Name of Part.
RF2OO
RF2O2
RF2O3
RF2I2
RE2IS
RF2I7
RF2IB
RF2I9
RF22O
RF22I
RF222
RF223
YE-8415
RGI96
RGI97
RGI9B
RG2OO
RF2O2
RG2O3
RG2I2
RE2IS
RF2I7
RF2IB
RF2I9
RF22O
RF22I
RF222
RG223
YE-8415
RHI9I
RGI96
RGI97
RGI9B
RG2OO
RF2O2
RG2O3
RG2I2
RE2IS
RF2I7
RF2IB
RF2I9
RF22O
RF22I
RF222
RG223
YE-8415
RKI9I
RKI92
RKI93
RKI94
RKI9S
RG2O3
RG2I2
RE2IS
RF2I7
RF2IB
RF2I9
RF22O
RF22I
RF222
RG223
YE-8415
Felt Strip for Crankcase Cover.
Turntable Filler and Overflow.
Guide Box Short Overflow Pipe.
Turntable to Guide Box Overflow Pipe.
Felt Strip for Vane Hinge Bearing.
Overflow Pipe from Turntable Body.
Overflow Pipe to Guide Box—3 Post.
Overflow Pipe to Guide Box-—4 Post.
Vane Hinge Bearing Oil Pipe.
Vane Hinge Bearing Oil Pipe Collar Gasket.
Pump Rod Guide Box Inspection Plate Gasket.
Large Reefing Pulley Bush.
sft. Section of Oil Supply Pipe.
Reefing Winch Body.
Reefing Winch Drum.
Reefing Winch Gear.
Reefing Winch Worm.
Reefing Winch Handle.
Reefing Winch Gear Rivet.
Top Tower Casting Cover Seal.
Wheel Hub Locking Screw.
Slide Bar Tie Rod Locking Screw.
Crank Locking- Screw.
■4-4
1
■4-4
A. Wheel Arm Hub Bolt—liin, x iin., 17ft.; liin
x iin., 21ft. and 25ft.; 21n. x iin., 30ft.; Galv,
High Tensile Steel Bolt.
B. Pivot Setscrews—Sin. x iin., 17ft.; lin. x lin.,
21ft. and 25ft.; liin. x iin., 30ft. M.S. Bolt with-
out Nut,
C. Oil Pump Lever Fulcrum Setscrew—lin. x iin.
Bolt without Nut,
D. Suspension Strap.
E. Suspension Strap Nut—iin., 17ft.; lin., 21ft. and
25ft.; liin., 30ft. M.S. Nut.
F. Crankpin Bolt Nut —iin., 17ft. and 21ft.; iin.,
25ft. and 30ft. M.S. Slotted Hex. Nut.
G. Crank Key—4in. x iin. x lin., 17ft.; sin. x lin. x
iin., 21ft.; 6i,n. x lin. x iin., 25ft.; 7in. x lin. x
9/16 in,, 30ft. Plain M.S. Taper Key.
H. Wheel Hub Key, Front—Sin. x iin. x 7/16 in.,
21ft.; Sin. x lin. x iin., 25ft.; 9in. x' lin. x
9/16 in., 30ft. M.S. Gib Head Key.
J. Oil Pump Valve-jin, dia. Steel Ball.
K. Oil Supply Pipe Elbow—iin. Galv. Pipe Elbow.
L. Oil Ring to Crankcase Pipe Elbow—iin. Galv.
Pipe Elbow.
M. Oil Supply Pipe Nipple—iin. Galv. Hex. Nipple.
N. Oil Supply Pipe Spring Backnut—lin. Galv.
Backnut.
O. Oil Overflow Pipe Spring Backnut—lin. Galv.
Backnut.
P. Oil Overflow Pipe Backnut—lin. Galv. Backnut.
Q. Oil Overflow Pipe Tee —lin. Galv. Tee.
R. Oil Overflow Pipe Plug—lin. Galv. Plug.
S. Oil Supply Pipe Socket—fin. Galv. Socket.
T. Reefing Wire Thimble—No. 7, 17ft. and 21ft.;
No. 8, 25ft. and 30ft.
U. Reefing Wire Rope Clip—iin., 17ft. and 21ft.;
5/16 in., 25ft. and 30ft.
V. Pullout Wire—iin. Circum., 17ft. and 21ft.; lin.
Circum., 25ft. and 30ft.
W. Oil Supply Pipe—iin. Galv. Pipe.
X. Oil Overflow Pipe Nipple—lin. Galv. Hex. Nipple.
CONNECTING RODS AND CRANKS.
17ft.
21ft.
25ft.
30ft. I No. Off
Name of Part.
RF 13D
7in. Stroke
RG 13D
Bt4in. Stroke
RH 13C
RK 138
12in. Stroke
914 in. Stroke
Crank (Short Stroke).
RF 53
RG 53
RH 53
RK 53
Sin. Stroke
lOin. Stroke
12in. Stroke
15in. Stroke
Crank (Special Stroke)
RF 11D
7in. Stroke
RG 11D
B% in. Stroke
RH 11C
RK 118
12in. Stroke
SYzin, Stroke
Connecting Rod (Short Stroke).
RF 52
RG 52
RH 52
RK 52
Sin. Stroke
lOin. Stroke
12in. Stroke
15in. Stroke
Connecting Rod (Special Stroke),


8 I <|/'


’%*' WOOD I %f
PUMP I - .ffc
ROD—'I <^J/




The Southern Cross Organisation
QUEENSLAND:
NEW SOUTH WALES:
SOUTH AUSTRALIA:
SOUTHERN CROSS ENGINE AND
SOUTHERN CROSS MACHINERY
TOOWOOMBA FOUNDRY SALES
WINDMILL CO. PTY. LIMITED
PROPRIETARY LIMITED
PTY. LTD.
22 Young Street, Sydney.
Box 33, P.O., Hindmarsh.
Box 109, P.O., Toowoomba.
55-59 Frome Street, Moree.
Box 115, P.O., Charleville.
Box 163, P.O., Lismore.
56-58 Gipps Street, Bega.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA:
Maryborough.
SOUTHERN CROSS (TAMWORTH)
SOUTHERN CROSS WINDMILL &
SOUTHERN CROSS EQUIPMENT
PTY. LTD.
ENGINE PTY. LTD.
PTY. LTD.
Box 241, P.O., Tamworth.
292-4 Railway Terrace, Maylands.
Box 393, P.O., Rockhampton.
VICTORIA:
SOUTHERN CROSS WINDMILLS &
SOUTH AFRICA;
SOUTHERN CROSS MACHINERY CO.
ENGINES PTY. LTD.
SOUTHERN CROSS WINDMILL &
PTY. LTD.
24 Moray Street, South Melbourne, S.C. 5.
ENGINE CO. (PTY.) LTD.
Box 304, P.O., Townsville.
Cnr. Fairy and Merri Sts., Warrnambool.
50 Henry Street, Bloemfontein.


31508023122384


