

Errol Street
State School,
No. 1402,
Norik MeSliourne
History
Diamond
Jubilee
Souvenir
1874-1934




Errol Street State School No. 1402
North Melbourne
DIAMOND JUBILEE
SOUVENIR HISTORY
1874-1934


ELIZABETH ANN MATTINGLEY,
the first school teacher of North Melbourne.


Quanti est Sapere
The Foundation of Education
in North Melbourne
An Historical Review of Its First Schools
Written by Arthur H. E. Mattingley for the Diamond
Jubilee Celebrations of the Errol Street State School,
North Melbourne, held on 6th October, 1934.
compiling a history of a great school the right to
i/l|g be considered great, important and worthy is
'dm measured by its achievements in building up charac-
ter and in imparting knowledge of the correct type
to its scholars.
In this respect the first schools of North Melbourne,
which eventually merged into the Errol Street State School,
No. 1402, through the agency of their various headmasters and
of their teaching staffs and the ability of these educationalists
to mould the plastic mind of the pupils placed in their charge
and to illuminate it with wisdom and also train the scholars
in those prerequisites that are necessary to equip them to be
useful citizens, has indeed been successful and a matter for
congratulation.
The tree of knowledge planted by the founders of the
school and whose culture has been assiduously attended to
from the foundation of the school to the present time by the
various teachers has indeed yielded magnificent fruit, and
the results obtained by them stand forever as an immutable
monument to the worth of their splendid attributes.


To the credit of the Errol Street schools it may be stated
that they have produced several pupils whom His Majesty
the King has graciously honoured by conferring on them a
Knighthood, an Acting Prime Minister of the Commonwealth
of Australia, Premiers of several Australian States, a High
Commissioner for Australia, a Judge of the High Court of
Australia, Ministers of the Crown, numerous politicians,
doctors, lawyers, scientists, a Lord Mayor of Melbourne,
magistrates, manufacturers, farmers, successful business men,
skilled artisans, specialists, artists, divines and able educa-
tionalists.
Its old scholars return their grateful thanks to the school
and its former staffs for the benefits that they have received
through their tuition and confidently expect that the splendid
traditions and the high standard of its training and the
general excellence of its culture will be further advanced in
future years.
To give the proper perspective to the history of the
Errol Street school one is lead to narrate those conditions of
education which pertained in Melbourne antecedent to its
foundation.
The Foundation of Melbourne and of its Educational
Development.
The little village now known as Melbourne had its begin-
ning on the banks of the Yarra Yarra River in June, 1835.
It grew with marvellous rapidity. As early as the 10th
of October, 1835, Governor Bourke wrote to the Secretary of
State for the Colonies earnestly recommending that provision
be made for schools in which children of different religious
tenets might be instructed without differentiation.
Towards the end of 1836 the first school was established
in the Port Phillip District by order of the Governor of New
South Wales for the children of aborigines. The Port Phillip
District was at that time a province of New South Wales and
was governed therefrom.
Afterwards a school for white children was built in 1837.
About 1838 separate efforts to provide educational facilities
for the children of Melbourne began to be made both by
private individuals and by the different churches.
Many of the buildings used as schools on week days were
used for religious purposes on Sundays owing to the dearth
of churches.
In 1836 Governor Bourke proposed to introduce a system
of education based upon the principle of united secular, but


separate religious instruction, but it was not until 1846, when
Sir Charles Fitzroy became Governor, that it was assented to
and he also assented to the appointment of two school boards.
one to superintend the affairs of the national, and the othei
to administer the fiscal and temporal concerns of the de-
nominational schools.
After some years’ experience the people desired a change
of the educational system and in 1862 Parliament created a
combined board in place of the two rival boards by passing
a Common Schools Act. As this combined board was com-
posed of members representing the principal churches it kept
alive the spirit of denominationalism which engendered a
feeling amongst the public that the control of education
should be placed in the hands of the State.
It should be remembered that the State of Victoria became
separated from New South Wales in 1851 and theieafter
passed its own laws.
So it came to pass that a Department of Education under
a Minister of Public Instruction was created by Parliament
on 17th December, 1872 and education became free, secular
and compulsory.
The Common Schools Bill was introduced into Parliament
by Mr. Heales in May, 1862, and passed on 12th June and
assented to on 18th June of the same year.
The Hon. James Wilberforce Stephen on 12th September,
1872, brought in a Bill to amend the law relating to educa-
tion, and the Board of Education was superseded by a De-
partment of Education. This Bill passed on 17th December,
1872. This repealed the Common Schools Act of 1862. Mr.
Stephen became the first Minister of Public Instruction.
The discovery of gold in the year 1851 brought to Victoria
thousands of people from almost every civilised country with
their families, which kept pouring into Melbourne in large
numbers. As this influx of population moved from one locality
to another many of the schools were perforce held in tents
until more permanent structures could he erected.
What a marvellous advance has been made in the wide-
spread facilities which are provided now for the education
of the children of the State of Victoria. Facilities which com-
pare favourably with the best of those adopted in other and
older countries.
Whilst the system of education was undergoing these
changes some of the people preferred to have their children
taught in private schools, so Mrs. Elizabeth Ann Mattingley
opened a small school for infants in one of the rooms of her


ALBERT MATTINGLEY,
First Headmaster, State School No. 1402, Errol Street, North Melbourne


private residence, Errol Street, on the 13th July, 1857. An
Upper School for more advanced children was opened by
Mr. Albert Mattingley, her son, a trained National School
teacher, on the Bth August, 1858, in an iron building situate
at the corner of Errol and Queensberry Streets (which had
previously been rented from Mr. Albert Mattingley s father,
John Thomas Mattingley, the first householder and whose
family were the founders of North Melbourne), and which
was used as a Presbyterian Church.
This building is now, and has for many years been, used
as a pawnbroker’s establishment.
In 1859 Mr. Albert Mattingley and Mrs. Elizabeth Ann
Mattingley built a brick school on their own land in Errol
Street, next to where now stands the Bank of Victoria, but at
that time the site at the corner of Errol Street and Queens-
berry Street was occupied by Fogarty Bros, as a grocer’s shop,
which was demolished and the bank was built on the site of
the shop.
The corner on which the bank now stands was originally
occupied by Tullock and Farmers, wine and spirit merchants
and grocery store, which was burnt down and was then re-
built by Fogarty Bros.
On the opening of the Upper School the Infant School
was combined with it, thus forming the National School
No. 206, Mr. Albert Mattingley being appointed the head
teacher and Mrs. Elizabeth Ann Mattingley the mistress of the
Infant School by the Commissioners of the National Board
of Education.
There were already practically five denominational schools
in North Melbourne, namely, St. Mary’s Church of England
School, Howard Street, No. 560; Flemington Church of Eng-
land School, afterwards called the Royal Park School, in Man-
ningham Street, previously known as Emu Street; Wesleyan
School, Howard Street, No. 459; North Melbourne Presby-
terian School, Queensberry Street, No. 307, also known as
the North Melbourne Grammar School; Saint Michaels
Roman Catholic School No. 178, all of which had been estab-
lished for some time in the district.
On the 30th September, 1859, on which date North Mel-
bourne was created a municipality, the record then prepared
shows that the total number of pupils attending the Denomi-
national schools was 693 and the number attending the
National School was 452. Previous to the 26th August, 1887,
the municipality of North Melbourne was the municipality oi
Hotham, having been proclaimed the Hotham Ward of the


S* SITE OF FIRST SCHOOL
i ' •# '■ '
■ ' f * i ...
Siie 0/ Elizabeth Ann Mattingley’s Private School, 1857. The building at the corner of the street
(now Reddish’s shop ) is the second or Common School, afterwards called the National School, 1858.


City of Melbourne on 26th January, 1855, and in honour of
His Excellencv Sir Charles Hotham, the then Governor of
Victoria.
On the Ist September, 1862, the Denominational and the
National Schools became Common Schools.
On the Ist January, 1873, the Errol Street Common School
No. 206 became a State School and on account of its large
and increasing number of pupils, the old Powder Magazine,
which was situate in the Royal Park facing the Flemington
Road, was used as an adjunct to the Errol Street School
No. 206, and the fourth and the fifth and sixth classes were
transferred to that building. The present fine school, Errol
Street No. 1402, having been erected, State School No. 206
was closed on 30th April, 1874, and the pupils attended the
new school building on Ist May, 1874.
Mr. Albert Mattingley was appointed its head teacher. On
the Ist of January, 1894, State School No. 307, Queensberry
Street, North Melbourne, was made an adjunct of the Errol
Street State School No. 1402.
On the 31st October, 1894, Mr. Albert Mattingley resigned
his position after having held the head teachership of the
schools for over 36 years. At the date of his resignation he
held the premier position on the Triennial Roll of Teachers,
viz., the first of the first class of the Victorian State School
teachers.
On Mr. Mattingley’s retirement Mr. Peter Drummond took
charge of the school in Januarv, 1895, and continued as head
teacher to May, 1910. During Mr. Drummond’s headmaster-
ship the Cadet Corps made fine progress and many of its
members afterwards took part in the Boer War.
In 1909 the Errol Street State School was proclaimed a
Training School and students from the Teachers’ College of
the University were trained by the staff under the leadership
of Mr. R. Faravoni, who taught at the school for nineteen
years.
Mr. Drummond, on his retirement, was like his prede-
cessor, No. 1 on the Triennial Roll for the First-class of
Teachers.
That the first three headmasters appointed should have
been at the top of the list of the teachers of the State indicates
the high esteem in which the Errol Street State School was
held by the Education Department.
Mr. Drummond was also a member of the Board of Classi-
fiers—the teachers’ representative.


The third or National School, No. 206 (1859)


At J - , *2 JkajjjgjMK
■# '%
/?8Slr * Jr
* ~# -• ■ - 4ftfli
| ' £ ' '
mmsA
1 | / ;■ -—-^■***’ , *.?7* 2H|
,
r * — jkk £ , - A «,4'f 1
"■’ * FP*
-• ■'■•"■ "■ ■'■■ ■ .- ■• :*• . .
■ -
■*■.:. . •' •*•"' : * _ - ; 4 ' ■ •
State
School No. 1402, Errol Street, North Melbourne, as originally built


Mr. Drummond was succeeded by Mr. D’Arcy C. Lear, who
was transferred from the school at Bendigo. He took charge
at the beginning of January, 1911, from Mr. R. Faravoni,
who had acted as head teacher from the date of the retirement
of Mr. Drummond in 1910.
A Rural School, mentioned below, was organised and es-
tablished for training students in the management of small
country schools.
During Mr. Lear’s headmastership the school was re-
modelled at a cost of more than £6OOO in 1916 and the pro-
cess of filling in the hollowed-out school grounds was under-
taken by the school committee.
A Junior Red Cross Circle was formed and since 1922 the
sum of £3O a year has been raised towards the support of the
Errol Street School Cot at the Children’s Hospital.
On his retirement in October, 1927, Mr. Lear was also like
his predecessors. No. 1 on the Triennial Roll for the First-
class Teachers.
He was followed by Mr. Ernest W. Blenkiron, who for a
short period was head teacher from January, 1928, to Decem-
ber, 1930.
Mr. Edmund A. Paige, the present head teacher, succeeded
Mr. Blenkiron and was appointed in January, 1931. Under
his guidance the school is maintaining its high standard of
excellence and progress.
Originally a Board of Advice, whose personnel was drawn
from leading citizens to help the head teacher with certain
phases of the requirements of the school, has been merged
into a School Committee and is elected by the parents of
the scholars.
A Mothers’ Club has also been formed and both these
bodies perform useful work for the benefit of the scholars.
Thrift is encouraged and a Savings Bank started at the
school has proved beneficial.
A modern feature has been the introduction of a Kinder-
garten which has proved to he invaluable in dealing with the
psychology of a child’s mind.
The present school is utilised by the Education Depart-
ment as a training academy for teachers in addition to the
curriculum provided for the education of State school children.
It possesses a complete model of a rural school, which is
situate in the school grounds, for the training of junior
teachers to equip them with the hest methods to he adopted
when dealing with the education of children in countrv


schools to which they are drafted when competent. Thus
the Errol Street school has a benign influence with the edu-
cation of the children in the various country districts of the
State through the appointment of the teachers trained in its
rural school and who have been transferred therefiom to the
country schools.
It might be mentioned that the old school, No. 1402, has
been partly remodelled, the extra large rooms divided into
smaller ones, extra buildings and wings added, the galleries
originally built in some rooms removed, the belfry demol-
ished, and other modern conveniences supplied. The original
building of No. 1402 was planned on the lines of the large
public schools in England extant at the time of its design
and it possessed a pleasing contour.
No account of the history of the Errol Street schools
would he complete without some description of the scenery of
the area in which they were erected and a few remarks ot
interest. An extract taken from the diary of Mr. Albert
Mattingley gives a short account of the appearance of North
Melbourne as seen by him on a bright October morning in
1852.
“The site of the future town was an ideal one, consisting
of undulating land richly carpeted with grass and studded
with noble redgum trees, which gave it a beautiful park-like
appearance.
“The land lying to the east and north-east of the present
town was similar in character in its charming park-like ap-
pearance. From the junction of the Flemington and Sydney
Roads to the Sarah Sands Hotel, Brunswick, then down the
centre of Brunswick Road to the Moonee Ponds Creek, then
along its course as far as Flemington Bridge, then along the
Flemington Road to the starting point before mentioned was
named Parkside. In the early years of the town the
aborigines used to camp and occasionally would hold a cor-
roboree in these park-like lands. Hundreds of parrots and
parakeets of beautiful plumage, the scarlet lory being quite
common among them, the white sulphur-crested cockatoo,
with its harsh screaming note, and occasionally the black
cockatoo, with its weird cry; kookaburras, magpies and
several varieties of honey-eaters were to be seen and heard
as well as the entrancing notes of the harmonious thrush,
whilst overhead wedge-tail eagles, hawks and kestrels soared
aloft. At night time the nocturne of the mopoke resounded
when opossums and native cats emerged from hollows in the
trees or from holes in the ground.


PETER DRUMMOND, Esq.
(1895-1910)
D’ARCY C. LEAR, Esq.
(1911-1927)
ERNEST W. BLENKIRON, Esq. EDMUND A. PAIGE, Esq.
(1928-1930)
Present Headmaster, appointed 1931


“On the waters of the swamp were black swans, pelicans,
magpie geese, black, brown and grey ducks, teal, cormorants
and gulls, whilst curlews, plover, crane, snipe and sandpipers
were seen in the shallows; quail and stone plovers on the
higher banks.”
Fifty-eight years ago the writer of this history, the eldest
son of Albert Mattingley, observed the same appearance of
North Melbourne as described by his father, and many times
he accompanied the boys of the Errol Street State School in
excursions for the purpose of bathing in the big “Fuse” or
the little “Fuse,” which were large, deep waterholes in the
Moonee Ponds Creek close to where it is at present spanned
hv the bridge which links the town of Moonee Ponds to that
of Brunswick. This part of the creek was also known as
"Lousy Pat s Creek,” after an old sundowner who used to
camp there. The local name “Fuse” arose apparently from
the many turns which the course of the creek there takes.
On one occasion a boy from the Carlton College unfor-
tunatelv was drowned in the “Fuse.”
In addition, the Royal Park at that period was clothed
with umbrageous red-gum trees and many were the times
when the scholars of Errol Street State School gathered the
white-looking, sweet-tasting manna from under these trees
and which had exuded from them. Clusters of she-oaks and
wattles also adorned the park and added grace thereto. Some
of the boys were in the habit of smoking the porous roots
of the wattle trees and also of eating the gum exuding from
the wattles, the combined effects of which usually upset them.
On a sunny day in spring the park presented a beautiful
appearance. Several gullies intersected the park and in the
crevices therein native cats made their home and were
hunted by the scholars of the school since the native cats
sallied out at night and killed the poultry of the residents
living contiguous to the park.
The diary of Mr. Albert Mattingley further states that
"about the months of July and August, 1860, it was Very
noticeable in North Melbourne that many pupils when dis-
missed for the day from their different schools wended their
Avay to the Royal Park, the great attraction being a number
of camels and their Hindoo attendants, which had been
specially imported from India for the purpose of the Burke
and Wills expedition. It is more than probable that these
were the first camels that had been seen in Australia. Sheds
had been erected in the Royal Park for the accommodation
of these animals . . . towards the end of 1859. Some of the


Hindoo attendants mentioned above visited the Errol Street
National Schools and showed great interest in the work then
being carried on. One young man, who stated that he had
been educated in a mission school in India, noticing a song
written on a blackboard, both read the words and sang the
air correctly and he afterwards drew a very fine portrait of
one of the monitresses who was standing near.
There stood facing the Flemington Road a bluestone wall
built in the form of a large square surrounding a number of
rooms overlooked by two sentry boxes at two of its angles.
This was the second powder magazine of Melbourne
erected in 1860. Since the first magazine erected on
Batman’s Hill (now known as the Flagstaff Gardens), in 1847,
was a source of danger owing to its proximity to the city of
Melbourne, tenders were called for building a military powder
magazine at the Royal Park and it was tendered for by the
contractor, P. Sinclair, for the sum of £259 7 on 15th October,
1860, and his tender was accepted. It was situate about 120
yards to the north of Flemington Road. The remains of its
foundations are still to be seen in the park where two gum
trees, a Moreton Bay fig tree and a Mater trough are con-
tiguous to one another.
Some ten years later, another and larger magazine was
built further north near the northern boundary of the park
and close to the northern fence, which at present surrounds
the Zoological Gardens. The old magazine, then empty, was
used as a Contagious Diseases Hospital, and, later, as a
branch school to the National School, No. 206, conducted
by Mr. Albert Mattingley and Elizabeth Ann Mattingley.
At the end of 1890, it was transferred to the Park Trustees,
who demolished it and sold the materials for £l4O.
The area of the grounds of the present Errol Street School
is approximately four acres, and a creek, whieh had its source
in the area now known as Parkville, used to run through
the centre of the four acres. This creek Mas spanned with a
bridge to alloM T the vehicular traffic along the Flemington
Road to pass over it without becoming bogged. Eventually
it was encased in a bluestone tunnel which M r as covered with
earth and thus hidden. This tunnel at present passes under
the centre of the school and, running underground under
Harris Street, empties into one of the canals in the West
Melbourne swamp area near the North Melbourne Cricket
Ground. On one occasion a man was washed down this
tunnel by the waters of a heavy thunderstorm, and, later, a


scholar of the Errol Street School was carried down a cul-
vert, which opened into the tunnel in Errol Street close to
the school fence. A grating was then placed over the culvert
to prevent similar occurrences.
The present embankment on the northern side of the
school ground was created when the bridge spanning the
creek on the Flemington Road was removed, and the road
levelled after the tunnel had been constructed. This embank-
ment on the inside of the school fence was planted with a
prickly acacia hedge, which was a mass of beautiful golden
blooms in the spring months, and there were many blue
gum trees planted in the school grounds by Mr. Albert
Mattingley. When these were in blossom parroquets and
honey-eaters ravished the blossoms for the delectable nectar
contained therein, whilst large black, large green and small
black cicadas kept up an incessant vibrating hum throughout
the sunny days of summer. During the early period of the
history of the school the boys used to go fishing, after school
was over, to the Moonee Ponds Creek, where bream, eels,
galaxias, and tupong were abundant in its then clean water.
Later on carp, which had escaped from the ponds of the
estate of Mr. Hugh Glass, inhabited the creek. The dainty
fern known as “Creeping Jinny” hung its green tresses over
the rocky outcrops in the Royal Park in the vicinity of the
railway cutting, and were sought for the purpose of growing
in hanging pots in a fernery. When the railway cutting was
excavated thousands of fossilized remains were exposed, prin-
cipally of extinct marine creatures.
Many of the old boys of the Errol Street State School
rendered patriotic service to the nation in its hour of need
during the Great and have added more lustre and fame
to that already possessed by their loved Alma Mater or
benign Mother who nursed them through their education.
The following names are inscribed on the Roll of Honour,
and are for ever enshrined in the records of the achieve-
ments of the school.
Some of these men unfortunately made the supreme
sacrifice for the sake of their country.
Quo Fata vocant. Requiescat in pace.


ROLL OF HONOUR
Errol Street State School, No. 1402
North Melbourne
*Died on Active Service.
Addis, Henry P.
Atkinson, Charles.
Atkinson, George Glenview.
Atkinson, Herbert Havelock.
* Atkinson, Raymond Leslie.
* Atkin son, Frederick Gordon
Thomas.
Abdallah, Edward.
Aarons, Leslie.
*Allen, Desmond Claude.
Boyes, Charles William.
Brock, S. E.
Berry, Bruce.
Boniface, R. G.
Black, Robert L. C.
*Beck, Stanley.
Begley, Thomas.
Butler, Frederick S.
Bracken (Dick), R. T.
Bracken, Jack.
Benari, Albert.
Boreham, W. S.
Boreham, A. E.
Black, Richard M. B.
Black, Neil C. E.
Brodie, Andrew.
Brown, John George.
Blake, Frank Rupert.
Black, Donald.
*Black, Bruce.
Betts, Frederick.
Broadford, George.
* Carless, J. N.
* Clark, James W.
Cannon, Leslie Wm.
Cameron, Ernest.
Clark, Robert.
Carter, Roger.
Coma-11, Ralph.
Clarke, George.
Clack, Victor.
Clencie, G. F. E.
Crawley, Fred.
Casson, Joseph Geo.
Cannon, Albert Victor.
-Clack, Edgar John
Collins, Harold L.
Cunning, A.
Crawley, Leslie James.
Cameron, Donald (Military
Cross).
*Dunn, David Leslie Clarke.
*Dunn, Herbert Francis.
*Dixon, Percy King.
: Dunn, Frank.
Harold.
Darbyshire, Keith.
Dettman, George C.
Downie, James F.
Darbyshire, Arthur.
Delaney, Raymond.
Davis, John Charles.
Dalcum, Leslie.
Dougherty, Charles.
Davis, Gordon.
*Dangerfield, Joseph G.
Duke, Frank.
Duke, Alfred.
Dangerfield, Gordon A.
Drummond, Alex.
*Drummond, Eric Gordon.
:I: Edwards, Frank Henry.
Edwards, William George
Ewin, Edwin French.
Footit, Albert Nolan.
Findlay, J. W.
Fox, Arthur.
Ford, C. W.
*Fraser, Alfred Hugh.
Gascard, Samuel.
* Greenwood, William.
Greenwood, John B.
Grant, Douglas Campbell
Gray, Hutton.
Germain, Donald.
Gray, Thomas Lawrence
Hammill, Arthur John.
Harbison, H. L.
Harbison, W. M.
Hayes, Ernest Charles
Hamilton, Alexander


"‘Hamilton, John.
Hamilton, James.
Henry, Mortimer.
Hamilton, Claude.
Hamilton, Gordon.
Hillman, Horace P.
Haymes, Robert.
Hayes, John Colin C.
Hanson, James Stanley.
Harley, Alfred.
Hall, Alexander James.
Hall, George Herbert.
Johnstone, Jack.
Johnson, Charles F.
Johnstone, William
Kirk, Jack.
Knowles, Sydney.
Knowles, Arthur.
Knowles, Thomas.
"'Kleberger, Theo.
Kirk, Joseph G. W.
Logan, Kenneth.
'Lindsay, Leonard.
Leatch, Thomas.
Moore, Reuben Leslie.
Mason, Charles.
Mason, Francis Henry.
Moran, D. Edward.
Martin, H.
"“Marshall, Peter James.
Milton, Henry Thomas
Marshall, Rupert.
Moran, Richard.
"‘Mitchell, Frederick.
Montgomerie, R. N. T.
Muir, Gordon.
Miller, W. G.
Miller, Herbert S.
Makin, James.
Matthews, Henry.
Martin, Arthur James.
Makin, George L.
Milligan, Robert.
Madden, William.
McLeish, Leslie John.
McKenzie, Albert.
McPherson, William J.
McWhinney, Lawrence.
"“McKay, William.
MacLeod, Roy A.
McNeil, Donald.
"‘Mcßeth, Alexander.
Mclndoe, William.
Neely, Leonard William
"“Neely, Jack.
*Neely, James.
Notman, A.
Nyberg, Charles Magnus.
Neville, G.
"“Oates, Frederick Ernest
Owen, David.
Painter, H. D.
Painter, L. G. W.
"“Pearce, George Gladstone.
Pearson, George.
Parsons, Arthur Lionel.
Powell, James Barwise
Perry, Stanley.
Petrie, James.
Pickett, Charles.
"“Paget, Leslie James
Painter, W. E.
Purves, W. F.
Purves, A. H.
Quick, Harold.
*Ray, Hedley.
Ryder, James Charlesworth
Royle, Herbert George.
Ryan, John.
Russell, Leslie Charles
Reynolds, Driver.
Royle, Francis Leonard.
Rye. Frederick.
Rook, John.
Roberts, John Josiah.
Robertson, George Buchanan
Rutledge, James.
Robertson, W.
Raverty, J. H.
Raverty, J. H. R.
"“Reynolds, Donald Thomas.
Samson. Stephen George
Swift, George David.
‘Smith, Maxwell George
Smith, Wallace B.
Smith, Bruce.
Searle, Edgar Thomas.
Sterry, Thomas.
Sterry, William E.
Stevens, Frederick George
*Smith, H. W. G.
Smith, H. L.
Simpson, Lawrence Gordon.
Sheldrick. Albert Ernest.
Spencer, William.
Smith, Alfred.
*Spence, Harry.
Sheehan, Arthur.
*Smith, Henry Gordon
Shanks, A. S.
Stevenson, George.
Smith, Valentine.
Spence, Raymond.
Stewart, Roy.
Stewart, Leslie.
Stott, Stanley.
Sampson, Albert N.
Sutton. Horace.


Sutton, Charles.
Woodhead, John Walter.
Shimmen, Richard S.
Wheeler, Ernest.
Sampson, George.
Welant, William.
Sheldon, Alfred.
Williamson, John Herrick,
Thomas, William Geo.
Williamson, Harold G.
Tidd, William.
Willcocks, Ernest Alf.
Thompson, Stanley David.
Willcocks, Albert H.
Topp, Archie.
Whatton, Charles.
Topp, Daniel.
Walters, L. E.
Thomas, John William.
Walters, F. E.
Taylor, George.
Wallace, Gordon Murray.
* Taylor, Gordon John.
Wills, Alfred G. S.
Turner, David John.
Wilson, John Edward.
Thornton, Leslie.
Wallace, Douglas McNair,
*Thompson, Horace.
Walker, John A.
Vaughan, Norman Harold.
Waldock, Albert J.
Wallace, Stuart.
Woolley, Leonard.
Woodington, Albert Ernest.
Watt, Alex. Roy.
Webb, George.
Woodhead, James A.
Yates, T. Edgar.




