

ERSKINE
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH
CENTENARY
1850 - - 1950


Present Officers
Minister
Rev. A. L. POLLOCK, B.A., B.D.
Student Assistant
Mr. L. N. BEAN
Deaconess
Miss N. HOLLIDAY
Session
Mr. H. L. Miller (Session Clerk)
Mr. J. Thompson
Mr. W. Mickelson
Sunday School
Mr. L. N. Bean (Superintendent)
Mr. W. Mickelson (Secretary).
Mrs. W. Mickelson (Treasurer)
P.F.A.
Mr. L. N. IJean (President)
Miss P. Allen (Secretary)
Mr. F. Wilson (Treasurer)
Board of Management
Miss E. J. Peacock
Miss F. Scully
Mrs. M. Richardson
Mrs. W. Mickelson
Miss W. Richardson
Mr. R. Belcher
P.W.M.U.
Miss N. Holliday (President)
Mrs. M. Richardson (Secretary)
Mrs. W. Mickelson (Treasurer)
Mission Committee
Mrs. G. Lewis (Secretary)
Miss E. J. Peacock
Miss H. Storie
Miss Johnstone
Miss F. Scully
Mr. Thompson, elder, has been a member of Erskine since his arrival from
Scotland over fifty years ago.
Miss E. J. Peacock has been a member of the Board of Management since
1922.


Erskine Church


History of Erskine Church
(Carlton United)
1850—1950
THE Presbyterian Church of Scotland in the last Century was divided into
many different branches, the greatest point of conflict being the question
of State support for the Church. These divisions were perpetuated in
Australia after colonisation, there being here in Victoria, in the forties, the minis-
ters of the Established Church of Scotland and of the Free Presbyterian Church of
Australia Felix started in 1843. There were also some ministers of the Relief
Church and the United Secession Church, which combined in Scotland to form
the United Presbyterian Church. That body gave birth to the original of
"Erskine” Church, Carlton. After the Union in Scotland in 1847, Mr. A. M.
Ramsay, previously a minister of the Relief Church, came to Melbourne, to
pioneer voluntary Presbyterianism here for the United Presbyterian Church of
Scotland, and he formed a congregation in Collins Street on the present site of
the Auditorium which contains the Metro Theatre.
About the same time there arrived in Melbourne from Van Dieman’s Land,
a Congregational minister, Mr. William Jarrett, who established a school here
at Port Phillip. He joined with Mr. Ramsay and two other ministers to form
a synod of the United Presbyterian Church of Victoria on the 22nd January,
1850. On the 27th of that month, Mr. William Jarrett commenced services in
St. Patrick’s Hall, still standing in Bourke Street, starting the branch of the
United Presbyterian Church, which eventually became Erskine Church. On the
11th August in that year the congregation, composed largely of English Pres-
byterians, constituted itself.
On the 9th May, 1851, this congregation opened "a temporary church,
intended ultimately to be used as a schoolroom in connection with a church
to be built in the future” about the site of the present Civil Ambulance building
in Lonsdale Street—this was known as the Second United Presbyterian Church,
Melbourne.
In 1855 the Rev. James Ballantyne, an ex-Secession minister, arrived in
Melbourne from the United Presbyterian Church of Scotland, and after about
eighteen months as colleague of Mr. Ramsay at the Collins Street United Pres-
byterian Church, later called St. Enoch’s, he withdrew in September, 1856, with
some of Mr. Ramsay’s congregation after a difference of opinion which resulted
in the resignation of both ministers from the Charge. Mr. Ramsay was re-
appointed to the Collins Street charge, and Mr. Ballantyne and his small con-
gregation remained independent. After a short time Mr. Ballantyne’s following
took over the Lonsdale Street church and absorbed its small congregation, Mr.
Jarrett withdrawing from the pastorate voluntarily (having received £6OO for
surrendering his rights!) leaving Mr. Ballantyne to continue as minister.
Mr. Jarrett stayed in Melbourne as a school teacher till the Union of
Presbyterian Churches in Victoria, supporting Mr. Ballantyne in his church,
and remaining a member of the Synod of the United Presbyterian Church of
Victoria. Following upon Union, he became minister of Daylesford for a
short time and afterwards was Editor of the "Argus” for a period, leaving the
colony a little later.
The amalgamation of Mr. Jarrett’s and Mr. Ballantyne’s congregation having
occurred at the end of October, 1856, Mr. Ballantyne settled down to a long
and fruitful pastorate. However, the following year he and several other
ministers of the United Presbyterian Church of Victoria, broke away from that
body, ostensibly on account of non-acceptance of the Standards of the United
Presbyterian Church of Scotland by that body, but probably due to the per-
sonal incompatibility of Mr. Ramsay and Mr. Ballantyne. After September,


1857, this congregation came under the auspices of the Synod of the United Pres-
byterian Church of Australia, formed by the breakaway members of the
United Presbyterian Church of Victoria. On the 18th April, 1858, a new stone
church was built in Lonsdale Street and formally named Erskine Church, after
one of the fathers of the Secession movement in Scotland. (Perhaps this was
done to pique Mr, Ramsay, whose background had been that of the Relief
Church of Scotland before the Union in 1847 in Scotland.) The congregation
retained the name when it moved to Carlton some time later.
In April, 1859, this congregation, with the rest of the United Presbyterian
Church of Australia, some of the United Presbyterian Church of Victoria, the
Synod of Victoria and most of the Free Presbyterian Church of Australia Felix,
united to form the Presbyterian Church of Victoria, this being the third and
final body to which Erskine Church was to hold allegiance.
After the Union there was no need for the presence of Erskine Church in
the city of Melbourne, which was well served by Scots. Church and St. Enochs
(Mr. Ramsay’s church), therefore Erskine congregation, in 1862, took over the
present site on a Government grant, in South Carlton on the corner of Rathdown
and Grattan Streets. The reasons prompting the choice of this site are open to
question, since it was so close to that of St. Andrew’s Church, Carlton, a Free
Presbyterian Church which had not joined the Union. It has even been sug-
gested that it hoped to absorb those parishioners of St. Andrew’s who were
dissatisfied with the position of their Church as regards the Union! However,
this proximity to St. Andrew’s Church was later to react detrimentally to the
growth of Erskine Church in Carlton, there being so many other Presbyterian
churches in the Northern Inner Suburbs.
On this site a small temporary brick church was erected in 1862 and a
villa manse was erected near it, fronting on Rathdown Street. Between the time
of selling the old church building in Lonsdale Street, which was for a con-
siderable time to be the Melbourne Masonic Hall, and the erection of the new
church, worship was carried out in the old Trades Hall in Lygon Street. The
church site was originally much larger than at present, several neighbouring
houses now standing on land which was sold to finance the building of a new
church and manse later.
During this early part of the Church’s history, there was no choir or organ,
the psalms in the service being conducted by a precentor who led the singing—•
this was very ably done by a Mr. Heggie for many years. In 1863 a choir was
formed, but no anthems were sung in church services. It was not until 1870
that a harmonium was introduced, though some members disapproved of the
innovation.
About 1870 part of the church site was sold and a large stone church
was to be built. This church, the present one, was completed in 1873 and it was
decided that the material of the old church should be used in the Sunday School
hall. The new church had a steeple which has been since removed. In 1875 the
Rev. Mr. Ballantyne visited the Old Country for health reasons, and was asked
to find a colleague for himself while there. He was unsuccessful in finding an
assistant. He returned the following year, but resigned aften nine months,
owing to continued ill-health—possibly also owing to dissatisfaction on the
part of a certain section of the congregation, and because his stipend was £760
in arrears! the congregation being willing to pay this off in instalments.
Thus ended the long ministry of an able servant of the church, a man who
had raised Erskine from a small, inexperienced congregation to quite an
important church. He had been for some years Editor of the Presbyterian
"Messenger.” He exerted great personal influence not only amongst his congre-
gation, but also in the courts of the Church —in 1861-2 had been Moderator
of the Assembly—and amongst public men in general. He was active in the
service of the Church right until his death in 1896.


After Mr. Ballantyne’s resignation an attempt was made to get a minister
here in Victoria, but owing to the shortage of ministers, was unsuccessful so it
was decided to call the Rev. Alexander Yule of the Free Church in Aberdeen,
Scotland. Accordingly, Mr. Yule became the third minister in 1879. In 1881
the present Manse was built, and the Sunday School hall was completed in
1889 during his fruitful ministry, when the congregation reached its peak in
numbers, with nearly 200 communicant members and many adherents. In 1887
the safe containing the Session Book and the Communion Plate was stolen—
a great loss. However, a new Communion Plate was presented by Mr. L. Walker,
a member of the congregation.
During the latter part of Mr. Yule’s ministry, a Sunday School had been
opened at Parkville to cater for that section of the parish, Gospel services had
been held there after the conclusion of the regular evening service at Erskine.
However, in 1890, the members of Erskine congregation living at Parkville desired
a church of their own, so the Parkville section of the Parish was detached and
College Church was built. The Rev. Mr. Yule desired to be transferred to that
portion of his charge, leaving the pulpit at Erskine vacant. The original congre-
gation was now thus somewhat depleted, the Parish now being about half the
previous size. The Rev. Mr. Yule continued some years at Parkville, loved by
his own congregation and respected in the Church at large.
In 1891 Rev. W. M. M. Alexander, from Mortlake, was inducted to Erskine
Church—the fourth minister. By this time St. Andrew’s Presbyterian Church,
Carlton, had joined the Union. As a result of this, the Parish of Erskine
Church was confined to the area bounded by Grattan Street, Nicholson Street,
Palmerston Street, and Sydney Road —an area of about half a square mile, part
of which, the University grounds, possessed four homes. Therefore, there
was much talk of amalgamation of the three Carlton charges of Princes Hill,
Erskine and St. Andrews, but in all congregations there was considerable
opposition, so the position remained as before.
In 1893, for the first time, an anthem by the choir was introduced into the
service—a very popular innovation. A special Evangelical Mission was held in the
district by Erskine Church in 1897, and about this time a Mission School was
opened in Faraday Street by the congregation. In 1900 Mr. James Bennie, who
had been an elder almost since the foundation of the congregation, passed to
higher service—a great loss to the church, since he had taken part in all phases
of its activities during his life. During 1902 a move was made to unite
Erskine congregation to one of the other nearby churches and to sell the
property. However, a Commission of Presbytery reported that although the
work of Erskine was limited by the condition of the Parish, which was in an
area the nature of which had changed through the years, the congregation’s work
was of such importance that it was not advisable to dissolve it. Also at this time
another denomination des.red to take over the church buildings and site and the
m n:ster and congregation, deeming this inadvisable, wished to carry on as an
active church.
In 1906 Jubilee celebrations were held, dating the fifty-year period from
the date of Mr. Ballantyne’s union of his charge with that of Mr. Jarrett’s.
In 1909 Mr. Alexander transferred to Abbotsford and the Erskine pulpit
was again vacant. The congregation decided to put themselves in the hands of
the Home Mission Committee, with the proviso that they be allowed to
reconsider their position every twelve months, and Mr. W. Ride was appointed
as Exit Student from the Theological Hall. The following year Mr. J. E.
Nichols, M.A., was appointed, although St. Andrew’s Church had again offered
to absorb Erskine.
In 1912 Mr. L. C. M. Donaldson, a Theological Student was appointed and
did wonderful work here. Although being in indifferent health, he built up the
church congregation until over 300 worshippers attended. His previous training
as a young people’s evangelist stood him in good stead. His work here resulted
in a great improvement in young people’s activities, establishing the Erskine


Young Men’s Institute. He remained here two years as a student missioner,
and was succeeded by Mr. P. E. Shepherd in 1914, but returned the following
year and remained until he was ordained and inducted into the Erskine Charge
in 1917.
In early 1916 an old hotel, the Duke of York in Rathdown Street, was rented
to be used as a Girl’s Hostel and Mission. This was named Erskine House 1 and
was conducted by a committee of ladies, with Deaconess Downes in charge. Thus
was established the first hostel for girls under the Presbyterian Church of Vic-
toria. Prior to the appointment of Deaconess Downes, Deaconess Storie in-
augurated a Mothers’ Meeting, which continues to this day. Late that year it
was announced that the whole of the church debt was removed
—a great tribute to the unfailing work of the congregation and
Mr. Donaldson. However, at the end of 1917, after a year’s service as an
ordained minister, Mr. Donaldson was forced to take leave of absence, owing
to indifferent health, and eventually to resign in June, 1919. This was a great
loss to Erskrne, as Mr. Donaldson had worked extremely hard in the Parish
and built up a church under great difficulties—as a large section of the popu-
lation belonged to Roman Catholic and Jewish faiths. A further section of the
people were residents of hostels and boarding houses, and it was among these,
many being young folk, that Mr. Donaldson obtained new members.
Sometime after his departure, the charge having been vacant for a time, the
financial position of the church, it was thought, would not permit it to continue
as an independent Charge; therefore, it was decided in 1920 to put the church
in the hands of the Inner Suburban Committee, who appointed Mr. J.
Hastie to the Charge. This year the church suffered by the death of Deaconess
Downes, who had been in charge of Erskine House—dping wonderful work
there with Mothers’ Meetings, Girls’ Clubs and general mission work. Deaconess
Kerr was appointed for twelve months prior to her departure for Korea.
Deaconess Jam eson, who had been voluntary assistant-deaconess, carried on until
Deaconess Kekwick was appointed. Mr. Hastie left the Charge in 1922 and the
Charge was placed in a Group Mission with the two Fitzroy congregations of
Napier Street and Young Street, under the supervision of Rev. John Barnaby,
with three assistants, Mr. Collins being Missioner at Erskine.
In 1925 the Charge was again placed under the Home Mission Committee
temporarily, being under the supervision of Rev. John Barnaby and Mr. W.
Strathie appointed missioner. On his transfer to Merbein next year, Mr. E.
New from that Charge replaced him. Deaconess Greve was appointed as
deaconess to Erskine. It was during 1925 that the church steeple was removed
ewing to difficulties of repair. Erskine House Committee took over the
E.Y.M.I. and used it as the Downes Hostel—named in memory of Deaconess
M. Downes, who died in office at Erskine—in conjunction with Erskine House,
later it was transferred to a house in Abbotsford. This was used as a Girls’
Hostel in the same way as Erskine House. In 1928 this was offered to the
Presbyterian Church of Victoria, to be used as a Rescue Hostel, on the con-
dition that it still bear the name of Downes Hostel.
When Mr. New left in 1927, Mr. Strathie returned for a year, then was
succeeded by Mr. J. K. Paton, who was to remain at Erskine as Student and
Min-ster for ten years. The Church suffered the death of Miss Bryant, an
active church member, for 50 years teacher of the Sunday school, and a
worker at Erskine House.
In 1931 the 75th Anniversary of Erskine was celebrated. Then in the
next year the three Carlton Charges of St. Andrews. Erskine and Princes Hill
were united to form the Carlton United Charge (of which Erskine alone re-
mains) with a common Session, but separate Boards of Management. The
Downes Hostel was to be taken over completely by the Rescue Mission, being sold,
and replaced and the name being perpetuated in the new establishment. It was
to this United Charge that Mr. J. K. Paton was ordained and inducted in 1933.
When the Union occurred it was decided that only an evening service would


be held at Erskine on Sunday, the morning service being held at St. Andrews,
and this arrangement continued for five years. This may be held to have con-
tributed to the decline of Erskine Church over recent years. But in 1938 the
St. Andrew’s Church was closed and the building shifted to Gardiner, and
morning services were once again held at Erskine.
In 1937 combination cupboards and tables in the Sunday School were
erected in memory of Miss Bryant. Mr. Paton received a call to Woodford
congregation in 1938 and the Session felt obliged to release him from his
pastoral tie. Mr. Paton’s ministry was a popular one and it was accompained
with much blessing. During the next six months, the services at Erskine and
at Princes Hill, were taken by theological students from Ormond College. In
March 1939 Rev. R. Nairn was inducted into the Charge. Since Princes Hill and
Erskine were both under Mr. Nairn, Student Assistants were appointed to aid
him, among them being Messrs. J. S. Smith, M. A. Tremewan and F. P.
Strickland.
In 1941, Princes Hill church was closed, because with the coming of the
war its congregation was so small that it was thought inadvisable to keep it
open, so Erskine Church alone remained in the United Charge. After a short,
but faithful m nistry, Mr. Nairn resigned.
A joint meeting of Presbytery, Erskine Session and the Home Mission
Committee was held to decide the future of Erskine. It was decided that Rev.
J. M. Taylor should be appointed to Erskine Charge. Mr. Taylor did good
work here at Erskine through the difficult war years, but was forced to resign
at the end of 1944, and owing to the shortage of ministers the
vacancy could not be filled. So the Presbytery of Melbourne East decided that,
under a special arrangement, the Charge would be worked in conjunction with
Carlton North, with Mr. L. N. Bean as Student Assistant at Erskine, under the
oversight of Rev. R. G. Butler, of North Carlton. The Charge was to be still
on the Roll of Assembly with a Representative Elder —being then Mr. H. Miller,
now Mr. W. Mickelson. This arrangement still exists at the present day—how-
ever, Rev. R. G. Butler having been called to Bentleigh, Rev. A. L. Pollock,
the new minister at North Carlton became minister to Erskine. Mr. Bean, in spite
of the burden of studies, has during the past five years effected a work, which,
though necessarily limited in scope, is quite real and evident.
The Erskine congregation has over this past decade entered upon difficult
times, and the faithful few who remain have been shouldering a very large
burden. The most encouraging features of the work are to be found in the
youth activities of the Church, namely in the Sunday School and in a live
P.F.A., and in a strong week-day Women’s Meeting under the leadership of
Deaconess Holliday.
The congregation is conscious of its obligation to keep the flag of Pres-
byterianism flying in that area between Carlton and the City; but more than
that to continue the preaching of the Gospel of a Living Lord and Saviour
in a place and at a time where it is very desperately needed.
May Almighty God grant, not only in Erskine, but in all of the Inner
Suburban Charges, of which it is a representative, that the work may not only
be continued, but, with the conscience of the whole Church being quickened
in regard to these needy places, it will be presented effectively with all of the
necessary resources the Church can bring to bear on the problem in equipment and
personnel; and not as it is now, dependent upon the sacrifice and devotion of
the few.
R.S. Belcher.


Notable Names in the History of Erskine
Past Ministers
Rev. W. Jarrett 1850
~ J. Ballantyne 1857
„ A. S. Yule 1879
„ W. M. M. Alexander 1891
„ L. C. M. Donaldson 1917
„ J. Hastie 1920
~ J. Barnaby 1923
„ J. K. Paton 1933
„ R. Nairn 1939
„ J. M. Taylor 1942
„ R. G. Butler 1944
„ A. L. Pollock 1949
Deaconesses
Miss H. Storie 1912
~ M. Downes 1915
„ E. A. Kerr 1920
„ M. Jamieson
„ M. A. Kekwick 1921
„ W. A. Greve 1926
„ E. Taylor 1928
„ W. A. Greve 1929
Mrs. F. Ferguson 1940
Miss W. A. Greve 1944
„ L. J. Norris 1945
„ N. M. Holliday 1946
Student Assistants and Missioners
Mr. W. Ride (Rev.) 1910
„ J. E. Nichols (Rev.) 1911
„ L. C. M. Donaldson (Rev.) 1912
„ P. E. Shepherd (Rev.) 1915
~ M. Collins (Rev.) 1923
„ W. Strathie (Rev.) 1925
„ E. New (Rev.) 1926
~ A. R. Campbell 1927
„ J. K. Paton (Rev.) 1928
„ S. 1933
„ A. I. Absalom (Rev.) 1934
„ W. H. Harrison (Rev.) 1935
„ J. S. Smith (Rev.) 1937
„ M. A. Tremewan (Rev.) 1940
„ F. P. Strickland (Rev.) 1940
„ L. Cartwright (Rev.) 1941
„ L. N. Bean 1945
Session Clerks
Mr, R. Aitken
„ J. Bennie
~ J. Archibald 1878
„ W. Falconer 1892
„ C. R. Craig Smith 1919
„ H. Clarke
„ J. Christie 1937
~ A. Stickland 1938
„ H. Miller 1944


Programme
Sunday School Anniversary
SUNDAY, 19th MARCH.
Morning, 11 a.m Rev. A. L. POLLOCK, 8.A., B.D.
Afternoon, 3 p m Mr. GREWAR
Evening, 7 p.m Rev. J. KENNEDY PATON
Women’s Meeting
THURSDAY, 23rd MARCH.
2.30 p.m. . Speaker: Mrs. E. HOLMES, President P.W.M.U.
P.F.A. Meeting
FRIDAY, 24th MARCH.
g p m Speaker: Mr. LLOYD BAIRD, L.L.B.
SUNDAY, 26th MARCH.
Morn:ng, 11 a.m Mr. L. N. BEAN
Evening, 7 p.m COMMUNION SERVICE
The Right Rev. A. S. HOUSTON, M.A., Moderator of Victoria.
The Evening Service on 26th March will be followed by Supper and
Social Hour in the Sunday School Hall.
Spectator Publishing Co., Printers, Melb.


