

ESSAY
ON THE
LANGUAGE OF THE SOUTHERN CHINS
AND ITS AFFINITIES
BY
BERNARD HOUGHTON, C.S.,
DEPUTY COMMISSIONER, SAMDOWAY.
RANGOON:
PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA.
1892.
Price, —Rs. 1-8-0.




ESSAY
ON THE
LANGUAGE OF THE SOUTHERN CHINS
AND ITS AFFINITIES
BY
BERNARD HOUGHTON, C.S.,
Deputy Commissioner, Sandoway.
RANGOON;
PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA.
1892.


TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Page.
Preface ... ... ... ... ... ... 3.
Preliminary ... ... ... ... ... ... 1
Grammar ... ... ... ... ... ... 9
Chin Sentences ... ... ... ... ... 43
Chin-English Vocabulary ... ... ... ... 54
English-Chin Vocabulary ... ... ... ... ipl
Appendix I.—Table of Relationships ... ... ... iii
Do. ll.—Chiu and Ghurka Physical Types ... ... iv
Do. 111-—Dravidian Analogies... ... ... ... v
Do. IV. —Customs and Folklore ... ... ... ... x


PREFACE.
The present short work, which makes no pretension to he
exhaustive, purports to give an outline of the main features
of the Chin language as spoken in the vicinity of Sandoway.
South of that place it is considerably corrupted owing to the
constant intercourse of the Chins with the Burmans, hut
northward, at any rate up to the limits of the Sandoway dis-
trict, there is not much variation and, such as there is, is chiefly
confined to a few of the vowels. In the Chin Grammar
examples are given of every construction and a few sen-
tences hearing on ordinary subjects have also been added for
the further exemplification of the rules given, whilst in the
Chin-English Vocabulary as well as in the grammar some
endeavour ha s been made to trace the connection of the Chin
with the cognate languages. The philological portion has,
however, been put in brackets so that it can he the more con-
veniently skipped by those who wish merely to study the
language itself.
Of the four appendices the first is simply a table of re-
lationships in Chin, the second is a comparison between the
physical type of the Chin and that of the Limhu-Gurkha,
the third traces in detail the connection between Chin and
the Dravidian languages, whilst the fourth (a reprint from a
paper in the present census report), gives some account of
the institutions of the Chins.
I would beg the indulgence of the student for any errors
or omissions that occur in this little work. It has been
undertaken, at the suggestion of Major Parrott, Commissioner
of Arakan, on the basis of some notes prepared by me when
studying for an examination in Chin, and it is scarcely pos-
sible that there should not he several mistakes in it. In fact
the time at my disposal has been too short and too much


interrupted by official duties to enable me to prepare a really
exhaustive and exact work. At the same time pains have
been taken to guard.as far as possible against error by check-
ing the words, &c., with the Chins of different places.
The philological portion was added as it seemed to me that
whilst on the subject it would be as well to examine also this
aspect of the language ( i.e its relation to others), by far
the most important from a scientific point of view. Finally,
I would say with Major Lewin* that “ I play the part here
“ of a simple pioneer going forward and blazing a path ; it is
“ for those who come after me to expand the track into a fair
“and well-engineered roadway for the good of all.”
SaNDOWAY :
The 7th September 1891. )
B. HOUGHTON.
*lntroduction to Exercises in the Lushai Dialect.


PRELIMINARY REMARKS.
The Chin language belongs to the tonic branch of the great
southern division of the Mongoloid family, though, as in most
languages of that branch, it is by no means destitute of
agglutinative particles. Chinese is in fact almost the only
perfect example of a tone-using language (the tih particle
scarcely counts), in which every syllable has a distinct mean-
ing of its own, though Burmese approximates to this state of
things. Between the isolating Chinese and the highly agglu-
tinative and Don-tonic Dravidian languages, this division of
the Turanian family presents examples of every gradation
between the isolating and agglutinative languages. The
former are geographically limited to the south-east portion of
Asia, the boundaries within which they are found being on
the north the Mongolian plateau, on the West the Pamir
plateau, the plains of Bengal, and the Arakan Yoma Moun-
tains ; South the Isthmus of Kraw; and East the China Sea,
&c. The agglutinative languages embrace the remainder of
the Mongoloid world which, as is well known, is a fairly ex-
tensive one. Although this division of the southern branch
of the Mongoloid languages into isolating (tonic) and agglu-
tinative* is now a real and convenient one, it must not be
supposed that it always existed. All the evidence available
points to the conclusion that the original Mongoloid speech
was isolating, but without tones and was in fact probably as
harsh as its modern representatives are soft in utterance.
The most probable explanation of the tones is that they
are the result of the soft and luxurious nature of the climate
in which the chief members of this group found themselves,
as in Burma at any rate the language of the supposed autoch-
thones (the Talaings), is destitute of them. The chief nations
of the group having contracted this disease of speech the in-
fection has since spread to others (such as the Thibetans),
who inhabit countries with a harsher and more bracing cli-
mate. The tones are indeed well suited to the easy-going,
‘ don’t-want-to-be-troubled ’ character of the Southern Mon-
goloids, and would be impossible in the language of the more
pushing and laborious Aryan even if the latter inhabited the
same countries as the former.
* However, though all isolating languages are tonic, all tonic languages are not
isolating.


Though a large portion of the Southern Mongoloids living
in the fierce heat and arid dryness of the Indian plains have
so far as is known kept themselves free from the infection
of tones and developed fully the agglutinative tendency of
their languages, the latter do not differ radically or ah ovo,
from those of the tonic branch. Taking the Dravidian as the
representative (I had almost said sole), type in the Southern
branch of the former languages, it will he easily seen that
(excepting the numerals) their principal and elementary
roots are identical with those of tonic, partly isolating Chin.
Not only so, hut it will he shown within (Appendix III)
that many of the verbal and other suffixes in Chin are essen-
tially Dravidian (approximating more to Tamil than to
Telugu).
Having the advantage of some acquaintance with the latter,
I have been enabled to bring out fairly completely the resem-
blances in Chin ; but although owing to the Southern Chins
being earlier immigrants to the east than their neighbours to
the north these analogies are with them more striking, lam
convinced that many substantial resemblances both in gram-
mar and vocabulary will be found on analysis between the
languages of the latter and the dwellers in far off Southern
India. In this connection it may he permitted to express a
regret that the late Dr. Caldwell in his learned and, in many
respects, excellent ‘ Comparative Grammar of the Dravidian
Languages * should have wasted so much time and space in
impossible comparisons between them and the Aryan and
Semitic languages, and that even in the Turanian branch he
should have gone so far a-field as the Hungarian, Osetic, and
other languages without first examining those existing in the
immediate vicinity of India proper. Many of the latter are
indeed only spoken by wild and barbarous hillmen, but it
is precisely amongst the latter that many old roots and forms
are best preserved, as there are numerous instances to prove.
Whilst not denying the existence of an ultimate connection
between the great families of speech, I would point out that
until not only the geographical and tribal distribution, but
also the probable primitive form of the principal roots of
each have been carefully ascertained by comparison inter se
of undoubtedly related languages of the same group, it is
useless and unscientific to institute comparisons between
Aryan, Semitic, and Turanian words. The languages of the
two former families have been fairly well analysed and made
known, but a great deal remains to be done with regard to


those of the latter family, which of all is at once the most
widely dispersed and the most subject to disintegration and
alteration of roots. What is now required is grammars and
yocahnlaries of all languages and dialects of this great family,
however small and insignificant they may he politically, for
it is thus only that the various intermediate links which
connect the principal and comparatively well-known lan-
guages can he ascertained. Every dialect thus reduced to
writing and analysed will form another link, connecting and
explaining the roots and structure of the cultivated tongues
until at length it should he possible to make a complete
analysis of the latter, leaving nothing unexplained. Until
such further knowledge is obtained it is almost impossible to
dispose of satisfactorily the various ethnological problems
which confront us in the study of these Mongoloid races.
It is only after such an exhaustive examination of the
Mongoloid languages still spoken in Northern India and its
precincts that the exact degree in which the languages of the
Aryans of those parts have been influenced by their Mongo-
loid predecessors can be ascertained. That influence is ad-
mitted even by Mr. Beanies, no favourable critic of the
latter races, as several passages in his Comparative Grammar
testify.*
At present much must be left to conjecture, and for that
reason I would deprecate at present any extended classifi-
cation of the language of this branch of the family. It has
been designated the ‘ Tibeto-Burman ’ by Captain Forbes,
and the c Indo-Chinese ’by Mr. McCabe. The latter nomen-
clature is useful in so far as it calls attention to the very
real connection of the Chinese language with those spoken
south of it, but at the same time until the extent of that
connection and also on the other hand of the Dravidian in-
fluences is more perfectly known, it seems premature to at-
tempt much more than a general classification such as
isolating and agglutinative, and a few special groupings.
As a mere conjecture of the original habitat, &c., of these
races the following may be hazarded. At first the stocks of
the Dravidian, Chinese, Tibetan, and other races may have
lived together in Tibet or perhaps a good distance to the
west of it. The Dravidian hordes first started on their immi-
* It is interesting to remark that the Aryan languages ot Northern India would
appear to have to some extent adopted the Turanian structure of sentences. The
example given by Mr. Beames, (page 249, Volume II), might well be taken for a
literal translation from a Burmese or Tamil manuscript.


gration, some entering India by the Northern passes and
some perhaps by the North-West. Some time after them the
Chinese separated themselves and went to the East occupying
gradually their present country, this separation occurring at
least 3,000 years ago, if the supposition may be trusted that
about that time the Chinese altered the old pronunciation of
their numerals. After the departure of the Chinese smaller
hordes from time to time poured into India, the largest being
the Burman one which, perhaps by the pressure of the newly
arrived Aryans, was forced into Burma. The hillmen of
Arakan I would regard as rather later immigrations.
The above account does not wholly explain certain special
Dravidian and Chinese elements in the Chin language, but
these will probably have to wait for explanation until the
ethnology of the tribes of Eastern Bengal and Tibet, in-
cluding the Himalayas, has been more fully explored. The
key to such problems lies in those countries and. not in
Burma.
The late date of the arrival of the Chins in their present
habitat is shown by their use of the word maku (from
Hindustani tomdko) for tobacco. That drug was, I apprehend,
introduced into these parts not earlier than the year 1550,
and had the Chins then been living in Arakan as at present
they would almost certainly have adopted the same word
as the Burmese, as they are now completely out of touch
with any natives of India. There are two other obviously
Aryan words in their vocabulary, namely, hdkalxm— all,
(from the Chittagonian word), and talaih— medicine, from the
Bengali and Chittagonian dhavai. It is therefore probable
that at no great distance of time they were living in the
Chittagonian Hill Tracts where the Lushai* or Dzo now are.
The language of the latter is most intimately allied with
Chin, and it is by no means impossible that Dzo and As ho,
their national names, are etymologically the same.
In the comparison of words those roots related etymologi-
cally with any given Chin one will be found under the latter
in the Chin-English Vocabulary, with the exception of the
* Major Lewin derives this word from lu {alu)= a head and shd =to cut, allud-
ing to their well-known head-hunting proclivities. Both roots are found in Chin,
but there, as apparently in Lushai, ‘ saw {slid) means to cut or fell, and not to cut
off. The word for tne latter action in Lushai is tun and in Chin h l aw. Lu-sai
in Chin means ‘ bald head.’ The word for ‘ bald ’ is not given in Major Lewin’s
Vocabulary, but it is not improbably the same in Lushai as in Chin, and the name
Lushai might then have been given to the Dzo as a nickname owing to their not
wearing their hair in the ridiculously high top-knot affected by their neighbours.


Dravidian roots. The latter I have preferred to place in a
separate appendix in order to bring out clearly the connec-
tion of those languages with Chin, a connection which,
though important, has not yet been recognized.
Some of the less important cognate roots under words like
ay6= a hone, ngo— fish, &c., have not been inserted as these
roots are so widely extended that a very large space would
be necessary in order to show their ramifications in every
language and dialect of the South Mongoloid family. On the
other hand the want of good works on most of the languages
cognate to Chin has prevented me from giving the connected
roots under many of the less common words. Although, there-
fore, Naga, Lushai, and Burmese are amongst the languages
most closely related to Chin, the reader must he cautioned
against supposing their resemblances to be so predominant as
would at first sight appear, for it happens that good vocabu-
laries, &c., on all three are forthcoming.
As has been repeatedly pointed out by Mr. B. H. Hodgson,
in comparing words of the Turanian languages we must first,
separate the real root from the prefixes, infixes, or suffixes
which have become attached to it. These adjuncts exist in
the isolating and tonic branch of the family equally as in the
purely agglutinative branch, only in the former they rarely
form separate syllables; and the fact of their existence points;
to the conclusion that tones are rather a disease of language
than a healthy growth, and that really primitive language was
probably destitute of them.
The normal forms of the affixes to be found in Chin and
its cognate languages may be denoted by a, ka, ma , na y
pa, and ta, the vowel of the last five being elided in Chin.
The affixes were originally one of the nasals, k, t, and p,
but the last letter cannot now be pronounced as a final by
the Southern Chins. As in several of the cognate languages
of which the utterance is not very distinct, the semi-vowels y,
I , and w are occasionally inserted after the first letter, and this
practice, when that letter happens to be k,p , or t, renders the
true form of the root doubtful.
Of the initial letters used in Chin h (not the aspiration
of another consonant) generally stands as in Chinese for an
original k * whilst d and I are apparently sometimes inter-
changeable. The latter equation is favoured by Bev.
*ln a few roots, however, I think that the equation h—s, ts or sh holds good.
Of. the Zend h, Sanskrit s.


J. Edkins, but I have not ventured to utilize it in the com-
parison of words in the Chin-English Vocabulary owing to
want of conclusive evidence to prove its validity. •
The Chin s like the corresponding Burmese letters re-
presents an original ch through the medium of the combi-
nation ts. Lushai has both ch and ts, and this is also the
case with Telugu which pronounces the letter ch before e and
i and ts before a, o, and u.
The sounds ch and j in Chin are undoubtedly as in collo-
quial Burmese a corruption of hy and gy, and are throughout
written by these letters. It is very possible that ch and jin
Tibetan and occasionally in Mr. Hodgson’s vocabularies are
really hy and gy ; indeed it may be conjectured that in
Sanskrit itself the former letters are simply the result of the
insertion of the semi-vowel y after a gutteral. The closeness
of the connection between the palatal and guttural vargas
in that language is in fact so far recognized that in one of the
systems of transliteration k, kh, g, gh, are written for ch,
chh, j,jh, and the interchangeability of these letters is well
known to all students.
In comparing Chin with Burmese the following equations
are, as a general rule, to be observed ;
Chin. Burmese.
'1 = r.
t‘ or c s = th.*
6 (final) = a.
aih „ =e.
au „ = aw.
oi „ =we (preceded by a consonant),
aw or au (medial) = a.
6 „ = ai.
o ~ au.
With, regard to Lushai words it must be noted that in Chin
t before an initial sibilant is not now sounded, that the final
p has become a h, and I final preceded by a vowel is corrupted
into aw. Initial dz is, I think, sometimes equivalent to s and
sometimes to y. The Lushais also use an initial tl where the
Chins have Id, in which connection it may be noted that
amongst the latter the more northerly use a final t in many
* I have transcribed the Burmese throughout by th thus distinguishing it from
an ordinary aspirated t. It is a mistake to transcribe it invariably by sas
although in many words (particularly those derived from Pali) it denotes an
original sibilant, yet in certain Mongoloid roots it is highly probable that it is a soft-
ening of the aspirated ‘ t.’


cases instead of the monotonous hof those further south. It
should he added that unlike the Chins and Burmans the
Lushais can still pronounce the semi-vowel r. In Naga (by
which is here understood Angami Naga) certain prefixes
have of course to he separated from the roots.
Both Nagas and Lushais say v instead of 10 and they
make use of the consonant /; hut it is not clear what letter
corresponds to this in Chin.*
In words in the Chinese colloquial language {i.e., the Man-
darin dialect) it should he noted that ch> j, and Ji represent
respectively in the old language t, d, and k. The Kamis
likewise have the consonant / (sometimes aspirated as in
qf‘d= a tooth) and also the curious guttural breathing which
is found in Lushai and some of the Himalayan languages.
The following is a list of cognate languages, words from
which are quoted in the Chin-English Vocabulary :
1. Balling.
2. Bhiitani.
3. Bodo.
4. Burmese.
6. (Burmese cello-
quial.)
6. Cliepang.
7. Chinese.
8. (Chinese colloquial)
9. Bhimal.
10. Garo.
11. Gurung.
12. Gyami.
13. Gyarung.
14. Horpa.
15. Kami.
16. Khasia.f
17. Kiranti.
18. Lepcha.
19. Limhu.
20. Lushai.
21. Magar.
22. Manipuri.
23. Manyak.
23 a. Mikir.
24. Mru.
25. Murmi.
26. Kaga.
27. Newar.
28. Sak.
29. Serpa.
30. Shandu.
31. Singpho.
32. Sunwar.
33. Takpa.
34. Taungthu.
35. Tibetan.
36. (Tibetan colloquial.)
37. Thochu.
38. Yayu.
My authorities for the words quoted (exclusive of Burmese,
Tamil, and Telugu) are :
Languages , fyc, of Nepal and Thibet , by B. H.
Hodgson.
* Possibly s.
t Khasia does not of course belong to the Tibeto-Burman family. But certain
words have been either borrowed from or given to it by neighbouring Tibeto-
Burman languages.


Miscellaneous Essays on Indian Subjects, by B. H.
Hodgson, (in two volumes).
Exercises in the Lushai Dialect, by Major J. H. Lewin.
A Manual of Thibetan, by Major T. H. Lewin.
Outline Grammar of the Angami Naga language
(with vocabulary J, by B. B. McCabe.
Manipuri Grammar, Vocabulary, Bfc. by A. J. Prim-
rose.
Vocabulary of English and Mikir , by Bey. B. S.
Neighbor.
China’s Place in Philology, by Bey. J. Edkins.
Chinese Manual, by B>. K. Douglas.
Khasia Vocabulary, by Captain Kelsall.
A Lepcha Grammar, by Colonel G-. B. Mainwaring.
The Mill Tracts of Arakan, by Major W. G. Hughes.
Some Kami words have also been obtained from In-
spector P. M. Duncan of the Burma Police, and
from a Kami youth; and a few Limbu ones from
a Ghurka constable at Sandoway.


GRAMMAR.
PHONOLOGY.
Vowels.
The sounds in Chin may he represented hy the following
characters. They are based mainly on the well-known Indo-
European system; hut certain modifications have been render-
ed necessary in order to represent accurately the peculiar
phonetics of the Chin language. Inter alia it has been
thought best to represent the aspirated letters hy the pre-
fixing or affixing of a reversed comma to the letter aspirated.
This, in accordance with the actual sound, is prefixed in the
ease of semi-vowels, sibilants, and nasals, and affixed in the
ease of the other letters.
Examples.
Vowels .
A-u=mother ... aasin f ago.*
Aha=potato ... dasin * father.'
In= a house ... iasin £ pin/
... iasee in c deep/ 1
Mun=to hate ... uasin * full/
Kalu-lut=slowly ... uasin e flute/
Bti'*=cooked rice ... uas in the German word
'- siinde/
En—to slant ... eas in 'end/
E=to eat ... easay in ‘ hay/
Hsn=silver ... easai in ‘ hair/
Konk'6=a hole ... oasin c don/
K6=nine ... 6asin c bone/
Yo*=to swim ... das in the German word
‘ konig,' or eu in the
Erench ' jeu/
P'oi=good ... oi as oy in c boy/
Yai=to he tired ... ai as in ‘ aisle/
Hau=to speak ... au as oiv in ' how/
Awnyawn=necklace, aw as in ' straw/
Note. —It will be seen that the Chin language is very rich
in vowel sounds. These are not, however, pronounced dis-
* Both long and short forms occur.
2


tinetly and, as a matter of fact, Chins living at no great dis-
tance from each other frequently use different vowel sounds
for the same word; medial 6 and aw being especially com
ferred with each other and final 6 and aw.
Chins when speaking to each other do so almost invariably
in what is termed musically 4 a low-pitched tone,’ as is indeed
usually the case with people who live in small villages in the
large jungles. This probably accounts for the easy manner
in which vowels are interchangeable as w r ell as for the ex-
istence of the modified vowels u and 6. It may be noted that
u when pronounced, quickly closely approaches the sound
of i.
When two vowels come together, as is not unfrequently
the case, they are separated in writing by a hyphen and are
not to be pronounced as a diphthong. The w r ords kiU=‘ a
hand/ dut=‘ to press/ ‘n4t=‘ a day/ are pronounced as if
written ku-at , du-at, 4 nti-at, —very much in fact as an English
rustic would pronounce them.
[I should prefer to write the vowel sound in hhi as a modified & (e), as etymologi-
cally this seems to be the case, but have been loth to depart from the method of
spelling prescribed in transliterating Burmese. In Chiu this sound is certainly
not as in German a modification of a. For the same reason am has been written
as stated and not as a. The latter method is employed by Mr. McCabe in his
work on the Angami Naga language, and in Chin at any rate this sound is un-
doubtedly often a modification of a. At the same time by writing it a we intro-
duce another diacritical mark, and it might be objected that if aiv is thus written
with one letter why not ai or oi. Of the latter it may be added that it is some--
times a variant of ai.\
Consonants.
The consonants in the Chin language are as follows : —*
k —as in 4 king.’
k ( —(the same sound aspirated,)
g —as in 4 gold,’
g ( —(the same sound aspirated.)
ng— as in 4 king.’
‘ng —(the same sound aspirated.)
ky— as 4 ch’ in 4 church/
gy— as 4 3’ in 4 joke.’
ny— as 4 ni’ in 4 onion/
* ny —(the same sound aspirated.)
t —as in 4 told.’
t‘ —(the same sound aspirated.)
d —as in 4 dolt.’
d ( —(the same sound aspirated.)
n —as in 4 no.’
‘n —(the same sound aspirated.)


p —as in 4 pirate/
p e —(the same sound aspirated.)
b —as in 4 boy/
b‘ —(the same sound aspirated.)
m —as in 4 mare/
*m —(the same sound aspirated.)
y— as in 4 you/
*y —(the same sound aspirated.)
I —as in 4 love/
*1 —(the same sound aspirated.
w —as in 4 won/
h —as in 4 hare/
s —as in 4 sold/
( s —(the same sound aspirated.)
sh —as in 4 shawl.’
z —as in 4 zinc/
The learner must be careful to distinguish between aspi-
rated and unaspirated consonants.
The sounds ch and j in Chin have been represented by
Icy and gy on the ground that they are etymologically the same
as the Burmese cqj which, though transliterated by Jcy (or
gy), is commonly pronounced as ch or j according to posi-
tion.
It will be noticed that the Chin has no r or th sound
(Burmese oo). The Burmese q (r), which is still so pro-
nounced in Arakan, is represented in Chin by I, and th (oo)
by t‘, (hard aspirated t), or s.
The aspirated letters are more clearly distinguished from
the others than is the case in Burmese ; but, on the other hand,
the aspiration is hardly so distinct as in the north Indian
languages.
II also occurs at the end of some words which would other-
wise end in a vowel, and in such cases the breath must be
expelled after pronouncing the vowel. This breathing, called
the spiritus lenis, is of varying strength and is denoted here-
in by h. Li s frequently joined with another consonant and
the learner should accustom himself to the easy pronunci-
ation of such compounds. In addition to the ordinary uses
of the nasals m and n they are also prefixed to certain words
very much in the same manner as in the Central African
languages. Their pronunciation when so placed becomes very
indistinct. When writing an apostrophe is placed after them,
thus : ri*gan, m’si"yaih. There is also in Chin a faintly pro-
nounced final n , which answers to the Sanskrit 4 anuswara/


Masculine.
Feminine.
man
... Nat' ‘o":=a woman.
Apo=father
... Arnica mother.
Ata=an elder brother
.... elder sister.
but is scarcely audible in ordinary conversation. It is, how-
ever, frequently en evidence when a compound is formed of
two words, the first of which ends with a vowel.
Examples.
c S6=a son ... ‘S6n-byan=a youth.
Tones.
The number of tones in Chin is apparently three, namely,
tile short acute, the heavy grave, and the rising tones ; but,
partly owing to typographical difficulties, the two last are
not mutually distinguished herein. The rising tone is not
however, I think, of frequent occurrence, and in practice little
or no inconvenience is experienced by the amalgamation.
As already remarked the Chins speak habitually in a lower
tone than their neighbours the Burmans, and a high pitched
tone of voice should therefore be avoided when speaking the
language.
The first of the tones is represented in writing by an in-
verted circumflex placed over thus : wo=a pig, bo=white.
(These two words should be pronounced as though one were
about to say wok , hok ; but stopped short before pronouncing
the final k .)
The heavy grave and rising tones are represented by c " *
placed at the end of the syllable thus : si"=a horse ; t c iin' / =
three; u"-i=a dog.*
In the negative voice and in giving Chin personal names,
a particularly low tone of voice is affected, very much the
same as that known in Mandarin Chinese as the k ( ii or
‘departing’ tone.
NOUNS.
Gendeu,
The gender of some nouns in Chin is denoted as in English
by different words, in the case of others by different affixes
to a common root. There is no grammatical gender.
Of the first class are the following :
* A new system of denoting tones involving the use of special type, is now being
considered.


Masculine.
Feminine.
Anau-ii'=:a younger
Aniibi ,/ =a younger sister.
brother.
Apu=a father-in-law ...
Apo=a mother-in-law.
P s owa=a husband.
P c aya=a wife.
‘S6n-byan=a bachelor ...
maid.
Masculine .
Feminine.
‘S6=a son
.... c S6nii" = a daughter.
Ah £ oi=a chief
Ah < oi-“un / =a chieftainess.
In the second class the feminine affix is invariably nu\ but
the masculine affixes differ.
[Cf. Lush., nu; and Chinese coll., nil= a woman, used as
a prefix to denote the feminine gender.]
No masculine affix. —
Masculine affix Pi ", after surds, or d‘i" after sonants :
N6n-d c i' /; =a male buffalo ; N6n-nii // =a female buffalo ;
bullock ; cow.
Masculine affix nsa* —
Akye"-nsa"=a male Aky e-nii"=a female tiger,
tiger.
Ami-nsa" = a male goat Ami-nif=a female goat.
Gyiyan-nsa"=a male Gyiyan-nffi=:a female sam-
sambur. bur.
‘Satgyf-nsa"=a male e .Sat-gyi-nu"=a female bark-
barking deer. ing deer.
Si"-nsa" = a horse .... Si"-nti"=a mare.
Masculine affix ‘lu-i. —
A'-‘lu-i=a cock .... A'-nu"=a hen.
[Of. Mikir, did.]
Masculine affix, hdn —
TJ"-i-han=a dog ... TJ"-i-nu"=a bitch.
Minzan-han=a tom cat Minzan-nu"=a female cat.
or n‘sa.
Masculine affix, pd, —
■W6-pa=a pig .... W6-nu":=a sow.
* The n is probably the euphonical infix sometimes inserted between the two
members of a compound when the first word ends in a vowel.


Masculine affix, po. —
Be-po=a drake M . 86-nii"=±a duck.
Mu-i-po=a male ele- female ele-
phant. pliant.
[The pet and po masculine affixes may he found in most
Tibeto-Burman languages.]
Some words are of common gender, that is, they denote in-
dilterently either male or female, such as—
Apo=a grandfather or mother. ‘San"-nu"=an old
woman, can, when desired, be added to distinguish the
feminine of these nouns.
Number.
Nouns have three numbers in Chin, the singular, the dual
used for two only, and the plural used for more than two.
The dual is formed by the addition of hoi to the sino-ular
thus. pat o - hoi , the (two) men, u"-i-hoi, the (two) dogs.
Except, however, in a few compound nouns the ordinary
numeral c two ’ is generally affixed in conversation instead of
using the dual termination. (See infra, —numeral adiec-
tives.) J
Such compound nouns are—
Tanau-hoi=the elder and younger brothers.
Aniibi -hoi and si -naung-hoi—the elder and younger
sisters: J °
Lang-p‘aya-hoi= husband and wife.
The plural is formed by affixing hyem, du or di , or dihiiaw
to the root. There are no irregular plurals.
Examples.
Akdaung^-hyaw=the persons.
Nan-‘s6-di-hyaw=the villagers.
[Of. Lush., ho, hoh; Manip., k‘oi, the plural affix used
with personal pronouns. As to di, cf. Burm., to ; Lush.,
a d^ e -~ Wlien a numeral is affixed neither the dual nor plural termination is
Oases.
There is no regular declension of the noun in Chin, hut
certain particles are added to denote the principal states'


Nominative. —This is shown by affixing nil (not to he con-
founded with the feminine nil!') to the root or plural affix,
thus —
Ah‘oi-nu=the chief {or gentleman).
Tanau-hoi-nu=the (two) brothers.
In-mdn-hyaw-nii =—the owners of houses.
This affix is frequently omitted in ordinary conversation.
[Cf. Manip., na, which also is sometimes dropped.]
Qenitive . —There is no affix, the wv>rd denoting the possessor
being simply placed before the noun possessed.
Examples.
Ni akTaung" u"-i = this person’s dog.
[ln Lush, and Naga also there is apparently no affix for
the genitive.]
Accusative. —The affix is ni, hut it is frequently dropped.
Native and Locative. —The affix is a ' meaning ‘ to’ or ‘ at.’
Nana=to or at the village.
Mo-d contracted into mwd (literally, to the presence of), is
usually after nouns denoting persons, thus :
Ah c oi-mwa==to the gentleman {or chief).
When a postposition of any kind comes after the noun the
affix d, if used, must follow it.
Examples.
In-haw-a=into the house (literally, house-upon-to).
My6k-hawa=northwards (literally, north-side-to).
In- go-wa= under the house (literally, house-under-at).
Note that in Chin when an affix beginning with a vowel
follows a word ending in a, u, or e (short or long), w is
frequently inserted for euphony, and that when following i,
ol or ai, y is similarly inserted.
[Of. Burm., d which, however, in spite of Br. Judson, is not
now used colloquially.]
Ablative . —The affix is hu (after surds), gu (after sonants)
or dgu .
Examples.
Ni nanagu =from this village.
[Cf. Burm., ha ; Manip., dagi ; Yayu, h l en.\
Instrumented . —There are three affixes, yu , til , and nil.


English.
Singular.
Dual.
Plural.
I
-Eye .
.. Ky e- * e m" .,
.. Kye-me".
Thou
... Naung... ISTaung-‘nf'-pa-‘ni".
..Naung-me".
He, she,
or it.
| Aya ■
f Nahoi-pa-Tii'' or
I yahoi. j
Nahyaw or yati"
or ayahyaw.
Examples.
Amu' / -i-yii / =hy means of an elephant.
Daho'A-tu' or a stick.
[Cf. as to nil, Chinese coll., na , meaning literally ‘ to take
similarly as to yil, cf. yung .]
Vocative. —This is formed by affixing o" thus—
or 0 chief.
[Of. Chinese affix a.']
PRONOUNS.
In Chin there are three personal pronouns only, namely,
kye, I; naung , thou ; and ayd, he, she, or it; and the honorific
use of nouns instead of pronouns, as is common in Burmese
and other cognate languages, is unknown.
The pronouns are declined, if such a word can he used, in the
same manner as the noun, and the affixes need not be therefore
again detailed here.
Exceptions. —The pronouns kye and naung have abbrevi-
ated forms ka and na, which are used both instead of, and
together with, kye and naung (see verbs). These forms are
also used in the genitive case. Before a vowel the a also can
he dropped leaving k, and n' alone.
Like the nouns the pronouns have three numbers, —the
singular, dual, and plural.
A shortened form of kye-me" is ame".
The plural in me" is, it may he remarked, restricted to the
personal pronouns only.
[Cf. Chinese coll., man, used for pronouns and human be-
ings only.
The dual and plural of the third person point to a lost root,
nd ‘he,’ and in fact in the Northern Chin this pronoun is de-
noted by ni (Kami ha-ni), probably the same as wfcthis.
Ayd is perhaps connected with Burmese ayd— a thing.]
Reflective Pronouns. —Vundon stands indifferently for
‘myself,’ ‘thyself,’ &c.


Relative Pronouns. —As istlie ease with all Tibeto-Burman
languages, Chin does not possess these, the construction used
being the relative participle ( see verbs).
Adjective Pronouns.
Possessive Pronouns. —These are formed from the per-
sonal pronouns by the addition of gu to the root.
Examples.
Kyc-gu ’=mine.
{Note. —The abbreviated form Tea cannot be used here.)
[Cf. Burm., k‘u ; Chinese coll., Jed.]
Possessive Adjectives. —These are the genitive cases of the
pronouns ‘kye’ or ‘ ka,’ 6 naung,’ &c.
Examples.
Kye si"=my horse. | Naung nan=your village.
Ka is shortened to W before a vowel.
Example.
K , amlu / ng==my mind.
Distributive Pronouns are formed by adding si-si to the
personal pronouns thus —
Kye-sisl, naung-slsi,=either I or you.
Demonstrative Pronouns. —Ni=this. T £ o=that.
These do not vary in the plural.
Interrogative Pronouns. —These are ani" {-nil)— who ? and
baung= what? or which? pahyd=how many, &c.
When using them it is not absolutely necessary as in Bur-
mese to put an interrogative particle (such as te ) at the end
of the sentence when it contains a verb, though this can be
done.
Examples.
AnPnu 16-waih* ?=who will come ?
Baung lawn ka sP-yaih ?=what road shall I go ?
When, however, the sentence does not contain a verb n
(preceded if necessary by euphonical y or w), is put at the
end.
Examples^
Ani'yii' ?=■who ?
Baung ?=what person ?
* Or y ani" l6-waih-mu" ?
3


IPahy6. —This is placed after the noun, between which and
pahya must he inserted the proper numeral auxiliary.
Examples.
moi-yii P=How many people are
there ?
Indefinite Rronouns —Some=awaraig-‘ni ,A .
Other or another= a‘saw‘l6 preceding the word or hi p
sometimes following it and sometimes preceding it.
Such—n’kTff, n’k‘a, n’k c u"t (preceding the noun).
All=sansat (placed after the noun).
The whole=hakalun.
Whoever =ani // pa-sisL
Whatever=haung-pa-sisf.
Examples.
Awaung- C ni" ‘saw"-hyaw —some bullocks.
BT'-ku"! moi-nii"=h.e is a worthless fellow (literally*
‘ others hand to him is not ’).
Nan- e s6-hyaw san-sat=all the villagers.
Nan-hakalun==the whole village.
Reciprocal Rronouns. —Each other=ak t yen-g f yen.
Adjectives.
As in all Tibeto-Burman languages there are no true adjec-
tives in Chin, all words used to qualify nouns being verbs and
conjugatable as such. When used adjectively they are usually
placed before the noun; but in the ease of some of the more
familiar words they may be affixed. Practice can alone teach
in what cases the latter construction can be used. When
placed before the noun, (and this construction must always
be used when the adjective is modified by an adverb such as
te), the particle ku or di is added to the root if it ends in a
surd, and gii or di in other cases.
Examples.
‘Liing-gii kyau=the high mountain.
Shik-kii a‘mu=a confused matter..
Baw"ku ayo"h=tho snapped rope.
‘Sami / -s6=a little child.
good man.
Te p‘oi-gii kTaung"=a very good man.
[The prefixing of the adjective is undoubtedly the true Tibeto-Burman method,
and it would be interesting to know to what influence the occasional affixing of it
is due. The latter practice prevails partially in Burmese, and is the regular rule
in Naga.]


An intensive is sometimes formed by repeating the noun
and affixed adjective, the latter being in a modified form.
Examples.
ak c laung"-ho"=very bad people.
In-p‘en in-p c o"=a very old house.
Comparison op Adjectives.
As already remarked these are really verbs, and the true
Chin method of forming a comparative and superlative is by
adding the verb hek (second conjugation) to the root, the
word t‘d (than) being placed after the object compared.
Frequently, however, the latter is understood.
Examples.
N 1 k‘laung"-t c a ay anti p £ oi-heku=he is better than
that fellow.
Ayanti plang-hekii =he is most (or especially) clever.
Ni kyau 6 liing-hekii=this mountain is higher or
highest.
The Chin has not nor cannot have the idea of comparison
which exists in English, and the construction with hek
which can be used with all verbs, may be best translated by
e especially,’ thus
Y6n-heku=they trust (me) especially.
T‘6 nan T6-heku=that village is especially far (or
furthest).
Ab‘oi-hek=the best.
[Of. Chinese coll., he, ‘to be much,’ c to exceed; ’ used also
for comparing adjectives.]
Besides the above a superlative (probably formed on the
analogy of Burmese), can be made by prefixing a and affixing
‘sun" thus- —
A-b‘oi- c sun"=best.
Numeral Adjectives.
The following are the cardinal numbers (the Chins have
no true ordinals): —
1 — haw.
2 c ni".
8—t e un // .
4 m'lffi.
5 higo".
6 ‘so^k.
7 ‘si".
8— c s'e.
9 ko"
10— c nga" (‘ ha v ’ by the
Northern Chins).
11—‘nga"-haw.


12 —‘nga"-‘ni".
20— go".
21 — go"-haw.
30—t‘un"kyit.
10—mTKkyit.
60 —haukkyit.
60—W'kkyit.
70—‘si"kyit.
80 —‘s'ekyit.
90 —ko'Lyit.
100—p e ya-haw,
1,000 —tatong (Burmese).
For multiples of 1,000 the Burmese words altered according
to Chin pronunciation are used.
As to ordinals the Chins can make shift up to three hy
calling the first £ ayang,’ the second c n’gla",’ and the third
‘ a‘non but these are not true ordinals.
Like the Burmans the Chins use numeral auxiliaries
which are, however, placed immediately after the noun and
before the numeral when the latter does not exceed ten, or
is a multiple of that number.
In other cases the auxiliary is placed between 10 or its
multiple and the succeeding numeral.
The following are the principal numeral auxiliaries :
Fun (shortened into pa before one and two) used for
persons.
Examples.
Ak < laung // -pun-t £ iin / = three persons, i.e ., persons-body
-three.
Ak £ laung // -go // -pnn-t < iin / =twenty-three persons.
[Cf. Lush., Kami, Shandu, pa.]
Ziln for animals and birds.
Example.
buffaloes.
Daw for long things.
' Example.
M e lii / -daw-haw=one boat.
Lun for round things, trees, houses, &c.
Examples.
Tu // -iin' / -lun-haw=one gourd. | houses.
Lo * for flat things such as clothes, mats, rupees. (Con-
nected with law— a leaf).
* Northern Chin, law.


Example.
K‘yi or pasos.
P‘A, one of a pair.
Example.
Ku'T-p‘akhaw ==one hand.
[Cf. Bnrm., p‘ak.]
Bate for creeping things, &c.
Example.
XJ-u"-baw-haw=one frog.
T‘ek for fish, arrows, &c.
Example.
Nffd-tfek-kiin'' =three fish.
Zu for pots of kanng, &c.
Example.
Yu"-zii-haw=one pot of kanng.
THE VEBB.
Verbs in Chin may he divided into two conjugations. All
roots in the second conjugation end in k and drop that letter
in the past and (sometimes) imperative tenses and in the nega-
tive voice. There is no rule by which it can he ascertained
whether a verb belongs to the first or second conjugation;
hut in the vocabulary they have been distinguished by add-
ing (1) and (2) respectively after the roots.
The different verbal forms will, for convenience sake, be
pointed out fully under the first conjugation, whilst under the
second one only those tenses, &c., in which the verbs differ
from the first conjugation will he described. In both conju-
gations it may be noted that euphonical y and w are, as is the
case with nouns, inserted between the roots and the termi-
nation when necessary. Verbs in Chin have three persons,
first, second, and third, and three numbers, singular, dual,
and plural. They have two moods, the affirmative and nega-
tive, and in the former six tenses, namely, the aorist, past,
future, imperative, preterite, and future perfect, besides parti-
ciples and other forms.
Eiest Conjugation—Affirmative Voice.
The termination of the aorist differs in this conjugation
according as the root ends in o or in another letter.


In the former case following the euphonical law which
prevails extensively in the Turanian languages, ,the termi-
nation is wo or rather 6, the w being obviously interpolated.
When the root does not end with o the terminative is u.
The more Northerly Chins do not use the 6 termination at
all, hut substitute for it hu, thus : 16-hu'.
Aorist. —(L6=to come.)
Singular.
Kye ka 16-w6=l come or am come.
Naung na 16-w6=Thon comest.
Aya (nil) 16-w6=Tle comes.
Dual.
Kye- < ni"-pa- f ni' / na 16-w6=We two come.
Naung-'nk-pa-Tikna 16-w6c=You two come.
Nahoi-pa-ffik 16-w6=They two came.
JPlural.
Kye-me" ma 16-wo == We come.
Naung-me" ma 16-w6=You come.
Kahyaw (nii) 16-wo or 16 -by aw=They come.
The termination of the third person plural, aorist, is either
Tiyaw or u or wo, as the case may he, and this is the only
case in which the verbal termination is altered according to
number or person. It will therefore in the other tenses he
sufficient merely to give the first person singular since,
except as regards the pronouns, the other persons do not
differ from this. The prefix a can be affixed at pleasure
to the third persons of the verbs and in the imperative to the
second person.
[The same rule prevails in Lushai.]
Shaw=to wear (a jacket).*
Singular.
Kye ka shaw-ti=l wear.
Naung na shaw-u=Thou wearest.
Aya (nil) shaw-ii—He wears.
Dual.
Kye- c nk-pa-‘nk n , shaw-u=We two wear.
Naung-‘nk-pa-‘nk n’shaw-ii=You two wear.
Nahoi-pa-‘nk shaw-ii=:Tliey two wear.
* To wear a ‘ paso ’ or breeches is ‘sank.


JPlural.
Kye-me" m’ shaw-ti=We wear.
Kaung-me" m’ sliaw-il=You wear.
Nahyaw (nil) shaw-ii or shaw-liy a w=They wear.
Except in the third person it will he noted a kind of re-
duplication of the pronoun or its termination takes place,
kye adding ka> mung, na, the first and second persons dual
adding na (before semi-vowels) and na or ri (before vowels
or consonants), and the first and second persons plural simi-
larly ma or m\ It is permissible for shortness to drop the
actual pronouns, hut the reduplicated form can never he
omitted. Thus one can say indifferently, ‘kye kalo-wo ’
or ‘ ka 16-wo ’ = 1 come, hut never ‘kye 16-wo.’
[Cf. Lush., koyma , ka ; nungma , i ; which are used precisely
in the same way as the corresponding Chin words. Also
the double possessive in Manip. e.g., nang-ina-pa—
thy father. In Manip., as in Chin the second word is
a mere abbreviation of the regular personal pronoun.
The reduplication of the pronoun before the verb takes
place also in Gyarung and in some of the Circassian
languages.]
Past Tense.
This is formed by adding ni-u" * to the root in all cases,
thus —
Kye ka 16-ni-u"=l came.
Kye ka shaw-ni-ii"=l wore.
The infix haw may he inserted between the root and the
termination without altering the meaning, thus—
Lo-haw-ni-ii" or 16-ni-ii".
Another infix ‘ma used with this tense gives the idea of
perfect completeness to the action, thus —
Ayanii is dead and gone.
Peeteeite.
This is formed from the past tense by the addition of the
infix ft eng) thus—
Kye ka had come (before something
happened).
* Northern Chin, ni-hii'.


Euture.
The termination is aih, thus —
Kye ka 16-waih=l shall come.
Kye ka shaw-aih=l shall wear.
[Cf. possibly the Manipuri future in ge.]
Euture Perfect.
This is formed from the future by the infix p e eng in the
same way that the preterite is formed from the past tense.
Kye ka 10-p £ eng-aili=l shall have come (before some-
thing happens).
Imperative.
As in Burmese various affixes are used to form this tense,
the most usual being we", b‘oi, ( naung-e", and ‘naung-b‘oi
for the singular, and b‘oi-zusmd. zii-he" for the dual and plural.
Examples.
L6-b‘oi-zii—come ye.
Myan-‘naung-e ,/ = have
pity.
L6-we":=come.
N , zun' / -b‘oi=mark or
note {it) .
To the south of Sandoway the irregular form sesso~g o ye
instead of sit-zu is used.
N ote also—
Awn-baih-i" or awn-i v =remain (thou).
Relative Participle.
This is the form which, in all languages of the Turanian
family, takes the place of the construction with a relative
pronoun which, as has been already stated, are altogether
wanting. The relative participle must he placed before the
noun to which it relates, thus reversing the order in an
English sentence. Instead of saying ‘ the man who comes,’
the construction is ‘ the (who) comes manwhilst ‘ the
the rope which I pull ’ is written as 4 the I (which) pull
rope.’
The termination for the relative participle in the first con-
jugation is gn or di {k'd after a surd). The pronoun when
used is reduplicated before it.
[Cf. Chinese coll., ti ; Burm. coll., di. Apparently the
only analogy to the relative participle gu is in Mongo-
lian, which has ku.\


Examples.
L6-gii ‘saw''=the bullock which comes.
Kye ka mun-gii k‘laung"=the man I hate.
Sometimes also the ordinary tense termination is used.
Example.
Td'-a 16-wo k c laung"=tlie man who has now come.
Present Participle.
This is formed hy adding tii to the root, thus —
doing. | Sit- tii' = going,
[Cf. Burm., tun ; Manip., duna .]
Another phrase, expressing continuation of the action, is
constructed by using the verb e awn *=‘ to he,’ with the con-
ditional form nd, e.g. —
Baung saih-na na awn-ti ?=What are you doing ?
Past Participle.
This has two forms according as to whether the nominative
or agent of the verb is in the first or other person.
In the former case the termination is liana * in the latter
dina. Pana can he used for both.
The conj unction £ and ’ being wanting in the Chin language,
the construction with the past participle must he used instead
of it. Thus, instead of saying ‘ I will come and beat you,’ the
construction must he e having come, I will beat you.’ This is
in Chin ‘ kye ka 16-hana naungni kadeng-aih.’
Examples are—
Ina sitpana bii' ka e-aih=l will go home and eat my
rice (literally, house to having gone, rice I will eat).
Pon-mu"-! ‘sawt"-pana saung wild ele-
phant came out and trampled down the paddy.
Nahyaw-nii ahon kudina nana p c 6niu"=they crossed the
river and arrived at the village (literally, they river
having crossed, village at arrived).
[Manipuri, which forms its present participle by the suffix
dund, forms its past one by infixing k‘i, ru or lu between
the latter and the root.]
A form which is much used instead of the past participle
is aih-gu or aih-gii'-pli-daw. This, however, can only he
used when the final verb is in the future and it implies a
* Or aih-nii (Northern).
4


more certain completion of tlie first action than the ordinary
past participle. It does not vary according to the person.
Nahyaw-nu bu'e-aih-gd'-pli-daw 16-waih=they will eat
their food and come, or, after eating their food they
will come.
[Cf. Burmese kaJ\
Verbal Nouns.
As in Burmese certain Chin words are formed from the
verbal root by prefixing a which is dropped when the noun
forms the second member of a compound.
Examples.
going (for asit).
Al6=the coming.
Aso"n:=tlie running (for a sawn").
Ah‘oi=a chief (froni p‘oi to he good.)
Conjunctive Aeeixes.
As in Burmese many meanings which are expressed in
English by means of conjunctions as given in Chin by the
addition of certain particles to the verbal root. These forms
I venture to style conjunctive affixes.
(1) The conditional.- —This is formed by adding to the root
the particle nd which, like the Burmese ogjS, has a double
meaning.
Thus : e ay and p‘6na ’ means either ‘if he arrives ’ or
e on his arrival/ The distinction between these two mean-
ings is clear in English, hut it is not maintained in Chin.
N.B. —An intensive can he formed by repeating the verb
after this form.
Example.
Sawn"-na ran away.
[Cf. Thib., nd .]
Time when —can, however, he more clearly denoted by
adding the particles h'wd* or c set-Mla-kwd to the root. The
latter of these has rather the meaning of ‘ whilst,’ but it
can be used also for ‘when/
Examples.
ICye ka p‘6-k c wa=when I arrived.
Ayanu su"ya moi-‘set-kala-k‘wa==when (or whilst) he
was there.
[Cf. Xaga, hi.] - ....
* For h'o-d.


Another method is to add d to the root, thus :
Nan-a p‘6-a=on arriving at the village.
Time past, {after), —The form used is that in aih-gu or
aih-gu -pli'-daw, for which see past particle.
Time previous, {before). —The particle k‘laung or kdaungd
is affixed to the root.
Nahyawnu p‘6-kTaung-a = before they arrived.
[Cf. Burm., k e ang .]
Reason why, {because). —When it is desired to connect the
sentences united in English by this conjunction, twak or
twdk-u is added to the verbal root, which must he in the
tense applicable.
Example.
Ay and p c 6-ni-u"-twak=hecause he arrived.
Although. —This is expressed by adding the affix nd-hawf
ti-haw, ta-k‘aw, ti-k‘aw, or ta-di to the verbal root, thus :
Examples.
although he ate {or eat) medicine.
Sitta-k‘aw or sitta-di=although he went.
{K‘aw is used by the Northern Chins and haw by the
Southern.)
In order to. —The affix ong is used and, like the correspond-
ing Burmese words, it has also the meaning of ‘ so that.’
Example.
Aya mawn-6ng= in order to seize him.
Another and better form is made by prefixing a and affixing
d to the root, which then becomes really a noun.
Example.
Aya amawna ka 16-w6=l have come to catch him.
Another method is to divide the sentence into two, thus :
Aya ka mawn-aih, ka 10-wo=:I will catch him, I am
coming, i.e., I am coming to catch him.
According to Zaw. —This follows the verbal noun which
is formed from the root by prefixing a.
Example.
Amoi-zaw=according as (it) is.
[This whole expression is sometimes used as a postposition.
See infra .]
* After vowels.


Concerning—Fie'. The verb before this must be put in
the proper tense.
Example.
Ayanii awn-hawkaih-pie'=concerning* bis remaining,
(literally, be will remain concerning).
As before =non-non.
Sit-non-non sit-b c oi=go as you used to go.
It may be mentioned with reference to these conjunctive
affixes that the ordinary Chin prefers to avoid their use by
splitting up bis meaning into short sentences. This is a
peculiarity shared by the languages of most people in a low
degree of civilisation.
Auxiliary Affixes of Tense (Verbal).
These are verbs added to the root in order to predicate
certain conditions of it. They are conjugated in the regular
manner.
The principal are as follows :
To he able, can —Wo ; Pe.
Sifya ka sit-k‘6-w6=l can go there.
A‘san"-nu 16-k‘6-waih=the elder will be able to come.
Ka hau t‘e"-nu"=l cannot say, i.e ., Ido not know how
to say.
[Of. Chinese coll., k‘o , Pe ; Lush., Pe.]
To wish, desire =woi.
Ayanii 10-woi-ii=he wishes to come.
To cause, let = s<?.
Example.
Aya-a n’k £ ya t c iin"-gyit n’deng-se=Let him he struck
thirty blows.
The construction with the affix Id (must), is generally used
to express causation.
[Of. Burm., se\]
Must, should=£d. When preceding the future particle,
this affix coalesces with it and forms one word laih.
Example.
Ayanii 16-laih=He must come.
[Of. Burm.. ra,~\
Another method of translating £ must ’ is to put the verb in
the future adding to it moi~yu.


Examples.
gff'ya m’sff-yaih moi-yii=we must go there (literally, it
is to he gone there).
This form is more used perhaps in the negative than in the
affirmative voice. The Southern Chins use another form in
paih , thus :
< Mak-e-paih=it will he known, it is to he known.
To dar e=d‘dk (second conjunction).
Ayanu koi-d £ akii=he dares to climb up.
To he suitable, fit = ‘san ; ddk. Tii'a m’sit- c sanu =it is
suitable to go now, or we ought to go now.
An intensive form of this verb is zd‘sana to which the
emphatic particle di" may he added.
Avanu p6-za‘sana-di"=he certainly ought to accompany
(us).
Reflective. —fi), (literally, to eat). This root can be added
to most verbal roots to form what in Greek would he called
the middle voice. It is used in many cases in which the
reflective idea is certainly not present to the English mind,
and practice alone can determine when its use is suitable.
Examples.
Nan- £ s6-hyaw-nii su"-eyu=the villagers assemble.
Ka hun-e-yu=l have got (it).
To he, to suffer =k ( awn; used as a substitute for the
passive, which does not properly exist in Chin.
Examples,
Adeng ka k £ awn-u=l was beaten, i.e., I suffered a
heating.
[Cf. Burm., k'an.^
To be proper, fit =p e a."
gffiya sit-p c a // -u=it is proper to go there.
The following verbs are often used as expletives only,—
hawk (2) ; p e oi (1).
Examples.
Ka c mii-hawkii=l see it.
Na hun-e-h c oi-yu=you have got (it).
Hawk is, however, also used in the sense of c already.’


Examples.
Ayanii pA-haw-niu // =he lias already arrived.
To begin =si.
Example.
Y 6 6-si-yu=it has begun to rain.
Auxiliary Affixes of Tense.
{Non- Verbal.)
These affixes are inserted between the verbal root and the
termination.
The principal ones are—
To continue, still= mo.
Ayanii sffiya moi-mo-wo=he is still there.
It is changed to mu in the imperative : Lo-mu-e^eome
on further.
[Cf. Manip., again.]
Denoting the indefinite past tens z—ftiX'.
Sffiya ka p c 6-p { ii / -u=l have been there (at some former
indefinite time).
Implying fault=£«wA
Example.
Ka have done it (vulgar English,
I have gone and done it).
Negative Voice.
In this voice no distinction is made as a rule between the
present, past, and future tenses though, if necessary, the verb
can be conjugated in them. In forming the negative the
following rule must be observed, namely, that an initial surd
becomes a sonant. * The only exception to this is when a word
begins with sh (as shaw) which does not alter, the corre-
lative sonant zh being unknown in Chin. A short final
vowel is also lengthened and the tone is by some altered to
the heavy one.
The negative indefinite tense, as it may be called, has a
variety of endings (the really essential one being nil"),
though the meanings are practically the same. The verb is
not inflected according to number and person.
* This rule is not generally observed by the more Northern Chins.


Negative Indefinite.
(1) Kye ka 16-nii"
(2) Kye ka 16-nii-di"*
(3) Kye ka 16-nii-hu"
(4) Kye ka 16-nii him" l
(5) Kye ka 16-ba-nii"
(6) Kye ka 16-shinii"t
(7) Kye ka 16-shinii-hun 7
(8) Kye ka 16-la'
I do not come, or did not
come, or shall not come.
Of these forms (1) is the most elegant, though (6) is per-
haps the most commonly used. (3) and (5) are not very
correct expressions, the particles hu" and ha which occur in
them being evidently borrowed from the Burmese.
(2), (4), and (6) are emphatic negations, and of these (4)
is the most elegant.
(8) is used only by the Northern Chins.
[Cf. as to la', Lush., loh ; Manip., loi.]
As already remarked the above forms are used for all
tenses, hut the following past and future forms are permis-
sible.
Fast.
Kye ka 16-niii" shinu"=l did not come.
Future.
Kye ka 16-waih shinii" =s I shall not come.
The following are examples of the inflection of roots to
form the negative.
Fos. —Ka saihii=l do.
Neg. —Ka zaiij / -nu // =I do not.
Fos. —Ka kan"u=l am well (in good health).
Neg. —Ka gan"-nii"=l am not well.
Fos. —Ka sit-ii=l go.
Neg. —Ka zit"-nu"=l do not go (also zel-nu'\
Fos. —Ka p‘oi-yii=l am good.
Neg.— Ka b‘oi"-nu"=l am not good.
Fos. —Ka p‘6-wo=l arrive.
Neg. —Ka b < o"-nii' / =I did not arrive.
Imperative.
As in the positive there are several terminations for this
tense.
t Also, ld-shin-di".
* Also, 16-di-nu''.


The most common are as follows :
Na 16-ne"
Na 16- 4 naung-ne"
Na 16-wai-di"
=do not (thou) come.
not go.
Of these the form 4 10-wai-di" ’ is most commonly used. In
speaking it is difficult to distinguish the second from the
corresponding positive form 4 lo- 4 naung-we".’
. Plural .
Zit' / -ai-zii=do not (ye) go. | L6-wai-zii=do not (ye) come.
Participle.
The negative particle is translatable literally into English
by prefixing the word 4 not ’ to the present participle, thus :
4 not entering,’ 4 not coming.’ Like the past verbal partici-
ple (positive), its use is mainly owing to the absence of con-
junctions such as 4 and.’
It is formed by prefixing a to the root and affixing Icon
(or ko), hoi or hohoi .’
Examples are —
Awaung-k6=not entering.
Al6h6boi=not coming.
making.
Note.— ln poetical language Icon can he prefixed to the
verb, which is then in the proper positive tense.
Example.
Kon zan'La'n kondiiyii* =neither growing old nor dying.
A peculiar form of the negative participle occurs in the
following very common construction, 4 palPatinii 16-do-awn na
awnil ’ ?=why don’t you come ? (Literally, why not coming
do you stay ?)
Relative Participle.
This is formed by affixing ai-di to the root, and it is used
in precisely the same manner as the positive relative parti-
ciple.
Examples.
L6-wai-di person who does not come.
YP-ai-di wo=the burden which is not heavy.
■ * The tense particle is elided in the first verb.


Conjunctive Affixes.
Conditional {if.)— This is generally formed by adding
n-nd if the root ends with a vowel and in-nd if it ends with
a nasal or consonant, and it has a double meaning like the
positive form.
Tims, ‘ayanii p‘6n-na’ =if he does not arrive, or on his
no a-arrival.
K‘li ‘saninna==if the wind is not favourable.
Y 6 6n-na=if it does not rain.
Another form is made by adding d-dind , and is used par-
ticularly when the root ends in a consonant, thus —
Zitadina=if you do not go.
A construction in di (for aidi) with awnd can also be used,
thus: —
B c oi-di awnna=if it is not good.
Although. —The affixes are na-haw , na-k‘aw, to awnnak'aw.
Examples.
Y 6 on-na-k‘aw=although it did not rain.
Zitto awnna-k‘aw=although he did not go.
Another form can be made by adding nu to the negative
participle.
Example.
Adeng-ko-nii=although (I) did not beat (him).
Heason why. —Twdk or twdkil is added to the negative verb
in the same way as the positive.
Example.
SoleYiii Voi-nffi twakii=because the writing was not
good.
The remaining affixes of the negative verb can easily be
formed from the positive and need no further explanation.
A few general examples are given.
Sii"ya iTzit"-la"nii"=Yon must not go there.
Ka cannot come.
Ni-ya na awn-zan-nu"=You should not stay here.
Su'ya p‘6-6ng m’si'-yaih moi-nu'=We have not to go
as far as there.
Ayanii b‘o' / -haw-nu ,/ =He has not yet arrived.
5


SECOND CONJUGATION.
Affirmative Voice.
All verbs belonging to this conjugation end in 7c, which
letter they drop in the past tense and, in the case of some, also
in the imperative. These latter are confined to certain roots
ending in aw7c or auTc, and they alter these letters to d. The
following are the principal roots which undergo this inflec-
tion :
c Sawk ( £ so)=to look.
Nank (no)=to utter, bark.
Tank (to)=to put.
Klauk (klo)=to fall.
Yauk (yo)=to hear.
Even in other roots the final 7c is sometimes dropped
in the imperative, though it is, I believe, more elegant to
retain it. The following are two examples of this conju-
gation :
Example.
£ Sawk=to look.
Aorist.
Kye ka £ sawku —I look, &c., &c.
Fast.
Kye ka ‘saw-niu"=l looked.
Future.
Kye ka £ sawkaih=l shall look.*
Imperative.
S6-we" or £ so-zaw=look (thou).
£ Saw"k=to come out.
Aorist.
Ka £ saw"ku.
Fast.
Ka c saw ,/ -nid' / .
Future.
Ka £ saw"kaih.
Imperative.
£ Saw"k or £ saw".
* Or ‘So -waih.


T is substituted for the final k in this conjugation hy the
more Northerly Chins.
I have hesitated somewhat whether to regard the k (or t)
as radical or as part of the termination, hut, on grounds of
analogy, have decided to place it with the root. It is doubt-
less the k or t which occurs so often as a transitive sign in
some of the Himalayan languages. The preterite and future
perfect in this conjugation are formed in the same manner
as in the first, the final k being dropped, thus—
Ka 4 saw-peng-niii"=l had cut.
Ka c saw-peng-aih=l shall have cut.
Relative Participle.
This is formed hy the addition of Ml or di.
Examples.
Kye ka hek-kii hen=the money (silver) which I give
(or gave).
Naung na ok-kii tu // -i=the water which you drunk.
Past Participle.
The terminations of this are the same as in the first conju-
gation, the root used being that of the imperative.
Example.
4 S6-hana ka 16-waih=having looked, I will come.
Conjunctive Affixes.
Conditional. —The root of the imperative tense is used.
Example.
Ka ‘s6-na—lf I look.
In order to —The root used is that of the imperative,
thus —
P6-i a- c so-a ka p‘6-wo=l have arrived in order to look
at the pwe. (And so on with the other affixes.)
Negative Voice.
The root used in this voice is that formed in the imperative
tense of the positive with the usual alteration of the initial
surd into a sonant, &c. Pinal kis dropped.


Examples.
Imperative. Negative indefinite.
‘S6=look .... Ka zo"nii"=l do not look.
‘Sawke"=cut .... Ka zaw"-nii"=l do not, &c., cut.
Apeke"=give .... Ka he"nii"==l do not, &c., give.
The past, future, and imperative call for no remarks. One
example will suffice.
Ka ‘saw-mu" shlnd"=l do not look.
Ka ‘sawkaih shinii"=l shall not look.
Zo"-wai-di" or zo"-ne"=do not look.
N.P. —The more northerly Chins sometimes form the nega-
tive regularly from the root, e.g ., ‘takii ’=it is torn ; ‘ d‘aka-
nii ’=it is not torn.
Negative Particle . —This does not differ from that in the
first conj ugation. The root used has the same form as in the
indefinite tense, hut final k is not dropped.
Azo"-k6=not looking.
Aglo"-h6-hoi=not falling.
A‘sawk-ko or azaw T k-ko=not cutting.
O
Relative Participle. —This is formed by the addition aidi
to the same root, thus —
Ka hekaidi hhn=the money that I did not give.
Ka zo"-waidi k‘laung"=the person I did not look at.
Conjunctive Affixes. Conditional. —The termination is nnd
after a vowel apd ddind after k, the root being as before.
Examples.
Na zo"n-na=lf you did not look.
Zawkadina=lf you do not cut.
Ka hekadina=lf I do not give.
The other affixes are added in precisely the same manner as
in the first conjugation to the root already stated.
Irregular Verbs.
Amongst the Southern Chins sit— to go, has its future si"-
yaih, instead of the regular form sitaih which is used further
north.
Klauk= to fall, forms its third persons (singular, dual, and
plural) in Mo in the present and past tense, and also takes
this form optionally in the infinitive.
Ka klauk-ii=l fall.
Ayanii klo-wo=he falls.


Interrogative 'Particles. —There are two of these, namely,
mu' and U'. The first, which is also pronounced mo ", mo",
and maw" is the ordinary particle, IP being used to express
doubt on part of speaker in the action taking place. This
difference is generally expressed in English by the tone of
voice in which the question is asked. These particles are-
added after the ordinary termination of tense, but the latter
are frequently elided in favour of the particle bd, thus—
Moi-ya-miT ? or moi-ba-mu" ? = Is it ?
Ka 16-ni-mii" ? = Did I come ?
Ka 16-waih-mii" ? = Shall I come ?
Ka 16-shin-mii" ? = Shall I not come ?
Ayanii 16-waih-lP ?=Will he come ? (Implying that
the speaker does not consider it probable that he will.)
Note. —When the interrogative pronouns are used no particle is necessarily
added to the verb.
Sii"-ya ani'nii moi-yu ? = Who is there ?
Banga n’sP-yaih ? = Where will you go p*
AkTaung'kpan pahyo moi-yu ? = How many persons
are there ?
[Of. as regards mil, Chinese, Kami, mo ; Lush., maw ; Mi-
kir, Naga, md. Li is probably allied to the Burmese le a
Id; Manip., rad\
ADYEBBS.
Pronominal Adverbs.
Such are—
Nik‘a=thus.
Pak‘a ?=What kind of; how ?
[Cf. Bahing, k‘6= manner, kind.]
Nik c un" or nik £ u"t=so much.
Pak‘un // or pakTPt ?=how much ?
Tti'-a^now.
T c e-k { wa=then.
Pak‘wa or pak c aw ?=when ?
Bang (a) ?=wdiere ?
?=whence ?
Pak‘atinu=why ?
Pahyo or pa-hyaw ?=how many ?
[Cf. the plural affix, hyaw. ]
* Or banga n’si"yaih-mu".


Y6-ka=very long ago, originally.
A‘nu'- a=afterwards.
[Cf. Naga, ke-naw.]
above.
Mya=here.
Sii // ya=there.
Mya-gii =hence.
that side.
Adverbs proper. —Such are—
At wang .
Amawn’ ==certainly.
easily.
Te; pii / -haw=very.
Their number is, however, limited.
Adverbs are formed from verbal roots usually by the simple
method of reduplication, thus—
P‘oi-b‘oi=well, thoroughly.
Yan-y an=quickly.
Adyerbal Affixes.
These are placed after the noun. The following are the
principal ones :
c Li-ii'n=like, as ; thus
na miigii=you are stupid as a bullock.
KhPt=like, as.
A‘sa-k £ u /A t na miigii =you are as stupid as a worm.
(emphatic).
Pa-haw dim'=one only.
Ayanii ak < laung // - £ si' / -pa-diin // =he is a thoroughly bad
man.
Sin = each.
Pa-haw-sin—each one.
Ti-ti=every.
‘Nu"t-di-di= every day.
[Cf. Lush., tin; Burm., taing.~\
An emphatic particle pa or ha is also sometimes placed
after a noun or adverb.


Examples.
‘SaV'-zun-haw-pa moi-nii // =there is not even one bullock.
Yo-ba 6-na-k £ aw=although it rained.
Ayang-ba sit-ii=he goes first.
[Of. Burm., pang.]
Postpositions.
These are affixed to the noun which they govern and take
the place of the preposition in English.
The commonest are —
a—— to 5 at.
Example.
Nana=to or at the village.
(This is frequently added to other postpositions.)
KTing ; haw=upon.
Example.
D £ ek-kTing(a) =upon the ground.
Go=under.
Example.
In-g6-(wa)=under the house.
[Cf. Manip., md-k‘d-dd.~\
£ Mawn-gawn=in front of.
Example.
Ka c mawn-gawn=in front of me.
[Cf. Manip., md-mang-dd.]
‘Nii'=after.
Example.
AyaAnu' (a)=after him.
B aw=side.
Example.
Myok-baw (a) = northwards (literally to the north side).
Mo=presence (contracted into mwd ).
Example.
Ab £ oi-mwa=to (the presence of) the gentleman (or
chief).
[Cf. Naga, s mo~dzu .]
BiT—upper part, above.
Example.
Nan-bii / (a)=above the village {i.e., higher up the river).


B‘6-6ng=:as far as.
Example.
Nan-p‘6-6ng=as far as the village.
[Cf. Manip., p‘a-obd.]
Amoi-zaw—according to.
Examples.
Ashd" t‘iin"zan amoi-zaw=according to the Chin custom.
Nii-adA:= together with.
Example.
Ayanii-a-dii^together with him.*
[Cf. Burm., atu; Chinese coll., t‘ung. ]
Conjunctions.
The few conjunctions in Chin are really verbal particles
used in the same manner as conjunctions are in English.
The commonest are—
N a-lawnna=besides.
[Cf. Burm., lun— to exceed.]
N’k‘yansinu=therefore.
Na-k‘an-ha-sina-haw or si-ya-k‘aw=however, hut.
Di=that.
This is occasionally added after subordinate sentences.
Si si=either, or.
Interjections.
These are not very numerous and no instruction is required
as to their use.
Examples.
o=a grunt of approbation. | E"n, o"=for calling.
Aya we"=exclamation of surprise or pain.
[Of. Naga, ayd?\
Kon-e-ni-ii"; p‘oi-yu;=well done.
P‘oi-b‘oi kyi"-yii=exclamation of sorrow.
Measures of Length.
A span=ak‘aw.
A cubit
A fathom (spear’s length)—lawn.
Distant as far as a call can he heard=he-e ‘san yau.
* Nil by itself is sometimes used for ‘ and ’ when several nouns occur together.


Capacity.
A handful=a‘nu // n.
A basket=taung".
One-sixteenth of a basket=tun.
One-fourth of a basket=ple.
One-half of a basket=k‘oi.
Months.
l=Tankii".
2=Maw".
3=N’gau ,/ .
4=Klon-diin.
S=Kl6-nii".
6=Tau £ salami g".
7= c Sadanng // .
B=Tan‘s6ngmu"n.
9=Natta.
10=Pyash.il'.
ll=Tabato".
12=Taho // ng.
The year begins with Tankii", which corresponds with the
English April-May.
[With the exception of Nos. 2,3, 4, and 5 the names are
obviously corruptions of the Burmese ones. As to N’gau",
cf. Manip., inga.]
Days of the week. —These are the same as in Burmese, the
names being only slightly altered.
Some Idiomatic Expressions.
Naung yan-yan na 16-waih-di alawn ‘sohana ka awn-ii=s
I hope you will come quickly.
‘Moi-san pyak-ii=he changes countenance.
Atwak moinu"=never mind.
K‘a-ti-yifi ? = What’s the matter ?
Alii klii-yii=he was laid low ( i.e he died).
Pii ka hau-waih=l will summon help.
E'-o ‘se-6kii=living is scarce and difficult.
K’amlii'ng ka dawn-ii=l am tired, used up.
K’alii ka me-yii—l have a headache.
K6-Tiing-ko-nen== superior, inferior.
Yan-haw ‘set- £ set=the whole night.
Amin m’s6-e-yii=we name (the child).
Sonle ka mi-ii=l have a cold.
T‘e-hu"= brothers and sisters,
Ni bin ‘sat !=That’s all!
ak‘laung" h‘oi=a good man and true.
Saung-t‘a"=the first fruits of the paddy.
6


Holaih na k { awn-aih=you will get into trouble, (compare
the slang expression, ‘yon will get hell over it’).
Tii'-we persons now present.
Bu'-a"n-haw ‘myin=long enough to cook a pot of rice.
Ak‘laimg // -k e awn 4 16-w6=inhabited country is distant.
Ahaung" rubs bamboos in order to get fire.
Aliinbek k‘awnu=:he makes loye to.
Bek-saih-ii=:he converses with.
Si-boi-zaung-boi=falsely.
Bi"-ku"t moi-nti' / =he is a worthless fellow.
A c sa"n-s6-wa tu // -i-yo / don’t show the young
crocodile how to swim. (Proverb.)
M pauh pauh."=these are note-worthy
words.
Note. —Chin proper names are monosyllabic, those of men
having A* or Ta prefixed, and those of women Fa or Si".
Ta and Fa are more honorific than the others.


CHIN SENTENCES.
Judicial and Police.
1. The prisoners must sit
down.
2. Whilst giving your evi-
dence yon must shiko.
3. Do not he afraid. Speak
clearly.
4. Are you a nat-worship-
per ?
5. No, I have become a
Christian.
6. Hold the thabye sprig in
your hands.
7. I cannot remember in
what month I saw the
prisoner.
8. It was in the cold weather,
after the harvest w r as
reaped.
9. He struck me on the
head twice with a stick.
10. The blood came out and
I fell down.
11. I had been drinking
kaung, hut was not yet
drunk.
12. He threatened me with
his da.
13. He thrust me with his
spear.
14. Arrest that man and take
him to the thana.
15. Tie his hands with rope.
16. Sir, before we reached the
thana, he ran away.
17. If you do not go, you will
get into trouble.
TakCkye-nd k'o'hia awn-laih.
‘Saukshe pauh naung na hau-
‘set-kala-k‘wa
na awn-laih.
N’kyi-ai-di". Kana" na hau-
‘naung-we".
Naung k‘un" na k‘ut-byaw-
ba-mii" ?
kye so-bo ka waung-
nid".
A c mu-n6n ku'T-nd na mawn-
‘naung-we".
Kye ni tala"kye baung-kT6-a
ka c mii-yd ka n’zun'-mi-
nd".
Saung yan-na ‘sit-k‘6-a ka
‘mii-yii.
K’ald-a n’ k'ya-hii" dabo // n-tii /
a ya-nii deng-d.
At‘i" ‘sawk"d ka k‘ldk"-daw-u.
Kye ayd" ohana ka awnd, ka
nuZ-haw-nd".
Aya-nii asnZ-nd hang-u.
Aya-nii ‘sauk-k‘ye-nu kye-a
shdnu.
Ni kTaung" mawndina gay a
na tawk-laih.
Aya ku /r t k c undina
m’to-zu.
Gaya m’pA-kTaung-a ayand
sawn"na sawn"niti",b‘oi-yo".
Gaya zit-adina holaih na
k‘awn-aih.


18. I suspect that Shwe Kin
stole my paddy.
19. The villagers fear greatly
the leader of the dacoits.
20. Were any lugyis present
when you searched ?
21. Have you any unclaimed
property ?
22. Whose turn of sentry
duty is it ?
23. What is your monthly
salary ?
21. How long have you been
in the force ?
25. Stand to your front.
26. Shortly after, the rain
began to fall and the
tracks were obliterated.
27. How much of the pro-
perty stolen has been
recovered ?
28. The Chins of a neighbour-
ing village have com-
mitted a raid on the
Kyakaik village and
taken away seven men
and women as captives.
29. On hearing this I went to
Kyakaik with five other
policemen to investi-
gate the case.
30. After having been re-
monstrated with, they
allowed me to go there.
When I asked the vil-
lagers to release the
captives, they wanted a
ransom of Ks. 50 a
head for the captives
they had taken.
31. We did not go into the
village in the day-time,
but at night we went
and surprised the of-
N’Gan saung my6-e-u-di ka
kyinii.
Nan-mon-di-hyaw akTaung"-
‘si'-lanni p‘oi-b‘oi akyi-yii.
Naimg in-a a‘san"-
hyaw po-ba-mii" ?
Amon moi-ai-di wo-mlo
moi-ya-mu" ?
Tu'-a aTenii anl'-mi kaung
nu"t-laih ?
Naung kT6-k c 6 pahyo na e-
laih ?
Ye-sho na saih-ii kun pahyo
moi-niu" ?
Na ‘mawn-gawn aso-we".
A‘nu-a atau yo-
6-si-yii k‘6long saih-saih
plak-'ma-niu".
Myo-e-gii wo pahyo bawn-
dina na bun-e-niii" ?
Asena moi-gu
Kyakaik-nan-a-gifi pat‘o"
naW'piin-'si'Ti e n-m awn-
dina situ.
Ni a‘mu ayauk-kiT ye-sho-
a f mu hi"-
zana ka situ.
Nahyaw-nii pauh hau-aih-gii'
pli-daw nana waung-b‘oi-
zii ak'waung aT 6 d ii.
Naungme" mawn-gu
kTaung'Chyaw m’ Tod-laih
ka naukii.
hawa hen-law-h a u k k y i t
na bek-laih anaukii.
Nan-a a‘nu"t-a awaung-ko
ayan-a waungdina ak-
‘laung'Vsr-hyaw akle-boi
m’ p‘6-wo. Nabyawdiiga


fenders in the camp.
Ten of them bolted and
seven were caught.
32. He said: ££ If you do not
give me the pig, I will
steal it.”
33. Next day the pig was
gone.
34. The accused hid in the
jungle and shot my
fowl with his cross-bow.
35. The ywathugyi put him
in the stocks.
36. He abused me and so I
struck him.
37. I have sinned this once;
have pity on me.
38. You will suffer thirty
stripes.
39. Last year I borrowed Us.
60 from him.
10. Some five months ago my
eldest daughter fell in
love with the accused.
41. After a month the ac-
cused’s parents came to
me and asked me to
give my daughter in
marriage with their son.
42. I was obliged to decline as
the accused belongs to
my clan.
43. Seven days ago the accus-
ed came at night and
took away my daughter
without my knowledge.
44. My daughter is with the
accused now. I want to
get my daughter back.
45. Your daughter is of age
and the accused is not
guilty (of kidnapping).
46. This is the man who
struck me.
sawnna
sawn" id". AkTaung" piin-
‘si" mawn-dina ma bnn-eyu.
Ay and wo n’bekadina my 6
liana ka bi"-e-aih han-d.
‘Nn'T-klaAgu/ wo kldkd.
Tala"k £ awn pon-a wi"-dina
awnii, kye a ali-yifi akawk-
d.
Nan-taih" kT6-wa aya-ni
tank-d.
Aya-nd kye abau bekd ; n*
k £ yan-sind ka dengd.
Ni n’ k'ya-haw ka ‘mau-lanh-
niii". Myan- £ naung-weA
Naung men n’k £ ya kilA'-kyit
na k £ awn-laih.
Yan-kuna aya-mwa hen law
hauk-kyit ka pdk-e-yd.
K £ l6 £ ngo" moi-niii" ka ‘se-
nd" £ san"-hek tala"k £ awnnu
mlaih-na awn-d.
K £ l6-haw kla"-a tala"k £ awn
anu"p6-hoi kye-mowa lo'-
wo. Kye £ so nanng £ s6nu"
k £ awne-yu abek- £ naung-
we" nahoi hau-d.
Tala"k £ awn a £ so" kye a£so"du-
yd-twak ka bek-ko-nii" ka
hau-la-yd.
Anif-a yan- £ si" moi-ya tala"-
k £ awn ayan-a 16-dina kye
akle-boi kye ‘sonii" bi"-
dina sitnid".
Tii'-a kye ‘sonA' tala"k £ awn-
mwa moi-yd. Bawndina
ka 10-woi-yd.
Nanng ‘sond" ashaw"-klil-
k"nid"; tala"k £ awn-a aplet
moi-ndA
Ni k £ laung" kye-ni deng-gd
kfiaung" tawn-d.


Revenue.
47. I have no money ; only
one pig for sacrificing
is left.
48. I shall fire my taungya
in April and plant the
paddy-seed in May.
49. What revenue do you pay
for your taungya ?
50. I pay He. 1 a year.
51. Do you cut your ‘ ya ’
yourself ?
52. No. My wife and son
assist me. I cannot cut
this year.
53. Which do you prefer,
—tanngya-cutting or
cultivating land ?
54. I prefer tanngya-cutting.
I have no cattle, and to
plough a piece of land I
shall require two buffa-
loes.
65. You are breeding pigs
and fowls ; why don’t
you breed buffaloes ?
56. I have no money to pur-
chase a buffalo.
57. The soil is not rich.
58. The paddy is not reaped
yet.
Hen moi-nu"; khuT'-wo-zun-
haw-diin" moi-hawkii.
Tankfi" k*'lo-w 7 a alo-a me'' ka
‘si'yaih; k c l6 Maw-a mok
ka shdnaih.
Naung alo-twak alo-k‘awn
pahyo na peklaih, ?
Kun-haw-a hen-law-haw ka
bek-laih.
Naung-nii piin-don alo na
‘sawk-ba-mti" ?
Si' / -nii' / , Kye p‘aya-nii kye
‘so kii-e-yii. Takun-a ka
‘ sawk-kA-nii".
Alo ‘sawk amlii ng-tauk-ba-
mii" ? Alaih saib, amlii'ug-
tauk-ba-mu"?
Alo‘sawk k’amlii'ng ka tauk-
liek-ii. moi-nii."
Alaih. saih-a non-ziin- t ni //
ka lii-e-yii.
Naung wo-nii a na haw-ii.
Non pak‘atinii haw-do-
awn na awnii ?
Non ka ‘le-aih hen moi-nli".
Niya d‘ek-tauh* moi-nii".
Saung ayan-haw-nii".
[Forests.
59. Is there any teak in these
jungles ?
60. How much do yon want
for cutting them and
floating them down the
river ?
61. I hear that yon have been
cutting and selling
pyingado without a
license. Is it true ?
Ni p6n-a ayl'-freYi moi-ya-
mii" ?
Ayl'-tV'n ‘ sawkdina ahon
myawn-dina 16-na ak c 6 pa-
lly 6 na lu-e-yii ?
Ak‘waung amoi-boi-bo kcyet-
paw t‘e"n ‘sawkdina na yi"-
yu ‘sadaung ka yauku. Si-
ya-mii" ?
* Tauh =clay.


62. Near the Yomas there are
large bamboo-jungles.
63. What is that smoke ?
61. It is the forest fire burn-
ing.
65. We set light to the dead
leaves every year,
66. I want to cut ten pyin-
gado logs to build a
house. Please give me
a license.
67. Did you pay any duty for
the timber you have
cut ?
68. I am poor and cannot
pay.
69. Pyingado is a reserved
tree. You must not cut
it without a license.
70. Pheasants and partridges
abound in dense jungles
away from human habi-
tation.
M’zon-sen-a yo~tauh‘len moi-
yii.
T e 6 baung-iP ?
K‘6n-me v 6-wo, ( Northern ,
6-hiP).
Kun-dP-di law-sa-a me" m’
c si"-yu.
In ka ‘saukaih-di k c yet-paw
t‘e"n Inn-*ngo" ka ‘sawk-
woi-yii. So myan-‘naung-
we".
Naung na ‘sawkkii t t e // n-twak
akauk hen ra pe-ni-mu'' ?
Kye ka ‘sinlaih-ii; hen ka
bek-k*6-nu".
KPyetpaw-Pe'hi ab c oi-nii haw-
dina tauk-kii t‘e"n tawn-ii.
So amoi-boi na ‘sawk-la"-
nii".
Ak‘laung' / -k‘awn c l6-gii ka-
niPn-a, h6-k‘yet-nu wo-p‘6n
niP'-yii".
Department oe Public Works.
71. Before beginning the
earthwork a tracing
will be cut through the
jungle.
72. Por earthwork you will
receive Us. 5 per hole.
73. Bring the mattocks; dis-
tribute them to the
men.
74. Measure out the road
carefully.
75. Where can I get iron-
wood for making a
bridge ?
76. There is plenty of iron-
wood here, but you will
have to bring it with
an elephant.
D‘ek s5-k‘launga pon d‘a-na
alawn-so na pok-laih.
hen-law-
‘ngo" na bun-e-aih.
N’tT'-p'ayaw 10-‘naung-we' / .
AkTaung"a p‘e-dina peke.
Ni lawn ‘sadi-yih sok-b e oi.
‘Lauk-Te saih-aih keyet-paw-
t‘e"n banga ka bun-e-k‘6-
wo ?
Ni-ya k‘yetpaw t‘e"n anii''-
ataung moi-yii. Si-ya-k'aw
na ‘niik-laih.


77. Last year I got Its. 10 for
clearing the jungle near
the telegraph line.
78. In the dry season all
bridges should be kept
clear of jungle.
79. Bridges constructed of
wood should be coal-
tarred every year.
80. Unseasoned wood should
never be coal-tarred.
81. What class of stone is to
be found about here ?
82. Will this stone do for
metalling roads ?
83. The thickness of metal-
ling is not to exceed
\ foot.
84. The centre of the road
should be 6 inches
higher than the sides.
85. The roof should have a
good slope as the rains
are heavy here.
86. I am fond of shooting.
87. The tracks of the tiger
lead to the evergreen
jungle.
88. Two nights ago a tiger
came into the village
and carried off my calf.
89. There was no moon so I
could not see.
90. There are a lot of green
pigeon on that tree.
91. When the paddy is ripe
wild elephants will
come ; but now they are
np the streams.
92. If you stay here you will
be able to get a shot at
a jungle-fowl.
Spoet.
Yankuna n’tT v -yo // h - sen - a
moi-gii pon d £ a-yii-twak
ka bun-e-yii.
K £ a-k £ o-a £ lauk- £ le-zena pon
na d‘a-laih.
T‘e"n-nu saih-gii Tauk- £ le-
hyaw-a kun-di-di kattaya-
tauh m’t £ awk-laih.
T‘e"n - lien - a kattaya - tauh
n’k £ ya-ba m’d e awk-la // -nu // .
Ni send pak £ a aliin k£awn-
kA-ba-mii" ?
Ni aliin lawn-k £ ling-a n’p £ 6-
a p £ oi-ba mu' ?
P £ 6-gii liin pe-wak lun-la"*
sinii".
Alawn-be-t £ a alawn-mliing"
pe-wak Tung-hek-laih.
Ni-ya yo p £ oi-b £ oi 6-w 6,
n’k £ yan-si-nii in-gliin sok-
sok na tauk-laih.
Kye £ senat kawka k’amlii'ng
ka taukii.
AkyekAlong m’tawn-na set-
gyi-a m’ p £ o-wo.
Yan- f ni // moi-niti // akye-nii
nana waung-dina kye
£ saw ,/ -so so-wo, sawn''-e-yii.
Tong yiikii, n’k £ yan-sinii ka
£ mii-k £ o-nu / .
T £ 6 t £ e"n-a wuhu aple moi-yii.
Saung 'myin-aih-gii' p 6 n-
mo'T p £ 6-wain; tii'-a ahon-
sit-baw-a awn-hyaw.
Naung niya na awn-na ho-a
na kawk-k £ 6-waih.


93. Is there much game in
this jungle ?
91. There are sambur, bark-
ing deer, and wild pig.
Ni pon-ddga amaih nd"-yaih
mu' ?
Gyi-yan, ‘sat-gyi, a‘ngaw moi-
hyaw.
General.
95. What is your clan ?
96. Can you sing or dance ?
97. There is no one here who
can relate the Chin tra-
ditions.
98. We do not now offer
sacrifices to or worship
our mother * Hli.’
99. I can tell you the ‘ kun ’
of my clan, but I do not
know anything about
my wife’s ‘ zdyaih.’
100. Formerly the Chins had
elephants and horses.
101. The Burmans are more
cunning than the
Chins and we are
afraid of them.
102. I eat dog occasionally.
103. Why do you not w 7 ear
the Chin ‘ paso ’ ?
101. Formerly all Chin wo-
men tatooed their faces,
but now some do not.
105. The Northern Chin w7o-
men wear red smock-
frocks.
106. A Buddhist girl of Ara-
kanese extraction mar-
ried a young Chin and
she has adopted the
4 zdyaih’ of her mother-
in-law.
107. Go quickly or w r e shall
not be in before dark.
Naung ‘so" baung ‘so"-d'?
Au-e-t'e-ba-mti" ? Lawn-t‘e-
ba-md" ?
Tu"-i-kon-pauh hau-t‘e-gu
mont‘en ni-ya moi-nd".
Td'-a a-n ‘Li-a kyeme"
m’hen" - ho-e - sind", k‘ut-
byaw-sind".
Kye ‘so" k'un'min ka hau-
k‘6-wo; ka p‘aya
pie' baung-pa ka ‘mak-nu-
hdn".
Set-k‘wa Asho'liyawa amo"-
si" moi-yd.
Asho"hyaw 7 -t‘a WoAhyaw
den-hekd; nahyawa m’kyi-
yu.
N’k‘ya haw n’k‘ya-‘ni" ur/-i-
-‘so ka e-yd.
Asho"k‘ye pak‘atind zauk-do-
awn na awnd ?
Yoka yawnii
saih - zaih a‘maungshdnd;
td'a aw r aung-‘ni" a‘maung
shdn-sind".
Myok-bawa p‘yan-
sen shaw-hyaw.
Lok c 6ng haw - nd"pa -haw
asho" ‘son-byannd k‘yin-e-
-yd. Apo waung-
niii".
Yan-yan sit-ke,zit-dina k‘oni"
mdg-k‘laung-a m’b‘6-sin-
di".
7


108. This spot is not good for
camping.
109. Cut those bamboos and
make a stockade.
110. That cooly has spoilt
my things, don’t pay
him his wages.
111. The rains have not
ceased and it is diffi-
cult to travel.
112. The river is running
very fast and to go in
a boat is unsafe.
113. The ywathugyi must
explain why his vil-
lage is in such a filthy
state.
114. It is due Sir, to the lazi-
ness of villagers.
115. You must order them to
dig drains around
their houses.
116. The mud is very deep
here; the buffaloes
have been rolling in it.
117. This is a new house;
there are no lice yet
in it.
118. Bring two mats, six pots
of water, four fowls,
and twelve eggs.
119. If you do not get me
some fowls I shall
shoot some.
120. Tell the ywathugyi to
have my pony fed
with paddy and chaff.
121. The weather is very hot
now, so we will start
before day-light.
122. Tive days have elapsed
since I saw him.
Sak c an klauka ni awndiin
h'oi-mi".
Y 6 ‘sawkdina taw" saih-e".
To a‘ngo" kye wo-mlopyak-
‘makii, ak‘6 ahekaidi".
Yo-6-wo hii-haw-nu"; m’si"-
yaih kyi"-ii.
Ahon-a tu"-i te 16ng-ii amfiii'
sit-na ami-anaw p‘6-waih.
Nan pak'atinii nikffi'T sii-
yii nan-taih"-nu hau-laih.
Nan-‘so - hyaw adawn - twak
su-yii, ffioi-yo".
In ‘ledina mlong so-laih na
hau-laih.
Niya 16 pu'-haw t‘uk-ii, non
loka bokii.
Nl in in-t‘a" tawn-ii; h6k moi-
haw-nii".
Adii'n-law-hii", yin-zli-lun-
cso"k, a-piin-mTi" a-toi-
cnga" - lun - ‘ni /r , na 16-
‘naung-we".
A na hekadina ‘senat-tffi ka
kawkaih.
Nan-taih"-a kye si" saung-
nii wuko" bek-se-b‘oi-di na
hau-we".
Tii'-a k‘6 t 6 ‘lokii, n’k‘yan-
sinii k‘6-wa"-k c launga m*
‘sawk"aih.
Kye-nii aya ka c mii-yii yan*
c ngo" moi-niii".
* Literally, nights.


CHIN AND ENGLISH.
A.*
A', ft., a fowl.
[Cf. Lush., Shandu, d;
Taungthu, d-wa ; Sa k,
Limbu, Kiranti, Che-
pang, wd ; Mikir, vo ;
Singpho, wu; Kami,
ta~wa ; Nag a, te-vu ;
Magar, gwd.]
Abl, n., a package.
[Cf. Chinese, hok.]
Abo-i, n., a mole (animal).
Abo-iin", n., a mole-hill.
Ab‘oi, n., a chief ; European
gentleman; the Govern-
ment.
[ Erom p‘oi good. Query :
Is this the same as the
Lushai hoi, a slave ? Cf.
Naga, heumd ; Shandu,
e-hai ; Limbu, hd.']
Ab c oi-nu"-lan, n ., the Queen.
Ab e oi-lan, n., a Prince ; a
Commissioner.
Abdn-nauk (2), v., to press.
Abu", n., a nest.
[Cf. Lush., Kami, hu.]
Ahyawn, n., weeds, under-
growth.
Adang, n., the support of a
roof.
Adauh, n., a handle.
Ading-byin, n ., the side of the
body.
Adii'n, n., a mat.
[Cf. Thib., den.]
Agaw, n., the kidneys.
[Cf. Dhimal, kehd.]
Aha, n., a potato, yam.
[Cf. Kami, han or ho; Garo,
hdn.]
Allan, n., a mosquito.
[Of. Dhimal, jd-hdn .]
Allan, n., an otter.
Ahau, n ., speech; a com*
mand.
Ahaung", n ., a liquid (not
water); * sawk' ", to rub
bamboos to get fire.
Ahawn", n., a bear.
[Of. Chinese coll., lining. ]
Ahe, n., a fig (jungle varie-
ty).
[Of. Manip., he-hong. In
Manipuri, ma-he is a
fruit.]
Ahe or ahe, n., an axe.
[Of. (perhaps) 0 h e p a n g
war he ; Naga, merre.]
Ahe'', n., firewood, fuel.
Aheng", adv., alive.
[Of. Kami, alien; Manip.,
king ; Burm., a‘reng ;
Mikir, he-reng ; Naga.,
( ri; Burm. coll., ashin ;
Chinese coll., sheng .]
Abet, n ., the breast (of birds).
Aho, n ., a yam. See Aha.
Aho'', n ., a tooth; the blade
of a da; n e si, a front
tooth; rikaim , a back
tooth; mu , a tusk.
[Cf. Shandu, Limbu, Lush.,
ha ; Kaga, hu ; Kiranti
(Yakha), hd, hdchi.]
Ahoi, n., a mango.
[Cf. Manip., he-hau.]
Ahon, n., a river, stream,
[Cf. Chinese coll., ho; Lim-
bu, wo-hong ; Kiranti,
* N.B.—S ome nouns begin indifferently with a or n.


hong-ku ; Serpa, hyung ;
Lepcha, ong-kyong .]
Aim, n ., steam.
[ Probably connected with
kii smoke. Of, Yay n,
hillili, 4 steam,’ and kulu
* smoke; ’ also Mikir, hi,
‘ smoke.’]
A 7 k (2), v., to split, crack.
[Cf. Burnt., aA]
Ak 4 a", n., a white ant.
[Cf. Perhaps Naga, me-
kro."\
Akau-lan, adv., prostrate (on
the back). See Aku-lut.
Ak‘aw", n., a part, portion.
[Prom Maud', to lop off.]
Ak 4 awn moi (1), v ., to be
vacant.
[Cf. Chinese coll., Mung.~\
AkTaung", n., a person, man.
[Cf. Burm., aMrung, 4 yon.’]
Ak 4 iaung"-k 4 awn, n., inhabit-
ed country.
Ak‘lanng"-mf, n., a leper.
Ak 4 laung"- 4 si", n., a scoundrel,
dacoit, robber.
AkTaung"-t‘aw, n., a substi-
tute.
Ak‘laung"-ut, n., a gang,
party (of men).
AlPlaw, n., sweat, perspiration
[Cf. Naga, akldn; Lush.,
Man; Kami, kaukd]
AkTaw mo, n., a pore.
Ak 4 ling, n., the marrow.
[Cf. Naga., keli.]
Aklong, n., fate, luck.
[Burm., akyaung .]
Ak 4 6ng moi (1), v., to be hol-
low.
[Cf. Burm., Maung ; Chi-
nese, Mam .]
Aka", n., a porcupine.
[Cf. Shandu, sa-ku; Lush.,
sakup ; Naga, toe-kru.]
Aku-lut, adv., prostrate (on
the stomach). See Akau-
lau.
Ak c un", n., a lid; cover.
[Cf. Manip,. Mum, t o
cover.]
Ak 4 un-yaih (1), v., to bind.
Aku"t-hen, n., a dowry,
Ak 4 waung, n., permission.
[Burm., aMwangd\
Akyat, n ., character.
[Cf. Thib., grag; Burm.
coll., akyet .]
Ak c ye", n., a kind of squirrel.
(coSoGoSll)
Akye, n., a tiger.
[Cf. Mikir, teke; Burm.,
kyd; Burm. coll., chd ;
Chepang, jd; Taungthu,
kd; Grumng, chen; Mur-
mi, chyan; Limbu, keh-
vu; Manip., kai\ Kami,
take; Kiranti, kiwa ;
Thochu, M 6; Gyami, Mu;
Kaga, teMu.]
Akyi", n., a parrot.
[Cf. Burm., kye ; Shandu,
aki; Kami, pagi.\
Akyin, n., weight.
[Burm., aMyind]
Alat- a 4 san", n ., an elder.
Alatso, n., taste.
[Burm.-Pali, aratha .]
A‘lauk, n ., a ladder, steps,
stairs.
Alaung, n., a custom; prac-
tise.
[CI Mikir, along; Thib.,
lu; Burm., le].
Alawn, n., a way. See Lawn.
Chin and English.


Alawn ‘s6-dina awn (1), v., to
hope.
(Literally c to be looking
along the path.’)
Alawn, n., rope.
[Of. Burm., Iwan.]
Ale", n., a cup.
[Probably connected with
law , a leaf, q. v ,]
Ale, n ., a debt. See Le.
A £ le, n ., east.
A £ le yo, n., a kind of bamboo.
[Cf. Burm., a‘re; Burm.
coll., ashe ; Thib., shur.]
Afle", n., a squirrel.
[Cf. Shandu, li-tso; Mikir,
kdr-le.]
All, n., a bow, particularly a
cross-bow.
Ali-se", n., the notch for the
string.
AH-lawn, n., the notch for the
arrow.
[Cf. Burm., le ; Chepang,
lu-i; Naga, ti-ld ; Ma-
nip., li-rung; Mikir,
t‘e'~h'.]
Ali", n., the hammer of a gun.
A £ ling", n., the back.
A £ ling, n., a thorn.
[Cf. Lush. ‘ ling ; Sepcha,
drong.\
Alit, n. 3 shade.
[Cf. Lush., Urn ; Burm.,
‘rip ; Thib., ‘rib.]
Alit-long, n ., status, position.
[Burm., arip-arating.]
A c l6, n., the spleen.
Alo, n. , a taungya.
[Cf. Lush., Id ; Shandu, Id;
Kami, ‘lau; Chepang,
bin; Manip., lau; Burm.,
yd.]
Aloi, adj., many, much; full.
Alok-a-dii', adv., easily.
[Burm., ahvetaku.]
Along, n., a wound.
A‘l6ng, n., a red and black
ant.
A £ lu, n., the neck.
Alii, n., the head.
Alii me (1), v., to have a head-
ache.
Alii £ maih-e, (1) v., to wash
the face, &c.
[Cf. Shandu, Kami, Mru,
Lush., lu; Magar, talu ;
Chepang, tolong; Man-
yak, wulli.]
A £ lii, n., a flying squirrel.
A £ lii', n., a trigger.
A £ lu-k £ o // , n.y the throat,
Aliin, n., a stone.
Aliin-dauh, n., a grind-stone.
[Cf. Kami, lun; Singpho,
n-lung; Taungthu, Lush.,
Limbu, lung ; Kiranti,
lung-va ; Vayu, lun-p‘a ;
Magar, ‘lung; Sak, ta-
lon ; Lepcha, long ;
Mikir, dr-long; Newar,
lohong ; Shandu, lauk ;
Naga, lu , in rosilu , £ fruit
stone.’]
Aliin, conj., again, moreover,
hereafter, next year.
[Burm., lun, to exceed.]
Aliin-bek k £ awm (1), v., to
make love to. (Prom alii ,
£ a head.’)
Aliin-bo, n., chicken-pox.
Aliingflo, n., the brain ifrom
aliin, head, and k‘ld , spirit.
[Cf. Naga., k‘ru.]
Aliin-heng, n., a maggot.
[Cf. Shandu, along-aklo.]
Chin and English.


Aliinzaung, n. 3 a maggot,
(another kind).
Adu-s,w.,the nape of the neck
Alut, n. 3 work; alute , to work.
[Burm., lupi]
Alut, n., form, figure; a doll.
[Burm., aruk. Of. Chinese
coll., luk, ‘ to carve.’]
Alu-t‘6, n., honeycomb (with
bees in it).
Alut-‘sawng, (1) v., to put on
an appearance.
[Burm., arup ‘saung.~\
A‘ma, n., pain, hurt.
[Cf. Shandu, a‘ma ; Thib.,
ma.~\
A‘ma-I6ng, n., a scar.
Amaih, n., (1) game; (2)
flesh.
[Cf. Chepang, mai ; Burm.,
ame ; Naga, t‘e-mo.]
Amaih-mon moi (1), v., to he
4 enceinte.’
A‘maih, n., a mole (a spot).
[Burm., ir me?\
Amak‘awn, n., security.
[Burm., amak'an .]
Ahnaung shun (1), v ., to tat-
too (the face).
A'maw, n., the hair (of the
body, animals, &c.).
[Cf. Chinese coll., mao ;
Kiranti, mod; Gurung,
moi ; Kami, mu; Man-
yak, mui; Burm., mwe;
Mikir, angmi.]
Amawn, n., price.
[Cf. Lush., amdn; Naga,
md ; Limhu, ko-men ;
Manip., mamal.]
A'mawn, n. 3 truth, perma-
nency.
[Burm., a l man.\
A t mawn-kdaung"-d&n, n. 3 an
assessor.
Ame-haw, n. 3 the sky.
[Cf. Manyak, ma ; Thochu,
mahto ; Burm., mo;
Murmi, mu; Gyar., mun;
Naga, ke-mu ‘ a cloud.’]
Ame-‘si, n. 3 a cloud (rain).
Ami, n. 3 disease, pain. See
a ( ma.
Ami-mo (1), v., to hurt, pain.
Ami-‘si", n., leprosy.
Ami-anaw, n., danger.
Ami, n., a goat.
[Cf. Shandu, amya; Kami,
ma-ai; Chepang, mi-cha;
Manip., pa-meng ; Lim-
bu, min-tha.~\
Ami, n ., the eye ; ami-maw 3
the eye-lash; ami-in, the
socket of the eye; ami-pe ,
the eye-lid.
[Cf. Kami, ami; Lush.,
amit ; Naga, ( mi; Murmi,
Singpho, Shandu, mi;
Taungthu, me; Mru, min ;
Lepeha, amik; Thib. coll.,
Serpa, Limhu, Magar,
mik ; Thib., mig ; Mikir,
mek; Gyar. ,myek; Burm.,
my ok ; Chinese, moki]
Ami he (1), v., to he blind.
Ami-hi'-e (1), v ., to shut one
eye.
Ami-kdi, n., a tear.
Ami-k‘u, n., an eyebrow.
[Cf. Lush, mi-ko; Naga,
kHe ; Shandu, mi-ku;
Burm., myak-k‘un. ]
Ami k‘ye-e (1), v., to wink.
Ami-u", n., the pupil of the
eye.
Chin and English.


Amin, n., a name.
Aminfien (1), v., to be re-
nowned.
[Of. Kami, Shandu, ami;
Murmi, Taungthu, Serpa,
Gyami, min; Thib., Bhut.,
Singpho, Limbu, Gumng,
Magar, Manyak, ming;
Gyar., tir-ming; Lush.,
a'ming ; Burm., a man;
Mikir, meug; Takpa, my-
eng; Kami, a‘mwan.~\
Amlak, n., profit.
[Burm., amraki]
Amle-baw, n., the tongue.
[Of. Kami, amU; Lush.,
Shandu, pale;
Naga, melil; Lepcha, Va-
yu, li; Limbu, lissu;
Burm., ‘rai]
A c mleng-yo", n., the shoulder-
blade.
Amlet-sodagd yo" (1), v., to be
an idiot.
Amliing", n., the middle.
[Of. Lush., alai; Burm.,
ale .]
Amlii'ng, n. s the mind, the
heart.
Amliing-Voi (1), v., to be
sane.
Amlii'ng-kyi (1), v., to be
angry, to hate; — mlik, to
be sorry.
Amlii'ng-t‘s (1), v., to be
angry;— tank, to like.
[Cf. Kami, amlun; Lush.,
lung; Naga, me-lu.]
Amlii'ng ko-nge (1), v. t to be
sorry.
[Cf., Lush., lung-ngai.]
Amo-e (1), v., to frown.
A‘moi, n., a pumpkin.
[Cf. Kami, amai; Shandu,
omare ; Huush.,fdng c md.
Ahno'-ii', n ., a sister-in-law.
[Cf. Manip., imau, * a
daughter-in-law. ’]
A‘m6n, n., a bug.
[Cf. Manip., md; Kaga,
re-mu.]
Amon, n., a beak, mouth,
lips,
Amon-k c 6-maw, n., the beard.
Amon-a'k (2), v., to have hare-
lip.
[Cf. Lushai, *mu-i, mur;
Limbu, mur a ; Newar,
mutd; Chepang, mo-
tong.]
Amon ‘non (1), v., to kiss.
Amu', n., night, evening,
[From mug, q.v .]
Amu'-baw, adv., in the even-
ing.
Amli'-La/, n., the first watch
of the night.
A e mu, n., a hawk, kite.
[Cf. Kami, a-mu; Naga, re-
mu, mu-u; Mikir, mu-
rdmhet; Shandu, pa-‘mo;
Chepang, mo-md .]
A‘mu, n., the 4 thabye ’ tree,
the Eugenia. It is con-
sidered sacred by the
Chins.
n ., a sprig of c tha-
bye.’
A‘mii-yon, n., the ‘ thabye ’
tree.
A c mu, n., a case, matter,
affair.
[Burm., a e mu.]
A‘mu-‘mawk (2), v., to
annoy, vex.
Chin and English.


Amu"-i or amo", n., an ele-
phant.
[Of. Bod o, moi-det ;
Manip., sdmu .]
Amu"-i-san-se, n., a maliaut.
Amuk, n., a cubit.
[Of. Kami, amiln.]
A‘mun, n., powder.
[Cf. Burm., ‘mun.]
A'mifn, n., foam, froth.
A"n, n., a pot.
[Cf. Kami, awn.\
A'nau-yo", n ., a rib.
[Burm., nan-yod\
Anatsa, n ., taste.
Anau-u', w,, a brother (young-
er).
[Cf. Manip., inau ; Lush.,
nau; Thib., nu-wo; Lim-
hu, unu-sa.
Anau-in, n., the after-birth.
A'naung", n., mist.
[Cf. Burm., ‘nang.]
A‘naung-kTiing, n., frost.
A‘naw", n., mucus (of the
nose).
Anda", n., yesterday.
Anda" ‘moi, n., the day before
yesterday.
[Cf. Naga, andu; Kami,
yandu.\
Andi, n., a centipede.
Andi-so-mon, n., an earwig.
And on, n., a twig, sprout,
[Cf. Burm. coll., ( nywan.\
A‘nen, n ., dregs.
A‘ngaw or a‘ngo, n ., a jungle
Pig-
[Cf. Naga, me-ngi .]
A‘ng6, n., morning.
A‘ngo-haw, adv ., in the morn-
ing-
A‘ng6-hi, adv., the same.
[Cf. Lepeha, ngol; perhaps
Kami, ak‘on ; Shandu,
na-¥la.~\
A‘ngo", n., a cooly, hire.
[Of. Burm., a ( ngd.]
Angyan", n., the Milletta
Atropurpurea.
Ani", pron., who ?
[Cf. perhaps Kami, amt.]
An-maw, n ., a radish.
A e n6, n., the ear.
A‘n6-gaung, n., the outside
part of the ear.
A‘n6-t‘e",w., the brow.
A‘no paung (1), v., to he deaf.
[Cf. Chepang, Mikir, no;
Kami, Taungthu, nau ;
Sun war, no-pa ; Thib ,
Burm., Manip., Shandu,
Singpho, nd ; Kiranti,
nd-pa; Gurung, Murmi,
nd-pe ; Bhiit., nd-vo;
Naga, nie; Chinese, ngi.
(The affix, pd , is evi-
dently that for flat
things).]
An-ok (1), v., to hiccough.
Anil", n., a mother.
[Cf Lushai, Sak, Kami,
Singpho, nu ; Shandu,
anaw; Thib., anu, ‘aunt ;*
Lush., ni, ‘ aunt Naga,
dnnd, ‘aunt;’ Chinese,
nil, ‘a woman.’
Aniihi", n., a sister.
[Literally ‘ other mother.’
Cf. Mikir, inipi , ‘ mother-
in-law.’]
A‘nu"n, n., a handful.
Anffi-po-hoi, n., parents.
A‘nu% n., a day. See ‘ Nu't.
A‘nyan"-ak (2), v, to oppress.
[Burm., nyang .]
Chin and English.


Anyen," n., peace, quietness.
[Burnt., angrin. Cf. Chi-
nese, ngan.]
Anyen"-e, n ., a pensioner.
[Burm. coll., anyen-sa.]
Anyet, ad ., severely.
A-6(l), v ., to put to sleep.
A-qi, n ., turmeric.
A-o"-i, n., a spade; dip.
[Cf. perhaps Manip., yot.]
Apa", n., the shoulder.
[Cf. Kami, palain ; Yaya,
p‘dka Burm., pak‘un.]
Apaih, n. 9 a stern.
[Burm., pe. ]
Apaung, n ., a wall.
Ap‘awng, n., quality, rich-
ness. See D‘ek.
Ap‘e, w,, the thigh.
[Cf. Kami, ap‘e; Manip.,
paigal; Lush., et-pul i
nulpui' ; Shandu, ban ;
Yayu, pek-teng.
Ape' 7 , n., an edge, border,
spout.
[Cf. Mikir, dpre.]
Apian, n ., a rhinoceros.
Aplet, n. y an offence, crime,
sin.
[Burm. coll., apyit.]
Aplf, n., juice, sap, gum.
Aplong, n ., a bison.
[Cf. Burm., praung.]
Apo, n., a father.
[This root runs through all
cognate languages, ex-
cept Thochu, Sakpa, and
Gy ami. It is found in
fact in almost all lan-
guages of the Turanian
family.]
Apo, n ., a grandfather.
[Cf. Kami, Lush., pu.]
Ap6‘san"-nu", n., a grand-
mother, or mother-in-law.
Apo", n., toadstool ; mush-
room.
[Cf. Naga, pi.']
Apong, n., (1) a district, juris-
diction ; (2) duty.
[Burnt., apaing. ]
Apo-po-i, n., a sweetheart,
companion. See JPo.
[Cf. Kami, apo-p'au.]
Ap‘ii, n., a share.
[Cf. Bur m.., pun.]
Apii, n ., (1) an uncle (mater-
nal) ; (2) a father-in-law.
[Cf. Kiranti, popo; Chinese
coll., apoh; Chinese, pak.]
Apiik, n ., the stomach.
[Of. Manip., puk; Chi-
nese, hok; Lepcha, ta-
hak; Lim b u, sabo ;
Burnt., paik.\
Apiin, n ., the body ; also
used as a numeral auxiliary.
See Grammar.
[Cf. Lush., pang ; Mikir,
being.]
Apiin, n., a heap.
[Burm., apim. Cf. Mikir,
d-bui.]
Ap c ya", n., a wing, a feather.
See F ( ay6.
Apyaw, n.y a fly.
Ap‘et, n., a sparrow.
Ap‘yem, n., a needle.
Apyiin, n., uprightness.
[Burm., ap ( raung.]
A‘sa", n., a worm.
[Cf. Naga, sochu.]
A‘sak-dai, n., an artifice.
A‘san", n., an elder, head-
man (from ‘san", to be
old).
8
Chin and English


[Cf. Mikir, dsdr ; Kiranti,*
sang ; Burm. coll., ‘san,
‘to increase/]
A‘sa"n, n., a crocodile.
[Cf. (perhaps) Shandn, sa-
dan ; Kami, sattam. ]
A‘sauh", n ., length. See
( Sauh".
Asaung, n., pith, kernel.
See azaung.
Asaung-glo (I), v., to he dis-
tant.
Asaw", n., yeast.
A‘saw", n ., the womb.
A‘saw-‘lo, pronml. adj., other.
A‘sawn, n ., the hair (of the
head).
[Cf. Chinese coll., san;
Burm., coll., l san; Manip.,
Mm, Kami, tsdm ; Lush.,
tsmn; Manip., tshum ;
Newar, song; Lepcha,
chom; Magar, cham; Sun-
war, chang; Shandn, shyok]
Asawn"-p6-i, n ., races, sports.
See Sawn",
Asen-hoi, adv ., near.
Ase-zan, n ., a sister-in-law
(older than one’s wife).
Aset-nauk (2), ®., to press.
Ashaw", n.y the breath.
Ashaw"-ho-t‘iik (2), v., to
commit suicide.
Ashaw"-‘si"-klauk (2), v to
sigh.
[Cf. Lush., shem ; Lepcha,
asom .]
Ashaw or ashaw-p‘aih, n., the
eaves (of a roof). '
Asheng, n., a worm (in the
body).
Ashet, n., a spur (of a fowl).
Asho", n ., a sea-snail.
Ash o'', n., a Chin.
[Cf. Lush., JDzo, the generic
term of the Lushai race.
If these words are identi-
cal the Lushais and Chins
must, at no distant time,
have formed one race.]
Asho-ko, n., core (of a plant).
Ashu-kyat, n., the armpit.
[Cf. Lush., dzdk.~\
Ashiin"-e (1), v., to use, to be
of use.
[Cf. Burm., athun.]
A'-‘si, n., a star.
A'-‘si' home-mon, n. 9 a comet.
[Cf. Shandu, d-si\ Kami,
ka-se ; Taungthu, ‘sd.]
Asi", n., an aunt (paternal).
[Cf. Dhimal, pi-sai ; Kami,
st~sd, ‘ a sister ;’ Chinese,
tsi, a ‘ sisterManip.,
echem , ‘a sister.’]
A‘si"-haung", n., oil.
[Cf. Newar, chi-kang ; Mur-
mi, chi-ku ; Thochu, chin-
gyu; Gyami, chinswi ;
Burm., chH ; Mru, Burm,
coll., ‘si ; Sak, si-da'k ;
Kami, sarau ; Lush.,
sa‘rik; Naga ,p6-sho.]
Asm", n., a da, sword, knife.
Asin" ‘sauh", n., a da-lwe,
fighting da.
[Cf. Lush., shem; Kami,
as an. ]
A‘sit, n., poison.
[Cf. Burm., ach‘ip.~\
A‘so, n ., a son; flesh. See*
‘So,
* Waling dialect.
Chin and English.


A 4 so", n ., thickness.
[Of. Naga, su.]
AW', n., a clan.
[Of. Mikir, dsong, 4 a tribe
Chinese, sok; Lnsh.,
at chi. ]
Asu"-i, n ., the breast (of a
woman).
Aso-sak, w., form.
Asun, n., a fairy.
A‘sun", w., the month (of a
river); end.
[Of. Burm., ch‘un , ‘ end.’]
A 4 su'n, w., a turtle.
Ata, n ., a brother (elder).
[Of. tanau-hoi, elder and
younger brothers.]
Ata-san, n., step-brother.
At c a", n., newness, a new one.
[Of. Lush., at‘d.]
Ataug, n ., peace, quietness.
At £ au, n., fat.
[Of. Lush., ai i au.'\
Atat pi ting-e (1), v. t to fight,
(as armies).
At'aw, n., an arrow.
[Of. Lush., t‘ul , Kami, tai ;
Man ip., ten; Limb.,
tong ; Thib. coll., Serpa,
Bhiit., Horpa, dd ; Thib.,
mdah?\
At‘e", n., a platform for
watching birds, &c.
At c en, n., ginger.
[Of. Chinese coll., jin-sen.
Of. Shandu, asen ; Kami,
kassin; Burm. coll.,
chin-sen', Manip., sing.]
At'eng", adv., tight.
[Of. Burm., at‘ang ; Dhi-
mal, tantan.\
At‘eng // -nii"- < saw (1), v., to
rape.
At‘i", n ., blood.
AtT'-glauh", n., a vein.
[Of. Lush., Shandu, Kami,
ti ; Sak, f‘e; Thib. coll.,
Serpa, Sak, Bhut., kyak ;
Burm., thwe.]
At c o", n., the soap accacia.
Atoi, n., an egg.
[Of. Lush., atui ; Shandu,
ate ; Taungthu, de ;
Kami, adui ; Mru, du-i ;
Dhimal, tu-i ; Singpho,
u-di; Sak, Mikir, Lep-
cha, ati ; Limbu, Pin ;
Kiranti, uding ; Chinese
coll., tan.']
Atong, n., the warp.
[Of. Burm., taing.]
Atii-saih (1), v., to imitate.
Atu' n., (1) a grandson, (2)
a son-in-law.
[Of. Lush., atu.]
Atii'-hen, n., interest.
[Burm., at6.]
Atiik, n., strife.
[Thib, tukpa , 4 to quar-
rel Burm., talk , 4 to
attack.’]
Atwang, adv., uselessly, in
vain.
A-u, n., a mother.
[Of. a-u 4 Li.]
A'-u-Ten, n., mother’s elder
sister.
A-u-t 4 oi, n., mother’s younger
sister.
[Probably a corruption of
anil" ; q.v. Of. Mru, a-u :
Thochu, au.]
Au-e (i), v., to sing (after the
Chin manner).
Aung, n., a pond.
[Of. Burm., ing.]
Chin and English.


Aung-gyi, n., a jacket.
Aung-gyi-t £ e", n., a button.
[Burm., ang-gyi .]
Aung-6, w., a crow.
Aung-6-kun-zo (1), v., to hop.
[Cf. Kami, d-d ; Mm, wa-
d.\
Awa", n., light.
[Cf. Manyak, wu; Thih.
coll., 'we; Chepang, wa-
ge, ‘ dawn.’]
Awa, n., a net.
[Of. Chinese coll., wang.]
Awan, n., a bubble.
[Perhaps Chinese, wan,
‘round,’ ‘a pill.’]
A wank, n., a (jungle) cat;
(from wauls, ‘ to crawl ’).
Awaung-‘ni", pron., some.
Awi" or awi'n, n., a hare.
[From wi , ‘ to hide.’]
Awin", n ., a sickle.
Awk (1), v., to slice.
Awk (1), v., to deliver up.
[Cf. Burm., ap.]
Awn, v., (1) to halt, stop,
remain ; (2) to he.
[Cf. Kami, on; Lush., om.]
Awn' or aung", n., vegetables.
[Cf. Kami, awn', Mikir,
hdn.\
Awndiin, n., a place.
[Cf. Mikir, d-dim .]
Awng or ong (1), v., to con-
quer.
[Bum., aung.]
Awn-hawk (2), v., to remain
over.
Awn"-hii or aung"-hu, n., ve-
getables.
Awnyawn, n., a necklace.
[Cf. Lush., awm, ‘ the
breast.’]
Awot, n., a leech.
[Cf. Lush., vdng-vut; Kaga,
re-vd.]
Aya, pro., he, she, or it.
[Cf. Burm., ayd, * a thing.’]
Ayan, n., night.
[ From sayan, q. v. Cf.
Shandu, ayi ; Chinese,
ya; Chepang, yd.']
Ayang", n., principal (in
money).
[Burm., arang.]
Ayang-gyi-gyi, adv., origi-
nally.
[Burm., arang. Cf. Chi-
nese coll., yue7i.]
Ayan-zaling, n., midnight.
Ayauh, n., a fine.
[Burm., lyau.]
Ayauk, n., a hag.
[Of. Naga, lok‘aw.]
Ayaung-‘sawk" (2), v., to
shine.
Ayaung-u, adv., immediate-
V
Ayaung" (yon), n., a ‘ kanyin ’
(tree).
Ayaw, n., cold.
[Cf. Lush., avaiv.]
Ayi", n., teak.
Ayo, n., a corpse.
"[Probably related to yd', a
bone. Cf. Mikir, bru.]
Ayo" n., a bone. See Yd'.
Ayo"h, n., a rope.
[Cf. Lush., W; Mikir,
dri; Chepang, rd; Naga,
ke-rd.]
Ayo"hdale (1), v., to gamble.
Ayii", n., rice beer, kaung.
Ayu"-haung v , n., the same.
Ayii"-kye"n, n., tube for
drinking kaung.
Chin and English.


[Cf. Chinese coll., yu, 4 new
wine’; Dhimal, yu;
Lush., dzu.]
Ayun, n., a creeper.
Ayd"n, n., a root.
[Cf. Kami, yon; Manip.,
ma-rd; Burm., arang,
4 foundation.’]
Aywai", adv., aslant.
[Burm., ywe.]
Azaung, n., a kernel.
Azaw-kat, n., mucus.
Azaw-tu"-i, n., phlegm,
spittle.
[Cf. Lush., me-tsd; Yayu,
cheku .]
Azaw, n., the lungs.
Azun", n., a boundary.
B.
Ba', n., a branch.
Ba, interrog. particle.
Ba-aw, n., lemon-grass.
Baha-noi, n., rice-flour.
Baih, postp., near.
Bang, adv., where ?
Bank (2), v., to pour out, to
lade.
[Cf. Mikir, hu, 4 to spill.’]
Baung, pron., what ?
Baw, n., a side.
[Cf. Lepcha, hon.]
Baw-bii", n., a burr.
Bawk (2), v., to hang up.
Bawk" (2), v., to break, to
cut off.
[Cf. Dhimal, hoi-ka ;
Mikir, ke-p‘uk ; Burm.,
p‘rat ; Naga, het.]
Bawn (1), v., to return.
[Cf. Burm.,|?/xm; Chinese,
coll ., fan.]
Bawn", n., the arm.
[Cf. Lush., hdn ; Manip.,
pdmhom-, Shandu, hopi;
Naga, hu.]
Bawn"-gyf, n., the elbow.
[Cf. Lush., kui.]
Be, n., side.
[Burm. coll., hek.]
Be-saih (1), v., to converse
with.
Be-e (1), v., to call one,
shout.
Be-he", n., the cheek.
Be-he" hi (1), v., to strike the
cheek, box one’s ears.
[Cf. Shandu, he; Kami,
tan-hen ; Lush., hi-ung ;
Burm., pa'; also pahak ,
coll., hahet , 4 the gills of
a fish.’]
Be"n-6, n., an opium-smoker.
[Literally, opium-drinker.
Burm. coll., hen].
Bep 4 ya"bs, n., the cotton-teal
goose.
[Literally, white winged
teal.]
Bi, postp., at. See A'ngo-hi.
[Of. Chinese coll., p‘i;
4 contiguous.’]
Bi" (1), v., to take; to seize;
hi"-dina sit, to take away.
[Cf. Chinese coll., pa ; Mi-
kir, he, 4 a handle.’
Bi", pronml. adj., other.
[Cf. Chinese, hit.']
\ Bi" (1), v., to spin.
1 Bi (1), v., to clap, pat.
Chin and English.


Bin (1), v., to be dense, thick
(as jungle).
[Of. Burm., pik.]
Bliing, n., an ant’s nest.
Bo (1), v., to pour (water).
See Bauk.
80-si (1), v., the same.
Bo (1), v., to carry across the
shoulder (as a bag).
[Cf. Chinese coll., fu\ Chi-
nese, be ; Lepcha, bu ;
Manip., pit; Dhimal ,pu.]
Bok or bo (2), v., to be white.
[Cf. Chinese coll., pok ;
Limbu, poran; Magar,
bo oho ; Hor p a, p'ru ;
Burm., p'yu\ Thakpa,
p'yok; Lush, vd.]
Bok (1;, v., to crouch.
[Cf. Burm., wap ; Chinese
coll., p'u ; Lush., pek.]
Bok (1), v., to roll in the
mud.
Bong, n., a target.
[Cf. Thib., hen.]
Bonkaw, n ., the goat-suck-
er.
86-n6 (1), v., to pack.
Bii, n., assistance. See Bit.
Bii', n., rice (cooked).
[Cf. Kami, Lush., bu, C rice.’
Perhaps Chinese, ban.]
Bii'-(a), postp., above. *
Buk (1), v., to push.
[Cf. Chinese ao\\., fong.]
Bun or bune, v., to get, ob-
tain.
Bun-plak (1), v., to decide
(a case).. See Bong.
Bun'-bo-in, n., a cobweb.
Byem-bli, 71., birdlime.
D.
D £ a (1), v., to clear (as jun-
gle).
[Cf. Naga, dd, £ to cut; ’
Lush., td, ‘to cut; ’
Bodo, dd , £ to cut.’]
Dada, n., a slug.
Daih- £ saw, n., a door.
D £ ak (2), v., to dare; to
learn.
Dale (1), v., to play, gamble.
Danga-bi" (1), v., to drag.
Dang-e (1), v., to quarrel,
light.
[Probably from the same
root as deng, g. v. Of.
Chinese, tang.]
Daung"(a), postp., below.
Daung-bok, n., tin.
Daung-k £ o", n., a door-way.
Daung-kV'-diin, n., a batten.
[Cf. Burm., tank'd £ a door;’
Manip., t'ong ; Tliib.,
gau ; ‘ a door ;* Chinese,
gud ; Mikir, mg'dp ; Ka-
ga, ki-k'd, k‘aru.~\
Dawn", n., a blanket.
D £ awn", n., the leg.
[Cf. Chepang, dom; Lep.
cha, dyeing .]
Dawn (1), v., to be idle.
Dayaw nauk (2), v ., to mock.
[Burm., tharawd]
De (1), v ., to roof (a house.)
Dek(e) (1), v., to be soft.
[Cf. Manip., t'ot.]
D £ ek, n., the earth, ground ;
pomb'oi-'sun —, the world ;
—pe", flat ground.
Chin and English.


[Cf. Lush., lei-diak, ‘ mud;’
Kami, d‘ek-kok, ‘ mud ; ’
Chinese, da, ti ; Cochin-
Chinese, dat.]
Beko, n., the Entada Purcae-
tha.
Ben (1), v., to deceive, to he
cunning.
Ben-do", n., a fire-fly.
[Cf. Mikir, ddm-pajuk.\
Beng (1), v., to beat, strike.
[Cf. Lush., deny ; Thib.
coll., Serpa, Bhut., Ma-
gar, dung ; Thib., dim ;
Chinese, tang.]
Bi (1), v., to roof (a house).
See De.
Bi (1), v., to winnow.
Bi-at (1), v., to cease.
Bidi-awn (1), v., to he silent.
Bk-e (1), v., to pinch.
Bi'k-doi, n., a tadpole.
Bin", n., a claw, nail.
[Cf. Lush., tin ; Bnrm.,
than.']
Bo (1), v., to sting; he daz-
zled.
[Cf. Burm. coll., tok ;
Burm., tup ; Chinese,
Pap.']
Bo' (1), v., to goto meet.
Bo'-e (1), v., to kneel.
[Cf. Khasia, dem; Burm.,
tup.']
Boi (1), v., to lay eggs.
Bok (2), v., to employ, send.
[Perhaps connected with
to, £ to send’, q.v.]
Bok-doi, n., a tadpole.
Bon, n., a sprig.
Bong or dong, n., a post.
Bong (1), v., to jump, spring.
[Cf. Bhimal, ton.]
Bii or di (1), v., to die.
[Probably related to t‘iik ;
‘to kill.’ Cf. Lush., Mi-
kir, tH ; Shandu, do ;
Kami, de ; Burm., the.]
Bddii, n., a slug,
Bd-e (1), v., to be hungry.
[Cf, Shandu, edu.]
Bun" (1), v., to stand; to set-
tle (of birds.)
Bdn"-na tank (2), v., to post-
pone.
[Cf. Newar, dong ; Lush.,
Lepcba, ding ; Thib.,
ten, ‘to halt;’ Burm.,
Paung, ‘ to erect.’]
Bon (1), v., to be convex.
Bun"-si-baung, n., a moment.
Bu"t (1), v., to press, shampoo.
[Cf. Burm., Pu, i to pound;’
Mikir, tok, c to pound;’
Thib., dung, c to pound.’]
But (1), v., to pare, slice.
Bwaung-d, postp., within.
E.
£ (1\ v. y to eat; e-e-yan,
food.
[Cf. Lush, ei. Perhaps
Thib., sell ; Limhu, die ;
Naga, chi ; Kiranti, Mi-
kir, c ho ; Th i b., zo ;
Manip., Burm., did ;
Chinese coll., chik.]
'Ek, n., dung, dirt, excre-
ment ; EPi •, rust.
[Cf. Lush., ek ; Kami, e;
Yayu, epi.\
'Ek-kun, n., a beetle.
En" (1), v., to lean, slant.
E" ‘se, n., a guest.
[Burm. coll., e-thi .]
Chin and English.


Galo, n., a ‘ kula,’ native of
India.
Gaw (1), v., to go round; to
coil, roll up.
[Cf. Newar, go-gu, ‘round;’
Manip., kei, ‘round;’
Thib., h‘or ‘a circle;’
Hhimal, gota, ‘round.’]
Gawt, n ., a sheath.
[Perhaps Naga, hud\
Gawt-‘maw, n., the beard.
[Cf. Shandu, ho-mi. Gawt
is perhaps connected with
the root ho, ‘ mouth.’]
Gleho", n., a thunderbolt,
(literally ‘ Gle’s tooth ’); a
celt.
Gle-nii shun(-u) (1), v., the
derbolt falls.
Gli, v., to trap.
G‘l6, n., air, wind. See k‘U.
G‘l6, v., koi (1), to belch.
G‘l6-a‘l6, n., the lee.
Glo-han, n., a fly (large kind).
Glu-glu p‘oi-p‘oi sit (1), v.,
stagger.
Gldn, n., a roof, thatch.
[Cf. Naga, g ; Manip.,
k ( dng.\
Gr.
Gliin-bon, n., the central
rafter,
[Cf. Manip., h ( dngnabui\
Go, postp., under.
[Cf. Manip., ma-fcd.]
Go",* adj., twenty.
[Cf. Manip., hid ; Singpho,
k‘un; Mik i r, inghoy ;
Gurung, huti ; Thib.,
h‘dl ; Tak p a, h‘ali ;
Shandu, h‘alpa.]
Gog ok, n., a snail.
Goik-‘sawk (2), v., to trespass
(as in a house).
Gon, n., a trigger-guard.
Gon-sale moi (1), v., to be
honourable.
[Burm., gun-thare. ]
Gyi, n., a horn.
[Cf, Burm., hr 6 ; Chinese
coll., Naga, hia ; Kami,
saki; Chinese, hah ; Ser-
pa, ar-hyoh; Garo, ho-
rong ; Balling, grong. ]
Gyi, n., a corner.
[Cf. Lush., hit.]
Gyi-yan, n., a sambdur;
[Prom gyi, ‘ a horn.’]
H.
Ha'', adj., ten (used by North-
ern Chins, probably a cor-
ruption of ‘ nga, q.v.).
Ha", n., gold.
Ha-e (1), v., to be thirsty.
[Cf. Lush., hdl ; Kami, hei\
Hak (2), v., to throttle.
Hak‘a, n., a jay.
Hakalun, adj., the whole,
entire.
[Chittagonian, hdkalun.{ ?)]
Hak-kyi, n., name of Nga
Thein’s bird.
Hame, n ., a chilly.
Han (1), v., to yawn.
[Cf. Lush., ham; Burm.,
ha ; Naga, he-hi.]
Hang (1), v., to he coarse; to
threaten.
* Northern Chin, kur.
Chin and English.


Ha"t, v., to be sharp, keen, po-
tent.
[Of. Balling, he.]
Han * (1), v ., to speak.
[Of. Chinese coll., hwa ;
Chinese, gwat ; Kami, hd ,
Lush., hau, ‘to abuse; ’
Bunn., haw , c to preach ; ’
Yayu, hot.
Hauk-kyit, adj ., fifty.
Haw or hawn, postp., over,
upon.
Haw, f adj., one.
[Cf. Kami, hd; Sun war,
Shandu, h‘d ; Yayu, ho ;
Lush., Magar, Lepcha,
hat; perhaps Thib., chig.]
Haw (1), v ., to feed (ani-
mals).
Haw" (1), v ., to be dry.
Haw-e (1), v ., to snatch,
seize; to obstruct, stop; to
cease.
Hawk (1), v., to roar (as a
barking deer).
[Burm., hauh.]
Hawk (2), v ., to prevent; to
protect.
[Of. Thib., hah ; Naga.,
h‘d.]
Haw-nii", n., a virgin.
Hek, n., a louse.
[Cf. Manip., hih.\
Hen (1), v., to capture (in
war).
Hen"-ho-e (1), v., to wor-
ship.
Hen, n., silver.
Hi (1), v., to cry out, scream.
[Cf. Burm., hi, ‘to neigh,
scream.’]
Hi" (1), v., to ask, demand,
question ; (also hi"-e).
[Cf. Balling, Dhimai, hi;
Chepang, hot ; Manip.,
haijd.]
Hi"-zan (1), v., to investi-
gate.
Ho (1), v., to sharpen, rub,
wipe.
Ho" (1), v., to be bad (used
only in conjunction with
‘si ").
Ho -a, n., jangle-fowl.
[Cf. Shandu, hod. j
H6-e (1), v., to scrape.
Hok (1), v., to pant.
Hok, n., peel, bark.
[Cf. Kiranti, hoh; Yayu,
hok-cho; Bailing, hoh-te.]
H6k‘a, n., the posteriors.
Hok'yet, n., a pheasant.
Holaih-a"n, n., hell.
Home, n., a tail.
[Cf. Lush., Kami, ame ;
Mikir, dr-me ; Naga,
Limbu, mi; Hhimal, md-
tong; Burm., amri.]
Hong", n., a tuskless male ele-
phant.
[Cf. Burm., haing.]
Hota", n., tomorrow,
Hii (1), v., to open.
Hii-hek (2), v., to be clever.
[Cf. Balling, Yayu, ho ;
Hhimal, he ; Lush., hong;
Manip., hang.']
Hii'-be k‘awn (1), v., to love
(poetical).
v., to scrape.
Hun-hiii n., dust.
[Cf. Khasia, puinpni.']
* Northern Chin, ha.
t Northern Chiu, hat.
9
Chin and English.


I.
I",* v., to sleep, lie down.
[Cf. Mikir, Kami, i ; Sun-
war, Limbu,
ipse ; Yayu, im.\
F-dlin-pauh, n., bed.
In, n., a house.
In-lCadiT, the back room.
In-‘sl, n., the back of a house ;
In-t‘6ng-m6n, an heir.
[Cf. Lush., in ; Khasia,
ung ; Kami, en ; Ma-
nip., yam ; Burm., im;
Limbu, him; Mikir, hem;
Mm, kin ; Sak, kyin ;
Kiranti, ¥um; Chepang,
Thib., Bhut, k‘yim\ Sun-
war, ki; Naga, Thochu,
k‘i ; Chinese, ke.~\
In-ditdt, n., a house lizard.
Ingoi, n., a brother-in-law.
Im-laih, n., a floor (bamboo).
Lpd-i pauh, n ., love-making.
K.
K‘a (1), v., to shut, prevent.
[Cf. Lush., ka" ; Naga, k‘d;
Burai., kd; Khas i a,
Mikir, k‘ang.]
K‘a, n., a clothe’s louse.
K‘adeng, n., a chair; bed-
stead.
[From Burm. coll., k‘adin,
‘ a bedstead.’]
K t adii / , n., a room (the inner
one).
[Cf. Burm., k‘an, ‘ a room.’]
Kak f (2), v., to cry, weep.
[Of. Bodo, Kiranti, Manip.,
kdp ; Singpho, krdp ; Lu-
shai, tap ; Newar, ¥wo ;
Kaga, kra; Dliimal, kdr ;
Kami, ¥di\
K‘ak (1), v., to awaken.
[Cf. Lush., kai-tan.~\
Ka"k (2), v., to separate, dif-
fer ; to toss in the air (as
rice).
[Cf, Manip., Chinese coll.,
k‘ai; Bum,, k'wa' ;
Thib., coll., gau ; Thib.,
k‘yed .]
Kako", n., a shell.
K‘ak‘6, n., the hot weather.
[Cf. Magar, kan, * hot;’
Kewar, kwa', 1 hot.’]
Kalako, n ., a scorpion.
Ka-lu"-lut, adv., slowly. See
nnder T.
[Cf. Naga, reW.\
Kalut-a tank (2), V, to invert.
Kan" (1), v., to be well.
. [Cf. Kami, kaung (?).]
Kana, adv., distinctly, loudly.
Kan-dan, n., a waterfall.
Kang (1) v., to respect.
[Cf. Chinese coll., kung.'j
Kang (1), v., to be clear,
pure ; to be hard.
Of. Chinese, kong ; Mikir,
kdng-tdngi]
Kan"-t‘et (1), v., to have scro-
fula.
* Northern Chin, ip.
t Northern Chin, kap.
Chin and English.


Kanyit-kapyit moi (2), v., to
he dirty.
[Cf. Burm., coll., nyit.\
Kan // -zan // , n., the breast (of
human beings.)
[Cf. Manip., k‘dm; Naga,
kd.]
Kanzana-hen, n., revenue.
[Erom the Hindustani.]
Ka-sdng-ka-pan''' sit (1), v., to
stagger.
K‘at-tak, n., an oar.
[Burm. coll., k ( at-tak. J
Ka-tn-galii, adv., dirtily.
K £ atya // , n., brass.
[Burm., k e atyd, ‘ pinch-
bek.’]
Kauk-tu, n., two days hence.
Kaung, n., an outpost;
sentry-box.
Kaung nu"t (1), v., to watch,
keep guard.
[Burm., kang.]
Kaw'', v., to have fever.
[Cf. Naga, ki-pe.]
K‘aw (1), v., to appoint.
[Burm., k‘an.]
K £ aw" (1), v., to cut in two,
cut off, lop.
[Cf. Chinese, kat ; Burm.,
coll., kot; Burm., k‘up ;
Manip., kak ; Lepcha,
kid.]
K £ aw-do, n., the lower jaw,
chin.
[Cf. Chepang, kamtyo;
Manip., k‘addng ; Dhi-
mal, kdtd.]
Kaw-e (1), v., to adhere, to
smart.
[Cf. Burm., kau, £ glue. ’]
Kawk or kwoik (2), v., to shoot;
to happen, take place.
[Cf. Kami, lean ; Sliandu
kd ; Lush., kdp ; Thib.,
gyap; Naga, hi.]
Kawk (2), ©., to pick up.
[Burm., kauk .]
Kawk (2), v ., to carry on the
shoulder.
[Of. Thib., coll., ; Ya-
yu, kuk ; Bahing, kur .]
K‘aw"k (2), v., to shiko.
K £ awn (1), v., to he empty.
Kawn, n., betel (the plant).
[Burm., kwan,]
Kawn (1), v., to descend,
go down.
[Cf. Manip., kum ; Dhimal,
ku ; Lush, ke ; Chinese
coll., kiang ,]
K £ awn, v., to reject, oppose.
[Burm., k‘an. Cf. Chinese
coll., kan .]
K‘awn (1), v., to meet, see.
[Cf. Dhimal, k l dng .]
K‘awn (1), v., to receive, bear,
suffer, support.
[Of. Burm., Chinese coll.,
. k‘an ]
K £ awn-e (1), v., to cohabit,
have sexual intercourse.
K £ awng (1), v., to crow.
Kaw-‘siin, n ., onion ; —— bo,
garlic.
[Cf. Chinese, coll., kiu,
‘ leeks/ and sien, ‘ wild
onions. ’]
n., a thief.
[Burm., k‘6-thu. ]
K'e-'mliing", n., a bullet.
Kla''' (1), v., to elapse.
[Cf. Burm., kyd ; Chinese,
coll., kin.]
Klan, n., a fence.
[Burm., kran.']
Chin and English.


Klan (1), v., to intend.
[Burm., krani]
Klang, n., the cross-bar of a
cross-bow.
Klan-glo, n., a ground lizard.
Klan-nii shun (I), to take
an oath.
[Bronx Burm., kyam-fo.]
Klauh", n., a muscle, nerve,
vein.
[Cf. Burm., kraw ; Manip.,
sin-gli .]
Klauk (2 ), v., to fall.
[Of. Lush., thd, tldyh ; Ka-
mi, hid ; Lepcba, Mikir,
klo ; Burm., krd ; Naga,
krd ; Tbib., gyel ; Burm.
coll., did ; Cbepang,
chon.]
K\e (1), v., to know, remem-
ber.
[Of. Tbib., k‘yen .]
Kie-sen, n ., copper.
[Of. Burm., kye ; Kami, ke-
rnel ; Shandu, kan.
Klen-kwong, n. } noose.
Klen-‘mun, n., a looking-glass.
KTi, n., the wind, air. See
eflo.
[Cf. Lusb., tli\ Naga, ti-
krd ; Taungtbu, Gyar.,
tali'. ; Kami, ali; Mru,
rali ; Shandu, lip i ;
Burm., le; Murmi, laba;
TJiib. coll ., ( la kpa; Tbib.,
lung ; Serpa, Blnit, lung.]
KTing, postp., upon, over.
Kling-gling (1), v., to be brit-
tle.
Kling-so', n., a bell.
Klin-so, n., a blister.
KTb, n., the m.oon ; a month.
KT6-goi, n., the new moon.
KT6-sbut, n., the waning of
the moon.
KTo-tB, the waxing of the
moon.
[Cf. Lush., Cbepang, tla'\
Naga, krd ; Shandu, ¥la-
pu ; Kami, lan ; Murmi,
la-ni ; Gurung, lan-ngi ;
Tbib., Lirnbu, Lepcba,
lava ; Taungtbu, lu ;
Takpa, le ; Manyak, He ;
Manip., t‘d is pexdxaps a
corruption of lid. The
late Sankrit glau is pro-
bably from this root.]
KT6, n., the spiiat, soul, ghost.
[Bi’obably the same root as
kli\ i wind,’ { air.’ Cf.
Lush., tldran.]
KT6, n., the stocks.
KT6-wa-tauk (2), v., to put in
the stocks.
Kl6-e (1), v., to cheat, be
miserly.
[Cf. Kbasia, klop.\
KTo-k‘6, n., a salary.
Klong (1), v.f to herd.
[Burm., kyaung.]
Klong, n., a furrow.
[Burm., kyaung.]
KTosbun, or kT6- c siin, n .,
midnight, the midnight
watch. See Klukshiin.
K‘l6-‘sun, n., the bamboo staff
held over the deceased when
their spirits are called.
Klu-e (1), v., to roar (as a
tiger).
Kluk (2), v., to grind (as
paddy).
Kluk (2), »., to lose.
[Cf. Tlxib., Idk ; Lush., at-
lau, ‘mislaid.’]
Chin and English.


KTiik" (2), v., to fall.
[Probably allied to hid, q.v.\
KTukshiln, n., midnight.
Kldn (1), v.f to dive ; to set,
(as the sun).
KTiing, n ., a lump, hard thing.
KTiing" (1), v., to stamp (as
children).
Ko", adj., nine.
[Cf. Burm., ho ; Lush, hd-a;
Murmi, huh ; Horpa, go ;
Kami, ta-haw , Thib,
Bhut., gu ; Thib. coll.,
Serpa, guh ; Chepang,
tahu ; Chinese, hu; Sing-
pho, tse-h’u.\
K‘6, n., the sky.
K‘6-tin" (1), v., to be overcast.
K‘6-wa" (1), v., to dawn.
K‘6-taung-don, n. the morn-
ing watch.
[Of. Bodo, h'6-rang ; Horpa,
ho ; Gy ami, h'en; Thib.,
h e a; Burm., haung-kangi]
K 6 (1), v., to be slack,
K £ 6 (1), v., to be bitter.
[This root is found in the
form h l d in Thibetian
and all the Himalayan
languages, except Hor-
pa ; also in Burmese, Lu-
shai, and cognate lan-
guages.]
K‘o" (1), v., to sit.
Ko (1), v. f to be scared.
K‘6 (1), v.f to be able, can.
[Cf. Chinese, h e 6; Lepcha,
h'u', Naga, ho, ‘power.’]
Ko, postp., without.
K6-be", n., a stirring-stick.
K6-bi", n., a weapon.
K‘6-e (1), v.f to sew, unite
with.
K‘6-e-gl6n, n., a seam.
K6-hi, n., a sieve.
Koi (1), v.f to ascend; climb
up.
[Cf. Kaga haw; Chinese'
coll., h‘ii\
K‘6i, n., half.
[Burm,, hwei\
K‘6i (1), v.f to assess.
[Burm., h‘we.\
Ko'"-!, n., customary law.
K‘6"-i, n., a bee (also h‘o" ;) —
nu'-ldn , a queen bee, — hya,
— hat, a honeycomb with-
out honey.
K‘o"-i-haung", n., honey.
[Cf. Manip., ho-i; Kami*
hoi ; Shandu, hi ; Naga,
ma-hioi; Lush., h‘waii\ 1
K‘o"-i-T6-i, n., a wasp.
K‘o"-i-z6, n., a swarm of bees..
[Cf. Naga, ma-hwi-tso. ]
Kok-lok (1), v.f to bend, be*
crooked.
[Cf. Serpa, hoh-loh; Limbu,.
hohta ; Murmi, hohteng ;
Chinese, h‘oh; Lepcha,
hoi; Thib., hyoh; Burm., ;
Shandu, hauh ; Mikir,
he-heh; Lush., Kami,
hoi; Manip., Idoli]
Ko"-kyit, j ground.. adj.,
ninety.
K6-I6ng, n., diarrhoea.
K‘6l6ng, n., footsteps, tracts.
Komawn, n., a weapon.
K‘6-mi, n., the ankle.
[Cf. Manip., fru-miti]
Ko-min-ko, n., the third
finger.,
[Cf. Manip., hutning t e au.\
Ko-mi-iT, n., the first finger.,
[Of. Kami, haw-mu.\
Chin and English.


Ko"n, n., high ground.
[Cf. Burm. coll., kon .]
K £ o"n, or *k £ o // , n., the foot.
K £ o // -nii // , n ., tbe big toe. See
under ku't.
[Cf. Manip., ¥ong ; Sing-
pbo, la-gong ; Chinese
coll., kid; Horpa, ho;
Tbocbu ,jako ; Sak, ¥6ll,
Kami, ¥6 ; Mm, ¥auk;
Taungtbu, ¥an; Tbib.
coll., Serpa, kang 6 ;
Tbib., hang pa; Mikir,
keng ; Lusb., ke ; Burm.,
¥ye ; Chinese, kakd]
K6n-do"n-da-lan, n., tbe
second finger.
K £ o"ng (1), v., to pare the
nails.
Kong (1), v., to crow, bellow.
See kaiong .
K £ 6ng (1), to be thin.
[Of. Kami, ¥6n ; Manip.,
kangd]
K6-ngaw-s6, n., childhood.
K £ oni", n., sun ; — kliln, sun-
set ; — akyen, afternoon;
— ‘sun, noon ; — ayo"h 6-e,
to be a balo round tbe sun.
[Cf. Kami, kani ; Naga, ko-
‘nd £ day Gyar., kini;
Lush., ni ; Mikir, dr-ni ;
Burm., ne; Serpa, m'mo;
Bhiit., nyim; Tbib., Man-
yak, nyima; Cbepang,
nyam; Limbu, Kiranti,
Magar, nam; Sun war,
nd; Naga, tindki.']
Konk £ o" n., a bole.
[Cf. Manip., kom\ Lusb.,
kong-kd, £ a door ’; kdi,
‘ a holeKami, a¥au ;*
Limbu, Jiongd]
n., the forest fire.
Kon-saung'', n., a bund (in a
field).
[Burm. coll., ha-sind]
K £ 6-p £ 6n, n., tbe sole of tbe
foot.
K £ 6-san, n., a toe.
K‘o- £ sun, n., noon.
K £ o // -tnttald',w., a bumble bee.
K £ o // zeng-u, n., a bornet.
Ku (1), v., to cross oyer (a
river).
[Of. Burm., kuJ]
K £ d", n., smoke.
[Of. Lusb., Burm., ¥6;
Naga, ku ; Yaya, kulu.]
K £ li (1), v., to carry an um-
brella, &c.
K £ d // -i (1), v., to bend.
Kulun-kak‘ye, n., name of
one of tbe pigs killed at a
Cbin wedding.
Ku'-'ma, n., one kind of
mange.
K £ un (1), v., to tie, to fasten.
[Of. Lusb., him ; Burm.,
kyan; Limbu, kyik .]
K £ un" (1), v., to cover.
[Of. Manip., ¥um ; Mikir,
d-kup .]
Kun" (1), v., to stoop.
[Of. Burm., kun\ Chinese,
hung ; Lusb., kun , £ to
nod.’]
Kun, n., a year.
[Of. Lusb., hum ; Sbandu,
kon.~\
K £ un", n., tbe semi-mytbieal
founders of the clan.
* K‘ has the Ai’abic f ain sound.
Chin and English.


K 4 un"-mm-zan, n., the prin-
cipal of them.
K ‘un"-daung-lan, n., the front
room of a house.
K 4 un-e (1), v., to shrivel.
K 4 undong, n., a house post.
Kun-so, n ., an insect.
Ku- 4 nu"n, n., the fist.
Kun-ziP, n., the heel.
Ku"t, n., the hand.
KiCt-nii", n., the thumb.
n ., the little finger.
[Cf. Kami, Lush., Manip.,
hut ; Ghepang, hut-fa ;
Yayu, got ; Limhu, pa-
hura, ‘arm Magar, hut;
Limhu, huh ; Sak, Shan-
du, Kiranti, hui\
n., the nail. See
Din.
[Cf. Lush, hut-tin .]
Ku't-kfiung, n., the back of
the hand.
Ku"t-k‘ye, n., the wrist.
[Cf. Lush., hut-tchang;
JSTaga hre in hi-krei\
Ku"t-p‘6, n., the palm of the
hand.
[Cf. Manip., h ( abdh ; Lush,,
hut-pai\
K 4 ut-byaw (1), v., to worship.
Ku"t-pyin, n., the knuck-
les.
Ku'P-Pok, n., an assistant.
[Burm. coll., let-Vauh. ]
Ku-ze, n., hoof.
Ku-zit or k 4 oi-zit, n ., a ring,
Kwang, n ., a 4 kwin.’
[Burm,, hwang. ]
Kya, n., a lily.
[Burm., hya. ]
K 4 ya-ba, adv ., never.
K‘yan (1), v., to cut into
shape, trim with a knife; to
point; to graze.
[Cf. Burm., hrwan .]
Kyan-dan (1), v., to he harsh.
[Burm, coll., hyan-dan. ]
K 4 yan-k 4 yan, adv., repeatedly.
Kyau, n., a mountain, hill.
[Cf. Shandu, hlo-pi; Burm.,
hyaw, ‘back, ‘ridge;’
perhaps h‘ru in Kaga,
chaguh’ru. ]
Kyau-kyet, n., a valley.
[As to hyet see under hdh ,
supra. ]
Kyaung-pauh, n., a demon.
K 4 yau" (-nil), adv., violently.
K 4 yaw, n., the bowels.
K 4 yaw-s6 (1), v., to have a
stomach-ache.
Kyaw (1), v., to mistake.
[Burm., hyaw, 4 to exceed.’]
Kyawn, n., an island.
[Burm., hywan. ]
Kyawn (1), v., to know ; to he
acquainted with.
[Burm., hyivani]
Kye (ka), pro., I.
[Cf. Lush., hema; Shandu,
harna; Kami, he; Taung-
thu, hwa ; Dhimal, Tho-
chu, ha; Yayu, Balling,
Lepcha, and Sunwar, go.
(Perhaps ultimately con-
nected with wide-spread
root nga). j
Kye, v., to he horn (of,
birds); he hatched, come
out.
[Cf. Thib., hye; Lepcha,
gyeh ; Kaga, haw.]
K 4 ye or K 4 yi, n., (1) a loin-
cloth ; (2) a paso.
Chin and English.


Kye- a c si, n., a small leopard.
[Erom akye , £ a tiger ; ’ d-
lsi, ‘ a star.’
K £ yed6h, n., the left (side).
K £ ye-k £ yaung or k £ ye-k £ yan,
n ., anklet.
[Burmese coll., kyekyin.
Anklets are not com-
monly worn by the
Chins.]
Kye-kV'n, n. 3 a prawn.
[Cf. Lush., kai-kaung ;
Kami, kai-sum.\
Kyen or kyen, n., the waist,
loins.
[Cf. Tbib., kyed ; Naga,
che.]
Kyen (1), v., to dazzle.
Kyen-kwat, n. 3 a certain kind
of orchid.
Kyen-sen, n. 3 a belt (such as
is worn by Chin women).
K £ yet (1), v. 3 to bold, pinch.
[Cf. Lush., tchel ; Chinese,
k ap.]
Kyet-16k, n., a chameleon.
K £ yetpaw, n., 6 pyingado,’
iron-wood.
K £ yet-pu, n., a friend.
K £ yet-pu-saih (1), v., to make
friends.
[Cf. Burm., kyak , * to be
acquanted,’ £ familiar.’
Perhaps, Tbib., tokpu .]
K e yi, n., a socket.
Kyk (1), v., to be frightened ;
to lie afraid.
[Cf. Th i b., ;Y, ‘ fear ;*
Limbu, Manip., ki.]
K‘yi" (1), v. f to point out, de-
signate.
Kyi" (1), v., to be difficult; be
scarce.
[Cf, Chinese coll., ki;
Kami, k‘d', Burm., k‘ak ;
Tbib., kak.]
Kyi-gon, n. See Kye-k £ o"n.
Kyin, n ., time.
[Of. Burm., kyin.]
Kyin (1), «?., to think,
[Cf. Burm., kyan.]
K £ yin-e (1), v., to celebrate a
marriage festival.
Kyit-tu, n., the day after
to-morrow.
Kyok (1), v., to kick.
[Burmese, ky au k. Cf.
Manip., kan.\
Kyon-kyen (1), v. 3 to be ac-
quainted.
[Burm. coll., kyun-kywin.]
K'yiin, n. 3 bush.
[Burm., ¥run.]
K c yiit (1), v., to govern.
[Burm., k‘yup. Cf. Tbib.,
gyur.]
K £ yiit-tauk (2), v., to confine.
[Burm., k‘yup-t‘d.]
L.
La (1), «?., should, must; (2)
to be practicable ; (3) to be.
[Cf. Eurm., ra ; Tbib., Id.']
Labo (1), v. } to follow, ac-
company.
Labs, n., mud.
La-bon, n., the neck. See
A‘lu.
La-bon-p'ffi, n., goitre.
[Burm., lan-hang.]
Chin and English.


Ld-ha-su or lahat, n., a cot-
ton spindle ; reel.
[Cf. Lush., Id-her ; Burm.,
rahat.]
Lai fl), v., to be brave,
courageous.
[Cf. Shandu, rai ; Burm.,
re ; Naga, ka-re-zd ; Ka-
mi, yi.
‘Lai (1), v., to take off.
Laih, n., a paddy-field.
[Cf. Burm., lay ; Thib., Id’,
Lush., la, ‘ land ;’ Naga,
le.]
Laih-gogok, n ., a snail.
Laip‘an, n., mange.
Lamfi, n., an omen.
Lan, n., a leader, chief.
[Cf. Lush., Idl.]
Lang, n., a husband; (used
only in the phrase lung-
p l ayd, ‘ husband and wife ’).
[Burm., I any .]
Lang" (1), v., to surround.
Lank on, n., a cymbal.
[Burm., coll., let kwin .]
Lapan, adj., right (side).
Lat-k‘awn (1), v., to accept,
(as a petition).
[Burm., lak-k‘an.]
‘Lauh (1), v.f to paddle; n., a
paddle.
[Cf. Burm., ‘law; Chi-
nese coll., Id; Chinese
lot.]
‘Lauk-‘le, n., a bridge.
Laung-do", n., a vulture.
Lau-p‘aih (1), v ., to be
talkative.
Law, n., a leaf; any thing
flat, a rupee.
[Cf. Gurung lau ; Kami, ld % ,
Yayu, Mikir, Chepang,
Id ; Thib .,ldma ; Singpho,
lap ; Dhimal, ‘ldv a ;
Bodo, Hai ; Magar, Id ;
Mru, ardm ; Taungthu,
le ; Garb, le-chak.]
‘Lawk v., (1) to send, de-
spatch; (2) to release.
[Burm., Hwat. ]
Lawn, n., a path, road.
[Cf. Kami, lawn ; Kewae,
lon ; Lepcba, Idm ; Che-
pang, liamy Thib., Bhnt.,
Serpa, Limbu, Kiranti,
Magar, Burm., Singpho,
lam ; Sak, I dag ; Takpa,
lemdaung ; Sun war, Id,
Shandu, Id’, Chinese coll.,
lu.]
Lawn (1), v., to twist.
[Cf. Burm., lun.]
Lawn" (1), v., to dance.
[Cf. Lush., lom, lam\
Kami, m’lan ; Naga, me-
law.]
Lawn tank (2), v., to plait.
[Cf. Burm., lun.]
Le, n., a debt.
Lemon, n., a creditor.
Le- bii-e a debtor.
[Of. Chepang, U, ‘to bor-
row.’]
Le", v., to write.
[Cf. Lush., lai ; Chepang,
Burm., re ; Naga, ru .]
Le" (1), v., to search.
‘Le (1), v., to buy.
[Cf. Lush., Shandu, Manip.,
le. Probably connected
with Id, * to take.’]
‘Lek (2), v., to joke; to
mock.
‘Len (1), v., to wave, brandish.
‘Len (1), v., to surround.
10
Chin and English.


‘Lbn (1), v., to be large, big,
[Cf. Kami, len; Shandu,
e-lai; Lush., ‘ rol .]
Le-‘ne, n., a pleader, advocate.
Le-‘ne-i6 (1), v. } to appoint
as pleader.
[Burm., ‘re-ne.]
Lbng (1), v., to knock against,
hit.
[Of. Lush., tleng 4 to arrive;’
Thib., lep * to arrive.’]
Lep-pyan, n ., an armadillo.
Let-p‘ai-u, n ., a ground-nut.
Let-‘se", n., catch.
‘Li, n ., the creator of man-
kind.
[Of. Thib., Hd; Manip.,
Id A.]
‘Li (1), v., to deceive ; ‘U-si
gil k‘laung ", a liar; ‘U-nd
wu', to persuade.
[Of. Burm., coll., U; Shan-
du, ‘ri ; Lush., mi-lep ;
Burm., Han.]
‘Li-16 (I), v., to coax
Ling-e, v., to plant (as paddy).
Ling-saw", n., a caterpillar.
[Cf. mling-bahi , ‘ an ant.’
Ling evidently means
insect, though it is not
used separatelv.]
Lit, the scale (of a fish).
[ Cf. Mikir, dlip.]
‘Li-ti'n, postp., like, resem-
bling.
L 6, n., mud.
L 6 (1), v., to come.
[Of. Taungthu, lone;
Lush., 16 ( aux . verb),
Kami, lau; Burm., Id;
Gyami, le ; Manip., Idk.]
‘L6 (1), v., to be distant.
[Cf. Lush., ‘ld; Lepcha, uu.\
‘Lo", n., a shield.
[Of. Burm., ‘lwd.\
Lobo, n., mud. See Labd,
‘L6-e (1), v., to alter.
[Of. Burm., Hwe.]
£ L6-e (1), v., to roll (in the
dust).
Lo-e (1), v., to bring, take.
[Cf. Manip., lau; Mikir,
long, ‘to obtain;’ Kami,
Shandu, Singpho, Lush.,
Id; Chepang, U; Magar,
lid; Limbu, le; Thib.,
Bhiit., len; Naga, le , ‘to
accept, ‘take.’]
L6-i (1), v., to be easy.
[Of. Lush,, hel; Naga me-
li ; Thib., Idra ; Burm.,
hoe.]
Lok, n., a puddle.
‘ Lok* (2), v., to be hot; am-
lii'ng—, to be anxious.
[Cf. Lepcha, ‘ ru; Lush.,
lum; Serpa, ha-ldn; Mur-
mi, Naga, le; Bahing,
gld; Naga, ne-law ‘to
bask.’]
‘Long (1), v. f to tease.
[Burm., Hating.]
‘Long (1), v., to store up.
[Burm., Hating.]
Long (1), v., to flow (as
water).
[Cf. perhaps Chinese, liu.]
Long (1), v., to bet.
[Burm., laung.]
Long (1), v., to be wild, sav-
age ; Asho" a wild Chin.
[Cf. Burm., raing.]
* Northern Chin, lek.
Chin and English.


L6n- £ maw, n., a hairy cater-
pillar.
Lii-e (1), v., to want, to lack,
be wanting.
[Cf. Burm., 16.]
4 Lii, postp., like, resembling.
See ‘Li-un.
[Cf. Lepcha, Burm., coll.,
lo.]
e Lu-i- £ lan, n ., a nettle.
£ Liik (2), v., to split.
[Cf. Lush., Hai ; Chinese,
lit; Burm., Hi, ‘to slice.’]
Lun (1), v., to be round.
[Cf. Burm., lun; Chinese,
lun , £ a wheel.’]
Lun, n ., a court.
[Burm., rund\
Lun'' (1), v,, to be enough.
[Burm., hm. Cf. Thib.,
yong.]
‘Lun-b s oi, n., a fern.
‘Lun-e, v., to shake, (as a
dog’s tail.)
c Liing (1), v., to be high;
(fig.) to be victorious.
[Cf. Chinese, Hung.']
Lut- e saung, v ., to create.
[Burm. coll., ( saung.]
‘Lwang (1), v ., to expel.
[Cf. Burm., Hwang , e to
blow away.’]
M.
Ma" (1), v., to drive.
[Cf. Burm., maung.]
Maih-haw (1), v., to abort.
‘Mak (1), v., to know.
£ Mak-e (1), v ., to be acquaint-
ed.
[Cf. Burm., ‘mat, ‘ to think,’
£ be of opinion.’]
Maku", n., tobacco.
Maku"-ku"t, n., tobacco-ashes.
Maku"-yon, n., a tobacco
plant.
Maku"-shaw, n., a cheroot.
Maku"-law, w., tobacco leaf.
[Erom the Hindustani. Cf.
Thib., t‘a-mak‘a; Shan-
du, omd-kauk; Chepang,
mingo.]
£ Ma-16ng, n., a scar.
Maih, n., indigo.
[Burm., me.]
£ Ma- £ lut, n., a boil.
£ Man-shing, n., the wood-
apple.
[Cf. Burm., ‘man.]
Manzan, n., a nettle (large
kind).
‘Mau (1), v., to be wrong, to
sin.
[Of. Burm., ‘ma\ Naga ,mu,]
Maung, n., a dream.
Example : ka maung ka
‘mu-yu, ‘ I dream.’
[Cf. Lepcha, mong ; Lush.,
mdng ; Mikir, e-rndng ;
Naga, ‘mo; Bodo, si-
mdng.]
Maung (1), v ., to revolve.
Maung-baw-ha", n ., gold kept
hereditarily by Chins.
Maw, n ., a bead.
Mawn (1), v., to hold, seize,
grasp, catch.
[Cf. Lush., Manip., muni]
‘Mawn (1), v., to be true,
honest, permanent.
[Burm., ‘man].
c Mawn-gawn, adv., in front.
[Cf. Lush., £ md-thd; Ma-
nip., ma-mdngd\
Chin and English.


Mawt (1), v ., to tumble.
Me (1), v., to be stable, firm.
[Of. Burm., mye; Naga,
ke-me-ti .]
Me' 7 , n., fire.
Me' 7 -bahi' 7 , n. y a spark.
Me' 7 -d6n, n., a flame.
Me' 7 -dsng, n., the nipple of a
gun.
[This root runs through all
the allied languages, ex-
cept Sak, Sokpu, and
some dialects of Naga.]
Me' 7 -k‘a-liin, n., a flint.
[Cf. Lush., me-k'aw-lung ;
Burm., mi-k‘at\,
Me' 7 -k‘u 7 , n., smoke.
M&n, n., a rattan..
Mena, n., a pine-apple.
Meng' 7 (1), v., to make a sound
(particularly of birds); to
quack, &c.
[Cf. Burm., myan\
‘Meng, w., ink.
[Burm., * many ].
Meng' 7 -g6 (1), v., to groan.
[Cf. Lepcha, ngd .]
Menglen, n., a tamarind.
Me' 7 -6 (1), v ., the fire burns.
Me' 7 -sa, n ., tinder.
Me' 7 -‘sauh' 7 , n., a torch.
Me' 7 ‘sT 7 (i), v., to set fire to.
‘Mi (1), v ., to pain.
Minzan, n., a cat.
[Cf. Kami, mdn-cho ; Mru,
ta-myin ; Sokpa, Bhut,
si-mi ; Mik i r, meng ;
Lhimal, men-k'au .J
Mi-u 7 , n., a race, tribe.
[Cf. Chinese, mi-u; Burm.,
my 6. J
Mlaih, n ., the navel.
Mlaiti-e (1), v., to love.
[Cf. (perhaps) Chepang,
‘marl.]
Mlaih-k‘o 77 , n., the eye (of a
needle).
Mlak, n., grass.
[Burm., mrakP\
Mlaung' 7 , w., a shoal (not
covered by water).
[Cf. Mikir, mili.]
Mlaung (1), v., to be bright.
Mlaung"-sadu", n., a wag-
tail.
Mlawk (1), v ., to wander
about.
[Cf. Burm. coll., ( le; Lush.,
I eng ; Naga, rd.]
Mle-e (1), v., to lick.
[Of. Chepang, lyem, ‘to
taste.*]
‘Mlem-ba (1), v., to touch.
Mle-mlak nauk (2), v ., to
praise.
Mien (1), v., to touch.
[Cf. Bailing, lim.'j
‘Mleng n. t a rafter.
Mli-in, n., a cocoon.
MTi 77 *, adj ., four.
[Cf. Kami, mle; Manip.,
mari ; Singpho, meli ;
Murmi, bli; (Tuning, pit;
Sak, pri\ Lush., Lepcha,
pali\ Mikir, p‘ili; Mru,
tali] Limbu, U\ Burm.,
le; Horpa, ‘ld ; Thib.,
bzhi.']
Mlik, (1) n., to be small;
slender.
[Cf. Thib., n-lik; Kiranti,
(Chhingtdngya), mik'd \
* Northern Chin, ‘U.
Chin and English.


M‘li"-kyit, ndj., forty.
Mlin (1), v ., to be pleasant to
the taste.
[Burm., mm.]
Mling-pak‘6n, n., a large black
ant.
Mling-bahi", n., an ant (small
black variety).
Mling-sen, n., a red ant.
[Cf. Lush., ling-kin ; Che-
pang,pling, ‘an insect ; J
Kami, pa-lm.]
Ml 6 (1), v., to vomit.
[Cf. Lush., lo ; Naga,
merre ; Balling, me.']
Mlo", n., poison used for ar-
rows.
‘MI6 (1), v., to slit.
Mlong, n., a ditch.
[Burm., mraung. j
Mid', n., a town.
Mld'-aung-o, n., a raven.
Mld'-dt, n., a Myook.
Mid'.wan, n ., a Deputy Com-
missioner.
[Burm., mro .]
‘Min or ‘min', n ., a boat;
canoe.
[Cf. Burm., He, laung ;
Lush., long ; Kami,
mlong; Mikir, te-long ;
Shandu,paZ<m; Singpho,
li; Naga, ru ; Gurung,
plava ].
‘Mid (1), v., to pray, (Chris-
tian usage).
Mldk (1), v., to sink.
[Cf. Manip., lup; Burm.,
mrup; Lush., let.]
Mo or mu (1), aux, v., to re-
peat, continue. Used only
as an auxiliary. See Gram.
[Cf. Manip., amuk, ‘again.’]
Mo-(a), postp., near, to the
presence of.
Moi (1), v.y to be, exist.
[Of. (perhaps) Manip., woi\
Yaya, mu, ‘ to dwell.’]
Moi (1), v., to bear, (to bring
forth.)
[Burm., mwe.]
Moi, v., to be happy.
[Burm., mwe.]
Mo-i (1), v., to be faint.
[Cf. Burm., mu ; Lush., mu,
‘ to sleep.’]
‘Moi-san, n., the face.
[Cf. Lush., ‘moi; Manip.,
Kami, mai; Chinese,
mien. J
‘M oin-tin-dun, n., a cemetery,
i.e., the place where the
body is burnt.
Mok-shdn (1), v., to plant (as
seed in a taungya).
M6-m6n-‘maw, n., the mous-
taches.
Mon, n., an owner (used as an
affix, thus : in-mon , * a
house-owner’) ; a person,
e.g., ndn-mon, a villager.
Mon-dauh-nu", n, the dusky
hamadryad.
Mong, n., a gong.
Mong-tun" (1), v., to strike a
gong.
[Burm., maung.]
M6n-m6i (1), v., to be dim.
M6n‘s6, n., a relation.
M6n‘s6-‘san-e (1), v., to be re-
lated.
M6nt‘en, n., one who knows
the traditions.
‘M6-p‘aya, n., name of one of
the pigs killed at a Chin
wedding.
Chin and English.


Mu, n., a stump.
‘Md (1), v ., to see.
[Cf. Lush., ‘mu.]
Mug (1), v., to be dark ; to be
stupid.
[Cf. Burm., maik ; Thib.,
mun.]
*Mu- £ mawk (2), v., to vex,
annoy.
Mun (1), v., to be giddy.
Mun (1), v ,, to hate,
[Burm., mun.\
Mun" (1), v., to break.
Mun-t‘en, n., a storm, squall.
[Burm., muniaing.]
Mii-shu", n., a hunter.
[Burm., mu-ch‘6.]
*Mut (1), v., to blow with the
mouth, to whistle,
[Burm., ‘mut.]
‘Mut, n., the guts, entrails;
the bile,
Mya, n., a slave.
[Cf. Kami, md-shdung.]
Myak, n ., a skein.
Myan (1), v., to forgive,
pardon, be merciful.
[Cf. Chinese coll., mien.]
Myan" (1), v., to rot.
*Myan (1), v., to unfold.
'Myan-e (1), v., to stretch.
Myau or man (1), v., to be
stunned, to faint.
[Cf. Burm., maw.]
£ Myaw (1), v., to tickle.
Myawn (lj, v., to sip; swal-
low.
Myen-da-hoi, n ., a swing.
£ Myin (1), v ,, to be ripe; to
be cooked. E.g., hu'-a'n haw
‘myin , £ long enough to cook
a pot of rice.’
[Cf. Lush., min ; Lepcha,
myen ; Thochu, Singpho,
Murmi, min ; Magar,
mincho ; Thib., sminho ;
Manip., mun; Burm.,
‘man ; Naga me.]
£ Myit (1), v., to extinguish.
[Cf. Manip., mut ; Lepcha,
mdk ‘ to die.’]
£ My6, n., a gad-fly.
Myo-e (1), v., to thieve, to
steal.
Myok, n., the north.
[Burm., myaup.]
‘Myiin (1), v. } to point,
sharpen.
£ Myut (1), v., to blow from
the mouth, whistle.
See £ Mut.
IST.
Nagun"-hang, n., a rainbow.*
[Of., Chinese, hung.]
Nahoi, nahyaw, pron ., they,
two; they.
Kaih (1) v., to press.
[Cf. Burm., nay.']
£ Naih (1), v, to flow (as blood).
Na-k c an-ba-sina-haw, conj .,
or.
Na-k‘an-si-na, conj ., however.
Na-lawnna, conj., besides.
[Of. Burm., l?m, ‘to ex-
ceed.’]
Nan (1) v.y to smell.
[Of. Burm., nan ; Chepang,
ngam ; Mikir, ingm'm ;
Lush., ‘mm ; Manip,,
nam ; Naga, me-naw.]
* Or n’gim"-hang,
Chin and English.


Nan (1), v., to squeeze.
[Of. Manip., nam, ‘to
press.’]
Ndn, n., a village.
Ndn-mdn, or nan-‘sd, n., a
villager.
[Cf. Thib. coll., ndng, ‘a
house Burm., nan, * a
palace.’]
Nana, acfo?., loudly.
Nat'o", n., a woman.
[Of. Kiranti (Thagmali),
madum, ‘ a wife.’ See
Nat‘o"ng, n., an ear-ring.
[Burm., nadaung.]
Nauk (1), v., to say, utter;
to bark (as dogs); to wear.
[Cf. Newar, nava.]
Naung, pron., thou.
[Cf. Lush., nungma ; Kami,
Singpho, Burm., nang;
Mik i r, Magar, ndng ;
Chinese coll., nin; Gya-
mi, Horpa, ni ; Manyak,
no; Naga, no.]
Naung (1), v., to thrash, tread
out (paddy); to pound.
[Cf. Burm., nang.]
Naung-‘ni", n., a sister-in-law
(younger than one’s wife).
Nau-iE, n., a younger brother.
See Anau.
‘Naw (1), v., to be blunt.
N’ba", n., measles.
N’d‘e ‘saih (1), v., to have
paralysis.
N’diE (1), v., to measure.
N’diin", n., uprightness.
[Erom dun", to stand.]
Ne-haw-sin, adv., equally.
[Burm., coll., m'.]
'Nga", adj., ten.
[Erom, l ngo", ‘five.’ Cf.
Mru, hd ; Kami, hau.]
Ngabok, n., a plantain.
[Cf. Kiranti, ngdk ; Burm.,
ngdpyaw ; Taungthu,
ngd.]
Ngak (1), v., to starve,
[Burm., ngat.\
Ngaun, n., a brinjal (sweet
variety).
‘Ngaw" or ‘ngo" (1), v., to
hire.
[Burm., e ngd.]
Nge (1), v., to be small.
[Burm., ngay.]
Nge-bd, n., a widower.
Nge-bd-‘sd, n., an orphan
whose mother is dead.
Nge-nu", n., a widow.
n., an orphan
whose father is dead.
Ngd, n., a fish,
Ngd-toi, n., the roe.
[Cf. Lepcha ngd; Thib.
coll., Serpa, Lim b u,
Kiranti, Manip., Sing-
pho, Takpa, Lush., Shan-
du, Burm., ngd; Thib.,
nyd ; Kami, ngau; Chi-
nese, ngad.]
‘Ngd (1), v., to be satisfied ;
dng, until satisfied.
Ngd-e (1), v., to growl.
[Cf. Lepcha, ngd; Lush.,
ngrd; Naga, nyd; Mikir,
inguer.]
Ngo", adj., five.
[Cf. Chinese, Guru n g,
Sunwar, ngd; Lepcha
pa-ngdn; Mikir, p‘o-ngd;
Naga, pa-nga; Thib.
coll., Sak, Serpa, Bhut.,
Murmi, Newar, Burm.,
Chin and English.


ngd; Mru, tangd ; Kami,
ba-ngd'; Manip., ma-
nga \ Thib., *nd. J
Ngoi-d (1), v., to regret.
[Of. Burm., Thib. coll.,
ngd, * to weep ; ’ Thib.,
ngu, ‘ to weep.’]
Ng6-Ting, n., a fin (literally
‘ fish-thorn’).
Ngd (1), v., to nod.
[Of. Burm., ngdi]
N’gye", n., a tonsil.
N’ha-sii, n., a spindle. See
Lahd-su.
Ni (1), v., to be black.
[Cf. Chinese, nig ; Takpa,
nyik ; Thochu, Gurung,
L e p c h a, Thib. coll.,
Serpa, Blmt, Burm., nah;
Thib., nag ; Shandu,
nauh ; Kami, ( nuni]
Ni, adj., this.
‘Ni, n., a loin-cloth, worn by
Chin women.
‘Ni", adj., two.
[Cf. Chinese, Newar,
Kami, ni; Manip., ani;
M u r m i, ngi ; Mikir,
hini ; Burm. coll., nit;
Lush,, ‘ nit ; Magar, nis ;
Gurung, nes ; Burm.,
‘naoh; Thib. coll., Serpa,
Bhut., ngi; Thib., nyis;
Lepclia, nyet; Limbu,
nyitah ; Naga, ken-na.\
‘Ni" (1), v., to stimulate, ex-
cite, urge on.
[Cf. Burm., e nd.]
Ni-nai (1), v., to soil, dirty.
Nin-k‘aung, n., a custom,
rule.
[Cf. Burm., nan, ‘ a rule.’]
Niyd, adv., here.
[Cf. Thib., na ; Kami, ne-
bei]
N’k‘a", n., a hook.
N’k‘a"-lawn, n., a fishing line.
[Cf. Khasia, kwai; Lush.,
chagwi; Kami, takoi ;
Chinese coll., kea; Chi-
nese kok .]
adv., repeat-
edly.
N’k‘aw, n., a span.
N’k‘a -zin-zin, adv., in order.
N’kla", postp., between.
[Cf. Burm,, krai]
N’k‘ii" (1), v., to cough.
N’k'ulu, n., the knee.
[Cf. Lush., k‘up; Manip.,
k c au.]
N’k c ya, n., a time,
N‘kya-di-di, adv., always.
[Cf. Lush., tinj every.’]
N’k‘ya-ko"-nu, adv., usually,
ordinarily.
[Literally, nine times.]
N’k‘yan-si-nii, adv., therefore.
N’k‘ya-te, adv., once, at once.
N’k‘yen-k‘yen, adv., occasion-
ally.
‘No 1), v., to dirty (as water);
to be clouded, foul.
[Cf. Burm., nauk.]
‘No (1), v., to chew.
Noi (1), v., to laugh, smile.
[Cf. Lush., noi ; Naga, nil;
Shandu, noi; Manip, ndk;
Chepang, ‘ ni. ; Newar,
‘ nyu ; Singpbo, ma-nui;
Taungthu, ngd; Murmi,
nyet; Gurung, nyed ;
Mikir, ingnek.]
Non,* n., a buffalo.
* Northern Chin, nau.
Chin and English.


[Erom a root meaning ‘bul-
lock ’ in the cognate lan-
guages. Cf. Thib., no;
Bhiit, ngo ; Chinese, ngu;
Gyami, neu; Chinese
coll., nieu; Gyar., nye;
Burm., nwd. It means
buffalo, in Shandu, and;
Kami, ken-nan; Mru,
nd.]
Non (1), v., to smell, kiss. See
Nan.
£ N6-gaung, n., the outside of
the ear.
[Cf. Manip., nakong ; Lim-
bu, neko ; Burm., na-
kaung.]
N’plau, n ., the yolk of an egg.
N’pTe, n. 3 a twin.
N’pii", n. 3 a knot, bud,
pimple.
[Cf. Lush., abawk.]
N’set, n., the spur of a fowl.
N’si" (1), v., to sneeze.
N’t £ e" shiin (1), v., to vacci-
nate.
N’t £ i", n., iron.
N’tT'-'ek, n., rust.
[Cf. Lush., t‘ir; Shandu,
ti-wa ; Chinese, Pit. ]
N’tT'-den", n. 3 a screw.
NTT'-hen, n. 3 steel.
n. 3 a hoe ; mat-
tock.
N’kin or n’t £ 6n, n., the guts,
liver.
[Cf. Bailing, ding; Burm.,
than.]
Nil" (1), v. 3 to be many, nu-
merous.
‘Nil, postp., after (time) ;
a l nu,adv. ,afterwards; (nu-
klaion, postp., after (place),
[Cf. Vayu, nung; Burm.,
nauk ,]
‘JSTii'-e (1), v ., to be late.
‘Niik (2), v. t to pull.
Nun (1), v. } to moan.
Nu"t (1), v., to guard.
‘N/t,* n., a day.
[Cf. Shandu, nitson; Chi-
nese, nit ; Burm., ne-rat ;
Vayu, nu-7na.]
£ Nut-t6, n., the nose.
< Nut-t6-k £ o' / , n., the nostril,
[Cf. Manip., naton; Mikir,
nokdn; Shandu, Lush.,
c nd ; Burm., Kami, nd ;
Naga, e nicha ; Chepang,
nge, nye.]
Nyang (1), v., to decline,
refuse.
[Burm., nyang.']
Nyang (1), v., to be vile.
[Burm., mjan .]
Nyau, n., tobacco-ash.
‘Nyaung-hli, n., a croton.
£ Nyaw or ‘Nyaw-bawn (1), v.,
to forget.
[Cf. Lush., ( ngil; Dhimal,
nil; (perhaps) Lepcha,
myon.]
Nye (1), v., to listen, obey,
pay attention, hear.
[Cf. Newar, nyo; Lepclia,
Sun war, Bhut., Serpa,
Thib. coll., nyen; Thib,,
Takpa, nyon; Singpho,
ngan; Lush., ngoi; Naga,
ra-nie.]
Nyen ( 1), v., to be quiet.
[Burm., nrim. J
* Northern Chin, niih.
11
Chin and English.


Nyen (1), v., to be low.
[Cf. Burm., nin ; coll., nen;
Manip., nem.]
Nyi (1), v., to be equal.
[Burm., nyi .]
Nyf-nyaw, v., to be level.
[Burm. coll., nyi-nywati\
Nyo-oi, n., the Cassia lignum.
[Cf. Burm., ngui]
N’za", n., the woof.
N’z6-ba (1), v., to feed.
N’zun", n ., a sign, mark.
K’zun" (1), v., to mark out,
mark.
N’zmP-dtin, n., the sight (of
a gun) ; a tally.
N , zun // -mi (1), v., to recog-
nise, remember.
0.
O (1), v., (with me") the fire
burns ; ( with yd) it rains.
0 (1), v., to be dumb.
[Cf. Burm., d ; Lush, ah,
‘ foolishness.’]
0", n., strength, power.
[Cf. Burm., a" ]
0- (1), v., to sit (on eggs).
(1), v., to rob.
01 (1), v., to be yellow.
[Perhaps Lush., a-eng ;
Burm., wai\
01- n., a fresh-water
crab.
Oi-nauk (2), v., to wear
(round the neck).
[Cf. Lush., atori]
Oi-sit, n ., a crab (small kind).
Ok (2), v., to drink; to smoke;
to suck.
[Cf. Sokpa, wudi\
Ok (1), v., to be stagnant.
O'k-tii', n., plains, flat
country.
O'bnlik (1), v., to be weak.
Ong (1), v., to succeed.
[Burm., aung.\
0-oi-k‘a, n., a crab (fresh-
water, —large species).
[Cf. Manip., wai-k‘a; Ka-
mi, ta-ai .}
o"pek (2), v., to abet, assist.
[Burm., d-pe.]
p.
P‘a, n., a side; one of a cou-
ple.
[Cf. Chinese, p l ii\
P £ a", n ., a flower, bloom.
[Cf. Sbandu, apd; Mru,pa-
au; Garo, pa; Lush.,
ni-pu ; Sak, Burm., pan ;
Singpbo, si-pan ; Kami,
pan .]
Pahoi-so, n., a gnat (sand-
fly).
Pahyo, pron., bow many ?
P £ ai" (1), v ., to fly.
[Cf. Manip., pai ; Chinese
coll., fei ; Naga, pro ;
Chinese, pit.']
Paih, n., a bean.
[Cf. Burm., pe.]
Paih (1), v., to steer.
[Burm., pe.]
P'aih", n., the top (of a tree).
Pak £ a, pron., what kind of.
Chin and English.


Pak £ atind, adv., why ?
Pak £ aung, n., a cockroach.
Pak'u't, pron., how much.
Pakyi, n., a grasshopper.
Pakyi- £ moisan- £ sauh // , n., a
mantis.
Pakyi-senat, n ., filth.
P £ ala", n., a pagoda.
[Burm. coll., p'ayd.]
Palang, n ., amber.
[Burm., payang .]
P £ alauh, n., a bat.
[Cf. perhaps Mikir, dr-
pldk; Lush., bag.']
Palawn, adv., during.
[Burm., patlun.]
Pa- £ len, n., a paternal uncle,
(older than father).
Paleng, n., a bottle,
[Burm., palang .]
Paliin, n., a winged ant,
[Cf. Burm,, palu.] •
Pambalet" n., a butterfiy,
[Cf. Shandu, bald.]
Pa £ naih, n., a jack-tree.
[Burm., pe‘nwe.]
Pan-shin, n., a stranger.
Panzi, n.j a cucumber.
[Cf. perhaps Chinese coll.,
pao, £ a gourd.’]
P £ a-p £ e", n., a besom, broom.
[Cf. Lush., mun-pid ; Che-
pang, p'ek; Mikir, dr-
p‘ek.\
P £ at, n,, a side,
[Burm., b‘ak.]
P £ at (1), v., to associate.
[Burm., p e ak.\
Pat £ o // , n., a man.
[JPa, the male affix or pre-
fix. Cf. Kiranti (Thag-
mali), padum , ‘hus-
band.’]
Pat e oi, n ., a paternal uncle,
(younger than father).
[Of. Burm., pa-t ( we .]
Pauh, w., a word ; language.
Pauh-bawn, n ., an inter-
preter.
Pauh-‘mo (1), v., to have deli-
rium,
[Of. Limhu, pan; Mikir,
pu ; Kami, pe.\
Pauh-t £ ii' (1), v., to be trouble-
some.
P £ auk (2), v., to be astringent.
Paung (1), v., (with a'no) to
be deaf.
[Cf. Burm., Manip., pang.]
Paung'" (1), v., to associate,
to embrace.
[Burm., paung. ]
P £ aw, n ., a bush.
[Cf. Naga, sl-pd.\
P £ aw or p £ 6 (1), v., to sprinkle,
scatter, spread.
[Cf. Lush., p ( d, vo ; Burm.,
pyan ; Baking, pu;
Kaga, priX; Vayu, Chi-
nese coll,, pd; Chinese,
put; Mikir, peprdt. ]
P £ aw (1), v., to prohibit.
P £ aw,* n., a snake; p‘aw-‘so,
a cobra.
[Cf. Kami, pd-sow; Shan-
du, pari; Horpa, p ( u;
G-yar., ka-bri; Thochu,
bugi; Many a k, bru ;
Thib., brut ; Lush., rul ;
Magar, but; Bhnt., Lep
cha, bo ; New a r, hi;
Sun war, busd; Sak, ka-
pu; Singpho, la-pud]
* Northern Chin, pul.
Chin and English.


P‘aw (1), v., to dye, stain.
P'awk (1), v., to read.
[Cf. Burm., p c at; Naga,
pro ; Cliepang, bro ;
Chinese, pok.]
Pawn-byet, w., a rag.
Pawng (1), v ., to hold in the
arms.
P‘awng-e (1), v., to like, pre-
fer.
P‘aya, n., a wife.
P‘aya-df, n., an adulteress.
P‘ayo, n., a bird.
P‘ay6-in, n., a bird-cage.
P‘ay6-bok, n., a paddy-bird.
[Cf. Naga, perd ; Takpa,
pyd ; Gyar, pye-pye;
Bhut .,b ( yd; Thib., bya.]
P c ay6-‘maw, w., feather.
[Cf. Naga, pard-md.]
P‘ayii", n., a rat
P‘ayu"-aw, n., a musk-rat.
[Cf. Chepang, yu; Kami,
myu ; Balling, yd ; Mikir,
phiju ; Lush., sa-dzu ;
Naga, te-zu.]
Pazaw, eonj., how much ?
Pazaw-tu'-i-bo, n., the water
which the souls must cross
after death.
P‘e (1), v ., to divide.
[Cf. Chinese coll., pre; Lep-
cha, py‘d ; Chinese, pit.]
Pe" (1), v., to be flat.
[Cf. Shandu, pe; Kami,
po ; Burm., prd ; Taung-
thu, sau-pye.]
P £ e" (1), v., to clean, sweep
away.
[Cf. Burm.,
Pek (2), v., to give.
[Cf. Chinese, pet ; Lush.,
Burm., pe; Takpa, be;
Kiranti, Kami, Shandu,
pai; Mikir, Manip., Lim-
bu, pi; Murmi, Gurung,
Serpa, bin; Thib. coll.,
p‘in; Lepcha, byi; Che-
pang, bit-i; Taungthu
pa; Bluit., bd ; Thib.,
p‘al .]
P‘en (1), v., to be old.
[Cf. Mikir, dbdn ; Shandu,
pron.]
Penbyaw, n., a board, a board-
ed floor.
[Burm. coll., pyinbya. Cf.
Mikir, peng. ]
Pla or plan (1), v., to show.
[Burm., pro.]
Plan, n., a time.
[Cf. Burm proud]
Pla-pla dawn (1), v., to
lighten.
Pla-tauh. n., a mangrove
swamp.
[Burm., prd-tawi]
Pla-tu'-i, n ., the tide.
Plai-e (1), v., to scratch.
Plaih (1), v., to dissipate.
[Burm., pray.~\
Plang (1), v., to be clever.
Plaung, adv., outside.
[Cf. Burm., prang ; Ma-
nip., ma-pan. ]
Plaung-‘saw, n. } name of the
rain fairy.
Pie or pie, n ., a country.
[Cf. Burm., pran; coll.,
ptyi.]
Pie (1), v., to be full, to be
complete.
[Cf. Naga., peli ; Burm.
coll., pri ; Chinese coll.,
liau. ]
Plek (1), n., to be thick.
Chin and English.


Pleng, n., one-fourth of a
basket (measure).
Ple- £ saw, adv., a little.
Pli-a, postp., besides.
[Cf. Burm. coll., pri ‘to
fill.’]
Pling (1), v., to swell.
[Cf. Burm., raung .]
Plo (1), v., to be shallow.
[Cf. Shandu, p‘on; Naga,
he-law .]
Pl6-e, n., a flute.
[Cf. Burm.^r^d; Lepcha,
palit.~\
Plohig-e (1), v., to remove,
alter one’s residence.
[Burm., praung .]
Pluk (1), v., to boil.
[Burm., prut?\
Plun, n., a ball.
P 6 (1), v., to accompany, be
with.
[Cf. Burm., pdi]
P £ o" (1), adj., old (used only in
conjunction with p‘en).
Po" (1), v ., to dip.
P £ 6 (1), v., to arrive, reach,
attain.
[Cf. Thib., p‘ep; Lush.,
p‘dk ‘to overtake.’]
P £ 6-e (1), v., to overtake.
P £ 6-ong, adv., as far as.
(Used as a postposition.)
[Cf. Yayu, bong?\
P £ o (1), v., to put out (to
dry).
P £ 6-i, v., to be past bearing,
(as fruit) ; to expend ; to
elapse.
[Cf. Burm., pwe .]
P6-i, n., a mat.
P6-h £ sauk (1), v., to weave
mat.
[Cf. Burm,, p‘yd; Naga,
zo-prd; Kami, bu; la-
mp., p‘ak .]
P6-i, n., a £ pwe,’ festival.
P £ oi, n., cotton.
P £ oi-bi", n., dressed cotton.
P'oi-kawt" (1), v., to dress
cotton,
P'oi-li-Pe'hi, n., a cotton
dressing bow.
P £ oi (1), v., to be good, be
fine in texture, be beauti-
ful.
[Cf. Manip., Shandu, p‘d;
Khasia, b‘a; Kami, ‘we ;
Naga, /ce-vz.]
P £ oi-b £ oi, adv., well, strongly.
[Cf. Manip., p‘ai.]
P £ oi-]inga, adv., vreU.
P £ oi-yun, n., thread.
[Cf. Manip., lang .]
Pok (1), v., to roll.
Pok, n., a net.
[Burm., paih. ]
P6-k‘li-p6- £ li, n., heaven.
P6-kyi-iit, n., name of the
place where the Chins origi-
nally lived in the northern
country.
Pombe, n ., a teal, duck.
[Cf. Burm., wambe ; Shan-
du, tan-p‘d; Kami, ram-
pan.]
Pomp'oi, n., a blacksmith.
[Burm., panpe.]
Pom-p £ oi- £ sun-d £ ek, n., the
'world.
Pon, n., jungle.
Pon-a, n., a jungle-fowl (used
by Northern Chins).
Pona-pagu', n., animals.
Pon-e (1), v., to wrestle.
[Cf. Lush., in-bun.]
Chin and English.


P‘6n-p‘e-lan-gan, adv., topsy-
turvy, tumultuously.
P‘6ng, n., a raft.
[Burm., p ( aung.]
P‘o"ng (1), v., to bake.
[Burm., p ( aung. Cf. Chi-
nese coll., p‘an, Chinese,
hok.]
Pong (1), v., to own, possess.
[Burm., paing.]
Pon-shiin, n ., a tuft.
Po-p'a", n., the SpatJwdea
JRheedii.
P6-p6-i, n., a companion,
sweetheart.
to accompany.]
P‘owa, or p‘oha n., a hus-
band.
P‘owa-di, n., an adulterer.
P‘owa-p6gu-‘s6, n., a step-son.
n., a step-
daughter.
Pii, n., assistance, help.
[Cf. Lush k'a-pui. ]
Pii'-haw, adv., very, much.
[Cf. Jjusb., pui, ‘ big.’]
Pik-hek (2), v., to be sur-
prised, astonished.
P‘iik (2), v., to pull out, ex-
tract.
[Of. Lush., p e ui; Mikir,
p‘U.]
Piik (2), v., to cook.
Piik (2), v., to borrow.
[Cf. Lush., puk ; Naga, te-
pu.\
Piik, n., the stomach. See
Apuk.
Piik-Po (1), v., to have a
stomach-ache, dysentery.
Pukawn, n., a ridge (of a
mountain).
Pirn (1), v., to heap.
Pun, n ., a heap,
[Cf. Burm., pun; Mikir,
dhui.]
Pun-ban, n ., form.
[Probably a corruption of
Burm. coll., pon-the-
ndn.]
Piin-don or piin-baw, pron .,
one’s self.
[Cf. Tbib., ton-dam , c in-
deed.’]
P‘ungyi-ky6ng, n., a monas-
tery.
[Burm., p'ungyi kyaung. ]
Pun-mon-moi (1), to be en-
ciente.
Piin-zen, n., threads used to
cross the Pazaw-tu'M-bo,
q. v.
P‘ya, num. adj., a hundred.
[Perhaps Gyar., parye;
Mikir, p‘drd ; Thib., gyd;
Burm., «,]
n., a wing.
P‘yak (1), v., to destroy.
[Burm .,p‘yak. Cf. perhaps
Thib., lak.\
P‘yan, n ., c a thindaing,’ the
smock-frock worn by Chin
women.
Pyang (1), v., to repair.
[Burm., pyang .]
Pyang-dina tank (2), v. } to
make ready.
Pyau (1), v., to he thin (as
liquid).
Pyau-pya (1), v., to he joyful,
glad.
[Cf. Chinese coll., Burm.,
pyau.]
Pyaw, (1), v., to roll up.
Pyen (1), v., to he tough.
[Cf. Burm., pyau.]
Chin and English.


Pyo (1), v., to rinse, wash out.
[Cf. Lush., p‘i.]
Pyong-ong, adv., gently.
Pyun-du"-i, n., urine.
P‘ymi-p‘yun-hau (1), v., to
confess; to speak truly,
faithfully.
[Cf. Burm ., ffraung.]
s.
Sa (1), v., to be dry; to
wither.
[Of. Naga, ke-sd ; Shandu,
sd; Lepcha, sdn.\
Sabaw, n., the luff a plant.
‘Sabon, n., a rebel.
[Burm. coll., thuboni]
Sab we-den, n., a table.
[Burm. coll., sabwe.]
‘Sadaung", n., news.
[Burm., thidang .]
‘Sadi, n., care, attention.
[Burm., thadi.^\
‘Sadi-pek (2), v., to warn.
[Burm., thade-pe" .]
‘Sa-e (1), v., to join.
[Cf. Chepang, choi]
Sai (1), v., to be bald.
Saih (1), v., to make, to do.
[Cf. Mikir, say, ‘labour;’
Chinese, sak ; Thib., chd',
Lush., chi.]
Saih-bo (1), v., to help.
‘Saih-e (1), v ., to be possessed
(by a nat, &c.).
SaitC-zaih", adv., com-
pletely, all.
Saih-zii', n., a custom, prac-
tice.
‘Sak (1), v., to shake.
[Cf. Lush., tsoi ; Naga,
tsug, ‘to shake the
head.’]
Salaung, n., a list.
[Burm., sarang. J
Sa-liC-lut, adv., gradually.
‘Sambala, n., a lime.
[Bum., thamburd. ]
‘Sami, n., a child (perhaps
from so, little and mi,
meaning a person.)
[Of. Burm., thami, ‘ a
daughter.’ The root mi
is found in Thibetan and
almost allied languages,
but apparently it only
occurs in this one root in
Chin.]
San, n., a shoal, a rapid.
‘San, n.., a sound.
[Of. Burm., than ; Yaym,
sang-ma.\
‘San, (1), v., to suit, be suit-
able, be ready.
‘San-d‘a-e, ‘san-e (1), v., the
same.
[Cf. Burra., thang ; Lush. r
tsem. j
‘San, v., to pack, put in.
‘San" (1), v., to be chief, be
old.
[Cf. Burm., old an, to in-
crease ; Mikir, sdr-u.\
Sanai", n., sand.
[Cf. (perhaps) Mikir, sang-
tii]
‘San"-b6, n., old man.
[Cf. Mikir, sdrpo. ]
n., an old woman.
San-b‘oi, n., one kind of or-
chid.
Chin and English.


£ San"-byen" (1), v., to be
extraordinary.
[Burm. coll., ‘saw.]
‘Sanda, n., coral.
[Burm., thandd .]
Sang, n., a stage, a shelf.
[Burm., chang.]
‘San"-hek (2) or ‘san"han (1),
v., to be old (of persons).
‘San-kalang or ‘san-glan, n.,
the brinjal (sour variety).
‘San-palang (1), v., to be
clean.
[Cf. Burm., chang. ]
‘San-zak (1), v., to be clean.
San-zat, or san-sat, adv., com-
pletely, all.
[Burm. coll., sin-zit.]
‘Sapauh, n., a mat.
Sase", n., a ghost, goblin.
[Burm. coll., tase. ]
‘Sat-gyi, n., the ‘ gyi ’ (a kind
of deer).
[Cf. Kami, Lush., saki;
Shandu, sail; Manip.,
saji; Burm. coll., ‘ sat ,
‘ a sambhur.’J
‘Sau-e (1), v., to reply, call in
answer.
‘Sauh" (1), v., to be long.
[Cf. Manyak, shd; JSTaga,
did', Shandu, si; Lush.,
Burm. coll., she ; Manip.,
sang; Kami, s h ang ;
Burm., ‘ran; Gurung,
‘rim; Takpa, Thib., ring;
Thib. coll., Serpa, Bhut.,
rim ; Murmi, ren g ;
Bhimal, rin.]
Sauk-yauk (1), v., to flame up.
Sau-6, n., a bamboo cup. See
Saung-o".
‘Sauk (1), v., to wear (a ‘paso*
or trousers) ; to plait; to
build a house.
‘Sauk" (1), v., to be unfaith-
ful (of a wife).
‘Sauk-k‘ye, n., a spear;
mon, a spearman , suhi
a particular kind of spear.’
[Cf. Kami, sd-k‘{; Lepcha,
sung-‘lyo.]
‘Saukshe, n., a witness.
[Burm. coll., thetthe.]
‘Saun, n., life.
[Cf. Lush., tshem, ‘to
breathe.’]
Saung, n., ‘paddy,’ unhusk-
ed rice; husked rice.
Saung-bo, n., ‘ kaukgyi 5 pad-
dy.
Saung-nii", n., ‘ kauknge ’
paddy.
Saung-tauk, n., sweet rice.
Saung-ho, n., ordinary rice.
[Of. Burm., chan , ‘rice;’
Thib., tchum; ‘ rice,’
Kami, son; Mikir, sang;
Shandu, sa-han; Lepcha,
zo ; Manip., cheng.]
Saung-bauh, n., straw.
Saung-gauh, n., a ‘sagaw,’
sieve.
[Burm, coll., san-gaw. ]
Saung-gyi, n., a granary.
[Cf. Burm., kyi; Chinese
coll., k‘u.]
Saung-mon, n., seed rice.
[Cf. Lush., mu; Kiranti,
oma.]
Saung-o", n., a tube or
pipe.
‘Saung-pauh, n., a ship.
[Burm., thang-haw.\
Sau-sau, adv., early.
[Burm., saio-saw.]
Chin and English.


"Saw", n., a bullock.
*Saw"-nii", n., a cow.
[Cf. Chepang, shy a; Ne-
war, sd; Sak, sd-lo ;
Manip., san ; Lush., se-
hong, 4 a cowKami,
sird ; Mm, si'-yd; Sing-
pho, kan-su .]
’‘Saw-e (1), v., to tremble.
‘Sawk (2), v., to cut.
[Cf. Lush., shat ; Lush.,
Limbu, tchep ; Th i b.,
ched.]
Sawk, or sok (1), v., to be
steep.
[Cf. Burm. coll., sank.]
‘Sawk" (2), v., to come out.
[Cf. Lush., shank.]
‘Sawk (2), v., look at, regard.
Sawn" * (1), v., to run.
[Cf. Manip., chen ; Serpa,
Lepcha, chong. ]
‘Saw"-‘saung", n., an ox.
Sayan, sa-an, n ., night.
[Cf. Lush., dzdn; Thib.,
tshanmo ; Thib. coll.,
chennio; Serpa, chemo ;
Lepcha, sanap; Limbu,
sendik ; Newar, cha .]
Se, n ., seed.
[Cf. Burm. coll., se ; Lush.,
tsd; Chinese coll., sa ;
Chinese, sat.~\
Se (1), v., to leak.
‘Se (1), v., to clean rice.
‘S'e, adj ., eight.
[Cf. Sak, a-tset ; Singpho,
ma-tsat ; Burm. coll.,
shit ; Bur m., * rach;
Mru., ri-yal .]
‘Sek (2), v ., to count.
[Cf. Thib., tsi ; Lush,, tcJur.]
Sek (1), v ., to try (a case), to
investigate.
[Burm. coll., sit.']
Sek (1), v., to soak.
[Of. Burm., ch‘im.]
Sek (1), v., to be narrow.
[Cf. Lush., dzim, also clzik,
‘ pith.’]
‘S'e-kyit, adj., eighty.
Sen (1), or senhek (2), v ., to
be near.
[Cf. Bhimal, cheng-so .]
Sen (1), v., to be red.
[Cf. Lush., shen ; Shandu,
se ; Naga, tsen-hu , ‘to
dye red.’]
‘Sen-kyen (1), v., to ponder,
to consider.
[Burm. coll., ‘sin-kyin .]
Sessen-galo, n., a military
policeman.
[Burm. coll., sit-thi-kuld.]
‘Set-‘set, adv., entirely,
wholly; nu"t , the entire
day.
[Burm. coll., thet-thet.~\
Shai" (1), v.\ to roast, toast.
Shanbon, n., maize; Indian-
corn.
[Cf. Kiranti, samho .]
Shau (1), v., to slacken.
[Burm. coll., shawj
Shau (1), v., to be sufficient.
[Burm. coll., shaw.]
Shau(T), v., to wash clothes, &c.
[Cf. Lush., shu ; Burm.
coll., shaw .]
Shauk (1), v., to be ashamed.
[Cf.Burm. coll.,sM; Burm.,
‘rak; Thib., ngosha.]
* Northern Chin, chon.
12
Chin and English.


Shaung-palaung-nu", n., the
Queen.
[Burm. coll., shin-paginma.
Shaw'', n., breath.
Shaw (1), v., to wear (a jacket
or smock-frock) ; to wrap.
Shaw (1), v., to select.
Shaw-na k‘aw (I), v., to elect.
Shaw", n., a blanket.
Shawt, n., a fan.
Shenat, or ‘senat, n., a gun.
[Burm. coll., thenat.]
Shenat-k c o", n ., the muzzle of
a gun.
Shenat-t‘en", n., a rifle.
Sheng, n. , the Thalia Cannce-
formis.
Sink (1), v., to be confused.
[Of. Burm., ‘ruk ; coll.,
shok.]
Sho (1), v. to beat, cuff,
[Cf. Bodo, shu ; Chinese
coll., sho, ‘ the hand.’]
Shon (1), v., to carry (by in-
stalments).
[Cf. Lush., shin; Burm.,
than .]
Shong, n., a porter’s sling.
[Burm., ch‘aing.]
Shong (1), v., to avoid, keep
out of the way.
[Burm. coll., shaung. Cf.
Chinese coll., shang ‘to
set aside.’]
Shon-muk or shiin-muk, n ., a
quail; a snipe.
[Cf. Naga, se-muh\
Shdn (1), v., to thrust, bore,
pierce.
[Cf. Lush., tshun; Khasia,
sam ; Mi k i r, chdng ;
Thib., tshuk.]
Shun" (1), to be dark.
Shu-‘na, n., a kind of grass.
Shun-kaw, n., a staff.
Shwan (1), v ., to present, put
in.
[Burm., thwang. ]
Sf (1), v., to begin.
[Cf. Burm., cha^\.
Sf (1), v. to be true.
Sf-yaidi-pauh, n., a falsehood.
Sf-yii, conj., yes.
Si" '-nii", conj., no.
Sf-ya-k‘aw, conj., but.
[Cf. Chinese coll., fsH;
£ even,’ correct.]
Si"* or se", n., a horse, pony,
[Cf. Chepang, se-rang ;
Sak, sa ; Newari, sd ( la.]
c Si" (1), v., to be bad.
[Cf. Chinese, ‘si; Lush. r
tchia ; Burm. coll., ‘so";
Naga, ke-shaw.]
fl Si", adj ., seven.
[Cf. Chinese, sit; Kami,-
se-ri G y a m i, ch‘i ;
Singpho, si-nit.']
c Sik (1), v., to pluck (as fruit).
[Cf. Burm., ch‘wat ; Yayu,
se.] f
‘Sik‘yan"hau (1), v., to sing.
[Burm., thik‘rang.]
e Si"-kyit, adj., seventy.
Sin" (1), v., to be clear.
[Burm. coll., sin. Cf. Burm.,
chang ; Thib., tsang.]
‘Sin {V),v. 3 to instruct, direct,
tell.
‘Sin-biik (2), v., to annex.
[Burm., thin-paik.]
‘Sin-laih, (1), v., to be poor.
[Burm. coll., ‘ singe. ]
Sfsf, conj., either, or. See Si*
* Northern Chin, she.
Chin and English.


Sisika, n., the beginning.
Sit (1), v ., to chew.
Sit (1), v., to go.
[Cf. Kami, chaik; Manip.,
chat ; Shandu, tsi-a; Na-
ga, tsu.~\
‘Sit-k‘6, n., the cold-weather.
[Cf. Naga., ti-siki ; Limhu,
si-sd, ‘cold;’ Thih., sil-
wa, ‘ coldSingpho, ka-
tsi, ‘cold.’]
‘Sitta, n., a box.
[Burm., coll., thittd .]
Si"-iin", n., a saddle.
Siyan-k‘yat, n., judgment.
[Burm. coll., siyin-k'yet.
‘So, n., a son; flesh.
‘Sonbyan, n., a bachelor.
[Cf. Mikir, oso ; Lush.,
afd-pa ; Kami, sa-pa" ;
Shandu, e sa ; Limhu, sa ;
Burm., thd; Chinese coll.,
tzu ; Ohepang, cho , ‘ a
boyManip., ma-cha ,
‘ a child.’]
So, n., a sparrow.
So, n., a letter, writing.
S6-e, (1) v., to learn.
[Cf. Burm. coll., ««■.]
So (1), v., to be wet.
[Cf. Burm. coll., so; Burm.,
cho ; Lush., pe-che-pe-
tsi.\
So (1), v., to be small, little
(usually affixed to nouns).
[Cf.Mikir, so ; Shandu, san;
Naga, ka-che; Singpho,
ka-tsi; Newar, chiga ;
Lepcha, chu ; Limbu,
chukpa ; Thib., cJdnng ;
Chepang, cholam , ‘ small-
er;’ Chinese coll., siao.]
So (1), v., to bite.
S6-e (1), v. } to charge (legal-
iy).
[Cf. Lush., she ; Kami, sau ;
Lepcha, tsuk ; Burm.,
chwe , ‘to stick, cleave ;’
Manip., chik.]
‘So, n ., jungle (used only in
such compounds as bam-
boo jungle, &c).
‘So-hawk (2), v ., to heat the
jungle for game.
‘So" (1) or so"-i (1), v., to he
thick, short.
So (1), v., to dig.
[Cf. Burm., ch'wa ‘t o
scratch up/]
‘So" (1), v., to spit.
‘S6-hi", n., a midwife.
‘S6-e (1), v., to stamp with the
foot.
‘S6-i (1), v., to issue.
‘S6-i (1), v., to cross over.
Sok (1), v., to plant.
[Burm. coll., saik.]
Sok (1), to measure, sur-
vey.
[Of. Thih., fshud.]
‘So"k, adj., six.
[Cf. Naga, suru ; Horpa,
cho; Sokpa, chorha;
Burm. coll., chauk;
Burm., Ttfrauk; Newar,
k‘u ; ohep a n g, kruk ;
Lush., ruk ; Mru, Kami,
ta-ru.]
‘So"k-kyit, adj., sixty,
‘S6-k‘6, n., the rains, south-
west monsoon.
[Cf. Naga, me-tsuki .]
Sole", n., a clerk; handwrit-
ing.
[Burm. coll., say4.]
Sole"-diin, n., a pencil.
Chin and English.


‘So-moi, n., a mother.
‘So"n, n., a spike.
So"ng-to"ng, adv., obliquely.
S6ng-gl6ng-wa", n., the morn-
ing watch.
‘Sonia", n., a daughter.
[Eeminine of ‘so, a son. Cf.
Lush., afa-nil ; Kami,
sa-nu.]
S6-iit, n., a hook.
[Burm., cha-up.]
So-yauk, n., an envelope.
So-zok-kyong, n., a school.
[Burm., cha-thang-kiyaung.]
Sii', n., a bamboo slip.
Sir (1), v., to bubble up.
[Burm. coll., su.]
Su (1), v., to be dirty.
‘Su"-e (1), v., to search.
[Cf. Chinese coll., so ; Chi-
nese, sok ; Burm. coll.,
sha ; Lush., tshe.]
Sd"-e (1), v. , to collect.
[Cf. Chinese, dzu ; Lepcha,
tsu ; Burm., chu ; Thib.,
tsho, ‘ assemblage sak,
‘ to collectNaga, kese.]
Su"-i, n., the nipple.
[Cf. Yayu, chuschu.]
Su"-i-haung", n., milk.
Su"-i-m6n, n., the tip of the
nipple.
Su"-i-6k (2), v., to drink milk.
Su"-i-nan (2), v., to milk.
Suk, n ., a tattooing instru-
ment.
[Burm., chut.]
‘Siak" (2), v., to jump down.
[Of. Mikir, chon.]
‘Suk (1), v., to retire.
[Burm., ch‘ut.]
‘Su-‘maw, n ., mildew.
‘Sun (1), v., to mount.
‘Sim (1), v ., to pierce. See
Shun.
‘Sian", n., the end, mouth (of a
river), bottom; v., to ter-
minate.
[Cf. Burm., ch e un.]
‘Sian, n., a mortar.
[Cf. Burm., ch‘un ; Lush.,
tsum.]
‘Sim (1), v., to swoop.
‘Sun-bu, n., an enemy.
‘Siin-e (1), v., to be concerned
with.
[Burm., coll., ‘suing.]
‘Siin-k‘aw-h6 or ‘siin-k‘o", n.,
a pestle.
‘Suiv‘sun (1), v., to be dusty.
Siing (1), v., to be stiff,
tough.
[Cf. Lush .,/uk.]
Sii"ya, adv., there.
T.
Ta (1), v., to lift up, raise.
[Cf. Man ip., t‘dngat;
Bado, to-t‘e ; Naga, t‘u ;
Kir anti, t‘e ; Thib.,
hdegs ; Burm., t‘a , ‘to
get up.’]
Tadu-monk‘an, n., an owl.
Tadiin'', n a comb.
[Cf. Naga, tudi. ]
Tai-gun", n., a swallow.
Taih, n., a hut.
[Burm., te.]
Taih'' (1), v., to tear up.
Taih (1), v., to move (as a
limb).
[Cf. Vayu, t‘ak.]
Chin and English.


Taih", n., a circle c thugyi, ’
a headman.
[Probably from Burm,,
talk, a revenue circle.]
T £ ak (2), v to be torn, rup-
tured.
[Of. Lush., tet.]
T £ ak or d £ ak (2), aux. v., to
know; to dare.
T £ aklik, n., a bracelet.
[Probably onomatopoeic.]
Takon or takaw", n., a fire-
place, hearth
[Cf. Lush., Pup ; Tbib.,
Pap.]
Tala'", n., the law (statutory).
[Burm., tard.\
Tala"d £ et, n ., a plaintiff.
Talaih", n., medicine ; paint.
Talaih"-t £ awk (1), v., to paint.
Talaih"-lun, n., a hospital.
[Cf. Naga, ddru. Probably
from Bengali, davai.]
Tala"k‘awn, n., a defendant.
[Burm., i tardk ( an.]
Tala'ld', n., plaintiff.
[Burm., tardlo.]
Talen, n., a wood-pecker.
Ta-lu"-lut, adv., slowly,
gradually.
Taliin-sauk so (1), v., to
echo.
Tamu"t, n., silk.
Tang Ti (1), v., to be quiet,
peaceable.
T £ an- £ mut, n., ashes.
[Cf. Kami, Pan-twi.]
T £ an-p £ d", n ., a porter’s yoke.
[Burm., Pan-bo.]
Tan so', n., a spit.
Ta-pli'-pli'-sbaw, adv., gradu-
ally.
[Burm., coll., pyi-byi.]
T £ au (1), v., to be fat, plump ;
{fig.) to be rich.
T £ au-e (1), v., the same.
[Cf. Lush., Pan.]
Tau-e (1), v., to be born.
Tauh, n., jungle.
[Cf. Burm., taw.]
Tauk (2), v ., to put, place.
[Cf. Lepcha, P 6 ; Burm.,
Pd ; Lush., dd; Yayu, to.]
T £ auk (2), v., to itch.
[Cf. Lush., Pak; Mikir,
kdng-Pdk.]
Taung (1), v., to gasp.
Taung", n., a basket.
Taung"-bok, n., a kind of
basket used in taungyas.
[Cf. Burm., taung ; Mikir,
ton; Kami, din-kom.]
Taung-laung, n., a threshing-
floor.
[Cf. Burm., talang.\
Taung-pauk, n., a gaung-
baung, turban.
Taung-taung, adv., immedi-
ately.
Taw", n., a stockade ; a com-
pany of armed men.
[Cf. Burm., tap; Naga,
kudd, dd-hu ; Lush., dai-
pui.]
T £ aw-e or t £ oi-e (1), v., to
exchange, to substitute, to
barter.
Tawk (2), v., to intend.
T £ awk (1), v., to smear, rub,
mix, put in.
[Cf. Burm., thut, £ to
smear; ’ Manip., tak, £ to
mix.’]
Pawn (1), v., to suit, be
suitable.
Chin and English.


Tawn-e (1), v., the same; to
be the matter with, be-
come ; to be.
[Cf. Chinese, Burm., tan.]
Tawn (1), v., to follow
(tracks).
[Of. Manip., sd-tdn .]
T £ awn-(y6n), n., a palmirah.
[Burm., Pan.]
T c awng (1), v., to light.
[Burm., Pwan.]
T £ awng (1), v., to plough.
[Burm., Pwan.]
Te (1), v., to decoy.
[Burm., te. ]
T‘e (1), v., to know.
[Cf. Lush., Urn, Pe ; Burm.,
thi; Thib., she; Naga,
si; Chinese, ti.]
T £ e v , n., fruit.,
[Cf, Kami, Mikir, dp4 :
Thib. de; Burm., thi.]
T £ e"n (1), v., to be raw,
green.
[Of. Burm. coll., sen ;
Manip., sang ; Bur m.,
chin; Singpho, ka-tsing.]
T £ e // n, n., a tree ; wood.
T'e'M-long, n., a log.
T'e'M-ba', n., a branch ; Pe"n-
hen, green wood.
[Cf. Mikir, Peng; Lush,
Pin; Shandu, ten; Kami,
den ; Taungthu, thing ;
Limbu, Magar, sing ;
Bhut,. shing ; Thib. coll.,
shingdong ; Tak p a,
shengdong ; Kira n t i,
sangtang; Thib,, yon-
shing]
T‘en" (1), v., to twist.
or dabon, n., a
stick.
T'e'Ti-ga', n. } the fork of a
tree.
T‘e"n-haung", n., the sap of a
tree.
T £ e'Ti-k c 6n, n., a Jew’s harp.
T‘en"-6, n., the cinnamon
tree.
n., the Dothergia
nigrescens.
T‘e"n -sa, n ., spunk.
Th-bon, n ., a ramrod.
Ti-ti, adj ., every.
[Cf. Lush., tin. J
Ti-ti-ti-tut, n., owl (large
variety).
Ti-ti-wa, n ., a plover.
Tit, v., to stutter.
[Burm. coll., tit.]
T‘it, v. 9 to be hot (to the
taste.)
T c 6, adj., that.
T‘6 (1), v., to be sour.
[Cf. Kami, tau; Shandu,
tu; Magar, Pup; Mikir,
Porong; Bhut., Pek.]
To (1), v., to sharpen, rub.
[Cf. Lush., tat; Ma n i p.,
i tak.~\
T £ 6 or t e o (1), v., to slip, be
smooth.
T £ o (1), v., to rise, get up,
awake; amlung t'6, to be
angry.
[Cf. Lush., Shandu, t‘6;
Kami, tau; Burm., Pa;
Mikir, Pur; Thochu,
toron. J
To-ba, adv., frequently.
To-e (1), v., to swing.
T c 6-e (1), v., to gore (as a
buffalo).
[Cf. Naga, t‘u; Mikir,
tong.]
Chin and English.


T c 6-hawk or t‘awk (2), v., to
send, accompany on a jour-
ney,
[Cf. Lush., Pdn ; Mikir,
toy ; Manip., Pd ; Thib.,
tid ; Chinese coll., clPai.]
T‘6k (1), v., to support.
[Burm., Panic.]
Tok (1), v., to attack (as
dacoits); n., a brick building.
[Of. Burm., tailc ; Thib.,
mak-tok , ‘a battle;’
Manip., Pek.]
T6-k‘an, n., a loom.
[From to, ‘to weave.’]
T‘6-ma (1), v., to rescue.
T‘o"n (1), n., to cuff.
T‘on (1), v., to be sluggish.
[Burm., Pun.\
Ton-don, adv., suddenly.
Tong, n., a mountain.
[Burm., taung.]
Tong (l j, v., to demand.
[Burm., taung.]
To"ng (1), v., to forsake, aban-
don, throw away.
[Cf. Thib., tong.]
Tong, n., a post, particularly
those used in the cemetery.
[Burm., taing.]
Tong-wa", n., morning, day-
light.
Tong-yiik (2), v., to be dark,
(as when there is no moon).
[Cf. Chinese coll., yu; Ball-
ing, rik. ]
T6-tak (2), v., to weave.
[Cf. Mikir, Pdk; Chinese,
tek ; Lepcha, Pdk; Thib.,
Paps ; Lush., td ; Naga,
daw.]
Tu (1), v., to be the same, be
similar, be equal.
[Of. Burm., tu; Yayu, tot. [
T‘li (1), v., to comb.
Tti (2), v., advance.
[Burm., to.]
T‘ii (1), v., to get up. See Po.
(1), v.\ to rot, become
putrid.
[Of, Shandu, Pu; Mikir,
Puvok; Lush., toi; Naga,
tite.]
Tui (1), v., to be sweet.
[Cf. Singplio, du-i;
te; Horpa, Pu ; Kami,
tu; Manip., Pum.]
Tu"-i, n., water.
warm-water; tu"-i-
-(ld, hot-water.
Tu"-iduga mliikdina du (1),
v., to be drowned.
Tu"-i kTiing, n., ice.
[Cf. Mru, Lush., tui ; Kami,
til; Shandu, Yayu, Che-
pang, Ta u n g t hu, ti ;
Bado, do-i; Magar, di.]
Tu"-i aung-6, n., a water-fowl,
diver (lit. ‘a water-crow’).
Tu'-i-bo, n., the place whence
water is fetched.
Tu r/ -i-det, n., a drop (of water).
[Cf. Lepcha, tok.]
n., spray.
adv., in the
beginning of all things.
TiC-i-kon-pauh, n., tradition.
Tu'-i-kyiin, n., a well.
Tu-i T6-e (1), v., to bathe.
n., a stream of water
* from the roof of a house.
n., the Avicenna
officinalis.
Tu"-i -iin'', n., a gourd (for
holding water.)
[Cf. Shandu, U-aung .]
Chin and English


Tu"-i-wan", n., froth, bubbles.
[Perhaps Chinese, wan ,
4 round ’ ‘ a pill/]
T 4 iik (1), v., to be deep.
[Cf. Shandu, tu; Thib.,
ting.]
Tiik (2), v. 3 to kill.
[Cf. Kaga, duk-ri; Lush.,
Pi'-Ur ; Shandu, Pi ;
Burm., that ; Thib., sed;
(perhaps) Chinese coll,
shu .]
Tun, n., a 4 byi ’ ( T Yteenth
basket).
Tun" (1), v., to play on an
instrument.
[Cf. Lush, turn. ]
T 4 iin", adj , three.
[Cf. Kami, ton; Lush., turn;
Burm., thun; Burm,
coll, than ; Newar, son ;
Murmi, som; Gurung,
Magar, song; Sun war,
Gy ami, sang; Gyar.,
Lepcha, Chinese, sam;
Thib., sum; Mm, shun;
Manip., ohum ; Naga,
s<?.]
T 4 un", n., lime.
[Burm., Pun.]
T 4 dn"-kyit, adj., thirty.*
T 4 iina tauk (2), v., to hide
{trans).
Tii- 4 nu"t, adv., today.
Twang (1), v., to clear away.
[Burm., twang.]
u.
U", n., the middle. See Anti-
n''.
[Cf. Thib, il; Burm., u",
. , ‘ pith/]
U-e (1), v., to suppress (as the
breath).
IT-i (1), v., to call. (See
Wu"-i.)
U"-i, n , a dog.
U"-i-nu" n., a hitch.
U"-i- 4 56-t 4 au, n., the cow-itch
creeper.
[Cf. Kami, ui ; Shandu,
i ; Lush., ui; Yayu, uri ;
Thib. coll., u-yd ; Maip.,
hu-i ; Chepang, ku-i ;
Singpho, Thib, k‘yi ;*
Limb u, k‘ia ; Serpa,
Phut, Gyar, Takpa, hH ;
Gyami, kau ; Sak, ku ;
Chinese, kiuen ; Mru,
ta-kwi; Thochu, k‘wa;
Sokpa, Burm., k‘wd.]
U"-i- 4 li", n., a dog-louse.
[Cf. Burm., He ; Manip.,
hui-ri; Lush,, rik; Naga,
te-‘ri.]
Un", v., to coyer; be overcast
as the sky.
[Cf. Burm., un.\
tin", n., the cocoanut.
[Cf. Burm., un.]
tin", n ., the skin. See U-im".
IT-nauk (2), v., to suppose,
think.
.. [Cf. Thib., no.]
tit, n., a crowd, company.
[Of. Burm., up.]
U-t 4 o"ng, n., a peacock.
[Burm., vdaung.]
* Northern Chin, ttin-gip.
Chin and English


tlt-p { ayaw, n. } a brick.
[Of. Burm., ut ; Khasia,
ud.]
Ut-p‘iin(l),«?., to make bricks.
U-u 7/ , n ., a frog.
U-u // -p6, n., a toad.
[Cf. Shandu, sa-ti.]
TJ-u"-i, n., a fruit-stone,
kernel.
XJ-iin", * n., the skin.
[Cf. Lush., avun; Manip.,
ul ; Chepang, pun ; Ka-
mi, ahun; Lepcha,
atun.]
w.
Wai" (1), v., to vary, differ,
(as language).
[Cf. Burm., we.]
Wa-‘sa (1), v., to be open (as
country).
Wat-ko awn (1), v., to be
naked.
[Burm., wat , ‘clothes.'*]
Wauk (1), v., to crawl.
Wauk-khi-Ti", n., the Gar-
denia turgida.
Waung (1), v., to enter.
[Cf. Burm., wang.; Chinese,
wang, ‘to go towards ;*
Bhimal, wang.]
Waw-ku", n., an owl.
Wawk‘6, n., a dove.
[Cf. Kami, ma-k'u.]
Wawk‘o",f n., the mouth.
[Cf. Gyar., tik ( e ; Takpa,
Sbandu, pa-kd; Chinese
coll., kou ; Bhut., Serpa,
Kami, Thib., ( kd; Lush.,
kum ; Bur m., k‘an-
twang; Mikir, ing-Jio.]
We (1), v., to stir.
Wek (1), v., to twist strands
together.
Wi" (1), v., to hide ( intrans .).
Wi"-dina awn (1), v., to lie
in ambush.
Wo" (1), v., to throw.
[Cf. Yayu, wo, * to shoot
war, ‘to throw away
Mikir, vdr.]
Wo", n., a Burman.
Wo, n., a load, burden,
a taungya basket.
[Cf. Chinese coll., ( wo ;
Burm., wan.]
W6-mlo, n., luggage.
[Cf. Lepcha, mid."]
Wo, I n., a pig ; t‘in-‘satv,
the pig whose entrails are
examined at a Chin wed-
ding.
[Cf. Naga, the-vo ; Shandu,
wo ; Kami, Manip., ok ;
Singpho, Manyak, wd ;
Hor p a, m ; Mag a r,
Burm., wak ; Sak, Lush.,
vak; Mm, Thib. coll.,
Mikir, Serpa, p‘ak;
Chepang, piak ; Thib.,
Blurt., Limbu, p‘ag ;
Kiranti, b‘ag ; Takpa,
Kewar, p ( d ; Sunwar,
p‘6.]
Wo-e (X), to quarrel.
Woi (1), aux. v., to want.
[Cf, Manip., wdt; perhaps
Chinese coll., yao.]
* Northern Chin, wun.
f Northern Chin, hak-kan.
I Northern Chin, wok.
IB
Chin and English.


Woih, n., an eddy.
[Burm., we. ]
Wo-kii, n., an ape.
Wongo-‘l6k, n., a fern.
Won- p‘dn, n., a partridge.
Wu" (1), v., to cover.
Wu"-a, n., an owl,
Wuho, n,, a peacock - phea-
sant.
[Wu probably means
Ya, n., a quid.
[Burm., ya.~\
Yai" (1), v., to be tired.
[Cf. perhaps Manip., tod. J
Yan (1), v., to reap.
[Cf. perhaps Chepang, m.]
Yan, n., gunpowder.
[Burm., coll., yan.\
Yan, n ., a night. See ayan.
Yang (1), v., to go quickly.
Yan-gyi ‘lnk (1), v ., to be an
earthquake.
Yan-kun, n., last year.
Yan-t £ e"n, n., saltpetre.
[Burm., coll., yan-zen.~\
Yan-yan, adv., quickly.
[ Cf. Burm., myan?\
Yan-sauh", n., a cartridge.
[From yan, gunpowder,
and ( sauh, ‘ long.’]
Yauh, v., to pay (penalty).
[Cf. Burm., lyaw .]
Yauh," (1), v., to be wide.
Yauk (2), v., to hear.
[Cf. perhaps ye, in certain
dialects of Kiranti.]
Yank-silk (1), v., to under-
stand.
Yaw (1), v., to be cold (im-
personal.)
‘bird.’ Cf. under d.]
Wuhd, n., a pigeon (green).
[Cf. Kami, ha-hu.]
Wuhun"pii (1), v., to thunder.
Wu"-i (1), v., to call. See
Jl'i. '
[Cf. Shandu, 6 ; Limbu, u .]
Wuko", n., husk (of paddy).
Wumun", n,, a pigeon (im-
perial).
Y.
Yaw-e (1), v., to settle; ap-
pease (as a quarrel).
[From yaw, ‘ to he cool/]
Yawn (1), v., to float down.
Yeng (1), v., to wait for.
[Cf. Yayu, rim. ]
Yi" (1), v., to be heavy.
[ Cf. Kami, yi; Lepcha, U ;
Lush., rit ; Yayu, U-sto ;
Chepang, Uto ; Burm.,
le ; Shandu, ru ; Manip.,
rum. ]
Yi" (1), v., to sell.
[Cf. Shandu, yi; Kami,
yau ; Lush., dzu; Chi-
nese coll., yuh ; Che-
pang, yin in yinlangal ;
Burm., raung ; Manip.,
yon .]
Yin-zii, n ., a pot of water.
Y 6, n ., a bamboo; yondaih,
t e dn, zen , daung, —
yun!' , — mid', — kli , different
kinds of bamboo.
[Cf. Shandu, ra-mu ; Lep-
cha, ru, ‘a cane (per-
haps) Manip., Burm.,
wa ; Kami, wu.']
Y - p c iin, w., a cluster of bam-
boos.
Chin and English.


Yd' * n., a bone.
[Of. Burm., yd ; Horpa, re-
rd ; Gyar., ‘ru ; Yayu,
Naga, r 4 ; Lush., aruk ;
Manyak, ruk‘u; Thih.,
coll., ruko ; Serpa, ruha ;
Bhdt., rut oh ; Takpa,
rospa; Thih., ruspa;
Manip., sa-ru ; Singpho,
n-rang ; Lepcha, a‘ret ;
Limhu, sayet; Mik i r,
ripi.]
Yd' (1), 0 ., to be mad .
[Of. Burm., ru"; Chinese,
yu, ‘ stupid.’]
Yo (1), v.. to scorch.
[Of. Naga, re-zd.~\
Yo (1), v., to swim.
[Of. Manip., iroi.\
Yd-mon, n., hail.
Yon, n., a stalk.
[Of. Burm., ard.]
Yon, n , a monkey ; — ( ni" , the
loris ; — do , the white
eyelid monkey ;—sen,
the red-tipped monkey.
[Of. Manip., ydng ; Shandu,
ay an; Lush., dzongd]
Yo-nauk (1), v., to celebrate
the funeral rites.
Yon-e (1), v., to be cold (of
persons).
[Of. Manip., ing ; Chinese
coll., lang; Lepcha
‘ yang. ]
Y6n-e (1), v ., to believe.
[Cf. Burm. coll., ydn,
Burm., yun; Lush, ring.\
Yong-ban, n ., a banyan tree.
[Burm., nyaung-bangd\
Y6n-so, n., a sprout.
Ydn-zon, n., a bamboo plat-
form on which the corpse
is laid; a throne, palace
(Christian usage).
Y 6-6 (1), v., to rain,
[Cf. Chinese coll., yu;
Burm., rwa; Lepcha,
rua; Balling, rwd-wd.\
Y6-ui, n., a lemon.
Yiik (2), 0., to pull out.
Yli" (1), 0., to feed, support,
nourish.
Yiik (1), 0., to be inferior, to
become dark.
[Cf. Shandu, yaih ; Burm.,
yutd\
Ydn (1), 0., to be tame.
[Cf. Burm., yah.]
z.
Zad‘6n, n., a cemetery, i.e.,
the place where the bones
are placed in an earthen
pot.
Zaw (1), 0., to he satisfied.
Zaw" (1), 0., to trample down.
Zawk-san, n., the forehead.
[Of. Lush., tchuld\
Zen-(a),£>6>s(p., near. See Sen.
Zf, w., salt.
[Of. Lush., tfs/; Naga,
; Yayu, chi-a ; Hor-
pa, Newar, chH; Thih.
coll., Serpa, Bhdt., Ma-
gar, Horpa, Burm., ch‘d ;
Thih., tchd; Mur mi,
* Northern Chin, ijoh.
Chin and English.


Gurung r chdchd; Tho-
chu, Manyak, che ;
Gyar., ch ( e.'\
Zi (1), v., to remove.
Zigan", n., sugar.
[Cf. Burm., thakrdj]
Zon or m’zdn n a large
mountain (such as the
Yoma).
Zwn" *(1), v., to fix on, mark,
note.
n., a large leopard,
ZtTyaih, n r> female ancestors,
corresponding to the K £ un,
q. v., only worshipped by
women.
*Cf. n'mn.
Chin and English.


ENGLISH AND CHIN.
A.
A, an, adj., haw.
Abandon, v., to"ng (1).
Abate, v., nge ; mlik.
Abet, v., o' pek (2).
Abide, v ., awn (1).
Able (be), v., k‘6 (1).
Abode, n., awn-diin.
Abort, v., maih-haw (1).
About, adv. and conj. ; ( adv .)
baung; [conj.) pie.
Above, postp., bii'.
Abscond,•«?., sawn"na sawn' (1)
Abuse, v., ahau bek (2) ; mon-
‘so-hau bek (2).
Accept, v., lat-k‘awn (1).
Accompany, v., po (1).
Accuse, v., so-e (1).
Ache, v., (of head) me (1).
Acid, v ., t‘6 (1).
Acquainted (be), v., kyon-
kyen (1) ; ‘mak-e (1).
Acquire, v., bun-e (1).
Adhere, v., kaw-e (1).
Admonish, v., m’zo-hau (1).
Advance, v., tii (i).
Advantage, n., kye-zu.
Adversary, n., ‘sun-bu..
Adulterer, n., p‘owa-di.
Adulteress, n.,. p‘aya-df.
Alfair, n., a ( mu.
Affray, n., p‘on-p‘e-lan-gan
sha (1).
Afraid (be), v. 3 kyi (1).
After, postp., (place) ‘nti'
klawn; (time) ‘nu.
Afternoon, n., k‘oni" akyen.
Afterwards, adv., a‘nu'.
Again, adv., mo ; conj., aliin.
Age, n., kun.
Ague, n., paw-‘saw kaw" (1).
Aim, v., zun" (1).
Air, n., k‘li; g‘l6.
Alive, adj.y aheng"
All, adj., saih/'-saih"; sansat;
‘set-‘set.
Alone, adv ., (pa) haw-dim".
Alter, v., ‘l6-e (1).
Although, conj ., na-k‘an-ha-
sina.
Always, adv., n’k c ya-dl-di.
Amber, n ., palang.
Ambush, v., wi"dina awn (1).
Among, posfp., dliga.
Ancestors, n., apo-apa.
And, conj., nil.
Angry (be), v., amlii'ng t‘o (1).
Animal, n., p6na-pagii / .
Ankle, n., d‘awn"-zit; k‘6-mi.
Anklet, n., k‘ye-k‘yaung.
Annex, v., ‘sin-biik (1).
Annoy, v., a‘mu-‘mawk (2).
Ant, mling-baln'-sen.
Ant, n., (black), (large) mling-
bak‘6n; (small) mling-bahi".
Ant, n., (red and black),
a'lo'ng.
Ant, n., (white), ak‘a".
Ant, n., (winged), palun.
Ant-hill, n., hlung.
Anxious (he), v., am lii'ng ‘l6k
(2).
Anybody, n., ani"-pa sisi.
Anything, n., haung-pa si si.
Ape, n., wo-kii.
Appearance (put on an), v. }
alut ‘sawng (1).
Appoint, v., k‘aw (1).
Approve, v., amliing tank (2).


Arise, v., t £ o (11.
Arm, n., bawn".
Armadillo, n., lep-pyan.
Armpit, n., ashu-kyat.
Arrest, n ., mawn (1),
Arrive, v ., p‘6 (1).
Arrow, n ., at £ aw.
Artifice, n., a £ sak-dai.
Ascend, v., koi (1).
Ashes, n ., t £ an-mdt; (of to-
bacco) £ nyau.
Ashamed (be), v., shauk (1).
Ask, v., hi" (1); hi"-e (1).
Assault, n., aku' / t-lu- £ mu.
Assemble, v., su"-e (1).
Assess, v., k £ oi (1).
Assessor, n., a'mawn-kdaung"
£ ldn.
Assistance, n., pit.
Assistant, n., ku // t-t e 6k.
Associate,«?., and n., p £ at (1) ;
paung" (1).
Astringent (be), v., p‘auk
(2)-
At once, adv., n’k £ ya-te.
Attack, v., tok (1).
Aunt (paternal), n., asi".
Aunt (maternal), n., a-u-t £ oi.
Auspices, n , lami.
Avicennia officinalis, tu'-i*
£ siin.
Avoid, v., shong (1).
Await v., yeng (1).
Awake, v., [trans.), t £ o (1);
(■intrans .), k‘ak (2).
Axe, n., abe ; ahe.
B.
Baby, n., £ sanh-so.
Bachelor, n., £ son-byan.
Back, n ., (of a house) in- £ si;
(of the body) a‘ling // ; (of
the hand) ku"t-k £ liing.
Back-door, n., in-‘si-daung-
k £ o".
Backwards, ado., siikdina.
Bad (be), v., £ si" (1).
Bag, n., ayauk.
Baggage, n., wo-mlo.
Bail, n., amak £ awn.
Bake, v., pong'" (1).
Bald (be), v ., sai (1).
Bale, v., bank (1).
Bamboo, n ., yd; (different
kinds) yon-daih, ydn-t‘an,
yon-zen, ydn-daung, yd-
yun".
Bamboo (cluster of), n., ydn-
p £ iin.
Bang, n., £ senat- £ san.
Banyan-tree, n., yong-ban.
Bar, v., haw (1); k £ a (1).
Bark, v., nauk (2).
Bark, n ., hdk ; t £ e"n-hdk.
Barn, n. saung-gyi.
Barter, v., t £ oi (1); t £ aw
(i).
Base (be), v., mok (1); mok-
a (1).
Basket, n., taung"; (taungya)
taung"-bok.
Bat, n., p‘alauh.
Bathe, v., tu'-i £ ld-e (1).
Batten, n.,
Bayonet, n , £ sauk-k £ ye.
Be, v., moi (1) ; la (1).
Bead, n., maw.
Beak, n., amdn.
Beam, n., £ mleng; adang;
gltin-bon.
Bean, n., path.
Bear, n., ahawn".
Bear (suffer), v., k £ awn (1);
(to bring forth) tad (1).
English and Chin.


Beard, n., gawt-‘maw; mon-
k‘o"- c maw.
Beast, n pona-pagii'.
Beat, v. t deng (1); sho (1).
Beautiful (be), v., p‘oi (1).
Because, conj., n’k‘yan-sinii.
Beckon, n ., aku"t-don-hoi (1).
Become, v., la; tawn-e (1).
Bed, n ., i"-dun-patih.
Bee, n., k‘o"-i.
Beef, n., ‘saw"-‘s6.
Beetle, n., v ek-kun.
Before, postp., (place) ‘mawn-
gawn; (time) k c laung.
Begin, v., si (1).
Beginning, n., si-si-ka.
Behead, v., alii k‘aw" (2).
Behind, postp,, ‘nil' klawn.
Behold, v., ‘sawk (2).
Belch, v., g‘l6 koi (1).
Believe, v., yon-e (1).
Bell, n., (cattle hell), kling-
so.
Bellow, v., kong (1).
Belly, n., phk.
Below, postp., daung-a.
Belt, n., kyen-sen; (to wear
a belt) kyen-sen dim" (1).
Bend, v., kok-lok (1); k £ u"-i
(!)•
Benefit, n., kye-zu.
Besides, adv. and postp.,
(i adv> .) na-lawnna ; {postp.)
pli-a.
Besom, n., p‘a-p { e".
Best, adj., ap c oi-‘sun".
Bet, v., long (1).
Betel, n., kawn.
Better (be), v., p‘oi-hek (2).
Between, postp., n’kla".
Beware, v., ‘sadi-tauk (2).
Beyond, postp., sii"-baw-a.
Big (be), v., den (1).
Bile, n., a‘mut.
Bind, v., akhin yaih (1).
Bird, n., p‘ayo.
Bird -cage, n., p‘ay6-in.
Bird-lime, n., byem-bli.
Birth-place, n., moi-gii awn-
diin ; tau-e-gii awn-diin.
Bison, n ., aplong.
Bit, n., awat.
Bitch, n., u"-i-nii".
Bite, v., so a)-
Bitter (be), v., k c 6 (1).
Black (be), v., nl (1).
Black-guard, n., akdaung"-
‘si".
Blacksmith, n., pomp‘oi.
Blade, n., aho".
Blame, v., aplet taung (1).
Blanket, n., Shaw'"; dawn".
Blaze, v,, do (1).
Bleet, v. , meng" (1).
Blind (be), v., ami be (1).
Blister, v ., klin-so te (1).
Block-head, n., miig ii
kdaung".
Blood, n., at‘i".
Bloom, n., p‘a".
Blow, n., n’k‘ya.
Blow, v., (with the mouth)
‘mut (1); (of wind) k‘ii 16
(i).
Blue (be), v., pya (1).
Blunder, n., a‘mau.
Blunt, v., ‘naw (1).
Bluster, v., t‘au (1).
Boar, n., wo-pa.
Board, n., penbyaw.
Boast, v., hoi (1).
Boat, n., m‘lii'.
Body, n., apiin.
Boil, n., c ma- c lut.
Boil, v., pliik (1).
Bone, n., ayo".
English and Chin.


Book, n., so-lit.
Bore, v., shiin (1).
Born (be), v., (of animals)
taii-e (1); (of birds) kye
Borrow (money), v., piik
(2).
Bosom, n.,
Bother, v., a £ mu-‘mawk
' (1).
Bottle, n., paleng.
Bottom, n., actin'".
Boundary, n ., azun"’.
Bow, n., ali.
Bow-string, n., ali-yo"h.
Bowels, n., k £ yaw.
Bows, n ., mlii'-u".
Box, n ., ‘sitta.
Boy, n ., ‘sami-po.
Bracelet, n ., t £ aklik.
Bracelet, to put on, v., t £ aklik
nauk (2).
Brain, n., aliin-g £ 16.
Branch, n., ba" ;
Brass, n., katya.
Brave (be), v., lai (1).
Breadth, n., a be".
Break, v., mun" (1) ; (as a
rope) bawk" (1).
Breast, n., kan"-zan"; (of
birds) abet; (of women)
a £ so"-i.
Breath, n.> asbaw".
Breathe, v., ashaw" £ lo-e (1).
Breeze, n., k £ li.
Bribe, v., lat £ song shiin (1).
Brick, n., iit-p £ ayaw.
Brick (to make), v. 9 tit p £ iin
(1).
Brandish, v., £ leo (1).
Bridge, n., £ lauk- £ le.
Bright (be), v., mlaung (1).
Brim, n ., ape'".
Bring, v., 16 (1), 10-e (1).
Brinjal, n ., (sweet) ngaun,
(acid) £ sanglan.
Brittle (be), v ., kling-gling
(!)•
Broad (be), v. 3 yauh" (1).
Brook, n., ahon-so.
Broom, n. 3 p £ a-p £ e".
Brother (elder), n. 3 ata.
Brother (younger), n., anau-
ii'.
Brother-in-law, n., ingoi.
Brothers, n., tanau-hoi.
Brow, n., a £ n6-t £ e".
Bubble, n.f awan.
Bubble up, n., sii (1).
Bud, n., n’pii".
Buffalo, n non.
Bug, n., a‘mon.
Build, v., ‘sauk (1).
Bull, n. 3 £ saw"-wan-daung.
Bullet, n., k < h-‘mliing // .
Bullock, n. y *saw"-t f i".
Bumble-bee, n., k£o"-tutta-
lti/;
Bund (field), n ., kon-saung".
Bundle, n., abi.
Burden, n., wo.
Burn, v., (1).
Burr, n., baw-bii".
Burst, v., p £ 6k (1).
Bury, n., £ mluk.
Bush, n , p‘aw, k‘yun.
Busy (be), v., alut nil" (1.)
But, conj., na-k £ an-ba-sina-
haw.
Bu 11 (of a gun), n., nauk-
t*e"n; in.
Butterfly, n., pam-balet".
Button, n., aunggyi t £ e".
Buy, v., ‘le (1).
£ Byi,’ n., of a basket)
tun.
English and Chin.


c.
Cage (for prisoners), n., tong;
(for birds) p‘ay6-in.
Calf, n.„ saw"-so.
Call, v. f wu"-i or u"-i (1);
(distant) be-e (1).
Calm (be), v., nyen (1).
Can, v., k‘6 (1).
Cane, n., men.
Capture, v„ mawn; (in war)
hen (1).
Carcass, n., ayo.
Care, n., ‘sadi.
Care, to take, v., c sadi pek (2).
Carry, «?., (on the shoulder)
hawk (2).
Carry, ©., (across the shoulder)
bo (1).
Carry, v., (by instalments)
shon (1).
Carry, v., (an umbrella) k‘ii
(1).
Cartridge, n ., yan-sauh".
Case, n ., a‘mu.
Cassia lignum , n., nyo-oi.
Cat, n., minzan.
Cataract, n., ‘san ; kan-dan.
Catch, v., mawn (1).
Caterpillar, n., ling-saw".
Cattle, n ., e saw"-n6n.
Cease, v., di-at (1).
Cemetery, n ., (burning place)
‘moin-tin-dun.
Cemetery, n ., ( where the
bones are kept), zad‘6n.
Centipede, n ., andi.
Centre, n., amliing".
Chaff, n., wuko".
Chain, n., n’t‘i"-yo"h.
Chair, n., k‘adeng.
Chameleon, n., kyet-lok.
Change, n., c l6-e (1).
Character, n. } akyat.
Charcoal, n., me"-a. See
Me",
Charge (legally), v., so-e (1).
Cheap (be), v., amawn mlik
(Ij, nge (1).
Cheat, v., klo-e (1).
Cheek, n ., behe".
Cheek (to strike the), v., he-
he" hi (1).
Cheroot, n., maku"-shaw.
Chest, n., kan"-zan".
Chew, sit (1); ‘n6 (1).
Chicken, n, 9 a-s 6.
Chicken-pox, n., n’t‘e"-b6 ; a-
lun-bo.
Chief, n., ab‘oi; lan.
Chief (be), v., ‘san" (1).
Child, n., ‘sami.
Childhood, n., ko-ngaw-so.
Chilly, n ., harne.
Chilly plant, n., hame-y6n.
Chin, n ., (the race ) Asho";
(part of the body) k‘awd6'.
Choose, v., shaw (1).
Cinnamon, n., t‘e"n-6.
Circle, n., waing.
Clan, n., a f so".
Claw, n., din".
Clay, n., d‘ek-tank.
Clean (be), v., ‘san-palang (1).
Clean, v p‘e" (1) ; (rice) ‘se'
Clear (be), ®., sin" ; (of water)
kang (1).
Clear (away), v., d‘a (1) }
twang (1).
Climb, v ., koi (1).
Clerk, w., sole".
Clever (be), v., plang
hek (2).
Close (be), v., sen (1); sen-
hek (2).
u
English and Chin.


Cloud, n ., ame-‘si.
Cloudy (be), v., k‘6 fin" (1).
Coarse (be), v. } hang (1).
Coat, n. 3 aung-gyi.
Coax, v. } fie-16 (1).
Cobra, n., p‘aw-‘so.
Cobweb, n., bun"-bo-in.
Cock, n., a'-fiu-i.
Cockroach, n. 3 pak‘aung.
Cocoanut, n. 3 tin".
Cocoon, n ., mli-in.
Cohabit, v ., k‘awn-e (1).
Coil, v ., gaw (1).
Cold-weather, n ., sit-k‘6.
Cold (be), v. 3 yon-e (1) ; (of
persons) yaw-e (1).
Cold, n ., ayaw.
Collect, v. 3 sfi"-e (1).
Colour, n., ayauug..
Comb, n., tadun".
Comb, v ., t‘fi (1).
Come, v ., 16 (1).
Come out, v. 3 c sawk" (2),*
Come in, v, 3 waung (1).
Come up, v ., koi (1).
Come down, v ., kawn (1).
Comet, n. 3 a-‘si-home-m6n.
Command, n ., ahau.
Companion, n. 3 po'-po-i.
Compassionate, v. 3 myan (1).
Company (of armed men), n.
t‘aw".
Comrade, n., po'-po-i.
Concave (be), v., kun-lung
a).
Conceal, v. 3 t‘fina tank (2).
Concerned with (be), v. 3 ‘sfin-
e (1).
Conduct, v., t c 6-hawk (2).
Confess, v ., pyun-pyun hau
w.
Confine, v., k‘yfit-tauk (2).
Confused (be), v., shik (1).
Conquer, v. 3 fifing (1); awng
(1); ong (1).
Consider, v. 3 ‘sen-kyen (1).
Constable, n., ye-‘so'.
Converse, v. 3 pauh (1); be
saih (1).
Convex (be), v. 3 dun (1).
Cook, v ., pfik (2).
Cooked (be), v ., ‘myin (1).
Cool (be), v., yon-e (1).
Cooly, n., a‘ngo".
Copper, n., kle-sen.
Cord, n, 3 ayo"h-so.
Core, n., asho-ko.
Corner, n. 3 gyi.
Corpse, n. 3 ayo.
Cost, n., amawn.
Cotton, n. } p‘oi; (dressed) p‘oi-
bi".
Cotton dressing bow ? n. 3 p‘oi-
li-t‘e"n.
Cough, v. 3 n’k‘u" (1).
Count, v. 3 ‘sek (1).
Country, n. 3 pie ; pie.
Court, n. 3 lun.
Cousin, n. 3 pa-fien-‘s6, &c.
Cover, v. 3 k‘un" (1); wu"
(1).
Cow, n., * saw"-nfi".
Cow-itch creeper, n. 3 u"-i ‘s6
t‘au.
Crab, n. 3 (fresh water) o-oi-
k‘a; oi-sit.
Crawl, v. 3 wauk (1).
Create, v. 3 lut-‘saung (1).
Creditor, n. 3 le-mon.
Creeper, n., ayun.
Crimson (be), v. 3 sen(l).
Crocodile, n. 3 a‘sa"n.
Crooked (be), v. 3 kok-lok
(1).
Cross over, v. 3 ‘so-i (D-
Cross (a river), v. 3 ku (1).
* Or ‘sawt".
English and Chin.


Cross-bar, n., (of a cross-bow)
klang.
Croton, n., nyaung-bli.
Crouch, v.y b6k (1).
Crow, n., aung-6.
Crow, v., kong (1).
Cry, v. f kak (2).
Cry out, v., hf.
Cubit, n., amlik.
Cucumber, n., panzf.
Cuff, y., sho (1); bf (1);
t‘o"n (1),
Cup, n., ale".
Cure, v., ku (1).
Custom, n., nin-k‘aung, saih-
zffi, alaung.
Cut, v., ‘sawk (2).
Cut off,?;., k c aw"(l); bawk (2).
Cutch, n., let-‘se".
Cymbol, n. 3 lankon.
D.
Dah, n ., asin".
Dah (fighting), n., asin"-‘sauh".
Daily, adv ., ‘nu"t-ti-ti.
Dam, n., kon-saung".
Damp (be), v., so (1).
Dance, v. 3 lawn".
Danger, n ., ami'-anaw.
Dare, v., d‘ak (2).
Dark (be), v., shiin"; rniig (1);
(as when there is no moon)
tong-yiik (2).
Daughter, n., ‘sonii".
Dawn, n., k c 6-wa."
Day, n., a‘nu"t or ‘nu"t.
Daybreak, n., a‘ngo ; k‘6-wa".
Day (next), n., hota".
Dazzle, v., do (1).
Deaf (be), v., a‘no paung
(!)•
Dear (be), «?., amawn den
(1). , „
Debt, n., le, ale.
Debtor, n., le-bii-e-k‘laung".
Decay, v., myan" (1).
Deceive, v. s ‘li (1); den (1);
‘liza (1).
Decide, v., bun-plak (1); or
apon-plak (1).
Decline, v., nyang (1).
Decoy, v., te (1).
Deep (be), v., t‘uk (1).
Deer, n., (barking) e sat-gyl.
Defeated (be), v. 9 shiin (1).
Defend, v., k c awn (1).
Defendant, n., tala"kye;
tala"k c awn.
Delay, v. t yeng (1)
Delirium (have), v., pauh ‘mo
(1).
Deliver up, v., awk (1).
Demand, v. 3 tong (1); hi";
hi"-e (1).
Demon, n ., kyaung-pauh.
Dense, v., bin (1).
Depth, n., atffik.
Deputy Commissioner, n.,
Mid-wan.
Descend, v., kawn (1).
Desire, v. 3 woi (1) ; lii (1).
Destroy, y., plak (1).
Detour (to make a), v., gaw
(1).
Deviate, v., kyaw (1).
Dew, n. 3 a‘naung.
Diarrhoea, n. 3 ko-long.
Die, v ., dii (1); or di (1).
Differ, v., ka"k (2) ; a'k (1).
Difficult (be), v ., kyi" (1).
Dig, v ., so (1).
Dim (be), y., (as the eyes)
mon- c moi (1).
Dip, v., po" (1).
English and Chin.


Dirty (be), v., kanyit-kapyit
ta'k (2); katu-gald moi; sii
(1); pakyisenat moi (1);
tof water) ‘no (1).
Disease, n., ami.
Dish, n., ale".
Disobey, v., nye (nii").
Dissipate, v ., plaih (1).
Distant (be), v., ‘l6, asaung
glo (!)•
Distinctly, adv., kana".
Distribute, v., p‘e-e (1).
District, n., apong.
Ditch, n., mlong.
Dive, v., kliin (1).
Divide, v., p‘e (1).
Divorce, v., ka"k (2).
Divorcee, n., p‘aya ka"kkii pa-
t‘o"; p‘owa ka"kkii nat‘o".
Do, v., saih (1).
Dog, n., u"-i.
Doll, n., alut.
Door, n., daih-‘saw.
Door-way, n., daung-k‘o".
Double, adv., plan-‘ni".
Doubt, v., u"-nauk (2).
Dove, n., waw-k‘o'.
Dowry, n., aku"t-bbn.
Downright, adv., saih/'-zaih";
p‘oi-b‘oi.
Drag, v., danga bi" (1).
Dream, n., amaung.
Dream, v., amaung ‘mil.
Dregs, n., a‘nen.
Dress, v. (cotton), p‘oi kawt"
(2).
Drink, v., ok (2).
Drive, v., ma" (1).
Drop (of water), n., tu"-i-det.
Drop, v., klauk (2).
Drowned (be), v., tu"-i-dii-ga
mliikdina dii (1).
Drowsy (be), v., i"-woi (1).
Drunk (be), v., mo'-i (1).
Dry (be), v., sa (1); haw"
(1).
Dry (to put out), v., p‘o
(!)•
Duck, n., be.
Dumb (be), v., 6 (1).
Dung, n., s ek.
During, adv., palawn.
Dust, n., hun-hdi.
Dusty (be), v., ‘sun-‘sun (1).
Duty, n., apong.
Dwell, v., awn (1).
Dwelling, n., in; awn-diin.
Dye, v., p‘aw (1).
Dysentery (have;, v., piik t‘o
(1).
E.
Each, adv., ti'-ti.
Ear, n., a‘no; a'no-gaung
(outside of ear).
Early, adv., sau-zau.
Earring, n., nat‘o"ng
Earwig, n., andi-s6-m6n.
Earth, n., d‘ek; pomp‘oi-‘sim-
d‘ek.
Earthquake (be an), v., yan-
gyi ‘bik (1).
Ease oneself, v., pona sit (1).
Easily, adv., alok-a-dii'.
Easy (be), v., 16-i (1).
East, n., a‘le.
Eat, v ., e (1).
Eaves, n ., ashaw-p‘aih.
Echo, v., tahin-sauk so (1).
Eclipsed (be), v., u"-i s 6 (1).
Eddy, n., woih.
Edge, n., ape".
Edifice, n., in.
Egg, n., atoi.
English and Chin.


Egg (to lay), v., doi (1).
Egg plant, n., ngaun.
Eight, adj., Ve.
Eighty, adj., ‘s'e-kyit.
Either, or, n., sisl.
Elapse, n ., kla" (1).
Elbow, n., bawn"-gyi.
Elder, n ., a‘san"; alat-a‘san".
Elect, v ., shaw-k‘aw (1) or
shawna-k‘aw (1).
Elephant, n., amu"-i, amo v -i;
(tuskless) hong.
Elsewhere, adv., bi"-lat.
Embrace, v., paung" (1).
Employ, v., dok (2).
Empty (be), v., ak‘awn moi
(i).
Enceinte (be), v., pun-mon,
amaih-mon-moi.
End, n., a‘siin".
Endeavour, v., o" tok (1).
Enemy, n., ‘sun-bu.
Enormous (be), v., ‘len (1).
Enough (be), v., lun" (1).
j Entada pursaetha, n., de-ko.
Enter, v., waung (1).
Entice, v., ‘le-16 (1).
Entirely, adv., san-zat; haka-
lun.
Entreat, v., hi" (1).
Envelope, n., s6-yauk.
Equal (be), v., nyi (1); tii
(i).
Equally, adv., ne-haw-sin.
Erect, v., dim" (1).
Escape, v., sawnna sawn" (1).
Espouse, v., p‘aya, p‘owa 10-e.
Even, adv., dim".
Evening, n., amib.
Every, adv., ti'ti.
Everywhere, adv., awndun-
titi; alat-titi.
Evil (be), v., ‘si" (1)..
Exchange, v., t‘aw-e (1).
Excellent (be), v., p‘oi (1).
Except, adv., and p<>stp.,
{adv.) nalawnna; postp.,
pli-a.
Expel, v., ‘lwang.
Expend, v., p‘6-i.
Expensive (be), v., amawn
‘len (1).
Extinguish, v., ‘myit (1).
Extract, v., p‘iik (2).
Extraordinary (be), v., ‘san"-
byen" (1).
Eye, n., ami ; (of needle)
mlaihk‘o".
Eye-ball, n., ami-u".
Eye-brow, n., ami-k‘ii.
Eye-lash, n., ami-‘maw.
Eye-lid, n., ami-pe.
F.
Face, n., ‘moi-san.
Faint (be), v., mo-i (1);
my aw (1).
Ealcon, n., a‘mu.
Eall, v., (of water) klo (1);
(of person) kla n k (2);
(down), kliik (2).
Falsehood, n., si-yai-di pauh.
Family, n., in-t‘6ng.
Fan, n ., shawt.
Far (be), v., ‘l6 (1).
Fast, adv ., yan-yan.
Fasten, v., k‘nndina tank (2).
Fat (be), v ., t‘au (I).'
Fat, n., at‘an.
Fate, n., aklong.
Father, n ., apo.
Fatber-in-law, w., apubo.
Fatigue, n., adawn.
Fault, n ., a‘mau.
English and Chin.


Fear,».,'kyi (1).
Feast, n ., m’e-po-i.
Feather, n., p‘ay6-‘maw.
Feeble (be), v., o" mlik (1).
Feed (support), «?., n’zo-ba
(1); yii"-sawn (1); (as a
horse) haw (1).
Fell, v., kluk" (1).
Felo de se, n., ashaw-ho tiik
(1).
Female, n., nil" (suffix).
Fence, n., klan.
Fern, n., ‘lun-b‘oi; wongo-
‘l6k.
Festival, n., po-i.
Fetch, v., 15 (1).
Fever (have), v., kaw" (1).
Few, adj., awaung-‘ni".
Field, n., laih.
Fifty, adj., hauk-kyit.
Fig, n., ahe.
Fight, v., (quarrel) dang-e
(1); (of armies) atat-pliing-
e(l).
Fill, v., pli (1).
Fin, n., ngo-fiing.
Find, v., k c awn (1).
Fine, n., ayauh.
Fine, v ., ayauh tawk (2).^
Finger, n., (first) ko-mi-ii';
(second) kon-do"n-da-lan;
(third) ko-min-ko'; (fourth)
ku"t-so.
Finished (be), v., pli (1).
Fire, n., and v., me" ; (to set
fire to) me"‘si (1); (a gun)
kawk (2).
Fire-fly, n., den-do".
Fire-place, to., takon ; takaw .
Firewood, n., ahe".
Firm (be), v., me (1).
First, adv., ayang.
Fish, n.y ngo.
Fish, (with a line), ??.,n’k‘a"-
lawn-nii leng (1).
Fish-hook, n .,
Fishing-line, n ., n’k { a"-lawn.
Fist, n., ku-‘nu"n.
Fitting, proper (be), v., csan-
e (1).
Five, adj ., ‘ngo".
Fix on, v., zun" (1).
Flag, n., alan.
Flame, n., me"-don.
Flame up, v., sauh-yauh (1).
Flat (be), v ., pe" (1).
Flat, ground, n ., d‘ek-pe".
Flesh, n ., a‘so.
Flexible (be), 0., pyin-bysn
(1).
Flint, w., me'-k'a-lun.
Float down, ®., yawn (1).
Floor, n., (wood) psn-byaw ;
(bamboo) im-laih.
Flour, n., (rice), baha-noi.
Flow, v ., long (1).
Flower, n., p‘a".
Fly, ®., p‘ai" (1).
Fly, n., apyaw; (large kind)
glo-han.
Foam, n., a‘mun.
Fog, n., a‘naung.
Fold, v., p3 7 aw (1).
Follow, v., labo, tawn (1).
Food, n., e-yaih-yan.
Fool, n ., miigii kflaung".
Foot, n., k‘o"n or k‘o".
Footsteps, n., k e 6l6ng.
For, postp., twak.
Forcibly, adv ., at c eng".
Forefinger, n., ko-mi-u'.
Forehead, n., zawk-san.
Forest, n ., pon.
Forest fire, n ., k‘6n me".
Forget, v., ‘nyaw (1); ‘nyaw-
bawn (1).
English and Chin.


Eorgive, v. 3 myan (1).
Pork, n. 3 (of a tree) Fe^n-ga.
Eorm, n. 3 a‘so-sak; pon.
Eormerly, adv. 3 si-si-k‘wa or
ka; ayang-gyi-gyi.
Eorsake, v. 3 to"ng (1).
Eorty, adj., mflF-kyit.
Forward, adv. 3 ‘mawn-gawn.
Pour, adj. 3 mfli".
Fowl, n. 3 a.
Fowl (jungle), n. 3 ho-a;
pon-a.
Frequently, adv. 3 t5-ba, t -
ba.
Friend, n. 3 k‘yet-pu ; (to make
friends) k‘yet-pd saih (1).
Frightened (be), v. 3 kyi; sin''.
Frog, n. 3 u-ii" or u-u".
Front (in), adv. 3 ‘mawn-gawn.
Frost, n., (hoar), a‘naung-
k‘lling.
Froth, n. 3 tu"-i-wan.
Frown, v. 3 amo-e (1).
Fruit, n. 3 t‘e".
Fruit-stone, n. 3 u-u"-i;
azaung.
Fuel, n., ahe".
Full, (be), v. 3 pli(l).
Full-moon, n. 3 k‘l6-pli.
Funeral-rites (perform), v. 3
yo-nauk (2).
Furrow, n. 3 klong.
G.
Gad-fly, n., ‘myo.
Gain, v. 3 bun-e (1).
Gamble, v. 3 dale (1) ; ayo'li
dale (1).
Gang, n. 3 ak‘laung"-iit.
Gape, v. 3 han (1).
Garden, n. 3 uyin.
Gardenia turgida , n. } wauk-
ku-‘li".
Garlic, n. 3 kaw-‘siin-bo.
Gasp, v., taung (1).
Gate, n. 3 daih-‘saw.
Gather, v. 3 sii" (1).
Gaungbaung, n. 3 taung-
pauk.
Gaze, v, 3 ‘sawk (2).
Gently, adv., pyong-ong.
Get, v. 3 bun (1); bun-e (1).
Get up, v., t‘ii (lb
Ghost, n. 3 k‘l6; sase.
Ghost-post, n. 3 k‘l6-‘siin.
Gibbon, n. 3 wo-kii.
Giddy (be), v. 3 mun (1).
Ginger, n. 3 at‘en.
Girl, n. 3 haw-nii".
Give, v, 3 pek (2).
Glad, v. 3 pyau-pya (1).
Glass (looking), n., klen-
‘mnn,
Gloom, n., amii'.
Gnat, n. 3 pahoi-so.
Gnaw, v. 3 so (1).
Go, v. 3 sit (1); (go round)
gaw (1).
Goat, n. 3 ami.
Goat-sucker (bird), n. 3 bon-
k‘aw.
God, n ., ‘Li.
Goitre, n., labon-p^'.
Gold, n. 3 ha''.
Gong, n., mong.
Gong (strike), v. s mong tun''
a).
Good (be), v., p‘oi (1).
Goods, n. 3 w6-ml6.
Gore, v. s t‘6-e.
Gourd, n ., (for holding water)
tu'-i-iin".
Govern, v. 3 k‘yiit (1).
Government, n. 3 ab‘oi.
English and Chin.


Gradually, adv ., ta-pli-pli-
shaw; ta-lu"-lut.
Granary, n., saung-gyi.
Granddaughter, n., atii"-
niP.
Grandfather, n., apo.
Grandmother, n., a po-‘san"-
nii".
Grandson, n., atii".
Grass, n., mlak ; (sharp-
edged) shu-‘na.
Grasshopper, n., pakyl
Grasp, v., bP (1).
Graze, v., k‘yan (1); (as cat-
tle), e (1).
Grease, n., a‘si".
Great (be), v., ‘len (1).
Green (be), v., sen (1).
Grieve, v ., amliPng mlik (1).
Grind, v ., kluk (2).
Grindstone, n ., aliin-dauh.
Groan, v., meng"-go (1).
Ground, n., d‘ek.
Grow, v., ‘len.
Growl, v ., ngo-e.
Grunt, v., meng" (1).
Guard, v., nu"t (1).
Guess, kyin-na hau (1).
Guest, n., e"-‘se; pan shin".
Guide, n., lawn-‘ma.
Guilt, n ., aplet.
Gum, n., (of trees) apli; (of
mouth) ho"-‘so.
Gun, n ., shenat.
Guts, n ., ‘mut; a'mut.
‘Gyi’, n., ‘sat-gyi.
H.
Habit, n., alaung.
Habitation, n., in ; awndiin.
Hail, n., yo-mon.
Hair, n., alii-thin" ; a‘sawn;
(of animals) a‘maw.
Half, n., ko-i.
Halo (be a), v, 9 (of the sun)
k‘oni" ayo"h 6-e (1).
Halt, v., awn (1).
Hamadryad, n., (one kind)
raon-dauh-nii".
Hammer (of a gun), n ., ali".
Hand, n., ku"t; lagp‘a, (poeti-
cal).
Handle, n., adauh.
Handsome (be), v., p‘oi (1).
Hang up, v., bawk (2).
Happen, v., kawk.
Happy (be), v., moi (1).
Hard (be), v., kang (1).
Hare, n ., awPn.
Harelip, n., amon-ak (2).
Harsh (be), v. } kyan-dan (1).
Hat, n., iitiik; (to wear a
hat), iitiik k‘ii (1).
Hatch, n., 6-e (1).
Hate, v ., mun (1).
Hawk, n., a'mii.
He, pro., aya.
Head, n., alii.
Head-ache (have), v., alii me
(1).
Headman, nantaih".
Healthy (be), v., kan" (1);
son-kan" (1).
Heap, n., piin.
Hear, v. s yank (2).
Heart, n., amliPng.
Hearth, n., takaw".
Heaven, n., P6-k‘li P6-‘li.
Heavy (be), v ., yi" (1).
Heel, n ., kun-ziP.
Height, n ., a‘liing.
Heir, n., in-t‘6ng-mon.
Hell, n. ., holaih.
Help, v. s saih-bo (1).
English and Chin.


Hen, n., a-nii".
Hence, conj., niya-gu'.
Herd, v., klong (1).
Here, adv., niya.
Hereafter, adv., aluna.
Hesitate, v., 6 (1).
Hiccough, v., an-ok (1).
Hide, v ., ( intrans. ) wi" ;
(i tram.) t‘ii-na tauk (2).
High (be), v., ‘liing (1).
Hill, n., kyau.
Hip, n., hok‘a-yo".
Hire, v., ‘ngaw" (1 ) or ‘ngo"
w-
Hiss, v., amon meng" (1).
Hit, v., leng (1).
Hive, n ., k‘o"-i-kat.
{ Hnan,’ n., a‘si"-yon.
Hoe, n., n’t/i" p‘ayaw.
Hold, v., mawn (1); hi" (1);
(between the arm and side
or with tongs) k‘yet (1);
(in the arms) pawng (1).
Hole, n., konk‘o".
Hollow (be), v., ak‘6ng moi
(1).
Honest (be), v., piling (1).
Honey, n., k‘o"-haung".
Honeycomb, n., k‘o"-hya.
Honourable (be), v., gon-sale
moi (1).
Hoof, n., ku-ze.
Hook, n., n’k'a".
Hop, v., aung-6 kun-zo (1).
Hope, v., alawn ‘so-dina awn
(1).
Horn, n., gyi.
Hornet, n., k‘o"-zeng-u.
Horse, n., si" or she''.
Hospital, n., talaih'lun.
Hostile (be), v., ‘sun-bu
saih (1).
Hot (be), v., k‘6 c l6k (2); (to
the taste) t‘it (1).
Hot-water, n., tu"-i-‘l6.
Hot-weather, n., k‘a-k‘6.
House, n., in.
House-platform, n., in-‘si'.
How, adv., pak‘a'.
However, conj., na-k‘an-si-na
or na-k‘an-ba-si-na.
How much, adv., pazaw.
How many, adv., pahyo.
Hundred, adj., p‘ya.
Hungry (be), v., dii-e (1).
Hunter, n., mu-shii".
Hurricane, n., mun-t‘en.
Hurry, v., yan-yan sit (1).
Husband, n., p‘owa'; husband
and wife, lang-p‘aya.
Husk (of paddy), n., wuko".
Hut, n., taih.
I.
I, pro., kye, ka.
Ice, n., tu"-i-k £ liing.
Idiot, n., amlet-sodago yo"
a)-
Idle (be), v., dawn (1).
11l (be), n., gan"-(nii // ).
Imitate, v., atii saih (1).
Immediately, adv., ayaung'
u; taung-taung.
Indian-corn, n., shan-bon.
Indigo, n., maih.
Infant, n., ‘saml-sd.
Inferior (be), v. s yiik (1).
Inflamed (be), v. t pling (1).
Injure, v., ami-mo (1).
Ink, n., ‘meng.
Insane (be), v., yo"(l).
Insect, n kun-so.
Insert, v., ‘san (1).
Inside, postp. , diiga; dwaung.
15
English and Chin.


Instruct (direct), v., £ sin.
Intellect, n., amln'ng.
Intend, v., klan (1); tawk
(2).
Interest, n., atii -hen.
Interpreter, n., pauh-bawn.
Intestines, n ., k £ yaw.
Invert, v., kaluta tauk
(2).
Investigate, v., sek (1) ; bi'C
zan (1).
Iron, n., n’td".
Iron : wood, n., k £ yet-paw
(t £ e"n).
Island, n., kyawn.
Issue, v., £ so-i (1).
Itch, n., t £ auk (2).
Ivory, n., amu'-ho".
J.
Jack (tree), n., pa £ naih.
Jacket, n,, aung-gyi.
Jaw, n ., (lower), k c aw-do or
k £ ut-to.
Jaw (upper), n., behe"-
yo".
Jay, n., bak £ a.
Jews’ harp, n., t £ e"n-k £ on.
Join, v., k £ 6-e (1).
Joke, v., £ lek (2).
Joyful (be), v., amlilng pyau-
pya.
Judgment, n., siyan-k £ yat.
Juice, n., t £ e // n-haung // ; (mil-
ky) aplf.
Jump, v ., dong (1); (jump
down) £ slik (2).
Jungle, n ., pon; tauh; £ so.
Jungle (young thick), n.,
kanii n.
Jungle (virgin), n., setgyi.
Jungle (beat), v, f £ so hawk(2).
Jungle-fowl, n., ho-a (by
Southern Chins) ; pon-a
(by Northern).
Jurisdiction, n ., apong.
K.
£ Kaung,’ n., avli"; tube for
drinking , ayii' / kye // n.
Kanyin-tree, n.,
Keen (be), v., ha"t (1).
Keep, ©., tauk (2).
Kernel, n., azaung.
Kick, v., kV'-nii kyok (1).
Kid, n., ami-so.
Kidneys, n., agaw.
Kill, v., tlik (2).
Kiss, v., £ non, £ nan (1).
Kite, n., a £ mn.
Kitten, n, 9 minzan-so.
Knee, n ., n’k £ ulu.
Kneel, «?., do-e r (1).
Knife, n., asin"; asin'-so'.
Knock against, v., leng (1).
Knot, n.y n’pii".
Know, n., kle; hmak (1);
t £ e (1); d £ a'k (2); kyawn
(!)•
Knuckle, n.,
£ Kula,’ n., galo.
£ Kwin,’ n, kwang.
L.
Labour, v., alut saih (1).
Lack, v., Hi (1).
Lad, n. t ‘so; ‘son-hyan.
Ladder, w., a‘lauk.
Lade, v., bank (2).
Lake, n., aung.
English and Chin.


Lame (be), k‘o"n-gan"(nii").
Lament, v., kak (2).
Lamp, n., me"-k‘wat; me"-in.
Land, n ., d‘ek.
Landing-place, n., tu"i-bo;
‘sit (for boats).
Land-slip (be a), v., yaw-sin
(i).
Language, n., pauh.
Large (be), v., ‘lbn (1).
Last, adj., a‘nu'-‘sun".
Late (be), v., ‘nii'-e.
Laugh, v., noi (1).
Law, n., (customary) ko"-i;
(statute) tala''.
LaAVsuit, n., a‘mn.
Lay, v., tauk (2); (eggs) doi
(!)•
Lazy (be), v., dawn (1).
Leader, n., lan.
Leaf, n., law.
Leak, v. 9 se (1).
Lean, v., en" (1).
Leap, v., dong (1).
Learn, v., so-e (1).
Leather, n., amaih-un".
Lee, n., gdo-a‘l6-diin.
Leech, n., awot.
Left (side), adj., k‘ye-doh.
Leg, n., dawn".
Lemon, n., yo ni.
Lemon-grass, n., ba-aw.
Lend, v., pek (2).
Length, n., a‘sauh".
Leopard, n., (large variety)
zun"-kye; (small) kye-a‘si.
Leper, n., ak‘laung"-mi.
Leprosy, n., ami-‘si".
Letter, n., so.
Level (be), v., nyi-nyaw (1).
Liar, n.. ‘li-si-gii k‘laung".
Lick, v., mle-e (1).
Lid, n., ak‘un".
Lie, v, t si-yaidi pauh hau (1)
Lie down, (sleep), v., i" (1).
Life, n., (term of life) ‘sann.
Lift, v., ta (1).
Light (be), v., k‘6 wa" (1).
Light, v. tr ., t‘awng (1).
Light, n., awa".
Lighten, v., pla-pla dawn (1)
Like, postp ., ‘li-h'n.
Like, v., p‘awng-e (1); mlaih
(1).
Lily (water), n., kya.
Lime, n., ‘sambala ; t‘iin"
(stone).
Lips, n., amon.
Liquor, n., ahanng".
List, n., salaung.
Listen, v., nye (1).
Little (a), adv., ple-‘saw ;
atone-zo.
Little (be), n., so (1); mlik(l).
Little finger, n., kn"t-so.
Liver, n., at‘in; at‘6n.
Living, v ., aheng" moi (1).
Lizard, n., (house) in-dftut;
(earth), klan-glo; (crow-
ing), tok-te.
Load, n,, wo ; wo-mlo.
Loft, n., adang-hawn.
Lofty (be), v., ‘lung (1).
Log, n., t‘e"n-lo"ng.
Loin-cloth, n., ‘nf.
Loins, n., kyen or' kyen.
Long (be), v., ‘sauh" (1).
L o n g (h o w), a d v., pak‘u"t
kla^ong.
Look after, v., apan-nank
(2).
Look at, v., ‘sawk (2).
Looking-glass, n., klen-‘mun.
Loom, n., to-k‘an.
Loose, v ., kink (2).
Loris, n., yon-‘ni".
English and Chin.


Loudly, adv ., nana.
Louse, n., (dog) u'-i-di" ;
(bug) adnon; (cloth) k‘a;
(ordinary) hek.
Love, v., mlaih-e (1); (to
make love) hii"-bek k‘awn
(1).
Lovely (be), v., p‘oi (1).
Low (be), v., nyen (1).
Luck, n., aklong.
‘ Luff a plant, ’ n.y sabaw.
Luggage, n., wo-mlo'.
Lump, n., kdiing.
Lungs, n., azawt or azaw.
M.
‘ Machan,’ w., at‘e".
Mad (he), v., yo" (1).
Maggot, n ., alhn-heng ; aliln-
zaung.
Mahant, n., amu"-i-san-se.
Maiden, n., haw-nil".
Maize, n., shan-bdn.
Make, v., saih (1).
Male, n., (suffix) pa, p 5.
Man, n ., pat‘o" ; akdaung".
Mantis, n., pakyi-‘moi-san-
‘sauh".
Mange, n., laip'an; k‘u‘ma.
Mango, n., ahoi.
Mangrove (tree), n., pla.
Mangrove swamp, n., pla-
tauh.
Manure, n., 'ek.
Many (much), adj ., alo-i;
pii'-haw.
Many (be), v., nil" (1).
Mark (to), v., zun"(l).
Market, n., ze".
Marriage festival (celebrate),
v., kyin-e (1).
Marrow, n ., ak‘ling.
Marsh, n., anng.
Mat, n., pd-i; adii'n; ‘sapauh.
Mat (weave), v., po-i ‘sank
a).
Matter (with), v ., tawn-e (1).
Meal, n., hi! -
Measles, n., n’ha".
Measure (survey), n., asok.
Meat, n., ‘so ; amaih.
Medicine, n., talaih".
Meet, v. t k‘awn (1).
Meet (to go to), v., do' (1).
Mend, v ., plang (1).
Meteor, n., a-‘si-p‘ai".
Middle, n., amliing".
Midday, n., k‘oni"-‘sun.
Midnight, n., ayan-zaling;
k‘luk-‘siln.
Mid-wife, n., ‘sd-bi".
Mildew, n., ‘su-‘maw; (to he
withered) ‘su-‘mawhok (1).
Military policeman, n., ses-
sen-gald.
Milk, n., su^-i-haung".
Milk (drink), v., su"-i-haung"
ok (2).
Milk, v., su"-i-nan (1).
Mind, n., amlil'ng.
Mire, n., lobo".
Mirror, n., klen-‘mun.
Miss, v., ‘man (1); leng-
th").
Mist, n ., a‘naung.
Mistake, v., ‘man ; kyaw (1).
Mix, v., t‘awk (2).
Moan, v., nun (1).
Mock, v., m’dayaw nauk (2),
Moiety, n., wak.
Moist (he), v., so (1).
Mole, n., aho-i; (a spot in the
skin) a‘maih.
Mole-hill, n., ahd-iln".
English and Chin.


Moment, n., duiC-si-baung.
Monastery, n., phungy i-
kyong.
Money, n., hen.
Monkey, n., yon; (white eye-
lid monkey) yon-do; (red-
tipped monkey) yon-sen.
Month, n., k £ lo.
Moon, n., k £ l6.
Moon (decrease of), n., k £ l6
shut.
Moon (increase of), n., k £ l6-
t £ i.
Moon (new), n., k £ l6-goi.
Morning, n., a £ ngo ; tong-wa".
Morning (in the), n., a£ngo-
kaw or a £ ngo-bi.
Mortar, n., £ siin.
Mosquito, n., ahan.
Mother, n., anii" ; a-u.
Mother-in-law, n., apo.
Mound, n., piin; (white-ant
hill) bliing.
Mountain, n., kyau; zon
(large one).
Mount, v., £ suu (1).
Moustaches, n., mo-mon-
£maw.
Mouth, n., wawk £ o // .
Mouth (of river), n ., a'siin".
Move, v., taih (1).
Mucus (phlegm), n., azaw-
kat; (of nose) a £ naw // .
Mud, n., lobo; 15.
Mumps (have the), n., behe"-
pling (1).
Murder, v., tiik (2).
Muscle, n., klauh".
Mushroom, n., apo".
Musket, n., shenat.
Musk-rat, n., p £ ayii"-aw.
Mutter, v., nauk (2); meng"
a).
Muzzle (of a gun), n., shenat-
k £ o".
Myook, n., mld'-ut.
N.
Nail, n., ; (of iron).
n £ t £ i"-shim.
Naked (be), v., wat-ko awn (1)
Name, n., amin.
Nape (of neck), n., a £ lu-o.
Narrow (be), v., ‘sek (1).
Naughty (be), v., £ si' (1).
‘ Nat n., asun; nak.
Navel, n., mlaih.
Near, postp., sen (a); baih;
adv ., asen-hoi.
Near (be), v., sen (1); sen-hek
(2).
Neck, n., a £ lu; ]a-b6n.
Necklace, n., awn-yawn.
Needle, n., ap £ yem.
Negligent (be), v., e sadi pun (1)
Nephew, n., atii" ; £ so.
Nerve, n., klauh".
Nest, n., abii".
Net, n., awa ; pok ; kawn.
Nettle, n., (small) £ lu-i- £ lan;
(large) manzan.
Never, adv., k £ ya-ba.
New, adj., t £ a' / .
News, n., £ sadaung.
Next, adv., anu'-a.
Niece, n„ atiT-nd"; ‘so-nil".
Nigh (be), v., sen (1).
Night, n., amii'; ay an; sayan.
Nine, adj., ko".
Ninety, adj., ko^-kyit.
Nip, v., di-e (1).
Nipple, n., (of a gun) me"-
don ; (of women; su"-!.
No, adv., si // -nii // .
English and Chin.


Nobody, n., aui"-pa si-si
(v. in negative).
Nod, v., ngu'; kun"-e (1).
Noise, n., a‘san.
None, n., baung-pa sisi ( v. in
negative).
Nonsense, n., alaung waung-
aidi pauh.
Noon (at), n., k‘oni" ‘siin (a).
Noose, n., ‘len-kwong.
North, //., myok.
0.
Oar, n., tak.
Oath (to take), v., klan-nh
shiin (1).
Obey, v., nye (1).
Oblique, adj., song-tong.
Obtain, v., bun-e (1).
Occasionally, adv., n’k‘ya-haw-
k‘ya-‘nin’k‘yen-k‘yen.
Odour, n., a‘nan.
Offal, n., akyaw.
Offence, n., aplet.
Offend, v., ‘man (1).
Offspring, n., ‘s6-‘sonii".
Often, adv., to-ba, to-ba'.
Oil, n., a‘si"-haung".
Old man, n., ‘san'-bo.
Old (be), v., (of persons) ‘san"-
hek (2); (of things) p‘en (1).
Old woman, n., ‘san"-nii".
Omen, n., lami.
On, postp., haw ; k‘ling.
Once, at, adv., zat-kanii;
n’k‘ya-te".
One, adj., haw.
Onion, n., kaw-‘shn.
Only, adv., diin".
Open, v., lili (1); be open,
(as country), wa-‘sa" (1).
Opium, n., be"n.
Opium-eater, n., be"n-6.
Nose, n., £ nut-to.
Nostril, n., ‘nut-to-k‘o".
Notch, n., abok; (for bow-
string) ali-se"; (for arrow in
bow) ali-lawn.
Note, v., zun" (1).
Now, adv., tii'-a.
Numb, v., t‘un" (1).
Numerous (be), v., nii" (1),
Nut, n., (ground) let-p‘ai-u.
Nutshell, n., ahok.
Oppress, v., a‘nyan-ak (2) ;
a‘nyan-16 (1).
Or, conj., na-k‘an-ba'-sina-
haw.
Orchid, n., (one kind) sanb‘oi;
(in general) kyenkwat.
Order, n., ahan.
Order, in, adv., n’k‘a-zin-zin.
Originally, adv., tu"-i-kon-
k‘o"-a ; ayang-gyi-gyi; set-
k‘a-k‘wa.
Orphan, n., (mother dead)
nge-bo-‘so; (father dead)
nge-mi-‘so.
Other, n., a‘saw-‘l6 ; bi".
Otter, n., ahan.
Outpost, n., kaung.
Outside, post])., plaung.
Over, postp., haw or hawn.
Overcast (be), v., k‘6 tin" (1).
Overflow, v., bo (1) ; Inn (1).
Overtake, v., p‘6-e tl).
Overturn, v., kalnta tank (2).
Owe, v., ale moi (1).
Own, v., pong (1).
Owner, n., mon,
Owl, n., (different kinds) waw-
ku"; tadu-monk‘an; ti-ti-ti-
tdt; wu"-a.
Ox, n., ‘saw"-‘saung".
English and Chin


P.
Pack, v., bo-no (1); ‘san (1).
Package, n., abi.
Paddle, n., and v., lauh.
Paddy, n., saung.
Paddy-bird, n., p‘ayo-bok.
Pagoda, n. 9 pala".
Pain, n. 9 a‘ma.
Pain, v. 9 ‘mi (1).
Paint, v. 9 talailP t‘awk (1).
Pair, n., (ziin) ‘nP.
Palatable (be), v ., alatso p‘oi
a).
Pale (be), v., bok (1).
Palm, n., (of the hand) ku"t-
p‘6.
Palmira, n., tawn-yon.
Pant, v. 9 hok (2).
Papa, n., apo.
Paradise, n. 9 P6k‘li P6‘li.
Paralysis (have) v., n’d‘e
‘saih, (1).
Pardon, v., myan (1).
Pare, v ., (the nails) k‘o"ng
(1); (scrape) ho-e (1) ;
(slice) diit (1).
Parents, n., antP-po-hoi.
Parrot, n., akyP.
Part, n. 9 ak‘aw".
Partridge, n., w6n-p‘6n.
Paso, n., k‘ye.
Pass, v., kla (1); p‘6 (1).
Past bearing (be), v., (of fruit)
p‘6-i (1).
Pat, v., a‘sa-‘sa bi (1).
Path, n. 9 lawn.
Patient, v., k‘awn (1).
Pay (a penalty), v. 9 yauh" (1).
Pay, n. 9 k‘l6-k‘6.
Peace, n, 9 atang.
Peacock, n ., ut‘o' 7 ng.
Peacock pheasant, n. 9 wuhd.
Peak, n. 9 ap‘aih.
Peel, n., ahok.
Peg, n. 9 so.
Pencil, n., s6-le' / -dun.
Pension, n. 9 anyen-e.
People, n. 9 ak‘laung"-hyaw.
Pepper, n. 9 (red) home-t‘e".
Perceive, ?;.,k‘awn(l); c mu(l).
Permanence, n. 9 a‘mawn.
Permission, n., a‘kwaung.
Peruse, v., p‘awk (1).
Persuade, v., ‘lina wu v (1).
Pestle, n., ‘siin-k‘0"; ‘siin-
k‘aw-ho.
Petty (be), v., mlik (1); nge,
a).
Pheasant, n., hok‘yet or wo-
k‘yet.
Physic, n., talaitP.
Phlegm, n. 9 azawkat.
Pick up, v., kawk (2).
Piece, n. 9 ak‘aw".
Pierce, v., sliiin (1).
Pig, n., wo.
Pig (jungle), w.,a‘ngaw,a‘ngo.
Pigeon (imperial), n., wu-
mun't
Pigeon (green), n., wu-luP-i
or wuhu.
Pile, n. 9 apiin.
Pilfer, v., myd-e (1).
Pimple, n. 9 n’piP.
Pinch, v. 9 di-e (1).
Pine-apple, n., mena.
Pipe, n (for water) saung-o";
(musical) plo-i; (for
kaung) aytP-kye'n.
Pistol, n. 9 sP-shenat.
Pit, n., konk‘o".
Pith, n, 9 asaung.
Place, n. 9 awndun.
Plaintiff, n ., tala' 7 det; tala'lu.
Plains, n. 9 ok-tir'.
English and Chin.


Plait, v., ‘sank or shank (1).
Plank, n., pen-byaw.
Plant, v., ling-e (1); sok
(1); mok-shun (1).
Plantain, n., nga-bok.
Plate, n. 9 ale".
Play, v., dale (1).
Pleader, n., le- £ ne.
Pleader (appoint), v. 9 le-‘ne.-
‘l6 (1).
Plot, v. 9 amliPng-nii kyen (1);
‘sen-glan (1).
Plough, v., tawng (1).
Plover, n., ti-ti-wa.
Pluck, v ., £ sik (1).
Plump (he), v. t t £ au (1).
Pocket, n., ay auk.
Point (a stick), v., £ myiin.
Point out, v., k £ yi" (1).
Poison, n., (arrow) mlo";
(generally) a £ sit.
Pole, n., shiin-kaw.
Pond, n., aung.
Ponder, v., ‘sen-kyen (1).
Pool, n., aung ; 16k.
Poor (be), v., ‘sinlaih (1).
Porcupine, n., aku".
Pore, n., ak £ law-mo.
Pork, n ., wo- £ so.
Possessed (be), v. 9 ‘saih-e (1).
Postpone, v. 9 dun' / -na tank (2).
Post, n., k £ undong; dong;
tong,
Posteriodr, n., hok £ a.
Pot, n., a"n; (water-pot)
yinzii.
Potato, n., aha.
Pound, v. 9 uaung (1).
Pour, v. 9 bo (1).
Powder, n., a‘mun.
Power, n. 9 o".
Practise, v. 9 saih-se (1) ; le-
la-nauk (2).
Praise, v. 9 mle-mlak nauk (2).
Prawn, n., kye-k^n.
Pray, v. 9 ‘mlu (1).
Precede, v. 9 ‘mawn-gawn sit
w-.
Precipice, n. 9 kyau-sok.
Pregnant (be), v., amaih-mon
moi (1).
Prepare, v. 9 plangna tank (2).
Present, n., £ sii.
Present (at), v. 9 adv., tiP-a.
Press, v., naih (1) ; du"t (1);
a £ set nauk (2); abon-nauk.
Pretty (be), v., p £ oi (1).
Prevent, v. 9 hawk (2); haw-
na tank (2).
Previously, adv., setk‘a-k £ wa.
Price, n., amawn.
Prick, v., shiin (1).
Prince, n., ab £ oi-la'n.
Principal (money), n., ayang".
Prison, n., tong.
Procure, v. 9 bun (1).
Profit, n., amlak.
Prohibit, v. 9 p £ aw (1).
Project, v., ‘sawk" (2).
Prop, v. 9 t £ 6k (1).
Prostrate, adv., (on the back)
akau-lau; (on the stomach)
aku-lut.
Protect, v. 9 hawk (2).
Proud (be), v. 9 amlii'ng £ len(l).
Puddle (buffalo), n. 9 16 k.
Pull, v., *niik (2).
Pull (out), v., yiik(2); p £ iik(2)
Pumpkin, n. 9 a £ moi-t £ e".
Pupil (of the eye), n., ami-u"
Puppy, n., u^-i-so.
Purchase, v. 9 £ le (1).
Pure (be), v. 9 (as water ) kang
(1); zin (1).
Purging, n., amlo.
Pursue, v., tawn (1).
English and Chin.


Push, $?., bnk (1).
Put, v., tank (2); (put in)
‘san (1); (put on) t £ awk
(1).
Putrid (be), v. 3 myan" (1);
Pit' (]).
Pwe, n., po-i.
Pyingado, n. 3 k £ yet-paw.
Q.
Quack, n. 3 meng".
Quagmire, n., labo or labok
or lobo.
Quail, n. 3 shon-miik.
Quality (of soil), n. 3 d‘ek a-
p‘awmg.
Quarrel, v. 3 wo-e (1).
Quarter, n. 3 piin-m‘li"-nu
piin-haw.
Queen, n., ab‘oi-nii"-lan;
shaung-palaung-nii".
Queen bee, n., k‘o"-i-nii"-
lan.
Quench, v., ‘myit (1).
Question, v ., hi".
Quickly, adj., yan-yan; be-
be.
Quietly, adv., anyen"-nii.
Quid, n., e; ya.
Quill, n ap‘ya.
Quite, san-zat; ‘set-‘set.
Quiver, n. 3 at‘aw-dong.
R.
Race, n., mi-ii'.
Races, n ., ason-po-i; ason-
pliing.
Radish, n ., an-maw.
Raft, n., p‘6ng.
Rafter, n., ‘mleng; (under)
adang; (upper) glii-bon.
Rag, n., pawn-bybt.
Rain, v ., yo-6 (1).
Rainbow, n., n’gun"-hang.
Rains, n., ‘so-k‘6.
Raise, v. 3 ta (1).
Ramble, v ., mlawk (1).
Ramrod, n. 3 tl-bo:
Rape, v. 3 at‘eng" e nii" ‘saw
(!)•
Rapids, n. 3 san.
Rat, n., p‘ayu"
Rattan, n., men.
Raven, n., mlii'-aung-o.
Raw (be), v., t‘e"n (1).
Reach, v. } p‘6-e (1); (for)
p‘an (1).
Read, v p‘awk (1).
Ready (be), v., ‘san-e (1).
Reap, v., yan (1).
Rear, n., diin'' (1).
Rebel, n., ‘sabon.
Receive, v., k e awn (1).
Reckon, v., ‘sek (1),
Recline, v., i" (1).
Recognise, v., n’zun // -mi (1).
Recollect, v., n’zun" (1);
n’zun'-rai (1).
Reconciled (be), v ., yaw-e
(1).
Recover, v. 3 bawndina bun
(1).
Red, v., sen (1).
Reel, n., p‘oi - klauk - diin ;
labat.
Reflect, v ,, ‘sen-kyen (1).
Refuse, v., nyang (1); k‘awn
(I)- ■
Regret, v., ngoi-e (1).
Reject, v., k‘awn (1); nyang
(1),
Relation, n. 3 m6n‘so.
16
English and Chin.


Belated (be), v. y m6n‘s6
‘san-e (1).
Remain over, v. t awn-hawk
(2).
Remember, v., (1).
Remind, v. 9 ‘ni (1); ‘sadi pek
(2)-
Remote (be), v. s ‘l6 (1).
Remove, v., plong-e (1);
(i tram.) zi (1).
Renowned (be), v., amm ‘len
(1).
Rent, n. y ak‘6.
Repair, v, plang (1).
Repay, v., bawndina pek (2).
Repeat, v., bawndina saih ;
ban (1).
Repeatedly, adv., n’k‘aw-
n^ni"; nVya-n^ni".
Repent, v. y ngoi-e (1).
Reply, v,, ‘sau-e (1)*
Report, n., pauh ; ahau.
Require, v., lii-e (1).
Resemble, v., tit (1).
Resin, n.., apli.
Respect, v., kang (1).
Rest, awn (1); nyen (1)
i" (1).
Restore, v, y bawndina awk
(1).
Retire, v. y ‘silk (I).
Return, v. y bawn (1)1
Revenue, n., kanzana hen.
Revolve, v. f maung (1).
Reward, n., ‘sii.
Rhinoceros, n., apian.
Rib, n., a‘naii-y6.
Rice (cooked), n. y bii'; (un-
cooked) asaung.
Rice (sweet), n., saung-tauk.
Rice (ordinary), n. y saung-ho.
Rice (long stalked), n., saung-
bo.
Eice (short stalked), n. y saung-
nif.
Eich (be), v. y t £ au-e (1).
Bide, £ siin or £ sun (i).
Eidge, n. y pnkawn.
Eifle, n. y shenat-t £ en".
Eight (side), adj ., lapan.
Eigorous (he), v. y kang (1).
Eim, n. y ape".
Eing, n. y koi-zit or ku-zit.
Einse, v. y pyo (1).
Eipe (he), v. y £ myin (1).
Eise, v. y t £ o (1).
Eiver, n. y ahon.
Eoad, n. y lawn.
Eoar, v. y (as a deer), hawk ;
(as a tiger) klii-e (1).
Boast, v. y shai" (1).
Eoh, v. y o"hawna hi" (1).
Bobber, n. y ak £ laung"- £ si".
Eock, n. y aliin.
Eoe, n. y ngo-toi.
Eoll, v. y (in the dust) £ l6-e
(1); (roll up) pyaw (1).
Eoof, n. y glim.
Eoof, v. y de (1).
Boom, n. y (front) k£un"-daung-
lan; (back) in-k'adli'.
Boot, n. y ayii"n.
Eope, n. y ayo"h, alawn.
Eot, v. y my an" (1); t £ u*
(i).
Bound, v. y lun (1),
Bow, v. s ka'k (1).
Eub, n. y ho; t £ awk (1).
Euler, n. y ab £ oi.
Eun, v. } sawn" (1).
Eupee, n.. y hen-law.
Euptured (be), v. y ak (2) ;
t‘ak (2).
Bust, n. y n’t £ i"- v ek.
Eutbless (be), v. y myan-(nii")
(I)-
English and Chin.


s.
Sack, n., ayauk.
Sad (be), v. f amlii'ng mlik (1).
Saddle, n., si"-un".
‘ Sagaw,’ n., saung-gauh.
Salary, n ., k‘lo-k‘6.
Saliva, n., azaw-tu"-i.
Salt, n., zf".
Saltpetre, n., yan-t £ e"n.
Salute, n., k £ awk" or k £ awt"
(2).
Sambur, n., gyl-yan.
Same (be), v., tii (1).
Sand, sanai".
Sand-fly, n., pahoi-so.
Sane (be), v., amlii'ngp £ oi (1).
Sap, n., f/e^n-haung".
Satisfied (until), adv., c ng6-
6ng.
Satisfied (be), v., zaw-e (1).
Savage, v ., long (1).
Say, v., hau (1); nauk (2).
Scale, n., (of a fish) lit.
Scar, n., a £ ma-16ng.
Scared (be), v., ko (1).
Scatter (seed), v., p £ aw (1).
School, n., s6-zok-kyong.
Scoop, v., plai-e (1).
Scorch, v., jo (1).
Scorpion, n., kalako.
Scoundrel, n., ak‘laung // - £ si // .
Scowl, v., amo-e (1).
Scrape, v., hu"-i (1).
Scratch, v., plai-e.
Scream, v., hi (1).
Screw, n., n’td^-den.
Scrofula (have), v., kan"-t £ et
(i). .
Sea-snail, n., asho"
Seam, n., k £ 6-e-glon.
Search, v., W'-e (1); le // .
Season, n., k £ 6.
Seat, n., kadeng.
Security, n ., amak £ awn.
See, v ., £ mti (1); k £ awn (1);
kyin (1) ; ‘sawk (2).
Seed, n., mon ; t £ e" ; se.
Sek (y of a basket),
Seize, v., mawn (1): bi" (I) •
haw-e (1). W
Select, v., shaw (I).
Self (myself), pro., piin-dom
Sell, v., yi" (1).
Send, v., t £ 6-hawk, t £ awk (2);
£ lawk (1).
Separate, v ., ka"k (2).
Serpent, n., p £ aw.
Set, v., (as the sun), kliin.
Set down, v., tauk (2).
Settle, appease, v., yaw-e (1),
Settle, n., (of birds) dun" (1),
Seven, adj., £ si".
Seventy, adj., £ si // -kyit.
Several, adj., awaung-bii".
Severely, adv., anyet.
Sew, v., k £ 6-e (1).
Shade, n., alit.
Shake, v., £ sak (1); (doff’s
tail) £ liin-e (1). V 8
Shallow (be), v., plo (1).
Shame, n., ashauk.
Shampoo, v.., du"t (1).
Share, n., ap £ d.
Sharp (be), v., ha"t (1).
Sharpen, v., t 6 (1).
She, pro., aya.
Sheath, n., gawt.
Shelf, n., sang.
Shell, n., kako".
Shield, n., £ lo".
£ Shiko,’ v., k‘awk" (2).
Shine, v., ayaung £ sawk" (2).
Ship, n., ‘saung-pauh.
English and Chin.


Shiver, v., c sa\v-e (1).
Shoal, n., san (if water ) ;
mlaung" (if no water). •
Shoot, v., kawk (2).
Short (he), v., ‘so"-i (1).
Shoulder, n., apa".
Shoulder-blade, n., a'mleng-
jo"-
Shout, v.j hi (1).
Shove, v.j bdk (1).
Show, v.j pla, plau (1).
Shrivelled (be), v., k‘un-e (1).
Shut, v.j k‘a r (1).
Sick (be), v., gan" (nii") (1).
Sickle, n., awin".
Side, n.j (of men) ading-by-
in.
Side, n.j haw; p‘at; (of coup-
les) p‘a.
Sieve, n.j ko-hi'.
Sigh, v.j ashaw klauk (2).
Sight (of gun), n.j n’zun"-
diin.
Sign, n.j n’zun".
Silent (be), v., didi awn (1).
Silk, 7i., tamu"t.
Silver, n., hen.
Similar (be), v., tii (1).
Simple (be), v., dim" (1).
Sing, v.j au-e (1); ‘sik‘yan"
ban (1).
Singly, adv., (pa) haw-dim".
Sink, v.j mliik (1).
Sip, v.j 6-hawk (2).
Sister (elder or younger), n.j
aniibi".
Sister (in-law), n.j a^o'-ti';
naung-‘ni" ; ase-‘zan.
Sit, v.j k‘o" (1); (on eggs) 6-
Six, adj. , ‘sok.
Sixty, adj., ‘sok-kyit.
Skein, n., myak.
Skin, n ., u-tin"; tin"; amaih-
iin" (1).
Skull, n ., alii.
Sky, n., ame ; k‘6.
Slacken,??., ko (1); shau(l).
Slant, v., en" (1).
Slave, n., mya.
Slay, v., tiik (2).
Sleep, v ., i" (1); (to put to
sleep) a-6 (1).
Sleepy (be), v., i"-woi (1).
Slender (be), v. f mlik (1).
Slice, v.j awk (1) ; k‘yan (1).
Sling, n., ‘son.
Slip, v., t‘o or t‘6 (1).
Slit, v., ‘liik (2); ‘mlo (1).
Sloping (be), v., en" (1).
Slowly, adv., ka-lu"-lut.
Slug, n., dada; dadii.
Sluggish (be), v., t‘on (1).
Small, adj., mlik (1); nge (1);
so (1).
Smart, v., kaw"-e (1).
Smash, v., pyak or plak (1).
Smear, v., t‘awk (1).
Smell, v.j nan (1).
Smile, v.j noi (1).
Smock-frock, n., ap‘yan.
Smoke, n., k‘u".
Smooth (be), v., t‘6 (1).
Snail, n., gogok; (different
kinds) gogok-mon-sen;
laih-gogok.
Snake, n., p‘aw.
Snare, v ., gon-nii ok (2).
Snatch, v. 9 haw-e (1).
Sneeze, v., n’si" (1).
Snipe, n.j shun-muk.
Soak, v.j sek (2).
Soap acacia, n., at‘o".
Socket, n., k‘yi.
Soft (be), v.j dek (2).
Soil, n., d‘ek.
English and Chin.


Sojourn, v., awn (1).
Sole, n.y k‘o"-p‘6n.
Sometimes, adv.y n’k‘ya-haw-
k‘ya-‘ni".
Son, n.y ‘so.
Son-in-law, n., atii".
Song, n.y au-e-pauh ; £ sik‘yan".
Sorry, v.y amliing-ko-nge.
Sound, n.y a‘san; (to make a
sound) meng" (1).
Sour (be), v.y t‘6 (1).
South, n.y tong.
Sow, n.y wo-nii".
Sow, v.y p‘aw (1).
Spade, n.y a-o"-i.
Span, n.y ak e aw.
Spark, n.y me"-bahi".
Sparrow, n.y so ; apyet.
Spathodia rheedii, n.y p‘6-p‘a".
Speak, v.y nauk (2); hau (1).
Spear, n., ‘sauk-k‘ye; subi-
‘sauk - k‘ye ( a particular
kind).
Spearman, n. , ‘sauk-k‘ye-mon.
Spend, v.y p‘6-i (1).
Spider, n.y bun"-bo.
Spike, n.y ‘so"n.
Spill, v.y bo-si (1).
Spin, v.y hi" (1).
Spindle, n.y ha-sii; la-ha-sii.
Spirit, n.y k‘l6.
Spit, v.y ‘so" or sho" (1).
Spleen, n.y a‘l6.
Split, v.y ak (2); ‘liik (2).
Spoil, v.y pyak (1).
Spout, n.y ape".
Spray, n.y tu"-i-don.
Spread out, v.y p‘aw or p‘6 (1).
Sprig, n.y andon.
Spring, v.y dong (1).
Sprinkle, v.y p‘aw (1).
Sprout, n.y andon ; yon-so.
Spunk, n.y t‘e"n-sa.
Spur, n., (of fowls) a‘set.
Spy, v., sho (1).
Square, n., m‘li"-gyf.
Squall, n., mun-t‘en.
Squeeze, v ., nan (1).
Squirrel, n.y a‘le" ; (flying)
a‘lu ; (large kind) ak‘ye".
Stab, v ., sliiin (1).
Stable (be), v., me (1).
Staff, n ., shiin-kaw.
Stage, n sang.
Stagger, v., ka-song-ka-pan
sit (1); gld-glu p‘oi-p‘oi sit
(i).
Stagnant (be), v., o°k (1).
Stairs, n., a'lauk.
Stalk, n., yon.
Stamp, v., ‘so-e (1); kiting"
(i).
Stand, v ., dim" (1).
Star, n., a £ si.
Startled (be), v., kyf (1).
Starve, v., ngak (1),
Status, n. y alit-long.
Steal, v., myo-e (1).
Steam, n.y aim.
Steam-boat, n. } me"-‘saung-
pauh.
Steel, n.y n’t‘i"-hen.
Steep (be), v., sawk, sok (1).
Steer, v., paih (1).
Step-brother, n., ata-san.
Step-son, n.y p‘owa-pdgii-‘s6.
Step-father, n.y pa-t‘oi.
Stern, n.y paih (1).
Stick, v.y k‘6-e (1).
Stick, n.y t‘e"n-bo"n, dabo"n.
Stiff (be), v.y siing (1).
Still, adv.y (and v.) mo (1),
hawk (2).
Stimulate, v.y ‘ni" (1).
Sting, v.y dd (1).
Stir, v.y we (1).
English and Chin.


Stirring-stick, n ., ko-be".
Stock, w., (of cross bow) ali-
tii".
Stockade, n., taw".
Stocks, n., k‘l6.
Stocks (to put in tbe), v.,
k‘l6-wa tank (2).
Stomach, n ., apiik.
Stone, n., aldn.
Stoop, v., kun" (1).
Stop, v., awn (1).
Store up, v., ‘long (1).
Storm, n., mun-t‘en.
Story, pauh; tu"-i kon-
pauh.
Stranger, n., pan-shin".
Straw, n., saung-bauh.
Stream, n., ahon.
Strength, v., o".
Stretch, v., ‘myan-e.
Strife, n ., atiik.
Strike, v ., deng (1).
String, n., ayo"h-so.
Strong (be), v., o" ‘l&n (1).
Stunned (be), v., myaw (1).
Stump, n., amu.
Stupid, adj., miig (1).
Stutter, v., (pauh) tok (1);
o (I)-
Submit, v., waung (1).
Substitute, n., ak‘laung"-
t‘aw.
Succeed, v., ong (1) ; ‘lung
(!)•
Suck, v., amyawn 6 (1).
Suddenly, adv ., tondon.
T.
Table, n.y sabwe-deng.
Tad-pole, n.y dik-doi.
Tail, n.y home.
Take, v.y bi" (1); 15 (1).
Take out, v.y ‘so-i (1).
Suffer, v., k‘awn (1).
Sufficient (be), v., lun" (1);
sbau (1).
Sugar, n., (plant) zigan"
(yon).
Suicide, commit, v. s asbaw-
ho tiik (2).
Suit, v ., ‘san (1); ‘san-d‘a-e
(1); tawn (1),
Sullen (be), v., amlffing t‘o
(1).
Sulphur, n., kan.
Sun, n., k‘oni".
Sunlight, n ., k‘oni"-wa".
Sunrise, n., k‘oni"-t‘o.
Sunset, n., k‘oni"-klun.
Support, v., t‘6k (1).
Suppress, v., u-e (1).
Surprised (be), v., pffi-hek (2)*
Surround, v., lang" (1).
Suspect, v., u"-nauk (2).
Suspend, v., bawk (2).
Swallow, n. and v., (n.) tai-
gun"; ( v .) myawn or
myaw (1).
Swarm, n., (of bees) k‘o"-i-s6.
Sweat, n ., aklaw.
Sweep, v ., p‘e" (1).
Sweet (be), v., tii-i (1).
Sweet-heart, n., po-po-i.
Swell, v., pling (1).
Swim, v ., tu"-i yo (1).
Swing, v. and n. } ( v .) to-e
or taw-e ; (n.) myen-da-hoi.
Swoop, v., ‘siin (1).
Sword, n., asin"-‘sauh".
Take off, v.y ‘lai (1).
Take away, v.y Medina sit
(1).
Talk, v.y hau; pauh hau (1).
Tall, ad.y Tiing (1).
English and Chin.


Tally, n., n’zun"-dun.
Tamarind, n ., menglen.
Tame, v., yim (1).
‘ Tanbo,’ n., t‘an-p‘u".
Tank, n., tu"-i-k‘an.
Target, n., bong.
Taste, n., alatso; v., mlin
W.
Tattoo, v., (the face) abnaung
sbiln (1).
Tattooing needle, n., suk.
‘ Taungya,’ n., alo.
Taunt, v., amliibig ‘mi-ong
aliau bek (2).
Teach, v., so-e (1).
Teak, n., ayi".
Teal (red), n., pombe.
Teal (cotton), n.,
Tear, n., ami-kTi.
Tear, v., (intrans.) t‘ak (1).
Tear up, v., taih" (1)
Tease, v., ‘long (1).
Tell (direct), v., ‘sin (1).
Ten, adj ., ‘nga" ; ha".
Terminate, v., ‘siin" (1).
‘ Thabye-sprig,’ n ., a‘mdnon.
‘ Thabye-tree,’ abnu-yon.
‘ Thakin,’ n., ab‘oi-bo.
Thalia cannaeformis, n.,
sheng.
Than, postp., t‘a.
Thank, v., kyezu daung (1).
That, adj., t‘6.
Thatch, n., gliin.
Them, pro., na-hyaw (a).
Then, adv., set-k‘wa, t‘6-k‘wa.
There, adj., sii'-ya.
Therefore, adv., n’k‘yan-si-nti.
Thick, v., plek (1).
Thickness, n., a‘so".
Thief, n., k^w-'sii".
Thieve, v., myo-e (1).
Thigh, n., ap‘e.
Thin, v., k‘6ng (1); (as liquid)
pyau (1).
‘ Thindaing,’ n., ap‘yau.
Think, v., kyin (1); u"-nauk
(2).
Thirty, adj., t c un"-kyit.
Thirsty (be), v., tu"-i ha-e (1).
This, adj., ni.
Thorn, n., aTing.
Thou, pro., naung.
Thousand, adj., to"ng.
Thread, n., p‘oi-yun.
Threaten, v., hang (1).
Three, adj., t‘un".
Thresh, v., ‘naung (1).
Threshing-floor, n., taung-
laung.
Throat, n., a‘lu-k‘o".
Throne, n., yon-zon.
Throttle, v., hak (2).
Throw, v., wo' 7 (1).
Throw away, v., to'big (1).
Thrust, v., shiin (1).
‘ Thugyi,’ n., taih"
Thumb, n., ku'T-nu".
Thunder, v., wuhun" pii (1).
Thunder-bolt, n., gle-ho".
Thunder-bolt falls, v., gle-
nii shiin (1).
Thus, adv., nikTii, nik‘u"t.
Tickle, v., ‘myaw (1).
Tide, n., pla-tu"-i.
Tie, v., k‘un (1).
Tiger, n., akye.
Tigress, n., akye-nii".
Tight, adv., at‘eng".
Time, n., k‘yin; (a time) plan;
n’k‘ya.
Timid (be), v., kyi (1).
Tin, n., daung-bok.
Tinder, n., me"-sa.
Tipsy (be), v., mo-i (1).
Tired (be), v., yak" (1).
English and Chin.


Toad, n., u-u"-p6.
Toad-stool, n., apo".
Toast, v., shaU (1).
Tobacco, n., maku".
Tobacco plant, n., maku"-
yon.
Today, n., tii- e nu"t.
Toddy, n., iin' / -haung // .
Together, adv., atiik
Toe, n., k‘6-san.
Tomato, n., c san-kalang.
Tomorrow, n., hota"; the day
after tomorrow, kyittu;
day after, kank-tu.
Tongue, n ., amle-baw.
Tonsil, n., agye".
Tooth, n., alio"'; (front) aho"n-
-‘s i /; (back) aho'Ti-kawn.
Top, n., p c aih'k
Topsy-turvy, adv., p‘6n-p‘e-
lan-gan.
Torch, n., me"-‘sauh".
Total, n., paung.
Touch, v., ‘mlem-ba (1).
Tough, v., pyen (1); siing
(!)•
Town, n., mlii'.
Tracks, n., k c 6-16ng.
Tradition, n., tu^-i-kon-pauh;
(one who knows of the
traditions) ak‘-
laung"-t‘&n.
Trample down, v., saw" (1),
or zaw" (1).
Trap, v., gon-nu gli (1), gon-
nii ok, (2).
Tree, n., t‘e"n.
Tremble, v., c saw-e (1).
Trench, n., mlong.
Trespass (as in a house), n.,
goik-‘sawk (2).
Trigger, n., aTu'.
Trigger-guard, n., gon.
Trip, v., mawt (1).
Troublesome, adj., pauh t c u'
(1).
Trunk, n., t e e"n-lo"ng.
True (be), v., ‘mawn (1); si
(1).
Truth, n., a'mawn.
Truthfully, adv., si-zaw.
Try, v., o".tuk (1)
Try (a case), v., sek (1).
Tube, n., (for drinking kaung)
ayiT-kye'n.
Tuft, n., pon-shiin.
Tumble, v., mawt (1), or
maw-e (1).
Turmeric, n., a-oi.
Turn, v., ‘le (1); t‘en" (1).
Turtle, n., a'siin.
Tusk, n., mu // -ho' / ,
Twenty, adj., go".
Twig, n., andon.
Twin, n., n’pTe.
Twist, v., lawn (1); t‘en" (1);
(a cord) wek (2).
Two, adj., ‘ni".
u.
Umbrella, n., t‘i".
Unbind, v., k‘yiit (1).
Uncle (paternal), n., pa-Ten;
pa-t‘oi.
Uncle (maternal), n., apu-bo.
Unclean (be), v., su (1).
Under, postp., go.
Understand, v., yauk-siik (2).
Underwood, n., ap‘aw.
Undress, v., e lai (1).
Unfaithful (be), (of a wife),
v., ‘sank" (1).
Unfold, v., ‘myan (1).
Unite with, v., k‘6-e (1).
English and Chin.


Untie, v.f kyiit (1).
Untruthful (he), v. 3 ‘li (1).
Up, adv., l)ii / ; haw.
Upon , prep., haw; k‘ling.
Uprightness, n., apyiin; (posi-
tion) n’ dim".
Uproar, n., p‘6n-p‘e lan-gdn
a‘san-‘len.
Urine, n., pyun-du"-i.
Use, n., alaung.
Uselessly, adj., atwang.
Usually, adv., n’k‘ya / -ko' / -nu.
V.
Vacant (he), v., ak‘awn-moi;
(house) in-hon (1).
Vaccinate, v., n’t‘e" shiin (1).
Valley, n., kyau-kyet.
Valuable (he), v., amawn ‘l6n
a).
Vapour, ft., aim.
Vary, v., wai" (1).
Veal, n.f ‘saw^-'so.
Vegetables, n ., awn; awn-hii;
aung-hiU
Vein, n.f atU-glauh".
Vend, v.f yU (1).
Very, adv ., pii'-haw ; t 6.
Vex, v., a‘mu ‘mawk (2).
Vigilant (be), v. } p‘oi-b‘oi
‘nu"t (1).
Vigour, n., o".
Vile (he), v., nydng (1).
Village, n., nan.
Villager, n., nan-m6n; nan-
‘so.
Violently, adv., k £ yau"-nii.
Virgin, n., haw-nii".
Visage, n ., ‘moi-san.
Voice, n., a‘san.
Vomit, v.f mlo (1).
Vulture, n., laung-do" (1).
w.
Wagtail, n., mlaung"-sadu".
Waist, n., kyen or kyen.
Wait for, v., yeng (1).
Wake up, v., k‘ak (2).
Wake, v. trns., t‘o (1).
Wall, n., apaung.
Wander about, v. } mlawk
(1).
Want, v., lii-e (1); woi (1).
Warp, n., atong.
Warm (be), v., ‘l6k (2); ok
(1).
Warn, v., ‘sadi pek (2).
Wash, v.y (a cup) py6 (1);
(clothes) shau (1); (face)
‘maih-e (1); (head) shau-e
(1). '
Wasp, n.f k‘o"-i..‘16-i.
Watch, v.f kaung-‘nu"t (1).
Watch, n., (first) amii'-ka";
(midnight) k‘ lii k-‘s ii n;
(morning) k‘6-taung-d6n.
Water, n., tu"-i; (from eaves
of house) tu"-i sho.
Waterfall, n., kan-dan.
Waterfowl, n., (diver) tu"-i
aung-6.
Wave, n. and v., ( n .) ‘long;
(©., as a sword) ‘len.
Way, n., alawn.
We, pron., kyeme".
Weak (he), v., o" mlik (1).
Weapon, w., ko-bi", kdmawn.
Wear, v., (jacket) shaw (1);
(paso) ‘sank (2); (round
the neck) oi-nauk (2);
(a hat) k c d (1).
Weary (be), v. } yai" (1).
17
English and Chin.


Weave, v., to-tak (2); (a
mat) ‘sank (1).
Web, n., hun^-bo-in.
Weeds, n., abyawn.
Weep, v., kak (2).
Weight, n., akyin.
Well, n., tu"-i kyiin.
Well (be), v., kan", son-kan"
(!)• ,
Well, adj., p c oi-lmga, p‘oi-
p e oi.
West, n., anok.
Wet (be), v., s 6 (1).
What, inter, pron., baung.
Whatever, pron., baung-pa
si'-si.
When, inter, pron., pak‘wa.
Whence, inter, pron., banga-
gii'.
Where, inter, pron., bang-a.
Which, inter, pron., baung.
Whistle, v., ‘myut (1).
White (be), v., bok (2).
White ant, n., ak‘a' 7 .
Who, inter, pron., ani".
Whole, adj., san-sat; £ set- { set.
Why, adv., pak c atinu.
Wicked (be), v., ‘si" (1).
Wide (be), v., yauh"
Widower, widow, n., nge-bo,
nge-nii".
Wife, n., p‘aya.
Wild (be), v., long (1).
Wind, n., k‘ll, g‘lo.
Wind, v., gaw (1).
Window, n., daung-k'o' 7 .
Wing, n., p‘ya".
Wink, v., ami k c ye (1).
Winnow, v., di' (1).
Winter, n., £ sit-k‘o'.
Wipe up, v., h 6 (1).
Wire, n., n’tT-yo'di.
Wish, v., woi (1).
Witch, n., sonmo.
With, postp., nii ; tii'; yii'.
Wither, v., sa (i).
Within, postp., dwaungli, dii-
ga.
Witness, n., ‘saukshe.
Without, postp., ko.
Woman, n., nat‘o".
Womb, n., a £ saw".
Wonder, v., pii'-hek (2).
Wood, n., t £ e"n.
Wood-apple, n., £ man-shing.
Wood-pecker, n., talen.
Woof, n., n’za".
Word, n., pauh.
Work, n. and v., ( n .) alut;
{v.) alut saih (1).
Worm, n., a £ sa"; (in the
body) asheng.
Worst, adj., a‘si' / -‘si!in".
Worship, v., hen'-ho-e (1);
k‘ut-byaw (1); (Christian)
pii'-tok (1).
Wound, n., along.
Wrap, v., shaw (1).
Wrestle, v., p £ 6n-e (1).
Wrinkle, n., u-iin'-ko.
Wrist, n., ku /7 t-k £ ye.
Write, v., le" (1).
Wrong (he), v., ‘man (1).
‘ Wundauk,’ n., wunt £ 6k.
Y.
Yam, n., aha.
Yawn, v., ban (1).
Year, n., kun ; last year, yan
kun.
Yearly, adv., kun-titi'.
Yeast, n., asaw".
Yellow (be), v., oi (1).
Yes, adv., sl-yli; si-ba.
English and Chin.


Yesterday, n ., anda"; day
before, n ., anda"-‘moi.
Yoke, w., t'an-p'ii".
Yolk, n. s n’plaw.
You, 'pro., naung, naung-me",
na.
Youth, n ., c s6n-byan.
Young, (be), v kun nge (1).
z.
Zealous (be), v., amlii'ng te moi (1).
English and Chin.


APPENDICES.


APPENDIX I.


Measurements of the different parts of the body of a Chin (Ko Lan) and a
GhURKHA (liENDA SUBAR.)
Different parts of the body.
Ko Lan,
Chin.
Eenda Subar,
Ghurka.
(1) Height without shoes
Ft. In.
5 5
Ft. In.
5 44
(2) Length of head from crown to chin (with calipers)
(3) Girth of head
0 9i
1 9|
0 94
1 9f
0 9
(4) Length of head, fore and aft, or forehead to occi-
put.
0 9*
(5) AVidth of head between parieties
0 7
0 7
(3) Crown of head to hip
2 24
2 2
(7) Hip to heel ...
3 24
3 2 3
(8) Width between the shoulders
1 2
1 9A
(9) Girth of chest
2 74
2 9
2 4 1
(10) Length of arm and hand
1 2
2 4J
(11) Length of arm
0 11
o Hi
0 10 1
(12) Length of forearm
0 101-
(13) Length of hand •
0 74
0 6f
1 7
(14) Length of thigh
i
(15) Length of leg to ankle ...
(16) Length of foot
1 3
0 Q 1
1 2
0 94
0 3|
0 34
1 5f
i 04
0 8f
(17) Width of hand
0 3 1
(18) Width of foot
0 4
(19) Girth of thigh
(20) Girth of calf
i 5
i 04
0 9
(21) Girth of forearm
APPENDIX II.
Physical Type of Chins compared with that of the Limbu Ghurkas.
Chin.
Ko Lan, of Daing-baing ; age 47 ; by
profession a taungya-cultivator; some-
what above the ordinary height of Chins
and spare of flesh as is the case with
most taungya-cutters. Colour an ordi-
nary brown, not dark ; iris somewhat
darker brown ; no trace of ruddiness in
the cheeks; colour of hair black ; a
very slight moustache; no beard or
whiskers ; no hair on breast or limbs ;
shape of head nearly round, neither
truncated occiputally nor pyramidised ;
vertical view oval, but wider in front
than behind the ears ; facial angle
moderately good; contour of face lo-
zenge-shaped, tapering very much to-
wards the chin ; a fairly good forehead,
not retiring; cheek bones very salient
Limhu.
fSubar, a Limbu Ghurka and a ser-
geant in the Sandoway police ; age 29 ;
somewhat spare in habit, but well-fed ;
colour an ordinary brown ; somewhat
lighter than Ko Lan’s owing to his ha-
bitually working with coat and trousers
on; no colour in his cheeks; eyes a
dark brown; hair black ; slight mous-
tache and a few hairs under the chin ;
hair of head cut, except tuft, which he
wears as a Hindu bjr religion ; no hair
on the chest, back or limbs; shape of
head nearly round, not truncated occi-
putally nor pyramidical; vertical view
oval, but wider in front than behind the
ears ; facial angle good ; contour of face
lozenge-shaped, but somewhat longer
than Ko Lan’s owing to the chin being
Physical Description.


Chin.
and frontal sinuses well developed ; ears
somewhat large, lopes hanging owing to
their being bored (the lopes are joined
when not bored); eyes good, not notice-
ably oblique ; nose flat, depressed, and
dilated towards the tip ; nares elliptical,
bridge broad; mouth good, not promi-
nent, and the teeth not projecting ; chin
pointed and small and jaws angular;
arms rather long and legs short; hands
and feet well made, but fingers and toes
thick at the ends; hair long and tied in a
knot like the Burmese; ears bored and
somewhat dilated ; expression pleasing
but timid, not very Mongolian, except
for the prominent cheek bones and
zygomata.
Limbu.
better developed; a fairly good fore-
head; cheek bones very salient; frontal
sinuses developed, but scarcely so much
as with Ko Lan; ears proper size,
lopes joined ; inner angle of eye oblique
downwards; nose flat and wide towards
the tip and not depressed, nares round
bridge broad ; mouth not prominent and
teeth not projecting; chin rounded and
of fair size ; arms rather long and legs
short ; hands and feet well formed, the
tips of the fingers though not tapering,
not particularly thick at the ends;
expression pleasing and Mongolian in
cast.
APPENDIX III.
Below are set forth resemblances between the Chin and Dravidian languages,
firstly as regards grammatical forms and secondly as regards roots (it is perhaps
needless to add that the construction of sentences is the same in all). The resem-
blances are principally with Tamil, which is admittedly the best preserved of the
Dravidian languages, but in a few instances the connection seems to be rather with
the Telugu than Tamil, these being chiefly instances where the former has preserved
certain particles not found in the latter. In the negative voice Malayalim alone
presents a parallel, but it is evident that of all the Dravidian languages Malayalim
has alone preserved a negative conjugation. This view does not quite coincide with
that of the late Dr. Caldwell, who seems to think that the short a is the negative
sign,—an opinion not generally shared. The present is, however, no place to enter
into a discussion on the philology of the Dravidian conjugations and declensions,
and I would merely state here that I am perfectly prepared to support my position
in every case that the particles resembling Chiu in the Dravidian conjugation, &c.,
are really radical and neither euphonical nor redundant.
With regard to the comparison of roots it will be well to note the following.
The Tamil language as is well known delights in the r sound of which it has three
varieties, and it is very fond of ending roots in it or I, though neither of these
letters can begin a word without a euphonical a or i being prefixed.
Chin on the other hand has gone to the other extreme and has subtituted I for r
wherever it occurs, whilst even I cannot now end a word.
The Tamil hard r at the end of a root becomes n both in Telugu and Chin
(cf. uy-u, un, awn=‘ to be’); whilst it must also be noted, as Dr. Caldwell has
pointed out, that the formatives which occur at the end of many Tamil words have
to be separated from the true root.
For the rest the comparisons speak for themselves and show, I think, a special,
(not merely a general), connection of Chin with the Dravidian languages.
Physical Description —concluded.


Part of verb.
English.
Chin.
Dravidian.
Remarks.
Boot
To do
Saih 1
Sey
Tel. Chey (u).
Present participle
Doing
Saih-tu'
Ches-tfi (Tel.) 8
Tel. Ches-ina-
Past tense
I did
Saih-nifi'
Sey-da-nen 3 ...
Past participle...
Having done
Saih-dina ...
Sey-dina.
Future tense ...
I will do
1 Saih-aih
Sey-ven
Sey-van, about
to do.
Imperative
Do (thou) ...
Saih
Sey.
Tel., Tulu and
Past relative par-
(Which) did...
Saih-di
Sey-da
ticiple.
Ku form rela-
tive participle
in di.
Future relative
(Which) will
Saih-gii 8
Sey-gu
Poetical ‘ I will
participle.
do.
Saih-a,
do.’
Infinitive
To do
Seyy-a 4
Conditional
If I do |
Saih-di-kaw...
Saih-na
Sey-dakal ...
Che s-t i-n a
(Tel.) 5
Although I do.
Negative aorist
I do not
Saih-n.fi/
Chey-ay'-eunu
(Mai.) 8
Negative imper-
Do not (thou)
Saih-aidf
Seyy-ade.
ative.
Negative verbal
Not doing ...
Saih-k6
Cheya-ko or
participle.
ka (Tel.) 7
Negative relative
(Which) does
Saih-aidi
Seyy-ada.
participle.
not
Causal root
Let it do
Saih-sd
Cheya-su (Tel)..
Comparison of Chin and Dravidian Verbal Forms.
The words under Dravidian are Tamil unless the contrary is noted.
Notes,—(. 1) The final his not radical, but merely the spiritus lenis.
(.2) In Tamil the infinitive is used instead of the present participle.
(3) The medial n is, I think,radical and note uphonic.
(4) Both forms are possibly corruptions of the future. Chins not infrequently use
that tense instead of the infinitive.
(5) Na is the true Teluga conditional particle- as in Tibetan.
(6) Malaylim is,,l think, the only Dravidian language that preserves the old negative
in nu. [Cf. the conjugation of the negative voice in Malayalim -with that in the
other languages]?. The ordinary Dravidian negative is now formed by merely
adding the personal termination to the root and originally, as in Gond to this
day, there was probably a word of negation ( ille or alia) preceding the verb as in
Tibetan and Burmese. Dr. Caldwell’s theory of a negative particle ais scarcely
tenable.
(7) Tamil uses the negative relative particle as the verbal participle..
(8) Sea below.
The above accounts for all Chin verbal particles, except the negative conditional,
and the negative verbal participle in hoi. Ot the first of these, however, the
Dravidian languages are destitute. The latter is probably derived from the Chi-
nese, As regards kw the only analagous relative participle- I have been able to
find is in Mongolian though the high Tamil future particle gw may be con-
sidered to be allied to it.
With regard to the present tense it is possible that the affix wis really a shorten-
ed form of hu, (page 22}, and may therefore be compared with the Tamil poetical
gw..
The Dravidian use of the infinitive in ga or kw as an ablative absolute can be
egitimately compared with the similar use in Chin of the future with gii affixed.
[Of. Tel., cheyu-ga and Chin, saih-aih-gu.\


Compa)
ison of Dravidian and Chin Roots. 1 — Tamil.
English.
Chin.
Tamil.
Remarks.
Abandon
Tong
Tur-u.
Ant-hill
Biting
Pur-ru.
Attack
Tok
Tak-kit
Burm., talk.
Beak
Mon
Muk-ku.
Before
‘Mawn ...
Mun.
Bird
P‘ay6
K‘6
Para-vei
Naga, para.
Bitter
Kei
Burm,, k l di.
Bone
Y6
Elu-mbu.
Break
Mun
Mur-i.
The form of the negative conditional in Chin formed by adding di and awnnd
to the root is evidently a contraction of an older ai-di-awnnd ; thus saih-di-awnnd
was originally saih~ai-di-awnnd.
There is precisely the same form in use in the Dravidian languages, and the
existence of this form in Chin shows that it had formerly a negative verbal participle
in ai-di similar to the Tamil. [Cf. also the Chin negative conditional in ddi-nd.~\
Both in the Dravidian languages and in Chin an emphatic d (preceded, if
necessary, by w or «) is often added to the root in the imperative.
With one exception Chin has it is true no personal terminations to the verb, but
this was probably also the case with the Dravidian verb originally, whilst Malaya-
lim at the present day has no such terminations.
THE NOUN.
On the supposition that h in Chin represents an original Jc the pluralising particle
Jiyaw (hoi, dual) may be compared with the Tamil leal. [Cf. Manip. &‘oh]
Similarly the pluralising particle, me, used only in the case of the first and
second personal pronouns is not improbably allied with the Tamil mar (used only
in the case of high caste nouns.)
With regard to the declension of the nouns the following resemblances may be-
noted:
Instrumental case, —(as ‘with a stick’). —
In Chin the affix is tu, in Telugu t 6, (Tamil, odu).
Another affix is nit in Chin and na in Telugu. (The Chin nominative affix, nu,
is probably the same as the instrumental, the Chin having, as has been done in
modern Hindi, used the instrumental as the nomination.)
Accusative. —The affix is ni in Chin and ni or nu in Telugu.
Like Telugu, Chin has no affix for the genitive case.
MISCELLANEOUS.
. The regular interrogative base in Chin is h as in Gond, but an exception is-
ani ~ who? This may possibly be allied to the Dravidian enna=. what? If
the particle h is taken from the Chin bang=z where, the base left is ang, which
is the same as the Tamil. (Lushai, the language most closely allied to Chin,
uses the Dravidian interrogative short e.)
The emphatic affix diin or don is probably the Dravidian reflexive pronoun tan,-
which in Tamil is used in the same way as dun in Chin.
In what is called in Sanskrit ‘ Sandhi,’ Chin resembles the Dravidian languages,
the letters infixed to prevent hiatus being y and w (according to the vowel)
in both, whilst in compounding words the nasal n (which also is used to prevent
hiatus in Southern India) is frequently infixed when the first word ends in a
vowel.


English.
Chin.
Tamil.
Beni arks.
Carry
Bo
Por-u
Bo — carry across the
shoulder.
Crooked
Kok
Kod-un
Cut
K‘aw
Kad-i
Cf. Burm., hup’, Teh, ho-
yu.
Day
‘Nut
NaZ.
Desire
Woi
Ava.
Divide
P‘e
Pi-ri.
Do
Saih
Sey
The final h is not radical.
Easy (be)
‘L6
E-li.
Mvn= be giddy. [Of. Bur-
mese, mti.]
Faint
Mun
Mur-chi
Father
Apo
Appan.
Fever (have)
Kawk
Kay.
Flesh
‘So
Ta-sei.
Flower
Pa
Pu.
Fly (to)
P‘ai
Para.
Foot
K‘6
Kal.
Forest
Pon
Pun-ei
(—Forest country).
Forgive
Hair
Myan
Maw
Man-uu.
Mayir.
Hand
Kut
Kei.
Head
Alii
Talei.
Heap
Pun
Por.
Hold
Bi
Pi-du.
Hot
K‘a-k‘6
Ka-y
K l dk‘6 = hot weather; h'6
— sky.
House
In
11 (in).
Jaw
Kawdo'
Kod-iru
Tel. goddu-va.
Know
T‘e
Te-ri.
Laugh
N oi
Nagei.
Leaf
Law
I-lei.
Mat
Aboi
Pay
Burm., pyd,
Moon
K‘16
N i-la
Burm. Id.
Mother
Anti'
Annei.
Mouth
Waw-k‘6
Yay.
Mucus
Saw
Sal-i.,
Mud
Lo
U-lei.
Near
Sen
Ser.
Night
Ayan
Ira.
Outside
Plaung
Bi
Pur-a.
Other
Pir-a.
Place
Diin
I-dam.
Pour
Bo, bau
Por-i
Tel. po-yu.
Press
Dut
I-du.
Burm. hd.
Prevent
K‘a
Ka
Bead
P‘awk
PatZ-i
Burm. p'nt.
Bed
Sen
Sem.
Beturn
Bawn
Pin
(In pinnidu).
Bice
Saung
Sor-u
Saung is boiled.
(Sar-u)
Sor-u unboiled.
Boll
‘L6
U-ru-lu.
Scratch
Plai
Para-ndu.
Shake
Sak
A-sei.
Sharp
Hat
Kar-u.
Comparison of Dravidian and Chin Hoots —continued.


English.
Chin.
Tamil.
Item arks.
Sharpen
To
Ti-ddu.
Sink
Mliik
Murgu.
Sit
K‘6
Kar
Tel. kur.
Skin
tin
Ur-i.
Slip
T‘6
Tav-aru.
Small
So
Si-ru
Cf. Burm. coll., s6-si.
Smell
Nan
Nar-a.
Smoke
K‘ii
Ku-mbu
Ku-mbu— becomes smoked.
Snake
P‘aW
Pa-rnbu.
Snatch
Haw
Kau-vu.
Sow
Paw
Pa-vu.
Staff
Shiin-kaw
K61
8hun= to thrust.
Stoop
K‘un
Kun-i.
Sweet
Tu-i
Ti-tti.
Swell
Pling
Ying-u.
Sun .,..
K‘6*ni
Na-yiru
Ni and Na are the real
roots.
Thou
N aung
Ni.
Two
‘Ni'
I-nei
Inei= a pair.
Under
Go
Kir.
Utter (say)
Nauk (no)
Nakku, na
The Tamil word means
tongue.
Wave
‘Long
Alei.
Weary (be)
Yai or dawn ...
I-lei or toy
Tel. day.
Well, n.
Kytin
Kin-aru.
Wipe
T‘awk
Tud-ei.
Write
Le
V a-rei
Burm. r4.
II—Telugut
English.
Chin.
Telugu.
Remarks.
Bush
P‘aw
Pad-a.
Cut
‘Sawk
Tsek-ku *
* To pare.
Deliver
Awk
Op-pagintsu ...
Burm. ap.
Dung
Ek
Er-uvu
Tamil ek-hali, ‘ debris.’
Hole
K‘6, konk‘6
G6-yi
Tamil, Jcu-ndu.
Hook
K‘a
Ko-kki.
Hoof
Ku-ze ...
Gorbdza.
Knee
N’k'ulu
M6-kalu.
Obtain
Bun
P6n-du
Tamil, pe r.
Pluck
P‘uk
Piku.
Rot
T‘ii
Te-vu.
See
l Sawk(‘so) ...
Tsu-du.
Stay (be)
Awn
Un-du
Tamil uri.
Throw
Wo
Ye-yu.
Waist
Kyen
Kaun-u.
b
Comparison of Dravidian and Chin /^tx^s-~-concluded.


English-
Burmese,
Tamil.
Remarks.
Approach
Kap
Kid-u.
Kaik
Kad-i.
Black
Call
Nak
Kaw
Nalla (Tel.)
Ku-vu
Chin, m.
Chin, wu.
Clear (become)...
Tang
Ter-u.
Dark (become) ...
Maung
Maug-ku.
Die
The (se)
Sa.
Eat
Sa ( coll.y
Sa.
Fitting (be)
Taik
Tak-ku.
Hearth
P‘6
Poy (Teh).
Leap
Kun
Kun-ali.
Press
P‘i
Pi-sei.
Eice (husked) ...
Chanba
Samba.*
Say
‘So {coll.)
Sol-lu.
Stand (stop)
Ne
Nil.
Sustain
Wander
T‘an
L e{cotL)
Tan-gu.
A4ei
Chin, mlawTc.
A few examples are appended showing the connection of * h ® wsSuSce
with Burmese in cases where the root is either wanting in Chin or the resemblance
is very remote.
* This is probably a word imported from Burma to Madras.
APPENDIX IV.
NOTES ON THE SOUTHERN OR TAME CHINS.
The following notes, which make no pretension to be exhaustive
are intended to suoplement the information contained m Mating Tet
Pvu’s “ Customary Law of the Chins" and its appendices. By far the
most valuable part of that book is, it may be remarked, the extract
concerning the Chins from Colonel Browne’s account of the Thayet myo
divtriet The information contained in this extract may be relied on
as very accurate. The same cannot be said of the notes by the late
Dr Forchhammer, who would seem to have derived his information
from some Burmanixed Chins who retained merely a very blurred
remembrance of their national customs and laws For example the
description of the Chin clan as endogamous is exactly the reverse of the
truth Whilst the alleged origin of the clan is obvious y the invention
of a Chin who regarded his national institution through Barman
spectacles. , ..
A comparison of the Chiu language, both as regards its grammar
and vocabulary, with the Kuki, Limbo. Thibetan Borman, and other
allied languages, though highly interesting m itself has of necessity
to be omitted from these notes on account of its technical character.
It is moreover a subject wbicb cannot bo adequately dealt with in a
short appendix to a Census report.


As is well known the Chins of Lower Burma form one branch
of that family of hill tribes, which under various
names, such as Kukis, Nagas, Mros, and Kamis,
inhabit the great mass of mountains stretching
General relation-
ship.
with various off-shoots southward from the Himalayas to Cape Ne-
m-ais. These tribes, together with the Burmans, are undoubtedly sepa-
rate waves of immigration of originally the same people whose modern
representative is the Thibetan race. The Burmans, dwellers m the
plains, whose spoken language has, as is usually the.ease been.far
more corrupted than that of their cousins in the hills, and whose
customs have been largely modified by their convei:TL rhfns and
era to Buddhism, are in reality very closely related to the Chmsand
other hill men. As their name implies (Mjamma _ Myo-raa-the
great tribe or race) they formed the largest irruption from the hig
lands of Thibet to the south-east; and having by numerical strength
ousted the aboriginal dwellers in the plains they have reached a pitch
of civilization which induces them to look down on the hillmen and
regard them almost as foreigners. A comparison however of written
Burmese (not “as she is spoken”) with the dialects of the latter and
Thibetan, &c., shows them to be (judged by a Turanian standard) o
essentially the same family, though it is probable for several reasons
that the Burmans preceded the Chins and Nagas from their original
home in Thibet. With regard to the Karens it seems probable that
although these possibly formed originally part of the same race as the
Burmans and Chins, yet their ethnological relationship with both
comparatively distant. The different route also {t.e., from the north)
bv which the Karens entered Burma has necessarily exposed them to
widely different influences than those to which their congeners have
been subject. As to the supposed connection of the Karens with the
Chins it is evident that it is and can be no closer than that between
the Karens and the Burmans.
If in fact we divide the great Southern branch of Turanian family
into three subdivisions—the Dravidian, the Thibeto-Burman, and the
Sinitic—the Karen falls naturally into the third division, whilst both
Burman and Chin come, of course, under the second.
The Southern or tame Chins, as they are sometimes called to dis-
tinguish them from” the Northern or wild Chins,
inhabit both sides of the Arakan-Yomas and are
found in the Akyab, Kyaukpyu, and San do way dis-
Special relation-
ship.
tricts on the west, and the Minbu, Thayetmyo, Prome and Henzada
districts on the east. They are very closely related to the wild Obms,
Mros, Karais, &c., for though the languages of these are mutually
unintelligible, a comparison of their vocabularies shows the difference
to be merely one of dialect and philologically of no great importance.
The tame Chins are in fact merely a tribe which formerly inhabited
the present Lushai or wild Chin country,* and which has been forced
south by a vis a tergo at probably no very distant epoch, as has been
pointed out by Major Hughes (“ Hill Tracts oi Aiakan ). ns
ment to the southward is still going on, though slowly, for tribes an
* Not of course as autochthones.


clans must be very hard-pushed indeed before they definitely abandon
their ancestral hills and valleys. There is a tendency amongst the
Southernmost Chins to merge into the Burman race, and this is also
the case amongst those who have gone farthest from the Yoma to the
eastward. _ One reason however which prevents the Chins from assimi-
lating rapidly with the Burmans is their practice of keeping pigs,
which are used both as an article of diet and for offering to the nats
and the “Khun” (see infra). These pigs are destructive of any kind
of garden in or near the village, and hence to avoid disputes Chin
houses must always be by themselves and not intermixed with Burman
ones.
Mention may be made here of a people called the Lins, who formerly
inhabited a part at least of the Sandoway dis-
trict. From the existence of such an expression
The Lins.
as “ Chinlin-lumyo” in Burmese it is not unlikely that the Lins were
a tribe of the same origin as the Chins, but nothing certain can be
predicated concerning this vanished race.
The only traces of it which exist are a burial-ground and a village
(Lintha), the name of which would show apparently that it was for-
merly a Lin settlement, Some bronze implements were dug up not
far from this village some 10 years ago, but it is not known what
became of them.
This institution is of such importance with the Chins that a slight
digression as to its nature may be pardoned. I
imagine the origin of the (exogamous) clan to have
been as fallows.
The clan.
Either owing to good cultivatable land having become scarce, or else
perhaps owing to some feud, a person of influence would separate
himself from the parent clan with whom he had formerly lived and,
taking with him a few of his relations, would migrate and make a new
settlement for himself in some conveniently situated valley. Sepa-
rated as all settlements were formerly by enormous tracts of jungie,
in which the clearings were but mere specks, the persons in this new
settlement, which would naturally be called after the leader’s name,
would soon assume characteristics of their own. The first settlers
being actually closely related, they would seek their wives from outside
the settlementobtaining them sometimes by a raid, at other times
by the more peaceful means of negotiation. The descendants of the
first settlers, although more and more distantly related according to
modern ideas, would still continue to marry women from elsewhere;
for as their fathers who founded the clan did so perforce must they
do. In time the parent village, if fortune favoured them and the
country was favourable, might throw out small off-shoots in the
vicinity, which would still continue to maintain close relations with
the original one. The name of founder, which was at first applied to
the original village, would then become a clan name proper.
Meanwhile the people whilst probably retaining the old ideas as to
the creation oi the world and such like would have erected the original
founders of the clan into guardian spirits of it. It is easy to under-
stand indeed how the reverence for them as the pioneers and founders


of the new community should gradually merge into their worship, and
how they would naturally be regarded as the guardians of the clan
which they had founded.
The above theory does not, it will be noticed, suppose the existence
with exogamous clans of the patriarchal family. In truth Ido not
think that such could have existed in the early times of “ storm-and-
stress ” amongst the hill-men. The struggle for existence was too
hard and fierce to permit of the existence of clans founded otherwise
than on the patria potestas. On the contrary system the clans would
become too intermingled to have formed good fighting units in a hill
country, and this in fact was the thing most necessary for their con-
tinued existence. The practice of female infanticide with its con-
comitant of polyandry doubtless sprang up amongst people who were,
whether from the favourable conditions of the country in which they
found themselves or from other circumstances, freed from the neces-
sity of constant warfare with their neighbours. When this institution
had once come into vogue the exogamous clan would cease to be in
any way a local body.
Where the clan is endogamous there is of course nothing to prevent
relationship being from the first derived through the mother. (The
causes which lead some tribes to become endogamous and others ex-
ogamous, though forming a highly interesting subject, can hardly be
discussed here.) All it is now desired to point out is that the ex-
ogamous clan was necessarily at first founded on a patriarchal basis
and that where such a clan is polyandrous, the latter is a mere subse-
quent growth that has obliterated the old patriarchal institutions.
Mr. Lang, who favours the opposite theory, states in his note on the
“Early History of the Family:” “Let us suppose that there were
“ groups called woodpeckers, wolves, bears, suns, and swine each with
“ its own little territory. These groups were exogamous and derived the
name from the rnpther. ” If however this was the case from the begin-
ning, how did such groups arise ? For every intermarriage would, as
Mr. Lang himself points out, tend to mix these clans with each other,
so that if we go back to the beginning, it is difficult to see how these
clans were ever formed, i.e., became of some numerical strength. Once
the clans were formed the theory no doubt works smoothly enough,
but for the clan ever to have come into existence at all it must, if
polyandrous and totem*kin, have been endogamous or, if exogamous,
must have been based on the patriarchal type. In no other way is it
conceivaole that the clan as such can have arisen.
The basis of Chin society is undoubtedly the clan (ahso), which
is amongst them, as it was amongst the Romans and Greeks, of a
distinctly patriarchal type. It possesses in fact several remarkable
points of resemblance to the Gens and Genos, and is in no way founded
on totemism. The ashfin birds (the king-crow*) are indeed still re-
garded by the Chins as their parents (a-u-pha), and it is forbidden to
a Chin to either kill or eat them. The bird is not, however, used as
a crest by the Chins. This honour is paid to the elephant, images
* This was the bird which hatched the original Chin egg after it had been discarded bv
Hli. - J


of which are carved on the posts in the Chin graveyards and (for-
merly) on the combs worn in the hair. But the elephant is not re-
garded as an ancestor, being looked on rather as the peculiar property
of Chins, which has inter alia been filched from them by their Burman
brother. The features of the Chin clan are those of the typical one
sketched above, and the present scattered condition of the clans of the
tame Chins is, I think, entirely due to political circumstances. These
Chins themselves have in fact still a recollection of the old order of
things, for they say that formerly each clan lived in its own valley and
warred against the neighbouring ones. In that time they add there
was no law and human life was little respected, as indeed is the case
to this day amongst the wild Chins.
The institutions of the Chins are, as has been already noted,
founded on the patria potestas. Relationship is reckoned only in the
male line and derives its origin in the semi-mythical “ Khun ” or
founders of the clan. The Khun (or Uyu) are ex-officio the guardians
of the clan and to them their descendants make oblations in times of
trouble or sickness. Their number varies in the different clans, thus
in the Un clan it is five, in the Mendhet nine, in the Talun five, and
of course only the people of the particular clan to which they belong
have any concern with them.
All Chins derive their ancestors from the Khun of a particular clan,
and as has been pointed out, it follows according to the primitive
ideas of relationship that all persons in each clan are related to each
other and consequently cannot intermarry. The Chins are therefore
an exogamous race, and must when taking a wife choose one from
some other clan. To take one from their own would be regarded as
sinful. On her marriage the woman is said to enter her husband’s
“ Khun, ” i.e., to come under the guardianship of the Khun of her
husband’s clan, and she leaves those to whom she formerly looked for
protection. Similarly the married daughter is not strictly entitled to
share in the inheritance of her parents as she has left their clan and
has therefore no further concern with them. Latterly indeed some of
the elders have given shares in the inheritance of a deceased man to
his daughter even although she is married ; for say they, she is his
daughter. This however must be regarded as opposed to the old
theory of relationship and is a sign of the decadence of the institution
of the clan. Four or five days after the birth of a child it is duly
initiated into the clan and placed under the guardianship of the Khun.
A cotton string (called khunhlung) is tied round its wrist for a few
days as a sign to all evil spirits that the child is under the latter’s
protection.
Besides the “ Khun ” of the clan to which they belong Chin women
worship certain other persons or fairies called Zii-
yaih. The names of these are handed down from
Zuyaih.
mother to daughter and are generally not known to the men. It may
be supposed that these Ziiyaihs are like the Khun semi-mythical
(female?) ancestors, but it is extremely difficult to get information
concerning them as most of the Chins either are or affect to be igno-
rant of the matter.


On the death of a Chin the body is washed with water in which the
Funeral customs.
A klo-hsün.
leaves of a certain tree (kayaihun-bon) have been
steeped. Khaung is also offered to the corpse and
its hair combed. Before cremation a “ klo-hsun” is
placed on the head of the deceased and his spirit,*
which until then is supposed to be with the corpse
in the house, is called. The spirit is supposed to
enter the klo-hsun,” which is then taken out and
planted in the burning-ground. The idea in this
ceremony is doubtless to get the spirit away from
the house and corpse of the deceased. A cock is
tied by a string to the deceased’s big toe, the object
being to frighten away a caterpillar (not a taukte
as stated by Colonel Browne) which the spirit will
meet on the way to Po-kli, Po-hli, or Nga Thein’s
country. Sometimes also a big wooden da is carried at the head of
the corpse in order to frighten away bad spirits. The body is then
cremated and a few of the bones collected in a pot and taken to the
cemetery.
If owing to its being the rainy season or from some other reason it
is impossible to proceed at once to the cemetery, the pot with the
bones is put up in a tree near the village pending removal. The flesh
of a fowl is offered for the deceased’s spirit to eat before this takes
place. A curious custom remains to be noted. If the Chin is wealthy,
a buffalo or bullock is killed at his funeral and, if poor, a pig. In
exchange as it were for the former five small pieces of bamboo wound
round with thread (red, white, black, green, and yellow), called
piinzen, or for the latter, one piinzen (with white thread) are given to
the deceased’s spirit to take with him on his journey to Nga Thein.
The reason for this is that on the w T ay thither there is a river of white
water (called the Pnzaw-tui-bo), which the spirit has to cross. On
arriving at the banks the latter calls out to Nga Them (see infra) and
shows him the piinzens with him, whereupon Nga Thein stretches the
thread (or threads) across and thus forms a bridge along which the
spirit passes to the other side.
The Chin cemeteries (zadon), whither the bones of the deceased are
carried after cremation, are situated in remote in-
accessible spots in uninhabited jungles. Each clan
The cemetery.
has its own cemetery, though now that the former have become so
scattered, a person’s bones do not always find their way to their proper
cemetery. The latter consist merely of a small spot cleared on some
hill and surrounded by dense jungle. In this are set up the posts
(ton) for the deceased, —stout wooden posts, some 3 or 4 feet high and
having the tops carved into the effigy of an elephant. Below this
image are cut six concentric notches if the deceased was a male and
five if it was a female. The earthen pot containing a few of the bones
of the deceased person is tied to the post. Near this are placed small
packets of rice, ngapi, chillies, betel, &c., for the refection of the de-
* Klo, literally wind. Comp. Latin spiritus.


ceased on his way to Nga Theiu’s country, and piinzen to enable him
to cross the white river. Sometimes also the deceased’s cross-bow
(in the case of males), and an implement of weaving (in the case of
females) are also added. A fence of bamboos is placed round the pot
to keep off evil spirits who may be lurking in the vicinity. After de-
positing the bones, &c., in the cemetery, the relatives on retiring put
a few bamboos across the way telling the deceased’s spirit not to
come beyond them, but to stay in the cemetery.
It may be noted that now-a-days the practice of putting up posts
in the “ zadon” is falling into disuse owing, the Chins say, to there
being no one who can make them.
The spirits of the departed after crossing, as already related, the
river of white water come to Nga Thein, who is regarded as the judge
of the dead. If they have been leading good lives, they go to a kind
of heaven. If they have been wicked persons (the most serious
offences are those against their own parents or their fathers and
mothers-in-law), Nga Thein points at them with his third finger (which
is called in Chin “ the finger without a name”). They then have to
get into iron pots and paddle in the cauldron of boiling water, which
is the Chin idea of hell, and so are lost utterly. There is also a tree
near where Nga Thein sits and with him is a dog. If the condemned
try to avoid their fate, the dog pursues them. If to escape him they
climb up the tree into the branches, Nga Thein shakes the tree so
that they fall into the “ hell-potwhilst should they manage to
reach the top, they fall victims to a big bird called hakgyi, who sits
on the top of the tree.
The full account of these given by Colonel H. Browne renders allu-
sion to them now unnecessary. It may merely
he added here that properly there are three pigs
Marriage customs.
slaughtered at a Chin wedding, called respectively the wo-t‘in ‘saw,*
the kulun-kakye, and the ‘mo-p‘aya, but that it is only the entrails of
the first which are examined. Besides these pigs another one (called
tauzii) is given by the bridegroom to his father-in-law and the spec-
tators.
The Chins are not very particular as to chastity before marriage.
Unmarried girls usually sleep in the inner room (inkadii) of the house
which has a door in the back wall of the house. Through this door,
which has no ladder, favoured swains are occasionally allowed to visit
at night those inside.
A brief reference here to this must suffice. The ordinary Chin
lives in the simplest way, his food of two meals a
day consisting of boiled rice with certain edible
Mode of life.
jungle leaves and perhaps some vegetables from his taungya, Salt
is the only necessary which he has to purchase, but ngapi is also
generally consumed. Most men and women are good workers, which
indeed is necessiated by their occupation as taungya-cultivators, and
they are somewhat more willing than the Burmans to do extra work,
* Wo-t‘in- t 6aw=pigs-guts looking.


such as carrying loads, &c. Their timidity and simplicity, however,
prevents them from pushing their way much.
In their domestic relations they are very affectionate, perhaps
more so than the Burmans ; and divorce, though freely permitted, is
but little availed of by them. They treat their dogs and pigs kindly,
feeding them well, both these animals in recompense occasionally be-
coming their food. (One reason given for eating dogs is that the
Chins formerly had some scriptures which were devoured by a dog, by
eating which animals therefore they imbibe as it were some of the
lost writings). Petty cases of theft, assault, &c., were even before
the introduction of the Village Regulation decided by the Chin elders
according to the Chin law (Kho-i), the penalties exacted not being
very great and consisting chiefly of pots of khaung, pigs, &c. Only
serious cases, such as murder and attempts thereat, are reported to
the thanas ; and as a matter-of-fact the Chin rarely appears in our
Courts, whether as complainant or accused.
Although khaung is freely drunk on every possible occasion offences
arising from its misuse are almost unknown, at any rate to the police.
Government has wisely refrained from interference with this drink so
far as the Chins are concerned. It is in fact impossible for people
living the hard life of taungya-cutters that the Chins do to indulge in
khaung to such an extent as to affect injuriously their health, as no-
body but those with strong and muscular bodies can support them-
selves by such an occupation.
The Chin house, as is well known, is divided into two room, the
front one (kundaunglan) being inhabited by the parents and youngest
children, and the inner one (inkadii) by the young unmarried persons.
The front of the house is a spacious though rickety platform, whence
there are two apertures into the front room. There are also two
from the latter into the inner room which has an opening in the back
wall of the house. {See under marriage.)
The Chin paso is now worn only by a few of the older men, the
Burman garment having almost entirely superseded it. It is however
still worn on such an occasion as a spear dance.
The women still almost universally wear the dark-coloured smock-
frock called by Burmans “ thindaing,” under which they wear a small
loin-cloth called a “ hni.” The practice of tatooing the face is being
gradually left off in this district and when not tatooed the Chin
women are undoubtedly comely (as judged by a Mongolian standard).
The origin universally assigned for this practice by Chins themselves,
namely, that it was done to prevent their women being carried off or
raped by the Burmans, is doubted by Colonel Hughes on the grounds
that the other hills tribes have not adopted the practice. It must
however be noted that no hill tribes of the Arakan-Yomas have come
under the power and influence of the Burmese to anything like the
extent that the tame Chins have.
The Burmans have turned that power with the Chins, as with
other wild tribes which have come in contact with them, almost
c


entirely to a bad purpose. The manner in which they have treated
the Chins in the past is shown clearly by Chin mythology, and in
fact to this day the Chins entertain a wholesome fear of the Burmans,
who maltreat and cheat them more than is generally suppose .
If under the Burmese regime a Chin wife or daughter were appro-
priated by a Burman, he would certainly have obtained no legal re-
dress even if he were venturesome enough to apply for such. Under
these circumstances therefore it is perfectly conceivable that me
Chins found it necessary in order to keep their women to themselves
to disfigure them by tatooing.
The Chin language is copious enough for all the wants of a half-
savage people, and it is a mistake to suppose with
Colonel Hughes that it is exceedingly poor. The
Language.
statement of that writer that the name of the Chief is used for that
nf the village, “probably owing to the extreme poverty of tne lan-
guage.” is certainly quite unsustainable. One reason why the language
fas been supposed to be poor is the habit of Ohm* when ques-
tioned off-hand as to their language to give, piobably throng
nervousness, Burmese words in many cases where they possess a true
Chin one. Like most savage people in contact with others con-
siderably more civilized than themselves they do not manufacture
Chin words to express things and ideas known only to civilized people,
but adopt for such the Burmese words. This does not however
nrevent them from having Chin words and idioms for everything that
can be known to people living in small villages amongst mountain-
ous jungles.
* * * * *
Appended is an example of a Chin song, being the first three verses
of a duet between a lover and his mistress.
The youth—
Ni-aw mliing-zin dawn-aw,
Hau-k‘aw ko-wa pon-aw,
Naung-me konbo naungme kyitaih nan-laih,
‘Sonboi p'oi-nii todo men-‘saw,
Pyang-bi p‘oi-nii awn-ling mon-gai,
So-loi si-ngou ka lunii.
10' nure-hearted maiden converse with me, I have crossed
mountains and jungles to your village to be with you, who sing
sweetly.) .. , . ..
Aung-o mo-wo ka koi-u,
S6-16i ka bawn-k’o-u,
Aung- o ka pya-yailm,_
Naungme konbo pya-linga,
‘Sonshli ka kliing-woi-u,
Pyaungbi ka koi-woi-u.
(I have climbed the mountain like a crow. I can return through
the jungles. Like a tired crow I desire to climb up and rest at your
village.)


The maiden —
Shettaw ‘son-kli ling-aw,
Pyang-aw sai-ngo law-law,
Kyeme konbo pyaw-linga,
Kyeme gyi-taih nan-laih-a,
Kyetong ni-ngon m’den-aih,
Lagp'an yo-won m’daung-aih.
(The maiden speaks with the youth, the youth who has come to
our village. I will receive and embrace him.)
Hii-law so-wa ton-ba-maw,
Kye-tawn nan-wa alok-ba-maw,
&c., &c., &c.
(Do you come idly or do you come to court me ?)
Some Chin Myths.
The world is conceived of as a flat surface of which the ultimate
support is the shoulders of a mighty giant (Ma
Kon), who supports it for ever, neither growing
The world.
old nor dying (k’on zanhan k‘6n diiyii) : when the giant is wearied he
changes the world from one shoulder to the other and this is the
cause of the earthquakes.
The giant supports on his shoulders, it may be noted, a large rock
on which is water. In this water is a fish of the kind known as “ nga
zalon,” which fish again supports a fiat rock on which is the world.
This is proved, according to the Chins, by the “ nga zalon ” having a
small stone in its head.
As to the origin of the stars the Chins say that there were two
nats, who engaged in mortal combat together.
One of them, Pirn Don, was slain, whereupon his
Stars.
right eye became the morning star and his left the evening. The
other stars are the hairs of his head.
This the Chin believes to be caused by a nat called Gle, who smites
bad men and bad trees with his thunderbolts.
The stone celts which are sometimes found buried
in the ground are said to be “ Gle’s teeth,”
Blasting by light-
ning.
A fairy called Pan 0 had a child, which a monkey took to play
with. Pan 0, being alarmed for the child, called
out “ My child will fall,” whereupon the monkey
Rain.
7 iT «/
was startled and actually let the child drop so that it died. There
was great lamentation in consequence and now when it rains the
Chins say that the rain-drops are the tears of the fairies who weep
for Pan O’s child.
(Another account is that they are Hli’s* tears.)
Similarly the thunder is said to be the sound of the gong beaten by
the mourners, and the rainbow is the striped cloth which was placed
over the face of the corpse.
* The Tibetan Hla.


Of the lightning a different account is given. Hli had a son and
daughter, who from their infancy loved each other dearly; so much
so in fact that when Hli put them in different cradles, one of them
would go to the other’s cradle to stay with him. Eli being angry at
this placed them far apart, one in the east and one in the west.
(Query Is this a dawn story ?) However their mutual affection is
not lessened and they wink from time to time at each other, thus
causing the lightning.
The Chin account of these is as follows. Once upon a time the
sun’s daughter was going to be married, so he
Eclipses. made a great feast for the occasion. As however
there was not enough game available, the sun having no dog of his
own went to a Chinaman and borrowed his dog. With this he pro-
ceeded into the jungles and had not gone far when he encountered
a poisonous snake, at which he thoughtlessly set the dog. The con-
sequence was that though the dog killed the snake it died itself from
the poisonous bite of the latter. The sun then went home and had
to pay compensation for the loss of the dog to the Chinaman. Now
at this time there were seven brothers, who used to live by hunting.
On this day they sent out the youngest to hunt, but the only thing he
brought home was the dead dog of the Chinaman which he found in
the forest. His brothers were angry at his ill success and the next
day, when they went out to hunt, they told him to stay at home and
cook the dog. Mow, as he made ready the pot for the latter, he f
chanced to put in it a certain herb, which has the property of making
those who eat it immortal (this herb, which has been tasted by the
sun and moon, has since been taken up to the sky by a fairy, who was
afraid that if it remained on earth the latter would become over-
peopled). As soon as the flavour of the herb came into the dead dog’s
mouth, he revived and jumped out of the pot. Ihe dog then, calling
to mind the events of its previous life, recollected that it owed its
death to the sun, who set it at the snake. It accordingly conceived
a hatred against this luminary and the moon as its brother, and has
ever since pursued them to bite them. Thus to tins day the Chins
say of an eclipse of the sun or moon that “ the dog bites it.”
One Sun Sun Pa Tun was making a fairy rope of sand with which
to girdle the world when the rope rubbed his hand
Fire - so that the blood came. The blood dropped on the
world and became fire, and this say the Chins, is how fire originated.
B. HOUGHTON,
S ANDO WAY : ")
The 23rd May 1891. )
Deputy Commissioner , Sandoway.
G. B. C. P. o.—No. 4637, B. S., 9-8-92--210.




ESSAY
ON THE
LANGUAGE OF THE SOUTHERN CHINS
AND ITS AFFINITIES
BY
BERNARD HOUGHTON, C.S.,
Deputy Commissioner, Sandoway.
RANGOON:
PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA.
iBQ2.
Price,—Rs, 1-8-0.
