

ESSAYS
A. N. LEWIS


' ■ 4 -m v r
l ; it. .
T 9 MAH 1945
ARNDELL NEIL LEWIS, M.C., E.D., LL.D.
Geologist, Lawyer, Soldier, Author
Died on Active Service, December 27th, 1943


Dedication
To Geologists the world over I dedicate this little volume of
my husband’s essays.
It was his strong belief that there was a bond of fellowship
between geologists no matter how far apart.
In their search for truth, and in wresting the secrets and
mysteries from Nature, they go out into the lonely places of the
earth, and amidst the beauty and solitude of the wild places they
must come very close to the Maker of those mysteries.
They are grand men.
My husband loved the truth. That great truth which is the
foundation of all scientific knowledge. It is through his geological
work that he will be longest remembered.
In his search for truth on the tops of the rugged mountains
he loved so well, and on the yellow button grass plains, and in the
dark damp forests where he could watch Nature unfolding her
story, he found tranquility and contentment. Here he could leave
behind the senseless tumult of the world and contemplate the
Greater Things. He strove to tell the story of that small corner
of the globe which was his home.
“And he wandered away and away
With Nature that dear old nurse
Who sang to him night and day
The rhymes of the universe.
And whenever the way seemed long
Or his heart began to fail
She would sing a more wonderful song
Or tell a more marvellous tale.”
Amy Lewis,
Abernant House,
Hobart.


“ Music of the Spheres ! ”
Music of the Spheres ! We understand some music, the rhythm
of the breakers on the shore, the gentler notes of the snow-fed stream,
the careless joy of small birds and positive rigour of the larger, the
boisterous challenge of the wind’s song, and the great hymn of eternal
praise raised to heaven, as the first shower breaks the drought. We
understand too, the music reproduced by man, and soul speaks to
soul, in the measured language that is above and beyond words
speaking and comprehended across all barriers of time and race, the
words not of one soul to another, but of the soul "which is and which
was and which is to come, the Almighty.”
This heavenly language was understood by man down the ages,
and now he knows more. He has analysed this language, reduced
its natural grammar to a system, and written down his knowledge
for future generations. Thus this language of the universe is seen to
be the cadence of rising and falling waves. Not regular waves as
the drumming of force, but many waves of infinite variations,
together producing harmony, divine or devilish merely by their
combinations. Thus far man seeks, feels and therefore knows.
But what of the higher and lower tones ? The human orchestra
that lifts the soul can play louder or softer with an insignificant
variation in its impulse, and the human mind hears no music. The
invisible atoms and the incomprehensible stars both in their courses
fixed by nature are producing the same impulses as our human
orchestra —the music of the spheres. Man could not always hear the
call of eternity that we call music. He had to learn. He did not
always know he had a soul. Today the atoms of which he is merely
one expression and the universe of which he is merely an atom are
beyond his comprehension. But he is learning to understand and
in time will hear the music of the spheres as his ancestors down
through the ages learnt to know the limited range of music from
sources nearer man’s own nature.
Tides ? Music is the perception of rythmic movement. Such
movement in the larger orchestra of nature we perceive and measure
even if we cannot hear its music yet. There is the rhythm of day
and night, the monthly circuit of the moon and the rise and fall of
the ocean, the yearly rhythm of the seasons. Beyond these we know
of the tide of human life, of the lives of nations and civilisations.
We know of greater tides in the world’s story with their rise and fall
of animal and plant types, the slow march of desert, forest, ice cap
and rolling seas across the face of the world. We feel still greater
tides of which the whole story of our planet is hut one wave. And all
these tides must give forth their music for the souls who can hear,


(since the impulse differs only in magnitude from those tiny move-
ments of man-made instruments which give forth the language
of the soul. Nature is music and music is the audible expression
of tides. Not one regular pulsation, but a divine arrangement of
myriads of varying beats each rising and falling in its appointed
time.
And where may a humble mind learn to hear this music of the
tides of infinity. Not in his soul alone, because that is but one
instrument. The music came from the arrangement of the beats
of all creation’s tides. But the Dawn Man could hear in a Beethoven
Symphony only a noise to alarm. The educated man who now
derives inspiration from a rendering of that symphony can only
understand the music of the spheres as an alarming jumble of
mathematical symbols. A million years of nature’s teaching is
only sufficient to interpret a tiny fraction of the music of creation.
We must be patient and content to walk nature’s pathways step
by step as she guides our feet, and let us honour her deputies who
show to us timid faltering wayfarers where to plant one step farther
along these paths. Whether it be a De Quiros who led the world
to his Austrialia del Espiritu Santo, the Southern land of the
Holy Spirit, or Jesus, who showed that the tides we can hear as
music can be recognised as not essentially different from the tides
which keep the stars on their courses, or Shakespeare, a
famous guide of earlier years, who sang
Look, how the floor of heaven
Is thick inlaid with patines of bright-gold ;
There’s not the smallest orb which thou beholds’t
But in his motion like an angel sings,
Still grieving to the young-eyed cherubins
Such harmony is in immortal souls ;
But whilst this muddy vesture of decay
Doth grossly close it in, we cannot hear it.
(Merchant of Venice, Act V.)
It is not yet that we are vouschafed a panorama of creation
and the climb to the highest mountain top is long and-hard. There
are many steps and each step demands a new guide. But to go on, or
if we are very frail, to have the will to go on is God’s desire —man’s
purpose in creation. And if it is not for us to find the next onward
foothold up the difficult crag, still there are easy places where
only the will to attempt the task allotted by God is required for
anyone of us to venture farther into His kingdom. The easiest place
is at home amongst the simple things.
Terra Australis Incognita the unknown South land,
Terra Incognita del Espiritu Santo, the unknown land of the
Holy Spirit—Australia. De Quiros named it and in his footsteps
others followed, Torres, Hartog, Tasman, Cook, D’Entrecasteaux
Terra Australis ceased to be incognita as each guide marked
another stepping place. We revere the courage and skill of these


pathfinders, and Australia is now our home. But are we equally
willing to follow those other intrepid guides to Terra Incognita
del Espiritu Santo ?
We have made our home in the once forbidding wilds of Terra
Australis Incongita one small flow of nature’s tide. Are we
content to let it ebb thence or can we accept God’s task and pass
to the more fully flowing tide which will carry us to Terra Incognita
del Espiritu Santo. Where is this Unknown Land of the Holy Spirit ?
For us, here, at home —Australia.
The Land of the Holy Spirit is all creation, but our poor
strength can only carry us a few steps forward to that peak in this
great unknown, whence eventually man will be priviliged to survey
that creation. Old De Quiros pictured the Land of the Holy Spirit
as situated to the South. His Country has now become our Australia.
Not now unknown but too vast for one mind to comprehend. So let
us follow the path Southward. There we will find Tasmania —a
country neither too large to understand, as De Quiros could have
understood it, nor too small to provide a sure base from which to
start a journey into that Terra Incognita del Espiritu Santo which
De Quiros could not penetrate, but the hazy image of which emerging
from the storms and clouds of creation’s birth has even now
vouschafed to those who have time to look, the existence of an un-
known land whose happy people can ever sing:
“The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want. He maketh me
to lie down in green pastures, He leadeth me beside the still
waters, He restoreth my soul, He leadeth me in the paths of
righteousness for His names sake, Yea, though I walk through
the valley of the shadow of death I will fear no evil, for Thou
art with me, Thy rod and Thy staff they comfort me. Thou
preparest a table for me in the presence of mine enemies ;
Thou anointest my head with oil, my cup runneth over. Surely
goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life,
and I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever.”
Let us follow the rhythmic Tides of God’s creation in Tasmania
to catch a glimpse of his Terra Incognita del Espiritu Sancta.
As the universe is so vast and we will learn so little by a speedy
flight, let us wander along some of the by-paths of one little corner.
As nature’s songs are so varied that we hear nothing if we attempt
to listen to many, let us pause a while and listen to one or two,
picked at random from this little corner. Not perhaps untrodden
paths or songs unheard by human ears,' but just tracks off the
highway, songs only heard by those who give the time to listen.
I ask you to come to Tasmania—not as a corner of the Universe
more favoured by creation, but as an easy place in which to learn
to tread these paths into the unknown Land of the Holy Spirit,
where nature still sings cradle songs for children of the spirit.
Thence more difficult journeys can be undertaken, more complex
symphonies enjoyed.


hence and Whither
In sections of Bombay, where Hindoos and Moslems are fairly
equally divided, it is no uncommon thing for a succulent underdone
roast piglet to be thrown by a mob of Hindoos over the wall of a
Moslem mosque. Now, to us roast sucking pig is a tasty delicacy
not to be lightly refused. To the Moslem it is a thing of such a high
degree of uncleanliness that its touch is everlasting death. So all the
Moslems run out of the mosque and beat any Hindoos they can find
and the Hindoo usually gets the worst of the scrap. Whereupon the
British tommy is summoned and both sides promptly set upon him
as the oppressor of true religion. If he stands aside in the spirit of
Christian meekness he will be killed as an infidel dog by the com-
bined rioters who will then proceed quite happily to dispose of each
other. If he restores peace and quiet he is liable to be pillioned by
his Christian superiors as an inhuman tyrant, unfit to guide the
destinies of the peace-loving Indians. Of all these people who would
you say were most filled with the divine spirit of true religion 1
Looking at such an everyday scene from the green slopes of the
Derwent’s banks, we can take a detached view and see that what is
for many millions a matter of life and death is really just a question
of relative values.
Now, I do not come here to throw a roasted sucking pig into a
Mahometan mosque. I do not come to bring the slightest feeling of
antagonism to a single mind. But I do remind you that this dis-
turbing of ant hills, this throwing of piglets into mosques cause,
activity, and progress results from activity. Using my simile in a
broader sense, sometimes a new idea thrown into an established
circle is momentarily unpleasant, may even appear an unclean
thing, but when a proper perspective is obtained by time or distances
it is seen to be no more than a healthy stimulus to new activity.
Philosophy and religion are man’s attempts to ascertain the
truth about himself. Truth is eternal and unbounded by factors
of time or space. The first essential to any enquiry which will
produce a true conclusion is the placing of all the known facts
in their exact proportions. The development of knowledge from
what we now regard as the crude ideas of past times is really little
more than arranging our observations in a more accurate plan of
relative importance—this relativity of physical things is the first
inquiry of science and a fundamental truth can lead to grave error
if its relation with other connected truths is distorted. That is the
text of my talk : Man’s place relative to the surrounding
material of the universe.


We are a Christian civilisation. Even quite apart from the
religious aspect, every thought, every activity of what we please
to call civilisation has been nurtured in the cradle of Christianity.
That fact alone should make us pause in any temptation to condemn
the Christian religion as old fashioned or for any other reason. We
must never overlook the simple fact that to condemn the past just
because it is the past is to forget that tomorrow, today will be
yesterday. The progress from the simple gospel story to the noblest
discoveries of the twentieth century science has been one continuous
majestic pageant of human endeavour, and there can be no real
conflict between the maturely developed philosophy of today and its
very simple origin any more than a grown man or woman can come
into conflict with their own youth. The Bible and the Christian
Church built on its philosophy has been the cradle of twentieth
century science equally with all the other factors which make up
what we call civilisation. It is therefore a great pity that modern
science and Christian philosophy parted 'company during the last
century. This occurred primarily, as so often happened, on a very
trivial difference. Bishop Ussher —an Irish Divine of the early
middle ages fixed the age of the earth at 4004 8.C., by the simple
process of computing the number of begettings mentioned in the
Bible and averaging the lives thus indicated. His chronological table
was printed at the top of the pages of the Authorised Version of the
Bible. When the science of the earth became known it was seen at
the very outset that this time scale would not fit. Many people,
devout according to their limited lights accused Geology of contra-
dicting the Bible, quite regardless of the fact that the dates printed
at the head of the text w ere neither part of the Bible nor in any way
connected with Christian philosophy.
I say, and this is the main purpose of my talk this evening, that
we must have a due sense of proportion. That to understand the
workings of God w e must in the very first place see everything in the
relative position assigned to them by the Creator. This after all is
science—nothing more or less than the placing of everything, great
and small in its true place as assigned by God in reference to every
other thing—a colossal task as yet barely commenced. Need I
simplify this further. If God created the Universe he placed every
atom of his wmrk in some relation to every other atom. Until we can
understand this relationship accurately we cannot understand God’s
works. If we adopt the philosophy which is based on any error in
this inter-relationship our philosophy must be false, and we cannot
gain a knowledge of God’s truths from falsehoods. It is difficult
to ascertain the truth, but the effort to do so is worth while.
I take one example—that of time. In the trivial details of
every day life time becomes of great importance, and, habitually we
measure time by the brief duration of a human span. But in the wider
sphere of God’s noble creation, time as a factor virtually does not
exist. 2,000 years ago the philosopher Herodotus said “If one is
sufficiently lavish with time, everything possible happens.” Modern


science has virtually abolished time except as the measure of the
duration of plants and animals. It is difficult to picture a universe
in which time does not exist, but such is actually the case, as I will
discuss later.
We are bound slaves of language, and our language is very
imperfect. We write a word and leave everyone to give his in-
terpretation of this word. We build such words into sentences which
mean something different to every reader. Then we endeavour to
force human thought into the cast iron jackets of those sentences.
Take for example the word God. This conveys a different meaning
to everyone in this room. I challenge you—what do you understand
by God—an elderly man of extreme benevolence capable of some
rather incomprehensible actions, a fierce tyrant with favourites
and enemies—a force quite beyond our understanding —even some-
thing we must accept but not think about. We use the word God
quite glibly but do we ever trouble to define with precision what
thought we desire to convey by this word. If this is correct are we
justified in condemning out of hand anyone else who desires to express
a slightly different idea by the use of this word ? This is but one
example. To progress we have to free ourselves from this slavery to
language, to deal in thoughts not words, and this is no easy task.
Well, so far we may agree that our actual position as unit
of creation is based on the philosophy of Christianity and we believe
that this philosophy defines the nature of God. Whence do we derive
our definition ? You may say from the Bible. Yes—if that suffices
we can agree. But for many people it does not wholly cover the field.
I have mentioned the simple question of time. The most junior
student of the Bible knows that it was written by men with a very
different outlook, social, geographical and philosophical, from that of
dwellers in Tasmania in the 20th century. Much of it is not easily
understood, apart from an intimate sympathy with the conditions
of the people and country where it was written. And so I come to my
third point. Let us agree on some terms which will cover all our
ideas of God. One word will not suffice, but let us agree that this
word includes the actual creative force of the universe—the unknown
guiding power behind the facts of nature —vital energy, everything
that is good. Having agreed upon this let us accept the simple fact
that the world and all its inhabitants, the sun and stars, the whole
universe and the thousand forces which go to make physical matter
what it is are one and all manifestations of the working of God —of
the very nature of God. That, when we look at the world around us
we are looking at the actual working of God, and if we can acquire
sufficient knowledge of God’s work, we can, with the narrow limits
of human understanding, acquire some knowledge of the nature of
God. Regard the Bible as you will, its thoughts today come to you
through human channels. Its writers, translators, printers were men
bound in their own straight jackets of convention and language.
The rocks and hills, grasses and insects, light and power, atoms and
molecules that make the world around us are direct works of God,


available for those who will study them without the interposition
of any other human mind.
Please do not misunderstand me. I do not want to decry in any
way one item of the philosophy of Christianity. I hope I have
already made this clear. St. Paul himself wrote “When I was a child,
I spake as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child
but when I became a man I put away childish things, For now we see
through a glass darkly, but then face to face ; now I know in part,
but then shall I know even as also I am known.” —1 Cor. 13, 11-12.
I now quote a passage from H. V. Morton’s “In the Steps of the
Master.” The author has been describing the most extraordinary
doings common in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre, including the
violent disputes as to customary rights between various sects and
sections of the Christain Church —he goes on :
“The late Bishop Gore was once shown round Jerusalem by a
friend of mine, who asked what he thought Jesus would have
said about the sectarian disputes round the tomb.
“I believe He would say, with that wonderful smile of His,”
said the Bishop, “My children must have toys. Do not all
children sometimes quarrel about their toys ? ”
To my mind that is the most noble thought, the highest epitome
of Christianity I have ever read from a modern writer. If the
Christian leaders throughout the centuries had been able to say in
answer to disputes and differences “Our children must have toys. Do
not all children sometimes quarrel about their toys ?” How much
human anguish would have been saved. We are all children as yet —
we all have our toys, and we quarrel about them. “When I was a
child I thought as a child, but when I became a man I put away
childish things.
And so my plea this evening is this : —Let us at least recognise
that we may be still children, and that many things we love may
really turn out to be children’s toys. This is the lesson of God’s
universe. “For now we see through a glass darkly, now I know in
part, but then shall I know even as also I am known.” God in His
wisdom is gradually unfolding to us His works, and from His work
we may learn His nature and His will. I say that for a Christian to
turn his back on God’s own revelation of His nature around us is to
deny God. Not one single revealed fact of nature conflicts or can
conflict with the Christian religion—provided, and this is vitally
important, we free ourselves from the bondage of language. We must
put ourselves in tune with the universe if we are to read what is there
for those who want to read. In this universe the Bible and Christian
traditions have their definite place, but to understand God’s works
we must first see and understand every item in the relationship in
which God has set them. This is science. So I say that modern science
is the gateway to revealed religion. The scientific text book must
be accorded its proper place amongst our books of religious guidance
if we are to hope to catch a glimpse of the marvellous creation now
being revealed to us.


Then nature the old nurse
Took the child upon her knee
Saying, “Here is a story book
Thy father hath written for thee.
“Come wander with me,’’ she said
Into regions yet untrod
And read what is still unread
In the manuscript of God.’
Longfellow : —
Ode to Agassiz on his 50 th Birthday.
Yes, here is a story book thy father has written for thee. If you
are a Christian—if you believe in God, the creator of all things —
can you turn your back on the manuscripts of God —the rhymes of
the universe, the story book written by God for you —Surely not.
Any apparent discrepancies are merely the result of imperfections.
I also affirm that there is nothing material in the bible which
conflicts with modern scientific ideas provided the proper pro-
portion is maintained and a fair allowance made for difference of
outlook and, above all of language.
I now wish to make a brief survey of Creation as revealed
directly by the observation of God’s handwork.
MATTER is the name given to the stuff of which the universe
is made. Matter assumes different qualities but these are only
external attributes imparted by different types of behaviour of the
constituent molecules.
We have to regard things not as individual elements of creation
but as examples of different types of behaviour. Wood differs from
iron because the atoms which make it up are behaving in a different
way. When we get down to elemental forces such as light, sound,
weight, electricity, etc.— these are not things at all they are
simply the way things behave. So at the outset we have to orient
our mind to regard behaviour and not physical attributes as the
framework of creation. Even the case of human relationship we
must regard a man as a continuous series of actions, of types of
behaviour, not as a material collection of flesh, bones, skin, etc.
All matter is built up of one or more numbers of elements,
substances which cannot be reduced to a simpler form by any process
of Chemistry. These elements are constructed of atoms. The atom


is the material basis of creation a nueuleus possessing a definite
weight or attraction round which a varying number of lighter bodies
called electrons are revolving at various rates. How these nuculei and
electrons behave determine the nature of the atom. This behaviour
enables one atom to behave in a certain definite way towards all
other atoms attracting some, repelling others. By these interatomic
influences the atoms build themselves into the next higher unit, the
molecule, and impart to this unit, molecular attributes of its own by
which it can combine with some molecules and reject others. These
forces impart characteristics to the next higher organisation, the
element, by which we can distinguish one kind of matter from
another. All these influences in their ascending scales are called
energy. Energy must have existed before matter or the elements as
we know them could not have been built from molecules and so on.
But energy is not a thing, it is how things behave. So there must
have been a forerunner of matter and this requires a forerunner of
energy something far simpler and more elemental than anything
we can as yet conceive. We call this material aether (or pre-matter)
as an expression for something we know must exist although it
cannot be perceived by human senses. It is the body of creation. We
can see this simply because light is transmitted through space.
Light is the vibration of matter in a certain way and if there was
nothing to vibrate there could be no light. So we can postulate the
universe as an enormous mass of this substance aether with here
and there more substantial centres visible to us as suns and stars.
It is also possible that outside our universe there are other universes
behaving in different ways and all inter-related, attracting, repelling,
going to make portion of a still larger unit of creation. And so the
vista widens.
It is a rule of creation that development is always from the
simple to the more complex a building process. The heavens at
night provide us with actual examples existing at this moment in
every possible stage of the development from the primary aether to
our earth and as far again beyond and in front of our development.
The science of astronomy, with its wonderful assistant, the
spectroscope, which by its analyses of stellar light has provided us
with a key to the history of creation.
In addition to aether, the other constituent of creation is
energy what this is we have no idea it being only portrayed by
behaviour. The plan of creation is a perfectly continuous evolution
in which time simply does not exist. In the first place there was
aether + energy. Then in the course of this evolution there
developed here and there concentrations of energy which by its
inherent power gathered atoms of the aether together or perhaps
the aether atoms themselves formed these knots of attraction and
produced the energy. Anyhow in time concentrations occurred and
the accumulations of atoms attracted more and more until a gas was
formed as can be seen today in the sky (nebular) —a further
stage was consolidated into suns vast enormously powerful,
concentrations of aether and energy. These concentrations or suns


have operated as mighty forges of the elements from the intangible
primary aether into the elements and compounds as we know on the
earth and in the heavens. An example of the process is given by the
radio-active elements. Whereas ordinary elements cannot be broken
down into anything simpler, these substances are constantly throw-
ing off atoms of hydrogen, helium and other rays with tremendous
velocity and in tremendous quantities. This effort in time changes
the original substance and also alters surrounding matter (Radium
is third in. succession from the parent Uranium). This process
cannot be hastened or retarded. It is actually the creation of some-
thing new out of a more elementary substance of inherent energy.
Eventually the process is complete and we have an inert unchange-
able element. All constituent matter of our earth was forged in a
way similar to this out of the aether, the energy concentrated in
the sun forged the elements of physical matter. The process is still
at work in our sun and the many suns of the heavens. The elemental
aether still exists, and even now accumulations of energy are
commencing before our eyes. Also we can see completely forged
suns our earth is approaching such a condition and the heavens
provide thousands of examples of the inert or dead stars of com-
pleted evolution.
Coming now to our own solar system which originated as I have
described, we find that our sun with its satelites is part of what we
call “The Milky Way.” The sun is rushing through space in an orbit
of its own at 200,000 miles per hour. Our sun is a comparatively
young one and at this moment in a position in its journey about
one billion miles from the centre of its orbit in the Milky Way.
Planets are not usual features in the heavens. It is clear that our
earth and the other planets of our solar system originated from the
sun perhaps by the near passage of a star, an event that must
have happened, if at all, some 10,000 million years ago, or else
through a series of subsidiary concentrations separated from the
main centre. In any case, the materials of the earth are, allowing
for differences in mass, the same as the materials of the sun.
We must now come down to earth. Our history commences
3,000 million years ago the date of the separation of the world
as a planet. For some 1,000 million years more the world acted as a
huge forge of the elements we now know in orderly progression,
and by a date 1,600 million years ago the initial energy had forged
sufficient material into a stable form to allow the geography of the
earth in general terms to be much as we now know' it, water had
commenced to wear aw r ay the surface, climate, the seasons, snow
and ice, rain and wind were as they are today. It is very clear that
the world is not appreciably cooler that it was 1,000 million years
ago. Above all, by the time that the atmosphere and water could
exist the forerunner of life was also established.
Evolution can only carry the forward development one stage
at a time. When the propelling influence has run its course, it pro-


duces a phase of stability until a new influence carries the process a
stage further. When the chemical elements constituting the earth
had been forged, the process ended with the small but significant
exception of the radio-active elements. The next stage was the
development of life. Life is part of the same evolutionary process, a
continuation of the forces which gave us inanimate matter. All
forms, plant and animal, probably did not originate from the same
living ancestor material, but the influences were the same, and the
inanimate source was the same.
The elements, carbon, oxygen and hydrogen are the basis of all
life, carbon being the most important. These are amongst the lightest
of the elements and the last to be evolved. Almost all chemical
molecules combine in a definite relationship in groups of from one to
six and form an element under the influence of their inter-molecular
attraction, which is hard and stable, but carbon has another property
that of combining with itself to form a group of molecules. These
have characteristics very different from the other elements, the chief
of which is an ability to change back again under certain influences
into an original form and then again resume its more complicated
structure under the influence which creates this new form. There
is a group of substances known as the colloids, of which carbon is the
chief constituent and gelatine maybe taken as an example. These are
gigantic masses of molecules which have never formed higher group-
ings and as the molecular mass increases the chemical union de-
creases until a delicate balance is reached which permits the
substance to undergo changes of shape or nature in response to
different energy changes. Given a periodic energy change a vibratory
motion can be imparted. Nature supplied these carbon colloids in
great quantity, and supplied the periodic energy changes by the
variation of heat and light from daily light to nightly darkness.
These colloids also possess the property of growing into larger
single units by addition of new materials other elements simply
add new units of similar size. So the next step in evolution was the
accumulation of the material a delicately adjusted substance of
carbon, hydrogen and oxygen which the daity alternation of light
and darkness set vibrating much as light affects a photographic plate.
The process was continued so long that, during the stage of its
development the vibration became a permanent feature and creation
produced the living cell a simple chemical substance capable of
periodic reactions and of growth this was the earliest form of life
and the basis of all life as we know it the more complex plants
and animals being merely collections of cells with the differentiated
functions. It is essential to remember that life developed from the
earth under the influence of the sun’s rays operating for a very long
time at least 1,000 million years.
In the course of time the world forged out of purely inamimate
mineral substances the fundamental basis of all life this is
chlorophyll—the green colouring matter in plants. It is a high
development but simpler than forms of life. Chlorophyll is simply a


carbohydrate formed from Carbon Dioxide + water (CO2 + H2O)
with portion of the Oxygen (0) driven off. It is a natural machine
which turns the physical energy of the sun’s light into chemical
energy and is Carbon Dioxide, Water + energy (CO2, H2O +
energy) and is what we call a living substance, and is also capable
of storing up reserves of CO2 + H2O as sugars. So life originated as a
perfectly simple chemical reaction of ordinary mineral substances
to a very long repeated photographic process in which physical
changes evolved a substance capable of chemical reaction. Life may
be evolving today under the same stimulus, but it cannot be pro-
duced artificially even in the simplest form because of the enormous
length of time required and perhaps for other reasons. The next
stage was the development in the simple chlorophyll molecule of
sufficient reserve of energy to continue the process. When this
stage was reached we had the simple single celled organism of the
first life a plant form capable of assimilating food direct from
mineral substances the salts of the ocean. Spontaneous generation
of life was impossible as chlorophyll is the only substance which can
convert mineral substance plus the sun’s rays into food for living
substances. Without chlorphyll there can be no food.
From this stage life developed under the influence of terrestrial
environment through the plants and animals to man and beyond the
simple animal man to the human soul in a clear uninterrupted
sequence. Animals did not have a plant ancestor but both developed
from the same very simple single cell of carbohydrate substance
sensitive to light and food. Millions of years have passed since
this development commenced and in that time many violent changes
occurred in the conditions on the surface of the earth. Plants and
animals developed simultaneously and it must always be remem-
bered that animals can only live by eating other animals or plants.
It is therefore clear that the inter-relationship must be very close.
Geological history shows us that the earth itself is subject to
a pulsating rhythm. This is due to the fact that it contains an
internal source of heat in the radio-active minerals which are
distributed through the crust and by their constant bombardment
tend in time to raise the heat of the earth. The sequence is as follows.
During a very long period this influence is at work. At the same time
water is wearing away the land and depositing the material thus
removed in the oceans. The interior of the earth although more
solid than the best steel than can be made by man as is shown by
the rapidity with which earthquake shocks are transmitted, is
nevertheless hot and will yield to long continued pressure. The
surface is unequal and the high land segments are balanced very
delicately on the plastic interior by the lower but heavier ocean
segments. As the temperature rises underlying rocks tend to melt
and allow the surface to adjust itself with great delicacy. Thus is
initiated a period of luxurious life in a moist warm climate and a
coal age occurs a period of maximum development of plant
and animal forms. Finally the action of running water in time upsets


the adjustment. This is followed by a general collapse of the equili-
brium, but as the world is a globe, any sinking must involve the
sinking segment occupying the lesser space. This is done by the
crushing of the boarder rocks which are folded over the older land
segments by this pressure forming the ring of newer folded mountains
we always see round the coast of continental blocks. In the process,
pressure is released and superheated rock fuses. This is squeezed
to the surface as lava. Then ensues a major volcanic epoch
mountain building earthquakes and volcanic activity arising
from the same cause. In this way the excess heat of the earth is
released and we enter into an ice age. Finally the crust settles
down again to another very long period of stability and adjustment
but in geographical detail based on the effects of the era of
paroxysm in effect, at least superficiality a new world. Each of
these cycles take from 30 to 50 million years. We are just now
emerging from an ice age following a major mountain building
period, and can look forward to some 20 to 30 million years of
comparative stability.
These major pulsations, with many minor ones have forged
the forms of life that we know —much as a baker kneeds dough.
Mother earth, has in actual fact, brought up her children. As I have
said one set of stimulating circumstances only carry the evolutionary
process one step further on but geological history shows definite
records of at least six major earth revolutions with many minor
ones, and each of these has created a new environment, a new
set of stimulations. The story of the development of life is very
complete when once the initial stages were passed. Only a few of
the very ancient forms have been preserved as fossils in the rocks,
but these constitute milestones upon which a general survey of the
history of life for the past 500 million years can be mapped. There
is however a more reliable means for filling in details, provided
the main outline is accurately mapped. It is a rule of life, that each
form passes through stages in its young life, reproducing its ancestral
development, and this when co-ordinated through the animal
and plant kingdom it gives us a wonderful story. Moreover, the
laws of evolution do not show, as is popularly but erroniously
believed, that a particular form of life must develop or die out.
There are very many primitive forms which have not evolved
at all during many millions of years. They have reached a mature
stage in which no further development is necessary and moreover
the organism thus fully developed possesses characteristics
which have not been rendered unsuitable to survival during sub-
sequent earth changes. Sponges and many lowly sea animals have
not changed since the earliest geological times.
The sequence runs on these lines ;—An animal or plant form has
developed as the result of the reaction of some ancestral form to a
new earth condition. It develops during a long period of stability
during which heredity is the dominating influence. If it develops
unfavourable characteristics it dies out, but survival is usually not


a difficult matter. Then comes a period of major earth changes.
Sometimes a plant or animal form is still in a developing stage and
is able to adjust itself to the change and it then survives. Other
forms which cannot adjust themselves are exterminated. Again, the
new conditions are more favourable to some forms and definitely
retard others. New forms appear, developed from primitive or re-
pressed forms which existed previously but could not compete
favourably. Old forms are repressed and so we see after such a
world revolution a new grouping of forms of life. In this period
survival of the fittest is the dominant law.
In this way life has grown. Sponges, corals, sea anenomes, sea
squirts, worms, crabs and crayfish, barnacles and shells developed
in the course of time, each type higher than the last, covered the sea
floor and gave place in their turn to something higher. In the plant
world the sequence was, algae, mosses, fungi and ferns. Then came
nature’s largest family, the insects, closely allied with the flowering
plants, next the vertibrates, fishes, reptiles, birds and mammals.
Finally came man. Each new form of life was more complex and
more highly organised than its predecessors, and was based on a
certain definite condition of the earth’s crust, and also of the life
there existing. The inter-relationship of life is a wonderful thing.
Plants cannot extract nutriment from the soil without the aid
of bacteria, animals live eventually by eating plants. Man is depend-
ent on a whole army of lowly forms for his very existence. In the
Mediterranian there lives a species of crab which plants a particular
sponge on its back in early infancy. That species of sponge can only
live on that particular crab’s back and the crab can only live if it
is covered by that sponge and this relationship has probably
existed for millions of years.
Most of these lowly creatures have fully developed. Nature by
long continual experiment has worked out what is ideally suitable.
Every detail of the animal’s life is pre-ordained. It is hatched
when the food it eats is available —it lives a strictly regulated
life one minute variation from which means death. Coral animals can
only live in certain temperatures, water inhabitating tadpoles change
into land living frogs just at the season when the ponds dry up. Some
life cycles are highly complicated particularly those of man}"
disease parasites, but certain conditions must be fulfilled and when
the conditions are present the animal is there also. Of all creatures
the insects are the most interesting from this point of view the
life story of the ant and the bee are well known. These are examples
of a fully evolved animal in which every detail of existence has been
forged by nature until nothing further remains to be done. The
relationship between plants and animals is so close that certain
insects are always to be found on certain plants and on no other.
All this means that nature in her moulding process was working
not on one species or type, but on the whole surface of the earth,
on rocks and hills, streams and sea shore, on moreover all the other
forms of life previously evolved. Therefore we can only regard


creation as a whole. It is one process, and species or types are merely
phases or examples. In this enormous pattern, man has his place
as definitely fixed as the place of the bulldog ant or wheat rust.
I must now say a few words about man. Man is no mystery, he is
just creation’s latest product, in no way inconsistent with any other
result of God’s plan. Man is a mammal and his bodily structure
shows that he had the same origin as all the other mammals. This
can be traced in outline from a single celled creature living in the sea.
Thence through a fish like form not necessarily any existing
types of fish, although it is not impossible that such was the case.
Thence to a form of amphibian resembling a frog although probably
much larger and then to a warm blooded, hair covered, four
legged carnivorous land animal. From this stage, man’s development
is uncertain. It is probable that all mammals had a common ancestor
type and that man descended directly from this ancestor alongside
the other mammals and not from them. Coming nearer the present
time, man probably descended from the same ancestor as apes and
monkeys, but not from monkeys as we know them they being
cousins only. The actual line of development has not been found
as a fossil of a living animal and can only be deduced from bodily
structures. But all mammals possess many attributes in common
and here allow me to postulate that if man is possessed of that
attribute which we call “Soul,” and I am going to affirm that he is,
it is impossible to deny that the other mammals, horses, cattle, cats,
dogs, bats, etc. also have the rudiments of this attribute, not nearly
as highly developed, that is obvious, but still vaguely existing. To
segregate “Soul” to man alone is as much contrary to the observed
facts of creation as to affirm that higher animals cannot feel pain
in some measure or do not possess rudimentary intelligence, love
and other attributes. It is only a question of degree, and science
is a splendid remedy for conceit.
The influence of earth conditions upon the development of forms
of life is no where better illustrated than in the case of man. The
earliest animal to which we can rightly attribute semi-human
characteristics, inhabited the warmer parts of the globe fairly
extensively during the period just prior to the last ice age. The
oncoming of more severe conditions resulted in a great extension
of ice from the poles. This pushed the desert belts nearer the equator
causing a very considerable restriction of the tropical forest belts
where man’s immediate forefathers found their food. At this time
their feeding grounds were fully inhabited as it is a rule of nature that
animals quickly breed up to the limits of their food supplies. The ice
age restricted this area and the consequent food supplies by quite one
half, and must have produced a tremendous struggle for existence.
As a result we find, in time, a very much higher race, more like
modern man. The ice receded and the new race spread again over
much of the world. Again the ice caps extended and the same result
occurred. In all, this happened four times and in each occasion a
very much more highly developed race becomes apparent. By the


time of the third ice invasion there was occurring the last of the great
earth movements which gave us the Himalayas, Alps and other
high mountain ranges, and also the hollows we know as the
Mediterranian, Bass Strait and other geographical features.
These all had their effect particularly in trapping branches of the
developing human race between the oncoming ice and desert belts
and impassable barriers. In this way the human family separated
into groups and races and some of these were forged into superior
people physically and mentally than others by more rigorous
struggles for existence, whilst others were cut off from the centre of
further development and remained stationary. Man as we know him
has been developing for about 400,000 or 500,000 years and in-
telligent peoples such as the Tasmanian aborigines were in existence
roughly 150,000 years ago. European peoples had developed 40,000
years ago, and at that date we may virtually commence the story of
civilisation how trivial does the period since ancient Babylon and
Egypt a mere 7,000 years appear. The last phase of the great
earth movements is recorded in the history of “The Flood” — an
actual happening due probably to the flooding of the newly forming
Mediterranean basin as the sea level rose after the last phase of the
ice age an outstanding catastrophe in man’s early history during
which the home of European man was largely destroyed. The
Biblical story of the destruction of Sodom and Gomorroh and of
Lot’s escape was probably based on observed fact during the
formation of the great Jordon, Dead Sea, Akaba rift valley at a
date somewhat later than the flood.
God created the animal MAN in the great forge of the earth.
Man’s development has been a continuous process, the details of
which have been traced by modern science. But the animal man was
not all. This was completed some 50,000 years ago, and since that
date there has been little change in the human body. Then the time
was ripe for the forging of the human soul. Man is differentiated
from the other members of creation by his brain. It is this that has
given him mastery over his environment at least to some extent.
But man is more than, an animal with a powerful brain. He is
certainly more than Hi pennyworth of chemicals. Music is a certain
association of sound waves, but it is more than this. Man is a
collection of living cells plus something. He is a unit of matter plus
energy, really a wonderful centre of energy, but there is more than
that. This something can best he expressed by the word “SOL T L.”
Well now where are we getting to. We can see a primordial
material which we call aether a forerunner of matter. In this
exists the elements of a force we have called energy. This aether is
able to collect into knots or seams productive of an enormous
output of energy or a concentration of energy causes this collection.
The suns have power to act as tremendous forges and to create all
the existing forms of matter out of the primitive aether. One of these
forms developed on our earth, and the most recent development
possesses an active form of energy peculiar to itself and we call it life.


The whole forge or machinery is still at work and operating on life,
and has developed something higher which we term soul. What a
tremendous vista is opened in these few words. What a wealth of
history is enshrined in a noble monument such as Mount Wellington,
what a fabric of interwoven romance is enacted beneath our very
eyes on every mossy bank, in every garden plot. And this is creation
the work of the creator. The human mind is too small, as yet
too young and undeveloped to comprehend even a small portion
of this great panorama. We live 50 years of a time in which a
simple cycle, a mere heart beat of creation occupies 50 million
and some people regard themselves as the centre, tbe goal of creation.
The question is often asked is there life on other planets or
stars ? There are hundreds of millions of other heavenly bodies only
a few of which we can perceive with our frail human senses. Each is
different, each has been the forge of some distinctive form of creation.
It is simply lack of imagination which tempts us to think that there
may exist forms of life such as we know elsewhere in the heavens.
There are probably hundreds of millions of forms of creations some
infinitely higher than our forms of life actually in existence at this
moment, but we cannot perceive them, and in our very very limited,
experience cannot form any conception of what they are like or
even recognise them as existing. From man’s outlook creation is
limitless infinite. Creation is God’s work, and by increasing our
knowledge, however paltry the field we may skim, we |increase in
some measure our knowledge of God. God’s work is infinite, and man
will never know more than a tiny corner of creation. Behind this
work is God. I lack words to express the magnitude of the vista
that opens, and can only hope to endeavour to so order my short
existence as to live in conformity with the revealed plan of this
creation.
What I have said does not answer the great questions which
have troubled mankind since he started to think. The questions
“Whence ? ” and “Whither ? ” Where did we come from and
where are we going ? Modern science has probed a short distance
into the past as I have oultined, but as yet it has not penetrated the
fogs of the future. That, however will come to some limited extent.
Nevertheless, we can say that man must live in accordance with
nature with God’s will, put it how you like that man’s soul
is being forged by the mighty process I have outlined.
Here is another thought. I have said that time is a factor
virtually without significance in world history as we go back to
the creation of the universe and of other universes, and of the
substance from which this and other universes have been created,
and the primitive material of that stage there must have been
such and also we look forward through the awe inspiring vista
science is slowly unfolding, time disappears altogether. Are we then
right in our conception of time in human affairs ? Let us for a
moment endeavour to imagine a world without time. We are here
at this moment. Then we walk across the room. Our existing during


this process has been continuous. From here to there we have been
a continuous being not a series of isolated occurrences. In the
meantime the rest of creation has also been moving, but has been
equally continuous. So, if we can free ourselves from this fettering
idea of time we may regard ourselves and everything else as a
process—may we say a long thin worm through space —in some
definite relationship to every other atom of creation. If we can do
this we can trace our existence before birth and after death we
are continuous and in this progress our earthly life occupies a very
small distance. Our birth and our death are merely spots or lines
on our passage through eternity. Moreover, it has been definitely
proved that every impulse of the universe even the dropping of a
book in this room causes waves which pass outwards to the
furthermost limits of the universe imperceptibly faint at a distance,
but nevertheless there. Human senses are incapable of learning
much of creation at a glance. One example must suffice. If an isolated
light sent a ray which at our eye could produce a spectrum a
rainbow when, for instance, passed through a prism, which rainbow
was one yard long, then the light if of the same nature as the sun’s
rays would be producing other rays which we could not see which
would extend over one million miles in length and there are
millions of suns all producing different rays. So we cannot trust our
eyes alone to disclose the nature of creation as it is to us.
But all we can learn from science shows us that what we call
good, the virtues we praise, love, courage, truth and honour are in
accordance with nature —are God’s laws, only we can as yet dimly
pereceive them.
He liveth best who lovest best
All things great and small,
For the great God above us
He made and loves them all. m
— Tennyson.
“Rhyme of the Ancient Mariner ”
So we come back to the question of language, and I suggest in all
reverence that my simile of creation as a great forge of all that we
regard as good is in no wise in conflict with the teaching of
Christianity. I recognise the difficulty of teaching a philospohy
which may as yet be regarded as vague. But this is clear. Man may be
given a certain free discretion, but this is limited very narrowly
one step beyond those prescribed bounds means death continued
divergence means extinction of the race. Creation is forging a unit
the man which is to be, which will conform exactly to nature’s law
that is, will resemble God exactly.
Let me state our problems in Tennyson’s inimicable words
which I never tire of contemplating, which I would like to see
incorporated in the Church’s services :
Oh yet we trust that somehow good
Will be the final goal of ill
To pangs of nature, sins of will
Defects of doubt, taints of blood.


That nothing walks with aimless feet
That not one life shall be destroyed
Or cast as rubbish to the void
When God hath made the pile complete.
'l'hat not a worm is cloven in vain
That not a moth with vain desire
Is shrivelled in a fruitless fire
Or but subserves another’s gain.
Behold, we know not anything,
I can but trust that good shall fall
At least far off at last to all,
And every winter change to spring.
The wish, that of the living whole
No life may fail beyond the grave
Derives it not from what we have
The likest God within the Soul ?
Are God and nature then at strife,
That nature lends such evil dreams
So careful of the type she seems
So careless of the single life.
That I considering everywhere
Her secret meaning in her deeds
And finding that of fifty seeds
She often brings but one to bear.
I falter where I firmly trod,
And falling with my weight of cares
Upon the great world’s alter stairs
That slope through darkness up to God.
I stretch lame hands of faith and grope
And gather dust and chaff and call
To what I feel is Lord of all
And faintly trust the larger hope.
“So careful of the type ? ” but no
From scarped cliff and quarried stone
She cries “A thousand types are gone :
I care for nothing, all shall go.
“Thou makest thine appeal to me
I bring to life, I bring to death
The spirit does but mean the breath
I know no more” —And he shall be.
Man, her last work, who seemed so fair
Such splendid promise in his eyes
Who rolled the psalm to wintry skies
Who built him fanes of fruitless prayer.


Who trusted God was love indeed
And love Creation’s final law
Tho nature, red in tooth and claw
With ravine, shrieked against his creed.
Who loved, who suffered countless ills
Who battled for the true the just
Be blown about the desert dust
Or sealed within the iron hills ?
No more ? A monster then, a dream
A discord. Dragons of the prime
That tear each other in their slime
Were mellow music matched with him.
Peace, come away, the song of woe
Is after all an earthly song :
Peace, come away ; we do him wrong
To sing so wildly ; Let us go.
“In Memoriam.”
The Bible using one language says “I am Alpha and
Omega, the beginning and the ending saith the Lord, which is and
which was, and which is to come, the Almighty.”
Science using another language says the same thing
matter is indestructible —it is evolved from something simple
under certain forces, it may be broken up into simple components
by other forces. Energy is indestructible it may be concentrated
into certain bodies and dispersed again. Creation is the evolution
of types of matter and energy from what has always existed and will
always continue to exist, however much its outward form may
change Alpha and Omege, the beginning and the ending, which
is and which was and which is to come the Almighty. Man, his
body and his soul is matter plus a particular form of energy
indestrutcible but always changing Alpha and Omega the
Almighty. But only a very infinitetsimal part not the whole con-
formity with that barely conceived, hardly understandable whole by
man, is our destiny, a destiny shaped by the whole.
And so, I put it to you that out of the welter and confusions
that is modern science, there will some day emerge a clearer con-
ception of the nature of God and of the place of the human soul in
creation. Both religion and science are man’s gropings after truth,
both using methods peculiarly suited to their searchings, but both
traversing the same road to what will eventually prove the same goal.
There is no room here for anything else than the helping hand
both can extend to the other. And having briefly traced the light
which science can throw on the past, I must complete my talk
with a word as to the future.
It is reasonably certain that the world is entering on a long
period of stability. Man will probably not have any major con-
vulsions of nature to contend with for many million years. You will


have noted the resemblance between the story of the development
of the earth and the development of our social institutions. In this
direction man has a long way to go. There will be ups and downs,
but the earth is now forging those forces which we may call civil-
isation. In the course of time, man under the influence of natural
laws will evolve a perfect civilisation grossness will be eliminated
by natural selection and good will prevail. In time the Sermon on
the Mount will become part of human nature as firmly fixed as
eating and sleeping. “The Mills of God grind slow, but they grind
exceeding small.” Measured by the span of a normal life, it will be a
long while before man reaches the millennium the Kingdom of
God on earth but it is coming every word of science teaches
us this and we are the agents by which creation is forging this
Kingdom of God. Therefore every action we can take which is good
is in conformity with this process of creation every evil action
retards it. We do not even know what is ultimate good, but we are
inexorably, slowly but surely forging this thing we may call ultimate
good out of the elements of creation.
This is probably not sufficient for us as individual human beings
—and here let me say that science, as yet, leaves many gaps which
can be filled by personal religion at the will of the individual and so
vast is the field of science that it has extended and not contracted
that place which can only be filled by personal religion. We want to
know something that happens to us personally after death. Here
science can help but little. Let me, however, remind you again of
the words of St. Paul words which I always regard as the
central message of the Church of England’s burial service : —“But
some man will say, How are the dead raised up ? and with what
body do they come ? Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not
quickened except it die. And that which thou sowest, thou sowest
not that body that shall be but bare grain, it may chance of wheat
or of some other grain. But God giveth it a body as it hath pleased
Him and to every seed His own body.”
The lesson of science is that death is merely a change. This is
clearly demonstratable in regard to the material body. Besides the
material body we have that phenomenom of life a form of cosmic
energy we call the soul this again is at least sufficiently a physical
fact as to be open to study. Science shows us that energy in all its
forms is indestructible. The physical quantity and variety of energy
comprised in a single human body is virtually infinite. Picture a
young soldier in the prime of his vital activities suddenly killed by a
rifle bullet or a leader of human thought or enterprise struck down
by a motor oar. That tremendous factory of vital energy stops
working but the energy itself is not destroyed. Living human
bodies merely change their latent or potential store of energy into
activities recognised by human senses. Death stops this change,
but does not destroy the energy itself, which is indestructible,
“which is which was and which is to come, the Almighty.” In
this dark future the search light of science has as yet hardly
penetrated —largely because science fears. I can carry our thoughts


but little further, except to say that if my premises are correct, if
creation is God’s forge and that vague indefinable but all powerful
force I have termed, for want of a better word, “energy” is really
the visible and physical attribute of the purpose of all things
the compelling motive the reason of creation —then I must also
be right when I say that man possesses a definite share of the force,
in a form somewhat different, but in general the same as the universe
as a whole and each component part of creation and this force
or energy is not and cannot be destroyed by death.
I said science fears to tread in the realm of the undisclosed
future science fears no phase of material creation, but it is
anxious not to offend the feelings of personal religion. The nature
of life after death is still the realm of personal religion, but I appeal
to the Church to help science, and I feel that the necessary sympa-
thetic assistance will be readily forthcoming so that religion and
science may go forward hand in hand courageously.
Into regions yet untrod
And read what is still unread
In the manuscripts of God.
And so we return to the first chapter of Genesis
“So God created man in His own image in the image of
God created he him.”
Do you think that perchance we have misunderstood these
words ? For generations we have considered them to mean that
man was a miniature of God and we have regarded God as a super
man. Perhaps we have made an initial mistake in the true nature
of man have taken external appearances alone as our image,
and then have built our conception of God on this immature idea
I do not say erroneous, merely incomplete. Therefore, I do not feel
that I am irreligious when I express my opinions that we do not yet
know much of man that by studying ourselves and our place
in creation we draw ourselves nearer to the Creator and that in
the end we will find that man is really a particular and definite
part of God’s nature still perhaps being forged and shaped that
lesson when learnt will lead to the highest lesson of all at present
quite beyond the comprehension of our immature minds.
‘But what am I
An infant crying in the night
An infant crying for the light
And with no language but a cry.”
Address given at St. Clement’s Church, Kingston, during 1942.


ife in a Medieval University
It may often be wondered why history text books give no exact
date for the commencement of our university system of education.
The reason is simple. The date in unknown and no one founded
the older European Universities. We know that the British
Constitution was growing for centuries before the summoning of
the first parliament. It was exactly so with the Universities. The
Charter was granted to the University of Oxford by Edward 111 in
1375, but for many centuries before that date the conditions were
present and the germs of that university were developing as I shall
explain in a moment. Certainly the University of Tasmania was
founded, but such a complex structure as modern higher education
could not possibly have been invented any more than the original
Constitution. It must perforce have grown slowly each advancing
step to satisfy a growing want.
Although this is primarily a note on Life in a University in the
Middle Ages, a short sketch of the existing conditions will aid in
understanding many seeming peoularities.
Old stories attribute the founding of Oxford University to
Alfred the Great, but whatever that great king did for education
he most certainly did not found any institution that later developed
into a University. The first university arose in Paris, and on this
model the others were established. Oxford was nearly the con-
temporary of Paris. The various colleges as distinct from the
University arose in this way. Learned men were rare in the 10th
and 11th Centuries, and there was a certain very real bond between
all scholars. Por motives of comradeship and protection these men
learned amidst a dark world and gradually collected together at various
centres like Oxford, Paris, Prague, and many other great cities.
Later, young men anxious for knowledge, came to these centres to
be taught at the feet of those who knew. These groups in time
increased into classes, each with a learned master at its head, but
without any interconnection except a common interest in a hostile
world. These classes, voluntary collections of teachers and scholars,
were the beginnings of our University Colleges. These loose knots
existed thus for centuries. Famous scholars travelled from city to
city gathering crowds of eager young men to their feet. Their
numbers increasing, the students would feel themselves a class
apart and would gradually unite to forward their common interests.
These were the conditions that had developed up to about 1300.
Whatever a University is now, then it was merely a collection of
disconnected units. The only bond that existed was between teacher
and learner, and there was absolutely no idea of a single body under
one head.


It must be borne in mind that right up to the time of the
Reformation, the Monastries were the great educating establish-
ments and clerics of any order patronised the Universities but little.
On the other hand the Monastries were only for clerics while the
Universities arose to cater for lay students in secular subjects.
The 13th century was a Golden Age for the Universities. They had
by this time grown large enough to be of consequence. Grateful
patrons showered money and lands on them. One by one they were
recognised and granted charters by Popes and Kings, and immense
privileges were bestowed. On the granting of these charters the
University for the first time became one corporate institution.
About Henry Ill’s reign the Universities were beginning to carry
considerable weight in national affairs. About this time the
Universities were “invaded” by Dominican Friars. St. Dominic,
unlike St. Francis, used the Universities to spread his views. The
laymen struggled hard at first to keep out the Friars, but the latter
were supported by the Popes, and very soon worked into highest
positions where they existed alongside laymen until the Reformation
From the date of receiving their charters onwards, the universities
steadily developed and infused their influence through the upper-
classes. To what extent will readily be seen by the large numbers
who read the Lollard tracts in Lancastrian times, when about
Edward I’s reign, scarcely a layman could be found who could
read or write his own name.
That is a very brief outline of the history of the University
movement up to the Reformation. It may be seen that they arose
and greatly developed during the middle ages. In other words
Alma Mater’s girlhood was an affair of Middle Age, and during
Middle Age had developed into a strong muscular lady, with
very far reaching and strong arms, ready to defend herself against
all aggression.
It must be obvious to any one who reads history that many
opinions held by men in the Middle Ages and many of the existing
conditions were very predjudioial to the interests of higher education.
For example, views on all matters could practically only be expressed
by lectures, speeches or manuscript writings. Means for publishing
were expensive and laborious, and the works when written were few
and had to be circulated from hand to hand. The manuscripts were
often badly copied and soon became illegible through age, rats or
dirt. Even then they were only of use to the few who who could read.
An example of the difficulty Medieval Scholars experienced with
their books is given by Petrach, the greatest writer of Medieval Italy.
Petrach possessed an original copy of a work of Juvenal, from which
no copy had been taken. This he lent to a scholar, who, becoming
very poor, pawned it. That work was never again recovered.
In the Middle Ages learning was a profession. Men were scholars
to serve no end but to spend a life searching after knowledge,
while even the most rudimentary education was considered un-
necessary for a soldier, noble, or gentleman.


Lack of good communications between the states of Europe,
great difficulties in the way of travelling, the unsettled nature of the
governments of the countries, the frequent wars, and the local
isolation of Medieval Europe kept scholars to a large extent at
home, and prevented that education from being acquired, that
comes from a knowledge of other lands and other customs.
There were also many prejudices existing which seem childish
to us today. The study of Greek and Greek authors was condemned
by the Church as injurious to good morals. Even Latin authors books
were banned for long as the works of Pagan infidels which ought not
to be read by good Christians. When at last this foolish restriction on
the best classic authors was withdrawn, scarcely any could read
Latin or Greek and as books in the vernacular were rare, few books
were within the pale of the majority of the people, who might have
been able to afford them. The translations made of the works of
classical writers were universally bad, and the authors were hardly
understood. The Church strictly forbade any study of the secular
side of life and thus the whole of the practical side of a university
education, the part we lay so much stress on now-a-days, was
absent in Medieval times. It was thus that a University education
was of such little use and that a man who had spent a dozen years in
study, rarely took up any other occupation. Roger Bacon, the
greatest discoverer in optics, physics and chemistry, was forbidden
to carry on his work on the assumption that he was a wizard.
Lastly the work of study was always being interrupted by
rows with the citizens of the University towns, but I have more
about that later.
And now we come to the most important aspect of our study
the scholastic work done in the Universities at any time between
1300 and 1500. At first the universities as we have seen were under
the patronage of Popes and of the Church, and most of the teachers
were friars, so the study of Theology stood alone, and above every-
thing else and infused every other study. Next to it came Canon
(or Church) Law which was also a popular study. In addition to
these the rudiments of Civil Law, Medicine, philosophy, logic and
rhetoric, music, mathematics and astronomy, mechanics and optics
were lightly studied. Several universities specialised in one particular
branch, for example, the University of Palermo in medicine, of
Prague and Edinborough in mechanics, of Oxford and Paris in
Canon and Civil Law, Theology and Philosophy. But the majority
of these studies were in their infancy while the rest were so infused
with Theological notions as to make them impracticable. For
example, the study of music was limited to Church singing, and of
mechanics to Church building. The only true Astronomy —as
apart from Astrology known was how to calculate the date of
Easter, while medicine had advanced no further then a knowledge
of the four humours and the practice of bleeding for every aliment.
Apart from Theology and the two branches of Law, the
Medieval scholars excelled in Philosophy. In time the students of


this branch built up a body of doctrine afterwards known as the
“disputations of the schoolmen” and many similar terms. These
doctrines were originally based on those of Aristotle. Many wise
scholars, exceedingly clever and able brought forward views and
opinions about many obscure aspects of life, society and ways of
living. But these men made many grave errors, chiefly through
ignorance of their subject, their narrow outlook and lack of practical
experience. Some of their theories were wierdly erratic. Their
followers often further distorted their views, until what at first
might have been a very plausible theory became an object for
ridicule. As was the case with the teachings of the famous Duns
Scotius, one of the wisest scholars of the Middle Ages, from a
corruption of whose name, as everyone knows we get our word and
idea “dunce.” These schoolmen by high and hard thinking en-
deavoured to invent explanations for mysteries of the Christian
Faith and of human life, and in their ignorance of the truth invented
some really wonderful arguments in explanation of things they
could not understand. This philosophical trend of the scholastic
system, as it was called, aided by Church prejudice against every-
thing non-religious, did much to bring the Universities into dis-
repute. The knowledge acquired was useless as it was absolutely
divorced from all things pertaining to everyday life. Indeed a
Medieval University taught very little that could be of use. This
deprived the community as a whole of practically all advantage
of the Universities. There were many men who had glimpses of
things great to the world, who were prevented from materialising
their ideas by this foolish restriction on secular or lay subjects. For
example, Roger Bacon, whom I mentioned before, in one of his
works that still exists said that the day would come when “carriages
can go without horses, boats can sail against the wind, and glasses
will be discovered that can reflect distant objects.” This man also
invented gunpowder and made great advances in many practical
sciences, yet he was forbidden by the Church to continue his work.
The study of what we now know as the Arts course, which
then comprised grammar Latin and literature, was somewhat
despised at first and considered “only worthy of schoolboys.”
Practically all the literature of Medieval Europe was written
in the Universities or at least by men who had received a University
education. For this reason it was often spoilt by the excess of classi-
cal illusions and by the imperfect adaption of classical forms to Europ-
ean words and ideas. The literature practically all poetry pro-
duced in the Middle Ages was not very remarkable, except the
works of a few great men like Dante, Petrach, Chaucer, and the
author of “Remain de la Rose,” the poem that influenced European
literature for over two centuries.
The study of mathematics was introduced late in the Middle
Ages from the Greek.
As I briefly stated in my opening section, the earliest germ of the
University originated when a famous scholar opened classes for


young men in some city. We will assume that these classes have
been going on for about two centuries and the university has
gradually developed into a definite organisation. The date
is about 1300 or afterwards. The model on which the
organisation was based was most naturally that of the Monastry,
and for that reason many resemblances were found between the
two. When the colleges began to be formed, at the head was placed
a “Rector” and under him was a “Magester Studiorum,” who
directed the tutorial work. The Rector had absolutely no legal
power until the granting of the Charter, but no student ever was so
bold or so powerful as to question his authority. When the colleges
were joined together an official called the Chancellor presided over
the whole University.
Students on coming to a University would decide what study
they would take up, and would go to the college where that branch
was taught. Here he would place himself under some teacher who
would be responsible, not only for his progress in study, but for
his conduct at all times. The student would be taught right through
his course by the one master, and there was a very real connection
between learner and teacher. The student would be about the age
of 14 or 15 when he entered the University the education given
being about the standard of a modern secondary school. He would
at first attend the lectures of a fellow who had finished the ordinary
University course and probably had the degree of M.A. or 8.C.L.,
but who had remained at the University for the purpose of further
study, perhaps for the degrees of D.C.L., B.D. or D.D. The lecturer
would discourse on the subject, minutely analysing and explaining
every sentence and rather studying the book than the subject
matter. He only would have the text books as they were far too
rare to be obtained by each member of a class. The M.A. degree at
this time was nothing more than the Chancellor’s approval or
inception stating that the student had requisite education to fit
him for a teacher or master in the Arts subjects. The fellow would
probably be about 21 years of age. After a few years study the
student very often went to another University to complete his
education.
The University in the Middle Ages was a little republic,
certainly under an absolute head, but that head always consulted
the interests and desires of those under him. There was no distinction
of birth. Students of any social class could sit together under one
master. As the Universities were so well endowed they charged no
fees and even gave material aid to poor students. It was only after
the Reformation when the Church was foully robbed of her pos-
sessions that students were excluded from Universities by poverty.
Indeed in the Middle Ages almost all the students were poor, as rich
men usually despised education or at least could do without it.
Since the poor could, by merit or hard work become amongst the
highest in a University, and educated men were needed for the
great offices of State, the poor could attain to the highest posts
through the University.


Oxford to take one typical example of the many universities
in the Middle Ages had none of the fine buildings and beautiful
gardens to be seen today. The colleges were wretchedly situated in
the narrow evil streets, small cramped buildings themselves, without
the slightest heed paid to beauty or hygiene. The students attended
lectures and took meals at the colleges, but lived anywhere they
pleased, in inns and hostelries in the city. These inns were crowded
and unhealthy. The exorbitant charges formed ground for the chief
complaint on the part of the scholars against the citizens. The
remedy was usually an appeal to the King or higher authority. The
following extract from an audience by King John gives the usual
trend of the King’s reply “Lest in the new community of the city
the masters and scholars of our institution may be oppressed by
the citizens, avarice inducing them, through the extortionate
price of lodgings we have seen fit to decree that henceforth at
Christmas one expert from the University, and one prudent, pious
and circumspect citizen on the part of the citizens, shall be deputed
to fix on the price of student’s lodgings.”
A great idea of the Middle Ages was that if the bod}’ was
starved and ill oared for, the nourishment all went to the brain.
Hence they eat little and lived in most unhealthy conditions
in most of the Universtites. Erasmus writes of Paris University—
“At all times their daily fare was a scanty dole of coarse bread,
accompanied occasionally by rotten eggs and wine resembling
vinegar, but their ordinary drink was from a putrid well
of water. Meat they never tasted. They slept on the damp
floors of rooms overhanging cesspools of the river and swarming
with vermin.” This account is amply proved to be not exaggerated
by other contemporary writers.
Cambridge was built in an unhealthy position for the same
reason. As the students eat together there was ample opportunity
to enforce diet regulations.
The following are some contemporary remarks about the food
and life at Oxford which was one of the most luxurious of the
Universities of the time. “The food was chiefly a good gruel in
abundance, made of milk and oatmeal, but spoilt by being burnt
in the cooking. The loaves were of pulse bread and were so dark
that the crusts could not be distinguished from the rest of the bread. ’ ’
“The meat served up was cut from aninals, goodness knows
when or where, of wonderful toughness and often so salt that it
skinned the mouth of the eater.”
“There be divers there which rise daily between four and five
of the clock in the morning, and from five of the clock till six of the
clock use common prayer in a chapel, and from six until ten of the
clock use either private study or common lectures. At ten of the
clock .they have their first meal dinner whereas they be
content with a penny piece of beef amongst four. Having also a few
porage made of broth of the same beef with salt oatmeal and nothing


else. After this slender dinner they be either teaching or learning
until 5 of the clock in the evening when they have a supper not
much better than dinner.”
But beef was cheap in those days.
The students of Oxford patronised no kind of sports, and were
not very cleanly in their habits. In summer they occasionally
bathed in the river, but in winter the only water they used was
taken as drink. A student whose fingernails were not in deep
mourning would be considered far too superior and epicurean to
live with the rest.
The schoolmasters who taught the sons of the students used
two wonderful educative methods. One was the ferula or spoon
shaped instrument with which he belaboured the palms of the
learners, and the other was the birch, composed of seven thin sticks
each one in honour of one of the Muses.
The civilian population used to congregate under the windows
to listen to a lecture.
I hardly need mention that the idea of women scholars did not
arise till the 18th century. Many humorous incidents occurred when
married men were appointed Masters of the colleges, and their wives
refused to leave the buildings and defied all efforts to evict them.
This essay would hardly be complete without some reference
to one of the greatest interferences University work experienced.
That was the chronic fights between the University and townsfolk
of the University city. But as the time is short I must merely give
you facts, though there are many exceedingly interesting details.
The great cause of the eternal friction was this. The town, or
city corporation existed before the University, but the latter soon
gained enormous privileges, chief of which was the right of the
University to the sole Jurisdiction over the students. Thus no
member of a university could be brought before a magistrate for
any offence whatever. Should however a student commit a very
serious crime, such as murder, the University stepped in and told
him not to do it again. More even than that. In any quarrel between
citizen and student, it was settled in the University court, always for
the benefit of the student. These conditions the citizens could not
get moderated until comparatively recent times, and there was always
bitter hostility between the University and the city.
About 1400, the Chancellor of Oxford solemnly ex-com-
municated the Mayor of that city for daring to move the city
Pillory to another position without consulting the University, and
it was only after the Mayor and town council had done a most
humiliating and extravagant penance that the curse was removed.
Very sanguinary riots were continually disturbing the peace
of the University, and often the students held the city by arms for
days, acting the whole time with absolute lawlessness.


It was through all these tremendous trials that we receive
our great heritage of learning and literature of ancient and medieval
times. We must be eternally grateful to the countless unknown
and dauntless spirits who kept alight the lamp of learning through
the dark ages, and gave it whole to us to make such use of as we are
able.


Notes on the History of Artillery
Development has been a slow process from step to step in
answer to specific needs.
The gun and the regiment grew side by side and the role in
battle has developed with both.
The tempo of development has vastly accelerated in the last
150 years, but the foundations of most that we now use were laid
long before.
The primary weapons of all warfare are those employed in
the hands of fighters. From the earliest times it has been desirable
to bridge the gap and damage the enemy before he can use his
primary weapons. Artillery is the term applied to the heavier of
such secondary weapons and means. The word has the same origin
as “Art” and probably denotes early reliance on the skill of the
personal manufacturer of ordnance.
In the above sense, Artillery has been used since the dawn of
history. The old testament and Homer refer to weapons for shooting
arrows and stones. Great changes followed the introduction of
Gunpowder as a propellant and further advances followed the
introduction of rifled ordnance. Aerial bombing is the most recent
development. The principles, however, have remained the same
and may be summarised as ways of assisting our fighters to get to
grips with the enemy, and of preventing his fighters from getting
in the first blow.
Armies in the classical times had engines capable of hurling
missiles up to several tons in weight, and lighter ones up to 1,000
yards distance. All ingenuity in building of fortifications was over-
come by these methods in time.
The pre-gunpowder weapons were in use prior to 500 8.C.,
and changed little until 1,000 A.D. The important types were
BALLISTA, actuated by the twisted rope into which were inserted
two bars of wood drawn back by a windlass, and CATAPULT,
actuated by a weight on a lever working in the vertical plane.
Ballista threw stones or arrows up to 2 lbs. in weight perhaps
for 1,000 yards. Catapults could throw weights of many hundreds
of pounds. Ballista was the flat trajectory high velocity weapon,
and Catapult the heavy weapon with high trajectory and relatively
short range.
By about 1,000 A.D. with the developments in the art of
smithing as witnessed by armour, iron springs were used and the
cross bow —(an iron spring bow wound to compression by a handle)


was increasingly developed as a weapon for hurling heavier weights.
Often high engines were built, which were capable of firing 10 lb.
stones and more, for 1,000 yards, and mounted on moveable
carriages.
Gunpowder changed warfare, but its adoption was a slow
process extending over 200 years.
Chinese used the mixture of saltpetre and sulphur for centuries
before gunpowder was known in Europe, but Eastern developments
did not proceed beyond fireworks. Knowledge of the power of ex-
plosives came from China, guns appear to have developed in Europe
and to have been the adaption of gunpowder to older weapons.
Roger Bacon (1214-1294) experimented with cast tubes firing shot
with gunpowder, but these were proclaimed as inventions of the
devil, by the Church, and Bacon’s various scientific experiments
nearly cost him his life at the stake.
England appears to have led the way in use of guns in war,
but Constantinople as the capital of the Eastern Greek Empire was
the centre of civilisation and industrial activity. From 1066 to 1450,
the connection between England and Constantinople was very
close, and England was a favourite recruiting ground for the
Emperor’s Guards.
The first record of a gun is a drawing in the margin of a manu-
script, written in 1326, in the reign of Edward ll—“De Officus
Regnum,” and now at Oxford. The drawing shows a knight in armour
firing a gun shaped like a recumbent vase, loaded with incendiary
arrows. The first extant record of the use of guns is by Constantinople
at the seige of Cividale, in Italy, in 1331. The earliest guns still
actually in existence are dated 1338. These were breach loading,
firing up to 50 arrows at a time with a charge of 2 lbs. of powder.
The date of the introduction of artillery as a weapon of war, may
therefore be fixed as between 1300 and 1350, that is in the reign
of the first three Edwards in English history.
The earliest gun design was a plain pipe laid in a grooved
carriage, secured by a moveable loop pin across the centre, and
pushed against a baulk of wood for firing. The earliest projectiles
appear to have been arrows. Firing was through a touch hole.
The “establishment” of artillery men for the Royal Army
which eventually fought at Crecy was, in 1344 when being raised in
England—12 men.
Crecy was the first important battle at which Artillery was
employed as part of the tactical plan. Vellani, a contemporary
writer records “The English made a noise like thunder, and caused
much loss in men and horses.” Edward 111 would not wait for his
guns at Crecy, and later abandoned them.
Earliest artillery was practically confined to seige purposes.
Inaccuracy and cumbersomeness limited its usefulness. By 1415
seige artillery was universal in Europe. Harfleur fell to this form of


attack, and the famous breach of Shakespeare’s ‘‘Once more unto
the breach dear friends,” was the first important breach by artillery
in a walled city, and rang the doom of the curtain wall defence.
Henry V had 25 master gunners and 52 gunners. At this time, a
gunner was a man who knew about the gun and was often the owner,
one gunner per gun, and he hired as many assistants as he re-
quired. Agincourt, only 500 years ago, was fought with less than
50 guns aside.
The period Crecy (1346) —Agincourt (1415) was one of the
greatest artillery developments in artillery, and considering the more
moderate tempo of those times, equal to any modern period.
The first development was in the direction of size and power
and this was only limited by construction difficulties. Early gun-
powder was very unreliable and rapid in explosion. Great difficulties
were experienced in making guns which could withstand a large
charge. Early guns were given names and were known throughout
Europe.
One of these, called “Dulle Greite” is still in existence. It was
made in Holland about 1390 and is known to have been used in 1411
in that country. Its weight is 13 tons, length 16 feet, bore 25 inches,
projectile, solid granite ball, weighing 100 pounds, charge 20 lbs.
of powder. Structure, iron staves the length of the barrel with outer
layer of hoops, all welded together, and a tapering chamber of cast
iron. It rests on three wooden cradles. It was loaded from the
muzzle by rolling the shot up an inclined plane. “Mons Meg” still
at Edinborough Castle, was made about 1420. Its calibre is 20 inches
and it fired a granite ball of 33 pounds. Its construction is cast
iron rings welded together. Two large guns of 29 inch calibre were
abandoned by the English at St. Michel in 1423. A gun made at
Constantinople about this time is preserved at Woolwich. Its calibre
is 25 inches, projectile weighs 675 lbs., and the gun weighs 18f tons,
constructed of solid brass.
In 1805 Turkey used some of these guns made at Constantinople
about 1430 against a British force at the Dardanelles. The guns
were very effective against wooden ships, and one single shot killed
50 seamen. The range of these guns is not known for certain, but
from deduction records, some achieved about two miles, and 2,500
yards was not infrequent.
This initial development in the direction of weight, limited
usefulness. Large teams of horses, special bridges, and even roads
were necessary, and when once placed in position, guns were usually
left. Even the gun was laid by placing it on the carriage in many
cases. The greatest difficulty was the tendency of the guns to burst.
Zizka, the patriot leader of the Hussites, first gave reasoned thought
to the tactical employment of light field pieces (1419-1424) and was
the father of Field Artillery. This arm soon spread, and from about
the time of Agincourt was to be seen with every large force.
Early field pieces had a calibre up to 6 inches, and fired stone
shot from 2 to 12 lbs., were mounted on wooden cradles, carried on


waggons, and moved into action by hand. The drivers drove the
teams on foot, with long whips. The “Cradle,” the “Carriage” were
terms actually in use in 1415. Their chief use was protection of
archers against cavalry, and on several occasions were very effective
in street fighting. In 1469 they were used in England by Edward IV.
Constantinople fell to the Turks in 1456 after having stood
impregnable for over 1,000 years. This was largely due to heavy
artillery. One famous gun was cast in Adrianople, and fired shot of
30 inches for more than 3,000 yards. The effect of these amongst
the buildings was devastating. With the flight from Constantinople,
which stimulated the Rennaisannce in Europe, came accounts of
the effect of heavy artillery and knowledge of its manufacture and
use. The commander of the Vargunnian Guards was an Englishman
who returned to the service of Edward IV.
Developments were slow for the next 150 years. About 1550
iron shot replaced stone. The first bronze cannon cast in England,
was dated 1521, and iron cannon were made from 1540.
History gave us many of the terms which we still use.
Piece was one gun. The gun was separate from its cradle and a
piece of artillery was the equivalent to the barrel and fittings.
Cradle was the block of wood in which the piece was placed
to hold it for firing.
Carriage was the wheeled vehicle on which the cradle and piece
was transported.
Breech was the hole at the end of the barrel and the breech
block was the block of wood forming part of the cradle which
closed the breech.
Lay and Layed. The cradle has to be pointed in the required
direction,and the piece was then laid in its place on the cradle. To
lay a gun meant to put it down on the cradle ready for firing.
Fire. The powder was ignited by a match —a piece of tarred
rope kept burning, and the original term was to “put fire to the
powder.”
It may be noted here that a gunner’s quoin was a wedge
used under the breech for giving the required elevation—this is of
later origin (about Elizabethan) and well-known to our early
explorers.
Brass canon cast as a whole began to replace the older hoop
and stave construction and cast iron shot. That of stones about
the period 1500-1550. Spain at the height of her power produced
bronze guns which are real works of art. Somewhat later India
designed most ornamental works.
Spain first developed the hand cannon, a small piece supported
in front on a fork and held to the shoulder. Early ones fired 4 oz.
balls. The original name was Harquebus (in different spellings)
They were first used to any effect at the Battle of Pavia, 1525,


which gave Spain control of what is now Belgium. This was primarily
a stage of naval development. Ships guns, particularly the high,
heavy, awkward cradle on small wheels, dominated gun construction.
The first world war of modern times “The Thirty Years War”
produced great developments. Gustavus Adolphus, probably the
greatest general of his time, was fighting the French with smaller
armies and inferior resources, winning by mobility. He saw the
possibility of quantities of light artillery and invented a gun con-
structed of tightly pressed leather. This fired a 2 lb. shot, and could
be carried by two men. It was very cheap and easily made. Before
long he developed a light field piece of bronze which fired a 4 lb.
shot. This weapon became the first lone field gun. At the Battle of
Brutenfeld in 1631, Gustavus had 12 pairs and 42 pairs against
Tilley’s larger batteries of 24 pairs, and he knocked all the larger
guns by rapidity of fire and manoeuver. At Lutzen in 1632 he had
60 guns organised as true field artillery. His batteries consisted of
2 four pair guns, one battery to each regiment in this line, and about
half the guns in reserve. These were rushed up to break an enemy
attack or breach his line preparatory to an attack on him.
In England to the end of Elizabeth’s reign, most guns were
owned by individuals or companies. The Honourable Artillery
Company is a survivor. The Master Gunner was a man of con-
sequence, and commanded the gun. The company entered into an
ordinary contract of service with the Government, for a sum of
money. They either had or hired a Master Gunner. He chose his crew.
Artillerymen were hardly considered part of the army. The drivers
were civilians usually hired with their horses and carts, and at first
were not even under military discipline. It was no unusual thing for
the artillery to leave in the middle of a fight, or to demand more
money to stay. Special companies of infantry which became known
as “Fusiliers” because they were armed with new firelocks fired with
a fuse kept bound round the right wrist, were provided nominally
to protect the guns, but in reality as much to keep the gunners from
departing unwarrantably. The first Royal Artillery manned guns-
being installed in Royal Fortresses and in Elizabeth’s reign, to be
appointed a gunner at the Tower of London was the equivalent of a
pension. Records show men of over 90 years of age on this establish-
ment.
Gun construction varied little from Cromwell’s time to
Wellington’s. Carved guns went out of fashion. Smaller guns were
usually of cast brass, and larger ones were made of cast iron. Iron
was gradually replaced by gunmetal, a tougher alloy of iron, anti-
minoidal lead (or tin) and carbon —forerunner of steel. Gradually,
with the development of better forging processes the calibre of the
guns was increased, and the weight decreased. Trunnions, moulded
as part of the gun itself, were introduced early. Field carriages, with
wheels and a trail were gradually developed. The establishment of
Royal Artillery gradually increased. Marlborough had over 100
field pieces and 11,000 artillerymen in 1711. Marlborough appreci-


ated the value of artillery to an extent which no former British
general did. Cromwell hardly understood its application, and Welling-
ton was without. Marlborough was greatly assisted in several
victories, particularly Ramillies, by putting numbers of guns, in-
cluding heavy pieces amongst the forward infantry.
The last civilian gunner disappeared from the British army at
the commencement of Marlborough’s campaign (about 1700) and
the Royal Regiment of Artillery was founded in 1716. Civilian
drivers continued to be hired as required for campaigns until 1793.
Prism powder, the first slow burning propellant, was introduced
about 1750. This gave the first real impetus to better gun con-
struction, by allowing reduction of weight. Before the Napoleonic
wars the first elevating gear was introduced for light field pieces.
This consisted of two upright bars attached to the trails and with
holes corresponding to different ranges into which a pin for support-
ing the breech was invented. The limber was introduced about the
same time. Sights consisted of a notch on the top of the barrel
until after the Napoleonic War, but a rough target sight for elevation
was in use occasionally. It is on record that Nelson gave it as his
opinion that sights were not advisable—guns should be got so close
to the target that they could not miss. It was only about 1760 that
guns of similar power were grouped together into batteries.
The lack of mobility of field artillery at the period is illustrated
by a charge at the battle of Kounersdaf (1759-Frederick the Great)
when the Prussians captured 72 guns from the Russians. During
the whole campaign the Russians lost 180 guns without the loss of a
single gunner. Frederick the Great re-organised his artillery in 1759
into heavy and light brigades, each consisting of 4 or 6 guns, each
with its own team of 4 horses and an ammunition waggon carrying
100 rounds of ball and 30 of grape. France followed. A general
named Gribcanval was appointed to command the artillery (1765-
1776). He reduced guns to uniform type with as many uniform parts
as possible and into changeable carriages. He introduced the first
official gun drill. In England, the re-organisation was effected by a
Major Spearman. The Royal Horse Artillery was formed in 1793,
and the remaining artillery was classified as Field or Garrison. The
Royal Corps of Drivers was formed in 1794, and a definite organiz-
ation into brigades or batteries was effected in 1806. Up to Waterloo
the usual terms were : A battery was a group of guns of any number
allotted to one tactical task (English historians speak of Napoleon’s
great battle at Waterloo—a concentration of 80 guns). A brigade
was the administrative units of 6 guns. R.H.A. was organised into
troops of 2 guns.
As may be expected, the Napoleonic Wars produced rapid
development. Napoleon himself started as an Artillery Officer.
After Friedland (1807) he said “Once this melee has begun, the man
who unexpectedly brings up a great quantity of artillery wins the
day.” He deprecated this practice of useless “artillery duels.” and
preferred to concentrate his guns on enemy infantry. At Wagram


he broke the Prussian line with 100 mobile guns working on pre-
allotted zones, and a definite fire plan, and arranged on three sides
of a square round the Prussian mass. The Allies broke Napoleon’s
infantry at Leipzic by a similar concentration of artillery. In other
words the role of artillery as an infantry support weapon had forced
itself on commanders.
Up to Waterloo this solid round shot was the chief projectile,
but grape and cannister were also used. Grape consisted of a number
of balls bound with rope and covered with gum to make an elon-
gated shell. The shock of discharge disrupted the binding and gave
a shot gun effect. This was effective up to a range of 300 yards.
Cannister was an elongated can filled with shot, and with a lid secured
by a bolt, which was unscrewed at the muzzle. This had a some-
what longer range.
For coast defence, as at Gibraltar, cannisters were sometimes
filled with inflammable material. The cannister was called the
“Shell.” No explosives were used up to the time of Waterloo.
One of the junior artillery officers in Wellington’s Army was
Lieutenant Shrapnell. He afterwards rose to the rank of Major
General, and was responsible for the first time expolsive projectile —
a modified and strengthened cannister shell, filled with shot and
opened by the bursting of a powder charge actuated by a time fuse.
The first fuse was made of wood. Inside was a spiral of powder
rings. On the outside were a number of holes. The appropriate hole
was punctured by a spike before loading, and the flash of discharge
entered and ignited the powder ring. The position of the hole so
punctured determined the time of burning and the position
where the shell burst and liberated the shot.
Great developments occurred after Waterloo. Gun and pro-
pellant improvements went together and resulted in longer range.
Sights, not unknown at Waterloo were developed. The first was the
"Gunner’s Quadrant” — simple right angle piece of wood, with a
degree scale in the angle and a plumb bob. One arm of the angle
was placed in the muzzle and the plumb bob gave the angle of
elevation. This was known as the quadrant elevation, i.e., the
additional elevation required over and above the angle of the sight
in order to provide for range.
Rifled guns were coming into service use by the time of the
Crimean War, 1854. The earliest rifled cannon were heavy pieces with
few grooves. Elongated shell were used although still worth a
CRH of about 1.5. Studs were fixed in a spiral on the sides of the
shells, and the shells were loaded from the muzzle.
This was the period of the rise of the great Armament firms.
These conducted extensive experiments in gun and munition con-
struction. The method was to produce a new weapon and then to sell
the design to a government.


A good breech loading system was invented in 1745, but the
gun burst at its trials, and in 1854, muzzle loading guns were still
in the preponderance.
The friction tube for firing, in line of the port fire was intro-
duced at this period and a system of inserting this in the end of
the axis of the breech was developed. In some guns a small breech
block was employed to seal the vent.
The earliest high explosive was also invented at this time.
Nitric Acid had been known for some years. About 1880 Nobel
invented dynamite, and experiments at the English gun experi-
mental station at Lyd produced the explosive compound known as
lydite—not very different from our present T.N.T. Cordite was a
further development of the same period.
Breech loading guns firing H.E. and using Cordite as a pro-
pellant were coming into use in the decade 1880-1890. Sliding wedge
types and swinging screen types of breech blocks developed along-
side each other with an early preference for the latter. During the
Franeo-Prussian War, 1870-72, the majority of guns were muzzle
loaders, but breech loading guns firing shells with time fuses were
used.


Arndell Lewis and “Minty” on the summit of K. Col
Mount Field, West.


Tasmania
How often do the thoughts of mankind turn to islands in
picturing the place in which to spend an ideal existence “The
Isles of the Blest” —the South Sea islands of our adventurous
youth the rocky strongholds of the insecure middle ages the
fantastic pleasances of American millionaires as featured in their
photoplays. All islands have a call. In fact, islands are unusual
and in a surfeited world anything different possesses a charm.
Islands are a world in miniature. Their rocks are pieces of landscape
out of place, the plants and lowly forms of life often display un-
common features and always appear in different groupings from
what is known elsewhere. Their people form one community,
closer knit individually and to some extent differing from other
communities. Islands are finite. There is a natural boundary which
cannot be crossed unconsciously, a boundary to the island’s interests
which sets a limit in every direction, a boundary against outside
influences. So islands appeal to all, and by the vast range of size
and characteristics will supply a dreamland for every fancy.
The vast old-new, desert-forest continent of Australia stretches
from near the equator half-way to the South pole. Beyond the
South-East corner of the Continent rises the rocky bastion known as
Tasmania. An island by the grace of God, in everything, a single
unit of creation, with romance and interest to suit all tastes, a
fortress against adverse forces of nature, and if necessity ever so
requires, against the ill-will of man, no small wind-swept rock, but
nevertheless finite and comprehensible.
Here we will pause for a season, and while the world rushes
from pleasure to destruction, we will watch the flow and ebb of the
Tides of God’s creation and pray that we may unfold to our mortal
sight just one glimpse of that Terra Incognita del Espiritu Sancto
the first few steps of the great world’s altar stairs that slope through
darkness up to God.
Tasmania lies in the Roaring Forties. To the South nothing but
a tempestuous ocean, to the white desert of Antartica, to the West,
half across the world lies Patagonia, to the East, New Zealand, a
thousand miles away across the Tasman Sea, and then, if you
missed that sister country, South America again. Only to the
Northward lies land which can be reached by practicable methods
even with modern means. Tasmania is separated from the continent
of Australia by Bass Strait, no mere Straits of Dover here, but a
moat built on that generous scale on which nature moulded all
Australia. From Wilson’s Promentary at the Southern extremity
of Continental Australia to the nearest point on the Tasmanian


coast is equal to the distance across Victoria from Melbourne to
Albury, to the distances between Sydney and Canberra, from
London to Manchester or Brussels. From Melbourne to Launceston,
the principal ports in Bass Strait and usual route for sea travel
the distance is equal to that from Sydney to Albury, or Melbourne
to Canberra, from London to Dublin or the highlands of Scotland,
or nearly to Switzerland, from New York to Ottawa. In fact, the
whole of Scotland or Ireland, or Holland and Belgium together
could be swamped beneath the restless waves of Bass Strait.
Australia terminates in its South Eastern corner with a line
of hills of deep red granite which rise to a bare basin at Wilson’s
Promentary. This chain passes southward in a sweeping arc and
forms the East coast of Tasmania. It also marks the Eastern limit
of Bass Strait, where the shallow pale green waters plunge down to the
deeps of the Tasman Sea the purple of the blue Pacific. A chain of
islands marks this line some gaunt granite crags, rising straight
from the water, others, large masses with fertile land farmed by
hardy island folk. The largest island is Flinders, maintaining the
immortal association of two of England’s greatest explorer’s in
these parts, Bass and Flinders. Flinders Island is the mighty
Strzelecki Range, seventy miles of tremendous granite crags rising
over 3,000 feet straight out of the Tasman Sea, with a small fertile
plain to the West.
On the western edge of Bass Strait lies another chain of islands,
of which the largest is King Island, the ships graveyard —a hundred
miles of sand dune, not 300 feet above the waves, but of most
surprising fertility, and the home of a thriving community. These
islands form links with the mainland of Australia. The coast of
Victoria at Cape Otway stretches down to King Island, but is too
distant to be seen. The Eastern arc has some much higher peaks
and from each the next in succession can be seen on a very clear
day, providing mental stepping stones. Not only the islands, but
the floor of Bass Strait itself bears witness to Tasmania’s connection
with Australia. Whereas the coasts to the West, South and East
drop steeply to great depths, Bass Strait is shallow like the
North Sea, 270 feet is the greatest depth, insufficient to cover an
interstate ferry steamer were such a vessel to sink bow first and
remain sticking vertically in the sand. The coasts of Bass Strait
can be followed beneath the sea, continuing the line of the East
Coast of Tasmania to Wilson’s Promentary, and the West Coast
to Cape Otway. This is so marked that deep sea life does not find
its way across Bass Strait, but passes from South Australian
waters along this submerged coast to pass south of Tasmania.
Another, but less obvious submerged connection, joins Tas-
mania with Adelie Land in Antartica. A thousand miles to the south
this submerged range appears as Mills Rise discovered by Mawson,
an area one third as large as Tasmania, rising to within 150 fathoms
of the surface from great depths. An equal distance further on is
Macquarie Island, another dependency of the State of Tasmania,


splendid in its chilly isolation, and a refuge for millions of penguins
and ocean birds. Adele Land stretches north to meet this connection
at Cape Adair. So Tasmania not only looks out towards the South
Pole, but bestrides nature’s ancient causeway across which once
passed succeeding generations of land plants and perhaps lowly
animal life. Now cold ocean billows bar the way hut who knows but
that the tide will again turn back and living forms will again cross
Tasmania on their journey to the great continent at the end of the
earth.
What do you picture Tasmania to be like ? No one sentence
can describe the island State except varied. You cannot describe
Australia in one volume there are so many Australia’s. So also
with Tasmania. Not the variety of a continent, hut packing within
its 26,000 square miles more rapid changes, more startling contrasts
than any similar area on the mainland more variety even than
the Bristish Isles. Perhaps the most widespread conception about
Tasmania is “It is very like England.” I thought so until one day
I was taking two Englishmen, scientists, just from the Old Country,
for a walk near Brown’s River on the outskirts of Hobart. A narrow
road wound in a double twist down through a perfect meadow,
rich and green with various grasses, white daisies and yellow
buttercups, across a bubbling creek overhung with willows and
ferns amongst their pink roots, and then disappeared in another
twist upwards past an old whitewashed farmhouse with shingled
roof. The road was lined with hawthorn in full bloom, the day was
warm and breathed calm prosperity. I said to my companions
“How very like England all this is.” Immediately the tall red
English scientist snapped at me—“ Like England? Where in
England did you see a hill woolly with Eucalpytus like that one,
where is a white washed two storeyed stone house with American
pines all round and no garden, Spanish sheep and Danish cattle.
Look over there at your blue ocean you call a “River” and its very
yellow beach and just behind a 4,000 foot mountain with trees
nearly to the top. Oh no, young man, nothing like England just
Tasmania.” Well it all depends on the point of view, and let me
correct the statement to “Some tiny corners scattered through
Tasmania, if you disregard the surrounding landscape, will remind
you of what you think England is like, if you have never seen
England.
To the Australian, Tasmania is a land of abundant water.
Broad, placid rivers fringed with brown pebble banks, with green
weeping willows above and grassy points with water rushes below,
meandering across the well farmed plains and every mountain stream
carries a clear runnel from highland moor. That is Tasmania of
the farm lands, where the massive stone houses peer out from oak
and elm. To the Englishman, Tasmania is a land of dry, bare rocky
hills. The country appears to be all round brown boulders, softened
with a mass of gum trees, never green, never tidy, brown grass
between the trees, brown sheep here and there, brown rabbits


everywhere. An uncomfortable land. That is the Tasmania of the
merino country, whence comes the world’s finest wool.
Another English visitor decsribed Tasmania as “Green Hell”—
wrote a book about it even. He saw the Tasmania of the rain forests
an unpredictable sea of green plant life, valuable and conforting
to its friends. I have heard another part described as resembling
the country behind Aden. That was Queenstown, with its crags of
bare pink rock stretching to a red summer moon, and motor car
lights descending from the Gormanston Gap high in the amethest
heavens. Tasmania of the mining fields, land of romance and strong
men. And there is the Tasmania of the Southern waterways. Hobart,
built by stout-hearted merchant traders from London, founded on
whale oil won by rough strong men from leviathans desporting
in its very harbour, fringed by brown fluted cliffs, sheer thousand feet
capped by tiny potato patches, bordered by well cared for orchards,
sheltered by benign Mt. Wellington. Where modern whalers from
the Artie circle moor alongside modern naval guardians of Aus-
tralia’s coral seas under the shadow of the old statue of Sir John
Franklin, and the modern Post Office tower. It is all Home to
Tasmanians, and is just one of God’s smaller anvils for beating
out a small pattern for His ever unfolding creation.
Tasmania is a shield-shaped island with its top or base washed
by Bass Strait. This North coast curves northward to Cape Grim
on the west and Cape Portland on the east, nearly 200 miles apart,
the greatest width of the island. This north coast is a gentle country
of rich farms. Low rounded hills rise sharply from the shore, showing
distinctly an ancient and more rugged coast, now weathered and,
in most places amenable to the plough. Below this sharp bank is a
marine terrace not far above sea level and sometimes only a few
hundred yards wide. Low, insignificant, rocky headlands break the
coast line every few miles with gently curving bays between.
Towards the West and the East these bays are beaches of golden
sand. The central third of the coast is shingly or rocky with rare
beaches.
Just about the middle of the curve of the North Coast is one of
the most remarkable harbours of Australia. A deep narrow valley
now flooded by the sea cuts into the heart of the country. This is
the Tamar, forty miles of winding riverlike seaway with rocky
shores surmounted by prosperous farms and orchards. At its head
stands the City of Launceston, centre of Northern Tasmania, an
inland port. To the East and the West of the Tamar, the North
Coast is cut by a succession of noble rivers, some with small estuaries
others opening across a sandy bar into Bass Strait. These rivers
flow through steep gorges as they cross the line of the old shore.
These are mostly rocky and uncultivated scrub. Above you find a
rolling plain of the richest volcanic soil supporting a happy com-
munity engaged in intense agricultural cultivation, principally of
potatoes. This rich country, particularly west of the Tamar, supports
a line of prosperous towns, clean, modern, red roofed, set in green
river flats beside the blue waters of Bass Strait.


But the coast country of rich farming land is a narrow strip.
Except south of Launceston, the land rises in less than 15 miles
by a series of gentle steps, until it is 1,500 feet above sea level,
the limit of suitable conditions for agriculture in Tasmania. The
farms give place to gorges and rocky ridges covered by the dense
rain forest, which are a by-word throughout Australia. Beyond
these, to the South stands a forbidding rampart of iron bound rooks
the plateau edge standing over 4,000 feet above sea level, nearly
sheer for the last 1,500 feet but softened in its lower levels by this
forest mantle. The rivers have cut the face of the plateau in tre-
mendous canyons and smaller tributaries lend their aid to this
dissection so that the long purple wall seen from Bass Strait becomes
on close inspection a bewildering maze of spur and gorge, outlier
and hidden pockets, all either impenetrable jungle or bare rock.
This bastion of the Central plateau extends for over 50 miles
from near the West Coast to the centre of the island and is con-
tinued as the North Eastern plateau to the East Coast. Fortunately,
south of Launceston, the walls recede southwards, and a wedge
of plain penetrates halfway to the South Coast. This plain is the
Midlands, rolling sheep country, well watered with luscious flats
and fields of waving oats, the richest portion of the State. The
Midlands rise southward but only to an elevation of 1,500 feet.
Here the northward tilting plain is cut by the gorges of the Derwent’s
tributaries, which provide easy access to the great inland waterways
of the South, where Hobart, the capital nestles between Mt.
Wellington and the polar ocean.
Hobart of the deep waters outpost of Empire, established
as a military barracks, built by exiled prisoners on a foundation of
whale oil, proudly waves the British tradition to the South Polar
seas. It is a city with a history, romance is enshrined in its older
streets, ghosts of red coats and whalers, Irish patriots, reprieved
from the gallows, Chartist pioneers, jostle with memories of men
who sailed with Phillip, fought at Trafalgar, Alexandria and Jutland
who dug up fortunes of pure gold and shining osmiridium, 15 times
more valuable. Here have come tea clippers from China and local
barks with the warrior prisoners from the Maori Wars, and sailed
with the only logs of timber the world could produce long enough
for English harbour works, with rosy apples measured by the
million cases, with Tasmanian men to fight for the Empire. Above all,
stands the serene statue of Sir John Franklin, Tasmania’s Galahad,
to welcome the illustrious line of his successors as they sail up the
Derwent to security from their explorations in the still unknown
polar continent, and his other successors, as they return from their
endeavours to unfold to civilisation the wonders of Tasmania’s
still unknown Western barriers.
Hobart is more than a historical museum. Its Western outskirts,
still within the city boundary, within hearing on a still day of its
Post Office clock, rise to over 4,000 feet. Here is snow for ski-ing
in winter and dark forests for the heat of summer. Strange animals


may be found on the mountain slopes and wedge-tailed eagles
alternate with noisy sea gulls in the pure air above the modern
capital of the world's newest country. The penguin barks on the
waters of the harbour, and the platypus walks across bitumen roads
in its path between the mountain creeks. For those who prefer man-
made wonders, a glistening air liner glides across the city daily, to
afford speedy connection with Melbourne. Indeed creation meets
at Hobart on the Derwent as perhaps no where else.
The capital of Tasmania faces south. To reach the great world
you must turn northwards. Hobart stands, virtually, where three
great valleys meet the sea. To the East the enclosed plain of the
Coal River, with its apologetically insignificant river, gives access
to the North by fertile plateau steps and to blue Tasman Sea, to
the East by passes through low but rough wooded hills. From the
North, westward, flows the noble Derwent, bringing the rainfall of a
third of Tasmania, and provides access by pleasant orchard and
hop fields to the surprising varied mining fields of the West Coast,
and to the never resting green rollers of the Indian Ocean. The Huon,
Tasmania’s most voluminous river gives access by wild gorge
and glacial valley to the still untamed South West.
The Western half of Tasmania is as wild as any parts of
Cromaty or Connemara with the forests of Ceylon superimposed.
Wherever you stand in Tasmania you can see mountains and looking
westward from the farming country anywhere between Launceston
and Hobart you see a sheer flat-topped rampart. These are the plat-
eaux, not impassable to strong men on foot, but only cut by passages
suitable for roads, where the Derwent and the Huon with their
tributaries burst through from their lower, but more rugged Western
mountains. These plateaux consist of a reddish brown rock, dolerite
sufficiently rare to be of great interest. The Western mountains are
white, glistening like snow above the evergreen forests.
The “West Coast” as Tasmanians habitually term the western
third of their State is one of nature’s museums. Physically it is a
series of rugged mountain ridges running parallel to the Coast and
seperated by deep gorges. The mountains seldom exceed 3,500 feet
in height, but this gives no conception of their awe-inspiring grandeur.
The valleys are mostly swamps, the silted beds of glacial lakes. The
nountain sides are clothed with a jungle as thick as that found
anywhere. In the forests grow trees not found elsewhere in the world,
often survivals from past ages, but always dominated by gigantic
eucalypts, sometimes 200 feet high. In the rocks below is a rich
wealth of nearly every ore and metal known to mankind. Strange
survival animals roam the ridges, or live in the trees, and the
despoiler man has hardly penetrated to disturb and disrupt orderly
creation.
One road runs from East to West, one railway permits ancient
trucks to creep gingerly from the North to the Centre.
Here and there are some roads, but in Zeehan, that was once
the Silver City, the motorist must put his modern car on the ancient


railway to move beyond the overgrown streets. Here and there
are some human settlements based on mines. Queenstown, at Mt.
Lyell is a considerable town, Rosebery may become so. Elsewhere
it is wooden huts around a galvanised machinery shed. But the
men you will find there are Men. You may not quite comprehend
their language, but you will never want in trouble.
Tasmania is an island and is enveloped by warm currents
from East and West, forced down to the colder water of the South.
These currents teem with fish, and Tasmanians go out to catch
them. The North Coast is low and mostly flat. The West possesses
only two harbours. The South and East make up. Every few miles
deep water cuts the land between cliffs hundreds of feet high.
Round these harbours live the men who go down to the sea, often
living on their little farms won from the forest, a hardy race as all
fishermen must be. Perhaps more so than most because in their small
community they must often work alone with not another sail in
sight, nor possibility of help in trouble.
Such then is our Tasmania.
