

DAYS OF THE COVENANT
IN SCOTLAND.
BYT ,JANE JOBS 08.
BEING THE
FIRST PRIZE IU THE SCHEME FOR HIGHER
CHRIS TIA N ED UCA TION
OF THE
srssfcj|teriait ut| Tittotpa, 1888.
Iftclbounw:
M. L. HUTCHINSON,
PRESBYTERIAN BOOK DEPOT,
15 COLLINS STREET WEST.
Rae Bros., Printers, 35 Elizabeth Street North, Melbourne.




ESSAY
ON THE
DAYS OF THE COVENANT
IN SCOTLAND.
ZB Y JAKE JOBSOItT.
BEING THE
FIRST PRIZE IN THE SCHEME FOR HIGHER
CHRISTIAN EDUCATION
OF THE
(Hjurtlj xtf Tutoiita, XBBB*
M. L. HUTCHINSON,
PRESBYTERIAN BOOK DEPOT, 15 COLLINS ST. W.


PUBLISHERS NOTE.
The following Essay took the first place at the last
Examination conducted under the auspices and by authority of
the Presbyterian Church of Victoria. The subject is one calcu-
lated to awaken further enquiry, and both old and young will be
the better for remembering what our present liberty and privileges
cost our forefathers.
In this colony, where all is activity and bustle in the business
of life, people often lose sight of that struggle which two hundred and
fifty years ago settled the great principles of our common religion,
and gave freedom of worship in the services of the sanctuary .
It is with great pleasure the pages are given to the public,
not only on account of their interest and merit, but also with a
view to stimulate the young people connected with our Church,
and in the hope that farther effort will be encouraged thereby.
Presbyterian Book Depot,
15 Collins Street West,
May, 1884.


DAYS OF THE COVENANT
SCOTLAND.
In these civilized nineteenth century days of excitement and com-
motion, when art, literature and science appear to have attained to
the full zenith of their power, and the news of the day and the
policies of the nations possess an all engrossing influence, it is in-
teresting to retreat from their brilliant glare and busy whirl, into
the shades of bygone years, there to look about us and review those
distant eras upon which the curtain of the past has fallen, bringing
back flashes of sunlight on the time-worn pictures.
There is much to deduce from these histories of the past, the lessons
conveyed in them not only being interesting but deeply instructive.
Especially is this the case in that portion of the history now to be
brought back to our recollection, the time of the Covenant in Scot-
land, when the fate of the House of Stuart stands a solemn warning
against absolutism and tyranny, and the champions of a nation’s
civil and religious liberty afford an ideal for all posterity to attain to.
And if the story bear somewhat a sombre hue, it nevertheless will
surely inspire us with a feeling of reverence for its grand and
patriotic aims and religious truths, and the wondrous patient en-
durance of the sons of the Scottish Kirk.
It is a noble theme, that of the days of the Covenant, a theme that
should raise our deepest feelings of gratitude and enthusiasm for
those who spent their lives struggling for the pure and truly
Scriptural doctrines held by our Presbyterian Church, and for its
discipline and government as prescribed in the word of God, bravely
upholding above all, the right of the supremacy of Christ alone in
His kingdom on earth. It is the history of Presbyterianism warring
against the encroachments of Erastianism and Prelacy; and to under-


stand that conflict, and appreciate the principles involved in it, let
us briefly review the history of the Church, to see how Scotland be-
came Presbyterian, and succeeding chapters will show the unceasing
efforts of kings, courtiers and prelates to sweep away a creed so
obnoxious, for did it not oppose the doctrines of arrogant and
despotic rulers. Scotland was blessed in being early instructed in
the truths of Christianity, drinking from a purer stream than the
already polluted one issuing from Home over the countries of
Europe.
At the close of the sixth century, Columba, a missionary from
Ireland, landed at lona, burning with a desire to publish to the
wild sons of Caledonia those saving truths which a Scot had pro-
claimed two centuries before to his own countrymen. This Scotch-
man was Succat, afterwards canonized and revered in Ireland by the
name of St. Patrick. Wondrous was the effect of that pure gospel
story told by Columba on lona's isle, from which it penetrated to
the heart of Scotland, and though Rome eventually drew the mission
into its fatal vortex, the rays of light shining from that little isle over
the land, were never wholly extinguished, for when the dark pall of
Romanism was lifted, the Scottish nation seemed to realise the errors
of Popery, and embrace with more true spiritualism and sincerity
the doctrines of the Word, than did its sister England.
Patrick Hamilton is honored with being the first to proclaim to
Scotland the gospel brought to light by the Lutheran reformation ;
and after a short but glorious ministry, that brave young soldier of
the Cross laid down his life for his Master’s cause.
Others succeeded him in the work, Wishart being specially not-
able among those early heralds, but above all how we delight to dwell
on the name of John Knox, the father of the Presbyterian Church.
He it was who never feared the face of man, but stood up daunt-
lessly for the truth, friends, position, wealth, happiness and peace,
all remorselessly thrust aside in pursuance of his great life object —
the building up of Christ’s Church, keeping it pure, and maintaining
and defending the religious liberty of believers from the encroach-
ments of the secular power.
Nor were his efforts futile. In spite of the strenuous endeavours
of the regent of Scotland, Mary of Guise, to crush the reformed re-
ligion and the bitter hostility of the Romish clergy against it, the
Protestant cause triumphed. In 1560, after a contest of thirty
years, a free Parliament ratified and sanctioned it to be the national
religion.
Not yet, however, was the Protestant faith secure in the land,
Mary, the young Queen of Scots, who had refused to ratify the


act, now returned from France, and assumed the reins of Govern-
ment. Being a staunch Papist, she looked with no favorable eyes
on the establishment of Protestantism, and with her power, com-
bined with the secret influence of her uncles, the Guises, it would
ere long have been overturned but for its fearless, faithful guardian,
Knox.
After the death of Mary, who was soon deprived of the power of
thwarting the reformed faith, a struggle ensued for the system of
church government compiled by Knox in accordance with Scrip-
tural directions and the example of the Genevese Church, with
which he had been connected. This system was known as the First
Book of Discipline, and the principles laid down therein were mainly
these :
Christ has established a kingdom on earth of which He is the
only and Supreme Head, and His kingdom, the Church, not being a
mere portion of the State as Erastiaus deems it, cannot be con-
trolled by the civil power, but by its own officers as appointed in the
Bible. Pastors, doctors or teachers, elders and deacons, and as
all ministers are equal, one cannot assert supremacy over another.
Thus the plan of Presbyterial government was set forth as opposed
to Episcopacy.
The various courts of the Church were likewise declared to be
Kirk Sessions, Presbyteries, Synods, and General Assemblies,
the latter being the highest court.
It is necessary to dwell on the principles of Church government,
for it was in upholding the right of Christ to be the sole Head of
His Church, and in preventing the assumption of control by any
kings, lords, or ecclesiastics whatever, that God’s servants linked
together in a holy covenant to defend his rights.
Scotland was now Presbyterian, and it will be seen how con-
stantly the Church was harassed and persecuted to make her give
up that form of worship.
CHAPTER I.
Knox had the disappointment of not seeing the Book of Discipline
ratified in his day, and of having his grand schemes for the estab-
lishment of the Protestant ministry, the endowment of schools, and
the relief of the poor, frustrated by the rapacity of the nobles, who
seized the revenues of the Catholio Church for their own aggrandize-
ment, allowing Knox only a third for those purposes.
Lay i patronage was also kept up contrary to the rules, which


ordained that each congregation possessed the right of electing its
own pastor.
The first attack on Presbyterianism was made by Regent Morton,
who introduced those mock prelates known as the “ Tulchan
Bishops,” when the nobles being presented with vacant benefices
transferred them to a minister with the proviso that the holder
should en joy the title and rank of a bishop, but hand the revenues
of the bishopric to the donor.
Knox was prevented by death from waging war with this form of
Episcopacy, but he had an able successor in Andrew Melville. That
zealous man, inferior only to Knox in his dauntless ardour, returned
from Geneva, took notice of and determined to cast down this mock
prelcay, for would it not subvert the spiritual independence of the
Church ? He never rested till in 1581 the General Assembly de-
clared the system of Tulchan bishops illegal. Kor was Melville
content with casting down, he could build up too, for he was mainly
instrumental in compiling that clear and comprehensive work known
as the Second Book of Discipline, which gave very decided definitions
of the relations of the clergy and the civil magistrates, declaring
that the Church was independent, and subject only to laws that
emanated from the Bible, not to arbitrary laws of the State. Ten
years later this book was ratified.
James the Sixth, who had commenced his reign in 1578, now
started the work of overthrowing the Scotch Kirk, which all the
Stuarts after him kept up, for they found Presbyterianism to be so
allied with free, enlightened, and constitutional government, that
before they «ould reign absolute and supreme that creed must per-
force be swept away. Long and severe was the persecution the
Church sustained at their hands, yet it all ended in disastrous
failure for the oppressors, and brought dire retribution down on
their heads. Though King James was but a boy when he ascended
th« throne he was still able to exert a pernicious influence, for his
favourites swayed him at their pleasure, finding him pliant in their
hands ; and they fostered in the young King’s mind absurd and
exalted ideas of the royal prerogative, and whispered in his ear that
the Presbyterian Church must be abolished, since it resisted his
absolute power, and excluded him from any control in ecclesiastical
matters.
A few leading points in James’ reign may be mentioned, that we
may be aware of the state of the Church when the great Covenant
was sworn to.
In 1584 the liberties of the Church were endangered by what is
known as the “ Black Acts,” which asserted the right of the King’s


supremacy in both Church and State, and furthermore forbade all as-
semblies to convene without the King’s permission.
Many ministers refused to own these Acts, as being utterly opposed
to the spirit of Presbyterianism, and were obliged in consequence to
resign their charges, and retire to England.
For a time the new statutes were enforced rigorously, in the de-
termined effort to introduce the Erastian element into the Church, but
a reprieve was at last obtained, when in 1585, Arran, the tyrannical
instigator of these schemes, was banished in disgrace from his high
position.
In 1592 the “ Black Acts” were rescinded, and Parliament ratified
Presbyterian government as set forth in the Second Book of Discip-
line. This Act of ratification is regarded as the grand charter of
Presbyterianism in Scotland, though not the basis of her constitution;
the Book* of Discipline compiled by herself from the Bible could alone
be termed the true basis and foundation of the Church, the act of Par-
liament gave the legal sanction necessary to the protection of those
enactments of the Church from any molestation or encroachment.
On assuming the government of England at Elizabeth’s death,
James resolved to abolish Presbyterianism in his northern kingdom,
that he might establish a uniformity of religion in the two countries,
not caring how he trampled on the consciences of his Scotch subjects
in thus destroying the ecclesiastical structure which had taken them
long years to rear, on the foundation of the apostles and prophets of
which Jesus Christ is chief Corner Stone.
In 1606 Parliament again overturned the Church, substituting
prelacy in its stead, and establishing the King’s right to be supreme
head. When this flagrant invasion of the Church’s liberties became
known, a protest was prepared, and signed by forty-two minis-
ters, headed by the dauntless Melville, who had to suffer for his bold-
ness by an imprisonment in the Tower, from which he was only re-
leased for a life-long exile in France.
The King obtained the Assembly’s concurrence with the last Act
by means of copious bribes, which fact caused the Glasgow Assembly
of 1610 to be regarded with the greatest derision and contempt.
But let it not be thought thaj these minions of the King repre-
sented the noble Ministry of Scotland ! Many there were whom
bribes could not buy, blandishments failed to move, threatening and
persecution only rendered more zealous and valiant in uplifting the
banner of Presbyterianism, and upholding the cause of Christ and
His kingdom !
The subversion of the discipline and government of the Church be-
ing accomplished, the King next introduced the five articles of Perth,


which showed that the government and doctrines of a Church are
combined, if the first is laid low the other is open to attack. 1 resbyte-
rians of to-day may think that the five articles of Perth were really
harmless in themselves, and could not be conducive of evil, nor
cause those assenting to them to sin against the Word of God.
It was not, however, the articles that the question really turned
on, it was the principles involved in them. Ihe articles in question
were, kneeling at communion, private baptism, private communion,
observance of holidays, and confirmation, all opposed to Presbyterian
policy.
The Scotch Church was essentially different from the English in
this particular, the former had endeavoured to banish all the
abominations of the Church of Rome, and to remove as far as possible
from the corrupt faith. England on the contrary clung to the
ancient forms and usages of the Church, and in the opinion of
Scotland was never truly reformed. When these five innovations
were proposed, the Scotch Church shrank from them, deeming them
but a snare and a pitfall, a false beacon uplifted to lure them from
the purity and steadfastness of their faith, to the customs of the
Anti-christian Church, against which they had so long waged war.
It being such a matter of conscience with them it was a decided
invasion of their faith to force these articles upon them, the Scotch
true to their beliefs would not receive such innovations, but
nursed in their hearts that first love and faith they had so long
professed, a feeling of veneration for their Church, so intense and
deep, that when their rights had been trampled on beyond all
endurance, the smouldering volcanic fire burst forth, and they rose
as one man demanding the rights of their Church. All faithful
ministers were dispersed, and banished to distant country charges,
but this plan, so far from hindering their influence, only intensified
it, as a great spiritual awakening far over the land testified.
The Lord visited His people in their desolation, and nourished
their souls richly with His Spirit, blessing them with convictions
of sin and need of regeneration, and without such convictions man’s
efforts are unavailing, for when souls are dead in sin nought can
raise them, and infuse into them life in a risen Lord, but the work
of the Holy Spirit, breathing into their souls the new life.
CHAPTER 11.
King James died in 1625, and was succeeded by his son Charles.
This prince was apparently of a pure and upright disposition, but
as a king he proved to be capable of the greatest scheming and


duplicity ; a man whose word could not be relied on, whose pro-
mises were as water poured on the ground. He too had most
exalted ideas of the royal prerogative, originally engendered by his
father’s councils, for King James ever instilled into his son’s mind
the belief in the divine and absolute right of kings; a monarch’s will
was law, now resistance was therefore strongly inculcated. Passive
obedience was exacted from subjects, who, in the opinion of the
Stuarts had no right to complain at any act emanating from the
kingly will, however capricious or unjust it might be. They thus
preferred reigning over subjects cringing under their feet than to be
beloved sovereigns governing by a law, a nation of contented, en-
lightened, and free people.
Such tenets accorded well with the natural bent of Charles the
First’s mind, and they were intensified in him, as he was of a more
resolute and determined nature than his father, whose vacillating
nature and feeble will prevented him from accomplishing much that
his extreme views dictated.
Charles the First was fully determined to carry out his father’s
injunctions for the total subversion of the Scottish Kirk, and the as-
similation of doctrine and worship to the Church of England.
Strange that Presbyterianism should be such a thorn in his side!
And yet it was natural that the King could not endure it, for did it
not set a limit to his power, and say he had no control over it ?
Charles lost no time in the formation of his plans for the attack on
the Church, and had an able coadjutor in his schemes in the person
of Laud, the semi-Popish Archbishop of Canterbury, a man of
austere habits, devoted to the rites and ceremonies of his Church,
and who was ever most unscrupulous and unpitying in the further-
ance of his plans. The barbarities perpetrated by this almost
Romish prelate on the Puritans, the institution of the Star Chamber
and Court of High Commission, and the shameful extortions of his
royal master, all worked in to deprive a tyrant of his throne, when at
last his oppressed subjects arose and demanded their rights.
Charles brought matters to a climax in Scotland by an ill ad-
vised and foolish action. Laud prepared a book of canons and a
liturgy for the Scottish Church, which were ordered to be adopted.
No class in Scotland felt disposed to obey the royal mandate. The
nobles were inflamed against the King by his proposal to transfer the
ecclesiastical benefices, whose revenues they had long enjoyed, from
their hands to the fund for the maintenance of the expensive hier-
archy lately established. The clergy in general were very averse to
the order, the General Assembly had not been consulted or even
apprised of these innovations, and the ministers had not even seen


the liturgy they were commanded to substitute for their own simple
form of church worship so beloved by the people. The mass of the
people themselves resented Episcopacy, and bitterly deplored the
loss of so many of their old faithful pastors. Thus it was on a dis-
contented and aggrieved nation that the King was forcing his
arbitrary plans.
The 28rd of July was fixed for trying the experiment, and every-
one looked anxiously forward to the day, and it came at last, tho
day so eventful in marking a crisis in Scottish Church history. The
Dean of Edinburgh, forcing his way through the thronging crowds,
ascended the pulpit of St. Giles, clad in the hated surplice, a
“ Babylonish garment ” as it was termed, and proceeded to read the
liturgy or “ black service book.” The excitement in the immense
crowd was quiet, but intense, and a voice was soon given to it.
No sooner had he started than up rose a fierce old woman owning
the ne’er to be forgotten name Jenny Geddes, who exclaimed in
passionate and ringing accents, “ Vilian, dost thou say mass at
my lug,” and hurled the three legged stool upon which she sat, at
the dean, who started in horror as it went whizzing past him. That
was the signal for uproar, and the wildest confusion reigned, stopping
the service effectually.
But this vehement tumult indulged in by the lower classes, was
but the frothy surface of a deep steady undercurrent, the strong
revulsion of all sensible and right minded people in the community,
who now revealed their detestation of that selfish tyranny which put
its heel down both on their civil rights and religious privileges, as-
signing them the position of serfs under a presumptuous and absolute
monarchy, rather than that of rational subjects. Women bore a great
part in the resistance at Edinburgh, not only those of low standing,
but even ladies of good blood and high rank who urged their hus-
bands to stand up for the liberty of the kirk, and speak out boldly
against this trespass on their country’s rights and liberties.
The crisis was now reached, brought on by the blind determined
zeal of Laud, and the King’s resolution to assert his royal prerogative
and force a nation to submit who would not brook such an infringe-
ment of its rights.
Now let us see the result of the experiment:—
What is known as the committee of the four tables was instantly
convened to take steps for future proceedings for the weal of Scotland
to defend the religious rights of her subjects, and to advocate the
constitutional government which her bravest champions, Knox pro-
minently, had advocated, with enlightened views far in advance of
their times.


The “ four tables” were composed of barons, nobles, clergy, and
burgesses, and each committee sent deputations to a head committee,
and then as the unanimous resolution of the representatives of every
class in Scotland, a resolution was formed to subscribe a great
national Covenant which could be signed by all classes, banded thus to-
gether in solemn union.
On the twenty-eighth day of February, 1638, was that Covenant
entered into which exerted such a mighty influence on the national
history of Scotland for years to come —aye, for years, for is its in
fluence buried in oblivion now ? While Scotland lasts and has one
true and faithful son those wonderful times will be rehearsed, and
the heroic efforts for liberty and religion form a grand standard for
all posterity to aspire to.
What a wonderous heart-stirring scene was that which took placa
in Greyfriars churchyard ; that eventful day in February, See the
surging crowds go swaying into the churchyard, all filled with
religious ardour and patriotic zeal ! There are Scotland’s
grandest sons, the greatest and worthiest nobles in the land ;
there are her holy Christlike ministers, gravely impressed
with the serious business on hand ; there are the excited
people, their hearts almost bursting with the wild enthusiastic
tire glowing in their veins! There were no cold reserved
Presbyterians that day. Alexander Henderson, an illustrious
divine, opened the proceedings with a solemn appeal to the “ High
and Lofty One with whom a nation essayed to enter into a Covenant,
the vessels of clay with the Almighty Potter.” The Earl of Lou-
don, a most eloquent speaker, then addressed the people, enforcing
the necessity of adhering steadfastly to the solemn engagement
.about to be entered upon. The Covenant was then read by Warriston,
who had helped to draft it, and rendered it the lucid and concise
exposition it was. A solemn, awe-stricken pause,—then at last the
Earl of Sutherland advanced and subscribed the Convenant, first
lifting up his hand and solemnly swearing the oath. Then name
followed name, the venerable and aged, those in the flower of their
manhood and the young stripling, the rich and the noble, the poor
and the lowly, all excited and enthusiastic, with weeping eyes and
uplifted hands solemnly swearing the Covenant. Some, in
the intensity of their passionate ardour, opened a vein and
signed their names in blood, others adding “till death” after
their signatures. What a mighty occasion it was, some shouting
as in the gladness of victory, others weeping in the exuberance of
their joy, a nation joined as one man, in a great heart-throb uniting
in defence of their religion and liberty, entering into a Covenant


with the Lord of Heaven and Earth for the maintenance of His
blessed truth, the preservation of His rights, and the liberty of His
children. Well might the Presbyterians take the impressive name
of Covenanters. Alas, that so many departed from their first love,
and though all the fickle ones did not desert the blue banner of the
Covenant yet were they wofully unfaithful to its principles, luke-
warm and timorous in the upholding of their glorious Christian
standard !
And what were the principles of this mighty Covenant that so
raised Protestantism on a pedestal high above the machinations of
Rome and its emissaries, the tyranny and oppression of the King,
and the plausible but deadly wiles of the Episcopal hierarchy, clothed
in the fair robes of English Protestantism ?
Those who signed the Covenant promised to adhere to and defend
the true religion, and strive to recover by lawful means the purity of
the Gospel, as practised in the land before the late innovations.
They pledged themselves faithfully to serve and uphold the King,
ever obeying him loyally while he governed according to law and
defended the civil and ecclesiastical liberties of the nation. They
promised to stand by one another in mutual protection and assist-
ance, and never to withdraw from their “ blessed and loyal conjunc-
tion ” through any allurement whatever, Members of this union
were likewise bound to live holy Christlike lives, examples of godli-
ness and piety, performing faithfully their duties to God and each
other.
Could anything be greater and nobler than this ? Oh that the power
of religion were such in this enlightened nineteenth century, that a
re-action could once more unite together for the defence of the truth
against the scepticism and worldliness of the present day ! 1 hat
Christians would resolve to resist all innovations not in accordance
with the doctrines and the practice of holiness taught by Christ and
the Apostles ! Our Presbyterian Church of to-day is in danger of
falling into the broad easy paths that lead away from the purity
and integrity of the faith. Certainly bigoted and intolerant views
are not desirable, but where the cardinal points of our faith are
concerned we cannot be too strict, too unyielding. Let us then
endeavour to hold fast the truth, avoiding the very appearance
of evil.
The Covenant was then sent through the land, and was sub-
scribed enthusiastically in every town.
The memorable Glasgow Assembly of 1638 completed the work
begun by the National Covenant, and, despite the desperate efforts
of Charles to frustrate the intentions of the Kirk, the Assembly


cast down prelacy, excommunicate! the bishops, many of whom
were notorious for their conduct, and re-established Presbyterianism
in its old pristine glory. The famous Henderson was moderator,
and dismissed the Assembly after a month’s hard work with these
striking words, “We have now cast down the walls of Jericho, let
him that re-buildeth them beware of the curse of Kiel that Bethelite,”
The great work achieved by this Assembly is termed the “ Second
Reformation,” a great term to apply to it, but aptly did it convey the
magnitude of the task accomplished when Presbyterianism, the
evangel and worship of Knox and Melvillle, was once more planted
in the land, after being for thirty years uprooted.
CHAPTER 111.
Charles the First did not intend to succumb tamely to these pro-
ceedings of his daring subjects, he therefore made preparations for
war with them, at the same time asserting his power by issuing
many imperious edicts. But though the King assumed an air of
careless indifference, the real sentiments of English statesmen were
far otherwise, they were full of forebodings as to the result of Scot-
land’s resistance to the royal authority—“ Nothing but croakings of
expected defeat.” Scotland on the contrary was bold and resolute,
the people had not merely sworn the Covenant as a relief to their
pent up feelings, they meant to defend it too, and soon 30,000 strong
and able men were marshalled together by General Leslie, who had
obtained high distinction under Gustavus Adolphus, and in a very
short time, a formidable army was ready to meet the King, and fight
under the blue banner of the Covenant, their battle cry being,
“ Christ’s Crown and Covenant.”
The Covenanters were also strengthened by the fact that the great
body of English Puritans were on their side, those Puritans now
rising to such importance in English affairs, where Parliament was
beginning to look grimly on the King’s conduct especially in the mat-
ter of this Episcopal war with Scotland, for which it refused to vote
supplies.
The King’s army advanced to meet the Covenanters in 1639, but
was unable to effect a landing, and a treaty of peace was concluded
at Dunse Law. The King here agreed to refer all disputed matters to
another Assembly, and both armies were then disbanded, though the
Scots were ready to take up arms again at the shortest notice.
The new Assembly did not fail to ratify the proceedings of the last
one, the National Covenant was renewed, and the Scotch Parliament


stepped into the contest, by demanding its rights, so Charles could
plainly see that Scotland would not be trifled with.
Hostilities were renewed in 1640, for, hearing that the King was
again collecting his troops, the Covenanters rapidly gathered under
their standard, and not waiting to be attacked, crossed the Tweed,
marched into Newburn on the Tyne, completely routed the King’s
troops, causing him to re-open negotiations with them. The Cove-
nanters remained stationed in England, their presence being very ac-
ceptable to the Long Parliament then sitting. Their demands wrung
an ungracious concession from the King, who could not contend with
the mal-contents in the Long Parliament, an<J with his insurrec-
tionary Scotch subjects at the same time. What the latter obtained
from Charles has been comprehensively epitomized into “ Free Par-
liaments and Free Assemblies.”
The Kirk now enjoyed immunity from the King’s encroachments,
the nation had rest, and enjoyed peaceably the exercise of the reli-
gion they had fought for. “It was a time of reviving and refresh-
ing from the presence of the Lord,” when the remaining fetters were
struck off the limbs of the Kirk and she walked over the length and
breadth of the land in the full and glorious liberty wherewith Christ
had made her free.
Her peace was only disturbed by the English troubles raging be-
side her, and ere long she would be drawn into the vortex of the
troubled factions at strife. Scotland could not rest in perfect fear-
lessness, while England groaned under a tyrant. If the King were
able to quench the resistance of his English subjects, and with his
coadjutors once more trample their rights under foot, then farewell
to the liberty Scotland was now enjoying. The time at length ar-
rived when she was called upon to cast the weight of her influence
either with the King or the Parliament. A singular responsibility
rested on her decision, she held in her hands the destinies of 1 ri-
tain and the cause of liberty for an indefinite future.
Commissioners had been despatched to Scotland for help in
England’s exigency. Their list of grievances actually drew tears
from members of the Assembly, in so pitiable a condition was the
sister kingdom, with its liberties crushed, and its religion changed
into a mockery, a plainer edition of the Church of Rome.
What was the decision of Scotland in this emergency ? The Kirk
plainly declared it was the Covenanters’ duty to help their oppressed
brethren, for if the sons of the Covenant left them in their perilous
estate what would be their own fate by and bye ? The final result
of the negotiations was the drawing up of the solemn League and
Covenant, which was presented to the Westminister Assembly of


Divines and the English Parliament, was accepted and sworn to by
those convocations, and ordered to be subscribed by all classes of
the community. This solemn League was in nature both civil and
religious, advocated preservance of the Presbyterian doctrines in
Scotland, and sought conformity of religion in the United Kingdom
according to the “Word of God” and the example of the best reformed
churches, the extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, etc., the preservation
of Parliaments and the rights of the nation, the discovery and
punishment of malignants, the defence of the King as long as he
recognized the laws, and lastly the mutual defence of those who
engaged in the bond.
Nothing could be more mistaken than the opinions many hold
that the solemn League was originated by a few rigid Presbyterians,
who wished to force their religion on the English.
Presbyterianism was not the religion stipulated to be conformed
to, and the League was arranged with all due formalities between
the Scotch Parliament and English Commissioners.
Many also object to the introduction of the religious element at all,
but the struggle in Scotland had always been essentially religious,
whereas in England the evangelical party had never been uppermost
in power or numbers, and though the questions at stake in the latter
country were civil ones, Scotland would only give assistance on condi-
tion that its own religious safety should be introduced into the treaty.
Therefore in times likethose when Church and State were unsparingly
commingled it was indispensably necessary to take the religious
under the wing of the civil. In respect to this League, Dodds says,
Presbyterianism at this juncture represented constitutional monarchy,
and prelacy with its adjuncts absolutism. The only fault in the
solemn League was the clause respecting the extirpation of Popery
and prelacy, extirpation by any means in the civil power being evi-
dently meant, the tenets of the Covenanters and their subsequent
actions proving that they did not approve of toleration.
But ere we blame them we must consider the times in which they
lived, times in which toleration was little understood, and almost
impracticable, when there were insidious enemies in every corner of
the field, when Rome had cast her envious eyes on the British
Isles, revolving schemes for placing them under her baneful sway ;
when the so-called Protestant Church of England was in deadly
risk of being engulfed in the murky depths of Popery ; then, indeed,
firm measures were needed to avert those threatening dangers, and
preserve the work of the Reformation.
Scotland fulfilled her part in the clause as to conformity of re-
ligion by accepting the elaborate standards composed by the West-


minster Assembly, laying aside without a murmur her old simple
forms in the directory given by Knox.
Meanwhile, the civil war was raging in England, and was at last
brought to a climax by the disastrous engagement at Marston Moor,
where the Covenanters, joining the Parliamentary troops, completely
vanquished the Royalists. From that day the King’s fortunes de-
clined, and in 1646 he threw himself into the hands of the Coven-
anters,
The Independents were now uppermost in Parliament, with great
Cromwell at their head, and rather than yieH to them the King
entrusted himself to the Covenanters, thereby much embarrassing
them. Every chivalrous and loyal instinct urged them to protect
their royal suppliant, for the Scotch are loyal to the back bone, as
they proved subsequently ; but they were held by the league to
oppose the King’s unlawful Government, and did they serve him
now they must be unfaithful to their solemn oath.
They delivered him to the Parliament after many negotiations
with Charles on the subject of church government and other dis-
puted points, but owing to the King’s habitual dissimulation no
permanent understanding could be effected. The Scotch army
when giving up the King extorted a promise from the Parliament
to treat their sovereign with honour and respect. This promise was
disregarded as is well known, and ere long Great Britain beheld
the spectacle of a scaffold erected before Whitehall on which was a
royal corpse. This terrible and summary retribution, though shock-
ing to the devoted loyalty of British subjects, was yet efficacious in
this—the Popish powers received an immense check to their schemes
for bringing Great Britain, now the centre and head of Protestant-
ism, back to the arms of Mother Church, and the cycle of thirty
years in which by war and intrigue the Popish emissaries had en-
deavoured to arrest the work of the Reformation, was brought to a
close by the dread sight of a sovereign’s blood poured out in ex-
piation of his misdemeanours, and that sovereign one whom Rome
had trusted to make an instrument for the re-establishment of
Popery in the country.
Dodds in his “Fifty Years’ Struggle” dismisses this tragedy with the
observation that its effect on the Covenanters was but to widen im-
measurably the breach between them and the Royalists, who looked
upon them as being chiefly to blame in the matter of the King’s
death, as they first took arms against him and upheld and aided
the Parliament,


CHAPTER IV.
Oliver Cromwell, after the execution of the King, soon rose to the
head of affairs, and assumed the Government of England under the
title of Lord Protector.
Stern and determined was his administration, all the turbulent
classes in England subsided into a submissive and quiescent state
under the iron sway of this mighty ruler, and Britain was raised to
a higher eminence than it ever before possessed. The people did not
exactly obtain the perfect freedom they had fought for, yet the
stern rule of Cromwell was infinitely preferable to the’unlawful
domineering rule of the Stuarts, and (which was no slight boon)
Cromwell was considerate and tolerant on the score of religion. ”
But how did Scotland succumb to the rule of him, whom thev
termed the Usurper? J
Such a thrill of indignation was felt by all classes at the death of
Charles, and the usurpation of the Government by Cromwell, that
the Covenanters were obliged to send for the Prince, and crown him
though probably much against their own inclinations, being well
aware of his perfidious and vicious nature.
Argyle the great leader of the Covenanters, and the most powerful
man in Scotland, placed the crown on his head, and the day of his
coronation was the occasion of gay festivities, while the rite was
performed with all due ceremony and solemnity, and yet it was a
terrible farce ! The young King went through the form of signing
the Covenants, and promised to rule in all justice and right, merely
to satisfy the scruples of the Covenanters, who on their side were
not deceived by his acceptance of their conditions, knowing well that
once he attained power, he would fling these binding vows and
promises to the winds.
The newly made King was now kept in great restraint, and a
strict supervision was exercised over him by the head leaders of the
Covenanters, especially Argyle, for which Charles, resentful of in-
dignities shown to himself, though callous of feelings of others
never forgave him. ’
The next event was the total defeat of the Covenanters, engaged
in the King’s cause at Dunbar, when Cromwell completely shattered
their forces. Out of these vanquished troops a King’s guard was
formed, composed of Royalists and those who had entered into the
engagement to rescue Charles the First.
This new party obtained a majority in Parliament, annulled the
Act of Classes announced by Argyle after the said engagement and
prior to the King’s execution. This Act of Classes had declared


all who had taken part in the engagement to be Malignants, who
must be incapacitated for a temporary or permanent period accord-
ing to their deserts, for public trust or employment.
It was their own prescription therefore that these Malignants
now annulled, and they in retaliation excluded the strict Covenan-
ters from their party.
The Kirk sanctioned these proceedings of the Royalist faction, and
emitted resolutions in favor of them.
This gave rise to the bitter distracting strife that rent the Cove-
nanters in twain, and caused miserable quarrels, in their grand
united body no longer united, but split up into Revolutioners and
Protestors, the former favoring the admission of all “ fencible per-
sons in the land” into the army, and the latter party headed by Jas.
Guthrie, protested against the “ resolutions” avowing that it was
wrong to allow Malignants to occupy places of trust.
This petty strife embittered and divided the grand company, who
when united could be almost invincible, but would prove to be help-
less and incapable of defence in the terrible days to come, when the
young King, whose coronation had been attended with such solemnity
and rejoicing, would break every solemn oath his lips had lightly
uttered, and come down on his people as a “ wolf on the fold.” Af-
fairs went on smoothly however, during the Commonwealth,
Cromwell having closed the Assembly doors on account of the dis-
tractions that rent it, so peace was enjoyed, and ministers devoted
themselves to the care of their flocks, imparting such heavenly truths
into their souls as would comfort and sustain them in the woful days
to come.
Cromwell died in 1658, and troubles began afresh. Had the son
been half the man his father was, we might have been yet living under
the Cromwell dynasty, but unfortunately he possessed none of his
father’s rare qualities, and was soon deposed from the Protectorship.
That was the signal for every class and sect in England to rear
its head, and confusion and clamour reigned again. A coalition was
at length formed of Royalists and English Presbyterians, and Scot-
tish Resolutioners, resulting in the restoration of Charles the
Second to the throne.
The Protestors, sad remnant of the great body of Covenanters,
stood out against the Restoration, not that they were opposed to
monarchy in the abstract, nor yet to the Stuart line, butAhey em-
phatically refused to connive at the king’s restoration, except on the
platform they had before stood—Free Parliaments and Assemblies,
constitutional government, and the independent privileges of the
Church.


Charles the Second ascended the throne of Britain on the 29th of
May, 1660, and a grand day of rejoicing it was both in Scotland and
England. The people seemed beside themselves with joy, hugging
the belief that the stern dreary days of the past were over, and hap-
pier, cheerier times were returning with their yojing sovereign’s as-
cension.
Alas, how sadly were their glad expectations disappointed ! Pre-
monitions of the future seemed already to trouble Scotland, for one
of its ministers who accompanied Charles from Holland, remarked
“ That they were bringing God’s heavy wrath to Britain.”
The vicious influence of the King on the nation is com-
pared to a upas tree, blasting all around it. Nothing honorable
or noble could exist amidst such contamination as proceeded from
his court.
Nor was it vice alone that the King was notorious for. He was
selfish, heartless and indolent, dead to all feeling save for himself.
Such a man would certainly never trouble himself with the cares of
Government, life was for him to enjoy, so he devolved all responsi-
bilities and duties on Clarendon, his Prime Minister, a staunch
Royalist and a bigot Anglican, who speedily turned his attention to
the re-establishment of Episcopacy in England and Scotland.
Charles was quite agreeable to any measure. “ Presbyterianism,” said
he, “ was not a religion fit for a gentleman.” He disliked it no doubt
on account of the strict morality it enjoined. He himself had no re-
ligion save that of Hobbism.
Clarendon had a difficult task to perform, and had to go to work
quietly and cautiously, for the Non-conformists and Presbyterians
in England and Scotland were numerous and powerful, and Royal-
ists and Presbyterians were no longer united, the latter withdrawing
from the coalition when the Royalists were suspected of contemplat-
ing the setting up of Episcopacy.
The result of Clarendon’s measures in England was the ejection
of two thousand of her ablest clergymen from their livings for Non-
conformity.
It was in Scotland that the blows fell sharpest.
Clarenden’s agents for subverting Scotland were two men whose
names are notorious in history, Middleton and Sharp, the former a
rough unprincipled soldier, who was a renegade from the Covenant-
ers, the latter a minister, smooth, grave and decorous, but as false a
hypocrite as ever breathed. In Cromwell’s time James Sharp had
been sent to London by the Resolutioners to counteract the supposed
designs of the Protestors, and after the restoration was entrusted
with the sacred and responsible duty of watching the Presbyterian


interests, possessing the unbounded trust of his colleagues who be-
stowed on him the encomiums of being pious and worthy. Very dif-
ferent epithets would be hurled at him in the future, when known
by the sobriquet of the Judas of the Kirk, for he basely betrayed
the trust reposed in him, deceived and cajoled his brethren, and
sold his Church for a primate’s mitre.
To these two men, the one a cruel drunken soldier, the other a
perfidious dissembler, was the task committed of crushing down re-
bellious Scotland, of pressing down the yoke roughly upon her and
terrifying her into submission. Middleton, as King’s Commissioner
opened the Scottish Parliaments in the beginning of 1661, his very
presence being deemed an ill augury, showing that the Scotch were
to be placed under martial law.
It was not intended to abolish Presbyterianism at once, but it
was on the programme, and preparations were made with that end
in view.
Parliament was packed, it proving an easy task to fill the House
with the creatures of the court. All books and pamphlets advocat-
ing liberty were condemned, many ministers and patriots banished
or imprisoned. Parliament seemed to have its way in everything,
without a dissentient rebellious voice raised protest ; indeed, the
times in Scotland were not favourable for a revolt. The Kirk, that
great organ and mainstay of liberty, was rent asunder, and thus
lacked the strength of past years ; the great Covenanting leader
Argyle was apprehended and cast into the Tower ; the grand old
race of nobles who had subscribed the Covenant were dead, and were
succeeded by a race too ready to imbibe the graceless libertine ways
of the court ; and lastly, Scotland enjoyed no act of indemnity, and
the Covenanters could be charged at any moment with their sayings
and doings for the preceding ten years, which could readily be con-
strued into treason.
The acts of Middleton’s Parliament revealed what was to be ex-
pected in the future as to Church matters.
The Act of Supremacy declared the King to be supreme “ over
all persons and in all causes ; the head of Church and State,” and it
was made incumbent to take an oath acknowledging him to be so.
Ministers were specially expected to take this oath of allegiance.
The Covenants were next declared unlawful, and were forbidden
to be sworn to in future,
Then came the “Actßecissory,” a piece of legislation unparalleled
in all history, when at one stroke of the pen all Parliaments and
Assemblies since 1638 were made null and void, all legislation for
that period cancelled, swept away as though it had never been I


Such was the extraordinary legislation Scotland was now to
experience !
The convention that passed these Acts is known as the ‘‘Drunken
Parliament,” for Burnet says : “ It was a mad roaring time, full
of extravagance, when the men of affairs were .perpetually drunk,”
and the day on which the “ Act Recissory ” was framed, was pre-
ceded by a night of hard drinking. What was the unhappy land
coming to, once so glorious, free and great, when such scenes attended
the first part of the scheme for overturning her religion and liberty?
Sad days were to dawn on proud bonny Scotland, and this was the
prelude, astounding and dreadful were the scenes to follow.
CHAPTER V.
The work of demolition once started went rapidly on. Argyle
had been conveyed from the Tower to Edinburgh, and was now on
his trial for high treason. “It was not Argyle,” says Dodds, “it was
Covenanting Scotland that was now to be tried and condemned, the
Marquis being its great champion and representative for the past
ten years.”
He was all but acquitted, nevertheless, though his accusers took
the utmost pains to ransack the political doings of the preceding
years to find condemnatory evidence. General Monk, however,
stepped in just as his character instead of being found blameworthy
shone unblemiscd as a true and loyal patriot, and basely gave up
certain letters addressed by Argyle to himself, and assertions found
hi these letters relating to the enforced duty of submitting to Crom-
well were considered quite sufficient to prove him guilty of treason.
Argyle was sentenced to be beheaded, but heard his doom with
composure, his habitual timidity and nervousness fled now when the
great question of death had to be grappled with, and grandly he
sustained the credit of his country and his religion in the last
bold hours of his life !
He exclaimed that though he was refused an earthly King’s
indemnity he was going to a great Sovereign, whose indemnity no
foe could prevent him from possessing. He prayed that when his
accusers come before that great Potentate’s dread tribunal, they
might not experience such treatment as had been shown to him.
And now surrounded by enemies, deserted and friendless in his
time of trial he never flinched at his fate nor indulged in one bitter
recrimination, he looked beyond, and exclaimed that though he had
placed the crown on the King’s head, that King was now hastening
him to a far better one, glorious, unfading, eternal! As he went


forth to his execution lie exclaimed that he could die like a Roman,
but would rather die like a Christian. He spoke a few words on
the scaffold, forgiving his enemies, but protesting his innocence of
any treasonable conduct. He then blessed God who had taken the
sting out of his sufferings, for the captain of his salvation had
borne it all before him, and would surely now lead him to glory.
The axe fell, and the head of Scotland’s great patriot, the Kirk’s
staunch and faithful upholder, rolled on the scaffold, the first martyr to
Presbyterianism since the Reformation. Alas ! Countless were the
numbers to succeed him.
The Reverend James Guthrie next sealed the covenanting cause
with his blood. He was a learned and holy man, yet, being a zealous
leading Presbyterian, he must die. “It is not the execution of me
or many others that will extinguish the Covenant,” said he,
“ my blood, bondage, or banishment will contribute more to the pro-
pagation of these things than my life or liberty could do.”
As soon as these devoted sons of the Covenant were thus ruth-
lessly removed the work of establishing Episcopacy in Scotland
went rapidly forward, the King ordaining it to be the national re-
ligion, which royal mandate was to be put into instant execution.
Bishops were appointed, the chief being James Sharp, Archbishop
of St. Andrew’s and Primate of Scotland ; and he had a most ragged
regiment of associates, of little learning and less morals, the only
exception being Robert Leighton, of Dumblane, who was both learned
and pious. These bishops appointed ten other bishops, and placed
them in their respective dioceses. These bishops, formerly Presby-
terian ministers, proclaimed their ordination of that Church null and
void, thus signifying that they regarded their old creed as worthless
and false. In May, 1662, a new Parliament sat, which finally com-
pleted the task of laying waste the grand old Scottish Kirk. It
confirmed and made law the ordination of bishops, and, strange
resemblance to the infallible and absolute decrees of Rome, it under-
took to release the consciences of all from the oaths and vows of the
Covenants, which were branded as seditious and unlawful. Every
possible odium was put upon these Covenants, and they were
ordered to be burnt at the cross of Edinburgh with effigies placed
in the flames to represent the destruction of Presbyterianism.
How flagrant were such outrages to all true Presbyterians !
That they should see the Covenant, sworn to with weeping eyes
and hands raised heavenward, loaded with contumely and dishonour,
and hear their doctrines denounced as dangerous and seditious.
Such gross sacrilege only tended to revive their slumbering
enthusiasism, raising up once more staunch and sturdy Covenanters,


ready to embrace privation and imprisonment, nay, even death
itself, for the beloved cause of the Kirk and liberty. The last
edict of this Parliament was memorable for being fraught with
disastrous and momentuous consequences. All ministers ordained
before 1649 were ordered to appear before the- bishops to receive
collation before the twentieth day of September. The year 1649
was specially fixed, for at that period the Covenanters had abolished
patronage which they deemed a carnal and erastian element in their
church.
The ministers were also to come and be presented with their
livings.
Would they submit and acknowledge the right of bishops to exer-
cise power over their brethren ? Would they accept their induction
as lawful in direct defiance of the rules of the' Kirk ? Instead of
the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, would they bow under
the touch of a Lord Bishop ? We shall see—Thus in the space of
two years was Presbyterianism once more overthrown. What
momentous issues now hung on the action of the ministers ! Did
they submit, succumb without a struggle, their holy religion would
be obliterated, and the mighty work accomplished by Knox and his
successors swept away ! Was darkness to settle once more o’er
bonny Scotland ? Ay ! Drear, long, deep darkness was gathering,
but there would be gleams of light. The lamp of God’s great word
would be lifted up by a few valiant souls in the moors and fast-
nesses of the land, who would bear the banner of Christ’s crown and
covenant, and, when one bleeding hand should forego the standard,
cut down in the burning strife, supply it with another as daring and
true.
Yes, a chosen band would again resist the enemies of Christ,
though it were the very struggle of death, —striving for the preser-
vation of all so dear to their hearts.
CHAPTER VI.
The Parliament left to the Privy Council the task of enforcing
the edicts passed.
The bishops held their diocesan courts, and were prepared to re-
ceive ministers prescribed in the edict for collation. Judge of their
consternation when they found that very few indeed came to obey
the summons. “ All,” says Dodds, “of what would be termed the
popular evangelical clergy disobeyed the order.”
Bishop Fairtoul instantly went to Glasgow, and complained about
it to Middleton, and the commissioner promised to see to it, and


see to it he did. In an act of the Privy Council known as the
“ drunken act of Glasgow,” a resolution was passed that ministers
must either come for collation, or be ejected from their livings, re-
move with their families from their parishes before the Ist of
November, and reside without the bounds of their respective Pres-
byteries.
Fairfoul confidently assured Middleton that not one in ten in his
diocese would now disobey the edict.
When Middleton passed this severe act after a drunken madden-
ing brawl he did not dream of resistance, he made sure it would ter-
rify the refractory ministers into submission,' but instead of that
four hundred of Scotland’s noblest pastors resigned their livings
and with their families left their homes in the depth of winter.
They have been termed “ Scotland’s hero pastors,” and well did
they justify such praise, for where a nobler act of heroism and
self-sacrifice performed than when the noble four hundred for the
sake of God and their conscience gave up homes and loving flocks,
and wandered forth to face the winter’s fury, “ not knowing
whither they went.” They embraced a life of suffering and took up
the cross rather than be false to their faith.
They leave their homes, so sweet and fair,
Embowered ’midst the nestling hills,
And with their wives and children share,
A dreary life of cares and ills.
Not knowing where to go, they face
The winter drear of storm and cold,
But trust their Lord’s protecting grace,
His mercy them will still enfold.
Middleton was thunderstruck. He half pitied, half abused them
for their rashness, often exclaiming, What will those mad fel-
lows do ?”
Those four hundred noble ministers now entered on a life of pri-
vation and hardship, houseless, homeless, exposed to a bitter win-
ter’s inclemency with their wives and little ones.
They were parted from the dear familiar churches where the Gos-
pel had so often been proclaimed from their lips, parted from the
loving flocks whom they had guided and cherished and instructed in
the ways of God.
Bitter, too, were the lamentations of their congregations, left as
sheep without a shepherd, desolate and sorrowful, not knowing the
Lord’s Day, but by “ the sorrowful remembrance of those enjoy-
ments whereof they were now deprived.” The bishops now had the
task of filling the charges thus suddenly made vacant, and were


obliged to bring hundreds of uncultured, untaught youths from the
north, with neither learning nor morals, whom they thrust into the
places vacated by the learned and pious four hundred.
The class of men thus obtained for curates n»y be imagined when
a gentleman of the north complained that it was, impossible to find
boys to herd the cows, for they had gone to be curates in the west.
The new comers were received very unfavorably by the people,
church doors were barricaded to prevent their entrance, who thus
had often to resort to the undignified mode of entering by the win-
dows, and petty annoyances were continually practised on them.
Middleton had now reached the zenith of his power, and was
soon to experience a downfall, brought about chiefly by his miscon-
duct, for even Charles was disgusted by his habitual drunkenness,
and felt annoyed at his high handed way of dispatching business.
He was therefore recalled, and Lord Rothes succeeded him, as Royal
Commissioner, but the change was for the worse, for Rothes possessed
all the bad qualities of Ids predecessor. New troubles were to dawn
for the Covenanters under his regime , the storm that burst upon
their pastors would not leave the people scathless.
The troubles commenced with the Conventicles. As before
stated, the people loathed the new curates, and instead of listening
to them, preferred going either to neighboring parish churches to
hear ministers to whom the edict had not applied, or else to some
barn or shed to hear their old pastors address them. Before long,
so many went to hear the ousted ministers, that the meetings had to
be held in the fields or on the hill sides, where far from the reach of
their oppressors, hundreds and thousands would flock to hear their
beloved ministers once more. Archbishop Sharp resolved to put
down these proceedings summarily, and therefore posted to London
to ask for more power in his hands, as church affairs in Scotland
were in rather a bad way. He begged that a Court of High Com-
mission might be established, for the speedy execution of all laws
against recusants. His request was granted, and he returned to
Scotland, to set up a Modern Inquisition, The Commission had
warrant to try and condemn all who spoke or wrote against Church
or State as now established. Sharp was president, and constantly
stirred up the other members to more arbitrary plans, but at last
the nobles resigned in disgust, and left Sharp and his brethren to
transact their odious work themselves. Troops of soldiers now
scoured the country, and whoever favored the outed ministers, or
were guilty of non-attendance at the parish church were brought to
the bar of the High Commission, where Sharp pronounced prompt
sentence against them. All that appeared before that tribunal


were condemned, and that speedily, undergoing a very scant trial,
rarely allowed to defend themselves, or if they were permitted to
speak, their words were twisted to suit the wishes of their accusers.
Various were the punishments inflicted, heavy fines, imprisonments,
whippings, brandings, and many were shipped off and sold as slaves,
in fact the whole system of this hateful court was so disgraceful that
ere two years elapsed, it sank under the odium attached to it.
The case of the minister of Solvend illustrates its inquisitorial
manner of procedure.
His offence was want of respect to Sharp, in not giving him his
new title when brought before him, and he was punished bj imprison-
ment in a loathsome dungeon in company with a lunatic, and was
afterwards banished to the Shetland Isles where he lived in a
miserable and pitiable condition, “ naught but barley for his food,
and sea tangle and wreck to prepare it,” Such was one instance
of the cruelties perpetrated on the people whose sole offence was the
preferance of their own religion to that of their oppressors.
While the nation groaned under this inquisition the people were
afflicted with a yet more terrible curse, and this was the incursions
of the soldiers who traversed the land, exacting fines and hauling
offenders to prison. A dreadful plague were these soldiers, they
were brutal ruffians, the very dregs of humanity gloating in the
havoc they wrought, and they were let loose on the Presbyterians
guilty of no offence save that of worshipping God in their own way.
Not only did the soldiers exact double the amount of fines prescribed
but quartered themselves upon families and took a malicious delight
in doing all the harm in their power. Their motto was “ destroy,”
and they did destroy. Little they recked whether their conduct was
right or wrong, their natural proclivities pointed them to such actions
which their masters did not check, but rather approved of them.
Like the captive Hebrews groaning under the oppression of
Egyptian Pharoahs, so the cry of the agonised and outraged people
went up to God for redress, who was thus seeing good to try His
children in the furnace of affliction that their faith might shine out
as gold seven times refined.
CHAPTER YIT.
Hitherto the Covenanters had met these persecutions with merely
passive resistance, but the time was come when, roused beyond all
endurance, they would rise into an organised and strong opposition,
brought on by the cruel oppressions of Sir James Turner and his
troops.


At this time apprehensions were entertained of a rising of the people,
and, to avert this suspected insurrection, many leading Presbyterian
gentlemen in the West of Scotland were imprisoned, the standing
army was augmented and placed under the command of Dalziel of
Buins, a most vindictive and relentless man.
Dalziel was a devoted Royalist, with quite a craze about Charles
the First. “ His religion,” says Dodds, “ was to destroy the
Covenanters. They were a canaille , good for nothing but to flesh
the swords of the Cavaliers.” Before the Restoration he had served
abroad, and now returned to practice on his countrymen the shock-
ing atrocities he learned there.
The tortures inflicted on the hapless peasants seem too dreadful
to credit. He would shoot and hang men for the most trivial
offences, and even hapless women and children found no pity at his
hands.
When such men were let loose upon the Presbyterians it was not
surprising that they at last revolted. The insurrection, resulting in
the disastrous battle of Pentlands, was not, however, a premeditated
affair, but occurred quite casually, originating in a simple inci-
dent. Early one morning in November four of the Wanderers, as Non-
conformists were termed, issued from their retreat in the hills of
the Glenkins into the village of Dairy to obtain some food. There
they found some of Turner’s soldiers binding an old man to carry
out their threat of roasting him on a gridiron for not paying his
taxes. The Wanderers interfered, and were successful not only in
making the miscreants release their victim but in taking them
prisoners, together with others engaged in similar nefarious work
elsewhere.
All who had joined in capturing the soldiers now assembled at
the Kirk of Irongray to deliberate on their next move. They had
gone too far to stop, for if they dispersed now they would only draw
down Turner’s wrath on themselves. They eventually decided to
surprise Turner himself and take him prisoner. By this time many
had joined the ranks of the resisting Covenanters, and the whole
body marched to Dumfries, took Turner quite unawares, and made
him a prisoner. They then conveyed him in humiliating style
through the town, and, to show their loyalty, drank the King’s
health at the cross. They then marched northwards three hundred
strong, and were joined by large reinforcements from the towns they
passed.
Though the rising was deemed rash and premature, many influen-
tial men in Edinburgh and elsewhere thought it their duty to counte-


nance it, in the hope of getting their grievances redressed, and seve-
ral men left Edinburgh to join them, meeting them at the bridge of
Doon, and Colonel Wallace was then appointed to take the command.
He was a brave and distinguished officer, having risen to eminence
in the Covenanting Army. Meanwhile intense excitement prevailed
at head quarters, at the news of the insurrection. Rothes was in
London, but Sharp was managing affairs in his absence, and he in-
stantly dispatched Dalziel with an army to meet the rebels. On hear-
ing this a council of war was held in the camp of the Covenanters,
and they determined to stand up for their religion and liberty.
They proceeded to Lanark, and despite the dreary discomforts of the
weather, these raw recruits developed into well-drilled and disciplined
troops. Even the captive Turner in his memorials confessed his ad-
miration at the way they kept together.
They arrived at Lanark on the 25th, about 500 strong, and all in
good spirits and full of ardour and courage. Here they renewed the
Covenant, and issued a solemn declaration, stating that the causes
of their taking up arms were—the insults heaped upon the Cove-
nant, the heavy hnes, the quarterings and ill-behaviour of the
soldiers, and the iniquities of the Court of High Commission. It was
for a redress of grievances they had taken up arms, and not in revolt
against King or Government.
Dalziel with his army was very close to them, but at this favour-
able time for meeting the enemy, they were unhappily divided in
opinion, and instead of being decisive and prompt, knew not what
was the best course to pursue. While some wished to fight then and
there, others opposed that plan, so they marched on to Edinburgh
hoping for many recruits from the Lothians. They pushed on
through rain and snow, through muddy roads and roaring torrents,
draggled, sick and weary, but how bitter was their disappointment on
reaching the Pentland ranges, to find no recruits at hand, the hopes
of which had buoyed them up so long amidst their misery in march-
ing onward, and to find instead that Edinburgh and Leith were all
in arms against them. Their brave commander, Wallace, deter-
mined to make the best of the adverse circumstances, and drew his
little force of five hundred to Bullion Green, there placing them
against DalzieTs great army. The little band fought with desperate
valor, but were at last overcome by the overwhelming numbers of the
enemy, and were obliged to succumb.
Many escaped over the hills, a hundred became prisoners, and fifty
were killed in the battle.


Their epitaph read thus :
A cloud of witnesses lie here,
Who for Christ’s interest did appear,
For to restore true liberty,
O’erturned then by tyranny.
These heroes fought with great renown,
By falling got the martyr’s crown.
All honor to these brave souls, the small handful that dared to
oppose a tyrant’s selfish and cruel will ! The prisoners had sur-
rendered on promise of quarter, but the promise was totally disre-
garded, for Sharp determined to gratify to the full, his rage against
the Covenanters. They were hanged in batches for greater expedi-
tion, and their heads and right arms whre struck off, the latter for
being raised in renewing the Covenant at Lanark. They all died
bravely, firm in their adherence to the Covenant, forgiving all their
enemies, and professing their loyalty to the king.
To obtain some information concerning this Pentland rising, the
Council determined to introduce the torture of the “ boot,” and
selected for its victims, Hugh MTvail and Neilson, of Corsack.
The torture and death of the beloved young Hugh M‘Kail was
the cause of great grief and distress. Ht was a youthful minister
of wondrous genius and learning, gifted, eloquent, and pious, and
of delicate loveliness of person.
His offence was not so much his joining the insurgents as that
he had offended Sharp by a sermon preached prior to the ejection of
the four hundred ministers, when he said “ The Scripture doth
abundantly evidence that the people of God have been persecuted,
sometimes by Pharoah upon the throne, sometimes by a Haman in
the State, and sometimes by a Judas in the Church,”
The people soon fitted the appellatives to those who deserved
them, and Sharp was ever afterwards distinguished by the unenvi-
able sobriquet of Judas. This rankled in the primate’s breast, but
not till now did he get an opportunity to avenge himself.
M‘Kail bore the dreedful torture of the boot without flinching,
and his persecutors wrung no confession out of him. He only
solemnly affirmed that the rising was accidental and not pre-
meditated.
And now his time came to die. Though many persons of influ-
ence begged Sharp to pardon him the primate knew no mercy, and
so he was sentenced to death. But how triumphant was that death !
Intense sorrow was manifested by the sympathising people, not a
dry cheek in the whole street. But they needed not to mourn for
the young martyr! He was transported with the cestacy of


■witnessing before many a good confession rather than overcome by
fear and the obloquy of his death. The culminating rapture of his
-closing words made them immortal. Let us repeat them, as our
eyes fill with tears and our hearts throb with emotion, “ Now I
leave off to speak any more to creatures and turn my speech to Thee,
■O Lord ! Now I begin my intercourse with God, which shall never
be broken off! Farewell, father and mother, friends and relations !
Farewell the world and all delights ! Farewell meat and drink !
Farewell sun, moon, and stars! Welcome God and Father!
Welcome sweet Lord Jesus, the Mediator of the New Covenant!
Welcome blessed Spirit of Grace, God of all consolation ! Welcome
glory ! Welcome eternal life ! Welcome death I”
When the prisoners were all executed Rothes made a tour through
the west, that all future attempts at insurrection might be stamped
■out by the execution of all suspected of being concerned in the
Pentland rising.
Many were punished by the confiscation of their estates, and even
of those already dead, or who had fled from the country.
Such was the swift retribution on the hapless people for the first
rising of the Covenanters, which had flashed conspicuous as a
meteor over the dark troubled land, but had now sunk into the
gloom, which now seemed more awful and deep than before.
CHAPTER VIII.
The fall of the Anglican party in England witli Clarendon at its
bead occasioned the rise of the “ Cabal” Ministry, whose members
were as venial, and profligate as men could possiblv be. The new
party having quarrelled with the Anglicans deemed it wise to con-
ciliate the Nonconformists in England and Scotland, so Lauderdale
was put in charge of Scottish affairs and Rothes recalled. Thirty
years previously, Lauderdale had been a most zealous Covenanter
and a Commissioner from Scotland to the Westminister Assembly,
but afterwards seceded, joined the Royalist engagers, underwent the
ban, the Act of Classes, and was obliged to do public penance which
rendered him afterwards a most bitter foe to the Covenanters. He was
a man of no moral or honourable qualities, and was selfish and
treacherous.
Lauderdale was complete master of Scotland, and under his regime
a policy of mildness and moderation was to be adopted. The
malignant and heartless Sharp was told to confine himself within his
diocese, nor meddle with the affairs of the State. The under manage-
ment of the country was put in the hands of three worthy men,


Lords Kincardine and Tweeddale and Sir Robert Murray. They
were both generous and able, and disapproved of all the late cruel
proceedings advocating instead liberty of conscience. It was im-
possible, however, under the circumstances to carry out all the wishes-
and desires of the people, and attain thorough harmony, but much
was done for them nevertheless.
Public affairs and finances were managed carefully, justice was im-
partially dealt out and a higher tone of morality introduced into the-
high places of the land.
The standing army was also disbanded, Turner and Bannatyne
deprived of their posts, though the cruel ruffian Dalziel did not
meet his deserts, as he could command interest at court.
In 1667 the King granted an indulgence to outed ministers, and
his reason for doing so was this—the parish churches still con-
tinued empty, the people preferring to frequent the glens and hill-
sides to listen to their old ministers rather than to sit in the-
churches hearing the harangues of uneducated curates.
This state of things should not be allowed to continue, and two
courses were open to stop it, either to resume the task of crushing
conventicles by the arm of the law, or to permit the outed ministers
to return. The latter plan was chosen but with restricting condi-
tions. If ministers who returned still refused collation from the-
bishops they would receive no stipend, but merely house, glebe and
annuity, and those who would not attend the diocesan courts wouldi
bo confined within the limits of their own parishes. This assump-
tion by the State of control over the Church and its officers could
not but be repugnant to any strict Presbyterian whose codes were
so antagonistic to interference of the secular power.
Many ministers were able, however, to satisfy their consciences,,
bow to the State’s decree and return to their homes and flocks,.
“ tempted back from peat-haggs.. coal-pits, dens by moaning river
sides, and exposure to famine and fire.” They were but human,,
and longed for home comforts again when there was a shadow of
consistency in returning to them.
But how infinitely nobler the others appear, who refused this-
treacherous compromise, and stern and valiant, held to the profes-
sion of their faith.
“ They had a principle .... and they kept by it, and it
is principle alone that can give sanctity to life, dignity to en-
durance, body to the spirit of enthusiasm, or true sublimity to-
death.”
Sad results were to follow the granting and partial acceptance of
the indulgence. The spirit of division was again to prevail in the


Church, between indulged and non-indulged, the latter too sternly
independent to accept the conditions and thereby acknowledge the
King’s right to dictate to them, and who reprobated their weaker
brethren accordingly.
The indulged themselves were now laid open to the attacks of
the secular power which would continually interfere with them till
the indulgence would become a dead letter. The Conventicles too
would now be more severely dealt with, as the Government would
consider that the people had been afforded every means of attending
their parish churches, and must be made to do so.
Darker days were hastening on, and were at last ushered in by
Lauderdale’s Scotch Parliament of 1669.
This Parliament was doubly severe, as there had been another
change of ministry, and affairs were once more in the hands of
Rothes and Sharp, who were as anxious as of yore to stamp out
Conventicles. The brief Indian summer of peace was gone, and
winter’s howling blasts succeeded it, and once more the Govern-
ment declared war with the Presbyterians, with no hopes of another
armistice.
Edict upon edict was passed against Conventicles, those “ ren-
dezvous of rebellion.” All who conducted or attended them were
to be heavily fined, especially when the meeting was held in the
field. The field preacher was to be put to death, and his goods
confiscated ; his hearers, besides a heavy fine for attendance, would
be compelled under another fine to go to their parish church. We
may imagine the enormity of these fines, when in one county alone
they amounted to the incredible sum of £9,000. Lauderdale who
had now attained the summit of his fame, was threatened with a
downfall by the collapse of the Cabal Ministry in England, and the
rising again of the Anglican party, under Danby, a bigot for the
Episcopal Church of England. Lauderdale seemed to be on the brink
of ruin but he weathered the storm, and remained a greater friend
with the King than ever. The prelatic party now concentrated all
their forces to crush the Conventicle, and with reason was it feared
and hated, for it was there that the nation’s heart was fed, and its
courage recruited,” thus rendering it hopeless for Parliaments and
committees to try to crush them.
It is a fair picture in the midst of these dreary times to turn to
one of those field meetings, those hill-side services, to see what the
people prized so highly that they would endure fines, imprisonment,
nay death itself, rather than forego such blessed meetings. Imagine
a sweet bright Sunday early in summer, the people instead of wend-
ing their way to the Kirk, are traversing miles to reach the grand


hall of worship. How grand is this temple of God’s own rearing,
the gurgling burns issuing from those everlasting hills which raise
their lofty heads in grand and calm repose, fit emblem of a believer
looking from the sordid cares of earth to the infinite glory beyond,
and resting in peace which is above and apart from earth’s
troubled scenes ; the soft heather as a carpet, the grand canopy
above, a covering, the warbling of the birds accompanying the vocal
strains ascending to the God of nature in that vast amphitheatre,
and the clear fresh breezes, type of the Heavenly Wind, fanning the
faces of the devout worshippers, and wafting the preacher’s words to
them.
How grandly sounds the psalm of praise swelling upwards on the
breeze, borne to the very heavens, and how solemnly sweet sounds the
voice of prayer ascending to the Most High in the midst of the
hushed multitude as the aged, toil-worn servant of the Cross pleads
with God for deliverance from their sad estate, or for courage to stand
firm in the fire of affliction till the end should come.
Then came the sermon, strong, practical, spirit-stirring, elevating
the souls of the listeners, and filling them with such intensity of love
and zeal, as would draw them out of themselves, and make them
think the cares and griefs of the present light indeed, “ not worthy
to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed.” How
blessed, too, must have been the Communion Sabbath in the wilds,
how vividly real must the Sacrament have felt to the partakers who
proved the truth of their profession, their mighty faith and self-
denial witnessing to their oneness with Christ their Passover, who
was sacrificed for them that they might be partakers of His body and
His blood.
“ From scenes like these auld Scotia’s glory springs,” and the
people were there strengthened for the fight, armed with the “panoply
of God” made to “ suffer and be strong.”
Meantime the Government were not idle in fulfilling their inten-
tion of extirpating Presbyterianism from the moorland, as they had
banished it from the parish.
A secret committee was formed composed of Lauderdale’s party,
with the relentless persecutor Sharp, at its head.
Soldiers were again let loose in roving bands, and again were the
old cruelties perpetrated by them. Fresh proclamations and edicts
innumerable were showered around. Additional troops were raised,
and garrisons placed all over the country. The dreadful ban of infeer-
communing was perhaps the heaviest blow of all. It forbade any
communication to be held with the “ rebels,” they must neither be


spoken to, housed or fed. None should give them assistance, harbor
or speak a kindly word under pain of falling under the same ban.
Under these dread edicts, the Covenanters were almost paralyzed,
the Armed Conventicle lay crushed. “ The year 1676 witnessed an
almost universal prostration,” and no wonder ! But not for ever
was the fire quenched. Scotland was once more to rush into the
thick of the tight, and not quit the field while the enemy stood un-
vanquished. In a few months they rallied again, and Sharp think-
ing he saw in them the old spirit of resistance, determined to crush
the Conventicle by denouncing all attending at, as traitors to the
king. He therefore prepared a last terrible edict, so dreadful that
even the hardened council shuddered, and demurred at the passing of
at, and it was only with great difficulty that Sharp got it passed.
This edict made the attending of a field meeting a capital crime-
All found guilty would be shot down as traitors ; but ere Sharp got
his edict ratified he fell by assassins hands at Magus Moor, None
■can justify the deed there perpetrated. Indeed, the greater part of
the Presbyterians disapproved of and disallowed any connection
with it; yet, alas, they incurred fresh odium by the tragedy, and
caused heavier punishments to fall on their defenceless heads. The
inveterate enemy of the Church was dead, but his infamous work
•survived him, as the King ratified the edict of death, and it was to
be put into execution from the thirteenth of May, 1679. Whoever
was discovered going armed to a Conventicle could be shot down by
any officer of the forces down to the meanest sergeant. And yet
the people, so far from being traitors or rebels, were but earnest
pious Christians, assembling to hear the pure tones of their beloved
Gospel, going armed lest they should be defenceless under assault.
The immediate result of the edict was to oblige everyone to carry
Arms, and to assemble in a few immense assemblies instead of many
small gatherings as heretofore.
The Conventicles or encampments as they now became were re-
garded by the State as the declaration of war, and the Government,
failing to raise a standing army, had recourse to a new device, that
of calling out the Highland host, ten thousand strong, who went in
•swarms through every village, committing outrageous depredations
wherever they went, living on the already poverty-stricken people,
And robbing and spoiling on every hand.
But all this rapine did not avail to quench the fire of opposition
burning in the bosoms of these indomitable people.
Seldom has such determined, such unflinching fortitude been
equalled in the history of time, and never has it been surpassed !


On the failure of this stratagem the Government made fresh
efforts to raise a standing army, and to effect this the “ cess” was-
levied, some paid it, though under protest, others emphatically refused
hence a fresh division ensued in the ranks of the oppressed Covenan-
ters.
A terrible bloody persecution followed under the direction of the
notorious Claverhouse. If ever a man earned and possessed a nation’s
curse that man was Claverhouse. His name is handed down to
posterity as a man of blood, who was loathed and feared by all. He
had served abroad a soldier, with distinction for his courage, and now
returned to devote his energies to the extermination of the “ fanatics”
the wretched persecuted Covenanters, whose only sin was that of
fidelity to their national religion. The one end and aim of Clavers,.
as he was called, was to serve his masters by helping them to banish
Presbyterianism. Like a pestilence his dragoons scoured the land
dispersing Conventicles, shooting down those who attended them, in
the hope that this violence would soon cause their victims to give
up their cause in despair, yet still the preacher’s voice was heard in
the moorland, though his hearers blood oft stained the heather in
consequence.
The headlong coursj of Claverhouse got a temporary check by
the memorable defeat at Drumclog, On that signal defeat of their
persecutor’s troops historians love to linger, telling with pride how
when disturbed in the midst of their worship, the alarm was given
to the Covenanters, the armed men assembled together, and marched
down the hill, singing the sublime and spirit stirring stanzas of the
seventy sixth psalm, The names of Hackston, Hall, Burley and
Cleland are fondly dwelt upon for their brave and gallant fight-
ing, then they say how splendidly the little band fought, until Clavers
and bis troops were completely routed and scattered.
The victory of Drumclog caused five thousand of Scotland’s
bravest sons to flock to the aid of the blue banner of the Covenant,
and amongst other moderates headed by Welsh an indulgee. Then
came discord with its usual results of division and strife with which
the timid and irresolute commander-in-chief, Hamilton was unable
to cope. 4s might have been expected, defeat and disaster were
bound to follow, nor did they tarry long.
The Covenanters encamped at Both well Bridge, and were speedily
attacked by Monmouth’s array. The gallant Hackston held the
bridge with three hundred men, but the main array was standing
idle on the banks of the Clyde, torn to pieces by the railing of
minister against minister, soldier against soldier, all arguing and
recriminating about views and doctrines, anything but paying at-


tention to the present business, they were totally unprepared for
fighting with ought but words and phrases.
Desperately the dauntless three hundred fought on, despairing
but determined, repelling again and again the surging hosts that
rushed to force the bridge. Wearied and heartsick they heroically
struggled on, beseeching their comrades to come and help them but
in vain.
At last the cry rang out that the ammunition was finished, and
slowly and sadly they gave way.
Then Monmouth’s army poured over the bridge, and the rest of
the Covenanters electrified at last fought bravely, but all too late.
The commanders had fled, so a dreadful panic ensued. The ground
was strewn with dead and dying men, for Monmouth’s order to re-
frain from carnage and bloodshed was disobeyed. The most sicken-
ing cruelties were perpetrated on the wretched prisoners, who were
bound two and two and driven to Edinburgh and there penned in
Greyfriars Church Yard as the prisons could not contain them.
What a different scene Greyfriars Church Yard presented to
what it did that glorious day in 1638! How bright and hopeful
seemed the future then, and now the blackness of darkness seemed
to have settled over the unfortunate sons of the Covenant, What
sad years had intervened between the two scenes !
“ Years
Of pain and wrong, the blood of martyrs shed,
The ashes heaped upon the hoary head,
The maiden’s silent tears.
“ The babe’s bread torn away,
The harvest blasted by the war-steed’s hoof,
The red flame wreathing o’er the cottage roof.”
Of the fifteen hundred prisoners, two only were executed. Owing
to the clemency of Monmouth, many escaped, others signing a bond
of non-resistance, were liberated, but five hundred who would not
surrender were taken to a vessel lying in Leith Eoads, and crammed
into a hold only able to contain a hundred men. What they suf-
fered there no pen can tell. .They were to be sold as slaves in
America, but a terrible storm arose when they were near the Ork-
neys, and many were drowned in the pitiless deep.
Thus the battle of Bothwell Bridge instead of freeing the op-
pressed, caused the yoke to be more rigorously pressed down on the
prostrate people than ever.


CHAPTER IX.
After the disastrous battle of Bothwell Bridge the Presbyterian
party became visibly and formally disunited. The Moderates sank
into a spiritless acquiescence to the will of the State for the sake of
peace. The long and bitter persecution forced them to succumb.
But thfire was yet a remnant, resolute and brave, who held out.
They could not go against their consciences, but determined to fight
it out to the last in the hope that deliverance would come to those
who struggled so faithfully for it.
This remnant became known as the Cameronians, from their
dauntless leader Richard Cameron.
One principle distinguished them, they cast off allegiance to the
House of Stewart, declaring their resolve first in the Queensferry
paper of Donald Cargill, and then in the great Sanquhar declaration,
when they formally denied Charles Stuart any right or title now to
govern Scotland, having forfeited such right by tyranny and breach
of the laws. This was a bold and decided course, and the only
outcome of the situation, yet it took the English nation eight years
longer to follow in the same line and decide that the House of
Stuart was unworthy of further trust and allegiance. Of course,
this action of the Cameronians simply shifted the war on to their
own shoulders.
But that dauntless remnant was to remain stedfast and immov-
able till deliverance came, they alone were to have the honour of
resisting a tyrant and demanding liberty whilst all others were
ground down ’neath the iron heel of despotism.
There were but three preachers in Scotland now who dared to
hold Conventicles, and these three men were Cameron, Cargill, and
the ‘prophet' Peden.
The conflict at Ayrsmoss carried off Cameron, who, before the
fight, uttered the memorable words “Lord, spare the green and take
the ripe.” His head and hands were struck off and given to the
Council’s officials with the remark, “ There are the head and hands
of a man who lived praying and preaching, and died praying and
fighting.”
Cargill was executed soon after Cameron’s death, and then the
Cameronians formed into united societies, with rules and maxims,
corresponding in their breadth and fullness with those demanded in
the “ Claim of Right of 1686.” But this sect had anticipated the
time, and were denounced as treasonable rebels and mad fanatics,
instead of being regarded as the sole champions of their country’s
liberty. These societies had no less than seven thousand members,


armed, drilled, and organised, and were the sole volunteers for their
country in the revolution of 1688.
A few more events must be rapidly touched on ere the eventful
story closes.
The first is the accession of James Renwick to the directorship
of the United Societies, which prospered wonderfully under his in-
defatigable care.
He was young, almost a boy, but gifted, enthusiastic and brave.
During the few brief years that the banner of the Covenant struck
from the dying Cameron’s hand, was borne b.y him over mountain
and dale, he made incredible exertions for the beloved cause, seeming-
to possess a charmed life, in the midst of sickness, privation, danger
and enemies on every side.
Now, when Renwick alone was left to keep the remnant, faithful,
the last awful times came. One would imagine that Scotland had
drunk the fierce cup of wrath to the bitter dregs, but not yet were
all its furies exhausted.
The ‘ killing times ’ of Scotland are still alluded to with a
shudder, when the mandate was kill! kill! kill ! when the land was
turned into a shambles, when all guilty of the sin of Presbyterian-
ism were shot down like cattle, that all opposed to Anglicism might
be extirpated.
Clavers and his ruffians were let loose on the devoted people to
butcher whom they pleased, neither age nor sex respected. How
our hearts recoil in horror when we read of such atrocities as the
shooting of John Brown the ‘ Christian Carrier ’ at his own door,
before the eyes of his wife and children ; of hapless heroic females
tied to a stake to be drowned with the rising tide, when the bodies
of the Covenanters were thickly strewed over the land and
“ Mangled and marred they lay,
Upon the bloody pillow of their rest.”
In those awful days it would indeed seem as though the heavens
were made of brass, as if the Lord had forgotton to be gracious,
when his children were allowed to pass through such calamities for
his name’s sake. Yes, he had tarried long ! Like the ancient
Hebrews they had been destitue, afflicted, and tormented, had
wandered in deserts and mountains and caves of the earth, and the
world was not worthy of them. Hunted, persecuted, cut down to
death, they fled from the fury of the oppressor, to such wild and
desolate haunts as never a human being durst before enter, and
there they tarried till God would arise and scatter his enemies.


Never has the world witnessed such sublime constancy, such sted-
fast adherence to their faith as these Covenanters displayed, and yet
how often are they made a scorn and a by-word, termed bigots and
fanatics, who knew not Christian charity ! Ah, if some were harsh
and bitter, what was the reason ? It was the cruel goading perse-
cution they sustained that drove them almost to frenzy, and ’tis ill
on the part of Episcopalians to speak of their want of love and
breadth of sentiment, when their oppressors betrayed such a woful
lack of the like charity and tolerance.
Charles the Second died in 1685, and his brother James succeeded
to the throne. He was a bigoted Papist, and soon broke off connec-
tion with the English Church, and published a toleration to all Non-
conformists except the Cameronians, though had it been granted
them, would have proudly refused a favor from suspected and
treacherous hands.
The martyrdom of the fair young Renwick closed the long era of
persecution, he was the proto-martyr of the Revolution, perished
with deliverance close to the door.
Alas ! it came too late to save this brave young Christian’s life.
Methinks if the ransomed spirit above know aught of the scenes
they have left, he would rejoice to know that he closed Scotland’s
noble army of martyrs, that the glory of the Most High was again
to descend on his native land, and the church arise clear as the sun,
fair as the moon, u and terrible as an army with banners.”
James at last fled with the advent of William of Orange on the
scene, to rescue a nation from a tyrant and from Popery.
Then the hunted, despised Covenanters came grandly to the front,
while all Scotland was in a stupor, these stern sons of the Kirk
came forth from their dens and caves and placed their disciplined
thousands at his command. The Revolution Settlement of 1690
■completed the restoration of the liberties of the Scottish Church and
though the dearest wish of the Covenanters (uniformity of religion)
remained unfulfilled, yet the settlement may be regarded as the
grand consummation of all that had been fought for in the bloody
■despairing struggle of fifty years.
All honour to the Covenanters ! How grand was the aim they
had striven for—a nation and a church’s freedom and liberty, and it
was attained at last!
Our beloved Presbyterian Church of to-day has reached a glorious
eminence, and enjoys her privileges undisturbed ; but, in the height
of her prosperity, let her not forget those principles for which
thousands of our countrymen laid down their lives. If she forget
them and depart from the truth and simplicity of God’s word,


•
rain will not be far of?; if she adhere to them and uphold the
Christian standard with unfaltering hand, turning neither to the
right hand nor to the left, then God will be with her and bless her,
and keep her as the apple of His eye ; she will, as far as a church
militant can, go from glory to glory till she is merged into the
glorious church of the first-born above, and the struggles of the
Covenanters for the preservation of their church in its integrity will
not ha\e been in vain.
Kae Bros., Printers, 35 Elizabeth Street N., Melbourne.
V , V«/t .


1508
00075003


A
