

t | n
gk\ M
<808)
<80e>
<m> \
<8oe>
<808-
<8O0)
<808-
<808-
<8oe=
<808-
<808-
<808-
<808>
<8C8-
<608)
<808)
<808>
<808>
<808=
<808=
<808=
<808-
<808=
<8C8>
■ ._ *!• - /
•AND
ESSAYS *♦*
REFLECTIONS
<808)
<808)
<808)
<808)
<808)
. <808)
<808-
<808-
<800)
<808)
<809)
<808)
<808)
<808)
<808)
<808)
<808)
<808)
<808)
<808)
<808)
<808)
<808-
<808)
<808-
<8oe>
.<««>
<so8>
<m>
<m>
IN
AUSTRALIA,
<808)
<808)
<808-
<808)
<806)
<«»>
f
<808=
<808=
<808=
<80e>
<8085
<808=
<808=
BY A LAYMAN.
<8$8
<808-
<808)
<8050)
<808>
<808)
<808-
■ <808=
<8085
<808=
■ C J “Tl, A>^.yl <rvvjj
<808>
<808)
<808)
<808=
<808)
<808=
<808>
<808>
<808-
<808>
<808=
808)
<808>
<808=
<80&>
CONTINUATION.
<80S>
<808)
<808)
—
x.vvwvw>/vyvv-
<808-
<808=
<808-
<808> ‘
<808)
<8<8)
<808-
<808) ’
<808)
<808)
<808)
<808)
<808?
<808=
<806)
<808)
<808)
SYBWEY:
<808)
<808)
<808)
<808)
<808)
<808)
PRINTED
| BY DANIEL LOVETT WELCH,
<808)
<808)
<808)
<800)
<808)
<806)
ATLAS OFFICE, GEORGE-STREET.
<808)
<808-
<808)
—
<808)
<808)
4853.
<808)
<808>
<8|8)
<808)
<808)
<808)
<808)
<800)
<808>
<808)
<808)
<809)
" * ||||




THE NEW CONSTITUTION. |j
It would not be less unreasonable to apply to a young
Colony all the measures which have been found ex-
pedient for the representation and government of the
parent land, than to fit out the boats of a ship with the
paraphernalia necessary for the navigation of the vessel
they belong to. And it is impossible to look at the
various plans proposed for a constitution for the Co-
lony, and the efforts made to provide materials for an
aristocratic chamber, without a painful sense of the lu-
dicrous.
It is difficult to avoid the conclusion that pattern,
and not expediency, has governed the minds of the
gentlemen who would at once project the councils of
the Colony into a counterpart of the great national as-
semblies of England. Indeed, perusal of the schemes
that have been laid before the public, leaves us much
in the condition of the schoolboy, who having wearied
through the whole alphabet, was quite at a loss to con-
ceive the value or importance of the task.
Surely it cannot be necessary to provide for a de-


pendent Colony,
forms that may be
required for its government when its state of depend
ency shalHiave ceased.
None can doubt that the Colony should be governed
by laws made by a Council composed of Colonists,
who are, or ought to be acquainted with its peculiar
interests. But why should these laws be submitted
to the mis-construction of a stolid and irresponsible
Upper House—a House probably composed of indi-
viduals with no preponderating interest in the pros-
perity of the country, and perhaps without that talent
which commands the respect of a people ?
What is the condition of the councils of England ?
The Commons propose and discuss a law; this law
undergoes the consideration of the Peers, —another
body of the British people interested in all that affects
the government of the Country. The law is then sub-
mitted to the Sovereign and her advisers.
In the Colony, the Council originates a measure,
that measure is submitted to the Governor, who may
fairly stand in the relation to the Colony which the
House of Lords does to the people of England, and
the proposed law is then laid before the Sovereign.
It is unreasonable and most mischievous that the
Legislative Assembly should be in any degree com-


posed of Crown Nominees, —a body of persons, who in
a deliberative assembly dare not deliberate. Nothing
is gained by placing Nominees in the House as safe-
guards against hasty legislation. That may be ef-
fectually prevented by the Governor, who with the
assistance of the Executive, ought to possess a power
of approving or rejecting the measures of the legis-
lature—a power the exercise of which would place
him in his proper relative position in the Colony, and
without casting upon him an undue share of responsi-
bility, greatly tend to give him additional importance.
The ultimate control of the Sovereign would interpose
an effectual guard against all legislation likely to in-
terfere with the general principles it concerns the
British nation to maintain in her Colonies. It can
hardly be conceived, that either the Governor or the
Sovereign would unnecessarily oppose measures which
the good sense of the Council might introduce for the
local Government.
The Governor would communicate to the House of
Assembly the financial wants of the Colony, and there
is no reason to anticipate in the members of that
House, such a blindness to the interests committed to
their care as would induce them to object to reason-
able demands.
Removed from the collisions that inevitably take
place in a body composed of the representatives of the


66
people and the officers and nominees of the Crown,
the Council would be anxious to sustain its character
of a popular Assembly and would feel a heavy, because
a sole responsibility for its measures.
1852.


THE CONSTITUTION QUESTION.
Few things are at the present moment of deeper im-
portance to the Australian Colonies, than the measures
which are to confer upon them a Constitution that,
however short-lived and bearing within itself the seeds
of dissolution, may nevertheless present obstacles to
their future good government, impossible to overcome.
It may be safely asserted that not one hundred per-
sons in New South Wales are capable of affording any
aid in the settlement of this difficult question, much
less the congregated masses who are ever ready to
vociferate for “a counterpart of the glorious consti-
tution of England,” or to lay the foundation of a de-
mocracy more tyrannical than that of America, or the
transitory political fabric constructed out of the French
Revolution of 1848.
A moment’s reflection will satisfy any thinking man,
that such a democracy would probably be the result of
tne unrestrained choice by the populace of the mem-
bers of both houses of Parliament. And one can
hardly contemplate the deference for the people, mani-


tested by at least one speaker at the meeting lately
held at the Victoria Theatre, without feeling that even
a Senator must be restrained from looking for prefer-
ment through a channel so unworthy as that of the
passions or fancies, of a mob no matter for what pur-
pose congregated. There is however an element, in
the most inconsiderate mob, that may be made the in-
strument of controlling a tyranny not less frightful •
the despotic tyranny r of irresponsible government ;
and the great question now under consideration, is the
means by which that element may be brought into
useful operation.
That the plan proposed for the nomination of an
Upper House, is one that would check;the progress of
genuine liberty and of free enquiry into the rights and
interests of all classes of the community, is so evident,
that on its authors may be justly charged much of the
intemperate character of the recent attacks they com-
plain of. It is impossible to contemplate the creation
of hereditary qualification for the senatorial office,
without the strongest feeling of disapprobation. If
the object be to secure for the Colony, as far as pos-
sible, a counterpart of the constitution of England, it
is necessary to inform ourselves of the ground on
which that constitution rests —to trace to their proper
sources any evils that may be justly chargeable upon
it. Is there not a possibility of introducing into this
Colony those evils, without advantages which have sa


much more than counterbalanced then\, that pertur-
bations are lost in the great movement of the whole ?
It is not true, as has been asserted, that the Peers
of England were ever elected by the people to check
the demands of the Sovereign : but satellites of a great
luminary to which they owed their existence, —they
originally purchased their political position by the ser-
vice of their swords, and Sovereign and Nobility have
each alternately defended the people against the ex-
actions of the other.
The English Peers have only the share of talent
and patriotism that falls to gentlemen enjoying the ad-
vantages of a liberal education, but their enormous
landed possessions make them always ready to sustain
a form of constitution which affords the sole security
for their position: and the jealousy with which they
guard the transmission to a single representative of
their estates as well as their titles, has, by perpetuating
in its integrity a wealthy and powerful class, continued
to the country the social security and that conservative
element, wealth has been almost invariably found to
afford.
What patrician qualification could senators of New
South Wales transmit to their posterity ? Have they
wealth to enable them to secure to a single represen-
tative the mediocre fortune of an ordinary English


commoner, nay a bare sufficiency to support him with-
out the toils of business; does this colonial settlement
of yesterday, afford any security that even he who has*
most successfully plied the labouring oar, can in the
incessant struggle which belongs to a rising country,
be maintained for a season of repose however brief?
But even could every requisite be seemed, is a
Senate likely to be benefited by the deliberations
of conceited heirs-at-law who have just attained their
majority, a Senate which will have to deal with the
ever varying phases which present themselves in a
land, the climate, the soil and the products of which,
daily present problems for the wonder and reflection
of the world ?
It is our duty, however, not to add to the unthinking
abuse of the ignorant on either side of the question,
but to grapple honestly with the difficult subject under
consideration. We should, if possible, point out a
course that may at once secure a body of senators
with as much wisdom as the Colony can afford: free
from the corrupting influence of the Crown ; un-
daunted by the vulgar abuse of a mob: of age at least
to have learnt the importance of calm deliberation—
who shall not transmit to a blockhead heir the office
without the endowments that are too often found to
descend with the man of genius into his grave. It has
been said that but for the federal principle, America,


losing her centripetal force, would fly into the regions
of anarchy. May not the two forces, the one impel-
ling the planet on its onward course, the other re-
straining it to its orbit, be united in forming a Con-
stitution for New South Wales ?
The plan I would propose, —at least for a trial, is that
the representative of the Sovereign select one hundred
persons in the colony whom he believes qualified for
the office of senator, (from time to time filling up va-
cancies) — gentlemen who shall not be less than thirty
years of age and who shall retain the office for life, or
for a term of at least ten years. Out of that number
the Lower House, which should be elected by the
people exclusively, should appoint and from time to
time keep up a Senate to consist of twenty-one per-
sons. The members of the Lower House should be
capable, at all times, if included in the list of indivi-
duals selected by the Crown, of accepting the appoint-
ment, —the vacancies occasioned by their retirement
from the Lower House being filled up as in all other
cases.
It has been thought so utterly impracticable to con-
stitute an Upper House, that suggestions have been
made for entrusting the legislation of the Colony to
one House only. But who can observe the crude,
precipitate and in some cases thoughtless legislation of
the present session of Council, and not feel that with-


out the check afforded by a second chamber, the rights,
the interests,.and even the liberties of the people, may
too often be overlooked in the pursuit of some sup-
posed object of expediency.
That this vitally important question should be de-
termined by the violent speeches of the partisans of
either side—that an inflamed populace should be in-
duced to demand a counterpart of the Constitution of
that “ land of liberty and equality” in which indivi-
dual citizens indemnify themselves for the sacrifice
they make to the multitude, by indulging in exclu-
siveness of the most tyrannical and degrading cha-
racter, —a constitution under which one portion of the
community has been raised to an undue eminence by
blasting the bodies and souls of three millions of human
beings, and those the producers of a large portion of
the exports of the state, I trust that no Australian,
certainly no Christian, will desire.
August , 1853.


PROSPECTS OF IRELAND.
A law of unceasing change, presides as imperiously
over nations as over the humblest individuals. The
immediate operation however, of this subtle tendency is,
owing to the longer duration and the more extensive
and complicated relations of the former, less perceptible
than in the latter.
Yet such are the inevitable results of this law
of change, that we can discern scarcely any point of
resemblance between aspects assumed by the same
country at different periods of its history. The con-
trast which presents itself between the architecture of
a baronial fortress and that of a modern mansion, is
not more striking than that between our habits and
sentiments and those of our Ancestors.
Who in contemplating, in their first results, the
successive conquests of England by the Dane, the
Saxon, the Roman and the Norman, could have con-
ceived that the noble race now dominant in that
country, would be indebted for their great moral and
physical qualities, to the wars that brought desolation


to the hearths of their ancestors, sweeping away both
rulers and institutions that on the children of those
who bent beneath the scourge, should be conferred
the mental capacity and the energy of the conqueror ?
Who could have conjectured that unvanquished Scot-
land should have been led on to civilization and re-
finement by the people, that a few centuries before,
she viewed from her mountain fastnesses with suspicion
and contempt.
Few observers of the prostrate condition of Ireland,
expect to find in her misery and degradation, the ele-
ments of her future greatness ! Yet unexampled
prosperity may be predicted as the effect of mighty
convulsions which have apparently shattered her ener-
gies and her hopes.
How little was it suspected, that the temporary
failure of the potatoe, which from its easy cultivation,
Mr. Cobbett maintained would perpetuate the degra-
dation of Ireland, might lead to a remedy for evils
which existed in that country before the introduction
of the plant itself from America ? How little was it
suspected that the Continent from which the potatoe
had been imported, might eventually afford an asylum
for the famishing multitudes of Ireland? How little,
that the advancement of Ireland to the highest moral
character and dignity, was likely to result from a ca-
lamity that had swept hundreds of thousands of her


children into a common grave? Yet what is more
probable than that the emigration of a large portion of
her remaining inhabitants, and the sequestration and
transfer of her lands to British owners, may prove the
means of effecting in Ireland that change which fol-
lowed the invasions and conquests of England ? What
so likely to regenerate Ireland as the influx of British
settlers, who with their capital will take with them
their sound judgment and their practical character ?
It has long been an enigma to all reflecting minds
that a country, on which nature has conferred un-
bounded fertility and a climate so congenial to the
natives of the British Isles, should have been utterly
prostrated. Perhaps the solution of that enigma is at
hand.
That the fanlt is not wholly with the people, is evi-
dent from their success as immigrants both in America
and Australia, and the distinguished character of many
of their descendants in all parts of the world. May
not the infusion of foreign blood have tended to promote
in those descendants, the favorable result derived by
the English from their conquerors ? The peculiarities
of the Irish people indicate the necessity of such a
change. With wit and eloquence the most brilliant,
with courage that has earned the highest honors in a
hundred battle-fields, and with the most generous and
kindly nature, they are deficient in those sturdier cha-


racteristics and that consistent firmness of purpose,
which constitute the peculiar moral features of the
people of England and Scotland.
In the North of Ireland, the introduction of Scottish
emigrants has produced a mixed race in which the
high characteristics of both the Irish and Scottish
nations have blended themselves.
May it not be safely predicted that when the neg-
lected soil of Ireland shall be cultivated with scien-
tific skill, —when the vast natural resources of an
island that has been justly styled the Garden of the
World shall be called forth, —when the rapid modes
of modern travelling shall have brought within the
reach of genius and taste her grand and affecting
scenery, —when her remaining population shall be
amalgamated with British emigrants, the union of
Ireland with Great Britain will be one of feeling and
not of force, and the melancholy political contests of
centuries will be exchanged for a generous rivalry in
exertions for the common good of a mighty empire.
1852.


RAILWAYS.
A stranger on arriving in Australia, cannot fail to be
struck with astonishment at our insensibility to the
importance of inventions, which are of hourly and in-
dispensable use in the ordinary business of social life,
even in countries not more advanced in civilization
than our own. People in England would now be as
little inclined to dispense with the advantages of rail-
way transit and of the electric telegraph, as their fathers
would have been to exchange the fast travelling mail
coach of their time for the courier, who in the reign of
the Stuarts, was charged with the conveyance of the
most important despatches at the rate of twenty five
miles a day.
What w T ould be thought by the people of Europe
and America, who found the mail-coach and the steam-
ship inadequate to the increasing demands of the age
without the aid of the steam carriage, of the transport
of the produce of this colony by bullock-drays which
require several months to perform a journey of four
hundred miles, —a journey which not unfrequently in-


volves a loss of more than one team, and too commonly
a serious deterioration of property.
That the unenlightened among the native-born
should, like their coloured brethren of the soil, see in
this nothing but a consequence of residing at a distance
of four hundred miles from the capital, may be con-
ceived. But that a member of the Legislative Council,
a gentleman representing the county in which the
capital of Australia is situated, —a gentleman who is
not supposed to be behind others in English and Con-
tinental experience, should express an opinion in
Council, that the time occupied in the conveyance of
colonial produce from the interior to the capital, might
be regarded as a matter of little importance, must ex-
cite the indignant surprise of every thinking man, —of
all who take an interest in the diffusion of intelligence
and in the education of the rising generation. Few
in selecting this land for the home of their families,
could have supposed that while America vies with the
Old World, Australia would be satisfied with a con-
dition little better than that of the interior of Britain
at the period of the Roman conquest.
Energy in a people can do much to advance, and
the want of it almost everything to retard the pro-
gress of their country. But the latter can scarcely
annihilate the advantages of the unrivalled harbour
of Port Jackson, nor the former convert the mud-


hanks of Port Phillip into a safe or commodious haven.
A chart of the Southern Seas will at once show that
Port Jackson is as well adapted by its situation as its
extent, to become the great outport of this Hemi-
sphere.
The first object of a people who aspire to a high
mercantile character, should be to facilitate every ap-
proach to their metropolis : and the ports in which
their cargoes are shipped and discharged, should pre-
sent the most ample maritime accommodation.
The coast of the Australian continent, and especially
that portion to the South of Port Jackson, is most
dangerous. The capital swept away by the loss of
small vessels during the last year, would have gone
far towards the expense of constructing a railway to
Melbourne, —a road that would on its completion, make
Sydney the port for receiving and shipping the pro-
duce of Victoria—a road of which Van Dieman’s Land
would avail herself, by conveying her exports across
the Straits to the Port Phillip terminus, instead of
sending small coasters on a perilous voyage to Sydney.
The Australian seas would then be navigated solely
by steam and other vessels of sufficient size to avoid
the dangers of a lee shore.
The foundation of so important a work cannot be
laid too early, and measures should at once be taken


lo prevent all interference with the due progress of the
undertaking.
What could more happily tend to raise the character
of the Colony, —to attract intelligent strangers to her
shores, than the determination of the local legislature
to apply all the means at its disposal to the opening of
her vast resources, by the execution of great public
works? What so highly calculated to enlarge and
improve the minds of the native born ?
A description of the electric telegraph which con-
nects England with France, or of works now associated
in Europe even with journeys of pleasure, would a
century ago have been looked upon as the phantasies
of an insane mind or the marvels of a fairy tale.
Telegraphic despatch may unquestionably be con-
ducted across the main ocean as well as across a channel,
and with greater safety; for, removed from the dis-
turbing causes to be overcome in shallow waters, the
apparatus would find its level far below the rage of
storms or' the drift of wrecks and beyond the attacks
of fishes, and would through profound darkness and si-
lence convey with inconceivable velocity, the thoughts
the sentiments and the wishes of those engaged in the
business of the Upper World.
The execution of such gigantic works not only


tends to raise the mind from the grovelling pursuits
with which it is too much occupied, but to invigorate
and fit it to contemplate the infinite wisdom displayed
in the Creation,
1853.


APOSTOLICAL SUCCESSION.
Now I say that every one of you saith, /am of Paul; and lof Apollos;
and lof Cephas; and lof Christ. Is Christ divided ? was Paul
crucified for you ? 1 Cor. i, 12, 13.
On looking into the records the Apostles have left of
the life and doctrines of our Lord, and of their own
conduct in executing the commission given them to
preach the kingdom of God, we become deeply con-
scious that the light that hath shined in our hearts,
“ to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of
God in the face of Jesus Christ,” is indeed a treasure
contained “in earthen vessels, —that “the excellency of
the power may be of God, and not of us; ” and when
we observe that the Apostles have in their writings
unreservedly recorded their own errors and infirmities,
we are made painfully sensible of the contrast between
their humility and the arrogance of those who style
themselves their Successors, and are led to enquire on
what ground the claim of those who appropriate to
themselves this title, rests. We are induced to ask
whether its validity is to be determined by the Scrip-
tures or the Church, by the Gospel of our Lord and


the writings of his disciples, or by the decrees of eccle-
siastical councils ?
It may however be proper, first to enquire what those
who claim the title, contend they have succeeded to.
Why were the Apostles selected ? What were
their qualifications ? They were not perfect, but they
were humble and they were holy, at least with the
exception of one , of whom none claims to be the suc-
cessor.
That the priests of our time have inherited the mi-
raculous powers which our Lord conferred upon his
Apostles, no member of a Protestant Church will, we
think, contend. They certainly have not succeeded
to the virtues that pre-eminently fitted the Apostles to
preach to all people the glad tidings of salvation.
It the model they have set up for imitation be the
Fathers, they should have concealed from us, before
demanding acknowledgement of their pretensions, tha
history of the squabbles and wranglings of the early
leaders of the Christian Church, they should have ex-
hibited the relics rather than the histories of their
Saints, and have amused the fancy rather than ex-
ercised the understanding and the judgment. Un-
happily, the lives of the Fathers disclose contentions
fatal to their claim to light up the narrow way pointed


out by our Lord for the guidance of his true disciples.
Not only do we read in ecclesiastical history of dif-
ferences of opinion among the early rulers of the
Church on the most vital matters, but alas! we find
those same rulers invoking divine wrath upon each
other and condemning each other’s teachings as false
and damnable.
The Protestant clergy, conscious of the sins and
errors of that Church which burnt the Bible and ex-
cavated the dungeons of the Inquisition, which substi-
tuted for the teaching of Christ the dogmas of a corrupt
priesthood, for the test of truth the concealment of
the prison, profess to have regulated their faith and
opinions by the alleged agreement of the Fathers
during the first two or three centuries of the Christian
era, and before the Church was corrupted by the
practices that too early sprang up amongst those who
professed the religion of Jesus. But alas !we find it
recorded by St. John that even in his time, five of the
Seven Churches of Asia had fallen from the faith : and
the other two afforded too fatal evidence of the melan-
choly shortness of their Christian career.
Why should Christians trouble themselves about
the Fathers, men who are entitled to respect only
when they agree with the infallible rules that Christ
has laid down for our guidance ? Why endeavour to
augment that light which requires no addition, to add


to that Grace which is sufficient for all ? Why neg-
lect the warning we have received against false
teachers, who privily should bring in damnable he-
resies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and
whose pernicious ways we are assured that many should
follow ?
Were the Fathers better than the immediate fol-
lowers of our Lord? Were they less affected by
human infirmities—more perfectly devoted to the office
they had undertaken —more holy and blameless in their
lives? Yet even of the Apostles, we find recorded
that on the solemn occasion of our Lord’s communi-
cating to them his approaching death, “ 1 here was
strife amongst them which should be the greatest; ”
and how soon afterwards, was Peter guilty of his me-
morable denial of his Lord and Master, and again at
Antioch of desertion of the Gentiles, from whom a
fear of the Jews induced him to withdraw, and which
drew down from St. Paul severe and merited reproof.
Even of Paul there is recorded an unseemly contention
with Barnabas.
If even in the natures, but partially subdued of these
noble-minded Christians, there lingered so much of
human infirmity, what could be expected of their con-
verts ?
Surely, true successors of the Apostles would have


labored to maintain the primitive simplicity of faith
and the earnest zeal of the disciples of our Lord.
They would not have incumbered those it was their
duty to guide in the path of their Divine Master, with
dogmas and barren subtleties, nor made them parties
in the quarrels and disputations that t»o early con-
vulsed Christian society.
If the Holy Scriptures Were found sufficient for all
purposes of doctrine and discipline by the early Chris-
tians, —those who had actually listened to the preaching
of our Lord and His Apostles, or those whose conversion
to Christianity had taken place before the earnest ap-
peals of the friends and companions of Christ's disciples
had been forgotten, and their doctrines confounded with
the fanciful theories and the corrupt practices of the
Jewish Doctors or the philosophy of the Heathen,
how vigilantly should we guard against the delusions
which took their rise amongst the controversialists of
a later and a darker age, —how jealously should we
look at the dogmas of men, framed often with a view
to the suppression of some temporary heretical opinion
of their day. How guardedly should we listen to ar-
guments, which having no application to the general
faith and condition of the Christian world, may at a
period when even the name of the heresy or the halluci-
nation they were intended to combat, has passed away,
lead the mind to conclusions the controversialist never
contemplated. Compare that declaration of Faith


which from its antiquity is called the Apostles’ Creed,
with the Athanasian and Nicene symbols. How wide
apart are the too frequently captious restrictions in the
two latter, from the simplicity, breadth and true Catho-
licity of the earlier declaration of Faith. It has been
said that the latter creeds are but the extension of the
Apostles’ Creed, but where in the Apostles’ Creed is
it alleged that Christ was begotten of the Father be-
fore all worlds ? Where that he was of one substance
with the Father, —that he was not made nor created,
but begotten ? Where that a Union of God and Man
are one Christ ? If the Scriptures are plain and ex-
plicit on these mysterious subjects, why dogmatize ?
If the creeds are not supported by the Scriptures, they
are the inventions of men and not the word of God.
At best they result from a presumptuous desire to
define mysteries that the human mind is incapable of
comprehending, and like all such unhallowed attempts,
have thrown a stumbling-block in the way of those who
might otherwise have humbly followed the course en-
joined by the Redeemer of the World. They have
rent the Church—have split Christian society into a
thousand sects and factions, and have delivered the
government of God’s worshippers to parties who pre-
fer the recondite definition of mysteries to the simple
preaching of Christian grace.
Unwarrantable and mistaken views of mysteries that
are placed beyond our comprehension, have led to more


strife about unimportant things, more disunion amongst
Christians, more unhappy divisions into sects, than all
the armies of infidelity could ever have achieved.
As might naturally be expected, in proportion to
the remoteness of the time of Our Lord’s advent upon
earth from the periods at which the creeds were
framed, the more widely the authors of them have de-
parted from that declaration of faith at once simple and
comprehensive, the adoption of which in the earliest
ages of the Church, distinguished the believer in the
doctrines of Christianity from the Infidel and the Idol-
ater.
In composing creeds or symbols of doctrine, the
object should have been not irreverently to ascend
into heaven and there pronounce categorically the
degrees of relationship which subsist between divine
and incorporeal beings, but, humbly to express for the
practical use of the Christian, those essential articles of
faith which our Lord taught to the humble auditors
that ever surrounded him. This is clearly and amply
effected in the Apostles’ Creed. What is a creed but
a belief ? Belief is not knowledge: it in-
volves a doubt. “ Believing and doubting” observes a
modern writer “are correlative terms”; yet the com-
pilers of the Athanasian Creed have ventured to ex-
clude from salvation all who do not faithfully hold the
dogmas they themselves held—all who do not believe


to be true, that which the authors of the Creed them-
selves could only express as matters of belief.
“ The Fathers as a body” says Mr. De Quincey “ are
chargeable with anti-christian practices of a twofold
order; sometimes, as supporting their great cause in a
spirit alien to its own, retorting in a tone not less un-
charitable than that of their opponents; sometimes,
again, as adopting arguments that are unchristian in
their ultimate grounds : resting upon errors the refu-
tation of errors: upon superstitions the overthrow of
superstitions; and drawing upon the armouries of
darkness for weapons, that to be durable, ought to
have been of celestial temper. Alternately, in short,
the Fathers trespass against those affections which
furnish to Christianity its moving powers, and against
those truths which furnish to Christianity its guiding
lights.”
In Christ’s teaching we find the principles he in-
culcated instead of being in any shape involved in
mystery, were simplified and systematically brought
down to the level of the meanest capacities,—ever led
to the justest sense of human infirmities, and were il-
lustrated by examples which the humblest and most
unlettered disciple could fully comprehend. The
Prodigal Son, the Dying Beggar, the Unjust Steward,
the Good Samaritan, and finally that Universal Prayer
he bequeathed his followers, all without doctrinal sub-


tlety or metaphysical reasoning,—appeal directly to the
universal heart and the universal understanding.
Let us then adopt the earnest advice of St. Paul to
Timothy, not to “ give heed to fables and endless gene-
alogies, which minister questions, rather than godly
edifying which is in faith,” and beware lest we be found
with those who “ turn aside into vain jangling, desiring
to be teachers of the law, understanding neither what
they say, nor whereof they affirm.”
“ Bring forth therefore fruits meet for repentance,
and think not to say within yourselves, we have Abra-
ham to our Father ; for I say unto you, that God is able
of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham.
Mat. iii., 8, 9.


THE RESURRECTION OF THE BODY.
For we know that if our earthly heme of hit tabernacle were dissolved,
we have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in
the heavens. — 2 Cob. v., 1.
That the material world and all it contains, consist of
various combinations of a gaseous matter capable of
extension into nebulse so diffused as to be detected at
enormous distances only, and of being so condensed as
to constitute the almost imperishable diamond, com-
binations that are perpetually changing and are daily
presented to us in a thousand shapes, is now less a sub-
ject of speculation than of certainty. And it has long
been understood, that the human body, composed of
the same elements, is altered by every act of inspi-
ration and is totally changed many times during an
ordinary life.
That a thing so constituted should accompany into
an eternal state the Immortal Principle of which it is
under the physical conditions of this life the tenement,
—that it should find a place in that kingdom, which
Saint Paul assures us, flesh and blood cannot inherit,


is opposed to all probability. Yet such a belief is
nevertheless, so earnestly insisted on by well-meaning
Christians, that we are led to look for a solution of the
mystery to our only infallible source of information,
the Holy Scriptures. There , notwithstanding the
metaphorical language with which, as is frequently the
case, an abstract doctrine is clothed, evidence will be
found sufficient to dispel every doubt of the untenable-
ness of the opinion, that the Soul, in its future and
eternal condition, will be reunited to the matter which
at present constitutes the body.
Great want of genuine Christianity is frequently
exhibited in construing the language of Scripture, and
nothing is more dangerous than to allow our appre-
hension of the idea sought to be conveyed, to be wholly
governed by the figure with which it is invested. Too
many have industriously labored to confound a doc-
trine with a metaphor merely intended as a vehicle of
expression, and from a possible want of aptness in the
image made use of, instead of advancing the cause of
truth, created mysteries calculated to keep the human
mind in darkness. They would prevent the exercise
of the understanding in those grand modern disco-
veries of science, which have made us more inti-
mately acquainted with the vastness of the works of
the Creator, and have enabled us to contemplate his
infinite wisdom and power in the records he has" left of
the Creation.


So figurative is even modern language, that expres-
sions which the advanced state of our knowledge alone
prevents from misleading us, are in daily use. We
have only to turn over a few pages of history, to find
that Galileo, for demonstrating the now universally
acknowledged truth, that the motion of the earth and
not that of the sun causes the phenomena we daily
witness, was exposed to the horrors of the Inquisition.
This was justified on the ground that his views were op-
posed to statements contained in the Holy Scriptures.
Too many in this age, not less narrow-minded than
the persecutors of Galileo, anxiously cling to the letter
when it assumes the mystical—reject it when it ap-
peals directly to the reason.. They insist on the re-
surrection of the identical human body, rejecting the
assurance of Saint Paul that it is not this body but a
spiritual body—that is a Spirit, that shall be raised from
the dead. Not infrequently do they confound the
rational enquiries of the believer in the great doctrines
of Christianity, with the infidelity of the Sadducee, who
questioned not the resurrection of the body but the ex-
istence of a future state.
It would have been difficult for the Apostles to con-
vey an idea of the great general judgment, involved
in the Christian doctrine of a retributive future state, to
a people eminently sensuous and altogether unpre-
pared to receive abstract spiritual doctrine, without


the use of language somewhat calculated to strengthen
a belief in the actual resurrection of the body. Con-
scious of the tendency of the figurative language he
unavoidably used, Saint Paul endeavoured, in his first
epistle to the Corinthians, to point out the difference
between a corporeal and a spiritual state.
It is too evident, however, that he was unable to
correct the popular notion that the material person
should become the denizen of a perfect and eternal
state —a belief that has unaccountably resisted en-
quiries that ought, at least in our time, to have led to
more rational conclusions.
We are frequently told from the pulpit, that the body
will be collected from the ocean and the mountain, and
that the Soul or Spiritual Principle will be mysteri-
ously re-incoporated with the identical matter which
in this life constituted the material person. This im-
plied rejection of our Lord’s assurance that a Spirit
hath not flesh and blood, too forcibly recalls the anec-
dote of that besotted victim of Hindu superstition who,
believing the destruction of animal life unwarranted,
on being presented with a microscope too obviously
revealing to him, that with every herb he ate, he ex-
terminated millions of creatures, instead of altering his
belief, dashed the instrument to the ground.
For what end present to its Creator, the Spirit


clothed in one of the ten thousand combinations of gas
which had in this life constituted the body,—does In-
finite Wisdom, in the economy of another existence,
require evidence of identity ? What purpose would be
served by the physical apparatus for receiving nourish-
ment or the canine teeth; —why the peculiarities that
distinguish the sexes, that constitute the difference be-
tween a Hercules and a Venus in a state in which “they
neither marry nor are given in marriage but are as the
Angels of God?” What need of legs to a Spirit tra-
versing all space in an instant ? How unlike all the
acts of the Creator we are acquainted with!
But if the Soul were again to tenant the body, where
would that body be found. Small is the frame of the
new born infant, and it is when beholding it, that the
ephemeral character of mere physical organisation
most forcibly strikes the mind. How rapid is the
change that takes place,—every hour alters its appear-
ance and enlarges it; at a later period this change is
less striking ; in old age hardly perceptible, the prin-
ciple of change is exhausted and the body dies. At
the resurrection, which of the displaced and worn-out
apparatuses of a material existence, is it contemplated,
should be re-united to the Soul ? Surely not that
which it left at the time the connection between body
and soul ceased, the worst of all the combinations of
matter that had been used even in this life : and where
is this used up matter to be found ?


The Creator in his infinite wisdom, allows nothing
to be lost,—nothing to remain unemployed, and matter
for a moment appropriated to the human body when
discharged by respiration or otherwise, is immediately
subjected to fresh processes —is now the man—the
horse—the tree, by unceasing novelty of combin-
ation producing endless variety of form. Where
then is the identity ? From the same matter a thou-
sand bodies have been framed, —matter which like
the atmosphere we breathe, is used but not retained.
The human body is to the casual eye, as the waters
of a river to one who gazes on their placid surface,
unconscious of a current that produces unceasing
change.
The body, in fact, constitutes as much a part of the
material system of things in the world we inhabit, as
the land, the ocean or the atmosphere. Is it possible
that in our future, —our eternal condition, in the
Heaven of Heavens, a part of this perishing world
should find a place ?
Whatever may be the condition of man in his future
state, it is quite certain that it will be spiritual and
not corporeal—that his person will not be composed of
flesh and blood—will not be made up of machinery for
receiving matter for the sustenance of animal life and
the continuation of the species. In short, that such
an identity as some Christians have pertinaciously con-


tended for, is utterly unfitted to a condition in which
no change can take place.
Happily for him who runs that he may obtain a
heavenly crown, the state of our future being, for all
purposes of practical religion, requires no definition—
can affect no Christian duty, and will assuredly be
provided for by the infinite wisdom and goodness of
God.
“ Jesus answered and said unto them, Ye do err, not
knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God. For
in the resurrection they neither marry, nor are given
in marriage, but are as the angels of God in heaven.”
Mat. xxii., 29, 30.


REPENTANCE OF NECESSITY PROGRESSIVE.
And one of the malefactors which were hanged, railed on him, saying,
If thou be the Christ, save thyself and us, but the other answering
rebuked hiin, saying, dost not thou fear God, seeing thou art in the
same condemnation ? And we indeed justly ; for we receive the due
reward of our deeds ; but this man hath done nothing amiss. And
he said unto Jesus, Lord, remember me when thou earnest into thy
Kingdom, and Jesus said unto him, To day shall thou be with me in
Paradise. — Luke, xxiii., 39, 40, 41, 42, & 43.
Few passages in Holy Writ have been the subject of
greater misapprehension or led to more fatal delusion,
than those which stand at the head of this paper.
By the worldly-minded, who are unable to exclude
from their thoughts the apprehension of a future judg-
ment, but who are too much devoted to the pursuits
they are engaged in, to conform to the rules laid down
in the Scriptures for our guidance, they have always been
thought to afford the assurance that the full repentance
which secures forgiveness, may be accomplished in a
moment. It has been imagined, that there is a ten-
dency in the example given on so solemn an occasion
as that on which our Lord finished his mission on earth,


to show that the devotion of a whole life to the hopes
that lie beyond this world, cannot be expected of frail
humanity, and is perhaps even unnecessary.
This view of the sudden reformation of the Thief is
one too commonly entertained by sincere Christians
and they tremble only, lest the moment of repentance
should be cut off. But, surely, neither the worldling
nor the Christian is warranted in arriving at such a
conclusion, nor entitled to slumber on the belief that
a transition from enmity against God to Christian holi-
ness can be so suddenly effected.
To the Christian the error, if it be one, is of more
moment in a theoretical than in a moral point of view.
To the man of the world, it is one of infinite concern.
He may find too late, the slender ground on which he
rests his hope of pardon slip from under him, and the
support springing from these words altogether imagi-
nary.
On what ground is the suddenness of the repentance
of the Thief assumed ? What is the evidence of the
wickedness of his life ? His condemnation by a legal
tribunal ? With the example of that of our Lord be-
fore us, we need hardly stop to consider the careless
manner in which justice was administered by the rulers
of Judea, nor to recollect the indifference to human
suffering which prevailed throughout the whole world


at that time. The manner indeed in which criminal
law was within the last century administered in Chris-
tian England, ought to warn us against too much re-
liance on the judgment even of a British tribunal.
But the thief, it will be urged, acknowledged his guilt.
What did he acknowledge—an offence that involved
entire moral obliquity ? Certainly not. He acknow-
edged what he might have conceived to be a just judg-
ment on a life he, if indeed a penitent, felt to be stained
with crime and rebellion against his God. But sup-
pose he had really been convicted of a crime of such
turpitude as to justify the penalty of death: suppose
that crime to have been murder, —What then ? Had
he no under current of feeling that might have brought
him to the throne of Grace ? Was there no circum-
stance that might tend to mitigate the horror and in-
dignation of righteous Christians at the deed ? Who
that knows the depravity of his own heart, —that mys-
terious compound of good and evil, can venture to pro-
nounce that such was not the case. Let us imagine
that this crucified offender was an obscure, humble and
uncrowned David—will erring human judgment dare
affirm, that the forgiveness our Lord pronounced, might
not as certainly have been accorded to his whole life
as that pardon which was conveyed to the Jewish
monarch through the prophet Nathan.
It is our crimes that pronounce upon us the fatal
judgment, and we can conceive of no restoration to


the favour of a holy and just God, without deep and
earnest and abiding repentance of our guilt.
The conversion of Saint Paul may be thought to
support the view that is generally taken of the sudden
penitence and forgiveness of the Thief, but there is no
analogy between circumstances which attended the
misdirected devotion of that holy man and the sup-
posed vicious career of the latter, to warrant such a
conclusion. That Paul was grievously mistaken and
fearfully misled, none can doubt, still less his sincerity
in the cause he believed it his duty to support. “ I
verily thought with myself,” said that earnest man,
“ that I ought to do many things contrary to the name
of Jesus of Nazareth.” His conversion was but the
direction of a holy zeal into its proper channel.
If the history of the Penitent Thief presents only
another example of the frailty of those who in a life
comparatively blameless, are found to deny their Lord,
—who are carried by impulses into the commission of
crime; farewell to the soothing hopes which the vicious
and the careless entertain of a late but effectual re-
pentance; farewell to a pardon only to be secured
when vice shall have lost her charms, when the self-
deluded victim shall be no longer interested in the
world he is about to leave, when his day of probation
shall have closed ? What, when awakened to a sense
of his awful condition, shall he have to fall back upon ?


Not on years of devotion in the service of his Maker*
chequered indeed by the infirmities of his whole life,
but like the rich man who enlarged his barns—like
him who was clothed in purple and fine linen and
fared sumptuously every day, the remembrance only
of a life spent in the gratification of his appetites.
“ Whose judgment now of a long time lingereth not,
and their damnation slumbereth not.” — 2 Peter, ii., 3.
Turn ye to the strong-hold, ye prisoners of hope. — Zechariah, ix., 12,
If the weaknesses of our nature are such that we know
not how often we offend, if the utmost we can accom-
plish, even with the assistance of Divine Love, is to
lay hold of the hope that is set before us, —how truly
is our condition in this body, that of prisoners, and if
we believe we are making progress in that narrow
way which leads through the strait gate to Eternal
Life, then are we indeed prisoners of Hope !
“ Which hope we have as an anchor of the soul.”—
Hebrews, vi., 19.


But I say unto you, That every idle word that men shall speak, they
shall give account thereof in the day of judgment. — Mat., xii., 36.
We turn from this startling declaration with the hope,
if not the belief, that a record will not be kept by the
Almighty of the inconceivable number of “ idle words”
spoken from the earliest age by the whole human race.
But a very slight examination of the works of the
Creator will effectually correct this delusion, and con-
vince us that we have nothing to hope from the failure
of that Eye which is never closed, of that Arm—which
alike sustains the heavenly bodies in their noiseless but
mighty revolutions, and provides for the wants of
creatures so minute, as without the aid of a micros-
cope, to be invisible to the human eye.
'lf the works of the Almighty, which surround us,
fail to awaken a sense of the Divine Infinity,—if their
ten thousand voices have been addressed to us in vain,
an enquiry into that bygone condition of the earth
which the researches of the geologist have disclosed,
will afford too conclusive evidence of the control ex-


rently u
r things appa-
thought,
bear its record to
Bering hope that a
nsitory, can fail to
of all the Earth.”
Even the contemplation of the powers of memory
with which God has endowed us, ought to impress us
with a more exalted sense of His unceasing vigilance
—powers which for years have not only preserved the
evidence of thousands of occurrences we have wit-
nessed, but have enabled us to recall a look—a gesture
—a tone, with a mysterious accuracy that no pencil,
no music can rival.
Professor Ehrenberg ascertained that the polishing
Slate of Bilin in Bohemia, which is of great extent
and forms strata fourteen feet thick, consists almost
entirely of an aggregation of the siliceous shells of the
Gaillonella distans. The size of these animalcules
of a line, is but equal to of the thickness of a human
hair. Twenty three millions are contained in a cubic
line, or forty-one thousand millions in a cubic inch.
Remote as the period must be at which this accu-
mulation commenced, the preservation nay the iden-
tity of these minute creatures is perfect. Evidence, if
possible more extraordinary and equally indisputable,
is extant of the habits of animals that for millions of
years have ceased to exist. Imbedded in the solid


lock,
covered that
of the Earth, and
containing half masticat
But the memorials of Divine Power do not end
here. Rocks on being separated, have disclosed the
footmarks of birds and of animals now unknown, and
what is still more marvellous, the impression made
upon sand by drops of rain nay more, the direction of
the currents of air that prevailed at the time those
drops were falling— for impelled in a slanting direction,
the sides of the impression are unequally raised.
The same slab has in some instances exhibited foot-
prints made before, and others after the rain had ceased
(the former indicated by the partially obliterated im-
pression of the animal’s steps, the latter by a clear un-
interrupted track). Even the delicate impressions re-
ceived from the body and ethereal wings of the may-
fly have been found, preserving through countless ages
in tablets of stone, evidence of the existence of an in-
sect the whole life of which was comprised in a single
day.
If it has been the will of the Creator to engrave on
His works so lasting a history of things of such minor
importance, surely those words which flowing from the
abundance of the heart, evidence our inmost thoughts.


shall have passed away.
iiiuo
3 sparrows are
;m is forgotten
isregarded that shall
stupendous creation
“ Even the very hairs of your head are all num-
bered.”—Luke, xii., 7.


' -


■ $• •■■
x v 'v *
' 'V » • ■ .
