

No literary or special merit is claimed. But it is claimed
that these essays and addresses bring into prominent
relief the essential fallacy of the assumption that consti-
tutions must be rigid—the mistake of those who would
guard against possible temporary mistakes of the people by
placing mechanical obstructions in the way of adjusting
the constitution as experience may dictate, and as the
novel conditions which must arise may render expedient.
In the course of the years to come, when the people of
Australia realise that the Law Courts can sit in judgment on
the legislature, and can treat a law as invalid because of its
being beyond the powers of the legislature, the fundamental
importance of flexibility and plasticity in the written con-
stitution will be even more apparent than it is now.
But that which was a bill has now become an Act, binding
as law throughout the Empire. The time for criticism has
passed ; the time for obedience has come. It is now the duty
of all good Australians, whatever were their objections to the
bill, to give loyal assistance to the constitution, and to aid in
working out to a successful issue the problems of our
Australian Commonwealth.
R. B. HIGGINS.


INDEX.
PAGE.
x. The Convention Bii.i. of 1898 ... ... 5
Address at Geelong.
2. “The Federation Forum” ... ... ... 37
From the Argus newspaper.
3. The Convention Bill ... ... ... 69
Articles in the Daily Telegraph.
4. The Premiers’ Amendments ... ... ... 81
Address at the Working Men’s Club, Richmond.
5. The Problems of Federation ... ... 99
Address at request of Hibernian Australasian
Catholic Benefit Society.
6. Manifesto of the Democratic Federal Union
7. The Proposed Act for Australian Federation 121
Contemporary Review, April, 1900.
8. The Commonwealth Act as Altered ... ... 141


The Federal Convention, consisting of ten members elected
by popular vote in each of the colonies of New South Wales,
Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania, and of ten members
chosen by the Parliament of West Australia, finished its
labours at Melbourne on the 16th March, 1898. The
following address was delivered at Geelong on April 18, 1898 ,




The Convention Bill of 1898.
IHAYE called this meeting for the purpose of laying before
you, my constituents in Geelong, some thoughts on the
Federal bill, which by your goodwill, I have assisted in
framing. I have not forgotten —I shall never forget —the very
handsome way in which the electors of Geelong indicated their
confidence in me on the day of the election for the Convention.
Nearly 45,000 electors of Victoria marked me as one of the Vic-
torian ten; and of these votes I had nearly 2000 in Geelong
alone. You then put me in a position of great privilege, but of
greater responsibility. As a man comparatively new to politics,
it was a great privilege to mix with so many of the most distin-
guished politicians in Australia—men who had the invaluable
experience of the working of Constitutional Government in five
colonies, and who have—many of them—acted as responsible
Ministers of the Crown. I should have been most stupid if I
did not learn much that is useful from them, and most ungrate-
ful if I did not acknowledge it. Taken as a whole, the Con-
vention contained as strong men as you could find in Australia.
But I find that for this reason alone many are inclined to vote
for this bill without fully considering it. They, say that a
Constitution which the ablest statesmen in Australia have, with
so much labor, assisted in devising, must be the best constitu-
tion that can be obtained, and ought to be accepted as of course.
That is a mistake. The stronger the men the harder is the
tussle ; and the harder the tussle, the less is each strong man
able to impress his personality on the result.. When the
Geelong football team meets foemen worthy of its steel, the
goals are usually fewer, or more evenly balanced in number.
One strong man wins on this point, and another on that ; and
the result may quite possibly be an inconsistent, incoherent, and
ill-digested constitutional scheme.
Perhaps some of you may think that I ought to have spoken
sooner. I deliberately abstained from doing so, in order that I
might not take any course rashly, fresh from the heat and ex-
citement of the debate. If I had given my views directly after
the convention, I should have said unhesitatingly, but with deep
pain, “ This bill will never do.” But I was urged—and I think
rightly —to reconsider the bill in quiet, after some interval, and
see whether, after all, notwithstanding what seemed to me to
be its serious blemishes, I could not recommend that it be adop-
ted. The cost of the convenaion to Victoria in money alone,
will be, I suppose, some £lO,OOO or £12,000; and I should so
B 1


much like to be able to recommend the bill—to see some direct
fruit of our labours. It is now a month since the bill was com-
pleted ; and I tell you that during that month my responsibility
has been pressing on me like a nightmare. The people of Vic-
toria have last week had the opportunity of reading m the papers
what their Premier, Sir George Turner, has to say about the bill;
and his utterances, his advice, naturally and properly, command
more attention and interest than anything that I can say. Well, I
find that after a careful examination of the clauses, he feels him-
self justified in recommending the bill. But let me warn you
that you must take the recommendations of any of the delegates
with much caution, with much of the salt of qualification. For
we are under a strong temptation to favor the acceptance of a
bill on which we have bestowed so much labour. Every work-
man likes to see some direct result from his work. I never saw
such hopeless and vacuous workmen as soldiers undergoing
punishment in a barrack yard, who had to carry cannon balls
and pile them up in one heap, and then carry them and pile them
up in another, and so on from heap to heap. For they laboured
and they achieved nothing. Even the mere sense of loyalty,
and respect for one’s colleagues is a strong incentive to recom-
mend this bill. Then is also the desire, the legitimate am-
bition, to have one’s name go down in our annals as one of the
framers of the Federal Constitution for Australia. So it is
not by any means remarkable that you find most of the delegates
concur in favor of the acceptance of this bill. It was so in
connection with the bill of 1891 ; it will always be so in every
such undertaking. But you—the electors—must judge for
yourselves—must not forego the duty which you are under, as
trustees for posterity, to consider the bill on its own merits.
Trustees for posterity—trustees for posterity ! We are making
for posterity a contract from which they are not to get out.
You have never had so momentous a political question to face
before. It is proposed that you shall bind, under an “indis-
soluble constitution,” your children and your children’s children
for all generations. If you once come under this bill, you and
your descendants must stay under it. Marriage is a big, a grave
undertaking ; but it can at least be dissolved by the death of
one of the parties. This constitution cannot be dissolved by the
death of any person, or of any number of persons. This is not
like an ordinary Act of Parliament which Parliament can change
if it do not work well. If the Factories’ Act of Victoria be found
defective,. Parliament can change it. Even the Constitution Act
of Victoria, the act under which we make Victorian Laws, can be
changed in any clause at the will of the Victorian Parliament.
I want to impress this point upon you, because I find some
unthinking people saying: “Oh, let us federate; and if the


arrangements do not work, we can put them right.” That is a
mistake. You cannot rectify an error in the federal constitution
as you can rectify an error in the Factories’ Act, or in any other
Victorian Act. Let me start with this proposition, in order to
clear our ideas :
Not a section, not a phrase, not a word in this constitution can be
changed by the Federal Parliament, no matter hoiv urgently the change
may be required, and even though every member in each House of
the Parliament may vote for the change.
There —you may rely on that and my other propositions as
absolutely true. There are some in this audience who do not
agree with me in my general politics ; but I feel sure that even
they will take my word to-night. Indeed, whatever faults I
have, I have never been accused of a want of candour. Let the
fact sink deep in your minds. Our Victorian Parliament has
power, under an Act of the Imperial Parliament, to change any
part of our Victorian constitution. Some parts may be changed
by an ordinary majority in both houses ; other parts cannot be
changed except by an absolute majority in both houses ; but any
part can be changed. Now, we know by experience how hard
it is to get a change of our constitution even with these facilities.
But the difficulty will be far greater in getting a change in the
Federal Constitution. So that it is no wonder if some of us do
not throw up our hats in the air ut once, and shout for this bill,
as the crowd shouts for a goal at a football match. It is no
wonder that some of us do not come before you with oratorical
effusions about the glories of union among Australians, and the
narrowness and pettiness of those who venture to criticise this
bill. Oratory is an excellent thing in a good cause; but we
must steel ourselves against its seductive power in a matter
which needs so much deliberatiou ih the interests of our common
country. Here is my next proposition :
To make a change in a single word in this constitution, there must
not only be an absolute majority of both houses of the Federal
Parliament ; but the change has to be submitted to the electors in the
several colonies; and unless there be a majority of the people, and
also a majority of the States in favour of the change, the change
cannot be made. Even if four out of every five Australians voting
vote for the change, the change is not necessarily carried.
Take these figures, which are quite possible: Suppose a
change in the constitution proposed, as to which the great bulk
of the large populations of New South Wales and Victoria are
agreed, but as to which opinion is nearly equally divided in the
other three colonies. Of course, lam taking the differences in
population as they stand at present; but the differences in popu-
lation will probably be greater hereafter. Assume that you have
overcome the difficulty of getting an absolute majority of the two


Houses in favour of the change. Then suppose that in New
South Wales 100,000 vote for the change and 10,000 against:
suppose that in Victoria 90,000 vote for the change and 10,000
against; suppose that in South Australia 14,000 vote for the
change and 15,000 against; suppose that in Tasmania GOOO vote
for the change and 7000 against ; suppose that in West Australia
GOOO vote for the change and 7000 against. Then you have
21G,000 electors voting for the change, and 49,000 voting against
it. That is to say, you have more than 4to 1 in favour of the
change. Yet that change cannot be made. Public opinion is
thwarted. After the prolonged discussion which must have
taken place before such a stage could be reached, the will of the
great mass of the Australian people cannot be carried into effect.
And the Australian people have no remedy, for they have, in the
words of the preamble, “ agreed to unite in one indissoluble federal
commonwealth . . . under the constitution hereby established."
The constitution binds them as by a contract, and the British
Parliament will have to let the Australian people lie in the bed
which they have made for themselves.
_ But I have not yet told you the worst. There are some pro-
visions of this bill which cannot be altered at all, even though
all these conditions, the difficult conditions to which I have re-
ferred, should be fulfilled. When you get a copy of the hill,
look at the last clause of the last section, and weigh it well.
Any layman can understand as well as any lawyer the point to
which I am going to refer. An alteration diminishing the
proportionate representation of any State in either house of the
Parliament is not to become law unless the majority of the
electors voting in that State approve the proposed law. This
clause is difficult and obscure in its application to the House of
Representatives, but it is clear as to the Senate. .To take a
possible case: If New South Wales should hereafter have
20,000,000 people, and Tasmania 200,000, Tasmania must
continue to have the same number of members in the Senate as
New South Wales, unless Tasmania consent to have the number
reduced. Under this Bill we are to start with six Senators for
each colony, no matter what the population. You may, in
other words, have 100 people in New South Wales for every one
in Tasmania ; and yet Tasmania is to have the same influence in
one of the houses as New South Wales; one person in Tas-
mania is to have as much influence on that house as 100
persons in New South Wales. We cannot alter this precious
arrangement unless Tasmania consent. You might as well
say we cannot alter it at all. If the sky fall we shall catch larks ;
and if Tasmania consent you may reduce her power in the
Senate.
Now, I should personally be willing to accept a worse consti


tution than this is in other matters, if there were reserved for
the future people of Australia reasonable facilities, after full
deliberation, to change the constitution where it proves to be de-
fective or unsuitable. Sir George Turner has, the other day, put
before the public a number of points on which he regards the
bill as defective and injurious. Well, even if, as he estimates, the
Victorian Treasurer may have to find some £500,000 a year
more, for some years to come, to compensate him for the loss of
sugar duties and other intercolonial duties, and to meet Victoria’s
share of the extra expenditure of the Commonwealth, that
would not be too high a price to pay for a good system of
Federation. The inconveniences felt during some years of
transition will be as nothing compared with the advantages of
Australian union. So strongly do I feel impressed with the
value of a federal union that 1 should not dream of voting
against this bill for the reasons which operate on Sir George
Turner—if we only trusted the free people of Australia to do justly
hereafter, to make such changes as they may find to be necessary,
to be, in fact, as wise and as fair as ourselves. But no—that
will not suit our wiseacres. We know better what will suit the
people of the after-time than they can know themselves. I say
nothing—nothing —-nothing should be made so rigid, so absolutely
unchangeable. You must have the ultimate sovereignty some-
where. I may put out of account the British Parliament, which
will not, cannot constitutionally, interfere with our internal
Australian arrangements, especially when they are the result of
a solemn agreement and compact. I say that subject to the
theoretical sovereignty of the British Parliament, the practical
sovereignty in our Australian affairs ought to rest with the
Australian people. As this bill stands, we are depositing the
sovereignty in a parchment document, which cannot be moved
by prayers, or swayed by reason, or impelled by force. I ask
you are the Australian people (in the words of Shakespeare) to
be thus
“ bound in Avith shame,
With inky blots and rotten parchment bonds ?”
You will notice that Sir George Turner has not touched this
point, and with good reason. For he, and the other ministers,
have made a mistake with regard to it. Not only did they
vote for equal representation of all colonies in the Senate —voted
that Tasmania with its 170,000 people, should have the same
voting power as New South Wales Avitli its 1,320,000 —but they
voted that this provision should be unchangeable, no matter how
much Tasmania may dwindle or NeAV South Wales increase.
As our Victorian ministers cannot complain of this feature, the
rigidity of the constitution, there is all the more need that I
should call your attention to it.


“ Well,” it may be said, “ wliat is this bill which is to be like
the law of the Medes and Persians that altereth not.” Now, Ido
not intend to go in full detail into all the provisions of this bill.
I propose to fix your attention ‘on certain of the main features
which, to my mind, ought to affect your votes. You would not
endure my speaking for more than an hour or two ; but 1 shall be
happy to answer any questions afterwards. I frankly tell you that
in my opinion many of the provisions are a great improvement on
the bill of 1891. Federation is a grand ideal towards which we
are making rapid strides. We are one people—we have one
destiny. We are adjoining commuuities of the British type,
under the British flag, occupying a great continent far removed
from the other centres of civilization. We have the same origin,
the same habits, the same ideals. Our families are scattered widely
over the continent, and the scattered ones find themselves at
home among fellow-countrymen, in West Australia as well as in
Victoria. We are labouring to express that unity in political
terms ; and we shall do it before we are done. Federation must
come, and soon. We all want it. I could wish that at the
poll to be taken on the 3rd of June, the Government could make
arrangements to have another question submitted at the same
time. In addition to the question, “ Are you in favour of this
bill ?” we should ask, “ Are you in favour of federation ?” and
the answer “ Yes” would be so overwhelmingly preponderant as to
give a great impetus to the federal movement. Personally, I
have only found one man in Geelong who is against federation.
He supported me in the election of 1894 ; but he told me last
October that he was voting and working against me, because I
was one of the federal delegates, and helping federation ; and
federation would be the ruin of Victoria. So Host his vote ; but
I did not lose my seat. Every new discussion brings us nearer to
this great goal. I have rejoiced to watch, in the course of our dis-
cussions, the steady growth in the convention of what I regard as
the true federal idea ; but still, the narrow provincial spirit is
too much for us. My objection to this bill is, not that io is
federal, but that it is provincial. I have come to the conclusion
that it ought to be called “ a bill to perpetuate provincialism.”
It is provincial, in that it refuses to allow the great intercolonial
rivers of Australia—such as the huge Murray system, which
extends from Queensland through New South Wales, Victoria,
and South Australia—it refuses to allow this river system to be
treated as an Australian subject in Australian interests by the
Australian Parliament. It is provincial, this bill, in that it
refuses to allow the railway systems of the colonies to be worked
for the benefit of Australia as a whole, without regard to state
boundaries. It is provincial, in that it leaves to the provinces,
the states, large control even over those subjects which are


called and recognised as federal—in that it creates a States-
house, the Senate, by means of which the selfish provincial spirit
—provincialism with its clumsy, greedy fingers—is to retain its
power over Australian subjects. This states-house theory is out-
and-out provincialism, under a softer name. I say that Australian
subjects should be dealt with by the Australian people as a whole,
and not by the states, which have their own state subjects to
attend to. Yes, provincialism is as yet too strong for us. It is
very hard for anybody to give up a power which he has once
enjoyed; and it is still harder for an organised state to make a
voluntary surrender.
In framing a federal Constitution, there are two main pro-
blems : One is to settle what are to be the federal subjects, the
business to be entrusted to the federal Parliament and Executive ;
the other is to provide that the opinions of the people within the
federation shall, after due deliberation, be carried into effect in
regard to those subjects. As for the subjects, I regret, as I have
said, the provincialism which has kept the railways and the
rivers out of federal control. But I should be willing to trust to
the progress of public opinion for the federalizing of these
subjects, if we found that fair play, free play, were given to public
opinion. But fair play is not given to public opinion. I think
that the subjects handed over may be divided, roughly, into three
classes : commercial subjects, social subjects, administrative
subjects. Under the commercial subjects I should put the
regulation of foreign and intercolonial trade and commerce,
banking, insurance, bills of exchange, insolvency, patents.
Under the social subjects, I should put marriage and divorce, old
age pensions, conciliation and arbitration in labour disputes.
Under the administrative subjects, I should put the postal and
telegraphic services, defences, light houses, quarantine, sea
fisheries. To give expression to public opinion on these subjects,
there are to be two Houses of the federal Parliament —a Senate
and a House of Representatives. The House of Representatives
is, in a certain limited sense, to be based on population —-one
member for every 58,000 people at the start. But no colony is to
have less than five members, and therefore Tasmania and West
Australia, although they have populations under 200,000, are to
have five members each. This will give a house of 64 members,
probably. As for the Senate there are to be six senators for
each state, no matter how few or how many the people. That
makes 80 senators for the five colonies; and, as it is provided
that the number of members of the House is to be, as nearly as
possible, only double the number of the members of the Senate,
there could be only 60 members in the House, but for the special
advantage given in the House to the least populous states, Tas-
mania and West Australia. I want you to observe that an


increase in the population of Australia, no matter how great, does not
involve any increase in the number of members in the House. Unless
the number of States be increased, or unless the number of
senators be increased equally for every State—say from 6tolo
there can be no increase of members in the House when Austra-
lia’s population has increased to 50 or 100 millions. Ido not
know how it appears to you, but to me it appears ludicrous,
even childish, to make the number of members of the National
House—the House which represents population—depend m any
way on the number of States. What on earth has the number of
States to do with it ? Under this precious scheme, the total
number of members in the House of Representatives will in no
sense depend on population ; but the distribution of the members
will. The 1891 bill and the United States Constitution were
more liberal in this respect; for they allowed one member for
every 30,000 of population at the first. You are aware how
difficult it is for men of moderate means to contest large districts,
and how large districts are very apt to fall into the hands of the
money-power. Here in Geelong, you have two members for
24,000 people. In the House of Representatives there will be
one member for 53,000; and it is quite on the cards that there
may be one member for every million.
So much for the House of Representatives. As for the Senate,
there are to be an equal number of members for each original
state ; and this can never be changed. The Senate is to be a
states’ house as distinguished from the people’s house. I have
consistently objected to this system, and the more that I have
thought and read upon the subject the more am I convinced
that the theorists who are imposing the system upon us are
fundamentally wrong. I object to having a states’ house in
addition to a people’s house—a house in which the states, as
states, are to be a check on the people. Some say that this is a
democratic constitution. I deny it, absolutely; and I say that
no one can clearly appreciate democratic principles who does not
see that this provision is inconsistent with democracy, or with
peace, order, and good government. It violates the principle
of the rule of the majority. This rule is not a fetish—it is not
an unreasoned theory. It is simply based on fundamental
physical laws. The majority of the people are stronger than the
minority, and in place of fighting it is better to yield to numbers.
It is better to count heads than to break them. To judge from
some recent speeches we shall have to go back to first principles
again. We liberals uphold the rule of the majority in order to
attain peace—to make particular interests, special interests, sub-
ordinate to the general interest ; to make the laws of a nation a
true reflection of current opinions and current culture. I came
cross a passage in John Locke the other day—the great John


Locke, wlio, in liis “ civil government” 208 years ago, explained
the conditions of this rule. He says, speaking of any political
community, as “it being one body must move one way, it is
necessary the body should move that way whither the greater force
carries it, which is the consent of the majority.” In Victorian
subjects the majority of Victorians should rule; in New South
Wales subjects the majority of the people of New South Wales
should rule ; in Australian subjects the majority of the people
of Australia should rule. Mark my words, there are more ways
of interfering with the will of the people than by property houses.
We must not suppose that by getting rid of property houses we
are securing that effect shall be given to the will of the people.
You can block the people just as well by the device of states’
houses, or by the device of an unalterable constitution. What
you have to aim at, in any house of parliament, is to get public
opinion properly reflected and voiced, and you cannot get public
opinion properly reflected and voiced in a house in which one-
tenth of the people paying one-tenth of the taxes, may have
nine-tenths of the power. Even at the start, one-fiftli of the Aus-
tralian people paying about one-fifth of the taxes will have three-
fifths of the power of the Senate ; and the differences of popula-
tion will increase as the years roll by. Under the constitution
of the State of Connecticut the three original townships returned
the same number of members. The same provision remains to
this day, although one of the towns has over 100,000 people, and
another is a mere village with a public-house and a rouseabout;
and, as a consequence, the name of Connecticut has become a by-
word in the United States for its backward politics. Recollect
that thinly peopled states are the least progressive, have the
lowest political intelligence. In large populations there is the
friction of mind with mind, and a keen discussion of social and
political problems. Small, scattered populations are the strong-
hold of the obstructives ; they become the pocket-boroughs of the
wealthy: What is the reason that England has remained so long
free from revolution while all the states of Europe suffered from it ?
It is because the constitution in substance recognises the right of
the majority to rule. As Dicey points out, revolutionists know that
they cannot succeed unless they have the majority of the people
with them ; and they know in England that when they have the
majority of the people with them they can, without endangering
lives, change the character of the House of Commons and
accomplish their purposes. The House of Commons is truly
sovereign, for it can change the constitution as it likes. It is
urged, by way of excuse for equal representation in the Senate,
that even if a man in West Australia is to have eight times the
voting power of a man in Victoria, those men who think with us
in West Australia will have eight times the power as well as


those who think against us. What an excuse ! How would that
be accepted in Manchester at the time of the Reform Bill of
1832 ? When the great population of Manchester found that
the rotten boroughs of Gatton and old Sarum had equal represen-
tation with Manchester, would they have been satisfied with the
statement, “ Oh, our friends in Gatton and Old Sarum will be
over represented as well as our enemies.” It is remarkable that
the theory of a states’ house had almost an exact parallel in the
Tory theory of 1832. The Tories argued gravely that the House
of Commons was not meant to represent the people or popula-
tion, but such communities or interests as the King chose to
invite to consult with him, and on this principle they justified a
system under which, as Lord John Russell said, “ a ruined
mound ” sent up two members, “ three niches in a stone wall ”
sent other two members, and “ a park where no houses were to be
seen ” sent other two. I tell you, it is possible to obstruct the
play of public opinion by other means than property houses.
You can obstruct it by a house representing states, or communi-
ties, or interests.
In the United States they had a good excuse for adopting the
system of a states’ house. The people had but a few years be-
fore been engaged in their war of independence. There was
utter disorganization, anarchy in the states; even treaties
could not be enforced ; and certain of the less populous states—
which had been already used to equal representation, as there
had been no census—threatened openly to make terms with
England, to re-admit the English troops, and thereby give a
foothold from which the independence, so dearly purchased,
could be destroyed. They threatened this unless equal repre-
sentation were conceded, because, as Washington and Hamilton
said, “ the peculiarity of their political situation rendered it in-
dispensable.” It was conceded, and probably wisely. But
although the evils of the system could not be so pronounced where
the States are numerous as where there are only 5 or 6, think-
ing men have traced to this system the unjust war with Mexico,
the growth of the slave power, and the great civil war. Now
you find the Senate the stronghold in America of rings and
trusts and corruption, which threaten the very existence of the
great Republic. But for the less populous States, the noble pro-
posal lately made from England for arbitration before war, and
instead of war, would have been easily carried. As the New
York World says :—“ The 26 Senators who defeated the treaty,
represent in whole or in part 17 States (naming them). These
include the seven rottenborough and sage-brush States of
Montana, Kansas, North Dakota, South Dakota, Nevada, Utah,
and Idaho, whose total population by the last census was only
2,408,333 out of a total for the country of 62,622,250. . . .


. . . This vote does not represent the will of the people.
This treaty has been warmly favoured by two administrations,
the one democratic, the other Republican. The moral and
patriotic sentiment of the country has expressed its approval
through the World’s great petition and otherwise with an unan-
imity and an enthusiasm never manifested in behalf of any cause
since the war of the rebellion ended.” The same comment has
been made by the editor of the New England. Magazine in the
last June number. He says : —“Ten of the 26 Senators, from
the five States of Idaho, Montana, Nevada, and North and
South Dakota, represent a combined population smaller than
that of either of the cities of New York, Chicago, Philadelphia
or Brooklyn. Nevada, with the same power in the Senate as
the largest State in the union, has a population (60,000) less
than that of Worcester, or Lowell, or Fallriver, or Cambridge
in Massachusetts. These were the States which blocked civiliza-
tion and covered the Republic with shame before the world.
. . . Only the constitution of the Senate, which makes it a
grossly and grotesquely unrepresentative body, makes possible
even such a minority vote as that which defeated the arbitration
treaty, and that the overwhelming majority of the American
people, and almost all of the country’s intellect and conscience
are on the side of peace and reason, and the proposed advance.”
This is the pernicious system—this is the ridiculous States’
house theory—which is imposed upon us by this bill; and—let
me remind you once more — this system can never be changed.
They will tell you that without conceding this system there
never could be federation. That is all nonsense—the experi-
ment has never been tried. The doctrine was laid down as if
it were essential to a federation as a fact, not as a concession.
What could the representatives of the less populous States do but
accept a concession which was offered to them as if it were a matter
of course! And if the concession be pleasing to the smaller
States, it is, of all other objections to this bill, the strongest ob-
jection in New South Wales; and without New South Wales
there will be no federation. In the N.S.W. Assembly 59 mem-
bers voted against equal representation and only 4 voted for it
If that is not a significant vote I do not know what is ; and such,
a newspaper as the Spectator, in England, has backed the New
South Wales members up in their attitude.
A great deal of capital is being made out of the fact that
this bill provides for one man one vote. It is a mistake :it does
not. In each State each elector is to have one vote; but all men
are not electors. There is a property qualification and an in-
come qualification in Tasmania; in West Australia there are
certain stringent residential and other qualifications; and in
Victoria, as is known full well, many men are deprived of a


vote by certain machinery in the Purification of Bolls Act.
There are wavs of making the franchise restricted in practice,
although liberal in theory. Besides, it cannot be “ one man one
vote,” so long as a Tasmanian has, in effect, 8 votes for a Vic-
torian’s one vote for the Senate ; or so long as a miner at Cool-
gardie has nine votes for the one vote given to a miner at
Broken Hill.
You will be told that we are to have the time-honoured system
of responsible government resting on the supremacy of the House
of Representatives. For my part, Ido not believe it. Of course,
though the words “ re-ponsible government ” are nowhere men-
tioned in the bill, you may be able to achieve the result by
putting in the House of Representatives supremacy in the money
power. The Assembly in Victoria can turn Ministers out and
put Ministers in, because it has a decided advantage over the
Council in money bills. The Council cannot amend any money
bills, and the Assembly can refuse Ministers money supplies if
the Ministers have lost the confidence of the Assembly. In this
bill (s. 53) you will find words to the effect that the Senate may
not amend the principal money bills —bills imposing taxation
and bills appropriating revenue for the “ ordinary annual services
of the Government.” But if you look a little further on, you
will find that the Senate can “request ” amendments, and can
keep on “ requesting ”as often as he likes, The Senate can send
down “ requests ” at any stage. I say there is no material
difference between the Senate proposing amendments to the
House, and requesting amendments to the House. Calling it a
different name does not alter the true nature of the thing.
The Senate will be able to escape the odium of rejecting the
measures absolutely which are necessary to keep the Government
going ; and it can keep Ministers on tenterhooks, can worry
Ministers until they accept, in whole or in part, the suggestions
of the Senate. Money bills won’t wait; the Queen’s Govern-
ment must be carried on, and Ministers must generally yield.
The power of veto—of saying “ No ” —is often fully as valuable
as the power of originating. You saw not long ago how a
Ministry can be coerced by a secondary house in the matter of
a money bill. The Turner Ministry got the Assembly to pass a
bill imposing a land value tax and an income tax. The Council
rejected it, with a clear intimation that it would pass an income
tax if sent up. The Treasurer was in dire straits ; he was in
sore need of money; he was faced with another huge deficit,
and he meekly submitted, brought in a bill for income tax, and
it was passed at once.
But we are told that the Senate cannot ori<jinate money bills
that taxation bills and ordinary appropriation bills must first be
put before the House of Representatives. That will not secure


supremacy to the national House. It does not secure
supremacy to the national house in the United States. By the
constitution of the United States all taxation Bills must origi-
nate in that house, and by long usage all appropriation Bills do
originate in that House. And yet the Senate has become the
stronger House—more frequently carries its way in money and
other matters. Constitutional writers, such as Senator Hoar,
and the Frenchman, Boutmy, have pointed out how this power
of originating money Bills has become, in the United States,
“ incredible as it may appear, a cause of inferiority and of
diminished influence in financial matters.” For some time after
the constitution was established it was thought that the House
of Representatives was going to become another House of
Commons in strength and prestige. But the Senate gradually
felt its power and used it, and the House is generally compelled,
nt the end of the session, to accept the Senate’s proposals. The
House having the originating power is under a responsibility to
the country of devising means for carrying on the administration,
and it is driven to choose some course which will satisfy the
Senate. You must remember, also, that in this bill the Senate
is to be elected by the whole colony, not by districts. That is a
noble provision—a provision which secures that one house at
least shall be free from petty local influences, although it will be
necessary and possible to make some provision, by Hare’s
system or some other method, whereby the country districts shall
get their fair share of representation. But this provision for
election by the whole colony, combined with the longer term of
office, and retirement by rotation, as distinguished from retire-
ment by ordinary dissolution, will all tend to make the Senate
the stronger and weightier house. It will justify the triumphant
boast of Sir Richard Baker, which he uttered after the bill had
been passed, that he looked on the Senate as “ the pivot on
which the whole Federal Constitution will revolve.” And yet how
absurd it is that that house, the Senate, which represents the
minority of the taxpayers, should have more power over the
money of the taxpayers than that house which represents the
majority of the taxpayers. As Mr. Reid well put it, we ought
to give superior money powers to the people’s house, because
taxes are raised from the people and not from the States. If
the states paid equal taxation, that would be a ground for con-
tending that the States’ House shall have an equal voice as to
the raising and application of the money. But the States do
not pay equally. Even at the start, one-fifth of the people of
Australia will have three-fifths of the power of the Senate ; and
it is a nice arrangement to give this one-fifth of the people
control of taxes of which they pay only about one-fiftli, and the
others four-fifths.


But as if we had not enough difficulties already to face, this
bill throws an apple of perpetual discord between the two
houses. This precious distinction between “ requests ”
and “amendments ” will lead to continual friction between the
two houses in appropriation bills. For you must call it a
“ request ” when you are dealing with a bill which appropriates
revenue “ for the ordinary annual services of the government,”
and you must call it an “ amendment” when you are not. At
present, in all the colonies, we put all kinds of appropriations
into any appropriation bill. The distinction is quite novel; no
one ventures to define what the “ ordinary annual services ” are ;
the treasurers are in despair about them ; and the definition will
have to be considered and re-considered as often as the increasing
complexity of our modern social organization raises the need for
new kinds of payments. I should like to know whether we are
to treat as an extraordinary appropriation and to put into a
separate extraordinary appropriation bill, an allowance of £5O to
the widow of a deceased warder, or an extra shilling a week to the
pay of a messenger.
“ But,” it is said, “ there is provision made for meeting dead-
locks between the two Houses. There is to be a simultaneous
dissolution of the two Houses, if there be a serious disagreement;
and if after the dissolution they still cannot agree there is to be a
joint sitting in which a majority of three-fifths can carry its way.”
This provision for a double dissolution is, I conceive, only right,
and will exercise a healthy influence on ordinary legislation. I
cannot complain of it, for it was I who suggested it, though not
as a substitute for the referendum. I moved it in Adelaide,
when I was beaten by 24 to 7. It was carried in Sydney ; and this
change of part is a good illustration of how repeated discussions
are leading us towards a workable federal constitution. If, as
happens under our Victorian Constitution, only one house is
sent to the country in the event of a critical disagreement, the
position is grossly unfair. The members of one house are sent
to face the worry and anxiety, and expense of a general election ;
while the members of the other house can roll back on their
velvet cushions and laugh. There can be no reason why, when
both houses are elective, both houses should not be liable to face
the electors. But the provision for simultaneous dissolution
cannot be regarded as a remedy for deadlocks. A deadlock
proper is a dispute during which money cannot be got to carry on
the administration of the country. This double dissolution is a
weapon of last resort, and can rarely be applied to money bills ;
for money bills cannot wait as other bills can. The Ministry
will generally find it necessary, as our ministers found it in 1895,
to back down, to yield. Besides, it still allows the minority of
people to rule, as the smaller states may back up their senators ;


and the voting is not necessarily on the merits of the measure
proposed. The machinery is too cumbrous, too risky, too incon-
venient to be often brought into play. Then, at the final joint
sitting, to require a majority of three-fifths is unfair. Say that
the two houses have 94 members ; to get three-fifths of the joint
sitting in favour of a measure, you would have to get 57 votes.
If you had 56 one way, and 38 the other, the 38 would win.
Why ? I moved that an ordinary majority should be sufficient;
but I was defeated.
In speaking of this double dissolution, it may not be amiss
for me to say that though from the first I feared that we should
not get a workable constitution, that we had started wrong,
accepting false theories, I worked with all my might to get what
I could. In the words of the Ingoldsby legend, I
“ Wisely fell back upon poor Richard’s plan,
“ When you can’t what you would, you must do what you can.”
I have even succeeded in carrying on my own motions, clauses
which I am amused to find Mr. Barton now referring to as induce-
ments to accept the constitution. But he spoke against them, and
he voted against them. I refer, for instance, to the power given
to the Federal Parliament to legislate for conciliation and
arbitration in labour disputes extending beyond the limit of any
one Stste. I w’as beaten in Adelaide, but I succeeded in
Melbourne, in the face of Mr. Barton's opposition; and now I
find Mr. Barton referring to the clause as a valuable and
attractive provision. I may refer also to the clause which
prohibits the Federal Parliament from imposing religious
observances, or interfering with religious liberty. Mr. Barton
did all that he could against it, and he could do a great deal as
leader of the Convention. Your Victorian Ministers also did
their best to emasculate it. And now I find Mr. Barton boasting
of the clause as if it were the great charter of religious liberty.
Before I pass from this machinery for settling disputes between
the two houses, I should like to refer to the refusal of the Con-
vention to allow the referendum. You know the idea is that where
two houses differ fixedly as to an important measure —when
session after session the measure is sent up and refused—the
electors should be asked at the ballot-box to say Yes or No to
the measure. A dissolution and general election does not
satisfactorily ascertain the will of the people, or which house
in the opinion of the majority of the people is right. For an
elector, in voting for a member, is influenced by a number
of considerations which have nothing to do with the measure on
which the houses are dissolved. An elector may vote for Jones
because he likes Jones personally, or because he dislikes Smith
the other candidate, or because Jones is on most subjects a good


man. But on a referendum there is a neat issue put before the
people—Do you wish for this measure or not ? Nothing, in my
opinion, would conduce more effectually to a healthy and
intelligent interest in politics ; nothing would—with proper safe-
guards—have such a beneficial influence on our political life.
But I am not disposed to push my views on this subject to an
extreme. I should be willing to trust the future people of
Australia, that they would adopt the referendum when the time
is fully ripe—provided you make it reasonably possible for them
to do so. I should trust fearlessly to the spirit of progress. I
should not refuse a Federal Constitution for the mere reason that
the referendum is not provided for. But, unfortunately, so far
as I can see, if the referendum be not adopted in this Constitution,
it can never be adopted. For the referendum, whereby the
final decision would be left to the majority of voters in Australia
is a distinct violation of the theory of a State house—a house
which is to speak the voice of the organised State and not of the
people as a whole. If the peoples’ house differ from the States’
house, and if their differences can be settled by tbe majority of
Australians voting, it is at once urged, “ What is the good of a
States’ house to check the peoples’ house ? Why, this would
destroy the effect of equal representation in the Senate !” It
was on this ground that our Ministers, Sir George Turner, and
Mr. Isaacs and Mr. Peacock voted against the referendum in
Sydney. In Sydney, there was a chance of carrying it. Mr.
McMillan, a New South Wales Conservative, said he was pre-
pared to vote for it. Mr. Holder, a South Australian minister,
and a staunch advocate of the views of the less populous States,
said that he would be prepared to concede the referendum. The
moment was critical. Then, and only then, was there a chance
of getting a solution which might have reconciled liberals to the
evils of equal representation in the Senate. But Sir George
Turner and Mr. Isaacs intervened, and shattered all our hopes.
They spoke and voted against the referendum on the ground that
it was inconsistent with equal representation. Of course it was
inconsistent; it was inconsistent with a false principle. But the
attitude might well have been taken that if, for the protection of
the less popular States, there was to be a States’ house, a house
which could stay the hand of a majority of the people doing an
injustice on impulse, yet that, in the end, in the final resort, the
majority should rule—the body politic should move, as Locke
says, “ that way whither the greater force carries it.” But the
opportunity was lost; and for ever, so far as regards this bill. If,
under this bill, a proposal be made for a referendum, the Senate
is almost forced to throw it out, and even if, by any good fortune,
it passed the ordeal of the Senate and got an absolute majority,
then the electors of the less popular States would be hardly


likely to consent to a curtailment of their influence. I think,
therefore, I am within the mark when I say:—
The Bill prohibits any change in the system of equal representation
for ever.
The Bill makes it practically impossible ever to adopt a referendum,
as it would interfere with that system.
In other words, under this bill we should have to give up, for
ever, the simple, peace-giving, wholesome principle, that the
majority must rule; and we must give up for ever all hope of
the referendum.
I desire now to direct your attention to the provisions as to
finance. The Federal Parliament may put on any taxes that it
likes—customs or excise, or direct taxation ; and it may borrow
any money. No customs or excise duties are to be imposed by any
State. With regard to the vexed question of protection, I think
that I should be wanting in my duty if I did not tell you that,
in my opinion, a protective tariff is by no means necessary under
this bill. That a large sum must be raised by customs and ex-
cise duties, at all events at the start, I admit; but that it may
not be raised by revenue duties, as distinguished from protec-
tive duties Ido not admit. lam convinced by the reasoning of
Mr. Pulsford, of Sydney, who has shown that a revenue of more
than £6,000,000 —the revenue estimated by many as necessary at
the start —can be raised by duties on narcotics and stimulants,
with a revenue duty on drapery, tea. coffee, and other goods. But
I heartily concur with the policy of leaving this question abso-
lutely open. lam always willing to trust the Federal Parlia-
ment for the solution of all political and social problems within
its scope—provided always that you trust the people who are
behind the Federal Parliament, —provided that you make that
parliament a fairly accurate exponent of public opinion through-
out Australia.
Now, the several States are to be left to direct taxation, and
a share of the surplus revenue raised by the Commonwealth, if
there is any surplus. By Sir Edward Braddon’s amendment,
not more than one-fourth of the customs and excise can be spent
by the federal parliament : the three-fourths must be returned to
the states. You will ask at once, in what shares? Well, for
the first five years after uniform customs and excise duties have
been imposed, each state is to get back, substantially, its own
receipts undpr the Commonwealth taxes, less its proportion of
the federal expenditure, based on its population ; and then after
the five years, parliament has to settle how the surplus is to be
divided. The customs houses and inspection at the border must
be kept up until uniform duties are imposed, and for 5 years
afterwards. And then ? How the surplus is to be divided after
the five years will, in all human probability, involve long and
D 2


bitter struggles, renewed from time to time. I observe that
Sir George Turner expects a general scramble, and log-rolling,
and possibly a combination among the smaller states, to get
better terms out of the larger. He seems to fear a combination
of the smaller states against the larger, when the question of
money is at issue. I concur with Sir George Turner in regret-
ting that the convention did not see its way to provide that
the surplus be divided in proportion to population. This would
be the broad, brotherly, Australian method of disposing of the
difficulty ; but it could not be adopted because of the timidity of
the delegates from New South Wales. You have little idea
how confident some people are in New South Wales that their
colony must be richer, and must contribute far more per head
of population to the revenue than any other colony, and this idea,
even if fallacious, must be reckoned with. If, as I apprehend,
the wealth and social condition of the people of the various
colonies are approximately equal in proportion to population,
when you take one decade of years with another, and when you
allow for the disturbing effects of loan moneys, we may have
some hope that the Federal Parliament will be persuaded
to distribute the surplus in proportion to population. Mean-
time, the narrow provincial solution holds the field. Bear in
mind that the Federal Parliament is under no obligation to pro-
vide any surplus—to raise any money by taxation which is not
required for federal purposes ; and that unless a handsome sur-
plus be provided, the various states will be unable to pay the
interest on their debts. The necessities of the State Govern-
ments in this respect will make them interfere in the elections
for the Federal Parliament, and will introduce into the State
politics the disturbing influences of the federal politics, and into
federal politics the disturbing influences of state politics. Mem-
bers will go into the Federal Parliament pledged to support the
principles of some state party, and into the State Parliament
pledged to support some federal party.
With regard to rivers, I was one of those who fought hard to
have the great Murray system treated on Australian lines, as an
Australian question. In New South Wales they have great
hopes of utilising the waters of the Darling, the Edwards, and the
Murrumbidgee, tributaries of the Murray, for conservation and
irrigation, for the development of the lands of New South Wales.
Mr. Reid spoke repeatedly of the waters of these tributaries as New
South Wales waters, although the Darling is very largely fed from
Queensland ; and but for the water which comes from Victoria,
the Edwards and the Murray would not be of much good. The
South Australians, who hold the lower part and mouth of the
Murray, wished to secure that the Darling waters should not
be absolutely at the mercy of New South Wales, and that the


Darling should be kept open for navigation so far as nature
has made it navigable. If South Australia and New South
Wales were ordinary owners of land along the course of the
river, South Australia could in the law courts have New South
Wales stopped from making any material diminution in the
volume of water which comes to South Australia. Now, in a
country so dry as Australia, the question of the use of the
rivers takes an exceptional importance ; and we have hardly any
true analogy to guide us. Sir George Turner backed up New
South Wales in Adelaide ; then backed up South Australia in
Melbourne ; and then backed up New South Wales again when
he realised that conservation and irrigation were probably at
present of more importance to Victoria than navigation. There-
fore, he proposed that for all time the purposes of conservation and
irrigation should be made paramount to the purpose of naviga-
tion. I wanted to leave the whole matter to the Federal Par-
liament, to adjust the respective claims of the various states in
the general interests of Australia as a whole. We cannot tell
what the future will bring forth, and what may be the most
beneficial mode of treating these rivers. We have no right to
say now, in 1898, what use shall be paramount for all time.
The South Australians were willing to accept my proposal;
but we did not succeed; and, as the power to regulate trade
and commerce has been held in the United States to involve a
power to keep navigable all inter-state rivers, a clause was
eventually carried to the effect that the Commonwealth shall
not by any regulation of trade and commerce, abridge the right
of a state, or of the residents therein, to the “ reasonable ” use
of the waters of the rivers for conservation and irrigation. The
phrase sounds well ; but I am afraid that it leaves us open to
long and bitter disputes in the Federal Parliament, and in the
Inter-state Commission, and in the law courts. To speak
candidly, every one remains in a thick fog about the rivers.
All depends upon the word “reasonable.” No one knows what
can be done, and what cannot be done, until the matter
is brought to a test by actual facts, by actual proposals to put
these waters to some definite use. I may say that I was much
struck with the liberal tone of the New South Wales news-
papers during this discussion. They scouted the narrow and pro-
vincial views taken by Mr. Reid and his colleagues. The people
are more federal in spirit than their representatives. It often
happens that agents are more exacting, less generous, than their
principals. I feel sure that if this bill be rejected we shall
approach the subject next time in a more federal spirit, and
recognise that the Murray system must be regulated by the
Federal Parliament, for the best advantage of Australia as a
whole. In this discussion, as well as in the discussions as to


railways and other important matters, I found that at the root of
the provincial objections of the New South Wales delegates was
the great blunder of the States House, with its equal represen-
tation. If the New South Wales membars felt that the weight
of the great population of New South Wales would be duly felt
in both houses of the Federal Parliament, they would, I am
convinced, have much more readily submitted to leaving the
whole question to the Federal Parliament.
But if disputes and litigation may arise from the provisions as
to the rivers, absolute confusion and dismay may be expected
from the provisions as to railways. I was one of those who
advocated the taking over of the railways—the great arteries of
the Australian body—by the Federal Parliament. The idea of
federalizing the railways is rapidly gaining ground. Now one
member, and then another, came over to it. But opinion had
not sufficiently ripened by the time that the convention ended.
I am happy to say that power has been taken for the common-
wealth to acquire the railways, or any part of the railways, of
any State by agreement of purchase. But until the railways are
purchased, what is to happen ? No one knows. I understand
that Mr. Matlieson, reading the clauses as a layman, gave a
report as to their effect on the Victorian Railways and Victorian
trade to the Government; and that the Victorian Government
sent him back the report, on the ground that he misunderstood
the clauses, and got from him another report. Sir Geo. Turner
has referred briefly to the later report. I should much like to
see Mr. Matheson’s original report, and the legal construction
put on the clauses for Mr. Matheson’s guidance, and Ins revised
report. They have not been published, so far as I know. You
all know that there has been for years waged a war of railway
rates between the eastern colonies. For instance, by means of
preferential rates, charging more for Victorian goods from and to
Ecliuca, than for Riverina goods over the Victorian railways, our
Victorian railways and our Victorian ports have been able to
retain a large share of the Riverina trade. These are called
“preferential” rates because they “prefer” New South Wales
producers and New South Wales produce to Victorian producers,
and Victorian produce, and Victorian storekeepers, by allowing
goods to and from New South Wales to be carried much more
cheaply. On the other hand, the New South Wales railways
carefully keep away from the Victorian border (except on the
main trunk line), and tap the Riverina, and charge excessively
low rates from the Riverina to Sydney. It is about twice as
far from Hay to Sydney as it is from Hay to Melbourne; but
to induce the Hay people to send their wool to Sydney, and to
get their stores from Sydney, the New South Wales railways
charge very low rates for the long distance. Cootamundra is


about half way between Hay and Sydney; but it costs about as
much to carry a bale of wool from Cootamundra to Sydney as
from Hay to Sydney. These low rates for long distances a,re
called “differential” rates. Now, you must allow some
differential rates, you must have low rates, tapering rates, so as
not absolutely to ruin the producers in the far back country.
No one denies that. But there is a point at which the
differential rates become improper, from a broad Australian
point of view ; and that point is, I think, when the rate is made
very low for the mere purpose of attracting trade from ports of
one State to ports of another. Victoria cannot make low
tapering rates, so as to get the Riverina trade, for she has not
the Riverina railways. Her only weapon in this war is the
preferential rate, under which a man in New South Wales has
his goods carried at a much lower rate, say from Echuca, than a
man in Victoria. We Victorians were willing to lay down our
weapons if New South Wales laid down hers also. We wanted
this unfraternal struggle, this ruinous, cut-throat struggle, to
cease. The Convention, as a whole, was with us in the justice
of our claim ; and it was, I must say, owing to the want of tact
(I shall use no stronger word) on the part of the Victorian
Ministers that we did not succeed. New South Wales insisted
that she was entitled to charge as low rates as she chose within
New South Wales territory, but that all preferential rates should
cease. At last I carried a clause forbidding all rates which were
framed merely with the view of attracting trade from ports of
one State to ports of another. This, admittedly, would have
covered the unjust differential rates of New South Wales, and,
with some slight qualification, it would have prevented cut-throat
rates of both kinds, while leaving the railway authorities full
discretion in their general regulations. I carried this clause in
the teeth of our Victorian Ministers by 18 to 15. Had the
Victorian Ministers voted with me, I should have carried it by
21 to 12. But the Ministers would have none of it. The
South Australians, who had been helping us nobly, and who
voted with me, thought that there was no use giving to Victoria
a clause which she did not want, and Sir Geo. Turner was asked
to frame a clause in his own words. Mr. Kingston wanted to
get the Victorian Minister’s three votes on our side, as we had
won by only a narrow majority, and might not hold the majority
in a full Convention. Then Sir George Turner and Mr. Isaacs
brought down their clause. It provided that the Parliament may
forbid as to railways any preference or discrimination, if such
preference or discrimination is undue and unreasonable or
unjust to any State. You need not be lawyers to see that the
whole provision turns on the words “ preference or discrimina-
tion.” The clause was carried, and mine was struck out; but it


was absolutely useless for our Victorian purposes. It enables
the Parliament to prohibit unfair 'preferences or discriminations,
but it does not enable Parliament to prohibit the unjust
differential rates of New South Wales. In the New South
Wales differential rates they charge the same to all persons for
the same class of goods from or to any station. There is no
preference or discrimination as to goods or as to persons. Sir
George Turner in his speech admits that he thinks our
preferential rates can be stopped, and that the New South Wales
differential rates cannot; but he puts the blame on a clause
carried by Mr. Grant allowing rates which are necessary for
development. That is not fair. If Mr. Grant’s clause were not
in the bill at all, still there would be nothing to enable
Parliament or the Inter-State Commission to interfere with the
unjust New South Wales rates. Some people say, “ Oh, you
may trust the Inter-State Commission for what is fair and just.”
Probably, if you do not tie its hands. But its hands are tied.
It is to have merely powers of adjudication and administration
for the execution and maintenance of the provisions relating to
trade and commerce. But there is no provision relating to trade
or commerce which forbids any differential rates. I agree with
Mr. Reid’s view of these clauses, when he told the electors of
New South Wales that the Commonwealth cannot interfere with
the special charges made by New South Wales on the Riverina
railways; and I agree with Mr. Wise, who says in the
“ Review of Reviews ” that these clauses “do not abolish
low rates for long hauls, nor do they deprive the State of
the control and management of its own lines.” I understand
that Mr. Barton has expressed his opinion to the same effect.
With regard to this Inter-State Commission I must say that I
do not think that the provisions relating thereto have been
sufficiently considered. They will lead to much difficulty, heart-
burning, and litigation. The Commission is to have such
powers of adjudication and administration as Parliament deems
necessary for the execution and maintenance of the provisions
of this constitution relating to trade and commerce. This is to
apply to the navigation of rivers, to shipping, to railways. The
Commission cannot prohibit anything which the Constitution
does not prohibit. It is to say what preferences and di scrim in a-
tions in railway rates are to be forbidden as unjust and unfair.
There is to be an appeal from the Commission to the High Court
on questions of law. The Commissioners are to have a seven
years’ tenure of office, and during those seven years cannot be
removed except on an address from both Houses. Ido not like
entrusting so much to an irresponsible body. Who are to be
appointed ? If the Railway Commissioners of the several colonies
are appointed they each will work for their own States as against


the interests of Australia as a whole. Speaking to you as a
lawyer, I think that the provisions leave much in uncertainty;
and I foresee much scope for quarrelling, not only in working
out the problems committed to the Commission, but as to the
relative powers of the Parliament, of the High Court, and of
this Commission.
I observe that Sir George Turner still persists in his view that
all the debts of the various States ought to have been taken over
by the Commonwealth. lam surprised at this persistency. As
Mr. Holder clearly pointed out, it would mean making a most
valuable present to the bondholders without getting any equiva-
lent from them. If the bondholders of South Australia, for
instance, learn that the whole of the colonies have taken over
the responsibility of South Australian loans, the bonds will at
once rise in the market, and the bondholders will get the whole
benefit of the rise, for nothing. If, on the other hand, as the
bill now stands, the Federal Parliament has merely the power
to take over the debts, it is possible for some able Federal
Treasurer to formulate a great conversion scheme, whereby, in
return for the Commonwealth assuming the responsibility, the
bondholders may consent to exchange their bonds for the bonds
of the Commonwealth before their bonds expire, and to take a
lower rate of interest for the Commonwealth bonds.
I want to call attention to the provision for the admission of
new States. To my mind, the provision for the equal repre-
sentation of the States in the Senate will seriously interfere with
the proper and necessary subdivision of the larger colonies. It
is true that only the original States —the States which at the
beginning of the Commonwealth adopt the Constitution—are to
be necessarily entitled to six senators. In admitting a new
State, the Federal Parliament may make such stipulations as it
pleases with regard to the number of senators. But the
practical difficulties are still great. You know that in Queens-
land there is an agitation for a division into three separate
colonies—North Queensland, Central Queensland, and South
Queensland. Now, suppose that all Queensland comes in as one
original State, and then attempts to subdivide ; or suppose that
subdivision takes place first, and each part asks for leave to come
into the Federation. Central Queensland has 56,000 people.
I assume North Queensland has about the same number. That
leaves about 868,000 in South Queensland. Is each of the
divisions to have six senators ? That will give Queensland
eighteen senators as against six for New South Wales, which
has three times as many people ; and New South Wales is not
unlikely to object, and Victoria, and, indeed, all the other
colonies. Are the three divisions to have six senators between
them ? Then South Queensland is likely to object to having


fewer senators than West Australia, which has not half her
population. Even if some intermediate course be adopted, and
South Queensland is to have six senators, and each of the others
two or three, Queensland will then have 10 or 12 as against six
in New South Wales. If by subdivision you increase the total
number of senators for the colony subdivided, you will have the
other colonies opposing. If by subdivision you do not increase
the total number of senators for the colony subdivided, you will
have the colony which is to be subdivided opposing. It would
be a curious thing to find this great fundamental flaw in the
Constitution, this great crack running through the whole
structure from basement to roof, and widening as the years
increase, having the indirect effect of checking the necessary
subdivision of these huge areas which we call colonies. No such
difficulty arose in the Uniced States, for there the new States
were created from new territory, not by subdivision, as in Aus-
tralia, Is it ever fully realised that the area of Australia is about
nine times as great as the area of all the 13 original united
States, and that the whole area of Australia is nominally within
the boundaries of the existing colonies ? The only colonies, by
the way, which have little or nothing to hope from subdivision
are Tasmania and our own colony of Victoria. It has to be
remembered, also, that whatever proportion of senators a State
begins with it must keep, for if the proportion were increased
for every State when the population increases, it would mean a
reduction of the proportionate representation of the other States,
and that is forbidden by the last clause of the last section of the
bill. For instance, Central Queensland might come in with two
senators, might increase to 5,000,000, while Tasmania remains
at 200,000. Still Tasmania must remain with her proportion
of six to two as against Central Queensland.
As to bounties. The Federal Parliament may grant bounties.
But inasmuch as many bounties might effect the same object as
protection between the colonies, might interfere with intercolonial
free-trade, the several States, were, at the first, absolutely
deprived of the power to give bounties from the State funds.
As this objection would not apply to bounties or aids to mining
for gold, silver, and other metals, the Convention resolved, on
my motion at Adelaide, to allow the States to give such
bounties. But even this did not cover all the ground. You
must be aware of the excellent effects of the butter bonus, in
which Victoria set the example to the other colonies. If we
had had to ask the Federal Parliament to grant such a bonus,
in the first instance, before the experiment was tried, the
Federal Parliament would probably have said No—that would
be benefiting Victoria at the expense of the general Australian
revenue. So with beet root, oil plants, and scent plants, and


other special industries; and bonuses for export to other
countries would not generally interfere with freedom of trade
between the colonies. Victoria, as Mr. McLean has pointed out,
is pre-eminently the colony suitable for special industries and
novel experiments—owing to the nature of its soil and its
comparatively dense population. Therefore Sir George Turner
very naturally wanted to give to the states a freer hand as to
bounties. I managed to get a clause carried allowing any state
to give any bounty, with the consent of the Governor-General-
in-Council (that is of the Ministry of the day), provided that it
did not interfere with freedom of trade between the colonies.
But Sir George Turner would not have this. He was offered
as the only alternative, a clause allowing bounties to be given
by any state with the consent of both Houses of the Federal Par-
liament ; and he took this latter alternative, although it involves
the delay and trouble of getting the consent of both Houses.
Not to embarrass our Premier, who from his official position
should know better than I did what Victoria wanted, I consented
to the withdrawal of my clause. lam not at all sure that I was
right in so consenting.
There is a curious phase of this federal campaign which
people ought to grasp clearly. The real contest will be in New
South Wales. There will be no federation without New
South Wales. Three colonies at the least must accept the bill,
or the bill cannot be transmitted to the Imperial Parliament;
and neither West Australia nor South Australia will accept the
bill unless New South Wales accept it. It is so provided
expressly in the West Australian Act; and there they are taking
care to vote after the other colonies. Ido not think that it is
so provided in the South Australian Act, but I find that the
South Australian Government has fixed their day of polling for
the day after the polling in New South Wales and Victoria.
They will not, in South Australia, come into the Federation
unless New South Wales come in ; for Victoria would have too
much predominance ; and, as one South Australian said to me,
“ Federation with Victoria is of no use to us. You can supply
yourselves with everything that we could supply you with.
What we want is the market of New South Wales.” So that
New South Wales holds the key of the position ; and she knows
it. If every elector in. Victoria voted for Federation, that would
not secure it. The very eagerness of our Victorians for
federation, and their willingness to abandon sound constitu-
tional principles for its sake, have produced a false impression.
One delegate said, in effect, “ Victoria must federate, or she will
go insolvent.” Another said, “You in Victoria are bound to
take whatever we choose to give you.” They mistake the
warmth of our national, Australian sentiment, for an indication


that we in Victoria dare not, cannot stand alone. Dr. Cockburn
is reported to have said to a newspaper man at an interview,
that the bill would be accepted by Victoria “ with eagerness,”
and in his colony by a substantial majority. I confess that I
should like to show our detractors (I do not include Dr-
Cockburn, of course), that Victoria is as able to take an in-
dependent stand as any of the colonies. I should like to teach
them that Victoria will accept federation with eagerness, that
she will make substantial sacrifices for federation, provided that
the people of Australia are allowed to control their own
destiny, provided that the bill is constitutionally sound. People
talk of the need for “ give and take ”in a federal compact. Of
course there must be “ give and take.” But it must be “ give
and take ” in financial arrangements: Ido not believe in
bartering fundamental democratic principles. Give up as
much money as you like; but do not give up our liberties—and the
liberties and political privileges of the future people of Australia.
Why is it that the reactionary, the obstructive forces in Vic-
toria are so eager for the acceptance of this bill ? I do not
suppose that Conservatives would formulate their reasons as I
shall express them ; but I will say that their instinct is leading
them correctly. Ido not entertain any unkind thought of our
conservative opponents, many of whom are my personal friends.
But, taking the class as a whole, they find that public opinion is
gathering in strength against their views ; that if the majority of
the people in Australia are allowed to sway in the legislation of
Australia, they will be hopelessly beaten. Their Mrs. Partington
brooms of property houses, and so forth, will not long succeed in
keeping back the rising tide. So they fasten their hopes on a
States’ House, to be a check on the People’s house, and on a
fixed, rigid constitution, enforced by a Federal Court, which will
serve as an invincible sea-wall against the encroachments of the
waters. In England, the Tories groan because they have not a
hard and fast constitution like that of the United States, which
does not permit of changes such as are possible under the English
constitution. For my part, I shall recognise no right on the
part of any house or body of men to interfere with carrying into
effect the deliberate will of the majority of the people, to
obstruct the peaceful operation of public opinion on our policy.
A written constitution, which cannot be modified, is not amenable
to moral pressure, to public opinion. It is a dead, lifeless thing
which no arts of persuasion can reach. It is not susceptible of
growth. In the quick change and movement of the world’s
development, it is—
“ Like a dead, leafless log in the summer’s bright ray ;
The beams of the warm sun play round it in vain ;
It may smile in his light, but it blooms not again.”


Wliat we want, above all things, is a constitution which may
grow with the growth, develop with the development of the
people; a constitution which shall be flexible, capable of adjust-
ment to the needs of the people. We want a tree which has life
and the promise of growth ; we do not want an Agamemnon’s
sceptre, which will not have leaves or shoots, or ever bloom
afresh since it left its parent stock in the mountains.
You will find that I shall be plentifully abused for this speech.
I fully expect to be sneered at, called names, ridiculed; probably
what I say distorted and misrepresented. I am speaking to a
few hundred; the newspaper reports will speak to thousands and
tens of thousands, “ and none of them nodding.” It would be
much easier for me to shout with what is at present the bigger
crowd in Victoria. But I won’t do it—
“ I will not do it,
Lest I surcease to honour mine own truth,
And by my body’s action teach my mind
A most inherent baseness.”
For 1 have a strong conviction that, with patience, we should
a much better constitution, one which will not leave a legacy of
miserable provincialism for ages to posterity. They will tell you
that if we do not get federation now, under this bill, we in these
colonies will drift further asunder, federation will become more
difficult, and we shall not see the movement revived within our
time. I have considered this statement, and Ido not believe a
word of it. They told us the same in 1891 ; and they were
wrong. Mr. Deakin warned his hearers in the Assembly that—
“ There is a tide in the affairs of men
Which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune ;
On such a full sea are we now afloat,
And we must take the current when it serves,
Or lose our ventures.”
He warned his hearers of the aggression of the European Powers
in the Pacific. He spoke of the temporary lull in their
movements, because they saw they were driving the Australian
colonies to federate. He said that we should see his reading of
the situation was correct if that federal movement failed. He
spoke of the dreaded influx of the Chinamen. He said—“ The
hour may strike too soon that tells us our united action has come
too late ; a series of sundered colonies may be seen drifting
helplessly together when they might have stood together against
a common foe. We have at this moment a magnificent
opportunity lying within our reach, lying at our hands.” What
more impressive warnings could be given to-day ? Mr. Munro,
the Premier of the day, said (for he had been one of the
Victorian delegates to the Convention of 1891) —“ I say now


that I feel perfectly satisfied, that if we accept the bill as it
stands we will get the very best form of federation which we could
ever get.” Another member, supporting the bill, said, “We
are getting good terms offered to us, and if we do not accept
them now we are not wise, for we may never get the same terms
again.” How absolutely wrong they were ! We all see now
how ridiculous was the scheme of 1891. We have in the bill
of 1897-8 several important improvements. If the bill of 1891
had been accepted, we should have been tied up in the meshes of
a constitution which would have been unbearable, a constitution
which would have involved the ruin of some of the colonies,
including Victoria. To-day you have new bogeys raised to
frighten you. It is said that New South Wales may place toils
upon the Darling, may cut down further her Riverina rates, may
put an export duty on wool coming into Victoria. If she should
do so, her own people would suffer the most, and would cry out
more loudly for federation. The truth is that what we have
gained in the direction of liberal principles in this bill is
gained for ever. Liberal principles, whenever grasped, abide.
We are rapidly moving towards the grandest scheme of federa-
tion that the world has ever seen. Shall we arrest that progress
by accepting this bill ? Shall we pluck the fruit before it is
ripe ? I think of this glorious ideal of federation as of a noble
and perfect fruit, rounding to ripeness, but as yet green and
crude and acrid. Under the influence of a few more genial suns
it will fall into our hands, mellow and warm-hued and luscious.
This movement for federation will go on. It is the outcome of
our pressing needs, the result of the overwhelming pressure of
our public exigencies. I do not know any more disparaging
reflection on the people of the Australian colonies than that
argument that they will throw up the federal idea in despair if
they cannot succeed on the first or second attempt. We must
have patience. Our rebuffs are—
“ Naught else
But the protractive trials of great Jove,
To find persistive constancy in men.”
Many of the delegates came to that convention bound by
election pledges, by platform declarations, which they would be
glad to modify if this scheme fails. We have started wrong in
several matters. Discussion and criticism have shown us our
mistakes. We have it in our power now to choose two courses ;
we are at the parting of the ways. One course is the course of
passion, of impatience, of hysterical impulse ; the other course
is the course befitting a great people—a people looking forward
to a great future—deliberation, and a jealous watchfulness to
preserve intact the fundamental principles which conduce to


peace, order and good government. Which path will you take ?
Will you trust the destinies of Australia to the future people of
Australia? 'Will you trust posterity to deal with the needs
of the future times as they arise; or will you tie the hands of
the generations which follow us ? Will you not give the future
people of Australia at least as much power as we claim our-
selves—a power to vary the constitution, as you claim the power
to make it ? If you vote for this bill, I believe that you vote
against a true and beneficial federation, which will come as surely
as the day follows the night; if you vote against this bill, you
vote tor the better bill which must soon follow. Time and
thought are on our side. I know we may be beaten in Victoria.
That should not affect our conscientious votes—
“ The fewer men, the greater share of honour.”
If this bill became law, we shall have at least the conscious-
ness of having done our duty; and we shall find ourselves
absolved from responsibility for the evils which must arise. I
have seen, the other day, a tree which, when a sapling, had an iron
band put round it; the siplmg grew, and the iron band stayed,
unmoved, biting into the vitals of the tree ; and the tree was
deformed, distorted, stunted. The sapling is Australia; the
iron band is this bill. Will you put the iron band around the
sapling ? If this bill does not become law, you will, in all
probability, have an opportunity to vote for a greater bill, freed
from the selfish elements of provincialism. But, in any case,
remember that—
“ Not failure, but low aim, is crime.”




THE FEDERATION FORUM.
At the request of the editor of the “ Argus” newspaper,
Mr. Higgins wrote, for publication in its columns, an article
stating summarily his principal objections to the Commonwealth
Bill as it left the Convention on the 16th March, 1898. This
article xvas submitted by the editor to Mr. Trenwith, leader of
the labour party; and his answer appeared, in parallel columns,
in the same issue of the newspaper ( 6tli May, 1898).
Subsequently, Mr. Higgins dealt with Mr. Trenwith 1 s answer
in an article which appeared in the issue of 10th May, 1898
(see post p. 57).




THE FEDERATION FORUM.
Argus, May 6th 1898.
MR. HIGGINS.
THE APPEAL.
In complying with the request of
The Argus to state in a compendious
form my principal reasons for urg-
ing the rejection of the bill drafted
by the Federal Convention, I can-
not but be conscious that most of
what I say will have little weight
with those who do not value demo-
cratic principles. There are many
persons, I find, who ask only how
the bill will immediately affect
their pockets—whether it will in-
crease their taxation, diminish
their trade, enhance their advan-
tages in competition, lower the
value of their property, ensure them
against loss in the case of hostile
attack. When you complain that
the bill interferes with the rule of
the people—that is to say (as
people must differ in opinions) with
the rule of the majority—these
gentlemen will tell you, “ So much
the better.” Should you urge that
this interference with the will of
the people is by this bill to be ren-
dered permanent, and incapable of
amendment, they will answer,
“ And a good job, too.” If you
point out that the bill will permit a
small minority of Australians to
block legislation demanded by Aus-
tralians generally, and still more
effectively to prevent an adjustment
MR. TRENWITH.
THE APPEAL.
In undertaking to consider, and
endeavouring to show, the insuffi-
ciency of the reasons presented by
Mr. Higgins for objecting to the
Commonwealth Bill, I cannot but
remember that there are a number
of persons who now, as in the
past, are opposed to federation
itself, and who are not opposing
this bill as a means, but in conse-
quence of the end to be achieved ;
who, from feelings of narrow pro-
vincialism, are afraid that the
obliteration of the arbitrary geo-
graphical lines and the embarrass-
ing and vexatious barriers that our
position of disunion in the past
has rendered necessary will in
some unexplained way injure their
personal interests. To such people
I make no appeal; but there are a
very much larger number of
persons who deplore the restricted
opportunities which disunion en-
tails, and are moved by a patriotic
desire to see these colonies acquire
those opportunities for social and
industrial development that can
only be obtained by joining together
in a bond of national union, and
who will approach the considera-
tion of this bill, not from the
standpoint of whether it is perfect
in every detail, or completely coin-
c 1


of the constitutional machinery to
meet new conditions which we can-
not now foresee, they remain un-
concerned. They generally have
in their mind’s eye a bullock stand-
ing on the Riverina side of the
Murray, waiting to cross without
the thirty shillings penalty, or a
portmanteau which is to be carried
from the New South Wales to the
Victorian carriage at Albury with-
out the obnoxious examination by
the officer of Customs. This species
of federalist may as well leave this
article unread. But I should like
to reach the mind of the elector
who is stirred by generous Aus-
tralian sentiment—the man who
sees that, though there are several
colonies, the people are one—one
in race, in language, in social con-
ditions, in ideals—a people which,
however, sundered in map-divisions
called “ colonies,” finds in its
largest interests solidarity and a
necessity to work out in our re-
mote continent a common destiny.
To this elector I should submit
that there are two —or rather three
—main problems in framing a
federal scheme. One is to settle
what subjects can best be dealt
with by Australia, as a whole, and
not separately, in the several
colonies. The second is to provide
machinery whereby Australian
public opinion on those subjects
may, after due deliberation, be
carried into effect; and the third
is to enable the Australian people
to alter that machinery from time
to time, as circumstances may re-
quire. I am convinced that the
bill, as framed, fails in the solution
of each of these three problems,
cides with their own opinions, but
whether, on the whole, it furnishes
an instrument of government by
which the people of these colonies
can with reasonable facility secure
the legislative expression of their
desires. To these I with confidence
appeal, in the hope that I may be
able to make clear some points
about which they are now in doubt,
and to remove difficulties by which
they may be beset.


and it fails because it treats them
all in a provincial, as distinguished
from a federal, spirit.
I. —SUBJECTS COMMITTED TO
THE COMMONWEALTH.
RAILWAYS.
(a) Under this bill the railways
are neither to be taken over by the
Commonwealth, nor to be worked
for the general good of Australia.
There is a power given to the
Commonwealth to purchase rail-
ways from any state, but, in the
meantime, these great arteries of
the continent are to be worked as if
each colony had a separate arterial
system. “ Cut-throat rates,” in-
deed, are stopped, if they are pre-
ferential or discriminating rates—
preferring or discriminating be-
tween persons or goods. Now,
this class of rates is Victoria’s only
weapon in the competition with
New South Wales for the trade in
Riverina. These rates are to cease,
while the competitive differential,
or long haulage, rates of the New
South Wales railways —rates de-
signed to attract trade from the
nearer port, Melbourne, to the
distant port, Sydney —cannot be
interfered with at all. Sir George
Turner seems to agree with Mr.
Reid, Mr. Barton and Mr. Wise
that this is the effect of the bill.
He attributes the blame to Mr.
Grant’s clause (sec. 108). But,
even if Mr. Grant’s clause were not
in the bill, there is nothing in the
bill which would allow any inter-
ference with the competitive dif-
ferential rates of New South Wales.
This result the Convention did not
intend; the majority of the Con-
I. —SUBJECTS COMMITTED TO
THE COMMONWEALTH.
RAILWAYS.
Let me take Mr. Higgins’ objec-
tions in the order in which he has
presented them :
“ Under this bill the railways
are neither to be taken over by
the Commonwealth nor to be
worked for the general good of
Australia.”
There are obvious reasons why the
railways in Australia should not be
handed over at once to the central
Government. In consequence of
the large area and scattered popula-
tion of these colonies, it is neces-
sary at times to make railways
without regard to their immediately
paying character from the book-
keeping point of view, but rather
that they should pay indirectly by
developing country that otherwise
would not be developed, and en-
abling people to obtain a livelihood
upon the soil who otherwise would
not be able to do so. To hand the
railways over to a central Govern-
ment, far removed from many of
the parts where development is
necessary, would probably be to
very materially reduce, if not
entirely stop, that class of railway
construction.
There is, however, in this bill a
provision that the railways shall
not be worked in a manner pre-
judicial to the general interests. It
is provided in clauses 101 to 103
that rates or fares that discriminate
unreasonably or unjustly to another


vention were with the Victorians as
to the justice of their claim. But
Sir George Turner’s clause (sec.
101, first part), was unfortunate in
the language used, and I have no
doubt that at any new convention
the matter would be put right.
RIVERS.
(b) The bill does not permit in-
tercolonial rivers— such as the great
Murray system, with its watershed
extending over Queensland, New
South Wales, Victoria, and South
Australia—to the Federal Parlia-
ment. The Parliament is not em-
powered to adjust from time to
time the riparian claims of the
colonies interested. This bill,
while enabling the Parliament to
deal with the navigation of rivers,
forbids it to abridge the “rights”
of a state “or ol the residents
state cannot be permitted, This
Mr. Higgins admits himself, when
he says:—“ Cut-throat rates indeed
are stopped if they are preferential
or discriminating rates—preferring
or discriminating between persons
or goods.”
Then he goes on :—“ Now, this
class of rate is Victoria’s only
weapon in the competition with
New South Wales for the trade in
Kiverina.” The answer to that is
that cut-throat rates on the part of
Victoria were only imposed after
cut-throat rates had been adopted
by New South Wales, and if, as the
bill provides, cut-throat rates of an
unreasonable character are pre-
vented in New South Wales, Vic-
toria will be able to obtain a very
large portion of the Eiverina trade—
much larger than at present —at
rates that will be remunerative,
instead of a loss to her railways.
Furthermore, the bill provides
that, as experience dictates the
wisdom of taking over the railways
from the states, there will be full
power in the Federal Parliament to
do so.
BIVERS.
“ The bill does not commit
intercolonial rivers ... to
the Federal Parliament.”
It will be seen by reference to
clauses 97 and 99 of the bill, that
this statement is incorrect. The
first of these clauses gives the
Federal Parliament power over
navigation of all rivers, and clause
99 throws upon the Federal Parlia-
ment the duty of deciding what is
the reasonable use for irrigation
and conservation purposes of the
waters of such rivers. Thus the


therein ” to the “reasonable ” use
of the waters for conservation or
irrigation. No one knows what the
“ reasonable use ” covers ; but this
much is clear, that the power of
the Australian Parliament, in re-
gard to a matter so important to
Australia, is to be checked for ever
—or until the constitution is
amended—by certain unknown
rights of states and their residents.
What a prospect for the law
courts !
RETURNING SURPLUS REVENUE.
(c) According to the bill, any
surplus revenue raised by the Com-
monwealth, and not applied to
Commonwealth purposes, is for
about seven years to be divided
between the states, according to the
amount of revenue raised in them
respectively, less their respective
shares (based on population) of the
federal expenditure; and after the
seven years there is to be (as in
Canada) a wretched scramble, from
time to time renewed, as to the dis-
tribution of any surplus. If we
were to wait for a year or two, and
give the statists time to adjust and
reconcile their figures, making al-
lowances for the temporary effects
of state borrowings, and for the
changes in imports which a common
seaboard tariff will effect, I feel sure
that the broad federal method w'ould
be adopted of prescribing a division
of the surplus in proportion to
the number of the people in the
several colonies. During the seven
years, be it noted, the nuisance of
border inspection and border sta-
Parliament is given power to make
laws not only for the control of
navigation, but for the control of
the waters for all other purposes.
At present the position of the
Murray and the Darling, and their
tributaries, is that New South
Wales has absolute control over the
whole length of the Murray till it
reaches the South Australian bor.
der, but immediately upon the
establishment of the Federal Par-
liament, this control by New South
Wales will absolutely cease, and be
handed over to the people of the
Commonwealth.
RETURNING SURPLUS REVENUE.
With respect to the disposal of
the surplus revenue of the Com-
monwealth, Mr. Higgins complains
that the system adopted by the bill
may lead, as in Canada, to a
wretched scramble, from time to
time renewed, as to the distribution
of the surplus ; and he says that if
we were to wait for a few years,
and to give the statists time to
adjust and reconcile their figures,
we might have a very much more
satisfactory scheme. To that I
would reply that it will be impos-
sible, however long we delay,
for the statists to obtain any
reliable basis for their calcula-
tions in connection with circum-
stances that have not yet arisen,
and that as any calculation they
make before federation is actually
in operation must be based on con-
jecture, those calculations them-
selves must be unreliable. The
bill has adopted the commonsense
plan of creating, during the period
of transition and while the dis-
turbance created by the alteration


tistics of goods crossing lias to
continue, and it has to continue
until—if ever —the per capita
system be adopted.
ABOLITION OF BORDER DUTIES.
(d) Intercolonial duties must go,
and it is well. But there is a great
deal of good sense in Mr. M'Lean’s
suggestion that such a duty as the
stock tax should be taken off by
successive steps within five years,
and not at one jump. However
beneficial the change may be, I do
not like that it should come with
violent suddenness. People who
have been leaning on the stock tax
should be allowed to adjust them-
selves to the new conditions. What
signify five years in the life of a
nation ?
BONUSES.
(e) The bill gives to the Federal
Parliament and takes from the
states the power to give bounties
on the production or export of
goods. The object is to prevent
any violation of the cardinal prin-
ciple of free trade between the
of Customs duties was settling
down, a debtor and creditor account,
by which the citizens of each state
have returned to them exactly what
they have paid in Customs duties,
less their share of the federal ex-
penditure ; and after that period it
has imposed upon the Federal
Parliament the duty of deciding
the basis upon which the surplus
is to be distributed thereafter, a
duty which it will be able to per-
form with all the facts of actual
experience at its disposal.
ABOLITION OF BORDER DUTIES.
“ There is a great deal of good
sense in Mr. M'Lean’s suggestion
that such a duty as the stock tax
should be taken off by successive
steps within five years, and not
at one jump.”
However reasonable that con-
tention may be on the part of Mr.
M'Lean, it is obviously one that
ought not to be made at this stage
by Mr. Higgins, because Mr.
Higgins was a member of the
Federal Convention, where he
might have had that provision
introduced, but where he took no
steps whatever to secure that end,
Personally, I feel that to make any
distinction of that character would
lead to endless complications, and
would seriously increase the diffi-
culties of union.
BONUSES.
Mr. Higgins’s next complaint is
that the bill gives to the Federal
Parliament, and takes from the
states, the power to give bonuses
on the production or export of
goods, and thereby, as he suggests,
intensifies the difficulty of de-


colonies. This reason would not
apply to bounties or aids to mining
for gold and other metals, and, on
my motion at Adelaide, these were
allowed. But why should not any
state be free to encourage novel
industries by bounties so long as
freedom of trade be not violated ?
The bill, however, prohibits a state
from giving any bounty except
with the sanction of both houses
of the Federal Parliament. It
would have been disastrous if Vic-
toria had had to wait for resolutions
of the Federal Parliament before
she started the butter bonus; and
a bonus for oil plants, or any novel
industry confined to any one state,
ought not to be made so difficult
to obtain. This question surely
needs to be reconsidered.
lI.—MACHINERY FOR GIVING
EFFECT TO PUBLIC
OPINION.
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.
(a) The House of Representatives,
which is supposed to be based on
population, is not so based. It is
to "start with one member for about
53,000 people, except that Tas-
mania and West Australia are each
to have two more members than
their share. The 1891 bill and
veloping industries that are peculiar
to any portion of the Common-
wealth, because it is necessary, and
he thinks objectionably necessary,
to obtain the consent of the Federal
Parliament before such bounties
can be given. As a matter of fact,
we have exactly the same principle
working in connection with the
relations of our central and local
governments. Our municipal bodies
work under an act of Parliament,
in which they are given definite
powers, and they frequently have
to ask Parliament for an extension
of those powers in connection with
the use of public property, and the
right to obtain loans, but whenever
they make such an appeal it is
notorious that, as a rule, it is
granted by Parliament in a few
minutes. For instance, in the last
session of our Parliament half a
score of such bills were passed
through within an hour. And it is
reasonable to assume that any
request to give a bonus that does
not derogate from that essential
principle of federation, freedom of
intercourse between the colonies,
could be obtained with equal facility
from the Federal Parliament.
lI.—MACHINERY FOR GIVING
EFFECT TO PUBLIC
OPINION.
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.
“ The House of Representa-
tives, which is supposed to be
based on population, is not so
based.”
The objection here taken is to the
provision for a fixed ratio between
the numbers of the two houses. I
agree with Mr. Higgins that this is


the United States Constitution were
more liberal, for they allowed one
member for every 30,000. Nor is
the number of members to increase
as population increases; it is to
depend on the number of Senators,
and to be (as nearly as possible)
double that number. When Aus-
tralia has 70,000,000 of people, it
cannot have more than 64 members
of the House of Representatives,
unless the number of Senators be
increased pari passu ! This curious
device is, I believe, without pre-
cedent, and will tend strongly to
perpetuate the force of pro-
vincialism, as well as of toryism,
in politics.
THE SENATE.
(b) That each original state shall
have six Senators, no matter what
is, or may hereafter be, its popula-
tion, is a dangerous violation of
the principle of majority rule—
a principle which is based on
fundamental physical facts. The
majority are stronger than the
minority, and it is better to count
heads than to break them. As
great old John Locke said 200 years
ago, (“ Civil Government,” 241),
speaking of any political com-
munity, “ It, being one body, must
move one way. It is necessary
that the body should move that
way whither the greater force
carries it, which is the consent of
the majority.” The object of the
principle is to get peace, order, and
good government ; to make private
and particular interests subordinate
to the general interest; to make
the laws of any nation a true reflex
of its current opinions and current
not a desirable provision, but, on
tlie other hand, I see no great
prospect of immediate incon-
venience from it. And Mr. Higgins
is wrong in assuming that there is
no precedent for this arrangement.
In our own constitution we have
acknowledged by our action the
wisdom and justice of it, for when
some years ago we increased the
number of the members of our
Legislative Assembly from 86 to
95, we also increased the members
of the Legislative Council from 42
to 48. Thus, our representative
Assembly is rather less than twice
as numerous as our chamber of
review.
THE SENATE.
“ That each original state shall
have six senators, no matter
what is or may hereafter be its
population, is a dangerous viola-
tion of the principle of majority
rule.”
Here again in some measure I
agree with Mr. Higgins, but I
differ from him entirely with regard
to the magnitude of the fault which
he indicates. Equal representation
was claimed by the small states as
a protection to them against pos-
sible absorption by the large states.
Our study of federal history leads
to the conclusion that there is
considerable justification for the
contention that equal representa-
tion in the Senate is a sine qua non
of federation, and experience teaches
us that, though possibly illogical,
it is not necessarily dangerous.
The reference by Mr. Higgins to
the effects of the American Senate
on American history is beside the


culture. The only permissible ob-
ject of any House in a democracy
is to get public opinion truly
represented and voiced ; and this
cannot be done when you find that
in Australian subjects an Aus-
tralian in Coolgardie is to have
nine times the voting power for the
Senate that his brother Australian
has in Broken Hill; and he may
hereafter have twenty, fifty times
the voting power. We might as
well provide for a house of munici-
palities in Victoria, in which the
city of Melbourne should have the
same representation as the shire of
(rum-tree Flat. We may judge
from the utterances of such repre-
sentatives of the working classes as
Mr. M‘Gregor, M.L.C., and Mr.
Hutchison, M.L.A., of South Aus-
tralia, that there is no general
demand in the less populous states
for such an anomalous system of
representation. The whole theory
of a “ states House ” is the same
in essence as that of the Tories in
1832, for they contended that the
House of Commons was not meant
to represent people, but com-
munities or interests invited by the
Sovereign to consult with him.
Even at the start one-fifth of the
Australian people, paying one-fiftli
of the taxes, will have three-fifths
of the power in the Senate. The
United States have discovered the
evils of such a system. It was the
cause of the unjust war with Mexico,
of the growth of the slave-power, of
the great civil war (see Clianning’s
History, 444). It was the cause
last year of the rejection by the
United States of the noble arbitra-
tion treaty submitted by England,
question, because in reasoning by
analogy it is necessary to reason
from circumstances that in essential
particulars are parallel, and tlie
constitution of the American Senate
and that of the Senate proposed by
this Commonwealth Bill are en-
tirely dissimilar. While the Senate
we propose to create is to be elected
by the whole people, and is capable
of dissolution at the will of the
Executive Government, the Ameri-
can Senate is elected by the State
Legislatures, and cannot be dis-
solved by any means. But an
example more pertinent is contained
in the Swiss Constitution, where
exactly the same principle of equal
representation prevails, with nearly
the same conditions of election,
and there is no evidence of any evil
having arisen from it, and the Swiss
people, though notoriously the most
politically independent and deter-
minedly self-govening people in the
world, have persistently refused to
federate upon any other conditions.
While it is true that this provision
does give to the voter in Coolgardie
eight times as much voting power
in one House as a voter in Broken
Hill, it is true also that it gives to
the democratic voter in Coolgardie
eight times as much voting power
equally with the ultra-Tory voter in
Coolgardie, and thus in the conflict
of parties, which is the only con-
flict which is reasonably likely to
occur in the Federal Parliament, as
in all other parliaments with which
we are acquainted, the balance of
parties will be very little influenced
by this circumstance.


and approved by the great masses
of people of all parties in the United
States (see “New England Maga-
zine,” June, 1897). But the United
States have no power to change the
system ; and, although in Australia
the evil results will be intensified,
the states being so few, this bill
makes a change impossible, how-
ever much some states may in-
crease and other states dwindle in
population. The system is out-
and-out provincialism. As Ananias
kept back part of the gift which he
affected to make to the apostles’
fund, so the states keep half of the
powers which they affect to commit
to the federation.
ONE MAN ONE VOTE.
(c) The bill does not provide for
one man one vote, but only for one
elector one vote. In some colonies
the qualifications and the machinery
for registration of electors are less
liberal than in others, and yet the
qualification of electors in each
colony will affect the character of
the laws made for all Australians.
ONE MAN ONE VOTE.
“ The bill does not provide for
one man one vote, but only for
one elector one vote.”
Readers of the bill will see that
it not only provides for one man
one vote, but that it provides for
one adult one vote so far as the
colony of South Australia is con-
cerned, and it provides for one
voter one vote in the colonies
where the franchise is not so wide,
But it further provides that Parlia-
ment may make a uniform fran-
chise, and clause 41 provides that
no citizen who has or who shall
acquire a vote in any of the states
can be deprived of the right to vote
by the Federal Parliament. Thus,
when the Federal Parliament comes
to make a uniform franchise, it
must make it as wide as the widest
existing franchise in any of the
colonies, and when we remember
the fact that Victoria, in the house
elected on the franchise upon which
both these federal houses will be


RESPONSIBLE GOVERNMENT.
(d) The bill does not even give
us responsible government resting
on the House of Representatives.
It is well known that responsible
government depends on one of the
Houses having a distinct superiority
in money matters. Now, it is true
that the House of Representatives
is to have the sole power to originate
taxation bills, and bills appro-
priating moneys “ for the ordinary
annual services of the Govern-
ment and it is true that the bill
professes to take from the Senate
the power to amend money bills.
But having regard to the superior
tenure by which the senators are
to hold their seats, to the superior
prestige of the senators arising
from the fact that they are elected
by a whole colony, and to the obli-
gation put upon the House of
elected, has repeatedly declared in
favour of manhood suffrage, and
once at least emphatically in favour
of adult suffrage ; that New South
Wales has achieved complete man-
hood suffrage, and has a large
majority of its people in favour
of adult suffrage ; and that South
Australia has already achieved
adult suffrage, we are as certain
as we can beforehand be certain of
anything that the first Federal
Parliament will be elected with
both houses pledged to introduce a
uniform franchise providing for
adult suffrage. Thus, not only
have we a provision for the most
liberal franchise possible in one of
the colonies, but the assurance in
the near future of the most liberal
franchise possible in all the colonies.
RESPONSIBLE GOVERNMENT.
“ The bill does not even give
us responsible government rest-
ing on the House of Representa-
tives.”
There are two factors necessary
to the achievement of a responsible
government. One is absolute con-
trol of the Representative House of
Parliament by the people; the
other is absolute control of the
Executive by that House. This
bill provides, as I have already
shown, that both Houses of Parlia-
ment must be absolutely under the
control of the people, and that
the Executive must be absolutely
under the control of the House of
Representatives, because it gives to
that House the sole right to initiate
bills for the raising or expenditure
of money ; and should at any time
the Executive become out of accord


Representatives to devise some
means whereby money may be
found to meet the ordinary needs
of the Government, there is little
doubt that the sole power to
originate money bills will have
the same curious result in Aus-
tralia as in the United States,
of enabling the Senate to have
the chief power in financial matters
(see “Boutmy,” 81). Moreover, the
power to “suggest” amendments
given to the Senate is just the same
as a power to propose amendments.
The only difference is in name.
The Senate can “ suggest” amend-
ments to any money bill, not once,
but as often as it likes ; and the
only effect of the difference in ver-
biage is that we shall have con-
tinual disputes between the two
Houses as to the form of messages
which are interchanged. Who is to
say what are the “ ordinary annual
services of the Government ?”
Nothing can be more preposterous
than equality of powers as to money
bills as between the “ States’
House” and the “Peoples’ House”—
the taxpayers’ House; for, as Mr.
Reid pointed out, the states do not
pay taxes equally. It will be still
more absurd to find the Senate
with even more control over the
money of the taxpayers than the
House of the taxpayers, and be-
coming (as Sir Richard Baker pro-
phesies) “ the pivot on which the
whole federal constitution re-
volves.”
with the Representative Chamber,
it is within the power of that
Chamber to at once bring the Ex-
ecutive to a standstill by refusing to
grant supplies. Mr. Higgins knows,
and all students of history know,
that it was by this power, and this
power alone, that the people of
England, through their representa-
tives in the Commons, have been
enabled to wring first from the King,
and subsequently from the Lords,
absolute control over the raising
and expenditure of public money,
and over all the executive functions
of government. If in Great Britain,
with the extremely restricted fran-
chise of the past, and the com-
paratively restricted franchise of
the present, the English people
have been able thus to secure
responsible government, how can it
be said that, with the extended
franchise and the perfect control of
our Parliament provided in this
bill, we shall not have responsible
government ?
Mr. Higgins declares that the
power to suggest amendments in
money bills given to the Senate is
equal to the power to make amend-
ments, and he adds :—“ There is
little doubt that the sole power to
originate money bills will have the
same curious result m Australia as
in the United States of enabling
the Senate to have the chief power
in financial matters.” Here, again,
Mr. Higgins proposes to reason
from circumstances in connection
with which theie is no possible
analogy. In America the Senate is
endowed by the Constitution with
the right to amend, as well as to
reject, money bills, and is given, in


DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE HOUSES.
(e) The cumbrous provision for
solving differences between the two
Houses does not secure finality,
and can liardly ever be, in practice,
applied to money bills. Money bills
will not wait; and the Ministry
will generally be forced to yield to
the ISenate in a money dispute, as
the Turner Government had to
yield to the Legislative Council in
1895 owing to the urgency of
financial needs.
conjunction with the President, the
sole control of the Executive;
while here the Senate is to be
precluded from amending money
bills, and is to have no control
whatever over the Executive. In
addition to the arguments deducible
by reasoning from common sense
in this connection, we are, for-
tunately, able to call to our aid the
indisputable logic of facts, as pre-
sented in the neighbouring colony
of South Australia. For years past
the South Australian Upper House
has had the power of suggestion in
connection with money bills, and
yet the South Australian Executive
is notoriously the most progressive
and independent in any of the
colonies. The Parliaments in
South Australia are much briefer
in duration, and the people have
more frequent opportunities of ex-
pressing their will in connection
with legislative matters.
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE HOUSES.
Mr. Higgins next complains that
what he calls the cumbrous pro-
vision of solving differences between
the two houses does not secure
finality, and inferentially he implies
that it is of little use. Here, also,
we have the teaching of experience
in the colony of South Australia to
guide us. For 17 years there has
existed in South Australia the
power to dissolve the Legislative
Council in the event of a dispute
between it and the House of
Assembly. During that period
South Australia has advanced in
liberal legislation in a degree un-
equalled in any of the other
colonies, and has achieved such


THE REFERENDUM.
(f) Not only is there no provision
for a referendum to the people
when the two Houses repeatedly
differ on a critical measure, but
there is no reasonable possibility of
the constitution being ever amended
so as to secure the referendum.
For the referendum is inconsistent
with equal representation of the
states in the Senate, as the Vic-
torian Ministers pointed out when
voting against the referendum in
Sydney. What, it will be said, is
the good of a states’ House to check
the peoples’ House if the people
are to be the umpire ?
democratic triumphs as adult suf-
frage, a provision enabling persons
whose business renders it neces-
sary for them to be absent on poll-
ing day to record their votes, a
state bank, a more effective land
tax than exists in any other
colony, and other advanced meas-
ures of legislation. These reforms
have resulted from the existence of
the provision that Mr. Higgins
complains of, although it has never
been necessary to call it into active
operation, It has, in fact, been a
reason-producing, dormant power,
very much in the same way as the
power to create additional peers is
in England. And Mr. Higgins,
who mentions the reform period of
1832, will remember how that dor-
mant power was effective in com-
pelling the arrogant and obstruc-
tive Lords to reluctantly give effect
to the people’s will in connection
with a large extension of the fran-
chise.
THE REFERENDUM.
“ Not only is there no pro-
vision for a referendum to the
people, when the two houses
repeatedly differ on a critical
measure, but there is no reason-
able possibility of the Constitu-
tion being ever amended so as to
secure the referendum.”
It should be scarcely necessary to
point out that the double dissolu-
tion just referred to is, in fact, a
referendum, though not as com-
plete as I and many others would
desire. But Mr. Higgins, in saying
that the referendum is inconsistent,
and, therefore, cannot exist in
conjunction with equal represen-


INTER-STATE COMMISSION.
(g) Any attentive reader will find
that the provisions as to the Inter-
State Commission have not been
sufficiently considered. Apart from
the well-grounded dislike of irre-
sponsible boards, the provisions
will lead to much difficulty and
quarrelling, not only as to the
personnel of the commission, and
as to the working out of the
problems entrusted to it, but as to
the relative powers of the com-
mission, of the High Court, and of
Parliament.
lII.—AMENDMENTS OF
MACHINERY.
THE SENATE.
(a) Equal representation of the
tion, has ignored the Swiss instance
in that connection. There, as he
knows, the cantons have equal
representation in the second cham-
ber, and the people have the direct
referendum in connection with
ordinary legislative matters. And
with the franchise that we are sure
to obtain in the near future, it
appears to me absolutely certain
that the people will, if they desire,
obtain a referendum under this
Constitution.
INTER-STATE COMMISSION.
Mr. Higgins says that the powers
of the Inter-state Commission are
so vaguely defined that they may
conflict with those of Parliament or
of the High Court. The answer to
that is that clause 100 of the bill
provides—
“ There shall be an Inter-
state Commission, with such
powers of adjudication and ad-
ministration as the Parliament
deems necessary, for the execu-
tion and maintenance within the
Commonwealth of the provisions
of this Constitution relating to
trade and commerce, and of all
laws made thereunder.’’
It will thus be seen that it is in
the hands of the Parliament itself
to define what are to be the powers
of administration aud adjudication
of the Inter-state Commission, and
it is unreasonable to assume that
Parliament will prescribe such
powers as would in any way conflict
with itself or with the High Court.
lII.—AMENDMENTS OF
MACHINERY.
THE SENATE.
“ Equal representation of the


original states in the Senate can
never be altered, no matter how
much one colony may increase and
another decrease in population. If
there should be 20 states, and if 19
contain millions each, and the
twentieth has become an almost
deserted mullock-heap, the twen-
tieth cannot have its power in the
Senate diminished without its con-
sent ! (Sec. 127, last clause),
Moreover, if a new state should
come into the federation with a
very small population, and be al-
lowed two or three senators, and if
its population should increase till
it became the most populous state
in the union, it could not get even
six senators without the consent of
every one of the other states ; for
that would be to diminish their
proportionate representation with-
out their consent. The evils of
having this provision of the consti-
tution so rigid has been pointed
out by many constitutional writers,
and notably by Burgess (1., 151-3 ;
11., 49). It is a distinct invitation
to powers behind the constitution
to interfere ; it is an incentive to
revolution, to violence, to anarchy,
AMENDMENTS OF THE CONSTITUTION.
(b) Changes in the ordinary ma-
chinery of the constitution can be
blocked by a small minority. For
instance, owing to an omission in
the final drafting (now, I believe,
generally admitted), a litigant is al-
lowed to appeal direct from a state
original states in the Senate can
never be altered, no matter liow
much one colony may increase
and another decrease in popula-
tion.”
I agree with Mr. Higgins that it
would be difficult to alter this pro-
vision ; but I think, in declaring it
to be impossible, he altogether
unwisely and unnecessarily enters
into the region of prophecy. Take
the instance he himself assumes ;
Twenty states, nineteen of which
have millions of population each,
and one which has become “ almost
a deserted mullock-heap.” Is it
not certain that nineteen states so
populated, finding themselves re-
sisted by one state of the character
suggested, would be so annoyed
that in all matters of legislation,
over which they would have ab-
solute control, they would, from
mere considerations of pique,
ignore the interests of this one
state, and compel it, if only in self-
defence, to fall in with the wishes
of its numerous neighbours ? But
even if such were not the case, we
would still have power to appeal to
the Imperial authorities for an
alteration of the constitution—a
power that would most certainly be
exercised in a case so extreme as
that which Mr. Higgins has in-
dicated.
AMENDMENTS OF THE CONSTITUTION.
“ Changes in the ordinary ma-
chinery of the constitution can
be blocked by a small minority.”
This contention of Mr. Higgins’
is correct in so far that it is barely
possible that three small states
uniting against two large ones


court to the Privy Council, ignoring
the Federal High Court. It is
possible that some defect may be
found in the section framed to safe-
guard the rights of public servants
in the transferred departments.
The Federal Parliament will have
no power to rectify such errors,
however apparent. To rectify them
there must be not only an absolute
majority of the members of each
House, but a general—and very
costly—poll of electors throughout
Australia ; and unless a majority of
the states, as well as a majority of
the people, approve of the amend-
ment, the error cannot be rectified.
The same difficulty would stand in
the way of any proposal to make
the intercolonial rivers an Aus-
tralian concern, or to check unfair
differential rates in the New South
Wales railways, or to define more
accurately the powers of the Inter-
State Commission. It is easy to
show how five out of every six
voters in Australia might say yes to
the amendment, and yet the amend-
ment be lost, owing to small
majorities against it in the less
populous states.
(c) The so-called “ provision for
settling deadlocks ” cannot be
brought into play for the purpose of
settling disputes between the two
Houses as to amendments of the
constitution. It only applies to
disputes as to legislation under the
constitution, where absolute ma-
jorities are not required in each
House, and where the question has
not to be submitted to the electors.
c 2
might successfully resist a desirable
alteration of the constitution. But
this is so extremely improbable
as to be practically impossible,
because to render it possible you
have to assume, for instance, that
ultra-democratic South Australia
would unite with conservative Tas-
mania and Western Australia in
order to resist some alteration of
the constitution desired by com-
paratively liberal Victoria and New
South Wales. That this is alto-
gether an unreasonable assumption
I think will at once be admitted.
However, as Mr. Higgins assumes
bare possibilities, however impro-
bable, in order to point out objec-
tions to the bill as it is, may
I be permitted to assume a not
improbable objection to the bill
as he proposes it should be ? If,
as he desires, a bare majority
of the people, without regard
to the states, could alter the
constitution, and one colony be-
came so populous as to outnumber
in population all the others, his
proposal would enable that colony,
by mere weight of numbers, to so
alter the constitution as to abolish
the provision by which the central
Government has control only over
those matters which are submitted
to it by the states, and to provide
that the central Parliament could
take control of all matters it did
not choose to leave in the power of
the states. Thus we should have a
return to that form of government
from which, within the memory of
many now living, we Victorians
struggled to free ourselves when we
obtained separation from New South
Wales. Would Victoria, or would


CONCLUSION.
I may add that, as one whose in-
terests are bound up with Aus-
tralia, as a member of the Victorian
Parliament, and as a member of the
late Federal Convention, it has been
with the keenest regret that I have
felt constrained by my duty to
oppose this bill. I should have
accepted it with many defects if it
were more flexible, more capable of
adjustment to meet new conditions
as they arise; and I know full well
that many votes will be cast for the
bill in the mistaken belief that if
we once “ federate ” we can put
right afterwards what we find to be
wrong. It may be noticed that I
do not press against the bill the
point that Victoria will for some
years suffer a considerable deficiency
in revenue—Sir George Turner
any of the less populous states,
enter into the federal compact with
such a possibility before them ? I
think the answer must be em-
phatically No.
The Federal Parliament, Mr.
Higgins complains, will have no
power to alter the constitution. It
will require an absolute majority
of both houses, and, as he says, “ a
general and very costly poll of elec-
tors throughout Australia.” Here
it will be observed that Mr. Higgins
is really deploring the cumbrous
and costly character of the referen-
dum in so important a question as
an alteration of the constitution,
while he demands it as a means of
settling ordinary differences be-
tween the two houses—an inconsis-
tency which I leave Mr. Higgins
himself to reconcile.
CONCLUSION.
In answer to Mr. Higgins’ general
contention that this Constitution is
practically incapable of alteration,
I would refer to the fact that under
the Swiss Constitution, in which
exactly the same conditions are
provided with reference to altera-
tion, in the short space of time
between 1874 and 1881 there were
three distinct alterations of the
Constitution, and during the whole
period from 1874 up to the present
time there have been six or seven
such amendments. Therefore, if
Switzerland, with exactly the same
provisions, can so readily alter its
Constitution, it is obvious that the
.statement that this Constitution
cannot be altered is incorrect.
Having met, however ineffi-
ciently, but at least fairly, the


estimates it at £500,000 a year. In
these hard times Victoria can ill
afford such a loss; but I should
think it a small price to pay for a
sound system of federation. What
are the consequences of waiting and
trying again ? Australians would
not be worthy of nationhood if they
were to throw up all hopes of feder-
ation because they have failed in the
first or second attempt. But there
is no fear of any such abandonment.
These rebuffs are
“ Naught else
But the protractive trials of great Jove
To find persistive constancy in men.”
We all, I think, recognise now how
well it was that the 1891 bill was
rejected. It would have meant the
financial ruin of Victoria, and the
permanent cramping of Australian
liberties. Yet in 1891 Mr. Munro,
the then Premier, said in Parlia-
ment, “ I say now that I feel per-
fectly satisfied that if we accept the
bill as it stands we will get the very
best form of federation which we
could ever get.” The same tone
pervaded nearly all the speeches.
Mr. Deakin eloquently reminded his
hearers of the “ tide in the affairs
of men ” which must be “ taken at
the flood.” He warned them of the
aggressions of European nations in
the Pacific, of the threatened influx
of Chinamen, of the opportunity of
union which would never return.
These prophecies were, like most
prophecies, mistaken. Again are
we at the “ parting of the ways.”
One road is the road of passion, of
impatience, of hysterical impulse ;
the other is the road befitting a
people destined to permanent great-
ness, the road of deliberation, of
objections presented by Mr. Hig-
gins, I desire to say now, as one
who for over 20 years has had to
run the gauntlet of the most mer-
ciless, and often brutal and unfair,
criticism because of my advocacy
of what I believe to be proper
methods of government, that if
federation presented no material
advantages, if the attainment of
national manhood under a bond of
union were not desirable on the
part of these infant colonies, and if
our social and industrial develop-
ment were not to be advanced
thereby, I should still recommend
the bill because of the immense
strides of a constitutional character
in a democratic direction that it
makes.
I believe that this bill, providing
as it does for two houses of Parlia-
ment, demanding no qualifications
for membership except those of
manhood, integrity, and intelli-
gence, and no restriction of voters
except that of adult citizenship, and
with that principle which has been
described as the keystone of the
democratic arch—payment of mem-
bers —furnishes an instrument of
government by which the people of
Australia can achieve whatever they
desire in legislative matters. I
believe that the Constitution con-
tains within itself the machinery by
which it can be moulded into any
form that the interests of the future
may demaud, and that it is, in
short, the most democratic and the
most elastic Federal Constitution in
the world.
W. A. TRENWITH.


forethought, of jealous adherence to
the fundamental principles which
conduce to peace, order, and good
government. The pressure of our
real exigencies will force the ques-
tion of federation on us until it is
solved. Belay is a bitter disappoint-
ment to us ; but future generations
will thank us for the delay. We
shall soon have another opportunity
of voting for a bill untainted by the
selfish elements of provincialism ; a
bill under which the people of all
these colonies, recognising the
solidarity of their interests in
matters Australian, will commit
those interests confidently to the
good sense and justice of the
majority of the Australian people,
and will allow the future people of
Australia as much power to vary
the constitution as we claim power
to make it.
Hy. B. HIGGINS.


THE FEDERATION FORUM.
REJOINDER BY MR. HIGGINS.
Argus, May 10th, 1898.
Sib, — I willirgly concede that there is some humour, as well
as tactical adroitness, shown in your selection of Mr. Trenwith
to reply to my criticism of the Convention Bill; and some, I
know, will rub their hands with glee at the irony of the situation
—my Pegasus coming to perform before the public in hobbles, in
the shape of comments made by the leader of the Labour party.
However, there is nothing unfair in the device, and it really will
suit my purpose better than any other course. For the discus-
sion between Mr. Trenwith and myself will bring out more
emphatically the points on which I most insist, and will enable
me to reach those minds which I most want to reach. If Mr.
Trenwith, with all his high character and capacity, cannot satisfy
the public that the bill is not narrow and provincial, undemo-
cratic and unchangeable, no one can. His arguments will also
reassure many of his old comrades, who have been inclined—un-
justly as I think—to accuse him of disloyalty to his principles ;
for the worst that he can now be accused of is a misapprehension
of certain of the clauses of the bill, and of certain arguments of
those who are opposed to his views.
I desire to refer to one of Mr. Trenwitli’s last arguments first,
because it deals with that objection which will turn so many
thousand votes —the rigidity of the constitution. Mr. Trenwith
does not deny that a small minority of the Australian people
could block amendments desired by the great majority ; but he
says that if a majority of the people, without the consent of a
majority of the states, could alter the constitution, a colony which
becomes very populous could, by mere weight of numbers, “ so
alter the constitution as to abolish the provision by which the
central Government has control only over those matters which
are submitted to it by the states, and to provide that the central
Parliament could take control of all matters it did not choose to
leave in the power of the states.” In short, he means that a very
populous state could make a subject federal which other states do
not want to be federal, e.g., education. But if he looked more


closely at my objection he would see that it applied only to the
power of the Senate and the provincial forces to block changes in
the machinery for dealing with the subjects committed to the
Commonwealth. The distinction is surely clear between the
subjects which are to be treated as Australian and the machinery
for dealing with those subjects. What have the states, as states,
to do with subjects which they admit should be treated on
national, Australian lines ? 1 urged this view in Melbourne, and
Mr. Glynn tabled an amendment of the bill on the same lines.
But we received no help or encouragement; and our Victorian
Ministers and Mr. Trenwith voted even for the clause making
equal representation unchangeable, except with the consent of
the state which is over-represented.
Again, Mr. Trenwith misunderstands my reference to the cost
of a referendum in the case of a proposal to change the constitu-
tion. I referred to the great cost, as it would operate to deter
Federal Ministers from proposing useful amendments—even
amendments for which absolute majorities of both Houses could
be easily obtained.
Mr. Trenwith also thinks that I am answered by his statement
that under the Swiss constitution “ exactly the same conditions”
are provided with regard to changes in the constitution. Now
(1) they are not the same conditions. I think that I have shown
this in the course of a late controversy with Mr. Deakin in the
columns of another journal, to which I may refer Mr. Trenwith.
In Switzerland the national forces are able to force the hand of
the Federal Parliament, and to compel the Parliament to frame
an amendment on the lines required by the mass vote. (2) In
a country with 22 or more cantons the obstruction of a “ crank”
canton can more easily be counteracted than in a country which
starts with only five or six colonies. (8) In Switzerland the
divergence of the cantons in race, in language, in religion, in
social conditions, in history, rendered impossible so close a union
as that which is requisite in Australia. (4) We should try to
make the Australian constitution an improvement on the Swiss.
The Swiss was originated in 1848, on the model of the United
States, before the states’ rights theory was discarded by consti-
tutional thinkers on federation.
Now, to go back to the subjects for the Australian Parliament.
As to the railways, Mr. Trenwith asserts that the bill provides
for the prevention of “ cut-throat ” rates of an unreasonable
character in New South Wales. I gave it as my opinion that
no rates can be prohibited unless they are preferential or
discriminating, such as the Victorian rates under which a lower
charge is made for the carriage of New South Wales products
than Victorian products, say from Echuca to Melbourne ; and
that the long haulage rates of New South Wales, fixed for the


purpose of attracting the Riverina and Darling trade to Sydney,
cannot be prevented. My opinion coincides with that of Mr.
Reid, Mr. Barton, Mr. Wise, and (as I infer) Sir George Turner.
What support has Mr. Trenwith for his assertion ? lam willing
to submit the point to any competent and disinterested arbiter.
As to the intercolonial rivers, Mr. Trenwith asserts that
“ clause 99 throws upon the Federal Parliament the duty of
deciding what is the reasonable use for irrigation and
conservation purposes.’’ This is a clear mistake. Section 99
forbids the Commonwealth to abridge the right of a state, or of
the residents therein, to the reasonable use of the waters for
irrigation, etc. But the Commonwealth is nowhere given the
power to say what is reasonable use. If Tommy be forbidden to
deprive his sister of the reasonable use of the jam-pot, that does
not give Tommy the right to decide, at his own sweet will, what
is the reasonable use.
As to the distribution of the surplus revenue, Mr. Trenwith
does not deal with the difficulty which will from time to time
arise after the seven years of bookkeeping and border inspection
and border statistics. Sir George Turner predicts a wretched
scramble and log-rolling, and probably a combination of the
smaller states against the larger to secure a better share of the
surplus; and it is quite possible that the anti-federal system of
bookkeeping, once started, will be perpetuated.
As to border duties, Mr, Trenwith does not show any specific
grounds of objection to Mr. M‘Lean’s suggestion that such
duties as the stock tax should be reduced gradually, by successive
steps, within five years; but he says that I ought not to raise
the contention, because at the Convention I took no steps
whatever to secure Mr. M‘Lean’s purpose. This would be no
answer, even if it were true. But it is not true. I spoke on
the point in Sydney (Sydney Debates, pp. 135-136), but I
received no support on the subject, even from the Victorian
Ministers. In Melbourne also I did my best to ascertain whether
such a sliding scale had any chance of acceptance, especially
when a sliding scale was allowed for the West Australian inter-
colonial duties. But I found that it would be futile for me—a
non-official member—to move any amendment on the subject.
As to bonuses, I still think that to obtain the consent of both
houses of the Federal Parliament to the granting of a bonus by
a state is too cumbrous, too dilatory, and too difficult a procedure.
I carried a clause in Melbourne to the effect that any state might
give a bonus with the consent of the Governor-General-in-
Council (in effect, the Ministry of the Commonwealth), provided
that the bonus do not derogate from freedom of trade between
the colonies. But, in deference to our Premier, who preferred


the clause as it now stands, I consented to the withdrawal of my
clause.
As for the House of Representatives, Mr. Trenwith agrees
that the fixed ratio, 2 to 1, as between the members of the house
and the senators, is not desirable, but he sees no “ immediate
inconvenience ” from it. That is just the point. Mr. Trenwith
and other advocates of the bill look at immediate results, and not
sufficiently at ulterior results, and at the difficulty of making
changes. There is no such ratio in the United States, or in any
other federal constitution. It is true that in Victoria there has
been such a ratio preserved between the Assembly and the
Council; but it is not made a rigid rule of the constitution, and
in a federation it is exceptionally pernicious, because it tends
strongly to perpetuate the force of provincialism, as well as of
Toryism, in politics.
As for equal representation of the states in the senate, Mr.
Trenwith agrees with me that “ in some measure ” it is wrong.
But he sajs it was claimed by the small states as a protection
against possible absorption by the large states. I want to know
when it was so claimed, and how absorption is possible. Equal
representation was, unfortunately, treated from the start as if it
were a necessary part of any federal scheme, although the best
recent constitutional writers regard it as part of a discarded
theory. Walter Bagehot, one of the clearest thinkers on politics,
says (English Constitution, p. 97): —
“ It is said that there must be in a federal government some
institution, some authority, some body possessing a veto, in
in which separate states composing the confederation are all
equal. I confess this doctrine has, to me, no self-evidence, and
it is assumed, but not proved.”
Dicey (Law of the Constitution, 4th ed., 135) absolutely omits
the states’ house from his “ leading characteristics of federalism.”
Freeman omits it from the requisites necessary for a federal
government (Hist. Fed. Govt., 2nd ed., 2). Labour members in
the less populous colonies go so far as to say that they do not
want a senate at all, as the interests of the masses in all the
colonies are solid. Nor is there any danger of “absorption,” when
the subjects given to the federation by the states are limited by
the constitution, and there is a federal court to restrain any
overstepping of those limits. I notice that Mr. Trenwith does
not deny the evil results of the system in the United States, but
he objects to that case as not analogous, inasmuch as the
Australian Senate is to be elected by the people of each state,
not by the Parliaments, and (he says) the Australian Senate is
“ capable of dissolution at the will of the Executive Govern-
ment.” Now, passing by the inaccuracy of the latter statement
(for the senate can be dissolved only in the extreme case of the


“ deadlock provisions ” becoming applicable), tlie facts alluded to
would only make the senate stronger ; and the stronger the
senate the more weight would be given to the provincial forces
as against the national forces ; and the disastrous results would,
therefore, be more accentuated in Australia than in America.
Then Mr. Trenwith falls back on the Swiss Constitution, which,
copying the American plan in 1848, gave equal representation to
the cantons (with a few exceptions) in a states’ house. He does
not remember that equal representation is a very different thing
when you start with 22 or more cantons, when a small canton
has only one-twenty-second part of the control of the Senate,
and when you start with five colonies, when a small colony has
one-fifth of the control. But now comes Mr. Trenwith’s
crowning argument—extraordinary as coming from a man of
democratic sentiments —that although equal representation gives
eight times as much voting power in one house to a miner at
Coolgardie as to a miner at Broken Hill, it does not make much
matter, for it will give eight times as much power to the
democratic voter as well as to the Tory voter in Coolgardie ! On
this principle, the men of Manchester, in 1832, might have been
effectively answered when they complained that they were not
represented in the House of Commons, and Old Sarum, with a
dozen or two voters, returned two members —“ Oh, it does not
matter, you know; for your friends in Old Sarum have as much
over-representation as your enemies.” Richmond has two
members; Croajingolong is a mere fraction of Mr. Foster’s wide
constituency. I suppose Richmond has more thousands than
Croajingolong has hundreds. On Mr. Trenwith’s principle, Ido
not see why Richmond should not pass on its right to two
members to Croajingolong, for the democratic _ voter of Croajin-
golong will have the same over-representation as the Tory
voter. It is not a question of democratic voting and Tory voting
at all. It is a matter of getting the Australian people, whatever
their views, fairly represented in any Australian house.
I confess that I cannot understand Mr. Trenwith’s persistence
in saying that the bill provides for one man one vote. For the
qualification is to be in each state “ that which is prescribed by
the law of the state as the qualification of electors of the
more numerous House of the Parliament of the state (s. 30).
In Tasmania and in West Australia every man lias not a vote —
far from it; and we know well how, in Victoria, many men
are disqualified from voting by reason of ill-conceived electoral
machinery. The Federal Parliament can make any provisions
as to the federal franchise, and Mr. Trenwith assumes that that
franchise, and its conditions, will be uniform over all the states.
That is not necessarily so. The Parliament has, to say the
least, power to leave Tasmania to its income and property


qualification. Mr. Trenwith, looking at the general feeling in
New South Wales, in Victoria, and in South Australia in favour
of adult suffrage, says that “ we are as certain as we can before-
hand be certain of anything” to have the members of both
Houses of the Federal Parliament pledged to adult suffrage. I
do not see the reason for this certainty, when one reflects that
the majority of Tasmanian and West Australian senators will be
added to a minority against adult suffrage from the other
colonies.
As for responsible, government, Mr. Trenwith has missed the
point. I said the bill does not even give us responsible govern-
ment resting on the House of Representatives; and Mr.
Trenwith merely gives reasons for thinking that we shall have
responsible government of some sort. He does not deal with
the point triumphantly made by Sir Richard Baker, after the bill
was completed, that the Senate will be “ the pivot on which the
whole federal constitution revolves ” (although it is not the
house of the taxpayers). Nor does he give any ground for
disputing my statement that the power of the Senate to
“suggest” amendments to any money bill, “at any stage, as
often as it likes, is just the same as the power to propose amend-
ments, which the Senate of the United States has.” He merely
says that the South Australian Legislative Council has had the
power to “ suggest ” amendments for many years back. He is
notaware that the South Australian Council can only “ suggest”
once, and even then cannot suggest any amendment of an
ordinary appropriation bill. (See the paper laid by Sir Richard
Baker on the table of the Convention, p. 3). The words of the
Council’s resolution, passed after a long struggle, are—“ That it
shall be competent to the Council to suggest any alterations in any
such bill (except that portion of the Appropriation Bill that provides
for the ordinary annual expenses of the Government) , and in case of
such suggestions not being agreed to by the House of Assembly,
such bills may be returned by the House of Assembly to this
Council for reconsideration, in which case the hill shall either be
assented to or rejected by this Council, as originally passed by the
House of Assembly.” In effect, the senate is to have the right
to do just what the South Australian Council does not do —to
make suggestions at any stage, and even as to items in an
ordinary appropriation bill.
As for the provision for solving differences between the two
Houses, Mr. Trenwith imagines that I complain of the double
dissolution. That is wrong. It was I who first proposed it. I
was beaten in Adelaide by 24 to 7. We won in Sydney. I
readily concur with Mr. Trenwith in recognising the healthy in-
fluence of the power to dissolve on all elective Houses. But I
say that the double dissolution, followed by a joint sitting at


which three-fifths must vote for the bill in dispute or the bill is
lost, is a cumbrous provision, does not secure finality, allows the
minority to carry its way, and can rarely be applied to money
bills, as they cannot wait. In this connection I may add that I
hope Mr. Trenwith has not fallen into the error which many have
fallen into—in thinking that sec. 57, the provision for solving
“ deadlocks,” applies to differences between the two Houses re-
garding amendments of the constitution. There are no means
provided of solving such differences.
As for the referendum, it must be obvious from the context
that I was referring to a national or mass referendum when
said that there is no reasonable possibility of the constitution
ever being amended so as to secure such a referendum. I or, as
the majority of the states as well as of the people must approve
of any change, the minor states weuld object to the people being
made the umpire in a dispute between the peoples’ House and the
states’ House. It would be, as the Victorian Ministers urged in
Sydney, giving equal representation with one hand and taking it
away with the other.
With regard to the Inter-State Commission, I said that the
provisions have not been sufficiently considered, and that they
will lead to much quarrelling. Mr. Trenwith merely refers to
section 99, and says that it is reasonable to suppose Parliament
will prescribe proper powers. But he does not refer to sections
51 (1), 78, 97-99, 101-108 ; and he labours under the false notion
that the Parliament can control the Commission, as our Victorian
Parliament can control the Railway Commissioner. The truth
is, Parliament and the Commission are to be co-ordinate, inde-
pendent powers, and will be parties to the quarrels which any
lawyer of experience will (as I think) safely prophesy.
As for the clause forbidding any change in the representation
of the states in the senate without the consent of the state which
is over-represented, Mr. Trenwith, with his usual candour, admits
the difficulty. But he says that in the case I put—l 9 states,
each having millions of people, and the twentieth being an almost
deserted mullock-heap—the 19 states could “ ignore the interests
of this one state, and compel it, if only in self-defence, to fall in
with the wishes of its more numerous neighbours.” What a
brilliant prospect ! This is surely the very kind of strain on the
constitution which ought to be avoided. It means a state of
compulsion, of fighting, of fratricidal war. There need not be
bloodshed —
“We fight now—by forbidding men to sell steel
Or buy wine—not by blowing out their brains.”
The Imperial authorities would probably step in to stop any ex-
tremes of physical violence ; but they would have to enforce the


constitution, however evil might be its operation. “ But,” says
Mr. Trenwith, “we would still have power to appeal to the
Imperial Constitution for an alteration of the constitution.”
Yes ; and so would the people of the mullock-heap. They could
say, “Look at the preamble. We all agreed to enter into an
‘ indissoluble Commonwealth under the constitution ’ established
by this act. We gave up certain rights in consideration of the
promise that equal representation is not to be altered without
our consent; and the other states ought not to take the benefit
of the agreement so far as it suits them, and to repudiate it
where it does not.” It is quite true that the Imperial Parliament
can, legally, repeal or alter any of our laws, whether Australian
or Victorian ; but it would be unconstitutional to do so, especially
when the law is based on a solemn agreement, and provides
specifically for powers of amendment, and the limits thereof, and
one of the parties to the agreement objects to the change. If
Mr. Trenwith is content with an Australian constitution which
ties Australia for ever to the apron-strings of the Imperial Parlia-
ment, lam not; and I have not found any who would be content.
I think it is due to The Argus to thank it for allowing me to
express my views as a member of the late Federal Convention,
and many will appreciate the public spirit shown in inviting this
discussion. I have been enabled to put my views before a much
wider circle than I could hope to reach by any addresses. It is
well to have Mr. Trenwith’s views so fully stated. One.can see
that he is deeply impressed with what he regards as the “ immense
strides in a democratic direction that this bill makes.” That
this bill should discard the antiquated system of property Houses
—a system for many years discarded throughout all the United
States—seems to him, as a man used to face the opposition of
such Houses; to involve the removal of all obstruction to the free
operation of public opinion. He does not see that public opinion
may be as effectively thwarted by other devices, such as states’
houses—especially if the system of states’ houses cannot be
changed. He is under the impression that he can treat this bill
like a Victorian bill—take what he can get, and push for more.
This, I think, is at the root of his mistake. This act cannot be
improved by the Federal Parliament as a Victorian act can be
improved by the Victorian Parliament. He thinks that he is
taking an instalment; he is really, by accepting this bill taking
a final payment—a fixed, rigid, and irrevocable commutation of
the privileges of the Australian people. I could trust all to the
future if this bill did not so tie the hands of ourselves and of
future Australians as to amendments—if the justice and good
sense of the Australian people were not so distrusted as they are
in the provisions of this bill. Now that I have heard the best


that can be said for this bill, I am more convinced than ever that
to reject this bill is the true wisdom, and that a far better bill, a
far more flexible, far less provincial constitution, will soon reward
the efforts of those who at present take on themselves the un-
pleasant task of saying No on the 3rd of June.—Yours, &c.,
H. B. HIGGINS.
May 9.




THE CONVENTION BILL
[DAILY TELEGRAPH ARTICLES).
At the request of the editor of the “ Daily Telegraph"
newspaper, of Sydney, Neiv South Wales, the following
three articles appeared in the issues of Saturday, May 21st;
Saturday, May 28th ; Wednesday, June Ist, 1898.




The Convention Bill.
(Daily Telegraph, Sydney, May, 1898.)
I am glad to avail myself of tlie opportunity offered to me by
The Daily Telegraph of putting my views of the Convention
Bill before its readers. For it is recognised on all sides that
there can be no federation without New South Wales, as there
can be no play of “ Hamlet ” with the character of Hamlet left
out. New South Wales bolds the key, and need not fear that it
may be left out in the cold. Under the West Australian Act it
is actually one of the provisions that West Australia is not to
enter the Commonwealth unless New South Wales be one of the
assenting colonies. Leaders of public opinion in South Aus-
tralia do not want federation unless they can make certain of
access to the markets which the western territory of New South
Wales affords. South Australia will not enter a federation in
which Victoria would have too great a predominance ; and I
notice that the day of polling there is to be the day after the
polling in the eastern colonies. Even in Tasmania there has been
a movement to postpone the day of polling ; and we may be sure
that the parliaments of the assenting colonies will refuse to send
home a bill which New South Wales has rejected.
Now, I cannot hope to add much weight to the arguments of
the public-spirited men in New South Wales who oppose this
bill; but a sidelight may not be altogether useless, when it
comes from a Victorian member of the late convention, who,
with deep regret, has felt it to be his duty to oppose the measure
in the interests of Australia as a whole. It is my hope that
New South Wales, the great parent colony, will face the
responsibility of its high position, and deliver the people of
Australia from an act which, under the guise of federation, will
stereotype and perpetuate a narrow provincialism.
One of the chief causes of danger is the warmth of federal
sentiment, which one so gladly observes in the colonies, and not
least in New South Wales. Anyone who reflects on the
geographical position of Australia, its relation to the outside
world, the unity of the people in race, in language, in habits, in
social condition, in ideals, must feel that that unity should find
political expression in a common organisation. Our sentiments
and our material interests demand the sweeping away of
Customs barriers between these colonies, and the cessation of
the provincial jealousies and rivalries on matters of Australian
concern. Therefore, when a bill is produced which is called a
c s


federal bill, and which certainly creates a new organ of govern-
ment, and which is to have the votefe —I can hardly say the
recommendations—of the principal statesmen of Australia, we
are very apt to close our eyes to defects in details and to vote
for it. Yet it is surely our duty—our duty to those who come
after us as well as to ourselves —to ask whether it will really
achieve our purpose, whether it will make provincial interests
subordinate to Australian interests on Australian subjects,
whether it can be changed with reasonable facility where it
turns out to be defective or injurious, and whether it will allow
the people of Australia to work out Australian problems as the
changing conditions of Australia may from time to time require.
I believe that this bill fails in all these respects.
A constitution should not be looked on so much as legislation
as the creation of a machine for legislation and government.
The mam problems of any federal scheme are, therefore, three
to settle what subjects shall be committed to the federal
authority; to settle the machinery for dealing with those
subjects ; and to provide that the people concerned may alter and
repair the machinery where it is faulty. To prevent “ unification,”
it is probably necessary to preserve considerable rigidity as to the
subjects committed to the federation ; necessary to let each
smaller colony feel that it can put a powerful obstruction in the
way of its more populous neighbours, should they attempt to
force into the federal scheme matters which it has not agreed to
treat as federal. But I contend that we have no right to dictate
to the future Australian people what shall be the machinery for
dealing with those subjects which are admittedly Australian, or
to interfere with the control of all Australian questions by the
majority of tne people of Australia. To judge from some advo-
cates of the bill, one would think that in the convention of 1897-8
the duty of members was to guide and restrain the people for
centuries to corneas to their own concerns—as the Biglow papers
Say — “ That wnt we hed met fur wuz jes’ to agree
Wut the people’s opinions in futur’ should he.’’
It is not enough to show people some of the atrocious faults in
this bill —to show how provincial it is in the subjects allotted,
and in the machinery for dealing with those subjects. They are
willing to waive many objections in the innocent belief that, with
the spread of intelligence and the growth of the federal spirit,
these faults can be set right. I confess that lam much inclined
to the same attitude, if I could find that under this bill free play
is allowed to the working of public opinion throughout Australia,
and that the Australian people are trusted with power to rectify
mistakes as and when they appear ; but I do not find this con-
dition fulfilled.
Our Victorian Parliament can change any part whatever of the


Victorian Constitution Act. Sometimes an ordinary majority of
each house is required, sometimes an absolute majority ; but any
part can be so changed. I presume that the New South Wales
Parliament has a similar power. Under the last section of this
bill, however, the Federal Parliament cannot make any change,
however obvious or necessary, in any clause or word of the con-
stitution. Under this section —
1. The preamble and the first eight clauses cannot be changed
at all.
2. The equal representation of all original states in the senate,
and the representation of any new state (whatever may be the
number of senators agreed on), cannot be changed without the
consent of the state which turns out to be flagrantly over-repre-
sented, and even though the people of all the other states require
the change.
8. As for the bulk of the other provisions of the constitution,
a small minority of Australians can prevent the large majority
from making any change ; and the selfish provincial spirit is
given special powers of obstruction in the senate, and in the rule
which requires the assent of a majority of states on the
referendum.
I should not mention the preamble (1) but for the curious
mistake which has been made by the Sydney Bulletin— a mistake
which has been circulated in tens of thousands of leaflet reprints
through all the colonies. This newspaper advises people to vote
for the bill, and to do the necessary repairs afterwards. It evi-
dently recognises the narrowness of the powers of amendment,
but it urges that if the worst come to the worst, there can be an
amendment striking out the word “ indissoluble” in the preamble
(‘‘ agreed to unite in one indissoluble Federal Commonwealth
. . . . under the constitution hereby established”); and
then there can be another amendment striking out all or any
portion of the act. This extraordinary piece of legerdemain is
absolutely out of the question. Sec. 127, which contains the
only power of amendment to be conferred by the Imperial Parlia-
ment, applies only to “ alteration of the constitution,” and “ the
constitution” begins with section 9: “The constitution of the
Commonwealth shall be as follows: —The constitution : This
constitution is divided as follows.” There is no power given to
any authority within the bounds of Australia to alter any part of
the act, except that part labelled “ the constitution.”
(4) As for the equal representation of all the original states in
the senate, the remarkably able debates in the New South
Wales assembly on the subject leaves little to be added to show
how unnecessary and how dangerous is this violation of the
principle of majority rule. This principle is based on funda-
mental physical facts—-the majority are stronger than the


minority, and it is better to count heads than to break them.
The object is to secure peace and order, to make private and special
interests subordinate to the general interest, and to make the
laws of a political community a true reflex of current opinions
and current necessities. No legislative house has any right to
exist in a democracy which does not fairly represent public
opinion ; and the senate cannot fulfil this condition when, on
Australian subjects, an Australian in Coolgardie is to have eight
or nine times the voting power as his brother Australian has in
Broken Hill. There used to be a theory that a states’ house,
with equal representation, is necessary for any federation, and
the Swiss republic, the Canadian, and the German federation,
bear traces, fainter and fainter, it is true, as the century has
rolled on, of this baneful theory. This bill proceeds to revert to
the original American system, which was adopted under stress
of the danger of loss of national independence, as a necessary
compromise between the existing loose confederacy and a true
federation. You might as reasonably insist, in New South
Wales, on having a second house which should, for New South
Wales purposes, give equal representation to the several districts,
however thinly peopled—a house in which a few square miles
near the Darling, with a squatter and a rouseabout, should have
the same number of members as Sydney. We are so used in
these colonies to the obstruction of property houses that we
forget there can be any other machinery of obstruction. I could
wish that some of the advocates of this bill would ponder over
the weighty words of John Locke, uttered in 1691. Speaking of
a.political community, he says (Civil Government, 241): “It
being one body must move one way, it is necessary that the body
should move that way whither the greater force carries it, which
is the consent of the majority.” The "whole false theory is the
same in essence as that of the Tories in 1832, who contended
that the House of Commons was not meant to represent the
people, but communities or interests invited by the King to
consult with him ; and they justified a condition of things in
which “ a park where no houses were to be seen, three niches
in a stone wall,” and “ a ruined mound ” had two members
each, while Manchester, with its teeming population, had not
even one member. The United States have recognised the evils
of the system, but they have to put up with it; for by their con-
stitution (as by this bill) the system cannot be changed without
the consent of the state which is over-represented. It was the
cause of the unjust war with Mexico ; of the growth of the slave
power, of the great civil war (see Channing’s History, 444). It
was the cause even last year of the rejection by the United
States of the noble arbitration treaty submitted by Eugland, and
approved by the great masses of the people of all parties. The


New England Magazine for June, 1897, says : —“ Ten of the 26
senators (who voted against the treaty) from the five states of
Idaho, Montana, Nevada, and North and South Dakota,
represent a combined population smaller than that of either of
the cities of New York, Chicago, Philadelphia, or Brooklyn.
Nevada, with the same power in the senate as the largest state
in the union, has a population (60,000) less than that of Worcester,
or Lowell, or Fall Liver,-or Cambridge, in Massachusetts. These
were the states which blocked civilisation, and covered the
republic with shame before the world Only the
constitution of the senate, which makes it a grossly and
grotesquely unrepresentative body, makes possible even such a
minority vote as that which defeated the arbitration treaty, and
the overwhelming majority of the American people, and almost all
of the country’s intellect and conscience are on the side of peace
and reason, and the proposed advance.”
The evils of this system will be aggravated in Australia, where
the states are so few, and the “ cussedness ” of a “ crank ” state
cannot be counteracted so easily as in America, with its 45
states. Of course, this system tends strongly to foster narrow
provincialism in the treatment of Australian subjects, and to
lessen the benefits which we hope for from federation, and from
the handling of matters of common Australian concern in the
interests of Australia as a whole. It is like the sin of Ananias ;
for the states, while affecting to give up certain powers for the
general benefit, keep back half their gift, keep a control of the
powers by means of a states’ house. Yet this is the part of the
constitution which, of all others, we select to put beyond the
control of the majority of the people, and the majority of the
states ! We have warnings enough from American publicists, if
we would only listen to them. Burgess, in his recent work
(Political Science) styles as “ confused and unnatural,” the rule
under which equal representation is secured against the state,
the sovereignty as organised within the constitution. . . . “No
constitution is complete which undertakes to accept anything
from the power of the state as organised in the constitution.
Such a constitution invites the reappearance of a sovereignty
back of the constitution ; i.e., it invites revolution.” (See also
p.p. 151-153, Yol. 1).
(3) Changes in the ordinary machinery of the constitution can
be blocked by a small minority of the people of Australia.
Suppose that some flaw be found in the section which attempts
to conserve the rights of all public servants in the departments
transferred to the Commonwealth ; or suppose that as, to say the
least, is quite possible—the financial clauses are found to be
working ruin to one of the federating states, rendering it unable
to meet its heavy bill for interest ;or suppose—as is probable—


that the provisions as to the inter-scate commission should be
found unworkable, or that the provisions allowing the scramble
for the surplus revenue should become unbearable; what has to
be done to put the matter right ? Even now, I believe, most
lawyers recognise that an accidental slip has been made in the
final drafting, by means of which a litigant can appeal direct to
the Privy Council, ignoring the High Court. If there is an
attempt to put any of these matters right, there have to be
secured (1) an absolute majority of each house of the Federal
Parliament, (2) a majority of the voters voting as a referendum,
(3) a majority of the voters voting in a majority of the states.
The selfish, provincial forces have two effective opportunities of
blocking the change—first, in the states’ house or senate, and,
secondly, in the referendum, which renders necessary the count
of the majority of the states. Nor wdll any federal treasurer
readily incur the huge expenditure which every referendum would
involve ; he will be tempted to let many matters of flagrant in-
justice continue rather than incur the pecuniary loss, as well as
the risk attendant on such a referendum. Take some figures,
which are quite possible, in a case where in the more populous
colonies public feeling is almost unanimous in favor of the
change, and in the less populous colonies opinion is about equally
divided Yes. No.
New South Wales... ... ... 100,000 ... 10,000
Victoria ... ... ... ... 90,000 ... 10,000
South Australia ... ... ... 14,000 ... 15,000
Tasmania ... ... ... 6,000 ... 7,000
210,000 ... 42,000
The majority is five to one, and yet the change cannot be made !
I have taken the case of West Australia being out of the federa-
tion ; but even if she were in, the risk of such a fiasco would be
nearly the same. Anyone can see that the risk is much greater
where, as in Australia, the states will at the start be few, than
where they are numerous.
I suppose I need hardly tell your readers that the so-called
“ provision for settling deadlocks” by double dissolution and a
joint sitting does not apply to a proposal to make any change in
the constitution. It only applies to disputes as to legislation
“ under ” the constitution, in which case absolute majorities are
not required in each house, and the question has not to be sub-
mitted to the electors after Parliament has dealt with it.
It would actually be better for Australian federation if, as in
the Canadian Act, there were no provision for amendment at
all, and no express agreement by the people of Australia to
bind themselves in an indissoluble commonwealth “ under the
constitution hereby established.” For, under this act, to any
request from Australia to the Imperial Parliament for a change


of this (Imperial) act, the Imperial authorities will be bound,
constitutionally, to say—“ No; we do not interfere in internal
Australian disputes. You have made an agreement binding
yourselves, for better or for worse, that your constitution shall not
be changed except within certain limits and in a certain manner ;
and the more populous colonies cannot take the benefit of the
agreement so far as it suits them, and repudiate it so far as it is
a burden.” They will have much stronger ground for refusing
to interfere than in the Victorian case of some 20 years ago,
when Sir Graham Berry went to London with Professor Pearson
on his fruitless mission to procure an alteration of the constitu-
tion to which the Victorian Upper House would not assent.
Have your readers considered the peculiar difficulties which will
arise in the future in connection with the subdivision of the huge
map-divisions (which we call “ colonies,’ and which we are to
call “ states ”) in consequence of the rigidity of the constitution
in the matter of representation in the senate ? The number of
senators for any new state is to be a matter of bargain between
that state and the federal parliament. Suppose that Queensland
came into the commonwealth as an original state with six
senators, and desired to be subdivided into three states —north,
central, and south ; or suppose that after subdivision Queens-
land, then three states, knocks at the door of the commonwealth,
the question will arise how many senators is each state to have ? If
the precious states' house theory be sound, each subdivision
ought to have six senators. But that would give Queensland 18
senators against the New South Wales six—although Queens-
land has about one-third of the population of New South Wales.
That will hardly suit, and I apprehend that New South Wales,
and, indeed, all or most of the other colonies, will object to such
a proposal. Then, is Queensland to have six senators in all, to
be distributed between north, central, and South Queensland ?
That will hardly suit either; for South Queensland, with more
than twice the population of Tasmania, would have only two
or three senators, as against the Tasmanian six. I shall be told
that some intermediate course will be taken—say, that Queens-
land will get 10 or 12 senators in all for her three subdivisions.
This will lessen the difficulty in degree, but not in essence. If
Queensland find that she is not to get, as to such subdivisions as
are, or may be, more populous than Tasmania, the same power
in the senate as Tasmania, she will object to the bargain ;
whereas, if the other states find that by subdivision Queens-
land, as a whole, gets substantially more power in the senate
than colonies which are more populous than Queensland, the
other states will object. It will be a curious result—not im-
probable—if this artificial states’ house system should result in
keeping part of Australia out of the commonwhealth,


or in keeping these great areas from making that
subdivision which must become expedient as popula-
tion grows and as territory is developed. Such a
difficulty did not arise in the United States, where new
states were created by aggregation, by the organising of outside
territories, not by sub-dividing existing states. It will be
observed also that whatever number of senators a new state
bargains for, she must retain, and whether she increases in
population beyond all other colonies, or dwindle till she become
an abandoned mining territory, a change is practically impossible.
For, if she greatly increase in population, the proportionate
representation of the less populous states in the senate cannot be
diminished without their consent; and that proportionate re-
presentation would be diminished by increasing the number of
senators for the state in question. On the other hand, if she
dwindle in population, her proportionate representation cannot
be diminished without her consent (sec. 127, last clause). In
short, no one can say to what an impasse this rigidity as to re-
presentation will lead Australia. We in 1898 have no right to
dictate to the future people of Australia as this section dictates,
or so to tie their hands by this parchment bond. We have no
right to deposit the ultimate sovereignity of Australia in a docu-
ment which cannot be swayed by reason or moved by prayers, or
impelled, except by the violence or revolution of the people
affected by it, and which in the meantime is to be backed up by
the courts, and the police, and the soldiery, and (if necessary) by
tne Imperial power.
11.
In my first paper I dealt with the rigidity of the proposed
constitution, not only with regard to the subjects entrusted to
the federal authority—as to which there is some justification for
rigidity—but with regard to the machinery for dealing with
such subjects ; and I endeavoured to show how the advocates of
this bill, while they think that they are working towards a
broad, national, Australian ideal, are in truth working to per-
petuate provincialism. I contend that to create a “states’ house,”
and to firmly and unalterably entrench it in the constitution
(s 127), means to place an immovable obstruction in the way of
a generous treatment of Australian subjects in the interests of
the Australian people as a whole. I say that we cannot treat the
constitution as a “ step in the right direction.” It is a final
step. We are to be committed to an “indissoluble common-
wealth under the constitution hereby established ; ” we are to
take this bill as a permanent and irrevocable commutation of
our claims to a national life. This is my reason for urging
delay; and the only means of getting delay is to reject this bill
on the 3rd June.


Now I desire to refer to certain grave faults of the bill in
detail. But I shall not discuss it from the provincialist point of
view, as to the relative commercial gains of New South Wales,
of Victoria, and of the other colonies. Sir George Turner speaks
of the bill as “ the very best bargain we could get on behalf of
Victoria.” I conceive this huckstering attitude to be absolutely
wrong. But so many contradictory statements are made by the
advocates of the bill, from this point of view, that I am con-
strained to refer to some of them, and to indicate the uncertainty
of the bill with regard thereto. For instance, we in Victoria are
instructed by the An/us and other advocates of the bill that
the federal authority can check the long haulage rates of
New South Wales, by means of which trade is attracted from
Riverina to Sydney which would otherwise naturally come to its
nearer port—Melbourne. But Mr. Barton, speaking to Sydney
audiences, assures them that these rates cannot be altered; that
the federation has not power to interfere with the intercolonial
traffic of a state which begins in its bounds and ends in its
bounds; and he goes so far in his indignation as to say that
anyone who, being a lawyer, says the contrary, is saying “ what
he knows is not a fact.” Take again the railway indulgences
granted to our Gippsland coal. This coal is carried by the
Victorian railways at half the rate that is charged for Newcastle
coal. Mr. Deakin assures our Gippsland miners that these
indulgences cannot be interfered with. “ The 103rd section of
the bill undoubtedly confers power upon the local Parliament to
foster the coal industry of South Gippsland by means of excep-
tional railway rates, and this assuredly would not be interfered
with by any action of the inter-state commission
There is no restriction upon these bounties, either from the
states or the Commonwealth.” This sounds pleasant to our
coal miners, until they hear what Mr. Wise has to say to the
men of Newcastle. I quote from a Newcastle paper:—“After
this constitution is adopted, you will be in a much better position
to compete with the Gippsland miners, as all subsidies and pre-
ferential railway rates must be abolished. In short, you will be
able to undersell the Victorian coal-miner in his own market.”
Of course I do not doubt in the least the honesty of these
speakers, each speaking in his ardour for the adoption of the bill.
But both statements cannot be true ; and it really would be only
fair to the electors of both colonies that the advocates of the bill
should agree as to its meaning before they make such utterances.
Take, again, sec. 99 as to the rivers. Who knows whether New
South Wales can be stopped by the inter-state commission, or by
any other federal authority, if it proceed to appropriate all the
waters of the Darling for conservation or irrigation ? We are
told here most positively that sec. 99 “ throws upon the Federal


Parliament the duty of deciding what is the reasonable use for
irrigation and conservation purposes of the waters of such rivers.
. . . Immediately upon the establishment of the Federal
Parliament this control of New South Wales will absolutely cease,
and be handed over to the people of the Commonwealth.” What
do the New South Wales advocates of the bill say to this doc-
trine? Then look at the provisions for the inter-state com-
mission. No one can say where its functions begin and where
they end; but any lawyer will prophesy with certainty an
endless field for litigation in questions as to the relative power of
Parliament, of the High Court, and of the commission, and in
questions as to the scope of the duties of the commission. Some
people fancy that the inter-state commission can be limited in its
powers and controlled by the wisdom of the Federal Parliament,
just as the Kailway Commissioners can be controlled and limited
by the State Parliament. That is a mistake. The Federal
Parliament can prescribe the power of “ adjudication and
administration .... for the execution and maintenance
of the provisions ” of the constitution, “ relating to trade and
commerce.” But when once appointed—and the appointment is
made obligatory—the commission is a power co-ordinate with
Parliament, independent, in most respects, of Parliament,
and irresponsible. Are the Railway Commissioners of the
colonies to constitute the commission ? If so, there will
be a nice tug of war; if not, who are to be the com-
missioners, and what work have they to do ? The pro-
visions have not yet been sufficiently considered. Take,
again, the financial question, which has been more fully dis-
cussed in New South Wales than in Victoria. Financial experts
say that either New South Wales people must endure a huge
addition to their customs and excise taxation, or some of the
other colonies will be unable to meet the interest on their public
debts—will become insolvent. Without attempting to dogmatise
in this dispute, I do assert that the matter is sufficiently grave
to make sensible men pause. And I may add that we are
creating an unprecedented position for our colonies, with their
Titanic loads of debt. Each colony—each “ sovereign state,” as
it is called—is to be dependent on an outside organisation for
its solvency—for raising enough money by taxation to pay, not
only the (unlimited) expenditure of that outside organisation, but
to distribute among the several colonies enough revenue for their
several needs. No doubt each colony will exert pressure to
have sufficient taxation raised ; but that is where one of the
evils comes in. The state treasurer, the state executive, will be
forced to actively interfere with the elections for the federal
parliament. Elections in each state for that parliament will
largely turn on state party disputes and on state requirements ;


men will be elected on state party issues; and there will be an
unhealty mixture of state issues and federal issues, and a steady
process of degeneration in state and in federal politics. When
the first seven years of the commonwealth have passed away—
the seven years of book-keeping and border inspection and
returns —the federal parliament will have to decide how the
surplus revenue is to be distributed between the several states.
That will be a nice apple of discord to throw among the states.
Sir George Turner predicts a “ general scramble,” “ log-rolling,”
and “ a possible combination among the smaller states to get
better terms out of the larger ones.” I think that his prediction
is likely to be unpleasantly fulfilled; and for this opinion we
have the confirmation of the experience of Canada.
I shall now pass to the argument that this bill provides for
responsible Government, resting on the house of representatives,
the national house; for it is urged that, having.the control of
ministries, the national forces will be able to overcome the
provincial forces—that the rule of the majority of Australians in
Australian matters will, through responsible government, be
secured. In my opinion, it is more than likely that the senate,
the house which the minority of taxpayers control, will before
long feel its power, control the finances, and make and unmake
ministries. There is no clause in this bill, as in the preamble
to the Canadian Act, indicating an intention to have a constitu-
tion on the English model. But the executive ministers must
have seats in parliament —in either house (s 64). It is urged
on behalf of the bill that supremacy in financial matters is
secured for the national house (1) by the provision that that
house shall originate all taxation bills, and all bills appropriating
moneys “ for the ordinary annual services of the Government ”
(whatever that may include); and (2) by the provision that the
senate may not amend any such bills. Now, the sole power to
originate money bills, which the house of representatives
possesses —partly by the constitution, partly by usage in the
United States, has become, incredible as it may seem, a cause of
inferiority and of diminished influence (of that house) in finan-
cial matters; and “ the balance of political power inclines
decidedly to the senate.” (Boutmy 81,116.) Senator Hoar speaks
of the power as a “ barren and empty privilege,” and says that
“ when the large states accepted the clause in question as a
partial equivalent for the equality of the small states in the
senate, they accepted a further limitation of their own power.”
Having regard to the longer tenure by which the senators are to
hold their seats, to their retirement by rotation, to tlieir prestige,
arising from election by a whole colony, to the obligation put
upon the House of Representatives to find some means whereby
money may be found to meet the needs of the Federal and the


State Governments, and to the peculiar urgency of money bills
which renders the deadlock provisions rarely applicable to a dis-
pute between the houses, I have little doubt that the senate will,
at the end of a session, nearly always get its way in money
matters, will before long control the finances, and thereby control
the ministries. At the first, no doubt, the Premier and the chief
ministers will be selected from the national house ; but the centre
of gravity will ere long be found in the senate, and ministers will
gravitate there. I believe, therefore, that there is considerable
truth in Sir Richard Baker’s triumphant prediction, uttered on
the last day of the convention, after the bill had been carried,
“ that the senate will be the pivot on which the whole
federal constitution will revolve.” With regard to the clause
forbidding the senate to “ amend ” (that is, to propose amend-
ments to) taxation bills or ordinary appropriation bills, the power
to “ request ” amendments is just the same—under a different
name. Probably the distinction will lead to elaborate disputes
as to the form of the message between the two houses in many
cases ; but that is all. The senate can “request” amendments
“at any stage ” —not once, but as often as it likes. It can pro-
tract the dispute until the House of Representatives, which is
responsible to the country for originating some means of getting
supplies, is, at the end of the session, forced to yield ; and if the
chief ministers are at the time in the House of Representatives,
they will be in the usual position of the party most eager for a
bargain—they will get the worst of the bargain, and will yield to
the senate’s demands. Yet how absurd it is that a house in
which, even at the start, one-fifth of the people, paying about
one-fifth of the taxes, hold tliree-fifths of the power, should have
equal, or, worse still, superior power as to the finances ! As Mr.
Reid well put it, such a position would be reasonable if each state
contributed equally to the taxation, but certainly not otherwise.
111.
It is urged that the power to suggest or request amendments
to money bills has for many years been found to work well in
South Australia. This statement must be qualified. From a
paper laid by Sir Richard Baker on the table of the convention,
I find the words of the compact made by the Legislative Houses
in South Australia: “ That it shall be competent to the Council
to suggest any alterations in any such bill (except that portion
of the Appropriation Bill that provides for the ordinary annual
expenses of the government), and in case of such suggestions
not being agreed to by the House of Assembly, such bills may
be returned by the House of Assembly to this Council for
reconsideration ; in which case the bill shall either be assented
to or rejected by this Council as originally passed by the House
of Assembly.” In short the Council can only suggest once, and


then is face to face with acceptance or rejection of the whole
bill; and the Council cannot make any suggestion as to ordinary
annual appropriations. I understand also that at the present
time a party is coming to the fore in South Australia pledged to
vote for the taking away even of this limited privilege from the
Council.
Some people who see the dangers to which I have referred fly,
as a last resort, to the clause called the “ deadlock clause.” They
fancy that by means of the double dissolution and the joint
sitting the general public opinion of Australia will prevail over
the provincial and restrictive tendencies of the senate. Now, it
was I who first moved in the convention in favour of the double
dissolution. We were beaten in Adelaide by 24 to 7, but we
carried our point in Sydney. I moved that an ordinary majority
should be sufficient to carry its way at a joint sitting of the
houses ; but the convention determined to insist on a tliree-fifths
majority —determined that if (for instance) all the members of
both houses voted, and 56 voted one way and 38 the other, the
38 should carry their way! I fully recognise the healthy
influence of the power of dissolution on any elective house.
But it is not enough to secure what we want. Suppose —as is
quite on the cards—a quarrel between the houses on the difficult
point of the distribution of surplus revenue among the states ;
and suppose that, which Sir George Turner apprehends, to
happen—a combination of the smaller states in the senate,
working to secure a greater share of the surplus. Should the
houses be dissolved, the senators of a small state will go back to
their electors, and point out that they are being punished by a
dissolution for working in the interests of that state ; and the
chances are great that the double dissolution will result in the
national and the provincial forces fronting one another very
much as before. The Australian ideal is still to be checked by
the narrow, provincialist forces ; and the position is practically
the same at the .joint sitting. The majority of the people of
Australia are not to be trusted. The national spirit is to be put
under restraint, and the provincialists can call “check” at
every move of those who work for the general good of Australia
as a whole. I assume that there is no need for me to point out
that even this cumbrous and defective machinery for getting rid
of a difficulty between the two houses cannot be applied to a
dispute between the two houses, as to the amendment of the
constitution. When an amendment is proposed, the blocking
power of the senate is absolute. The people of the several states
cannot deal with the proposal until the senate has first consented
to the proposal by an absolute majority. If any elector feels
doubt as to my assertion that the “ deadlock ” provision does
not apply to the case of a proposed amendment, I feel no doubt


that any of the legal members of the convention who advocate
the bill would confirm my view on the subject.
With regard to a national referendum, there is at present a
difference of opinion, even among those who call themselves
liberals. Personally, lam strongly in favour of remitting to the
people of any civilised community, where a serious dispute
arises between two houses of parliamei t, the question which of
the two agents the people, as the principals concerned, think to
be right. Of course, such a referendum should not be taken
except in grave cases, and after the members have repeatedly
taken the responsibility of voting for or against the measure,
and after full discussion in parliament and in the press. I
conceive that there was a critical day in Sydney last September,
on which it was possible, if the advantage had been properly
pushed, to get the insertion of a clause providing for a national
referendum for the final settlement of a protracted dispute
between the houses. Mr. W. M‘Millan, although of con-
servative leanings, was prepared to vote for it. Mr. Holder,
although much bitten with the states’ house theory, was pre-
pared to vote for it. But our Victorian ministers stepped in,
and dashed our hopes. They could have said that though they
were willing to give equal representation to the smaller states,
in order to assuage the fears of some people in those states, they
were not willing to repose the final settlement of any Australian
subject in any control except that of the majority of the Aus-
tralian people. But they said that they would not give equal
representation with one hand and take it away with the other ;
and all hope of a national settlement was lost. Now, in the
making of the constitution, one can conceive of a provision for
the referendum, as a kind of set-off to and corrective of equal
representation. But when once this constitution is adopted, all
hope of the referendum must be for ever abandoned. For there
is, first, the block of the senate, and then there is the block of
the vote of the smaller states to any amendment of the consti-
tution providing for the referendum. The senate and the
smaller states will urge, as was urged by the Victorian ministers
in Sydney, “ What is the good of a states’ house to check the
people’s house if the people are to be the umpire ? What is the
good of a states’ majority to check the people’s majority if a
majority of the people can decide any dispute ?” I should not
urge the refusal of this constitution because it does not provide
for the referendum, but because it renders the adoption of the
referendum practically impossible.
The great bait held out to catch the votes of liberals is the
alleged provision for “ one man one vote.” It should be
called “one elector one vote;” for every man is not an
elector. I do not know how matters stand in New South


Wales, but in Victoria ; owing to bad electoral machinery, tens
of thousands of persons entitled to a vote are deprived of it. In
Tasmania there is an income and property qualification. In
West Australia there is a long residence qualification, which
practically disfranchises a large proportion of the migratory
mining population. There are only, I am told, 15,000 electors
in a colony of 100,000 people. The federal parliament can
make provision as to the suffrage. But the provision need not
be uniform—it may leave Tasmania to its limited franchise.
Laws which are to affect all Australians are to be made by men,
some of whom are elected on a narrow franchise. But the
grand error in this connection is that people think that in
getting rid of property houses, houses resting on a property
qualification for members or for electors, they are getting rid of
the only possible obstruction to the free operation of Australian
public opinion on Australian subjects. They forget that as
effective an obstruction can be applied by means of a state
house, a minority house, a provincial house ; and, above all, if
backed up by a rigid, restricted parchment constitution. We in
Australia, have been so much hampered by the antiquated
system of property houses —a system wlrch has been long since
discarded by each of the 45 united states of America—that we
fancy the abolition of property houses means the subordination
for ever of narrow, special interests to the general interest.
This fallacy is very common among people who have only
watched Australian politics, and it has to be pointed out again
and again by those who see it.
I feel that I have in these two papers exceeded the limits of
your generous invitation. I should have liked to refer to the
danger of the huge electorates necessary for the house of
representatives- —one member for about 53,000, even at thq
start; and to the danger of the fixed proportion of two to one
as between the house of representatives and the senate. When
Australia has 70,000,000 of people, it cannot have more than 64
members of the house, unless the number of senators be
increased so as to preserve the same proportion! There are
many other matters to be criticised in this complicated bill ; but
1 feel that I have sufficiently trespassed on your indulgence and
on your readers’ patience. When all has been said and done by
way of criticism, there are many who will vote lor the bill in the
smug optomistic belief that any mistakes in the bill can be set
right, and many who will vote for the bill because so many able
men of the convention have expressed their intention to vote
for it. It is very difficult to get men who have been accustomed
to the omnipotence of the British parliament, and to the omni-
potence (within the limits of New South Wales) of the New
South Wales parliament, to understand the helplessness of the


federal parliament, and of the federated people who will have to
beat their heads against the iron walls of this federal constitu-
tion. It is still harder to get men to see' the peculiar pressure
of political exigencies on those statesmen who express their
reluctant approval of the bill, and the peculiar temptation
which every member of the convention feels to find some
tangible result for his labours, and to have his name associated
with the federal constitution for Australia. It is amusing to
watch the perplexity of the two premiers of the largest colonies.
They do not like the bill, but they do not want to be identified
with what seems at first sight to be opposition to the strong
current of federal sentiment. They remind one of the attitude
of ’Zekiel, when courting Huldy :
He stood a spell on one foot fust,
Then stood a spell on t’other;
An’ on which one he felt the wust,i
He couldn’t ha’ told ye nuther.
It is only fair, however, to Mr. Eeid to admit that he has
put his grave difficulties frankly and fully before the people of
New South Wales. He does not advise the electors to vote for
the bill. They are to “judge for themselves,” but he is going
to vote for it. He is explicit in disavowing any sympathy with
the cry that it is a case of “federation now or never, ’ for the
people of Australia will not allow the fate of disunion to come
upon them, whether the bill be accepted or not. The discussion
on this bill has had a great educational influence on people and
on politicians. The people have never been consulted until this
time, and there is no need for discouragement if we fail in
solving the problem at our first attempt. The result is well
worth the money which has been spent; the value of a sound
scheme of indissoluble union cannot be measured in money.
Convention delegates must feel that many of their platform
declarations will have to be modified in consequence of the
debates, and will have to be still more modified as the result of
the voting on the 3rd of June. Some of us see the solution of
many of the difficulties of the problem in allowing New South
Wales the due weight of her great prospective population in
both houses of the federal parliament, so that she will feel free
to commit to the keeping of the federal parliament several
matters as to which she now repudiates federal interference.
Eut be that as it may, a decisive rejection of this bill by the
electors of New South Wales on the 3rd of June will do more
than anything I know of to open the eyes of Tories and “ states’
rights” men, and to make possible a broad and healthy and
flexible system of federation, and to create a constitution which
shall grow with the growth and develop with the development of
the Australian people.
May 24.


ADDRESS DELIVERED ON
THE PREMIERS’ AMENDMENTS
BY INVITATION OF
THE WORKING MEN’S CLUB, OF RICHMOND.
The commonwealth bill of 1898 was accepted, on
referendum to the electors , by large majorities in Victoria,
South Australia and Tasmania ; but in New South Wales the
affirmative votes did not reach the minimum number ( 80,000 )
required by the New South Wales Enabling Act. After much
correspondence, the Premiers of New South Wales, Victoria,
Queensland, South Australia, West Australia and Tasmania
met in secret conference at Melbourne on the 28th, 30th and
31st January, and the Ist, 2nd and 3rd February, 1899, and
framed certain amendments, agreeing that if these amendments
were made the amended constitution could be recommended by
the Premiers to the electors in their respective colonies.
This address was delivered at Richmond on the 19th
February, 1899.




The Premier’s Amendments of the
Commonwealth Bill of 1898.
{APPRECIATE highly the honour which the Working Men’s
Club of Richmond has done me in inviting me to give an
address on the new aspects of the federal question. I am
aware, of course, that many of you may have disagreed with me
in the attitude which I took up with reference to the late
Convention bill last year; but, so far as I can find, it is well
recognised that I did the best according to my light, and that I
had nothing to gain, but much to lose, from what I did. I
opposed the bill with much hesitation, with much regret, with
much distrust in myself when I found that my fellow-delegates
from Victoria to that Convention recommended the bill to the
acceptance of the people of Victoria. But now that I have read
the Premiers’ proposed amendments, I have no reason to regret
my opposition. We w’ere easily beaten in the voting. I think
we all knew we should be ; but even though beaten, we find that
our arguments, our principles, have had a very decided effect in
the shaping of the bill. Every real modification proposed is in
the direction advocated by the conquered—except as to the
capital, and that was a foregone conclusion in any case. That is
a remarkable result. I can assure you —and I was in communi-
cation throughout the struggle with the anti-bill men in New
South Wales—that our steady adherence to liberal principles,
to national Australian principles, strengthened the hands of our
brothers in New South Wales. Here, in Victoria, we had not a
single newspaper to back us up. But the “ Daily Telegraph, in
Sydney, invited me to write in its columns, and I gladly seized
the opportunity, though in the very thick of our own campaign.
You know that in New South Wales, as well as here, the
opponents of the bill had to face the opprobrious taunts of
those who said they were opposed to federation; whereas, in
fact, they, and we, were aiming at a more perfect federation,
a more perfect Australian brotherhood. Well, owing to their
gallant, uphill fight, they were so nearly equal to the other side
that it has been felt to be fruitless to force the bill through New
South Wales without making concessions to their leading
C 4


principles. The bill as amended still contains some most
dangerous clauses; but even if it should be passed into law,
it will free our Australian Commonwealth of some of the worst
features of provincialism which appeared in the Commonwealth
Bill; and, above all, allow (what the Convention bill did not
allow) the possibility, though after much unnecessary strain and
struggle, of a better constitution in the future.
One fact stands out now as clearly as the sun at noon-day —a
fact which those of us who opposed the bill insisted on, and
begged our Ministers to recognise—the fact that there is to be no
federation without New South Wales. No colony is indispensable
to federation except New South Wales. Three colonies have
accepted the bill with all its faults, and they are legally entitled
to ask the Imperial Parliament to pass the bill into law. But
they don’t do it. Why ? Because neither Tasmania nor South
Australia will federate with Victoria unless New South Wales be
in the federation, too. As a South Australian politician said to
me, “ We don’t care twopence about federating with Victoria,
you can supply yourselves with all that we can produce, but we
want a share of the trade of New South Wales.” As Sir Henry
Wrixon said the other day in the Federal Council: “ The bill
having technically failed in the parent province, but having
succeeded in the three other colonies, it was then open, under
the law, for those three provinces, in which the process of
legislation had been completed by an affirmative vote of the
people, to have sent home the bill to the Imperial Parliament,
and proceeded to act under it. But, of course, no one would
have proposed such a thing ; it was not for a moment thought ot,
and I merely allude to it for the purpose of showing that it is
cleared out of the way.” And yet our ministers, with
extraordinary fatuity, while professing to be in accord in
principle with the aspirations of New South Wales, insisted on
making concessions to the other colonies at the expense of New
South Wales—at the expense of justice to New South Wales, at
the expense of the larger national life to which we aspire. For
instance, our Premier led off in Adelaide by conceding equal
representation of the states in the Senate as a matter of course,
as essential to any federation; and from that moment a
reasonable compromise on the subject became impossible. No
authoritative voice from any colony had then insisted on equal
representation of the states—which means unequal representa-
tion of the people—as being essential. Ido not believe that if
the Liberals of South Australia, of West Australia, of Queens-
land, of Tasmania (and there are some in Tasmania), had the
subject fully debated before them, they would have equal
representation—a states’ house —at all. I have spoken with
labour leaders in South Australia, and I find that they see that


the theory as to the need of a states’ house to check the people’s
house is cant and pedantry. The great mining population of
West Australia have not yet been consulted at all; and they
make up, it seems, about 50 per cent, of the male adults in
that colony. The people of Queensland have never yet been
consulted on federation. And listen to what Mr. Glassey, the
leader of the labour party, the leader of the Opposition, in
Queensland, had to say at the recent Federal Council. He said :
“ It is true that Mr. Dickson made certain objections to some of
the provisions of the Commonwealth Bill, more especially with
respect to the powers of the Senate. The honourable gentleman
attaches great weight and importance to what he regards as
states’ rights. I, on the other hand, hold very strong views in the
opposite direction, notwithstanding the fact that I come from
Queensland. As was stated by my fellow-representative, Mr
Barlow, Queensland, with its 600,000 people, will be regarded as
a smaller state in the federation, but I contend that the majority
of the people of a state, whether it is large or small, should rule,
and I do not by any means agree with equal representation in the
Senate any more than in the House of Representatives. I
thoroughly endorse the principle that the majority of the people
should rule in both houses of the Federal Parliament. Therefore,
we who represent Queensland in this Council are not agreed in
regard to state rights. I have no fear of the majority of the
people outraging any state right or doing any damage to any
state; I have no fear of their taking any course which would be
detrimental to the best interests of any of the colonies, even if we
have proportional representation in the Senate, and I certainly
favour that principle.” Mr. Glassey has a strong backing, and is
too clear-headed not to see that this doctrine of a States’ House, as
necessary to protect the minor states against the masses of the
people of Australia, is simply rank Toryism working in a disguise.
They sav that if you scratch a Russian you will find the original
Tartar. ‘ If you scratch a States’-right man, you will find the
reactionary Tory.
I would have you to note that our brothers in New South Wales
have not made use of their commanding position in this federal
question for the purpose of aggrandising New South Wales. They
have used it for the benefit of Australia and the Australians; and
we should never forget this to them. Even in the matter of the
federal capital, they do not insist that it shall be in Sydney. This
was never the cry of the masses ; it was the demand of an influen-
tial section of men in property-owning arid importing circles. We
knew all along that the capital would be in New South Wales, and
it was not grudged. Mr. Dobson, one of the Tasmanian members,
said at the Federal Council last month : “ It is a well known fact
that nine-tenths of the members of the Convention, who were the


people’s cliosen representatives, would have consented to the
federal capital being in New South Wales.” This slight con-
cession, which is now expressed in words, was always the general
understanding. If the New South Wales members had insisted
on its being inserted in the bill of 1898, it would have been put in
without a division. But I would have you to note the significant
fact that such special concessions as are proposed to be made to
the desires of particular colonies are to be made to just those
colonies which have not been too greedy to clutch federation at
any price. New South Wales was not too eager, and she is to
have the capital ; West Australia was not too eager, and she is to
be allowed to charge intercolonial duties for five years longer ;
Queensland has not been too eager, and she is to be allowed to
elect her senators by three districts. Tasmania, Victoria, and
South Australia get no distinctive concession. And yet Victoria
has good ground for asking that her hands should not be tied, as
they are tied by this bill, in the railway competition for the
Riverina trade ; and she has good ground for asking, as Mr.
M‘Lean showed, that her border duties should not be removed at
once, but by successive steps during five years. The party that is
too eager for a bargain always gets the worst of it. But let me
pass from these matters to another, which dwarfs them by com-
parison. I refer to the new proposal with regard to the amend-
ment of the constitution. I have always maintained that grave
mistakes must be found in any constitution, and that novel condi-
tions must arise which will render our best-laid schemes unwork-
able ; but that if there be a reasonable power to amend the con-
stitution, if the people of Australia as a whole are free to bring
their commonsense, and their sense of justice, into play from time
to time, so as to mould their constitutional arrangements as the
circumstances demand, we might at once safely entrust ourselves
in almost any scheme of federation. But no people are truly free
who are not free to mould their own constitution. It seems im-
possible to convince some people, who have learnt how the British
constitution has been moulded and varied in character from time
to time, of the difference between a written constitution like this
one, and an unwritten constitution like the British. We are told
by mouthing orators, that the genius of the Anglo-Saxon race
could never submit to a constitution which is ill-adapted to its
wants ; and people still say this, even though they have the warn-
ing example of the United States before their eyes, where states-
men groan to find it impossible to vary the constitution in any
material point without a civil war, and where the people have come
to look on the constitution as if it were as unalterable and as
fundamental as a law of nature. Only once since the beginning of
the century, has there been any material alteration ; and that was
the fruit of the four years civil war —the great 14tli and 15th


amendments, establishing the civil rights of the negroes. The
Anglo-Saxon character of the race has never enabled the people of
the United States to get rid of the system of equal representa-
tion ; it has never enabled them to get rid of the system of
election of senators by the State legislatures. Mr. Edward
Dicey, in the last September number of the Nineteenth Century
points out how the constitution of the United States, “ bound
as it is by the written word, does not possess the same facility
of adapting itself to new and unforseen conditions ” as the
British Constitution “ has displayed time alter time in our
own history.” And he says, “ Owing to the inelasticity of the
constitution, the Gordian knot could only be cut by the
sword ” (referring to the great civil war). Now, under the
late bill, the bill of 1898, for any alteration of the constitution
you had to get four consents, four majorities—two national and
two provincial. You had to get an absolute majority of the House
of Representatives (the National House), an absolute majority of
the Senate (the Provincial House), a majority of the people of
Australia voting on a referendum (a National majority) and a
majority of the States (a Provincial majority). You had to get all
these four to concur, or there could be no amendment. Should
the Senate stand out against the alteration, should it fail to give an
absolute majority of members for the alteration, you could go no
further—you could not appeal to the people. You could not get
over the Senate’s obstruction by any joint sitting, by any dissolu-
tion, by any referendum. Now, what is proposed ? It is
proposed that if one of the two houses fail to give an absolute
majority, you may appeal over the head of that house, to the
votes of the people and of the states. You can get over, you
can dispense with, one of the four consents—the consent of one
of the houses. This is a great step in advance. For, in the
first place, it enables you to get over one of the two obstructions,
created from a provincial point of view, to any alteration which
most Australians consider to be necessary ; and in the second
place it creates a precedent for appealing to the public when two
houses differ—a precedent of which we shall not be slow to
avail ourselves in our state constitutions in Victoria and else-
where. You are now to be allowed to alter the constitution by
the consent of one house, and of the majority of the voters on a
referendum, and (I am sorry to have to add) of the majority of
the states. I fancy that the far-reaching consequences of this
proposal have hardly yet been grasped. It seems to me that it
will be actually less difficult to get an alteration of the consti-
stitution carried where the two houses differ than to get an
ordinary law carried where the two houses differ. For, if the
two houses differ as to an ordinary law, the law cannot be
carried without a double dissolution, and, possibly, a joint


sitting ; and a dissolution is just the thing that members, of a
paid parliament particularly, wish to avoid. When members are
being paid a regular salary of £4OO per annum, forced dissolu-
tions will become rare, and the unseemly scramble for the
ministerial benches will become rare also. We have fewer
forced or special dissolutions in Victoria since payment of
members. The party of progress will be tempted to accept a
compromise, or to back down on some excuse. But, to alter the
constitution, you will need no dissolution. The ministry can let
their followers keep their seats, and yet appeal, over their
opponents’ heads, to the people and the states. 1 fear that
ministries will therefore be tempted to treat many proposed laws
as amendments of the constitution —to bring in measures which
can be passed under the constitution as measures for changing
the constitution. This is not as it ought to be. We should not
be under the temptation to put matters into the constitution as
part ot the constitution which could be dealt with under the
constitution.
By the way, I wonder what Mr. Reid was about in submitting
to this proposal. I did not expect anything so drastic. You may
know that Mr. Beid, like Sir George Turner, has never shown
any disposition to relax the restrictions as to altering the consti-
tution. When Mr. M‘Gowan, the labour leader in New South
Wales, drew attention to the subject in the New South Wales
Assembly, he carried his main proposal for liberalising the power
of amendment by 58 votes to 22. But Mr. Reid was one of the
22. Now, Mr. Reid has been strenuous in insisting that New
South Wales shall not be forced by the other colonies to surrender
its land policy, its railways, its rivers (he calls the Darling and
Murrumbidgee New South Wales rivers) to the federal control.
Yet, would you believe it, under this proposal of the Premiers,
Victoria, by combining with two or three of the smaller colonies,
could force New South Wales and Queensland to part with all
their railways, all their land policy, all their rivers, to the federal
control, even though every elector in New South Wales said No
to such an amendment. Of course, lam putting an extreme
case ; but it serves for an illustration. Y'ou see, therefore, that
the proposal of the Premiers makes an addition to the subjects
committed to the Federal Parliament too easy, from Mr. Reid’s
point of view. On the other hand, an alteration in the machinery
of the constitution, for the purpose of dealing with admitted
federal subjects, is still left too difficult. Suppose, for instance,
it were desired to alter the constitution as to the giving of
bounties by any colony from its own moneys. Under the bill,
no state can give a bounty, even from its own moneys, except
with the assent of both Houses of the Federal Parliament —and
this assent may take a long time to get. Well, it is quite possible,


under the Premiers’ proposals, for five out of every six Australian
electors to say Yes to the proposed alteration, and yet the
amendment would not be carried. Take these figures :
Yes. No.
130,000 ... 10.000 ... New South Wales
110,000 ... 10.000 ... Victoria
37,000 ... 3,000 ... Queensland
15,000 ... 16,000 ... South Australia
6,000 ... 7,000 ... West Australia
* 6,000 ... 7,000 ... Tasmania
304,000 53,000
That is to say, 304,000 vote for it and 53,000 against it, and the
53,000 have their way. The figures quoted are not at ail un-
likely—they are quite possible, having regard to the present
relative populations and the voting last year. You see the
people are asked to vote, but a minority—a very small minority,
carry their way. This is the precious dual referendum of which
Sir George Turner was so enamoured in the Convention. I say
it is not the referendum at all, but a sham, a delusion, and a
snare.
The truth is, Mr. Reid would have been much wiser if he had
seized the valuable and statesmanlike distinction laid down in
Mr. M‘Gowan’s proposal—the principle that no new subject is to
be added to the federal area without the consent of each of the
states, for they have consented to come in for certain subjects and
for no others ; but that the machinery tor dealing with Australian
subjects, federal subjects, shall be easily alterable at the will of
the majority of the Australian people. This is the ideal aimed at
in the platform of our democratic federal union. By failing to
grasp this distinction between the two kinds ot amendments, our
Premiers have opened the door to what they so much dread, more
than by anything that has been done—they have opened the door
to the gradual "unification of Australia—the throwing of more
and yet more subjects into the control of the Federal Parliament,
the further reduction of the powers of the legislatures ot the
several colonies. Just think of it again—one federal house, with
the approval of an ordinary majority of the voters and of a ma-
jority of the states, can drag into the federal area matters
which the colonies now deliberately resolve to leave to their
local parliaments —matters such as the land laws, the educa-
tion laws, the local Government laws, the factory laws, the rail-
way systems. On the other hand, an accidental small majority
in Tasmania, West Australia, and South Australia can prevent
huge majorities in New South Wales, \ ictoria, and Queensland
from making the smallest necessary change in the mere machinery


clauses. For what is good in this proposal, I give credit to Mr.
M'Gowan and his friends in Sydney, who brought into prominence
the importance of making the constitution more flexible : for what
is bad in this proposal. I regret to have to blame our own
Ministers, who have consistently opposed the giving of a liberal
power of amendment, and who have always insisted on the
precious, so-called “dual” referendum—a referendum under
which 500,000 electors may say Yes, and 50,000 may say No,
and the Noes have it.
I shall now leave the amending power, and pass to the pro-
posal for settling “ deadlocks ” between the two Houses as to a
proposed law. The expression “ deadlocks ” is inaccurately
applied to ordinary differences as to laws : it strictly applies only
where the differences are such that money cannot be obtained for
the purpose of carrying on the Queen’s Government. But let that
pass. The proposal in the bill of 1898 was to dissolve both
Houses, to send them to their electors ; and, if they still differed,
to have a joint sitting, and to let a three-flftlis majority carry the
bill, if a three-fifths majority can be obtained. Suppose 74
members in the House, and 36 members in the Senate—these
will probably be the numbers if Queensland come in, and West
Australia, if we get the six colonies to federate. That would
mean 110 members in all; and if there were 65 members for and
45 against, the 45 would carry their way. If there were 53 for
and 36 against, the 36 would carry their way. Well, as to this
joint sitting, it was I that first objected”to the three-fifths
majority. I moved in Sydney that an ordinary majority should
suffice. I was beaten. Mr. Reid, and the New South Wales
members who voted, voted against me. But in Melbourne I
brought the matter forward again, and Mr. Reid voted with me,
but we were beaten. But this three-fifths majority at the joint
sitting constituted so glaring an infringement of t,he wholesome
democratic principle of majority rule, that it was one of the main
grounds of the failure of Mr. Barton to carry the bill in New
South Wales. Now, I find that the Premiers, in deference to
the objections of New South Wales, propose to put away the
stipulation for a three-fifths majority, and an absolute majority
of the total number of members is to suffice. That is to say, if
of the 110 members 56 vote one way and 54 the other, the 56
will carry their way. But there must be at least 56 to carry the
bill. In effect, you must have a full house and no pairs. I have
not much to say against this condition. Coming straight from
the country after an election campaign on the double dissolution,
in which the proposed bill has been the main subject of contro-
versy, I have no doubt that the members pledged to support the
bill, as well as the members pledged to oppose it, will be in their
places. Therefore, I regard this proposed amendment as a


decided improvement on the late bill, although I do not attach
so much importance to it as a gain as others do. After the
double dissolution, we shall know who wins before the joint sit-
ting. The numbers will practically be “ up.” The joint sitting
will probably be very rare. Still, it is well to have the pro-
vision, as a weapon of final resort, should it be necessary, The
coon said to the colonel, who was such a dead shot, “ Don’t fire,
colonel, I'll come down and in the same way those who find
themselves in a decided minority after a double dissolution will
often yield rather than let a joint sitting take place. So this is
a distinct gain for democratic principles—a gain which, as I may
remind you, we should not have had if our too fervid orators,
with what the Argus used to describe as “ stirring perorations ”
about the glories of federation at any price, had had their way.
Next I come to the Braddon clause —the “ Braddon Blot,” as
it is called in New South Wales. That provision is to remain
for 10 years, and thereafter until the Federal Parliament other-
wise provides. The Premiers have in effect shunted the whole
financial difficulty on to the shoulders of the Federal Parliament.
This Braddon clause, which is to last for at least 10 years, pro-
vides that the Federal Parliament shall not spend more than
one-fourth of what it raises by Avay of customs and excise duties;
the three-fourths go back to the states. The difficulty arises
from the huge, the unprecedented borrowings of the Australian
colonies. We have so much interest to pay each year on our
debts that if we do not get back most of our customs revenue,
some of our colonies (including Victoria) will become insolvent.
We raise in Victoria about £2,000,000 per annum from our
customs ; and it is nearly all needed to pay the interest on our
public debt. What with the loss of the sugar duties, and the in-
tercolonial duties, and with our share of the expenditure caused
by the Commonwealth, our local treasurers will retrench to the
bone in order to avoid big deficits. This Braddon clause is a
mere makeshift to prevent too big a deficit, and it is a very im-
perfect makeshift. But the Premiers propose that it may be
swept away, after 10 years, by the mere authority of the Federal
Parliament; and this encourages me. It means more flexi-
bility—and I have always fought for flexibility. I have much
hope that during these 10 years people will come to recognize
the substantial similarity, in wealth and economic condition,
of the several colonies in proportion to their population. One
colony appears to be more prosperous than another while
loan moneys are flowing in, while it is borrowing largely and
spending lavishly. But taking one decade of years with
another, the condition of the people in the various colonies is
very much the same. Their habits of life, their food, their
expenditure, are very similar. I have hope that at the end of


the 10 years the Federal Parliament will exercise the power-
conferred by another clause of the bill of taking over all, or
proportionate parts, of the debts of the several colonies. This
will free state treasurers of perpetual worry about his state’s
financial solvency, which otherwise will altogether depend on
what an outside power, the Federal Parliament, may choose to do.
I do not like the position with which we are faced, the solvency
of Victoria depending on the course taken by the federal
government, There is no precedent that I know of for such
financial dependence of one government upon another—unless
it be the Egyptian government depending upon the British—not
a very brilliant example for us to follow. Such dependence
would mean an unwholesome confusion of federal issues with
state issues. The Victorian government would have to interest
itself most strenuously, as a government, in elections for the
Federal Parliament; and federal politics would be mixed up
with Victorian politics, to the grave detriment of both. This
Braddon clause is right, in so far as it prevents this absolute
dependence of the Victorian government on the Federal
Parliament; and the Premiers’ proposal is right in so far as it
trusts the good sense of the Australian people to devise a better
scheme hereafter, when conditions are better known. But,
unfortunately, the good sense of the Australian people is not
quite trusted. For, by the device of a states’ house, to check the
people’s house—a states’ house whose members have a longer
and firmer tenure than the members of the people’s house, and
represent whole colonies instead of districts in a colony —it is
quite possible that one-fifth of the people, paying one-fifth of the
taxes, will eventually have four-fifths of the control of the
taxation and expenditure, will have more power over money
matters than the members who represent the taxpayers in
proportion to their numbers.
With regard to the capital, I need say very little. As
compared with other matters, it is of small importance in which
colony the capital is; and we all knew it was to be in New
South Wales. But the words used by the Premiers in their
proposal will lead to some difficulty. I notice that the 10 miles
square are to be the property of the Commonwealth, as well as
subject to the jurisdiction of the Commonwealth. So far as
Crown lands are concerned, New South Wales will grant them
for nothing; but so far as private lands are concerned, the
Federal Parliament must acquire them by purchase. It must
acquire them; but the owners are not obliged to sell, and I can
foresee a nice fleecing of our federal funds. The Premiers
ought to have inserted a power to take the lands compulsorily,
after arbitration as to fair value. And they ought to have
enabled the Federal Parliament to make laws for the local


government of the federal territory and for the exercise of civil
rights by the inhabitants. But such is the pedantry of our
constitution-makers that they must repeat the blunders, as well
as the merits, of the American constitution. Just fancy the
federal territory being under the absolute rule of the Federal
Parliament, even as to lighting and drainage and police, and
the people in it having no voice whatever in the election of
federal representatives !
The provision with regard to the alteration of boundaries of
states is little different from the original bill. It means, for
instance, that Riverina cannot be separated from New South
Wales unless not only the Parliament of New South Wales
consent, but also the people of New South Wales, on a
referendum. I regret the provision in the bill, for if there is
anything to which the finger of destiny seems to point in
Australia, it is to the subdivision of these huge, artificial,
unwieldy, unmeaning divisions, defined according to arbitrary
lines of latitude or longitude, which we call separate colonies.
The bill is meant to interfere with that wholesome destiny.
As for the rivers, the Premiers propose to leave the clauses
as they stand, with all their imperfections. I say here what I
have said throughout, that the great river system of the Murray
river, with its tributaries, should be made a federal matter, to be
dealt with in the interests of Australia as a whole. As matters
stand, no one knows what can be done with the rivers—whether
New South Wales can dam back the Darling for irrigation
purposes, or Victoria make the Murray a bed of caked mud in
our summer heats. As a lawyer, I prophesy much litigation,
much strain on the federal union on the subject of the rivers. I
feel sure that if New South Wales felt that her great population
would have due Aveight in both houses of the Federal Parliament,
her representatives Avould have consented to federalise the rivers.
As for money bills, the position is as unsatisfactory as ever.
There is nothing whatever to ensure that the national house, the
House of Representatives, the house that will represent tax-
payers in proportion to their numbers, shall have supremacy in
regard to money bills, bills as to taxation and expenditure, and
thereby have the making and unmaking of governments, the
control of governments, the control of federal policy. The
power of the senate to “ request ” amendments at any stage, to
interfere with the supplies necessary to carry on the ordinary
machinery of government, still remains absolutely unaltered ;
and unless the constitution be amended in this respect, the
senate will become Avliat the senate of the United States has
become—the stronger and more prevailing house in money
matters, the house that most frequently carries its way. The
greater security and length of tenure Avliich senators will enjoy,


as compared with the members of the House of Representatives,
the election of senators by a whole colony in place of by mere
districts in a colony, their freedom from dissolution (unless in
the rare event of a double dissolution) will enable the senate to
gradually assert a superiority, will make it the maker and
unmaker of ministries. At the first no doubt the principal
ministers may be found in the House of Representatives, as a
consequence of old associations. But you may be sure that
ministers will gravitate to the stronger house, the house that
most frequently carries its way; and when the tug of war
begins between the houses, we shall soon discover where the
greater strength lies. Yet what can be more absurd and
anomalous than that the house in which one-fifth of the people
of Australia, paying one-fifth or less than one fifth of the taxes,
and having possibly three-fifths or four-fifths of the voting power
—that this house shall control the taxation and expenditure of
the other four-fifths of the people of Australia, and, by means of
control of the money, control ministers, control the policy of
Australia!
I would also have you to notice that no attempt has been
made to alter the quota system—the system under which you
cannot increase the number of members of the House of
Representatives, no matter how much the population of
Australia may increase, unless you increase rateably the number
of senators. To increase the number of senators, you must
increase the number of the states, or the number of senators for
each state. At the start we shall have one member of the House
of Representatives for (about) each 53,000 of people. We may
end by having one member for each million of people, if the
states will not subdivide themselves; and every possible
obstruction has been put in the way of subdivision.
Then, again, the Premiers propose to leave the equal
representation in the senate as an unalterable fixture, as a weight
round the neck of the federation, like the stone round the neck of
the dog that you want to drown. Remember that the bill provides
that this part of the constitution cannot be changed as other
parts can be changed. An express exception is made as to
equal representation. If New South Wales or Victoria have
100 electors for every one in Tasmania, Tasmania is to be as
strong in one whole co-equal house of the federation for ever—
unless Tasmania consents to surrender her right; that is, until
something happens that can never happen without force. With
miserable, narrow pedantry we have copied this irrevocable
provision from the United States constitution. They were
careful to avoid it in Canada and in Germany ; but what was
not good enough for Canada or Germany is treated as being
good enough for Australians. Our ministers voted for it in the


convention. They excused themselves by saying that the
smaller colonies demanded it. I deny it. Sir George Turner
treated it as an essential federal feature in Adelaide. I have
shown you what Mr. Glassey has said, speaking for Queensland.
I have shown you what the labour leaders of South Australia
have said. The working men, the masses of West Australia
and Queensland, have never yet had a say in the matter. I
would remind you also that to give undue power to electors in
sparse populations, in thinly-peopled countries, is to give
increased strength lo politicians of reactionary, of anti-liberal
principles. Liberalism and progressive principles are always
stronger in great populations, where men meet frequently,
discuss frequently, have access to the best thoughts that are
going. Reactionary principles hold their own best in thin and
scattered populations, where there is less friction of mind with
mind, less combination, less intelligence. Believe me, the
distinction which is drawn between men in populous states,
and men in non-populous states, under which a man in a
thinly-peopled state may have eight or nine or ten or 100 times
the voting power that a man in a populous state has, is a mere
blind, a mere stalking-horse for Tory principles. As I said
before, scratch a States’-house man and you will find a Tory.
Believe me, the interests of working men, of the masses, in all
the colonies are solid. What is the interest of the toilers in
Tasmania is the interest of the toilers in Victoria. There is no
need for a states’-bouse. The states, as states, have nothing to
do with matters which pertain to Australia as a whole. The
states have their own matters, reserved for the states to attend
to. The conliicts which have taken place in the United States
have not been between the populous states and the thinly-
peopled states. This teaching which we have had, about the
importance of protecting the smaller states against the greater
states, is very like the teaching which Frenchmen and Germans
have as to the clashing of the interests of France and Germany.
Soon the masses of both countries will realise the solidarity of
their common interests; and I think that the masses in the
Australian colonies will soon realise the same truth as between
themselves.
I should like here to ask what those gentlemen have to say
for themselves now who preached so strenuously last May that if
the bill were not accepted by the colonies on the 3rd of -Tune, we
might say farewell to federation for our generation, for 50 or 100
years—perhaps for ever. Sir George Turner is reported in the
Aryus, of June l, as having said that “If we neglected this op-
portunity there were very few of us who would ever have another
opportunity. If we neglected it, it would be a national disaster,
and an everlasting disgrace to the people of Australia.” Mr.


Deakin is reported in the Arpm of May 28 as having “ reminded
his hearers that it had taken many years to bring federation to its
present advanced stage, and he would venture to say that if the
people turned their back on the present opportunity another would
not present itself in the life of any man then present.” The truth
is the problem is as live a problem as ever, although the bill has
not been carried. Australia will have no rest until the problem
is settled. Federation, the union of the Australian people for sub-
jects of common concern, is a necessity of our circumstances. The
facts of our peculiar and isolated position render it necessary,
absolutely necessary. Sir George Turner is reported to have said
recently that if this attempt at federation fail, he will have nothing
to do with any further attempt. I hope that he never uttered such
an impotent and insolent threat. The forces that move Australia
to federation are too strong for any politician, however eminent, to
withstand. It will be, it must be, consummated ; but we have
nothing to lose by a wise delay. We have everything to gain by
a careful attention to the conditions of the partnership before we
enter into it under a compact binding, not only ourselves, but our
children, and our children's children, indissolubly. We have
gained by every delay which has been interposed. The bill of
1891 was better, more national, more liberal, than the Federal
Council Act. The bill of 1897 in Adelaide w r as more liberal,
more national, than the bill of 1891. It was made still more
liberal, more national, by the amendments in Sydney, and again
by the amendments in Melbourne in 1898. It has now been
made more liberal, more national, by the amendments of the
Premiers ; but there is still plenty of room for improvement. I
would like you to mark what Mr. Deakin said in the Federal
Council the other day. His object was to induce Mr. Dickson, of
Queensland, and Sir John Forrest, of West Australia, to become
advocates of the bill with such amendments as the Premiers should
recommend. They were inclined to ask, you know, for another
convention. What did Mr. Deakin say ?—“ 1 hope that, on re-
consideration, even our friends from Queensland will note that,
just as the measure of 1891 w r as an advance on the Federal
Council Act of 1884, which established this council —a distinct
advance in a liberal direction—and just as the measure of 1897-8
was another advance towards unification on the bill of 1891,
if another convention were called together there is a very large
section in New South Wales, in South Australia, and in this
colony who would endeavour still further to enlarge the popular
powers. I would ask my honourable friends, therefore, to re-
member that, if that effort were successful, they might find them-
selves confronted with what should be to them a less acceptable
measure than this. The set of the tide is unmistakable. It has
been from first to last —from the inception of the federal move


ment to the present time—in the same direction. I admit that
it cannot advance indefinitely. Complete unification is not
sought, and is certainly not provided for at present. The amend-
ments proposed by New South Wales, or some of them, are in
the same direction—which appears to be the trend of the whole
of Australia—and therefore they may well ask themselves whether
they would not act wisely in accepting this measure with its im-
perfections.” Well, you see Mr. Deakin’s advice to the Premiers
who had not consulted their electors, to Premiers who have not
been regarded as very favourable to democratic aspirations—his
advice was, “ Take this bill, for if you don’t a more democratic,
a more national bill, will follow, and be forced on you.” For the
very reasons which induced Mr. Deakin to recommend Mr.
Dickson and Sir John Forrest to take this bill, I should like to
see some delay in taking the bill. Mr. Deakin’s words are abso-
lutely true —“ The set of the tide is unmistakable”—in a liberal,
in a national Australian direction. Well, I confess that I should
prefer to take the tide at the full. We have known skippers to
wreck their ships by trying to clear the bar, and get into the open
ocean before the tide was at full. But I have done my duty, I
hope. Of course, Victoria will give a big majority for this bill,
as it is more in accord with the liberal principles of Victoria than
the previous bill. All that we can do is to keep bravely on high
the flag of a broader, a saner, a nobler Australian brotherhood.




THE PROBLEMS OF FEDERATION.
The legislative Council of New South Wales, having
refused to pass the enabling bill framed to enable the
commonwealth bill, as amended by the six Premiers in
conference, to be submitted to the vote of the people of New
South Wales for acceptance or rejection, certain additional
members were nominated by the Executive to the Council, and
the enabling bill was thereupon passed.
The following address was delivered at the Hibernian
Hall, Swanston Street, Melbourne, on the 3rd May, 1899, at
the request of the Hibernian-Australasian Catholic Benefit
Society.
C 5




The Problems of Federation.
AN ADDRESS BY MR. H. B. HIGGINS, M.L.A., DELIVERED AT THE
REQUEST OF THE HIBERNIAN AUSTRALASIAN CATHOLIC BENEFIT
SOCIETY, ON MAY 3, 1899, AT THE HIBERNIAN HALL, MELBOURNE.
WHEN your great association asked me, some two months
ago, to give an address on federation, I thought it better
to decline, until we should learn the fate of the Federal
Enabling bill in New South Wales. But now the bill has been
passed by the New South Wales Parliament —with a certain
strain upon the constitution, it is true (A) —but it has been passed ;
and the federal scheme of 1898, with the Premiers’ amendments,
is to be put for acceptance or rejection before some, or all, of the
Australian colonies. My address this evening will therefore
touch a pressing issue of politics ; but I do not want to deal with
the subject in the controversial spirit of an advocate or an
opponent. Perhaps we have had a little too much mere advocacy
and recrimination ; too many “ stirring perorations,” and too
little quiet thinking. I should like you, if possible, to look at
the bill as the people of Australia will look at it 50 or 100 years
hence. But that is the difficulty. It is very hard to get people
to think over consequences even 10 or 20 years hence ; and it is
still harder to get them to realize that this bill is not an ordinary
bill, which can be readily repealed or amended if it do not suit.
It is, of course, to be a final and binding compact, from which
the people of Australia are not to extricate themselves, except by
defiance of the law —by revolution. Even revolution would be
a difficult matter, if—as is intended by the bill—the Imperial
power is to be always held over our heads ready to keep the
peace and to enforce the law. You probably know that I took
the responsibility, although a member of the Federal Convention,
of opposing the late bill. I opposed it, not because I did not see
the value and the need of federation, but because I conceived
that the Australian people are worthy of something better than
that bill. I regarded it as a bill which would prevent the true
fraternal union of the people of Australia in matters of common
concern, and for ever —as a bill got by pedantry out of provin-
(A) The Government of New South Wales nominated additional
members to the Legislative Council of New South Wales, when the
Council refused to pass the Federal Enabling bill, which provided that
the Commonwealth bill of 1898, with the Premier’s amendments,
should be submitted to the vote of the people.


cialism—a bill to perpetuate provincialism. It is, therefore, a
matter of much gratification to me to find that the amendments
made by the Premiers, amendments forced upon them by the
criticisms of opponents of the bill, are in the direction which I
regard as right. I cannot find that any one of the Premiers’
amendments is retrogressive, reactionary. We are only be-
ginning, however, to appreciate what a true federation means.
The movement, indeed, is about 50 years old. It Avas mooted
when the separation of Port Phillip from New South Wales was
discussed. But the details of the federal scheme have never
been properly faced till about two years ago. In 1891 the dele-
gates came together with the notion that they had merely to give
to Australia the peculiar constitution of the United States, with
something, more or less, of the British system of responsible
Government thrown in to flavour it. Then we sat down in 1897
with the 1891 scheme before us, and with certain fundamental
assumptions —unjustifiable assumptions—as to what is necessary
for any federal scheme. lam not surprised at our making such
a mistake. As Guizot said : “Of all the systems of government
and political guarantee it may be asserted, without fear of con-
tradiction, that the most difficult to establish and render
effectual is the federated system: a system which consists in
leaving in each place a province, in every separate society all
that portion which can abide there, and in taking from it only so
much of it as is indispensable to a general society, in order to
carry it to the centre of this larger society, and there to embody
it under the form of a central Government.”
The essential problems of a federation, as you see, are to
separate the federal subjects from the subjects left to the several
states, and to devise appropriate machinery for the new Federal
State. Our object, therefore, in Australia should be to create an
organization which shall give effect to general Australian public
opinion on Australian subjects, on subjects which the several
states recognise to be matters of general Australian concern; to
get Australians to act together as a nation in national Australian
matters ; and any device which interferes with this end is a
mistake. But the reasoning of our political leaders has been
something like this:
The United States have a Federal Constitution ;
The United ’States have been remarkably successful in
achieving wealth ;
Therefore, the United States Constitution should be
adopted by Australia.
1 fear there is some truth in Gdthe's criticism of the English—
that they are pedants. When concrete, physical difficulties are
before them, they are more practical, probably, than any nation.


But m dealing with the distant and the general, they lose sight
of realities of things, they follow what is conventional, they are
led by phrases, they mistake the temporary for the permanent.
The British Constitution has been a great success, because it
has never been set out in black and white, in a systematic, final,
unbending scheme. If it had been so set out, say at the
revolution of 1688, it would probably have been drawn up on
the basis of the existing conditions, so as to bind future genera-
tions, and would not now be showing the results of a free,
healthy expansion during 200 years. Each century gradually
modifies the constitution to suit its needs. There is, fortunately
for us, no restriction whatever on the power of the British
Parliament to change the constitution absolutely as it pleases.
A constitutional change may be made by an ordinary majority in
two houses, by the same machinery as is necessary for putting
an extra penny per gallon on imported wine, or for amending
the law as to registration of dogs. By the British constitution
the good sense and justice of the members, responsible as they
are to the people, are implicitly and unreservedly trusted. This
trust, this confidence, is what we should find in any Australian
Federal Constitution. If you are not to trust the people as a
whole in dealing with the people’s affairs as a whole, whom are
you to trust ? We certainly cannot put greater trust in the
wisdom of a lifeless piece of parchment, written now, but sure to
be unsuitable for the conditions of future centuries. Now,
keeping steadily in view the two main problems in any federal
scheme —the division of subjects, and the devising of appropriate
machinery—and keeping in mind also the advantage of allowing
the machinery, when worn out or inappropriate, to be replaced
or improved, I would have you to notice, first, the claptrap of
certain favourite arguments which were used to push forward
the late bill. “ Don’t bother about the amending power,” say
some; “do you mean to tell me that people of Anglo-Saxon
blood will submit to any constitution that does not suit them ?”
Yes, Ido mean to say so. That Anglo-Saxon bravado is rather
inapt in this connection. If there is one characteristic which is
more marked than any other in our British and American
communities, it is the general respect for, and obedience to the
law, so long as it is law. A small minority, if it has the law on
its side, has, with us, much the best of a struggle. During the
Chartist rising there was a picture in Punch of one of the
enrolled special constables meeting a huge and fierce Chartist
labourer. The special constable is a little shopkeeper, who
would be helpless in the hands of his big brawny opponent.
“ Now, look here,” says the little fellow, “if you kill me, why
it’s murder ; but if I kill you, it’s all right.” That is the way
Anglo-Saxons regard the law. In the United States also, in


1861, the leaders of the southern states had to convince their fol-
lowers that secession was within the powers conferred or reserved
by the constitution before the southerners would consent to secede ;
and Lincoln and his friends had to instil into the northerners,
and especially the northern democrats, the conviction that the
constitution made the union perpetual, and that he was going to
fight against individuals and not against States, before the North
would unite to prevent secession. ’Why, the whole fight was
based on rival interpretations of the constitution —each party
claimed to be upholding the law, not breaking it.
Another argument used with an air of great profundity is,
“ History shows that perfect constitutions never work well. Do
not attempt to get a perfect constitution—take what you can
get, you can never get all you want.” I suppose the natural
corollary of this doctrine is that we should try to make the
constitution imperfect—put flaws into it on purpose, for fear it
should be perfect. But the doctrine is not true. What perfect
constitution has not worked well ? If you show me, in history,
any constitution that has not worked well, I will simply say it
is not a perfect constitution, or even a workably good con-
stitution. Where, then, are these historical instances ? A
constitution is, in this respect, like a piece of machinery—it is
meant to work, and if it does not work it is not perfect, it is not
even good. But my objection to the late bill was, not that it
was not perfect, not even that it was bad in material points ; but
that no efficient power was reserved for the future people of
Australia to make it better when they want to, and that
the bill actually created insurmountable obstacles in the way
of improvement.
“ Oh, but,” we were told by Mr. Deakin, “ we have a power of
amendment. Not too easy a power of amendment—a healthy
man does not want to be always taking drugs.” This was a
fetching argument; but, I say it with all respect, this also is
claptrap. A healthy man does not want to be always taking
drugs ; but that is no reason for putting drugs out of his reach.
I want to know, are we to treat the free people of Australia as a
two-year-old child for ever, from whom we put the bottles away
under lock and key, or so high that he cannot reach them ? Take
this for certain, that any restriction on the power of amendment
is really prompted by a distrust of the people, of the general
average of good sense and just feeling in the community. Finally,
and as the clinching argument, our leaders in politics shook
their wise heads and assured us, “ If we do not take the federation
offered to us by this bill, there will be no federation in our time,
or for 50 or 100 years. The minor states have gone to the
utmost limit of concession, and will yield no more.” What do
we find? That federation is as live an issue as ever, and presses


on us with irresistible force until the problem has been solved;
and that within the past week one of the minor states, South
Australia, has agreed, by a majority of nearly four to one, to the
bill with amendments which operate against the privileges of the
minor states, whereas it agreed to the late bill by a majority of
only two to one. So that argument also is claptrap.
Now, since this federal problem has been before us, I have
read a great deal about the history and the development of politics
in the United States, and I say unhesitatingly that the chief
difficulties and the chief sores in public affairs of the United
States have been owing to the inflexibility of the constitutions of
the federation and of the states. Take, for instance, the move-
ment for the reform of the public service. You know that they
have had in the United States, for very many years, what is
called the “ spoils system.” The victorious party at the election
for the presidency removed the public servants appointed by the
other party, and put in office men of its own. Democrats were
turned out by the republicans, and republicans were turned out
by the democrats. You have thus two great armies of partisans,
deeply interested in the success of their party—the office holders
and the office-seekers. What was the difficulty in the way of
abolishing this pernicious system ? It was a difficulty of the
constitution, and it is almost impossible to amend the
constitution: for the constitution gives the president the
right to nominate public officers and to remove them, and no
Act of Congress can take it from him. Take again the peculiar
difficulties which exist in the United States in consequence of
the tremendous powers and influence of the great corporations.
These corporations, existing for private gain, are strong enough
frequently to control legislatures ; they are the centres of “ log-
rolling” and corruption; they often levy blackmail on the
public. We have hardly anything to be compared with them
in Australia. Professor Adams has shown, in his work on
“ Public Debts,” how the corporations have attained their position,
and have seized monopolies which the states ought to hold or to
control. It appears that the State Constitutions have, generally,
provisions forbidding the state to borrow, limiting the power of
the state to pledge its credit for public purposes, debarring the
state from carrying on public undertakings ; and, in imitation of
the Federal Constitution, the State Constitutions are made too
rigid. The result is that the wide area of operations in businesses
wdiicli have the nature of monopolies, from which the state is
excluded, has to be thrown open to private greed, to huge
financial companies. The corporations do the work which the
state ought to do ; and they work for their own gain, whereas
the state would have to keep in view the general public advantage.
Take again the great civil war of the sixties. When the crisis


was approaching, desperate efforts were made to secure now one
amendment, now another, of the constitution—amendments
which would have satisfied the great body of moderate men of
both parties, and prevented that terrible waste of life and of
resources which the war involved. But the amendments could
not be carried—the constitution was too difficult to amend ; and
the contending parties flew to arms. From 1804 to 1865
not one amendment was carried in the constitution of the United
States, although the conditions of civilization were changing
more rapidly than in any previous epoch of the world, and
nowhere so rapidly as in the United States. Years were spent
in endeavours to procure an amendment of the constitution
providing for a reform in the mode of choosing presidential
electors ; but the efforts were fruitless. Strenuous attempts were
made to get an amendment of the constitution allowing congress
to make internal improvements, to construct roads and canals;
but to no purpose. As Mr. H. J. Ford sayS in his masterly
treatise of last year on the “ Rise and Growth of American
Politics ” : “The conditions required for amendment of the
constitution are so many, and so rigorous, that in the
ordinary course of politics it is impossible to satisfy them.’’
“In the ordinary course of politics ” —yes. It is true that
there were three amendments passed from 1865 to 1870
—amendments which secured the civil rights of the negro
and abolished slavery. But these amendments were the fruit of
the civil war; and even then they could not have been carried,
only that the conquerors treated the rebel states and the rebel
inhabitants as having their federal rights suspended in conse-
quence of insurrection.
Now, is it not an amazing piece of pedantry, that in spite of
the experience of the United States, the framers of the Australian
constitution in 1891 and in 1898 imitated the constitution of the
United States in its rigidity? If the late bill had been carried,
not a word could be amended, unless you got, first, an absolute
majority of the whole number of members of each house ; and
that, as we know from our Victorian experience, is very difficult
to get. Until the two Houses agreed by an absolute majority in
each, no more could be done. But afterwards you had to get a
poll of all Australian electors ; and, even if five-sixths, or nine-
tenths of the Australian electors voted in favour of the amend-
ment, it was not necessarily carried. You had to get a majority
of the states to consent also. You might possibly find all the
electors in the three most populous colonies, and nearly half of
the electors in the three less populous colonies, in favour of the
proposal; but the proposal would be treated as rejected. They
told us that a federal constitution ought to be made more difficult
to amend than an ordinary constitution. With one qualification


which I shall state presently, that is another piece of clap-trap.
There is no valid reason whatever for making a federal constitu-
tion more rigid than the constitution of a single state ; the more
elastic the power is, in the hands of an order-loving people, the
better it is, except, it may be reasonably said, as to the subjects
of legislation to be committed to the Federal State. Any state
entering into a federal bond may reasonably say, “We are willing
to federate as to certain matters of common concern—matters
which can better be dealt with by the people of the federation, as
a whole, than by the people of each state separately. We are
willing to give up to the common control questions of customs
duties, of foreign commerce, of bankruptcy, of defence. We are
willing to ‘ pool ’ these matters. But you must not take away
any other subject of legislation without our consent. We are
not willing to give up to the federation questions of education, of
local Government, of land laws. The general mass of public
opinion, through the federation, should have its way as to the
matters which we have pooled, not as to the subjects which we
have not pooled.” Now, it was on these lines that Mr.
M'Gowan, the leader of the labour party in New South Wales,
tabled, and carried, his amendment of the late bill. He was
willing to yield to the alleged dread of unification so far as to
provide that as to subjects reserved by the states, and kept from
the federation, no state should be compelled to part with any of
them without its consent. But, as to Australian concerns—as
to admitted Australian subjects—the majority of Australians
should rule. I think you will admit that this position is consis-
tent and reasonable.
Now, what do the Premiers propose ? I was agreeably sur-
prised that they proposed anything. Mr. Reid had voted in the
New South Wales Parliament against the main part of Mr.
McGowan’s amendment. Sir George Turner had not shown any
appreciation of the importance of the matter —Premiers have a
lot of things to think of. They are more disposed to look at the
immediate exigencies of their Ministry than at the future results
of policy. As for the other Premiers, it was to be feared that
they would refuse to assent to any proposal tending to diminish
the power of the less populous states. But the pressure of the
opinion of the New South Wales Assembly, and of the opponents
of the late bill in New South Wales and in Victoria, had a
marked effect. The Premiers propose to take away one of the
obstructions to amendment; they propose to render unnecessary
the consent of one of the Houses, if the other House carry the
amendment twice, within the same session with an interval of
three months, by an absolute majority. Ido not deny that this
is a great step in advance. It means, as I have said elsewhere,
the taking away of one of the four consents which the late bill


rendered necessary before there could be any amendment of the
constitution. It means, in all probability, that the general
public opinion of Australia, which will be fairly represented in
the House of Representatives, will be able to appeal from an
obstructive senate direct to the people and to the states. We
shall only have to look for three consents instead of four to any
amendment which general public opinion may require—the con-
sent of the National House, the consent of the Australian nation
on a referendum, and the consent of a majority of the states.
But now let me indicate to you four obvious objections to the
power of amendment as it has been left by the Premiers’ pro-
posals. In the first place, as you have to get the consent of the
states, as well as of the nation, you are liable to have
general Australian public opinion defied by a petty minority
of voters. Five out of six voters may say yes to the amend-
ment, and the sixth may say no; and the noes have it. As
you have to get the consent of the states, 10,000 voters in
Western Australia will count for as many, will have as
much legal force, as 100,000 voters in New South Wales. Un-
due weight is given to voters in thinly-peopled colonies ; and it
must be remembered that in thinly peopled countries, in
scattered communities, public intelligence is not so awake, public
spirit is not so developed, progressive principles are not so well
apprehended, as in the midst of large populations. In the second
place, the proposal tends distinctly to unification, instead of
federation of the Australian colonies. It opens the way for the
federal power to encroach more and more on the powers reserved
at present to the several states, to add subject after subject to
the scope of the federal constitution, and, perhaps, finally to
leave the States’ Parliaments with no business to do. For
instance, the land laws and education are matters reserved to
the states. Suppose that a movement is set on foot to add
education to the federal scope, to make it one of the subjects for
the federal parliament. All that has to be done is to get one
more than the half of the members of the House of Repre-
sentatives to vote for the change, and (after the senate has twice
rejected it), to get a majority of the people of Australia, and four
out of six states, or three out of five states to consent. New
South Wales may find its land laws and its land revenue
appropriated by the federal power, against the wishes of all the
New South Wales members, and against the wishes of all the
New South Wales people. This result is owing to the Premiers
having failed to see the point of Mr. McGowan’s amendment as
carried by the New South Wales Assembly. Unification of all
the Australian colonies may, or may not, be a good thing. But
that is not what is meant by federation ; and if the minor states
consent to a proposal so obviously pointing towards unification,


it shows me that they will consent to almost anything—that our
fear of deterring them from federation if we did not allow them
certain unjustifiable concessions was wholly groundless. The
tendency of the larger, the federal organisation, is always to
absorb the functions of the smaller powers, the states. In the
third place, it will be actually easier for a Government, when it
finds that the two houses disagree on an important measure, to
get it carried as an amendment of the constitution than as an
ordinary law under the constitution. Suppose that an Old Age
Pension bill is to be brought in, and it is known that the Senate
will reject it, or (what is much the same thing) so amend it as
to defeat its object. The Ministry know that on its rejection by
the Senate there is no course open—if it be brought in as an
ordinary bill under the powers given by the constitution —but to
get a double dissolution, a dissolution of the two houses ; and, if
the bill be again rejected, there is a joint sitting of the members
of both houses. But honourable members do not like dis-
solutions ; and they will like dissolutions still less when £4OO
per annum is attached to a seat in the Federal Parliament.
Pressure will be brought on ministers to bring in the proposal
in the form of an amendment of the constitution. There is
nothing to hinder such a course ; the constitution does not limit
the nature of the amendments which may be proposed; and
arguments can easily be found in favour of making such an
important proposal a constitutional concern. By this course,
when the senate obstructs, there will be no need for members
to undergo the worry, the risk, the expense of a general election;
they will retain their seats, and throw the responsibility of
accepting or rejecting the measure on the electors. This aspect
of the proposal of the Premiers seems to me to present very
grave dangers. I may add that there are other reasons to
induce a Government to adopt the system of legislation by way
of amendment of the constitution rather than by way of making
an ordinary law under the constitution. I refer to the provisions
of sec. 57 of the bill, which prevent a double dissolution within
six months before the time at which the House of Repre-
sentatives would be dissolved by ordinary effluxion of time.
The senate will generally be able to prevent the double disso-
lution by adopting Fabian tactics of delay until the six months’
term has begun.
In the fourth place, the Premiers still retain that exception to
the amending power, which forbids change in the system of
equal representation of the several states in the senate. This
system, which gives a colony like Tasmania equal weight, in
one of the two co-equal houses of the federal parliament, with
New South Wales or Victoria, which gives voters in a scattered
and sparse population more political weight than voters in a


dense population; and the smaller the population the greater
the weight of the voter, the larger the population, the less the
weight of the voter ; this system is to be continued for all time.
The bill, as it left the Premiers’ hands, still provides that no
amendment of the constitution can effect thi: inequality of
voting power, an inequality which must grow as time increases.
An equal representation of the states means an unequal, a
glaringly unequal, representation of the people. We cannot
safely prophesy ; but everything at present points to the existence
of a great population on the eastern and south-eastern sides of
this continent. But even if the population of an eastern state
should be one hundred, one thousand times, as great as the
population of a drought-stricken sandy desert in the west, the
desert will have as much voting power in one of the two equal
houses of parliament, unless the people of the desert consent
to forego their advantage. It is just the same as if there were
in the Victorian constitution a provision, unalterable, that for all
time the County of Croajingolong, or one of the north-western
counties of the Wimmera, should have the same number of
members in one of the Houses of the Victorian Parliament, as
this County of Bourke.
Now, this extraordinary system has been adopted in Chinese
imitation of the constitution of the United States, in disregard
of the bitter experience of the United States, in disregard of the
more recent examples set by Canada and by Germany. If you
read carefully the history of the United States, you will find that
the unjust Mexican war, the annexation of Texas, the furious
struggles in the creation of the western states, were owing to this
system. The slave-holding south struggled to get into the union
as many slave-holding states as possible, as this tended to keep
up the preponderance of the slave-holding interests in the senate,
where each state had equal power. The slave-holding interests
had no chance in the other House of Congress, where the great
populations of the rapidly developing north had their due weight,
and where the growing public opinion against slavery had due
expression. The population of the Southern States remained
almost stationary, while the Northern States absorbed all the
population that Europe could send them. It was the struggle
over slavery in the territories, or not yet organised states, that
led to the great civil war. It was equal representation that
defeated the beneficent proposal for an arbitration treaty with
England four or five years ago. It was pointed out that the
treaty was thrown out in the senate by the “ rotten borough and
sage-bush states,” such as Nevada and Kansas. It is hard also
to over-rate the importance of having particular interests repre-
sented in any house in proportion to their popular strength—in
proportion to the number of people affected by that interest. Mr.


Ford says (1898): “In the house, the weight of particular in-
terest is proportioned to their popular strength, but in the senate
there may be a very great disproportion. Nevada, with a popu-
lation of 45,761, has the same representation in the senate as
New York with 5,997,853. Thirty-two million people in 10
states are represented by 20 senators, while 29,000,000 people in
other states have a senatorial representation of 68. On Feb. 1,
1896, the senate substituted a free silver bill for the treasury-
relief bond bill passed by the house, by a vote of 42 to 35 ; but
the minority represented nearly 8,000,000 more people than the
majority.” The truth is, we have been pedantic enough to
accept and to treat as a fundamental axiom of federation, a device
which was accepted with great unwillingness and distrust by the
strongest men among the framers of the constitution of the
United States —accepted by them merely because the only alter-
native was anarchy and loss of independence. It is interesting
to know that so clear a thinker as the late Walter Bageliot
utterly repudiated the device as being essential to federation ;
and Dicey and Freeman concur with him. When the American
fathers of the constitution were urging the people to accept it in
1789, their stock argument, when they had to excuse this absurd
device, was that the House of Representatives, with the people
on its side, would always be in the ascendant. It was supposed
that the House of Representatives would be another House of
Commons; and for some time there is no doubt that it was the
stronger house. But the pressure of stubborn facts, in the
struggles between the houses, has altogether reversed the posi-
tion. The senate has become the stronger house. The highest
prerogative of the House of Representatives, the control of sup-
plies, has been relinquished. “ The senate loads up the
appropriations with grants which should have no consideration
except as independent bills reported from competent committees.”
It is in the senate that the great party leaders, such as Webster,
Clay, and Calhoun, were found. “At present,” says Ford, “ the
Government is subject to the rule of an oligarchy entrenched in
the senate.” In a recent article in the Forum, Senator Hoar—
although a zealous defender of the senate —says as follows :
“We choose our chief magistrate every four years, and the
members of one house of congress every two years. One-third
of the senators go out of office every two years. The term of
office of an individual senator is six years. The senate is con-
trolled by the majority of the states. A majority of the people
cannot change the policy of the country unless a majority of the
states also consent. A senator must be a citizen of the state
from which he is chosen. Thus, no change in the popular
opinion can compel a change of policy during the four years of
the president’s term, nor can it compel a change of policy in a


body where great and small states meet as equals, unless a
majority of the states agree to tlie change. But the purpose and
desire of the numerical majority of the American people may be
baffled tor twenty years by the local interests and feeling of a
majority of the states, and those, perhaps, the smallest in popu-
lation.”
The subject of the dominance of the United States senate
brings me, by a natural transition, to consider whether the same
result may be expected to occur under the amended bill, and, in
this connection to consider especially the money powers of the two
houses. I am surprised that in the criticisms of the late bill in
New South Wales more prominence has not been given to the
money powers of the two houses. There is in the late bill some
affectation of limiting the power of the senate with regard to money
bills ; but the limitation of its powers is verbal, not real. Can
anyone point out any difference, except in words, between sending
back a money bill to the House of Representatives with amend-
ments proposed by the senate, and sending it back with amend-
ments “ suggested ”or « requested ” by the senate ? There is
none. It was stated that the Legislative Council of South
Australia has had a similar power for many years. This state-
ment is not true, as will be obvious from a reference to a paper
laid upon the table of the convention, compiled by Sir Richard
Baker. The powers of the two houses with regard"to money bills
will be equal; but the position of the senate and of its individual
members will be stronger; and the senate will, as in the United
States, assert its superiority in disputes as to money bills.
Consider that the House of Representatives has to undergo a
general eletion every three years at least, and that the senate
has not; consider that a senator holds office for six years ; that
the senate is practically continuous, half the members having to
retire every three years ; consider that a senator can boast that
he has behind him the votes of the electors of a whole state,
while a member of the other house represents only a district.
Which, now, will be the stronger house when the tug-of-war
comes ? We are going to try to apply the system of responsible
government, ministries responsible to parliament, ministers
resting their position on a parliamentary majority, to a
constitution which creates two houses co-equal in all powers.
It lias never been done before; and no one has shown
how it can be done now—unless, perhaps, if one of the
houses secures an advantage by the prestige and tenure of its
members. The senate will have such an advantage. It will have
equal authority and more strength. At first, probably, the chief
ministers of state will be in the House of Representatives. But
strength and weight will tell, and pretty soon. That strength
and weight, in political conflicts, will be found to be in the senate,


and to the senate ministers will gravitate. The chief control of
ministers, the whiphand over ministries, will pass to the senate ;
and the house in which the minority of the people of Australia
holds the great majority of votes, the house in which one-fifth
or one-sixth of the people, paying one-fifth or one-sixtli of the
taxes, will have tliree-fifths or four-fifths of the voting power—
that house will have the chief voice in the taxation and expendi-
ture of the people of Australia !
Suppose, then, that you find that, as in the United States, the
senate has the dominance in money matters ; suppose that, in
consequence, it has the chief voice in the making and unmaking
of ministries; suppose that the ministry and the senate are in
accord as to policy, what effective check is to be found on the
power of this “ oligarchy entrenched in the senate ” —to use
Mr. Ford’s words ? In the United States they have the president,
with a power of veto on all proposed laws, a power which is not
merely nominal, as in the case of England or of the British
colonies. The president of the United States has, during the
term of Ins office, extraordinary executive powers —powers in
active exercise, powers which exceed the powers of any consti-
tutional monarch. The president elected (practically) by popular
voice, is the check on the senate of the United States. He
voices the aspirations, the views, of the great bulk of the people.
And when the senate, in endeavouring to further particular and
private interests, comes into collision with the general interest,
the president, with his tremendous power, can protect the general
interest. There is not any such protection provided by our
constitution. The ministry, supported by parliament, can do
anything ; and as I have pointed out, the senate will have the
predominant voice in parliament. I will confess to you that I
feel much misgiving about the position : and I think that, under
the circumstances, you will not be surprised. The evils which
have arisen in the United States will arise here, and in an
accentuated form. For the senate will be stronger than the
United States senate, by virtue of the fact that it is elected
directly by the people of the several states, and not by the legis-
latures of the states ; and the people of Australia will not have
the protection of a president’s power.
You will have observed that I have not said much about the
financial problems dealt with in this bill. It is not because Ido
not recognise the difficulty of the problems; it is not because I
admire the attempt at solution. The crux of the difficulty lies in
the unprecedented borrowing of these colonies, and the huge
annual interest which has to be paid on our debts. Victoria, for
instance, has to give up to the federation all her customs and
excise revenue, and, unless she receive the greater part of it back,
she would become insolvent. The interest on her debts, and the


customs and excise revenues, are, at present, about the same
amount —£2,000,000 a year. Tasmania’s position is still more
critical. Therefore, it was that Sir Edward Braddon proposed
and carried a clause, that of the nett revenue from customs and
excise not more than one fourth should be used by the federation
—the other three-fourths should be distributed among the
states. But in what proportion? There is the rub. The
bill provides that, for five years after uniform duties have
been imposed—that is to say, for about seven years in
all—each colony shall be credited with the amount collected in
it. After the seven years, the Federal Parliament has to settle
the proportions for distribution. There is a pretty apple of
discord, of perpetual discord, thrown among the colonies. If
one wanted to create bad feeling among the colonies, to promote
dissensions, to encourage “ log-rolling,” and all kinds of unfair
combinations of states against states, I do not think we could
desire anything better than this, especially when it is combined
with a states’ house, in which small populations are given an
unfair advantage over large populations. The only modification
of the financial clauses proposed by the Premiers is that the
Braddon arrangement, by which three-fourths of the customs
and excise are to be returned to the states, is to last only for ten
years, and thereafter until the Parliament otherwise provides;
and, during the same term, the Government may grant any
state financial assistance. So, after the ten years, the Federal
Parliament will be free to raise merely enough revenue to answer
its own purposes : it will altogether depend on the Federal
Parliament whether the states shall be solvent or not. There
need be no surplus to return; and, if there be any surplus,_ the
Parliament has absolute power to say how it is to be divided.
On the one hand, it is easy to foresee that a State Government
will have to use all the power and the influence that it has to
induce the Federal Parliament to adopt such a customs and
excise tariff as will suit the needs of that state. This means an
unwholesome importation of state issues and state party struggles
into the elections for the federal houses, which is contrary to all
the canons of political wisdom, based on political experience in
all constitutional countries. On the other hand, if, and so long
as a large surplus is secured for any state, the Executive
Government of that state receives a large revenue, for which it
is not dependent on the state parliament, or on the people who
are behind the state parliament. If there is one thing which
the history of British liberty teaches us clearly, it is that the
Government should not be in a position to get money without
the consent of Parliament, from some source outside Parliament.
Now, the ridicule which was so freely poured out here on the
New South Wales objections to the “ Braddon blot,” as it was


called, was simply silly. We ought to understand an opponent’s
views before we condemn them. An attempt has been made
here, and is still being made, to make out that all the opposition
in New South Wales to the late Federal Bill was owing to
jealousy of Victoria, and the desire to get the capital in Sydney.
This attempt is unfair, and exposes us to deserved ridicule in
return. I may say, in passing, that I have received, this
evening, copies of the speeches of Mr. Holman and Mr. Haynes
to Sydney audiences ; and in those speeches 1 cannot find one
reference to the question of the capital being in Sydney. That
point seems to interest rather the property-owning and importing
classes than the great masses ol the people. The tact is, that
New South Wales can afford to do at present with much less
customs and excise duties than we can, tor it has a great land
revenue. It collects about £1,500,000 at present; alter federa-
tion the tariff would have to be increased so tar as to enable
Tasmania and all the other states to meet their financial obliga-
tions, that is, to a sum estimated at £10,000,000 or £11,000,000.
Of this great sum, New South Wales would raise not tar from
£4,000,000, which means a great increase in the taxation of New
South Wales during the first seven years ; the extra amount
raised by New South Wales would go, wholly or in part, to the
New South Wales Treasurer, to increase his revenue —it would
not go back to the people’s pockets. After the seven years,
parliament would have to provide the mode in which the surplus
revenue from customs and excise should be distributed; and
here, if not before, comes in the great temptation for the minor
colonies to use their unfair advantage in the senate, to combine,
and enjoy much of the money which New South M ales taxpayers
contribute. Therefore, it is not so wonderful that New South
Wales objected to equal representation in the senate ; and we
come back to the same point, the constitutional flaw. If our
leaders had struggled with the same zeal to give to New South
Wales the just position as to representation to which her great
population entitles her, as they have struggled to give West
Australia and Tasmania advantages to which they are not justly
entitled, most of the difficulties of federation would vanish, or,
at least, any temporary injustice or inconvenience could be
ignored in the confidence that they would be rectified by the
general good sense and justice of the united people of Australia.
No doubt Mr. Reid says that he has obtained the utmost con-
cessions that he could from the minor states; but you must
recollect the peculiar and difficult position of Mr. Reid and his
Ministry. I firmly believe that New South Wales could have
obtained federation on any just terms that it thought fit to
impose.
I am fully sensible, as aware as any of you can be, that this
Q 0


address of mine cannot be attractive, cannot appeal powerfully to
the sentiment and imagination of the people, will not even be read
or considered by the great masses of voters who have so many oilier
more urgent things of the present time to attend to, than the effects
of a proposed constitution on their children and their country.
But you have invited me to address you on this subject, and I am
trying honestly to give you my views, after careful consideration.
I have even reduced my thoughts into writing, lest I should be
tempted into inaccuracy or exaggeration. I am not asking you
to vote in one way or the other should the question of the accep-
tance of the amended bill be submitted to you. The agricultural
classes here seem to confine their attention to the effect of the
abolition of intercolonial duties on their land, and the prices ob-
tained for their produce. The commercial classes seem to treat
the proposal for federation as they would treat a mere proposal
for an alteration of the tariff; and to look to immediate effects on
trade, and to a possible temporary advantage over rivals in busi-
ness operations. Melbourne importers are eager that Sydney
importers shall be put under the same tariff obstructions as
themselves ; and Sydney importers are eager that they shall not.
There is quite as much selfishness in much of our Melbourne
enthusiasm for federation as in much of the Sydney opposition
to it. . As Yaltour says: “ Eight and justice, put in the balance
with interest and passion, weigh as little as bank notes against
a handful of big pennies.” One might say, that in this great
movement, pecuniary interests are like cash, the general good of
future Australians are like mere promissory notes, which may or
may not be met—and, if met, this generation will not receive the
proceeds. The watchfulness of many who have long fought for
the cause of liberal reform seems to have been lulled to sleep by
two sops—the concession of the principle of one elector one vote
for the two houses, and the power to dissolve both houses on a
contest between them. To this latter concession there has been
now added, by the agreement of the Premiers, a provision that if
there should be a joint sitting of the two houses after a double
dissolution, and then renewed disagreement, an absolute
majority of the total number of members of both houses shall
suffice to carry the proposed law. Of course, this is an improve-
ment, I am bound to say so, for it was I who proposed it, twice.
I was beaten by a big majority in Sydney, and afterwards by a
reduced majority in Melbourne. But I regard it as particularly
valuable, in that, taken in conjunction with the liberalising of
the amending power, it shows that public opinion is in process of
ripening. With every new discussion, we are coming nearer
and nearer the true goal. “ But,” you are told, “we are not
to go on improving it for ever. The longer you deliberate,
the better the scheme, no doubt; but that means that there will


be no federation in our time.” Well, I quite admit that no
federal scheme should be rejected on any but the gravest grounds ;
that we should not wait for a perfect constitution. But this
makes a flexible constitution all the more important. We
want to federate now, even if the scheme has many faults; and
we ought to provide that the scheme shall contain within it-
self the means of readily adjusting itself to new conditions
and of rectifying errors. Please to understand that I am not
singular in pressing the importance of a flexible constitution.
We need not, it is true, be guided by the judgments of outsiders
as to what we are doing. But it is interesting to note a few
thoughtful opinions. Dr. Burgess, in his philosophical treatise
on the United States constitution, says of the amending power :
“ This is the most important part of a constitution
A constitution which may be imperfect and erroneous in its other
parts can be easily supplemented and corrected, if only the state
be truthfully organised within the constitution; but if this be
not accomplished, error will accumulate until nothing short of
revolution can save the life of the state.” Speaking of the pro-
vision that the constitution shall be unchangeable by amend-
ment with regard to equal representation of the states in the
senate, he calls the provision : “ Confused and unnatural .
. the state, as organised in the constitution, must be the
final judge of this (equal representation). No constitution‘is
complete which undertakes to except anything from the power
of the state as organised in the constitution. Such a con-
stitution invites the reappearance of a sovereignty back of the
constitution, i.e., it invites revolution.” Mr. Leonard Courtney,
M.P. (speaking of certain evils in the system of electing the
President) says : “ Far the best way out of the difficulty would
doubtless be to amend the constitution, but this is almost an
impossible process. The dead hands of the founders of the
Republic have tied up their successors in bonds, happily few in
number, etc The great danger of the United States
in the future may, perhaps, lie in the difficulty of obtaining
relief by constitutional means from the proved inexpediency, if
not injustice, of constitutional provision.” Dr. Goldwin Smith
says: “ The constitution of the United States is practically
unchangeable Constitutions, like every work of
man, wear out; as Bacon says, ‘ What men do not alter for the
better, Time, the Great Innovator alters for the worse but you
might as well invoke an Avatar of Vishnu as call for an organic
amendment of the American constitution. The article which
gives Nevada an equal representation in the Senate with New
York is practicably immutable.” The Spectator, one of the
most influential of the London weeklies, says (after the Adelaide
convention) : “ Australia must not adopt a constitution which is


practically unalterable like that of the United States. She
must not put herself into a strait waistcoat, but into any easy-
fitting jacket, capable of being altered and let out as occasion
may demand. The people of New South Wales are right in
demanding that the various states, great and small, should not
have equal representation in the senate, but one proportionate
to population.”
No one knows what is before us. Probabilities point to a
majority in New South Wales. But what of Western Australia
and Queensland ? As for West Australia, I cannot help thinking
that as her delegates have had so great an influence in framing
the constitution, and have helped most materially to impose on
it that character to which the larger populations object, it is
rather unfair that we should have to send home this bill to the
Imperial Parliament unless West Australia does likewise. If we
had only to consult New South Wales, Tasmania, and South
Australia, we should enjoy a very different constitution. But
Sir John Forrest was allowed to bring his solid team often men
to the convention to turn the scale of voting, although they had
not to face the ordeal of popular election for the purpose. I have
nothing but what is good to say of the West Australian delegates ;
but is this fair play ? Why should they help to frame a constitu-
tion by which they are not to be bound ? Why should delegates,
directly elected by the people, have their work controlled by
delegates, not so elected ? A kind friend, personally unknown to
me, has for some time been sending me West Australian
newspapers referring to federation ; and from all that I can gather
it is very doubtful whether the federal bill will for many years be
accepted there. For inter-colonial freetrade is regarded as
destructive of their nascent industries, and as taking away too
huge a slice of their revenue. As for Queensland, federation
without that great and rich colony would not be Australian
Federation at all.
I find that I have not, in this, my address, touched on half the
problems which this bill presents. I have not had time to speak
of the effect of its provisions in preventing the healthy and natural
gradual subdivision of the huge areas which are called states. I
have not spoken of the quota system, under which the number of
members of the National House cannot be increased, even though
the population increase fifty-fold, unless the states are sub-
divided, or the number of senators be increased for each state. I
have not spoken of the admitted blunder in the framing of the
clauses as to the Privy Council appeals, and I have not even
referred to the judicature provisions. I have not dealt with the
narrow, provincial treatment of the debts, and the railways, and
the rivers, or the absurdities connected with the inter-state
commission. I have not mentioned the good clauses of the


bill; for I know that we have secured those clauses, absolutely,
whether this amended bill be accepted or not. They will be
sure to re-appear in any scheme of federation to be put before
the people of Australia. I know now that federation is assured
in the near future, wdietlier this bill becomes law or not. I
have the pleasure of knowing that the delay of this past year
has made the bill better; and the pleasure of knowing, also, that
if circumstances should render further delay necessary, we shall
have a still better bill. Time and thought are working for us.
Prejudice and pedantry and provincialism are being lifted like a
heavy mist by the sun ; and I have hope that before long we
shall see a true federation of all Australian people, not marred
by distinctions of states in Australian concerns, but whole and
complete like Australia itself, and to last as long as
“ round her, indivisible, the sea,
Breaks on her single shore.”




MANIFESTO OF THE DEMOCRATIC
FEDERAL UNION.
On the 20tli June, 1899, the electors of New South Wales
accepted the Commonwealth bill, as amended at the Premiers
conference, by 107,420 votes to 82,741. Inasmuch as the bill had
been improved at the conference, and as Victoria had accepted
the bill without amendment by a huge majority, it was hopeless
now to organise opposition in Victoria; and. little or no active
efforts were made by those who desired further amendment.
But the following manifesto was issued by the Democratic
Federal Union, in answer to manifestoes published by advocates
of the bill in the news columns of the “ Age ” and the “ Argus ”
newspapers. It was submitted 1o both newspapers for publi-
cation in a similar manner; but both refused it, and it had to
be inserted in the “ Age ” as an advertisement.




Manifesto of the Democratic Federal
Union.
To our Fellow Electors of Victoria.
"We are asked, in 1899 as in 1898, to vote for or against a
scheme of federation. The advocates of the scheme of last year
were, therefore, wrong when they told us it was a question of
“ now or never ” for federation. The great problem will press
upon us until it has been solved. They were wrong, also, in
saying that the bill of 1898 was the “ best bill obtainable,” for
the bill has been made better ; but it is not yet worthy of the
people of Australia—it is not nearly so much improved as it
would be if there were a fresh convention, elected direct by the
people, now that the people have become familiar with the
questions involved. For such improvements as have been ob-
tained we are indebted to those who voted No last year. If any
further improvements are in store for us, they will be due to
those who vote No now.
We invite you to vote No to this bill. We do not ask you to
vote No in the interests of Victoria, but in the interests of all
Australia. We do not ask you to vote No in your own interests
only, but in the interests of future Australians. Those Victorian
electors who are not able to see anything in federation but one
common defence force and the removal of intercolonial duties,
and the placing of one tariff around Australia —objects most de-
sirable in themselves—will, of course, not heed our warning.
We appeal to thoughtful electors to consider how much more
this bill involves ; to consider that the scheme is final, irrevoc-
able, meant to bind our children and children’s children for all
generations; to consider that the people of Australia cannot,
without violence, escape from the bonds of the constitution when
it has become law ; to consider that whatever safeguards are
provided must be provided now ; to consider that the advantages
of a common tariff and of free-trade throughout Australia can be
obtained without making such permanent constitutional sacri-
fices, without incurring such tremendous risks, as this bill
involves. We do not emulate the example of advocates of the
bill in asking men to vote on one interpretation or view of the
bill in Victoria, and on another in New South Wales. They have


told the coal miners of Gippsland that the indulgences granted
in railway rates could be continued by the Victorian Government
after federation ; whilst the miners in Newcastle have been told
that all such indulgences must cease. Here we are told that the
concessions in railway rates made in Biverina with the view of
drawing the trade to Sydney could be stopped; in New South
Wales the electors are told the contrary. Here you are told
that your manufacturers will have the free run of the New
South Wales markets, without the competition of European
manufacturers; in New South Wales the electors are told
that, with their advantages in coal and iron deposits, they could
cut out Victorian manufacturers in Victoria. In Sydney, the
electors were advised to vote for the bill because the Sydney
importers could “load up” their warehouses before the uniform
tariff came into operation, and produce a “ boom ” in Sydney
business. We discard all such appeals to provincial selfishness
and to sectional and temporary interests.
Blunders there are—and many of them—in the bill; but we
do not ask you to vote No because of mere blunders. Look to
the root of the federal laws—look to the root of the federal con-
stitution. If these roots are sound, the tree will be good;
blunders can be rectified, and provision can be made for new
conditions as they arise. The financial clauses are at present in
a state of inconceivable muddle. Each colony gives up all its
customs and excise taxes (its chief source of revenue), and
retains all its debts. No one really can foresee the result, except
that there is to be an unholy scramble for the surplus revenue
after seven years, when state will be pitted against state, and
each state will depend on the Federal Parliament for solvency,
and the State Governments will be receiving outside supplies for
which they will not be dependent on the State Parliaments. But
look to the roots. The root of the laws is to be found in the
character of the Parliament and of the executive ministry ; the
root of the constitution is to be found in clause 128, as to
amendments of the constitution. If, having settled by agree-
ment what matters should be treated as matters of general
Australian concern, we deposit in the Australian people as a
whole the power to mould the laws in these matters, and the
power to mould the constitution under which laws may be made,
we should be safe in entering into almost any scheme of federa-
tion ; but in this most critical point the proposed scheme fails.
Nothing is left so rigid in the scheme as provincialism in the
Parliament—provincialism in the clause as to amendments of
the constitution—except, indeed, provincialism in the clauses
which obstruct the subdivision of the enormous areas which we
call “colonies,” and which we are to call ‘states” (S.S.
128-128).


Under this scheme there is to he, for ever, a “ states’ house,”
to check, to curb, the people’s house. There is to be, for ever,
a house—the senate—in which the selfish, provincial interests
of the several colonies are to be given power as against the
general interests of the Australian people—a house in which
each colony, no matter how few or how many the people, is to
have an equal number of members. This “equal representa-
tion ” cannot be changed, even by the difficult process of
amending the constitution. It has to be continued, even if
there should be 20,000,000 people in an eastern colony and
200,000 in a western colony, so that one Australian may have
100 times as much political weight (for this house) as another
Australian. The more populous the state in which a man lives
the more opportunities he has, by friction with many minds, of
acquiring intelligence, the less will be his political power!
Exactly the same vicious principle is carried into the provision
for amending the constitution, for there has to be a majority of
“ states,” as well as a majority of people, for any amendment.
It is possible for five out of every six, or even nineteen out of
every twenty voters throughout Australia to say Yes to an
amendment ; and yet the amendment cannot be carried. This
is the provision which, according to some advocates of the bill,
“ impresses upon the bill the stamp of democracy !” When four
electors vote No to the bill in New South Wales for every five
who vote Yes, it is “democratic” to impose on New South
Wales a constitution which forbids majority rule for all time ;
but if five men shall vote Yes to any amendment for every one
who vote No, it is “ democratic ” that the Noes should carry
their way. Suppose the financial provisions of the constitution
to be working ruin to some one colony, but to give an unfair
advantage to two or three other colonies, the selfish interests of
the latter colonies are invited and enabled to obstruct the general
good sense and justice of the Australian people in remedying the
mistake. The danger is very real, for Sir Samuel Griffith has
shown how the financial provisions of the bill of 1891 would
have thrown the whole burden of federation on Victoria, and
that Victoria would be actually contributing money to the other
colonies; and yet the convention delegates of 1891 did not
foresee this result.
This vicious system of giving a separate voice to state interests
as against Australian interests, is, unfortunately, just the thing
which is most firmly imbedded in the constitution. “ Equal
representation” of the “States” cannot be changed by the
federal parliament, even with the consent of a majority of the
states and a majority of the people. They used to tell us that
this system is a necessary part of any true federal scheme ; but
it is not. Now they tell us that it is a necessary concession to


the less populous states, without which such states will not come
into the federation. But there is no foundation for this state-
ment. It seems to be made by men who want now to excuse
themselves for a mistake unfortunately made under a false
theory of federation. The less populous colonies have never
been tried with any other system. New South Wales does not
want it; Queensland does not want it; Victoria does not want
it. When did the people of South Australia, of West Australia,
of Tasmania, ever declare that they would not accept federation
except on this vicious basis ? They have never been tried. The
more national, the more liberal, the more democratic the constitu-
tion is made, the more do the people of Australia like it, whether
they live in the more populous or in the less populous colonies.
In South Australia the bill was accepted last year by a majority
of about 2to 1. This year, although the amendments tend to
weaken the provincial forces, as against the national forces, the
amended bill has been adopted by about 4to 1. In Tasmania,
although the opposition was pretty vigorous last year, it is this
year “ dead,” according to Sir Edward Braddon. The people of
the less populous colonies will not be slow to recognise that the
system of equal representation of the states in the senate, and in
the final count for amendments, is not necessary for their pro-
tection any more than it is necessary for the protection of the
county of Croajingolong against the county of Bourke, and that
it is fraught with danger to the peace, order, and good government
of Australia. The concession of a vote to states as a check on
the vote of the people as a whole ought, in truth, to be known
as the Great Betrayal.
There is every reason for predicting that this “ states’ house ”
will control the finances of Australia, and thereby control the
executive, make and unmake ministries. It will have equal
authority with the people’s house, but a stronger position, and
more power. The senators are to have a longer tenure, more
secure seats, greater prestige as being elected by a whole colony,
instead of by districts in a colony. The senate will be enabled
to pursue a policy more steadily and continuously than the other
house. True, the senate is not to originate money bills; but
the senate in the United States does not originate money bills,
and yet it is by far the stronger house in financial matters. So
it will be here; and to the stronger house in financial matters
ministers will gravitate and ministries must bow. The
tremendous initiating and guiding power which ministries have
will be wielded by the house of the minority, the senate ; and
the dangerous position will arise in which one-fifth (or less) of
the people of Australia, paying one-fiftli (or less) of the taxes,
will have three-fifths (or more) of the control of the
expenditure.


Do not be misled by those who say that the provision for the
double dissolution of the two houses, and the subsequent joint
sitting, will enable the majority of Australians to rule, and
to control ministers and their policy. Double dissolutions must
be very, very rare, especially where members of both houses are
paid. But, in any case, such dissolutions will be inapplicable to
money bills ; for money bills will not stand delay. There is no
joint sitting until after a double dissolution. The stronger
house, the senate, will get its way in 99 cases out of every 100 ;
and the ministry must please the stronger house, or resign.
Do not be misled by those who say that little Switzerland,
with its numerous cantons, is a safe example to follow as to
amendments of the constitution. We have not, in this consti-
tution, the Swiss national initiative, under which 50,000
electors, irrespective of cantons, may demand that an amendment
be submitted to the people and to the cantons. We shall not
have 22 or 28 “ states,” in which the weight of a selfish
“ state ” can be easily counterbalanced. We shall have—and, it
is probable, must always have (sections 7, 128, 128) —only six
“ states,” in which each state, no matter how small, will have
one-sixth of the power on the final count. Nor has Switzerland
such strong temptations to a struggle between the states as are
afforded by the extraordinary financial clauses in the proposed
Australian constitution.
To vote No means merely to vote for a little further delay,
and a new convention. Do not look for a perfect bill; but ask
fcr a bill which shall leave the door open wide for improve-
ment at the will of the majority of the Australian people. If
this bill become law, the selfish state forces will be too securely
entrenched to allow of the Australian people as a whole being
made the court of final appeal. If you hope for a true
referendum in the future, you must not leave the state forces in
the impregnable position in which this bill places them. This
bill makes an Australian referendum impossible, for ever. This
bill seals up the fountains of future democratic development.
Consider who are asking you to accept this bill. Are not all
those forces which have hitherto obstructed progress pushing
the bill forward ? Are not those shortsighted guides in favor of
it who led us into the mistakes of the “boom’ period, who
committed us to rash borrowing, rash railway development,
rash irrigation schemes ? Our past disasters were bad, but
temporary; but the disasters arising from this bill will be
permanent—will be felt more by our children than by ourselves.
Never were any people in a position to frame a national con-
stitution with such calmness and thoroughness. We are not
pressed by danger of external attack or of internal anarchy.
Every delay hitherto has led to some improvement. Those


colonies which have not been greedy for federation at any price
have obtained special concessions to their wants. New South
Wales has secured the capital; West Australia has secured a
prolongation of her intercolonial duties ; Queensland has been
allowed to divide herself into districts for the election of senators.
What concessions have been made to Victoria, to South Aus-
tralia, to Tasmania, which accepted the bill by such large
majorities? Yet Victoria might reasonably have asked that the
removal of her intercolonial duties should be gradual, by suc-
cessive steps during five years. By the unnecessary haste of
our leaders, they have invited a huckstering attitude on the part
of other colonies.
The amendments to the bill have been framed by six premiers,
in secret conclave. So far as regards Victoria, they were framed
without any previous authority from the people, without any
previous authority from, or discussion in parliament. Every
effort is being made to avoid another convention, in which all
the representatives would sit by popular election, and, after
facing, as candidates on public platforms, questions as to their
views and votes put by the electors, who are now better educated
as to the problems. The people of West Australia and of
Queensland have never yet been in any way consulted. Why
should we submit to a constitution moulded by premiers who
have not yet consulted their people ?
We cannot honestly say that we expect a majority in Vic-
toria to vote No, after the voting of last year. Whoever is
determined to be on the winning side in Victoria had better vote
Yes. But those who vote No will strengthen the hands of the
8:1,000 electors in New South Wales who work for a broader,
more generous scheme of union. Nearly all the votes against
the bill in New South Wales were given on the broad, national
grounds on which we appeal to j ou. The national federalists are
solid throughout Australia. Here in Victoria we have no money,
no daily newspapers, little organisation. All the social and
moneyed interests are against us ; even the Governor and the
Lieutenant-Governor have abandoned the attitude of impartial
spectators, and have thrown their weight in favor of the bill.
The Government favour the bill; the Opposition favour the bill.
Nevertheless, we invite jmu to vote No, and to insist upon your
leaders giving you a better bill.
The bill has not become law yet. It will not become law until
it has been sent home by the resolutions of the Parliaments of
each of the accepting colonies, and approved by the Imperial
Parliament. It is now almost certain that Western Australia
will not accept the bill. Sir John Forrest and his ministers are
against it, on financial and commercial grounds. Yet Sir John
Forrest and his nine fellow delegates were allowed, although no


elected by the people, to appear and vote at the convention, to
hold the balance of power there, to mould the act by which we
are to be bound and they are not to be bound ! It was largely
for the sake of inducing West Australia to accept the bill that
these alleged “ concessions ” have been made—that we are
sacrificing sound constitutional principles. If we had to consult
the wishes of the other five colonies only, the bill would be very
different. Remember, the game is not all over yet; there is
hope yet. If the bill come to be reshaped, let Victoria be
able to show that a substantial number of voters have asserted
her right to insist on further improvements. Every vote No to
this bill will help; every vote No will add weight to the demand
for a true, national, democratic federation.
H. B. HIGGINS
President.
B. O’LOGHLEN
W. J. FORMER
J. B. RONALD
Vice-
Presidents.
L. F. S. ROBINSON
Hon. Sec.




THE PROPOSED ACT
FOR AUSTRALIAN FEDERATION.
“ The Times" having referred to the opponents of the
Commonwealth Bill as “ Little Australiansthe following
article was written in September, 1899, for publication in
England, with a view of showing that the motives of the
opponents had not been fairly represented. The greater past
of the article appeared in the “ Contemporary Eeview ” for
April, 1900.




THE PROPOSED ACT FOR AUSTRALIAN FEDERATION.
NEVER, probably, has a term less appropriate been applied
to a body of voters than that of “ Little Australians."’
applied by tlie Times to those who opposed the Draft
bill for the federation of the Australian colonies. An
unhappy expression of this sort, thoughtlessly used, only ex-
poses the ignorance and indifference so prevalent in the Mother
Country with regard to the affairs of Australia, and of such other
possessions of the Crown as give little or no trouble to the Imperial
Government. If the course of the discussions in Australia should
be more attentively examined, it will be found that the aim of
the great majority of the opponents of the Bill is a closer and
more complete union, than the Bill permits, of the people of
Australia, sundered as they are, artificially and arbitrarily, and
often merely by lines of latitude and longtitude. It is true that
during the recent contest the advocates of the Bill were pleased
to call their antagonists “Anti-Federalists,” “enemies of union”
and so forth, and to take advantage of the prejudice which con-
founded opposition to a particular scheme with opposition to
federation. But they know better. Mr. B. R. Wise, although a
strenous partisan for the Bill in New South Wales, admits the
fact in his interesting and temperate article in the National
Review for July last:—
“ From the first there have been two Schools of Federal thought—the one
“urging the unification for limited purposes, the other insisting on
“ historic, as well as theoretic grounds, that a union of States required
“ a recognition of the States as such.”
Apart from the admitted difficulties of making the necessary
financial adjustments between the colonies, and of selecting the
purposes for which united action is desirable, it ought not to
be hard to solve the problem of uniting the people of the Aus-
tralian colonies under the Federal scheme. Federation, in any
case, is limited unification ; and the limits are fixed by defining
the scope of the federal and the state organizations. In Austra-
lia there is no racial difficulty. The people are already one in
origin, in ideals, in habits of life. The families are numerous
which have members in two or more colonies. The colonies have
the same form of Government, the same relative position towards
the Empire. Everywhere one finds the same problems to be
faced, the same lines of political cleavage. For its own internal
concerns, it is intended that each colony shall keep up its separate


existence; but for Australian concerns—matters which can
be better dealt with by Australia as a whole—there is a desire
on all sides to have one common Australian organization. The
framers of the bill have preferred to define the subjects to be en-
trusted to the central organization, rarlier than (as in Canada)
to define the subjects to be left to the states ; and there seems to
be no serious objection to this course, if the demarcation of sub-
jects between the states and the federation be sound and well de-
fined. The Commonwealth, it is agreed, is to have control of
commercial relations with other countries, the tariff (customs
and excise), bounties, the postal and telegraph services, defence,
lighthouses, quarantine, currency, banking, insurance, bills of
exchange, bankruptcy, copyright, patents, marriage and divorce,
old age pensions, immigration, the influx of aliens and criminals,
industrial conciliation, etc. The States are to retain the resi-
duary subjects, and to keep up their separate parliaments to deal
therewith, without any possibility of interference on the part of
the Federal Parliament. Why, it is asked, should the states
“ as states” have any longer a voice in the making of laws on
Federal concerns ? Why should the states keep back part of
the price of union ?
None of the advocates of the bill gives a satisfactory answer
to these questions. But, to use the words of Mr. Wise, they
insist “ on historic as well as theoretic grounds ” on erecting a
federal house in which to secure the recognition of the states as
such, each colony shall have an equal number of members, no
matter what the population is —or may become —and this equality
of Colonies is made final and unchangeable (sec. 128). If one
colony 100 years hence should have a population of 20,000,000
and another a population of 200,000, the latter is (under the
bill) to have the same number of members in one co-equal house
of the Federal Parliament, and is not to be deprived of this unfair
advantage without its consent! The case of Manchester and
Old Sarum is nothing to it. One Australian may have 100
times the political weight of another as to tariff laws, or as to
bills of exchange, or as to divorce —because he lives on a different
side of a degree of longitude. As I understand them, the
national federalists have never insisted on any absolute arith-
metical equality of voting power in the electors. They are
willing, if necessary, to concede some advantages in voting power
to less populous colonies, especially at the beginning. But they
urge that great disproportions in population should gradually, if
not at once, be reflected in the number of representatives in
Parliament—that the laws and the constitution of federated
Australia should faiily represent the aims, the culture, the
interests, the ideals of living Australians, from generation to
generation.


“ On historic as well as theoretic grounds ” the promoters
of the bill insist on equal representation of the colonies—that is
to say, unequal representation of the people—in the Senate.
Their theory is wrong ; their history is misapplied. They have
mistaken for an essential condition of federation a device which
was the result of the peculiar circumstances of the United States
at the time of their union, and from which the great republic
would gladly relieve itself to-day if it could. What does a lucid
thinker like the late Walter Bageliot think of their theory ? He
says;—
“It i-i said that there must he in a Federal Government some institu-
“ tion, some authority, some body possessing a veto in which the
“ separate States composing the confederation are all equal. I confess
“ this doctrine has to me no self-evidence, and it is assumed, but not
“ proved.” (English Constitution p. 98).
They treat federation as if it were a recognised cut-and-dried
algebraic formula, applicable for all time and under all circum-
stances. But who is the sponsor for their formula ? Professor
Freeman was a theorist, I presume, and he said :
“ The Slate administration within its own range will be carried on as if
“there were no such thing as a union. The federal administration
“ within its own range will be carried on as freely as if there were no
“ such thing as a separate State.”
This statement of what Federation is taken to mean leaves no
room for “ the recognition of states as such ” in federal concerns.
But enough of abstract theory. The American colonies had
characters far more distinct, each from each, than the Australian
colonies. They had not the facilities for locomotion and inter-
communication which the railways and the postal and telegraphic
systems afford to Australians. The men of Georgia had little in
common with the men of Massachusetts, except rebellion. The
members of the Convention of 1878 found that they had to choose
between anarchy and loss of independence on the one hand, and
this device of equal representation in the Senate on the other;
and they probably chose wisely under the circumstances. But
is it not pitiable, is it not ludicrous, that with all the experience
of 110 years behind us, we should solemnly adopt by choice a
system which the strongest men of the American Convention
adopted only under compulsion ? Surely it is obvious that the
lines of party struggle will not—unless as a consequence of such
a system as this—follow the lines of the State boundaries. In
America, the evils of the system are recognised by the publicists
of to-day. It was the bulwark of the slave power, the cause of
the unjust war for Texas, the pivot of the constitutional struggles
which culminated in the great civil war. But for this system,
the recently proposed arbitration treaty with England would


now be law. Tlie International Commission over which the late
Lord Herschell presided, found, we are told, its chief difficulty
in the constitution of the Senate. As Mr. Snead Cox states the
position in the July number of the Nineteenth Century :
“ Ever y treaty for its validity requires ratification by two-thirds of the
“ Senate, but those who framed the Constitution can hardly have antici-
“ P a ted bow it would work at the end of a hundred years. Taking the
“figures of the last census, we find that ten States of the Union, with a
“ population of 32,106,000—ha1f the population of the country at that
“date—are represented by only one-fifth of the Senate. In fact, their
power in the Senate is equalled by another ten states having a popu-
lation of only 1,857,124. Add to them another five states with a
‘‘population of 1,875,046, and we find that fifteen states with a popula-
tion of 3,732,170 not only outweigh the ten great states which have
half the people of the whole Republic, but have power to place an
“absolute veto upon any treaty. When once trade questions come
“under discussion the particularist interest of each state is liable to be
“affected, and men representing a mere fraction of the whole people of
“the Union are in a position to frustate and wreck the most carefully
“ drawn international agreement.”
I think it will be recognised that men who object to this
equal representation of the colonies in the Senate, who see
danger in this invitation to (what Mr. Cox calls) “ particularist
interests” to assert themselves as against the interests of Aus-
tralians as a whole, cannot fairly be called “Little Australians.”
But what such men principally object to is the permanency, the
immutability of this vicious system. The constitution, as it ap-
pears by its preamble, is based on an agreement of the people of
the various colonies, who have “ agreed to unite in one indisso-
luble Federal Constitution under the constitution
hereby established \ and under that Constitution no amendment
ol this system is to be made, by any device, without the consent
of the colony whose representation it is proposed to reduce from
equality. It is difficult to get people who have been trained in
the traditions of the British Constitution to realize what it
means to have a rigid written constitution. They know it well,
to their cost, in the United States. For instance, it is clear
that if the Constitution could have been amended by the will of
the great majority of the people of the United States, there
would have been no civil war. Certain amendments of the Con-
stitution were proposed before the war, amendments any of
which would have been accepted by the great body of moderate
men of all parties as a compromise, and which would have
peacefully led to the speedy extinction of the curse of slavery;
but it was seen that the amendments could not be carried. The
“ particularist interests” interfered. In Great Britain every law
is experimental. The people, by returning a sufficient number
of members to the House of Commons, pledged to any given pro


posal can always carry it—ultimately, if not immediately. The
same machinery is necessary for carrying a tithe Act or a
vaccination Act, as for carrying an Act to abolish the House
of Lords, or for fixing the duration of Parliaments at one
or at fifty years. The people through the House of Commons
are sovereign, the sovereignity is not committed to a piece of
parchment. Those trained to the British system do not realize
what an advantage, what a check on violent movements it is,
not to be bound by a written fundamental law which cannot be
changed, or if changeable, can only be changed under very ex-
ceptional conditions. In an article in the Forum for June 189 b,
a thoughtful writer, Mr. Conant, says, speaking of the United
States Constitution : “The Constitution like other human in-
struments should be amended. This has been the secret of the
British Constitution. It has not been a set of rigid formulas in-
scribed upon mouldering parchment. The Constitution has kept
pace with the steady upward march of the British people.” In
the Times (21st June, 1899), it is complacently stated among
sonorous periods : “ The Commonwealth will be established, and
the imperfections of the Constitution will be amended in the
light of experience.” Similarly, His Excellency, Lord Brassey
Governor of Victoria, treats British experience and principles as
being necessarily applicable to all Constitutions. At a speech
made in Melbourne, in the early part of this year, His Excellency
said as follows :
“ Where the Federation scheme is found to work to the disadvantage,
“ and contrary to the expectations and intentions of those who framed it,
“ such amendments will doubtless he proposed as are seen to be desirable.
“ Of this power of adaptation, a free people can never deprive themselves.
“ Having this power, you may look forward to the experimental stage
“ on which you are about to enter without a shade of anxiety or appre-
“ hension.”
The experimental stage ! To whom is this constitution an
experiment ? Perhaps to onlookers, but not to the Australian
people. So far as they are concerned it is meant to be final,
indissoluble; and unless within the four corners of the
Constitution sufficient provision is made for the great body of the
Australian people to change its provisions, it is to remain
unchanged. Nothing, nothing, nothing should be excepted
from the power of the people as organised within the Constitution.
But there is something else withdrawn from the power of
the people in the same way. It is the power to subdivide the
huge areas which we call colonies, and which we are to call
States. For no amendment can be carried altering the limits of
a State without the consent of that State (Secs. 123, 128).
Anyone who glances at a map of Australia, and sees how small
a portion of it is as yet effectively settled, will admit that greater


sub-division for the purposes of local government and local
development is our proper and healthy destiny. But the Federal
Parliament and the federated people are forbidden to subdivide.
All the members of the Federal Parliament, and all the people
of the other colonies, and all the people of Central and Northern
Queensland may hereafter see the necessity for dividing
Queensland into three or more separate colonies; but the
subdivision cannot be carried out (should this bill become law)
without the consent of the older and more populous settlements
in Southern Queensland. Victoria could not have been separated
from New South Wales if the people of Port Phillip had to wait
for the consent of the Sydney parliament and of the New South
Wales people. In view of the solemn nature of the agreement
on which the proposed constitution is to be based, it would be
utterly unconstitutional for the Imperial Parliament to interfere
after it has once sanctioned the bill. Southern Queensland, of
course, objects to have the wealthy districts of the North and
Centre separated from the South ; and the bill ties these districts
more firmly than ever to the South. It is the rigidity of the
constitution in this respect which most influenced men in
Central Queensland to vote against the bill on the 2nd September.
There are other practical difficulties, also created by the
constitution, in the way of subdivision. Under Sec. 121 if
any new State is to be admitted into the Commonwealth, the
Federal Parliament has to settle the terms, “ including the
extent of representation in either House of the Parliament ”
Is each subdivision of Queensland to have six senators ? This
will mean 18 senators for Queensland, as against six for New
South Wales, although New South Wales is a more populous
colony; and New South Wales will object. Is Queensland to
have six senators distributed between her three divisions ?
Then South Queensland will object, her population being even
now twice as great as Tasmania, with six senators, or West
Australia, with six senators; and the disparity in population
will grow with the years. How this rigidity of the Constitution
as to State boundaries and as to representation in the Senate
cramps the wholesome development of Australia at every point!
If we could have forty-five States, as the American Union has,
the evil would not be so marked. For a small State, with its
particularist interest, would then only count for one forty-fifth ;
with us it will count for one-sixth; and it will be able often to
hold the balance of power, and to pursue a policy of selfish
bargaining for concessions in the provincial interest. Unfor-
tunately, the Constitution by all its provisions fosters the
provincial forces as against the national forces. Take the ratio
between the members of the provincial House (the Senate) and
the national House (the House of Representatives). It is


one half (Sec. 24). In the United States it is about one-fifth,
and will become less as population increases. In Canada it is
about one-third; and there the Senate is not based upon equal
representation. In the United States they began with one
member of the House for every 80,000 inhabitants ; in Australia
we begin with one member of the House for every 53,000
inhabitants. And in Australia we shall never be able to increase
the number of members of the national House, no matter how
much the population increases, unless we either increase the
number of senators in the same ratio, or increase the number of
States (see 24). I have already pointed out the difficulties
placed in the way of increasing the number of States.
But is the constitution flexible as to ordinary amendments
of the constitution ? Let us see. In this respect there has been
an improvement made by the premiers at their sitting in Mel-
bourne early this year. Last year, as the bill stood after the
convention had passed it, no amendment of the constitution,
however insignificant, could be carried without (a) the consent
of an absolute majority of each House, (b) the consent of the
majority of the States, and (c) the consent of a majority of the
people on a referendum. Should the provincial House (the
Senate) fail to shew an absolute majority in favour of the altera-
tion, nothing further can be done. The Senate was impregnable.
No dissolution of Parliament, no joint sitting, no referendum
could shake its power to reject. But the pressure of the argu-
ments of the labour and radical parties, especially in New South
Wales, was so much felt, that the Premiers—none of whom had
ever shown any proper appreciation of elasticity in the Constitu-
tion— were forced to devise something. So they agreed that a
proposed amendment, if passed twice in one House by an
absolute majority, and rejected twice by the other House, may
be referred to the States and the people ; and if a majority of the
States, as well as a majority of the persons voting, approve of
the amendment, it is to become law. Of course, it does not be-
come law if it affect the matters to which I have alluded—equal
representation in the Senate or the sub-division of a State. But
as to ordinary amendments, the Premiers’ proposal enables the
national House, acting (as is to be presumed) in the general
interests of Australia as a whole, to get rid eventually of one of
the provincial obstructions—such obstructions as the Senate can
create. This is a gain, which, so far as it goes, is to be placed
to the credit of those who, in order to secure a better Bill for
Australia, voted against the bill in 1898. Had we accepted the
advice of those who cried for federation at any price, this gain
could not have been secured. But even wTtli this alteration in
the amending power, a due degree of flexibility is not secured.
It is a “ toss-up ” whether the vast majority of Australian


voters can, in any given instance, carry tlieir way. It is possible,
(though this extreme instance, of course, is not likely to occur)
that all the voters in the three most populous colonies, and half
of the voters in the three least populous, should vote Yes to the
amendment; and yet the amendment could not be carried. We
should not have secured a majority of the States as well as a
majority of the people. The votes might be five to one for the
amendment; but the amendment would fail. It is the same
radical flaw as before—the vice of looking for the consent of the
states as well as for the consent of the Australian people in
matters of Australian concern —the fault of insisting on “the re-
cognition of the states as such ” to use the words of Mr. Wise
again.
By the way, I see that Mr. Wise has not yet grasped the
proposal which the Legislative Assembly ot New South Wales
made as regards the amending power. He points out, justly,
that a mass Australian referendum might—if unlimited in scope
—enable the national forces gradually to absorb all the remain-
ing functions of the separate states ; and he says that this is
“ inconsistent with the preservation of that separate existence of
the states which was one of the terms of the federal compact.”
But the real proposal was to confine the operation of the mass
referendum to admitted Australian concerns —to prevent it from
operating so as to take over from any state any concern which
that state did not consent to surrender, to throw into the com-
mon pool. The true limits of the federal area is found in the
subjects selected to be taken from the states and entrusted to the
Federal Parliament. Within those limits, it is contended by
national federalists that the will of the majority of the Australian
people should prevail.
It will be obvious that these objections, going as they do to
the root of the laws and to the root of the constitution of United
Australia, transcend immensely in ultimate importance any ob-
jections to the immediate financial or commercial arrangements
contained in the constitution. If the constitution were made
flexible, capable of being moulded at the will and in the interests
of the masses of Australians, if.the legislators were amenable to
the will of those masses, mistakes could soon be corrected, novel
conditions could be met as they arise. But, grave as are the
objections, it must be admitted that they apply more to the
distant than to the immediate future, more to other generations
than to the present ; and they are not likely to appeal to the
average “ man in the street.” He is always more concerned
with the tug and strain of every-day life, the prospects of work
and wages and trade and prices, meat, shelter, clothing and
amusements. But, to my amazement, these objections were
soon apprehended and appreciated, especially by the labouring


masses. Tlie present writer, although a Victorian by residence,
in last May and June addressed meetings, by invitation, in
various parts of New South Wales ; and everywhere he found
the keenest attention paid to these constitutional flaws. “ Speak
to us,” they said, “ about the constitution. We know we shall
have to pay more taxation here. We know that the financial
clauses are bad, that the arrangements about rivers and railways
and debts are unsatisfactory. But if we can only see that our
children are to have a safe constitution to live under, we will
vote for the bill for the sake of union. We don’t care about
the site of the federal capital. The constitutional points are the
points that affect the votes.” But, of course, there are many in
every country who do not attend political meetings, many who do
not trouble themselves abouc constitutions, many who are capti-
vated by the mere name of union, many who are content to take
the advice of their political leaders ; and the leaders of public
opinion combined to recommend the acceptance of the bill;
ministry and opposition united and fraternized on platforms in
favour of the bill. The Premiers said it was safe ; and what
could a busy man, who minds his own business, do but accept
their statement? In New South Wales and in Queensland,
however, the opponents of the bill had a great daily metropolitan
newspaper boldly and every day declaring its defects : in Victoria
they had none. Never was the power of the press in Australia
so clearly demonstrated as in the result of the late voting.
But what answer have the advocates of the bill to the
constitutional defects to which I have referred ? They told the
people that the ministry of the Commonwealth would be depen-
dent on the national House, just as the English ministry is
dependent on the House of Commons. They said that the
national House had the money power. They said also that
there was a provision for a joint dissolution of the two houses
after continued disagreement, and then for a joint sitting at
which the national House would have more members than the
senate, and at which an absolute majority of the members of the
two houses is to prevail.
To show that I am not doing injustice to the advocates of
the bill in stating their arguments as to the money powers, I
shall give some quotations.
“It (the House ot Representatives) would be the house that
“ shaped every line of the tariff, that shaped every item on the annual
“ appropriation bill, that would hold the ministry in the hollow of its
“hand, and would control the Executive power of the Commonwealth
«from day to day. If the senate passed a vote of censure, nobody would
«p e the worse. If the House of Representatives passed a vote of censure
“ the ministry would be destroyed, and would have to apply to the people
“to decide.” (Mr. Reid, Premier of New South Wales, at Bathurst,
“ June, 1899.)
c 7


“ The House of Representatives .... is made the dominant
“ partner in legislation in many ways, but chiefly by the operation of the
“ principle of responsible government, which will make the power of the
“states depend upon the pleasure of the people.” ( Sydney Morning
“ Herald , June 6th, 1809).
“ The power of executive government would rest with the popular
“chamber, the ministry being directly amenable to the will of the
“ people. (Mr. Deakin.)
“ There was to be equal representation in the states’ chamber ; but
“ it would not be forgotten that the ministry of the day would only be
“ responsible to the House of Representatives elected upon the basis of
“population. Though the senate might reject measures, it could- not
“ turn the government off the Treasury benches.” (Chief Secretary of
“ Victoria, Geelong Advertiser , July, 1899.)
These quotations put crudely, but clearly, the view which
was confidently proclaimed throughout New South Wales and
Victoria. But, of course, anyone who reads the conditions
prescribed by the bill, and has any acquaintance with constitu-
tional practice, will see that there is no real foundation for this
view ; that, to say the least—there is no sufficient ground for the
bold assertion that the national house is to be the dominant
house. It is true that appropriation bills and taxation bills are
to originate in the House of Representatives. But the senate
may at any stage request amendment of such bills ; and, if the
request be not complied with, can reject the bill (sec. 53). A
Governor’s message, recommending an appropriation, can be
sent to either house (sec. 56). In all other respects the senate
is to have equal power with the other house (sec. 53). Consider
that a senator is to hold office for six years (sec. 7), a member of
the house for only 3 years (sec. 28) ; that the house can be
dissolved singly, but the senate cannot (sec. 28) ; that the
senators retire in rotation, while the members of the house
retire en bloc (secs. 13, 28) ; that a senator can boast that he
represents a whole state (sec. 7), while a member of the house
represents only a district in a state (sec. 29); that the senator
is elected by the suffrages of all the voters of his state who
choose to vote, and that no voter can vote more than once
(sec. 8, sec. 30) ; and it will be apparent that there is no
foundation for the complacent belief that the national house is
alone to control ministers, or that the senate “ cannot turn a
government off the treasury benches.” The experiment of two
co-equal houses has never been tried in conjunction with the
peculiar British system of responsible government. One of the
two houses must ultimately prove to be the stronger; and the
probabilities are all in favour of the senate, with its firmer seat
for members, its smaller number, and its superior opportunities
for pursuing steadily a consistent policy. In the United States,
all taxation bills, all appropriation bills, originate in the House


of Representatives ; and yet the senate is the stronger house in
regard to money bills. Mr. Ford, in his “ Rise and growth of
American politics ” (1898) shows how Madison urged in favour
of the acceptance of the constitution that the House of Repre-
sentatives would have the control of the purse. But, as he says,
“its highest prerogative, control of supplies, has been relin-
quished.” The senate “loads up the appropriations.” As
senator Hoar admits, the power of originating money bills has
become “ incredible as it may appear, a cause of inferiority and
of diminished influence in financial matters.” If the United
States had responsible government, the principal ministers
would be found in the senate. The great party leaders, such as
Webster, Clay, Calhoun were senators. Now, if the Australian
Commonwealth start with six original states, less than one
third of the people will at once have two-thirds of the control—
through the senate—of the taxation and the expenditure. South
Australia, Tasmania, and West Australia together will have,
even at the beginning, about one half as many people as New
South Wales, and will certainly not contribute more than half
as much taxation. But they will have three times as much
control over the expenditure as New South Wales in the senate.
What a position to face !
“But,” we are told, “there is a provision for a double
dissolution when the two houses fixedly disagree, and then a
joint sitting, at which an absolute majority of the total number
of members will carry its way, if they still disagree.” This
section 57 seems to have a soothing effect on some academical
politicians; but practical men see how ineffective it will be to
meet the dangerous position to which I have referred. Money
bills certainly will not stand the delay which this cumbrous
clause involves. Occasionally it may be of use as to a piece of
general legislation which justifies the expense and risk and
delay of a double dissolution. But in 99 cases out of 100, if the
senators insist on “ loading the appropriations ” in favour of
their colonies, the senate must prevail. It is unnecessary for
me to show the possibilities of a considerable majority being
baulked by a minority even at a joint sitting; it is enough to
show that this section is not applicable to money bills ; and
whichever house controls the money bills, controls the ministries.
Even as regards general legislation, double dissolutions must
become very rare where the members of both houses are paid
(sec. 48), and when the constituencies are so wide as to make
contests very expensive.
I do not deny that financial and commercial considerations
led many men in each colony to look with misgiving on
federation, just as they led others—and a far greater number—
to work for federation at any price and under any scheme


In Victoria, a rich apple-grower told me that he would rather
not have federation because the Tasmanian apples would swamp
his market. In New South Wales, where the great revenue
from the sale and leasing of Crown lands has enabled Parlia-
ment to dispense with such heavy customs taxation as has
been found necessary in the other colonies, many did not like the
prospect of increased taxation which a customs’ union with the
other colonies involved. The importing interests did not look
with favour on the prospect of a protective tariff being applied
to New South Wales. In Queensland and in the minor colonies
it was said that the local manufacturers could not compete with
the Victorian manufacturers until their factories have had
protection for as long a time as Victorian factories. But, to
tlieir credit be it said, such considerations did not influence the
great majority of the men who voted against the bill. Every
one admitted that union ought to come, even though it should
involve a loss or a temporary loss to his particular interest. But
the constitutional objections became more forcible in view of the
financial provisions of the bill. For five years after the uniform
tariff has been imposed, each colony is to get back the customs
and excise duties collected in it, after deduction of its share
(calculated per capita) of the federal expenditure (secs. 89, 93).
But what is to happen after the five years ? The Federal
Parliament is to provide on such basis as it deems fair for the dis-
tribution among the states of the surplus revenue collected by
the Federal Parliament (sec. 94). It is at this point that a great
struggle must begin, and be perpetually renewed. Each state
must fight for its own hand ; and combinations of states against
states, log-rolling, a general and unholy scramble, are invited
and may be expected. If New South Wales could be made to
feel that her great present and prospective population would have
due representation in both houses of the Federal Parliament,
and in the moulding of the constitution, I am convinced that her
fears of injustice would be allayed, and that the 83,000 who
voted No to the bill would have been reduced to 10,000 or 20,000.
As matters stand four men are being dragged reluctantly into
this federal compact for every five who are willing to submit to
it. How blind our leaders have been ! They have endangered
the cause of union by making dangerous concessions, in the sup-
posed interests of the less populous colonies. These colonies
have not demanded these concessions. They have accepted the
concessions, when offered, as was to be expected; but they have
never been even asked to accept a constitution on the sounder
basis recommended by experience and by principles of safe
government. New South Wales did not approve of the system
of the states’ house, or of a states’ vote or the final count for
amendments. Victoria did not want it; Queensland did not want


it. It was one of the matters to which objection was most pro-
minently taken in the manifesto of the anti-bill leagues in New
South Wales, in Victoria, and in Queensland. As for South
Australia, it is significant that in 1898 the voting for the bill was
about 2to 1; whereas in 1899, when the Premiers’ amendments
had to some extent weakened what Mr. Wise calls “ the recog-
nition of states as such” in federal matters, the voting was about
4to 1. In Tasmania, the voting was about 4tol in 1898; in
1899 it was 17 to 1, the highest proportion in the whole group.
Some of the labour leaders in South Australia have told me that
they see no necessity for a states’ house at all, and yet it was to
protect such colonies as South Australia that the senate was
so constituted. What will amaze those people who in future
times look into the history of this Australian movement is the
pedantry which assumed that the “ concessions ” which peculiar
circumstances rendered necessary in the United States had to be
made in the constitution of Australia. The objections which
were most strongly urged against the acceptance of the United
States constitution were provincialist objections—that the separ-
ate states were being obliterated. The objections which are most
strongly urged, and by the most people, against the Australian
constitution come from the other quarter. Most of the objectors
here say that the constitution is too provincial—that the states,
as states, should not have a separate voice in matters which we
agree to raise out of the provincial into the national arena.
It is a matter for deep regret that the candidates for
election to the convention committed themselves to the American
system as a system necessary for federation; that they did not
clearly see, until it was too late, what was accidental and what
was necessary in that system ; and that they did not at least
try whether the people of the minor colonies would not accept a
scheme based on the simple and well settled principles which
conduce to peace, order, and good government.
I have already urged that nothing should be excepted from
the power of the people as organised within the constitution.
There are two other, and, to my mind, very weighty arguments
in support of this view. One applies to the United States as
well as to Australia ; the other does not. I refer (1) to the
power of the federal High Court; and (2) to the absence in
Australia of any presidential or other veto on the bills passed by
the legislature. The federal High Court can declare an act of
the federal parliament, or of any state parliament, void, as being
in excess of its powers. No matter how desirable the act passed
may be, the High Court is under an absolute duty to declare it
void, to refuse to give effect to it, if it transgress the
constitution ; and there is no remedy. In England, parliament
i s omnipotent. No court can treat any act as void. In America,


and in Australia, Parliament (and the people) are kept within
the prison walls of the constitution ; and the High Court keeps
the key. Parliament cannot change the constitution after the
judges have declared its interpretation. Since about 1803, there
have been only three changes of the constitution of the United
States; and all three were the result of the civil war. In
France, they have a fundamental law of the constitution. But
if the legislature has passed a law, no court can declare it void.
So it is in Switzerland; and in these countries, therefore, the
oppression of a written, fixed constitution is not so keenly felt
as in America. As for the presidential veto in the United States,
Mr. Ford, in his valuable book to which I have referred already,
happily compares it with the veto of the people’s tribune in
ancient Rome. The president and his executive cabinet are
outside the legislature ; the president is, substantially, elected by
the masses of the people; and he uses his veto power more
freely than any constitutional monarch. That veto is exercised
in the interests of the bulk of the people against the encroach-
ments of the oligarchic senate. Mr. Ford looks forward to the
extension of the president’s executive authority as the only
practical method, within the constitution, of advancing popular
rule. We shall not have, under this bill for Australia, any
prospect of such relief. The executive will be in parliament,
responsible to parliament, subservient to the more powerful
house of parliament. When the senate in the United States
compels, as it often does compel, the other chamber to adopt a
measure which the senate desires in the “ particularist ” interest,
the president can step in and say “ I forbid.” There will be no
such protection under the Australian constitution. The Governor
General must follow the advice of his responsible advisers ; and
his responsible advisers will be, practically, a committee of the
senate resting on the approval of the senate. Ido not think that
I have overstated the danger.
To outside observers it must appear curious that the bill
has been carried in Victoria by a far larger majority than in New
South Wales. It is certainly not because the people of New
South Wales are less fraternal in sentiment. The extraordinary
disproportion is attributable chiefly to the attitude of the press,
but also to an organised society, which certainly deserves great
credit for keeping the ideal of federation before the public. I
refer to the Australian Natives’ Association of Victoria. No one
who is not familiar with Australia can realise the power of the
metropolitan press in a country in which the metropolis contains
one third or more of the population. The opponents of the bill
in Victoria had not a single daily paper to support them. In
New South Wales, they had on their side the Daily Telegraph,
the newspaper which has the largest circulation there. In


Victoria, there were no men of money among the opponents of
the bill. The importing classes looked forward to New South
Wales importers being put under the same tariff restrictions as
themselves, under the federation. The manufacturing classes
expected to exploit the markets of New South Wales, protected
against the formidable competition of English and European
goods. In New South Wales, on the other hand, the national
federalists had the assistance of the purses of many of the
importing and propertied classes. The generous impulse for
“ Australian union ” —one people one destiny —led the Australian
Natives’ Association in Victoria at their annual meeting in 1898
to pledge their members to support the bill and work for it, even
before the bill had been completed by the convention. The
leading newspaper of Victoria, the Age, failed to take the bold
stand of the Sydney Daily Telegraph ; and though recognising
some of the dangers of the bill, advised its readers to vote Yes.
The clergy in Victoria gave sermons on “ Union ; ” they offered
their schools and their churches to advocates of the bill to speak
in, even on Sundays; and when the other side asked for a
similar favour, refused it. The opponents of the bill were
jeered at as “ Anti-Federalists,” “ Antagonists of Union.” Their
arguments were distorted and misrepresented ; arguments which
they had not used were attributed to them, and, of course, easily
refuted. The opposition to the bill came only from the poor
and uninfluential. The points which they urged were dry,
constitutional points; the evil effects seemed remote; the
immediate benefits of federation were obvious. Many men could
not be brought to see anything in federation except the
abolition of intercolonial tariffs, and one tariff for Australia.
Looking back, it is to me wonderful that, in face of all their diffi-
culties, the opposition scored so many as 22,000 against 100,000.
The greatest number of votes against the bill was found where
working men were strongest in numbers. There was a second
poll this year—July 27. In the meantime, the bill had been
amended by the premiers, in the direction suggested by the great
body of dissentients in New South Wales. The bill has been
made to some extent more flexible as to the amending power;
and the provision that a three-fifths majority should carry
measures at a joint sitting had given way to a provision that
an absolute majority should be able to carry it. These
changes were, from a democratic point of view, regarded as
improvements. But above all, in the meantime, in June, 1899,
the electors of New South Wales had declared by 107,000 votes
to 83,000 that they would accept the amended bill. Unless
New South Wales stood out for a better bill, Victoria could not.
Plausible appeals were made to drop a useless opposition. The
Democratic Federal Union of Victoria, which had opposed the


original measure, declared that though they still disapproved
of the bill even with the amendments, a campaign against it
would be useless. The advocates of the bill beat the drums for
a big vote; but they feared “apathy.’’ So the organising
secretary of the Australasian Federation League came to the
Victorian premier and suggested that a gay picture card should
be issued to all who should vote at the referendum, as a memento
of the victory of “Federation.” The picture card was to
contain portraits, beautifully enwreathed, of the premiers of
those colonies which accepted the bill, and a certificate that
So-and-So voted at the federation poll. The Premier—the
government being all in favour of the bill—accepted this sugges-
tion, and promised to have a picture card suitably designed and
prepared at the people’s expense and distributed. This promise
was blazoned about in all the newspapers, proclaimed at all the
numerous meetings throughout the colony. The Argus, in
particular, appealed to the electors to come and vote and thereby
win the “ Certificate of merit.” The law as to bribery at
elections is, as to this matter, the same in Victoria as in
England (17 and 18 Viet. C 102 S 8); but the usual penalty—
the loss of a seat and disqualification for sitting in parliament—
could not be applied where there was no candidate for election.
The Democratic Federal Union wrote protesting against this
unfair device; but the Premier persisted. Orators went round
the country announcing that all who “did their duty at the
poll,” helping to “make a nation,” would receive illuminated
cards, “ which would be handed down to the coming race as
unpurchaseable.” {Age, 24tli July.) The promise of the
illuminated card was a decided success. It certainly achieved
the end for which it was intended. The promise was announced
about a fortnight before the poll, and during that fortnight no
fewer than 33,633 new electors rights were issued ! As officially
declared the poll was 152,653 for, 9,805 against. As the Argus
said after the poll:
“The facilities for voting granted on this occasion were an
“immense factor in the result, and the promised Certificate to each voter
“ was no small element. Many voters were under the impression that
“ these certificates were to be handed to them immediately their votes
“ were recorded, and called in at the central rooms of the league to
“ complain that this had not been done. They evidently overlooked the
“ statements in the press that certificates would be forwarded in due
“ course to those recording their votes. The printing alone of so large a
“number must take time. ’
The cards have not been issued yet, but the promise has done
its work. (1)
(i) It is now publicly stated in the newspapers that the proposed expenditure for the
cards was struck out of the estimates by the late Premier (who promised the cards) ; and
that the present treasurer will not allow the expenditure !


Time—and your space—forbid me to do more than to shew
what may he called the immovable defects of the constitution,
and the mistake made in classing the opponents of this bill as
“ little Australians.” Many of those who see most clearly the
blunders and crudities and provincialism of the clauses relating
to finance, to the railways, to trade and commerce, to the inter-
state commission, to the rivers, to the federal courts, would be
glad to vote for the constitution as a whole, if they saw a way
fairly open for public opinion to produce such changes as may
appear necessary in the interests of the masses of Australians.
It would be interesting to trace the history of this movement.
An English constitutional reader would find much attractive
material. He would find the remarkable report of the committee
of the Privy Council, Ist May, 1849, in favor of “ creating some
authority competent to act for these colonies jointly.’’ This
committee did not dream of “ the recognition of states as such ”
by means of a house in which each colony should have an equal
voice. They proposed one house—a house of delegates—to which
each colony should contribute members in numbers roughly pro-
portioned to population ; ,2) and they proposed that that house
(with the Governor-General) should have power to alter its
numbers or to alter its constitution, with the consent of Her
Majesty. But a curious memorial was presented in 1857 to the
Secretary of State for the Colonies, Mr. H. Laboucliere, requesting
a permissive act enabling the colonies to form a convention, with
power to create a federal assembly. It was presented by some
colonists in London, calling themselves the “general association
for the Australian coloniesand it boldly stated that the
“ principle of equality (of representation) is quite as indispensable
to the fair representation of the colony in a federal assemblage
as it is to the fair representation of the several States of America
in the senate of that country.” Mr. Laboucliere in his reply de-
clined to propose such a bill. Ho referred specifically to this
principle of equality of representation. He said “ without
entering into all the objections to which it appears to him
exposed, it may be sufficient to say that he can not think it at all
probable that the several colonies would consent to entrust such
large powers to an assembly thus constituted, or to be bound by
laws imposing taxation (such as is involved, for instance, in tariff
arrangements), or in the appropriation of money, which is
involved in several of the subjects of legislation suggested by the
memorialists ; and even if they were to consent in the first instance
in the establishment of such a system, the further result would , in his
opinion, very probably be dissention and discontent. He does not,
(») “ Each colony to send two members, and each to send one additional member for
every 15,000 of the population, according to the latest census before the convening of the
house.”


therefore, think that Her Majesty’s Government ought to intro-
duce a measure of this character, although merely permissive in
its provisions, unless they are convinced that there is a reasonable
prospect of its working in a satisfactory manner. Mr. Labouchere
would not consider himself warranted in making such a proposal
unless he was both himself satisfied that it was founded on just and
constitutional principles , and also that there ivas reason to believe that
it was likely to be acceptable to the colonies which were concerned in
it."
The italics are mine: the signature is Mr. Herman
Merivale’s ; the sturdy good sense is, it is to be presumed, Mr.
Laboucliere’s. He saw that the Australian colonists of 1857
were not the only persons whose opinions were to be consulted;
that his duty was to safeguard the liberties of the future popula-
tion as well as to comply with the reasonable wishes of the
then existing population of Australia.
I am afraid that Mr. Wise is not quite correct in saying that
“ from, the first there have been two schools of federal thought.”
The discussions of 1890, of 1891, of 1897, show that until the
meeting in Adelaide the leaders of public thought in Australia
assumed that the American system and no other was “ true
federation.” When the error was pointed out, it was too late.
They had committed themselves to that system, and they began
to excuse themselves by asserting that without such a system the
colonies would not agree to federation. This assertion I dispute.
The experiment has never been tried.. The colonies have not
had the choice of any other system.
HENRY BOURNES HIGGINS.






Draft of a Bill to Constitute the
Commonwealth of Australia.
Copy of Federal Constitution under the Crown, as finally adopted
by the Australasian Federal Convention, at Melbourne, in the
Colony of Victoria, on the 16tli March, 1898, showing amend-
ments of the constitution agreed to at a conference of the
Prime Ministers of Victoria, New South Wales, Queensland,
South Australia, Tasmania, and Western Australia, which sat
at Melbourne on the 28tli, 30th, and 31st January, and the
Ist, 2nd, and 3rd February, 1899.
(Alterations from the Original Text which were made at the
CONFERENCE ARE SHOWN BY BLACK LETTER WHEN NEW MATTER IS
INTRODUCED, AND BY STRIKING THROUGH ANY OLD MATTER WHICH IS
omitted. Alterations which haye been made by the Imperial
Parliament are indicated in the notes.)
[63 and 64 Vict. C. 12.]
[9th July, 1900.] (1)
WHEREAS the people of [here name the Colonies which have
adopted the constitution ] , (2) humbly relying on the bless-
ing of Almighty God, have agreed to unite in one
indissoluble Federal Commonwealth under the Crown of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, and under the
constitution hereby established : And whereas it is expedient to
provide for the admission into the Commonwealth of other
Australasian Colonies and possessions of the Queen : Be it there-
fore enacted by the Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty, by and with
the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
Commons, in the present Parliament assembled, and by the
authority of the same, as follows :
I. This act may be cited as The Commonwealth of Australia
Constitution Act.
11. This act shall bind the crown, and its provisions referring
to the Queen shall extend to her Majesty’s Heirs and Successors
in the Sovereignty of the United Kingdom.' 3 *
(1) Date inserted by the Imperial Parliament.
(2) “ New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia, Queensland, and Tasmania ” (names
inserted by the Imperial Parliament.)
(3) “ The provisions of this act referring to the Queen shall extend to her Majesty’s
Heirs and Successors in the Sovereignty of the United Kingdom.” (Clause 11. as altered by
the Imperial Parliament.)


111. It shall be lawful for the Queen, with the advice of the
Privy Council, to declare by proclamation that, on and after a
day therein appointed, not being later than one year after the
passing of this act, the people of [here name the Colonies which have
adopted the constitution ] (4) shall be united in a Federal Common-
wealth under the name of “ The Commonwealth of Australia.”
But the Queen may, at any time after the proclamation, appoint
a Governor-General for the Commonwealth.
IV. The Commonwealth shall be established, and the constitu-
tion of the Commonwealth shall take effect, on and after the day
so appointed. But the parliaments of the several colonies ‘may
at any time after the passing of this act make any such laws, to
come into operation on the day so appointed, as they might have
made if the constitution had taken effect at the passing of this
act.
V. This act, and all laws made by The Parliament of the
Commonwealth under the constitution, shall be binding on the
courts, judges, and people of every state, and of every part of the
Commonwealth, notwithstanding anything in the laws of any
state; and the laws of the Commonwealth shall be in force on
all British ships, the Queen’s ships of war excepted, whose first
port of clearance and whose port of destination are in the
Commonwealth.
VI. “ The Commonwealth ” shall mean the Commonwealth of
Australia as established under this act.
[“ Colony ” shall mean any colony or province.] (5)
“ The states ” shall mean such of the colonies of New South
Wales, New Zealand, Queensland, Tasmania, Victoria, Western
Australia, and South Australia, including the Northern
Territory of South Australia, as for the time being are parts of
the Commonwealth, and such colonies or territories as may be
admitted into or established by the Commonwealth as states ;
and each of such parts of the Commonwealth shall be called a
“ state.”
“ Original states ” shall mean such states as are parts of the
Commonwealth at its establishment.
VII. The Federal Council of Australasia Act 1885 is hereby
repealed, but so as not to affect any laws passed by the Federal
Council of Australasia and in force at the establishment of the
Commonwealth.
Any such law may be repealed as to any state by the parlia-
ment of the commonwealth, or as to any colony not being a state
by the parliament thereof.
(4) “ New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia, Queensland, and Tasmania, and also
if her Majesty is satisfied that the people of Western Australia have agreed thereto of
Western Australia,” (Names as inserted by the Imperial Parliament.)
(5) The words within brackets were omitted by the Imperial Parliament.


VIII. After lie passing of tliis act the Colonial Boundaries Act ■
1895 shall not apply to any colony which becomes a state of the
commonwealth ; but the commonwealth shall be taken to be a
self-governing colony for the purposes of that act.
IX. The constitution of the Commonwealth shall be as
follows: —
THE CONSTITUTION.
This constitution is divided as follows :
CHAPTER I.—THE PARLIAMENT.
Part I. — General.
Part ll. — The Senate.
Part 111. —The House of Representatives.
Part IV.—Both Houses ol the Parliament.
Part V.—Powers of the Parliament.
CHAPTER lI.—THE EXECUTIVE GOVERN-
MENT.
CHAPTER lII.—THE JUDICATURE.
CHAPTER IV.—FINANCE AND TRADE.
CHAPTER V.—THE STATES.
CHAPTER VI.—NEW STATES.
CHAPTER VII.—MISCELLANEOUS.
CHAPTER VIII.—ALTERATION OF THE CON-
STITUTION.
THE SCHEDULE.
CHAPTER I.
THE PARLIAMENT.
Part I. —General.
1. The legislative power of the Commonwealth shall be
vested in a federal parliament, which will consist of the Queen,
a senate, and a house of representatives, and which is herein-
after called “The Parliament,” or “the Parliament of the
Commonwealth.”
2. A Governor-General appointed by the Queen shall be her
Majesty’s representative in the commonwealth, and shall have
and may exercise in the commonwealth during the Queen’s
pleasure, but subject to this constitution, such powers and
functions of the Queen as her Majesty may be pleased to assign
to him.
8. There shall be payable to the Queen out of the consolidated
revenue lund of the commonwealth, for the salary of the
Governor-General, an annual sum which, until the parliament
otherwise provides, shall be ten thousand pounds.
The salary of a Governor-General shall not be altered during
his continuance in office.


4. Tlie provisions of this constitution relating to the Governor-
General extend and apply to the Governor-General for the time
being, or such person as the Queen may appoint to administer
the government of the commonwealth ; but no such person
shall be entitled to receive any salary from the commonwealth
in respect of any other office during his administration of the
government of the commonwealth.
5. The Governor-General may appoint such times for holding
the sessions of the parliament as he thinks fit, and may also
from time to time, by proclamation or otherwise, prorogue the
parliament, and may in like manner dissolve the house of
representatives.
After any general election the parliament shall be summoned
to meet not later than thirty days after the day appointed for
the return of the writs.
The parliament shall be summoned to meet not later than six
months after the establishment of the commonwealth.
6. There shall be a session of the parliament once at least in
every year, so that twelve months shall not intervene between
the last sitting of the parliament in one session and its first
sitting in the next session.
Part ll. —The Senate.
7. The senate shall be composed of senators for each state,
directly chosen by the people of the state, voting, until the
parliament otherwise provides, as one electorate.
But until the parliament of the commonwealth other-
wise provides the parliament of the state of Queensland,
if that state be an original state, may make laws
dividing the state into divisions and determining the
number of senators to be chosen for each division, and in
the absence of such provision the state shall be one
electorate.
Until the parliament otherwise provides there shall be six
senators for each original state. The parliament may make
laws increasing or diminishing the number of senators for each
state, but so that equal representation of the several original
states shall be maintained and that no original state shall have
less than six senators.
The senators shall be chosen for a term of six years, and the
names of the senators chosen for each state shall be certified by
the Governor to the Governor-General.
8. The qualification of electors of senate shall be in each state
that which is prescribed by this constitution, or by the parlia-
ment, as the qualification for electors of members of the house
of representatives ; but in the choosing of senators each elector
shall vote only once.


9. The parliament of the commonwealth may make laws
prescribing the method of choosing senators, but so that the
method shall be uniform for all the states. Subject to any such
law, the parliament of each state may make laws prescribing the
method of choosing the senators for that state.
The parliament of a state may make laws for determining the
times and places of elections of senators for the state.
10. Until the parliament otherwise provides, but subject to
this constitution, the laws in force in each state, for the time
being, relating to elections for the more numerous house of
the parliament of the state shall, as nearly as practicable, apply
to elections of senators for the state.
11. The senate may proceed to the dispatch of business, not-
withstanding the failure of any state to provide for its represen-
tation in the senate.
12. The Governor of any state may cause writs to be issued
for elections of senators for the state. In case of the dissolution
of the senate the writs shall be issued within ten days from the
proclamation of such dissolution.
13. As soon as may be after the senate first meets and after
each first meeting of the senate following a dissolution thereof,
the senate shall divide the senators chosen for each state into
two classes, as nearly equal in number as practicable ; and the
places of the senators of the first class shall become vacant at
the expiration of the third year, and the places of those of the
second class at the expiration of the sixth year, from the begin-
ning of their term of service; and afterwards the places of
senators shall become vacant at the expiration of six years from
the beginning of their term of service.
The election to fill vacant places shall be made in the year at
the expiration of which the places are to become vacant.
For the purposes of this section the term of service of a senator
shall be taken to begin on the first day of January following the
day of his election, except in the cases of the first election and
of the election next after any dissolution of the senate, when it
shall be taken to begin on the first day of January preceding the
day of his election.
14. Whenever the number of senators for a state is increased
or diminished, the parliament of the commonwealth may make
such provision for the vacating of the places of senators for the
state as it deems necessary to maintain regularity in the
rotation.
15. If the place of a senator becomes vacant before the ex-
piration of his term of service, the houses of parliament of the
state for which he was chosen shall, sitting and voting together,
choose a person to hold the place until the expiration of the
term, or until the election of a successor as hereinafter pro-


vided, whichever first happens. But if the houses of parliament
of the state are not in session at the time when the vacancy is
notified, the Governor of the state, with the advice of the execu-
tive council thereof, may appoint a person to hold the place
until the expiration of fourteen days after the beginning of the
next session of the parliament of the state, or until the election
of a successor, whichever first happens.
At the next general election of members of the house of represen-
tatives, or at the next election of senators for the state, whichever
first happens, a successor shall, if the term has not then ex-
pired, be chosen to hold the place from the date of his election
until the expiration of the term.
The name of any senator so chosen or appointed shall be
certified by the Governor of the state to the Governor-General.
16. The qualifications of a senator shall be the same as those
of a member of the house of representatives.
17. The senate shall, before proceeding to the despatch of
any other business, choose a senator to be the president of the
senate; and as often as the office of president becomes vacant
the senate shall again choose a senator to be the president.
The president shall cease to hold his office if he ceases to be a
senator. He may be removed from office by a vote of the senate,
or he may resign his office or his seat by writing addressed to the
Governor-General.
18. Before or during any absence of the president, the senate
may choose a senator to perform his duties in his absence.
19. A senator may, by writing addressed to the president, or
to the Governor-General if there is no president or if the presi-
dent is absent from the commonwealth, resign his place, which
thereupon shall become vacant.
20. The place of a senator shall become vacant if for two
consecutive months of any session of the parliament he, without
the permission of the senate, fails to attend the senate.
21. Whenever a vacancy happens in the senate, the president,
or if there is no president or if the president is absent from the
commonwealth, the Governor-General shall notify the same to
the Governor of the state in the representation of which the
vacancy has happened.
22. Until the parliament otherwise provides, the presence of
at least one-third of the whole number of the senators shall be
necessary to constitute a meeting of the senate for the exercise
of its powers.
23. Questions arising in the senate shall be determined by a
majority of votes, and each senator shall have one vote. The
president shall in all cases be entitled to a vote ; and when the
votes are equal the question shall pass in the negative.


Part 111.
The House of Representatives.
24. The house of representatives shall be composed of
members directly chosen by the people of the commonwealth,
and the number of such members shall be, as nearly as prac-
ticable, twice the number of the senators.
The number of members chosen in the several states shall be
in proportion to the respective numbers of their people, and
shall, until the parliament otherwise provides, be determined,
whenever necessary, in the following manner :
I. A quota shall be ascertained by dividing the number
of the people of the commonwealth, as shown by
the latest statistics of the commonwealth, by twice
the number of the senators.
11. The number of members to be chosen in each state
shall be determined by dividing the number of
the people of the state, as shown by the latest
statistics of the commonwealth, by the quota ; and
if on such division there is a lemainder greater
than one-half of the quota, one more member
shall be chosen in the state.
But notliwitlistanding anything in this section, five members
at least shall be chosen in each original state.
25. For the purposes of the last section, if by the law of any
state all persons of any race are disqualified from voting at
elections for the more numerous house of the parliament of the
state, then, in reckoning the number of the people of the state
or of the commonwealth, persons of that rac6 resident in that
state shall not be counted.
26. Notwithstanding anything in section twenty-four the
number of members to be chosen in each state at the first
election shall be as follows : [To be determined according to latest
statistical returns at the date of the passing of the act, and in relation
to the quota referred, to in previous sections.] ,6)
(6) New South Wales ... Twenty-three
Victoria ... ... Twenty
Queensland ... ... Eight
South Australia ... Six
Tasmania ... ... Five
Provided that if Western Australia is an original state the numbers
shall be as follows—
New South Wales ... Twenty-six
Victoria . . ... Twenty-three
Queensland ... ... Nine
South Australia ... Seven
Western Australia ... Five
Tasmania ... ... Five
(Numbers as inserted by the Imperial Parliament).


27. Subject to tliis constitution the parliament may make
laws for increasing or diminishing the number of the members
of the house of representatives.
28. Every house of representatives shall continue for three
years from the first meeting of the house, and no longer, but
may be sooner dissolved by the Governor-General.
29. Until the parliament of the commonwealth otherwise
provides, the Parliament of any state may make laws for
determining the divisions in each state for which members of
the house of representatives may be chosen, and the number of
members to be chosen for each division. A division shall not
be formed out of parts of different states.
In the absence of other provision, each state shall be one
electorate.
30. Until the parliament otherwise provides, the qualification
of electors of members of the house of representatives shall be
in each state that which is prescribed by the law of the state as
the qualification of electors of the more numerous house of the
parliament of the state; but in the choosing of members each
elector shall vote only once.
31. Until the parliament otherwise provides, but subject to
this constitution, the laws in force in each state for the time
being relating to elections for the more numerous house of the
parliament of the state shall, as nearly as practicable, apply to
elections in the state of members of the house of representatives.
32. The Governor-General in Council may cause writs to be
issued for general elections of members of the house of repre-
sentatives.
After the first general election, the writs shall be issued with-
in ten days from the expiry of a house of representatives, or
from the proclamation of a dissolution thereof.
33. Whenever a vacancy happens in the house of represen-
tatives, the speaker shall issue his writ for the election of a new
member, or if there is no speaker, or if he is absent from the
commonwealth, the Governor-General in Council may issue the
writ.
34. Until the parliament otherwise provides, the qualifications
of a member of the house of representatives shall be as follows :
i. He must be of the full age of twenty-one years, and must
be an elector entitled to vote at the election of members
of the house of representatives, or a person qualified to
become such elector, and must have been for three
years at the least a resident within the limits of the
commonwealth as existing at the time when he is
chosen:


ii. He must be a subject of the Queen, either natural-born or
for at least five years naturalised under a law of the
United Kingdom, or of a colony which has become or
becomes a state, or of the commonwealth, or of a state.
35. The house of representatives shall, before proceeding to
the despatch of any other business, choose a member to be the
speaker of the house, and as often as the office of speaker becomes
vacant the house shall again choose a member to be the speaker.
The speaker shall cease to hold his office if he ceases to be a
member. He may be removed from office by a vote of the house,
or he may resign his office or his seat by writing addressed to
the Governor-General.
36. Before or during any absence of the speaker, the house of
representatives may choose a member to perform his duties in his
absence.
37. A member may by writing addressed to tlie speaker, or to
the Governor-General if there is no speaker or if the speaker is
absent from the commonwealth, resign his place, which there-
upon shall become vacant.
38. The place of a member shall become vacant if for two
consecutive months of any session of the parliament he, without
the permission of the house, fails to attend the house.
39. Until the parliament otherwise provides, the presence of
at least one-third of the whole number of the members of the
house of representatives shall be necessary to constitute a meeting
of the house for the exercise of its powers.
40. Questions arising in the house of representatives shall be
determined by a majority of votes other than that of the speaker.
The speaker shall not vote unless the numbers are equal, and
then he shall have a casting vote.
Part IV.—Both Houses of The Parliament.
41. No adult person who has or acquires a right to vote at
elections for the more numerous house of the parliament of a
state, shall, while the right continues, be prevented by any law
of the commonwealth from voting at elections for either house of
the parliament of the commonwealth.
42. Every senator and every member of the house of repre-
sentatives shall before taking his seat make and subscribe before
the Governor-General, or some person authorised by him, an
oath or affirmation of allegiance in the form set forth in the
schedule.
43. A member of either house of the parliament shall be
incapable of being chosen or of sitting as a member of the other
house.


44. Any person who—
i. Is under any acknowledgment of allegiance, obedience, or
adherence to a foreign power, or is a subject or a
citizen or entitled to the rights or privileges of a subject
or a citizen of a foreign power : or
n. Is attained of treason, or has been convicted and is under
sentence, or subject to be sentenced, for any offence
punishable under the law of the commonwealth or of a
state by imprisonment for one year or longer : or
hi. Is an undischarged bankrupt or insolvent: or
iv. Holds any office of profit under the crown, or any pension
payable during the pleasure of the crown out of any of
the revenues of the commonwealth : or
v. Has any direct or indirect pecuniary interest in any agree-
ment with the public service of the commonwealth,
otherwise than as a member and in common with the
other members of an incorporated company consisting
of more than twenty-five persons :
shall be incapable of being chosen or of sitting as a senator or as
a member of the house of representatives.
But sub-section iv. does not apply to the office of any of the
Queen’s ministers of state for the commonwealth, or of any of the
Queen’s ministers for a state, or to the receipt of pay, half-pay,
or a pension by any person as an officer or member of the
Queen’s navy or army, or to the receipt of pay as an officer or
member of the naval or military forces of the commonwealth by
any person whose services are not wholly employed by the
commonwealth.
45. If a senator or member of the house of representatives—
i. Becomes subject to any of the disabilities mentioned in the
last preceding section : or
ii. Takes the benefit, whether by assignment, composition, or
otherwise, of any law relating to bankrupt or insolvent
debtors: or
in. Directly or indirectly takes or agrees to take any fee or
honorarium for services rendered to the commonwealth,
or for services rendered in the parliament to any person
or state:
his place shall thereupon become vacant.
46. Until the parliament otherwise provides, any person
declared by this constitution to be incapable of sitting as a
senator or as a member of the house of representatives shall, for
every day on which he so sits, be liable to pay the sum of One
hundred pounds to any person who sues for it in any court of
competent jurisdiction.


47. Until the parliament otherwise provides, any question
respecting the qualification of a senator or of a membei of the
house of representatives, or respecting a vacancy in either house
of the parliament, and any question of a disputed election to
either house, shall be determined by the house in which the
question arises.
48. Until the parliament otherwise provides, each senator and
each member of the house of representatives shall receive an
allowance of four hundred pounds a year, to be reckoned from
the day on which he takes his seat.
49. The powers, privileges, and immunities of the senate and
of the house of representatives, and of the members and the
committees of each house, shall be such as are declared by the
parliament, and until declared shall be those of the commons
house of parliament of the United Kingdom, and of its members
and committees, at the establishment of the commonwealth.
50. Each house of the parliament may make rules and orders
with respect to —
i. The mode in which its powers, privileges, and immu-
nities may be exercised and upheld :
ii. The order and conduct of its business and proceed-
ings either separately or jointly with the other
house.
Part V.—Powers of the Parliament.
51. The parliament shall, subject to this constitution, have
power to make laws for the peace, order, and good government
of the commonwealth, with respect to :
i. Trade and commerce with other countries, and
among the states:
ii. Taxation ; but so as not to discriminate between
states or parts of states :
in. Bounties on the production or export of goods, but
so that such bounties shall be uniform throughout
the commonwealth:
iv. Borrowing money on the public credit of the com-
monwealth :
v. Postal, telegraphic, telephonic, and other like ser-
vices :
vi. The naval and military defence of the commonwealth
and of the several states, and the control of the
forces to execute and maintain the laws of the
commonwealth :
vii. Lighthouses, lightships, beacons and buoys :
viii. Astronomical and meteorological observations :
ix. Quarantine :


x. Fisheries in Australian waters beyond territorial
limits :
xi. Census and statistics :
xii. Currency, coinage, and legal tender :
xm. Banking, other than state banking; also state
banking extending beyond the limits of the state
concerned, the incorporation of banks, and the
issue of paper money :
xiv. Insurance, other than state insurance ; also state
insurance extending beyond the limits of the state
concerned:
xv. Weights and measures:
xvi. Bills of exchange and promissory notes :
xvn. Bankruptcy and insolvency :
xviii. Copyrights, patents of inventions and designs, and
trade marks:
xix. Naturalisation and aliens :
xx. Foreign corporations, and trading or financial corpora-
tions formed within the limits of the commonwealth:
xxi. Marriage:
xxii. Divorce and matrimonial causes ; and in relation
thereto, parental rights, and the custody and
guardianship of infants :
xxiii. Invalids and old-age pensions :
xxiv. The service and execution throughout the common-
wealth of the civil and criminal process and the
judgments of the courts of the states :
xxv. The recognition throughout the commonwealth of
the. laws, the public acts and records, and the
judicial proceedings of the states :
xxvi. The people of any race, other than the aboriginal race
in any state, for whom it is deemed necessary to
make special laws :
xxvii. Immigration and emigration :
xxviii. The influx of criminals :
xxix. External affairs :
xxx. The relations of the commonwealth with the islands
of the Pacific:
xxxi. The acquisition of property on just terms from any
state or person for any purpose in respect of
which the parliament has power to make laws :
xxxii. The control of railways with respect to transport for
the naval and military purposes of the common-
wealth :
xxxiii. The acquisition, with the consent of a state, of any
railways of the state on terms arranged between
the commonwealth and the state:


xxxiv. Railway construction and extension in any state with
the consent of that state :
xxxv. Conciliation and arbitration for the prevention and
settlement of industrial disputes extending beyond
the limits of any one state :
xxxvi. Matters in respect of which this constitution makes
provision until the Parliament otherwise pro-
vides :
xxxvii. Matters referred to the parliament of the common-
wealth by the parliament or parliaments of any
state or states, but so that the law shall extend
only to states by whose parliaments the matter is
referred, or which afterwards adopt the law:
xxxviii. The exercise within the commonwealth, at the request
or with the concurrence of the parliaments of all
the states directly concerned, of any power which
can at the establishment of this constitution be
exercised only by the parliament of the United
Kingdom or by the federal council of Australasia :
xxxix. Matters incidental to the execution of any power
vested by this constitution in the parliament or in
either house thereof, or in the government of the
commonwealth, or in the federal judicature, or in
any department or officer of the commonwealth.
52. The parliament shall, subject to this constitution, have
exclusive power to make laws for the peace, order, and good
government of the commonwealth with respect to—
i. The seat of government of the commonwealth, and
all places acquired by the commonwealth for public
purposes :
ii. Matters relating to any department of the public
service the control of which is by this constitution
transferred to the executive government of the
commonwealth.
in. Other matters declared by this constitution to be
within the executive power of the parliament.
53. Proposed laws appropriating revenue or moneys, or im-
posing taxation, shall not originate in the senate. But a
proposed law shall not be taken to appropriate revenue or
moneys, or to impose taxation, by reason only of its containing
provisions for the imposition or appropriation of fines or other
pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or payment or appropria-
tion of fees for licences, or fees for services under the proposed
law.
The senate may not amend proposed laws imposing taxation,
or proposed laws appropriating revenue or moneys for the
ordinary annual services of the government.


The senate may not amend any proposed law so as to increase
any proposed charge or burden on the people.
The senate may at any stage return to the house of represen-
tatives any proposed law which the senate may not amend,
requesting, by message, the omission or amendment of any items
or provisions therein. And the house of representatives may if
it thinks fit make any of such omissions or amendments, with or
without modifications.
Except as provided in this section, the senate shall have equal
power with the house of representatives in respect of all proposed
laws.
54. The proposed law which appropriates revenue or moneys
for the ordinary annual services of the government shall deal
only with such appropriation.
55. Laws imposing taxation shall deal only with the imposi-
tion of taxation, and any provision therein dealing with any other
matter shall be of no effect.
Laws imposing taxation, except laws imposing duties of
customs or of excise, shall deal with one subject of taxation
only ; but laws imposing duties of customs shall deal with duties
of customs only, and laws imposing duties of excise shall deal
with duties of excise only.
56. A vote, resolution, or proposed law for the appropria-
tion of revenue or moneys shall not be passed unless the purpose
of the appropriation has in the same session been recommended
by message of the Governor-General to the house in which the
proposal originated.
57. If the house of representatives passes any proposed law,
and the senate rejects or fails to pass it, or passes it with amend-
ments to which the house of representatives will not agree, and
if after an interval of three months the house of representatives,
in the same or the next session, again passes the proposed law
with or without any amendments which have been made,
suggested, or agreed to by the senate, and the senate rejects or
fails to pass it, or passes it with amendments to which the house
of representatives will not agree, the Governor-General may
dissolve the senate and the house of representatives simul-
taneously. But such dissolution shall not take place within six
months before the date of the expiry of the house of represen-
tatives by effluxion of time.
If after such dissolution the house of representatives again
passes the proposed law with or without any amendments which
have been made, suggested, or agreed to by the senate, and the
senate rejects or fails to pass it, or passes it with amendments to
which the house of representatives will not agree, the Governor-
General may convene a joint sitting of the members of the
senate and of the house of representatives.


The members present at the joint sitting may deliberate and
shall vote together upon the proposed law as last proposed by
the house of representatives, and upon amendments, if any,
which have been made therein by one house and not agreed to
by the other, and any such amendments which are affirmed by
an absolute majority of the total number of the members
of the senate and house of representatives [tim>o fifths of
tfao-members prosont and voting thereon], shall be taken to have
been carried, and if the proposed law, with the amendments, if
any, so carried is affirmed by an absolute majority of the
total number of the members of the senate and house of
representatives [three-fifthB--of-4ho members present and voting
thereon], it shall be taken to have been duly passed by both
houses of the parliament, and shall be presented to the
Governor-General for the Queen’s assent.
58. When a proposed law passed by both houses of the
parliament is presented to the Governor-General for the Queen’s
assent, he shall declare, according to his discretion, but subject
to this constitution, that he assents in the Queen’s name, or
that he withholds assent, or that lie reserves the law for the
Queen’s pleasure.
The Governor-General may return to the house in which it
originated any proposed law so presented to him, and may
transmit therewith any amendments which he may recommend,
and the houses may deal with the recommendation.
59. The Queen may disallow any law within one year from
the Governor-General’s assent, and such disallowance on being
made known by the Governor-General, by speech or message to
each of the houses of the parliament, or by proclamation, shall
annul the law from the day when the disallowance is so made
known.
60. A proposed law reserved for the Queen’s pleasure shall
not have any force unless and until within two years from the
day on which it was presented to the Governor-General for the
Queen’s assent the Governor-General makes known, by speech
or message to each of the houses of the parliament, or by
proclamation, that it has received the Queen’s assent.
Chapter IT.
The Executive Government.
61. The exective power of the commonwealth is vested in the
Queen, and is exercisable by the Governor-General as the
Queen’s representative, and extends to the execution and
maintenance of this constitution, and of the laws of the
commonwealth.


62. There shall be a federal executive council to advise the
Governor-General in the Government of the commonwealth,
and the members of the council shall be chosen and summoned
by the Governor-General and sworn as executive councillors,
and shall hold office during his pleasure.
63. The provisions ot this constitution referring to the
Governor-General in Council shall be construed as referring to
the Governor-General acting with the advice of the federal
executive council.
64. The Governor-General may appoint officers to administer
such departments of state of the commonwealth as the Governor-
General in council may establish.
Such officers shall hold officer shall hold office during the
pleasure of the Governor-General. They shall be members of
the federal executive council, and shall be the Queen’s ministers
of state for the commonwealth.
After the first general election no minister of state shall hold
office for a longer period than three months unless he is or
becomes a senator or a member of the house of representatives.
65. Until the parliament otherwise provides, the ministers of
state shall not exceed seven in number, and shall hold such
offices as the parliament prescribes, or, in the absence of pro-
vision as the Governor-General directs.
66. There shall be payable to the Queen, out of the consoli-
dated revenue fund of the commonwealth, for the salaries of the
ministers of State, an annual sum which, until the parliament
otherwise provides, shall not exceed twelve thousand pounds a
year.
67. Until the parliament otherwise provides, the appointment
and removal of all other officers of the executive government of
the commonwealth shall be vested in the Governor-General in
council, unless the appointment is delegated by the Governor-
General in council or by a law of the commonwealth to some
other authority.
68. The command in chief of the naval and military forces of
the commonwealth is vested in the Governor-General as the
Queen’s representative.
69. On a date or dates to be proclaimed by the Governor-
General after the establishment of the commonwealth, the
following departments of the public service in each state shall
become transferred to the commonwealth :
Posts, telegraphs, and telephones :
Naval and military defence :
Light-houses, light-ships, beacons and buoys :
Quarantine.
But the departments of customs and of excise in each state shall
become transferred to the commonwealth on its establishment.


70. In respect of matters which, under this constitution, pass
to the executive government of the commonwealth, all powers
and functions which at the establishment of the commonwealth
are vested in the Governor of a colony, or in the Governor of a
colony with the advice of his executive council, or in any
authority of a colony, shall vest in the Governor-General, or in
the Governor-General in council, or in the authority exercising
similar powers under the commonwealth, as the case requires.
Chapter 111.
The Judicature.
71. The judicial power of the commonwealth shall be vested
in a federal supreme court, to be called the high court of Aus-
tralia, and in such other federal courts as the parliament creates,
and in such other courts as it invests with federal jurisdiction.
The high court shall consist of a chief justice, and so many
other justices, not less than two, as the parliament prescribes.
72. The justices of the high court and of the other courts
created by the parliament:
i. Shall be appointed by the Governor-General in council.
n. Shall not be removed except by the Governor-General in
Council, on an address from both houses of the par-
liament in the same session praying for such removal
on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity.
hi. Shall receive such remuneration as the parliament may
fix; but the remuneration shall not be diminished
during their continuance in office.
78. The high court shall have jurisdiction, with such excep-
tions and subject to such regulations as the parliament pre-
scribes, to hear and determine appeals from all judgments,
decrees, orders, and sentences :
i. Of any justice or justices exercising the original jurisdic-
tion of the high court:
n. Of any other federal court, or court exercising federal
jurisdiction : or of the supreme court of any state, or
of any other court of any state from which at the
establishment of the commonwealth an appeal lies to
the Queen in council:
in. Of the inter-state commission, but as to questions of
law only :
and the judgment of the high court in all such cases shall be
final and conclusive.
But no exception or regulation prescribed by the parliament
shall prevent the high court from hearing and determining any


appeal from the supreme court of a state in any matter in which
at the establishment of the commonwealth an appeal lies from
such supreme court to the Queen in council.
Until the parliament otherwise provides, the conditions of and
restrictions on appeals to the Queen in council from the supreme
courts of the several states shall be applicable to appeals from
them to the high court.
u, 74. No appoal shall bo pormitted-to-tho Quoon in council-
-4a any matter involving the interpretation of thio oonotitutioo or-
of tho constitution of a stato, unloes tho-public? interests-of aomo-
part of her Majesty’s dominions, othor-than the eommonwcalfch-
or a state; iavolvodr
Exoopt as provided in this section, this constitution shall not-
-irapair any right which tho Qooon-may bo ■ploaßed-40-exot l oiao,
■by virtuo of her royal prerogative,- to grant- special leave of
appoal from tho high court to her Majosty in council.—But tho-
parliament may-make laws limiting tho-mattors ia-whieh ouoh ■
loavo may bo asked.
75. In"all matters—
i. Arising under any treaty :
n. Affecting consuls, or other representatives of other
countries:
hi. In which the commonwealth, or a person sueing or being
sued on behalf of the commonwealth, is a party :
iv. Between states, or between residents of different states,
or between a state and a resident of another state :
v. In which a writ of mandamus or prohibition or an in-
junction is sought against an officer of the common-
wealth :
the high court shall have original jurisdiction.
76. The parliament may make laws conferring original juris-
diction on the high court in any matter—
i. Arising under this constitution, or involving its interpre-
tation :
ii. Arising under any laws made by the parliament:
iii. Of admiralty and maratine jurisdiction :
iv. Relating to the same subject-matter claimed under the
laws of different states.
(7). 74- “ No appeal shall be permitted to the Queen in council from a decision of the high
court upon any question, howsoever arising, as to the limits inter se of the constitutional
powers of the commonwealth and ihose of any State or states, or as to the limits inter se of
the constitutional powers of any two or more states, unless the high court shall certify that
the question is one which ought to be determined by her Majesty in council.
“ The high court may so certify if satisfied that for any special reason the certificate
should be granted, and thereupon an appeal shall lie to her Majesty in council on the
question without further leave.
Except as provided by this section, this constitution shall not impair any right which the
Queen may be pleased to exercise by virtue of her royal prerogative to grant special leave of
appeal from the high court to her Majesty in council. The parliament may make laws
limiting the matters in which such leave may be asked, but proposed laws containing any
such limitation shall be reserved by the Governor-General for her Majesty’s pleasure.”
{New clause as substituted by the Imperial Parliament .)


177. With respect to any of the matters mentioned in the last
wo sections, the parliament may make laws —
i. Defining the jurisdiction of any federal court other than
the high court :
ii. Defining the extent to which the jurisdiction of any
federal court shall be exclusive of that which belongs
to or is vested in the courts of the states :
in. Investing any court of a state with federal jurisdiction.
78. The parliament may make laws conferring rights to pro-
seed against the commonwealth or a state in respect of matters
vitliin the limits of the judicial power.
79. The federal jurisdiction of any court may be exercised by
such number of judges as the parliament prescribes.
80. The trial on indictment of any offence against any law of
die commonwealth shall be by jury, and every such trial shall
ae held in the state where the offence was committed, and if the
affence was not committed within any state the trial shall be
Lield at such place or places as the parliament prescribes.
CHAPTER IV.
FINANCE AND TRADE.
81. All revenues or moneys raised or received by the executive
government of the commonwealth shall form one consolidated
revenue fund, to be appropriated for the purposes of the
commonwealth in the manner and subject to the charges and
liabilities imposed by this constitution.
82. The costs, charges, and expenses incident to the collection,
management, and receipt of the consolidated revenue fund shall
form the first charge thereon ; and the revenue of the common-
wealth shall in the first instance be applied to the payment of
the expenditure of the commonwealth.
83. No money shall be drawn from the treasury of the
commonwealth except under appropriation made by law.
But until the expiration of one month after the first meeting
of the parliament the Governor-General in Council may draw
from the treasury and expend such moneys as may be necessary
for the maintenance of any department transferred to the
commonwealth and for the holding of the first elections tor the
parliament.
84. When any department of the public service of a state
becomes transferred to the commonwealth, all officers of the
department shall become subject to the control of the executive
government of the commonwealth.
Any such officer who is not retained in the service of the
commonwealth shall, unless he is appointed to some other office
of equal emolument in the public service of the state, be entitled


Transfer of
property of
state.
to receive from tlie state any pension, gratuity, or other compen-
sation payable under the law of the state on the abolition of his
office.
Any such officer who is retained in the service of the common-
wealth shall preserve all his existing and accruing rights, and
shall be entitled to retire from office at the time, and on the
pension or retiring allowance, which would be permitted by the
law of the state if his service with the commonwealth were a
continuation of Ins service with the state. Such pension or
retiring allowance shall be paid to him by the commonwealth ;
but the state shall pay to the commonwealth a part thereof, to be
calculated on the proportion which his term of service with the
state bears to his whole term of service, and for the purpose of
the calculation his salary shall be taken to be that paid to him
by the state at the time of the transfer.
Any officer who is, at the establishment of the commonwealth,
in the public service of a state, and who is, by consent of the
governor of the state with the advice of the executive council
thereof, transferred to the public service of the commonwealth,
shall have the same rights as if he had been an officer of a
department transferred to the commonwealth and were retained
in the service of the commonwealth.
85. When any department of the public service of a state is
transferred to the commonwealth—
i. All property of the state, of any kind, used exclusively in
connection with the department, shall become vested in
the commonwealth ; but, in the case of the depart-
ments controlling customs and excise and bounties, for
such time only as the Governor-General in Council may
declare to be necessary.
n. The commonwealth may acquire any property of the state,
of any kind, used, but not exclusively used, in connec-
tion with the department; the value thereof shall, if no
agreement can be made, be ascertained in, as nearly as
may be, the manner in which the value of land, or of an
interest in land, taken by the state for public purposes
is ascertained under the law of the state in force at the
establishment of the commonwealth.
hi. The commonwealth shall compensate the state for the
value of any property passing to the commonwealth
under this section; if no agreement can be made as to
the mode of compensation, it shall be determined under
laws to be made by the parliament.
iv. The commonwealth shall, at the date of the transfer,
assume the current obligations of the state in respect of
the department transferred.


86. On-tlie establishment of the commonwealth, the collection
and control of duties of customs and of excise, and the control of
the payment of bounties, shall pass to the executive government
of the commonwealth.
87. During a period of ten years after the establishment
of the commonwealth and thereafter until the parliament
otherwise provides of the net revenue of the commonwealth
from duties of customs and of excise, not more than one-fourth
shall be applied annually by the commonwealth towards its
expenditure.
The balance shall, in accordance with this constitution, be
paid to the several states, or applied towards the payment of
interest on debts of the several states taken over by the common-
wealth.
88. Uniform duties of customs shall be imposed within two
years after the establishment of the commonwealth.
89. Until the imposition of uniform duties of customs —
i. The commonwealth shall credit to each state the revenues
collected therein by the commonwealth.
ii. The commonwealth shall debit to each state—
(a) the expenditure therein of the commonwealth
incurred solely for the maintenance or con-
tinuance, as at the time of transfer, of any
department transferred from the state to the
commonwealth.
(b) the proportion of the state, according to the
number of its people, in the other expenditure
of the commonwealth.
hi. The commonwealth shall pay to each state month by
month the balance (if any) in favour of the state.
90. On the imposition of uniform duties of customs the power
of the parliament to impose duties of customs and of excise, and
to grant bounties on the production or export of goods, shall
become exclusive.
On the imposition of uniform duties of customs all laws of the
several states imposing duties of customs or of excise, or offering
bounties on the production or export of goods, shall cease to
have effect; but any grant of or agreement for any such bounty
lawfully made by or under the authority of the government of
any state shall be taken to be good if made before the thirtieth
day of June, one thousand eight hundred and ninety-eight, and
not otherwise.
91. Nothing in this constitution prohibits a state from
granting any aid to or bounty on mining for gold, silver or other
metals, nor from granting, with the consent of both houses of
the parliament of the commonwealth expressed by resolution,
any aid to or bounty on the production or export of goods.


92. On tlie imposition of uniform duties of customs, trade,
commerce, and intercourse among the states, whether by means
of internal carriage or ocean navigation, shall be absolutely free.
But notwithstanding anything in this constitution, goods im-
ported before the imposition of uniform duties of customs into
any state, or into any colony which, whilst the goods remain
therein, becomes a state, shall, on thence passing into another
state within two years after the imposition of such duties, be
liable to any duty chargeable on the importation of such goods
into the commonwealth, less any duty paid in respect of the
goods on their importation.
93. During the first five years after the imposition of uniform
duties of customs, and thereafter until the parliament otherwise
provides :
i. The duties of customs chargeable on goods imported into
a state and afterwards passing into another state for
consumption, and the duties of excise paid on goods
produced or manufactured in a state and afterwards
passing into another state for consumption, shall be
taken to have been collected not in the former but in
the latter state.
ii. Subject to the last sub-section, the commonwealth shall
credit revenue, debit expenditure, and pay balances to
the several states as prescribed for the period preceding
the imposition of uniform duties of customs.
94. After five years from the imposition of uniform duties of
customs, the parliament may provide, on such basis as it deems
fair, for the monthly payment to the several states of all surplus
revenue of the commonwealth.
95. Notwithstanding anything in this constitution, the parlia-
ment of the state of Western Australia may, during the first five
years after the imposition of uniform duties of customs, impose
duties of customs on goods passing into that state and not
originally imported from beyond the limits of the common-
wealth ; and such duties shall be collected by the commonwealth.
But any duty so imposed on any goods shall not exceed during
the first of such years the duty chargeable on the goods under
the law of Western Australia in force at the imposition of
uniform duties, and shall not exceed during the second, third,
fourth, and fifth of such years respectively, four-fifths, three-
fifths, two-fiftlis, and one-fifth of such latter duty, and all duties
imposed under this section shall cease at the expiration of the
fifth year after the imposition of uniform duties.
If at any time during the five years the duty on any goods
under this section is higher than the duty imposed by the


commonwealth on the importation of the like goods, then such
higher duty shall be collected on the goods when imported into
Western Australia from beyond the limits of the commonwealth.
96. During a period of ten years after the establishment
of the Commonwealth and thereafter until the parliament
otherwise provides, the parliament may grant financial
assistance to any state on such terms and conditions as
the parliament thinks fit.
97 (iroj. Until the parliament otherwise provides, the laws in
force in any colony which has become or becomes a state with
respect to the receipt of revenue and the expenditure of money
on account of the government of the colony, and the review and
audit of such receipt and expenditure, shall apply to the receipt
of revenue and the expenditure of money on account of the
commonwealth in the state in the same manner as if the
commonwealth, or the government or an officer of the common-
wealth, were mentioned whenever the colony, or the government
or. an officer of the colony is mentioned.
98 (£?). The power of the parliament to make laws with
respect to trade and commerce extends to navigation and
shipping, and to railways the property of any state.
99 (96). The commonwealth shall not, by any law or regu-
lation of trade, commerce, or revenue, give preference to one
state or any part thereof over another state or any part thereof.
100 (99y. The commonwealth shall not, by any law or regu-
lation of trade or commerce, abridge the right of a state or of
the residents therein to the reasonable use of the waters of
rivers tor conservation or irrigation.
101 (100). There shall be an inter-state commission, with
such powers of adjudication and administration as the parlia-
ment deems necessary for the execution and maintenance,
within the commonwealth, of the provision of this constitution
relating to trade and commerce, and of all laws made there-
under.
102 (101). The parliament may by any law with respect to
trade or commerce forbid, as to railways, any preference or dis-
crimination by any state, or by any authority constituted under a
state, if such preference or discrimination is undue and unreason-
able, or unjust to any state: due regard being had to the
financial responsibilities incurred by any state in connection
with the construction and maintenance of its railways. But no
preference or discrimination shall, within the meaning of this
section, be taken to be undue and unreasonable, or unjust to
any state, unless so adjudged by the inter-state commission.
108 (162). The members of the inter-state commission—
i. Shall be appointed by the Governor-General in council:


ii. Shall hold office for seven years, but may be removed
within that time by the Governor-General in council,
on an address from both houses of the parliament in
the same session praying for such removal on the
ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity:
m. Shall receive such remuneration as the parliament may
fix; but such remuneration shall not be diminished
during their continuance in office.
104 (108). Nothing in tins constitution shall render unlawful
any rate for the carriage of goods upon a railway, the property
of a state, if the rate is deemed by the inter-state commission
to be necessary for the development of the territory of the state,
and if the rate applies equally to goods within the state and to
goods passing into the state from other states.
105 (HH). -The parliament may take over from the states
their public debts as existing at the establishment of the
commomvealtli, or a proportion thereof according to the respec-
tive numbers of their people as shown by the latest statistics
of the commonwealth, and may convert, renew, or consolidate
such debts, or any part thereof; and the states shall indemnify
the commonwealth in respect of the debts taken over, and
thereafter the interest payable in respect of the debts shall be
deducted and retained from the portions of the surplus revenue
of the commonwealth payable to the several states, or if
such surplus is insufficient, or if there is no surplus, then the
deficiency or the whole amount shall be paid by the several
states.
CHAPTER V.
THE STATES.
106 (40©j. The constitution of each state of the common-
wealth shall, subject to this constitution, continue as at the
establishment of the commonwealth, or as at the admission or
establishment of the state, as the case may be, until altered in
accordance with the constitution of the state.
107 (106). Every power of the parliament of a colony which
has become or becomes a state, shall, unless it is by this consti-
tution exclusively vested in the parliament of the common-
wealth or withdrawn from the parliament of the state, continue
as at the establishment of the commonwealth, or as at the
admission or establishment of the state, as the case may be.
108 (107). Every law in force in a colony which has become
or becomes a state, and relating to any matter within the
powers of the parliament of the commonwealth, shall, subject to
this constitution, continue in force in the state ; and, until pro-
vision is made in that behalf by the parliament of the common-


wealth, the parliament ot the state shall have such powers of
alteration and ot repeal in respect of any such law as the par-
liament ot the colony had until die colony became a state.
109 (486). When a law of a state is inconsistent with a lawo
the commonwealth, the latter shall prevail, and the former shall
to the extent of the inconsistency, be invalid.
110(f094. The provisions of this constitution relating to the
Governor of a state extend and apply to the Governor for the
time being of the state, or other chief executive officer o
administrator of the government of the state.
111 (m). The parliament of a state may surrender any part
of the state to the commonwealth 5 and upon such surrender
and the acceptance thereof by the commonwealth, such part o
the state shall become subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the
commonwealth.
112 (H 4). After uniform duties of customs have been
imposed, a state may levy on imports or exports, or on goods
passing into or out of the state, such charges as may be
necessary for executing the inspection laws of the state ; but the
net pioduce of all charges so levied shall be for the use of the
commonwealth; and any such inspection laws may be annulled
by the parliament of the commonwealth.
113 (H2j. All fermented, distilled, or other intoxicating
liquids passing into any state or remaining therein for use, con-
sumption, sale, or storage shall be subject to the laws of the
state as if such liquids had been produced in the state.
114 («9). A state shall not, without the consent of the
parliament of the commonwealth, raise or maintain any naval or
military force, or impose any tax on property of any kind
belonging to the commonwealth ; nor shall the commonwealth
impose any tax on property of any kind belonging to a state.
115 (114). A state shall not coin money, nor make anything
but gold and silver coin a legal tender in payment of debts.
1 16 (416). The commonwealth shall not make any law for
establishing any religion, or for imposing any religious obser-
vance, or for prohibiting the free exercise of any religion, and no
religious test shall be required as a qualification for any office or
public trust under the commonwealth.
117 (110).. A subject of the Queen, resident in any state, shall
not be subject in any other state to any disability or discrimina-
tion which would not be equally applicable to him if he were a
subject of the Queen resident in such other state.
118 (4-1-7). Full faith and credit shall be given, throughout the
commonwealth, to the laws, the public acts and records, and the
judicial proceedings, of every state.


119 (118). The commonwealth shall protect every state
against invasion, and, on the application of the executive
government of the state, against domestic violence.
120 (119). Every state shall make provision for the detention
in its prisons of persons accused or convicted of offences against
the laws of the commonwealth, and for .the punishment of persons
convicted of such offences, and the parliament of the common-
wealth may make laws to give effect to this provision.
CHAPTER VI.
NEW STATES.
121 (120). The parliament may admit to the commonwealth
or establish new states, and may upon such admission or
establishment make or impose such terms and conditions, in-
cluding the extent of representation in either house of the
parliament, as it thinks fit.
122 (121). The parliament may make laws for the govern-
ment of any territory surrendered by any state to and accepted
by the commonwealth, or of any territory placed by the Queen
under the authority of and accepted by the commonwealth, or
otherwise acquired by the commonwealth, and may allow the
representation of such territory in either house of the parliament
to the extent and on the terms which it thinks fit.
128 (122). The parliament of the commonwealth may, with
the consent of the parliament of a state, and the approval of
the majority of the electors of the state voting upon the
question, increase, diminish, or otherwise alter the limits of the
state, upon such terms and conditions as may be agreed on, and
may, with the like consent, make provision respecting the effect
and operation of any increase or diminution or alteration of
territory in relation to any state affected.
124 (128). A new state may be formed by separation of
territory from a state, but only with the consent of the parlia-
ment thereof, and a new state may be formed by the union of
two or more states or parts of states, but only with the consent
of the parliaments of the states affected.
CHAPTER VII.
MISCELLANEOUS.
(124). ThO'Ooat of-government of tho commonwealth shall-bo-
dotorminod hy tho parliament and shall bo within territory vootod--
■ -t h o-eom mo n wealth.
Until ouoh determination the parliament shall bo oummonod ■
to moot at -euoh plaoo within tho commonwealth as a mujority-of ■


the-gev«3w«s of-fco -er,4n the «vent of an eq«fd4iYi«e»
-epttrkra among tfee gevemorsy as the gevcrrrer-gon-sralr shall
Street.
125. The seat of government of the commonwealth shall
be determined by the parliament, and shall be within
territory which shall have been granted to or acquired by
the commonwealth, and shall be vested in and belong to
the commonwealth, and [if New South Wales be an
original state shall be in that state] (8) and be distant not
less than one hundred miles from Sydney.
Such territory shall contain an area of not less than
one hundred square miles, and such portion thereof as
shall consist of crown lands shall be granted to the com-
monwealth without any payment therefor.
(9 [lf Victoria be an original state] the parliament shall
sit at Melbourne until it meets (10 'at the seat of govern-
ment.
126 (P 25). The Queen may authorise the Governor-General
to appoint any person, or any persons jointly or severally, to be
his deputy or deputies within any part of the commonwealth, and
in that capacity to exercise during the pleasure of the Governor-
General such powers and functions of the Governor-General as
he thinks fit to assign to such deputy or deputies, subject to any
limitations expressed or directions given by the Queen ; but the
appointment of such deputy or deputies shall not effect the
exercise by the Governor-General himself of any power or
function.
127 (H 56). In reckoning the numbers of the people of the com-
monwealth, or of a state or other part of the commonwealth,
aboriginal natives shall not be counted.
CHAPTER VIII.
ALTERATION OF THE CONSTITUTION.
128 (m). This constitution shall not be altered except in the
following manner :
The proposed law for the alteration thereof must be passed by
an absolute majority of each house of the parliament, and not
less than two nor more than six months after its passage
through both houses the proposed law shall be submitted in each
state to the electors qualified to vote for the election of members
of the house of representatives.
But if either house passes any such proposed law by
an absolute majority and the other house rejects or fails
(8) “ Shall be in the state of New South Wales.” (Words in brackets as altered by the
Imperial Parliament).
(9) Words in brackets omitted by the Imperial Parliament.
(10) “ Meet ” substituted for meets ”by the Imperial Parliament.


to pass it or passes it with any amendment to which the
first-mentioned house will not agree, and if, after an
interval of three months, the first-mentioned house, in
the same or the next session, again passes the proposed
law by an absolute majority, with or without any amend-
ment which has been made or agreed to by the other
house, and such other house rejects or fails to pass it with
any amendment to which the first mentioned house will
not agree, the Governor-General may submit the proposed
law as last proposed by the first-mentioned house, and
either with or without any amendments subsequently
agreed to by both houses, to the electors in each state
qualified to vote for the election of the house of represen-
tatives.
When a proposed law is submitted to the electors the
vote shall be taken in such a manner as the parliament pre-
scribes. But until the qualification of electors of members of
the house of representatives becomes uniform throughout the
commonwealth only one-half of the electors voting for and
against the proposed law shall be counted in any state in which
adult sufferage prevails.
And if in the majority of the states a majority of the electors
voting approve the proposed law, and if a majority of all the
electors voting also approve the proposed law, it shall be pre-
sented to the Governor-General for the Queen’s assent.
-A-a [No] alteration diminishing the proportionate representa-
tion of any state in either house of the parliament, or the
minimum number of representatives of a state in the house of
representatives, or increasing, diminishing, or otherwise
altering the limits of the state, or in any manner affecting
the provisions of the constitution in relation thereto,
shall [not] become law unless the majority of the electors voting
in that state approve the proposed law.
THE SCHEDULE.
OATH.
I, A.B., do swear that I will be faithful and bear true allegi-
ance to her Majesty Queen Victoria, her heirs and successors
according to law. Ho help me God !
AFFIRMATION .
I, A.B., do solemnly and sincerely affirm and declare that I
will be faithful and bear true allegiance to her Majesty Queen
Victoria, her heirs and successors according to law.
(Note. — The name of the King or Queen of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Ireland for the time being is to be substituted
from time to time).








