

ESSENCE
OF
“PROGRESS AND POVERTY”
EXTRACTED FROM THE AMERICAN OF
HENRY GEORGE
AND DONE INTO AND DEALT WITH IN PLAIN ENGLISH
BY
E. G. FITZGIBBON
AUSTRALIAN EDITION-




ESSENCE
OF
“PROGRESS AND POVERTY”
EXTRACTED FROM THE AMERICAN OF
HENRY GEORGE
AND DONE INTO AND DEALT WITH IN PLAIN ENGLISH
BY
E. G. FITZGIBBON
AUSTRALIAN EDITION.




ESSENCE OF
“ PROGRESS AND POVERTY.”
CHAPTER I.
THE PLOT.
Scene. —The Study of Mr. Henry George.
Personce. —Mr. Henry George, and in him The Arch
Tempter.
DIALOGUE.
A. T. Henry, raised as you have been on the Pacific Slope,
ergo, from local associations a free trader, ambitious of fame, with
respectable intellectual parts, fair education, a facile pen and easy,
graceful style, why do you not, like Henry 0. Carey, of the Penn-
sylvania side, who has made a name for himself as the apostle of
protectionism, distinguish yourself in the public advocacy of your
free-trade principles ?
H. G. Cui Bono ? What the Secession War twenty years
ago was undertaken for and failed in, is not likely to be accom-
plished by anything that I could write. All the literature of the
Cobden Club would have no more effect upon Massachusetts
manufacturers than the adventures of Baron Munchausen.
A. T. Then eschew the literature of the Cobden Club, and
get at your object indirectly.
H. G. Howl
A. T. What is the object 1
H. G. To abolish Customs duties.
A. T. Is hanging the only way of killing a dog ? To whom
do the Customs duties go, and for what purpose 1
H. G. To Government, for its maintenance.


A. T. Well, if all taxation were rendered needless, there
would be no excuse for collecting Customs duties, and straight you
have free trade established without any mention of the subject.
H. G. But you cannot do without Government.
A. T. Granted, but you might make Government so abun-
dantly wealthy, as to leave no excuse for taxation.
H. G. How 1
A. T. By a swinging impost on land. In the lively times,
nearly a hundred years ago, when I was gloriously busy in France
with the revolution,- I had amongst my proteges a fellow named
Quesnay. If you look up his writings you will come upon a
notion which secured him some notoriety until things grew too
hot for theorizing ; it was that all taxes should be abolished except
an impot unique upon land, so that landowners should bear the
whole cost of government and a surplus to boot. They are
neither producers, manufacturers, exporters, nor importers who are
the folks with whom you are concerned.
H. G. But the modus operandi ?
A. T. Simple enough, a mere legislative act. John Stuart
Mill and Herbert Spencer advocate the assumption of the owner-
ship of land by the State, and the compensation of the owners so
dispossessed.
H. G. That would not work ; the amount of compensation
would be so enormous. It could only be effected by an im-
mense loan, to pay interest on which general taxation would still
be necessary, and free trade indefinitely postponed.
A. T. Then pay no compensation.
H. G. But that would be confiscation, the bare proposal of
which would, be yelled at as unjust and iniquitous.
A. T. Headlong again, like a bull at a gate. Don’t make the
bare proposal; cover up its bareness with three or four hundred
pages of a neatly, methodically, and gracefully compiled philoso-
phical treatise, the bigger in reason the better, because it will the
more effectually bother your adversaries to follow you, and tempt
them to waste their energy in combating details, which are of no
more importance than is the “ patter ” with which a thimble-rigger
distracts the attention of his observers from his fingering, palming,
and placing the pea, whilst seemingly only engaged in shuffling
the thimbles. Like him, too, in treating of the science you have


taken in hand, say political economy, you will shuffle about with
fitting “patter,”—land, labour, wages, capital, interest, &c. ; they
give room for any amount of hocus pocus, and having arranged
them to your purpose, you will triumphantly discover under the
thimble Land Ownership, and the name Rent, the pea which
whilst so remaining is the root of all evil, but which by mere
transference to coverture of the thimble, State Ownership of
Land, will at once germinate into the golden age which poets
have sung, and high-raised seers have told in metaphor; the
glorious vision which has always haunted -man with gleams of
fitful splendour; what he saw whose eyes at Patmos were closed
in a trance; the culmination of Christianity ; the city of God on
earth with its walls of jasper and its gates of pearl; the reign of
the Prince of Peace.
Make only a slight and incidental reference to your real
object, free trade in America; deal rather with the social con-
dition of England and the British people ; and to give Homeric
personal interest to the theme, select some prominent Englishman
as your special example. Being a citizen of the great American
Republic, you will of course choose a nobleman, probably a duke,
with, it may be, even a secondary hete noir as low down as a
marquis. Don’t forget about the city of God upon earth, the
culmination of Christianity, and so forth, with some other
apposite Scripture references quoted “ like a very cunning clerk.”
It will have upon some a soothing, lubricating effect, so that you
will, so to speak, absorb and assimilate them. Above all be
careful to proclaim yourself in set terms a devotee, a very incar-
nation of justice, or as some Cockney admirer may title you, a
very Harry Stides George, so that when you have led up to and
must out with the confiscation proposal, it will be becoming in
so awfully, quite too entirely learned, just, good, and Scripture-
quoting a philosopher to declare that to confiscate the ownership
of their lands is an act of not justice merely but of actual mercy
to the owners, whom you will take special pains to blacken and
brand with infamy as nefarious robbers, deserving of, and, if they
grumble, likely to fall in for much harsher treatment.
H. G. Well, but, I say, that will be rough on some of the
poor beggars. That duke whom you suggest I should single out,
for instance, came by his property innocently enough from his


forefathers, however they may have got it; and then, think of
some poor widow, with her fatherless children, to whom the place
her husband left her at his death is her whole income and means
of support for herself and them; or the labourer who, preparing
to marry and make a home for himself, has paid part of his
wages week by week to get a bit of land and build a cottage on
it; or that old shopkeeper, who stuck to business so long, and
pinched and spared till he could buy two or three little tenements
to give him an income, and a bit of a villa just out of town to
end his days comfortably in ; —surely it won’t honestly do to say
that this man’s or the labourer’s little estate is not the produce
of his toil, nor that old, hard-worked lawyer’s, nor the merchant’s,
nor that weather-beaten ship captain’s neither. And then again,,
some of this land has been actually given away and devoted to
charity, and there’s Parnell’s estate at Avoca, which the Irish
Land League have begged the world through to get the money to
pay off the mortgages of and give to him clear. And crowds of
others have bought their land direct from the State, and
paid the Government the highest price it would fetch at public
auction. I say, you know, to call these nefarious robbers and all
that is really coming it a trifle strong.
A. T. “Won’t honestly dol” That is sweetly simple; would
do honour to Yerdant Green. What have you to do with
honesty 1 You have your ambition, have you not ? Let them
have it hot, I tell you; and, what’s more, pitch into Herbert
Spencer roundly for his namby-pambyness in proposing com-
pensation ; it will show that, great gun as he is among the
Britishers, you are a cut above him in boldness and originality.
You will not induce the world to follow your lead, but that’s of
no consequence; what does matter is, that you will at once
become talked about, you will have done your best to fulfil Jack
Falstaff’s injunction: “Rob me the Exchequer, Hal, and mind
thou doest it with clean hands.” And the more you’re criticised
the more your book will sell; the English will swallow any
bunkum if cleverly spiced, and, with a handsome sum in your
pocket, you will be gratified with transatlantic fame to the top-
most bent of your vanity. Therefore, take my tip, write a book,
and out-Herbert Herbert with Social Ex-Statics.
H. G. Thanks, old friend. Here’s to the work, and the title
shall be “Progress and Poverty.”


CHAPTER II.
THE CONSUMMATION.
Factum est —the book is complete—a handy volume of four
hundred and one pages with a copious index to prove method and
deliberation, dispel doubt as to the seriousness of the argument,
and scout the suspicion that this is the most recent and subtle
development of American humour, to raise a horse-laugh against
Social Static philosophers. It sells, too, in thousands, and all sorts,
from Oxford Dons to asses’-bridge juvenile debating society orators,
are smitten with its beaiities. Mr. Henry George is famous, has
fobbed a heap of money, is furnishing his publishers with more of
the like stuff, and is orating to crowds of admiring Britishers.
The number of pages was limited only by book-making con-
siderations of handiness, for as to matter, if the four hundred and
one pages had been multiplied by the same number, it would have
been an advantage in giving room for the introduction of so many
the more side issues to lead contentious critics on Will-o’-the-Wisp
digressions, and of unimportant truisms wherewith to gloss over
the main point, give a pervading flavour of veraciousness, and
present a thicker'crust to counteract the tendency of falsehood to
behave like butter in hot porridge.
But for this the pages necessary to the work would have been
the number which it contains less four hundred. Bor, all that is
original in it, the sole excuse for its production, may be stated in four
lines—namely, the assertion that it would be a just act on the part
of the State to seize, confiscate, and appropriate without compen-
sation the land ownership of all individual landowners, with the
incidental right to receive and use the ground rent. This assertion
is all that is added to previous literature, and, if it were true, its
self-evidence would have rendered a second page needless, but
being untrue, it, after the nature of lies, requires an unlimited
amount of bolstering, and remains an untruth to all eternity.
Hence for what is stateable in four lines, we have four hundred and
one pages, and regrets that opportunity will not admit of more.
And yet the assertion is no more proved at the end than at the
beginning of the volume.


The whole force of this assertion, ergo , the truth or falsehood,
God-inspired or devil-prompted character of the entire work, rests
upon the meaning of the one word Just. Conscious of this, Mr.
George demonstrates in set terms his knowledge of the reverence
which is popularly paid to justice, and adopts what he is pleased
to call a test to prove that his proposal tallies with this sentiment.
He proceeds as follows : “When it is proposed to abolish private
property in land, the first question that will arise is that of justice.
Though often warped by habit, superstition, and selfishness into
the most distorted forms, the sentiment of justice is yet funda-
mental to the human mind, and whatever dispute arouses the
passions of men, the conflict is sure to rage, not so much as to the
question, ‘ls it wise V as to the question, *ls it right 1 ’ This
tendency of popular discussions to take an ethical form has a
cause. It springs from a law of the human mind, it rests upon a
vague and instinctive recognition of what is probably the deepest
truth we can grasp. That alone is wise which is just, that alone
is enduring which is right. In the narrow scale of individual
actions and individual life this truth may be often obscured, but
in the wider field of natural life it everywhere stands out. I bow
to this arbitrament and accept this test.”
But he takes care that the test shall be of his own concoction,
and a most characteristically curious one too. It is this. “If
private property in land be just, then is the remedy I propose a
false one ; if, on the contrary, private property in land be unjust,
then is the remedy the true one.”
Now this is an impudent juggle. First, observe that the
“ remedy ” which he pretends to test the justice of is not the
same thing that he a moment previously mentioned as certain to
give rise to the question of justice,—namely, the proposal “to
abolish private property in land,” and which, as advocated by
Englishmen, i.e., with compensation to landowners, might perhaps
meet the inquiry,—but an altogether different thing which he
craftily puts forward under colour of it—viz., to punish land-
owners as robbers by confiscating their property, giving them no
compensation, and terrifying them with threats of liability to
greater ill-usage. And, whilst as to this no question of justice can
arise, because the proposition has flagrant injustice on the face of
it, he pretends to be unconscious of that fact, and professes to test


whether it is or is not just by discussing a third and still further
different matter—namely, whether private property in land is just,
and submits this precious “ remedy ” of his to no test whatever.
A glance is sufficient to reveal the monstrous roguery of this
piece of legerdemain. Suppose private ownership of land to be
unjust, how does that decide that Mr. George’s “ remedy,” the
punishment which he would inflict upon landowners for such
injustice, would not be inadequately lenient, or unduly severe, and
therefore in either case unjust 1
Paraphrase his test. Suppose some Draconic farmer’s friend to
recommend hanging as the penalty for stealing a turnip from a
turnip-field, the justice of the punishment might be tested by the
same formula. “If stealing a turnip be just, then is the remedy
I propose a false one ; if, on the contrary, stealing a turnip be
unjust, then is the remedy the true one 1
Or suppose the crime to be wilful murder, and the suggested
punishment a fine of five shillings, and the same formula gone
through ; and both stealing and murder being unjust, would the
“test” decide that the suggested punishment or “remedy” in
either case would be a j ust one 1
In fact, like a cuttle-fish, he involves himself in an ink-fog, and
takes advantage jof the obscurity to practice a deception. And
having done so, it is as interesting as to observe through a
microscope the voracious energy of one of the infusorial animalcula
in a drop of ditch- water, to watch him, with a velocity which
prevents his unsuspecting reader from noticing the trick which he
has played, dash off upon the false issue he has raised, and in a
torrent of historical, legal, economical, political, poetically-
imaginative, and awe-inspiringly encyclopaedic erudition fulminate
a furious indictment of robbery against landowners, charge the
jury, which is himself, to bring in a unanimously prompt verdict
of guilty with a faint recommendation to mercy, and pass sentence
upon the culprits, with solemn admonition that they merit even
greater severity. And all the while he is in seeming unconscious-
ness that the many parts which one man in his life is said to play
are few as compared with his : first, accuser ; second, prosecuting
counsel; third, jury of say twelve; fourth, judge; fifth, legisla-
ture of Crown, Lords, and Commons; or if that be shocking to
his republican nerves, say President, Senate, and Representatives,


the accredited legislative voices of nations, to prescribe the penalty
for the crime which he is pleased to create, charge with, prosecute,
find guilty of, and pass sentence for. Nor does it seem to
strike him as anything unusual to allow the unfortunates no
opportunity to be heard in their own defence before even verdict
should be given against, not to say sentence passed upon them.
Nor that even Eouquier Tinville gave some pretence of a hearing
to those whom he intended to send to the guillotine. In short,
he tests what is just by begging the argument that landownersliip
is unjust, and asserting that the punishment which he is pleased
to prescribe for such assumed injustice is just.
This foolery is mere thimble-rigging, in lieu of which a
perfectly true and fair test can be appealed to, which, whether he
pleases or not, Mr. George must “ bow to the arbitrament ”of
and accept. The question is : Is the meaning of “just,” as used
in this book of Mr. George’s in support of his contention, that
landownersliip should be confiscated without compensation to the
landowners, the same as the word ordinarily conveys and which
receives popular reverence 1 In short, would such confiscation be
just 1
To test this it may be premised that when a word signifies an
active principle, the operation of that principle amongst the
people to whose language the word belongs best defines what the
word means, and next in value is the opinion of the best-informed
of those to whom the language Is native. Adopting this dupli-
cate process, let us see whether “just,” as used by Mr. George,
signifies that which Englishmen mean, and which receives popular
reverence under the same assemblage of letters.
Ist. Test by active operation of the principle of justice amongst
Englishmen.
The English nation when it emancipated the West Indian
slaves paid their owners £20,000,000, or, as Mr. George puts it
in his currency, $100,000,000, because Englishmen held that the
payment of such compensation was just; they have been proud of
having done so, and have been universally honoured for it.
The American Government since then liberated four millions of
slaves, but gave their owners no compensation. Outside of North
America, and doubtless by those in it who were sufferers, this
liberation of slaves without compensating their owners was looked


upon as merely one of the cruel expedients of war, adopted from
no such humane sentiment or love for freedom as actuated the
English people, but to cripple the Southern rebels, and it had no
reverence or approval as an act which should be perpetrated in
cold blood.
Mr. George, however, cites it as an example to be followed
towards landowners whose estates he desires to have forfeited
without compensation, and asserts that to be just.
Clearly, then, Mr. George’s rendering of “just” is diametri-
cally opposite to the active justice of the people to whose
language the word belongs.
2nd. Test by competent English opinion. John Stuart Mill
and Herbert Spencer may be counted well informed as to their
native tongue, and whilst advocating that the State should be the
sole landlord, they both hold that it would be just to compensate
the landowners. In this opinion of theirs as to what is just other
Englishmen coincide. Mr. George states the fact at page 255 of
his book : “It is this idea that suggests the proposition which
finds advocates in Great Britain, that the Government shall
purchase at its market price the individual proprietorship of the
land.” Mr. George’s contention is that to pay nothing for the
ownership of theiand would be “just,” and that to pay would be
unjust.
Manifestly, therefore, the word “just,” as used by Mr. George,
has not the same signification as John Stuart Mill, Herbert
Spencer, and other Englishmen attach to the word of the same
form in their language. His word is no doubt American, and
would probably be best interpreted by reference to the action of
the “Sovereign State” of Pennsylvania some years ago with
regard to its bonds. The English designated it by a word of
different signification in their language—Repudiation; and Mr.
Geoi'ge, in asserting that this is what receives popular reverence,
is knowingly guilty of gross slander and insult towards humanity.
The object of the book, therefore, is to corrupt the mind and
conscience of the English people into accepting the perversion of
an important word of their mother tongue, and of the vital prin-
ciple which that word indicates.
The main propositions of the book are three :
Ist. That every individual who owns land—no matter how


acquired by him—is a robber, because “ not merely the surface
of the earth as distinguished from the water and the air, but the
whole material universe outside of man himself,” belongs by
right of birth to everybody, and no particular portion of it to
anybody; wherefore anybody who specially appropriates to his
own use any part of what belongs to the entire human race
is a robber against his species, deserving neither mercy nor con-
sideration.
2nd. That the rent paid to individuals for land absorbs all the
gain of labour and capital, robbing the one of its wages and the
other of its interest.
3rd. That the punishment and rectification of this robbery and
the prevention of the payment of rent to individuals by the State’s
summarily seizing, confiscating, and appropriating without com-
pensation the rent of all the landed property of every individual
owning land, would not only be absolutely just, but would bring
about a state of universal prosperity, beatitude, and peace ,the
possibility of which has heretofore only been dreamed of.
Let us take these propositions in the order in which they are
here stated.
The first of them is amplified into a definition that the right
to the whole material universe, outside of man himself, the surface
of every habitable inch of the globe at all events, is the equal
right of all men, —a right which vests in every human being as he
enters the world, and which, during his continuance in the world,
can be limited only by the equal rights of others. And the pro-
position is specifically illustrated by the statement that to the
Duke of Westminster’s estates the poorest child born in London
has as much right as the duke’s eldest son. “ And though the
Sovereign People of the State of New York consent to the landed
possessions of the Astors, the puniest infant that comes wailing
into the world in the squalidest room of the most miserable
tenement house, becomes at that moment seized of an equal
right with the millionaire, and it is robbed if the right is
denied.”
Accepting this as becomes conventionality discarding philoso-
phers, and, as Mr. George elsewhere desires “in reasoning that
aims at exactness,” why has not the juvenile London pauper as
good a title to the property of the Astors as the “Sovereign


People of the State of New York,” and the badly lodged, puling
New Yorker as good a claim as the sucking Cockney to the lands
of Mr. George’s favoui’ite duke ? Both are human beings,
probably even of the same subdivision of the race. Why, then,
are their individual rights of common ownership to the entire
material universe, to every habitable inch of the globe’s surface,
to be limited and restricted by “ the people of the Sovereign
State of New York” or the realm of England? If they be so
limited, then on Mr. George’s own showing the Sovereign State
and the realm named, and scores of other states and realms, are
convicted of robbery against every bantling that squeals elsewhere.
Indeed, fierce armies of such bantlings grown older, Assyrian,
Hyksos, Hebrew, Mede, Hellene, Homan, Goth, Hun, Vandal,
Saxon, Arab, Northman, English, Spaniard, German, Russ, Frank,
and Filibuster, have, in wild invasion, cruel siege, and bloody
battle, affirmed such limitations to be robbery against them, only
to re-enact the like against the residue, and leave sovereign states
and realms as they now exist, each, if not itself individual owner,
at least the accomplice, abettor, and defender of individual owners
of land comprising entire countries, held in (according to Mr.
George) denial of right, and in robbery of other individuals of the
human family who have common and indefeasible right to every
inch of the globe’s surface, including the portion so improperly
appropriated. Wherefore, pursuing Mr. George’s theory, “in
reasoning that aims at exactness,” the land held by each of them,
or by each secured to individual owners, must, at least as to its
rent, be, without compensation, forfeited and confiscated to “ the
State,” which for that purpose must be a single Government,
exercising jurisdiction and care over the entire human species of
all countries, colours, languages, and creeds. A grand idea truly,
worthy of a transatlantic republican philosopher : And so simple
too ! Merely the coalescing of the human family into a cosmopoli-
tan republic, to be endowed with the landownership of the entire
surface of the globe, taken for that purpose from every separate
state and individual, by all of whom it is to be yielded up in
obedience to an act of the Legislature, and doubtless cheerfully,
for Mr. George declares that this proceeding will inaugurate the
reign of the Prince of Peace !
This is the reductio ad absurdum , and if to avoid it Mr.


George objects that by “ State ” he means not one universal
republic, but the political Governments of various places, then he
will advocate that portions of the earth’s surface, down even to
those which most nearly resemble the Sovereign State of Monaco,
no larger than a well-sized park, and with a single individual
practically the political government, may be held to the exclusion
of other individuals of the human race entitled by right of birth
to joint ownership in the whole ; and therefore that the holding of
land by individuals is just, notwithstanding such alleged right of
joint ownership, and consequently, according to his own “test,”
that individual landowners are not robbers, and that to despoil
them of their estates on pretence of their being such would be
unjust; therefore the remedy which he proposes is false and
needless, there being no wrong to remedy. He is welcome to the
alternative.
Pass on to the second proposition : That the rent paid to
individuals for land absorbs all the gain of labour and capital.
This is exemplified specifically as to capital by the statement
(page 158) that capital is robbed of its interest by the rent which
is paid for land on which a manufacturing or commercial city is
built, and as it is stated that similarly labour is robbed of its
wages, “ rent swallows up the whole gain.”
This statement of the effect of rent upon capital is unsupported
by a scintilla of evidence. Is that because it is a truism of which
proof would be surplusage ? If so, owners of land, and they only,
get the whole gain of the exertions of labour and investment of
capital; they alone, therefore, can become rich.
Is that true 1 People unindoctrinated with the results of Mr.
George’s manipulation of the thimbles of political economy have
strong justification for believing it possible to invest capital in
commerce or manufacture in a manufacturing or commercial city
without further connection with land than the very small considera-
tion of the value or rent of the site of an office, warehouse, or
manufactory, and so far from its being the case that such rent or
value “swallows up the whole gain,” that a return for capital may
be obtained permitting the payment of rent and of the wages of
labour in full, and leaving a surplus sufficient for the building up
of a handsome fortune. Amongst instances by the thousand may
be cited the story of Josiah Mason spending his starving wife’s


last ninepence in flour to make tea-cakes to sell and gain sixpence
profit by, and afterwards, as a steel-pen maker, rising to the
possession of wealth, the honour of knighthood, and the gratifica-
tion of endowing Birmingham with an industrial college. If Mr.
George’s proposition be true this man never existed, nor Stewart of
New York, nor Lord Overstone. The biographies of men who
have risen are romances for children, and the phrase “ Merchant
Princes” is a fancy from the Arabian Nights. Not being land-
owners, their existence would be contrary to Mr. George’s discovery
that “rent swallows up the whole gain;” therefore they not only
never did, but they never could have existed, so there is an end
of them, as also of the fallacy contained in the records of the
House of Commons, and in Mr. Justin McCarthy’s statement in
his “History of Our Own Times,” that previously to 1858, when the
property qualification for Members of the House was abolished,
“ men who were rich enough to spend thousands of pounds in
contesting boroughs and counties, had often to go through the
form of having a fictitious conveyance made to them because they
did not happen to have invested any part of their wealth in land.
Great city magnates, known by their wealth, and known in many
cases for their high personal honour as well, had to submit to this
foolish ceremonial.”
If “rent swallows up the whole gain,” how came these people
by their wealth, and having it, why shoxxld they be exempt from
the expense of good government, which secures them with great
care and cost in its possession, and be allowed to shuffle the
whole burden on to the shoulders of owners of land, which no
thief coxxld carry away 1 Objectionable qxxestions, for it is clear
that for the consistency of Mr. George’s “patter,” the alleged
wealth of such miserables does not and never did exist, and is,
therefore, not taxable, because anything which would throw doubt
upon the desirableness of the French revolxxtionary expedient of
impdt unique, a tax on land and on nothing else, would peril the
building up of the city of God upon earth out of the abolition of
duties on cotton fabi'ics and hardware.
Which brings us to the third proposition, so softly, elegantly,
and unalarmingly put, that “to appropriate rent by taxation,” or,
in other words, that to mei’cilessly snatch away by a villainous act
of inhuman political tyranny the property of “old men and babes,


and loving friends and youths and maidens gay,” whilst with
slanderous malice foully branding all those as robbers, and insulting
them with a cynical sneer that they deserve, and may rejoice that
they do not receive, worse treatment, “ would raise wages, increase
the earnings of capital, extirpate pauperism, abolish poverty, give
remunerative employment to whoever wishes it, afford free scope
to human powers, lessen crime, elevate morals and taste and
intelligence, purify Government, and carry civilization to yet
nobler heights.”
To suppose this scoundreldom possible we must imagine a
national electorate of swindling fools inflicting wrong upon them-
selves by electing a popular representative house of thieves, and
with no second chamber possessing a grain of honesty or common
sense; and the first result a constitutional revolution in the
direction of arbitrary power, by placing “ the Sovereign as the
1 epresentative of the collective rights of the people” in permanent
possession of a superabundant revenue, with no need to apply to
Parliament for supplies, and free to govern at his own sweet will.
And the effect of the outrage is to “ raise wages.” Yes, tempo-
rarily to the extent of their being equivalent to a greater quantity
of the commodities cheapened by the removal of duties, but only
until the temporary disturbance should be settled by wages being
forced (quoting Mr. George) “by competition amongst labourers
to the minimum at which labour will consent to reproduce.”
Increase the earnings of capital.” Not a whit, if the argument
be tiue that capital is robbed of interest by land-rent, for eventu-
ally land by sub-letting will be raised in value upon all who require
to use it, and an irresponsible and dishonest Government will
corruptly appropriate and misapply the revenue, and so neces-
sitate other forms of taxation.
“Extirpate pauperism and abolish poverty.” By robbing of
their property and rendering destitute thousands of the middle and
working classes to be comforted only with the assurance that the
Duke of Westminster will not, after all, be really badly off!
“ Give remunerative employment to whoever wishes it.” Re-
munerative until over-production renders it otherwise, or as to
agriculture, the subdivision of land brings Englishmen to the
same condition as the peasants in France, Belgium, and Holland
(pages 231-2), whose “material progress has not been so rapid


■with a minute subdivision of the land, and where the condition
of the labourer is worse than in England, whilst the tenant-farmers
are rack-rented with a mercilessness unknown in England, and
even in Ireland ; ” —a sort of levelling which Mr. George looks
forward to for England with hope, if it will only despoil the large
landowners.
“ Afford free scope to human powers.” Heaven forefend if in
the same direction !
“ Lessen crime, elevate morals, taste, and intelligence.” If it
lessen crime it must be on the principle of similia similibus curantur.
But the assertion that morals, taste, and intelligence would be
elevated by such means, is simply false and impudent balderdash.
“ Purify Government.” By handing over the wealth procured
by a gigantic swindle to a Government having no necessary depend-
ence on Parliament.
“ And carry civilization to yet nobler heights.” Yea, even to
a very apotheosis ; to “ the golden age which poets have sung and
high-raised seers ” (by the way, for the satisfaction of grammatical
curiosity, what is a “ high-raised seer ” 1) “ have told in metaphor ;
the glorious vision which has always haunted man with gleams of
fitful splendour; what he saw whose eyes at Patmos were closed
in a trance; the culmination of Christianity; the city of God
on earth with its'walls of jasper and its gates of pearl; the reign
of the Prince of Peace.” Prince of what, Mr. George ?—Peace !
Then why walls and gates, whether of jasper, pearl, or cobweb?
Peace ! Perhaps in America, from fear of mob tyranny ; but
Englishmen, Mr George, are free, and by no means prone to sub-
mit tamely to ill-usage. There is an anecdote in their history
about a generation or so after the Norman Conquest, of a sturdy
old baron, whose lands were coveted by the “ Sovereign as the
representative of the collective rights of the people,” giving answer
to demand for production of his title deeds by clapping hand on
his sword; and be assured, Mr. George, that the working-man of
to-day in England, whose freehold homestead you would dis-
honestly rob him of, by converting it into a precarious rent-paying
tenement, would not be a whit less prompt to find weapons where-
with to defend his property.
Peace ! With fierce indignation and wrathful resistance against
•cruel and brutal wrong !


City of God ! With wailing, railing, curses, hatred, misery, and
strife.
Culmination of Christianity ! With a tyrannous doing of that
to others which no man would desire to have done to himself.
Truth, decency, and common sense revolt against this Yankee
hifalutin, rhapsodical trash, in adoration of a bogus, shoddy
millennium of free trade in slops and ironmongery.
But though common sense spurns the insult and patience rebels
against consideration being wasted upon it, let us examine some
of the materials which Mr. George’s book affords us to draw our
own conclusions as to the effects which would follow the adoption
of the notable expedient which he advocates; for example, as to
the beatitudes which he declares would inevitably spring from a
return to the custom of holding land as common property, we shall
do best by inquiring whether the like effects did spring up and exist
in times and places where that custom prevailed. Take two of
his instances, the one comparatively ancient, and the other of almost
our own day—viz., “ the tribal rights of the Irishman,” and those
of “ the Aboriginals of New Zealand,” and remembering that in
both those cases the custom was not an innovation suddenly
effected with brutal and exasperating cruelty and insult, as pro-
posed by Mr. George, but one to which the people were “ native
and to the manner born.” We may from Mr. George’s rhapsody
be warranted in expecting to learn that Ireland, under the Brehon
land-tenure, and New Zealand, at the advent of Europeans, were
respectively illustrations of “ the culmination of Christianity, the
city of God upon earth, and the reign of the Prince of Peace.”
Do we find this expectation verified i
1. As to Ireland. An Irish historical writer* may answer.
“ Scarcely a single page of the uncouth annals of the period is
clear of the record of some dark crime or faithless cruelty,” and
the story of what preceded and led to the invasion of the Normans,
inter-tribal wars, deceitfulness, violence, lust, bloodshed, and
devilish inhumanity are curious realizations of Mr. George’s
fancy picture ; whilst as to the economical effect of the Brehon
land-tenure the same writerf declares that “ The gavelkind
of Ireland was about the worst of all laws; no people could
* Smyth, “ Ireland Historical and Statistical,” vol. i., p. 98.
t Ibid., p. 69.


possibly advance in civilization under such a system. By that
law all property was a common holding in principle, but the
division was made by the Chief, so that whenever the head
of a sept or family died, or, as oftener happened, was violently
removed, his successor distributed all the lands anew, and naturally
rewarded his own followers with large shares to the prejudice of
all who had supported his enemy.” Now, in this statement, if for
death of the head of the sept or family we read change of govern-
ing party, we shall have exactly what would occur under Mr.
George’s system and republican morality, and with the result
indicated by the Irish historian. “ The general confusion and
poverty inseparable from a tenure of property at once so pre-
carious and arbitrary requires no comment.”
2. As to New Zealand. The like story of inter-tribal war,
bloodshed, and cruelty might be repeated, but with this difference
as to economical results, that there was no poverty ; for, as to those
who might have suffered from it, their countrymen providently ate
them.
But, in addition to such blessedness as this, Mr. George has yet
another boon in store for Englishmen wherewith to crown their
happiness in the good time coming; they are to abandon monarchy,
aristocracy, and prelacy, and follow the example of America, by
adopting republican government. The one hundred years’ history
of the United States, and Mr. George’s experience as a citizen
“ raised ” and matured in the great Republic, enable him to speak
of its institutions with knowledge, which gives confidence that is
utterly wanting in regard to his wild speculations and fervid
rhodomontade as respecting the necessity for, and anticipated
benefits from confiscating rent.
It is to be remembered also, that he is no maker of “ goaks ” or
humorous satire—mo Artemus Ward, Bret Harte, Mark Twain,
Josh Billings, or Hosea Biglow—but an advanced politico-
economical and social philosopher, disposed to “ argument which
aims at exactness;” therefore, the facts being within his knowledge,
we may accept his statement of them, and therefrom contemplate
the inestimable blessings which he anticipates our enjoyment of.
Some of the products of the republicanism which has made the
United States “ the most advanced of all the great nations ” he
enumerates as follows : “ gross corruption and fraud,” “ constant


under-valuations of the Custom House,” “ ridiculous untruthfulness
of income tax returns,” “absolute]impossibility of getting anything
like a just valuation of personal property,” “douceurs to assessors”
[This, by the way, is invaluable evidence as to what would
occur when a Government which had stolen the ground owner-
ship of the land of the country should depend upon ridiculously
untruthful returns or unjust valuations, made by corruptly-elected,
douceur-receiving assessors for assessment of the annual rent to
be got out of the plunder], “ bribes to Customs’ officials,” “ money
expended in electing pliable public officers or procuring acts or
decisions which avoid taxation.”
These, however, are mere incidentals, and, though it be to
borrow verbatim nearly a whole chapter from “Progress and
Poverty,” it would be wrong to fail to do so for the purpose of
impressing most strongly upon Englishmen and others what are
the effects of republicanism in the United States according to so
competent and (on this point) indisputable an authority as Mr.
Henry George.
His testimony to the republicanism of his country is as follows—
“In all the great American cities there is to-day as clearly
defined a ruling class as in the most aristocratic countries of the
world. Its members carry wards in their pockets, make up the
slates for nominating conventions, distribute offices as they bargain
together, and though they toil not, neither do they spin, wear the
best of raiment, and spend money lavishly. They are men of
power, whose favour the ambitious must court, and whose vengeance
he must avoid. Who are these men ? The wise, the good, the
learned—men who have earned the confidence of their fellow-
citizens by the purity of their lives, the splendour of their talents,
their probity in public trusts, their deep study of the problems of
government ? Ho ; they are the gamblers, saloon-keepers,
pugilists, or worse, who have made a trade of controlling votes
and of buying and selling offices and official acts. They stand to
the government of these cities as the Praetorian Guards did
to that of declining Rome. He who would wear the purple, fill
the curule chair, or have the fasces carried before him, must go
or send his messengers to their camps, give them donations and
make them promises. It is through these men that the rich
corporations and powerful pecuniary interests can pack the


Senate and the Bench with their creatures. It is these men who
make school-directors, supervisors, assessors, members of the
Legislature, Congressmen.
“In theory, we are intense Democrats; the proposal to
sacrifice swine in the temple would hardly have excited greater
horror and indignation in Jerusalem of old than would among
us that of conferring a distinction of rank upon our most eminent
citizen. But is there not growing up among us a class who have
all the power without any of the virtues of aristocracy 1 We
have simple citizens who control thousands of miles of railroad,
millions of acres of land, the means of livelihood of great num-
bers of men; who name the Governors of Sovereign States as they
name their clerks, choose Senators as they choose attorneys, and
whose will is as supreme with Legislatures as that of a French king
sitting in bed of justice.
“ There is no mistaking it; the very foundations of society are
being sapped before our eyes.—lt is a matter of fact that, in spite
of our laws, any one who has money enough and wants to kill
another may go into any one of our great centres of population
and business and gratify his desire, and then surrender himself
to justice with the chances as a hundred to one that he will suffer
no greater penalty than a temporary imprisonment and the loss
of a sum proportioned partly to his own wealth and partly to the
wealth and standing of the man he kills. His money will be
paid not to the family of the murdered man, who have lost their
protector; nor to the State, which has lost a citizen, but to lawyers
who understand how to procure delays, to find witnesses, and to
get juries to disagree.
“ And so, if a man steal enough, he may be sure that his
punishment will practically amount to but the loss of a part of
the proceeds of his theft; and if he steal enough to get off with
a fortune, he will be greeted by his acquaintance as a Viking
might have been greeted after a successful cruise. Even though
he robbed those who had trusted him ; even though he robbed the
widow and the fatherless; he has only to get enough, and he may
safely flaunt his wealth in the eyes of day.
“ All this is matter of common observation. Though we may
not speak it openly, the general faith in republican institutions
is, where they have reached their fullest development, narrowing


and weakening. It is no longer that confident belief in
republicanism as the source of national blessings that it once was.
Thoughtful men are beginning to see its dangers, without seeing
how to escape them; are beginning to accept the view of Macaulay
and distrust that of Jefferson. And the people at large are
becoming used to the growing corruption. The most ominous
political sign in the United States to-day is the growth of a
sentiment which either doubts the existence of an honest man in
public office or looks on him as a fool for not seizing his oppor-
tunities. That is to say, the people themselves are becoming
corrupted. Thus in the United States to-day is republican
government running the course it must inevitably follow under
conditions which cause the unequal distribution of wealth.
“ Where that course leads is clear to whoever will think. As
corruption becomes chronic, as public spirit is lost, as traditions of
honour, virtue, and patriotism are weakened, as law is brought into
contempt and reforms become hopeless, then in the festering mass
will be generated organic forces, which shatter and rend when
seeming accident gives them vent. Strong, unscrupulous men rising
up upon occasion, will become exponents of blind popular desires
or fierce popular passions, and dash aside forms that have lost
their vitality. The sword will again be mightier than the pen,
and in carnivals of destruction brute force and wild frenzy will
alternate with the lethargy of a declining civilization.”
Mr. George holds all this to be due to “conditions which cause
the unequal distribution of wealth.”
That an equal distribution of wealth is synonymous with
patriotism, virtue, and intelligence.
And that the “ great cause of inequality is the natural monopoly
which is given by the possession of land.”
As to which he may be answered that inequality in wealth, as
inequality in stature, physical strength, health, temper, disposition,
intellect, education, morality, wholesome associations, opportuni-
ties, and accident, and because of them, is incidental to or inherent
in the nature and social relations of men, and will outlast any
“ sovereign remedy” which he or any other man can prescribe.
One whom it would be blasphemy to put Mr. George in com-
parison with for love towards humanity, or for acquaintance with
human nature and its tendencies, who knew all men and needed


not that any should testify of man, for he knew what was in man,
and to whom the world is indebted for all the progress it has since
made towards the realization of the city of God on earth and the
reign of the Prince of Peace, and will ultimately owe their full
enjoyment, so far from holding opinions such as these of Mr.
George, refused to have anything to do with equal distribution of
•wealth, replying, when asked by one brother to bid another to share
the inheritance, “Man, who made me a judge or divider over
you 1 ” and he went on to caution against the spirit which had
prompted the i-equest—covetousness; and gave as a reason that “ a
man’s life ” [which embodies patriotism, virtue, and intelligence]
“ consisteth not in the abundance of the things which he possesseth
and whilst advising the rich to put no trust in wealth, but rather
to divest themselves of and give it to the poor, held out no
expectation that equality of wealth or abolition of poverty would
result, but, on the contrary, said, “ The poor ye have always with
you,” and gave a graphic illustration of one amongst the causes
wherefrom poverty will be continuous, the distribution of wealth
notwithstanding, in the case of that young man who, having
claimed and got the portion of his father’s substance falling to
him, that is equal distribution of wealth as between him and his
brother, wasted his share in riotous living, and came to want even
to the degree of filling his belly with the husks that the swine
did eat.
But suppose that, instead of giving such answers, Mr. George’s
argument be conceded, and it be admitted that inequality in the
distribution of wealth results solely from the natural monopoly
which is given by the possession of land, and is the root of all
evil, and that the abolition of such possession of land is the
“ sovereign remedy,” and would result in an equality of wealth
and countless blessings.
Then, with a ludicrous inconsistency which justifies the suspicion
that, like Barnum, and others of his famous countrymen, spiritist
mediums, and so forth, Mr. George is really perpetrating a trans-
parent piece of refined humour, and laughing heartily in his sleeve
to find that a solemn, savagely-earnest, and semi-sanctimonious
style has not only humbugged gullible old John Bull into a belief
that the argument is serious, but has filled the humourist’s pockets,
and procured him the reputation and fame of a philosopher;


Mr. George does not advocate the abolition of the monopoly of the
possession of land, nor the equal distribution of wealth, and as
without these his unhappy country is, as he declares, doomed ta
swift perdition, thither he patriotically lets it rip.
Here (page 288) is his own final and supreme statement of the
practical application of his proposal :—“ Let the individuals wha
now hold it still retain, if they want to, possession of what they
are pleased to call their land. Let them buy and sell, bequeath
and devise it; we may safely leave them the shell if we take the-
kernel. It is not necessary to confiscate land ; it is only necessary
to confiscate rent.”
Be it noted this does not do away with the so-called monopoly
given by the possession of land, for it continues the possession.
How does it prevent inequality 1
Ist. As between those who now own land and those who do
not, the latter will remain landless, or, if they want it, be
compelled to pay rent to the former, or purchase with money,
which is aggregated rent; and as to the benefit gained by relief
from other taxes, that would not remedy the inequality, for it
would be equally shared in by the landholders and the landless.
2nd. As between different holders of land. As Mr. George
puts it (page 320) : “The Duke of Westminster, who owns a
considerable part of the site of London, is probably the richest
landowner in the world. To take all his ground-rents by taxation
would largely reduce his enormous income, but would still leave
him his buildings and all the income from them, and, doubtless*
much personal property in various other shapes, he would still
have all he could by any possibility enjoy.” How would this
alter the inequality between this pet Duke of Mr. George’s and
the owner of one single tenement, the ground-rent of which would
be taken from him ? Relatively they would remain as unequal
as before. And as regards the “ equal right of all men to the
use of land,” the Duke, in addition to having one house for his
own use, which is all that by the equal right-of-all-men doctrine
he could properly claim, could grant or refuse five hundred houses
to others.
To argue upon such incongruous nonsense is absurd, but again,,
if only for amusement, it may be worth while to follow this
genius one wing-flap further in his flight.


As to appropriation of rent, into which he has resolved his
“ Sovereign remedy,” he declares (page 366) that the appropria-
tion of rent for public purposes, becomes, when political and
religious power pass into the hands of a class, the ownership of
the land by that class, and the rest of the community become
.merely tenants.”
Now Mr. George must be perfectly well aware that the
government by a class has given way to government by party ;
therefore, in plain English, the political party in power is to be
made more powerful still by being constituted the owner of the
land of the country, and its political opponents merely tenants.
Vce victis in a party struggle under such conditions. As the Irish
writer before referred to, has it: ‘‘The chief” ( i.e ., victorous
party) “ distributed all the lands anew, and naturally rewarded
his own followers with large shares to the prejudice of all who
had supported his enemy ; no people could possibly advance in
civilization under such a system.”
The addendum is worth repeating : “ The general confusion and
poverty inseparable from a tenure of property at once so precarious
and'arbitrary requires no comment.”
So it amounts to this, that on the advice of this Yankee joker
the English people are to abandon monarchy, aristocracy, and
prelacy, and take instead republicanism under the same conditions
as have reduced the inhabitants of the United States into slaves of
mob tyranny and of scoundreldom. With the additional infamy of
accompanying this dive into perdition with the villainous perpetra-
tion of an act of foul national dishonour and cruel wickedness,
which would have the effect of adding immensely to the im-
portance and profits of the “ gamblers, saloon-keepers, pugilists
or worse,” the class who in the great republic govern all elections
and appoint to all offices, and of intensifying and embittering party
sti'ife and hatred, by adding to the already baneful effects of
government by party the demoralization of enormous pecuniary
advantage in the spoils of victory.
Thank you, Mr. George. John Bull may be an obfusticated
old buffer, but he is not fool enough for that. He thought when
your countrymen were playing up Yankee Doodle a hundred years
ago, that it was to the devil they were going, and you are remark-
ably candid in proving how very far they have already got on the


road, and how rapidly they are hastening to complete the journey.
It will he as well for him to wait and see the finish. In the-
meantime, would it he possible to point out to so transcendentally
distinguished a philosopher that monarchy, aristocracy, and
prelacy are exactly the influences which protect England from the
anarchy towards which, as he declares, the United States is tending?
That there are influences arising from these institutions powerfully
operative upon the entire community towards the development of
the highest, the holiest, the purest, and the noblest impulses by
which humanity can be affected : Influences which knit and
bind Sovereign, aristocracy, prelacy, and people into a mutually
trusting, law-abiding, self-reliant, and progressive nation. For,
bethink you, Mr. George, the poorest child in England may
become by ability and the qualities which deserve confidence and
respect, and no otherwise, a polished and honoured gentleman, the
gentleman a knight or baronet, the commoner a peer, the peer a
stage higher in the scale of nobility; and so any boy may become
a clergyman, and the clergyman may reach a bishopric or arch-
bishopric, but ever and always by the qualities which gain and
secure respect. And for the Sovereign there is as strong an
ambition to deserve and enjoy the confidence and love of all her
subjects.
If testimony were needed of the inestimable benefit of monarchy,
aristocracy, and prelacy to England, and the damnable injury of
republicanism to America, it is afforded by Mr. George’s statement
that those who in England are elevated for public admiration and
example, by the honour and distinction of rank and title, “ the
wise, the good, the learned, men who have earned the confidence
of their fellow citizens by the purity of their lives, the splendour
of their talents, their probity in public trusts, their deep study of
the problems of government,” have in America the places in
which we should look for them filled by “ gamblers, saloon-keepers,
pugilists, or worse,” who hustle them out of public life into
uselessness to the State and political oblivion.
In fact, John Bull has no valid inducement to pull down the
partition walls of his drawing-room and dining-room so as to add
the extent of those apartments to that of the kitchen and scullery,
and mix his books, pictures, mirrors, statuary, art-treasures, and
bric-a-brac amongst slop pails, coal-scuttles, cooking utensils, kitchen-


furniture, and rubbish. He may be excused for objecting, that
this is contrary to his notions of good order and of beauty; that
to his thinking it is right and seemly that his rooms should be
suited to those who have to occupy them, and that in his state
apartments there should be picture-rods and pedestals and shelves,,
on which to lift and place that which is worthy of being studied,
admired, and copied; that he thinks it quite right to have so
placed Sir Philip Sydney, Sir Matthew Haffi, Sir Peter Paul
Rubens, Sir Christopher Wren, Sir Isaac Newton, and scores of
others, and as to yet more elevated pedestals, he is proud of
having lifted up Bishop Ken, Bishop Heber, Archbishop Whately,
Lord Bacon, the Duke of Marlborough, Lord Nelson, the Duke
of Wellington, Lord Macaulay, Lord Lytton, the Earl of Beacons-
field, Lord Tennyson—everyone of whom and crowds of other
ennobled worthies began as plain Mr.
What does the knighthood of England serve as 1 A reward
to naval and military commanders for long, arduous, and valiant
service, to public officials for zealous, faithful performance of duty
and avoidance of scandals of the General Belknap sort, to good
citizens for public-spirited and clean-handed fulfilment of shrieval-
ties, mayoralties, and honorary positions of public importance,
undefiled by practices of the Boss Tweed description, and to the
honour and distinction of private worth, and of excellence in the
liberal professions, science and the arts. And so with the higher
ranks, the baronetage and the several grades of the peerage,
rewards for highest qualities of statesmanship, of administration
and command, and for devotion of brilliant talents to the service of
the best interests of the nation—so charily conferred withal as to
avoid their inordinate increase, whilst their heredity (a pet
republican objection) has the advantage of producing youths
reared to the memory and emulation of great and worshipful deeds,
and bound by the obligations of nobility to stainless honour and
scrupulous rectitude, not the less so because some individuals fall
short of their obligations, and when they do, are the more justly
reprobated. And this hereditary nobility, whilst constantly fed and
strengthened by accessions from the commonalty, as constantly and
regularly sends back its cadets, carrying with them the recollections
and associations of their family’s honour, as the ocean sends up
by evaporation healthful supplies of moisture to clouds, which


dissolve and fall again to feed the rivers and fertilize and beautify
the country.
Any man’s son, if he have talent, good conduct, and good luck,
may rise to be a lord, but a lord’s younger descendants are mere
•commoners, which is the advantage of the English system of
nobility over that of some other countries.
Clearly, then, as to monarchy and aristocracy (of which prelacy
is only another form), these influences are inspiring, purifying,
ennobling. What has Yankee republicanism to offer in exchange
for them 1 The worship of the almighty dollar—Mammon in all
his grovelling filthiness.
Mr. George himself has said it: The people of the United States
are becoming so corrupted that they do not believe there is such
a person as an honest man in office unless he be a fool. Any
wealthy man may murder whom he pleases, and with a hundred
chances of his being able to bribe away severe punishment. Men
of the highest ability and character are compelled to eschew
politics; the arts of the jobber count for more than the reputation
of the statesman; and he who is ambitious must court and avoid
the vengeance of corrupt and characterless ruffians, with whom
rest all elections and appointments to public office, to both
branches of the Legislature and the Judicial Bench.
It is probably in individual resentment of this shameful despotism
that the good people of the United States revenge themselves by
each insisting on taking the mote out of his neighbour’s eye, and
tyrannizing over him to the full extent that is possible without
amenableness to the law, and even combining to exceed that limit
by the Vehme Gericht of Vigilance Committees inflicting domi-
ciliary nocturnal visits, flogging, tarring and feathering, and hang-
ing under the judicial authority of mob fury and savage passion
personified in His Honour Judge Lynch, whose efforts to override
the decision of the regular tribunals have recently had practical
illustration in the Cincinnati riots and bloodshed of April 1884.
Thus the most laudable aspirations of the American mind become
acrid and tyrannical. The saloon-keeper and his whisky-mill
must be put down by mob vote of local option, or by prohibiting
the sale of all intoxicants, but here, as in their prohibition of
■aristocracy, the over-righteous, by sweeping intemperance, sacrifice
a good and gain an evil. In attempting to wholly prevent the use


of that which makes glad the heart of man, and the Bible commands
him to take, they induce sly drinking, hypocrisy, and falsehood.
And, to the extent to which they succeed, it would seem that they
produce a worse evil, by sharpening, cynicising, and souring the
tempers and dispositions of their people, to the embitterment of
domestic life and the rupture of matrimonial bonds; insomuch
that, quoting from the New York Nation, “The facility and fre-
quency of divorce in the Eastern States are such that societies
are organizing to discourage the practice, as there are associations
to prevent intemperance in other things ; as, for instance, whisky
drinking. In a lecture in the Centre Church of New Haven, the
Rev. S. R. Dyke, Secretary of the New England Divorce Reform
League, presented some startling statistics. It appears that while
in the year 1849 there were only 91 divorces in Connecticut,
now the average is 440 a year. The population of the State
has increased less than 70 per cent, in thirty years, while the
number of divorces has increased 500 per cent. In Connecticut
the ratio of divorces to marriage is 1 to 10.4 ; in Vermont, 1 to
13 ; in Massachusetts, 1 to 21 ; and in Rhode Island, 1 to 10 *
while New Hampshire, which is sometimes regarded as the type
of bucolic simplicity and primitive purity of manners, stands first
on the list, with a ratio of 1 to 9; though Maine follows hard
after with about the same figures.” And these are the puritan
and anti-liquor law regions ! Imagine English society with one
divorce to every nine marx-iages !
Mr. George says that, in theory, his countrymen are intense
Democi-ats ; that the proposal to confer a distinction of rank upon
their most eminent citizen would create horror as of the vilest
sacrilege. In theory, but how about truth and fact 1 That for the
most part they ai’e veritable tuft-hunters, who admiringly worship
a lord’s title and console themselves for the absence of legitimate
distinctions by dubbing themselves with substitutes of their own
creation, lionourables, and what not. Why, how many times does
the title of the Duke of Westminster occur in Mr. George’s book l
He rolls it about with as much satisfaction as a cow does her cud,
and how unctuously he takes care to prefix the title “ Sovereign”
when making mention of one of the States !
As to the assumption of titular military rank by his country-
men, it is told of Abraham Lincoln that he once said that he


could not throw a stone in Washington but it would be sure to
hit a Major-General.
And it is certain that if, in the civil war, General M'Clellan,
whom the love for titles caused to be styled “ The young American
Napoleon,” had won a battle or two, and got Napoleonized into
Emperorship (which was easily on the cards), and had created
a score or so of dukes, lords, and things of that sort, converting
Senator Thaddseus Washington O’Reilly's better half into Lady
Orailly, Congressman Larry Delaney’s wife into the Countess De
Lainny, and Mrs. Mackay into the Princess Tas d’Argent, the
General might have been shot the day after, but those noble
peeresses would not only not have given up their titles, but would
have been the envy of their sisterhood throughout the Union, and
the fashion would have spread like a tire in Chicago.
Where American republicanism is leading to, Mr. George has
told us ; it is to carnivals of destruction, brute force, and wild
frenzy, alternating with the lethargy of a declining civilization.
And this is to be all prevented by a national crime, having the
effect of increasing the means and rewards of corruption. Mr.
George may tell that to the Marines. John Bull will not believe
it ; he is quite aware that republicanism is the dead level of decom-
posed rottenness, which, when the putrefaction is completed, will
constitute the manure out of which other organisms will spi’ing.
If any wisdom be secreted in the process in America, the shoot
will be a healthy young oak, with sturdy head of monarchy, and
bright green leafy branches of nobility to grace the stem with
honour, and give grateful shade and beauty to the land.
But whether that, the upas tree, or only noxious weeds, suffice
it that John Bull is plainly told that it is to perdition that
American republicanism is rushing headlong, and that he would
not be a bull, but an ass, if he took Mr. George’s advice and did
the same.
He is proud to know that in England the rich are growing
richer—aye, and the middle class, and those below them like-
wise ; but he also knows that it is absolutely untrue that the poor
are growing poorer, more numerous, or at all more helpless, even
in English great cities. He rejoices in the knowledge that in-
creasing prosperity is accompanied with decreasing poverty, and
not that only, but decreasing crime. In 1870, three years after


the justice of the Englishmen in England towards the Englishmen
in Australia had finally abolished transportation, the criminal
population amounted to 12,000, and now, after a lapse of fourteen
years, they do not number so many by more than one-sixth. So,
too, with pauperism; for five years preceding 1870 the pauper
Hass averaged more than per cent, of the population, whilst
for the five years preceding 1883 the average is barely over 3 per
«ent., and there is a larger sum annually expended on the main-
tenance of the decreased number.
John Bull does not even object to the utmost publicity being
given to the poverty which does exist; he rather desires it,
though it should be the mere reproduction from plays or periodicals
of typical cases of misery, in sensational pamphlets such as “ The
Bitter Cry of Outcast London;” for thereby is brought into stronger
relief the pleasing fact that in England there is felt towards the
poor a warmer sentiment than is expressed by the republican word
“ citizen a recognition of English blood, kindred, and country.
The tendency of the wealthy, the fashionable, the talented, and
the beautiful, is “ Eastward Ho ! ” For from the Queen —God
bless her! —throughout all ranks downward there is an honest,
earnest, Ipving, and humane desire to do all that legislation,
liberality, and active benevolence can accomplish to ameliorate
the condition and improve the circumstances of the poorer class.
To rob landowners of their property, and abandon monarchy,
aristocracy, and prelacy in emulation of the progress of the great
American republic, “ the most advanced of all the great nations,”
towards “ carnivals of destruction, brute force, and wild frenzy,”
would be no improvement upon this.
CHAPTER III.
NEMESIS.
Personce. —Mr. Henry George, asleep ; over him his Guardian
Angel , weeping , speaks —
Oh, Henry, Henry ! pity and shame that talent should be so
misapplied, that such a wealth of language, gift for the turning of
well-phrased sentences, power of fascinating and holding attention,


abundance of fine sentiment, and verisimilitude of reverence for
justice and right, should be vilely desecrated to inculcating ethics
that would mark whoever should practice them as a ruthless
tyrant and a thief !
And this under the garb of philanthropic philosophy, too thin
to hide the wickedness, too frail to shield from reprobation, ridi-
cule, and contempt.
Pseudo-philosophy will no more serve you than would gentle-
manly dress, speech, and manners him who, possessing them, should
be detected teaching naughty words to the children, and inciting
accomplices to rob the house on pretence that the goods in it had
been stolen by their owner.
Fame of Authorship ! Notoriety ! Popularity ! Money ! Vanitas
Vanitatum. For oh, Henry ! in the compendium of true philoso-
phy it is written—
“ Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil; that put
darkness for light, and light for darkness \ that put bitter for sweet,
and sweet for bitter.”
CONCLUSION.
The title of the hook “ Progress and Poverty ” may be translated
from American into English as “Humbug and Knavery.”




