

ETHNOLOGICAL NOTES ON THE
ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY.
R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
(Mernb. Assoc. Soc. d'Anthrop. de Paris).




ETHNOLOGICAL NOTES ON THE
ABORIGINAL TRIBES of the NORTHERN TERRITORY.*
By R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
(Memb. Assoc. Soc. d’Anthrop. de Paris.)
In 1890, the Rev. H. Kempe, a missionary at Hermannsburg, on
the Upper Finke, completed a. valuable grammar and vocabulary of
the language spoken by the aborigines of the Mac Donnell Ranges,
Alice Springs, and the Finke River, in the Northern Territory of
South Australia.! From careful inquiries made by means of friends
who have resided in that part of the country I have obtained reliable
information that there is a similarity in the construction of all the
dialects along a wide zone of territory from Alice Springs' northerly to
Davenport Range, and from Alice Springs southerly to Maoumba
River. I am, now engaged in obtaining particulars of the tongues
spoken in different parts of the Northern Territory, which I hope to
submit to this Society on an early date. For the present I shall con-
tent myself with adding, at the end of this paper, a vocabulary of
the Chingalee dialect, spoken at Daly Waters, Powell’s Creek, and
Elsey Creek.
In the following pages it is proposed to deal briefly with the social
organisation, rites, and customs in force among the native tribes of
the Northern Territory.
Every tribe consists of two primary divisions, which may be called
phratries—a word used for a similar purpose among the ancient
Greeks —the men of one phratry marrying the women of the other.
Among the native inhabitants scattered over about three-fourths of
the Northern Territory we find that each phratry is subdivided into
four sections, making eight partitions of the community. Every
section has an independent name by which its members are recognised.
And, moreover, the women are distinguished from the men. by a
feminine form of the name of each division.
All children, boys and girls- alike, born into the tribe, bear the
name of one of these sections, and also that of some animal, plant, or
inanimate thing, which is their totem. These may be called ancestral
appellations; in addition to which each person has an individual
name, by which he is distinguished among the men and women of his
tribe. Every youth who passes through the inaugural rites receives a
* Taken as read before the ltoyal Geographical Society of Australasia, Queensland,
May 27, 11)01.
(f) Trans. Roy. Soc. S.A., vol. xiv., pp. 1—54.
Reprinted from the Proceedings and Transactions of the Royal Geographical Society of
Australasia, Queensland, Vol. XVI.


secret name, which is known only to the initiated; and further, he
possesses what may be called a titular name, which indicates the
degree he has attained to in the initiation ceremonies of his people.
Every woman likewise has a secret name, of which she herself is not
informed —this knowledge being possessed by the initiated men only.
There are also relationship names, which need not now be further
referred to.
Along the boundary line between the Northern Territory and
Western Australia, there are a number of tribes on the Negri and
Behm Rivers, Sturt’s Creek, Stirling Creek, and other watercourses,
among whom may be mentioned the Mayoo, Jeelowng, Neening,
Jarroo, Munga, and other tribes, possessing eight sections in their
social structure. Four of these sections form a phratry, which may
be distinguished as A, whilst the remaining four constitute phratry B.
which can be clearly illustrated in tabular form, as under:
TABLE No. 1.
Phratry Husband Wife Son Daughter
/l. Chungulla Narbeeta Chambijana Nambijana
2. Choolima Nanagoo Chapota / Nemira
A 4
3. Changary Nambijana Chinuma Nanagoo
.4. Chavalya Nemira Choongoora Narbeeta
15. Choongoora Nungulla Chavalya Nabajerry
6. Chinuma Naola Changary Nhermana
7. Chapota Nabajerry Choolima Naola
8. Chambijana Nhermana Chungulla Nungulla
The above table shows the husband, wife, son and daughter belong-
ing to each of the eight divisions, on the same line across the page.
For example, Chungulla, marries Narbeeta, and the progeny are Cham-
bijana and Nambijana, and so' on. This I have called the ordinary or
“direct” rule of marriage. Chungulla can, however, in certain cases,
exercise the right of marrying a Nanagoo woman. I have distinguished
such a marriage as irregular or “ alternative.” Again, Choolima
takes Nanagoo as his regular spouse, and his “alternative’’ wife is
Narbeeta. Besides these irregularities there are others of less fre-
quency. For example, Chungulla can occasionally marry a Naola
woman, and Choolima can take a Nungulla as his wife, but such mar-
riages may be designated “rare.” Whether Chungulla marries Nar-
beeta, or Nanagoo, or Naola, his children are Chambijana and Nam-
bijana, as in Table No. 1.
In the other pairs of sections, Changarry and Chavalya —Choon-
goora and Chinuma —Chapota and Chambijana—marriage and descent
follow the same laws, mutatis mutandis. It should be stated, however,


that the majority of marriages are in accordance with what is here
termed the “ direct” law. Before a union can take place under the
“alternative” regulations, or under those which I have called “rare,”
either the man or the woman must belong to a distant family, so as
to- guard against nearness of kin.
In examining Table No. 1 it becomes apparent that Chungulla and
Chambijana are related to each other as father and son in continuous
alternation; and it is also found that they have certain totems which
descend with them; for example, Chungulla Opossum: may be the
father of Chambijana Opososum, and in the next generation Cham-
bijana Opossum will be the father of Chungulla Opossum. The follow-
ing table illustrates the pairs of sections possessing the relationship of
father and son, together with some of the totems appertaining to
them :
TABLE No. 2.
PI (White crane, galah, lignum, opossum, wind, copper-
• Urr. a < headed snake, iguana, mopoke, moon, lightning,
<3 | unambijana 0 g f
© 1
'o p. ~ i White crane, blood-wood, mussel, kangaroo, native cat,
rtv!°° ima rock wallaby, wild orange, bilbee, wood duck, crow,
\lmapota j porcupine>
Eaglehawk, emu, water-snake, tree-snake, pelican, fish,
p, , mosquito, quandong, curlew, death-adder, honey,
, mva ya j centipede, stone spear-head, shag, cockatoo, rat,
PQ ' loongooia wa sp, nut-wood, grasshopper, grass, all pigeons,
plain turkey, ants, whistling duck, native bee.
.2 1
. P / T?on , lnliniirlr r*4r»v»n 1-vwzotttm li n ttt Ir /I t n OfA Cin TO l*ain
l Eaglehawk, stars, brown hawk, dingo, sun, rain,
Cliangary J cooliba tree, wild potato, black-headed snake, clouds,
\Chinuma ] thunder, ibis, water-hen, boree tree, scorpion, native
( companion, black duck.
In general the progeny, boys and girls alike, inherit the totem of
their male parent, but in this matter irregularities have been observed,
which lam now investigating. In treating of the “alternative” mar-
riages in a preceding page, it was stated that Chungulla, could also
marry Nanagoo, or Naola, and in a similar manner Choolima could
wed Narbeeta, orNungulla. In consequence of polygamy being sanc-
tioned, it is possible for either Chungulla or Choolima to take one
wife from the direct section, and another spouse from the “ alterna-
tive ” division, and a third from the “rare” class, which increases the
difficulty of tracing the totems. (See Table No. 1.)
Owing to the close blood relationship subsisting between Chun-
gulla, Chambijana, Choolima, and Chapota, I have discovered that
the same totems are more or less in use among these four sections,


whom I have accordingly called Moiety Ain Table No. 2. In other
words, the totems given in that table as belonging primarily to Chun-
gulla and Chambijana, are also to some extent common to Choolima
and Chapota. The same' remarks will apply in, all respects to the
totems of the remaining four sections, which are distinguished as
Moiety B in the table. Marriage between persons of the same totem
is forbidden if they belong to families inhabiting neighbouring hunting
grounds; but where the parties to the union come from remote dis-
tricts, and, therefore, cannot be any blood connection, I have observed
individuals of the same totem living as man and wife.
On Sturt Creek and on Victoria and Ord Rivers, certain totems
appear to be invested with greater importance than others. Among
these may be mentioned the White Crane and Eaglehawk, all the
totems in the community being divided between these two birds. (See
Table No. 2.) In other places, patches of country are said to belong
to certain totems ; for example, the kangaroo, white hawk, emu, eagle-
hawk, etc., will each have a particular ridge, scrub, plain, waterhole, or
the like. Every section is subject to certain restrictions as to the
animals and plants which they may search for and eat. Certain foods
are also tabooed to pregnant women and young people of both sexes.
Over the whole of the country drained by the Victoria River and
its numerous affluents, extending northerly to the Fitzmaurice, Flora,
and Daly Rivers, we find a considerable number of important tribes,
including the Moodburra, Kangarraga, Cheea.l, Tewinbol, Bilyanarra,
Wartaman, Oolawunga, Muttangulla, etc,, who have the same organisa-
tion as that given in Table No. 1. The following are the masculine
and feminine forms of the names of each section—the numbers 1,2,
etc., corresponding to those in the table referred to:
1. Jungalla, Nungalla; 2. Joolama, Nowala; 3. Dhongaree, Non-
garee; 4. Dhalyeree, Nalyeree; 5. Jimidja, Namaja; 6. Janna, Nan-
nakoo; 7. Jeemara, Neemara; 8. Jambijana, Nambean,
The country around Daly Waters, Newcastle Waters, and Powell’s
Creek is inhabited by the Chingalee tribe, between whom and the
Victoria River are the Kwaranjee and other people. East of the
Chingalee is the Koodanjee tribe. Their divisions have the following
masculine and feminine names : —l. Chunkaleeinja, Nunkaleeinja; 2.
Chulainja, Nalainja; 3. Tunkareeinja, Nunkareeinja; 4. Taraleeinja,
Naraleeinja; 5. Jimmitcha, Namuinja; 6. Chunainja, Nanainja; 7.
Chemarainja, Nemarainja.; 8. Tampachina, Nambajina. These eight
names, with dialectic modifications, have been observed by competent
friends who have made inquiries for me from the north-west corner
of Queensland, along the shore of the Gulf of Carpentaria to the Roper
River, and over all the country lying between there and the overland
telegraph line, and are fully described by me in other publications.


Among the tribes on the Upper Roper and its tributaries, on the
Katherine, and thence north-easterly to the Goyder River, the or-
ganisation is the same, but the nomenclature of the eight sections is
as follows: —1. Yungalla, Inkagalla; 2. Urwalla, Imbawalla; 3.
Uwungaree, Imbongaree; 4. Uwallaree, Imballaree; 5. Eemitch, Im-
madenna; 6. Uwanee, Imbannee; 7. Unmarra, Inganmarra; 8.
Tabachin, Tabadenna.
From the point where the boundary line between the Northern
Territory and Queensland meets the Gulf of Carpentaria, and thence
southerly to the junction of the Rankine and Georgina Rivers, extend-
ing westerly beyond Elkedra and Alroy Downs, and easterly into
Queensland, is inhabited by the Inchalachee, Warkya, Wanyee, Kur-
rawar, Yookala, and several other tribes, possessing eight divisions, as
under, all the rules of marriage and descent being precisely the same
as in Table No. 1 :
TABLE No. 8.
Phratry Husband Wife
Son Daughter
I Kingilla Nolangma
Naratyoo Neeonama
A
Akamaroo Jummeeunya
Komeranjee Neemurrama
Bongarinjee Jummeeunya
Boolarinjee Neemurrama
Warkoo Neeonama
Boolanjee Nolangma -
I Boolanjee Nungallama
I Warkoo Nurralama
Boolarinjee Nulyarama
Bongarinjee Nongaryma
' 1
Komeranjee Nulyarama
Akamaroo Nongaryma
Naratyoo Nurralama
Kingilla Nungallama
A few of the above names are varied in different parts of the tribal
districts. In some places Naratyoo is called Burralanjee; Warkoo is
Narrabalanjee; Komeranjee is Boonangoona; and Akamaroo is known
as Thimmermill. 1
The first author to report the existence of an organisation contain-
ing eight sections among the natives on the Finke River, Alice Springs
and Mac Donnell Ranges, was the Rev. Louis Schulze, a missionary at
Hermannsburg. 2 The} 7 were next referred to by Dr. E. C. Stirling in
1896, 3 and by Spencer and Gillen in 1897. 4 Mr. Schultze, and the
other writers who followed his classification, divided the eight sections
into two moieties, which did not represent the phratries, nor give the
correct descent of the offspring. On the 12th of June, 1898, I read a
(1) Journ Roy. Soc., N. S. Wales, vol. xxxii., pp. 251-252. Ibid., vol. xxxiii.,
p. 111.
(2) Trans. Roy. Soc. S. Australia, vol. xiv., pp. 228-227.
(3) Report Horn Exped., Part iv., p. 46.
(4) Proc. Roy. Soc., Victoria, vol. x., N. S., p. 19.


paper before the Royal Society of New South Wales, in which, inter
alia, I gave the following tabulation of the two phratries, and the
sections composing them 2 :
TABLE No. 4
Phratry Husband Wife
Son Daughter
Mbutjana Mbutjana
Koomara Koomara
/ Ungala Knurraia
I Parulla Panungka
A i
I
Pungata Mbutjana
Bultara Koomara
Knurraia Knurraia
Panungka Panungka
/ Panungka Parulla
Knurraia Ungala
| Koomara Bultara
V Mbutjana Pungata
Bultara
Pungata
Bultara
Pungata
Parulla Parulla
Ungalla Ungala
What has been said in explanation of Tables No. 1 and No. 2
regarding direct and alternative marriages, the descent of the pro-
geny, and all other matters, applies equally to Table No. 4. Mr.
Sohultze had previously reported the occurrence of alternative mar-
riages, and he states that “whether Bultara has a Koomara. or
Mbultjana for his wife is immaterial .... the children are
Panungka.” According to my investigations, his conclusions are cor-
rect.
In the Warramonga tribe about Tennant’s Creek, the names of
the eight sections, how they intermarry, and the resulting offspring
are as under:
TABLE No. 5.
Phratry Husband Wife Son Daughter
i Jungulla Numajillee Ambajona Lambean
Joopalla Naponunga Takamara Nakamara
i Jungulla Numajillee
Joopalla Naponunga
-
Tapongatee Lambean
k Kubadjee Nakamara
Taponunga Naponunga
Jungaree Numajillee
Jungaree Nongillee
Taponunga Narala
Kubadjee Nabadjee
Tapongatee Napongatee
B H
v
Takamara Nabadjee
Ambajona Napongatee
Joopalla Narala
Jungulla Nongillee
Taking thei first name in the table, we see that a Jungulla man
takes a Numajillee woman, who is his regularly appointed spouse;
and his family are Ambajona and Lam bean; but he has the alter-
native of marrying a Naponunga maiden instead, and polygamy being
allowed, he may select a wife from each of the sections mentioned.
(2) Jour. Boy. Soc., N. S. Wales, vol. xxxii., p. 72.


A man cf the Joopalla section, whose proper wife is Naponunga, can
marry Numajillee—that is, Jungulla and Joopalla can exercise their
choice over the same two sections of women. Similar privileges are
accorded to the men of the other pairs of sections, who may reverse
their wives in the same way. Everything which has been said in
the explanation of Tables 1 and 2 applies to this table.
The Yorrawinga, Yoolanlanya, Yanindo, and some other tribes are
located on the Upper Georgina, Woodroffe, Field, Hay, and other
watercourses, and reach some distance within the Queensland frontier.
Among them there are only four divisions, instead of eight, with
rules of intermarriage and descent as indicated in the following
synopsis :
TABLE No. 6.
Phratry Husband Wife Offspring
. j Deringara Koomara Belthara
i Gubilla Belthara Koomara
Belthara Koomara
R } Koomara
| Belthara
Deringarra
Gubflla
Gubilla
Deringara
To the South-west of the people represented in Table No. 6, and
on the South of the organisation described in Table No. 4, the region
is occupied by the Arrinda, Andigarina, Loorudgie, and other tnbes,
having the following intermarrying divisions :
TABLE No. 7.
Phratry Husband
. j Parulla
I Bultara
Offspring
Koomara
Panungka
Panungka
Koomara
~ ( Panungka
) Koomara
Parulla
Bultara
Bultara
Parulla
Throughout the whole l of the province of South Australia situated
to the southward of the tribes represented in Table No. 7, I have
describe! the social organisation of all the different communities
in a paper on the “ Divisions of the South Australian Aborigines,"
published in the Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society
(Philadelphia, U.S.A.), Vol. xxxix., pp. 78-93, with a map of South
Australia, showing the boundaries of every native community in the
province.
In a tract of country reaching inland easterly and southerly from
Port Darwin, marriages are arranged by the elders, who are well
acquainted with the genealogy of the various families composing the
tribe. The daughters of certain women are betrothed to the sons of
certain other women, and on such children attaining puberty they
become man and wife. The relationship subsisting between these two


women is practically that of cousins, and their respective progeny are
second cousins. In determining the betrothals the old men are guided
by the totem of the parents of the children, in addition to their
pedigree. Although there are no sharply defined divisions, like those
enumerated in Table No. 1, yet upon closely investigating both systems
of marriage regulations, they are found substantially the same in
their fundamental principles.
The initiatory rites of circumcision and subincision to which the
youths are subjected, are practised over the whole of the Northern
Territory, with the exception of the region lying north-westerly of a line
drawn approximately from the mouth of the Victoria to the mouth of
the Goyder River. In a portion of this district, from the Daly River
round along the coast to the Liverpool River, circumcision only is in
vogue. Even when associated with subincision, circumcision is the
principal ceremony, and its celebration is attended with many for-
malities and repulsive practices, which are fully described by me
elsewhere. The age at which it is performed varies from six to
twelve years.
It may be explained that subincision consists of cutting open the
penile portion of the urethra from the meatus unirarius towards the
scrotum. The length of the incision varies in different localities, being
in some cases continued nearly to the scrotum, whilst, in other places
it extends downwards about two inches. Again, there are regions
where the incision commences below the glans, say an inch from the
meatus, and extends towards the scrotum some two. or three inche:.
In this form of mutilation the head of the organ is left, intact, whilst
in that last described it is split open. The incision the urethral
canal, in whichever manner it is performed, does not prevent either
coition or procreation.
When the girls arrive at puberty the vaginal orifice is enlarged,
the process varying in different tracts' of country. In some districts
it is accomplished by a man inserting his fingers and using sufficient
force to stretch the parts. A smooth stick prepared for the purpose,
or a smooth stone of the requisite size and shape found in a water-
course, are also used for this operation. Over a very large geographical
area the enlargement is effected by lacerating, or cutting slightly
into, the perineum with a stone knife. The mutilation, whether by
forcible rupture or cutting, does not affect the uterus or ovaries in any
way, and there is no apparent, diminution of the woman’s child-bearing
power. No woman is allowed to marry until this operation, in one
form or another, has taken place.
All over the Victoria River country, and reaching southerly to
Lake Amadeus, the natives have an ingenious way of trapping hawks,
which are very numerous and form an article of food. A blackfellow


and his family, or perhaps a few men who are friends, go out cn a
ridge where there are rocks with bunches of spinifex (Triodia pungens)
■growing in the immediate vicinity. They set to work and gather a lot
of moderate sized pieces of stone, say from 20 to 50 pounds in weight
or more, and lay them in the form of a square or rectangle about
three or four feet each way. A wall is built up by laying tier upon
tier of stones —merely balanced one on the other, without mortar—
to a height of about four feet, the height being less or more according
to the scarcity or otherwise of building material. The primitive
structure is roofed in by laying sticks horizontally from one wall to
the opposite one, and over these a. few green bushes are thrown,
for the two-fold purpose of affording a shade to the occupant, and
hiding him from view. A small hole is left in this airy roof about
a foot or eighteen inches in diameter, and there is also- an opening in
one of the walls large enough for a man to crawl through.
The hunter who is to do the trapping has provided himself with an
iguana, opossum, leg of a wallaby, or any suitable bait, which he
partially roasts to make it all the, more readily scented by the birds
of prey. He then goes into' the trap and sits down, holding the
broiled iguana or other bait up through the opening in the roof.
His companions now set a light to two or three bushes of spinifex,
growing some on one side and some on the other of the trap, and
go away to their camps, or into another part of their hunting grounds.
The smoke from the burning spinifex, which ignites slowly, soon
attracts the hawks, which come flying to the scene-, because they are
accustomed to see and capture rats and other small game, running
before bush fires. Kangaree rats and bandicootsi build their nests
at the bases of spinifex, which affords them a good cover. A hawk
will soar round and round close to the fires, and the man moves his
bait to attract attention. As soon asi the hawk espies this, it
swoops down on the wing, and grasps the- iguana in its talons. The
moment it does this, the man below instantly takes hold of the feet
of the bird in his right hand and pulls it down into the trap, whilst
with the left hand he catches the head, and bites deeply into the
animal’s neck with his teeth, near where it joins the skull, causing
instant death. He then pushes the bait up again through the roof
and waits for another hawk, which is caught in the same way. This
is continued either as long as any birds are in sight, or until the
hunter has caught sufficient for his present requirements.
To catch the larger game, such as kangaroos and emus, a hunter
will conceal himself behind a bush or screen of boughs which he has
prepared, near a track along which these animals are known to travel
to a watering-place. At other times a man will plant in a similar
way close to a rock-hole, and when the animal is drinking will knock


it over with a club or spear. Another way is for the hunter to
carry a bush sufficiently large to conceal his body, and walk slowly
and stealthily towards a number of emus, kangaroos, or other game,
until he gets near enough to use his weapons.
To form a weir for catching fish, the natives of the Victoria and
Roper Rivers select a part of the river which runs over a> flat, rocky
bar, and build a wall of loose stones from side to side, in the form of
the letter V, but with an opening at the apex, which is down stream.
The water can percolate freely through any part of the wall, but fish
are carried by the current towards the opening. Men and women
stand in the stream and catch the fish in their hands, pitching them
out on the bank or into vessels. If a catfish is seen, one of the fisher-
men drives a spear into it and lands it in that way; it being dangerous
to catch these animals with the naked hand on account of the pro-
jections on the head.
Fish are sometimes caught by throwing small leafy branches of
bloodwood or gum trees ipto waterholes, and leaving them to soak.
Next day the water is discoloured and tastes strongly of the leaves,
causing the fish to come to the surface in a stupefied state, where they
are caught by the natives, who are watching for them. In small
waterholes, whose depth is not greater than up to a man’s chest, the
natives collect a quantity of spinifex, and fasten it together in a layer
across one end of the waterhole, reaching from the bottom upwards
close to the surface. A number of men then push this wall of spinifex
before them towards the other end of the hole, driving the fish in that
direction, where men and women are watching for them. Any of the
fish attempting to turn back over the top of the spinifex wall are
caught or speared by the men who are there.
The women carry yamsticks made of any very hard wood, between
four and five feet in length, one end of which has a chisel-shaped edge,
and the other a point —both these extremities being hardened in the
fire, and are kept sufficiently sharp by scraping from, time to time
with a flake of hard stone. The weapon is used in searching for
edible roots, grubs, and other insects, and also 1 for digging out iguanas,
rats of different kinds, porcupines, frogs, or any creature which bur-
rows in the ground. In digging for yams of different kinds they do
not pull the plant completely out of the ground, as a white man does
a turnip, but loosen the surrounding soil sufficiently to enable them to
break off the bulb—the top being left in the ground to take root again
or run to seed.
A few different kinds of trees bear fruit, nuts, and edible berries.
The Leichhardt pine and other trees produce a species of fig which
furnishes good eating when ripe. There are some native vegetables
called cucumbers, melons, and potatoes, which have some slight resem-


blance to the European products, and a small wild grape grows in the
jungles. Seeds of the eucalyptus and grass seeds are used as food.
The latter are ground on a flat stone by rubbing with a smaller one
held in the hand. Water is used in grinding most seeds, which are
usually very hard. The mee-uk'ka tree bears pods, each containing
a number of seeds, which are pounded and ground fine. The pul-
verized mass, in either case, is made into a cake and baked on the
coals.
The nut-wood tree grows on the downs, from ten to twenty feet
high, bearing fruit resembling a nut which is much sought after by
the natives, both for the fruit and the kernel.
When long periods of drought occur in any kind of country —and
during very wet seasons and excessive floods in low-lying lands —game
of all sorts, as well as fish, become so scarce that famines necessarily
follow, and many people die of starvation.
Along the valleys of most of the rivers and creeks there are plenty
of tea-trees growing, which have a soft outer bark which peels off
easily without injuring the bole. ( This bark is largely used by the
natives as a protection against the rain. In the desert country, where
there are no tea-trees, the people make a kind of rug or covering out
of long grass, which they cut off with stone knives near the ground, and
plait it into a close mat. A breakwind is made by bending over the
tops of the spinifex and laying a few bushes around the camp fire.
The natives then cover themselves from the rain with the grass rugs.
Water-bags are made from the skin of one of the legs of a large
kangaroo, or from the whole skin of a wallaby, or other small animal,
for carrying water on hunting expeditions into waterless country.
Wooden vessels (referred to in the next paragraph), are commonly used
for bringing water into oamp, and also for conveying it short stages —a
few handfuls of grass, or small twigs, broken from a green shrub,
being placed on the surface to prevent its splashing out as the bearer
walks along.
Wooden vessels for holding water, honey, or in short, anything, are
made, in the following way, out of the branch or trunk of a tree which
has soft wood resembling the kurrajong, or cork-tree. A piece of
timber of the required size, varying in length from one foot up to three
or four, is cut off with a stone hatchet—a part of the branch which has
a bend in it being preferred. The operator then commences on the
concave side, and chips out as much wood as he can with his hatchet—
cutting the chips parallel to the grain of the wood, not transversely.
For finishing the scooping out of the utensil he uses a double-ended
chisel. This tool is made of a slightly curved piece of very hard wood,
known as “ desert gum,” from fifteen to twenty inches long, on each
end of which is inserted a piece of hard stone, chipped or ground to a


cutting edge. The edges of the stones are at right angles to the plane
of the curvature of the wooden handle. One end of this tool is pro-
vided with a narrow edged stone, and the other with a wider, for use
in different portions of the vessel; and the bend in the handle enables
the workman to use the implement with facility on the curved surfaces
of the interior. The sharp stones are secured in the ends of the chisel
by means of gum,, which is obtained in some places from the roots of
spinifex, in other parts from the beef-wood tree, and again in others
from the grass-tree. There is more gum on the side on which the
concavity of the handle occurs, to resist the greater pressure, or con-
cussion of the blow, on that side. The gum, when first' collected, is
broken fine by pounding it either with a stone or a piece of hard
wood, and is then held close to the fire, causing it to run together into
a lump, which is carried about until required. When they want to
use some of it they soften it before the fire. In many tribes a chipped
or ground stone is fastened in the end of the throwing stick, and used
as a chisel.
To protect their feet from the sharp stones in rugged country, or
from the hot' sand of the desert, the natives sometimes make shoes, or
sandals, from the bark of the tea-tree, with a string tied over the foot
to keep it on. This string is made from the bark of a shrub with a
yellow flower which grows on the sand hills. In some districts the shoe
itself is made with strands of the bark of the same tree, worked in the
manner of netting, and is fastened on the foot as just stated. In other
parts these shoes are made of animal fur, woven into a net with very
small meshes. 1
Shoes are also sometimes made of emu feathers matted together to
form the soles, which are fastened on the foot with string in the usual
way. It has been erroneously said that such shoes, which are worn
only by old conjurors, do not leave any tracks on the ground which
could be detected by others, but the real explanation of their im-
munity from pursuit is because no man would attempt to follow the
tracks of an individual using shoes of this character, from a super-
stitious dread of the magical powers of the wearer.
Tufts of feathers of the common brown hawk, emu, or plain turkey
are sometimes worn by the men under their belts, as a charm against
their enemies, or for the purpose of adding valour to the wearer. Some
men possess waistbelts made from the hair of a deceased warrior, which
are supposed to preserve those who use them from their enemies or
evil spirits. The fat of such a warrior is often mixed with coloured
clays, and rubbed over the bodies of the young men. Belts are also
(1) Captain Cook states that he saw natives in Tasmania who had their feet
protected from the rough stones by means of pieces of animal skin.


made partly or wholly from the hair of a man’s mother-in-law, sup-
plied by her to his wife at various times. Remnants of food are des-
troyed or buried in the sand to prevent their falling into the hands of
-mystic creatures, or enemies from another camp. If a man fear that
his wife, or one of his wives if he have several, wishes to get rid of
him, he never lets her see where he defecates, because she might take
some of his excreta and give it to an old sorcerer, and get him to
“ point a bone,” or work some other magic for the purpose of destroy-
ing her husband. In some tribes it is a universal rule that the women
never see where the men evacuate; if within view, the women must
turn their faces in the opposite direction while a man is so engaged.
If they see a whirlwind passing along, catching up leaves, small
twigs and dust, or if a violent thunderstorm is imminent, an old man
will collect a handful of long grass and micurate upon it—-or perhaps
several men may join in the latter act—after which he sways the grass
to and fro in his hand in the direction of the approaching danger,
muttering some incantation the while, by which means he thinks the
storm or whirlwind will be stopped, or at any rate be bereft of its
baleful influences. If the whirlwind turns off in another direction, or
the storm clouds disperse, both of which are very probable con-
tingencies in that arid country, he believes that his efforts have been
successful. If, however, this expedient is ineffectual, then he considers
that the evil spirit is more powerful than himself.
Some of the old men, the Shamans of the tribe, profess to have the
power of causing the supply of animals, fruits, vegetable roots, and
■other sources of food to increase. If an abundance of wild ducks is
desired, a man of the wild duck totem officiates as the Shaman; if
iguanas, an iguana man is supposed to take charge of the enchant-
ment, and so on.
On the upper Georgina and Field Rivers, the Yorrawinga natives
have a tradition that there was once an enormous snake-like creature,
called Wakana, endowed with supernatural powers, whose trail marked
out rivers and watercourses wherever it went. At every place where
there is a big waterhole at the presnt day, they aver that Wakana
camped at that spot after having done a hard day’s work. They like-
wise believe in an evil-disposed being in human shape, called Arenga,
who prowls about the camp at night; he is covered with feathers, and
has claws like the eaglehawk, and can fly like that bird. These natives
have names for the four quarters of the compass; the south is v'ilga ,
the north aralinga , the west atugrabinga, and the east erawina. The
moon is algunda, and when a new moon appears they sing a peculiar
chant for the occasion. The Southern Cross they call waubara, the sun
awigela, the planet Venus warjera.
Rock paintings are fairly numerous in the Victoria River basin,
especially on Gordon and Jasper Creeks, the Wickham and elsewhere


The watercourse® are bounded by rocky escarpments, the bases of
whioh are hollowed out in place® by the action of the weather and
other causes. In these depressions, which are more or less sheltered
from the rain, the natives draw pictures of alligators, fish, human
beings, flying foxes, kangaroos and other things, in pipe-clay, red ochre
and charcoal. In some, places where there is a sufficient rock surface
the natives delineate an immense snake-like monster, twenty or thirty
feet in length, which is said to have dug out waterholes and formed
rivers in olden times.
Mr. Michael Costello gave me the following account of some rock
paintings on the Valley of Springs Station, on the Limmen River.
There are four remarkable flat-topped sandstone hills, called “ The
Archers,” all about the same height and shape, looking like ancient
castles. They consist of immense blocks of Desert Sandstone, and are
shown on the Government maps of the Northern Territory as Mount
Thomas, Mount John, Mount Charles, and Mount David. Nine
miles up a valley, and at a part of it where there is a narrow gorge,
there are some native paintings. The gorge is about a mile and a half
south of the Limmen River, and a stream of fresh water runs through
it all the year round. On both sides of this gorge there are some in-
teresting paintings on the bare rocky walls, many of them being done
fairly well for the natives. There are pictures of alligators, snakes,,
fish, blackfellows in fighting attitudes, and some painted hands. Their
favourite drawing was tne snaked some of the representations being of
fabulous forms and sizes. In riding through the bush on the Limmen
River, Mr. Costello informs me he has frequently noticed rough out-
lines of large snakes cut into the white bark of gum trees. The natives
also sketch boomerangs and shields on the bark of trees, and paint
them on rocks.
If there is a man in the general encampment who has two or more
wives, and an unmarried fellow takes a fancy to one of them, or comes
to the conclusion that he will annex her, he watches till some night
that she is sitting at her camp fire, her husband being absent in some
other part of the camp, when he suddenly seizes her and carries her
off to his own fire. As soon as the husband learns what has occurred
there is a row, consisting of much angry recrimination between the
two men, but none of the other people interfere. If the husband
thinks the usurper is stronger than himself he lets him retain the
woman, otherwise there is a fight, after which the victor takes final
possession of her. This method of securing a wife is called jarrada,
but the women thus appropriated must belong to the section from,
which the man can lawfully select a spouse.
1. Serpent worship—or the fear of serpents—has been observed in almost every lanct
of whioh we have any knowledge


When a man dies, a platform is made by placing sticks horizontally
across the spreading branches of a low tree, and on this the corpse is.
laid, covered with bushes, paper-bark or grass, and is left there till
the flesh decomposes and the bones fall to the ground. The relatives
of the deceased now visit the spot, breaking the bones of the arms and
legs in some cases, and eating the marrow. They have a superstitious,
belief that eating marrow confers strength and superiority upon them.
The bones are carried away and placed in caves or clefts in rocky
places, or interred. In many districts the bodies of deceased persons
are buried in the ground, in others they are burnt. In rocky country,,
instead of laying the dead body on an arborial platform, it is placed
on a projecting shelf of rock on the face of a cliff. In all cases the
weapons of the deceased are placed with his remains, and if, as some-
times happens, the body is not disposed of in any way, his weapons,
and effects are left at his camp, and are never touched or used by any
one. Like other Australian natives, when a man dies his death is
attributed to some designing person in another tribe, and the injury
must be avenged. This retaliation is called xuarring-arree.
The rainy season commences about December every year, and the
hierarchy have observed that certain conspicuous stars are in par-
ticular parts of the eastern sky on the evenings of that period. The
old head men, therefore, avail themselves of this knowledge, and
muster their tribe on the approach of such times, for the purpose of
going through certain ceremonies for producing rain. The old
Shamansi also know from tradition and experience that the rainy
season comes to an end when the same remarkable stars are in the
western sky early in the tvening, which is generally about the begin-
ning of March, and consequently if there is too much rain in any given
year, these men work somewhat similar enchantments to bring fine
weather. The gatherings for the production, as well as for the cessa-
tion of rain, may continue for some time with intervals between them.
I have observed that the men of certain sections of a phratrv or
moiety will have charge of bringing the wet at one oorroboree, and the
men of a different set of sections of another phratrv will be the prime
operators at the succeeding ceremony.
Periodic journeys are made into the territories of adjoining and
distant tribes for the purpose of exchanging manufactured or natural
products. The routes along which the people travel on these occasions
seem to have been fixed and acknowledged from time out of mind.
The period of the year is usually the autumn, because then the rock-
holes, springs and watercourses have been replenished by the annual
rains. For example, the natives of the Upper Victoria travel east-
ward to Newcastle Waters; thence northerly to Daly Waters, Birdum
Creek and Katherine River, returning by way of Delamere and


Gregory Creek. Residents of the Wickham River go westward to the
Negri and Ord Rivers, which they run down a long way, coming baok
by Auvergne on the Baines, and thence up the Victoria River home.
There are several of these bartering or trade routes in different dis-
tricts, and the journeys, which occupy a long time, are marked by good
feeling and festive corroborees throughout.
The principal weapons in use are the barbed spear, fish spear,
womera, tomahawk, bomerang, a two-handed waddy, stone knife,
double-ended chisel, and yamstick. The natives are very dexterous in
making stone spear-heads. They get the jaw of the crocodile, either
upper or lower, and break it into flakes by means of a heavy stone
held in the hand. The bones of these animals are very hard and do
not break easily; with them the workman chips suitable stones into
the requisite shape for spear heads. When, after much patient labour,
the necessary form is attained, the serrations are made by pressing a
small sharp piece of crocodile bene against the edges, chipping out
small gaps at regular intervals all the way along. The war'reedilla,
a hunting boomerang, a little over two feet long, is made on Sturt
Creek, with a hook projecting from one extremity, on the convex
edge, or back, of the weapon. The hook, which is about five or six
inches m length, extends backwards, forming an angle of thirty cr
■forty degrees at the point of juncture. This implement is in use
mong all the tribes from the Western Australian boundary right
across the Northern Territory into Queensland, where it was met with,
under substantially the same name, by Dr. Roth. 1 It is mentioned by
Mr. D. W. Carnegie, 2 who saw it among the natives in Western Aus-
tralia.
Flat sticks, or boards, called mirral'loo, varying from five feet to
nearly twice that length, from three to six inches in width, and thin,
are used by the natives of Sturt Creek and elsewhere in different im-
portant ceremonies. Bullroarers and message-sticks are also employed.
All these instruments and their uses, which are of a secret character,
form the subject of another article.
Marks are formed on the bodies of men and women by means of
cuts with stone knives. Soft sandstone, ground fine, or charcoal
powder, in either case mixed with grease, are rubbed into the cuts to
raise scars. Ashes mixed with soft animal fur or the down of birds,
are also applied to the incisions to keep them open. Long horizontal
scars are made across the chest and stomaoh; short vertical lines,
either straight or slightly curved, being cut on the shoulders, back and
limbs.
(1) Ethnological Studies, etc., Queensland Aborigines,” p. 145, Fig 353
(2) <l Spinifex and Sand,” p. 343.


Cannibalism is practised over the whole of the territory treated of
in this paper. A man’s body is cooked in a hole dug in the ground in
the same manner as a kangaroo, emu, or other large game. It is a
common belief among these natives that infants reside in rocky hills,
and in the dense foliage of forest trees, before they enter the bodies
of the women who give them birth.
The inhabitants of all the islands in the Gulf of Carpentaria are
virtually the same people, in language and customs, as those on the
adjacent mainland
In the
following tabulated list of fourteen members of the Chinga-
lee tribe, I have in each case given the section and totem of the
individual, the totem of his or her father, the totem of his or her
mother, and the totem of the offspring
Individual (man or woman),
Totem of | Totem of
Individual’s ! Individual
Individual’s
Totem of
Individual’s
Offspring.
Father. Mother.
Name.
Section.
Totem.
Charlie
Chuna
Blk. striped
snake
Blk. striped
snake
Streculia
) Blk. striped
j" snake
Lucy (wife) Nala
Native bee
'Native bee
Harry Chuna
Earth-worm
Iguana
Nora !Nala
Nut-grass
Blk. striped
snake
Earth-worm
Iguana
j- Iguana
3 Palmer
Chula
Nana
Honey
Kangaroo
8a His wife
4 Rowley
4a His wife
Honey
Large water-
snake
Nut-grass
Kangaroo
j Honey
Chula
iNana
Kangaroo
Honey
Kangaroo
Streculia
Bandicoot
Honey
[ Kangaroo
5 Toby
5a Belle
! Tunkaree
Watersnake
Iguana
Ground
honey
Honey
[Water-
j snake
, Nemara
Honey and
Kangaroo
Iguana
Streculia and
Bandicoot
6 Jack
6a Mary
Chula
Streculia
Wallaby
Iguana
Streculia
Nungalee
| Streculia
Watersnake
Wallaby
W atersnake
7 Jumbuck
Tunkaree
Iguana
Iguana
8 Brumbie
Tunkaree
Plain-grass
Iguana
Not certain
Plain-grass
It will be observed that No. 5 is married to a woman of the
“alternative” section, that is, Nemara instead of Nabajina. No. 6
has taken a spouse from the ‘ rare ” section, his present wife being a
Nungallee, instead of a Nana or Nameeinja. The parents of Jumbuck,
No. 7, are both of the same totem.
According to this table, the children of Nos. 1,8, 4,5, 7, and 8,
take the totem of the father; but the offspring of Nos. 2 and 6 have
the totem of the mother. The wives of Nos. 5 and 6 have each two
totems. Examination of the totems in the fourth, fifth, and sixth
columns shows that some of them follow the father and some the


mother, whilst others inherit the totem of neither parent. In other
instances, not included in this table, I have found that among the
offspring of the same parents there is considerable irregularity —some
of the children having one totem and some another. lam inclined to
think, however, that if one had time to prepare tables of genealogies
for two or three generations, taking into account the “ alternative ”
and “rare” as well as the “ direct ” rules of intermarriage, the totemic
laws of descent might be found to be more fixed than at present
appears. This and other matters connected with the totems will be
further dealt with when certain investigations on which I am now
engaged shall have been completed.
In many of the tribes dealt with in this article the section to
which the offspring belong is determined through the mother. If
Chuna marry Nala, his children will be Tunkaree and Nungaree; if
he take an “alternative” wife, they will be Taralee and Naralee; and
if he choose a partner from the Nameeinja or “rare” section, they
will be Tampachina and Nabajina.
Again, in some tribes although a man may marry into three
different sections, he cannot do so concurrently. For example, Chuna
can marry Nala, or, polygamy being in vogue, he may take two or
more Nalas, but until they die, or are “ divorced,” or run away, he
cannot marry a woman belonging to either of the other two sections
over which he has marital rights. In like manner, while he possesses
a “rare” or an “alternative” wife, the same law will apply to< him.
It is, perhaps, unnecessary to add that, moreover, marriages within
the prescribed sections are more or less regulated by betrothals in all
aboriginal tribes.
VOCABULARY.
This vocabulary contains a first instalment of about 210 words in
the language of the Chingalee tribe, whose boundaries I have already
stated. Substantially the same tongue is spoken along that portion of
the overland telegraph line from Adelaide to Port Darwin, comprised
between the Katherine River and Tennant’s Creek. On the west of
the telegraph line, including the Victoria River, Camfield Creek, Sturt
Creek, the Negri and Ord Rivers, and extending onwards far into
Western Australia, the structure of the language is the same as the
Chingalee. This will also apply to the dialects in all the country
between the part of the overland telegraph line referred to and the
G-ulf of Carpentaria, comprising Playford Creek, Cresswell Creek, and
the rivers Calvert, McArthur, Limmen, Roper, Hodgson, and Strang-
ways.
Throughout this enormous region, with very few exceptions, the
grammar of the language is substantially the same, although a large
number of words may differ more or less widely, or although the


vocabulary is almost quite divergent. The following is a synopsis of
the grammatical elements of the dialects analyzed from a mass of
information bn this subject collected by me within the geographic
limits indicated.
Nouns have the singular, dual, and plural numbers, and the usual
-cases; they are declined for number and case by means of postfixes.
Adjectives are declined similarly to the nouns they qualify. Pro-
nouns have the same numbers as the nouns, and are declined for pre-
sent, past, and future time. The verbs have three numbers, with the
usual persons and tenses; and three moods—the indicative, impera-
tive, and subjunctive. A verb and the suitable pronoun are merged
into one word, which can then be inflexed by suffixes for all the tenses,
as well as for number and person. Adverbs and prepositions have
their places in the language, but there are few conjunctions and inter-
jections. There is no article corresponding to aor the.
As the equivalent of English words will be most frequently re-
quired, I have put them first throughout the vocabulary. The spelling
is as nearly as possible the same as<in English. Words of the same
character are placed together under separate headings, thus:—Family
terms. —Parts of the body. —Natural objects. —Animals.—Weapons.—
Adjectives. —Verbs. —Miscellaneous.
Family Terms, Etc.
Man, Pia
Old man, Mullaga
Woman, Nay-annee
Old woman, Immakinnee
Boy, Ahwah
Girl, Weewinnee
Baby, Korragulla
Father, Keeta
Mother, Bellannu
Head, Tummungeh
Parts of
Hair, Tatagura or Melabana
Eye, Ahbanjuh
Face, Ejeeju
Ear, Lungah
Nose, Kullamee
Smell, Bijwanggetju
Mouth, Ajarahgoolu
Teeth, Ahbinju
Uheek, Kukunda
Forehead, Wuddaru
Beard, Jinteemee
Tongue, Talana
Husband, Unbeah
Wife, Kabinnee
Elder brother, Bapa
Younger brother, Burdatdah
Elder sister, Beebinnee
Younger sister, Burdatannee
Children, Wawalla
Copulation, Yanganu
Masturbation, Jeepanu
the Body.
Breasts (female) Ahbulluh
Arm, Peeannee
Hand, Munda-munda
Finger-nail, Meelinjee
Thigh, Tarramullu
Calf of leg, Illikbee
Foot and foot-mark, Yunku
Toe, Übanna
Skin, Kurranu
Blood, Borajah
Bowels, Billa-billa
Excrement, Oomee
Urine, Myaggu
Stomach, Tunardgu


Sun, Olajennee
Br
Moon, Badungarra
Mi
Stars, Kommaranjee or Chinkachee
Sn
Clouds, Medeye
Th
Sky, Kullamarra
Li<
Ra ; n, Eepilkinnee
Gr
Rainbow, Kingmee
St<
Light, Ellabarungoo
Hi
Dark, Kommaru
Cr<
Morning, Warrarunga
Gr
Day, Adajudaju
Nr
Night, Warraru
Pk
Heat, Adalagu
Sti
Cold, Korramunraulla
Tr<
Fire, Pooba
Ba
Water, Eepilka or Kalarunga
Wc
Milk, Choomoolka or Ahpulluh
Ca:
Food, Kundurru
Ho
Demon, Warrajee
Pal
Shadow, Eeleechinku
Ho
Wind (strong), Myamba
Gr<
Animals.
Porcupine, Ivallamijee
Pel
Fish, Kagwag
Lai
Native dog, Wolloggu
Bees, Burrungah
Tail of animal, Bundamee
Kangaroo, Kunchalowree
Wallaby Kallamali
Opossum, Chukalajee
Bandicoot, Patkoclali
Emu, Kinnee-injinnee
Iguana, Wollanja
Eaglehawk, Dundaninguh
Crow, Onkalay
Wild turkey, Kunnainju or Korka
badee
Weapons.
Wood-spear, Kunnarinju
Shield, Tarramee
Tomahawk, Warra-warra
Natural Objects.—Nouns.
Breeze (light), Looarkoo
Mist, Illeebanku
Smoke, Ookalu
Thunder, Dundunbeeaju
Lightning, Dojamee
Ground, Korrallu
Stone, Ketcheelulu
Hill, Kuncharu
Creek, Cliurkulu
Grass, Peekarra
Nut-grass, Appajimmee
Plain-grass, Urpaj inghee
Streculia, Maekemmee
Trees, Toranku
Bark, Koranu
Wood, Pooba (same as fire)
Camp, Maruli
Hole, Kwawah
Path, Karratbee
Honey, Wungoorah
Ground honey, Onkaroonee
Pelican, Looinnee or Belladee
Laughing-jackass, Karkanah
Native companions, Dallywa
Black cockatoo, Larikpinnee
Butcher-bird, Kudparenkee
Fly, Konninga
Mosquito, Konamaru
Earth-worm, Eepurooh
binee
Water-snake, Eddengaddali
Large water-snake, Kawalajah
Kite-liawk, Dedinguna
Galah. Kila-kiladee
Stoneknife, Taperree
Boomerang, Kurrabadu
Club, Kudru
Black striped snake, Wahlaclia


Alive, Wunga
Dead, Bellenneegunna
Big, Mullaga (also Head-man )
Small, Kullagulla
Long, Breeja
Short, Mummaringee
Good, Badwarrah
Bad, Akkeeabudah
Hungry, Tummundurra
Thirsty, Wunjunganu
Black, Kubbreekubbra
Full, Bada-bada
Empty, Dayloonga
Quick, Kala
Slow, Wahdruku
Eat, Tarrangiju
Drink, Eepilka tarrangiju
Sleep, Munundigu
Sit, Ajjoo
Go, Wirree
Come, Unkoo
Speak, Ambanaju
Walk, Adu
Run, Tarkandammee
Bring, Abawah
Take, Espeere
Lift, Eepandammee
Carry, Tallada
Make, Unkalammee
Yes, Yoo-yoo
Alright, Wallee-wallee
No, Kabee
Exclamation, Ahwoo !
I, Iyah
Eh ? Nah ?
Mine, Arrana
To-day, Talangu
Yesterday, Eetaju
To-morrow, Wetanagah
That one, Eeninneekee
Adjectives.
Blind, Kummumurra
Deaf, Longajitchah
Strong, Tatahla
Weak, Mumnunbeeaku
Wild, Eeminjee
Heavy, Bundundara
Light, Tumundara
Afraid, Elleewala
Sweet, Wungurra
Right, Walanbala
Wrong, Areenama
Straight, Wajankaka
Crooked, Kitteelagu
Tired, Whyabbee
Verbs.
Break, Larkamijee
Strike, Myammee
See, Ahtanganu
Hear, Unkanaju
Know, Lunkunanu
Give (request), Mawa
Give, Winnanagme
Like, Ahkitbee
Sing, Annainkaja
Weep, Uhkanaju
Miscellaneous.
I don’t know, Ayununku
Where? Wahjanay
Why ? Ahdanana
One, Tuukabennee
Two, Ukadilla
Three, Morkunbilla
Four, Tatawallah
Five, Dardu
Lamentation, Keening
Frightened, Illawollennee
Fight, Myamunkummmee
Kill, Myanwarrajinnee
Fall, Udkanna
Cutting the private parts
woman, Beebajana


APPENDIX.
ABORIGINAL ROCK-CARVINGS.
In 1894 I contributed an article to this Journal on the "Aboriginal
Rock Picture® of Australia,” 1 in which I suggested that search sliould
be made for carved rocks in the valleys of Queensland rivers and on
the coast. Since then I have learnt of some interesting aboriginal
carvings on the Burnett River, parish of South Kolan, county of
Cook, in Queensland. These drawings are cut on some flat rocks
situated in the wide channel of the river mentioned, at the junction of
Pine Creek, and about four miles south-easterly from the township of
South Kolan.
The rocks containing the carvings are a kind of hard sandstone,
which are quite dry during the greater part of the year; but in time
of floods are totally submerged. Owing to the latter circumstance,
and long exposure to the weather, many of the drawings are now
scarcely distinguishable. Most of the figure® are small, varying from
a few inches in length to upwards of two feet, representing native
weapons, animals, human footmarks, and nondescript devices. The
outline of each figure is marked out by a groove cut into the hard
surface of the rook to a depth ranging from one-eighth to one-quarter
of an inch, the width of the groove varying from less than half-an-
inch in the smallest, to about an inch and a-quarter in the largest
specimens.
The mode of execution was to make a row of indentations or punc-
tures along the outline of the drawing, by repeated blows with sharp-
pointed pieces of hard stone. The distance between the indentations
varies from about a third of an inch to half-an-inch or more, being
farther apart in the larger objects. After the punctures were com-
pleted, the spaces between them were also chippd out, thus making a
complete groove around the exterior of the drawing. The positions of
these punctures are still easily discernible, being somewhat deeper and
wider than the other portions of the outline, thus remaining as a
witness of the method adopted in carrying out the work.
Old residents of the district have known of the existence of these
rock carvings for twenty-five or thirty years, but very little attention
has been given to them, and so far as I know, no definite description of
them has hitherto been published. By the kindness of a friend 1
succeeded in getting a portion of the rock chiselled out, on which is
carved the representation of a human foot. The block of stone is now
in my possession, and will be exhibited to any one desirous of ex-
amining it.
(1) Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc., Auati, Queensland, vol. x., pp., 46-70.
