

EUGENIC PROBLEfIS
AND
THE WAR.
A LECTURE
GEORGE WALTERS
PUBLISHED BY REQUEST
PRICE - - - SIXPENCE


. .. ( y / * •, ' !■, ; r ; ?v. ■/ ; t/'y 1V7 ,r /■
,.. Ge ° r^ How ° wMii>
(\)U,ECTlOI\A|r
Xatioxal Library ||
I
i
3
\ ' A -J . 7 ' • ) ■ ■/ . / / I
/ ■< » ■ , , j , ,, ; 1 ' • ., f ■
/


EUGENIC PROBLEMS
AND
THE WAR
A LECTURE
GEORGE WALTERS
Delivered in the Hyde- Park Unitarian Church,
Sydney, N.S.W.,
On Sunday Evening, August 27th,
and redelivered
Under the auspices of the Eugenics
Society, in the Oxford Hall,
On Friday, September 29th, 1916


This address was first delivered from a few notes on
Sunday evening, August 30, 1916, in the Hyde Park Unitarian
Church, and redelivered in the Oxford Hall on Friday, Sep-
tember 29th, under the auspices of the Eugenics Society. It
is printed and published at the suggestion, and at the expense,
of Mr. H. G. Bell, the hon. treasurer of that Society. It is
hoped that the work of promoting eugenic enquiry may be
stimulated, and to this end those who favour the movement
are invited to communicate with Mr. J. 0. Eldridge, hon. sec.
Eugenics Society, o/o Oxford Hall, Liverpool Street, Hyde
Park, Sydney.


EUGENIC PROBLEMS AND
THE WAR
Professor Huxley began his 4< Romanes Lecture,” 1873.,,
with a reference to that which he called the 1 delightful
child's story,” known as Jack and the Beanstalk.” The
bean is pictured as a simple, inert looking thing, from which,
however, may be evolved wonders which are only neglected
because they are so common.
But we might well exclaim — How much more is a
human child than a bean!” The wonders waiting to be
evolved are worthy of our deepest thought and most earnest
consideration.
Eugenics is really the science of good birth
The time ivas when Man was treated as a mere machine,
and the living child little better than an intruder upon our
planet.
The time is when we deem it necessary to educate (not
simply instruct) the children and develop the faculties of
mind and body.
But, the time will he when people will provide for the
clean, healthy, happy coming of the infant into this world.
I want yon to consider, with me, some eugenic problems
in relation to the present horrible world-war. We may rest
assured that there will practically be a new Earth —if not a
new Heaven ! W 7 ill that new Earth be wiser, better, purer
than that with which men have been familiar in the past ?


There is a district in Gippeland, Victoria, where, so the
t
lolk assured me, after a great bush-fire beautiful red flowers
spring up in profusion, which had not previously been in
evidence. We may wonder whether, after the conflict in
which the nations are engaged, the civilized world will
produce flowers of higher nobility, of sweeter purity, of genuine
social advancement.
There is, at least, the suggestion of a reply in an article,
}jy Professor Welch, in Friday’s ‘ Morning Herald,” where ho
says :
“ Two men I honour at this time. Above all is he who offers his
life—and his nearest and dearest who share in the offering. But next to
him is the man who honestly opens his mind to the light of Truth, and
loots out his cherished convictions when he finds them false. This
as bo mean sacrifice, Men have grown up with prejudices, which they
mil convictions, as dear to them as life itself. It is a sure test of
manliness to admit being in the wrong and to seek the right. If the war
should do nothing more than cleanse men’s minds from dross, it will not
have been wholly evil. The mind set free would mark the dawn of a
iresh renaissance, and we should see not only the birth of a new nation—
sot only the birth of a new Empire—but the birth of a Few World.”
It seems quite clear, to some of us, that we shall have to
learn to speak boldly, at the same time discreetly, upon such a
subject as Eugenics. Wise and healthy parentage is, at this
m any other time, an exceedingly important topic ; and yet
e f a H important topics it is perhaps the most neglected. Why
should this be so? Shall we reply “Because pradishness
is masquerading as delicacy ”? Many excellent people refuse
j 0 discuss, or even consider, problems which are vital as
regards the health of the individual and the welfare of the


ra.ce. We might echo the words of Mis. Browning (in her
poem <£ Aurora Leigh ”)
4 ‘ May the good God
Save us from all such good people.”
Aro the duties of parents to their children properly fulfilled m
these days ? The great majority do something in the way of
preparing the young folk for a trade or profession. The
boy may be trained to be a carpenter, a clerk, a doctor,,
or a clergyman. The girl may be trained to be a housemaid*
a teacher, a typist, or a nurse. But who trains them for the
most important matters of life and conduct ? This is mostly
left to haphazard, to the demons of filth and pollution. Thus*
the road to Heaven is reeking with the mud and misery of &
human (or inhuman) hell 1
There are times when we speak of the devastating horrors
of the world-war of today. We dwell upon the awful picture
of wounded and dying. We refer, with bated breath, to the
outrages committed upon the people of Belgium, of Poland,
and of Servia. We tell, with a shade of incredulity, of the
reported massacre of almost an entire population in Armenia.
But we fail to realise that greater horrors have been
enacted, year after year, in the very midst of our much-
boasted so-called Christian civilisation. Well might an
eminent physician exclaim :
41 At present we are engaged in the pastime of manufacturing
diseased infants, idiots, imbeciles, and insane. We allow these to marrj
and beget offspring ? How long is this to continue?”
Here, if we will realise it, are problems which we, or those
who come after us, will have to face, unless Civilised Man if
prepared for what is called 11 ace. Suicide .


Let me ask you to consider, very briefly, the scientific
theory of evolution, according to which there has been a very
gradual advance from one form, or type, of Life to another‘and
a higher. Underlying all this age-long development there has
been the Law of Natural Selection, a Struggle for Existence
and the Survival of the Fittest. As Huxley expressed it: —
“ Man, the animal, has worked his way to the leadership of the
sentient world, and has become the superb animal which he is, in virtue
of his success in the straggle for existence,”
But it would almost appear that Man has introduced a new
interfering force that has —at least —a tendency towards the
perpetuation of those who are less fit for the work of life. We
take pity upon, and we preserve, those who are weak and
wounded—physically, mentally, and morally. There may be
instances in which it must be a cruelty and a crime to allow
the newly born infant to survive ; but, as a general rule, I for
one would very strongly insist that our care for the physically
and mentally weak is most desirable. Unless those sufferers
are in such a condition that their continued existence here is
a living hell, we must do our utmost of kind charity for them.
This exercise of the gentler virtues will be of importance in the
©volution of the higher moral and spiritual manhood.
But (a very important “ but”; this must not go to the
really absurd extent of allowing the unfit to perpetuate and
even increase the miseries of our Race. This distinction must
be clearly noted, lest people should draw the quite unnecessary
conclusion that the advocacy of Eugenics is. in any way, out
of harmony with the virtues of kindness, mercy, charity, and
brotherly love.
One is compelled (if a thinker, at all) to speculate as to


the effect of the war upon the coming generations of civilised
communities, as regards mere numbers and also (more impor-
tant still) the physical and mental qualities of those born into
the human world. We have been made painfully aware of the
number of fine young Australians who have fallen in Gallipoli
and in Northern France. But the numbers of British, French,
Russian, German, Austrian, Italian, Belgian, etc., killed and
wounded are beyond the powers of our imagination to picture
—perhaps fortunately so. It has been suggested by a writer
in the ‘ Sydney Daily Telegraph” (April 21, 1916), that the
war may bring about what may be called a patriotic birthrate.
This would, of course, mitigate the loss of births resulting from
the war, but it would not alter the stern fact that a large pro-
portion of the male population will have hem swept away.
And — who who will have been thus remorselessly swept
away ? Not the physically unfit. Not the degenerates. Not
the man of weak mentality or lack of nerve-power. In most
instances the physically strongest have been selected to go into
the conflict. The boldest and bravest, of all ranks of society,
have been the victims. Those who have not gone to the great
struggle are, generally speaking, the least “ fit, sc far m
physical strength, nervous force, and mental ability are con-
cerned. Even the returned wounded soldiers are not (again
generally speaking) so “ fit” for parentage as they were befote
they left their Australian homes and went to assist the cause
of civilisation and freedom against the brutal foe.
Thus far, we seem to be faced by a great problem, involv-
ing very great danger for the welfare of the human family.
The flower of manhood, to a great extent, has gone, so far as
this world is concerned, and the race must suffer.


There are, however, some sources of hope, faith, and
encouragement.
If we venture upon a comparison, or contrast, between
Great Britain and Germany, we shall probably realise that the
latter is fighting under the influence of vain ambition and of
hatred for others. Force and mere animalism are her allies.
It was hardly an exaggeration when Professor Poulton said : —-
“The victory of Germany would impose upon mankind a new
criterion, leading to the predominance of a revolting type.”
If, on the other hand, we inquire as to the reason for Britons,
from the homeland and from beyond the seas, being involved
in the awful struggle, we may remember that the keen re-
sponse has been at the call of Honor and Duty, it has been
inspired by a High Ideal. The ultimate triumph of this force
must tend towards the welfare and progress of humanity.
Again,—it is, of course, true that many of the soldiers have
been married men and have left children. Also, — if the war
should end within a year or two (as it surely must) then the
boys and youths of today will be the fathers of the next gen-
eration.
One all-important truth is that the women will remain,
and I deem it very probable that the long struggle will have
given them finer ideals, and greater riches of mind, heart, and
sou). In this thought there is indeed a source of hope and
encouragement.
But —we'must not omit consideration of the disproportion
between the sexes, as regards numbers. Ii Great Britain,
before the war came with its disturbances and horrors, the
disproportion was so great that about -one million of the
women were pre condemned to single-blessedness. ” After


the slaughter, the disproportion will be more serious still. Mr.
H. G. Wells, maybe with a touch of exaggeration, has said :
“ To discuss the effect of tbe war, upon the relation of men and
women to each other, is to enter upon the analysis of a secular process
compared with which even the vast convulsions and destructions of this-
world-catastrophe appear only as jolts and incidents and temporary
interruptions.”
The absence of men at the war has brought about the
occupation of women, to a very much larger extent than,
before, in work and industry of many kinds. We are realising
this, in no insignificant degree, in Australia. In Great Britain
tbe women have truly risen to the occasion and they have
taken on the tasks of men, even to harvest work, to furnace-
tending, and to the manufacture of munitions of war. In
France this is more universal than in other countries. Hera
is a Social Problem for the future, looming up with some-
what menacing aspect.
But we are not only concerned with a social or industrial
problem. There is a question of eugenics. How will the
•new conditions affect those women as mothers ? Well, it may
be that, for many of them, the factory work will be lighter
than were the domestic labours of the home. The working-
nyan, in some instances, may overlook the fact that while he
is engaged in manual labour, the woman at home is working
as continuously and as earnestly as he —-especially if he should
be one of those degenerate specimens of humanity who make
themselves into rogues and thieves by following the gospel of
‘•Go slow !”
But our immediate question, regarding the employment
of women in various industrial pursuits, is—How will it affect


the future of the Eace ? In spite of so-called “ advanced ’
ideas, it is natural for women to contemplate matrimony,
home-life, and the rearing of children. Unless the Eace is to
commit suicide, they must continue as human inclination
would lead. As Ella Wheeler Wilcox says, in one of her
poems—“ The impulse of all love is to create.’
That the women, after the war, will continue in many of
those occupations which they have recently adopted may, I
think, be taken for granted. To some slight extent this will
diminish the number of those who might suffer severely
through being shut out from desired marriage and home-ties ;
but, all the same, will such a condition of things be for the
advantage of the world? —will it be beneficial for the progress
of mankind ?
It is much easier to ask these questions than to answer
them ; but happily our old world has a curious way of “ worry-
ing along,” despite tho troubles and difficulties of the road.
Possibly this war, by destroying many of the best fitted, will
teach us to prevent the indiscriminate reproduction of the
unfit It may help to convince rational men and women that
what is deemed necessary in the breeding of horses and dogs
may be even more necessary in the case of human beings.
Some of those people who would most strenuously oppose
any resort to negative or positive eugenics will express their
conviction that God has made Mari in His own Image, which
sometimes does not appear very complimentary to the divine
and infinite power. As Moncure Conway said, in his book
entitled —“ An Earthward Pilgrimage,” and of course referring
to English conditions :
‘ Does each of the swarming millions around us represent some


divine thought? It is a hard saying. Bo many seem mis-sent or acci-
dentally sent into this over-populated society of ours ! We have dis-
covered how to make our chimneys consume their smoke; we can turn
our garbage to golden grain ; but we still go on Carting men to the
gallows quite helplessly, Yet now and then, from their dumb ranks,
some voice comes telling us of a beauty hidden beneath their hard
animalism, as when Ebenezer Elliott’s tears hiss upon his anvil and his
hammer beats out: —
‘ Flowers of thy heart, 0 God, are they—
Cast thou not them as weeds away,
Their heritage a winter’s day;
God save the People !’ 55
By means that I have hinted at, and by other moans
which conventionality and hypocrisy insist shall not be publicly
discussed, it will be possible, some day, to bring the human
form and character a trifle nearer to the divine. So long as the
great mystery of life is relegated to the beastiality of school-
playground talk, and to the obscene jesting of the hotel-bar,
club room, or revue, it is not easy for rational and pure-minded
men and women to raise the discussion to a high level of true
philosophy and religion. While we are stuffing the cotton-
wool of conventionality into our ears,—-while we refuse to look
the facts of life fearlessly in the face,—while wo are too
cowardly or too hypocritical to speak of the things that per-
tain to the welfare of humanity,—all this time, every day
every hour —every moment, —vice and crime, disease and
folly are blighting what ought to be the fairest flowers of
manhood and womanhood.
While we shrink from discussing matters which are un-
doubtedly unclean and unpleasant, all about us is a hideous
plague, running riot through society, corrupting the innocent


as well as the guilty, cursing the unborn child as well as the
man or woman, blighting the existence of many who should be
strong and valiant in the great Battle of Life, and preparing a
veritable * hell ” for infants being brought into this world
which we call God's Earth 1”
Some people, especially doctors and lay reformers, are
beginning to deal, as far as maybe possible, with the haunting
horrors. When the war is over,.when sweet peace returns
one© more, we shall (perhaps!) face these problems with
chasten’d spirits and with determination.
Once again let it be said that, unless the Human Race is
going to commit suicide, such questions must be dealt with.
If ive have not the courage to do our duty, let us hope
that God will (after, and instead of, us), raise up men and
women who will be brave enough to think, to speak, and to
acts, so that the life blood of Humanity may be cleansed from
poison— bo that the Mystery of Life may be recognised as
divine and beautiful—so that children may have a heritage of
physical strength and mental vigor—so that a new and better
Eden may be cultivated on our earth, —so that Love may
come, at last, to be Lord of this world as well as of Heaven 1
4 ■ Then comes the statelier Eden back to men ;
Then reign the world’s great bridals, chaste and calm ;
Then springs the crowning race of humankind.
May these things be !”


Appendix.
The following poem by Ella Wheeler Wilcox, was read daring
the service on Augustt 80.
ILOIIO, SPEAK AGAIN !
When God hi-ad formed the Universe, He thought
Of all the mairvels there-in to be wrought,
And to His aiid, then, Motherhood was brought.
My lesser self, the feminine of Me,
She shall go forth throughout all time,” quoth He,
■“ And make My world what I would have it be.
■“ For I am weary, having laboured so ;
And for a cycle of repose would go
Into that silence which but God may know.
** Therefore I leave the rounding of My plan
To Motherhood ; and that which I began
Let woman finish in perfecting man.
4 ‘ She is the soil ; the human Mother Earth :
She is the sun, that c V " e seed to birth.
seed to birth.
She is the gardener wb ws its worth.
44 From Me all seed, of any kind, must spring.
Divine the growth such seed and soil will bring.
For All is Me, and I am everything !”
Thus having spoken to Himself aloud,
His glorious face upon His breast He bowed,
And sought repose behind a wall of cloud.
Come forth, 0 God 1 though great Thy thought and good,
In shaping woman for true Motherhood ;
Lord, speak again ; she has not understood !


The centuries pass : the cycles roil along—
The earth is peopled with a mighty throng,
Yet men are fighting, and the world goes wrong.
Lord, speak again, ere yet it be too late.
Unloved, unwanted, souls come through earth’s gate.,
The unborn child is given a dower of hate.
The world progresses in all ways save one.
In Motherhood, for which it was begun,
Lord ! Lord ! behold how little has been done !
Children are spawned like fishes in the sand.
With ignorance and crime they fill the land.
Lord, speak again, till mothers understand.
Better a barren soil than weed and tare,
Or sickly plants that die for want of care
In poisonous jungles, void of sun and air.
True motherhood is not alone to breed
The human race ; it is to know and heed
Its holiest purpose and its highest need.
Lord, speak again I so woman shall be stirred
With the full meaning of that mighty word
True Motherhood. She has not rightly heard.
