

AN HISTORICAL
ST ORY
EUMALGA
OR THE
White Chief
BY Robert Porter
FOUNDER
of the
WELLINGTON
GAZETTE


EUMALGA.
OR
THE WHITE CHIEF.
AN HISTORICAL ROMANCE.
INTRODUCTORY.
“Eumalga!” What a pretty name?
A name that is borne to this day by
a lovely spot not many miles to the
south of Dubbo.
Eumalga was the daughter of a
black warrior—a sturdy chief of one
of the Macqaurie tribes—a name as-
sociated with love and tragedy, and
its beauty casts a graceful reflection
upon its owner who, like many an-
other clothed in a dusky skin, has
proved just a s brave and just as faith-
ful as many of her noblest white sis-
ters.
The “White Chief!” —who was he?
It was he who, by his daring, had
saved the life of this dusky maiden,
and, in return, she gave her life for
his. He wag one of the many who had
been wmongly sentenced to penal ser-
vitude in Australia —that brutal Si-
beria—where the lowest casts of
criminals were chained and herded in
the deepest misery with those of lefty
minds and innocent hearts. And the
“White Chief” was of the latter class.
He was the victim of circumstantial
evidence, mingled with a woman’s
hatred, a murderer’s callous deeds,
and torn from a happy home to pass
cut of a promising life into an Aus-
tralian chain gang and misery, only
to be released by a black warrior’s
daughter—the faithful Eumalga.
The main facts of this sad story
of the old Wellington Stockade, be-
tween the years of 1822 and 1835, and
the sensational career of John Saville,
were told by Richard Taylor (who
was also a prisoner at the Wellington
Stockade) and other old hands with
whom the writers has t<t|me in con-
tact during a long period of years.
Taylor, though not taking a prominent
part in the doings at the old Stock-
ade, was a man of intelligence, and
his description of life in the old penal
settlement—the cruelties perpetrated
by heartless beings in charge of fel-
low creatures, doomed even to death
by the lash or the rope for breaches
of an unwritten law, which will never
again be tolerated under the British
flag—was pathetic in the extreme. It
was really a case of the savage black
wondering at the equally savage white
man’s treatment of his white brother.
Yet it fell to a daughter of that black
race to rescue one of those innocents
who were sent by the British Govern-
ment to die—or be flogged to death—
and thus restore him to his home
and friends.
THE WELLINGTON SETTLEMENT.
A convict settlement was formed at
Wellington shortly after the crossing
of the Blue Mountains by Mr. Lawson
and others, and the discovery of the
Bathurst Plains. This remarkable
event in the history of the Colony took
place in the year 1813, and at the end
of the sdftne year an exploring party,
under the command of Mr. S. W.
Evans, was despatched by Governor
Macquarie to follow up the discoveries
already made. Mr. Evan s took a 21
days’ journey from Bathurst, going
98 miles in a north-easterly direction.
The end of his journey was the flat
upon which the town of Wellington
now flourishes.
A convict settlement was formed
at Bathurst the same year, and a
few years afterwards, 1819. the toll
of Mffe convict bell could be heard
echoeing from the hills surrounding


the valley of the Bell river, which
joined the Macquarie a short distance
to the north.
This part of the cohntry was a per-
fect paradise for its aboriginal occu-
pants. The kangaroo, the wild
turkey, the emu, were here in large
numbers. The flats were well-shaded
by huge gums down to the reedy
swamps that lined the bank s of the
rivers, which contained an abundance
of fish and much-prized turtle. There
were no clearings and no fences; all
was as Nature made it. Little was
known of the country beyond, but it
wau believed to be inhabited by savage
blacks, who would be an effectual
block to the escape of any convicts
who might be brought here. The
authorities contented themselves with
the idea that prisoners would not ven-
ture amongst the blacks for fear of
being mercilessly killed or brought
back for cruel punishment. in re-
sponse to bribes offered for their cap-
ture. As a matter of fact, several
prisoners did escape; most of them
were brought back, some were heard
of for a time, and others were never
heard of at all.
The convicts, about 50 in number,
were brought to Wellington by a
company of 30 soldiers, under the
orders of a captain or commandant.
The captain’s house and other build-
ings were erected on a rocky knoll
near the old burial ground still in
existence. The sundried foundations
were visible only a few years back,
and there are even now traces of
them. The bones of a large number
of thie unfortunate beings who were
brought here are rotting in this old
burial ground, as well as many of
their gaolers. Several of the graves
were once enclosed by wooden rail-
ings. At the head of one grave, up
to a few years ago, was a pine slab,
stuck into the ground about a foot
deep, on which were recorded the
deaths of a soldier and a child. The
slab was dated 1825. The establish-
ment was finally broken up in 1835,
when thie prisoners were removed to
Bathurst. The buildings were handed
over to thie Church Missionary Society
for the education of the blacks. A few
military were left behind for the pro-
tection of the mission. The Rev. Wil-
liam Watson was the first missionary,
and he was joined by the Rev. Gun-
ther (father of Archdeacon Gunther)
who afterwards resided at Mudgee for
many years. The residence of Mr.
Watson was situated on the bank of
the Macquarie River, where it still
stands —a monument of mission life
in the old convict days. It is only
recently that the little old convict
church, which almost joined the
house, was pulled down by its present
owner. The old bell, which tolled the
hour of prayer, was presented to the
Methodist Church at Wellington, and
its mellow tones rang out over the
township for many years.
Mr. P. Simpson (said to be a mar-
tinet) was relieved of the charge of
the convict station in the year 1826.
He was succeeded by Captain Brown,
Lieut. Stewart, Mr. John Maxwell
(who is said to have been an indulgent
man), and last by Mr. Kinghorn.
From the sight of the commandant’s
house there is one of the most lovely
views to be obtained in this singulary
beautiful neighborhood. From it can
be seen the winding valley of the Bell,
the mountain ranges to the westward
and south, the Macquarie valley to
its junction with the Beil on the north
and the far distant blue ranges in the
opening to the north-west, through
which these united rivers flow.
This paradise was inhabited by a num-
erous tribe of blacks. Another tribe
occupied the country below the junc-
tion of the rivers. The chief of that
tribe wag named “Warree.” His towri
or kingdom extended to the place
now knon as Dubbo, where it was
bounded by the kingdom of a chief
known as Eulomogo; a creek being
known by his name at the present
day.
The prisoners at the stockade occu-
pied rude buildings, the walls of
which were sundried bricks, and the
roofs were covered with bark strip-
ped from the trees on the flat. Some
of the men were employed in making
bricks, some in erecting fences, and
others in clearing trees from the river
flats, or in hoeing the land and sowing
grain. All were in the most abject
misery. They were nearly naked and
half starved, and life must have been
a heavy burden. The climate was
then much hotter than it is now.
Clearings have made a freer passage
eumalgA.


for the air, and the swamps and reeds
have disappeared.
AT HOME IN ENGLAND.
In order to properly understand
this story, we must cast our minds
back to England. We travel together
sixteen thousand miles, and arrive at
a little town near London, name un-
known, but an old market town, sur-
rounded by the country seats of many
wealthy families, the heads of which
were engaged in some London busi-
ness, such as stock-brokers, bankers,
large manufacturers, whose custom it
was to drive to town daily in their
carriages. The lands around were
park-like—it was one of the most
beautiful and retired spots in all Eng-
land, notwithstanding its proximity to
the big city.
Here was the country seat of Sir
John S. Luscombe, Bart. The man-
sion was situated in a park of con-
siderable extent for that part of the
country, and there were fine farm
lands attached to the estate. Sir John
was of a fine stock of no great wealth,
but his father had gone into an ex-
tensive manufacturing business in
London, in conjunction with a work-
ing or managing partner, and the pre-
sent 'Sir John had succeeded to the
whole. He allowed his life to become
absorbed in the business, and at sixty
years of age found that he had doubl-
ed his father’s wealth, and that he had
become a confirmed bachelor.
He began to look about him for an
heir. His business proclivities had
estranged him from his relations, not
one of whom had he seen for many
years. He knew that he had an
uncle living somewhere in Lincoln-
shire, but whether he was dead or
alive, or had sons or daughters, he did
not know. This uncle was much
younger than Sir John’s father, the
old Baronet, and the probabilities
were that he was still living. Sir John
wrote him a letter inviting him to
visit his place and bring all his family,
if he had any. Accordingly, in re-
sponse to this invitation, the Baronet
was well pleased to receive a letter
from his uncle, by the hands of his
only son, stating that, being in very
poor health, he could not undertake
the journey (there were no railways
then), but had sent his much-beloved
son, who had never yet been in the
metropolis, and would be only too glad
to make his cousin’s acquaintance.
The country cousin, as is the rule in
many English families, had been nam-
ed after hi s grandfather, and there-
fore the two cousins bore the same
Christian name.
The country cousin was a young
man about twenty years of age. Of
life in cities he had seen nothing,
and he was one of those whose hon-
est, open natures lead them to be-
lieve all men true and faithful who
have not been proved otherwise. In
person be was manly, and he was
blessed with high spirits and an ac-
tivity that led him to engage in all
the sports and field pursuits of the
shire. His father, unlike Sir John,
had been unfortunate in life, and his
at first poor estate had been material-
ly reduced. Of course, the young
man would be heir to the baronetcy,
next to his father, provided Sir John
died without issue, but he would not
be hair to Sir John’s estate, which
was not entailed, nor to his fortune,
which he had made himself, unless
Sir John so willed. It was, therefore,
to the young man’s interest to ingra-
tiate himself with his old cousin. He
was willing enough to please him if
possible, but to set about worming
himself into his cousin’s affections by
hypocritical means, for the purpose
of becoming his heir, was far from
the young man’s thoughts. He was
candor itself, and treated his rich
cousin as if he had not a penny to
leave.
As is often the case, people succeed
in accomplishing a thing without ef-
fort. whereas they often fail notwith-
standing the greatest effort. In a
case like this, the very appearance of
an effort is often a bar to success, as
sinister motives are suspected.
The young man soon became a
great favorite, and the baronet made
no concealment of his intention to
make him his heir. Sir John sold his
London business, receiving a con-
sideration which made a material dif-
ference to his fortune, and he was
now one of the richest men in that
part of the country.
The two cousins visited London to-
gether and saw all things worth see-
EUMALGA.


ing, many of them being new to Sir
John, whose life had been absorbed
in business. They waited on all the
country families, and were invited to
all balls, dinners, and other events
of importance. The young man was
perfectly happy, and the old man was
equally so, ag well as proud of his
country cousin namesake and intend-
ed heir. And so time sped on.
The Lincolnshire squire died, and
as his wife had predeceased him by
several years, his son let the estate
to a tenant and went to reside per-
menently with the baronet, who took
the place of a father. And, indeed,
the baronet regarded the young man
with as much affection as if he were
his own son.
There was one person, however,
into whose good graces John Lus-
combe, junior, could never enter j and
she was the baronet’s housekeeper.
This woman was about 40 years of
age though she tried to make herself
look younger by every feminine art.
She had a very peculiar cat-like ex-
pression of the eyes, which gave deep,
hateful glances when anyone offended
her. Her features were regular and
well-formed, and she was active and
industrious. As sbe never bestowed
on Sir John one of these malignant
glances, but always received his or-
ders with a smile, and was altogether
an admirable housekeeper, she had
come in time to be greatly trusted by
Sir John, and was often consulted in
sundry weighty matters connected
with the household and the manage-
ment of the estate. Under these cir-
cumstances she had come to con-
sider herself mistress of the mansion
(as to all intents and purposes she
was) and never having seen or heard
of any relatives of Sir John, had con-
ceived the ambition to become his
wife. She thought she saw the baron-
et was smitten with her charms as
well as being perfectly satisfied with
her good management, and sbe looked
forward to a time when he might be
afflicted with a temporary illness, or
to some further opening for making
herself necessary to his comfort,
when she might so play her cards
as to lead him to make a proposal of
marriage.
The baronet, poor man, never
dreamed of such a thing, but the
housekeeper did not know that, in
fact she thought otherwise. Her
chagrin was great, then, when the ar-
rival of the country cousin gave a
new turn to the baronet’s ideas, and
she saw, unmistakeably, that she was
totally eclipsed, even if she had been
(as sporting men say) in the running
at all. She was utterly lost what to
do to gain her end; but there was one
thing she did do, and that wag to re-
gard the usurper, as she called him
(to hreself only) with as vigorous a
hatred as was ever borne by woman
towards man, and that is saying a
great deal. But she wag a weak wo-
man after all. In her young days she
had been a village beauty, and had
met with a fate not unusual among
girls of that class. She had been woo-
ed, only to be betrayed, and had given
birth to a baby girl. The child was
adopted by a married sister, and
brought up as her own daughter,
and now this child was a young wo-
man in the service of the baronet,
and was known as the housekeeper’s
niece, which she believed she was.
The relationship brought the girl
some consideration amongst her fel-
low servants, but her aunt treated her
with considerable asperity. The
maid was very pretty and of good
figure, and had numerous admirers
amongst the farmers’ and trades-
men’s sons of the neighborhood. Her
most ardent admirer was a somewhat
surly groom in the baronet’s employ.
This man was considerably older than
the maid, but he appeared to dote
upon her, indeed, he exhibited a pas-
sion of the greatest intensity.
John Luscombe, junior, had come
in contact with the housekeeper’s
niece on several occasions, and a
smile and passing word of greeting
had been exchanged, but there was no
courtship between them. The fact
was that the girl favored a young far-
mer of good prospects, and occasion-
ally stole out to meet him. When
she did she was conscious that she
was watched by the jealous groom,
and occasionally angry words between
them were the consequence. She had
given this man some encouragement
till the farmer appeared and sup-
planted him. In spite of her superi-
ority the housekeeper, as wag natural,
had a certain amount of affection for
EUMALGA.


her niece, and kept a watchful eye
upon her and her movements. She
had forbidden stolen interviews with
young farmers or any other person,
and insisted upon her bringing her
needlework into the housekeeper’s
room at night after work was done.
Young girls are very apt in eluding
the vigilance of their guardians, and
one night, when the housekeeper was
busy, her niece managed to get away
unseen, having received an intima-
tion that her lover would be ready to
meet her at the old spot. It was re-
marked by a fellow servant that she
left the door of the house in company
with John Luscombe, junior, and was
seen to walk with him some forty or
fifty yards, where they were lost to
sight. About a quarter of an hour
afterwards the housekeeper enquired
of the servants whether they had seen
her niece, and. was told that she had
gone out in company with young John
Luscombe. She hurried after them,
and had gone but a short distance
when a stifled scream met her ears.
Hastening to the spot whence the
sound came, she almost fell over the
body of her niece, at the same time
seeing the figure of a man running
away and disappearing in the dark-
ness.
The housekeeper’s shrieks soon
brought assistance, the body of the
girl was carried into the house, and
a medical man sent for; but it was
soon discovered she was quite dead.
The police were informed and next
morning a constable and detective
officer arrived. The baronet and his
cousin were both deeply grieved by
this brutal murder. As for the house-
keeper, she had passed from one faint-
ing fit to another, and so remained
throughout the night, but was now
calm. The detective made enquiries
as to who had been last seen in the
girl’s company, and was informed of
the facts. The Baronet was a Justice
of the Peace, and a formal inquiry
was at once initiated before him. The
housekeeper played her cards in a
most skilful manner from the very
moment she found her niece had been
murdered, as the evidence will as-
suredly show.
Jane Lee, a domestic, swore that
while she was standing talking to
another domestic at the stable door.
she saw young Luscombe and the de-
ceased pass, and she heard them
talking until they disappeared in the
darkness. A few minutes afterwards
the housekeeper went out and she
heard screams.
Thomas Stubbs, the footman, bore
out the statement made by Jane Lee,
with the addition that he found the
housekeeper bending over the dead
body of deceased.
The medical officer, Dr. Bathi, said
he had made a post mortem examina-
tion of the body, and found a wound
over the region of the heart. After
probing the wound, he had come to
the conclusion that some sharp in-
strument had penetrated far enough
to cause instantaneous death.
There was an awful stillnes in the
room as the housekeeper, Maria Jones,
stepped forward to give her evidence.
About a quarter past eight the pre-
vious evening she missed her niece,
and, being anxious about her going
out, went in search of her. She in-
quired where the girl was, and was
told she had gone out with young
Luscombe. She followed quickly,
heard a short scream, ran to the spot,
and found her niece on the ground,
to all appearances, dead. She saw a
figure of a man hastening away in the
darkness. That was all she -new.
On being questioned by the detec-
tive whether she recognised the man
or not, she at first gave evasive replies
but on further pressure, the cat-like
expression appeared in her eyes, and
nerved her to swear a foul lie. “Yes
yes,” she said; “I am very sorry to
say it, but I clearly recognised Mr.
John Luscombe, junior.”
Luscombe, the innocent man, was
dumbfounded for the time being. He
denied that he was the man. What
motive, indeed, could he have for
murdering such an inoffensive girl
as the deceased? He merely went out
to give an order to the groom about
the horses, and had left the deceosed at
the stables, but he was unable to find
the groom, and on hearing screams,
went to the spot where the body of
deceased was found.
It was remarked that no weapon
had been discovered. Whoever had com
mitted the crime had carried away
the fatal weapon.
EUMALGA.


“Would Mr. Luscombe, junr, mind
having his roo'ms searched?” asked
the detective.
“Not in the least,” replied the young
man, who had not suspecteil the dead-
ly action of the housekeeper, who
hated him even unto death. “I have
nothing to conceal. Here are the
keys.”
The officer was shown young Lus-
combe’s apartments by the house-
keeper. He searched the desks and
other places wherein a weapon might
be concealed, but found none. He
was on the point of leaving, when the
housekeeper suggested that the bed-
room might be searched. Her oppor-
tunity had come at last. She did not
falter, she did not even hesitate. She
was outwardly calm; but what were
her inward emotions? Had she any
emotions at all they were those of
gladness, because now was the time
coming when her hated rival would
be removed for all time, and she would
be free in her endeavours to trap the
old baron into marrying her.
And so she calmly looked on while
the bedroom was searched, and after-
lifting and removing many articles,
the detective turned his attention to
the bed. There, between the mat-
tresses rested the blood-stained dag-
ger, a small weapon of old workman-
ship, well known to be the property
of young Luscombe.
These facts were laid before the
baronet, but he would not believe his
cousin guilty, and declined to com-
mit him for trial.
The case was reinstated by the de-
tective before the local bench of
magistrates, where the same evidence
was adduced, with the additional tes-
timony of the surgeon that the dag-
ger exactly fitted the wound.
And so John S. Luscombe was com-
mitted for trial at the assizes at Maid-
stone, commencing the very next
week.
The housekeeper still played her
part, hesitating very much in giving
evidence against the cousin of her old
master.
The judge, in summing up, said this
hesitation was very natural in one
who had been so long in the baron’s
employ, and who would be desirous of
shielding his relative, though he may
have murdered her niece. He was
only the more convinced of the truth
of her evidence. As to the 'motive for
the crime, that was nothing to do with
the jury; they might imagine a mo-
tive, or they might not, but he did not
see how they could ignore the conclu-
sive evidence against the prisoner
by finding him not guilty.
The jury returned a verdict of
guilty without leaving the box.
And so young Luscombe was sen-
tenced to death, without hope of
mercy.
He was removed to the condemned
cell, where he had a most affecting
interview with the old baronet, who
thoroughly believed in his innocence,
but could devise no method of bring-
ing the crime home to the guilty
person. And who could they suspect.
Indeed, the baronet was as little ac-
quainted with the doings of his house-
hold as a perfect stranger, so absorb-
ed had he been in business, and so
entirely did he rely on his house-
keeper for the management of his
household, and upon an old bailiff for
the upkeep of his estate.
The baronet parted with the young-
man in despair of finding anything
to refute the fearful evidence that
had been brought forward. The only
thing the baronet could do was to ap-
ply to the Home Secretary for a
reprieve. By the aid of powerful in-
terests the sentence of death was
commuted to transportation for life.
The young man thought death would
be more acceptable; but not so the
baronet, who had a firm hope that the
mystery would be cleared up.
By a judicious use of money the
name ‘Luscombe’ had been kept from
the papers, and the prisoner was
transported under the name of John
Saville.
And so the parting came; the pro-
mising young man was sent to his
doom; the old baronet was left to
mourn. The housekeeper had tri-
umphed !
After a voyage extending over six
months Savilee arrived at Sydney in
the latter part of the year 1822. He
was kept there for a short time and
then sent on to Wellington.
EUMALGA.


ARRIVAL OF JOHN SAVILLE.
It was in the spring 1823, in the
evening of a hot day, that an addi-
tion to the number of prisoners arrived
at Wellington.
As usual, they mostly consisted of
the lowest rank in life. But amongst
them was one of a very different
stamp. He was young, about five and
twenty years of age, and evidently
came from a class many grades above
his companions. He was a powerful
man, over six feet high, blue eyes, fair
haired and fair complexion, though
exposure to the sun and hardships he
had undergone had tanned his face
and arms. His countenance in repose
was pleasing, but he had a determined
look and frown. What his crime had
been, no one knew. He himself said
he was innocent, that a chain of cir-
cumstantial evidence had been woven
around him by a villain, resulting in
his conviction and transportation for
life. He, an innocent man, as he
said, had been torn from home and
friends and subjected to the most hor-
rible treatment. The “iron had en-
tered his soul,” he had attempted to
“kick against the pricks,” and the
result was he was packed off as an
incorrigible to the little known settle-
ment at Wellington, which was re-
garded as a soft of inland Norfolk
Island, or Ultimo Thule, from which
no poor convict was ever expected to
return. His assertions of innocence
were looked upon as the usual thing,
and only brought him extra kicks.
On arrival at the Stockade, the
prisoners were handed over to the
overseer by the soldiers in charge. The
overseer, a brutal man named Brown,
had himself been a convict, and hav-
ing been placed in a little brief auth-
ority, was a harder taskmaster than
others who had come to the Colony
free. He surveyed the new comers
with the glare of a tiger, and eventu-
ally fixed his gaze upon the man
named Saville.
“And so you are the beauty I have
been warned about, are you? I’ll fix
you, I’ll teach you to play any of your
games with me. Don’ l t frown, sir, or
I’ll have you tied up and give you a
couple of dozen by way of introduction.
Take him inside and put the irons on
him for to-night. To-morrow we will
see what he is made of.”
The man whose name was recorded
in the prison books as John Saville,but
which was not his full name, was
taken into the stockade and heavily
ironed. Weary and footsore, covered
with dust of the road, famishing with
thirst, he sank upon the floor, and
groaned in anguish of body and mind.
Who can tell the sufferings of a man
like this, under such dreadful circum-
stances? Born of a good family,
brought up in luxury, expecting to
take a high position in society; and
yet, on the very threshold of his car-
eer, to have his life blasted with a
false charge, and to be condemned,
an innocent man, to penal servitude
for life! The anguish of an educated
mind, under such circumstances,
would indeed be unspeakable. All
hope had fled; he had, as he thought,
reached the goal from which he should
never return to civilization. He had
a proud spirit, and Avhat wonder that
he occasionally retorted upon his bru-
tal keepers. It would have been far
better for his bodily comfort had he
humbled himself.
“EUMALGA.”
There had been many heavy rains in
the mountainous country to the
south-west, since known as the Molong
and Orange districts. The Bell River
was in flood, the waters were discol-
ored and ran rapidly. A number of
aboriginals were stationed at various
distances apart on the west bank
of the river, opposite the prison settle-
ment. Now and again a turtle would
be borne down by the current, and
then would the cry arise ‘ ‘Ah! ah!
Wyabooka,” while fingers would be
pointed at the passing turtle, and one
would try and induce another to
plunge in and secure the much cove-
ted prize. Wyabooka was the native
name for turtle, and never more did
London alderman yearn for this dainty
dish than did the noble savage who
inhabited the neighbourhood of Wel-
lington long for the oily Wyabooka.
But it was a remarkable fact that,
with their desires for the turtle
and their notable swimming powers, no
black would plunge into the water
when it was muddy, or when there
was a cloudy sky. He would unhesi-
tatingly dive in when the water was
transparent and the sky was clear and
sunshiny, chase the turtle through the
watery depths, and generally capture
EUMALGA.


him too. “Budgeree, budgeree pat-
ter” —good, good food! On this oc-
casion there appeared to be an unusual
number of turtles swept down by the
stream, and the blacKs watched them
go by with heavy sighs. ‘‘Ah, ah,
Wyabooka !” rang out again, and was
shouted with increasing excitement
and more violent gestures. The river
flowed on, but their mutual power of
persuasiveness seemed unavailing, and
they were doomed in the sadness of
their hearts and epicurean cravings to
view the precious objects floating away
like fairy gifts, when their attention
was drawn to a new object. A young
gin, more daring than the others, or
desirous of exhibiting her skill and pro-
W'ess before the rest of the tribe, plung-
ed into the water as a turtle of a
large size passed by. The bank of
the river at this spot was steep, but
not more than six feet above the
water, no great depth to plunge, but
at the foot of the bank was a ledge
of ground about two feet wide just
under tne water. The girl would
have gone clear into the stream, had
not her naked toe caught in a root,
which in her excitement she did not
see, and instead of going fairly out
into the stream, she fell straight
down head-lirst, striking the lower
projecting bank. Natives’ heads ari
said to be hard, but the girl was
either wholly or partially stunned,
and was being swiftly carried away
by the stream in great danger of being
drowned. The blacks followed the g id’s
body, and the forest re-echoed with
their exclamations of terror, but
their superstitious fears would not let
them plunge in to the girl’s rescue.
“AVargoondah!” or ‘‘what’s the mat-
ter,” was hastily called out by those
who had not seen the occurrence, and
were attracted to the spot by the
cries of others. Yet no one attempted
a rescue, on that side of the river at
least.
But it so happened that Saville and
another convict were on the opposite
side, having been at wmrk grubbing
out a large tree, and hearing the noise
made by the blacks, their attention
was attracted.
Saville, who was a strong swimmer,
forgetting his misery and bitter feel-
ings towards mankind in general, dart-
ed into the stream and caught hold of
the girl as she was disappearing. The
river is not wide, except when it over-
flows its banks altogether, and it was
an easy matter for Saville to float
down a little way till he came to a low
point, and then, assisted by the wil-
ling hands of the blacks, carry his
dusky burden to dry land. The girl
was insensible, but under the treat-
ment of her black friends soon re-
covered her senses. She gazed around
in wonder, but that wonder was lit up
with the greatest astonishment, not
unmixed with fear, when her eyes fell
upon the face and form of her pre-
server.
There is a great vitality in the black
race, it is hard to kill them with blows,
and wounds signify little, so in a few
minutes the girl had recovered. Her
friends very evidently told her who
her deliverer was, though Saville could
not understand a word they said; the
girl looked her thanks and timidly ap-
proached, and no doubt did express her
thanks in her native tongue. One
word was explained by signs. She
tapped her forehead several times,
and repeated the wmrd “Eumalga,”
evidently meaning that was her name.
The soldier, w T ith loaded musket, in
charge of the working party, was a
pretty good fellow, and he stood on
the opposite bank watching the scone
with interest, but he now became im-
patient, and loudly called upon Sa-
ville to return. The latter was temp-
ted to make a sudden dash for the
bush, and chance the bullet that
might come after him; but he was un-
prepared for the escape, and knew not
what danger he might be running
into. So he was fain to take to the
river again and swim back to bondage.
The blacks made no attempt to detain
him, already having a very wholesome
dread of the white man’s weapon.
Indeed as the white man pointed the
weapon towards them they scampered
off into the bush, with the exception
of the girl, who watched Saville till
he reached the other bank in safety.
PRISON LIFE.
And so Saville returned to his sla-
very. He went to the daily task set
out for him in sullen despair. He
was kept at work principally with a
large hoe, about nine inches deep and
eight v ide, with a handle as thick as
that of a shovel, with which the men
turned over the ground.
They could not bear the weight of
EUMALGA.


clothes when at work in the heat of
the day. An eye-witness said: “At
a distance I saw about fifty men at
work, as I thought, dressed in nan-
keen jackets, but on nearer approach
1 found them naked, except for a pair
of loose trousers. Their skins were
tanned by the sun and climate to that
color. I felt much pity for the poor
wretches.”
About this time one Richard Taylor
arrived at the Settlement. He came
to Sydney in a vessel called the Mar-
quis of Hastings. He stayed only
one hour in Sydney, having been
packed off with others as quickly as
possible.
Richard Taylor, or Dicky Taylor, as
he was afterwards called, was only a
“seven-years man,” but never left
Wellington, where he died, fifty years
afterwards, when in the service of
Mr. Joseph Aarons, of Nanima. A
doctor, who was transported for fight-
ing a duel, also came to Wellington,
but received much better treatment
than the other prisoners. Saville, be-
ing a born gentleman, made the ac-
quaintance of the doctor, and secured
his friendship; but was also brought
in contact with Dicky Taylor, and his
friendship was of considerable service
during after events.
The greater number of overseers em-
ployed in the Colony had been crimin-
als themselves, and were ruffians of
the deepest dye; they were influenced
by the worst passions and frequently
got an unfortunate wretch flogged for
complaining of their oppression. The
overseer Brown has already been men-
tioned. He had taken a particular
dislike to Saville, for the reason, per-
haps, that he saw how infinitely su-
perior to himself he was as a man,
and sought every opportunity to annoy
and humiliate him; but fortunately
Brown’s reign was short.
The tribe of blacks occupying the
Wellington flats and country adjacent,
between the Bell and Macquarie Riv-
ers, became familiar with the garri-
son, and often visited the stockade.
Among them was a young gin, who
was very friendly with Brown, but,
as was said, “by accident” he shot her
dead with a pistol. He was tried, and
sentenced to two years’ imprisonment.
He was, of course, deposed from office.
This man, if not particularly favor-
able to Saville more than the others,
was a monster in human shape. One
day Saville and a convict named Coop-
er were digging out the stump of a
tree. Cooper was really ill, and with
difficulty dragged his aching limbs
along. Work he could not, and he
was sitting on the ground when the
overseer came round. Cooper was
harshly ordered to go on with his
work, and being unable to rise, still
sat on the ground. The overseer’s
wrath was fearful to witness; he
caught hold of a handspike Avhich was
lying near, and struck Cooper on the
head, killing him on the spot. Saville
was ordered to throw the body into the
stump hole and cover it up.
Saville, hardened as he was by ter-
rible suffering, and the sufferings he
had witnessed, was horribly shocked
by this act of brutality, and not being
able to restrain his feelings, poured
out wrathful denunciations on the
overseer’s conduct. The latter retort-
ed with a paroxysm of anger and
abuse, and promised Saville a flog-
ging the first opportunity if he dare
say the victim had met with his death
in an unfair manner. And Saville
was so low in misery, and broken- spiri-
ted that he dare not inform, or even
complain, for he well-knew the conse-
quences, and very justly feared that
the overseer would from that moment
seek an opportunity to have him se-
verely punished, and very little ex-
cuse was required for the most fearful
- or tac lightest offences men
wore t.sd to a tree, cart wheel or tri-
angles, and flogged with the cat, some
getting as many as three hundred
lashes, one man having been known
to receive the last hundred on the
calves of his leg, because his back was
too much cut up to receive any more.
The deposed convict Brown, thrown
back amongst the ranks in the midst
of his atrocity, was in turn treated
with the vilest usage. The convicts
took every opportunity to wreak upon
him their long pent up vengeance.
He was in constant fear of his life,
and more than once narrowly escaped
mutilation, if not death, by the co-
vert action of the men while at work.
In an evil moment, after a more
than ordinary brutal outrage had been
committed upon him, he determined to
fly from the settlement, and take his
chance amongst the blacks. An un-
usual opportunity presenting itself,
he managed to get "away without be-
ing seen, and effected his escape. He
EUMALGA.


went in an Easterly direction, crossed
the Macquarie, and fell in with some
natives camped on the river bank,
nearly opposite the spot now known as
Apsley. Unfortunately for Brown,
among this party w r as the brother of
the young girl he had shot. This
blackfellow, having been at the settle-
ment, was well acquainted with the
overseer, and also with the circum-
stances attending his sister’s death.
He had vowed vengeance, and he yell-
ed with grim delight when he recog-
nised the man. He addressed a few
hasty words to the others, and spring-
ing to his feet seized a spear and
launched it with such fatal aim that
Brown was transfixed and fell to the
ground mortally wounded. Rushing
up to him t-e young native brained
him with a waddy, and then deliber-
ately cut out his heart, stuck it on a
spear, and placed it against a gunyah
to dry in the sun. There are still
some in Wellington who recollect the
fierce young black who, in after years,
was known as “Old Darby,” and who
was known to carry about with him
the white man’s heart.
About this time two soldiers crossed
the Macquarie on a shooting expedi-
tion, and lost themselves in the bush
for several days. They became excited
and threw away their muskets They
travelled in search of tne settlement
until nearly exhausted with hunger,
thirst and fatigue. They eventually
came to the back or north side of
Nanima mountain and crawled to the
top for the purpose of overlooking
the country around. To their great
iov and surprise they could see the
Wellington settlement almost under
their feet, and after a short rest got
down to the river and found their way
home. The mountain was afterwards
named “Mount Diehard” in com-
memoration of the event, which name
the mountain still bears. The lands
at Nanima were shortly afterwards
granted to Mr. Montefiore, and the
house built by him, or his overseer,
was continually visited by the offi-
cers of the garrison.
Farming operations prospered, and
the yield of wheat from the flats ex-
ceeded the most sanguine expectations;
t’" crons were so abundant that there
was a vast deal more wheat than was
required.
And so passed on this prison life in
one daily and weekly round.
SAVILLE ESCAPES.
“You Dog I’ll Quicken You.”
Saville had reached the lowest
depths of degradation and despair,
and, like many others, cared not wheth-
er he lived or died. What was the
pang of death compared with the tor-
ture, the humiliation, the daily mis-
ery, and the heartrending surround-
ings of this brutal convict prison.
One evening he was working near
the river with others, and not being
quick enough in doing some piece of
work, the overseer struck him with a
stick.
“You dog, I’ll make you quicken
your pace!” said he.
Saville had often been struck before,
but his pent up rage could endure in-
sult no longer. He became a madman
for the time. He seized the brutal
overseer by the waist, raised him in
his arms, and dashed him to the
ground with such force that he was
rendered insensible, and narrowly es-
caped with his life.
At this moment the soldiers in charge
of the gang happened to be at a con-
siderable distance, Saville having
been separated from the other, pri-
soners for the purpose of doing the
particular piece of work he was per-
forming under the direction of the
overseer- But the fracas had leen
seen, and one of the guard was has-
tening to the spot. Saville nesitated
for a moment. “If 1 remain I shall
be whipped to death or hanged. If i
fly,” thought he, “I can but perish cf
hunger or be killed by the natives, 1
may as well die one way as the other*
and there is a chance of freedom if 1
can but escape!”
He hesitated no longer; the soldier
was running towards him, and, bound,
ing with the speed of a deer to the
water’s edge, he plunged in, net a
moment too soon, for a bullet whistled
over his head as he struck the water.
Fortunately the Bell was again in
fresh, and there was a broad stream of
water, running at a fair pace.
Saville swam under water as long as
his breath lasted, going down the
stream, and before the soldier reached
the bank he was a hundred yards away
The soldier re-loaded his piece and
took another shot at the fugitive, but
the distance was too great, the aim
bad, or what was quite likely, the man
did not wish to hit, but thought it
EUMALGA.


his duty to fire. No matter which,
Saville got out of the water on the
other side and disappeared into the
bush.
WARREE.
The miserable, dirty, drunken lied
Indian of the present day is no more
like the noble warrior so ably pictured
by Fennimore Cooper, than is the dir-
ty, drunken blackfellow to-day any-
tnmg like his ancestors of a few gen-
erations baciv. The confiscation of
their best hunting grounds, and the
use of ardent spirits have done their
work. The great majority of this
dark race have disappeared. Numer-
ous tribes are now only to be found in
the almost unexplored interior, and
even they, in the course of a few more
years, will cease to exist.
Many years ago, a numerous tribe
occupied the country between Wel-
lington and Dubbo. As has been al-
ready stated, the towri, or tiora,
claimed by the chief Waree, extended
from the junction of the Bell and Mac-
quarie Rivers to where it joined the
dominions of a chief named Eulomogo,
about thirty miles down the river.
It was near the close of day. On
an openly timbered fiat on the left
bank of the Macquarie, just below a
tall conical mountain, which has since
been called Mount Arthur,and opposite
a place named by the blacks Gobalyan,
there was an encampment of portion
c / the Warree tribe. “Gobalyan”
means in the native language, “early
spring.”
The mountain range rose steep in the
rear, and spurs sheltered the camp on
two sides.
The sun had sunk over the back of
the range, leaving the camp in deep
shadow. As the sun disappeared the
air became suddenly chilly, and the
gins added wood to the fires which
burnt in front of the gunyahs.
These gunyahs, or huts, were formed
by sticking two forked sticks in the
ground, putting a sapling across, and
leaning against them sheets of bark
stripped from the white box. Bushes
or branches of trees were also added
to keep off the wind. The fronts of
these gunyahs were open and faced
the fires. The floors were covered
with rugs made of opossum skins, very
neatly sewn together, upon which peo-
ple slept. The gunyah belonging to
the chief occupied the centre of the
flat or gully nearest to the
mountain; the other huts extended in
long lines, in the shape of a Y, to the
right or left.
The men of the party were returning
from their day’s hunt, they came
sometimes in solitary ones, sometimes
in twos or threes. Some young men
brought wallabys; the old men brought
opossums and fish. They were thrown
wto; a heap to be divided by the old
men, according to custom, as soon as
the last hunter returned. The fish,
the opossum, the young nangaroo,
vcutd be given to the old men and
children of tender years, the wallaby
and old kangaroos to the young men.
This law was for the purpose of mak-
ing the young men of the tribe under-
take the task of hunting the animals
most difficult to capture, leaving the
pursuit of smaller game to the old
men and gins.
All tne men had returned save one,
an energetic young fellow whose cus-
tom it was to take the widest circle,
and who never returned empty-hand-
ed.
While the party are awaiting the
return of this scout, it will be as well
to describe their chief. Warree was a
man of over middle-age, about fifty-
five years. Like most of the natives
of tais part,ho was tall and well-built,
straight as an arrow, and still very
active, though there were signs of de-
cay. His dark eyes gleamed under
bushy eyebrows; his long beard, once
black, was mixed with grey, as was
his hair. With the exception of
a girdle of sewn opossum skins,
he was naked; a piece of this
skin was tied round his fore-
head and hair, in which were in-
serted a few red feathers, taken from
a parrot’s wing. The only weapon he
had was one of the new and much-
prized whiteman’s tomahawks, got in
exchange for native honey and opossum
cloaks, and which he carried in his
hand as he paced the green sward in
front of his gunyah. A collection of
spears, boomerangs, hielemans (or
shields) and nullah-nullahs were on the
ground or leaning against the gunyah.
Near him were seated the old men
ncillors of the tribe, waiting to dis-
tribute the game according to cus-
tom .
“Kumbo is late returning to-night,”
said the chief. “He must be heavily
EUMALGA.


loaded, or he would have been here be-
fore now.'''
“Kumbo is a skilful hunter aud a
brave warrior,” said an old man named
ippai. “He is later tiiau usual to-
mgut, and perhaps has been led to a
long distance by a wounded animal.”
‘■The women are getting impatient,”
said another, “the division Lad better
be made.”
“When the shadow of the hill reaches
the top of yonder oak,” said the chief,
the division of spoil may begin. We’ll
wait no longer” ’
The shadows of evening were now
setting in rapidly In a very short
time the oak indicated was all in
gloom, the sun only shining on the
top of the Nanima hills. The gins
piled more wood on the fires, and the
distribution was made. There was
enough for all but none to spare, as
was generally the case, indeed through-
out Australia the food captured was
not more than sufficient to supply the
population, comparatively small as it
was. Kangaroos were not so plentiful
then as in after years, the black fel-
low and dingo keeping then in check.
The cooking was completed and the
evening meal was begun, but Kumbo
did not appear. A little uneasiness
about him was beginning to be felt,
for it was an unusual thing for one
of the tribe to be out after nightfall.
Like the birds, these children of the
forest begin to get heavy-eyed as the
darkness approaches. The meal was
nearly finished when a young gin said
she heard a faint cooee. Every ear
in the circle was strained to catch the
next sound.
Again in the distance was faintly
heard a prolonged coo-ee, and evident-
ly one of distress
“It’s Kumbo,” said the chief; “he
has perhaps fallen from a rock and
hurt himself. Let two young men go
to his assistance.”
Two men instantly rose from the
ground and departed in the direction
of the coo-ee, which again came faint-
ly on the breeze. They coo-eed in re-
turn, and as they got to a distance
from the camp short answering coo-ees
could be heard again and again till
they ceased altogether.
A full moon had risen just after the
setting of the snn, and was throwing a
brilliant light upon the camp ivhen
the two men returned with Kumbo.
His appearance caused great commotion
and great consternation. He was
scarcely able to stand. In answer to
numerous and voluble inquiries as to
what was the matter, he showed a
wound extending from the muscle of
the back on the right side round to
the breast The wound had been in-
flicted by a bullet, though he could
not tell what it was. His e xplanation
was, that he had seen a flock of wild
turkeys on the bank of the Bell, the
birds wore more timid than usual; he
had stalked them for hours before he
could get a favorable chance with
the boomerang, and had been led a
good deal farther up the river than he
expected to go. He had at length
brought down the primest bird, which
weighed as heavy as six opossums.
Hlinging the turkey over his back,
he was making for the camp of his
tribe,, when he was accosted by a white-
man from the opposite bank. Not
understanding the language, he did
not know what the white man said.
He heard a noise like thunder and felt
himself struck in the side. He was
very much frightened, he dropped the
turkey and ran for his life, until he
fell exhausted in a rocky creek. He
lay there some time, unable to rise,
but had eventually managed to crawl
within coo-ee of the camp.
‘ ‘The whiteman has struck him
with his lightning spear,” said Warree
“I have seen them strike a kangaroo.
A 'moon ago I was in the rocics of
Mount Arthur, and watched a party of
men with red skins on them. A kan-
garoo was between them and me, and
I saw one of them point his spear at
the kangaroo. Lightning and thunder
followed, and the kangaroo fell dead!
Who are these men that they should
come to our hunting grounds with
their slaves, and disturb our game and
wound our young men.”
“Vengeance on the intruders,” cried
out the young men. “Lead us
on, brave Warree, we will fall upon
them with spear and nullah-nullah and
kill them all .”
This sentiment was applauded by all.
There was a very wholesome dread of
the whitemaii’s musket, though they
did not know its name.
The old men took council together,
and at the conclusion one of them
made a speech. “Old men, warriors,
and brothers. We see our wounded
brother; the whiteman has done it
with his fire-spear. If we stand open-
EUMALGA.


ly before the whiteman wo shall fall
before that deadly thing. Let us
watch him in secret. Let us throw the
spear from behind the rock, or from
tlie thick scrub where the whiteman
cannot see us, and we shall escape un-
harmed.”
The wisdom of this advice was too
plain to be questioned, and prepara-
tions were made for rest for the night.
The medicine men attended the wound-
ed Kumbo, their simple balm giv-
ing immediate relief from pain, and
ensuring a rapid recovery.
But the events of the night vme
not over, there was to be another ex-
citement, and a much greater re.
Scarcely had the hubbub caused by f he
arrival of Kumbo subsided, and the
quiet of night had fallen upon the
scene, when a faint coo-ee was Heard,
this time in an opposite direction.
An answering coo-ee was given, though
there was so'mething in the tone of
the call w'hich the listeners thought
curious. A couple of scouts were
again sent out, calls and responses
were heard for a short time, succeeded
hy a yell that awoke the echoes of the
place, and caused the whole of the
blacks to spring to their feet and lis-
ten in silent wonder to what was go-
ing to happen next. In the course of
a short time the scouts returned, sup-
porting between them the figure of
a white man. They brought him to
the front of Warree‘s gunyah, where
he fell to the ground, being unable
to stand.
The whole tribe of men, women and
children came and looked upon this
enemy of their race in silent wonder,
and some with visible fear, incapable
as he was of doing them any harm at
that moment.
Vengeance upon the whiteman had
been determined upon. Here was
vengeance brought into their hands
without an effort. Here was a white-
man without his dreaded fire-spear,
exhausted with travel, unable to de-
fend himself. Now they could avenge
the injury to Kumbo!
“Tie him to a tree and make him a
mark for our spears.” ‘‘Brain him
with a nullah-nullah,” and various
other methods of slaying the white-
man were suggested. Nobody thought
of sparing him; they bright have
done so but for the indignation caus-
ed by the wounding of Kumbo.
Warree and the old men took coun-
cil, and the utmost glee was evinced
by the tribe when it was announced
tnat the whiteman should be tied to a
tree, and that the brother of Kumbo
should stand at fifty paces and throw
spears till the whiteman was killed,
ine execution was to take place
there and then.
The whiteman was sitting on the
ground near a young box tree in
front of Warree’s gunyah. To save
trouble he was lifted up, strong pie-
ces of twisted kangaroo hide were
passed under his arm and fastened
round the tree. Thongs were also tied
round his knees and he was kept up-
right.
Amidst the greatest excitement and
clatter of tongues, the brother of
Kumbo took his stand at fifty paces
from the victim. The men and wom-
en, with eager faces, stood in line to
the right and left to watch the result
of the throws.
Kumbo’s brother was a good marks-
man, and it w r as expected the first,
or at any rate the second spear, wmuld
transfix the prisoner.
The moon was now well up and shed
a brilliant lustre over the scene. The
fire at Warree’s gunyah threw a
light on the prisoner’s face. He was
a young man of noble appearance,
evidently exhausted by hunger or
hardship, in fact he was the hero of
this story, John Saville.
LOST.
it has not been explained how Sa-
ville came to arrive at the camp of
the blacks on that particular evening.
The last heard of him was that knock-
ing down the prison overseer he had
Hod into the bush. The nearest shel-
ter he could reach was the rocky por-
tion of Curra Creek, which he could
see in the distance. He ran like a
deer to the foot of the nearest moun-
tian, climbed to a good height, and
then lay down exhausted. Whilst
resting he thought over the circum-
stances of his position. He was half
naked, without food, and without arms
of offence or defence. He had no
knowledge of Australian woodcraft
or of how to get a living in the bush.
He had a choice, however, and that
was, whether he should give himself
up to the prison authorities, or search
out a tribe of blacks, and throw him-
self on their generosity. If he halted
EUMALGA.


between the two he wmuld inevitably
starve to death. After all, it w T as per-
haps only choosing which way he was
to die. The only hope lay with the
blacks, and to give himself up to them
was his final choice. Having made
up his mind he set about carrying his
determination into effect. Even now r
he began to feel the pangs of hunger,
but he knew of nothing in this soli-
tary bush that he could get to eat.
He thought the quickest way to fall
in with the blacks was to go down the
river. He was afraid to go straight
for fear of being seen by any party
sent after him, and so he would make
a detour through the hills and turn
to the river after a few miles. He
saw no chance of food till he did fall
in with the blacks. He walked
throughout the remainder of that day
until night set Ai, when he
w as weary and hungry, and threw him-
self down under the shadow of a rock
to seek repose.
Though autumn was approaching,
the nights were still warm, and the
wanderer felt no want of a covering;
but the bush mosquito, a big grey
fellowq that can bite through a shirt,
was very troublesome, and his slumber
w'as fitful.
The silence of an Australian night
is terrible to one lost, and new terror
is added when that silence is disturbed
by the blood-curdling howl of the
dingo, or native dog, the hoarse gut-
tural cry of the native bear, the mel-
ancholy call of the cuckoo, or the cur-
lew’s dismal screech.
Long before dawn Saville was awake,
little refreshed in body, ravenously
hungry. He set off by the light of
the sinking moon in a northerly di-
rection, still among the mountains.
He knew the river must be on his right
hand if he put his face to the North,
but it took him a long time to get
through the range. He eventually
struck the river, as he could not well
help doing, several miles dowm, but
w'hen he did arrive at the river bank
he found he was walking up the strea’m
instead of down. Like all lost persons
he had been travelling in a circle,
and wmuld have found himself at n’ght
pretty near to where he started from
in the morning. He continued to go
up the stream. He knew there w r as a
tribe of blacks somewhere near Wel-
lington, and hoped to find their en-
campment somewhere on the river
bank. He had never seen the Mac-
quarie River, and thought by its size,
in comparisan with the Bell, that he
must be further down the stream than
he really was.
It was just mid-day when he reach-
ed the river, and his strength was be-
ginning to fail. Hunger, anxiety, the
distance he had walked, the prostration
of his mind and body, which had been
constantly sapping his bcdy for months
past, began to tell upon him now. He
felt that he was sinking, it would be
impossible to keep up much longer-
He lay down to rest, and could hard-
ly rise again, and when he walked on,
his pace was slow. Still he toiled on-
But he had seen no blacks, a most
unaccountable thing, he thought, and
it really was so, for he must have
been within the circle of hunters
thrown out by the tribe. The poor
fellow began to stagger; he struggled
on again and fell. He rested a few
moments and tried to rise once more,
but failed. Hope died in his bosom;
he gave himself up to perish.
“And so this is to be the end of my
life —a life only one short year ago so
full of happiness and promise!”
He was lying on one of those points
which stretch from the hill to the
river, the centre of which was higher
than the sides. The moon arose in
all the glory of fullness. From where
he was he could see across the next
piece of flat ground, and upwards to-
wards the hills again. Presently he
looked in the latter direction. He
had been expecting to see an encamp-
ment close to the river bank, and as
his eyes rose up he saw a fire burning
brightly. The sight fillecf him with
renewed hope-—a hope for a new life.
By a great effort he rose to his feet an d
advanced a few paces, but it was no
use trying as his feet were greatly
swollen, and he fell to the ground once
more —lost while help was in sight.
He thought he saw figures moving
about tne hres —they were blacks he
was sure. He called out as loud as
he could, but there was no response;
the distance w-as too far for his voice
to be heard. He had heard the coo-ee
of the blacks, and now he tried to
imitate them, and was astonished at
his success, for it brought an imme-
diate response. It is really wonderful
how far the coo-ee can be heard in the
bush. The shrill tones penetrate to
EUMALGA.


a distance the ordinary “hallo” of a
man cannot reach. Soon he heard a
closer call, which he answered, then
another. In a few moments two
young warriors stood near him. They
could not communicate by word of
mouth, hut the blacks soon saw the
nature of the case, and assisted the
whiteman to their camp.
FOUND.
“Wirra! Wirra! Yaninda! Minya.”
As John Saville stood bound to the
tree, and the arm of the wounded
Kumho’s brother (also named Kumbo,
it being a family name) raised to
throw the fatal spear, the scene pre-
sented was one of the most striking
and romantic that could well be
imagined. The two rows of excited
blacks with scarcely a vestige of clo-
thing upon them, the spearman with
his up raised arm, the prisoner bound
to the tree, the flickering rays upon
his face, the silent forest, the resplen-
dent moon above all —a picture for
Salvata Rosa. Words can scarcely
portray the scene. And now another
figure is added, making a grand ta-
bleau. As the shaft is apparently
about to leave Kumbo’s hand, a fe-
male form glides in front of the vic-
tim, and holds up a hand to stay the
proceedings.
“Wirra! Wirra! Yaninda! Minya!’’
she exclaimed in a shrill tone. “No
No! how is this. What are you doing.
Is this the way you reward the slave
who saved the life of Eumalga, the
daughter of your chief,”
Eumalga called Saville a slave, be-
cause she knew he was one of those
kept in bondage and made work for
the red-coated whites. She had no
idea the prisoners wore being punished
for crimes, but imagined they were
captives taken in war. It must be re-
membered that white men had only
made their appearance in this district
about four years previously, up to
which time they were totally un-
known.
The appearance of Eumalga caused
Kumbo to lower his spear. Another
moment and it would have sped on
its death dealing flight.
’there was complete silence, and Eu-
malga’s words were heard by all.
Eumalga was the possessor of one
of the new iron tomahawks (native
name, (“burgoon”) introduced by the
whiteman, and sold or trafficked to
the blacks for skins, or services ren-
dered, or for the capture and restora-
tion of runaways. With her tomahawk,
sharpened as keenly as a razor, Eu-
malga instantly cut the thongs that
bound the fainting prisoner to the
tree, while she explained in her rapid
language that he was the whiteman
who had saved her from drowning,
and was not one of the intruding
whites, but one who was brought there
and kept a prisoner by them.
1 ‘Let not your vengeance fall upon
the man who never did you harm, but
saved my life. If you seek vengeance
let it fall upon the heads of those who
brought him to our peaceful hunting
grounds.”
The whole of the tribe were well
acquainted with the fact that Eumal-
ga’s life had been saved by a white-
man, and Warree bore him good will
for so doing.
The natives of the Wellington Val-
ley, as it was then called, were of a
much milder disposition than the coast
blacks, or those further in the interior.
To this day the few that are left are
of a child-like nature, easily pleased,
without malice, and changeable. In
old times there was perfect justice be-
tween the tribes, their fights were
more like tournaments or trials of
skill, and bloodless (except on very rare
occasions), and it 'may be readily im-
agined how quickly all thought of ven-
geance was abandoned for the pre-
sent.
Willing hands assisted Saville to a
seat on soft skins under the shelter of
a gunyah. Simple restoratives were
given him, and in a short time he
was able to eat what appeared to him
the most delicious food.
Eumalga gave her own share of fish,
a pigeon was also found, there was
plenty of kangaroo, and there were
edible roots and plants. Saville was
very hungry, but sufficient was found
to satisfy even him. He could talk
only by signs, but he felt confident
that he made Eumalga understand he
did not wish to return to the white
settlement. Indeed she intuitively
knew this. Prisoners had escaped be-
fore, and she could see how afraid they
were to be given up.
The warm skins, the satisfied sto-
mach, the relief from present anxiety,
the bodily weariness, induced Saville
EUMALGA.


to sink into a state of contented re-
pose, and the whole ca'inp was soon in
silence.
BUSH LIFE.
The morning after his romantic en-
trance into the encampment of the
Warree tribe, Saville awoke much im-
proved in mind and body, and he was
further refreshed by a bath in the
river, though in lieu of a towel he
had to use grass and leaves. He comb-
ed his hair and beard with his fingers,
and did the best he could to improve
his personal comfort. He had only
one article of clothing, being naked to
the waist, and the air was chilly. Eu-
malga offered him a short opossum skin
cloak, which he was very glad to ac-
cept.
The 'morning meal was made of the
remains of the feast overnight, and
then tile hunters went forth on their
daily rounds, the old men to look for
opossums, or other small game, and
the gins hastened to the river to
catch fish.Warree and the old men, or
elders of the tribe, held a solemn con-
clave as to what was to be done with
the whiteman who had arrived amongst
them.
As a matter of caution, some men
were sent up the river towards the
white settlement, with instructions to
hasten back at full speed if any white
men were seen coming that way, as it
was not unlikely that a party of sol-
diers would be sent out in search of
the runaway.
Eumalga was summoned before the
Chief, her father, to give an account
of the saving of her life. She related
the incident, and ddated upon the
courage displayed by Saville in plung-
ing into the rapid stream when she,
a splendid swimmer, was unable to
contend against it. She made the most
of the circumstance in order to raise
Saville in their estimation.
The whiteman was then called before
them and questioned, and though nei-
ther understood a word the other said,
by signs, (which on an emergency can
be made to express things plainly)
they came to the conclusion that Sa-
villo was one of the bondsmen at the
settlement, that he ran away, and that
he was desirous of being admitted
into the tribe.
Warree made a speech in favor of
his admission, and it was carried una-
nimously that he be admitted after due
trial, according to the custom of the
tribe.
This determination was conveyed to
Saville by signs that Mere well under-
stood.
Owing to his swollen and lacerated
feet, Saville Mas unable to umlk any
distance for a day or tM r o, Eumalga
undertook the task of instructing him
in the mysteries of the dialect of the
Warree tribe. He very soon learned
to call things by their proper names,
and made considerable progress in
conversation. In about a Meek he Mas
quite recovered. He made himself
mocassins of kangaroo hide to protect
his feet until they became hardened,
and M T hat M-as equally necessary, a
covering of opossum skins to protect
his head from the fierce rays of the
sun. He soon understood that three
moons must pass over before he could
be formally admitted into the tribe.
In the meantime he would have to
prove himself an active and success-
ful hunter, able to sustain his mvn
life in the bush. He made a friend of
Kumbo by his solicitu _s about his
M'ound, and the tM-o recovering their
strength together, M r ere as it were
companions in arms. Many a lesson
in the use of the boomerang and
spear was given, and Saville proved an
apt pupil. In youth in England he had
been an ardent sportsman, and very
easily adapted himself to the savage
methods, though they required 'much
more skill, patience and endurance.
To avoid contact M’ith the whites,
they made their hunting grounds the
country longer down the river, often
penetrating below the place which is
now knoM’n as Ponto. They never re-
turned wdthout being loaded with
game.
And noM r more daring schemes filled
Saville's breast. For his own bodily
comfort as a whiteman, he required
various articles of English manufac-
ture, and he determined to get them
from the settlement, if he could do so
M'ithout flinch risk. He was becoming
the foremost ’man in the tribe in ac
tivity and endurance, and having the
knowledge of daily life on the settle-
ment, thought he could avail himself
of t.iat knowledge and supply himse.f
with the articles he required without
causing suspicion to fall upon the tribe
he was with. He took council with
Kumbo. and the tuo decided upon the
EUMALGA.


course to be taken. They also took
Eumalga into their confidence, and
she impressed other gins to act ’ as
spies and scouts. As a rule the blacks
were w r ell treated by the whites, and
were allowed free access to the settle-
ment, but it was only with the Wel-
lington tribe that there was anything
like free and friendly communion.
The white people took every care to
protect their property from theft, but
losses were frequent, and it was the
policy not to make too much fuss ab ) it
the loss of smaller articles, though the
thieves would have been severely pun-
ished if caught. With this knowledge
of the settlement, and his black allies,
Saville managed to secure numerous
tomahawks, axes, articles of clothing
and other necessaries.
Dicky Taylor, who was then a pri-
soner, had been very friendly with
Saville. This man, from the fact that
he had only a short time to serve,
was better treated than the convicts
who had a life-sentence, and was
placed in an office of authority over
some of the others. He was a well-
dispositioned man, and was sent out
for a trivial offence, as was common in
those days. He enjoyed more liberty
than the others, and one day, having
been sent to search for some stray
horses, which were supposed to have
gone down the river, he got bel iw
Mount Arthur, and was seen by Sa-
ville. whose spies had apprised him
of the coming of a whiteman. Sa-
ville thought he could trust this man,
and revealed himself to him. He was
not deceived, for Taylor agreed to
furnish him with a variety of little
articles from the settlement, which no
born gentleman could well do without.
Amongst the articles were a comb for
the hair, a few shirts, some coarse
towels and a strong jack knife with
spring-back, which Saville carried in
his belt, the handle secured to a piece
of strong string to prevent loss by
jerking out.
In return for these kindnesses, the
horses were got for Taylor, and he
wms acquainted with the secret of th ;
now far-famed Wellington Caves,
which he communicated to the officer
in charge of the settlement. The in-
formation was deemed of such im-
portance that Taylor was rewar led
with a ticket-of-leave, to his great >-t-
--isfaction. As a mark of his gratitude,
he managed to procure a musket and
a bag of shot and some bullets with
powder, which he presented to Saville.
About this time several prisoners es-
caped into the bush, and not bHng
adopted by the tribe, they were re-
duced to very great straits. There
was an abundance of wheat stacked at
the settlement farm, and these men
used to steal sheaves to eat. To cut
them off from the supply of food, it
was barbarously determined to ou.-u
the stacks, and the order was carried
out. A vast quantity of wheat was
thus destroyed. As if nature had de-
termined to avenge the wilful destruc-
tion of one of her best gifts to man,
from that time until the settlement
was abandoned the earth refused l*>
yield a crop.
SAVILLE'S INITIATION.
The time for Saville’s formal in-
itiation into the Warree tribe had now
arrived, and preparations were made
for a grand corroboree to celebrate
the event.
As a preliminary, a hunt on a large
scale was organised, for the purpose of
procuring a sufficient supply of food,
after which, as game was becoming
more timid and scarce every day,
through being disturbed so much by
the white settlers, it was determined
to aba/ndon the present camp and go
to the limit of Warree’s towri, adjoin-
ing the towri of the Chief Eulomogo,
some five and twenty 'miles down the
river.
On the day of the hunt the whole
tribe was awake at an early hour;
there was no delay with the morning
meal. Every person able to assist,
was to do so. A ring was to be form-
ed round a large tract of country,
which w T as to gradually close and
force the game down one of the moun-
tain gullies which suddenly narrowed
amongst some rocks, upon which were
stationed the best marksmen. The
gins and the old men were to occu-
py the pass nearest home, the most
active young 'men were to take the
widest circle.
When all were in readiness, armed
with the weapons they most fancied,
or which they could use with the best
effect, Warree gave the signal for the
commencement of the hunting song,
with which the proceedings of the
day were to be initiated.
Led by a musical director, who
EUMALGA.


struck two pieces of stick together in
perfect measure to the time of the
song, the gins continued beating and
marking the rythm, as if to incite
inspiration. The song was repeated
several times, each time with mere i ei
energy, until the singers were well-
nigh exhausted with their enthusiasm.
The song on this occasion was called
“Wanban Kolba,” or “The Kangaroo
on the Rocky Mountain.” The fol-
lowing is a fairly literal translation: —
WANBUN KOLBA.
Over the Rocky Mountain
We’ll hunt the kangaroo;
By yarran grove and fountain,
The haunt of the fleet bulboo.
When we return at eve.
Well laden with the spoil,
The welcome w T e’il receive.
Will reward us for our toil.
Then a way to the woods, away!
Bold Warree sound the advance!
We’ll hunt the game to-day,
To-morrow the corroboree dance.
Away! away! away! These latter
words concluded the song, and with
animated gestures moved off
in haste to take his allotted post.
As this hunt was an event of some
moment, Saville thought he would
take Taylor's presentation musket to
the scene of action, and risk the ex-
penditure of a few charges of ammu-
nition. He was well accustomed to
the use of the weapon, having been
one of the crack shots of his county.
The most likely place for him to get
close enough sight of the game was at
the entrance of the gully or drive,
where he would, at the same time,
be above the line of marksmen, and
not wound anyone opposite. It would
be mid-day before the circle of hun-
ters began to draw in. In the mean-
time, from his post behind a rock,
he got two or three chance shots, and
was successful in bagging a wallaby
and a half-grown kangaroo. By-and
bye, as the circle began to close in,
all kinds of game passed by, either
singly or in mobs. He allowed the
mobs to go on, for fear of turning
them off, "merely showing himself so
as to keep the animals in the straight
run. Towards evening a considerable
number came through, closely followed
by pursuing blacks. Many broke
away, but the majority went straight
down the drive. Saville made a cou-
ple more hits with his musket, and
then took to his spears, the art of
throwing which he had very soon learn-
ed. At the conclusion the gully m
front of him bore splendid evidence of
his prowess, as he had accounted for
much game, including a very fine tur-
key. The rest of the hunters had had
very poor success, but they were en-
gaged more in guiding the game into
the gully than killing, but a good
many animals had been killed in the
narrow part by the marksmen posted
on either side.
The hunt over, the carcases were
collected and conveyed to the camp,
and when piled, formed a goodly heap,
promising a week’s feasting. In hot
weather it would have been useless to
collect so many dead animals at one
time, but the winter had now set in,
and the meat would keep. The num-
ber of animals bagged by Saville pro-
cured him much kudos amongst the
tribe, in fact they were beginning to
be quite proud of him. He was also a
great favorite with Warree and Eu-
malga. Saville had saved her life, he
was a noble hunter, a handsomer man
than any her tribe could produce, and
therefore how could she help loving
him deeply, more particularly as her
affections were disengaged, and still
more particularly because she had
been promised in marriage to Eulo-
mogo, the chief of the neighbouring
tribe.
As for Saville, he was not, so to
speak, in love with Eumalga. but he
felt very grateful to her for interfering
in time to prevent his life being taken,
and for various little kindnesses and
attentions, which to one in his posi-
tion were very acceptable. He would
have done anything for her, cham-
pioned her cause, or even married
her, believing life would, of necessity,
be passed as a member of the tribe.
He had no hope of liberation, he was
respectful and kind to Eumalga, show-
ed he was pleased to be in her com-
pany, and what more could she expect
in a community where women were not
treated with the highest deference.
She was quite satisfied with Saville’s
friendship, and had it not been for
the little matter with Eulomogo,
would have had no doubt about per-
suading her father to give her to the
man she preferred, and that man the
first warrior of the tribe.
EUMALGA.


The aboriginals of the Wellington
district were by no means so ugly and
coarse-featured as those of the coast
and further interior, as they were less
ferocious and hostile. The situation
of the country and the mildness of
the climate, tie district being one
thousand feet above the sea level, be-
tween the severe climate of the moun-
tains and the much hotter conditions
prevailing in the interior plains, had
something to do with these charac-
teristics .
Eumalga was a young woman about
seventeen, of pleasing countenance,
though she had the uVimistakeable
mouth and nose of her people. But
her dark eyes were very soft. her
teeth were brilliant, her form was
well-moulded, her carriage graceful,
and her demeanour gentle and cour-
teous. She did not attempt to hide
her preference for Saville —she had a
sort of undefined hope that she might
be his after all; a strong trust in his
ability and willingness to save her
from Eulomogo, if there was the least
chance.
The day after the hunt was the day
of Saville’s formal reception into the
tribe, the whole of the Tnembers had
assembled, a strong party having ar-
rived from the west side of the towri to
take part in the ceremony. There
were, perhaps, 600 present. The
scene was an open glade near the
camp, opposite Gobolyan. The place
was surrounded by a belt of timber
and narrowed at the western end.
Across this end were seated a great
number of women, who chanted one of
the native melodies while they beat
time by striking two sticks together,
or beating a stick upon the fleshy side
of a skin, tightly rolled up.
Warree himself took his position in
front of the orchestra. The first act
of the corroboree was a representation
of a hunt for the kangaroo. One
black imitated the various attitudes
of the well-known 'marsupial with
amazing fidelity, while the hunters
put themselves in all the postures of
a wily pursuit. A wild kind of dance
followed, during which the performers
exhibited extraordinary feats of agil-
ity. A representation of a battle-
field was the next scene. Some re-
presented the enemy and others the at-
tacking party. The spectators groan-
ed when one of the latter fell, and
cheered lustily when one of their op-
ponents met with the same fate. Ano-
ther wild dance ensued. The last
scene was an exhibition of skill in
throwing the spear and boomerang,
and Saville was called upon to display
his prowess, and did so with credit,
being no mean performer. He wound
up by fastening a square opossum
skin against a tree, producing his
musket and putting a bullet through
the skin at fifty yards. The men were
very much interested in this feat and
examined the hole in the skin and
the mark of the bullet entering the
tree w. n great curiosity They highly
applauded when Saville with his toma-
hawk chopped the bullet out and
placed it in their hands.
The final rite was then performed.
Saville stood in the middle of the glads
surrounded by the tribe. Warree ad-
vanced towards him with a spear and
slightly penetrated his breast, naming
him “Ippai.” With a muscle shell
from the river he then cut Saville’s
breast, not deeply, from the collar
bone a couple of inches straight down
the breast on both sides. The blood
flowed, but clay was instantly put into
and upon the wound, and, strange to
{ say, he felt no ill-effects, the cuts
pealing rapidly. This final rite having
been auly accomplished, a loud coo-ee
was sounded, which was a warning
note to the women to return to the
encampment. The gins left imme-
diately, and proceeded to the camp to
get ready the food. After a short in-
terval the men formed a procession
and marched home singing tne “Koo-
rinda-braia,” or song of rejoicing.
At the camp all was bustle. The
women soon set before their lords the
eatables prepared, and the feast was
enjoyed with the greatest gusto. Sa-
ville (now named Ippai) occupied a
position at the Chief’s fire, and was
waited upon by Eumalga.
The festivities were kept up as long
as the food lasted, after which the
tribe dispersed and things went on
in their usual monotonous round, that
is, for a few days, after which it was
found absolutely necessary to shift
the encampment, as the recent hunt
had scared away nearly all the game.
By this time Saville had become
pretty well acquainted with the lan-
guage or dialect of the tribe —he was
able to converse about ordinary topics.
He had at first made a friendship with
EUMALGA.


young Kumbo, and as time went on
they became united in the bonds of
brotherly love, on the one part with
the devotion of a dog for his master,
on the other with the genuine feelings
of a gentleman for one who was so
brave and faithful, though of an in-
ferior race.
THE DREAM OF LOVE.
With Eumalga, Saville often whiled
away the passing hours of evening
after nightfall, in pleasant conversa-
tion. She was fond of listening to his
description of England and other
lands, and he was pleased with her
wrapt attention, wonderment and curi-
osity. Till his coming she had no idea
of the world beyond her own towri,
or of the very existence of the sea.
Saville had told her that his name
was John, and she got into the habit
of calling him by that name. She had
been much improved by the mere
contact with Saville, who had induced
her to adopt many little ways of
feminine decency and adornment, ac-
cording to civilised notions. His des-
cription of European females and their
dress led her to copy them as far as
she was able and could understand.
She also caught from Saville several
little endearing words he used to-
wards her, and with which there were
no corresponding words in her native
tongue.
To while away the time, Eumalga
would sometimes sing a simple native
melody. The following is a free trans-
lation of one:—
EUMALGA’S 'SONG.
When the glorious sun awakens from
his rest
And tips the hills with his golden
ray,
I spring from my couch like a bird
from its nest
And to the woods I take my way.
I wander on o’er hill and glade.
While listening to the bul-bul’s song,
At noon I rest beneath the shade
Of the leafy deep-green currajong.
At eve I return to my sylvan home,
And wait the hunters’ joyful lays;
When, laden with the spoil, they come,
I welcome them with smiles and
praise.
The sun recedes, stars shine above,
Again I rest in sweet repose.
Contented if the youth I love.
One grateful smile on me bestows.
" And do you not,” said Eumalga,
in one of their conversations, “long to
return to your beautiful land and be
once more with your friends?”
“I do, indeed, Eumalga, but I fear
there is no hope for that. I dare not
even venture amongst the white men
for fear of being imprisoned.”
‘‘Ah, what should become of poor
Eumalga if you did return to your own
country? I should have no brother
then.”
“I shall never forget y°u> dear
Eumalga; I should always remember
your kindness and be with you in my
thoughts. But such a thing is im-
possible. I am doomed to live and
die in your tribe, unless some un-
fortunate chance should throw me
into the hands of my enemies.”
Eumalga shuddered at the thought.
After a pause, during which they
were both wrapped in thought, Saville
said.
“But you will leave me, ere long.
What shall I do for a friend and com-
panion when Eulomogo claims his
promised bride?”
Eumalga’s brow darkened.
“I would rather die,” she said, “than
become the bride of that fierce old
chief. 0 ( John, as you have to stay
in our tribe,” and she threw her arms
lovingly over his shoulder, unconsci-
ous of any departure from female pro-
priety, “ask my father to give me to
you! If I become the wife of Eulo-
mogo I shall die!”
Saville would have been either more
or less than a man if he were unaffect-
ed by this touching appeal, showing
how completely he had won the heart
of this dusky maiden. He kissed her
cheek and attempted to console her
with the assurance that he would
demand her in marriage, and that he
would use his growing influence with
the tribe to have the claims of Eulo-
mogo set aside..
He had scarcely said these words
when he felt himself touched on the
shoulder by the point of a spear. He
turned and saw the chief standing
behind him.
‘‘Let my son remember that Eumal-
ga is the promised wife of Eulomogo,
and before bullas (two) moons have
EUMALGA.


passed, that promise must be carried
out.”
“I hope not, noble Warree, for
Eumalga has confessed she loves me,
and I have promised to ask her of
you.”
“It cannot be, my son. under ordin-
ary circumstances I should be glad
to bestow my daughter upon a gallant
warrior like you, but she has been
promised to Eulomogo, and the pro-
mise of Warree, confirmed by the
councillors of the tribe, cannot be
broken.
“Is there no hope, Warree? I would
gladly perform any task or under-
take any adventure if thereby I could
alter the decision.”
“I tell you there is no hope, Ippai.
And let me caution you not to raise
any false hopes in the breast of Eu-
malga, or do anything to tarnish the
honor of the tribe. If you do, much
as I love you, your punishment shall
be severe. Take this friendly warn-
ing. I have seen your growing inti-
macy with Bumalga; let it not exceed
the bonds of friendship. There are
other young women in the tribe. I
will see that one is chosen for you.”
Both Saville and Eumalga were well
night speechless after this address,
and they knew the unalterable fate
that awaited her unless something like
a miracle should happen, or Eulomogo
should die.
The dark thought passed through
•Saville’s mind that he might lay wait
for and shoot Eulomogo when he got
into the neighbourhood of his towri;
but he instantly dismissed that base
idea. It was utterly foreign to his
nature and breeding as an English-
man to foster a single thought of
shooting or spearing a man, though
he might be a savage black. He would
have met him in open fight had there
been war between the tribes, but was
not equal to murdering him in times
of peace.
From this time the lovers, as they
might now be called, though the love
was a bit one-sided, were kept apart,
and only occasionally speech passed
between them in the presence of War-
ree or of an old gin appointed to
watch over Eumalga.
It was a terrible trial for Eumalga.
But still there were spasmodic rays
of hope in her soft, dark eyes. Would
that great God, of whom Saville had
told her, deliver her from the cruel
clutches of that black monster, Bu-
lomogo! She hoped, even in bitter mo-
ments of despair.
[sThe Warree tribe had a curious
method of counting. The following is
an example:—Nunboy, 1; Bulla 2;
Bulla-nunboy 3; Bulla-jer, 4; Bulla-
jer-nunboy, 5; Bulla-jer-bulla. 6; Bul-
la-jer-bulla-nunboy, 7; Bulla-jer-bulla-
jer, 8; Bulla-jer-bulla-jer-nunboy, 9;
and so on. Five Bulla-jers would be
twenty.]
SHIFTING CAMP.
Bright Ribbons for Eumalga.
Before leaving the encampment at
Gobalyan, Saville, through his scouts,
who were all greatly attached to him,
obtained another interview with Dicky
Taylor. In exchange for native honey,
handsome opossum skin cloaks, and
more by good-will than the value of
the property, secured a fresh supply
of powder and ball, a couple of strong
knives, an article or two of female
apparel, some bright ribbon, a few
beads, and some necessary clothing
for himself, altogether of little cost,
but almost priceless to him.
Returning to the camp, he present-
ed a knife to the chief, and another to
his friend, Kumbo. He pleased Eumal-
ga with a present of ribbon and beads,
reserving the apparel, as well as some
of the smaller articles, for future use.
By this action it would appear that
he contemplated a lengthy absence
from the Wellington settlement. He
had also obtained a supply of needles
and thread and some fish-hooks. He
was not without a fair clothing of
skins, having occupied many an even-
ing in fabricating them, with the help
of Eumalga, who was skilled in the
native method of sewing skins to-
gether. He had effected a great im-
provement on the native style in his
own dress, and in the dress of Eumal-
ga, who had readily adopted the style
of garment he suggested, more in ac-
cord with his European ideas of mod-
esty.
The encampment at Gobalyan was
then abandoned. There were no tents
to strike nor pots and kettles to col-
lect. The blacks merely took up their
weapons and their opossum rugs, and
feUMALGA.


early one fine spring morning march-
ed off. They took the route down
the river, rested in the middle of the
Bella crossing pursued their journey
Billa crossing, pursued their journey
in the afternoon, and, long before
nightfall, arrived at and lit their fires
upon a flat on the right bank of the
Macquarie River, about twenty-five
miles distant. From that day to this
the spot is known as “Warree Flat,”
and not far from “Eumalga Plain,” as
after events caused it to be called,
and the name was adopted by Mr. J.
E. Serisier, when he bought the land
for a vineyard.
The hunters had collected what
game they could during the journey,
but it was not a plentiful supply;
therefore the tribe had to retire for
the night upon short rations, which
they did without a murmur, being ac-
customed to privation. In few dis-
tricts in the Colony was food in more
abundance than would support a
small population; this fact accounts
for the adoption by the various tribes
of the most vigorous laws for the pre-
servation of game, and for the preven-
tion of too great an increase in the
population, by enforcing celebacy in
young men. Their laws were laws of
necessity, the infringement of which
would bring upon them the punish-
ment of starvation. All were therefore
interested in preserving these laws,
not but that they were sometimes
broken by powerful chiefs or influen-
tial warriors, for society was pretty
well the same as it is amongst the
whites, money and power obtaining
the, privileges denied the poor and un-
influential.
Saville sought every opportunity of
ingratiating himself with the tribe.
He was indefatiguable as a hunter,
an expert fisherman, aided by his
superior tackle, for the blacks had
not yet got beyond the use of fish-
bones for hooks. He was allowed to
instruct Eumalga in the new style of
fishing, lending her some of his hooks.
The old gin was always present, but
by a judicious investment of a few
beads and a piece of ribbon, Saville in-
duced her to keep out of earshot.
Amongst the things Saville had
learned were the laws and customs
of the tribe, and he fancied he saw a
way to save Eumalga from Eulomogo
without breaking those laws, provided
he was supported by the most active
warriors. He made a confidant of
Kumbo, his bosom friend. The lat-
ter sounded some of the principal war-
riors, and found them quite willing
to support Saville’s claim.
“Why give away the flower of the
tribe,” said Kumbo, ‘‘to an enemy,
when she prefers one of our own
tribe?”
“It shall not be!” chorused the war-
riors. “We will resist this claim of
Hulomogo’s with spear and shield.
Let the brave Ippai lead us on, and
we will drive Eulomogo from his
towri.”
It was not, however, the intention
of Saville to cause a war between the
tribes. All he wanted was the sup-
port of the warriors in what he in-
tended to do, and he fondly hoped no
bloodshed would ensue.
Having decided upon his course he
consulted Eumalga, and she, poor
thing, very readily agreed. She would
have grasped any proposal to save
herself from Eulomogo.
An elopement was impossible; and
where could the lovers go? It would
be absolutely necessary for them to
leave the tribe. If they went to another
tribe they might fare far worse, Sa-
ville would undoubtedly be killed and
Eumalga taken to wife by some chief
who probably already had two or
three wives. If Saville could have
gone amongst his own countrymen
their course would have been clear
enough. They could have reached the
white settlement in one day.
To obtain further favor in the eyes
of the warriors of the tribe Saville
took an active part in military drill,
and became one of the most expert
in the use of the native weapons. Like
all young men of position at that
period, he was an expert swordsman,
and could “single-stick” with any man
in his county. He gave the war-
riors an exhibition of his skill, and
excited their admiration by the way
he could give them smart blows with-
out permitting himself to be touched.
He was particular in exorcising him-
self in the use of the hieleman, or
shield, for reasons that will be ex-
plained.
EUMALGA.


THE WAKING MOONS.
Escape of Warree's Heralds.
And thus the two fatal moons wan-
ed —the time had arrived for the de-
livery of Eumalga to Eulomogp.
One day, towards the end of the
second moon, Saville was not surpris-
ed by the arrival at the camp of two
envoys or messengers from the
dreaded chief, who demanded to be
taken before Warree. These messen-
gers belonged to a class who were
privileged to go from tribe to tribe
bearing messages, or to negotiate and
arrange for meetings. They were
much honored by all tribes. Their
business wa s scon explained. They
reminded Warree that the time was
at hand when his daughter, Eumal-
ga, should be given in marriage to
Eulomogo.
“Is the noble chief ready to carry
out his contract?” said one, whose
name was Murree.
‘‘My noble brother will find that
I am faithful to my word, and that
Eumalga is ready to obey her father’s
command.” returned Warree.
A negotiation was then entered into
about the meeting of the tribes to
witness the ceremony, and when it
should take place.
Several localities were suggested,
but it was eventually decided that
the meeting of the tribes should take
place on a plain near the boundary
or dividing line, between the two
towris. This plain was about four
miles from Warree’s camp. The meet-
ing was to take place on the seventh
day of the new moon, and was to be
celebrated by a grand corroboree, in
which the two tribes were to mingle
on a friendly footing.
Eulomogo’s consent to this arrange-
ment was first to be obtained, and as
the messengers had business with an-
other tribe to the northward, they
requested Warree to let one of his
men accompany them and return with
Eulomogo’s views.
Warree nominated Kumbo as his
herald, and he was ordered to get
himself in readiness..
It might be thought Kumbo had
nothing to do but assume his spear
and shield and start off. But it ap-
peared that Eulomogo was then
camped at the opposite or north-west
side of his towri, some forty of fifty
miles down the Macquarie, and it was
necessary to prepare sufficient food
to last the journey, for so jealous
was each tribe of its fishing and hunt-
ing rights that no one dared to kill
an animal on his neighbor’s towri.
A war would have been the conse-
quence.
While Kumbo was getting ready,
Saville got the permission of Warree
to accompany his comrade on the
expedition. His particular reason for
going was to see the redoubted Eulo-
mogo; but any excitement was pre-
ferable to the monotony and uncer-
tainty of his present life.
Saville got ready assistance in the
preparation of his food, and having
deposited his belongings in the hands
of his chief for safety, he started with
the party on the journey. He had
thrown off his European apparel and
adopted the simple savage costume,
which was very nearly no costume at
all. They both had circlets of opos-
sum skin and a belt, attached to which
was a pouch and knife, and wore a
band round the head, in which were
stuck some bright feathers. They
each carried two spears and a shield,
and a rug was slung across their
shoulders.
When he first came amongst the
blacks Saville had been compelled to
make himself a hat to protect his head
from the heat of the sun, but he found
that when his hair grew long and
thick, and shaded his neck, he could
go without a hat, except on a very
hot day. He went on this journey
without cne, because to have worn a
hat would have given him an extra-
ordinary appearance in the eyes of
the new tribe, but he concealed a
piece of calico in his rug or cloak,
which he could use on the journey if
the sun proved too hot..
Warree’s two ambassadors would
have been no disgrace to any tribe in
Australia, so far as their personal
appearance went. They were both
tall, athletic fellows, straight as their
own spears, though the white man ex-
ceeded his comrade in weight and
muscle. As a man there were few, if
any, blacks in Australia who could
have coped with 'Saville in a trial of
strength. He was quite satisfied
about his own prowess, and had the
Englishman’s contempt for all inferior
races. He would not have shirked a
EUMALGA.


hand-to-hand encounter with any war-
rior in the tribe.
It was past noon when they start-
ed, therefore they were compelled to
camp when they had only gone about
fifteen miles on their journey. They
had passed the swampy flats on which
the town of Dubbo now stands, and
the junction of the Talbragar with the
Macquarie. Saville struck a light
with a piece of flint on the back of
his knife, much to the wonderment of
the two strangers, whose mode would
have been to rub two sticks together.
Saville was altogether an enigma to
them; they had never seen a white
man before, though rumors of such
beings had gone from tribe to tribe.
That he was a man different to them-
selves could not be concealed. If he
had darkened his skin and hair, his
blue eyes would have betrayed him.
The party started again at sunrise,
rested for a couple of hours at mid-
day, and a little before sunset arrived
at Eulomogo’s camp.
Murree and his comrade immediate-
ly appeared before the chief, and
acquainted him with the result of
their mission. They also acquainted
him with the fact that two of War-
ree’s warriors had accompanied them
for the purpose of returning with
Eulomogo’s consent to the matters
which had been arranged. The chief
was also apprised of the fact that one
of the warriors was an extraordinary
being, perhaps one of those whitemen
of whom they had lately heard such
wonderful accounts.
The two warriors were introduced
to the chief with the ceremony to
which every tribe was accustomed.
Saville was anxious to see the chief,
and Eulomogo was just as anxious to
see Saville, or Ippai, as his name had
been given.
Eulomogo was a chief who had made
his name a terror to the surrounding
tribes; he had committed some most
inhuman atrocities, and it was in con-
sequence of one of his victories that
the agreement about the surrender of
Eumalga had been made some few
years before. Like Warree, he was
past middle age, but he retained all
the fire and energy of youth, if not
the elasticity. He was taller than any
man of his tribe, and powerfully built
for a black; his eyes glowed like
coal s of fire, and his voice grated on
the ear. His form was partially wrap-
ped in an opossum cloak, and he wore
the usual bright feathers in a band
round his head. He was unarmed,
but weapons of all kinds rested
against his gunyah. As he stood
eagerly scanning the features of Sa-
ville, his appearance was calculated
to strike terror into the hardest
breast. The blacks had been accus-
tomed to cower before him, and he
expected tire Warree men would be
no exception. He was disappointed
and displeased when, instead of the
usual fear and trembling, eye met
eye, and his own were inclined to
quail before the keen glance of the
extraordinary stranger. Suppressing
his rage, the chief addressed Saville
in friendly words.
“Of what tribe are you, Ippai? The
paleness of your skin and hair leads
me to think you are one of those white
men who have recently come into
being.’’
“You think right, noble chief, lam
one of the white race, of which you
speak, but I am an adopted warrior
of the Warree tribe, as these scars
will attest, and my brother Kumbo will
affirm.”
The blacks of that day in this part
of the colony had no conception from
whence the white men came. They
soon got the idea that they were res-
urrected blacks. Hence the saying,
“Tumble down black-fellow, jump up
white fellow,” meaning that after
death blackfellows were born again,
white.
Eulomogo examined the white man
with great curiosity, which was shar-
ed by everyone who dared to come
within the circle of privileged war-
riors.
“And in what tcwri was Ippai born?”
asked the chief.
‘Tn a towri beyond the sea.”
“Beyond the sea? What is the sea?”
inquired the chief.
Saville did his best to answer other
inquiries in a manner which Eulo-
mogo could understand, utterly ignor-
ant, as he was, of anything outside
his native country.
“And is Eumalga a beautiful maid?
I have been told she excells all others
of her tribe.”
“You have been correctly informed,
noble chief. She is indeed more beau-
tiful than can be described, and
EUMALGA.


gentle and kind as I have experienced.”
The chief cast a fierce glance at the
speaker as he uttered these words
with every sincerity.
“And have you been much In her
company?”
‘‘l have seen much of her since I
was adopted by the tribe.”
“You appear to have a very good
opinion of her,” said the chief, with
a sneer.
I have reason to have a good opinion
of her since she saved my life, and
has been very kind to me,” replied
Saville.
“Saved your life, did she? How was
that?”
Saville gave a narrative of what
is already known, and was obliged
to admit that Eumalga knew him be-
cause he had rescued her from drown-
ing.
“A pretty state of things,” mutter-
ed the chief. “I must claim this girl
at once; I’ll deal with this presump-
tuous white man in another way.”
The chief spoke hi s thoughts rather
louder than he imagined, for, though
the words were not intelligible to
Saville, who was not yet well-skilled
in the language, Kumbo thought he
caught their meaning. The latter
had been a silent observer of all that
took place.
‘‘You intend to return at once?”
asked the chief.
“We intend to depart as soon as
we receive a message for our chief.”
said Saville.
“I will give you my words at sun-
rise in the morning. How far will
you go to-morrow?”
“We shall endeavour to reach the
junction of the Talbragar with the
stream beside us.”
“It is well. And now, as you must
be hungry and tired, take rest.”
Room for the envoys was made in
a circle of warriors round one of the
fires, and they were supplied with
food. They had to answer a multitude
of questions, apd were glad when they
were permitted to seek repose, which
they did by wrapping themselves in
their rugs, with feet to the burning
embers.
They awoke early, after a refreshing
sleep. Saville had taken his usual
morning bath in the river before the
sun was well up. Thev expected an
immediate audience with Eulomogo to
receive his message, but the sun was
an hour high before they were called
before the chief, and they observed he
had previously been in conversation
with some of the men of the tribe.
‘‘Tell my brother Warree that I will
be at the place appointed on the sev-
enth day of the moon, and I agree with
everything that has been arranged by
Murree.”
Bending their heads to the redoubt-
able chief, the messengers set out on
their return journey.
They had scarcely got out of hear-
ing of the camp when Kumbo told his
comrade that he feared they would
be molested on their way.
“I saw rage in the chief’s eye when
you met, and Jealousy and murder In
his face when you were speaking of
Eumalga. I had my eyes and ears
open. I saw a small band of men
leave the camp an hour before we
did. And did you mark how he in-
quired where we would camp to-
night?”
“I did. But if he intended us evil,
it was in his power to kill us where
we were.”
"Not so,” said Kumbo. "He was
afraid to do it in the presence of the
privileged messengers now with his
tribe. They would spread the news,
and the honor and dignity of Eulomo-
go would be tarnished. If the tribes
did not unite agaii/st him in war for
his treachery in killing peaceful en-
voys. His plan is for the war party
sent out this morning to attack us in
our camp to-night, a long distance
away, so that he may deny all know-
ledge of our fate.”
Saville began to think there was
something in his friend’s surmises,
and took council with him on the best
way to circumvent such a wiley foe.
Kumbo suggested that they should
make a wide detour to the right, and
by a rapid movement, get beyond the
place where they had intended to
camp. Saville agreed.
They instantly put on their best
speed, and at a favorable spot crossed
the river to make a detour from the
direct road. The party laying wait for
them, as they imagined, had had a
long start, and would use every en-
deavour to intercept them. Their num-
ber would allow them to throw out
scouts, and the two friends would have
some difficulty in getting through the
EUMALGA.


chain unperceived. Their safety lay
in the fact that their opponents did
not know they were on their guard,
and would expect them to run into
the trap, on the direct route, without
any hesitation.
Our two friends pursued their jour-
ney with the speed of practised run-
ners, their confidence returning as
mile after mile was passed over with-
out the appearance of the enemy.
They took a brief rest at noon and
consumed some of their provisions.
By nightfall they had got some few
miles beyond their stated resting
place, but they continued their jour-
ney until a pitchy darkness set in and
they had reached the neighborhood
of the Dubbo swamps. Here they
sought shelter under a giant gum tree,
and lit their tire in confidence.
[“Dubbo, or Dubogu,” appears to
have been the native name for Dubbo;
a place for getting paint.]
‘‘l believe, Kumbo, yon were mis-
taken, after all,” said Saville.
“I don’t think I was, but we have
outwitted them,” replied Kumbo. “Two
hours after sunrise we shall be at
Warree’s camp.”
They ate their evening meal, and,
being weary after Ureir long day’s
march, soon fell into a sound sleep,
from which the howl of the dingo,
the screech of the curlew, or othei
noises of the night, failed to awaken
them; and they slept on till broad
daylight.
Tno travellers awoke almost at the
same moment, and were surprised to
find the sun already up. They sprang
to their feet and made instant pre-
parations for departure, but in a leis-
urely manner. They consumed what
remained of their food and rolled their
cloaks into convenient parcels for
carrying on their backs, and then
strolled quietly towards home.
“We shall not lie expected very
early,” said Saville. “because they will
think our night's camp was further
distant. We came a long journey yes-
terday, but by our late start this
morning we have lost more than we
gained, and we shall probably arrive
later than Warree may think we
should.”
“I know one who will he anxious
tc see us.”
‘‘Yes, Eumalga, pcor girl, she has
reason to be anxious about this mat-
ter. What a ferocious wretch they
think of giving her to.”
“He'll heat her brains out if she
gives him the slightest offence,” said
Kumbo.
“Is this monster such a skilful and
strong warrior as 1 have been told?”
“No man has been able to stand
against him in open fight. His very
name seems to striks his enemies with
1 error,” said Kumbo.
“Well, Eulomogo, bidderbung!” (I
am not afraid of you) said Saville,
contemptuously. (Bidderbung was also
a challenge word).
They were now approaching the
boundary line between the territory of
the two chiefs, and less than another
hour would bring them to Warree’s
camp.
The eyes of the native black roam
unceasingly around; nothing escapes
hi s notice. As the two envoys were
walking along unsuspectingly, Sa-
ville lost in thought, Kumbo suddenly
exclaimed, ‘‘We are beset, Ippai, run!’’
and he set the example by running
off at top speed. Looking round Sa-
ville saw they were pursued by half-
a-dozen blacks, and he Instantly de-
vined that while he and Kumbo had
been dawdling the morning away, the
war party had been searching for their
tracks, and, having found their fire,
had come upon them with unerring
certainty. They were, now fearfully
close. If they had remained unseen
a few minutes longer they would have
been within spearing distance, and the
fate cf the envoys would have been
quickly decided by a spear coming
through their backs.
“Let us make for yonder clump of
trees,” said Saville. “They will shel-
ter us if we find we cannot out-run
these wretches, and if we have to stop
we will sell our lives as dearly as pos-
sible.”
They ran on at full speed and would
have got clear away by out-running
their pursuers, when, unfortunately,
Kumbo caught his foot in a forked
stick. He rose limping, and it was
evident he could keep the pace no
longer.
“Go on, Ippai, leave me—save your-
self,” exclaimed the noble fellow when
he found he could net run any fur-
ther, and would soon he overtaken.
“Never!” said Ippai; ‘‘we will die
together, if die we must. We are
EUMALGA.


close to the trees now. One more ef-
fort, and we are at least secure from
spears.”
Kumbo bore his pain manfully, and
they reached the shelter of the friend-
ly trees just as a flight of spears whiz-
zed past.
If the pursuers had made up their
minds to kill the envoys at all costs,
they knew that it must now be by a
hand-to-hand encounter. To spear
them at a distance would be impos-
sible, as all blacks were so skilled in
using the hieleman or shield that they
could ward off spears no matter how
rapidly thrown, besides which the two
had the protection of the trees. While
the pursuers were holding their con-
sultation, previous to the attack, Kum-
bo noticed the approach of a small
party of his own tribe. Among them
was Eumalga. The reinforcement
could not be seen by the Eulomogo
men. Kumbo and Saville could now
have joined their friends in safety,
but their blood was up, and they
determined to entice into attack the
men who, only a moment before, they
were anxious to avoid. They shouted
out yells of defiance for two reasons:
to excite the enemy to come on, and
to cause their friends to hasten their
steps. The yells had the desired ef-
fect. With responsive yells, the war
party rushed up the incline. On the
other side the Warree men, hearing
the yells and seeing the gesticulations
of Saville and Kumbo, also rushed
up the incline, on the oposite side.
The opposing parties met on top.
Never was there a greater surprise.
Both paused in amazement, but only
for a moment. Saville and Kumbo
(despite his sprained foot) threw
themselves against the foe, and each
struck down an opponent by sheer
impetuosity. The others turned and
fled, but it was too late; a shower of
spears was hurled at them, and they
fell transfixed. So great was the rage
of the Warree men, when they were
informed of the facts of the case, that
before Saville could interfere, those
of the six assassins who were not al-
ready dead were killed. Not one was
left alive!
Saville and Kumbo’s fierce on-
slaught caused the greatest admiration
among their brother warriors, with
whom they were the heroes of the
hour. Now their lead would have been
followed anywhere.
A consultation followed as to what
should be done with the bodies of the
slain. Eulomogo and hiis tribe would
undoubtedly discover the bodies, if
not removed, and accuse the Warree
tribe of killing his warriors in time
of peace, and perhaps make the charge
a pretext for war.
The warriors were inclined to risk
the war, and let the bodies remain
w T here they were, but more prudent
council prevailed, the bodies were car-
ried away and secreted, and all marks
of the fight were carefully obliterated.
Eulomogo would miss his emissaries,
but could not tell where they had
gone. He would suppose they re-
mained away in search of game.
SURRENDER OF EUMALGA.
The Meeting on Eumalga Plain.
The meeting between Eumalga and
Saville was emotional. She congrat-
ulated him upon hig escape, admired
his courage, and was glad to think
that it was chiefly through her un-
easiness about him that the warriors
had been induced to accompany her
on the way to meet him, though they
would cross the boundary of Eulo-
mogo’s territory. She received with
terror the news that on the morning
of the seventh day of the new moon
that notorious chief would come to
demand her from her father’s hands.
Only one short week of respite, for
it was now the last day of the old
moon.
Saville comforted her as well as he
could, assuring her that he now had
such confidence in the support of the
warriors of the tribe that he felt sure
he would succeed in the step he had
determined upon, and he was willing
to take any risk for her sake. She
was fain to be content, and to hope
for tine best.
Arrived at Warree’s gunyah, the en-
voys delivered the message from Eulo-
mogo. Warree received it in silence.
The day after this two other envoys
arrived at Warree’s camp. 'Saville had
expected them for no doubt Bulomogo
would be sure Warree’s two envoys
to his camp had been murdered on
their return journey, and then would
think it necessary that Warree should
EUMALGA.


be informed that the appointed day
for the surrender of Eumalga had
been approved. Consequently, Saville
had determined to remain away from
the camp until he should be informed
the new envoys had come and gone,
taking Kumbo with him. for it was
thought desirable that Eulomogo
should remain in ignorance of their
escape.
The two new envoys were ordinary
men of the tribe, but they were re-
ceived by Warree with the usual hon-
or. They explained that their chief
had thought it better and more honor-
able to send two of his own men with
the durian (message) of acceptance
of the appointed day, and they could
take back with them the assurance
that Warree would be on Eumalga
Plain at noon on the day stated. The
envoys kept their eyes rolling about in
search of the whiteman, and at length
asked to see him.
“He is not here,” said Warree, who
had agreed to conceal the fact that
Saville and Kumbo had returned. “He
will doubtless be here to-morrow.”
The strangers made signs to each
other, which, in the light of the pre-
vious proceedings, were well under-
stood.
They then asked to see Eumalga,
and she was shown to them, or, in
modern language, was introduced.
They may have bowed to each other,
but did not shake hands —probably
shaking hands was not then a custom
cf the tribe.
The men departed early next morn-
ing, and Saville, having been inform-
ed, returned to camp.
Warriors were then detailed to
watch on the border of the towri, in
case other messengers should come;
but none appeared.
During the days that intervened,
Saville was all activity. He canvas-
sed the warriors about their willing-
ness to risk even a war with the hith-
erto much-dreaded Eulomogo, and
found them more ready than he antici-
pated. The fact was, they only wanted
a leading spirit, and s ince the fatal
fight of the previous week (which
could not be concealed from the war-
riors) they had regarded Saville with
a reverence almost amounting to wor-
ship, and would do anything he ask-
ed. His color, his prowess, his pos-
session of the musket and other
strange weapons, elevated him in
their minds to such a pitch that had
he so desired they would have pro-
claimed him chief.
Saville saw and appreciated their
feelings towards him, and deeply con-
sidered how he might best avail him-
self of their assistance without bring-
ing them into collision with Eulomo-
go and his tribe. In the latter case
he saw a long and deadly conflict,
which he had every reason to avoid.
He was determined not to allow Eu-
malga to be given up wfthout a
struggle. If the worst came, he would
be prepared. He turned his powder
and bullets into cartridges, made a
cartridge pouch attached to a broad
strap to hang over his shoulder, clean-
ed his musket, and got his native wea-
pons in readiness. Being an expert
swordsman, he prepared himself a
heavy, but well-balanced waddy, or
club, of ironbark wood, with which he
thought he could do good execution in
a melee. And as matters turned out,
it was fortunate he did prepare this
handy weapon. He instructed Eumal-
ga in the use of the musket, and how
to load it. He and Kumbo got the
warriors to look up their warlike
weapons and add to their stock of
spears. The energy Saville displayed
infused amongst them an enthusiasm
that gave promise of good results.
And so the seventh day of the
moon came round. 'Saville was anx-
ious, but hopeful and confident.
Poor Eumalga! She passed the time
in tears. Move her father to pity
she did; but she could not induce him
to recall his promise to Eulomogo.
The honor of the tribe had been pledg-
ed, and, besides, there was the certain
result of war if that pledge was not
kept.
“But he has no more warriors than
we have,” urged Eumalga, “and I am
sure ours can fight as well as Eulo-
mogo's warriors.”
She spoke the truth —the tribes
were pretty equal in numbers. It was
only the superior ferocity, prestige
and skill of Eulomogo that led his
tribe on to victory.
“Enough!” cried Warree, “I can-
not risk a war. Now leave me and be
"prepared.”
“But,” again urged Eumalga, “there
is Ippai. I know he is brave, and he
EUMALGA.


would be on our side with his fire.”
Warree was shaken in his resolve
and paced the ground in evident in-
decision.
“It cannot be. I know well your
preference for this white stranger,
who, I must say, is worthy of your
love —but it cannot be. Under other
circumstances I should have been
glad to give you to him, but the word
of the tribe is pledged—it is now too
late—too late.”
Eumalga saw that it was useless to
further press her request, and retired
to her gunyah to weep in silence—
bitter tears of the deepest sorrow.
The plain upon which the meeting
with Eulomogo was to take place,
was situated about four miles from
Warree’s camp away from the river,
towards the back country. The word
“plain” is rather a misnomer, for it
was timbered here and there with
eucalypti and pine, and is undulating.
It had a park-like appearance, and the
rocky rises close by commanded a
very extensive view. The soil is vol-
canic, and in dry weather cracks and
divides into little blocks. A creek
rises near and runs down into the
river, widening as it goes. The plain
was famous for the kangaroos and
wild turkeys which made it their
home. What the name of the place
was before the time of the events
herein recorded, has not been handed
down, but it was afterwards called
“Eumalga.” The late Mr. J. E. Serisi-
er’s vineyard occupies the site upon,
which the event of the day took place.
A creek not far distant has retained
the name “Eulomogo,” near which
a public school, known by the same
title has been established, and a rail-
way siding bore the same name.
On the morning of the seventh day
of the new moon, the whole of the
warriors of the Warree tribe assem-
bled at their camp and formed into
procession. They were all armed with
boomerang, nulla-nulla, dullu (spear)
and shield. Saville and Kumbo were
in the lead, Warree and the elders,
with Eumalga amongst them, brought
up the rear. There were no other
women in the procession, but a num-
ber of gins came in a body at some
distance behind. Besides the native
weapons, Saville had his musket
slung to his back.
The warriors were animated and
eager, the idea having been spread
amongst them that the day was not
going to end so peacefully as it had
begun. Secret instructions had been
given to a chosen few.
As was usual when in procession,
a song was sung, and it was signifi-
cant that it was rendered with great
excitement. The following is a trans-
lation:—
DITAL DITAL BA-EOO-NAI.
Brothers, brothers, on we go
To meet the foe;
Although we know
Dark strife will grow
On our path;
Yet shall wrath
Nerve our arms to meet the foe.
It was very evident that, whatever
might be the cause, the giving away
of Eumalga was not a popular topic
with the tribe, and that the warriors
would just as readily fight their neigh-
bors as corroboree with them in
friendship.
In this humor the procession reach -
ed the meeting ground a short time
before mid-day. They found the place
already occupied by Eulomogo and
his men. Warree’s procession opened
out to the right and left, leaving the
chief and Eumalga in the centre, op-
posite to where Eulomogo stood in
the centre of his men. Eulomogo
strode forward impatiently.
“How, now, Warree, you are late.
Minyanda wirai buddang buoge? (Why
did you not come sooner?) I have
been waiting here since the shadows
of the trees were longer than their
trunks, and now there is scarcely any
shadow at all. I was beginning to
think you were about to play me
false, and was about to march down
with my men and take the bride you
seem Ad loth to part with.”
“Noble Eulomogo, the sun has not
yet reached the centre of the day.
We certainly do regret that Eumalga
is about to leave our tribe for yours,
but in proof that we intend to carry
out our agreement, behold, she is here.
Karia wannammindya gannanduyan,
gaddugual wirai giarradu!” (I do not
break a promise, neither am I afraid).
One of the Councillors took Eumal-
ga by the hand, and led her forward
to the chief, her father. Warree then
EUMALGA.


took his daughter by the hand and led
her towards Eulomogo. The latter
scanned her features first with an
eager and then with a displeased look.
“Is this the beautiful flower of the
Warree tribe? By my father’s spear,
she looks as if she were going to her
funeral rather than to her husband.”
Addressing Eumalga, he said, “You
will have to alter your looks, girl,
If you want to please me.”
“She is grieved to part with her
friends, noble Eulomogo. In a few
days her smiles will return.”
The old chief thought different, and
was really grieved to think his daugh-
ter wa s *0 he given to the human tiger
in front of him. He would have re-
called his promise even then, but,
alas, he was one of those whose want
of energy led them to perform hu-
miliating acts and to suffer indigni-
ties which a man of energy and de-
termination would have avenged.
The ceremony proceeded. Warree
addressed Eulomogo, saying: “I now.
in fulfilment of the promise I made
to you, on a former occasion, present
you with my daughter. Eumalga, the
flower of the tribe, and the beloved of
her people.”
“Thanoonah!” (Come here) shouted
Eulomogo, fiercely.
Warree was handing the shrinking
girl over to Eulomogo, who, with a
deep frown on his face, was stretch-
ing out his hand to receive her, when
there was a commotion which took
all by surprise except those in the
secret.
A warrior rushed forward, and just
as Eulomogo was about to take hold
of Eumalga, snatched her back, ex-
claiming:
“I claim the girl as mine, and am
prepared to stand any ordeal in de-
fence of my title.”
It is needless to say that the war-
rior -was Saville.
In accordance with an ancient cus-
tom regarding lovers, when consent
of parents had not been obtained, he
had claimed the girl, find the usual
mode of dealing with him would have
been to compel him to stand on the
defensive while the father of the girl
and five of his family threw at him
a certain number of spears, boomer-
angs, and waddies. This was genei-
ally done without any damage, and
the lover then threw his opossum
cloak over the girl and she was his
beyond dispute. But this was an ex-
traordinary case, as 'Saville had ex-
pected. There was a counter claim-
ant as determined as hdmself.
The wrath of Eulomogo was in-
describable as he saw Eumalga cling
affectionately to her lover. Snatching
a Spear from his nearest attendant,
he threw it with great force at the
couple.
“Die, you dogs!” he yelled.
But the movement had been anti-
cipated. Kumbo threw himself in
front and warded off ,the spear, and
Saville was prepared.
No black can spear another, except
when taken in the rear, they are so
expert with the shield.
A dozen spears were instantly in
readiness to be darted at Eulomogo,
hiad he attempted further violence.
Saville could have shot him on the
spot, but he was too generous to take
the advantage of possessing so super-
ior a weapon.
Eulomogo seemed to hesitate about
his procedure: he wag weighing his
chances if he made a sudden onslaught
and he must have noticed how well-
prepared the opposing warriors were,
while his own were comparatively un-
prepared. He quickly decided. A
grim smile illuminated his ferocious
countenance as he said:
“I also claim the girl, and I chal-
lenge the warrior who has seized her
to mortal combat!”
The glare of a tiger was in his eyes,
and his countenance was frightful to
look upon when he recognised, in the
person of the warrior who had snatch-
ed the girl from him, the white man
to destroy whom he had despatched
six men. Those braves had never re-
turned, and here was the white man
before him!
Many a horrible battle had Eulo-
mogo fought, and always had victory
been on his side. As yet no man had
ever been able to stand against him.
He would make this Ippai another vic-
tim. “Gibbannilgirri gualdu!” (I will
be revenged.)
[Note. —In the native tongue, the
letter U appears to be invariably pro-
nounced like oo.]
EUMALGA.


THE DUEL.
The chief, Warree, was utterly as-
tounded at the turn things had taken.
He saw there was a complete under-
standing between Saville and the
most active warriors, and though his
authority had to a certain extent been
set aside, or ignored, he was more
pleased than offended, because he
could not be held responsible for what
had been done without his knowledge,
which ever way matters terminated
and there was the chance of Saville’s
success and Eumalga’s release, and
the death or defeat of a relentless foe.
That Euf.omogo would be mortally
offended Saville was sure, and the
challenge to deadly conflict was what
he expected. On consideration he
was satisfied with the turn events had
taken. As a personal opponent he
rather despised his enemy, notorious
warrior though he was. He deter-
mined to let matters take their
course, and if he could destroy this
monster in open and fair fight, he
would rid the tribe of a dangerous
enemy and thug acquire a fame that
would make him master of all the
blacks in that region. A new thought
struck him. If he had to pass his
life amongst them it should be as
King—not as subject of an inferior
race! Up to this time he had been a
creature of circumstances. He would
how act with a motive and bold policy.
Balgabalgar (king) of a powerful
tribe, he could hold hig own against
other tribes, even if he had to retire
before the advancing strides of the
white men.
The elders of the two tribes met
to arrange the nature of the duel,
and the weapons to be used. It was
agreed that the men should have one
spear, one boomerang, and one nulla-
nulla, or waddie; that they should
stand at fifty paceg and cast the
spear, should run ten paces and throw
the boomerang, and then should close
and settle the contest with the nulla-
nulla. The throwing of the spear
and boomerang was regarded as a
mere preliminary—the real contest
was to be at close quarters.
No delay was made. An even piece
of ground was chosen and the dis-
tances marked.
Eulomogo took his post with fiend-
ish alacrity. A young warrior at-
tended the chief and bore all his arms.
The dreaded chief was stark naked.
He stood about six feet two or three
inches in height, and was of powerful
build, for a black, but, like most of
his countrymen, he was deficient, in
flesh and muscle. His comparatively
spare figure gave him the appearance
of a greater height than he really
was. His skin was jet black, he had
long coarse hair, just tinged with
iron-grey, his beard was long and of
the same color. The expression of
his cruel black eye was terrible to
behold. Every opponent, hitherto, had
quailed before his glance. There were,
no doubt, few blacks in all Australia
who would have been able to stand
jagainst him in single combat. He ap-
peared to be quite aware of the fact,
and anticipated an easy victory.
Saville was not slow in taking his
post, though he did so with more
leisure. He was also naked, with the
exception of a girdle round his loins.
With the exception of a small shield,
his weapons were borne by his faith-
ful friend, Kumbo. As he stood at
his post ready for the signal to begin
the fight, he presented a picture as
different from the savage opposed to
him as is possible to imagine. He
was within two inches of the height
of Eulomogo, but his broad build and
swelling muscles made him appear
shorter than he was. His once white
skin had become tanned by exposure,
but his flaxen hair, of which he had
taken great care, hung down his neck
in curls. His keen blue eye was
piercing, but had nothing of the tiger-
like gleam of his opponent’s. His ap-
pearance was that of a powerful
Saxon athlete or gladiator, cool and
collected in his movements, but watch-
ful.
The two tribes were ranged on
either side, anxious spectators of the
fight. Scenes of this kind were usu-
ally initiated with songs or chants,
but it was remarkable that on this
occasion there was perfect silence.
All felt that something extraordinary
was about to happen. It was to be
no tournament or trial of skill and
courage, as such ordeals generally
were, but a fight to the death of one
or the other.
The Eulomogo men had full confi-
EUMALGA.


dence in the prowess of their chief—
in their opinion he was invincible.
On the other side, the Warree people
were divided., The immediate friends
of Saville had no doubt of his ability
to conquer, but others were fearful,
so much terror had Eulomogo’s name
inspired.
Eumalga was a prominent figure in
the scene. She was the stakes to be
competed for, and stood within the
lines, in full view, waiting for the
cloak of the victor to be thrown over
her. She was terrified, yet confi-
dent, and prayed that the God, of
whom Saville had so often spoken,
would protect him and give him the
victory.
The combatants being in readiness,
the signal for the onset was given
by the elders appointed.
Eulomogo at once poised his spear
on the thrower used for the purpose,
and launched it with great velocity,
instantly afterwards preparing to re-
ceive the spear of his adversary.
Saville had determined not to throw
away a chance or risk anything, re-
serving his efforts for close quar-
ters. He quietly waited for the black’s
spear and turned it off. He then
carelessly threw his own, and it went
so wide of the mark that Eulomogo
made no attempt to parry.
The second act followed. Eulomogo
rushed forward the stipulated number
of paces and threw his boomerang
with wonderful force and dexterity,
again instantly preparing to receive
the weapon of his antagonist.
Saville coolly waited for the boom-
erang, sprang on one side to avoid it,
and then ran forward and launched
his own, making no great effort, as
before.
“Is this a child I am fighting?” said
Eulomogo contemptuously, in his
harsh voice. “I thought I should have
to meet a man!”
‘‘Eulomogo will find a man before
he is done. Where are his six war-
riors he sent to murder two peaceful
envoys? As dead as he shall be ere
long.”
If Saville had said this to infuriate
his opponent still more, he was suc-
cessful, for w r ith the howl of a wild
beast the chief rushed upon him,
nulla-rulla in hand, for the final
struggle. Saville was armed with his
heavy, iron-bark waddie. strong as
well-balanced, and put himself on the
defensive, retaining his shield in his
left hand.
The black chief had no idea of the
art of self-defence or attack, but
thought to rush upon his enemy and
brain him by brute force. He made
some desperate blows at Saville,
which the latter parried with ease, but
did not return, as he was waiting an
opportunity to give a stroke that
would be fatal. This style of fighting
puzzled the black, for he became calm-
/er and more wary. The next moment
he made a terrific blow at Saville’s
left shoulder, which would have crush-
ed the bone had it taken effect. But
the latter skilfully parried with the
shield in his left hand, and immediate-
ly with his right delivered the black
a dreadful stroke on the left ear,
which stretched him on the ground.
Seeing Eulomogo fall, one of his
warriors ran forward to examine the
wound. The base of the skull was
smashed, so heavy had been the blow.
The renowned chief —the tyrant—had
fallen to rise no more.
, With Saville the conflict had never
ben in doubt —he felt he was quite
equal to fighting the chief at close
quarters with his naked hands, and
the latter armed. There was little
doubt he could, but he would perhaps
have only disabled, not killed his op-
ponent.
There was a great commotion when
Eulomogo fell. The Warree men yell-
ed with delight—their opponents
yelled with rage. Eumalga ran in-
to her lover’s arms, and was immed-
iately placed behind the ranks, out
of harm’s way. Saville seized his
musket and ammunition from the
hands of an attendant, and, with a
hundred warriors, was on the alert
to resist any attack.
Spears were poised on both sides,
and there was every sign of a deadly
conflict.
A big, powerful black, said to be
the brother of Eulomogo, rushed for-
ward, and was in the act of throwing
a boomerang amongst the Warree
men, when Saville, seeing the time
had come when he might make a
deep impression on the minds of
both parties, and at the same time
stay further effusion of blood, with
EUMALGA.


the quickness of thought, raised his
musket, and shot the black through
the breast.
He fell as the weapon was about to
leave his hand!
An indescribable consternation fol-
lowed this exhibition of superior
power.
The Eulomogo men had heard ru-
mors from the runners of the white
men’s new weapon, but this was the
first time they had seen one.
The Warree men were more accus-
tomed to the weapon, but even they
had a terrible fear of its effect.
Their opponents fell flat on their
faces in mortal dread as Saville strode
forward, musket in hand, a light
smoke still curling from the muzzle.
The Warree men recovered them-
selves quickly, and having their old
enemies at their mercy, would have
rushed upon them; but Saville ran
between them beating down their
raised spears, and commanding them
to desist. Such was his influence from
that moment that every man obeyed.
Saville then faced the Eulomogo
men and told them to rise without
fear. They did so, and there was si-
lence while he gave a short address.
He said he was a white man who had
left his tribe to reside with the Warree
men, by whom he had been received
as a brother. He had saved Eumal-
ga’s life when she was drowning, and
he thought he had more right to her
than Eulomogo. He intended to pass
his life with the Warree tribe, and
was desirous that peace should ex-
ist between them and their neigh-
bors. He then told them how the
white men were increasing in num-
bers, and emphasised that the Warree
and Eulomogo tribes would be com-
pelled, by the white men’s advance,
to die for want of food, or press back
into the interior, where they would
have to contend against hostile tribes
of a more ferocious character, whose
country they would be invading. He
then counselled close union between
them, so that they would form a
body of warriors who could hold
their own against the inland tribes
upon which they must press.
The chief, Warree, when Saville had
ceased speaking, came forward, and,
in a short address, confirmed what
had been said, so far as his experi-
ence went. His tribe had already
been compelled to come to this side
of the towri through the scarcity of
game near the white settlement. A
large block of land at Nanima, on
the north bank of the river, near the
settlement, had been taken posses-
sion of by a white man, who said the
land had been given him by the great
white chief on the other side of the
mountains which they could see from
that spot. So critical was the state
of things becoming by the advance of
the white man and the scarcity of
game, that he felt himself unequal
to the conduct of the affairs of the
tribe, and would have great pleasure
in resigning his office of Chief in
favor of Ippai (Saville), who had the
skill, knowledge and bravery requi-
site to lead them through all diffi-
culties.
Kumbo followed with an address
in which he extolled the skill and
bravery of Ippai in eloquent terms.
He had listened to his words telling
them of the advance of the white
man, the dispersion of their game, and
the occupation of their ancient hunt-
ing grounds. He would be willing to
bury all animosity and to unite with
the gallant Eulomogo men in the for-
mation of a strong tribe, as suggested.
Kumbo’s speech was subtle and dip-
lomatic. No one, seeing the blacks
as wandering vagabonds amongst the
white men, can judge what they were
like in their natural state.
An old man of the Eulomogo tribe,
named Kubbi, then spoke. They had
heard rumors of the white men from
the envoys who went from tribe to
tribe. This was the first time he had
seen one of those strange beings, and
he was fully impressed with his
strength, skill and courage, and his
possession of a weapon which would
kill so suddenly, and with the use of
which they were so thoroughly ignor-
ant. He had listened to their words
of peace and unity, and thought they
were good. United they would be
able to sustain their lives, and the
lives of their little ones. Divided,
they would be starved. Eulomogo was
dead; they would have to elect a new
chief, and what better could they do
than accept Ippai as chief of the
united tribe.
Another Eulomogo man, named Kap-
EUMALGA.


pai, supported the views of the pre-
vious speaker.
The laws of the aborigines were
rigid and fixed to a degree which can-
not now be realised. They were sanc-
tioned by antiquity, and were faith-
fully observed by every tribe and
every member without a murmur. The
boundaries of the different towris
were scrupulously maintained, and
every trespasser in search of game
was punished with death. Their cus-
toms and ceremonies were of an elab-
orate character, and all their business
was regulated by a Council of old
men, but to which young men, of un-
usual courage and prowess, were
sometimes admitted.
Warree proposed that the council
of the old men of the two tribes now
be held. '
Kubbi agreed on behalf of the old
men of his tribe, but he reminded
them that they first had a solemn duty
to perform, namely, the burial of their
late chief, and the warrior who had
fallen with him. The ceremony could
not take place that day, as the pre-
parations would take a long time, and
it was then considerably past noon.
He proposed that the burial take place
at noon on the second day.
This proposal was agreed to. The
bodies of deceased were placed side
by side on bark stripped for the pur-
pose, and covered with green leaves
and boughs.
A working party was selected to
dig the graves, after which the tribes
separated with courteous ceremony
each retiring to their own camping
ground.
So ended the most memorable event
jn the history of the natives of the
district of which particulars can be
obtained.
THE BURIAL OF EULOMOGO.
The Warree men returned to their
camp on Warree Flat. They could
not restrain their feelings of triumph
through their noble Ippai,and as they
marched home they chanted songs in
his praise. He was their hero. With
him as a leader they -would, dis-
dainful of all dangers, rush upon any
foe, or undertake any enterprise. Nor
was Warree at all jealous. He ap-
peared to be only too glad to have
such a strong staff as Ippai to lean
upon.
Such was the position of Ippai.
He was a gladiator in the eyes of the
blacks, and virtually monarch of all
he surveyed.
According to unalterable and per-
fectly undisputed custom, Eumalga
was now the property of Ippai. No
one dreamed of opposing his right.
Poor Eumalga! What a change had
taken place in her life. Yesterday
she was weeping and beset with a
heavy sorrow—a sadness which she
thought no power could lift from her
soul. To-day, as she gazed upon the
strong face of her lover, she was over-
joyed, bright smiles and happy laugh-
ter replacing the pangs of sorrow.
She was not only thankful for the
turn her life had taken, but happy at
the ending of her trouble with that
brutal chief whom Saville’s strong
arm had despatched to his final hunt-
ing ground.
The congratulations between Ippai,
Warree, Kumbo, and the elders and
warriors of the tribe were loud and
sincere, and council was held on their
future proceedings. They determined
first to honor the funeral of their late
enemy with their presence, as an act
of courtesy to the tribe with which
they now wished to unite.
A little before noon the following
day the Warree men arrived at the
scene of yesterday’s conflict. They
found that two deep graves had been
dug—green leaves and fresh gathered
flowers of the yarren were placed in
the bottom. The bodies were tied up
in their opossum cloaks so that when
seated their knees touched their
mouths. In this attitude the bodies
were gently lowered to their final
resting place, and were then covered
with green leaves. A vacant space of
a few feet remained between the top
of the bodies and the top of the
graves. These were left unfilled, for
no earth must be cast upon the dead.
A sheet of bark, taken from a large
box tree, was placed over the top of
each grave, upon which the earth dug
nit v;as thrown in a large heap.
In the course of time the bark would
rot, the earth would fall in, and then
the graves would be filled. The marks
of the deceased were carved deeply
in the surrounding trees. The men
eumaLga.


drew near and chanted mournful songs
in j raise of the departed, terminating
in wails of sorrow.
The women then came forward and
having lacerated their bodies with the
sharp edges of muscle shells, caus-
ing the blood to flow freely, marched
round the graves, weeping and wail-
ing and shouting loud lamentations.
An agonising shriek concluded the sec-
ond and final portion of the cere-
mony.
The members of both tribes then
silently departed for their respective
camping grounds.
Alas for the aboriginal race! The
mausoleum of a white man now occu-
pies the very site of the dagunmar
(tomb) of Eulomogo! The clumps of
pines, which were left standing by
the clearer’s axe, wave over and shade
alike the bones of the child of the
soil and those of the white usurper!
BALGABALGAR! (KING).
The following day was the time
appointed for the council between the
old men of the two tribes. By mut-
ual agreement, made through messen-
gers, the meeting was held near the
river. Bumalga Plain was avoided by
all parties for a long time afterwards,
and, according to ancient custom, the
very name of the deceased chief was
not mentioned, so great was the re-
verence for the dead.
The Council met at noon, and con-
sisted of Warree, Ippai, Kumbo, and
seven others on the one side, and
ten old men of the Eulomogo tribe
on the ether side. The representa-
tives met in a friendly manner, and
with a courteous demeanor charac-
teristic of the aborigines at that
period.
The meeting was first addressed by
Warree, who repeated his wish to
give up the chieftainship, on the
ground that the white man was ad-
vancing into his temtory, that game
was becoming so scarce, through dis-
turbance, that some new scheme for
securing food would have to be ma-
tured, and that he did not feel him-
self equal to the task of coping either
with the white man or with any of
the surrounding tribes. He conclud-
ed his address by proposing that the
two tribes unite their forces and that
Ippai be chosen Balgabalgar (king or
chief).
Kubbi, elder of the ether tribe, sup-
ported the proposition. Runners had
informed him of the melancholy fate
of the tribes on the other side of
the mountains, since their game had
been disturbed by the white men.
What less could they expect on this
side when the whites increased in
numbers, unless they were prepared
to retreat upon their neighbors.
Ippai rose to address the council.
As he did so, awe was visible on every
countenance. His appearance was
calculated to excite the deepest re-
spect. Unlike the others, he was
neatly dressed in partly European
costume. He had exhausted his ward-
robe for the occasion. He had made
for himself well-fitting mocassins of
hide and a neat jacket, in addition
to which he had shirt and trousers
obtained from the Wellington settle-
ment. A small ammunition bag was
slung over his shoulder, his hunting
knife was in his girdle, and most im-
pressive of all, his dreaded musket
was in his hand. As he spoke, he let
the butt end of the weapon fall light-
ly to the ground, and held it by the
muzzle with his left hand. He told
them he had been brought to their
country by unfriendly white men
against his will; that he had left them
at the first opportunity, and had de-
termined to pass his life with the
Warree tribe and their friends. He
explained how the tribes on the
eastern side of the mountains had
been starved out, and repeated his
prophecy that, in time, the tribes
on the western side would have to
fall back on the tribes in the interior
or starve. No tribe could so fall back
unless it was stronger than its neigh-
bor. By uniting their two companies
they would be able to form a tribe
strong enough to hold their own
against any other they might meet,
and they could fall back in safety. He
complimented the Eulomogo men
upon the renown they had gained
under their late chief, and promised,
if elected king, he would do his best
for the general good, and to increase
the prestige of their name.
Kumbo followed. He was an ad-
mirable speaker, and used “the finish
and completeness of his language and
EUMALGX.


the number and delicacy of its in-
flections.” (as an able writer has as-
serted the native language possessed),
with such success that he was ans-
wered with shouts of applause, and,
(in modern phrase), the proposition
to make Ippai King of the united
tribes was carried by acclamation.
King Ippai returned thanks for the
honor conferred upon him, and re-
peated his determination to do his
utmost for the honor of the tribes and
their general welfare.
A further consultation ensued upon
their immediate course of action As
no large body of people could exist in
one place, it was determined to sep-
arate in small sections, each section
to occupy a different locality. Com-
munication was to be kept up by
means of runners or messengers, and
they were to be prepared to meet at
a given spot at the shortest notice.
The council then broke up. The
next day the tribes separated into a
number of little parties, and each
proceeded to its destination. King
Ippai chose to remain with Warree
and a few chosen men at the camp
they then occupied on Warree Flat.
Ippai had found this a good fishing
ground, and with his superior tackle
could catch fish in sufficient quantity
to support half his party, without fear
of exhausting the supply. Edible
herbs and bulbs also abounded along
the river bank.
His first labor was to build himself
a decent hut, seeing his altered posi-
tion. He made a framework of sap-
lings, and covered and enclosed it
with bark. The fastenings were all
made with throngs of twisted kan-
garoo hide. He collected a quantity
of flat stones, and built a fireplace,
at the end of the hut, topping it with
a wooden framework and bark, in
the afterwards bush fashion. He
made a table in the centre by driving
some pointed saplings into the floor,
fastening cross pieces, and strain-
ing a large kangaroo skin over the
top. A bedstead was made in the
same way, as he deemed it prudent
to sleep a slight height from the
ground.
Eumalga was as happy as the days
were long. For a gin, her lines had
indeed fallen into pleasant places.
She was better treated than her fel-
lows, and under instructions from her
English husband had, with great apt-
ness, assumed a neatness of appear-
ance and modesty of habit that at once
raised her above them. Her dress
was, of couse, very primitive, but
what will not skill and knowledge
effect with the coarsest material, aid-
ed by the few articles secured from
the settlement through Richard Tay-
lor? ,
Ippai made periodical visits to the
outlying encampments, occasionally
taking with him as presents small ar-
ticles he managed to get, through his
white friend at Wellington, of little
intrinsic value, but invaluable in the
eyes of those who had never seen such
things before.
AN INTERLUDE.
It is here desirable to give a short
account of the positons occupied by
some of the different tribes in New
'South Wales, their different dialects
and their origin.
The coastal blacks, between Kemp-
sey, on the north, and Bulli (including
Sydney) on the south, were called
the Kuringai. Their territory ex-
tended inland to the summit of the
Blue Mountain ranges, between Syd-
ney and Bathurst.
From the Blue Mountains a line
running north-west by Babee (near
Rylstone) Gulgong, Cobbora, to near
Coonabarabran, thence south to the
Lachlan River, across the Murrum-
bidgee to the Murray River, was an
immense territory covering the whole
heart of New South Wales, and in-
cluding Wellington, said to be occupi-
ed by a people speaking the Wiradhati
dialect. The true pronunciation of
the name of the dialect was “Wirad-
geri.”
The country between cannonbar
and Bourke, and from Coonamble to
beyong Byrock was the territory of a
people called the Gai-amba, an off-
shoot of the great Kamalaral tribe,
the centre of whose territory was
Gunnedahi. From Cobar to South
Australia, with the Darling River for
a centre, the country was occupied
by a tribe called Ba-kan-ji.
It is said that though the various
dialects differed yet, when tribes
met together, a very short period en-
EUMALGA.


abled them to converse freely, show-
ing the common origin of the lan-
guage. A Wellington friend told me
that when he crossed the Murray at
a place then called the Sand Hills
(now Deniliquin) the blacks on the
south side of the river had a very
different dialect to those on the north
side. Their tongues appeared to hit
the roof of their mouihi with every
word. Neither side of the river could
understand the other. With the party
from Welington were four or five
local blacks who could not under-
stand a word of the language used on
either side. The natives made signs
to them to go away and leave the
white party, but they were afraid to
go, and so refused. Then again, on
the north, the Bourke blacks could
not be understood by those from Wel-
lington..
The territories of the tribes men-
tioned were cut up into small towris,
under different chiefs. The natives
of each territory, too, bore different
characters. The Wellington blacks
were of a mild disposition. They had
plenty of “yabber,” (talk) but show-
ed little fight. On the contrary, the
Bogan people were very fierce and
treacherous. It appeared that the
hotter the climate the more savage the
natives became.
The Rev. John Fraser, 8.A., L.L.D.,
in a learned book upon the “Origin
of the Australian Race,” say s he
proves a kinship between the Dra-
vidian race and thp Australian. Tu
his opinion the home of the negroid
population of Australia is Babylonia.
There, as history tells us, mankind
first began to congregate in great
numbers, and amongst them the Ha-
mites, the progenitors of the negro
races. It seems to have been those
Hamites who were the first to try
to break down the great love-law of
universal brotherhood and equality,
for Nimrod, of their race, wished to
establish dominion over his fellows,
and to raise an everlasting memorial
of his power, like those which his
kindred afterwards reared in Egypt.
The attempt was frustrated by the
confusion of tongues at Babel, and
here began the first movement of the
negro race towards India, and subse-
quently towards Australia. The na-
tive boomerang of Australia is used
in the south-east of India, and can be
traced to Egypt, both of them Hamite
regions.
Another subject needs a little light,
and that was the preponderance of
males over females, which will, no
doubt, account to some extent for the
desire of the Eulomogo tribe to ob-
tain Eumalga. It is stated that the
women, to rear an infant, found it
necessary to suckle it for three years.
Any intervening children would be al-
lowed to perish, no food suitable for
infants being available. A child would
depend on its mother for support un-
til it could subsist on meat. In conse-
quence of the necessity to keep down
the population, male children would
be preferred to females, and the ma-
jority of the latter would be allowed
to die, or would be sacrificed. There
is little to show that infanticide was
a well-known practice, but one in-
stance was heard of many years ago.
The first white woman who came 1o
the Wellington settlement, stated that
on one occasion there was an encamp-
ment of blacks at Wellington, on the
flat where the present municipal coun-
cil chambers now stand, and to her
horror she saw a black gin, at one
larger fire than usual, burning the
body of an infant. Woman-like, she
expostulated with the gin, but the
gin was not the least affected, and
quietly remarked. “Me no want ’im.
Me no want ’im.”
In consequence of the scarcity of
women, in comparison with males,
many men of every tribe were unpro-
vided with wives, who were mostly
nothing better than slaves. Hence,
for those coveting such a luxury, arose
the necessity of stealing the women
of some other tribe; and in these
expeditions the men would cheerfully
undergo privations and dangers equal
to those they would endure when in
search of blood revenge. Finding an
unprotected female at large, they
would stun her with a blow from a
waddy, then drag her by the hair
to the nearest thicket to await her
recovery. When she came to her
senses they would force her to ac-
company them; and as, at the worst,
it was but the exchange of one brutal
lord for another, the women generally
entered into the spirit of the affair
and took as much pains to escape as
EUMAXiQA.


though it were a matter of their own
free will. This outrage is said to have
not been resented by the relations of
the female—they only retaliated by
a similar outrage when they found the
opportunity.
THE EXPLORING EXPEDITION.
The period of our story must now
be advanced to the year 1828. The
drought of 1812 had compelled the
settlers on the eastern side of i-he
Blue Mountains to push their flocks
and herds through the newly discover-
ed pass over these hitherto unpene-
trable barriers; and now again, in the
year 1828. a still more frightful drought
which commenced in 1826, compelled
the stock holders to seek pastures new
for their greatly increased numbers
of sheep and cattle. Mr. Oxley had
previously penetrated the country be-
low Wellington, but had been compell-
ed to turn back by what then appear-
ed to be an inland sea. We know
now-a-days that when the Macquarie,
Bogan, Castlereagh, and other rivers
overflow their banks in flood time, the
interior plains are covered with water,
which flows off again in a compara-
tively short time after the rain at
the river heads ceases.
When Mr. Oxley first reached the
Macquarie marshes, it must have been
in an unusually wet period, or he
must have hurriedly retreated. How-
ever, his surmise that there was
a permanent inland sea was very
natural, borne out as it was by the
fact that all known western rivers
flowed inland, and that as yet no im-
portant outlet to the sea had been dis-
covered. It was against all reason-
able probability that there existed a
system of river drainage by which all
the western waters turned to the
south and emptied themselves into a
lake near the sea on the shores of
Encounter Bay, so named by Captain
Cook.
The drought of 1828 was far more
serious that the previous one of 1812,
and it was thought that an opportuni-
ty was now presented which might
not soon occur again, of exploring the
country round the supposed inland
sea, and the marshy districts of the
lower Macquarie, and even of pene-
trating the mysterious and altogether
unknown country beyond.
An expedition was formed for this
purpose, under the command of Cap-
tain Sturt, of the 39th Regiment. He
wa s accompanied by Mr. Hamilton
Hume, Mr. McLeod, a surgeon, and a
young surveyor, named Johnson, who
had arrived in the colony about a
year previously.
In the month of September, 1828,
the exploring party reached Welling-
ton, and then halted to complete their
preparations. Mr. John Maxwell was
then commandant of the Wellington
settlement. Under his directions, 17
bullocks were broken in to carry a
pack, and two to draw a boat which
was mounted upon a four-wheeled
carriage. Provisions were packed, and
two soldiers and eight prisoners of
the Crown were chosen to accompany
the expedition.
The country was in a frightful state,
owing to the drought. Speaking of
the neighborhood of the Macquarie
generally, Captain Sturt said: “The
vegetable kingdom was about anihi-
lated; minor vegetation had disap-
peared, and the largest forest trees
were drooping and many were dead.
The emus, with outstretched necks,
gasping for breath, searched the
channels of rivers for water in vain,
and the native dog, so thin that it
could hardly walk, seemed to implore
some merciful hand to kill it.” I am
inclined to think the captain was mis-
taken about the native dog, as a
drought would only make grass-eating
animals easier to catch, and the deep
pools of the Macquarie could not be
dry, nor -were they many miles apart.
The season was, however, wretched
enough.
The leaders of the expedition were
mounted on strong hackneys of the
afterwards well-known Sydney breed,
of no great size, but famous for their
speed and endurance.
It was a fine morning in early
spring, the day after the main body
of explorers had left the Wellington
settlement, when Captain Sturt,
Hume and Johnson left the previous
night’s encampment on the river bank
at Terrabella. It was the plan for the
leaders to push on in advance, so as
to discover the proper route and a
halting place for the next night, and
EUMALGA.


return to meet and bring up the main
body.
The three horsemen followed the
river on the right bank, cutting off
all angles that could be perceived.
They had travelled a few miles when
Mr. Hume suddenly reined in his
horse, evidently surprised at some
object ahead. Captain Sturt also
pulled up.
“Look on that rising ground, Cap-
tain. There appears to be someone
living there. It must be a black, but
the hut, for hut it is, looks more
like the work of a white man than
an aboriginal. Let us go and see
it.”
“Agreed,” said the eaptain. “But
look to your rifles, and be in readiness
for anything that may turn up.”
They were each armed with light
rifles, and carried horse pistols in
the holsters of their saddles. They
went up to the hut with caution, and
were disappointed when they found it
tenantless.
“it appears very much like the work
of a white man,” said Sturt. ‘‘But
it cannot be, unless some escaped
prisoner built the place. If so, no
doubt the poor devil has fallen a vic-
tim to the treachery of the natives.”
“Helloa,” said Hume, who had been
examining the surroundings with
great curiosity, “there has been a
woman here,” and he held up a small
piece of female apparel. “This must
have been got from the Wellington
settlement.”
The mystery had thickened. Here
was evidence of both male and female
European occupation, but the occu-
pants had vanished.
“The mystery is partially explain-
ed,” said Johnson, who had been at-
tentively examining everything about
the place. “Here is a name carved on
a tree.”
A box tree stood by, from which the
bark had been stripped. On the trunk
was engraved, in deeply cut Roman
letters, the name,
JOHN SAVILLE, 1827.
“My goodness me,” said Johnson.
“I once knew a John 'Saville Lus-
combe, in the old country, who was
transported for life, on a charge of
murder. I was somehow convinced
he was innocent. He was a good fel-
low, and I knew him well. I made
inquiry about him when I came to
Sydney, but could get no tidings be-
yond the fact that one John Savllle
had arrived in Sydney and been des-
patched to Wellington, from whence
the last report was that he was dead.
John Saville, and John Saville Lus-
combe may be one and the same
person. If so, he had probably es-
caped tiom the settlement.”
“He must have resided here some
time, for there are marks of continued
use of the hut by more than one per-
son,” said Hume.
“If he has not been killed and his
belongings appropriated by the blacks
he must have moved off, taking them
with him, for there is little or no-
thing left behind,” said Sturt.
“Poor fellow,” said Johnson, “I hope
he is safe. I should like to meet him.”
Tne party then went on their jour-
ney, and. having reached the site
of the present town of Dubbo, return
ed t 0 bring up their followers.
Long before nightfall the new camp-
ing place was reached by all hands.
Hay after day the same procedure
took place, until the explorers found
themselves a long way towards the
marshy district described by Oxley.
It had been noticed, as a most re-
markable thing that up to this time
not a solitary black had been met
with since the party left Wellington,
though numbers had been seen in the
distance.
The weather continued dry, and the
day s were exceedingly hot for the
period of the year. It was now Oc-
tober.
On a day that seemed more than
usually sultry, Sturt and Johnson
were out together in advance of the
party. They had crossed one of the
wide treeless plains which charac-
terise the lower Macquarie, and ar-
rived at a thick, scrubby belt of tim-
ber dividing the plain from another.
Sturt proposed a short rest, and
Johnson was only too glad to assent.
They therefore dismounted, tied their
horses under the shadiest trees they
saw, and sought shelter for themselves
under another. Not fearing the prox-
imity of natives, the pistols were left
in the holsters, and the rifles were
stood up in the shade of some bushes.
EUMAIiGA.


The barrels were hot, and it was a
relief to get rid of them.
T don’t see the use of carrying
about these infernal rifles,’ said John-
son. ‘We haven’t met a black since
we started, and if we do, I don’t think
they will harm us.’
T don’t see the use of them,’ said
Sturt, ‘but it is well to be prepared
for any emergency. We know not what
a day may bring forth in this myster-
ious land.’
‘We can, at any rate, rest easy for
an hour or so,’ said Johnson. T sup-
pose we shall soon meet with more
natives than we care to see.’
Here the conversation ended, and,
under the influence of the unusual
heat, and wearied by the journey, the
two explorers fell fast asleep.
They must have been asleep half-
an-hour when Sturt, having the re-
sponsibility of the expedition upon his
mind, was more wakeful than his
companion, opened his eyes and sat
up.
‘Am I in a dream,’ thought he, ‘or
is it reality? Johnson! awake! we are
surrounded by savages!”
Johnson was up in a moment, and
Sturt sprang to his feet. The rifles
had been removed, and between them
and their horses was an uglier lot
of blacks than they had even seen.
It was a fact, as previously stated by
Saville, that the blacks further to the
north-west were much more ferocious
than those about Wellington.
The horses, poor animals, were
pawing the ground with impatience,
greatly terrified by the presence of the
natives, who looked upon them with
as great a curiosity as they did the
white men.
Our two explorers saw at once
that it was utterly impossible to es-
cape. To make a dash for the horses
would be a fatal movement, and even
if they could reach and mount them,
a number of spear s were ready to be
launched, and they would be transfix-
ed before they had moved a yard.
A hideous yell had greeted them as
they rose from the ground.
“It is of no use to attempt to es-
cape,” said Sturt. ‘We had better
stand quiet. They may not intend
to hurt us, after all.”
“Hulloa, there go the horses,” ex-
claimed Johnson, as they broke loose
and scampered away across the plain.
“That chance is lost. If we escape
at all, we shall have to foot it back
to the camp. ”
Some of the blacks now approached
the whitemen and began to address
them in voluble language. Whether
questions were being asked or not
the latter did not know, as they could
not understand a word thiat was said.
Seemingly tired of talking without
eliciting an answer, the blacks mo-
tioned the two whites to follow them
through the scrub. They did so, and
were conducted along a native path,
similar to a cattle track, for about
half-a-mile. They then issued from
the scrubby belt, and the prisoners
found themselves at a large encamp-
ment of blacks on the river bank,
just at the point of a deep angle from
the opposite side.
Loud exclamations, peculiar to the
natives, bad announced their approach
and the whole camp of gins, old men,
young men, and children, were eager-
ly awaiting the arrival of something
extraordinary.
The two men were examined with
the greatest curiosity, and their little
belongings were taken from them and
passed from hand to hand. No indig-
nity was offered the whitemen, nor
were they in any way illused. The
vhole tribe seemed content to stand
and stare at them.
“We are safe for the present,” said
Sturt. “ I don’t think the chief and
some of the principal men are here.”
“Nobody seems to have any particu-
lar authority,” replied Johnson. ‘‘The
chief must be away, and with him
some of the men.”
They were right in their surmise,
for about an hour before sundown the
chief arrived, accompanied by a num-
ber of men who had been with him on
a hunting expedition. The new-com-
ers had to have their look at the
strangers, and the latter were then
talked to in a language they did not
understand.
The chief was of the Eulomogo type
of inferior strength, but having a face
of frightful malignity. Getting no
satisfactory answers from the white
men, he shook a heavy waddie in their
faces.
The two prisoners thought their last
hour had come.
EUMALGA.


“This, then,” said Sture, “is the
end of my ambitious hopes of discov-
ering the particulars of the inland
river system of Australia, and of un-
locking the secrets of the interior.
I suppose we shall be killed and eat-
en.”
“There seems every probability of
such a result,” said Johnson. I see no
hope of escape.. If we could get away
in the dark we should be inevitably
overtaken, for the brutes can track
like sleuth hounds."
“I am afraid there is no hope of
escape,” said Sturt.
‘T am perishing of thirst,” said
Johnson. “I wish the fellows would
get us a drink.”
“Let us make signs to them for
water,” said Sturt.
They did so, and were understood
by a gin, who brought them a coola-
min of water, which they drank eager-
ly.
A “coolamin” is simply a piece of
bark stripped from the knob of a
tree. The blacks use them to hold
honey or water; they will last a reas-
onable time before splitting, but any
number could be got in the forest.
Food was not offered the prisoners,
but, if it had been, they were too de-
pressed to eat.
While this was going on an animat-
ed discussion was proceeding between
the chief and the old men of the tribe.
The prisoners could already make out
that the chief and a few men wanted
to kill them, while others were for
letting them go. After a time the
discussion grew warmer, the chief be-
came furious, and, as if to decide the
matter at once in hi s own way, he
made a rush at the prisoners, waddy
in hand, with the evident determina-
tion to kill them, in spite of all coun-
sel.
‘‘Good-bye, Sturt.”
“It is all over with us, Johnson,
good-bye, for ever.”
The lives of the two white men
hung, as it were, upon a thread. Ap-
parently nothing but a miracle could
save them.
But an interruption did occur, or
Sturt would never have lived to dis-
cover the Murray.
THE MYSTERIOUS HORSEMEN.
The attention of the chief and those
rushing on with him was distracted
by a most unusual and unknown noise.
It was no less than the gallop of a
shod horse coming along the path
from the belt of timber in which the
prisoners had been captured.
Previous to this time the natives
had never seen a horse, though prob-
ably they had heard of the animal us-
ed by the wMte man through their
runners, or detailers of news, who
went from tribe to tribe.
The first horseman to arrive on
the scene of contemplated murder
was a powerfully built man, who, at
first sight, might have been taken for
a black, for he was dressed in skins,
and his head was encircled by a band
in which were stuck some bright fea-
thers. But his complexion, though
bronzed by exposure, was too light
for an aboriginal, and European feat-
ures at once proclaimed him to be
a white man. His bearing was as of
one accustomed to command.
The other horseman was unmistak-
ably an aboriginal, but his features
were intelligent, and he seemed to
have borrowed some of-the haughty
bearing of his leader.
“They are our horses," said Sturt;
“but who are the riders? Are they
friends or foes?”
“Yes, they are our horses, sure
enough. The men must have caught
them after they broke away. Whe-
ther the riders are friends or foes
it would be hard to say, but they
cannot be worse foes than those who
were about to attack us.”
“That magnificent fellow riding
your horse, Sturt, is surely not a
blackfellow. Look at his hair, eyes,
and complexion. I believe we are
safe after all!”
While this conversation was pro-
ceeding the white horseman, for such
he undoubtedly was, had commenced
to address the awe-stricken blacks.
His manner was bold and threatening,
and his language violent. He spoke
fluently in the native tongue.
“Stand back, yammadi! (dog).
Touch not one of those white men; or
the vengeance of the White Chief
shall fall upon you. I will strike
with lightning the man who dares to
EUMALGA.


injure these or any other white men
visiting this towri. Listen how I can
make the thunder speak!”
He had drawn a pistol from the
holster, and suddenly fired it over
their heads. The bullet whistled
through the air, and the report filled
the listeners with consternation. To
add to their terror, a loud yell was
heard near at hand, and as if in ans-
wer to the pistol shot, a band of some
fifty or sixty armed natives rushed to
the side of their leader.
The White Chief sprang off his horse
and the black horseman also dis-
mounted.
Going up to the two white prison-
ers, the chief said, in pure English,
but with a strange intonation, caused
by the long use of thie native tongue:
“Captain Sturt and Mr. Johnson, I
am aware you are the leaders of the
party now exploring the course of the
river. I have watched your progress
and guarded you from dangers. It
has been my good fortune to save
you from a sad fate at the hands of
the villainous chief who heads this
band of natives.”
“I saw your horses running loose
over the plain, and managed to catch
them, and, fearing something had hap-
pened, I and my lieutenant mounted
and tracked the horses to the belt of
timber, ordering a number of my
men to follow at their utmost speed.
From the tracks on the ground I in-
stantly divined what had happened,
and came on here. The tracking took
some time, but fortunately my arrival
was not too late. Here are your
horses. Mount and I will escort you
to within sight of your camp. Has
anything been taken from you?”
“Thanks, chief, for your timely res-
cue. It would have been all over
with us had you arrived a minute
later. You appear to be a white man.
Might I inquire your name?”
“I am Ippai, king of some united
tribes; but we can talk as we go
along. Have you lost anything?”
The rifles were mentioned and the
few articles which had been taken
from their persons.
The chief addressed a few words
to his lieutenant, who instantly set
about collecting everything that had
been stolen. When the smallest ar-
ticle had been recovered, the chief
said:
‘‘Kumbo, remain here to protect our
rear until we have time to get through
this scrubby belt, and then hasten
after us. Come on, gentlemen, this
way—l will be your guide.”
Sturt and Johnson mounted their
horses with alacrity, and followed
their friend. With great
speed and endurance he ran before
them on the way to their camp, never
hesitating as to the route.
The sun now sinking rapidly,
and soon darkness began to creep
over the scene. But still onward went
the guide, till the gloom of the night
had quite set in. Suddenly stopping,
he said;
“I need go no further. Do you see
yonder light?”
Sturt looked in the direction point-
ed out, and at last discovered the
flickering light of a fire a long dis-
tance across the plain.
“Yes, I see a light.”
“Well, that is your camp fire. Make
straight for it, and you will reach
it in a short time. “Good night.”
‘‘But won’t you come to the camp
with us? I shall be sorry to part thus
with one who has done us such ex-
treme service.”
“Is there nothing I can give you,
or do you you?” inquired Sturt.
“No, nothing. My wants are few.”
“But I will insist upon you taking
something. If you don’t like visiting
the camp, I will make up a small
parcel from the store and leave it
on the camp when we depart. Money
would be of no use to you.”
“Well, I accept, but not for myself.
Once more, good night.”
The white chief turned round, strode
quickly away, and disappeared in the
darkness.
Sturt and Johnson reached the camp
in safety, thankful for their escape.
Their account of the day’s adventure
was listehed to by McLeod and Hume
with great wonder.
Who can this mysterious and power-
ful chief be? Evidently he wag a
gentleman born.
“I cannot think where I have seen
the man before,” said Johnson. Then,-
with a brightening look, he suddenly
exclaimed: “By George, I have guess-s
EUMALGA.


ed it. And yet his appearance is so
changed! ”
“But who is he?” asked the others,
quickly.
“Do you remember the deserted hut
we saw about five and twenty miles
this side of Wellington?”
“Yes, I do,” said Hume.
‘‘And do you recollect we saw carv-
ed on the tree, the words, “John Sav-
ille?”
“I recollect.”
“And I told you I thought I knew
the man at home.”
“Well?”
“Why, this white chief, who has this
day saved our lives, is no less a per-
son than my old friend, John Saville
Luscombe.”
LIEUTENANT KUMBO.
The camp of the explorers was on
the right side of the Macquarie, at
the commencement of a deep bend or
angle to the left. Sturt and John-
son had explored the course of the
Macquarie round this bend till they
came to the scrubby belt at the point
of a deep angle from the other side of
the river. Under the guidance of
King Ippai, their return journey had
been much) shorter, as they cut direct-
ly across the point round which they
had gone during the first part of the
day.
The next morning Captain Sturt
assembled his men and told them of
the proximity of a tribe of blacks who
were likely to be hostile to their fur-
ther progress. He related his own
narrow escape, but determined to push
on at all hazards. They were fourteen
men in all, armed with rifles, and he
argued that no tribe of blacks, of the
number they expected to meet, could
prevent their passage down the river.
Many of the natives were friendly dis-
posed, and all would have a great
terror of the rifles when once dis-
charged. At the same time he re-
quested his followers to have a sharp
Icok-out, to keep together, and to be
well prepared.
The men were unanimous in ex-
pressing their determination to go on,
and spoke contemptuously of the na-
tives.
The tents were struck, the bullocks
were yoked, and the party prepared
to move on. But before doing so, the
leaders held a consultation upon what
they could spare to leave behind as
a present for the hero of the previous
day.
“The chief,” remarked Johnson,
“said he would accept our kindness,
but not for his own sake. He must
have someone else to think of —per-
haps a wife. You remember we saw
a portion of female apparel at the de-
serted hut.”
“By jove, yes.” said Hume. “I won-
der whether she is a white woman. If
so, she must also have escaped from
the settlement.”
‘T don’t think any women are sent
to Wellington,” said McLead, “so she
must be black.”
“However, black or white,” said
Sturt, “we must do the best we can
for her, for her husband’s sake.”
The expedition was not overburden-
ed with supplies, but they had a good-
ly store of comforts and nick-nacks,
and a parcel of what was thought to
be the most useful things was made
up, directed to King Ippai, and left
on the camp.
Johnson was at first inclined to
write a few lines to let the chief know
he had been recognised, but he did
not do so, thinking that as he had not
made himself known, and had con-
fessed that he knew the names of the
leaders of the exploring party, he evi-
dently did not wish to be recognised,
“He surely did not think there was
any fear of his being arrested as an
escaped prisoner.” said Sturt.
“I think not,” said Johnson. “It
was no doubt his unwillingness to
appear amongst us as a convicted fel-
on. And from what we saw of the men
under his command, I should say
they would make it pretty warm for
a small party like us having their
chief a prisoner. So he could have
no fear on that score.
“I think you are right,” said
Sturt. “He must wish to be unre-
cognised.”
Here the conversation ended, and
the order to advance was given. Under
the guidance of Sturt, who had taken
notes of the course of the river, a
cut was made across the plain to
the river bank, a short distance from
where it was intersected by a belt
of timber before mentioned. This was
EUMALGA.


a good day’s work for the bullocks, as
there was no water, though they had
no heavy waggons to draw. It was
also thought advisable to halt before
reaching the camp of natives known
to exist on the other side of the tim-
ber and prepare for hostilities.
The camp was accordingly pitched
on the open plain about a mile from
the scrub, and guards were mounted
and relieved at intervals during the
night.
Nothing disturbed them, however,
and in the morning not a solitary
black was to be seen.
The danger now anticipated was
an attack while passing through the
scrub.
The leaders were consulting about
the best course to take when they
were astonished by the appearance
amongst them, as if by magic, of a
black, bearing in his hand the green
branch of a tree which he waved in
token of friendship. As he was totally
unarmed the whites made no move-
ment to arrest or hinder his closer
approach. He was a young man, with
unusually intelligent features, and he
was dressed in neat garments of skin,
smacking of European manufacture.
Going up to Captain Sturt he held
out a fresh piece of bark, on the in-
ner side of which were scratched the
words: “The way is clear—the bear-
er will guide you.”
“Hulloa, this is the chief’s, lieuten-
ant, who protected our rear the other
night. I can recognise him by his
head-dress,” said Johnson.
Captain Sturt took the piece of bark
and read the inscription.
“What do you make of this, gentle-
men; ‘the way is clear —the bearer
will guide you!’ So says this letter
from our countryman king. Can we
trust it? Is no treachery intended?”
“I would stake my life on the
chief’s honesty,” said Johnson. “Be-
sides, has he not already saved the
lives of two of us, when he might
have left us to be killed, simply by
not interfering?”
“True, I think we may trust him,”
said the captain.
They then turned and questioned
the black, and to their surprise found
he could speak a few words of Eng-
lish. The White Chief had evidently
being occupying his leisure hours in
improving the education of the lieu-
tenant, who was no less a person
than our old friend Kumbo, much
improved in bearing by contact with
Saville, with whom he was a great
favorite. The blacks were great imi-
tators, and readily adapted themselves
to the European modes.
“Blackfellow all gone,” said he,
pointing to the position of the camp.
“How do you know?” said Sturt.
“Me take word from chief tell um
go. See um all go way quick.”
“If they had not gone, what then?"
asked Hume.
“Make um go. White Chief plenty
warrior, well trained. Fight all tribes
and beat um," said Kumbo, proudly.
‘How came you to learn white man’s
language?” asked McLeod.
“White Chief teach me. I learn
quick. Suppose speak to me, other
blackfellow no hear. Me Lieutenant
Kumbo.”
Kumbo drew himself up to his full
height, and looked very much as if
he felt himself the equal of anyone
present.
“Did your chief get the things left
for him at our camp last night?” ask-
ed 'Sturt.
‘‘Yes, I send warrior to go fetch
him, and take to chief’s gunyah.”
“Has your chief got a wife?”
“Yes, he got daughter of old chief
Warree. She say thankee for berry
good present. Look, gib me this!” and
he displayed a handsome pocket
knife which had been packed amongst
the goods.
“You seem to be favorite, Kumbo?”
“Yes, chief berry kind to me; like
brother.”
“And so the blacks who took us
have left their camp,” said Sturt, and
-we can go on without fear?”
“Yes, you go on.”
“Well, we’ll take your word for it
and move on. I have no doubt what
you say is true, and you need not
trouble to guide us; we can follow the
river down.”
“Chief say me go first, show way.
Must go.”
“Very well, then, we will accept
your leadership. But we have not yet
had breakfast. Have something to eat
with us.”
The foregoing conversation was car-
ried on with a little difficulty. Kum-
EUMALGA.


bo could not understand many of the
words, but his intelligence very quick-
ly led him up to the meaning.
The invitation to eat was accepted,
for no black ever refuses a feed. The
lieutenant was treated to salted meat
and biscuits, and some of the more
dainty luxuries still in the larder
of the expedition.
“A fine fellow this,” said Sturt,
aside, to Hume. “We seem to be in
luck’s way. It seems that the route
has been cleared for us, and a power-
ful hand has protected us from un-
seen dangers.”
Kumbo was keenly questioned upon
the habits and position of his white
chief, but nothing could be got from
him except the oft reiterated reply
that he was a great chief—king of all
that region.
“Tt is not exactly right to pry
into our countryman’s position in this
manner,” said McLeod. “And it is just
as well not to give him any offence.
This lieutenant of his will give a
faithful description of our questions.”
“I am sorry your countryman holds
aloof from us,” said Sturt. “But I
suppose he is too proud to come before
us in the character of an escaped con-
vict. Why, he has done enough al-
ready to entitle him to a free par-
don, and if I am fortunate enough to
return safely to Sydney, I will make
such representations to the Governor
as will ensure a pardon at once.”
“From his present conduct,” said
Johnson, “I doubt whether he would
accept a pardon without it came with
a full admission and proof of his inno-
cence—and I really believe he is in-
nocent.”
‘‘l think you are right,” said Sturt.
“I think I should act in the same way
if I were similarly situated. However,
we cannot compel him to visit us.
No doubt Lieutenant Kumbo will de-
liver to him our thanks for this ad-
ditional favor, and assure him of our
gratitude and willingness to aid him
in any way possible.”
Breakfast was now over, and every-
thing was packed for another start.
In the meantime, the bullocks had
been yoked and the horses saddled.
The leaders of the expedition placed
themselves at the head of the party,
and with rifles loaded and pistols in
their holsters, the order to march was
given.
Kumbo quickly ran to the front and
showed the way along a native path
through the belt of scrub.
These native paths have been dis-
covered in every part of the country,
and lead unerringly from point to
point, or across mountain ranges, not
by the straightest line, but by the eas-
iest road, for a blackfellow, any more
than a white man, would not travel
over a rugged path, no matter how
direct, if an easier one, though more
circuitous, was to be found.
With very little difficulty a passage
was cut for the waggon through places
where the path narrowed, and by noon
the party arrived at the scene of the
encampment previously described.
Not a black was to be seen, and
every fire was extinguished, a sure
sign that the spot would not be re-
visited for a long time. Once let the
fires go out accidentally, or bd ex-
tinguished purposely, and the camp
would be abandoned for no other
reason.
“You see,” said Kumbo, pointing to
the deserted gunyahs, “White Chief
say true —:Kumbo say true —blackfel-
low all gone!”
“I am sure we are much obliged
to you and your chief," said Sturt. We
should have had a little difficulty in
getting through that scrub, with show-
ers of spears falling on us from un-
seen foes. We do not fear the open
plains, but I confess the scrubs often
make me feel nervous.”
’T leave now,” said Kumbo. “You
go on —no fear more blackfellow long
time.”
“Well, good-bye, Kumbo. Give my
thanks to your white chief, and take
this present for yourself,” said Sturt,
as he handed to Kumbo a new toma-
hawk. “I shall, perhaps, meet you
again. I hope so.”
“Suppose blackfellow stop you,
white chief help you, then see you
again,” said Kumbo, as he turned back
on the path and was quickly lost to
view.
“This is becoming quite a romance,”
said Johnson. ‘‘But, romance or not,
such powerful auxiliaries are very
welcome, and auger well for the suc-
cess of our expedition.”
EUMALGA.


"This white chief and lieutenant
appear to be noble fellows,” said
Sturt. “I willingly accept their aid,
and will get a pardon for your friend,
Luscombe, whether he likes it or
not.”
HISTORICAL.
All thoughts of the white chief and
his sable lieutenant were now dis-
missed by the explorers. The anxie-
ties of the journey occupied a prom-
inent place in their minds. The pro-
gress of the party was very slow,
and it was not till the 26th December
that they reached the great marshes,
which .when flooded, Oxley had taken
for an inland sea, and from which he
had been compelled to retreat. Here
the scene was of the most gloomy de-
scription. A dreary expanse of reeds
met the eye in every direction. The
boat, which had been drawn on wheels
from Wellington, was now launched
on a small, sluggish stream, and by
its use Captain Sturt attempted to
penetrate the reed beds, but he soon
found that the stream, small as it
was, became divided into other small-
er watercourses, and eventually the
whole were lost. Nothing but reeds
could be seen, and the Captain, in
despair, returned to his fprmer camp.
In the meantime, Mr. Hume had been
out on horseback towards the north,
but had also been compelled to return
to the camp, having been prevented
by the marshy nature of the country
from exploring it to any considerable
distance, for it was found that, al-
though there was not sufficient water
for navigation, there was enough to
render the country so swampy and
boggy that travelling on horseback in
any direction was difficult, and in most
cases impossible.
After many researches they at
length came to a part of the reeds
where the water had dried up, the
clay beneath their feet being baked
and hard. There was the same dreary
stretch of reeds, now withered and
yellow under the glare of the sun.
The explorers endeavoured to pene-
tate this solitude, but the physical ex-
ertion of pushing their way through
the tangle was too great. If they
paused to rest, they were almost suf-
focated in the hot and pestilent air.
The only sound they could hear was
the distant booming of the bittern,
and a feeling of the most lonely
wretchedness pervaded the scene.
They proceeded with difficulty for
some time in a northerly direction,
when the party again divided, and
Captain Sturt, with his division,
emerged upon scrubby land and sandy
plains, over which he rode for two
hundred miles.
Mr. Hume, with his party, after
crossing various creeks and a chain
of ponds, again joined the main party,
and they proceeded north over a great
plain covered with shells and claws
of crayfish, evidences that the country
had very recently been under water.
The explorers were greatly irritat-
ed by mosquitoes and a fly called the
kangaroo fly, and were frequently in
great want of water. Their positic.i
was, altogether, exceedingly depress-
ing; but on they went, day after day,
until on the 4th February, 1829, their
spirits were revived by the discovery
of a river about 250 feet wide, deep,
and covered with wild fowl. They
named this river the Darling. In
tracing its course downwards they
came upon various camps of natives,
who set fire to the reeds and bush to
drive the intruders back.
In spite of all obstacles, however,
the explorers pushed on until they
found that the Darling received a con-
siderable tributary from the south-
east. This they took for a continua-
tion of the Macquarie, after its es-
cape from the marshes, and they trac-
ed it up some fifty or sixty miles, and
then proceeded in a south-easterly
direction, towards the Castlereagh.
That river, which, ten years before,
had been a fine stream, was found to
be merely a dry channel, overgrown
in many places with reeds and bushes.
They followed this channel for about
100 miles, where they again struck the
Darling. This was the 29th March.
It is now known that the stream
which joined the Darling, and which
Sturt at first took for the Macquarie
was the Bogan, as afterwards called,
that being . the native name. The
river into which the Castlereagh was
traced has since been called the Bar-
won, which flows into the true Dar-
ling further on.
EUMALGA.


THE ATTACK AT THE SHALLOWS.
Through all their wanderings, the ex-
plorers had managed to preserve their
boat, which was now launched upon
the stream, and the captain and six
others (Hume, Johnson and four con-
victs) took their places in it. The
rest of the party, commanded by one
of the soldiers, with the boat carriage
and cattle, were to go on by easy
stages until they were met by Sturt
on his return, his intention being to
follow the river no great distance, but
to come back and start on his return
journey to Sydney,' after striking
across country to their original track
along the Macquarie.
And here it may be mentidned that
the feat was accomplished, all arriv-
ing back in safety. "The very boat
was brought back to and
deposited under a verandah at the
stockade, where it remained until it
rotted to pieces. It is a pity this boat
was not preserved as a memento of
the journey.
A week had elapsed. The boatmen
had made great progress, and the
journey had been so delightful and
easy, and given such rest to the tired
men, that the leader had permitted
the boat to go further than he in-
tended. The scenery was splendid;
the river wound sometimes between
steep, high banks, at other times in
a broader sheet, where the banks
were low and the view extended.
Sometimes there were thick scrubs,
sometimes open forest lands of park-
like appearance, and at other times
there were vast, treeless plains. Fish
were plentiful and easily caught, and
wild fowl were in abundance. The
explorers took their mid-day meal on
shore, where they found a suitable
landing place, beneath some shady
trees, and at night a tent was pitched.
The boat glided gently down the
widening stream; there was a fair
wind, and a sail was hoisted.
“Thi s is our last trip,” said Sturt.
“A week or two at most, and we shall
be on our way home. I confess I am
getting tired of the journey, and shall
be glad to be once more with our
friends in Sydney.”
“Yes,” said Johnson, "the thing is
becoming monotonous. I don’t care
how soon we start for home.”
“By George,” said Hume, “I think
the monotony is likely to be changed
in a manner we little expect.”
“How so,” asked Sturt.
“Why, look at that crowd of blacks
assembling down there!”
Hume had been the only observant
person in the boat. The leader and
others had been lolling about in list-
less idleness. Indeed, the easy motion
of the boat, the balmy breeze, the
moderate heat, was such a change
from the tiring land journey they
had just accomplished, that all felt
inclined rather to sleep than remain
watchful in the passing scenery—with
the exception of Hume. This member
of the party was a native of the Col-
ony, a most expert and intrepid bush-
man, anxious to distinguish himself on
all occasions, but of a rather domin-
eering disposition.
Hume’s exclamation caused all in
the boat to direct their attention to
the quarter indicated. Throughout
their wanderings they had seen very
few natives.
“It appears as if all the natives of
this region have congregated on this
river,” said Sturt, after gazing a few
moments at the large number of
blacks under some trees at no great
distance on the right bank of the
river.
‘‘Yes, and they are painted and arm-
ed, too,” said Hume, “as they generally
are, previous to going into deadly con-
lict.”
Notwithstanding these signs of hos-
tility the boat was allowed to drift
on. Captain Sturt, who was steering,
let the boat go straight for the bank
on which the natives were collected,
under the impression that they would
turn out to be friendly.
“There goes their war-song,” said
Hume. “I think we had better pull
to the other side.”
The boat had now approached so
near that the blacks held their spears
quicering in their grasp ready to hurl.
They were painted in various ways.
Some, who had marked their ribs,
thighs and faces with a white pigment,
looked like skeletons. Others were
daubed with red and yellow, and their
bodies shone with the grease with
which they had besmeared themselves.
A dead silence prevailed amongst the
front ranks—it was those in the
EUMALQA.


background who were chanting the
war-song. Behind all was a multitude
of women, who carried supplies of
spears, and who were extremely clam-
orous. They appeared a s if they had
had a bucket of whitewash capsized
over their heads.
“What on earth are the wretches
at now,” said Sturt.
‘‘lt strikes me they are making for
that bank which projects into the
river, and which will bring us within
range,” said Hume.
As he spoke, the natives reached
this point, or bank, and covered it
in a dense mass.
“That’s their plan,” replied Sturt.
“Then we shall have to fight our way.
I told you the monotony of the jour-
ney was about to change, and it has
changed, with a vengeance. How do
you like the present aspect of af-
fairs, Johnson?”
“It looks rather blue,” replied he.
“1 think we shall have room to
pass by out of shot,” said Sturt, as
he steered close in to the left bank.
One of the blacks, apparently the
chief, advanced into the water, and
turned from time to time to direct
his followers.
‘‘By heaven,” said Sturt, “the w’ater
is shoaling fast —fight we must. The
fellows must be half way across the
river.”
It is said of Sturt that he never
directly or indirectly caused tbe death
of a black, but with his extreme re-
luctance to take away life, he now
saw the impossibility of avoiding an
engagement. And with such enormous
numbers against them he was fear-
ful of the result. The situation was
most appalling. They were but six
in number, in an open boat, and the
stream, shoaling so fast that it
appeared probable the blacks would be
able to completely cross the water.
This was soon proved to be nearly the
case, for a number of blacks, as the
boat approached, strode out into the
river up to within a very short distance
of the opposite side.
“There appears to be a narrow-
channel of deep water close in to the
left bank,” said Hume.
“They appear to have gone as far
as they can,” said Sturt. “That fur-
thest out man is much lower than the
others.” pointing to a black who was
up to his armpits in the water, while
the others were scarcely up to their
hips.
“Yes, I think we have gone near
enough,” said Sturt, ‘‘they look de-
cidedly dangerous.”
A new difficulty had presented it-
self. It was discovered that the river
made a sharp reach to the right, into
which it was too late to turn under
sail. At this critical moment the
blacks began to cast their spears, but
fortunately, owing to the onward mo-
tion of the boat, they were unable to
throw with certainty, and no one was
hit. Seeing the failure of their aim,
the blacks flung themselves into the
most extravagant attitudes, and work-
ed themselves into a frenzy of loud
and vehement shouting.
“Down with the sail,” cried Sturt.
“Out with the oars!..
The order was quickly obeyed, and
the men pulled for their lives. Sturt
steered across the stream to the left
bank, along which the boat sped in
safety.
Disappointed in their expectations,
the blacks ran along the right bank,
endeavouring to secure an aim, but
failed for the time.
All at once it was noticed that the
blacks were imbued with a new idea,
for they all ran at top speed down
the river.
The litle band of whites preserved
their coolness, and if anything could
be gleaned from their countenances,
it was that they had determined upon
an obstinate resistance.
Addressing all under his command,
Sturt said: “Gentlemen and prisoners,
you see our predicament. Our only
chance of escape is in our firmness.
We will steer along the deep water.
Mr. Johnson will take the helm. Every
person take his musket and join in
a first volley. After firing, you three
prisoners attend to the defence of the
boat with bayonets only, while myself
and Mr. Hume will continue firing.
'.But let no shot be fired until I have
discharged both my barrels.”
The command was agreed to by a
loud cheer. Each man seized his
weapon, and at the same time Sturt
distributed seme loose cartridges. He
was himself armed with a double-
barrelled fowling piece.
The oars were now abandoned and
EUMALGA.


the boat drifted on with the stream
towards the fatal spot, carefully steer-
ed by Johnson.
“We shall, after all, only have them
on one side of us,” asid Sturt.
As they neared the bank the cap-
tain stood up and made signs to the
natives to desist, but without success.
Sturt then took up his gun, cocked
it, and brought it to a level, taking
aim at the nearest savage, in the
hope that the fall of one man would
save the lives of many. The distance
was now too trifling to doubt the
fatal effects of the discharge.
Amongst the whites there was a
perfect silence, their very breath was
suspended in anxiety for the signal
shots.
Sturt’s finger was on the trigger
and his eye was glancing along the
barrel. A few seconds more and the
life of at least one of the blacks would
have been closed. But at the very
moment that the captain was about to
pull the trigger, his purpose was
checked by Hume.
“Look, Captain, to the left,” cried
Hume. ‘‘We are indeed in for it
now. There are a lot of black devils
approaching on our left, who will
spear us from the top of the bank as
we pass under.”
Sturt turned his eyes to the left,
and was horrified to see another par-
ty of blacks coming on the scene. It
consisted of four men only, who were
running at the top of their speed. The
leader was several yards ahead of the
others. He was a big, powerful fel-
low, and arrived on the river bank a
few moments after he was first ob-
served.
The attention of the blacks on the
other side was also arrested by the
newcomers. It seemed as if some-
thing extraordinary and totally unex-
pected had caused both blacks and
whites to pause before entering into
the deadly conflict which was but
awaiting the signal shots.
SAVED BY THE WHITE CHIEF.
The scene was now one of the most
intense interest. The destruction of
the little party of whites seemed in-
evitable, within easy range, as they
were, of several spearsmen, those on
the left bank being scarcely ten feet
from them and above their heads.
The silence was broken by Hume,
whose keen eyes had been fixed upon
the leader of the newcomers.
“Hurrah,” he shouted, “here’s our
friend again!”
“The White Chief!” exclaimed Sturt,
in utter amazement.
“By jove, it’s my old friend again,”
said Johnson.
“Hurrah for the White Chief.”
,»houted everyone in the boat, under
one of the sudden inspirations com-
mon under exciting circumstances.
The White Chief, or King Ippai, or
Saville, as he was occasionally called,
for it was indeed that renowned indi-
vidual, as he paused for a moment
on the bank, acknowledged the salute
with a bow.
‘‘Don’t fire, gentlemen,” said he,
hurriedly, “don’t fire, leave these fel-
lows to me.”
Captain Sturt had the greatest con-
fidence in the White Chief, which was
shared by all under his command.
“Lower arms, gentlemen,” com-
manded Sturt; “but be on the alert,
we may assist our countryman.”
As he spoke, the White Chief plung-
ed from the top of the bank down
into the river, quickly shot through
the deep water, and in another mo-
ment was in front of the foremost
black on the other side, and against
whom Sturt’s aim had been directed.
Seizing the man by the throat the
White Chief pushed him back with
r.mazing strength until he was among
two or three others of his compan-
ions in shallow water.
‘“Back, yammadi,” (dog) cried he,
with a vehemence and agitation that
wa s exceedingly striking. ‘‘Touch
one of these white men and I’ll bring
fire and thunder upon your heads.
Back, back, and let the white men
pass in peace!”
As was afterwards known, amongst
the hostile blacks was the chief from
whom 'Sturt and Johnson had been
rescued when prisoners In the belt
of scrub on the Macquarie. This
black was named Boro, and was of a
most malignant character. His hat-
red of the whites was intense, and it
was chiefly through his efforts that
the present attack upon the explorers
had been arranged. He was the fore-
EUMALGA.


most man in the water, and was close
to the White Chief when he pressed
back the black from the deeper water.
Boro had particular hatred for the
White Chief, not without cause, for
by the strength of the latter’s com-
bined and redoubtable tribe he had
been forced to leave the ancient hunt-
ing grounds, or towri, of his people.
Boro thought he saw an opportunity
for immediate vengeance. He was
armed with a waddie, and with savage
delight he raised the weapon with
the intention of making a furious blow
at the White Chief.
Two of the White Chief’s men paus-
ed j,on the bank of the river, but
the- third plunged in after his chief
and quickly made his way to his side.
“Lieutenant Kumbo,” shouted Hume.
“It is indeed the lieutenant,” said
Sturt. “Faithful fellow, he is close
to his master’s heels.”
Kumbo, as he raced through the
water, was greeted by a loud cheer
from the occupants of the boat.
As the lieutenant reached his chief’s
side Boro raised the deadly weapon,
but the stroke was never made. See-
ing his chief’s danger, Kumbo threw
himself on the black, and they fell
together in the water.
|Jumbo was the next athlete t 0 his
chief in the tribe, and was far more
than a match for his weaker but more
treacherous foe, and would have chok-
ed him, under water, had not the
White Chief said, in English;
“Let him up, Kumbo, don’t kfll him.
I would rather not injure any of them
—I think we can frighten them off.
Thank you, Kumbo, for saving me
from a nasty blow.”
“All right, chief, let him go. Bif
next time try hit chief, kill him.”
It is almost incredible, but it is
nevertheless true, so telling was the
influence of the great White Chief, or
“burrambin” (as white men were first
called by blacks) who had conquered
every opponent between Gobalyan and
the Darling, and who could have en-
rolled a large body of natives under
his standard, that the hundreds of hos-
tile blacks on the bank of the river
shrank from him in mortal fear. Whe-
ther this fear would have been last-
ing, had he been supported by his
lieutenant only, may have been ques-
tionable. But it was not tested, for
at that moment a loud shout resound-
ed from the left bank of the river,
and a company of the chief’s well-
armed and trained warriors appear-
ed in sight.
In his account of this adventure,
Sturt, speaking of the White Chief,
says:—
“Forcing all who were in the water
upon the bank, he trod its margin
with vehemence and agitation, at one
moment pointing at the boat, at an-
other shaking his clenched fist in the
faces of the most forward, and stamp-
ing with passion on the sand. His
voice, which at first was distinct and
clear, was lost in hoarse murmurs.
The reader will imagine my feelings
on this occasion; it is impossible to
describe them. We were so wholly
lost in interest in the scene that was
passing that the boat was allowed
to drift at pleasure. For my own
part, I was overwhelmed with aston-
ishment, and in truth stunned and
confused —so singular, so unexpected,
and so strikingly providential had
been our escape.”
The arrival of a large body of the
White Chiefs trained men completed
the discomfiture of the attacking
force, which quickly moved off to a
safe distance, but within view of the
after proceedings.
“Let us take the boat to our coun-
tryman chief and his lieutenant,” said
Sturt.
The convicts took the oars, and,
steered by Johnson, the boat soon
reached their deliverers, who, after
a little reluctance, were induced to
step on board.
“We can go back as we came,” said
the chief. ‘‘We shall be none the
wetter.”
“It will pain us greatly,” said Sturt,
“if you refuse to give us an oppor-
tunity to express our thanks.”
“Come into the beat, Luscombe, old
man. I know you have recognised
me,” said Johnson, “and here’s my
hand: and, believe me, I sincerely be-
lieve in your innocence of the crime
with which you were unjustly charg-
ed, as I have explained to all present.”
“And we are all prepared to take
Johnson’s view of the matter,” said
Hume, in confirmation of which here’s
my hand.
“1 am sure,” said Captain Sturt,
EUMALGA.


“that a man who could act so nobly
and with such moderation and con-
sidration for the lives of the blacks,
as you have done on this occasion,
could not be guilty of any serious
crime. And here is my hand, also, if
you will consent to take it. I do not
know how to thank you for your time-
ly interference. You seem to have
the power of turning up just at the
right moment.”
The White Chief could not, without
great discourtesy, refuse so flatter-
ing a reception, and he and Kumbo
accordingly stepped into the boat and
were rowed to the other side of the
river.
A short distance further on the
banks lowered and the boat was
beached, and the party went ashore.
Here they found a party of about
200 warriors drawn up as if on par-
ade. They presented arms to the White
Chief and his friends.
“You have a fine company of men,”
said Hume. ‘‘Well trained, too, appar-
ently. You have brought your Eng-
lish knowledge to bear upon them, and
with good results.”
“Yes,” said the chief, “I flatter my-
self that I have the best-trained and
most faithful company of warriors in
this region, and I could march fear-
lessly from one end of ihe colony to
the other. But I am greatly indebted
to my friend and brother here. Let
me introduce you to Lieutenant Kum-
bo, who, I believe, would lay down his
life for me without a moment’s hesita-
tion. He saved me just now from
a cracked skull at the hands of your
old enemy of the scrubby belt when
you, Captain Sturt, and Johnson, were
taken prisoners.”
“Was that scoundrel amongst
them?” asked Sturt.
“Yes, I am informed that hie was
the principal mover in this day’s pro-
ceedings.”
‘But how did you manage to arrive
so timely?”
“I was nearly too late, it appears.
The fact is, I only heard last night
from one of my scouts that the at-
tack was intended. I was then at my
camp some fifteen miles distant up
the Macquarie, and we could not start
to help you until sunrise, and we did
not know exactly where the attack
was to be made. We saw the blacks
running along the bank and assem-
bling on the sandy point, and divined
whiat was about to happen. They were
so engaged with what they were do-
ing that they failed to notice us un-
til our arrival. Kumbo and I, with
two of cur best runners, came ahead
at our best speed, leaving the others
to follow. We were just in time, and
that is all. If we had been too late,
I should never have forgiven myself.”
While this conversation was going
on Kumbo was warmly greeted by all
present. The lieutenant received the
compliments of the explorers with
ease and a gentlemanly bearing which
considerably surprised the party.
“Kumbo, tell the warriors to dis-
perse, but to remain within call,” said
the chief. “Pish are plentiful here;
they can catch some for dinner.”
The order was given and the men
separated. The river here was teem-
ing with fish, and in a remarkably
short time enough had been caught
to provide a substantial meal for all.
“I think I understood you to say,
chief,” said Sturt, “that you were
camped fifteen miles away up the
Macquarie. That could not be, for
that stream joins the riyer we are
now on fully thirty miles, at least,
from here.”
“I am right, nevertheless,” said the
chief. “The river you mean is not
the Macquarie, but the Bogan, as
the blacks call it. It runs somewhat
parallel, but rises somewhat further,
westward.”
“But where does the Macquarie join
this river,” inquired Sturt.
“Why, not far from where we are.
It is net a river, however. After it
leaves the marshes it is nothing but
a chain of ponds. You can follow
them back on your return, if you in-
tend to go by the route you came.”
“We intend to return at once,” said
Sturt, and will do as you suggest,
thus completing our chart of this por-
tion of the river system.”
“Have you heard or seen anything
of cur men?” asked Johnson of the
chief. “McLeod, our doctor, i s with
them. We promised to return up
stream to meet them, and then steer
for home. But if we go by the Mac-
quarie from the junction here, we
need not pull the boat up stream
again. We could wait for them here.”
EUMALGA.


“Ah, Johnson,” said Hume, “you are
thinking you might be called upon to
take an oar now and again.”
“Well, I confess I would rather
rest where we are,” said Johnson.
‘‘There appears to be plenty of fish
and poultry about this place, and we
are as secure here as anywhere else.”
“I heard of your party some fifty
miles or so back,” said the chief.
“They can't be here, then, in less
than three days,” said Sturt, unless
they push, as they had orders to come
cn by easy stages.”
“If it will be of any service I will
send a runner to tell them to come
on,” said the chief.
“You are very kind,” said Sturt,
and I will freely accept your offer.
I really do not know how to repay
you for your assistance.”
“Even Johnson would not like to
lounge, about here for more than three
days,” quietly remarked Hume.
“O, I can put in three or four days
with pleasure,” said Johnson. “I am
nof one of those restless, ever-active
dissatisfied fellows like you are,
Hume.”
“If you will write a note to your
surgeon,” said the chief, “I will send
off the messenger at once. He will be
twenty miles on the road to-night,
but as he cannot speak a word of
English it would be useless to send
him without a note. He might also
be given a piece of white calico, or
handkerchief to wave when he sights
your party, as he might be shot at.”
“No, he would not be shot at,” said
Sturt, as I have given strict orders
to the contrary; and, whether or no,
they surely would not fire at a single
man?”
“But you are not with them now,
Captain Sturt.”
“The doctor is, though. But, to
prevent accident, he can take a small
white flag we have here.”
The letter was written on a leaf
from Sturt’s diary and handed to the
chief.
“Kumbo,” said he, “give this letter
to the smartest man you have here,
and tell him to go with all speed
up the river until he meets a party
of whites, when he is to give it to them
and then hasten back here.”
“And tell ham if he makes good
speed I will give him a new toma-
hawk on his return,” said Sturt.
Instructions how to use the white
flag were also given.
A cooee from Kumbo brought sev-
eral young men to the spot. Selecting
a fine young fellow from amongst
them he gave him the letter, the flag
and instructions. Influenced, no doubt,
by the splendid reward, the messeng-
er had scarcely been told what to
do when be moved off at a rapid pace.
“I’ll bet that fellow comes up with
the party by noon to-morrow,” said
Hume.
“And be back here by noon the next
day to claim his reward,” said John-
son.
“He will return before then,” said
the chief. “He is a swift runner, and
the party will be 15 miles nearer
here to-night than they were last
night.”
“Well, let us have some dinner,”
said Sturt.
By this time the cook of the party
had prepared some savory dishes of
fish and wild-fowl, which were placed
before them; also ship biscuits and
condiments, tin plates and knives.
The biscuits and salt were a treat
to the chief, who had not tasted any
for years.
Noticing his evident relish for these
articles, Sturt said; “I suppose you
feel it very hard to be without bread
and other things you have been used
to?”
“I did at first, but I had almost for-
gotten the taste of bread. We have
native roots and bulbs for vegetables,
but I confess they are a poor substi-
tute for bread.”
“We do not wish to ask questions
that may, perhaps, be offensive,” said
Johnson, “but we are all burning to
know how you came to your present
position, and if you feel inclined to
tell us, we shall be only too glad
to listen.”
“Yes, give us your history,” said
Sturt. I ask, not from idle curiosity,
but with the sincere desire to serve
you, if possible. I have not the
slightest doubt we can secure your
pardon as a prisoner of the Crown,
were it for nothing else than your
services to us. And not only pardon,
but suitable reward.”
“Gentlemen, I thank you for your
EUMALGA.


good wishes. You have already ex-
pressed your belief that I was not
guilty of the crime with which I was
charged. My friend, Johnson, knew
enough of me at home to convince him
as I sincerely hope, that I am inno-
cent, and that my word can be taken
as that of an honorable man.”
“I do, indeed,” said Johnson.
“Thank you. Then you will all
probably believe me when I assert
that I knew nothing whatever of the
crime of which I was convicted, con-
clusive as the circumstantial evidence
against me may have appeared to be.
But I am sorry I could not avail my-
self of the offer of pardon. My pride
would not let me—l could not bear
to be pointed at as the convicted mur-
derer! No, unless my innocence shall
be proved, which is improbable after
the lapse of so many years, I shall
remain with my black friends with
whom I have found a home. The only
thing that sometimes makes me long
to visit the old country is pity for
the poor old man who adopted me as
his son, and who must bitterly grieve
fcr me, if he is still alive.”
“Have you never heard from him?”
“Alas, no. Any letters that may
have come would pass into the hands
of the prison authorities.”
“Well, we can do one thing for you,
with your consent, and that is, get
your letters, if there are any, and for-
ward them to Wellington. As to
your pardon, we will get it in spite
of you, whether you like it or not.
It will save you from all fear of
arrest, and enable you to go to
Wellington and get your letters, and
any little thing you may want. There
“will no doubt be money for you in
your letters, and yo.u can make your-
self comfortable. I do not wish to
pry into your domestic arrangements,
but we have heard you married an
old chief’s daughter, and you may at
some future time, if not now, be de-
sirious of obtaining things for her
comfort.”
“Well, Captain, do as you like. I
owe a good deal to that old chief’s
daughter. So to while away the time,
as you have nothing to do but wait
here until your men arrive, I will give
you a sketch of my history since I
came to the Wellington settlement.”
The White Chief then related to the
explorers the adventures, with which
the reader i s already acquainted, up
to the time he was made King of the
united tribes of Bulomogo and Warree.
The narrative created the greatest
astonishment, and was listened to with
deep interest.
Taking up the story from the time
he was chosen King, he said he had
lived for a year or so on Waree Flat
in the house he had built, but dread-
ing contact between his tribe and
the increasing whitemen at Welling-
ton, and influenced by the severe
drought that set in, and further by
a desire to explore the unknown in-
terior, he had moved down the river
to the boundary of the old Eulomogo
towri, and eventually penetrated the
towris of other tribes until ho got
beyond the Macquarie (native name
“Wambool”) marshes, and was now on
an extension of that river called the
“Wamerawa,” his well-trained men
and the terror of his name having en-
abled him to overcome or defy every
other tribe. He had seen and guessed
the mission of the explorers and taken
steps to assist them when in need;
for, although desirous of keeping clear
of white men, he could not let his
countrymen perish without an effort
to save them.
“Truth is indeed stranger than fic-
tion,” said Sturt. “No romance could
contain more exciting adventures, or
be filled with greater mysteries.”
“And Bumalga,” asked Johnson, “is
she well?”
“O yes,” said the chief. “She is
well and happy.”
“Don’t be offended by my curiosity,
Luscombe, but, there is no denying it,
I should very much like to see this
wife of yours.”
“Now, Johnson, I think you are go-
ing a step too far,” said Sturt. “Your
curiosity sounds somewhat impertin-
ent (begging pardon for using the
word) to the chief. If we were in a
civilised country, we could expect to
be introduced to our friend; but here,
where there are no drawing rooms or
other advantages, we cannot expect
such a thing, though I have no doubt
all present would be glad of the op-
portunity of seeing and expressing
their admiration of the character of
one who could act so well under such
trying circumstances.”
eumalga.


“ Well, perhaps I have gone too far,”
said Johnson, ‘‘and I apologise to the
chief. But he knows what a thought-
less fellow I am.”
“No apology is needed, gentlemen.
I confess, were my situation changed
with one of you, I should be anxious
to see the heroine of my story, and
to show you that I am not offended,
I will introduce her to you. I have
no fear of her behavior. In fact, I
am rather proud of her, and you will
see how readily the native woman
adapts herself to the modes of civil-
ised life; and she speaks English well.
We seldom use the native tongue.”
“Thank yOu, chief,” said Sturt. “I
confess I be very glad to see
her. I suppose we cahnot do so until
we start on our return journey, as
your camp is some fifteen miles from
here.”
“I don’t know,” said the chief, ‘‘but
you may see her this afternoon. To
tell the truth, when I am on an ex-
pedition like this, she is never far
away, and I should not be surprised
if she were within call at this very
moment.”
“You don’t say so!” exclaimed more
than one, and the three gentlemen
(the convicts having drawn away by
themselves) who had been lying on
the ground at ease, sprang to their
feet with excitement.”
“Be seated, gentlemen, I pray, or
you will, perhaps, frighten my native
bird. Sit down, and I will call her..
Please remember it will be her first
meeting with English gentlemen, al-
though she has seen other white men
besides myself at the Wellington set-
tlement.”
The chief gave one of those sharp,
indescribable calls in use amongst the
natives, which, to the astonishment
of all, was answered by another, evi-
dently given by a female, in a low
tone, from behind a few scrubby
hushes not fifty yards away from
where they were seated.
Another low call from the chief,
and there came into view, from behind
the bushes, a native woman, evidently,
but so totally different in appearance
from what had been expected, that
all rose from the ground to receive
her with voluntary respect.
Eumalga, for it was she, quickly
reached the chief’s side, and was in-
troduced in due form.
She was dressed in most becoming
attire, principally made of opossum
skins, but with a close-fitting, stout
calico jacket, buttoned at the neck,
underneath her skins.
Her long, dark hair was neatly
twisted round the back of her head,
and she had mocassins, or boots, made
of kangaroo hide, well-shaped and
fastened with laces. She still looked
young. and, as she gracefully bowed
to the gentlemen, a smile parted her
lips and displayed a most brilliant
set of teeth.
“Eumalga,” said the chief, “Captain
Sturt, chief of this party, Mr. Hume
and Mr. Johnson, the latter an old
friend of mine. He knew me when
I was with my friends in England.’’
“I am very glad to meet with ray
husband’s countrymen, especially as
I am aware they are gentlemen, and
above the common men I have seen.’’
She spoke in a pleasant, light-ton-
ed liquid voice, that sounded quite
charming to the listeners.
A conversation ensued, well sus-
tained by Eumalga. She was asked
if she would not like to visit her hus-
band’s country. She replied that for
his sake she would like to accompany
him home; but for herself, she was
contented to be where she was. She
knew no other happiness.
Her r anner was m )dest and lady-
like, and Captain Sturt could not help
congratulating the chief upon the pos-
session of such a wife, and expressed
his surprise that the nati/e woman
bhculd so readily adapt herself to
European customs. The example and
tuition of Saville had raised her a
long way above the other native wo-
men, and she was as much a lady, in
comparison to them, as any high-bred
lady in comparison to the lower or-
der.
“Well, Captain, we must be going,”
said the chief. “It will take us some
hours to reach our present camp, even
if we can reach it to-night. I will
take some of my men away, but leave
enough to protect you, in case of need,
though I do not think any assistance
will be required. There is plenty of
fish and game here, and my men can
stay for a day of two. My messenger
to your men will probably return to-
EUMALGA.


morrow night, and the next day I will
come back and guide you as far as
where the Wambool enters the
marshes, from whence you already
know your way back.”
‘‘Will your wife first inspect my
store of trinkets, and choose what
she pleases,” said Sturt. “When the
party arrives with the packs, I shall
have much pleasure in making a
more substantial present, and will
leave you everything not necessary
for our return journey to Welling-
ton.”
“Like all her tribe,” said the chief,
“Eumalga has a childish love for trin-
kets and ornaments, and will be well-
pleased with the opportunity to ob-
tain something new.”
Sturt ordered one of the men to
bring from the boat a package of
beads, tomahawks, and trinkets which
the explorers had brought with them
for the purpose of rewarding or en-
listing the good-will of the natives.
They were opened before Eumalga,
and she was requested to take what
she liked. She was very much pleas-
ed with the assortment, and chose
several articles.
The chief and Eumalga then said
good-bye and left for their home, re-
ceiving the hearty good-wishes of the
three gentlemen whom they had that
day so signally served.
Lieutenant Kumbo was left in charge
of the blacks remaining to protect the
explorers in case of emergency. He
was the source of much information,
and was treated with great consider-
ation. By his direction the blacks
brought in a quantity of fish and game
and the explorers fared sumptuously.
They erected their tent under the
shade of some large gum trees, and
quietly awaited the return of the
scout with the news of their party.
Just after sundown the following
evening the man came back with the
news that he had come up with the
party at daybreak that morning,
camped near the river, and had de-
livered the message. After a short
rest and refreshment, he had started
back with a written answer, which
he handed to Kumbo. The party, he
said, could not arrive until the fol-
lowing night, as they would be com-
pelled to follow the river; he had
saved considerable distance by taking
short cuts.
The letter was handed to Captain
Sturt. It merely stated all haste
would be made to reach the meeting
place, and from what they understood
of the distance, they thought they
would arrive the following night.
The messenger seemed thoroughly
knocked up after his journey, but,
hfter a plunge in the river, was hll
right again, and came to the camp
with the evident intention of claim-
ing his reward. The coveted toma-
hawk was at once handed to him, with
commendations upon his speed and
endurance, Kumbo acting as interpre-
ter.
It was late next night when the
men arrived with the bullocks and
packs. They would not have come
on so late, had not messengers been
sent out to meet them and bring them
in if possible. They had met with no
adventure, and had only seen natives
in the distance. They were much as-
tonished and greatly interested in the
account given of the scene at the
Shallows.
Next morning preparations were
made for starting on the return jour-
ney to Wellington. The camp was in
motion at daylight,,, as a re-arrange-
ment of the packs had become neces-
sary, owing to their reduction in
bulk. The boat was re-mounted on
its wheels, and everything that could
be spared was thrown into it, to be
left at the White Chief’s camp, or at
a convenient spot near it. The chief
arrived at about 8 o’clock, just as pre-
parations were finished.
‘We have had our breakfast,” said
Johnson, “but I daresay something
can be found for you—you will have
to rought it.”
“I am not very particular at any
time,” said the chief. “I am as hun-
gry as a hunter after my fifteen miles
walk, and I am not likely to be par-
ticular on this occasion. I could eat
anything from a bandicoot to a wild
duck.”
“We can give you the latter, for,
thanks to your men, we have been
supplied with more fish and fowl than
we could eat. I think I saw a whole
roast duck being put away in the
grub-box.”
The duck was found, some biscuits
EUMALGA.


were turned out, there was some tea
in the bucket, and the chief made a
hearty meal.
The White Chief accompanied the
explorers a day’s journey from the
Macquarie marshes, to where Sturt
picked up the tracks he had made
going out.
As a parting gift, the chief was
persuaded to accept a musket and a
good store of ammunition. Indeed,
he was very glad to accept it, for his
old musket was worn out, and the
little ammunition he had obtained was
exhausted.
The journey back to Wellington
was safer and more pleasant than
the out-going trip. There were no
accidents, and no treacherous blacks
on their way. They arrived safe and
sound at Welington where the boat,
bullocks and packs were left, and Cap-
tain 'Sturt and his friends proceeded
to Sydney.
MAJOR MITCHELL.
The date of our romance must once
again be advanced a short period. In
the meantime Captain Sturt had. by
way of the Murrumbidgee, with his
eight convicts and Mr. Macleay, dis-
covered the Murray and Lake Alexan-
dra. His return journey of a thous-
and miles t up the Murray, was one of
the most wonderful ou record.
The next traveller who sought to
fill up the blank map of Australia in
the north-west, wa s Major Mitchell.
The upper Darling had been discover-
ed by Sturt, and the supposed mouth
of the Darling, where it flowed into
the Murray, had also been discovered
by the same explorer. It was Major
Mitchell’s intention to explore the
lower course of the Darling, through
many hundred miles of unknown coun-
try.
Major Mitchell arrived at Welling-
ton in the year 1835, where he made
the number of his party up to twenty-
three. The botanist of the party was
Mr. Richard Cunningham, brother of
Mr. Allan Cunningham, to whose mem-
ory a monument is erected in the
Sydney Botanical Gardens. There
was also Mr. Larmer, an assistant
surveyor.
The following were the names of
the men who composed the party:
Alexander Burnett, overseer.
Robert Whiting, carpenter.
William Woods, John Palmer, and
Thomas Jones, sailors.
John Souter, medical attendant.
Robert Muirhead, Charles Hammond
John Baldwin, Joseph Herbert, Wil-
liam Thomas, Thomas Murray, Ed-
ward Gaynton, Charles King, P. Boyle
and H. Tucker, laborers and bullock
drivers.
William Baldock, groom.
Joseph Jones, shepherd.
John Johnson, blacksmith.
John Bulger, shoemaker.
Anthony Brown, George Squires,
and Thomas Reeves, servants.
Nine of these men had been under
the command of Major Mitchell on
a previous expedition, and were con-
sequently well acquainted with the
service.
It was early in the year 1835 that
Major Mitchell and his men left the
Wellington settlement on their jour-
ney to this Darling. The party direct-
ed their course to the nearest point
of the Bogan River, the head waters
of which had been discovered by
Sturt.
Near Wellington some of the War-
ree tribe were met with and they
were requested to take a message to
their White Chief. A letter was writ-
ten to him informing him that Major
Mitchell was going down the Bogan
to the Darling, and requesting the
White Chief to meet him somewhere
on the route, as there were important
communications from England and
Sydney, in which the chief was deep-
ly interested.
The blacks sent away their messen-
gers, but told the Major that the chief
was a long distance off; that he had
gone on a visit to the Castlereagh dis-
trict, and was then probably some-
where about the locality now called
Coonabarabran —amongst the ro-
mantic scenery of the Warrumbungle
ranges. Many of the blacks
Wellington could, by this time, speak
broken English.
Bullocks had been broken to draw
the main supplies in a roomy wag|
gon, and two men were detailed t<l
drive the team, and follow the partil
EUMAIiCrA.


as quickly as the condition of the
bullocks would allow. The Major
pushed ahead to find and mark the
way, but their progress was so slow
that the bullock team was seldom
more than a day’s march behind.
On the 17th April the expedition ar-
rived at a p l ace called by the blacks
“Pony.” There were some cunous
rocks of rel sandstone forming the
top of a ridge, and in a deep gully
there was a well, the water of which,
although at times apparently deep,
had the previous night been drained
rearly to the bottom by a party of
some tribe, whose fires were still
burning.
Some natives who had accompanies
the expedition as far. as this, ex-
amined the traces of those who had
fled with considerable interest, and
then fell behind and disappeared. They
had evidently recognised the presence
of a fiercer tribe with whom they did
not wish to come in contact. The
cattle had no water during the night
and began to be distressed. Conse-
quently Major Mitchell pushed for-
ward about nine miles in the hope of
reaching the Bogan, but did not come
up with that stream and returned to
the party, whom he met before sun-
down.
There were other teams besides the
heavy one coming behind, and the bul-
locks were unyoked and taken to a
large dry creek (since named Bullock
Creek), which had been crossed and
the drivers were instructed to take
them down this creek in search of
water, as it was believed to lead to
the Bogan. Horses were also driven
along this creek, and eventually, late
in the night, the Bogan was reached,
and the stars were reflected upon a
sheet of water. Bottles were filled
and the Major and others on horse-
back went back to the camp, reach-
ing there about midnight.
Now occurred what was shortly
afterwards found to be the first trage-
dy of the journey. Mr. Cunningham
was missing.
The day had been very hot and op-
pressive, and water had not been
found. Mr. Cunningham, the botanist,
during the journey had often been
absent on horseback, in search of
new plants. This day be had with
him a dog, and, as afterwards dis-
covered, he became lost and wandered
about for five days, when he fell in
with some natives under the leader-
ship of Boro, the brutal savage whc
has previously been referred to, and
in connection with whom there will
be a very tragic scene towards the
end of the story.
Cunningham had become delirious
from exhaustion, and Boro killed him
with one blow from a club. Such was
the end of a brave explorer, a good
man, and an eminent botanist.
In the mean time, diligent search
was made for Cunningham by the
Major and his party. His tracks were
come upon, and found at one place
to cross those of the party. A letter
stuck in the cleft of a stick, giving
him directions how to proceed, ap-
pears to have been found by Cunning-
ham, but he must have been men-
tally incapable of pursuing the course
laid down. One party, after an ab-
sence of three days, returned with his
saddle and bridle, whip, glove, and two
straps and a piece of paper on which
were pricked the letters, “N. 8.”
Mr. Larmer. in charge of the party
reported having easily found the
tracks of the horse beyond the scrub,
which they had followed until they
came to where the horse lay dead,
with the saddle and bridle on. From
the- tortuous tracks of the horse and
from the absence of Mr. Cunningham’s
foot steps, some way from where the
horse was found, it was considered
that he had either left the animal in
despair, or that it had got away from
him. At all events, the horse had
apparently died from thirst.
Some blacks were met with, who
said Mr. Cunningham had not been
killed, but that he had gone west-
ward, pointing down the Bogan, with
some myall (wild) blacks. A silk
handkerchief was found in posses-
sion of one of the natives brought in
by searchers. He gave his name as
“Werrajouit.” There were no marks
upon it, and upon being asked where
he got it, he pointed to the north-
east, and said ,“old fellow.”
Several cf the blacks appeared to
have been at one of the out-stations
(which were being rapidly pushed
into the interior) and could speak
a little English.
Near one of the natives’ fires a por-
EUMALGA.


tion of Cunningham’s coat and some
fragments of a map he carried were
found in a hollow tree. The finding
of these things caused great alarm
amongst the natives and most of the
tribe decamped, including the man
who had the handkerchief.
A friendly king of a tribe was here
met with, and he ordered a black
named “Tackijally Buckenba,” a most
intelligent man, to accompany the ex-
pedition as guide.
Up to this time nothing definite was
known of the fate of Cunningham, and
it was hoped that he had really gone
down the Bogan in search of the
expedition, and still might be alive.
It was only on the return of the
party towards the head of the Bogan
where a cattle station had been es-
tablished, that the true history of
Mr. Cunningham’s murder was related.
BEGINNING OF TROUBLE.
About the middle of May, 1835,
Major Mitchell’s party had reached
part of the Bogan near hills from
which could be seen a distant moun-
tain, which the Major named “Mount
Hopeless.” The party was camped on
the left bank of the river, where water
was more abundant than had been pre-
viously met with. There were several
deep water holes. As tents were be-
ing pitched some hideous yells were
heard from a water hole lower down,
followed by a gunshot.
Burnett, the overseer, was heard to
call out, “hold him.” A black was
then seen running, screaming and
bleeding, and was stopped by the Ma-
jor.
The overseer came up limping, and
stated that on approaching the water-
hole with his gun, looking for ducks,
the native was sitting there with
his dog (the blacks had, by that time,
obtained dogs from the whites). As
soon as he saw Burnett he yelled hid-
eously, and ran at him in a furious
manner, first throwing a fire-stick and
then a boomerang, the latter striking
Burnett on the leg. The black still
advancing with another boomerang.
Burnett fired at him in self-defence,
which was, under the circumstances,
quite excusable.
When intercepted, the black threw
away his weapons and sat down. Ho
was found to have received shots in
various parts of the body, but chief-
ly on his left hand and wrist, which
were covered with blood. His wounds
were dressed by the doctor. He prov-
ed to be a raw savage, and stared
wildly around him at the sheep, cattle
and horses, tents, etc., the like of
which, it was very evident, he had
never seen before. He had never even
seen a whiteman. He was given a
piece of bread and allowed to depart.
The expedition moved on. Some
rotten ground was crossed, which de-
layed the carts, and to avoid a con-
tinuation of that kind of ground the
party turned to the left and reached
a plain where the surface was firm,
and finally, a few days afterwards,
camped on a fine, open forest flat. ’
The plan of encampment, always
carried out, was to place the carriage,
holding the boats and covered with
tarpaulins, parallel to a line formed
by the light carts, with other light
carts on the flanks, room being left
between for a line of men. A secure
defence was thus formed againsts
spears and boomerangs, in case of any
general attack by the natives.
Owing to the boggy nature of the
track passed over, the heavy waggon
had been delayed, and it was determin-
ed to camp here until the waggon
came up. They could rest
horses and add to the larder of fish
and fowl, which were plentiful in
that locality. There certainly were
plenty of fish, but, after several trials
fishing was found to be a hazardous
occupation. Unless a watchman kept
a constant look-out from a high por-
tion of the river bank while others
fished, the latter were in constant
danger of their lives from the spears
of concealed blacks. Indeed, the
blacks began to be very troublesome.
Two more days passed, during which
the task cf fishing and procuring food
had become more and more danger-
ous. The natives began to show them-
selves in large numbers, and an at-
tack upon the camp was hourly ex-
pected. Every preparation was made
by the whites to meet the foe. A
rampart of trees was erected round
the camp as an additional security,
behind which the sentinels were to
take refuge in case of attack, after
firing their muskets.
EUMALGA.


A good day’s sport had been ob-
tained, and fish and fowl were brought
in sufficient for the next two days. A
good substantial supper was thorough-
ly enjoyed.
“To-morrow,” said the Major, “our
men should arrive with the supplies,
if nothing has happened them.”
“I fear they will have great dif-
ficulty in reaching here at all,” said
Surveyor Larmer, “if they have to
fight their way through as many
blacks as were collected here yester-
day.”
“To-morrow, I think,” said the Ma-
jor, “it will be as well to go and meet
them, and escort them here. I begin
to have great fears for their safety.”
“It would be a wise thing to do,”
said Larmer.
It was determined to run the track
back next day, until they met the men
with the supplies, and afterwards to
keep altogether.
The camp soon sank into peaceful
slumber—the still .mss of the night
was broken only by the peculiar cry
of the opossum, or. the melancholy
screech of the curlew. The sentinels,
four in number, awoke thqir comrades
at the appointed hour and were re-
lieved. They took their posts on four
sides of the camp, and met each ottur
in alternate marches to the right and
left.
Just before daybreak two of the
patrol were approaching each other
when one suddenly stopped and looked
across the open plain.
“Do you see any thing moving over
yonder?” asked one of the sentinels,
pointing in the direction named.
The man addressed squatted of the
The man addressed squatted on the
ness.
“Stoop down, King,” said he. “You
can see much better with your eyes
nearer the ground, and you have a
much keener sight than I have, for I
could see nothing as I stood up, and
now I fancy I can see something mov-
ing towards us.”
King stooped down, shaded his eyes
from the starlight, and gazed earnest-
ly across the plain.
“By Jove,” he said, ‘‘l believe the
black devils are coming upon us.”
“We will be certain first, and then
fire our pieces.
“There is no doubt about it,” said
King. “If that is not a black stalk-
ing towards us with a ispear in his
hand, I’m dreaming.”
“By George, there is a perfect le-
gion of them behind. Let us fire—we
must give them timely warning at the
camp. Pick off the leader.”
The two men took aim, and the
report of their pieces awoke the still-
ness of the night with their terrible
noise. The men had scarcely fired be-
fore the reports of the guns of the
other two sentinels were heard, indi-
cating that the blacks had surrounded
the position.
The scouts instantly fell back upon
the camp at full speed. They found
the party in commotion, but there was
order in a few minutes, and the men,
with their weapons and ammunition,
were ranged about the enclosure,
close to the wooden ramparts.
Perfect silence ensued, broken only
by the snapping of a stick, denoting
the stealthy advance of the foe.
The major was a humane man and
did not wish to shed blood unless com-
pelled. He therefore determined to
try thie effect of a sky-rocket on the
fears of the blacks. A supply of these
combustibles had been brought, and
were kept with the ammunition in one
of the light carts.
The rocket was quickly fired and
the men, at thie same time, were or-
dered to discharge their muskets in
the air and shout loudly. The flare
of the rocket' and the accompanying
noise had a tremendous effect upon the
natives, for they fled at their highest
speed. The attack had been discon-
certed without known bloodshed.
Day wa s breaking, and the retreat-
ing blacks could be plainly seen.
That was a smart brush,” said the
Major. “Thank goodness it is over
without injury to any of us. We
should have had a narrow squeak if
we had been found asleep.”
Immediately after breakfast the
Major ordered ten men on horseback
to accompany him. They had no pre-
parations to make, more than saddle
the horses, which had been left out-
side the camp, and were luckily un-
injured, so that by seven o’clock they
were riding along the track to meet
the bullock drivers.
BUMALiQA.


THE FATE OF THE TEAMSTERS.
The two men in charge of the sup-
plies for Major Mitchell and party,
plodded on their way towards the un-
known country with great pluck and
persistence.
Their names were Boyle and Tuck-
er. One hailed from Liverpool and
the other from London, and both were
smart bushmen.
In those days it was an extraordin-
ary trait in the character of men from
England’s metropolis, that they made
the best of stockmen or bush serv-
ants, and a cockney was sure to be
chosen from amongst all others by
any settler in want of a bushi hand.
They journeyed about ten miles a
day with great regularity, as often
as possible adopting the camping
places of the Major’s party, which
were plainly visible, and had been
fixed upon with great care. They
took alternate watches at night, and
always kept their muskets loaded
and ready for use. But, the blacks
they often met proving very friendly,
they soon abandoned their caution,
and both slept a s soundly under
the dray in the solitary bush as if
they were on feather beds in their
native land. The boggy land they
had got into gave them a deal of
trouble and caused considerable de-
lay, but they were net at all anxious,
as the tracks of the party ahead could
be plainly seen.
One morning they were yoking up
the bullocks when they saw a couple
of blacks standing at a distance of
about 200 yards, intently regarding
their proceedings.
“D’ye see them ’ere niggers a-stand-
ing looking at us,” said Tucker, “i
wonder what they take us for? I don’t
suppose they ever seed a white man
or a bullock afore. They must think
the cattle is strange hannimals!”
“Yes, I see the beggars,” said Boyle.
“Let’s call ’em over and see what they
are like. They look to be real wild
uns.”
“All right,” said Tucker, and they
broke off some green branches which
happened to be near and waved them,
at the same time making signs to the
blacks to approach.
They appeared to hesitate, but even-
tually made up their minds to come
nearer. They had a watchful eye on
the white men, and approached with
great trepidation. They were armed
with a couple of spears each. One
wore some bright feathers in his hair,
and was apparently a chief or man in
authority, but he was of no great size.
He was remarkably distinguishable
from the other black, and, indeed,
from all blacks they had previously
seen, by the malignant expression of
his face. From what afterwards took
place, there was every reason to be-
lieve that this black was the chief,
Boro, who had twice before appear-
ed upon the scene. The white men
were in the towri of his tribe, not
long taken up.
Nothing could be made out of the
two blacks, and it was with) some
difficulty they could be induced to
accept some damper and salt beef,
though they looked upon it with greedy
eyes.
‘T shouldn’t like to be caught asleep
by them scowling beggars,” said
Tucker. “I’d ’ave a poor chance of
walking again.”,
“They’d make good company at a
tea party,” said Boyle. “I wonder
whether there are many of the same
sort about here. I think we’d better
be watchful, or we shan’t live to see
the Major again.”
Seeing something in the expression
on Boro’s face that put him on his
guard, Boyle snached up his musket
and held it ready for use. Abject ter-
ror immediately appeared in the
black’s faces.
“Ah, me boys,” said Boyle, ‘‘you’re
frightened, are you. This can’t be
the first time you’ve seen a musket,
for you appear to know it’s use. I’ve
a mind to put a ball through each of
you. Something tt 11s me you are
dangerous customers. ’
‘‘Let ’em go,” said Tucker. “It ain’t
any good shootin’ ’em, but we’ll ’ave
to keep our weather heye open till we
meets the Major.”
The blacks were, by signs, told to
go. They immediately went off at a
smart walk, which soon increased to
a run, and as far as they could be
seen, they were running at top speed.
“‘Ha, ha,” said Tucker. “I don’t
think them beggars will come anear
us agin in a ’urry. Look at ’em arun-
ning—they’re goin’ like a couple er
EUMALiGA.


hemus with a kangaroo dorg arter
’em. Ha, ha.”
“I hope they’re not going to fetch
some more of the same kidney,” said
the more cautious Boyle. “I feel a
bit skeered about these beggars, and
mean to keep a sharp look-out.”
The bullocks were yoked, and a
start was immediately made. Both
men rode upon the waggon, with their
muskets in readiness. The bullocks
kept the track, guided by an occa-
sional word.
A short halt was made at noon,
while the billy was boiled for tea.
The bullocks lay down contentedly in
their yokes, and chewed the cud.
Again a start was made, and the bul-
locks went along easily until about
an hour before sundown. The load
was not very heavy, and there was
plenty of strength for the weight. At
this hour they arrived at another of
the major’s camping grounds, and as
usual, adopted it for themselves. It
was situated near a waterhole.
The bullocks were turned out and
the men camped for the night, Boyle
insisting upon watch being kept in
turns, remarking, ‘‘l don’t care about
being caught sleeping by niggers like
them we saw this morning.”
Nothing disturbed them during the
night, and they began to think their
fears were groundless.
‘We’re bound to come up with the
Major soon,” said Tucker. “They can’t
have much grub left, and that’ll fetch
’em up standing. I bet we’ll see the
party before another day passes.”'
.Again the bullocks were yoked,
and the two men, with indomitable
pluck, started on their last journey.
After the they had received
at the hands of the two white men
the black chief Boro and his com-
panion travelled at their best speed
during the greater part of the day.
In the afternoon they reached that
portion of the river where J&ajor Mit-
chell was camped. They related to
their fellow blacks their adventure
with the bullock drivers, and proposed
that all the blacks then assembled
should go back, overcome the white
men by sheer force, and plunder their
goods. The proposal was agreed to,
and Boro prepared for another vile
tragedy.
The ill-fated buljocfc. drivers had
been about an hour on their last day’s
journey, when they saw, away across
the plain, a surging mob of blacks,
making straight for the waggon. The
natives numbered fully seventy-five
men, and they rushed along in eager
haste, and without concealment, evi-
dently confident in their superior
number.
“We are in for it now,” said Boyle.
“Them fellers means business. What
shall we do?”
“Why, we’ll fight to the last,” said
Tucker. “If they do attack us, our
guns may frighten ’em off.”
In a few minutes the blacks came
within bullet range. There was great
excitement amongst them. They came
along at a mad rush, gesticulating vio-
lently, and shaking their spears at
the white men.
“They mean it” said Tucker. “Let
us see if a bullet will stop them.”
He raised his musket, took aim and
fired. The bullet struck a black, who
staggered and fell, but got up again.
With savage and discordant yells
the blacks rushed on at full speed to-
wards the whitemen, at whom they
now discharged a shower of spears.
Tucker and Boyle, as if by mutual
consent, hastily jumped off the dray
and got underneath. From this cover
they fired twice at the infuriated
blacks as they raced up, while the
dray shielded them from spears. But
spears struck two of the bullocks and
wounded them deeply. They started
forward in agony, and the rest of
the team moving on, the dray was
suddenly drawn from over the heads
of the two men, and left them fully
exposed.
They sprang up and faced their
foes with clubbed muskets. This was
their last act—they had no oppor-
tunity to strike a blow, for Boyle was
immediately pierced by two spears,
thrown at a short distance, and killed
on the spot. At the same moment,
Tucker was struck on the head with
a nullah, or some other heavy weapon
thrown at him, and he fell senseless.
A black rushed up and pinned him to
the ground with a spear.
The savages peaned their victory
with loud yells of triumph.
Everything in the dray was then
thrown out. There were many valu-
able prizes for the blacks, but numer-
EUMALQA.


ous articles for which they could con-
ceive no use. Every article they
thought worth having was being has-
tily appropriated , when the progress
of their plunder was suddenly inter-
rupted by the appearance of Major
Mitchell and his troop of ten men.
The Major and hds party had no dif-
ficulty in finding the route they had
to take, as their own outward tracks
were plain. The horses were fairly
fresh, and were kept at a fast amble,
so that in less than three hours they
were approaching one of their pre-
vious camping places, which would
have been a day’s journey for the bul-
locks.
“We shall soon sight our last camp-
ing place,” said the Major. ‘‘l hope
we shall find our men with the team.”
T fear we shall not,” said his com-
panion. “If they had camped there
last night we should have met them
by this time, unless they cannot find
the bullocks.”
A loud shout was almost immediate-
ly made by the men, and the blacks
and bullock dray came into view.
A short pause was made, while
every eye was strained to scan the
distant scene.
“Follow me!” shouted the Major.
Spurs were put to the horses, and a
gallop of a few minutes brought the
party to the team.
The blacks had previously thrown
down what they had in hand and tak-
en hasty flight.
The scene presented to the aston-
ished white men was most appalling.
Here were the goods scattered about,
two of the bullocks dead in the team,
and, O, Heaven! the two men lying on
the ground, apparently dead!
There was a burst of agony from
all the horrified onlookers.
The Major and others sprang from
their horses and ran to the murdered
men. Here lay Boyle, dead, with two
spears through his body.
“Poor fellow,” said the Major, “he
is beyond mortal help!”
Attention was then directed to
Tucker, who lay upon his back with
a spear through his side, the point
of the weapon sticking fast in the
ground and remaining upright.
“He’s alive!” shouted half a dozen
at once, as Tucker was seen to move
his hand towards his mouth, evidently
asking for a drink.
The water keg belonging to the dray
had been smashed, but there was an
uninjured billy can, and a man was
instantly sent to get water from the
nearest pond.
In the meantime the Major produc-
ed a small flask of brandy and water
with which the parched lips and swol-
len tongue of the sufferer were mois-
tened. In a short time he revived
sufficiently to speak a few words in
a low voice.
A consultation was held about the
best way of taking out the spear,
and it was decided to scrape away
the earth from the point and see how
far it went through, with a view of
cutting off the barbed point and then
drawing the shaft out. On scraping
the earth away it was found that the
spear head had been driven complete-
ly into the ground. It was thought
best to saw it off as it was fixed. To
have pulled it out of the ground and
sawn it off with the man sitting up,
would have inflicted fearful pain, as
the spear could not have been held
firm. Fortunately, the blacks had not
taken a small saw, which was stuck in
the side of the dray. With this the
head of the spear was carefully cut
through, and the shaft drawn out,
without inflicting more pain. Probably
the sufferer was then beyond feeling.
By this time water arrived, and the
wound was washed. In a short time
poor Tucker managed to take n drink,
and eventually revived so much as
to be able to relate in whispering
tones, and at intervals, the particu-
lars of the attack. But alas, his re-
covery was evanescent, and, notwith-
standing the most careful and con-
stant attention, Tucker. in the course
of a few hours, quietly breathed his
last.
The spears were taken from the
body of Boyle, and a spade, usually
carried on bullock drays, having been
found, a shallow grave was dug and
the two bodies were laid side by side
and carefully covered with earth. The
litle mound, the last resting place
of two brave men, was visible for
many years afterwards.
The state of the stores was next ex-
amined. It was found that, though
several things had been carried off,
EfUMAJjGA.


and the remainder had been scattered
about, the bulk of the goods had been
left behind.
It was decided to put the things
back into the dray and go back to the
camping place, and then decide what
should be done. The goods were re-
placed in the dray and the two dead
bullocks separated from the rest,
and two other drivers were put in
the place of the murdered men.
A start being made, the old camp-
ing place (which was only about two
miles distant) wag reached before
nightfall. One of the slain bullocks
was cut up and carried to the camp
for food.
Every precaution was taken against
a surprise by the blacks, though no
attack was expected that night. Nor
wag there any disturbance.
Next morning a consultation was
held between the Major, Mr. Larmer,
and Burnett, the overseer, upon the
advisability of carrying on the expe-
dition in the face of the unexpected
hostility of the blacks.
The Major was naturally anxious to
go on, as there would be discredit in
returning. He had not yet gone as far
as Sturt went.
The result of the conclave was a
determination to push on. All prepar-
ations possible under the circum-
stances were made for a long jour-
ney.
After the attack upon the bullock
drivers it was discovered that the up-
per Bogan black, who had accom-
panied the expedition as guide, had
disappeared. He had doubtless gone
back, as he was afraid of the myall
blacks he had fallen in with. Singu-
larly enough, his place was taken by
newcomers.
Major Mitchell, just as preparations
for the camp for the night had been
completed, was surprised to hear that
two blacks were approaching, one
of whom had a white handkerchief or
flag, attached to the end of a spear,
which he repeatedly waved as he
came along. A white flag was waved
in answer. The usual sign of peace
amongst the blacks was the waving of
a green bush.
The two natives were received by
the Major with due courtesy for there
was something unusual about their
appearance, particularly the one who
waved the flag.
On coming up to the Major, the
flag-bearer astounded him by bidding
him “good evening,” in fair English,
and by adding, “Major Mitchell, I
believe.”
The Major replied that he was the
individual named, and would be glad
to learn the errand of a native who
spoke good English, and who appear-
ed to be above the common blackfel-
low.
The latter was a tall, well-made
man, about thirty years of age, and
wore more than the usual clothing,
neatly made. He had an air of confi-
dence and command that greatly puz-
zled the Major, The second black was
apparently of inferior grade, as he
kept behind the other.
The first man stepped forward and
increased the Major’s astonishment by
handing him a letter. The Major read
it and found it was his own letter
to the White Chief. On the back was
written, with some black substance,
“The bearer, Lieutenant Kumbo, will
explain.”
The Major grasped the situation at
once. From Captain Sturt he had
learned of the doings of the White
Chief and his Lieutenant Kumho, and
he was only too glad to hear of that
renowned chief’s proximity. Offering
Kumbo his hand (for it was indeed
our old friend), the Major said:
“I am exceedingly glad to see you.
Where is your chief? Is he likely to
join me before long?”
Kumbo explained that the messen-
gers bearing the letter had searched
for the White Chief in the Warram-
bungle mountains, but he had left for
the Castlereagh, and it was a consid-
erable time before the letter had
reached the chief. The latter had
instantly began preparations to go
and seek the Major, but, wishing to
bring a number of men with him, had
not been able to get away for a time.
lie had, however, determined to let
the Major know, as quickly as possible,
that he was coming, and had despatch-
ed Kumbo and an attendant for that
purpose. The White Chief would come
on with all haste, cross from the
Castlereagh to the Bogan, get upon the
Major’s tracks, and follow them until
he came up with him.
EUMALGA.


The Major again expressed the
pleasure it gave him to hear the news
and invited Kumbo and his attendant
to supper.
The doings of the White Chief and
his lieutenant were the talk of the
evening throughout the camp, and
Kumbo was made the hero of the hour.
The expected arrival of the White
Chief and his men gave further confi-
dence to the whole of the members
of the expedition.
TROUBLE THICKENING.
It was on the second morning after
their arrival at the old camp that
the explorers once more turned their
steps towards the Darling, in the
hope of discovering the ultimate fate
of that river, the determination being
to make easy stages until the true
Darling was reached. The Major and
some others would then take to the
boat, leaving the rest to await their
return.
The day’s journey brought the ex-
plorers once again to the camping
ground on the Bogan. The camp was
pitched within a breastwork of trees,
and the horses and bullocks were
turned out to graze, with the exception
of one horse, which was tied up in
readiness to be used to collect the
others in the morning. Sentinels were
placed round the camp as before, and
duly relieved every two hours, and
so the night passed quietly.
The camp was astir at daylight.
One of the men, named Hammond,
was despatched on the horse to go
round the outside stock, while others
were to collect those within view. All
the men had returned except Ham-
mond, and no anxiety was, for a time,
felt on his behalf, it being thought
that he was in pursuit of a horse
still missing.
After a time, however, the Major
became uneasy, and despatched three
other horsemen to look for Hammond
and bring him back. Kumbo and his
man volunteered to go upon Ham-
mond’s trail, but preferred to walk.
The tracks were soon found to be
leading directly across the plain to-
wards a belt of scrub, some two miles
distant. The men were hastening to-
wards the scrub, when their anxiety
WJis relieved by seeing Hammond is-
sue from the timber and ride towards
them at full gallop.
The satisfaction of the rescue party
was soon changed to consternation
when they saw the horseman, as he
neared the centre of the plain, stag-
ger in the saddle, first one side and
then the other, in an evident endeavor
to keep his seat, and finally fall to
the ground. The horse, like a well-
trained animal; stopped immediately
its rider fell from the saddle, and
began picking the grass.
The relief party went to Hammond’s
assistance as soon ag possible, and
with great care placed him on the
horse again and took him to the camp.
On arrival at the camp Hammond
was lifted off the horse and laid on
the ground, where he again fainted.
‘Good heavens, he’s wounded!” said
the Major.
“Yes, sir,” said one of the men
sent out, “he told us he was struck
in the side by a spear thrown from
behind a tree. It’s a wonder he was-
n’t killed!”
Hammond’s shirt was taken off and
It was found that a spear had struck
him on the ribs and traversed through
the flesh round his side, leaving a
ghastly furrow, which was bleeding
freely. Medical attendant Souter
dressed the wound, the bleeding was
stopped, and the gash bandaged
In the course of a few minutes the
wounded man regained consciousness
and was able to relate, between parox-
ysms of pain, the events of his morn-
ing’s ride.
He had gone in the direction pointed
out as that from which one bell had
last been heard. He soon discovered
the tracks of the hiorse, and followed
them across the plain to the belt of
scrubby timber they could see. He
followed the tracks through the scrub
on to another plain. He had pre-
viously heard the tinkling of a bell
which he recognised as the horse bell
and was certain he had now overtak-
en the animal. On issuing from the
scrub, he was astonished to see the
horse, surrounded by a mob of
blacks, lying on the ground with a
spear in its ribs. He was almost
immediately seen by the excited
crowd, and was greeted with a yell of
rage or defiance. A number of blacks
darted towards him poising their
EUMADGA.


spears. He did not wait for them to
come within spearing distance; but
turned his horse round and fled.
As he was returning through the
scrub, a spear was thrown at him
from behind a tree; it struck him in
the side, fortunately not going
straight through, but traversing the
flesh and passing out near his back.
The wound gave him frightful pain,
but he managed to put spurs to his
horse and gallop out across the open
plain until he fainted and was brought
in, as described by the rescue party.
The savage Boro had very nearly
claimed another victim.
FORT BOURKE.
Major Mitchell’s party continued
the journey down the Bogan, chiefly
across plains which were destitute of
grass.
The ground was so soft that the
cart wheels sank deeply. The soil ap-
peared to be excellent though) it had
the appearance of naked fallow land.
On the 25th of May, the party
reached the junction of the Bogan
with the Darling, with its broken
earthy banks, lofty trees, and long,
deep, still reaches so characteristic
of a lengthened and slumbering
course.
There was an abundance of pas-
ture, such' excellent grass as had not
been seen on the whole journey. It
covered the fine open forest land on
the bank of the river, and spread
out across the plain which could be
seen in the distance.
The ground where the party struck
the Darling was the highest in the
neighborhood, rising gradually from
the lower levels to an elevated and
extensive plateau overlooking a deep
and broad reach. This was covered
or protected on the north by a green
swamp, which was again shut in by
an extensive bend of the river Tine
whole place seemed extremely favor-
able for the object about which the
Major was then anxious, namely, the
establishment of a secure depot and
place of defence.
During the night nain fell for the
first time during the long journey. If
rain had fallen previously for a
couple of days, the journey would
have been much more difficult, as
two days of wet weather would have
made much of the ground impassable
for the carts.
Next morning was fair, and having
reconnoitered the course of the river
and the environs of the camp, the
Major at once selected the spot where
the camp then was for the proposed
fort. The boat was put into the
water and found to be sound after
their five hundred miles journey.
A strong stockade of logs was erect-
ed, so that the party might be se-
cure under any circumstances. A
large number of natives were ex-
pected to put in an appearance as
soon as they heard of the arrival of
the explorers. All hands were set
to work falling and cutting branches
and in a very short time a stockade
was in progress capable of a stout
resistance against any number of na-
tives. The place was named. Fort
Bourke, after the then reigning Go-
vernor of the Colony.
The fort was finished on the 29th
May. On the first June thie Major
Mr. Larmer, and fourteen men em-
barked on the river for a journey
downwards, leaving the depot in
charge of Joseph Jones (assistant
overseer) and six other men, armed
with four muskets and four pistols.
The Major’s party made very slow
progress, meeting with shallows and
rocks that dammed up the channel,
making it necessary to unload and
draw the boat over. The river was
then in a very low condition. These
impediments determined the Major to
return with the boat to the fort and
to afterwards explore the course of
the river on horseback until hd could
discover more of its character and ul-
timate course.
Kumbo and Ms man, by agreement
with the Major, had gone back along
the Bogan with the view of meeting
the White Chief, who, on striking the
Bogan, from the Castlereagh, across
the Macquarie, would at once see
that the Major had passed along, and
would follow the tracks down the
river.
The White Chief was much longer
coming than was expected. Signals
were agreed upon which should let
the Major know a friendly party of
natives was approaching.
Major Mitchell and four men on
ETJMALGA.


horseback set off to examine the river
downwards, and in a few days re-
turned and broke up the encampment
at Fort Bourke. The whole party
then proceeded down the Darling in
the same order as they had traversed
the Bogan.
Owing to the increasing opposition,
annoyance, and threatening aspect of
the natives, and the worn-out state of
the cattle and horses, the party was
eventually compelled to return with-
out being able to trace the Darling to
the Murray, which was the real ob-
ject. The Major found that he could
not proceed further without repeated
conflicts with the blacks, one of which
would, no doubt, be fatal to the whole
party. The journey back to the fort
was very difficult. The cattle began
to fail, rain came on, and some of the
men were afflicted with scurvy.
Worn out and jaded the party were
on their last day’s journey, and had
camped for the noon-day meal, when
a gunshot was heard on the river.
This was followed by several others,
and as five of the bullock drivers and
two men sent for water were at that
time down at the river, and also the
tribe of a chief who had been met
with and styled King Peter, it was
evident a collision had taken place.
The arrival of another tribe on the
right front of the explorers made this
appear like a premeditated attack.
Two blacks came forward, just as
the shots were echoing along the river
and asked for fire and something to
eat, evidently a pretence.
The river extended along the
Major’s front from west to north-east,
at an average distance of three-quar-
ters of a mile.
The advancing tribe was now about
half a mile to the westward of the
scene of action. Soft and hollow
ground, thickly set with polygnum, in-
tervened.
Preparations to meet the newcom-
ers were hastily made, and three men
were sent to assist those on the river
in front, in a south easterly direction.
The vehicles were drawn into a
hollow square, and muskets, pistols
and ammunition were placed in
readiness. A man named Whiting,
who was very ill and weak, crawled
to a wheel, and said that though
unable to stand, he still had strength
enough to load and fire. The shots
on the river were renewed almost
as soon as the reinforcements left
the camp.
The Major was afterwards inform-
ed that Joseph Jones had taken a pot
and tea kettle for water > Thomas
Jones being stationed on’ the bank
covering the other with his pistol,
as was now usual and necessary,
King Peter, who had come along the
bank with several other blacks, met
him when half way up, and smilingly
took hold of the pot, as if meaning
to assist him in carrying it up. But
on reaching the top of the bank he,
in the same jocose way, held it fast,
until a gin said something to him,
upon which he let go the pot and
seized the kettle with the left hand,
at the same time grasping his club,
or waddy in his right hand, and strik-
ing Joseph Jones senseless to the
ground by a blow on the forehead.
On seeing this state of affairs, sail-
or Jones fired and wounded King
Peter in the thigh or groin. The king
dropped his club, reeled over the bank.
swam across the river, and scrambled
up the other side. This delay gave sail-
or Jones time to reload for defence
against others of the tribe who were
advancing towards him. One black
who stood by a tree with a spear
quivering in his hand ready to throw,
was shot at by Jones, but apparently
missed.
Just at this time the supports ar-
rived, and King shot the black in
the breast and he went down into the
river.
More firing took place, with what
effect was never known, but the
blacks retired for the time being, and
the wounded man was got back to
camp.
Robert Muirhead was another man
out. He was endeavouring to raise
a bullock which had become bogged
in the edge of the river, and had to
pass in view of the newly arriving
tribe. Two spears were thrown at
him from a small thicket with such
force that one was broken in halves,
and the other stuck in a tree close
behind him. He escaped both by
stooping at the moment they were
about to strike him. The spears were
apparently thrown by scoutg in ad-
vance of the main body.
EUIAALGA.


The Major was in no way respon-
sible for this preliminary skirmish,
but he had, nevertheless, to put up
with the consequences, and he de-
termined to be prepared to meet the
blacks in whatever numbers they
might appear. At any rate, he would
make an obstinate resistance and fight
to the last.
The advancing tribe came on slow-
ly, and when they got within about a
quarter of a mile from the Major’s
camp, stopped to reconnoitre. Two or
three of them advanced a few paces
in front of the main body and shook
their spears menacingly. They had
most likely heard of the white man’s
U£w weapon.
Suddenly the whole crowd gave
forth a succession of fearful yells,
and, as if in answer, corresponding
yells were heard on the Major’s left,
and shortly afterwards about thirty
black s came up the bank and ap-
peared upon the plain. The camp was
now threatened on the right front and
left flank.
The danger fhichi the besieged were
in was from spears thrown into the
centre from two sides, necessitating
getting under the carts for protection.
It must be remembered that the wea-
pons with which the explorers were
armed were muskets and pistols, all
with flint locks. The muskets were
of the old Brown Bess type, almost
useless, except at close quarters.
After consultation- it was decided
to reserve the fire until the blacks
came within range, and then pour in
a volley and reload as quickly as it
was possible to do so in a reclining
position. It was hoped, however, that
one volley would be sufficient, as, no
doubt, twenty men would be hit.
No movement having been made
within the camp, both companies of
blacks made another short move in
advance, getting within spear range,
when a couple of dozen of these
weapons were hurled at the enclos-
ure. Some passed over the camp,
some to the sides, and one stuck quiv-
ering in the inner side of one of the
carts.
"That would have been a close call
for some of us, if we had been un-
protected,” remarked the overseer.
It was agreed that matters were
now getting warm, and that the final
assault would soon be made. How-
ever, the blacks again paused, won-
dering, perhaps, why there was no
reply from the camp.
Another set of yells was given, and
spears were again shaken menacingly
at the besieged.
The Major could no longer endure
the position under the cart, and bold-
ly emerged into the hollow square,
taking up a position at the south-
west corner, which seemed to be most
secure, no spears having fallen in that
angle. He was followed by Mr. Lar-
mer and the overseer.
The blacks were now preparing for
the final rush, and the Major called
to the men to be in readiness to fire
as soon as he discharged his weapon.
There would be little time to reload
if the blacks came on with a rush,
but one more volley might be got in.
After that the men were to come from
under cover and fight in the open,
unless they wanted to be prodded with
spears without being able to resist.
THE WHITE CHIEF TO THE
RESCUE.
“By heaven!” exclaimed the over-
seer, “there is another company com-
ing up at a rapid stride. Look, Ma-
jor, over there. See how the devils
run! ”
The Major looked, and to the as-
tonishment of all, yelled out: ,
“Hurrah! Look at the red crosses
on their breasts! We are saved! It
is the White Chief! What excellent
order they keep—like trained men!”
The blacks on the left flank may
have seen this new band approaching,
but, if they did, they perhaps thought
they were allies come to share the
spoil. The blacks on the right front
did not see them, as was afterwards
ascertained, for they were coming up
in about the same direction, from
the south-west, and would be some-
what in the rear, and their attention
was rivetted on the camp.
A stern voice was now heard to
call out in command, the words spok-
en in English—“ Halt! Take arms!
Aim! Fire!”
The company consisted of about
a hundred and fifty men in close
order, a rear rank marching at about
twenty paces behind the front rank to
EUMAL6A.


enable them to throw spears over the
heads of those in front. Each man
had a red cross upon his breast, and
a bright red feather fastened ij-n his
head. Each bore six spears and a
shield, and _a nullah-nullah was at-
tached to a broad belt of skin round
the waist. Their response to their
leader’s command was as if by one
man, so thoroughly had they been
trained.
A hundred and fifty spears left the
throwers and found victims in the
confused mass in front, whose at-
tention the words of command had
awakened.
Seeing what had taken place in
front the blacks on the left flank
ran away with all speed and disap-
peared down the river bank, followed
by all those in front who could get
away.
Major Mitchell and his party came
out from behind the carts to meet
the White Chief and his men. Every-
body shook hands with the chief,
and expressed thanks for his timely
arrival.
The scene before them had been
changed as if by magic. Instead of a
plundered camp and the mangled re-
mains of the gallant explorers, the
ground was strewn with dead, dying,
and wounded savages—the untutored
savages who were, in their customary
manner, fighting the invaders of their
beloved territory. And yet it was by
the hands of their fellow countrymen
that defeat and death had been dealt
out to them.
As a last act, Lieutenant Kumbo
and his men were directed to do what
they could for the wounded and to
bury the dead.
When all was fairly quiet the White
Chief, addressing the Major, said;
“Kumbo informs me you are Major
Mitchell. You sent me a message to
meet you somewhere on the journey,
and accordingly I have been in search
of you. I struck your track on the
Bogan and followed it along, very
shortly afterwards meeting Kumbo,
who returned with me to the stockade.
Fort Bourke you have named it, where
I expected to find some men in gar-
rison. Seeing your tracks proceeding
further down the Darling, I followed
on, and, fortunately, arrived in the
nick of time.”
“Yes,” said the Major, “Captain
Sturt told me you had a very good
habit of coming up just in time, to his
great advantage.”
“I should have arrived sooner on
this occasion,” said the chief, “but I
wanted to bring a strong force, as
I knew the malignity of these Bogan
myals, and my men were somewhat
scattered. A considerable time elaps-
ed before messengers could reach
them, and then, when they got to-
gether it was a good long march from
the Castlereagh to the Bogan without
stores of food. I also wanted to bring
over all my possessions, intending to
again take up my abode on the Bar-
won.”
“I think you will alter your mind
when you read the correspondence
I have brought you from Sydney.”
“How is that?” asked the chief with
a shadow of thought across his brow.
“Your innocence of some crime al-
leged against you has been proved,
and you are a free man.”
‘‘Thank Heaven!” said the chief, in
a voice full of emotion. “I may now
be able to see my dear old uncle, and
to meet my former friends without
shame! ”
“There is no doubt about it,” said
the Major, “and I will explain all
things this evening, by which time
I think we can reach the fort, where
we shall be safer if we can get the
cattle together quickly and harness
up the horses.”
“You will be safe enough anywhere
with my men in attendance, but they
will also have to collect some food
before nightfall.”
A bullock is bogged on the bank
over there,” said the Major. “Tell
your man Kumbo to have him killed
and cut up. We were just going to
have our mid-day meal. Join us —I
am sure you are hungry after your
march. I still have something good
in the larder. Call up your lieuten-
ant.”
“Excellent!” said the chief. “Hun-
ger is no name for the vacuum I feel,
and the word larder makes my mouth
water.”
A black boy, acting as the chief’s
orderly, was sent to tell Kumbo he
was wanted, and that redoubted and
well-reputed individual soon appear-
ed, and met with a hearty welcome.
EUMALGA.


On Kumbo’s return from the slaugh-
ter of the bullock—much to the joy
of the hungry warriors—the mid-day
meal (somewhat delayed) was pro-
ceeded with), the White Chief and
Kumbo performing prodigies of valor.
EUMALGA! FAITHFUL EUMALGA!
At the conclusion of the meal, the
White Chief and Mr. Larmer drew on
one side while the packing previous
to a start for the fort was going on.
They walked away chatting and
slowly passed a thicket of trees. They
turned to retrace their steps, and
their back s were towards the thicket
when a black stepped stealthily out,
poised a spear, and launched it at the
White Chief.
Alas! Alas! His fate is certain! But
no! Another is the victim!
A female appears, she throws her-
self between the White Chief and the
black assassin, and receives the spear
in her own breast!
The immediate commotion attracted
the attention of the whites, and they
hastily turned round.
At the same instant another black
sprang upon the assassin and dashed
his brains out with a heavy waddy.
“I say next time Boro meet White
Chief he die,” said Kumbo, for it
wqs the faithful lieutenant.
The White Chief wa s almost para-
lysed at the suddenness of the attack,
but he instantly recovered and grasp-
ed in his strong embrace the form of
his rescuer.
“Eumalga! my poor Eumalga!”
cried the chief, in grief-stricken tones.
“She has sacrificed her life for me!”
It was customary for gins, even
those who had children, to follow their
lords about, and if the latter were
killed or beaten by an enemy, the
women were passed over to the con-
querors.
Following the usual custom, but in
her case with different motives, Eu-
malga had crept as near the White
Chief as she could, and, unfortunately
for herself, had been concealed in the
same thicket in which Boro (wounded
in the onset) had sought shelter. She
had watched the White Chief as he
passed, and, seeing Boro emerge and
poise the spear, she had, without a
single thought for her own safety,
flung her body in front of the chief,
and received the spear intended for
him.
When it became known to the White
Chief’s warriors that Eumalga had
been treacherously speared, perhaps
fatally wounded, by Boro, chief of
the opposing tribe, their rage was un-
bounded. The wounded in the en-
gagement with the whites were merci-
lessly killed, and if the unwounded
had not fled there would have been
a massacre.
Major Mitchell and the rest of the
white party sincerely grieved with
the White Chief.
The Major had heard the story of
Eumalga from Captain Sturt, and the
romantic history had often been the
theme of conversation.
Of course, all that could be done
for Eumalga was done at once. The
spear was extracted with great care,
and the wound was dressed after the
native fashion. It was hoped the wea-
pon had not penetrated the ribs, but
had gone merely through the flesh
under the breast.
Eumalga bore the intense pain
with great fortitude.
The White Chief knew what ter-
rible wounds the blacks would sur-
vive, and how tenacious of life they
were under the most frightful suf-
ferings, and he, therefore, had hopes
of Eumalga’s recovery.
'She was placed upon a mattress in
one of the carts and conveyed to
the fort with the rest of the party,
where she was left in the care of
some gins, who were only too anxi-
ous to supply her slightest wants.
The fort was found to be uninjur-
ed, except that the blacks had been
to infinite pains to cut out most of
the large spike nails fastening the
legs, of which the block house was
constructed.
‘T had a long conversation about
you, Luscombe,” said the Major, aft-
er the evening meal, addressing the
White Chief by his proper name,
“with Captain Sturt. He told me
your history, and of the great ser-
vices you had rendered him on his
journey hither. He recommended
me to find you out for my own sake.
But I had another reason for sending
you word of my presence in this re-
EUMALGA.


gion. He gave his Excellency a viv-
id account of the critical circum-
stances in which he had been placed,
and of his rescue by you. He also
informed the Governor of his belief
in your innocence of the crime at-
tributed to you. The Governor was
greatly interested in your history, and
at once promised a free pardon. Cap-
tain Sturt had spoken of you by the
name of the White Chief, and at the
conclusion of the conference, his Ex-
cellency asked for your real name.
“John Saville Luscombe,” said Captain
Sturt, ‘ but I believe he was trans-
ported under the name of John Sa-
ville only!’ ‘Why, I believe some pap-
ers arrived by the last ship from
England relative to a prisoner nam-
ed Saville,’ said the Governor. T
have not read them yet, but will
hunt them up, and if you will call
again to-morrow I will acquaint you
with the particulars.’ After this
Sturt took his leave. Next day he
again waited upon the Governor, and,
when introduced found that the let-
ters relating to John Saville were
lying open on the table. ‘This is an
extraordinary occurrence. Captain
Sturt,’ said the Governor. ‘lf the
White Chief you have described to
me is the John Saville, otherwise
John Saville Luscombe, mentioned
in these papers, there is no necessity
for me to grant him a pardon, for
here is the King’s own pardon, for-
warded through the Colonial Office.
From what is mentioned in the ac-
companying letter, it appears that Sa-
ville was innocent, a groom in the
employ of his uncle having confess-
ed to the murder. There are some
private letters for Saville. and my in-
structions are to send him back to
England as soon as possible. What
do you think of this news, Sturt?’ T
think it is only a completion of the
romance which has surrounded his
movements ever since he came to the
colony,’ said Sturt. T am very glad
he has been proved innocent of the
crime, as we all believed him to be.
It will be great news for him.’ ‘How
shall we convey it to him?’ asked the
Governor. T propose,’ said Sturt, ‘to
send word to him by Major Mitchell,
who is going into the country inhab-
ited by the tribe he commands. If
Mitchell finds him, the White Chief,
as he is called out there, will be of
great service to him.’
“He spoke the truth there,’’ con-
tinued the Major, “but you were near-
ly too late.”
“It was a narrow escape, I admit,”
said the White Chief, “but better late
than never.”
“Well, to continue my story,” said
the Major, ‘‘Captain Sturt’s interview
with the Governor resulted in my
being furnished with a copy of the
documents forwarded, and with the
private letters, which I left at Wel-
lington, with the commandant, Mr.
John Maxwell. I was afraid to bring
them further for fear I might lose
them. We can get them on our re-
turn, for I assume you will return
with us.”
“Most assuredly I will,” said the
White Chief. “I shall not rest easy
until I ascertain what those letters
contain. My poor old uncle has, doubt-
less, written, and is waiting in great
anxiety for news of me. But 1 can-
not leave Eumalga in her present
state. Impatient as I am to get to
Wellington, I cannot start until she
has sufficiently recovered to accom-
pany us, for I have hope she will re-
cover. But you need not wait, Major,
you and your men can find your own
way back, that is, if you have decided
to go back.”
' “I am afraid we shall be compelled
to wait for you and your warriors, ’
said the Major, “Our ammunition is
nearly exhausted, and our cattle are
jaded, and if we meet any of our late
enemies we shall have a poor chance
of escape.”
“A thought strikes me,” said the
chief ‘‘l can see a way to hasten
our journey, even while we are wait-
ing here. I will send Kumbo and a
few picked men on to Wellington, with
an order to get my letters, and with
a request to send fresh horses for
our use. We should be met half way,
and I could appoint a place to meet
Kumbo on his return. This arrange-
ment would give us over a week to
stay here. By that time, according to
my experience of wounds inflicted on
the native race. Eumalga will be able
to travel. And by that time, also, the
horses you have will be fit to go on.”
The Major could but consent to
the proposed arrangements. Indeed,
EUMALGA.


a week’s rest, after their arduous and
exciting labors, would be very wel-
come. Their safety was assured.
Kumbo was summoned to the coun-
cil and informed of the wishes of
his chief, who explained how anxious
he was to get his letters.
The lieutenant instantly prepared
for the journey, and in the course of
half an hour had selected a few fav-
orite warriors to accompany him to
Wellington.
It was too late to start that night
or they would have done so, notwith-
standing the long distance they had
travelled that day.
There was a good store of writing
materials amongst the belongings of
the explorers, and a letter to the com-
mandant was duly written and deliver-
ed to Kumbo’s safe keeping.
The commandant was requested to
deliver the horses and letters to
Kumbo, also some clothing for the
White Chief and Eumalga, and to
treat Kumbo well, and let Mm have
anything he required.
The chief wrote another letter to
Dicky Taylor, requesting him to aid
Kumbo all in his power, and to come
back with the horses.
At break of day next morning Kum-
bo was ready to start. An escort of
men was told off to see him and his
comrades well out of the “troubled
country,” and then return.
Kumbo inquired anxiously about
the state of Eumalga, and having been
assured that to all appearances she
was doing well, he set off on his jour-
ney with a light heart, proud of his
commission.
LETTERS FROM HOME.
An escort of fifty men had been sent
with Kumbo a day’s march on the
way to Wellington. In two days this
escort returned with the news that
no opposing natives had been seen.
Eumalga, under the simple native
treatment, very soon showed signs of
rapid recovery, and her condition gave
hope that the most frightful wound
would not be necessarily fatal. In
a week’s time she was able to sit up,
but she wag very weak.
At the end cf two more days the
combined' party moved out of camp.
and, by easy stages, Eumalga re-
clining on a soft bed in one of the
carts, reached the appointed meeting
place with Kumbo. In the meantime,
Kumbo had travelled with great speed
to Wellington, where he arrived on
the twelfth day, or about the same
day as the Chief’s party started from
<he Darling.
The commandant was very much
surprised one afternoon when he was
informed that a small party of trav-
elled blacks, with a leader who could
speak English, demanded an interview
Mr. Maxwell went out to
see them, when Kumbo presented him
with the letters entrusted to him for
delivery. He then asked for Richard
Taylor, and that individual having
been hunted up, was presented with
the letter addressed to him. It was
as follows:
“Darling River, A.D., 1835.
“To Mr. Richard Taylor, Wellington.
“Dear Friend.—You will no doubt be
surprised as well ag pleased to hear
from me after so long a silence. Since
last I saw you at Gobalyan I have
gone through many strange adven-
tures, but, thank s be to God, I have
escaped from all perils, and am in
sound health, which I hope you also
enjoy. I am very sorry to say my
wife, Eumalga, the old chief’s daugh-
ter, has been seriously wounded by a
treacherous black, but I am in good
hope of her recovery. You will be
glad to hear that my innocence of the
crime for which I was transported,
has been acknowledged, and that a
pardon and letters from England
await me at Wellington. I intend com-
ing to Wellington as soon as my
wife can travel, in company with
Major Mitchell and party, who brought
me the good news, and who are com-
pelled to return. I send this letter
by my friend, Kumbo, whom I have
taught to speak English, and who will
explain the position of affairs with
me. Will you kindly assist him in
getting horses to meet us, and if pos-
sible come with him. You will be
quite safe. He is a fine fellow, and
is to me as a brother. When I reach
Wellington, I believe I shall, in some
measure, be able to reward you for
all your kindness to me. I am writing
under difficulties, and, as Kumbo will
further explain, I need say no mom
EUMALGA.


Believe me to be your very grateful
friend
“JOHN SAVILLE.”
The letter was written upon a piece
of blue foolscap, evidently torn from
a diary kept by one of the Major’s
party.
Mr. Maxwell, having read the three
letters, two addressed to himself and
one to Taylor, proceeded to question
Kumbo upon the state of affairs at
the Darling, and the lieutenant gave
a true account of all he knew.
The fame of the White Chief and hi s
black lieutenant had already reached
Wellington through Captain blurt’s
party. One of the convicts, who went
with Sturt, was at Wellington, and
he identified Kumbo as one of their
heroic deliverers at the shallows.
Kumbo was made much of by all
at the stockade, and was probably
treated to a good deal more than was
good for his health.
Instant preparations were made for
sending the required horses and
goods, but it was the third day before
they could be collected and prepared.
Richard Taylor was then a free
man, and was in some person’s em-
ploy, but he readily obtained leave
to accompany the blacks on their
return journey. It was necessary that
someone should go who knew more
about the management of horses than
the blacks did.
Kumbo was impatient at the delay,
but it was unavoidable, and he de-
termined to travel back as fast as
he could.
The White Chief’s party had rested
a day at the appointed meeting place
before Kumba put in an appearance.
No uneasiness had been felt about
him, as he was journeying principally
through his own towri, and the nearer
he got to Wellington the more famili-
ar was he with the country.
Towards sundown on the second
day after the White Chief and party
had arrived at the rendezvous Kumbo
and his followers returned with the
horses, and were heartily welcomed by
all. He brought letters for Major
Mitchell, and the letters from Eng-
land for the chief, also the supplies
feciuired.
The chief was pleased to read the
contents of his letters and took them
on one side. Tears filled his eyes
as he recognised the writing of his
unde.
“God bless the poor old fellow, I
see he is alive,” said he, and he
read;
THE GROOM’S CONFESSION.
‘‘My dear John, —As I have not
heard from you since your arrival in
New South Wales, of which fact I
am assured by the prison department,
I am only too fearful that I am again
writing in vain. I have written many
times before but have received no
answer. The letters, therefore. I am
sure, did not reach you. I intend to
forward this through the Government
to the Governor of the colony, who
will be instructed to find you if pos-
sible. If you are alive I have hope
that this will reach you. My dear
boy, you cannot imagine the suffering
I nave undergone since you left, as
I knew, and happily can now prove
you to be an innocent man. But
what must have been my sufferings
to yours—incomparable. But I must
hasten to tell you that you are now
free from all suspicion, the groom,
then in my employ, having confessed
that he did the deed. You will re-
member, this surly fellow. He was in
love with the murdered girl, who, it
appears had given him some encour-
agement, and, meeting her as she was
going to a stolen interview with an-
other, he taxed her with inconstancy,
and, receiving a saucy answer, in a
mad fit he stabbed her to the heart
with an old dagger belonging to you,
and which by some fatal means you
had left near the stables that day.
He had scarcely committed the deed
and was running away when the
housekeeper came up and saw him
in the darkness. She must have pick-
ed up the dagger, and, seeing an op-
portunity of fixing the crime upon
you, for whom, for reasons which have
been suggested, and which I need not
explain, she entertained a great hat-
red, she, with devilish malice, placed
the weapon, where it was afterwards
found, in your bed. There is little
doubt she saw r it was the groom run-
ning away, which accounts for her
hesitation in giving evidence that it
was you. She has been charged with
this malicious procedure, and though
EUMALGA.


she has not acknowledged her culpa-
bility, her conduct has been such as
to leave no doubt erf her guilt. These
.are the bare facts of the case. My
•dear boy, your innocence has been
proved—what need for further ex-
planation. Come back quickly. I am
fast getting old and am but the
shadow of my former self, but if I
-have one year of your companionship,
and see you honorably settled in my
place, I shall die content. I send
you herewith a draft on Sydney for
£250. If you find that sum insuffi-
cient, draw upon me to any extent.
I suppose there are bill discounters
in Sydney. Hasten home, my dear
boy that I may see you once before
I die, and that God will protect you
i s the prayer of your most affection-
ate uncle,
“JOHN S. LUSCOMBE.”
The other letter to the White Chief
was from a friend living near his
uncle’s estate, and it confirmed what
the first letter had stated, adding
some more particulars.
The letter from Mr. Maxwell to
Major Mitchell was of the usual rout-
ine, informing him of the despatch
of the horses and goods to his order.
The morning after the receipt of
the letters, Major Mitchell, Mr. Lar-
mer, and others, on horseback, start-
ed for Wellington, where they arrived
In less than three days. The White
Chief and Eumalga, with the rest of
the party, went on by easy stages,
and it was about ten days before they
arrived at the old Gobalyan encamp-
ment.
DEATH OF EUMALGA.
The White Chief, arrived at Gobal-
yan, could not compare his present
position, as King of the tribe, and a
free and proved to be innocent man.
with his position as a fugitive convict
when he first came there. Then he
would, if caught, have been hanged,
or flogged to death. Now hie had but
to visit the stockade and be received
with honor by the commandant.
These thoughts were, however, di-
verted by anxiety for the state of
Eumalga. She got no better, in fact
was getting weaker, and could not
even sit up.
A camp was fixed nearer Welling-
ton, in the angle of the Macquarie,
opposite Mount Arthur. Here there
was a long and broad sheet of water,
and, according to the customary
treatment of natives suffering from
wounds, Eumalga was placed in a
bark canoe and a blackfellow paddled
it up and down for hours daily. But
she continued to sink, until at last
she was unable to be moved from her
bed.
Medical advice was obtained from
Welington, but no improvement took
place. On the contrary, it was seen
that the poor sufferer’s days were
numbered. A week or two at most,
and she would cross that bourne from
whence no traveller returns.
The White Chief was inconsolable.
He waited on Eumalga day and night,
and displayed the greatest anxiety.
“O that she may recover,” he would
exclaim. “What can I do to save her?
If she dies, she will have sacrificed
her life for me!”
“John,” would poor Eumalga whis-
per, “don’t grieve, it is fit that I should
die. I should only be a burden to
you amongst your friends at home!”
“Would that I could take you with
me —I should only be too proud.’
“John,” she replied, “we must part
now, but shall meet again,” uncon-
sciously continuing in her native
tongue, “dullabang gattigin muron
wigirri yandunda bullungirri.” (Our
souls will live when we are dead).
On another occasion she said, “Don’t
grieve, John, I am ready to go. The
Lord, whom you have taught me about
will receive my soul. If we are good
we shall go to God and always live
with him.”
The faithful Eumalga was at last
on the point of death, yet her brave
heart never faltered or cowed before
her approaching end. She had done
her duty, and she knew it was for the
best.
“Good-bye, John,” she whispered;
“do not grieve, but keep me in your
affectionate remembrance. Your hand,
John. The sun will soon set —death
is near!”
“O that I should have to say good-
bye, Eumalga; but be comforted. In
death good souls ascend to Heaven!”
“‘Good-bye, John, repeated Eumal-
ga, faintly, and in scarcely audible
EUMALGA.


tones she whispered the first sentence
of the Lord’s Prayer—a prayer the
White Chief had taught her—in her
native tongue: “Giannigin Babbin,
gindu murrubirra ginya Yuinnu
wulluin yalla barri. . . . Gurramban-
ganu barri buogalla. . . .”
Silence reigned supreme—the soul
of Euraalga had departed!
The news of Eumalga’s death
spread very rapidly. It was repeated
from mouth to mouth, and from run-
ner to runner, and by next day every
black within thirty miles had assembl-
ed within the neighborhood of Go-
balyan for the purpose of attending
the funeral and taking part in the
demonstration of grief. The White
Chief bad a decent coffin made at the
Welington settlement, in which Eu-
malga’s body was placed, and wild
flowers were strewn upon it.
The period of tbe year was about
October, and the wattle and other
trees and shrubs were in full bloom.
The prayers of the Church cf Eng-
land were read over the grave by the
Rev. William Watson, then appointed
a missionary to the blacks.
The White Chief thought it inad-
visable to check the native ceremonies
and the gins gashed themselves with
shells and plastered their hair with
pipeclay until it dried and rattled,
and the men showed every respect
for the departed Eumalga and sorrow
for her death. Indeed, she had always
been greatly beloved by the whole
tribe.
The spot chosen for the grave was
upon the rising ground on the right
bank of the Macquarie, opposite Mount
Arthur, and not far from Gobalyan.
A large mound of earth wag formed
over the grave, the remains of \(rhich
may be seen to this day. It is situat-
ed in one of the paddocks bought
from the Nanima estate, within view
of Gobalyan house, on the left side
of the railway line. A tree on the
north side of the grave, another on
the south, another on the east and one
on the west, were deeply engraved
with the totem of the deceased. Two
of these trees are yet standing. One
has the bark off on the side facing
the grave, from about seven feet high
to the ground, and the deeply indented
carvings are as plain as when first
made. The tree is a very old white
box. Carved parallel lines, running-
from top to bottom, are deeply cut
in the solid wood.
And so passed from sight the faith-
ful Eumalga.
“FAREWELL, MY FAITHFUL
FRIENDS.”
On the morning after the funerah
a rumor having spread through the
camp that the White Chief was about
to leave them, the tribe crowded round
Mm and begged him to remain. Kum-
bo was in great grief over the loss
of Eumalga, which was added to by
the prospected departure of hi s be-
loved chief.
The chief informed them that it was
true he was about to visit his own
towri, and partially allayed their anx-
iety by saying he might return. He
was not going to Start that day, and
before he did he would treat them to-
a grander corroboree than they had
ever enjoyed, at which he would for-
mally appoint Kumbo his successor.
The chief then (taking Kumbo with
him) waited upon Mr. Maxwell, the
commandant at Wellington, for the
purpose of making preparations for
the return to Sydney. He was cour-
teously received and informed that
the station was about to be broken
up, orders having been given to re-
move the prisoners to Bathurst. If
he chose, the chief could accompany
the men back, or he could retain two-
or three horses and travel by him-
self.
The chief preferred the latter
course, having no wish to witness the
sufferings of the convicts. He pro-
cured, through the commandant, to-
whom he showed his money order
on Sydney (Sturt and Mitchell had
also left directions about him), all
that the station could supply in the
shape of clothing and presents for
the tribe, such as tomahawks, knives,
blankets, useful articles and trinkets,
and bought as many fat bullocks as
he thought would supply the tribe
with a great feast. Richard Taylor
heartily assisted the chief.
The tribe at Gobalyan were liter-
ally astounded at the value of the
gifts the chief, Kumbo, and Taylor
EUMALGA.




brought to the camp. There was some-
thing for everyone, and the chief pro-
mised, if Kumbo went with him to
Sydney he would send them many
more useful articles.
The next day a grand corroboree
was held at which Kumbo was duly
installed as chief.
Saville had bade the tribe a final
farewell amid much sorrow. He ad-
vised them to return to the lower
•Macquarie and keep as much away
from the white men as possible. He
concluded by saying, “Farewell, my
faithful friends.”
All preparations having been made,
Saville and Kumbo (who insisted
upon seeing the last of his friend)
started for Sydney on horseback. Rich-
ard Taylor went with them as far as
Bathurst. Additions to their ward-
robes were here obtained, when Tay-
lor left his friends and returned to
Wellington. On their arrival at
•Sydney, Saville and his well-dressed
lieutenant were presented to the Go-
vernor, and received many congratu-
lations for the part they had taken
in rescuing the explorers from a per-
ilous position.
Kumbo was struck with great won-
der at what he saw in Sydney. Then
followed the preparations for Saville’s
voyage, and at last the faithful black
watched his friend’s departure in the
great canoe for the land he had never
seen.
Saville lived for many years, and
was quite an oracle upon Australian
matters. He was alive and well in
1854.
Major Mitchell saw Kumbo before
he left Sydney to rejoin his tribe.
The Major told Kumbo % he contem-
plated another exploration with a
strong and well-armed party, and in-
duced the black chief to promise to
assist him with a small band of picke'd
blacks, and appointed a rendezvous.
A LETTER FROM SAVILLE.
In 1836, Richard Taylor received the
following letter:
“Gracechurch-st.. London,
“June 10, 1836.
“My dear friend, —I have no doubt you
will be glad to hear that I arrived
home safely in the good ship com-
manded by Captain Towns, having
made a pleasant, though somewhat
lengthy, voyage. I think of you often,
and my gratitude for your kindness
when I was in captivity will never
cease. I often wonder how the old
tribe is getting on. Kindly write and
let me know about them, and please
see that poor Eumalga’s grave is kept
in order. Tell me how Kumbo got on
in the expedition with Major Mitchell
down the Lachlan. On reaching home
I found my dear old uncle in feeble
health, but I am thankful to say the
joy of my return has built him up
again, and he has yet a few years
of happiness in store. I am not idle.
I am carrying on business in London,
and doing well, thanks to my uncle's
generosity and experience. I have
been quite a hero amongst my friends,
and have had to recount again and
again the wonderful adventures I
went through in Australia. I have
had to describe Eumalga and her ways
hundreds of times to female listeners,
and have met with much sympathy.
Her saving me at the sacrifice of her
own life is regarded with great ad-
miration, and my marriage with her
is so far from being considered a bar
to my marrying again that I have
been accepted by a lady with whom I
was on friendly terras before I was
falsely charged with that crime, and,
with the full consent and approval of
my uncle, we are shortly to be mar-
ried. I thought the change from the
savage to the civilised life would af-
fect my health, but the sea voyage
gradually brought me back to civilis-
ed customs, and the cold weather
which prevailed on my arrival in Lon-
don made warm clothing a necessity.
Again asking you to kindly write and
let me know how things are going on
about Wellington, and with kind re-
gards and everlasting gratitude, I
am yours very faithfully,
“JOHN S. LUSCOMBE.”
Enclosed in the letter was a draft
for £lO cn a Sydney bank. And for
many years afterwards, at Christmas
time a mysterious letter would reach
Taylor, from Sydney, briefly stating
that a sum of money was lying to his
credit in a Sydney bank, and was pay-
able to his order.
THE END.
EUMALGA.
