

1 8 55.
VICTORIA.
BALLAAEAT OUTBREAK.
PETITION.
Ordered by the Council to be printed, 18 th December, 1855.
To the Honorable the Members of the Legislative Council.
The Memorial of the Undersigned y
Humbly sheweth ?
That during and after certain disturbances, which happened on the Eureka, on and about
the third December, One thousand eight hundred and fifty-four, there was a wanton and uncalled
for destruction of the property of those individuals who chanced to live within and near to
what was then called the Stockade; and that as your Memorialists know and expect that your
Honorable House will take into consideration that they had no power over the parties who then
acted in opposition to certain grievances, against which the complaint was universal, and that
the choosing of that particular spot as the centre of action was a thing totally independent of
their will, they beg to lay before the Council their conviction that the accidental selection of that
particular spot should not implicate the parties who happened to reside there ; and hence they feel
that the destruction of the property, a destruction which was continued and persevered in after the
opposition to the authorities had ceased, was a wanton and uncalled for assertion of power at once
degrading to the actors, and unjust, for the reasons aforesaid, to the sufferers. Your Memorialists,
furthermore, would beg your Honorable House to take into consideration that the view of the
case which they now lay before the Council is the opinion of the people of Ballaarat of those
who were not, as well as those who had been actors in the drama of that time?as may be inferred
from the following Resolutions, which were passed unanimously at a public meeting, holden on
the Eureka, Thursday, 22nd November, 1855: ?
1st. 11 That the people were justifiable, however much its effect is to be deplored, in
resisting injustice and oppression, as proved by the several verdicts given at the State
Trials.?
2nd. ?That as there was a great deal of property destroyed, both by the Military and
Police, after the cessation of the disturbances, it is the strong conviction of this
meeting that the Government should compensate the sufferers.?
3rd. u That a memorial be presented to the Legislative Council, praying the House to take
into consideration the losses sustained by the people through the wantonness of the
Police and Soldiery; and that this meeting shall instruct some person to draw out
such memorial forthwith.?
Now your Memorialists, believing that they have a right to compensation for their respective
losses, and being sustained in that opinion by the united opinions of the people, as expressed in
the foregoing Resolutions, beg most humbly to impress upon your Honorable House that it should
o-rant to the sufferers full compensation for at least the pecuniary losses. Trusting in the willingness
of your Honorable House to entertain the prayer of this Memorial, your Memorialists wish not to
draw still further on your sympathy by reminding you of the uncalled for cruelties, of which power
made a sport, and how the unarmed and unopposing were killed, nor that some of those who
found unfortunately that their dwellings were on the ground selected as the site of the Stockade,
were at that very time dreaming of a return to their native places; enjoying by anticipation the
comforts they should bring to their kindred in the old home, and that at one stroke all this
happiness was destroyed, and they found themselves reduced from affluence to penury. Your
Memorialists wish not to dilate upon those horrors, but rather that they should be allowed to
sleep with those unfortunate men who never more may offend against power, and whose life blood
was spilled in what they at least conceived a just and holy cause. Your Memorialists beg of your
Honorable House simply to consider that agreeably with justice, and the opinion of the people, as
expressed in the Resolutions herein given, and by the signatures which follow, that they are
entitled to, and pray the favorable consideration of your Honorable House.
Your Memorialists shall ever pray.
[Here follow 752 signatures.']
E.?No. 4.
Authority: John Feeees, Government Printer, Melbourne,


