

1855-6
Victoria.
MR. B, S. HAiSSALL.
CLAIM FOR COMPENSATION,
WITFI COPIES OF EVIDENCE, &c.
Mum to
MR. HUMFFRAY ?21st FEBRUARY, 1856.
LA ID upon the Council Table hy the Chief Secretary, by command of His Excellency the Officer
administering the Government, and ordered hy the Council to he printed , 22nd February , 1856.
To His Excellency Sir Charles Hotham, Governor and Captain-
General of the Colony of Victoria.
The humble Memorial of Miners , Storekeepers , and others on behalf of
Mr. Benden Sherral Hassall, Storekeeper , Eureka, Ballaarat,
Sheweth ?
That the said Benden Sherral Ilassall resided on the Eureka, Ballaarat, on the 28th
of November, 1854.
That at night of the day beforementioned, a detachment of soldiers with military stores
arrived on Ballaarat, and as they were passing over that part of the diggings known as the Eureka
along the road leading by the ? London? Hotel, the Officer in command enquired of the said Mr.
Ilassall the way to the Government Camp, on Ballaarat, and Mr. Hassell went out into the road
and gave the Officer the information desired.
That as Mr. Ilassall was returning into the Hotel after pointing out the way to the Officer,
he was shot in the leg.
The following is a copy of the surgeon?s certificate : ?
? Ballaarat, 17th July, 1855.
- This is to certify that Mr. Benden Sherral Hassall was under my care for a period of
four months, labouring under the effect of a gun shot wound of left leg, received on the 28th ot
November, 1854, which completely incapacitated him from following his usual business; from the
severe nature of this wound he has not as yet perfectly recovered, and I furthermore consider
he will never recover perfect use and strength of same limb.
(Signed) ? TIMOTHY DOYLE,
v * ? M.R.C.S.?
That the bullet has not yet been extracted from the limb; and from present appearances,
it is very probable that Mr. Hassall will have to undergo a severe surgical operation before there
is any chance of his recovering (if at ail), the active use of the wounded limb, or be freed from
frequent attacks of excruciating pain.
C.?No. 23.


That Mr. Hassall has suffered considerable pecuniary loss through his not being able to
attend to the disposal of a large stock of goods, and which, in consequence of their being kept so
long were much depreciated in value.
That Mr. Hassall is well known as being a peaceable and loyal British subject, and in no
way countenanced or aided in any manner the unfortunate disturbances which took place on the
Eureka, either at the time he received the wound or on any subsequent occasion.
That Mr. Hassall is unable distinctly to say whether he was shot by one of the insurgents
or one of the soldiers.
That your Memorialists respectfully urge that your Excellency will be pleased to take this
special case of Mr. Hassall?s into your consideration, and award such compensation as your
Excellency may be advised as just, under the peculiarly hard circumstances by which Mr. Hassall
has suffered so much in pocket and been maimed in body for life.
And your Memorialists will ever pray, &c.
{Here follow 486 signatures .)
Report of Board, with Copy of Evidence.
No. 55 | 122.
Sir, Police Office, 22nd October, 1855.
In reporting upon the Petition of Mr. B. S. Hassall for compensation for a wound received
during the disturbances at Ballaarat, the Board have the honor to transmit the evidence taken:
that of the assistant Surgeon of the 12th Eegiment, as also of a con-commissioned Officer, who
was in company with the detachment of the 12th Eegiment when proceeding through Ballaarat,
on the night of the 28th of November last.
By the evidence it appears impossible that the petitioner received his wound from the
military; and the Board cannot see anything which would justify their recommending any
compensation whatever from the Government.
But if the Board may be permitted to make a suggestion, a small donation from each
of the individuals who have interested themselves?as shewn by the numerous signatures to the
Memorial, would demonstrate their sympathy with the petitioner in a much more intelligible form,
and more advantageous to his interests.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) # B. P. STUET,
Chairman of the Board of Enquiry.
P.S.?Captain Atkinson who commanded the detachment is not at present in Melbourne.
Copy of Evidence taken before the Board appointed to consider Claims for Compensation
for Losses sustained during the Ballaarat Riots.
Police Office, 22nd October, 1855.
*
Assistant Surgeon, George Arden, of tbe 12th Eegiment, examined.
I was in company with the detachment of the 12th Eegiment proceeding to Ballaarat the
latter end of December last, the detachment was commanded by Captain Atkinson. On the night
of the 28th, about nine or ten o?clock we got into the diggings; we had drays, and it being quite
dark and the horses jaded, we were marching very slowly.
As soon as we got into the diggings, a mob of diggers collected and assailed us with cries of
? Joe! Joe!? I was on the middle cart, Captain Atkinson was with the first cart, and Lieutenant
Paul with the last. We were pelted with large stones and bottles; we had not stopped anywhere
before we were assailed ; the drivers knew the way. One of the carts was capsized, the driver and
two men were severely injured; the men were turned out and ordered to load; we found two men
missing, and a party went back to find them, they were laying off the road badly wounded ; when
the soldiers turned out and loaded, the crowd dispersed; Lieutenant Paul was ordered on with
the carts; we were shortly afterwards joined by the 40th men from the Camp. During the
disturbance several shots were fired by the diggers, but the military never returned the fire; I
am quite confident that not a shot was fired by the military; our drummer boy was shot in the
leg.
Previous to the attack there was no stop or hesitation about finding the way; the drivers
knew the road. It is hardly possible that any Officer could have asked the way as there was no
halt.
2


Afterwards, when Mr. Paul went on with the carts, he may have asked the road, but I am
not aware that he did so; shots were fired all about until the troops arrived in Camp; but the
military never fired throughout; I never heard any complaint that a person had been wounded.
(Signed) GEORGE ARDEN,
Assistant Surgeon 12th Regiment.
Taken before us at the Police Office,
Melbourne, this 22nd day of
October, 1855?
(Signed) E. P. STURT,
W. McCREA.
Lance Corporal, George Sharpe, of the 12th Regiment, examined.
I was in company with a detachment of our Regiment about the 28th of November,
proceeding through the Ballaarat diggings, we were commanded by Captain Atkinson; I was
with the third cart from the rear when the mob attacked us with stones, sticks, and bottles; I
heard some shots fired by the diggers, some shots were fired at us; Iam quite certain that none
of the soldiers fired a shot.
I never heard any Officer ask the road to the Camp, the drivers appeared to know the way.
(Signed) GEORGE SHARPE.
Taken before us at the Police Office,
Melbourne, this 22nd day of
October, 1855?
(Signed) E. P. STURT,
W. McCREA.
The Honorable The Colonial Secretary,
&c., &c.
3
Authority; John Ferres, Government Printer, Melbourne-


