

1854-5
VICTORIA.
COPIES OF CORRESPONDENCE
RESPECTING
AMERICAN CITIZENS
WHO WERE SUPPOSED TO HAVE PARTICIPATED IN THE LATE RIOTS AT BALLAARAT.
LAID upon the Council Table hy the Colonial Secretary, hy command of His
Excellency the Lieutenant Governor, and ordered hy the Council to he
1th March , 1855.
Consulate of the United States,
Melbourne, 24th October, 1854.
Sir,
I have the honor as well as the satisfaction to inform your Excellency that I have just
seen an intelligent American gentleman (Mr. Nicholls, who will call upon your Excellency),
from Ballaarat; and he assures me that the Americans did not participate in the late riot at
Ballaarat, but, on the contrary, the Bowling Saloon that was burned belonged in part to an
American.
2. The Biot was got up, and the prime movers were Scotchmen, as the murdered man was
one of their countrymen.
3. I am happy in hearing and believing, and thus informing your Excellency of this good
account of my countrymen, and I hope and trust their future conduct may be such as to entitle
them to the high position of law-loving and law-abiding citizens.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) JAMES M. TABLETON,
U.S. Consul.
Lieutenant Governor Sir Chas. Hotham,
&c., &c., &c.
Government Offices,
Melbourne, 25th October, 1854.
Sir,
I am desired by His Excellency the Lieutenant Governor to acknowledge the receipt of
your letter of the 24th instant, assuring His Excellency that the citizens of the United States
did not participate in the late riot at Ballaarat, and to express to you- His Excellency?s great
satisfaction at receiving this assurance from so high a quarter.
2. Sir Charles Hotham most cordially echoes your own sentiments, when you say that you
? hope and trust their future conduct may be such as to entitle them to the high position of
law-loving and law-abiding citizens,? and His Excellency is satisfied that every effort will be
made on your part to retain this high and distinguished character for your countrymen.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) J. H. KAY,
Private Secretary.
James M. Tarleton, Esq.,
U.S. Consul, &c , &c., &c.
A.?No. 67.


Consulate of the United States,
Melbourne, 4th December, 1854.
Dear Sir,
I have not issued a Proclamation, as I did not think it necessary. I have no hesitation in
saying that there are not any Americans engaged in this affair, and they all know my sentiments.
If however the Governor wishes, I will do so.
2. I have every confidence that my countrymen throughout this Colony will keep them-
selves in the proper position.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) JAMES M. TARLETON,
U.S. Consul.
J. H. Kay, Esq,,
Private Secretary.
Government Offices,
Melbourne, 4th December, 1854.
Dear Sir,
In reply to your note, the Lieutenant Governor desires me to say he is sorry to inform
you that the leader of this movement is a young American. He has seen a person who is
just arrived from Ballaarat, who was in the insurgents? camp ; he saw this person, and says he is
their most active leader.
2. His Excellency regrets to be compelled to give you this information. -
Believe me, &c.,
(Signed) J. H. KAY,
Private Secretary.
James M. Tarleton, Esq.,
U.S. Consul.
2
Authority: John Fekkes, Government Printer, Melbourne.
