

-TH- '
v\ - ■ •* 1 Ste-i±
■
fr*"” "• '■ - t ■ ■ =
• , _ I
Peacock Bros., 668-663 Collins Street, Melbourne






CART. ARCHIBALD CURRIE.
The Introduction
THIS illustrated souvenir of the voyage of the “Darius”
was printed at the wish of the passengers and officers,
who, having had such a pleasant time together, and
having on hand the papers and photos, desired some tangible
record of the trip. We regret that space and cost forbade
us printing the whole of the papers, but sufficient is now given
to refresh our memories (if such were needed) of the pleasant,
fleeting days spent together. The Evening Lyre was edited
by Mr. W. M‘Clay, second officer. Photos by Capt. H. Press.
S.S. “SDadus.”
THE S.S. “ Darius” is one of Messrs. A. Currie & Co.’s well-known Indian and Australian Steamers.
The Pounder of this firm, Captain Archibald Currie, was born in Saltcoats, Scotland, in 1831,
and in 1872 came out to Australia and established a line of sailing ships lndia and the
Australian Colonies, among which were “ The Singalese,” “James Wilson, “James Service, the “Rollo.
In 1885 Messrs. A. Currie and Co. decided to go in for steamers, and their first steamer was the
5.5. “Bucephalus,” followed shortly by the S.S. “ Clitus,” S.S. “ Argus,” and in 1892 by our good ship
5.5. “ Darius.” These steamers made a good name for themselves in the Indian and Australian trade.
But as lines advanced, the firm decided to be in the front rank of shipping, and built in 1898 the
fine steamer S.S. “Euryalus” with passenger accomodation amidships on upper deck, electric light, and
all other modern conveniences. Other passenger steamers followed, S.S. “Portunatus” and S.S.
“Gracchus,” and as the South African trade between Australia expands, other fine steamers will follow.
The firm also run regular steamers between Colombo, Madras, Calcutta, Java, Singapore, and
Australia, one of the specialties being the carriage of horses to India, in which they take the leading place.
Captain Currie, although advanced in years, is energetic and np-to-date, and his opinions in
mercantile and financial matters are always sought after. He is Chairman of the Melbourne Savings
Bank; also Chairman of the Victorian Marine Board. He still takes the leading part in his firm, in
which he is assisted by his son, Mr. A. Currie, Jun.


(frUcmud
5.5. “OfIRIU 3 ” MAY J7lll - lw -
XTbe Ebftor’s Bow.
1. “That the paper be named the ‘ Evening Lyre.’
2. “ That it should be published irregularly every
morning.
The name was chosen “ Evening * Liar” because evening
journals usually publish as often as suits them, a privilege
it is intended to exercise in the present case, and to
protect the paper from libel actions, as no one can blame a professed
liar for not telling the truth.
We wish only to add, that while advantage will be taken of any
interesting or humorous episodes during the voyage, offensive person-
alities will be avoided, and we hope our readers will take everything as it
is meant—to amuse all apd hurt none.
# # *
Mar flews.
LATEST TELEGRAMS
5 a.m.—None whatever.
We are arranging to receive war news via. the Cape, by Vermicelli
Wireless Telegraphy, and hope in our next issue to give our readers the
latest news up-to-date. The Vermicelli system is a great improvement
on ‘ |; Maccaroni’s, and has the advantage of being open to all (at the
(’Printer’s Errors. Ed.)
E desire to introduce to the public the “ Evening Lyre,”
and to explain the origin of the paper.
At a meeting of the Literary Society, held on the
24th inst., it was decided to publish a paper, and the
following motions were passed unanimously:
dinner table). But as the patent has not yet been issued, we cannot
supply details of its working. However, our readers will get plenty of
it before the passage is over (in the shape of pudding).
PEOPLE ARE SAYING
That they are glad the weather keeps fine. That they hope they have
now got over their absurd craze for getting rid of their meals as soon as
they have eaten them.
THE VOYAGE DAY BY DAY.
At sunset to-night we shall be four days out, and shall have run 1,000
miles of our journey. We are to be congratulated on having come
through the belt of easterly winds, which usually fringes the coast, with
such fine weather and so little delay. Already we are a day’s run ahead
of former passages across, when we experienced bad weather at the start.
May 28th, 1904.
The weather is perfect, being fine, warm, the sea smooth, and the
“ Darius ” is doing her best in her present trim, scoring 257 miles to-day.
Tomorrow we shall pass Reunion Island (about 1,200 miles to the north-
ward.) The nearest land at present is the barren Crozet Island, 660
miles south.
PEOPLE ARE SAYING
That they are beginning to get their sea-legs now. Ladies especially are
coming out. That we have got Brighton Beach in miniature on the after
well deck. (No bathing allowed in public, however, mixed or otherwise.)
ADVERTISEMENTS.
Lost, since departure from Durban, note, Union Bank of South
Africa. Finder will be rewarded on returning same to Editor. (He did
not lose any, but that’s a mere detail, he’s hard up.)
The Editor desires to acknowledge receipt of MS.S., which will be published in our
next, having arrived after we had gone to press.
NOTICE. —Tickets will be collected to-day at 10 a.m. sharp by Chief Officer.


S.S. “ Darius,” May 28th, 1904.
Mar flews.
DARING ATTACK ON THE GALLEY. GALLANT DEFENCE.
(By our own Correspondent.)
Yesterday afternoon a most determined assault was made on the
SALOON PASSENGERS.
Galley by the Ship’s Cat. The garrison, which at the time consisted only
of the chief cook, made a gallant defence, but the issue remained doubtful
till re-inforcements arrived in 'the shape of the 2nd cook and a couple of
firemen. Thereupon the enemy, seeing her rear threatened (by a few
heavily-armed boot-toes), and her communications cut off, beat a rapid
retreat, which was quickly converted to a headlong rout (by the aid of
a few lumps of coal.)
RUSSO-JAPANESE WAR.
We regret to state that we have been unable to arrange to receive
* Vermicelligrams of the War as we intended, owing to the chief officer
positively declining to keep a man at the masthead day and night in a
bos’n’s chair to receive the messages. He actually suggested we should
stop up there ourselves (with our bed.) We are now endeavouring to
arrange a carrier-mollyhawk service and will give further news in our next.
S.S. “ Darius, May 30TH, 1904.
THE VOYAGE DAY BY DAY.
We have been running for the last two days before
strong westerly gales, and have been rapidly decreasing
the distance between ourselves and Melbourne. The
runs, 272 and 263 miles, are very creditable to the ship,
and to-day’s run promises to be another “ whopper.”
Meantime the weather has got colder, and there is no
mistaking the fact that winter is knocking around here
at present, but it is not likely to get any worse.
jNfarrow €scape o j a Coal trimmer.
The ’tween deck bunker was the scene of an exciting
episode, which might have proved serious, on Saturday
last. About 2 a.m. a heavy run of coal took place,
burying one of the trimmers, just above the hatch to the
lower bunker. Nothing of the man was visible but one
arm, and before he could be dug out a second run
occurred, shooting the man through the hatch into the
lower bunker, along with several tons of coal. Fortu-
nately he was not deeply buried and when extricated,
was found to be uninjured except for bruises and the
shock.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
Matrimony. —A gentleman, young, steady (ahem !) good-looking (?)
wishes to correspond with young lady with view to above. The trans-
action to end up in exchange of photos, and a tender and affecting
farewell on vessel’s arrival. Apply “ Flirtation,” Evening Lyre Office.
The Editor begs to acknowledge further copy which will be used as required.
How do you know our Second Officer is a direct descendant of Julius Caeser ?
Julius Caeser died and turned to clay, and the Second Officer is Mac Clay.


S.S. “ Darius,” May 30TH, 1904.
PEOPLE ARE SAYING
That one young gentleman showed exceedingly bad taste lately. Talking
of lollies he remarked he could’nt bear them, didn’t like any “ sweet
things,” not even girls? He was asked, “not even girls;” he replied
firmly, “that the only music heard so far has been that of babies, and it
is time a concert or sing-song was got up.” (The smoking-room aft and
the well-deck forward are admirably adapted for such. We have seen
many evenings pleasantly spent thus.—Ed.)
CORRESPONDENCE.
Mermaidton, Indian Ocean,
36° S. 54 0 E.
To the Editor of the “ Darius Liar.”
Dear Sir. —We beg space in your valuable paper to
ventilate what is considered in our regions a grievance.
We wish to draw your attention to the important matter
of Food Allowance. From our Intelligence Department
in Durban we learn your boat left on 23rd inst., since
when the only support we have received has been from
the saloon passengers. Our family being large, I find
the supply quite inadequate for our present requirements.
My wife and family are bitterly complaining of what
they consider your inhospitable, inhuman and unusual
treatment. Nowhere in our annals is there record of
such gross inattention to us on the part of passengers.
We sincerely hope our few remarks on this serious and
dilapidated state of affairs will bring about a desired
change.
We are, Sirs, Yours etc.,
Disgusted Father Mermaid.
We deeply sympathise with “ Father Mermaid,” but
fear his family’s rations will continue decreasing as the
passengers are recovering their appetites Can any of
our readers suggest a remedy ? Perhaps some kind
friends would cultivate sea-sickness for the sake of the
starving family.—Ed.
S.S. ‘‘ Darius,” May 31ST, 1904
THE VOYAGE DAY BY DAY
Last night we accomplished a third of our journey (1830 miles),
having taken slightly under seven days to get so far. Yesterday’s run,
267 miles, was up to the mark, and to-day’s promises to be better still.
Mar IRews
RUSSIA and JAPAN
We are in a position to state that the carrier-mollyhawk service has
been satisfactorily arranged, and in our next issue we hope to give the
contents of our first budget.
FORE CABIN PASSENGERS.
THE SITUATION IN MANCHURIA.
The Russians are still there; we can’t exactly say where, but there is
no doubt 'they are there. The Japanese are there also, “very much
there in fact,” probably near Port Arthur, but their exact positions we
cannot specify lest the Russians should get hold of the news.
The Editor will be pleased to receive copy for the paper. Such copy to be dropped
in Editor’s Box, Chart Room, 12 to 4 p.m. All copy should be as short as possible.
The Editor reserves the right to publish or refuse the whole or any part of all copy.


S.S. “Darius,” May 31ST, 1904.
trraoeb\> on tbe “Bavins.”
UNPARALELLED ATROCITY
WHOLE FAMILY FOWL-LY DONE TO DEATH.
(By our own Correspondent).
On Saturday evening
whilst peacefully engaged
in their various avocations
the victims of this terrible
outrage were set upon by
an organised band of
ruffians, who, in spite of
their desperate efforts to
escape, in the end over-
powered and brutally
murdered them by de-
liberately breaking their
necks. We are sorry to
have to state that the per-
petrators of the atrocious
crime are still at large.
<^o(>
PEOPLE
ARE SAYING
Very little just now, and
that mostly too strong
to be printable. The
weather probably is partly
to blame.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
Wanted, a nice, clean boy, Kaffir preferred. Apply “Painter”
S.S. “ Darius.”
(We fear such an article it is impossible to obtain, even in the land
of Kaffirs, but we suggest that “Painter” exercise his art, and make
one for himself out of some woolly-headed customer on board, 3rd Officer
for instance.—Ed.)
CORRESPONDENCE.
We have received an interesting and encouraging letter from
“ Mother,” which we are sorry we cannot re-produce in full, but we give
the following extract: —
“To-day is your day and mine, the only day we have, the day in
which we play our part. What our part may signify in the great whole
we may not understand, but we are here to play it and now is the time.
This we know is a part of action, not of whining; of love, not of cynicism.
It is for us to express it in terms of human helpfulness.”
We wished further to
notice “Mother’s ” letter,
but space forbids, and we
can only add that she
writes this for the mothers
on board, and we are sure
we can thank her in their
name.
June ist, 1904.
THE VOYAGE DAY
BY DAY.
Yesterday’s run,' 266
miles, was still A. 1., but
to-day’s will be much less
and our chances of seeing
Amsterdam Is. are now
very small. Last night
the wind came away from
the north, and from 12 to
2 blew a small hurricane,
with a very low glass,
29.20, and terrific squalls.
4 a.m. the wind was once
and at 4
But by 2 a.m. all was quiet and serene,
more in the west.
PEOPLE ARE SAYING
That one gentleman at any rate, believes that laziness is nothing unless
it is well followed up. He was overheard telling the boy to call him at
six. “ But isn’t that rather early to get up,” he was asked. “ Oh, I
don’t want to get up ” he replied, “ I only want to have the pleasure
of rolling over and sleeping again.”


S.S. “Darius,” June ist, 1904.
AMSTERDAM ISLAND.
Amsterdam Is., with St. Paul Is. 50 miles south of it, forms one of
the great ocean sign-posts or milestones, by which sailing vessels
use to verify their positions. The Island is volcanic, 2,600 feet high,
18 miles round, covered in parts with grass and shrubs, and un-
inhabited. There is one stone hut on the north side, and a depot of
provisions for the use of shipwrecked sailors.
Its first discovery is rather
noteworthy. It was dis-
covered by the crew of the
“Victoria,” Magellan’s
ship, the first to make the
voyage round the world,
on March 18th, 1852. It
was afterwards called
Amsterdam, by a Dutch
navigator, after his own
vessel.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
Lost, Stolen or Strayed,
a saloon passenger (male),
young, dark, and tall.
Last seen about three days
ago, in good health, in the
vicinity of his cabin,
apparently about to enter.
Any information leading
to the discovery of the
remains will be thank-
fully received by his
executors.
WAR NEWS, Latest Telegrams
2 a.m.—Not arrived yet. 3 a.m.—Still waiting. 4 a.m. — Give it up,
will appear in our next.
THE ENGLISH LANG CT AGE
M. Francais : “You wind up ze clock to make him go ? ” “ Quite right.” “Deu
what for you wind up ze business to make him stop ? ”
In a debate the other evening we were told “ there are hereditary drunkards, and it
•would be impossible to cure them." The query: “ How an hereditary drunkard could
get drunk without drink has not been answered yet.”
S.S. “ Darius,” June 2nd, 1904*
THE VOYAGE DAY BY DAY.
The past twenty four hours have been rather uncomfortable for all
on board, and it is fortunate that such a heavy confused sea as we had
yesterday is not often met with. The effect on our speed was consider-
able, the run being only 243 miles. We reached Amsterdam Is. at 9.30
last night. We were then 2,250 miles from Durban and had 3,200 still
to go. We were 9 days i| hours out, against 10 days 23 hours for the
same distance last trip.
PEOPLE
ARE SAYING
That the musical evening
held aft on Tuesday night
went off very well con-
sidering with so little
notice it was got up, and
those who were not present
missed a very enjoyable
two hours. Now that a
start has been made, and
it is known that we have
good singers among the
ladies and gentlemen, and
a good accompanist too,
we hope that Tuesday was
the first of many such
evenings. That the effect
in the change of weather
was seen in the attendance
at the breakfast table yes-
terday. One lady made a
heroic effort to overcome
her feelings, but was forced
to give it up and beat a
retreat.
ADVERTISE MENTS
Wanted. —lmmediately, by a young lady, some reliable contrivance
to enable her to sleep comfortably in an athwartship berth when ship is
rolling, without sliding from end to end like the sand in an egg-boiler.
Apply “ Sweet One,” “ Darius.”
NOTICE. —The person who left the three chocolates behind last
night by mistake, after eating the box-full, can have same by applying
at this office.
THE USUAL IRREGULAR EDITION WILL NOT BE PUBLISHED TO-MORROW.


S.S. “Darius,” June 4TH, 1904.
THE VOYAGE DAY BY DAY.
Since passing Amsterdam Is. we have had a decidedly rough time-of
it. The gale of Thursday, following a heavy and alarming fall of the
barometer (29.10), was one of the most severe we have seen in these
latitudes, and the ship behaved very well in the tremendous sea that got
up during Wednesday night. The runs, 227 and 233 miles, though the
smallest by far of the passage, could hardly have been better, and might
have been much worse. Yesterday afternoon we were half-way over to
Melbourne, 10 days 16 hours out.
EDITOR’S APOLOGY.
The weather was responsible for the non-issue of the paper yesterday.
There has been a strike among the staff.. The sub-editor struck (the
■editor), but matters are working smoothly again.
“ Darius” philharmonic Society
The Committe of the above Society are arranging to hold a Concert
and Social this evening (Saturday), in the winch deck at 7.45. Captain
Press lias consented to take the chair. There is an interesting and
extensive programme, comprising violin solos, vocal solos and duets,
recitations, etc. All are cordially invited, and the committee hopes
there will be a large attendance.
ADMISSION FREE. CHILDREN HALF-PRICE. Doors open 6.30. Rickshaws at 10.
THE LAST LETTER OF A BACHELOR.
Mixed my feelings as I view this sinking sun—fun done
Not again will eye of Phoebus ever see—me free.
For to-morrow morning early I'll be wedded, Fred,
Yes, to-morrow to the altar with a sigh I hie.
Yet I’m sighing not too sadly for a man—can plan.
When I have a wife and children, without guile—l’ll smile.
As I hear the little voices cry, Mamma! papa !
No more shall I at dinner pick my own —lone bone,
But sociably shall carve for three or four—or more !
My expenses will be doubled do you say ?—Yea, they
Will increase, no doubt about it, but the bliss— is this—
That my sorrows will be less, my wife will bear fair share.
She will comfort, she’ll inspirit, she’s like you—true blue,
Always helping, never hindering, just as you—too, do.
Now to us a Christmas visit you must pay—may stay,
For you’re welcome here to share our lot, cot, pot —what not!
PEOPLE ARE SAYING
That people in general, and some in particular, would
do well to draw their curtains when they light their
lamps in the evening. What the eye doesn’t see the
heart doesn’t grieve at, but sometimes the eye can’t
help seeing things it ought not to see, but which are
nevertheless interesting. We hope this hint will suffice.
ANNOUNCEMENTS.
Boat Drill to-day at 4.45 p.m., weather permitting.
Divine Service in the saloon to-morrow, children 2.30 p.m., adults 3 p.m
QUERY?
Why have we reason to believe that the sculptor of “ The Greek
Slave ” was a despicable character ? Because he chiselled a poor girl
out of her clothes.


S.S. “Darius,” June 6th, 1904.
THE VOYAGE DAY BY DAY.
The weather has kept fine and the daily runs have mounted up
again, being 259 and 258 miles.
PEOPLE ARE SAYING
That they are glad to see that Father Neptune’s last
valescent, having appeared on deck to get her photo
taken on Saturday afternoon.
patient is con-
Darius Philharmonic Society.
The first of this season’s concerts was held in
Winch Deck Hall on Saturday evening. The hall
was very comfortably and tasfefully furnished, and
decorated for the occasion by the Committee. 'There
was a very large attendance. Captain Press took the
chair at 7.45 prompt, and opened the concert with a
short and appropriate speech. Then followed the
programme, consisting of Violin and Vocal Duets,
Solos, and Recitations. All were well appreciated,
though by request of the Chairman, no encores were
given till towards the end, lest the proceedings should
be lengthened too much. Midway through there was
an interval of ten minutes, when refreshments were
handed round. After the programme had been gone
through, Captain Press made another neat and
humorous speech, and Mr. Hall, on behalf of the
passengers, expressed their appreciation of the labour
of the Committee and Official Staff of the vessel.
Captain Press responded and the proceedings were
terminated with National Anthem.
We should have stated that the Drum and Fife
Band paraded the streets before the performance.
1. Overture .. "Sultan’s March" .. Mr. Stobo
2. Song .. “ On the Banks of the Wabash ” Mr. McClay
3. Recitation .. " The Dream ” .. Mr. Ihiermeykr
4. Song .. .. •• "Apart” .. .. Mrs. Kennedy
5. Song .. "I Cannot Sing the Old Songs ” Mr. Nicholson
6. Violin Duet .. .. .. Messrs. Stobo & Ruddle
7. Song .. .• “ Love’s Old Sweet Song ” .. Mrs. Ruddle
INTERVAL * . .
LADIES’ COLUMN
Useful Household Recipes.
To make a Venetian blind—poke him in the eye.
To make a. Maltese cross—Pull her tail.
To make an acid drop—Let the bottle drop.
To make a Black Pudding, Leave it too long in the oven.
PROGRAMME
8. Song .. ~ " The Skipper ” .. Mr. Rodger
9. Song .. .. "Mignonette” .. Mr- Butters
•A- j 0 Dukt .. " Larboard Watch" Mr. & Mrs. Ruddle
00 ix. Song .. " The Night Maloney Landed in New York ”
.. Mr. Thiermeyer
2K 12 . Recitation .. " Relief of Lucknow ” .. Mr. McClay
* 13. Song .. “Tapping at the Gaiden Gate” Mr. Nicholson
Qod Save the King.


“ S.S. “Darius,” June 6th, 1904.
Apalling Tragedy.
MURDER ON THE HIGH SEAS.
(By our own Correspondent).
To-day we have to record another of the series of brutal crimes
which have marked the voyage, most of which have apparently been
perpetrated by the same band of ruffians. On this last occasion they
have been satisfied with a single victim (unmarried), whom they seized
in his own home on Saturday evening, tied hand and foot, and after
dragging him away to a retired spot, slit his throat from ear to ear.
Death must have ensued in a very few moments. As before, the murderers
got clear a\iray, and at time of going to press had still eluded capture.
A DYSPEPTIC DITTY,
I love the little lobsters, their tint is so warm,
And if I don’t eat them they’ll do me no harm.
ELEGY ON THE DEATH OF THE SHEEP.
(With apologies to Sir John Moore).
Swiftly and gladly we laid him down
On the dish with the sauce and the gravy:
And we polished him off from the tail to the crown,
Excepting the skin and bones, maybe.
Not a sound was heard, not a sorrowful note,
As his corpse to our stomachs we hurried,
And we fastened our dresses, we buttoned our coats,
O’er the spot where our hero we buried.
S.S. “Darius,” June 7TH, 1904.
We publish the following to show what we have
to put up with :
What is it folk all rush to see
To know what the days’ news may be ?
A paper run on the strict Q.T.,
The “ Evening Lyre.”
What is it they always say
As they read the “ Voyage Day by Day,”
With its lengthy runs and prospects gay?
The “lonely Liar.”
What do they to each other tell
When, summoned by the breakfast bell,
They’ve seen it’s got no truth to tell
That “ wretched Liar.”
ADVERTISEMENTS.
Wanted. —New waste-paper basket to receive the
poetic rubbish dumped here at present in large
quantities by the post. Largest size required.
Apply “ Evening Lyre ” Office.
TO MAKE A MALTESE CROSS.
A gentleman now on board and well-known to all, has sent us the following incident
which he assured us actually occurred in his own experience, and is therefore the
only genuine version :
He was wandering around Amsterdam Island one day with his camera looking for
snap-shots of the natives, fauna, flora, &c. (and finding none), when he happened on the
Kindergarten. Being anxious to learn he entered and asked the nearest pupil, who
happened to be drawing, if he knew how to make a Maltese cross. “Yes," replied
the boy. “ Good,” said our friend, “how would you begin?” “Why, I should jes’
stick one of my sisters hat pins into his leg, and run,” answered the boy.


S.S. “Darius,” June Bth, 1904.
THE VOYAGE DAY BY DAY.
On Monday night we got a change in the weather, with the first
head wind and the coldest night of the passage. The thermometer stood
at 50 0 at midnight (in the shelter). It is rather unfortunate that we
should have head winds now, just a week’s run from our destination.
Already it has affected our speed, the run yesterday being 248 miles, and
to-day’s will be less. 4 a.m.—After heavy rain for some hours the wind
has gone to the west again.
S.S. “Darius,” June qth, 1904.
We only made 234 miles yesterday, but again we
have fair wind and our speed is increasing. This
morning at breakfast time we shall be off the West
Australasian Coast, and anyone with good eyes and a
good glass (extra good, warranted to reach 300 miles),
may see Cape Leuwin on the port side.
The Cookery Craze.
We are informed another gentleman tried to out-
shine Prof. Evans, yesterday, and gave an afternoon
tea with eatables of his own make. This sort of thing
should be stopped, as the results cannot fail of being
harmful.
Later. —We are relieved to know our fears were
groundless, as we are informed the gentleman in ques-
tion did not really make the cakes himself, but imagined
he did,to please the ladies. (Signed) “Knowledge.”
We publish to-day an illustrated supplement
containing a short account of the rise and progress
of the firm, with views of some of the vessels, including
a full page engraving of the “ Darius.”
S.S. “DARIUS.”
The Steamer “ Darius,” when launched twelve years ago, was con-
sidered one of the finest and most up-to-date vessels in the Australia-
Calcutta trade, but she has since been far out-classed by her newer and
more modern sisters, though she is still as steady, sound, and sea-worthy
as when built, and is a great favourite in the horse trade. Until two
ago she was always on the regular run to Calcutta, but latterly she
has been most of the time on the South African line. The most promin-
ent incident in her life so far has been the loss of her propeller about five
years ago in the Indian Ocean, when bound to India with a full load of
passengers and horses. After drifting about for some days, and being
out of the track of steamers, the 2nd Officer, Mr. R. L. Instpne, with the
Captain’s permission called for volunteers, and set out in one of the boats
to Padang, Sumatra, 600 miles away, for help. It has been our good
fortune to hear from his own lips the story of that trip, which took a
fortnight to perform. How they sailed day after day, through the stormy
winds and seas, and incessant rain that accompany the breaking of the
S.W. monsoon. How, though some days they hardly moved, yet on one
they made the record run for a ship’s boat, 135 miles. A Dutch
steamer picked them up and took them into Padang, where they learnt
that the “Darius” had been towed into Colombo two days before. And
how, after being feted in Batavia, Singapore, and Calcutta, the 2nd
Officer was ill for months from the exposure.
(We learn Mr. Instone referred to above, is to have command of
the “Darius” on her next trip).


S.S. “Darius,” June iith, 1904.
THE VOYAGE DAY BY DAY.
We are gradually drawing near the end of our journey, and are still
keeping our speed, the run yesterday being 252 miles. To-day we shall
be finished with the thousands in the distance to. go, and shall have
hundreds only, so that now we shan’t be long.
PEOPLE ARE SAYING
That “itis so cold.” Consequently you don’t see much of them about
the decks, and when they do appear they look as if trying to catch a tram,
or as having suddenly remembered an important engagement.
ANNOUNCEMENTS.
Boat-muster at 4.45 p.m.
Divine Service in the saloon to-morrow afternoon at 3 p.m.
“Darius” Philharmonic Societ;
The second of this well-known Society’s popular season concerts will'
be given to-night in the Winch Deck Hall. The programme includes
some new and interesting items, and is well worth seeing. All are cordially
invited. Prices as per handbills. Ladies wearing matinee hats are re-
quested by the management to leave them at home, or else to kindly sit on
them during the performance. Doors open by turning handles as usual.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
Wanted. —Immediately, by member of the Theatrical
Company now here on tour, for use to-night, various
articles of feminine apparel, including skirt, petticoat,
corset (waist 42 in.) open-work stockings (12 in.), &c.,
&c. (N.B. —This is genuine).
S.S. “Darius,” June 13TH, 1904.
THE VOYAGE DAY BY DAY.
The run on Saturday was disappointing, being only
250 miles, while the log showed 14 more, but yester-
day’s was an improvement, 265 miles, and there is
still a chance of getting ashore on Tuesday evening.
ANNOUNCEMENTS.
A prize of a painting is offered by Capt. Press for
the best essay on the trip. Essays not to exceed one
page of foolscap, and to be written on one side only.
All essays to be signed with a “ nom de plume,” and
to be handed in by this evening, when the best will be
chosen by public vote. The prize essay will be
printed with this paper.
Luggage will be got up from the hold to-day at
10 a.m. All passengers requiring luggage up should
notify the Chief Officer before then.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
Wanted. — Athletic young man to assist engineers in turning the handle of crank
shaft a little faster, so that we may get ashore Tuesday night. Apply, Engine Room.
Wanted,— Young lady to do a little darning and mending for the Editor. Owing to
the pressure of editorial duties, the editorial toes and heels are peeping through the
editorial socks, and the editorial shirts are sadly in lack of buttons, etc., and he wishes
to have one of each to go ashore in. Wages liberal. Apply, “ The Room, Starbd. side.
Professor : “ What are the last teeth to come.” Student : ‘‘h alse teeth* *


S.S. “Darius,” June 13TH, 1904.
“Darjius” £liilfiarmonic .Society
The final concert given by this Society was held on Saturday,
evening, and went off without a single hitch. Mr. Evans was M.C., and
as usual Capt. Press took the chair. The concert commenced at 8 p.m.
The large and varied programme was divided into two parts.
The first part consisted of the concert proper, vocal
songs and duets, violin pieces, and a marionette
exhibition (the Irish Jig). The full programme will
be published separately. All the pieces were well
rendered, and thoroughly appreciated by the audience,
especially the marionette. After the conclusion of
Part 1., there was a short interval, during which
Mr. Seymour, in the name of the passengers, presented
Captain Press with an Address, in which they most
kindly and heartily expressed their appreciation of
himself and staff, and of the treatment they had
received during the voyage, and the attention they
had had on the part of the butler and staff. -The
address (which will be printed separately in full) was
read by Mrs. Ruddle and given to the Captain, who
then responded with a suitable and, as usual, humorous
speech, and called on Mr. Innes, who reponded for
the Officers; Mr. Evans, in the absence of Mr. Sara,
for the Engineers ; and the Butler for himself and staff.
The Second Officer also made a statement regarding
the “Evening Lyre’s” finances. The Captain then
announced the competition for a prize for the best
essay on the trip (see announcements), and the second
part of the programme was then gone on with. This
consisted of a laughable farce entitled “The Private
Asylum,” which went off splendidly, everybody being
well up to their part (they were all balmy), considering
they only had two days to get it all up.
The stage and scenery were very well arranged.
The piece represented the engagement by Dr.
Dosemup of a boy to look after his patients, and the
boy’s experiences with the patients. Mr. Nicholson
made a fine Dr. Dosemup, while the boy and the flower girl attracted
great attention, and the other patients gave everybody a laugh.
The evening was wound up with the National Anthem and Auld
Lang Syne, and with a cheer for the M.C, adjourned for coffee.
Landlady ; “ Yes, sir, two chickens went into that soup.”
Lodger; “ Never mind, ma’am, never mind, no harm done ; no one would ever
suspect it, I assure you.”
Wanted, (Urgent) stout heavy person to sit on the safety valve, to enable a higher
pressure of steam to be got up on the boilers, to ensure the vessel getting up this evening.
Nice easy job, and warm (very much so). Apply at once, Engine Room.
S.S. “Darius,” June 14. TH, 1904.
THE VOYAGE DAY BY DAY.
The run yesterday was not so good as we hoped, being only 256 miles,
and we had still 317 miles to make. The weather keeps fine, and we
hope to see land at dawn, and reach Cape Otway about 8 a.rn. if the
vessel keeps her speed up. From Cape Otway to the Heads will take us
about 5J hours, and from the Heads to Melbourne 3 hours.
PEOPLE ARE SAYING
That the Editor was in luck’s way yesterday afternoon.
How glad they are the voyage is nearly over, in spite of all the
complimentary things they said of ship and staff on Saturday night. At
least, most of them are saying so, though there are a few exceptions.
Such is life, in a pork shop, with the fire out and a flea on the mantel-
piece singing out driven from home. Just think of the awful loneliness of
that desolate flea, alone on the mantelpiece in the bare, cold room, ruth-
lessly hunted out of his snug warm home (someone’s bosom).


S.S. “ Darius,” June 14TH, 1904.
EMtor’s Jfarewell
And now that we have come very near to the end of our trip, as to-
night, all going well, most of us will say good-bye to the “ Darius,” the
editor wishes to say farewell to his readers, wishing them all health,
happiness, and prosperity in the future. Also, lie hopes it is not a final
good-bye, but that he may meet them again. And he takes this oppor-
tunity of thanking those who have so much lightened his labours by
suggestions and contributions, and in
particular his brother Officers, Messrs.
Innes and Grant, for their help in copy-
ing out the paper each day. And what-
ever short comings his readers have
found in his literary efforts on their
behaff, he hopes they will smile on and
pass over, remembering that experience
teaches, and this is his first attempt to
gain experience. And when in the days
to come they may glance at these pages
and think on the days of the past, that
the thoughts may not be unpleasant, is
the sincere wish of
THE EDITOR.
xk A
Essay Competition.
Last night at 8 p.m. the reading of
the Essays was done in the Winch Deck
Hall. There were five essays sent in,
all very good. Mr. Ruddle read them
all out twice, and then the ballot was
taken, the result placing Mr. Sharp’s
(Brick Bat) essay at the top of the poll,
and he accordingly was awarded the prize, a fine little oil painting by the
Captain, framed. Mr. Taylor’s (“ Evening Lyre” Correspondent) essay,
which was very good, came a close second. After the award was given a
musical evening was held, and song followed song till after 10 p.m., when
the meeting broke up. The Prize Essay is as follows :
E Uoyage front Durban to Melbourne.
By “ Brick-Bat " (Mr. Sharp.)
It was a fine clear day on the 23rd of May, 1904, when Archibald Currie & Co
steamer, “Darius,” was lying moored to the Durban wharves; the merry sing-song of
many kafir labourers loading coal told of the hasty preparations for sea. A stout rope
passed from the tug “Richard King,” and fastened to our stern was the first means of
helping us to break away from Bonnie Durban and the sweet-hearts we left behind ;
once in the channel the good ship “Darius” was able to “paddle her own canoe,” and
with a slight pitch and easy roll she cleared the once dreaded sand bar of Durban. We
saw our good old skipper, Captain Press, with a merry twinkle in his eye, bid adieu to
the Pilot. “ Full steam ahead ” was the order given to the Chief Engineer, and straight
as an arrow the “ Darius ” ploughed her way across the main. The bell rang for dinner
and the Butler with a cunning smile, invited each and every one to a hearty meal; some
of the ladies, after their last peep at Durban by the setting sun, retired to the seclusion
of their berths, others made a bold attempt to join in the feast; some of the men
hurriedly left the table as though they had suddenly remembered an important appoint-
ment, but if your curiosity had led you to follow these men you would have found that
a feeling of sympathy for the hungry fishes had overcome them. Bright sunshiny days
followed and the good ship kept her straight course to the South East.
The Passengers, many ladies and a good
muster of children ranging from 1 to 7 years had
early settled down to enjoyment and ease, when,
alas for the plans of man, the ship began to roll
more heavily and angry .white foam appeared on
the crest of the waves, and the last two days of
May were spent in vain endeavour to keep the
perpendicular. It was the night of the ist of
June, that the storm somewhat abated, but a
thrill of alarm went through the saloon when
they became aware that the incessant throb of
the propeller was no more felt. What was the
meaning of this ? one could hear in whispers.
“The wheel has stopped,” one lady exclaimed,
but after all it only proved the trustworthiness of
our Captain and Engineer in slackening speed
while passing Amsterdam Is., whose precipitious
heights could be dimly seen like a huge black
phantom through the darkness of the night. The
next day broke bright and calm and this con-
tinued day after day, pleasantly spent by yarns
or novels or quoits, until by the 13th we began to
look eagerly for Cape Otway and our destination
after 22 days pleasantly spent.
. £bc Jftnteb ♦ .
This morning soon after 6 o’clock a
strange amphibious sort of being, en-
veloped in oil-skins and sou’-wester,
came over the rail and soon appeared in
the cabins to the consternation of some and amusement of others. A
close investigation revealed a Postman, his satchel among other items con-
tained an Illustrated Post Card with the addressees’names S.S. “Darius,”
Long. 143.30 E., Lat. 38.55 S. At 8 o’clock we signalled Cape Otway,
and at 2 p.m. passed Queenscliff, where the signal “Welcome Back” was
to be seen flying. About 5 arrived at Williamstown, and after getting
pratique from the Customs Health Officer, went to Port Melbourne pier.
Having made fast and the gangway lowered, three hearty cheers were
given by the passengers for the “good ship ‘ Darius,’ for the owners, for
the Captain and Mrs. Press, for the Officers, and for the Crew,” who
responded by cheering the Passengers. Thus (as far as Melbourne) termin-
ated a very pleasant, and we trust aprofitable trip, and though we may not
all meet again on the “ Darius,” may we all meet where there is no more sea.


“Darius”
Philharmonic
Society .
PART I
“ Sultan’s March
i. Overture
Messrs. Stpbo & Ruddle
2. Song “ The Skipper and His Boy” Mr. Nicholson
3. Song ... ... “Juanita” ... Mrs. Kennedy
4. Song “ Rocked in the Cradle of the Deep ” Mr. Rogers
5. Duet ... “ Life’s Dream is O’er ” Mr. & Mrs. Ruddle
6. Song ... “ The Housemaid ” Mr. McClay
7. Song ... ... (Comic) ... Mr. Thiermeyer
8. Song ... ... “ Killarney ” ... Mr. Evans
g. Duet ... “ Larboard Watch
Messrs. Evans & Rogers
10. Song ... “ Queen of the Earth ” Mr. Butters
11. Song ... “ Beating of My Own Heart ” Mrs. Ruddle
12. Duet ... ...“ The Brickfield ”
Messrs. Anderson & Thiermeyer
13. Marionette Exhibition (The Irish Jig) Mr. Thiermeyer
14. Violin Duet Selections Messrs. Stobo 6c Ruddle
15. Song ... “ Act on the Square ” Mr. Nicholson
16. Song ... “ The Romany Lass” ...Mr, Stobo
INTERVAL
Lily, the Flower Girl (patient)
Septimus (the family man’s patient)
Hydrophobia (patient)
Sir Henry Irvine (patient)
Mr. Puddles (patient)
King of India (patient)
S.S. “Darius”
SATURDAY,
JUNE nth, 1904.
PART 11.
Cbe Xunatfc
(A FARCE).
Scene: Sitting Room in Dr. Dosemup’s Private Asylum.
CHARACTERS.
Mr. Nicholson
Mr. Thiermeyer
Dr. Dosemup
Weary Willie (Boy)
Mr. Stobo
Mr. Dwyer
Mr. Hehir
Mr. Rogers
Mr. Evans
Mr. Anderson
SUPPER AFTER THE PERFORMANCE.
Peacock Bros. , Print.
. . Programme . . .


June nth, 1904.
S.S. “DARIUS.”
Dear Sir,
We, the undersigned passengers from South Africa to Melbourne and other ports, desire to place on record our grateful appreciation of the
unvariable kindness, courtesy, and attention which we have received from yourself, Mrs. Press, the Officers, and the whole of the ship’s company.
We feel that the very enjoyable voyage we have experienced is very largely due to the efforts of yourself and Officers of ths good ship
“ Darius,” and although some of us are nearing home, it will be with feelings of deep regret that we shall soon have to part with those whom we
have looked upon as real friends, and who will remain in our memories as being connected with one of the most enjoyable episodes in our lives.
Without desiring to appear in the least invidious to the rest of your Officers, we would like to place on record our appreciation of the
Chief Officer’s (Mr. Innes) able and kindly efforts to contribute towards our safety, enjoyment and comfort.
We would also desire to specially mention Mr. Sara (your Chief Engineer) and his staff, in whom we have felt the utmost confidence
and whose kindness and courtesy, we are in a large measure indebted for our very pleasant and happy voyage.
Our thanks are also due to the Owners of the good ship “ Darius,” for providing such a comfortable and seaworthy boat, and liberal
treatment on board.
In conclusion we would ask you to specially thank the Butler and his assistants for their untiring attention to us on the voyage
Wishing yourself, Mrs. Press, and the whole of the ship’s company, health, prosperity, and future happiness,
We beg to subscribe ourselves, Dear Sir,
Yours very faithfully,
S. KENNEDY.
A. PARKHURST.
W. H. RUDDLE.
T. RUDDLE.
A. SEYMOUR.
A. SEYMOUR.
A. G. SEYMOUR.
GEO. SHARP.
A. BRADEN.
T. HEHIR.
M. DWYER.
M. E. MOLES.
J. HALL.
- G. ROACH.
R. WILSON.
H. L. HALL.
J. NICHOLSON.
PERCY W. DWYER.
F. FRENCHAM.
W. J. BEANLALD.
E. THIERMEYER.
A. BULLEN.
M. KRUMBECK.
P. KRUMBECK.
D. H. NICHOLSON.
A. THOMAS.
W. J. OWENS.
W. P. TAYLOR.
J. ANDERSON.
H. A. LUCKMAN.
W. SINGLETON.
D. W. RODGER.
(




