

the WESTRALA GARDENER
Every Amateurs Gardening Guide


Mr, T. VC/. Langley's home at 44 Clifton 'Crescent, Mt. Lawley
The Charm of beautiful gardens Is exemplified.
V
Mowing the Lawn tnaq be turned into quite a pleasant j6b, if gou have the
Alpha
Mower
It is a smooth cutting, easg running; r ' ,U Hsharpemh$ r machine u?ilh
adjustable bearings, high speed 5-.. cutting mheel, etc.
MADE IN AUSTRALIA Blf A BRANCH OF THE JILVENQLISH LAIPN
MOIPER MANUFACTURING COMPARE DERBI], EUQLAUD
12 inch Cut, 50/- ,14 inch Cut, 52/6
Grass Catchers Extra*'
Spray Pumps and Materials
Heavy brass Continuous Sor« w p, jmps.. 8. 6.
.Gaird'W.'i'iViiise t,DrassJ with rose &■ iet, 7 6
Clensil, A pint 1/6; 1 pint 2 6
hatakilla, 2/6 Carton
Green's Fly Bait, A pint 1 - tin; 1 pint 1/9 tin
1 quart 2/6 tin.
Black Leaf 40, 2 oz. 2 4 oz. 3/6:
6 oz. 5/'i,B oz. 5 6
Fruit Fly Traps 2/- each
“Ideal” Snail and Slug Destroyer 13 pkt.
PLANTS and SEEPt/MK*.
ETC.
' All Trees and Plants purchased at our
Horticultural Department are grown from
infancy in the open air, consequently they
do not suffer when transferred to permanent
positions as is often the case with shade-
house plants.
T
$
’i
It Isn’t IPorfe
A
■: (
J f\
•t-* -
n
o
Y Harris, Scarfe & Saedovers t
A Hay St. (La mi ted) Perth


Every Amateur’s
Gardening
Guide
cSimpfe treatise
For Amateurs
In Town, Suburban and
Country Qardens
By
E. A. Hughes
"Elfin"
Broadcaster of “Helpful Hints to Qardeners"
From Station 6IPF, Perth
Full\] Illustrated bij Sketches
and Photographs
W.A. PROVINCIAL PRESS LTD.
469 Murray St. Perth


Enjoy the pleasures of a Garden with a good Book!
This Singular Book wields a Strange Power over its Readers.
Give us 5 days and we’ll give you a
Magnetic Personality. Let us prove it— F’ ee!
No leader of Men has long survived without Personal Mag’-
netism. No Business man can win an outstanding success with-
out it!
No Woman can reign as a Social Queen or as a winsome
wife without it!
It is your Greatest Capital—greater than wealth —than good
looks!
Let us prove it at Our Risk. Send for this book on five
days free trial on the following condition. *
Vou deposit with us the sum of 25/- (total cost of the
work). If in the country or elsewhere in Australia, 1/- extra
for postage, and at the expiration of five days return it to us
in perfect conditions, and we will return your money. If
desiring to retain the book—send your name and address for
registration in the Personal Magnetism Club of America. A
full descriptive 4 page circular posted free on request. Or the
book may be inspected at our Bookshop.
Books Tell You-
How to develop a Magnetic
Personality.
How to use Certain Original
Secrets.
How to gain perfect nerve
control.
How to read people’s feelings
by watching their mouths.
How to read people’s thoughts
by watching their eyes.
Howto develop a magnetic eye.
How to make your face appear
20 years younger.
How to control others by a
glance.
How to use Magnetic Healing.
How to end awkwardness and
timidity.
How to attract the opposite
sex.
How to get ahead in your busi-
ness or profession.
How to make your subconsci-
ous mind work wonders.
And dozens of other vital
topics.
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiimiimiimiiiiimimiiiiimmiiiiiiimi
ORDER FORM
ALBERT & SON LTD.,
Booksellers by appointment
to W.A. University,
180 Murray St., Perth, W.A.
Please send copy (ies) of
“ Instantaneous Personal Mag-
netism ” to the following ad-
dress;
Name
? personal hagnet^^
V • v
* Ti-V- •- ■.
Use Its Secrets. Feel the Effects.
Estimate the Benefits. Consider the
New Powers. See the Quick Profits.
Albert & Son Ltd.
General and University
Booksellers
180 MURRAY ST., PERTH
Sole Agents for the Ralston Univers-
ity Press Publications, for the
whole of Australia.
Address }
State - S
Enclosed 1 i
This book cannot be procured |
elsewhere in Australia but j
only through the Sole Agents: S
ALBERT & SON LTD., S
PERTH, W.A. |*
=tii


Perface
TN placing before garden lovers " The Westrala
Gardener,” the best apology the writer can offer
is the conviction that such a publication is not only
needed, but will be welcomed by many. Literature,
it need scarcely be said, is not the writer’s profession,
but his pastime.
Written from experience gained as a grower,
specialising for years in the cultivation of Sweet
Leas, Dahlias, Carnations, and Rhses, also as an
exhibitor, judge, Floricultural Society secretary, and
writer of gardening notes, with a desire to do his
part in spreading more widely and minutely a know-
ledge of the pleasing art of flower growing—it is
intended to be suggestive and helpful, and to strive
to point out methods of diversifying the charms of
a garden, as well as indicating the practical details
of cultivation.
To be practically useful to all classes of learners
(in language simple fthroughout) has been the object
of one amateur striving to help another. The selec-
tion of plants and their treatment has been given
not so much from the florist’s and show bench point
of view as from utility and the general effect in
flower beds and borders.
The publication of such a work has been made
possible through the courtesy, kind permission and
assistance of the management of West Australian
Newspapers Ltd., who, through the columns of their
papers have done much to encourage and foster the
love of floriculture throughout the State of Western
Australia.
Appreciation and thanks are expressed for permis-
sion given to publish in book form many of the
gardening contributions that have appeared under
the ivriter’s nom-de-plume, "Elfin.”
E. A. HUGHES.


Adelaide cE Queen Sts.
FREMANTLE.
( opp. Toy & Gibson’s) ,
PERTH.
Brunch Office:
The TOork of a £ifetime can be
protected only by a "ZOill
Prudent men leave behind them carefully drawn Wills,
and the need for such provision was never greater than it
is to-day. A will protects the work of a lifetime. It
removes the possibility of one’s estate being wasted by
costly litigation.
But in making your will, see that your wishes are set
out clearly and distinctly and are properly expressed. To
this end you will find excellent advice in our booklet,
" Wills & Wisdom,” free on request. Write or call to-day,
or arrange for a confidential Interview.
THE WEST AUSTRALIAN TRUSTEE
The Company acts as Trustee,
Executor, Administrator,
Agent, Attorney, and
Guardi an.
EXECUTOR AND AGENCY COMPANY LIMITED
Edmund S. Barker. Manager


Introduction
THE pleasures of gardening have furnished innumerable writers
with a fertile theme, and if the most enthusiastic poetical imagi-
nations have scarcely done their subject full justice there is small
chance of treating it adequately in dull prose here. True, flower
gardening does not contribute to the substantial of the table, but it
certainly does to its elegances and has those refining attractions that
with many has not only made it a favourite pursuit, but has enticed
eminent men and women in all civilised lands to become ardent
amateur gardeners.
The growing beauties, the perfumes and peace of a garden tend
not only toward mental relaxation, but rouse the best in human nature,
and there seems so much to care for and admire that one can only
feel gratitude and satisfaction for the gift of growing flowers.
Much sentiment might be expended on the pleasure derived from
the hobby, and much might be written on the elevating tendency of
the culture and arrangement of flowers, and more than enough said
to justify the exclamation, ” Give me a fine day and a flower garden,
and I will make ridiculous the pomps and pageants of emperors and
kings! ” One cannot imagine romance without a garden! Poets,
painters, musicians and playwrights have ever borrowed from the
theme to enhance their productions, and few pictures, be they ever so
colourful, are more appealing than those with a garden setting; while
flowers chosen as a gift convey just what they are meant to bring—
affectionate remembrances silently expressed.
Statesmen, civic authorities and town planners are now more than
ever recognising the moral and elevating influence that flowers, gardens
and open spaces have among the masses of our pent-up cities, and many
regard such influences as nothing less than one of the gifts bestowed
by Providence to make the sweets of life outweigh its evils.
With gardening comes contentment, and nothing can give a
nation peace, prosperity and contentment if her people have lost the
love of simplicity. And what a happy land is that where its people
are filled with the spirit which finds pleasure in the garden!


■M
v
m
to he State’s Leading Florists
Artistic Designs in all classes of Floral Work
Specialists in Bridal Bouquets, Posies, Sprays, etc.
Order for wreaths executed on the shortest notice.
Careful attention and prompt despatch given to
country orders. Choice Cut Flowers, Seedlings
and Pot Plants always on hand.
Prices to suit ail Requirements
t


A SHADY WALK, TREASURY GARDENS


GLORY OF THE GARDEN
"Then seek your job with thankfulness and work fill further orders
If it’s only netting strawberries or killing slugs on borders;
Then when your back stops aching and your hands begin to harden ,
You will find yourself a partner in the Glory of the Garden.
Oh, Adam was a gardener, and God who made him sees
That half a proper gardener’s work is done upon his knees;
So when your work is finished, you can wash your hands and pray
For the Glory of the Garden that it may not pass away,
And the Glory of the Garden it shall never pass away.”
RUDYARD KIPLING.


PART I
CONTENTS
Introduction
Hints Suggestive of Layout
Colour Contrasts
Soil Preparation
Digging and Trenching
Lime in the Soil
Mulching
Seed Sowing
Preparing for Seedlings
Damping Off
Manures and Manuring
Liquid Manures and Their Uses
Plants from Cuttings
Layering Shrubs
Soap in the Garden
Making a Hotbed
Window Box Plants
Wisdom in Don’ts
Garden Terms Explained


FOY^GIBSON
PTY- LT D. P E RTH
Dblrlbuloiq of Dependable
UorHcullural Requires...
4."
m
■HI
le ■■
■MVill ■
lii
V>>
.■-.j ■ n
ri
't-'Ttil
Supplies of the following are available in season—
Slurdij Dwarf ROSE TREES, over 150 varieties listed.
Climbing and Pillar ROSES, oner 50 varieties listed.
Standard ROSES, a wide range of varieties.
Selected and reliable FRUIT TREES,
GjRAPE PINES, etc., all leading varieties.
We also supply the following —
Lawn and (garden Fertilizers [all leading brands].
Spraying Solutions, Springes, Sprats, and all spraying necessities.
Cement (garden Ornaments, (gardening Tools and all Horticultural
requisites.
Choice Flower Seedlings, Flowering Bulbs, Ferns, Palms, Shrubs,
Ornamental Trees, etc., all leading varieties in season.
Distributing Agents for—-LAID SOMMER'S [Eastern Stales], Dependable
Lawn and (garden Seeds.
IPILSON & JOHN'S [Local] Dependable Lawn and (garden Seeds.
GUARANTEE OF DEPENDABLE SUPPLIES
We take every precaution to secure only the very best First quality Seeds, Bulbs,
Plants, etc., true to the name and description. We would be pleased to hear if any
case occurs where this is not so, that we may be able to check & correct any errors.
HORTICULTURAL SECTION
LOWE R O BOUND FLOOR


Every Amateur’s
GARDENING GUIDE
"A garden is earth’s hymn of praise to heaven,
Sung every season in some changing tune;
Where chords are colours and where colours sweet
Are tender symphonies.”
&
EXCEPT for differences caused by variation in climates, soils and
conditions, gardening and its principles are the same the world
over. In the laying out of a new garden there must always be a certain
amount of formality, and those who seek to exclude this altogether
do so by resorting to devices so artificial that often they are more
discordant than those they obliterate. Because of this, many errors
are made. The small trees and shrubs received from the nurseryman
in tiny pots assume a large size in a few years, and it is then realised
that far too little space has been allowed between the various speci-
mens. Apart from the lawn, what may be termed the piece de resis-
tance in a small suburban garden should always be the "mixed border,”
where the keynote right through is simplicity, while harmony and
variety is desired. Paths also, from a point of neatness and utility,
should be considered. One of the essentials is that they should be as
few as possible, wide in contruction and unobtrusive in design.
The joy of a garden is derived from watching the development
and features of plants specially admired. There is true enjoyment in
gradually bringing a garden towards the stage of completion, rather
than in hastening to fill up all spaces in the shortest time possible.
One ma>< have a garden of rest with the soft green of lawns and
the foliage of shrubs; others may develop brilliant colour schemes
with annuals; and others again take their delight in producing only
show blooms of their favourite fancies. The desire of each is fulfilled
according to likes and dislikes, but the general objective of all is to
have a flourishing garden surrounding the home, and then to rejoice
in the pace of progress shown. Conventional ideas regarding lay-out
and design are, perhaps, too often followed, but the garden that
carries new ideas and creative designs never fails to attract, simply
because it is different. In laying out a garden adapt the garden to the
situation, and endeavour to get away from the conventional.


The accompanying diagrams aim at something away from the
conventional as regards lay-out and design. One of the designs with
its square lay-out provides for a spacious lawn in the centre, with
A square layout for a garden
A circular design for a garden
rose plots, side walks, borders, and shrubbery; while the other, with
its circular design, suggests ssomething novel for rose beds and colour
schemes with annuals. In each design the gravel paths can either be
used as sidewalks or made sufficiently wide to allow for in and out
motor traffic from the gate to the front door.
COLOUR CONTRASTS
The importance of the right combination of contrasting colours
is too often lost. It is surprising how changed a garden can become
by the skilful association of various shades of colour. A discordant
note is often struck through a flower (perhaps pretty by itself) not
harmonising with its neighbours. Some kind of colour scheme should
always be adhered to, and the different plants used in combination
made to harmonise or contrast effectively; moreover, plants to be
combined should be such that they flower together, as the whole effect
will be lost if, for instance, the edging consists of little else but faded
blossoms when the central occupants are at the height of their glory.
Again, the massing of too many subjects or even several different
colours or shades is to be avoided. If the beds can be confined to
two, or, at most, three subjects, the effect is more pleasing, and two
colours or shades look much better than half a dozen. Some there
are, of course, who prefer to see the beds bright with plants of all
shades, but there is no getting away from the fact that mixed beds
or borders of separate colours strike a distinctive note, and lend added
charm to the general appearance.
Green is the foundation of all gardens and predominates, so,
should you feel tempted to try something in the way of colour schemes,


as a background the foliage of the plant (apart from the flowers)
should weigh in the decision of the location. In arranging the flowers,
an easy road to success is to select only flowers of the same colour
and of such shades as will blend. Blue, varying from lavender to
indigo and deep purple, are safe colours for experiments, and you
can with safety create a blue bed that will be pleasing.
Yellow is dangerous to use freely, and masses of deep yellow
or orange are generally too glaring to be agreeable; but pale lemon
shades can be employed safely, and very fine effects can be carried
out with some of the latest art shades of antirrhinums or violas.
Red is difficult to handle successfully. Certain bright vivid
shades strike a false note. A single plant of fiery orange or scarlet
is hard to assimilate in open beds, so that it is safest and more pleasing
to group your reds in one bed, interspersing here and there a blue or
a white.
In small quantities white is excellent, but a little goes a long way,
and there is something flat looking or uninteresting in a large white
bed or border.
Artistically introduced contrast enhances the value of colour.
No one knows this and studies more the blending of colours than
the modern milliner or dressmaker, and quite a lot of added pleasure
can be given the garden by introducing a few colour contrasts.
SOIL PREPARATION
Much of the success obtainable in the garden is due to the
character of the soil, and the main purpose of soil cultivation is to
provide an abundant food supply for plants and trees. A deep, loose
soil is necessary for all plants, even though they themselves may only
grow shallow surface roots; a loose soil below these roots helps to
retain moisture, which in dry weather is attracted to the surface am-
ongst the feeding roots, whilst in deep rooting plants the roots can
more readily penetrate to a depth into the soil.
A light soil is preferable to a heavy one: first, it is more easily
worked—that is, dug, forked or moved in any way; secondly, if not
wet or water-logged, owing to imperfect draining, it is warmer than
heavy soil; thirdly, if poor, it can be readily enriched by applications
of manure.
Deep, sandy or otherwise loose soils will require no first trenching,
merely digging manure in to a full spade depth. If considered too
sandy, a few loads of loam or cow manure could with advantage be
incorporated with the soil. Where the sub-soil is of a tolerably good
kind, loam or a friable clay, it is best to bring it to the surface,
placing the top spit at the bottom. Manure then added to the sur-
face should be dug in as deeply as possible. A good sub-soil is then


made, which will grow good crops for several years in succession.
Excessively light soils which are not sufficiently retentive of moisture
to enable plants to thrive, may be improved by applications of old
turfy loam, decayed vegetable matter, or old stable manure well de-
composed.
Manure to be added should be dug in at the first digging, so that
it has a chance of being thoroughly incorporated with the soil at
second or subsequent diggings.
Loose soils are readily dug when in a dry state, 'but stiff soils
unless thoroughly soaked with rain or water, may give trouble, and
digging may be difficult.
" Had Li e a spade in Paradise and known its use, the
world may never have heard of all the trouble over the
apple.”
DIGGING AND TRENCHING
In setting out to make a garden, one of the most important
things is to work the land well, and this can best be done by trench-
ing. The importance of having the soil loose and accessible to the
air cannot be over-estimated, and often amateurs in their haste to
get plants growing, do not spend sufficient time with digging opera-
tions. Trenching is done by taking off a strip of the top soil three
feet wide and one foot deep. This should be carted to the rear of the
section. Then dig the trench thus made another full spade deep,
turning over the soil and replacing it in the bottom; then mark an-
other strip, and take off the surface soil to fill up the first trench.
By this means the whole of the ground is thoroughly dug 20 inches
deep and the fertile soil kept on the top. Ground thoroughly trenched
will not need redoing for several seasons. In ordinary digging, the
main thing is to turn the soil thoroughly over and, except in very
shallow soils, the spade should be used to its full depth. When digging
it is always best to have a small trench open so that all surface weeds,
litter, etc., can be put in and buried.
LIME IN THE SOIL
” Lime makes a rich father and a poor son; use it as a
wise father rises his powers, and not as a reckless, un-
thinking son wastes his fortune .”
Most of our soils in and around the city are deficient in lime,
liberal quantities of which should be dug in with the ground prepara-
tion. Stiff soils, rich in lime, never set hard; the lime, moreover, warms
the soil and promotes a quicker growth during the cold weather.


More and more amateur gardeners are now in the habit of dress-
ing their plots periodically with lime, but there are still some gardeners
who do not yet realise how universally valuable lime is to their soil.
Lime is not a manure in itself. It has the power of setting loose all
those stores of plant food locked up, which otherwise remain un-
available to the plants.
It also checks any tendency towards sourness, so apparent in wet
and over-damp land. Further, it makes heavy soils more workable,
and is essential for freeing soils of insects. In short, there is no more
valuable asset to the gardener than lime.
To apply wholesale quantities to ground that is already well
supplied with lime is certainly a wasteful procedure, quite apart from
the possibility of harmful effects. A simple test can be made to
ascertain whether lime is present in any particular spot. Take a small
quantity of soil, and after mixing it with water in a glass or jar to the
consistency of paste, pour into the mixture a little hydrochloric acid.
If the liquid bubbles freely there is sufficient lime in the soil, while
its proportionate deficiency is shown by the absence or feeble nature
of the effervescence. If required, a good dressing of lime can then be
given, and under ordinary circumstances further applications should
not be required for a year or two. The best time for such a dressing
is either in winter or early spring when the ground is free from
crops and before fertilisers are applied.
MULCHING
Conserving the moisture in the soil is the secret of success with
quite a number of amateur gardeners, especially where the water
supply is not good. With water conservation, hoeing also plays an
important part, as by keeping the top soil always loose and open the
the loss from evaporation Is minimised. While the loose soil on top
may be dry to the depth of two or three inches (and this is invariably
the case in sand), the soil lower down is always moist. As this mois-
ture gradually rises, continual hoeing among the plants admits air to
the roots, which not only proves beneficial, but help them to assimilate
the various foods in the soil.
Many summer crops benefit by a timely mulch, especially where
the soil is light in texture. Beans and marrows, melons and carrots,
as well as early planted cabbage and cauliflower all derive benefit from
it. Apply the mulch when the soil is moist, so as to retain the
moisture. Various things can be used, such as long and short stable
manure, cow manure that has been well pulverised, seeweed, and clip-
pings from the lawns. The value of mulching cannot be over-esti-
mated. It saves time and water and certainly keeps the plants in
good heart through the hot spells. In the dahlia beds, mulching is
most desirable, as it saves frequent waterings,, and prevents forcing
the growth.


At the same time, the hoe destroys all foreign vegetation, such
as weeds, etc., that otherwise would deprive the plants of their sus-
tenance, while various eggs and larvae of injurious insects are also
brought to the surface and prevented from hatching.
If the mulch is of stable manure, after every slight rain or water-
ing the manorial salts of the mulch wash into the roots and stimulate
the growth of the plants.
SEED SOWING
The readiest mode of increasing plants is by seeds, and the annuals
and biennials are all propagated in this way, while many of the hardy
oerennials can be treated simiharly. The seed of all the hardy annuals
and perennials can be sown out of doors preferably in autumn. If
sown in the open, a moderately sheltered warm position must be
selected, the soil rendered fine by sifting or raking, and the seeds sown
thinly, covering the small seeds very lightly with fine material, and
the larger ones about their own depth.
For various reasons it is necessary to sow seeds thinly, for not
only is it wasteful, but when they germinate the young plants soon
become " drawn ” and spoil each other. Thin and even sowing of
small seeds is difficult, both in the open border and under glass in pots
or boxes. A good system is to sow the seed on the surface of a
6in. or 7in. pan or box of well-prepared soil, not covering with
earth at all, but placing a sheet of glass over it, paper over that, and
spraying the surface several times a day, especially while the sun is
still warm. If done well this plan is quite good, but once the seed
begin to germinate they should be very lightly covered with fine sifted
manure. Another good plan is to place about an inch or half an inch
of spaghum moss on top of the pan or box; water pouied gently on
this will saturate the moss,, keep the surface of the soil moist, and
thus set up a quick germination. One watering a day or once in
every two days is all that is necessary, but as germination proceeds,
lift off the moss so that the tender little plants do not become drawn
or spindly.
The larger the seeds the deeper they should be covered with soil.
Seeds sown outside require to be covered more deeply than when sown
under glass. A useful average guide is to bury the seeds sown in pots
and boxes with twice their depth of soil. Fine seeds, such as petunias,
linerla, nemophilia, etc., hardly need any covering. A light dusting
of fine silver sand is all that is necessary. It materially assists germina-
tion to cover pots and pans with sheets of glass, fine calico or paper.
The soil is then kept moist without watering.


PREPARING FOR SEEDLINGS
In making up u secdbox the first thing is to see that there are
sufficient holes in the bottom to permit of the surplus moisture drain-
ing away quickly. Spread a layer of crocks (broken pieces of pot,
brick, or charcoal), and cover with some moss, cocoanut fibre or other
material to prevent the sod from washing down and blocking up the
crevices between the crocks.
Next introduce your soil or compost, consisting of, say, a mixture
of moderately fine sand, loamy soil, and ancient cow manure well
pulverised between the hands. Use two parts of sand, and half a part
each of soil and manure. Finally, add a good dash of finely crushed
charcoal.
With this medium fill the box, which should be about 5 in. deep,
to within half an inch of the top. Press down with a small trowel,
and sow your seeds.
If, for some reason or another the material in the box has dried
out, sprinkle it until it has been damped right through. Then dis-
tribute the seeds. If these should be very small, mix them with some
fine light-coloured sand, and sprinkle through the top of an old pepper
pot. Seeds of this nature are best sown in small earthenware pans,
which can be stood in water when the application of moisture is de-
sirable, because it is inadvisable to spray overhead on account of the
danger of washing out the seeds and seedlings, and causing damping
off.
Phlox drummondi, annuals, asters, and seed of this description,
however, can be safely broadcasted in the ordinary way. Merely cover
and no more with a mixture of sand and finely ground charcoal,
and water gently as required.
Some culturists when dealing with aster, tomato, and other
seeds of moderate size, dibble each seed in separately, and this is a
capital method to pursue, because, although it involves considerable
time and care, there is no necessity then, so long as the spacing is
done properly, to prick the youngsters off. A disadvantage is that in
the event of poor germination there are numerous blank spaces in the
seed box.
"Look on yttnder earth-.
The golden harvests spring; the unfailing sun
Sheds light and life; the fruits, the flowers, the trees,
Arise in due succession; all things speak
Peace, harmony and love.”
SHELLEY


DAMPING OFF
Many amateurs arc not successful with the raising of seedlings,
the cause of which is damping off, due to overcrowding and some-
times watering in the early stages with liquid manure. Damping off
may be prevented by transferring, or what is usually termed pricking
off, into boxes or pans containing a compost of finely sifted loam,
leaf mould and a little sand. Where there is much overcrowding the
plants may be transferred at an early stage; indeed, when the opera-
tion is carefully performed, and only a couple of leaves showing,
the plants will race ahead from the first move.
Th e use of two pointed sticks is necessary when handling the tiny
plants. by this means the seedlings may be taken out of the pan
and carefully placed in their new quarters, without fear of loss. At
the first move, however, the plants will need shading for a day or
two and subsequent waterings must be carefully performed. The
use in the seed boxes of soil that is sour or contains manure will often
account for the damping off of seedlings, as will also the close cover-
ing with glass without the withdrawal for a portion of the day in
order to admit air. Over watering, in addition to close covering,
will certainly mean failure, and even with plants that are not con-
sidered delicate watering must be carefully performed. In pricking
off, manures of any kind should be avoided. Seedlings when they are
transplanted nearly always have the tiny root hairs broken, and until
these grow again and a certain amount of new fibrous root is made
the plant is not in a fit condition to assimilate manures of any kind.


MANURES AND MANURING
Many amateurs in their anxiety to excel in producing something
different from their neighbours appear to think that the more they
can force a plant by manuring the bigger the flowers and the greater
the yield, forgetting that a plant—just like a human being—requires
only a given quantity of food. Anything in the way of manures
given m excess of what is required for health and vigour is apt to
become injurious to the roots.
A fertile soil is one which not only affords a safe anchorage for
plants, but during the season of growth provides both food and
moisture. Further, it must give to the feeding roots all the necessary
requirements, such as phosphate, potash, and nitrogen, necessarily in
liquid form. Consequently, a fertile soil must be one in which a
constant supply of moisture is available.
The mechanical condition of a sandy soil is excellent, but it is
so porous that it does not retain the moisture, and if the two con-
ditions, porousness and the ability to retain moisture, are to be com-
bined, the presence of organic matter is essential.
There is one other important factor, and that is ventilation, and
the soil to be in good condition must allow for a constant circulation
of air. Much of the food of plants is assimilated through the agency
of bacteria, and bacteria cannot live without air. To be fertile, soil
should be well drained, deeply worked, so that there is a constant
supply of moisture and air below to allow the various organisms to
develop the food for plant uses.
Manures are classed as natural or organic when they are direct
products of animals or vegetation, and unorganic when of a mineral
nature or obtained by manufacturing process. Then again, the ferti-
liser may be a general manure or a special one. General manures are
such as contain in sufficiently large quantities all those ingredients
necessary for plant foods, while a special manure contains one or,
perhaps, two of these ingredients. The special manures are either
nitrogenous, phosphatic or potassic. Nitrogen produces plenty of green
stem and foliage, tending to urge vegetation to yield an excess of
leaves. Phosphates give every energy for the production of flowers,
seeds or fruits, while potash is absolutely necessary for the successful
development of all life. A manurial mixture for all-round use must
be either a general fertiliser containing all plant foods or a suitable
combination of nitrogen, phosphates and potash.


A Complete Manure
A mixture in which the essential elements of nitrogen, potash, and
phosphoric acid are suitably blended for the majority of vegetables is
the following:—Sulphate of ammonia or nitrate of soda, 18lb.; sul-
phate or muriate of potash, 18lb.; superphosphates, 36lb. These should
be well mixed, and passed through a small sieve before being placed
in a box or bag, to be drawn upon as occasion requires. It must be
kept in a dry place. For the kitchen garden, three ounces to the
square yard should be sprinkled over the surface of the newly-dug
soil, and then raked in. This will also do for pot plants, at the rate
of a six-inch potful to a barrow-load of soil.
Hints on Manuring
Do not apply fresh manure to growing crops unless it is by way
of a mulch. Half-rotted manure is best for this purpose.
Never expose animal manures to the open air for any length of
time. A large amount of plant food will be lost in the form of gas.
The texture of the soil can be changed by applying fresh manure,
ploughing, or digging it in, and leaving the soil after digging as rough
as possible.
Never substitute lime for a fertiliser; a dressing of lime, fresh or
slaked, will break down heavy soil, sweeten sour soil and one of a
sandy nature.
Planting of seeds too soon after a dressing of fresh caustic lime
is likely to kill tender young plants, particularly young seedlings.
Slaked lime is safer for dressing where young plants are growing.
The quantity of manure to apply to the land depends upon the
texture of the soil, the need for plant food, the kind of plant food
already in the soil, and the age of the manure applied.
Some bonemeal and a smdl quantity of coarse salt added to horse
manure improves it in value as a plant food.
Liquid Manures
Liquid manures are always of importance in the garden, especially
the section given over to the vegetables. In relation to garden crops,
its stimulating effect is very noticeable, as the fertilising ingredients
are made more readily available to the plants. Manure in a solid
form can be applied to the soil before the seeds are sown or seedlings
planted, but subsequently this cannot be dug into the soil without
some interference with the roots of growing crops. This is where
liquid manure becomes so valuable. On pot plants and flower beds
liquid manure has very beneficial effects. The solid manure originally
applied to the soil becomes in time exhausted by the plants, and it is


at that stage that more nourishment is required. Liquid manure, easily
applied, comes to the rescue and remedies the defects. Liquid manure
may be made by putting horse or cow manure in a tub or kerosene
tin full of water —say six or eight inches of manure. The amount is
not important. Add to this about three handfuls of bone meal, to-
gether with the same quantity of soot. Let this soak for a time.
When giving out, fill the can with three parts of plain water, and fill
up with the liquid manure. It is best to have the water when mixed
about the same colour as moderately weak tea.
Mistakes are frequently made in giving sprinklings of water on
the surface, which tends to draw the roots to the top, where they are
not wanted. What is wanted is to get the water down to the roots
or under the roots. This invigorates the plant and better results are
obtained. With this object in view, obtain an old broom handle,
sharpen one end; and make three or four holes around the plant, push-
ing the broom handle in a sloping position, so as to get under the
roots. Push about a foot to 18 inches into the soil, about six inches
away from the main stalk. Fill up the hole with the manure water
twice and then cover up the holes. Do this once a week. The same
method may be used for applying lime water to carnations. In this
case once a month is often enough. It is best at all times not to
water the foliage, only the ground, especially with manure water.
Never apply liquid manure when the soil is dry.
To make liquid manure, soak a sugar bag of poultry or cow
manure for a week in a cask with the lid knocked off—one holding 40
to 50 gallons is most handy. Use the resulting liquid at the rate of
one part to three parts of water. Fill the cask again, and when the
manure has soaked use the solution at the rate of one part to one part
of fresh water. The cask may then be filled up a third time and after
the liquid has been allowed to stand for a week it may be used neat.
This form of liquid manure is soft; and if it is applied weekly at the
rate of four gallons to the row of about 18 running feet, such crops
as lettuce, cabbage, silver beet, etc., show results.
f 7 see with half-attentive eyes
The buds and flowers that mark the spring,
And 'Nature's myriad prophecies
Of what the summer suns will bring.”
HOOD.


| “Florida”
“Moimt Lycll ”
“ C.S.M.L.”
Mixed Fertilisers and
Sulphate of Ammonia
Happpy influences that bring QUAN-
TITY and QUALITY together in
Orchard, Citrus and Berry
fruit yields, and make
your LAWN the
envy of your
neighbours.
w
Full particulars from
Cuming Smith & Mount Lyell
Farmers Fertilisers Ltd.
133 St. George’s Terrace Telephone B 2370


A Manure Cask
The successful gardener al-
ways has a supply of liquid
manure on hand, and an old
cask partially sunk in the
ground, as is shown in the
accompanying sketch, will be
found useful.
Partially sink an old cask in
the ground, keep it filled with
water, and suspend cow ma-
nure and soot tied in a piece
of old sacking.
Manures in Small Quantities
Half an ounce of sulphate of ammonia to a gallon of water makes
a good safe liquid manure.
A dipperful of soot to about 1 5 gallons of water is a good tonic
for sweet peas, and improves the colour.
A teaspoonful of nitrate of soda to the square yard sprinkled on
the daffodil bed works wonders.
Sulphate of ammonia used as a fertiliser should never be mixed
or brought into contact with lime, but can be mixed with super-
phosphate.
Blood and bone, dusted and worked into the pansy bed, improves
the blooms, and a watering with soot water improves the colours.
Stable manure (animal or vegetable refuse), composition roughly
70 per cent, water, 4 per cent, soluble matter, 26 per cent, insoluble
manurial matter, supplying humus which decomposes slowly into plant
foods, and physically improves the soil. This is best applied in and
through autumn and winter at the rate of about 40lb. to the square
yard.
Soot (from chimneys) contains 5 to 10 per cent, sulphate of
ammonia, and is a valuable insecticide. Soot can be applied to the
soil surface any time, but not along with lime.
Nitrate of soda contains about 15 \ per cent, nitrogen. Quick in
action, the soil should be in good heart, and as a top-dressing it should
be applied during active growth. Used in liquid form, joz. to the
gallon is sufficient.
Sulphate of ammonia is about 20 per cent, nitrogen, and is
regarded as one of the best nitrogenous manures, and should be used
as a top-dressing a few days before planting. For flowers and young


plants, it is best used in liquid form—£oz. to a gallon of water is a
safe mixture.
Superphosphate (from mineral or organic phosphates) is one of
the best phosphatic manures, and used loz. to three gallons of water
makes a gdbd liquid manure.
Bone meal or dust, rich in phosphates 50 per cent., lime. 10 per
cent., nitrogen 3 per cent., is rather slow in action, but is valuable,
as its effects are more lasting.
Nitrate of potash (30 per cent, potash) used in the autumn is
considered by some a better potassic fertiliser than sulphate of potash.
Wood ashes are rich in potash and other salts suitable for vegeta-
tion, and should be regarded as a rich semi-natural fertiliser, of value
in the garden.
PLANTS FROM CUTTINGS
Carnations, Pelargoniums, Begonias, Marguerites, Antirrhinums
and Verbenas are some of the popular plants which may be struck from
cuttings. Pure sand placed round the base of the cuttings helps them
to root. One way to provide this is to spread a thin layer of pure
sand, say, an inch deep, on the surface of the bed or box, and when
a hole is made with a pencil or a thin dibbler, place the cutting in this,
firmly embedded in sand. After planting, the cuttings should be
regularly watered, but not overloaded, as good drainage is essential.
Where boxes are used they should, of course, be provided with drain
holes or space allowed for this purpose between the cracks at the base
of the boxes. With Carnations, boxes covered with glass will be found
to give a greater percentage of rooted plants, and as a rule the water
supply can be regulated more easily with glass-covered boxes.
Damping off can be avoided by removing the glass for half an
hour or more after each watering. Roses may be successfully rooted
in a special bed. The cuttings, if spaced in rows 12 to. 18 inches
apart, will readily root if firm wood is chosen and the cut is made
below a joint. A piece of old wood attached to the cutting, usually
termed a " heel,” if trimmed with a sharp knife will root readily.
Sand is necessary for the rooting of cuttings, because it lays close
and remains porous for draining! .Another reason is that it is free
from fermenting material and comparatively free from fungus and
bacteria. The main objects of using sand are drainage and to render
a soil more friable. Actually, there is no plant food in sand, and its
use is quite mechanical.
Proper preparation of cuttings is an important matter, and it
should be remembered that the formation of roots takes place chiefly
at a joint or at parts of the stem where buds and leaves are already
present. The cut should always be made with a sharp knife immedi-
ately below a joint after several of the lower leaves have been cut or


stripped off. With tender plants, the leaves and leaf stem should be
cut off close to the main stem, and the cut should be made close up
to the joint. In dealing with Carnations or other plants whose stems
are tough, the lower leaves may be stripped off with a quick backward
pull. In most instances, matured wood gives best results, but tough
old wood, especially if showing any signs of decay, should be discarded.
Vine Cuttings
If it is desired to propagate a particularly good Grape, take a
cutting from well-ripened wood of the current year’s growth, making
sure the vine it free from disease. Lengths of from nine to twelve
inches are most suitable, selecting them as close to the arm as possible.
Do not take the end of a runner, but the base, where the joints are
closer and the wood more seasoned. Cuts should be made at right-
angles, the top immediately above a bud and the bottom immediately
below. Six or seven buds in all may be included on the cutting. To
strike cuttings take out a V-shaped trench deeply enough to allow
the top buds of the cutting to show when it is filled in. Spread a
little clean sharp sand at the bottom and place the cuttings perpen-
dicularly against the wall of the trench and then fill in the soil. It is
important that the soil be firmly pressed around the cutting at the
bottom, but at the top it may be as loose as possible.
LAYERING SHRUBS
Many garden plants, especialy shrubs, are very difficult to propa-
gate, as cuttings wither before they have had time to make roots, and
if seed is produced it takes some years to grow into plants of any size.
In such cases, recourse is had to layering. The best time to do the
work is when the sap is moving briskly, and when the new growth
is reaching maturity. There should also be enough moisture in the
soil to encourage the layered parts to throw out new roots. Before
the layering is done, the soil around the shrub should be forked several
inches deep, so as to provide a suitable place for the roots of the layers,
while it is also advisable to lay these down in the new sandy soil.
Pieces of the shrub are brought to the ground and pegged down, first
having a notch or slit made in them to encourage the formation of
new roots. For large branches the system known as " ringing ” is
sometimes adopted. This consists of taking off a ring of bark all
round the stem about an inch in length.' The portion of the stem
pegged down is then covered with soil. There should be about a foot
of the branch left beyond the point where it is layered, with all the
leaves and tips intact. Late autumn is the best time for moving the
layers and setting them up as independent plants. After a plant has
been layered a few months the entire severing of the parent stem


will rapidly increase the production of new roots. Once the branch
is pegged down there should be about a foot left beyond the layering
point, with all leaves and tips intact.
The illustrations show two
methods of preparing the
shoots prior to layering,
either a notch or a tongue
may be cut in the stem. The
top sketch shows the tongue
method, while the bottom one
shows the notched or ringed
method. Whichever method
is adopted, the branch with
the tongue or notch must be
covered with soil.
It may be desirable to layer
many of the climbing plants
growing in the garden for the
purpose of covering up un-
sightly fences or bare spots
somewhere.
SOAP IN THE GARDEN
Soap can be made to play an important part in the garden, especi-
ally where it is a question of keeping the plants clean. In the manu-
facture of many of the preparations employed for the eradication of
garden pests, soap is much used. Soft soap is an excellent insecticide
in itself for the destruction of aphides, but it can be rendered more
effective by adding something more to give it a " sting.” For that
reason kerosene, benzine, nicotine, and other things are added to the
soft soap base. Ordinary common soap is of service to combat insect
pests —indeed, it would be doing quite the right thing to give in-
structions to save the strongest suds from washing day. If they were
used when slightly warm, the solution would be thoroughly effective
in cleaning plants affected with green fly and aphis. Disinfectant
soaps are much superior to the ordinary sorts, and Sunlight or Lifebuoy
is effective when used to clean up either plants or trees. The carbolic
used in manufacture has a decided effect in killing insects and in
cleaning up plants generally, and any of the carbolic soaps on the
market, which are not so expensive, can be used. In dissolving any
of the soaps employed, boiling water should be used, and after the
cut-up pieces have dissolved, the solution should be used slightly
warm. When a cold liquid comes into contact with green fly, aphis,
and suchlike they have some means of closing up against it; but with
a warm solution this does not happen, and they more readily succumb.
Waste water from the kitchen, while soapy, is generally greasy, and
should not be used on plants, but washing soap-suds is quite good.


MAKING A HOTBED
Early Tomatoes, Melons, and Cucumbers are raised by means of a
hotbed, the careful preparation of which should be understood. The
amount of manure required depends on the size of the frame, but a
double load of fresh manure, with a fair percentage of straw through
it, will meet most requirements. In the heap, turn the manure two
or three times with an interval of three or four days between each
turning. This makes an even and slower heat throughout. The size
of the bed depends on the size of the frame used, and this should be
built so as to leave about a foot of space all round. Drive four stakes
into the ground at the four outside corners, and commence building
the bed. Begin by building up the outside edges, using long manure;
keep straight lines from stake to stake. Lay carefully for 18in. in
width round the edges to a depth of one foot. Fill in the centre up to
the same level, and trample all firmly into position, but continue
adding manure and trampling firmly down. Take care to keep the
line straight along the outside edges and level on the top. When the
heap of manure is getting low, place the frame on the bed, and pack
manure around the outside edge for about 9in. Trample the manure
inside the frame and put a layer of cinders or gravel on top of this,
to act as a drainage between the pots or boxes containing the seedlings.
Keep the frame open for a day or two to let the rank heat outside;
after this the bed is ready for use. The hotbed will hold a steady
heat for about ten weeks, and may be used afterwards for anything
requiring a little mild heat. When the heat is out of the bed, the
manure will be well rotted and may be dug into the soil for vegetable
crops or used as mulching, for the flower beds.
WINDOW BOX PLANTS
In many homes to-day window box gardening is becoming a
feature, and for this nothing lends itself better than the Primula
malicoides. In the early spring the dainty and graceful rosy-blue
flowers and bright green foliage give a glorious effect, and, grown
as an edging to Iceland poppies, a pleasing contrast is obtained.
Primula sinensis and Obonica grandiflora are both good strains to
grow, but these are varieties more suitable for pot and glasshouse
culture. Other effective plants are Zonale Pelargoniums, Pansies,
Petunias, Mignonette, Lobelia and Verbenas.
"Go make thy garden fair as thou const.
Thou workest never alone;
Perchance, be whose plot is near to thine
Will see it and mend his own.”


DESTROYING WEEDS
There are many ways of destroying weeds on paths, which, if left
to grow, soon give an untidy appearance and detract from the merits
of a fine display. One of the oldest is salt; one pound of salt to one
gallon of water, boiled in a copper and applied in the shape of hot
brine through a watercan, is excellent. Arsenate of soda is also good.
Place one pound of powdered arsenic in three gallons of water; boil
this and keep stirring. Then add seven gallons of cold water and
two pounds of washing soda. Stir well while boiling and apply while
hot from a watercan, while the paths are hot and dry throughout the
day. Carbolic acid is also effective. One ounce of carbolic acid
added to one gallon of water and sprinkled over the path from a
watercan is a good weed killer.
WISDOM IN "DON'TS”
Don’t try to cultivate more ground than can be managed or there
. will always be neglected portions in the garden.
Don’t sow seeds too thickly, for in the cold weather many a seedling
will be lost through damping off.
Don’t neglect seeds once sown. Keep them continually moist, as
neglect means disappointment.
Don’t have anything to do with plants which have been kept in pots
until the root system has become cramped and deformed.
Don’t use dirty pots, but see that they are cleaned; dirty pots inter-
fere with successful cultivation.
Don’t over pot or over water the palms for home decorations. These
do best without a liberal root action.
Don’t be afraid to support the carnation plants. Make cylinders of
mesh wire and keep them off the damp ground.
Don’t over water the cinerarias or primulas. Let the plants stay
on the dry side until the weather warms up a lot.
Don’t fail to get all the fruit and vine pruning done in June.
Don’t attempt to prune with blunt tools, as dull seccateurs leave
ragged ends.


GARDENING TERMS EXPLAINED
Annuals. —Plants which live one season only.
Biennials. —Plants which increase growth only the first season, and
produce flowers and fruit in the second season.
Budding. —Taking a dormant left bud from one plant, and placing it
in the stem or shoot of another by opening up the bark. Bud-
ding is more commonly done with rose bushes and fruit trees.
Compost. —A mixture made from decayed animal and vegetable
refuse, mixed with fine sifted soil to which lime has been added.
Deciduous. —A term applied to trees and shrubs which shed their
leaves in one season. Trees and plants which keep their foliage
are known as " Evergreens.”
Half Hardy. —A term applied to plants which, whilst sufficiently
hard to be grown out of doors, must be sown and sheltered in
their early stages under glass.
Hardy. —Usually applied to annuals, the plants of which can be
grown from first to last in the open.
Hybrid.—A plant produced from seed which has been impregnated
with the pollen of another species or variety.
Perennials. —Plants which die down each year, but start growth
again the following spring.
Pollination. —The art of transferring the pollen to the female
organs of the flower. This must not be confused with fertilisa-
tion. A plant can be pollinated, but not fertilised; that is, it
will not produce seeds.
Propagation. —A gardening term used to increase plants by seed,
tubers, ‘or bulbs, cuttings, layers, etc.
Spurs. —The small cluster of buds which produce only fruit and will
not develop into shoots.
Suckers. —Useless stems thrown up from the roots.
"In my garden there are roses.
In my garden there are violets blue,
In my garden there is sunshine.
In my garden there is — You.”


Seeds and Plants of Qualil
*The best seed alwaqs produces the best result. Cheap seed never
mill; and the difference in the cost between the two is negligible.
lUe keep the best strains in all lines. In both Flower and vegetable
Seeds we keep an extensive variety.
Roses
This is one of our main
specialties. All our
plants are produced
in m.A. bq our own
experts, me produced
over 40,000 this season.
A large supply of
Shrubs. Creepers,
Palms and Ferns are
always in slock.
Catalog post free. Send
for one and study it at
your leas ire.
&
%
&
m
f'nt.
m
•et,*
&A
■tvl
i
m
A.vr
m
f
Wa
l&lr*
m
CAROLINE TESTOUT
tUilson &l Johns Ltd.
74-76 BARRACK STREET. PERTH
W.A.'s Oldest, Largest and Mcst Progressive Seedsmen and Nurserymen


"Who loves fair flowers and shady bowers,
And all the joys a garden brings.
Knows sweet content and merriment.
Far more than happiest of kings.”
PART II
CONTENTS
Wattle Time
Bulbs —
Anemones, Begonias, Cyclamen, Cannas, Daffo-
dils, Freesias, Gladioli, Gloxinias, Hyacinths,
Liliums, Hippeastrums, Iris, Lachenalia, Ranun-
culus
Chrysanthemums ,
Carnations
Dahlias
Roses
Rose Plebiscite: The West Australian Selection
Rose Pruning
Bush Roses
Roses from Cuttings
Budding Roses
The Sweet Pea: History and Evolution
Sweet Pea Culture


WATTLE TIME
Do you think there are any trees quite so beautiful as the Wattle?
And do you think the landscape is ever fairer than when in early spring
time the spreading Wattle tree grove, with its golden-flushed and
honey-scented blossoms give out its glories? Nature, with her silent
harmonies and moods, paints many beautiful pictures on which to
feast the eyes, but none perhaps more exquisite than those of a spread-
ing Wattle laden with its wonderful burden of blossom. To walk
abroad when the sun shines bright and the sky is blue, through any
favoured spot or blossomed lane surrounding the city, of itself secures
a mental tonic, but to stand amid the trees when the dainty, fluffy
petals are quietly falling and carpeting the earth with a fairy mosaic
touch creates a memory of indescribable beauty. In many of our old
suburban gardens, planted by hands that have long gone to work in
another garden, braving the elements stands many an old tree, sending
out its sweetness in the spring and in the summertime its shade.
Reminiscent of kindly-natured people, the Wattles give of their
best impartially, leaving behind a happy memory when Father Time
kisses them and tells them it is time to rest.
BULBS
March is looked upon as the best time for general bulb planting,
although some growers get in a few early sorts through February. Much
depends upon the space available. If the ground is ready, March plant-
ings can be accepted as a general rule. There is no doubt that bulbs
do better when given beds to themselves; these need not necessarily
be in the front garden, and positions among the fruit trees will accom-
modate many varieties nicely. Lines of Daffodils, Jonquils, Crocuses,
Freesias, Ixias, Iris, and such like will do exceptionally well if grown
some little distance from the fruit trees. The shedding of the leaves
of the deciduous trees gives the required light and sunshine throughout
the winter, while the summer shade protects the bulbs if they are left
in the ground all the year round. Good drainage, fairly deep digging,
and manuring with old and well decayed cow manure, together with
bonedust, will give excellent results. Manures, however, should be
kept well below the surface and thoroughly incorporated with the
lower soil. If cow manure be unprocurable, bonedust by itself will give
all that is required for fine blooms, and, apart from a little liquid
feeding at flowering time, nothing special in the way of cultivation
is required.
* :S* *
"Let your love of the garden tend to induce that love of life’s
simplicity which, after all, is the charm of living.”


Anemones
Of the many forms of floral beauty which can be used for adorn-
ing the garden in spring, few excel the Anemone, while as a greenhouse
or bush-house plant it has much to commend it. Its flowers, of the
most brilliant and vari-
ed hues, and beautiful
foliage combined ren-
der it most useful for
decoration. Corms may
be sown in March or
April, while seed sow-
ing will give satisfac-
tory results, and a
choice may be made be-
tween A. Coronaria or
the Giant Saint Brigid
flowers of which are
semi-double. When
grown from seed, the
seed must be sown
early and not later than
the middle of February.
Seeds are rather difficult
to sow on account of
the cotton-like down
which adheres to them,
but the trouble may be
overcome by rubbing
them in some dry sand.
The best soil for the
Anemone is a deep
sandy loam well pulver-
ised and enriched with
well decayed cow man-
ure.
Begonias
The gardener with a glasshouse should certainly grow a few
Begonias, as they make a beautiful display, but as a bedding plant they
will not be a success except in sheltered situations free from hot drying
winds. In starting Begonia tubers the best method is to place them
in shallow boxes containing nice light soil, consisting of one part of
loam, leaf mould and coarse sand. Do not cover the crown of the
tubers, and water sparingly till new growth is started. As soon sta
they commence to grow freely they should be re-potted at once, but


plenty of drainage must be provided. While growing, the foliage must
be kept clean and healthy, and overhead watering should be done at
least twice a week. The less shading the plants get the better, as heavy
shading causes the wood to run up spindly and weak. Watering is
one of the main factors and plants should neither get too much nor
too little. As the plants come into bloom a little weak liquid manure
can be given once a week. In drying off, some growers make it a rule
to shake most of the soil from the tubers and in a dry condition store
them away in the sand; while others prefer to leave them alone in the
pots. The latter method is favoured most, A good storing position is
the glasshouse floor or a dry corner away from perpetual wet. While
resting, the " out of sight, out of mind ” policy is not good; they
should not be forgotten, and the soil should never get really dust dry.
♦ ♦ ♦
Cyclamen
It would be difficult to name any plant combining more grace-
fulness with its host of prettily marked leaves than the Cyclamen.
Flowering through the winter, and at its best in early spring, it also
has much to commend it as a greenhouse and shadehouse plant. Easily
raised from seed, sown either in the autumn or spring, there is nothing
over-difficult in the cultivation, but the secret of success lies in the
fact that they must be kept growing continuously from the day
the first leaf appears until the flowering period is reached. For seed
raising, the following compost is recommended: Two parts sweet
loam to_one part each of leaf mould, peat and fine sand, thoroughly
mixed. Sprinkle the seeds thinly on the surface and cover with about
a quarter of an inch of the compost. It is advisable to set the seed
pans under a frame shaded from the sun. After the seeds have ger-
minated, the young plants, when large enough, should be placed singly
into small pots. Once the flowering period is over the bulbs go to rest,
and about November the bulbs should be dried off and kept until
January, when they can be repotted and started afresh.
* *
Cannas
Gannas belong to our most showy plants. They will thrive under
almost any conditions and will grow into stately and attractive plants
without much care. If properly grown they reach a beauty and make
a display hardly equalled by any other of the bulb family. In order
to grow Cannas to perfection, the soil must be prepared deeply and
made very rich. Well rotted stable manure is the best suited for this
purpose, as it will not only provide plenty of plant food, but also holds
the moisture. Cannas prefer plenty of water, particularly at the time
of flowering. The tubers should be planted 1J to 2 feet apart as soon
as all danger from frost is over. They should be kept free from weeds
and soon make a thicket of foliage, and by mid-season will be crowned
with large and beautiful flower heads, which, with their rich and


strong colourings, are magnificent. In the fall of the season, when
the foliage starts to go off, the roots should be dug up with as much
earth adhering as possible, and stored in a fairly warm and dry place,
where they will mature fully. In replanting out the large clumps
having several stalks, they should be pulled apart and the divisions
treated as separate plants.
♦ * *
Daffodils
Daffodils in all their numerous sections, especially the large trum-
pet group, are extensively grown, and rightly so, as they are not only
valuable as garden subjects, but are charming for decorative purposes.
In planting,, rows are suggested, and a recommendation is made
to plant six jto nine inches below the surface. Take out a trench about
nine inches deep, and scatter a little bonedust along it; then put an
inch of fresh loam over them and place the bulbs firmly on that, about
six inches apart. First prepare to plant the bulbs in a bed by them-
selves, and don’t scatter any of the Daffodil family among the ordinary
garden plants. There are several reasons why they should be kept
apart: Daffodils will not stand rich soil conditions; they don’t take
kindly to partial shade; there is no proper bulb development unless
plenty of sunshine can be given them; there should be no disturbing
of the roots or foliage until the whole season’s growth has died down;
bulbs should never be crowded—three inches apart, and twice their
own depth below the surface is safe planting. Daffodils do not take
kindly to wet soil, and sweet conditions give the best results. Plant
in rows or groups of ten to twelve bulbs, as single specimens make no
show. Beds where the bulbs are to be planted should be deeply dug,
so that the bulbs can send the roots well down, and, contrary to what
a number imagine, the Daffodil is deep rooting. The best manure is
bonedust, which should be well incorporated in the soil. Stable manure
is not recommended, but old and well rotted cow manure, with well
rotted leaf mould if it can be procured, is excellent.
Emperor, Empress, Princess, and Sir Watkin are all good varieties
that can be recommended.
H- * *
Freesias
These popular flowers are to be found in most gardens, and rightly
so. No one can question their right to a place in the bulb garden.
They are one of the most easily cultivated bulbs. Besides being very
easily cultivated, they give an abundance of bloom for the small
space they occupy. The flowers are highly prized on account of their
delightful fragrance. Freesias thrive in any ordinary garden soil, pro-
vided the drainage is good. The bulbs should be planted in circles about
a foot in diameter, allowing two inches between each bulb, and covered
with a couple of inches of fine soil. Freesias are also adapted to pot
culture. Two or three six-inch pots each containing ten or a dozen
bulbs will make a nice show in the greenhouse during early spring.


Gladioli
It would be difficult to describe the beauty of the Gladioli, and
such marked improvement has taken place of late years with new
varieties that no garden is complete without them. They are fine
subjects for back lines and
can be used with striking
effects when planted in
groups in the large beds.
They thrive best in a deep
rich sandy loam which
has been well prepared for
some time before planting.
Deep digging and moder-
ate manuring are essential
with all soils, but the
manure used (stable for
preference) should be old
and well decayed. A good
loam of medium texture
is the soil on which the
Gladioli thrive best; and
those who wish to special-
ise in this direction for
show blooms should bear
this in mind. Too light a
soil is improved by the ad-
dition of heavy loam or
cow manure, and a soil
that is too heavy can be
lightened with sand or
gravelly grit from road
sweepings. In each case the manure should be placed at least a foot
deep in the ground, and, as a preventive against wireworms and other
insect pests, a good dressing of soot may be dug in. In a bed alone
planted for decorative effect, the bulbs should be placed nine inches
apart, but if especially fine spikes are desired they should be at least
twelve inches apart. A few single specimens planted in conjunction
with a groundwork of dwarf plants gives a pleasing effect, and the
bulbs can thus be used sparingly. The bulbs should be set about three
inches below the surface, and embedded below and above in clean
sand, so as to prevent rotting. A hole four inches deep should be
made with a trowel, about an inch of sand put in, and then the bulb
set firmly enough, soil finally being replaced to fill in the hole.
Lifting the Corms. —Corms should be lifted every season after
the foliage has died down. They should be left to dry out and should
then be thoroughly cleaned and stored in a dry and airy situation.
Some of the latest varieties, such as Pfitzers, Triumph, Queen Mary,
Scarlet Princeps, Gertrude, King George, A. B. Kunderd, Herata, and
Ida Van, are exquisite creations.


Every garden large
or small should con-
tain the Gladiolus,
or Gladflowers, as
they are often call-
ed. The season of
planting is not con-
fined to any one
period of the year,
and, planted out any
time, Gladioli will
grow with proper at-
tention. April or
May is about right
for a spring display,
while corms planted
in January produce
fine spikes in the
autumn. Attention
to mulching and
watering in Febru-
ary and March is
necessary. As cut
flowers for inside de-
coration, the value
of the Primulus hy-
brids cannot be over-
estimated. Graceful
in appearance, the
delicate shadings of
orange, lemon, tan-
go, buff and pink
lend themselves to
artistic treatment.
Gladioli may be
grown successfully
from seed, which
should be sown dur-
i n g the S p t i n g
months. Seedlings
thus raised, provided
they receive careful
treatment, should
flower within s i x
months from sowing
the seed. Germinat-
ing unevenly, seed should be sown in drills and left undisturbed until
all the young plants are strong enough to handle.
Gladioli Spray


Sole City Agents - - FOY & GIBSON PTY. LTD.
Glad. Corms at Buyable Prices
Moondoo Glads
. NEW COLOURS :: NEW TYPES
M. L. PIESSE, Gladiolus Specialist. Phone MLI93
" MOONDOO,” West Road (South End), BASSENDEAN
Western Australia
Member British Glad. Socy.; American Glad. SocyNew England
Glad. Socy.; Horf. Socy. of West. Australia; Canadian Glad. Socy.
ALL GOODS POST FREE IN AUSTRALIA
OVER 400 VARIETIES
Standard li.P. —Scarlet Princeps. Herada. Ida Van, Lilac
Wonder, etc.. sd. each.
Standard Prim. Hybrids, such as Hernume, Vanessa.
L’Yser, Psyche, 4d. each.
My endeavours are to produce and sell best quality
corms of large size, young, and disease free.
To guard against disease, all corms are dipped in a solu-
tion of mercury—the best known remedy.
My collection is kept up to date by importations of the
newest varieties from Europe, America, and includes the
cream of the Pfltzer, Mair, Lowe Gibson, and Kunderd strains.
Under the originator’s name a few are:-^-
Pfltzer. —Pfltzer’s Triumph. 1/6: Troubador. Purple. 2/6; Mrs.
Anna Pfltzer. White, 2/6; Mrs. Van Konenyenburg. 3/6.
Mair. —Gertrude, 2/-; Jessie. 1/6: Comrade. 1/6; King George.
Bd.; Duchess of York. 1/-: Queen Mary, 1/6; Bertie Snow,
Bd.
Lowe Gibson. —Miarquis of Dufferin, 1/- Moondoo. 2/6.
Knnderd. —Alton. 6d.; A. 13. Kunderd. 6d.: Fern Kyle, Bd.:
Pink Cloud. Bd.; Dr. Nelson Shook, 1/-.
Pety. —Monty Carlo, 2/6. lienonle. —Roi Albert. 3/-.
Famous Primulinus Hybrids—
Tame Purple, 6d.: Golden Frills. 1/6: Paon. 6d.; Alice Tip
Lady, sd.
Special Moondoo Mixture, 3/6 per doz.; Mixed Corms, 2/- per
doz.; Ideal Primulinus, 3/- per doz.
Mixed Rainbow Preesias.—Lavender, blue, pink, orange, and
cream, 2/- per doz. Post free; ready March.
SUPPORT LOCAL INDUSTRIES :: All Corms Sold
Grown from Bulhlets RAISED ENTIRELY IN
WESTERN AUSTRALIA


Gloxinias
Gloxinias are easily raised from seed and are good subjects for
glasshouse culture. Seed raising can be pursued along the following
■lines. In an ordinary 5 or 6 inch pot,
after providing plenty of crocks for
drainage, fill up with good potting soil.
Press this firmly down, and, having made
the surface level, sow the seeds thinly;
do not cover same, but gently press them
into the soil, and then cover with a sheet
of glass. Do not water the seeds over-
head, but stand the pot in a vessel con-
taining a few inches of water, and when
the moisture has been absorbed, and
reaches the surface, remove the pot to a
favoured position. Seedlings should ap-
pear in about ten days from sowing, and
when through remove the glass and
transfer the pot to a position where it
will get plenty of air and light, but avoid the direct sunshine. When
large enough to handle, prick the youngsters off into a box containing
a mixture of good loam, and space them- about 2in. apart. When a
fair amount of growth lias
been made, pot them up
into well-drained fin. pots,
which will be sufficient to
carry them right through
the flowering period.
ih >f- Sf
Tup Hy.uinth
This popular sweet-
smelling favourite is one
of the bulbs available for
spring flowering, and
whether it is delicacy of
colour or fragrance, it has
few equals. The soil best
suited for growing it well
is a rich deep light loam,
and any ordinary garden
soil not too heavy or wet,
if deeply dug and well
manured, will grow the
Hyacinth. When grown
out of doors, Hyacinth
bulbs should be placed out


at the end of March or early in April. The crowns of the bulbs
should be placed from 2 to 4 inches below the surface of the soil, and
two or three inches of litter or light manure should be placed thereon
for protection as the leaves push through. For pot culture, the best
soil for Hyacinths is a rich sandy loam composed of one-half well
rotted manure and sand, with an equal quantity of good loamy soil.
When placing the bulbs in pots, the crown should be just above the
soil level. The pots should be placed on level soil out of doors, and
surrounded and covered with a thick layer, say, 6 inches, of cinder
ashes, charcoal, or crocks. As the leaves and flower spikes appear they
should be removed from this position to either indoors or into the
shadehouse, and as the flower spikes appear be watered at brief inter-
vals (rain water for preference).
Liliums
The Lilies, so beautiful and varied, are admired by all, and both
L. Auratum and L. Candilum should have a place in every garden.
To grow them satisfactorily, a somewhat sheltered position in
the garden must be chosen, but the position must be one protected
from the strong summer sun and drving winds, vet one that receives
the full play of all the winter sunlight possible. A well-drained sandy
loam suits them, but any soil can be made suitable by adding a fair
amount of old spent manure. The bulbs require fairly deep planting,


but the depth can be determined by the size of the bulbs, which
should be set in the ground to twice the depth of the diameter. Num-
erous varieties can be grown. The following are a few of the popular
sorts: —
Auratum: The Golden Rayed Lily of Japan is a beautiful variety,
with pure white flowers and crimson spots. L. Henryi : Has large
orange coloured flowers spotted brown. Longiflorum Harrisi : Often
referred to as the Easter Lily, is a fragrant pure white trumpet variety.
Speciosnm Album'. Another good white, often called the Tiger Lily.
Speciosum Roseum : A white shaded and spotted with rose and red.
The well-known Madonna Lily, known as P. Candilum, is a pure white
trumpet variety, which gives its flowers on long upright stems. L.
Tigrinium: Bears bright orange flowers spotted with black.
The Liliums are suitable for pot culture in a shade or bush house.
A well drained sandy loam, together with leaf mould and a fair
amount of old cow manure, makes an excellent potting mixture.
The Hippeastrums
There is little doubt about the magnificence of the Hippeastrum
and their supple requirements, but, outside of a few, these are not
grown throughout the State as they should be. The bulbs make fine
pot plants, but they may also be grown out in the open, and where a
rich soil is provided, magnificent results follow. Plenty of cow manure
and bonedust will give returns; but this can be supplemented with
liquid manure when the flower stems show up.
For pot culture a rich loamy soil is necessary, and to this should
be added some leaf mould and bonedust. Six-inch pots will take large
bulbs, and they sould be planted so that a good part of the top portion
shows above the soil. Burying the bulbs under the soil is a mistake.
Bulbs may be planted in the early part of the year, or again in June
or July, and the flowering follows quickly in September to October.
Irises
The Iris is a beautiful genus of plants and the charming variety
Iris stylossa , flowering through the winter, so acceptable when flowers
are scarce, should be grown more extensively. The plants need little
attention, and the only enemies that attack it are the slugs and snails,
which are very fond of the buds and blossoms. The variety Iris
stylossa alba, the white variety, is also worth growing. It is not quite
so floriferous as the lavender blue. Other varieties are worth growing,
especially the Scorpion Iris ( Iris alata), which is equally beautiful to
the Stylossa, but is more azure or turquoise blue.


Dutch Irises are the result of a cross between Iris Jingitana (a
natural species) and different varieties of the well-known Spanish Iris.
Iris Jingitana is a strong growing plant, and the flowers are very large
and beautiful. It is early flowering, producing its blooms in June
and July. Its great drawback lies in its being shy; its flowers are
seldom seen. The Spanish varieties are too well known to need des-
cription. Their beautiful flowers are always to be seen in many
colours during October and November.
When making preparation for divisions it is well to remember
that the Iris likes a fairly rich soil, so that well-decayed manure should
be worked into the soil for a depth of at least 12 inches. Where the
bed has become hopelessly crowded, and the plants have failed te
flower well, division and re-planting of new rhizomes is the only
remedy.
* * +
The Lachenalia
A showy little bulb which comes into flower early and is most
suitable for pot or window box cultivation is the Lachenalia. Rather
formal in habit, producing a stiff spike about 9 inches long, the pretty
bell-shaped yellow and golden-tipped-with-scarlet blossoms make a
good show. By some they are called the " soldier bulbs,” because they
stand so rigidly and erect when grown formally in rows.
The bulbs are of a rather soft nature and should be planted as
soon as received. Single specimens are not very effective, and the best
results are attained by grouping them in pots and planting them about
4 inches in rows. The spikes
when cut last well in water,
but usually they are too short
for making an effective de-
coration, and are therefore
really more suitable for pot
culture.
* *
The Ranunculus
One of the gayest, most
beautiful and free-flowering
bulbs is the Ranunculus, and
for garden decoration or cut-
ting purposes few bulbs are
grown to the same extent.
Corms are usually planted
in March, and from them
sturdy plants are obtained,
while the grower can make
a choice of either Persian,


French, Scotch or Turban varieties. The Persian and French strains
generally produce the show quality blooms. Where the saving in
cost is a consideration seed sowing is more generally practised. De-
scribed in most catalogues as Ranunculus Asiaticus Super bissimus y this
strain, from seed, gives flowers which are single, semi-double and
double. Single and semi-double are exceedingly pretty and useful for
decorative purposes, the singles resembling very much the markings
of the Poppies,, extending to pinks, yellows, creams, carmines, whites,
scarlets, and orange shades.
Well drained and deeply dug soil is required for the best results.
In such soil plants raised from seed in boxes should be planted out to
three to four inches apart. At the end of the year, when the plants
have finished flowering, and have withered off, the bulbs may be
taken up and stored in boxes of dry sand or soil. If some selection
has been made during flowering, such as marking the singles and
doubles, the pick of the varieties may be obtained and the rest dis-
carded. If seed raising is to be tried (there is nothing difficult in the
operation), then an early start must be made, so that the seedlings
are well advanced and able to go out early in the autumn. Probably
the most popular of all the classes are the Turban varieties, which
are particularly striking. The flowers are very large, brilliantly col-
oured, and the petals have a slightly crinkled appearance. The Turbans
do not grow as tall as the Asiaticus , although they are more brilliant
in their colourings, and some of the scarlets, crimsons and golden
coloured sorts are very fine. The Persian varieties are popular with
the exhibitor.


LOUISA POCKTT


CHRYSANTHEMUMS
For garden decoration in late autumn there is nothing more
brilliant and showy than Japanese Chrysanthemums, particularly the
decorative and single varieties. The beginning of August is always the
time for the Chrysanthemums to claim attention. As a rule, Chrys-
anthemum cultivation begins where it ends, that is, after the plants
are cut down in the autumn, and it is important that the old plants
should then receive care and attention in order to ensure the produc-
tion of good shoots and cuttings for striking at this period. The
selection of the cuttings is important. As a rule it is desirable to avoid
growths springing from the hard wood of old stems and suckers or
growths from the suckers are preferable. The cuttings chosen should
not be too stout and fleshy, nor should they be weak or spindly, but
of moderate growth and
firmness, and about 3 or 4
inches long. In preparing
the cuttings, cut just below
a leaf joint or eye, and re-
move the lower leaves and
eyes along the portion of the
stem that has to be inserted
in the soil. The cuttings
should be inserted singly by
means of a blunt piece of
stick in 3 in. pots, or several
may be placed around a
larger pot. The pots should
be clean and well drained,
while the material used should
be a light sandy soil free
from manures. The diagrams
show i prepared cutting and
the method of inserting same
in the pot.
When growing in the open
bed and in making up the
soil, if possible select some
virgin plot from a paddock.
and take about one inch of the top grass and allow it to lay in a heap
and rot. About August turn over the soil and add a little horse or
cow manure, a little bonedust, and some charcoal, together with a few
handfuls of soot and lime to keep down the slugs arid snails. Turn
this over several times and mix well together. Select, if possible,
rather heavy turfy soil, and add a little charcoal to keep it open.
When the soil is ready, put it in the bed already prepared, and trample
it down solidly so that when the bed is finished there is about four
Showing how the cutting is made by
removal of the lower leave and cut-
ting beneath a joint. A indicates depth
at which to insert-


inches of made soil. About September or the beginning of October
select young plants from the finest varieties obtainable. Plant these
in the bed about six inches from the sides and eighteen inches apart.
When they start to grow take out the tips of the plants so that some
nice shoots will break out from the bottom. This is all that is needed
until about December, when three or four shoots should be selected
and all other side shoots removed. Stake up and tie to sticks the ones
selected, and keep any other shoots off except two or three laterals, in
case of slugs eating away the top ones, or in case of accident. When
the shoots on top get a good start and they are securely staked and
tied, the laterals can be removed.
February is the most
anxious time for the
Chrysanthemum grower,
because it is then that
attention must be given
to bud selection for show
blooms. The first crown
bud is generally the one
that produces the finest
flower, but in some vari-
eties the second crown bud
produces the best blooms,
and it is a question of be-
ing fully acquainted with
the variety. It is often
safer to take two first
crown buds and one sec-
ond, and as they develop
watch them carefully and
then select the most vigor-
ous and robust grower.
The first crown is best to
select for varieties that
have not too many petals,
and generally produces the
largest flower. The second
crown is the best for the
full varieties. Buds should
be selected any time after
the 4th to the 16 th of
February. When the buds
are fairly large the plants
will benefit by top-dress-
ing with cow manure, soot
and bone meal. About a
fortnight later start giv-
ing them weak liquid


manure, but this should be made to the colour of weak tea. If the
plants are backward, a little sulphate of ammonia—one ounce to the
gallon of water —will help them along. With some plants the early
leaves will possibly be yellowing or appear unhealthy. These should
be immediately removed and examined for red spider, which do a
lot of damage if not checked. In tins, tubs or pots the drainage
should be carefully attended to, and on no account must the pots
be allowed to stand in saucers or pans filled with water. Plants
grown in tins or boxes should have the top soil constantly stirred and
kept open for the air to play its part, and as the plants, while growing
quickly, will exhaust the nourishment from the soil, weak liquid
manures should be given frequently. While it is not desirable that
the plants should be allowed to flag, it is best not to water until
the condition of the soil in the pots indicates that water is needed.
Of course, when the pots are filled with roots, and during the hot
weather, the danger of over-watering is not so likely, especially where
a liberal and sound condition of drainage has been ensured, but, never-
theless, care should be exercised.
Diagram No. 1 shows a spray or cluster of terminal buds, while
diagram No. 2 shows the centre terminal bud retained to form a large
bloom.
Fig. 3 shows the top of a Chrysanthemum stalk, with a cluster of buds. In
this case, the terminal bud will give the finest bloom and the marks show how the
others should be pinched or cut out to throw all the vigour of the plant into that
one precious bloom.
Fig. 4 shows the appearance of the shoot when the disbudding has been done.
To get the perfect bloom, growers have to protect it from the heat of the sun,
from fierce winds, and from rain.
"Come not with careless feet
To tread my garden’s unfrequented ways;
No highroad this, no busy clanging street,
No place of pretty shows and fond displays —
Here there are blossom sweet.”


CARNATIONS
If you are out to grow Carnations successfully, there is a lot to
learn, but the task is fascinating and the pleasures are many.
Essential facts worth remembering are that Carnations are good
hardy " doers,” that won’t thank you for excessive coddling, and
also that situations play a big part in success. Many grow Carnations
in the mixed borders, under rose bushes, and alongside other plants.
True, they get flowers, and if only garden flowers are wanted there
is nothing wrong with this method; but the show bench Carnation
comes from the Carnation bed, where watering, manuring and feeding
operations can be exclusively confined and governed.
The position of your proposed bed should claim first attention,
and this should be well out in the open, with perfect drainage, as
low-lying or damp retaining grounds will mean failures. A good plan
is to have your beds about four feet wide, with narrow paths between,
and if you are in stiff soil or heavy ground raise your beds above the
footpath, as this gives a " carry-off ” in winter. Beds of this width
VASE OF CARNATIONS


permit of three rows of plants, spaced about 18in. apart, which can
be weeded worked and cultivated without any unnecessary tramping
down and walking over.
Before planting, go to a little extra trouble with the preparation
of your bed. If in stiff soil, dig your land over at least three times,
and work in plenty of good rotted stable manure, along with lime, and,
if trenching put in the
bottom of your trench
well down, and allow
it to settle before plant-
a basic foundation is
good, but, if procurable, work in a few barrow loads of loam or
gravelly silt from the roads or footpaths, but in digging this in spread
it evenly. The best foundation possible for a Carnation bed is
the old mortar and rubble from an old demolished building; it lasts
for years, and gives the roots something to feed on as they go well
down. Carnations love lime, as much as the small boy loves good
lime juice, so in making your bed work this in freely, and, with a
tenacious root holding, you cannot tramp or firm your bed down
too much.
in selecting your plants secure well-rooted struck cuttings, and
don’t purchase sick spindly stuff. Some plants may possibly run
straight up into a flower bud without shooting out. On no account
let them flower, but encourage lateral growth by pinching back to
one of the joints. True perpetuals, however, do not require much
stopping. Water the young plants two or three times per week, and
before the hot summer sets in, mulch your bed well with manure,


but remember over-watering is harmful. It not only forces soft
sappy growth, but carries much of the food which is in a state of
solution down below the level of the roots. Always have a few
young cuttings coming on to replace two-year-old plants, for young
plants produce the finest blooms. After their second year plants
that have been constantly developing growth and producing blooms
become scraggy and lose their vitality; these should be discarded for
young plants.
Carnations strike easily from cuttings, but select good healthy
pipings from the first year’s growth; wait until the growth is past
the sappy stage, and then strip off most of the bottom leaves and
insert the piping about an inch deep in clean sharp sand. Many
people make the mistake of transplanting side branches carrying a
lot of growth, and using old spent wood. These may strike all right,
but, generally speaking, they only make sickly plants that soon
die out.
Layering is a good safe way to propagate, and this is done by
taking a side branch, stripping off the leaves, and at a strong joint
making a good clean upward slanting cut (but don’t cut right
through). With a strong hairpin or bent wire peg this firmly down
in the sand, and root action will soon set in. If show blooms are
wanted, it is advisable to disbud and shelter your flowers from the
weather. This is usually done by passing the flower stem along a
slit in a platform on a stake and
inverting a flower pot as the bud
opens.
* * *
Carnations from
Cuttings
Under good conditions, Car-
nations can easily be propagated
from cuttings. Young, sturdy
tips, from clean growths about
3 in. long are most suitable.
These should be cut off cleanly
and squarely just below a joint
and two or three of the bottom
pairs of leaves should be re-
moved. It matters little whe-
ther the cuttings are planted
direct into the bed, into a propa-
gating frame, or inserted in pots,
but in any case the soil should
be of a light sandy nature. Sand
is a good medium for rooting
cuttings, but when it is used by itself the cuttings must be potted
off as soon as they are rooted, as there is no sustaining power in sand
alone. The diagram shows two Carnation tips prepared for striking.


DAHLIAS
It may be said that almost any kind of soil can be made suitable
for Dahlia growing. Stiff soils should be brought to a fine tilth, while
sandy soils can be stiffened up with a liberal use of cow manure. Good
drainage is necessary, particularly if the tubers are to be left in the
soil throughout the winter. Lime plays an important part in Dahlia
growing, and whether the plot is sand or otherwise, a grower cannot
go wrong in spreading a dressing of lime over the soil at the outset
of operations. When planting, choose an open position away from
overhanging trees, etc., and for exhibition purposes devote space to
special beds, though, of course, mixed areas will give good results
also. In preparing the ground refrain from leaving the manure in
layers, as it should be well mixed in with the soil. Bonedust as a
manure should not be overlooked; add it to the top soil at the rate of
a couple of handfuls to the square yard, and dig it in. Bonedust placed
deep down in the soil is wasteful. Keep away from the general run
of chemical fertilisers, but dig in plenty of cow or other animal
manures or any other material that will add humus, such as leaf mould,
grass, weeds, and seaweed, etc. Tubers are popular for planting with
the novice, but sturdy green plants (rooted cuttings) are safe if they
are shaded with tree branches until they recover from the shifting
and the watering is not overdone. Both tubers and green plants can
be lost at the early stage through over-watering. A couple of hand-
fuls of clean sharp sand surrounding the tubers and roots of green
plants is to be recommended, but a little crushed charcoal mixed with
the sand is much better. Provide and place in position the stakes to
support the plants before the planting is undertaken. Lay the tuber
with the shoot or eye pointing upwards at the base of the stake, so
that support may be given to the plant at the outset. If planting in
the mixed border, each plant or tuber should be placed in a saucer-
shaped depression. This will serve to hold the moisture and the
subsequent mulch with which it is advisable to provide for all plants
from the start. Allow 30 inches at least between the plants in rows,
and to 4 feet between the rows. In growing the various types it
is advisable to group same, especially if it is intended to save a faw
good flowers for seeding purposes.
Trenching may not be necessary, although it may be advisable
on new soil, but double digging is certainly most beneficial. The top
spit should be removed to the depth of a spade and the soil below
worked up well with a fairly liberal supply of animal manure. Refrain
from leaving the manure in layers, and do not at the start over-
manure, as stimulants can be added later if necessary. Green manure
is useful, and all grass and small weeds should be dug in. Leaf mould,
decayed and half decayed stable or cow manure can be used to enrich
light soils, while bonedust should not be overlooked. As a general rule,
it is advisable to avoid chemical manures, but when it comes to top
dressing or feeding the plants at flowering time, there is nothing to
equal fowl manure.


"Mrs. P. HOOD"
Paeony Dahlia Raised by P. Hood


Watering. —In growing Dahlias the question of watering is of
prime importance. Generally speaking, in the early growing stages
Dahlias should not be watered. They should receive enough to keep
them growing steadily, but heavy and continuous waterings will mean
forcing. If the soil has been well prepared and carries a fair amount
of manure, and cultivation has been followed assiduously, enough
moisture will be found in the
soil by the roots of the plants.
In seasons of protracted drought
or through hot spells, if they
show signs of wanting water,
then give it freely, but do not
just sprinkle the surface. Super-
ficial waterings are worse than
useless for Dahlias, and do more
harm than good. Water should
be given generously when it is
needed, and let that suffice until
it is required again, when an-
other soaking can be given. Stir
and cultivate the soil to a shal-
low depth as soon as the surface
dries after watering.
Planting. —The best results
will come from plantings under-
taken during the first or second
week in December, although
plantings can be made right up until January. Pompon varieties are
best planted in November, while the singles, if put out in January,
give the best results to the exhibitor. Tubers left in the ground from
the previous season will commence to grow long before December and
any advanced growth on these or the stored tubers should be cut back
to the lowest pair of leaves on the main shoot. It is always advisable
to plant out in the evening if the weather is hot, and it may be neces-
sary to shelter the plants lightly for a few days, especially if they are
small and soft. This can be done by fixing a few branches or twigs of
any kind in the soil about them. If they flag badly during the heat of
the day a light spraying of water over the foliage in the evening will
revive them. As the plants develop they should be trained and tied to
the stakes.
Tubers. —The easiest method of increasing the stock of Dahlias
is by division of the tuber. There are, however, a few things to know
to ensure success. Effective growth does not start from eyes in the
tuber, but from eyes which lie at the base of the old stem where it
junctions with the tubers. The tuber is simply the storehouse from
which the shoots draw sustenance until the new root systems are
established, afterwards rotting away and decaying. As there is no
certainty as to where an eye will start, divisions cannot be safely
Correct Method of Planting Tubers


carried out until the new growth starts. In order to induce them to
start, place the tubers in a warm position and cover with bags or soil
which is kept fairly damp. This will quickly start the eyes into
action. When the young shoots are well in evidence, it is a simple
matter with a sharp knife to divide the tuber vertically into the
required number of pieces. All that will be found necessary to plant
in order to secure good strong plants and large flowers is a piece of
tuber as big as a potato, with
one good strong eye in it.
When planting, place stakes
at the required position, and
always plant to the stake, but
do not stake to the plant.
Division of the tuber is neces-
sary in any case, whether an
increase of stock is required
or not ’
plant out the whole of the
clump. The planting of the
tuber in toto only ex-
hausts a much larger area
than is necessary, and results
in six or seven stems with
Clump of Dahlia Tubers before cutting up
small flowers of inferior quality. One eye will form one strong stem
through which the flowers will receive the full flow of sap. This is
more easily tied and controlled, and gives finer flowers.
?:• * *
Dahlia Types
It is not perhaps advisable to recommend any one type of Dahlia
as better than another, as it is generally a matter of individual taste
which determines the selection, and as a rule the average amateur
cannot go far wrong by growing a few of each variety.
The Paeony is a good garden type of Dahlia. They may be said
to be the easiest of all to grow, and require no dis-budding, unless
grown for exhibition, and then very little, if the plants have been
thinned to a few shoots.
Cactus. —With the exhibitor, the Cactus Dahlia holds pride of
place. It is certainly the most handsome creation of the Dahlia family,
and on the show table always attracts admiration for its artistic forma-
tion. Somewhat disappointing as a garden decoration.
The Collarette is an easy type to cultivate. There is a de-
cided difference of opinion regarding the artistic value of this Dahlia,
either for cut purposes or as a garden plant. With some growers they
are great favourites, and they are certainly very floriferous and showy,
and are easy to produce in good form and size. This type also needs
little thinning of the buds, and is easily deformed by over-feeding.


FINE DAHLIA DISPLAY
The Show Dahlia is practically discarded by the owners or cul-
tivators of small gardens. They are as difficult to grow to perfection
as the Cactus are, and are not so generally useful and admired. Their
extremely formal build displeases present-day decorators.
The Pompoms, practically miniature Shows, are gaining in popu-
larity, owing largely to the improvements m colour of many of the
newer varieties. They are very free bloomers, stand a good deal of
heat, and, in addition to being very decorative, may be carried a dist-
ance in good condition without a deal of trouble.
The Decorative is a valuable type, both for garden and show
work, and perhaps to-day at the hands of culturists is claiming most
attention. In the past there has been the tendency to describe any-
thing not in agreement with recognised types as a Decorative, but of
recent years breeders have wmrked to a standard, and given us a type
with all the true Decorative characteristics, with flowers carried on
straight, stiff stems.
Stars and Singles. —Undoubtedly the most charming of all
Dahlias for table and room decoration are the Stars and Singles. The
habit of the plant is quite dwarf and requires no staking. The new
Dwarf Budding Decoratives are so beautiful and striking that they
should be included in all Dahlia gardens.


Dahlias from Seeds
Growing Dahlias from seed is quite worth while. If seed is sown
in August and the plants are fully developed by February, they flower
within four to six months from the time of sowing the seed. In
some instances, according to the variety, the blooms come earlier, but,
speaking generally, five months is a good average. The first flowers
from seedlings are not always the best, and it is necessary to get good
straight growth and plants with plenty of vigour before looking for
blooms. The seedling Dahlia makes almost as big a tuber in the first
season as does the one from a division or an old root. As to the
treatment of the seedling, seed should be sown late in August in a
shallow box. Make the soil rich and porous, and place the seed two
inches apart in rows. Proper spacing with the seed leaves room for
development, and does away with the necessity for " pricking off,”
which, in garden parlance, is the act of transferring the young plants
from crowded quarters to a place of more freedom.
Keep the soil moist and watch the seedlings closely until the baby
stage is over, and shelter them from the hot sun. Sowing in handy
boxes is advocated, because they can without difficulty be moved from
place to place. When about a finger high, and the third and fourth
leaves are showing, they can be placed out into permanent quarters. Be
careful not to over-feed at the start, and partly shade the plants for
about a week until they become established. Space the plants about
twelve to eighteen inches apart, alternately, first a light stem and
then a dark one, as the stem gives an indication of the colour of the
flowers. After shifting the seedling and getting it firmly rooted, treat
it in the same manner as you would either a tuber or a rooted cutting.
Once the plants get a start, keep them growing in the same even
stride. Dahlia growing from seed is particularly fascinating, because
of the variety of colours obtained. All the latest handsome specimens
seen on the show bench come from seed.
* * *
"And balmy springtide, glad with sunlit days.
Give all we longed for in the rime and rain.
Since breaking buds are blowing o’er the world.
And birds are making song and nest again.”


ROSES
"Loveliest of lovely things are they
On earth, that soonest pass away —
The rose, that lives its little hour
Is prized beyond the sculptured tower."
* *
These sentiments, penned centuries ago by an ancient poet, have
not only stood the test of time, but have been re-echoed and passed on
so often that few there are to-day who fail to pay homage to " Her
Majesty ” the Rose, who throughout the gardening world reigns sup-
reme as Queen.
While Roses may be planted anywhere in the garden where the
situation is an open one, and the sun can reach them during the day,
some knowledge of habits and requirements is essential, while the
utmost consideration should be given to the selection, for when a
Rose is planted it is there to stay. The method of planting should
also be carefully considered, and also whether standards or dwarf-
worked plants are required. Where Roses are to be grown in the
mixed border half standards will be favoured, so that annuals and
other small plants can be grown around them. Low half standards
showing about 12 to 18 inches of stem above the soil are preferable,
because the stems or ” stocks ” are less liable to become scorched by the
hot summer sun. The best time to plant is from the middle of June
until the end of July. As a rule, when the planting is done in June
the soil still retains enough warmth to encourage the plants to make
fresh roots quickly.
In preparing the soil for Rose growing, remove the top surface
to the full depth of the spade, and then dig up the lower soil to a
depth of at least 18 inches, working the manures well into the lower
soils. Where the soil is sandy, heavy loam, if possible, should be worked
into it, together with plenty of well-decayed cow manure, decayed
vegetable matter,, bones, or grass. A couple of handfuls of bonedust
should be added for the benefit of each plant. Lime, which has a bind-
ing effect on sand, and the reverse action on heavy land, should always
be employed in Rose growng. Spread it on the surface, and dig it in
before any manures are added. Ashes fresh from the fire can be dug
into the soil freely, and will feed the plants for several seasons. Plenty
of potash in the ground tends to grow stronger wood, with resultant
fuller and stronger blooms. Lime added to very heavy soils loosens
without destroying the tenacity, while it also warms cold and damp
soils, and neutralises acidity.
Soil preparation should be carried out some time before planting.
Between the first digging and the planting, the soil should be fre-
quently turned over to sweeten, by the action of the air and sunlight;


VASE OF ROSES


and the more the soil is turned over, the better. Frequent turning at
intervals of a week or ten days is beneficial, as, with each turning,
the top soil will be exposed to the air and sun.
Although Roses will grow and flower in almost any class of well-
prepared soil, the best results are had from rich deep, tenacious loam,
but not actual clay. Where the natural soil is light, sandy or shallow,
some heavy clay or loam should be procured and mixed well with the
soil prior to planting. This should be dug in to a good depth, so that
the roots get the full advantage. Failing this, good Roses cannot be
produced without the addition of much heavy manure and a largely
augmented water supply. On poor soils manure is absolutely neces-
sary. This, for preference, should be either well-decayed stable or
cow manure. Fresh manure should never be used, as it is apt to destroy
the roots when decaying, but it may be placed well down at the bottom
of the holes so as to encourage deep rooting.
Having received your plants from the nurseryman, before plant-
ing have a good look at the bush. First, see if any roots are bruised
or damaged; if so, cut them back with a clean cut well above the
damaged part. Root pruning is to be recommended before planting—
that is to say, that all long and large roots can be shortened, and any
damaged or broken roots removed. Any soft, withered growth may
be topped, but drastic pruning of the top hamper should be left until
July, when the shoots should be shortened back to a plump " eye ”
that is pointing outwards.
The distance between the plants must be determined by the
habit of each variety. In planting either standards or half standards
place the stake in the centre of the hole, driving it home firmly before
placing the bush in position, but taking care that the stake will not
protrude through the head of the plant as it develops.
When planting, the bush should be placed to a similar depth to
that occupied in the nursery bed, or perhaps a shade deeper. In the
centre of the hole make a small saucer-like mound and set the plant
on this, as this immediately gives
the roots 3 downward tendency.
Next arrange the roots carefully,
spreading them out in all direc-
tions round the plant. Fill in
soil gradually, and press it
firmly down with the foot (but
not stamping). If the plant is
set too shallow, or firming of
the soil neglected, the wood may
shrivel before growth starts.
Plant the standards just a little
dee P er than they have been pre-
viously grown, but never anv
i 11 tl i-
shallower. Ihe same applies to
In planting a rose bush, the hole should
be made wide and the roots well spread
out.


|i'
l| Charles Rhodes, f.r.h.s.
Nurseryman, Seedsman and Florist
GUILDFORD - Phone 325
Head Office ; Ethel St, Nurseries : Guildford & Bassendean
and Darling Range
*
ALL
NAMED
VARmiD
hZ.
Cash Couhu
A.-fc i 'i
(?o}t
“ Everything for the Garden ”
I Specialities : — Rose Trees, Palms and Decorative Plants
Hardy Herbaceous Perennials, Shrubs, Cut Flowers
and Floral Tributes


the dwarfs and climbers, with the exception that the junction of the
bud and stock should be placed just below the surface of the soil.
Bush Roses. —The great majority of plants grown in Western
Australia are budded on a vigorous growing stock known as Fortuniana
and are thereby improved in growth and freedom of blooms. This
budding is done by the insertion of an " eye ” or " bud ” under the
bark of the stock, and the point of the union is then called the " bud.”
The placing of this bud at the time of planting below the ground is
essential for the following reasons. If any serious injury is suffered
below the bud the upper part of the plant may die, and for this reason
alone it is advisable to place the danger point below the ground. An-
other advantage is the fact that it serves to steady the bush against
winds. The main point for consideration is that the roots should be
low enough to receive sufficient moisture and yet close enough to the
surface to get the full warmth of a well worked and aerated soil.
Emphasis should be given to the proper constitution of the soil round
the roots. It is not intended to convey the idea that severe ramming
should be done, but in nine cases out of ten the casualties at planting
time are due to insufficient tramping or firming of the soil. It is
frequently recommended to mulch the soil immediately after planting,
but unless this is done with judgment harm may easily result. When
planting, a few salient points can be remembered. Place the roots low
enough to be in moist soil, yet close enough to the surface to gain all
the advantage of warmth, soil aeration and bacterial energy. Spread
the roots out well and cover with fine soil. Tramp well and water
copiously. . Do not manure, do not prune too hard, and do not omit
staking and securely tying the plants.
Roses, in order to get the best results, should be given resting
periods, through restrictions of waterings, and it is not always desir-
able that plants should be kept flowering during the hottest part of
the summer. From December to February, with a rest, the plants will
produce much finer blooms during the autumn, and this is the time
when the blooms are not only so delightful in colour, but keep so
well when cut.
* * *
Varieties
Red Roses are probably the most popular, and the first in this sel-
ection comes Hadley, because it is a good grower of fine form and free
flowering, with a good scent. Lord Charlemont is perhaps the best of
the crimsons, with its exquisite colour and splendid form, and if it
only had the habit of growth of Hadley it would surpass it. Hoosier
Beauty is a brilliant scarlet with a powerful fragrance, and other
first-class reds are General McArthur, Laurent Carle, Etoile de Holland,
Hugh Dickson, Walter C. Clarke (a strong grower of a deep blackish
maroon shade), and E. G. Hill, a new crimson, with sweetly scented
flowers carried on long stems.


Among the pinks, Dame Edith Helen must be given first choice,
but the conditions of a good stiff soil must be right to secure exhibi-
tion blooms. Mrs. Bryre Allan is a large well-formed flower, of good
colour, sweetly scented, Los Angeles is lovely, its salmon pink shading
being most attractive. Rose Marie is not so well known, but it is a
grand clear pink of fine form, delightfully perfumed. Belle Siebrecht
produces well-formed deep rose pink flowers, particularly good in the
spring. Konegin Carola Columbia, Radiance, Lorraine Lee, Caroline
Testout, Maman Cochet, and Madam Segond Weber are only some of
the many grand pinks that can be chosen.
Coming to the yellows, perhaps Rev. F. Page Roberts, with its
golden colour touched with buff, comes first, but Lady Hillingdon,
Golden Ophelia, Mable Morse, George Schwartz, Sunburst, and Golden
Emblem (a wonderful grower and free-flowerer) are all charming
varieties.
Among the whites, buffs and combined colours are white Maman
Cochet, Mrs. H. Stevens, Mrs. Foley Hobbs, Frau Karl Druschki, Mrs.
H. Brocklebank, K. A. Victoria, Molly Sharman Crawford, and Ophelia
and Madam Abel Chatenay. The latter two should be included in
every selection, as their exquisite colourings entitle them to a place in
every Rose garden.
In selecting Roses, it is well to remember that exhibition blooms
do not always give the best garden results; a large number of the
show Roses are not suitable for garden purposes. Many of them hang
their heads, and some require shading to get perfect flowers, while
others do not flower freely.
Roses such as Mrs. Foley Hobbs, the Cochets, Mrs. Edward Maw-
ley, and the Duchess of Portland, while good exhibition sorts, are not
always satisfactory as garden Roses. On the other hand, there are
many grand garden Roses that are equally good for exhibition, and
among them are such favourites as Hadley, Hoosier Beauty, Dame
Edith Helen, Mrs. David McKee, Ophelia, Lord Charlemont, Golden
Emblem, Mrs. Herbert Stevens, Konegin Carola, Rev. F. Page Roberts,
K. A. Victoria, and Los Angeles. Any of these can be recommended,
not only as good garden varieties, but most suitable for bedding effects.
The purely decorative Roses, those that are not quite full of petals
and do not have the high pointed centre required for exhibition, are
extremely popular for decoration, and are well worth growing, and
no Rose garden should be without Sunny South, Red Letter Day,
Fancy Free, Madam E. Heriot, Hallmark Crimson, Edith Clark, and
Lorraine Lee. The Dwarf Polyantha Roses, which are remarkably free
flowering, are also popular, and the newer varieties make a beautiful
spring show.
Climbers. —Miss Marion Manifold (crimson scarlet), Black Boy
(deep velvet crimson), Kitty Kinninmonth (light carmine), Chateau
de Clos Vongeot (deep black crimson), Belle Siebrecht (deep pink).


white Maman Cochet (creamy white), Reine Marie Henrietta (cop-
pery crimson), William Allen Richardson (orange yellow), Marechal-
Niel (golden yellow).
Dwarf Polyantha Roses. —A place should be found for one
or more varieties of the Dwarf Polyantha Roses. They make an effec-
tive display when grown in beds by themselves in mass, or are equally
effective when grown as a garden edging. The following are a few
of the good sorts that can be recommended:—
Cecile Bruner. —An old favourite, giving charming salmon pink
flowers nearly all the year round. As a buttonhole or bouquet Rose,
this variety is unsurpassed.
Orleans Rose. —This charming variety is one of the most popular
of all. Its semi-double rosy red blossoms are produced in great pro-
fusion nearly all the year round. The blossoms are apt to fade a little
in the hot weather.
Ellen Poulson. —A vigorous and free flowering dwarf,- giving full
and sweetly scented blossoms of a brilliant dark pink shade.
Pearle d’Or. —A variety giving beautiful flowers of good shape.
The colour is a pale yellow with orange centre.
Borderer. —This was raised by Mr. ’Alister Clark, of Victoria. The
variety is free flowering, producing large quantities of double flowers.
The blending of the colours pink, copper and amber gives a most
delightful combination.
Perle des Rouges. —This is perhaps the richest in colour of all the
Polyantha Roses. Its deep velvety crimson blossoms are produced in
abundant clusters during the greater part of the year.
Tiptop. —Another of the pretty ones in this class, and makes a
fine show as a garden edging. The blooms are orange yellow shaded
with crimson.
* * *
A Plebiscite Selection
The West Australian Newspaper some months ago asked its
readers through a plebiscite for an expression of opinion as regards the
most popular twelve Roses grown. The interest displayed was State-
wide, and the varied range of varieties chosen demonstrated that the
cult with many was no idle fancy and that the Rose still stands to-day
where it has stood for ages—at the apex of the great pyramid built
by the world’s lovely flowers.
The selected first twelve— Hadley, Ophelia, Rev. F. Page Roberts,
white Maman Cochet, Fpau Karl Druschki, Madame Abel Chatenay,
K. A. Victoria, Golden Emblem, Lady Hillingdon, Mrs. Herbert
Stevens, Blackboy and Hoosier Beauty —are all magnificent Roses, but
some there are who do not consider Frau Karl Druschki a good all-
round garden Rose, for the reason that it does not flower continuously,


while others claim that Blackboy is essentially more a climber than a
bedding Rose. Hadley, from the commencement of the count, was al-
ways the popular choice, and, while not always placed first with some
lists, it was selected by 71 different growers. In the final twelve there
are three reds, four whites or creams, three yellows, and two soft-
shaded salmon pinks; but there has been no choice for a decided bright
pink or silvery pink, such as Belle Siebrecht, Maman Cochet, Radiance
or Columbia.
In this respect the second twelve covers a wider range of colours,
and in this collection can be found Roses carrying delightful com-
binations, such as Penelope, with its cream and carmine petals; Shot
Silk, with its cherry, cerise and salmon orange; and Madam Butterfly,
with its pink and apricot and yellow centre. In the second twelve
are also found three of the newer Roses, such as Dame Edith Helen,
a pure glowing rose pink; Golden Ophelia, a rich golden yellow shad-
ing away to lemon at the edges; and Rose Marie, a rich shining rose
pink.
In the first and second twelve it is pleasing to find two Australian-
raised Roses of undoubted merit, Blackboy and Sunny South. Both of
these were given us by Mr. Alister Clark, of Victoria.
In a brief review, it is impossible to deal with the merits of all
the first 3 6 chosen, but, in describing fully the first twelve, it can
safely be said that there is not a faulty Rose in the remaining lot,
and grand old favourites such as Cloth of Gold, Warrior, La France
and George Dickson are still worth growing. Dealing with the Roses
singly in accordance with the votes cast, the following descriptions
will no doubt prove interesting:—
Hadley (71 votes) is an H.T., dark red Rose, with a strong rich
fragrance. It is a vigorous grower, mildew proof, and produces its
blooms on long strong stems. Hadley, perhaps, is the most popular
red Rose grown in Australia to-day.
Ophelia (H.T.) (58 votes) is a Rose that does well in light soils,
and has given excellent results in Perth’s sand. It is a delicate salmon
flesh, shading away to the base with yellow, and carries a true rich
tea fragrance. Its vigorous habits and strong character of growth
make it an ideal garden Rose.
Rev. F. Page Roberts (H.T.) (5 5 votes). —The blooms are large
and double, of true exhibition form, and the colour is most pleasing.
The inner side of the petals is a soft buff, shading to a rich yellow at
the base, and the reverse a salmon shaded carmine and yellow. The
blooms last well when cut. It has a vigorous spreading habit and
makes a splendid half or full standard bush.
White Maman Cochet (H.T.) (54 votes) is a vigorous exhibition
Rose, slightly tinted with pink, and is mildew proof. Grown on it*
own roots or budded on dwarf stock, it is quite one of our beat
garden Roses. The character of the growth is vigorous and strong.


"The Queen of Flowers”
I The We str a I a Qardener


Frau Karl Druschki (H.T.) (48 votes) produces pure white
double blooms of splendid shape and form. This variety has a decided
climbing habit when not pruned, as it throws out long canes. A
vigorous grower.
Madam Abel Chatenay (H.T.) (40 votes) is a bright carmine
Rose shaded with pale vermilion rose and salmon pink. The flowers
are double, of good form and shape, and up to exhibition standards.
K. A. Victoria (H.T.) (32 votes), while 30 years old, is still
popular. The flowers are large, full and up to exhibition standard;
the colour is a creamy white with a faint lemon tinge in the centre.
It flowers freely and is a maker of good strong wood.
Golden Emblem (H.T.) (30 votes) is cadmium yellow, with
buds reddish gold, beautiful foliage and good growth. The flowers
are produced on long stiff stems. It is a new Rose, but should be in
all collections.
Lady Hillingdon (H.T.) (29 votes) bears rich yellow flowers
produced on long, wiry stems. Semi-double, the blooms carry a
strong tea scent. This Rose must be grown under good conditions.
Mrs. Herbert Stevens (H.T.) (28 votes). —For a long time it
has been one of our best whites. The buds are long and pointed, and
the blooms, produced freely, open out in semi-double fashion. It is a
good exhibition variety and a strong grower.
Blackboy (H.T.) (25 votes) is a deep velvety crimson, shaded
sooty red. The blooms, semi-double, are carried on long stiff stems.
It does well as a climber.
Hoosier Beauty (H.T.) (24 votes). —Glowing crimson with
darker shadings. The blooms are large, full and generally well formed,
and carried on long stiff stems. The outstanding feature is the rich
powerful fragrance along with robust growth.
The following are chosen as six good reds, yellows, whites, pinks,
and mixed colours:—
Reds. — Hadley, Blackboy, Warrior, Etoile de Holland, Hoosier
Beauty, Laurent Carle.
Pinks. —Madam Abel Chatenay, Belle Siebrecht, Maman Cochet,
Rose Marie, Columbia, Mrs. Bryre Allen.
White or Buffs. —White Maman Cochet, Mrs. H. Stevens , Mrs. H.
Brocklebank, K. A. Victoria, Frau Karl Druschki, Molly Sharman
Crawford.
Yellows. —Golden Ophelia, Lady Hillingdon, Golden Emblem,
Cloth of Gold, Rev. F. Page Roberts, Perles des Jardins.
Combined Colours.— Ophelia, Penelope, Madam Butterfly, An-
toine Rivoire, J. J. L. Mock, Lady Roberts.


Rose Pruning
To the keen rosarian the pruning of the Roses is always interesting
work, and the successful grower is the one who makes a close study
of the different varieties and their various habits. The best time to
prune the standards and bush roses is from the end of June until
about the middle of July, although the hybrid perpetuals can be done
during June, leaving the teas and hybrid teas until early July, as if
pruned earlier the plants are apt to shoot out, and the young shoots
be damaged by the cold weather or late frosts. Various classes and
varieties produce all sorts of growth, and all kinds of wood, so that
each bush must be considered and dealt with according to its require-
ments. Experience is better than instruction, and, after a few at-
tempts, pruning is generally not the difficult task it is often thought
to be. There are, however, some general principles that apply, and
it is these that probably confuse the novice.
A mistake commonly made is the pruning of strong growing
Roses hard back, leaving the weaker growers almost alone. In most
cases the opposite method should be adopted, for the following reasons:
—The strong growing Roses are capable of producing bud, bringing
to perfection far more blooms than the weak-growing ones, and there-
fore more wood should be left on them. Oh the other hand, Roses
that are rather poor growers should be well thinned out and then cut
back fairly hard to make them produce strong wood. It is a common
error to hardly cut the weak growers, hoping that by leaving nearly
all the wood the plants will increase in size; but this often leads to
die-back, and in most cases if these plants were cut back fairly hard
they would grow freely and make good heads. Another general rule
is to cut just above a bud that points outward, but this does not
always apply. With some Roses, such as the Cochets, it is often
better to cut just above buds that point inwards, to correct the
spreading habit of the plants for shape and compactness. All this
shows how necessary it is to study the character and habit of each
plant before pruning.
Before making a start, take a careful look over your bush and
try to imagine what it will look like when finished, and don’t cut
away something you are immediately sorry for. Also remember that
a system of pruning each class of Rose alike cannot be followed,
because the habits of each—the teas, hybrid teas, perpetuals, climbers,
ramblers, etc. —are different, and each Rose must be handled on its
merits accordingly. Having in mind always the strength and habit
of the plant, conduct the pruning along lines that will renew growth
for next season’s blooms. Strong growers, such as Frau Karl Druschki,
George Schwartz and the Cochets should have about two-thirds of
their growth pruned off; while with others not quite so vigorous, such
as Lady Roberts, General McArthur, Laurent Carle, Rhea Reid, and
Madame Lambard, about half the growth should be left. The teas
and hybrid teas, makers of small spindly wood, should be pruned hard


to induce fresh vigorous growth, and it is necessary to cut out all
thin and spindly wood, removing anything more than two years old.
In appearance the bark of this is grey and scaly, so take it right out
and leave only the wood where the bark is green and clear and fresh-
looking. All wood growing in the centre should be removed, as
keeping the bush well open admits freely air and light.
In growing bushes on their own roots or dwarf budded stock,
start by selecting a good strong healthy stem. Discard all others, and
on. this stem cut back laterals close and induce side eyes to start
reserving shoots in position as will make for a symmetrical head. On
budded stock it is safe to shorten the weak growers back to three or
four eyes, leaving the stronger growers with about a dozen of buds
on one-year-old wood. The hybrid perpetuals are usually strong robust
growers and must be given plenty of latitude, and it is a mistake to
cut these hard back, as this would only have the tendency to encourage
growth at the expense of blooms; so shortening back is all that is
required..
The grower out for show blooms will always cut fairly hard with
the weak growers, generally to three buds, while the strong growers
may be allowed to retain four, five and in some cases six leaf buds.
It is essential always for the pruner to know and understand the dif-
ferent classes and varieties, while the golden rule of pruning the
vigorous sorts lightly and the weaker varieties strongly should be
closely observed. The soundness of this lies in the fact that the
vigorous growers should be discouraged to make growth and the
weaklings encouraged through hard pruning to make growth.
As a rule, the Tea Roses are makers of a lot of small twiggy
growths. These should be cut right out and the plants built up on
good, clean, healthy wood of last season’s growth. Among the hybrid
teas, some of our best exhibition sorts are found, and where blooms
are required for this purpose the bushes should be heavily pruned in
winter, so that all the energy of the plant is then concentrated in
the buds required.
Selecting a few of the popular cultivated sorts from the many
that were chosen in the recent plebiscite, the suggested treatment
should give good results:—
Madam Abel Chatenay. —This Rose must be allowed to develop
into a big bush, and a light to moderate pruning suits it best.
K. A. Victoria. —A variety which sends out splendid flowering
shoots. Prune back to four or five buds.
Antoine Rivoire. —A maker of good, clean growth. Prune back
to about four buds.
Laurente Carle. —Under good conditions this is a fine grower and
requires only moderate pruning.


Hadley. —A maker of vigorous growth, this Rose can be pruned
on the light side—six to eight buds can be left.
Belle Siehrecht. —This is a variety which does not resent hard
pruning. Cut to about four buds.
Madam Lombard. —This variety produces flowers on every shoot.
Prune back to three or four buds.
Madam Segond Weber. —A grand Rose, of good habits. Prune
to four buds.
Lady Roberts. —A Tea Rose which makes a lot of spindly wood.
Thin out well and cut back to about four buds.
Ophelia. —A Rose that, in the sand, does not want drastic treat-
ment. A maker of good, clean wood. Cut to four to six buds.
White Maman Cochet. —A maker of a lot of small spreading
growth. It does not object to
hard pruning. Cut to three or
four buds.
Frau Karl Druschki. — A
strong grower, blooming well
under reasonable treatment.
Prune to three buds.
If only choice exhibition
blooms are required, prune so
that only very short growths
remain. Always, for the sake of
the future shape of the plant,
prune to an outside bud, re-
membering that as a general
rule the more a shoot is cut back
the longer will be the growth
from the bud left at the top.
Standard Rose bush after pruning
showing all wood removed.
Climbers and Ramblers
Many make the mistake of classifying the climbers and ramblers
as one and the same, but there is a vast difference, and a good compari-
son is made by looking at the Cochets, Reine Marie Henriette, Marion
Manifold, and then turning to Dorothy Perkins, Lady Gay, Hiawatha,
or American Pillar.
Among the climbers are several different classes, and these classes
require different treatment. Generally speaking, there are three dif-
ferent classes, the Noisettes and the Banksias, the ordinary climbers
including the teas and hybrid teas and the ramblers. Cloth of Gold,
Marechal Neil and Souv. de la Malmaison are Noisettes, and can be
given the same treatment as the Banksias or the Fortunianas. These
Roses flower on the one- and two-year-old wood, and consequently


should not be pruned during the winter to any extent. The only
pruning they should receive is to cut back long, straggling growth
that is in the way, and a light trimming to keep the plants within
bounds. If they are pruned severely during the winter very few
flowers will be produced, and the plant will devote its energies into
making strong new growth that will not flower until the following
season. The correct time to cut these Roses back is in December, just
after the flowering period is over.
When pruning the climbers, aim at getting a wide spreading
bush, because climbers do not do so well if the limbs are grown up-
right and straight, and, remember, the wood has to ripen before the
blooms appear. Cut out all spindly bits and dry stems, shorten back
all plump green laterals by half, but be careful of all climbing shoots
of last year’s growth, and any long shoot (plum and green) should
be left alone, as this is where the next season’s, flowers will come from.
Climbing tea and hybrid tea Roses should have all old, worn-out
wood removed. The one- and two-year-old canes should be retained.
Thin out the weedy wood; shorten back the laterals (side shoots) that
flowered last year, and also shorten the long shoots or canes by taking
off about a quarter of the growths. With climbers the wood has to
ripen before it flowers.
The Macartneys, Jessie Clark, Flying Colours, Harbinger, and the
like should not be pruned during the winter, but should be treated like
the Banksias, as they produce their flowers on the previous season’s
growth. These should be pruned directly after flowering.
Climbing Roses should be encouraged horizontally and not directly
upwards. Where they are grown on a fence or trellis the growths
should be trained outwards and upwards in fan fashion. Where grown
on a tripod the branches should be wound around in spiral fashion.
Tie the selected canes firmly to the supports allotted to them, dis-
tributing them as evenly as possible so as to render the best show of
blossoms posible. With climbers newly planted, cut back to the base
so as to leave two or three leaf buds to each shoot.
The Ramblers. —These are vigorous growers with trailing hab-
its, and the difficulty is generally overcrowding. To get the most
graceful effect from these Roses the long shoots should not be allowed
to overcrowd each other. Take the trailers and lace or tie them into
position at least a foot apart, and cut right out at the base of the
plant all surplus growth. The long shoots, when tied into position,
should be pruned back at the ends, which will cause the buds all along
the canes to shoot and produce clusters of flowers. With these, the
Wichuranians and Multiflora varieties, such as Bush Kambler , Lady
Gay and Dorothy Verkins, the pruning should be done just after the
flowering period, and throughout midsummer is the best time to shape
your plants for next season’s growth and flowers.


Noisettes and Banksias. —Banksias and Noisettes are another
class calling for treatment of their own, and are pruned along totally
different lines. These require to be pruned after flowering. Of the
latter type, Cloth of Gold, Marechal Neil and William Allen Rich-
ardson are great favourites. The Banksias, as well as the Fortuniana
variety, require similar treatment. To prune these Roses in winter
means a loss of flowers, for they produce their blooms on laterals all the
way along their canes. Wood that is dead or shrivelling can, of course,
be cut away, or any portion that has grown out of bounds‘may be
trimmed back. If good flowers are wanted from the first two named,
prune just after the flowering season, and then work on one- or two-
year-old wood. Severe treatment is not required; all that is necessary
is to keep the long rambling growths in check.
* * *
Bush Roses
In pruning, a Rose correctly pruned should at the finish of the
work have its limbs so regulated that they are running outward from
the main stem at about equal distances. With the centre open, there
should be no chance for overcrowding.
The shortening of all healthy growths
depends largely on the vigour of the
plants and the quality of the blooms
required. In cutting, take out growths
which cross each other, and retain the
best, but see t^at c^e cuts are mac^e c^OS€
to [ be stem tbe branches retained.
Aim at obtaining a symmetrical, well-
balanced plant; this applies to a dwarf or
bush Rose just as much as to a full
standard.
In growing bushes on their own roots
0 r dwarf budded stock start by selecting
a good strong healthy cane. Some shoots
will look almost as brown as the old
wood, with plump buds all along. These
are valuable and should be left to de-
velop, even to the extent of cutting away
less ripened wood. Often green unrip-
ened late autumn shoots will be found
and these if not required for refurnishing
the plant, should be cut out, as they are
not likely to produce good blooms. Hav-
ing selected a good healthy stem, discard
all others, and on this stem cut back
laterals close and induce side eyes to
start, reserving shoots in position as will
make for a symmetrical head. On bud-
ded stock it is safe to shorten the weak
In pruning Roses, thin shoots
should be cut out and others
shortened.
Roses should be pruned to a
bud pointing outwards.


growers back to three or four
eyes, leaving the stronger
growers with about a dozen
of buds on one-year-old wood.
Any plants which have
been left for a year or two
require to be cut hard back
to form a fresh framework,
and in any variety where a
strong shoot is growing in a
manner likely to upset the
balance of the plant it is well
to either stop it or remove it
altogether.
* * *
Roses from Cuttings
The method to adopt in
striking favourite varieties is
as follows:—Cut a well rip-
ened cane about Sin. long
with a heel, as shown on dia-
gram, splitting open the base
and allowing the sap to flow,
thus causing it to callous.
Plant in a sunny situation,
on the slope, not upright, al-
lowing the sun and dew full
play on the base, thus assist-
ing the root system to form
thoroughly. It is possible to
lay clumps of cuttings flat,
placing grass or light loam
over the base. When bright
Type of cutting from which good results may
be had. Length, about eight inches. Place
about four inches in the ground.
green growth begins to show up, it is time to plant permanently in a
nice sharp loam, with a little sand at the base, thus assisting the root
systems to gather strength to carry them through the warmer weather.
* * *
Budding Roses
The budding of Roses is a fascinating pastime with many ama-
teurs, and one presenting no great difficulty. In fact, where common
sense, a sharp knife and a little knowledge are combined with some
soft binding material it is comparatively easy. Budding consists of
placing a bud of a choice or valued variety on the limb of vigorous
growing stock, and it is becoming quite a common thing to see roses


growing on their own roots carrying two or three ifferent colours. To
be successful both the stock and scion must be full of sap and it is
while the sap is flowing freely that the work should be done. When
the shoots are not sufficiently succulent the bark will not lift well and
it is difficult to remove the fragment of wood from the bud shield
without pulling out the bud. A good test is to give the thorns a
push sideways—if they come off clean the work may proceed, but if
they hang to the mark or tear off stringily the wood is too dry. The
only thing to do then is to give the plant plenty of water in order to
make the sap flow freely. Ihe right kind of bud to use is one that
is nicely visible, but has not yet started into growth, and preferably
from a shoot that has blossomed. Cut out a piece about an inch long
with the bud or germ lying at the base of a leaf stalk in the centre of
the piece—this is called the bud shield. The leaf stalk is cut off
except for a small portion at the base; the woody piece at the back
of the actual bud or eye is removed and then the bud is ready for
insertion. Make a T-shaped cut —or rather two cuts, one for the cross
strike and one for the down stroke—on the upper side of each shoot,
an inch or two from the base, going no deeper than the depth of the
bark. With the blade of the knife slit the bark gently to about half
the circumference of the stem.
A BOWL OF FRAU KARL DRUSCHKI


Loosen the bark of the stock with the
bone of the budding knife and insert the
bud s bi £ ld; pushing it downwards as tar
as go. P art the shield re-
mains above the T cut, it is removed.
When the bud is resting easily in the
cut press down the edges of the T over
it and at once bind it in place with a
length of wet raffia, taking care not to
cover the bud.
Throughout the operation it is neces-
sary to work quickly to get the buds in
position before the sap, both in the bud and the cut is dry, while care
should be taken to see that no empty space is left below the top of
the T, as this makes a bad joint and admits air, which causes both
bark and bud to dry. In taking out the piece of wood at the back
of the bud or eye, sometimes the heart
of the bud comes with it, leaving a hole.
The bud is then no good and a new one
must be taken. This often happens when
the scion is too dry. Cut the bud from
the stem in a very thin layer, but be
careful not to injure the eye.
The after-care of the buds and stocks
consists of applying water plentifully to
the roots, while it is also advisable to
shade the buds with newspaper or some
other light material at first. Sometimes
buds start growth almost immediately
and ma y produce flower buds the same
season, but these should be taken off to
strengthen the shoot. In the diagrams,
A is the bud, B the cut in the bark, C
the bark turned back to receive the bud,
D and £ the bud, £ the bud placed in
position, and G the completed budding.
Before the bud is tied, its bark should be
cut where the arrow points, so that the
whole of the inner part of the bud
touches the wood of the parent stock.
"In Eastern lands they talk in flowers,
And they tell in garlands their loves and cares;
Each blossom that blooms in their garden bowers
On its leaves a mystic language bears."


Spraying Roses
So soon as the pruning is finished, spray the plants thoroughly
with Bordeaux mixture (ordinary commercial strength) or some other
fungicides, to prevent the unsightly and harmful mildew from
gaining a hold. Do the work on a cloudy day, for preference, but not
while there is any rain threatening, otherwise the germ killer will be
washed off before it has played its part. See that every part of the
bush is sprayed, and when you have completed the task, incorporate
with the adjacent ground a little air-slacked lime. This will assist to
sweeten the soil and tend to check the growth of any fungoid present.
One spraying should be sufficient, but often it is not, hence it is well to
give another application within a month or six weeks. This makes
for safety. As a final hint, treat your sprayer with due consideration
after you have dealt with the last bush. Cleanse the sprayer thoroughly
by passing clean water through it, and then hang it up to drain dry.
Handy Spraying Mixtures. —All pruning should be well in hand
by June, and cleared up towards the end of July. Following
the pruning should come the spraying, which is equally important.
Bordeaux Mixture. —Quicklime, tablespoons; bluestone, 1
tablespoon; water, 4 quarts.
Kerosene Emulsion. —Kerosene, J pint; water, \ pint; household
soap, 1 cubic inch. Dilute with 15 pints of rain water.
Arsenate of Lead.—Lead arsenate paste, 1 tablespoon; water or
Bordeaux mixture, 1 gallon; Paris green, 1 teaspoon.
Paris Green. —Paris green, 1 teaspoon; water or Bordeaux mixture,
3 gallons.
Resin and Soda Wash.—Dissolve 3 lb. of washing soda and 4lb.
of finely-powdered resin over a fire in about 5 pints of water, then add
sufficient water to make 5 gallons. Boil well until the resin is tho-
roughly dissolved, then add 1 gallon to 7 gallons of water.
* * *
"Here may I live what life I please,
In green old gardens, hidden away
From sight of revel and sound of strife.
To sing my song and to say my say,
To hold my faith and to live my life,
Making the best of a shadowy day.”
VIOLET FANE.


The Hosethots
DEPENDABLE
n
V
•**
*
DUNLOP PERDRIAU
Carden Hose
OBTAINABLE ALL STORES


VASE OF SWEET PEAS


THE SWEET PEA
ITS HISTORY AND EVOLUTION
Under ideal climatic conditions, there are perhaps few parts of the
world better suited to growing Sweet Peas through the winter than
Western Australia. Their popularity is such that probably a brief
outline of the history and evolution of the present early flowering
varieties will be found interesting.
As far back as 1699, a monk named Cupani, living in Sicily,
devoted much time to the floriculture of that island. His operations
included the Sweet Pea, which was then a small flower with a red
standard and blue wings.
Cupani eventually sent seeds to Dr. Uvedale, in England, then a
schoolmaster at Enfield, and from these species come the creation of
the modern Sweet Pea.
British growers soon commenced to take advantage of the varia-
tion in the flowers, and seeds were offered for sale as early as 1783,
and were catalogued and described as black purple, scarlet, white, and
painted lady. A black purple was referred to in 1800. Thirty-seven
years later history records a striped flower, and a yellow is said to
have been offered subsequently. In 1860 the first edged variety ap-
peared (called a blue hybrid). This variety received a first-class
certificate from the Royal Horticultural Society in 1883, but previously
(eighteen years before) a similar award was given to Scarlet Invincible.
About this time, between 1860 and 1870, many new Sweet Peas
were introduced, and endeavours were made to improve the size,
substance and form of the flower, as well as the colour. Varieties
followed each other in quick succession, and the interest in the flower
rapidly increased. Many firms contributed to its success, but their
results paled into insignificance when Henry Eckford commenced, in
1870, to devote his life to the development of the Sweet Pea. Eckford
made the Sweet Pea a general favourite. His first success was Bronze
Prince, but he had not then learned all there was to know of " fixity.”
The variety was very inconstant, but in other respects excellent.
Year after year fresh novelties were obtained, his earlier varieties
being distributed by others, and the later productions by himself.
By this time he had left private service and had established himself in
business at Weni, in Shropshire, and eventually he distributed only
such varieties as were properly fixed.
With the institution of the National Sweet Pea Society (England),
in 1900, many other raisers came into operation. Eckford and his
contemporaries achieved wonders, but all of their varieties had smooth
or hooded standards, and when eventually Silas Cole (gardener to
Earl Spencer, of Althorp Park, Northampton) exhibited a shell-pink
variety, with waved standards and wings, at an exhibition at the Royal


Aquarium, in 1900, the Sweet Pea world became amazed at the beauty
of this newcomer, for nothing like it had been seen before. This waved
" break ” appeared in several places in England, and from the same
variety, Prima Donna, in 1901, but to Mr. Cole belongs the honour
of introducing it to the floral world. The new arrival was named
Countess Spencer , the stock of which was purchased by the late Mr,
Robert Sydenham, of Birmingham, who, in response to persistent re-
quests, distributed it, unfortunately, before it was fixed. Had Countess
Spencer been kept for distribution until it had been grown to come
" true,” possibly many of the heartburnings and regrets of the Sweet
Pea raiser and lover would be unknown.
It was not long after the introduction of Countess Spencer that
other varieties followed, a number of which were " sports,” and others
were derived from crosses with this variety.
At first the stocks sent out gave endless trouble, because they
were unfixed. Mendel’s law of segregation was not then understood,
but the Sweet Pea raiser of to-day has this knowledge to guide him,
so that the introduction of new varieties is an easy although pains-
taking matter. The introduction of Countess Spencer has meant much
to the floral world, and to-day we in Australia give pride of place to
Sweet Peas of Spencer form, a term which denotes the waved standards
and wings; although there is another class, termed the Unwin distinc-
tion. These were introduced by Unwin after the advent of Countess
Spencer. The flowers differ from the Spencer forms in that the
" keel ” is quite closed, as in the old grandiflora types, and the flowers
are not quite so large.
The Americans have done much in connection with the early
flowering varieties, or, as some folk will persist in calling them, winter
flowering Sweet Peas.
It is said that many years ago (1858) a quarryman’s wife in
northern New York saved seeds from a bright-flowering plant of the
old original variety Painted Lady, and for a number of years she
selected the seed until perfecting what became known as Blanche
Ferry, which was introduced by D. M. Ferry & Co., of Detroit, in
1899.
In the trial grounds of this firm it was discovered that some of
the plants flowered much earlier than others, and by careful selection
an extra early flowering strain of this variety was worked up. This
was sent out in 1895, and from this variety ( Blanche Ferry) all the
early flowering Sweet Peas of America have come.
The Rev. Edwyn Arkwright, in his garden at Telemly, in Algeria,
Africa, conducted some experiments with early varieties. These came
about with the appearance of a " sport ” which appeared in the
reverend gentleman’s garden in February of 1900, and from which
the well-known Telemly varieties were subsequently evolved. Mention
must also be made of the early varieties offered in England by Mr.
C. Englemann, of Saffron Waldon, Essex, England. These were
evolved from a " sport ” of Captain of the Blues, a grandiflora variety


BEAUT[?] BOWL OF SWEET PEAS.
which flowered in winter under glass. The class is not known to any
extent in Australia, but was given some prominence as a florist’s flower
in the Old Country.
Mr. Anton C. Zvolanek, of Bound Brook, New Jersey, America,
produced types almost identical with the Telemlys. These were de-
rived from crosses with the grandifloras and the Spencers, and to
Zvolanek belongs the credit of introducing the early flowering Spencers
to America.
To Australia belongs the credit of introducing some of the finest
early flowering sweet peas in existence. In the earlier operations the
grandiflora types were worked upon and Blanche Ferry, Mont Blanc,
and Earliest of All were forbears of some fine productions. It was
with these varieties that Mr. W. R. Sayers, of Neutral Bay, New South
Wales, achieved some splendid results. Mr. Sayers commenced with
the grandifloras, and intended to keep to that type. In looking for
the best of that description a variety containing latent Spencer
"blood” was unknowingly used. As a result subsequent generations
from crosses so made produced early flowering Spencers of no mean
quality.


It was with the introduction of the Yarrawa Spencer in 1908
that the work of the sweet pea raiser in Australia may be said to
have achieved the marvellous success as now witnessed in the latest
Australian productions. To Mr. W. H. Young, of " Yarrawa,”
Summer Hill, Sydney, New South Wales, belongs the honour of
discovering the variety bearing the name of his home. It made its
appearance in the winter of 1904 from among some plants of English
Spencers that were not expected to flower until early summer, the
seed of which had been imported from England.
This newcomer, blooming as it did in the depth of winter, was
recognised as a decided acquisition. Messrs. Arthur Yates and Co., of
Sydney, eventually secured the stock, and some few years later intro-
duced it to the floral world. That Yarrawa has played an important
part in the operations at the nursery of Messrs. Yates and Co., at
" Concord,” New South Wales, and that also of Mr. Hamilton C.
Motte, at Albury, New South Wales, and at " Brookvale,” with Mr.
W. H. Hatcher, and others, is admitted; indeed, the American raisers,
too, have not been slow to recognise its value in their operations.
M M
♦ ♦ ♦> ♦>
Sweet Pea Culture
"Oh! blossom poised for flight, yet resting still.
That butterflies may light, in quivering delight,
fust when they will!”
5r >b H*
Designated as the " Imperial Flower,” the sweet prophecy uttered
by an American clergyman some few years back, concerning the sweet
pea, has been abundantly fulfilled, and " with a ' keel ’ meant to seek
all shores, ' wings ’ that fly across all continents, a * standard ’ friendly
to all nations, with a fragrance like the universal Gospel,” th| present-
day popularity with everyone is well understood.
The creation of the early or winter-flowering varieties brought
about a complete revolution with winter gardening, and for pride of
place the sweet pea now comes an easy first, because if sown early
enough, glorious flowers of all colours can be had right through the
winter.
Planting —In planting, choose a good open situation, where
all the sun and light possible can be had, and for preference have
your rows running north and south, but good results can be obtained
by growing in clumps.
Before planting your seed, be sure the ground is well dug, trench-
ing if you like, but in this direction, unless show blooms are wanted,
there is no necessity to go to extremes, and providing you have gone
a foot to 18in., and worked in plenty of good manure (cow for pre-
ference) , they will do all right. If you decide to trench, take your
sand or soil out to a depth of about 2ft. by 18in. wide. In the bottom
put in all the rotted sweepings of leaves, grass, etc., from your compost
heap, as this provides both humus and drainage. In throwing back
the top soil work in plenty of old manure, but, whatever you do.


THE AUTHOR AND US SWEET PEAS
avoid having your manure in layers, and as you till up the trench,
keep up a thorough incorporation by digging.
If available, work in plenty of slack lime, and when nearing the
top of your trench, work in bonedust.
Don't overcrowd, as each plant, when fully grown, covers several
feet, and at least 9in. to a foot should be given each seed. Place the
seeds about an inch deep, and do not let them come in direct contact
with manure, as the humus will set up decay.
Cover the top soil with a good mulch of litter, and then give
them a good watering, but, to avoid rotting, don’t overdo this; simply
keep them moist.
Opinions differ as to seed nicking, but to ensure good germination
do so. Take your penknife and nick a small piece out of the skin of
the seed, but avoid the base of the seed, carrying the live germ.
Training the Plants —When about 6in. to Sin. high, pinch your
plants back, and repeat this again when at 18in., as this forces the
strength back in the haulm, and sets up a strong, vigorous root action.
The wisdom of the operation soon becomes apparent as your plants


Beautifying
the Home
Cyclone Garden Arches, etc.
improve any home.
4ft x 3ft
Fig. 170, 3ft Opening Fig. 229, 3 t Opening Fig. 161, 3ft Opening
4-1 /- 23/- 18/6
CYCLONE Catches are simple and sure in
action.
CYCLONE Hinges — efficient.
Send lor Catalogue—lt Is FREE
The Cyclone Fence Co.
114 Murray Street, Perth
begin to stool out. Allow no side shoots to grow lower than a foot
from the ground; this policy allows for freedom of hoeing and cultiva-
tion, and gives all the sunlight possible. It is necessary, of course,
to stake and tie up the plants securely, and do not make the mistake
of forcing your plants, for remember they have to go right through
the wet months, and forced, sappy growth is no good in resisting cold
winds and rain.
Staking —The permanent staking may consist of wire netting or
bushy stakes. The netting should be 6ft. high, and of wide mesh.
The lower edge should be a foot from the ground, so that cultivation
may be easily done. The end posts for the netting should be firmly
erected and stayed, and "droppers” fixed about every 15ft.
The young plants should be conducted to the netting by a stick
to each, and as they climb, should be tied at intervals with cheap
twine or raffia.
Important —In order to prevent the possibility of disease, it is
not advisable to grow sweet peas in the same ground for two seasons
in succession. For the same reason, a heavy dressing of lime is strongly
recommended, but this should not be put on within three weeks of
the application of manure. Material for staking which has been used
previously, should be sprayed with strong Bordeaux or lime-sulphur
mixture. Weak sprayings of this, if used early, will also Combat mildew
on the growing plants.


PART III
CONTENTS
Sundry Scintillations
Annuals, Biennials and Perennials: Brief
Classification
Annuals and Perennials: Seed Sowing
Aquilegia Hunnemania
Amaranthus Iceland Poppy
Alyssum Kochia
Antirrhinums Larkspurs
Ageratum Leptosyne
Asters Lupins
Balsam Linaria
Beilis Perennis Marigolds
Calendula Mignonette
Cosmos Nemesia
Cineraria Nemophila
Clarkias Nigella
Calliopsis Pansy
Carnation Penstemon
Coreopsis Petunia
Cyclamen Phlox
Celosia Rudbeckias
Cockscomb Shirley Poppy
Candytuft Pyrethrum
Clianthus Primula
Coleus Salpiglossis
Dimorphotheca Salvias
Delphiniums Scabious
Dianthus Schizanthus
Eschscholtzia Stocks
Fuchsias Sweet Sultans
Godetias Verbenas
Gaillardias Violas
Gerberas Wallflowers
Gypsophila Zinnias


The Westral Seed Co.
Seed Specialists
Merchants and Importers
♦
195 WILLIAM STREET, PERTH
Tel. 82083 Western Australia Tel. 82083
God
Jen
Thank
7
•f
small
"Thank God for a garden,
Be it ever so small.”
FLOWER SEEDS
VEGETABLE SEEDS
AGRICULTURAL SEEDS
We stock Seeds that grow; Manures for their growing; Insecti-
cides, etc., to keep a crop healthy.
We sell at the lowest possible prices.
All orders, whether small or large, receive the same prompt
attention.
A trial order will convince you.
Our Catalogue, with full directions what and when to sow, will
be forwarded post free on application to —
The Manager,
WESTRAL SEED CO.
195 William Street, Perth,
Western Australia.
Cable Address : " MUNKEN.”
A.B.C. Code, sth Edition.


SUNDRY SCINTILLATIONS
Every gardener strives to pierce the veil which Nature draws over
her secrets. Frequently he attempts to improve on Nature’s methods,
and frequently he fails.
Nature’s charm is simplicity, and the grace of simplicity enhances
beauty.
To own a bit of ground, to scratch it with a hoe, to plant seeds
and watch renewal of life, is the commonest delight of all, and a
most satisfactory thing one can do.
The meanest flower that blows can give thoughts that often lie
too deep for tears.
ANNUALS, BIENNIALS AND PERENNIALS
There are three classes of flowers: Annuals, Biennials, and Peren-
nials, each section claiming its admirers. For the novice, the gardener
of limited means, or for the owner of the new and as yet rather bare
looking villa plot, annuals can be recommended as the cheapest,
showiest, and most easily grown of all flowering plants. Given proper
treatment, they will equal, and even surpass, in brilliance and length
of flowering season the choicest of the bedding border perennials and
tender plants.
Hardy Annuals include Clarkia, Candytuft, Calendula, Centaurea
(Cornflower), Annual Chrysanthemums, Dianthus, Eschscholtzia, Go-
detia, Alyssum, Calliopsis, Collinsia, Lobelia, Lupins, Leptosyne, Stocks,
Scabious, Poppy, Sweet Peas, Cosmos, Schizanthus, and Virginian
Stocks.
Half-hardy Annuals. —Some of the most effective in this class are
Asters, Amaranthus, Celosia, Cockscomb, Balsam, Phlox, Petunia,
Salpiglossis, and Zinnia. Most of these cannot endure frosts and are
generally planted for summer flowering.
Biennials and Perennials are classes which do not flower the same
year they are sown, and include Anchusa, Aquilegia, Chrysanthemum,
Delphinium, Gaillardia, Penstemon, Hollyhocks, Sweet William, and
Wallflower.
The Herbaceous Perennials are very beautiful, and are those
plants which die down each year and re-establish themselves in the
spring.
It is not always advisable to leave the perennials in the same place
year after year, as the soil not only becomes exhausted, but the growth
becomes weak and the flowers poorer. This also applies to the Chrys-
anthemums, especially the singles; but before these are cut back mark
the colours and names of each variety, so that when planting time


comes in the spring you will know the ones valued most. Where such
plants are in the way, there is no reason why they should not be
moved. With the Chrysanthemums it is well to wait until about July
before breaking up the clumps, so if a bed is made somewhere at the
back of the house out of sight, preferably in a sunny position, the
plants, with a clump of earth, can be taken up, transferred and left
alone until the spring. As many of the perennials can be divided, it
is not necessary to keep more than an odd clump or two, unless a
great number of plants is required for transplanting. By removing
the plants that are summer flowering varieties, the vacant spaces can
always be used for the spring flowering subjects, and the front beds
thus kept tidy.
ANNUALS AND PERENNIALS
A number of gardeners, while successful in other operations, fail
in the raising of fine seed such as Petunias, Iceland Poppies, Cinerarias,
etc., because more often than not the seeds are treated in the wrong
manner. Often they are covered with a layer of soil or the watering
is carelessly performed. The best plan is to sow the seed in pans or
shallow seed boxes which have been partially immersed in water after
the surplus moisture has drained away. A little fine sand may be
sprinkled over the surface after sowing, but this should only be a very
thin covering. When done thoroughly, the moisture in the soil should
be sufficient to ensure germination. A sheet of glass should cover the
pan or box and overhead watering avoided if possible until the seeds
are through. From then on watering should be done by carefully
lowering the pan into a tub of water. This should not be submerged,
but held sufficiently deep for the moisture to find its way to the
surface. It is a common fault either to sow too thickly or thin
out the plants insufficiently, as when overcrowded they can neither
develop or flower to perfection.
AQUILEGIA
What is to-day known as the Aquilegia was years ago commonly
called the Columbine, and few gardens were complete without them.
The days of the old flower are, however, gone. While we still have
Columbines, they are now referred to as Aquilegias, because of the
great improvement that has taken place.
Grown under heavy soil conditions, the Aquilegia is a perennial,
but it has been proved that young plants planted annually give better
blooms. Although it is possible by division of the old roots to obtain
an increase of stock, it is better to resort to seed sowing each year,
and to look for the best blooms in their second year. Seed sown in


September, October and November will be certain to produce plants
that will bloom the following spring, but it is sometimes possible to
obtain flowers from sowing in February. Seeds may be sown in pans,
boxes or seed beds, and when the tiny plants are fit to handle they
should be transferred to other boxes or beds and placed out about two
inches apart. Afterwards, when strong enough, they should be placed
out into the open beds, where they can take care of themselves. The
plants enjoy good food, and it is scarcely possible to overdo the manur-
ing, so in making up the beds use plenty of manure, cow for prefer-
ence. A little bonedust may also be added with advantage. Aquilegias
adapt themselves to almost any soil, but if some leaf mould or old
mortar can be worked in, so much the better. When flowering time
is approaching, a good mulch of half-decayed stable manure will help
to larger flowers, while it will also conserve the moisture. Special
beds are preferable for the plant, but where this is not possible, their
delightful foliage, apart from the choice blooms, add a charm to the
mixed border.
AMARANTHUS
The Amaranthus embraces a large variety and makes a fine
summer show. The plants are half-hardy and useful for many loca-
tions, while on account of their tall growth they are well adapted for
backgrounds to the flower beds or borders. The Tricolour Splendem
is the best variety to grow, because of its beautiful variegated foliage;
but for a garden effect, if a few of the bicolours, with their darker
foliage, are placed here and there a pleasing result will be obtained.
Amaranthus are best grown in moderately rich soil, and if provided
with too much nourishment fail to develop their bright colours. When
the seedlings are about an inch high they should be pricked off and
later placed out in the permanent bed, about a foot to eighteen inches
apart. Sow seeds during spring and summer.
ALYSSUM
The sweet Alyssum with its small trusses of white flowers in
quaint profusion is an excellent little plant for the borders. Seed
should be sown during the spring and autumn. Hardy and fragrant,
it flowers well throughout the summer.
ANTIRRHINUMS
These hardy showy plants are best raised in seedbeds, and trans-
planted out a foot apart. Like the Larkspurs, they dislike a well-
manured soil, as in a rich soil they are likely to get collar rot, especially!


if heavily watered. Antirrhinums that fail arc generally those killed
by manures. Give them a little bonedust, but keep stable and cow
manures out of the borders where you wish them to grow.
A bed manured during the previous year for another crop is quite
suitable, but add nothing more when planting out. There are some
fine varieties, especially the intermediate section, which produce plants
18in. to 2ft. high. Some of the best sorts are Vesuuus (flame and
pink), Rose Dare (bright rose pink), fascination (pale pink), The
Bride (pure white), Maize Queen (maize, shaded pink), Yellow Queen
(bright yellow), and The Fawn (buff shaded with pink). Grown
separately, some splendid contrasts can be secured, but good effects
can be had by massing the pinks and the whites, and growing the
orange, yellow and flame colours together.
AGERATUM
Ageratums are very useful plants for large beds, and, being of a
bluish lavender colour, have not many rivals. They are easily man-
aged and not over-particular about soils. Sow seed in spring and
autumn.
ASTERS
Asters should b e
sown fairly early in
order to produce large
sturdy plants. If sown
late the plants do not
develop enough, and
unless they are strong
they will not bear the
quantity of blooms
they should. The best
strain for the garden
is the Giant Crego,
which grows to a
height of nearly two
feet and produces a
fine crop of blossoms
on long strong stems.
The flowers are double
and have narrow rib-
bon-like petals, which
give them a graceful
appearance. Asters
prefer a well-worked


richly manured soil, and should be planted about a foot apart, so that
the plants have room to develop. They always look best when mixed,
as the colours never seem to clash, but exquisite effects can be obtained
by massing them in separate colours. The Ostrich Plume and Giant
Cornet varieties are also good, and if blooms are required for exhibition
the quilled sorts should be chosen. For autumn decoration there is a
late .variety known as the late American branching strain, which is
quite satisfactory. Seed should be sown in the spring for a summer
display.
BALSAM
Like the Cosmos, the Balsams give far better results when sown
late, and seed put in any time from November until the end of Dec-
ember will produce better plants and finer blossoms.
If the seed is
sown earlier the
plants start t o
flower in the hot
blooms are very
apt to get scorch-
ed, whereas i f
they come later
the cooler nights
help them to de-
velop slowly, and
you get larger
plants and far
finer blossoms.
They can be
grown with great
success in the
glasshouse, one
plant being placed
in a s in. pot. The
seeds can be sown
in the seedbed and
the plants trans-
planted Ift apart
or the seeds planted direct into the bed where you wish the plants to
grow. The seeds, being of fair size, are easily handled and should be
planted separately 6in. apart, to allow for misses. If they all come up,
then some can be thinned out to leave the plants Ift. apart. Choose
a moderately heavy soil and a sunny location, and when in full bloom
give plenty of water. The symmetrical, well-branched plants are
covered with lovely double blooms.


\
ir-z
I
$
That tiny
That tender, young shoot reaching
out for the warmth of the sun that
is the leaf we take for Bushells Blue
Label Tea.
If left on the plant for another day or
so it would grow as coarse as all the
other leaves. But it is plucked before
the tropical sun has time to spoil the
flavor or scorch any of it away.
Therein lies the essential difference
between Blue Label and ordinary tea.
Therein lies the secret of its delicious
flavor, and its wonderful economy in use.
n
&
Over two hundred cups
to the pound—which
means seven big cups
of delicious tea for less
than one penny.


BELLIS PERENNIS
This charm-
ing large flow-
e red English
Daisy i n its
pink and white
shades is an
ideal border
plant for mas-
sing effect. It
is very hardy,
comes up read-
ily from seed,
a n d makes a
good show
throughout the
winter. The
Monstrosa va-
riety is best.
Sow seed from February until April in seed boxes, and transplant
out to about 6in. apart. Blooming right through the winter months,
the plants clothe themselves with a mass of blossoms almost as large
as white Asters.
CALENDULA
The Calendula is a hardy annual most suitable for garden decora-
tion throughout the winter, and valuable also as a cut flower for
inside. The seed may be sown in the autumn (the earlier the better),
so that the seedlings, when planted out, are well advanced before the
cold weather sets in. The plants do best in an ordinary good garden
loam, but respond quickly to liquid manure given during the flowering
period. There is a number of varieties, and a few of the good ones
are Echinos, which produce large double flowers of a rich cream,
striped with yellow, and excellent for cutting. Galta, a large double
with striking of a creamy white striped with orange, is very showy.
Larnae, the plants of which attain a height of about 18 inches, and
produce large double dark orange blooms, is ideal for bedding pur-
poses.
COSMOS
Although these showy, half-hardy annuals thrive in almost any
situation, probably the most suitable spot for their culture is in shelt-
ered corners. They are shallow rooting, and if planted in open and
exposed positions will require to be carefully staked. In corners this


is not so essential, and
it is just as well not to
provide them with any
support. Cosmos are
usually sown in four
colours — white, pink,
crimson, and yellow —
but of late years inter-
mediate shades and new
forms, in the shape of
doubles, have proved at-
tractive. In the com-
mon Cosmos the whites,
pinks a n d crimsons,
have a yellow disc, but
in the dark red species
the disc or button is red
also. Another variety
is the Klondyke, with
showy orange flowers.
Sandy loam is suitable,
but they are not too
particular as to soils.
Seed sown early in
spring will give flowers throughout the summer
CINERARIA
Cinerarias are
are among the
finest of flow-
ering plants—
useful for table
and inside
decorations
while they also
make a good
outside show.
The seed is
small and
should be sown
on the surface
of soil, pressed
into pots or
boxes and then
dusted over
lightly with
sand o r fine
soil, and in the
usual way be


covered with a piece of glass or paper until the seedlings appear. Prick-
ing off is not necessary, the seedlings being transferred when the second
leaves appear direct into small pots. The best soil for potting is a
mixture of loam, sand, and leaf mould, and, if procurable, a small
quantity of peat; but this mixture must not be over-rich, or more
leaves than flowers will result. On the other hand, the plants will not
do well if starved, for the Cineraria is a quick grower and a gross
feeder. The young plants need to be set low in the soil, but the
hearts must not be covered; and they can remain in the potting stage
until large enough to be transferred to the open bed, when hardy
treatment is called for from thence onwards.
CLARKIAS
Clarkias are extremely showy in the garden, and particularly valu-
able for house and table decoration, as the blooms are readily adapted
to artistic arrangement. Unless the work is carried out in moist
weather, and when the seedlings are very small, Clarkias do not trans-
plant readily, and the best results will be obtained from sowing seeds
where the plants are to remain, thinning out from six to eight inches
apart. A medium rich soil gives the best results, as too much fertiliser
makes large soft plants and little bloom. Clarkias are liable to damage
from heavy winds, and for protection the plants must be well staked.
Abundance of water is necessary in dry weather and an occasional
application of very weak liquid manure may be given every fortnight
until the plants are in full bloom, but be careful not to overdo the
manure.
CALLIOPSIS
This is one of the finest bloomers we have. It is half-hardy, of
quick growth, and does well in almost any location. The brightly
coloured star-like blooms are borne on stems of good length, and,
being graceful and showy, are particularly useful for cut flowers.
Exceedingly hardy, the Calliopsis is capital for bedding. Sow
seeds in autumn or spring.
CARNATION
Marguerites are well worth growing, especially in the mass, and
while the individual flowers cannot be classed with the perpetual
varieties, the sweet clove-scented perfume makes them indispensable
for cutting. They can be sown as an edging and thinned out to about
4in. apart, or can be massed in beds by themselves. Marguerites flower


in four to six months from sowing, but arc generally regarded as
perennials. The Dianthus, which is one of the Marguerite family,
should be sown in patches where they are to remain. Altogether, there
are about a dozen distinct varieties of the Marguerites, all fine flowering
and prettily marked, the least of which is by no means the old and
popular double Indian Pinks.
COREOPSIS
A biennial that gives a delightful touch to the garden, and is
most valuable as a fine producer of decorative cut flowers, is the
Coreopsis grandiflora. The sheaves of its flowers used by the florists
testify to its usefulness. The Coreopsis is often called a perennial,
and also may be grown as an annual, but as the plants flower freely
they soon run out, and it is best to raise new stock every year. Easily
grown and quite hardy, the seeds can be sown in drills outside. When
large enough to handle, the seedlings should be pricked off, and when
placed in their flowering positions the plants should be spaced about
fifteen inches apart.
CYCLAMEN
Cyclamens are not as extensively grown as they deserve for bush-
house and indoor decorations. The blooms are freely produced during
the winter and spring, while the beautiful mottled foliage has dis-
tinctive charm. Plants coming into bloom should be regularly supplied
with weak liquid manure, but care is needed in applying this, for if
poured into the centre of
the plant many of the
young flower buds will rot.
Decaying leaf stalks and
flower buds should be
regularly removed, as, if
allowed to fall over fresh
buds or blooms, they
quickly disfigure them.
For use as cut flowers, the
stalk should be pulled
right out from the corm,
and not cut.
CHOSIA
The Celosia, which are
really feathered plumed
Cockscombs, are especially
suitable for Perth’s climate


as a summer display. Not only are they handsome garden subjects,
but last in bloom almost longer than any of the other summer flowers.
They are to be had in almost every shade—white, cream, scarlet,
bronze, and copper shades. They should be sown in November in the
open seed bed and transplanted eighteen inches apart whenever a
favourable opportunity arises. With the Celosia the centre of the
plant should never be nipped out, as the finest spikes of bloom come
from the centre of the plant.
COCKSCOMB
i e ol d- f ashio ned
of the seed.
Planted as a border or edging, the Cockscomb gives quite an attractive
appearance to the summer garden.
CANDYTUFT
A hardy annual growing from 6 to 1 8 inches in height, according
to variety. The blossoms are borne on variously long spikes, and the
newer varieties are quite large flowering and very fragrant. Of easy
culture and valuable for cut flowers; fine effects are obtained by
massing or edgings in borders. The whole of this pretty family are
well worth a place in the garden, the crimson and white varieties
being exceedingly showy. They bloom in great profusion.
CLIANTHUS
CUanthus Dam pier i —Sturt’s Desert Pea, as it is more commonly
known —with its brilliant scarlet and black flowers, is one of the most
magnificent native flowers in cultivation. While not hard to grow


with the average good gardener, there are, however, certain little
peculiarities regarding seed raising that must be understood. Seed
must be sown where the plants are to remain, as it is not easily trans-
planted, and any interference with the roots at all is fatal.
While the seed retains its germinating powers for several years,
best results are obtained from freshly gathered seed. In warm districts
seed may be sown in early autumn or late spring, but as a general rule
September is best. It is best to try and follow the natural character-
istics of the plant as far as possible; that is, by selecting sandy soil and
avoiding manures of any kind, especially the artificial fertilisers, as
these are all against success. This is general with native seeds of any
kind. Germination is facilitated and increased by soaking the seed
in warm water prior to sowing. Seed must be sown where the plants
are to remain.
COLEUS
The best time to sow is September or October, but the earlier
the better. The seed should be sown in pans or boxes in prepared soil
—equal parts of leaf mould, loam and sand, which should be nice and
moist at planting. Germination is generally free, but the seeds should
be thinly distributed and lightly covered. If the soil is not allowed
to become dry and shading is attended to, the young plants soon make
their appearance, but many young plants are lost by over-watering,
which causes them to damp off. Pricking off the youngsters is gener-
ally a difficult operation, and care must be taken not to squeeze the
young plants, which are succulent, or they will die off. After pricking
off, water must be given sparingly, and a light spray once or twice a
day is sufficient. As they grow they can be moved out into larger
pots, the potting material of which can consist of well-rotted cow
manure and sand. Once established, the plants grow quickly and can
be used for single specimens or for bedding out.
DIMORPHOTHECA
The African Marguerite Daisy, called by an unpronounceable
name Dimorphotheca, is a great favourite on account of its handsome
golden flowers with black zones at the base of the petals. The plants
grow from 12 to 15 inches high, with flowers measuring 2\ inches
across. This plant does well in dry situations, and for that reason is
valued where little water or attention can be given to its cultivation.


Of late considerable
improvement has
been made by the
production of choice
hybrids, the shades
of which run from
the purest white to
sulphur lemon,
bright golden yellow
and bright orange
shading faintly to
salmon rose. For
borders or bedding
effects, because of its
hardiness, it is most
suitable for our
climatic conditions,
and is one of the
dwarf bedding sub-
jects that is made
full use of by the
municipal gardeners
throughout Austra-
lia. Seed should be
sown in boxes, the
seedlings pricked off
and placed into per-
manent beds when
large enough t o
handle.
DELPHINIUMS
As permanent subjects in the hardy flower garden we have few
plants more worthy of special attention than the Delphiniums. For
producing a striking display over a long season they are probably
unique. For general effect in groups or beds they are extremely valu-
able as a whole, but one is easily carried away on closer inspection by
the exquisite beauty of their flowers, particularly those with clear
sky-blue shades. Indeed, they have many points of excellence, any
one of which alone should entitle them to popularity.
If seed is sown during the autumn plants will be produced that
are strong and sturdy for planting out during the spring, and the
best time for planting out is August or September. The semi-tall or
intermediate Delphiniums are fairly easy to grow, and do not require
staking like the taller varieties. The giant hybrids should also be


sown at the same time, in order to secure good crowns for the spring
planting, and plants raised in the autumn are better than those raised
from seed in the spring. In growing Delphiniums from seed always
procure perfectly fresh seed from a reliable source, and do not begrudge
paying a good
price for it,
because seed
that is in any
way old will
not germinate.
Prepare boxes
for sowing in
the following
manner: Bore
plenty of holes
in the bottom,
covering them
with a layer of
small stones;
then place a
layer o f fine
rubble on the
stones. Put
some good or-
dinary garden
soil through a
|-inch sieve,
and fill the box
to within one
inch of the
top. Press this
down firmly
and sow the
seed thinly.
Water well.
Shade until the
seed germin-
ates and gradually harden off the plants by exposure to the sun a little
longer every day. In about six weeks’ time the seedlings ought to be
strong enough to prick off, and when ready to go into their permanent
positions see that the bed is well dug and receives a liberal supply of
old and well-rotted manure. Plant the seedlings out to a foot apart
each way.
Delphiniums flower the same year from seed, but it is necessary
to sow early, so that the plants are well established before the cold
weather sets in.
For massed bedding effects nothing perhaps is more striking than
the Tom Thumb and Blue Butterfly varieties. The dainty spikes of
Cambridge blue, ultramarine, sky, and indigo lend themselves admir


ably for inside artistic decorative arrangement. Where a bed of blue
flowers is desired, nothing equals the Delphinium.
DIANTHUS
The different varieties
of this magnificent tribe
adapt themselves particu-
larly well to our climate,
and bloom nearly the en-
tire season. Quite hardy,
the Heddiwtgi strain are
beautiful in their markings
and are ideal for gay bed-
ding effects. Seed can be
sown in either autumn or
spring.
ESCHSCHOLTZIA
This is one of the most beautiful of the Californian annuals, and
is excellent for garden decoration, as well as for bordering. The plants,
which grow to about eighteen inches high, have handsome foliage, and
the blooms, owing to their facility in lending themselves to artistic
arrangement, are particularly useful for table and house decoration.
It requires plenty of space, and will thrive in any ordinary soil. Sow
the seed either in autumn, March or April, or spring, where the plants
are to remain, thinning out the seedlings to from eight to ten inches
apart.
Eschscholtzia require a well-drained good loamy garden soil, are
quite hardy, and the plants are not affected by cold weather. There
are a number of varieties, all of which are good, but the following
can be recommended:— Sensation, which the name truly describes, is
one of the brightest; the plants grow very erect and the blooms are
a rich deep scarlet. Fairy Quern, with the outer side or back of the
petals an intense cochineal carmine shade, and the sides creamy white,
is a striking and distinct combination in colours; while Masterpiece,
Mandarin and Rose Queen are all distinct but beautiful in their
markings.
FUCHSIAS
Fuchsias are favourites with all, and few plants yield a better
return for the labour expended upon them. If it is desired to increase
the stock of the varieties grown it can easily be done by taking
cuttings of the young shoots when they have advanced two or three
inches, inserting them in light loam. Cuttings may be taken off


'
iiiiiimiiiiiiiiMimiinmimiiimmiinmiiiimiimiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii/iiiiiiiiiiiitiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiniii)iiiimiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiMiii<Miiiiim<
Reliability and Dependability Always at BAIRDS
YATES’
Reliable
SEEDS
I For the
| Home Garden
1 Market Garden
i and Farm
Give Best Results and Cost You no |
More I I
THE steady growth of Yates' Seed Business is proof of the |
satisfactory growth of Yates' Seeds and Plants. Reliable |
because only tested seeds giving a high germination per- |
centage are sold, and all seeds are thoroughly tested by experts |
in the germination houses. MAKING YATES' A NAME 1
TO CONJURE WITH. The Season's Date is on every _ |
packet of Yates' Reliable Seed and at the end of the season |
all unsold packets are destroyed. i
Yates 7 Choice Strains of Flower Seeds for the |
Garden Beautiful and Horticultural Shows ! I
Collection of FLOWER SEEDS Especially for Children =
Six small packets of assorted Hardy Flowers, Yates' Selection, 1 - |
Twelve small packets of assorted Hardy Flowers, Yates' Selection 21- =
Nurserymen and all Flower Growers get best results |
with Yates’ Reliable Flower Seeds I
YATES’ RELIABLE VEGETABLE SEEDS
15 varieties of Peas, 24 of Beans, 8 =
of Carrots, 12 of Cucumber, 9 of =
Lettuce, 75 Melons and Pumpkins, 3 =
Rhubarb, also Spinach, Brussels =
Sprouts, Sweetcorn, Psanuts. Parsley =
Thyme, Sage, Herbs, Tobacco. =
Market Gardeners can obtain their requirements |
at the very finest prices. |
The BAIRDS CO.'s growth of Seed Sales is eloquent TESTIMONY of =
the Quality of YATES' Reliable Seeds which are |
household words in the Commonwealth. =
The Bairds Co. Ltd. Perth Kalgoorlie & Boulder |
tO varieties of Cauliflower, 20 of
Cabbage, 8 of Turnips, 20 of Tomato,
5 of Celery, 18 of Onions, 2 of Pars-
nips, 6 of Radish, also Leek, Egg
Plant, Mustard Plant.
liiHiiiiiimMiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiMiiiMiiMiiimimmuiiniiiMiiiimimiiimiiiiiiiiiiiiimiMniiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiimiimiiiiiiimiiiiiiimiij:
i ii 1 11 1 m m i ini 11 j m im i nn t n 1 11 11 11 m 11 j 11 1 ii 11) 11 m ii i ij m in (i in 11 in 11) m iii 11, tin 1


nearly all through the year, but the autumn is the most favourable
time. They should be strong young shoots about 2in. long, with three
or four joints. Take off the two lower leaves, cut clean across a joint,
and insert them an inch deep either in soil or sand.
When the flowering season of the Fuchsia grown in pots is ended
remove them from the shadehouse or greenhouse into a sheltered well-
lighted situation in the open garden. The object is to ripen the wood.
Probably the best time for this operation is late summer, as, once the
plants are in flower, they should be kept going with weak doses of
liquid manure. The Fuchsia is a hardy plant, which responds to
protection from hot and east winds, and revels in the atmosphere of
the seashore. It will strike readily from cuttings, but never cut down
and shift plants at the one operation. After cutting down, allow the
plants to grow two or three inches. Plants that have been cut fairly
hard back should be allowed to make plenty of good fresh growths
before being disturbed. When re-potting use a smaller pot than that
in which the plant has been growing, carefully packing down the old
soil to a ball and roots. They can be given a second shift into larger
pots later without interference beyond the removal of loose drainage
material. A suitable compost for the Fuchsias can be prepared by
mixing two parts of turfy loam and one part'of peat, with a sprinkling
of bonedust and crushed charcoal.
GODETIAS
Godetias, or, as they
are sometimes called, An-
nual Azaleas, are showy
and free flowering plants.
There is nothing new
about them, and it is
only necessary to see a
massed bed to appreciate
their worth. In a loca-
tion where it is not ex-
cessively hot they make
a magnificent summer
display with their bright
flowers in rose, carmine,
pink, lavender and white.
Godetias are well suited
for growing in semi-
shade and are excellent
for decorative work.
Sow the seed either di-
rect into the bed or in
boxes and transplant.
spacing the plants out to about 12 inches apart.


GAILLARDIAS
What are the merits of
the Gaillardia—or, rather,
what are they not? The
plant is thoroughly hardv,
of tidy growth if properly
staked, and the flowers ap-
p e a r i n g in succession,
numbers at a time, are of
brilliant amber orange and
crimson colours. Where
flowers are wanted in
quantity for cutting, no-
thing more profitable can
be grown, while for shape
and inside decorative work
they are simple enough to
satisfy the artistic taste;
and not only can they be
gracefully arranged, but
they remain fresh for a
long while and open their buds in water. Where good varieties have
ben obtained and the plants are now old and ragged-looking, fresh
plants can be had by layering, which is more satisfactory than cuttings.
The stems should be bent and pegged down into the soil, and they
will proceed at once to send out roots, and when firmly established
can easily be removed to permanent quarters. A few Gaillardias
gladden the garden.
[?]
GERBERAS
Gerberas have most aptly been describ-
ed as the "Aristocrats of the Flower
Garden,” and for daintiness and decora-
tive effect they have few equals. The
cut flowers last for days in water, and
the long-stemmed, marguerite-like blooms
are extremely appealing when employed
for indoor adornment.
During recent years flower lovers have
paid more attention to the Gerbera, or,
as the)- are often called, the Barberton
Daisy, but the plants are not grown as
extensively as they might be. The original
Gerbera is that known as Jamesoni, a
scarlet, which is still worth growing, but


the hybrids derived therefrom are far in advance as regards colours.
Particularly hardy, the plants are warm country lovers, but suffer from
frosts. Fresh seed is essential to success, and this should be sown soon
after gathering. Seed should be sown in a box of sandy soil with the
point of the seed downwards and the fringed part just peeping through
the soil. A piece of glass whitewashed on one side should protect the
seed until it germinates; then it should be transferred to beds, the
soil of which should be fairly rich, in a well-drained sunny position.
A vase of Gerbera well arranged, with their own foliage, upon a dining
table is certainly a very beautiful decoration, and, what is more, they
last for days in water.
GYPSOPHILA
The Gypsophila is a quick-growing small annual with myriads
of small, open, bell-shaped flowers, borne in great profusion. It does
well almost anywhere in an open situation, and is much esteemed for
bunching with other flowers, as it adds grace and lightness to the
bunch. The plants grow 10 to 15 inches high, and can be grown
fairly close together, so as to give a massed effect.
HUNNEMANIA
Every flow-
lover appreci-
ates the Iceland
Poppy, and it
is safe to say
that this poppy
variety is the
most popular
of all winter
flowers, for
anyone can
grow it, and
one may go on
picking the
blooms for
months.
This plant,
often called
the Perennial
Eschscholtzia,
is almost as re-
fined a s the
Iceland Poppy.


Truly, there is only one shade and that yellow, but it is most pleasing,
and the fact that the plant is a perennial and flowers freely is sufficient
recommendation for its growing. The foliage is also pleasing, being
a silvery green and fringed, and, apart from the flowers, the plant is
ornamental. Hunnemannia does not transplant very well, so sowings
of seed must be made where the plants are to flower. If the seed does
not germinate easily—and in this respect it is like other seed that does
not germinate well—a good plan is to soak it in warm water for an
hour or so before planting. A rich friable soil and plenty of moisture
during the dry weather are required.
ICELAND POPPY
Of all the flowers that have jumped to the front of recent years,
nothing equals the Iceland Poppy, which is easily the most charming
of all our winter bedding subjects. Grown extensively for cut pur-
poses, it has no equal with the florists and for inside decoration, the
harmonising shades of the tangos, yellows and pale pinks being beauti-
ful in the extreme.
When preparing a bed for Icelands, be sure to work in plenty of
lime, as this encourages good growth. In planting out choose a sunny
warm spot, and
one that will give
all the sunlight
possible through
the winter; at the
same time avoid
over- crowding.
Plants should be
spaced out 9 in.
apart, as they re-
quire room to de-
velop. There is
nothing more
striking than a
bed o f Iceland
Poppies, especially
in one colour,
tangerine, while
some charming
shades of pink are
provided from the
Coonara strain.
These, however,
are not quite as
large as the Sun-
b e a m variety,
which are dainty
and most bcauti


ful under artificial light. Iceland Poppies appreciate plenty of manure,
and, if the plants are given a weak solution of sulphate of ammonia
as soon as they are established they will grow quickly and soon produce
flowers.
KOCHIA TRICOPHYLLA
Along with the Amaranthus, the Kochia, or better known as
Summer Cypress or Burning Bush, always gives satisfaction. It is very
quick growing, branches freely, and is perfectly round in shape; while
the feathery green foliage changes to crimson in the autumn. Raise
the plants from seed sown in beds or boxes and plant them out to
about 20 to 30 inches apart.
LARKSPURS
The Larkspurs have improved out of all knowledge during the
last few years, and with many are becoming popular for the reasons
that when most of the spring annuals are over the Larkspurs come
into full bloom and give a glorious display right on until November,
and even later if the season is a moderately mild one. Many gardeners
fail to grow Larkspurs successfully, which is probably due to mis-
understandings, and it is a mistake to transplant them, as the best
results are obtained when the seed is sown direct into the bed. Plants
that are moved not only weaken, but are subject to collar rot, and
this more often than not explains many failures. Another thing the
Larkspur does not appreciate is soil that has been too heavily manured,
and here again is another reason for failure. The seed should be sown
during April, so that the plants will become well established before
the coldest part of winter sets in. There are a grand lot of varieties to
choose from, which include amethyst, lilac, deep violet, rosy scarlet,
and white, which are all double.
LEPTOSYNE
Leptosyne is one of our good hardy lemon-yellow flowers, carried
on long stalks, which make it effective as a border plant and valuable
as a cut flower. Sow seed during autumn and give the plants plenty
of room.
LUPINS
The Lupins are a handsome family of hardy plants that do well
through the winter. Free flowering, as border plants they make an
effective display and give a great variety of colour. The annual
Lupins are dwarf growing, most of them attaining to the height of


two feet, although the variety Nanus , a beautiful little plant giving
blue and white flowers, does not grow over a foot in height. The
variety known as Pink Pearl has become very popular because it lends
itself so admirably for decorative work. The annual varieties make
a fine show when grown in masses in beds. The seed may be sown in
the autumn and again in early spring. Improved as they have been of
late years, dark blues, scarlets, yellows, and dark reds—all worth
growing—can be had.
LIN ARIA
Charming free-flowering hardy annuals, particularly effective for
beds or borders; flowers somewhat resemble miniature Snapdragons.
They thrive well in hot dry situations such as rockeries or dry borders
exposed to the sun. The best time to sow the seed is in the autumn.
Flowers are on open heads with long upright stems; this makes the
flowers show up well and gives the beds a fine appearance. The
colours are charming, including shades of blue, heliotrope, violet,
yellow, cream, pink, and white. The seeds can be sown where you
wish the plants to grow, or they can be raised in seed boxes and
transplanted. What the Phlox gives us in summer, the Linaria will
do in winter.
MARIGOLDS
For summer flowering, both the French and African Marigolds
are most useful. Seed should be sown in pans or boxes under glass or
shade in fine sandy soil. The seed germinates quickly, and when large
enough can be transplanted. The African variety requires more room
than the French, and it is a good plan to plant them out in bunches
of five or six plants together. As a rule, more than half the plants
will bear single flowers, no matter how good a strain of seed is used.
The flowers of the French variety are prettily marked, and, as
they last a long time in water when cut, are useful as cut flowers.
They succeed best when grown in rather poor soil, but liberal supplies
of water should be given in dry weather. The variety Signata Pumila,
with its fern-like foliage, is compact in habit and is useful for edgings,
and in the late summer or autumn is covered with flowers of various
shades of yellow.
MIGNONETTE
Mignonette, the delightful sweet-scented annual, is one of the
old-world flowers which is always welcomed. It makes an excellent
pot or window box plant, and does well in the open if the situation
is suitable. Seed should be sown in the pots or boxes in which the


plants are intended to flower, and careful attention must be paid to
watering in the early stages of growth. The most suitable compost is
loam of fair quality, mixed with old mortar or lime rubbish. The
soil should be fairly well firmed, but not rammed tight, though it must
on no account be on the loose side. Five or six inch pots will be big
enough to grow plants that will give a good return of flowers. When
the seedlings are a fair size, thin out the plants to five or six, and as
the pots or boxes are well filled with roots give liberal supplies of
liquid manure. Mignonette is not at all partial to some of the forcing
artificial manures, and these should be avoided, more especially sulphate
of ammonia.
NEMESIA
The Nemesia, a native ot South Africa, deserves to be grown
extensively in our suburban gardens, because it does so well with us
during the winter months. The Nemesia is a beautiful annual, and
when the seed is
sown early and
the plants well
established before
the winter cold
sets in, it makes
a glorious show-
ing. N e m e s i a
plants are some-
what dwarf, gen-
erally reaching to
about 12 or 15
inches, and at
flowering time are
coveted with bril-
liant and richly
coloured blossoms.
The improved
strain Strumosa
grandiflora gives
a wide range of
colours: yellow,
brown, blue,
mauve, white, le-
m o n , cardinal,
etc. The seed
should be sown in
boxes and when
large enough to handle the plants should be spaced out to a distance
of 9 to 12 inches apart. A light sandy soil suits them well, and well
decayed manure and a sprinkling of bonedust should be worked into


the soil. Later on, in the autumn, sowing straight into the bed where
the plants are to bloom can be done—that is, provided a judicious
thinning out of the plants is made.
NEMOPHILA INSIGNIS
This is a charming little blue annual that makes an excellent
edging, or is suitable for a bed in a lawn. Sow the seed early in
March, where it is intended to grow. If this cannot be done there is
very little difficulty with transplanting, and it flowers well during
the cold winter months.
NIGELLA
The Nigella, of Love-in-the-Mist, is one of our prettiest old-
fashioned annuals. It is odd in every respect, and adds beauty and
interest to any garden. It grows well under almost any conditions
and stands up to the heat. The flowers come in blue and white, and
the thin moss-like foliage runs close up to the blooms, which appear
as surrounded by a wreath of mossy fibre. The foliage is thin and
very graceful, and the large seed-pods are quite ornamental and attrac-
tive. Nigella is well adapted for mass planting or for making borders.
PANSY
Pansy seed may be sown early in autumn or late in winter, but in
our climate the best results are obtained by sowing the seed in February


and March and transplanting the seedlings out before the cold weather
sets in. Seedlings planted early come into bloom during the winter
months, and continue in flower right through the spring and until the
hot weather sets in. The best method of raising the seed is to sow in
shallow boxes which are protected from the sun by hessian-covered
frames, removing the covering at night or on cool days. As the
seedlings come through they should be gradually hardened off and not
allowed to grow up weak or spindly, and be transplanted out when
large enough to handle conveniently. The most suitable soil is a good
garden loam, well endowed with lime, which is a necessary element to
good culture. The ground must be properly prepared first of all by
applying a dressing of lime, and about a fortnight or so later digging
in a liberal dressing of well-rotted stable or cow manure. While
regarded as a perennial, the Pansy is best treated as an annual. A few
good sorts to grow are
Bugnot’s Giant Ex-
PENSTEMON
As an attractive and
decorative plant for
the flower border, the
Penstemon has few
rivals. It is easily
grown, stands the heat
and drought well, it is
perfectly hardy, and
produces fine spikes of
bloom nearly all the
year through. The
large Gloxinia types
are among the very
best of our herbace-
ous plants, and though
lasting for two or
three years are best
when propagated an-
nually, either by seeds
or cuttings. The lat-
ter is the best way to
perpetuate good vari-
eties, named or other-
wise, but seeds saved


from good strains produce plants with fine colour breaks. If Pen-
stemons are massed the effect is brilliant indeed, as they possess all the
charms of a big bedder. As a perennial they will do well almost any-
where, and when most others arc feeling the worse for wear they hang
on with a good show of blooms. Penstemons are easily propagated
and if the young fresh green tips are pinched out and planted under a
little shading of glass or calico they strike readily.
PETUNIA
There is no summer flower for bedding purposes that gives better
results than the Petunia, and almost under any conditions the plants


succeed. Where a brilliant show is desired, nothing, unless it is the
Phlox, compares with the Petunia, and where a massed effect is wanted,
and the compact varieties chosen, the results are always pleasing. One
of the best varieties for a bedding effect is Feltham Beauty , which
covers its compact bushes with bright, rosy pink blooms; while Rosy
Morn and Adonis are equally good. The variety Purple Prince finds
many admirers, and when the plants come true the colour is certainly
very fine, but the bushes have not the same compact habit as Rosy
Morn and Feltham Beauty. For our climate the seed is best sown in
August and September, and the plants placed out in the spring make
a fine show right throughout the summer. It is best to sow the seed
—which, by the way, is very fine—in pans or boxes, but these should
be well prepared and well drained. A light sandy soil mixed with
sifted leaf mould is best, and the watering should be done before the
seed is sown. The best plan is to lower the box or pan of soil into
the water until the moisture makes its way up to the surface of the
soil, and this should be done some few hours before the seed sowing
takes place. Petunia seed should be sown very thinly, and this can
best be accomplished by mixing the seed with fine sand and shaking
it over the soil from an old pepper dredger. A gentle pressure of the
soil afterwards is advisable. This can best be done by using a sheet
of glass. No soil covering should be given the seed, but some covering
—either paper or glass—should be provided.
The box or pan may not require watering until the tiny plants
are through, but then this must not be done from overhead, and if it
becomes necessary to add further moisture, the box should again be
lowered into a vessel of water until the moisture makes its appearance
on the surface. Over-watering should be avoided, otherwise the plants
may damp off. When the seed has germinated the glass should be
gradually removed, a little each day, until it is clear of the box
altogether. As soon as the plants are large enough to handle they
should be pricked off into boxes of soil and spaced out about an inch
apart. Once they reach this stage there is no further risk and they
can remain in this position until it is time to plant them in the
permanent bed.
V V V I
MM ♦ #
r 'Oh! gather me the rose, the rose.
While yet in flower we find it;
For summer smiles, but summer goes
And winter waits behind it.
The myrtle and the rose, the rose.
The sunshine and the swallow,
The dawn that comes, the wish that goes.
The memories that follow.”


PHLOX
Among our summer-blooming annuals, the Phlox Drummondii
must take a first place. Sown in the autumn, it will flower in winter,
and continue for several months. A later sowing in early spring will
possesses a great
variety of colour;
it is dwarf in
habit, and hardy.
Some varieties are
brilliant and
dazzling.
RUDBECKIAS
Both the annual and perennial Rudbeckias are worth growing, and,
as they are not particular as to the situation, provided there is a fair
amount of shelter and sunshine, a position could be found for them
in almost any garden. Seeds of the annual varieties should be sown
in the autumn in warm districts, and in spring in the colder parts.
The perennial Rudbeckias are easily increased by division of their
roots, but each portion must be furnished with one or more crowns.
The best time to plant the divisions is the end of winter, just as new
growth begins. Rudbeckias produce single and double bright yellow
or orange coloured flowers. The variety Lancinata makes a handsome
plant and has ornamental foliage; while there is a remarkably fine
double-flowering variety called Golden Glow. All are easily cultivated,
hardy in habit and thrive well in good soils.
♦ • ♦ ♦ ♦♦
♦ ♦ ♦♦
SHIRLEY POPPY.
The Shirley Poppy should be planted where it is required to bloom.
Not that the seedlings will not transplant, but if the tiny roots are
broken or bruised they receive a severe check and seldom do well.


The seed should be mixed with sand and broadcast when the autumn
rains commence. Plantings may be made from March to the end of
May, and a succession of flowers will follow from September onwards.
This poppy flourishes in almost any soil from sand to stiff loam. It is
partial to stable and cowyard manure, or any organic fertiliser, and
the more water the plants receive the more robust they become. To
pick Poppies for indoor decoration, it is necessary to place the flower
stalks in water as soon as they are severed.
PYRETHRUM
During the spring months there are no flowers that are more
conspicuous than the versatile Pyrethrum, or Poor Man's Chrysanthe-
mum, as they are often called. Pyrethrums are so exceedingly easy of
cultivation, and withal so beautiful and useful, that they are recog-
nised as every amateur’s plant.,
Pyrethrums come up easily from seed sown in the autumn, and
are in bloom early in spring. The flowers are exquisite for cutting
and household decoration generally, as the blooms, like single Marguer-
ite Daisies, are carried on long stalks. They are of all shades of pink,
some delicate and some very rich bright crimsons, deep crimsons,
creamy pinks, and white. They are also to be had in double varieties.
The plants take up very little room, as they grow practically flat, like
a Ranunculus, and throw up their flowers from the centre of the
crown. They bloom continuously for months, are hardy perennials,
and most suitable for the small garden.
PRIMULA
This is a bush-house or greenhouse perennial suitable for pot
culture, extremely handsome and free flowering, and of easy culture.
Seedlings raised in pots in the late summer or autumn should, as soon
as the plants are fit to handle, be transplanted; pot them off into small
pots, and place them in a frame or bush-house, and as soon as they
are again well rooted they should be shifted into blooming pots.
Primula Malacoides is a good thing to grow as a pot plant or for
ornamenting the flower border. Its delicate lavender flowers, pro-
duced in whorls on long, slender and graceful stems in great pro-
fusion, are best seen as a pot plant, but if it is included in the garden
and placed in the front line to other plants whose colours will not
clash and whose growth will not be too rampant so as to overshadow
it, it will give a lot of pleasure. The best effect is obtained by massing
them, and plants should be set out no wider apart from six to nine
inches. The Malacoides like a position that gets all the morning sun,


but where they are slightly shaded after midday. When sowing, the
bed should be well dug and then treated with stable or cow manure;
and if to the soil a little lime is added, so much the better.
SALPIGLOSSIS
One of the showy summer annuals is the Salpiglossis, the seed of
which should be sown early in September. The bed where the plants
are to be grown should be well levelled, and on stiff soils sand should
be scattered over the surface and raked in. Salpiglossis does best in a
light sandy soil, and the seed should be sown direct into the bed, as
the plants do not transplant well. Mix the seed, which is fine, with
sand or sifted ashes, so that it can be distributed thinly and evenly
over the surface, and then just cover it lightly. On no account should
the seed be buried deeply. After covering, dust fine sifted stable
manure over the surface so that the seed will not be washed about
when the bed is watered. Once the seedlings are through and growing
strongly they should be thinned out to a distance of about 9 to 12
inches apart. The finest variety of Salpiglossis is the Emperor strain,
which produces large flowers, varied in colour and beautifully veined.
SALVIAS
Salvias are responsible for a gay late summer display, and the
earlier they can be put out the bigger the bushes will be. The seed,
however, is somewhat difficult to germinate, and early batches should
be sown in boxes or a hot bed or in glass frames, and treated similarly
to Tomatoes. Plants, however, if procurable, can be planted out,
provided a little care is given should late frosts come along. From the
nursery beds a better plan would be to single pot the little plants in
three to four inch pots, and keep them going until established as
strong plants. Salvias grow fairly tall, but the centres can be taken
out so as to induce them to branch out with laterals that will flower
freely. With old plants the crown can be cut out and put in sand,
which will root in a few days. Bedded out, with hot weather and kept
well watered, Salvias come into flower in a few weeks, and keep
blooming right on until the beginning of winter.
SCABIOUS
Scabious, or Pin Cushions, as they were called in our boyhood
days, deserve attention, especially as the newer sorts are beautiful and
useful both for garden and decorative purposes. The old dull-coloured
flowers have in recent years undergone a complete change, so that


to-day the newer varieties are well worth cultivating. The Scabious
family, which includes both annual and perennial varieties, may easily
be raised from seed, and where a good bed is laid down there will be
plenty to cut and come from in the way of flowers in early spring.
The colours range through various shades of blue, mauve, lavender,
maroon, and pink; but there is a delicate shade of lavender blue called
Azure lurry, which as a cut flower is beautiful indeed. Of the perennial
varieties, S cabiosa Columbaria is about the best, as the plants are dwarf
and produce a good crop of flowers. Plants of the perennial variety
must of necessity be purchased from the nurserymen, but seeds of
the annuals can be sown in seed beds or boxes, and the plants when
large enough can be transplanted. In the mixed beds or borders
clumps of Scabious make a good effect.
SCHIZANTHUS
Schizanthus, though
it may be grown in
the open border, is
more suitable for pot
culture, and where a
glass house or shade
house can be provid-
ed there is no more
pleasing subject to
grow for display
purposes. The seed is
sown in boxes of
light soil covered
with a sheet of
glass, kept moist
until germination
takes place, and then
the glass gradually
removed to admit
light and air. When
the seedlings are
large enough to
handle they should
be pricked off either
into small thumb
pots or into other
boxes of soil, allow-
ing a space of about
3 in. between each
plant. From the
thumb pots the


plants should be lifted into 6in. sizes, and finally they are put into
9in. pots, in which they can be left to flower. A liquid stimulant
should be given the plants as they reach the flowering stage, but not
before, as otherwise a soft, sappy growth is likely to result. In pre-
paring the potting soil add some old cow manure and a little bonedust
to some friable loam. Leaf mould may be added to the mixture if it is
procurable.
STOCKS
Stocks are among the most beautiful and sweetly-perfumed flow-
ers of all, and for a showy display are hard to beat. Though easy to
raise from seed, many failures result from transplanting. Sowing
directly into the permanent beds is advocated; for, like the Cabbage,
good results do not follow once the plant receives a check. Either
massed or grown in separate colours, the effect is charming. Ten
Weeks, Winter Flowering and Nice varieties are the best, and should
be grown in good, rich soil. After transplanting the ground must be
kept loose by frequent cultivation, and as the plants spread and grow,
staking is necessary, nothing being better for this purpose than fruit-
tree prunings pushed well into the ground. As the plants come into
bud, liquid manure applied after watering will be beneficial, but this
should not be overdone, as forcing will reduce the flowering period.
In transplanting or thinning out, give each plant plenty of room,
allowing at the least 12 to 18 inches apart.
SWEET SULTANS
The newer varieties of Sweet Sultans, which originated from the
Centaurea, grow from one and a half to two feet high, and have orna-
mental foliage and large flower heads, which stand well above the
plants. The colours of these flowers include blue, purple and white
shades, which are admirable for indoor decoration and florists’ work,
as they keep fresh in water for many days. There is also a yellow
variety, known as Centaurea Chameleon, the flowers of which are a
bright citron yellow, which would certainly be grown more if better
known. All these plants thrive in a sunny situation that contains a
fair percentage of lime, and ground where it is proposed to grow
these flowers should receive a light dressing of lime. In climatically
favoured districts, the seeds may be sown in the open, but in colder
parts they should not be sown in the open ground until August. As
the seedlings do not transplant very well, the seeds are best sown in
the places where the plants are to grow and flower. In the mixed
borders, a good plan is to sow the seeds in small groups at intervals,
but if this method is adopted the seeds should be sown thinly and left
covered with fine soil or leaf mould. If it is desired to grow the
plants in masses, the groups should be about 13 inches apart. Should
the young plants come through too thickly, thin out the weaker ones.


VERBENAS
Verbenas were for-
merly far more pop-
ular than they seem
to be to-day, but
they are capable of
making a narrow
border or a small
bed extremely gay.
i s > however, not
giving the plants a
reasonable chance to
put out young seed-
lings about an inch
high, for they have
to make good
growth. Plants from
pots should be se-
cured and when the
roots have been com-
fortably established
in fertile soil the
main branches should
be pegged down with
hairpins and just covered with a mixture of sifted mould and sharp
sand in equal quantities, leaving only an inch of each stem uncovered.
Treated thus, the plants will root at every joint and, with an elaborate
root system, growth and flowers will be abundant.
VIOLAS
For border work or beds of self colour, the Viola is unsurpassed,
and, seeing that the flowering period is so long, we often wonder why
this flower is not grown more. Perhaps, as a guide to the novice, this
will be better described as a bedding Pansy, and it is this that is used
for the gay effects seen in the spring gardens. Violas are easily raised
from seed, are dead hardy, and produce thousands of flowers; so don’t
overlook them. They can be had in separate colours, such as white,
yellow, purple, mauve, and lilac, and lend themselves admirablj for
ribbon border work.
Probably the most popular Viola is the blue Papilio, which flowers
very profusely and makes splendid compact plants. Deep violet Papilio
is also good, the plants being compact and flowering very freely, and
the colour is very rich. For a pure, brilliant, bright yellow, Lutea
grandiflora is the best, and the best white is Snow Queen.


WINTER WALLFLOWERS
One of the most fragrant of the winter flowers is the Wallflower.
Old-fashioned it may be, but nevertheless it is one of those'charming
garden sorts that never loses popularity, and there are few gardeners
who do not appreciate the rich shades of colour produced. In order
to get plants that will flower early, the seed should be sown as early
as possible in February. The annual variety, Early Paris Market , is
the most satisfactory of all, because it comes into flower early and
blooms freely a month or two after sowing.
Pick out a sunny position and sow the seed directly into the beds
in drills about one foot apart, and then thin out the plants so as to
leave them about nine inches apart. Wallflowers are lime lovers, and
if some lime and bonedust is worked into the soil it will promote
healthy growth.
ZINNIAS
There are several varieties of these showy, hardy plants. First
come the Giants, which have become popular of late years on account
of their brilliant colour and exceptionally large striking flowers, many
of which grow to five inches across. They are taller in growth than
any of the other varieties. Then comes the ordinary Elegans double
variety, which produces smaller flowers, more refined in character.
This is the variety that provides the flowers for the show-bench, as
their perfect form and clearly defined colours fill the requirements of
the show class. The Permila class is a dwarf type producing clear
coloured flowers, and is a good garden variety, as the plants, being
compact and bushy, cover themselves with brilliant blossoms, similar
to the Elegans. There is also the Tom Thumbs, the plants of which
are about a foot high, with small cone-shaped flowers. Some gardeners
are very keen on these small ones, as they are useful in the small
borders.
Zinnias can be sown from October onwards, and splendid results
come from sowing the seed direct into the beds where the plants are
to grow. Once the warm weather sets in, they grow very fast, and
the plants come into bloom at a time when a touch of gay colour is
most needed. It is a good plan to sow seed also about Christmas-time,
so that the plants will come into flower just as the worst of the summer
heat is over, and, as the bushes develop better, they carry well into late
autumn. Seed can be sown in beds or seed boxes and transplanted.
The Giants should be spaced about 2ft. apart, the Permila variety about
18in., and the little Dwarfs from 9in. to a foot. Blood and bone
manure worked into the bed before planting is a good fertiliser, but
the Zinnia does not do well where fresh stable manure is used.


"Nature, in her cultivated trim,
Dressed to his taste, inviting him abroad —
Can he want occupation who has these!”
PART IV
CONTENTS
Gardening Proverbs
Lawns
Seed Sowing
Root Planting
Topdressing
The Hedge
Dwarf Edging Plants
Shrubs
Climbers and Creepers
Pot Plants
Palms
Verandah Plants
Ferns
The Agapanthus
The Aspidistra
Home Fruit Garden
Fruit Trees
Planting Citrus Trees
Peach Tree Pruning
Pruning the Shrubs
Pruning the Vines
Insect Pests and Remedies
Handy Spraying Mixtures
Simple Fungus Remedies


GARDENING PROVERBS
Large trees make more shade than fruit, and very large rose bushes
carry more stalk than flowers.
Kindness, like grains, increases by sowing.
Be at war with the pests, at peace with your neighbours.
The self-satisfied worker does just to-day what he did yesterday, and
this year what he did last, and, dead to the opportunities around
him, rests and rusts.
Envy not your neighbour’s garden; emulate his efforts and make yours
better.
Do unto your weeds as you would have your neighbour do unto his.
Having done a really good thing, set about another better.
Never put a plant in the dark corner of a room; keep it as near the
light as possible.
LAWNS
What would our gardens or homes be without lawns? Certainly
nothing, makes the house more attractive than nicely-kept lawns, while
nothing equals the " spacious greensward ” as a playground for child-
ren; and few, tired and weary from a hard day’s toil, fail to appreciate
the restful lazy stretch on the lawn in the cool of the evening.
In setting out to plant a lawn, either by seed sowing or the
planting of roots, it is essential that the ground should be deeply dug
and improved by the addition of old and well-decayed manure. Sweet-
ness of soil is desirable, and it is a good policy to allow the soil, after
being dug, to rest for a while before planting. After digging, the
ground should be levelled, rolled or trodden down and raked, to get
an even surface.
SEED SOWING
The best season to make a new lawn from seed is the autumn, as
early as possible after the break-up of the hot weather; the soil is then
warm, and with the autumn rains the seed germinates readily, and the
young grass has ample time to become well established before the cold
weather sets in; and as weeds are far more in evidence in the spring
than they are in the autumn, it follows that the long start given to
the autumn-sown grass gives it a better chance to withstand the
growth of any weeds that may be lying dormant in the soil when they
appear in the spring. It is also less likely to be burnt out with the
heat of summer, the roots having had time to reach the moist subsoil.


ROOT PLANTING
In laying down a Couch or Buffalo lawn from roots, early spring
planting is advocated. Winter planting is unsatisfactory, as the growth
is slow and weeds as a rule overtake and choke the grass. For the
same reason, late autumn planting is not recommended, as weeding is
necessary over a long period, whereas in the spring the grass is active,
the ground soon covered, and the weeding operations short. In plant-
ing, dibble in the rooted pieces set on the slant about nine to six inches
apart. This is best done by laying down a board to walk on, as well
as for a guide for planting in a straight line. Commence by planting
at one end and continuing straight along the bed until the end is
covered. As soon as the growth starts, pin the runners down with
pieces of wire or good stout hairpins, as this will mean the rooting at
every joint. Once the roots take hold and the grass begins to spread,
a light topdressing of a light sandy soil should be given, as this fills
in all uneven spaces caused through weeding, etc.
There are certainly other grasses which can be used, but in the
sandy soils there is nothing which binds so well as the Couch or
Buffalo. Chewing’s Fescue and Blue Kentucky sown with Couch
gives a good cover, and, mixed with sand, can be sown at the rate
of half a pound of each seed to fifty square yards of surface. Lawns
can be kept green throughout the winter by sowing Chewing’s Fescue
or New Zealand Rye Grass, and many prefer this two-grass lawn, as
it produces a moss-like green appearance all through the winter.
TOPDRESSING
The usual practice is, at the commencement of summer, to top-
dress the lawn with sand, but there is little food value in the sand itself,
and this merely helps to level up the surface, and at the time of the
year when cutting is continuous a good plan is to give the surface a
light dressing with fine, old, well-rotted stable manure. This, after a
good watering, goes well in, and gives the young surface roots some-
thing to feed on, and as you continue to cut and use the lawn, help
matters along still further by dusting with bone super.
Don’t fail to remember that if you use anything but old and
well-rotted stable manure you will be seeking trouble, and no doubt
will only sow weeds that will eventually cause a lot of trouble.
Throw the dressing over the surface with a spade and do the
levelling off with a wooden spreader, made by nailing a two-foot
length of three-by-one jarrah on to an ordinary rake or broom handle.
This sort of tool is much more effective than the back of a rake, which
is generally used. Before doing the soil spreading, scatter round some
fine bonedust, by using a handful to about every square yard.
Lawns should have the mower run over them regularly, and all
edges neatly trimmed. Any depressions or hollows should be filled


gradually, that is, as the new growth pushes through, with a mixture
of sand or loam and old stable manure; and, if you have a roller, run
it across the lawn fairly frequently. Lawns composed of English
grass —that is,' Fescue—Kentucky or Blue Grass, should be cut at least
once a fortnight, though once a week is better. *
Where lawns are laid down on stiff soils, prosphates are good;
but if sandy soil, sulphate of potash is relished, and in and around
Perth it could well be mixed with the soil and used as a topdressing at
the rate of one teaspoonful to the square yard.
The following is handy to know. For autumn and winter top-
dressing use fine bonedust, 2oz. superphosphate, loz. to the square
yard; and as an early spring application use superphosphate and
nitrate of soda 1 Joz. to the square yard. Nitrate of soda is particularly
beneficial for grass lawns and can easily be applied by watering in a
solution of about half an ounce to the gallon. Tennis lawns that wear
in certain parts can with advantage be topdressed with nitrate of soda,
either crushed fine or mixed and spread with fine sand.
THE HEDGE
If it is intended to plant a garden, it is well to give full considera-
tion to the hedge. Undoubtedly, the hedge can be made to play a
useful part, especially when covering from view unsightly portions,
such as rubbish heaps, fowlruns, etc., or acting as breaks to windy and
dusty situations. The trimming and cutting should always be borne
in mind, and varieties can be chosen that not only make for a lot of
hard work, but lose their beauty with age. Again, some hedges, such
as Coprosma and Pittosporum, throw out surface roots, and in most
cases the ground on either side for about five or six feet becomes
useless. Where space will permit, a good idea is to give the hedge a
bed to itself of 4ft. wide and where the bed, if running parallel to the
fence, can have a path beside it, so that this will not encourage the
roots to spread.
It is advisable to take out a good trench 18in. deep, break up
the bottom soil, and when refilling mix up well with the soil manure
and a little bonedust. After allowing this to settle well down with
a good watering, set the plants out, but in the early stages see that no
check is given by allowing the moisture to dry out. For the small
garden the Plumbago is about the most suitable, and the plants should
be set out about two feet apart. The Cypresses can have a space of
four to five feet between.
Suitable varieties are Coprosma, Cupressus (Lambertiana horizon-
talh), Duranta, Privet, Pittosporum, and Rhaphiolepis.


DWARF EDGING PLANTS
A good deal of attention has been paid of late years to small
effective edging plants, and some beautiful borders are seen each spring
with such subjects as the Violas, Pansies, and Lobelias.
A compact little plant that will flower well along the edges of
beds containing taller subjects is always desirable, and the Virginian
Stock for this purpose is still a favourite with many. A plant, how-
ever, that has come to the front during the last few years is the Dwarf
Alyssum, or Carpet of Snow. Having proved itself so even in growth,
hardy and free flowering, it has certainly charmed everyone that has
grown if. Easy to raise from seed, it can be transplanted or sown
where it is to grow without difficulty. It comes into flower a month
or two after sowing, and continues right on for months.
The small English Daisy, Beilis Perennis, is also one of the most
delightful of edging plants. The plants grow quickly, soon come into
flower, and bloom freely for a long time. Set out six inches apart,
so that as a continuous line the plants just touch. They show off to
great advantage a bed of Pansies, Violas, or Iceland Poppies.
SHRUBS
Shrubs lend dignity to gardens, even moderate-sized ones, and a
garden without shrubs appears flat and uninteresting, and loses charm.
Correct planting gives a spacious effect, while a garden with shrubs
judiciously planted gains in interest. At the same time, an aesthetic
effect can be gained by planting both evergreen and deciduous shrubs
together, as the combination lends variety and charm to the shrubbery,
and among the deciduous varieties are many that are beautiful both
for flowers and foliage. The lovely deciduous ornamental flowering
fruits, such as Prunus pissardi and Prunus moseri, in addition to their
charming flowers have grand foliage. Other favourites are the Lauris-
tinus, Veronica, Hibiscus, Oleander, Abu til on, Camelia, Buddleia,
Lantana, and Poinsettia. Among the non-flowering types are the
beautiful Golden Cypress, Variegated Privets, Coprosma, Acalpha, and
a host of others that adapt themselves admirably to special planting
schemes.
In planting shrubs, deep-rooting should be assisted as much as
possible. In naturally deep loose soils the roots will go deep into the
subsoil with little trouble. Soils should be deeply trenched and heavily
manured. The manure should be buried at the bottom of the trench
before filling in. The tap-roots go downwards and ramify at the
bottom and, though a few surface roots are still made during dry
conditions, moisture is still absorbed by these lower roots.
Some shrubs are hardier than others and more suitable for dry
country. All our native shrubs are extremely hardy and well adapted
for dry areas, and a good variety can be had from planting these.


The general list of shrubs is a lengthy one, and in the selection
one must be guided by the size of the garden and the spaces to fill.
The following are a few worth growing:—
Abutilon (or Lantern Flower). —These make nice ornamental
specimens for the garden, varying in height from 4 to 6 ft.
The Acacias, particularly the varieties Baileyana, Longifolia and
Podalyraefolia, are worth including in the larger gardens.
Flowering Peaches, although deciduous, are always appreciated
when in bloom, especially the pink variety.
Flowering Gums can be included in large gardens, but they need
to be kept well away from beds of choice flowers, as they are great
soil robbers. Eucalyptus ficifolia (scarlet) and E. Colophylla rosea
(pink) are two popular varieties.
The Guelder Rose (Snowball Tree), deciduous, bears flowers re-
sembling the Hydrangea, and grows to a height of 6 or 8 ft.
Lantanas provide a variety of colouring and are pretty specimens
that should claim attention.
Lagerstromia Indica (Cape Plant) does well in Perth, and its
fine show of pretty rose-coloured flowers is seen everywhere.
The Neriums (Oleander), because they are hardy, are worth an
inclusion. Madoni Martin (salmon), Delphine (crimson) and Madoni
Grandiflorum (white) are good varieties.
Plumbago) Capensis. —A fast-growing but rather straggling shrub
which, however, stands pruning, and in the latter part of the season
is covered with a mass of pale blue flowers.
Prunns Pissardi. —Beautiful purple foliage, but the flowers are
insignificant.
Chlosya Ternata. —A handsome shrub growing to a height of
about 6ft., with glossy green foliage and pure white flowers.
Coprosma. —A medium-sized evergreen, with shining bright green
foliage. When well grown and allowed sufficient space it makes a
beautiful shrub.
Diosma. —A neat dwarf, close-growing shrub, bearing a multi-
tude of small white and delicately scented flowers. Excellent for the
small front garden.
Genista. —This is one of the well-known and exceedingly orna-
mental free-flowering dwarf shrubs, and should be in every garden.
Height, about 4ft.
Hibiscus Splendens. —This is a fine growing variety, producing
large flowers of a bright red colour. The variety Hibiscus Hugeli,
with its lovely foliage and beautiful mauve flowers, is also worthy of a
place.
Lanrestinus. —This is about one of our best evergreens, and does
well almost anywhere. The habit of growth is good, and when in
flower the fragrance is just delightful.


Heliotropum (the Heliotrope) is one of the finest scented flowers
and is deemed worthy of a place in any garden, because of its delicious
fragrance.
Acalypha Marginata (the Fijian Fire Plant). —A handsome foli-
aged shrub, with browny-red leaves margined crimson. Very sus-
ceptible to frost.
Aloys/a Citriodora (known as the Lemon-scented Verbena) has
sweetly scented foliage, which, when handled, emits a strong, delight-
ful perfume. It produces heads of small white flowers in the spring,
but the foliage is responsible for the perfume, and not the flowers.
It is a deciduous shrub.
Burgmamia Knighti, commonly known as the Trumpet Lily, has
a powerful perfume that fills the whole garden. The only trouble is
that this shrub is almost too strong, and it is not advisable to plant it
too near the house, as the heavy scent will permeate the rooms,
especially if warm, sultry weather obtains. It grows to a height of
8 feet and is an evergreen.
Pittosporum. —A large-sized, exceedingly useful shrub, attaining
a height of 10 to H feet, with clusters of lovely sweet-smelling white
flowers in spring.
Veronica. —Dwarf evergreen shrubs from two to three feet in
height. Andersonii: Flowers blue. Gracilis: Small white flowers;
dwarf growth; graceful. Imperialis: Crimson shading to magenta.
CREEPERS AND CLIMBERS
There are few gardens that cannot be improved by the judicious
planting of one or more of the beautiful varieties of plants suitable for
climbing or creeping purposes, and in suburban gardens when space
is limited it is often economical with regard to space saving to plant
climbers, instead of large growing, encumbering hedges. For walls
and fences there are many beautiful plants available, and what is
more effective than climbing Roses, such as the Macartneys, Banksias,
Fortuniana, and others of the many handsome varieties which make
vigorous growth?
Creepers can be separated into two classes, evergreens and decidu-
ous varieties, and as most gardeners prefer evergreens, the following
come under this heading. Among the Bignonias and Tecomas there
are several excellent evergreen varieties, as well as deciduous sorts.
One of the finest, perhaps, is Bignonia Chirere, which has splendid
foliage and produces. reddish-orange flowers. Tecortia Jasminoides has
green foliage, and produces large headj of pale pink flowers carrying


crimson throats. This variety flowers continuously from early summer
to late autumn. There are several excellent Honeysuckles. This is
a good grower, very hardy, and covers well. Tacsonia Taylori, often
called the Banana Passion Fruit, is quick growing and produces large
pale pink flowers which are slightly flushed with purple. In some
districts this creeper is apt to die out when it reaches the age of four
or five years. Asparagus Plumosus, usually known as the Asparagus
Fern, grows well anywhere and covers quickly. Bignonia Venusta is a
splendid free flowering creeper, producing large clusters of brilliant
orange flowers during July, August and September. Nothing perhaps
is more suited to Perth’s sandy conditions than this. Where a rapid-
growing creeper is required, especially in country districts, Kennedya
Nigricans will be found useful. It makes an excellent shelter and
Nigrocans will be found useful. It makes an excellent shelter and
can be trained over fences, etc., where a breakwind is required. .Jas-
minium Primulinum is one of the most beautiful of all the Jasmines,
producing long sprays of large double bright yellow flowers. This
blooms during the winter, and a plant in full bloom is a beautiful
sight. Where an evergreen creeper is required for covering a wall,
the climbing fig. Ficus Stipulate, will be found satisfactory. Although
the Dolichos is an old and perhaps despised creeper, there are few
varieties which make such a dense mass of foliage and grow so quickly
under, the hardest of conditions. It is also excellent for breakwinds,
and if planted up against wirenetting fences it will give protection in a
very short time. There are two varieties, the pink and the white,
and both of them are equally hardy. Virginian Creepers are especially
pleasing and appealing. In, suitable positions the deciduous character
of the plant is a recommendation for growing them upon walls and
buildings when the shade produced by the greenery is desirable in
summer, and sunlight is preferred in the winter. Best results in
colouring of the foliage are obtained, however, when the plants are
fully exposed, and for general purposes the variety known as Veitchii
is considered best, the foliage turning a brilliant vivid crimson in the
autumn. The variety Purpurea has very distinct and beautiful foliage
of a bright colour.
A few of the best that can be recommended are:—
The Bignonias or Tec&mas. —The best of the deciduous varieties
are Grandiflora, which is the largest flowering of all; Guilfoylei (deep
red), and Mackeni (the pink variety).
The best evergreen sorts are Venusta (orange winter flowering),
Chirere (deep red), and Glacilis (a brilliant yellow), which flowers
in the early spring.
Mandevilla. —This is very handsome and well worth a place,
covered with large snow-white scented flowers. It makes an excellent
covering. It likes a moist soil and warm situation.
Kennedya Nigricans. —Exceptionally valuable in country districts
where protection is wanted from the wind and rough weather. It is
a tremendous grower, has large leaves, and requires very little attention.


If a shelter is wanted, and this is run over wires, it will soon be just
as valuable as a good hedge, and it will be produced in very much
less time.
The dainty Clematis Montana and Montana Reubens —white and
pink varieties—are the most suitable and the loveliest creepers for
growing on the wirenetting around tennis courts, as they are light
growers and do not overburden the netting in the way that so many
of the stronger growing varieties do.
Passiftora. —The Passion Flowers are among the finest of our
creepers. The variety Passiflora Edulis gives the well-known Passion
Fruit. The variety Tacsonia is very beautiful and quick in growth.
Hardenbergia. —This is a pretty white-flowered variety with ever-
green trailers, and suitable for poles or pillars.
Among the Honeysuckles, Lonicera Confusa is one of the most
free-flowering. It is a strong grower and covers itself with yellowish
flowers borne in splendid sprays. The Variegated Golden Leaf Honey-
suckle, which has creamy white flowers, is valuable for its foliage.
Wistaria Sinensis is one of our best spring flowering creepers, the
lovely racemes of lavender flowers being very striking. This creeper
does best when grown on a verandah or trellis facing north or east.
It will also do successfully on a western aspect, but the southern side
is too shady and cold for it.
Antigonon. —One of the prettiest climbers imaginable; large
sprays of beautiful pink flowers are produced in summer. Suitable for
warm climates only, and should be planted in summer and protected
from frost through its first winter.
]asmimini is in bloom right throughout the winter, and makes a
fine display. It is of a semi-creeping habit, and is very suitable for
planting in a corner or up against a fence.
POT PLANTS
Pot plants are useful for table decorations, and for this reason
the chief aim is generally to grow them in small pots rather than in
big ones. The plants, however, need plenty of room for growing, and
when this is stinted they commence to die back. Where a plant has
grown for some time in the one pot, with its roots cramped, it will
soon die of starvation, for it has absorbed all the nutriment in the soil.
If every year, or, with the robust growers, every six months, the old
soil is replaced with fresh soil, rich in foodstuffs, the plant will continue
in healthy growth, even though its roots may be somewhat pot-bound.
This is the only secret of growing plants in small pots. With nearly


all plants, the best time for re-potting is just before the spring, as the
roots are then in a dormant state and absorb little nourishment, but
with the first warm days the small fibrous roots soon commence, and
it is then they should be encouraged.
PLAMS
Palms are fine pot plants for house decoration, as they remain
healthy for a long time when confined to the living rooms. The leaves
should be washed regularly to remove dust and scale pests. Where
plants are badly infested with scale insects, spray with red oil, one
part of oil to thirty parts of water, adding soft soap to the solution.
Spray with clean water before applying the oil solution. Where neces-
sary Palms can be re-potted in spring. Place plenty of clean crocks
at the bottom of the pots
to ensure perfect drainage.
Palms require a stmer com-
post than most plants. A
ITianur c- When potting press
mens, some of the
liquid manure occasionally.
in growing these plants is to
put them into over-large
pots. They simply require bare accommodation for their roots, with
a very small margin of soil left over, as the soil not actually occupied
with the roots soon becomes sour through constant watering. Palms
do not need a shift until the roots have actually lifted the plant right
out of the soil; so when it is re-potted the topmost roots will be only
just covered. The best compost for palms is lumpy loam, three parts;
leaf mould, one part; rotted manure, one part; and coarse sand with
plenty of sharp grit.
* * *
"Lo! higher still the stately palm trees rise,
Chequering the clouds with their unbending stems;
And o’er the clouds, amid their dark blue skies,
Lifting their rich unfading diadems.”
WILSON


"Oh! Lovely Rose, of thee we sing”
The We str ala Qa r d ene r


VERANDAH PLANTS
With Pot Plants grown on verandahs, passage ways or between
the house and the fence, where there is a regular draught or current
of air, little success can be looked for. Such places are usually shady
and are frequently chosen for the reception of Ferns or Palms in tubs.
Plants so treated as a rule do not thrive, partly because of the draught,
but more often than not because the tubs do not provide nearly
sufficient space for their big root system, and often the situation called
the fernery might well be described as a place where Ferns and Palms
should not be grown. A southern aspect protected from north and east
winds is suitable, but any position that is at all draughty should be
avoided.
FERNS
The potting of Ferns is usually carried out in the springtime,
when vigorous growth recommences after the mors or less dormant
period of winter. Young Ferns may be " potted-on ” into larger pots
at almost any time during the growing season, but should not be
transferred into too large a pot. The new pot should be perfectly
clean within and without, and good drainage should be provided. Most
varieties do well in a compost consisting of a mixture of one part of
mellowed turfy soil, one part peat or leaf mould (or a blend of each),
a little sand, and a handful of small wood charcoal (not ashes). Work
up the mixture finely and use it when neither wet nor dry. Get the
soil into the condition in which a handful compressed will, when
released, flake away. On taking the Fern from the old pot, remove
as much detachable soil as possible without injury to the roots, re-pot
firmly, and water thoroughly; then, until the plant is firmly estab-
lished in its new quarters, give only sufficient moisture to keep the
soil from becoming dry. When growth is active, water freely.
THE AGAPANTHUS
The Agapanthus, or Blue African Lily, as it is familiarly called,
is a plant which has not been sufficiently appreciated by the great
bulk of gardeners. It is best represented in the larger gardens, where
occasionally one sees fine specimens. The Agapanthus is not difficult
to grow, but, nevertheless, it has a few requirements the neglect of
which, together with improper treatment, leads to failures. It is one
of the plants which occupy the borderland between the hardy and
half-hardy, and succeeds well when grown in the open on hardy lines,
but the most effective way to get results is to grow it in tubs or boxes.
When so accommodated it can be used effectively as a verandah plant,
and one of the main things is to keep the roots well within bounds.
Restricting it maintains vigour, and occasional applications of weak


liquid manure at the blooming period are amply repaid. A rich loam,
with some decayed cow manure, is a good compost, and when removal
is necessary to a larger pot or tub, the plant should be disturbed as
little as possible.
THE ASPIDISTRA
The Aspidistra is perhaps the most popular plant for house deco-
ration. Probably because it is so hardy it is often neglected, with
the result that it soon becomes unhealthy, the leaves split, turn yellow
and die. Watering is often the cause of trouble, and either too much
or too little is given. The way to water is to wait until the plant is
fairly dry and then soak the pot for a time in a bucket of water. The
leaves should also be sponged occasionally with warm soapy water.
Plants can be kept in good condition by applications of weak liquid
manures. Never let the pots stand in water for any length of time,
and see that the saucers or pans are emptied when the pots have
drained. In potting, it is necessary to use only clean, sweet potting
loam free from manures. Re-potting can be carried out in the autumn
and spring.
HOME FRUIT GARDEN
FRUIT TREES
Most of the home gardens claim a few fruit trees, but too often
the trees are planted without a few of the essential principles of fruit-
growing being understood, and there is more than merely digging a
hole and putting a tree in if success is required. In and around Perth
the sand provides a natural drainage, and this offers no great obstacles,
but in wet, water-logged soils slipshod methods are no good. The
amateur should remember that trees make growth in root, trunk and
branch each year, and thus draw heavily on the ground for food.
If the roots have no substance to feed on it is useless to try to grow
trees, as they cannot be expected to produce fruit unless food is given
them. It is not sufficient to water them now and again and attend
to the pruning. The most vital point is to maintain in the soil the
essential food elements of trees —nitrogen, phosphoric acid and potash.
Nitrogen can be supplied by turning in leguminous crops, such
as clover and peas, each year, and potash is useful to produce a healthy,
stocky growth in the tree, with well-flavoured fruit. The best time
to apply these ingredients is in the autumn and winter. Stable manure
is invaluable, as it contains the three elements, nitrogen, phosphoric
acid and potash, and any animal manure, as a matter of fact, is suitable.
A substitute for potash, if unobtainable, can be made by treating the
ground with air-slaked lime. Phosphoric acid is supplied by super-
phosphates. and nitrogen by nitrate of soda or sulphate of ammonia.


A few suggestions of the errors to avoid may be helpful:—
1. Select varieties suited to your soil, climate and local conditions.
2. Properly prepare the ground before planting. Digging a hole and
throwing in a few shovelfuls of manure is not sufficient.
3. Work the manures well into the ground for a few yards around
the tree, and see that the hole is sufficiently large enough to
accommodate the roots as they spread out.
4. When planting, firm the soil well down around the roots, and
see that it is fine. It Is very necessary to have the soil in close
contact with the roots.
5. Avoid bringing the roots of a newly-planted tree in contact with
manures, especially if fresh. A tree at planting time is not in a
condition to absorb the nutriment; prepare and manure the holes
well, but set the roots in soil.
6. Before planting out, cut the trees back, both at the roots, where
they are damaged or long, and also the tops.
7. Mulch properly in the dry season to prevent the young trees from
suffering from drought before the roots get a good hold.
8. Once planted, don’t let the trees take care of themselves. Culti-
vate, prune, spray, and give attention that will induce good
growth.
9. In stiff retentive soils see that good drainage is provided, and in
sandy soils see that the watering through the hot dry summer is
thoroughly and systematically attended to.
A Few Varieties
Peaches. —Hale’s Early, Briggs’ Red May, Early Crawford, Dunhelm,
Elberta, and Triumph.
Nectarine. —Goldmine, Irrewarra, and Hunt’s Tawny.
Apricots. —Oullin’s Early, Moorpark, and Riverside. The latter is a
really good cropper.
Apples. —Jonathan, Cleopatra, Rome Beauty, Dunn’s Seedling, Granny
Smith, and Yates.
Pears. —Bon Chretien (Williams), Keiffer’s, Duchess, and Josephine.
Vines. —Sweetwater, Crystal, Black Prince, Black Malaga, Gordo
Blanco (Muscat), Flame Tokay, Black Hamburg, and Almeria.
Citrus. —Washingtons, Lisbon Lemon, Tangerines, and Mandarins all
do well in Perth sand.
Last but not least, the Passion Fruit. This does well almost anywhere,
and a good trellis makes a fine summer shade.
* *
"How various trees their various fruits produce!
Some for delightful taste and some for use;
How sprouting plants enrich the plains and woods —
For physic some, and some designed for foods;
How fragrant flowers, with different colours dyed,
On smiling meads unfold their gayest pride.”
BLACKMORE.


PLANTING CITRUS TREES
July and August are the best months for planting citrus trees.
The trees are usually sent out balled with earth and wrapped around
with hessian, which makes the planting fairly easy. A good hole
should be taken out three feet across and the bottom soil loosened
up for another foot. To the bottom spit should be added well-rotted
cow or stable manure and bonedust, which should be well mixed with
the whole of the soil. It is a great mistake a put a mass of manure at
the bottom of the hole and cover it with soil, as, being closely confined,
it starts to ferment and gives off a gas that is very liable to rot the
small and tender roots of the trees. In all cases when using manure
it should be thoroughly mixed up with the soil.
Planting. —When planting do not take the bag off the tree. Place
the tree just as it arrives in the hole at the same depth that it has been
grown previously, then cut the string and just loosen the top of the
bagging. Fill the soil in and firm it down well around the tree, and
then give a thorough soaking with water to settle the soil well down.
When trees or shrubs are planted this first heavy watering is very
necessary to consolidate the soil around the roots, and this should be
allowed to sink down to, say, within two inches of the ground level.
A good mulch of manure will bring the soil up to the surface level,
and this will assist to keep the soil moist around the tree during the
summer, thus saving a good deal of watering.
PEACH TREE PRUNING
Two pieces of fruit bearing peach
wood.
Not all amateurs make a success
of pruning the Peach trees in the
backyard, because more often than
not the wrong wood is cut away.
Peaches carry their fruit on last
year’s wood and old growths never
sport a flower. The accompanying
illustration will convey some idea
of the wood on the trees and the
sort of wood to keep for the fruit.
As evidence of the coming flower,
the buds are fluffy-tipped, while the
leaf buds lie much closer to the
stem and are not so plump, and on
dormant stock look more dead than
alive. One illustration shows a
sturdier piece of growth with four
sets of buds showing. Taking the
lowest bud on the outside, will be
seen two fruit buds, and in the
centre the leaf bud. Both the
flower buds are plump and fluffy,


while the centre bud is dark and thin. This will either produce a
strong upright growth or a short lateral for next season’s fruiting.
The pruning drives the tree one way or the other, and if the cut is
made just above one of these sets the leaf bud will then grow into a
sturdy shoot.
PRUNING THE SHRUBS
In the general way of pruning, that is, with the Vines, Fruit
Trees and Roses, not a few overlook the Shrubs; but there are quite
a number of the flowering Shrubs that are all the better for pruning.
For instance, the Yellow Broom should be well clipped back so that
it will become a dense mass in the spring. Erythrina should be
pruned hard, leaving only about six inches of the previous season’s
growth, while the Lagerstromia should have all small weak wood cut
out and the other growths cut back fairly hard. The Lemon-scented
Verbena Aloysia does all the better for pruning and should be pruned
back hard, leaving about four inches of the previous season’s growth.
With the Guavas the young bushes make a lot of growth low down
the branches, often touching the ground. These should be thinned
out and trimmed up generally. Fuchsias should be cut, taking out
the small spindly wood and shortening the stronger growths a little.
The Hydrangeas should be thinned out where necessary.
The pruning of the flowering shrubs should be done after the
flowering period. When new growth springs into activity they should
be left alone.
PRUNING THE VINES
Pruning time is always more or less a trouble to the gardener
whose knowledge is not sufficient to give him a good grip of the
question. All pruning, whether it be Roses, Trees or Vines, is done
with the object of promoting sturdy growth, and, while with some
fruits the aim is to secure an even development of the tree, so that
there is an even distribution of fruit twigs, the idea with the Vines
is to distribute the new season’s growth evenly so as to increase the
sizes of the bunches and the berries. Looking at the Vines once the
leaves have fallen it will be
noticed that they are dotted with
buds in embryo ready to burst in
the spring. If all these were left
to develop the result would be a
lot of small bunchy masses of
foliage, which would become a
strain on the resources of the
plant.
Different varieties of Vines
require different treatment, and,
A pruned vine with arms tied into position
and carrying both rods and spurs,
is shown above.


much in common with the Roses, all pruning is not done along rule-
of-thumb lines. Some varieties are more productive from growths
coming from buds near the base of last year’s wood, while others bear
heaviest from buds situated near the ends of the shoot or cane. Some
Grapes are pruned on what is known as the rod system, and others
on what is known as the spur, and it is the difference between the
two kinds of pruning that makes for success or failure with the
fruiting.
The vine bears on the wood made during the current year; that
is, the shoots that will come after pruning, and as a rule the bearing
shoots will be found to come from spurs that are one and two years
old. During the first two years all vines may be pruned alike, for the
first objective is to shape the main stems so that they later on will
become the frame on which the fruit-producing wood is formed. In
subsequent years the pruner must be guided by the variety and prune
according to its needs, for while some varieties crop best if short
pruned each season, others require to have long canes or " rods ” left.
The latter are of very vigorous growth and some varieties, like the
Sultana, when pruned hard back devote all their sap to making new
wood, and have nothing in reserve to develop fruit.
Varieties such as Ladies’ Fng-
ers, Black Prince, Sultanas, Wal-
cham Cross and Frontignacs pro-
duce the best when rod-pruned.
When rod pruning is practised
space the spurs further apart, tie
the top shoot into postion, and
spur-prune the lower one. The
next year cut the rod right out
and use the top shoot from the
spur as a new rod and spur-
prune the lower one.
Varieties to be pruned to a
spur are Sweetwater, Doradilla,
Gordo Blanco, Muscat, Red
Prince, Red Malaga, Wortley
Hall, and Lady’s Finger. Those
to be spur and rod pruned are:
Crystal, Waltham Cross, Cent-
ennial and other varieties. It is
necessary to organise vines in
such a manner that in the pro-
cess of pruning each year there
is wood to form rods and wood
to form spurs. Every rod must leave an accompanying spur. The
spur must be left close to the vine end of the rod when pruning takes
place, so that next year it will form the rod, the old rod being cut right
off as close to the old wood as possible. To assist in this direction the
This sketch shows rods of different lengths
(figures 1 and 3), and a spur (figure 2).


following description, together with accompanying diagram, will no
doubt be useful. A spur means to cut the cane back to two or three
buds, and a rod means to leave a dozen or even more on it. The spur,
by reason of fewer buds, is short, while the rod, because of the larger
number of buds left, is much longer. Figure 2 in the diagram shows
a spur, and figure 3 a rod, defined as a piece of last season’s wood,
carrying two and sometimes three buds, after pruning. A " rod ” may
be of any length, but generally speaking ranges from two and a half
to three feet. In rod and spur pruning the rod and spur are, where
possible, associated together to facilitate manipulation, and enable the
bearing wood to be kept close to the old main stems. The spurs should
be at least ten inches apart, and where both rods and spurs are adopted
there should be a distance between them of 15 to 18 inches. The
illustration shows both rods and spurs.
INSECT PESTS AND REMEDIES
Most suburban gardens grow a few fruit trees and vines, but quite
a number of unhealthy and disease-infested trees are often seen. This
comes about through neglect in spraying. The following descriptions
of a few of the pests and brief remedies will be useful.
Aphides. —There are two species of aphis which attack peach
trees —the black and the green. The eggs are laid upon the bark
during the previous summer, and from them the winter and spring
broods arise. The black aphis disappears at the coming of summer and
the hot winds, but is followed immediately by the green aphis. These
pests attack the tips of growing shoots and shelter themselves among
the leaves, which, irritated by repeated bites, curl over into a canopy,
beneath which the insects shelter. Treatment.—Kerosene emulsion
spray of 1 in 15, or tobacco wash, or red oil, 1 in 25.
Woolly Aphis. —Two forms of this pest are known, one attacking
the trunks and the other the roots. They are sap-sucking. The
trunks and limbs should be sprayed with kerosene emulsion and the
roots dusted with tobacco dust.
Ruthcrglen Fly attacks all fruit. Mode of attack; it pierces into
the fruit and extracts the juice, causing the fruit to dry up. Treat-
ment. —Keep the block free of weeds, cultivate frequently (as the
eggs are deposited in the ground), and by doing so the eggs are
destroyed. Spray thoroughly with benzole emulsion or tar water, 1
in 50. Tar or straw burnt beneath the trees will suffocate the fly.
Curculio Beetle. —A small black beetle, living at the base of the
vine, just underneath the surface of the ground. This pest is dormant
in the daytime, but, leaving its recess at night, it climbs the stem of
the vine and attacks the buds and young shoots when just shooting
or shot, returning to the ground in the daytime. These beetles are


c
,ean and
Qardens
Healthy
re*
8
ss
Sle
V: vH#||L|
Representing the most extensive
scientific study that has ever been
devoted to the destruction of gard-
en foes with oil insecticides, Shell
White Spray, the summer spray,
and Shell- Red Spray, the winter
spray, are proving of inestimable
value to gardeners in all States in
ensuring clean and healthy gardens.
Codlin moth, woolly aphis, cherry
and peach aphis, slug, San Jose scale,
mussel scale, borers, thrips, red
spider, etc., are definitely checked
when Shell Spraying Oils are used
at the times and strengths as stated
in the Shell Company’s book, "Pro-
fitable Fruit Spraying,” free to all
gardeners.
SHELL WHITESPRAY
FOR THE GROWING PERIOD
SHELL REDSPRAY
FOR THE DORMANT PERIOD
PRODUCTS OF THE SHELL COMPANY LTD.


very cunning, and when a light is brought to bear on them they fall
to the ground and sham death. They also operate against plums,
pears, and citrus trees, mostly when the trees are young. Treatment. —
Spraying with arsenate of lead at 1 in 20 has had some success, but
the strength could be doubled.
Cotton Scale. —The cotton scale, a white large soft scale, some-
times attacks the roses, but it can be easily got rid of by spraying
with lime, sulphur and nicotine. It is a dirty-looking insect, but it is
not nearly as dangerous as the black and red scale.
Scale on Citrus Fruits. —Spray with Shell Red Spray Oil in winter
or late spring, or adopt the following remedy: lib. sulphur, 4lb. soft
soap, made in a paste, and mix with 1 gallon of boiling water. Dilute
and make up in 20 gallons of cold water.
Red-legged Earth Mite. —The pest thrives under damp and shelt-
ered conditions, and in order to mitigate its ravages these should be
avoided as much as possible. Clean cultivation is the first essential.
The mite loves cover, and the shadow of trees and bushes. Keep down
all weeds and avoid heaps of rubbish and litter. Watch carefully the
seed beds, as seedlings planted out carrying the mites or their eggs
quickly spread the pest. All seedlings should be dipped in a solution
of tobacco water or kerosene emulsion before planting out. Land
to be planted with vegetables or winter crops should be kept under
clean fallow for twelve months; land should also be thoroughly limed.
The pest revels and breeds in light sandy soils, being rarely found in
any numbers on clay soils. Do not use stable manure as a mulch. Dig
all manure well in, so that the surface of the ground will be free
from shelter. Flaked naphthalene placed around the plants or in the
seedling beds acts as a check. Phenyle 1 part to 80 parts of water is
effective.
Leaf Curl attacks peach trees. The first formed leaves thicken,
pucker up and discolour, and soon fall. Another set is produced, but
too late to mature the fruit. This is fungus trouble, and seems te
winter in the buds, entering the young leaves when formed. Treat-
ment. —Spray with Bordeaux mixture before the bursting of the buds
—6 of bluestone, 4 fresh unslaked lime, and 50 fresh water.
The Green Tomato Bug. —The green tomato bug is a annually
increasing cause of loss to tomato and bean growers, and it also attacks
other vegetables, fruits, and garden plants. It is not until it makes
its appearance in vast swarms later on that any effort at control is
attempted. By this time vast numbers have reached the adult green-
winged stage. Whilst in the pre-winged stage it is comparatively
easy to destroy, but when adult is a considerably greater problem. As
a remedy, various tests carried out by the Government Entomologist
have proved Clensel to be most effective.
The Clensel test was carried out as follows:—In each experiment
twenty bugs were used. Clensel at a strength of 1 part to 30 parts
of water killed 75 per cent. A percentage of all stages survived, and
those killed died within 24 hours.


&he Perfect Insecticide and Fungicide !
PATERSON’S
Concentrated CLENSEL
A British Product— Mixed in a Minute
THERE is nothing to equal it for Spraying Flowers, Vines, Fruit Trees,
etc.; for the extermination of Aphis, Tomato Bug. Tomato Wilt,
Thrips, Green Ply, Red Spider, Red Mite, Scale, Ants, and other pests;
it is also invaluable as a preventative and cure for Mildew and Fungoid
Diseases. 1 part Clensel to 25 parts water.
A NON-POISONOUS Insecticide, but actively antiseptic. IF USED
AS DIRECTED, will not burn, stain, or injure the most delicate plant, and
can be used with safety even when the plants are in bloom or in fruit.
CLENSEL stimulates growth and root action.
CLENSEL is recommended by the Department of Agriculture as a
LURE FOR FRUIT FLY TRAPS. Mixture: I part CLENSEL to 39 parts
water. (See Official Journal.)
CLENSEL has been on the world’s markets for over 30 years, and
is being used throughout Australia. New Zealand, Great Britain, India,
America, and South Africa, with satisfactory results.
CLENSEL exterminates all vermin, and may be sprayed freely with-
out contamination of food or stains to carpets, clothes, etc. It is in-
valuable for use in lavatories and drains.
IMPORTANT.—CLENSEL is a Contact Spray, and must be thoroughly
emulsified and used under pressure.
WHAT THE GOVERNMENT ECONOMIC ENTOMOLOGIST
RECOMMENDS:
For Green Tomato Bug and Pittosporurri Bug, if in pre-wing stage,
spray thoroughly with 1 part CLENSEL to 100 parts of water; if winged
adults are present, use 1 part CLENSEL to 60 parts water. For Fruit
Ply Traps, 1 part CLENSEL to 30 parts water. For Rose Aphis, Black
Aphis, and Thrips, 1 part CLENSEL to 60 parts water. For Red and other
Mites. 1 part CLENSEL to 70 parts water. For Tobacco Plant Pests. 1
part CLENSEL to 25 parts water.
SOLD IN TINS, ALSO 4 and 50 GALLON DRUMS
BERNARD SHAW CO.
COLONIAL MUTUAL CHAMBERS, 53 ST. GEORGE’S TERRACE, PERTH
TELEPHONE 810271
Clensel at a strength of 1 part to 60 parts of water killed 95 per
cent. This result was somewhat surprising, both adult and pre-winged
stages being killed. The 5 per cent, which survived the treatment
were probably not brought into full contact with the spray.
At a strength of 1 part Clensel to 100 parts of water, 95 per
cent, of the bugs were killed. This strength proved lethal to the
unwinged stages of the bug, adults comprising most of the 5 per
cent which survived the treatment.
Mealy Bugs. —These are pests that infest the vines and roses.
The name is derived from the yellowish white secretion resembling
flower which the insect throws off. Carefully rub off with the
hands or brush all infected parts, that readily yield to treatment, and
then spray the plants with kerosene emulsion or a lime and sulphur
wash.


Red Spider. —This pest is commonly found on the under surfaces
of leaves. Here it spins a fine silken web, while it proceeds to suck
the juices out of plants. Wherever the pest appears the plants should
be sprayed with kerosene emulsion, tobacco decoction, or should be
dusted with very fine tobacco dust.
HANDY SPRAYING MIXTURES
The true gardener never neglects spraying operations, and the
best for winter use with the roses, trees and vines is Bordeaux Mix-
ture, which is made as follows:—2lb. of copper sulphate, lib. of new
lime, and 10 gallons of water. Dissolve the sulphate in hot water,
slake the lime to powder, and then mix all together. Slake the lime
with a little water before you turn in the bulk of the water. Keep
the liquid well stirred while in use.
Kerosene Emulsion. —Kerosene, 2 gallons; Sunlight soap, £lb.;
naphthaline, Dissolve the naphthaline in the kerosene. Boil
the soap in one gallon of water. When boiling remove to another
vessel, add the kerosene and naphthaline and churn violently for ten
minutes. This will form a creamy mass, which thickens on cooling.
This constitutes a stock solution. When using, add one part to
eight parts of water, and apply with spray pump.
Burgundy Mixture. —Take 6lb. of bluestone and lib. of common
washing soda; dissolve each separately in 10 gallons of water. Dilute
the bluestone solution to 40 gallons, and then add the soda solution.
For spraying after the fruit has set, make the solution up to 60 gallons
instead of 50 gallons.
Tobacco Wash. —Tobacco, lib.; soft soap, lib.; water, 10 gal-
lons. Soak the tobacco in water for twenty-four hours, draw the
liquor off, and keep the tobacco just below boiling point for three
hours to extract the nicotine. Nicotine is a volatile substance, and if
boiled much of the strength of the mixture will be carried off in
the steam. Mix the two liquors after having strained all refuse from
that which has been boiled. Dissolve the soft soap by simmering in
water, and add the tobacco water in the proportions named in the
formula. Apply with a spray pump in early spring, before the trees
break into blossom.
Resin and Soda Wash. —Dissolve 3lb. of washing soda and 4lb.
of finely-powdered resin over a fire in about 5 pints of water, then
add water to make 5 gallons. Boil well till the resin is thoroughly
dissolved, and the mixture is of a dark brown colour, and then take
1 gallon of the mixture to 7 gallons of water, and apply hot.
Lime-Sulphur Solution can be purchased ready for use, but the
recipe for making it may be found useful for those who like pre-
paring their own mixture. Place lib. of quicklime in a dish, add a


little water and stir it until the bottom of the dish is covered with
a paste. Then add a like quantity of fine sulphur and enough water
to give the liquid a creamy consistency, and again stir until the
boiling shows that the lime is slaking. Let the mixture stand for a
day, stirring it occasionally, then add sufficient water to make five
gallons; strain through a fine sieve. In some orchards where the
liquid is widely employed on vines, roses and fruit trees, the lime
and sulphur are boiled together in a pot of water for half an hour,
and the material diluted when cool.
SIMPLE FUNGUS REMEDIES
Powdery Mildew. —The affected plants should be dusted with
flowers of sulphur applied in three or four applications, with intervals
of about a fortnight between. A simple way to apply is to take a
small square of coarse hessian or cheesecloth, enclosing the sulphur
and tying the four corners together. Hold with one hand and beat
the bundle with a stick over the infected plants.
Shothole Fungus. —Spray with Bordeaux mixture when the trees
are about to burst into leaf, as the spores of the disease winter in the
buds and diseased leaves, attacking the new growth as it forms. The
importance of a thorough first application is at once made obvious.
Odium. —This powdery mildew, called odium, which affects the
vines, can be controlled by sulphur dustings, but these should be
commenced early in the season, as soon as the shoots appear, and
continued regularly until about Christmas time, or as often as the
humidity of the environment renders it necessary. Especially is it a
good thing to dust with sulphur at flowering time.
* * if
"He who may garden is, among men, wise .
The dews of Peace have washed his seeing eyes.
He has clear vision from which doubt has fled;
He calls the rain his friend; when, wintering.
His garden sleeps, he has belief in Spring,
Such faith is nurtured in a garden bed.


"Plant the seeds of kindness where you pass along,
Keep the note of courage always in your song;
Though the Fates may drive you onward day by day.
Spread the cheerful gospel as you go your way."
PART V
CONTENTS
Vegetable Fragments
Vegetables
Soil Preparation, etc.
Vegetable Seed for Sowing
Beets
Broad Beans
Cabbage
Cauliflower
French Beans
Melons
Water Melons
Rock Melons
Tomatoes
Cucumbers
Pumpkins
Vegetable Marrows
Onions
Peas
Potatoes
Rhubarb
Spinach and Silver Beet


(Fo secure the best results from your garden
you must put the best into it,
therefore use —
l
i Everything of the
Plants
Bulks
Fruit Trees
Poses
1 specialise in Pansies, Sweet Peas,
Antirrhinum and Stocks in separate
colour or mixture.
Spray pumps and gardening requisites
always available.
Artificial Manures and Insecticides
supplied in large or small quantities.
All orders even the smallest have the
same careful and prompt attention.
Jl TRIAL SOLICITED
Catalogue and price list posted free.
E. SYMONDS
Seed and Plant Merchant
Best in—
Seeds
200-202 William St.
Perth
Also No. 6
New Metropolitan Markets
I


i m 11 11 1 11 1 ii n i m 11 11 1 mu 11 1 m ii i n m 1 14 1 1 n i m 1 11 in n n 11 1 n i m mu ii i mi ii m ii 11 1 n i mi i mi i ii ti i ii im ii ii ii m i m ii m i ii ii mi'
1 mmiitiiitimifiiiMPinMiitimiMMiitmiMiiiiKimiiiiHitiiiiimiiiritiM mi uii iiiimiiiini nun tiiiiiitiiiiiiiiiiniiKiti m iiiMiiiiiniiniiitiiiiiiiimur
Let
Flowers
76 FUQH ST.
FREMARTLE
lake your message
of happiness, good
wishes or sympathy
Richardsons
Florists
FM2784 Shop
FM2621 Kes.
IDedding bouquets, Cut Flowers,
Bon Uoqage Posies,
Funeral Designs
Plants, Shrubs, Fruit Trees
Uegelable and Flower Seeds
FREMANTLE'S LEADINQ FLORISTS |
3rfiiiiiiiiniiiimiiiiittiiMiiiiitiiiiiiiiiiiiitiimiMiiMiiiiiiiiiiMiiiiiiiimii>iimiiiiiiiinimmiiiiiiiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiimiiiiiiHiiiiiii)
VEGETABLE FRAGMENTS
Don’t cry and cultivate more ground than can be managed, or there
will always be a neglected portion of the garden.
Don’t sow seeds too thickly, for, if unfavourable weather is experi-
enced, many of the seedlings will be lost through damping off.
Don’t neglect the seedlings once they are up. Neglect causes many
disappointments. Keep them continually moist, but not over-wet.
Don’t expect results unless you work for them. Gardening is pleasur-
able work.
Don’t overcrowd plants, but give each subject room for development.
Don’t use dirty pots, but see that they are well cleaned; dirt greatly
interferes with successful cultivation.
Don’t be mean if you have learned a wrinkle or two; pass it on, and
share your knowledge with your neighbours.
Don’t forget the sun shines on us all; if }'our pleasures in the garden
are great, share them with others.
Don’t be afraid to ask a gardening man a few questions; most true
gardeners are great old gossips, and as a rule share their knowledge.


VEGETABLES
SOIL PREPARATION, ETC.
successful methods than
Through the ' winter
months, when growth
is slow, thinning out
goes hand-in-hand with
good cultivation, and beds of Lettuce, Carrots, Turnips, or other
root crops that are systematically thinned out, reach maturity much
earlier than beds left untouched. Generally speaking, it is best to
make two operations of the thinning, the first as soon as the seedlings
have grown big enough to handle, or just when they have made their
first true leaf, and again when they are considerably larger and left
at the proper distance for maturing.
If vegetables of first-class quality are to be grown, then the
manure heap or its equivalent in artificial manure is necessary. No
manure gives such good results as farmyard or stable manure. It may
be dug into the ground in autumn or winter in a half-decayed con-
dition, but if applied in spring or summer it should be decayed before
use.


Many crops can be materially assisted by the application of
quick-acting foods during the growing season. Such crops as Cabbage,
Cauliflower, Brussels Sprouts and Onions are greatly benefited by small
dressings of sulphate of ammonia or nitrate of soda, applied at inter-
vals of two weeks. This is best applied in small quantities, the merest
sprinkling along the sides of the plants being sufficient. The finer
the powder the quicker the action, and if applied during showery
weather it dissolved quickly and the rain carries it down to the roots,
thus stimulating and encouraging top growth. If given when the
soil is comparatively dry, moisture is necessary to make it quickly
available.
Vegetables, as is well known, assimilate varied substances from
the soil. For instance, those which develop chiefly leaf growth, such
as Cabbage, Spinach and Lettuce, benefit most by nitrogenous manures
such as nitrate of soda, sulphate of ammonia, and potash; while
vegetables grown for the value of their roots and tubers, such as
Potatoes, Turnips, Radish, and others, need chiefly potassic manures.
Tomatoes, Peas and Beans need phosphatic manures, and the best way
of applying these in the form of superphosphate and bonedust. Lime
is chiefly valuable for the quality it possesses in setting free other
substances in the soil for assimilation by the roots of plants, and does
most good in land which has had much yard manure, as it corrects
acidity and acts as a general soil sweetener.
It is understood that no one would think of commencing opera-
tions upon a dry soil. Damp soil is the only thing to handle. Con-
templating work upon a seed patch, or any other operation requiring
digging, the sprinkler should be brought into operation a couple of
days before work is commenced.
The importance of having a rotation of crops with vegetables
is most necessary, and, wherever practicable, however small the garden
may be, the principle of changing the crop should be put into practice.
If a deep-rooting crop, such as Carrots or Parsnips, was sown last
year on a piece of ground, this season a crop of a surface-rooting
nature should be put in. Potatoes, Cabbages or any member of the
Brassica family, and, in fact, most other vegetables, should not be
grown year after year in the same ground. The Onion plant seems
to be an exception to the general rule.
Beans should follow Cabbages, Parsnips, Carrots, Potatoes, and be
followed by the Cabbage tribe, Leeks, and Turnips.
Beet should follow Cabbage, Leeks, Onions, Celery and Potatoes,
and be followed by Cabbage, Cauliflower, Peas and Beans.
Cabbage should follow Peas, Beans, Onions, Potatoes, and be fol-
lowed by Onions, Beet, Carrots, and Potatoes.
Carrots should follow Onions, Cabbage, Leeks, Celery, Potatoes,
and be followed by Cabbage, Onion, Peas, and Beans.
Celery should follow Potatoes, Cabbage, and early crops, and be
followed by Peas, Beans, Onions, Leeks, and Potatoes.


Leeks should follow Cabbage, Beans, Peas, Potatoes, and be fol-
lowed by Peas, Carrots and Parsnips.
Onions should follow Cabbage, Beans, Peas, Celery, Potatoes, and
be followed by Cabbage, Peas and Beans.
Potatoes should follow Cabbage, Beans, Peas, Onions, Leeks, and
be followed by Peas, Cabbage and Celery.
VEGETABLE SEED FOR SOWING
The following details given by an authority as to what may be
done with specified quantities of soil should prove helpful:—Broad
Beans: One quart will suffice for four rows each 15ft. long. French
Beans: One quart will sow nine rows each 15ft. long. Beet: One
ounce for three rows, each 15ft. long. Cabbage and Cauliflower: One
ounce (broadcast) for one bed 4ft. wide and 13ft. long. Carrot: One
ounce will sow four rows each 25 ft. long. Turnips: One ounce to
ten rows each 15 ft. long. Lettuce: One ounce to four rows each 30ft.
long. Onions: One ounce to ten rows each 10ft. long. Parnips: One
ounce to ten rows each 15 ft. long. Peas: One quart to eight rows
each 15ft, long. Potatoes: Fourteen pounds to 100 ft. of row set
one foot apart. Spinach: One ounce to six rows each 10ft. long.
Radish: One ounce broadcast to bed 4ft. wide and 30ft. long. Small
seed should be mixed with sand or dry sifted soil to facilitate distri-
bution. As a rule short rows of Carrots, Parnips, Spinach, Lettuce,
etc., are most convenient and enable the ground to be cropped more
successfully than long rows. . Cabbage and Cauliflower from seed
sown broadcast have to be transplanted when large enough. Culture
and transplanting will be facilitated if the seeds are sown in lines and
not broadcast.
BEETS
During the hot weather there are few better salads than Red
Beet, so a few should be grown in every garden, because it is much
better pulled just before it is wanted for cooking. The best and
quickest maturing variety is the Egyptian turnip-rooted kind. This
does well even in shallow soils, and produces fair-sized roots without
running to seed. For Red Beets the ground should be worked well,
but not heavily manured. Freshly manured ground produces coarse
roots. Take out drills lin. deep and 12in. apart, and sow the seed
rather thinly; afterwards thin out the plants to about 4in. apart in
the rows. Keep the soil between the rows well stirred, but be careful
of the roots, as the slightest cut makes them bleed. While the plants
are growing a light dressing of nitrate of soda between the rows, or an
occasional watering with weak liquid ammonia, will help them along.
A row ! ot two of Red Beets in the kitchen garden, along with a few
plants of Silver Beet, are very useful and profitable.


BROAD BEANS
Broad Beans are very hardy,
although they do not succeed
well in hot weather. The sowing
period in Australasia extends
from the autumn throughout
the winter, and in the cooler
districts, for late crops, up to
September.
The seed should be sown in
drills, from 2ft. 6in. to 3ft.
apart, according to the growth
of the variety and the strength
of the soil. Place the Beans
about 3 in. apart in the drills,
triangularly, so that they will
form a double row, and cover
them to the depth of 3 to 4 in.
If the soil is very dry it is advis-
able to water the drills previous
to sowing, in order to assist ger-
mination, and for the same
reason the seed may be soaked
for a few hours previously.
After sowing, avoid raking the
surface soil too fine, as it is bet-
ter to leave it a little rough for
large seeds. As soon as the plants
attain the height of 5 or 6 in.
the earth should be drawn up to
them on either side, 3 or 4 in.
deep. Should any vacancies
occur in the rows they may be
filled, as the Beans can be safely
transplanted, but as a general
rule this practice is undesirable.
CABBAGE
Cabbage is grown very extensively, and often forms one of the
most profitable of market garden crops. It is suitable for cultivation
in practically every country. There arc numerous varieties suited for
sowing at different times during the year; in fact, sowings may be
profitably made every month, except in certain districts, perhaps
during April, May, or June.


The young plants are transplanted usually in rows from two feet
to three feet apart, according to the variety planted.
Soil. —Cabbage are gross feeders, and prefer a deep, retentive
loam which has received a good dressing of stable manure some time
before planting.
In the growing of crops of the Cabbage tribe sufficient fertilisers
and water should be applied to enable the crops to be grown without
any undue check, which probably would deprive the Cabbage of that
crisp, tender, bright freshness which enhances its value both on the
market and table.
CAULIFLOWER
Cauliflowers are not so hardy as their kindred Broccoli, and will
not stand severe frosts. They are suited for warm climates or for
spring and summer growth. They should be planted out about three
feet apart.
The first point in growing Cauliflowers successfully is to provide
an abundance of rich food, and to hustle them right up to heading
time. If you purpose going right on from beginning to end, make a
seed box in the usual way. Use good loamy soil, carrying a percentage
of old cow manure, and sow your seed lightly. Meanwhile, get your
ground ready for planting by working in a liberal dressing of well-
decayed stable manure and add an ounce of superphosphate and bone-
dust to the square yard. Dig your ground well and deep, and let it
settle down, and when your seedlings attain a handy size, carrying
four leaves, set them out in rows two feet apart each way, and water
in thoroughly.


FRENCH BEANS
this, the bed be pre-
pared so that no
moisture can collect
immediately round
the seed. A loose, open soil is imperative, and it needs to be well
worked, so as to be friable. For early sowings choose a piece of soil
on which a crop has been grown during the winter, and been repeat-
edly worked up. Raise low ridges 2ft. apart and about 3in. above
soil, level and sow the seed on top of the ridges. Surplus moisture
thus drains away from around the beans, and as sunshine on mild days
shines on both sides of the ridges, the soil is warmed and very few
seeds will rot. Sow once a fortnight, the first two lots, say, on ridges,
and then the next lots in the ordinary way of shallow drills.


MELONS
There are two methods of growing Melons—by the hill process
or by the saucer-shaped bed. Almost any soil will do, provided
sufficient manure is used. Where the ground is inclined to be heavy,
rubbish heap siftings and compost can be added. Take out a hole
2ft. by 2ft. and about 18in. deep. Fill this to the top with manure,
then add some of the earth to it. A hill is thus formed, on top of
which a shallow depression may be made for sowing the plants or
seeds. The saucer method is to go a bit deeper, say, up to 2ft. Fill
in with two-thirds manure, then add earth and level off, so that as
the lot sinks it will form a shallow pan. In following this plan, it is
necessary to provide drainage in the bottom of the hole. The holes
or hills should be about 6ft. apart. Two or three Melons to each
hole is quite sufficient. Sow five or six seeds, and thin out the weakest
when the first rough leaves have formed.
WATER MELONS
The Water Melon is a fairly strong grower where plenty of
manure has been supplied. In its early stages, some forcing material,
such as liquid cow manure, may be applied. It will not be found
necessary to pinch the shoots to induce fruiting, but good results
will follow if the
plants are pegged
ing the numbers
on each vine.
There are many methods of testing when Melons are ripe. Some,
with a knife, slit out a section to investigate. A fairly reliable guide
is the tendril on the end of the Melon. If this is green and healthy,
leave the Melon alone; when it dries up, it is time to pick.


ROCK MELONS
Rock or Musk
Melons are as
widely appreciat-
ed as the Water
Melons. The cul-
tivation is on all-
fours with Water
Melons, except
that laterals
should be induced
by pinching back
the leaders. It is
unnecessary t o
shorten the later-
al s when they
start to spread. It
is a good plan to
pick Rock Melons
a few days before
they actually ma-
ture.
CUCUMBERS
These may be sown in hills or holes 6ft. apart, or in a bed. There
is much to be said for the latter method. The Cucumber is frequently
slow to mature, and runs to leaf if given too rich stimulants. To
make sure of Cucumber-bearing growth, pinch the leaders to start
laterals, and pinch the laterals later. If allowed to remain after
maturity, they impair the productivity of the vine.
For sweetness and flavour, the apple-shaped leads, and it is
certainly the variety for the home gardener.
PUMPKINS
The Pumpkin is an excellent vegetable, and, with a dry shed, the
season’s crop can be kept for twelve months or more. In this respect
it ranks with the Potato and Onion as an economical crop. Cultural
methods are on the same lines as with Melons and Cucumbers, except
that a dozen feet instead of six is wise between the holes. If the fruit
is shy in setting —a frequent fault in Pumpkins—pinch the runners
ruthlessly.
Where it is intended to store them, they should be picked when
fully ripe and left in the sun to dry. Cut the stem about 2in. from


the Pumpkin and
let it dry in the
open. It will soon
become hard,
when the crop
may be removed
into the shed.
The Ironbark is
as good a setter as
any of them, and,
with the Trom-
bone, should form
the basis of the
sowing. Turk’s
Turban is not so
tough in the skin
and is equally
good eating.
VEGETABLE MARROWS
Cultivation with these is the same as for the rest of the Marrow
tribe, except that you can economise in space between the holes.
One plant is enough for each. In the base of the bush varieties, 3ft.
between holes is quite enough. The bush kind, indeed, is the ideal
thing for the
home garden,
They mature
quickly, fruit
rather well, and
s:, occupied by
ONIONS
Fairly rich soil
i s required i n
making the seed
bed for Onions,
and a good tilth is
necessary. After
manuring and
digging over,
work it as fine as
possible, and sow
the seed in shal-


low drills, covering with a mixture of sand and fine sifted stable
manure. The Onion grows in hairpin fashion when small, and it is
important that the top soil should be loose and moist. Many sow the
seed broadcast, but the drill system results in better plants, that are
more easily handled at transplanting time. It is always wise to thin
out early, so that good stocky plants are available when the time
comes for planting out. The bed Onions occupy when transplanted
should be well manured and finely dug, and if a good dressing of lime
beforehand is given, so much the better. In planting out it is well
to allow plenty of room, which can be done by making the rows a
foot apart and spacing the plants nine inches from each other. Beds
four or five feet wide are preferable to large patches, which in the
hoeing and weeding are constantly trodden over.
PEAS
Like all other plants,
much depends for success
on soil preparation, and
Peas like a rich friable soil
carrying plenty of lime.
If the ground lacks lime it
should be added either by
the use of gypsum or air-
slaked lime. Further, the
soil should be fairly deep
to allow the roots to go
well down. In shallow
soils they are likely, owing
to their nearness to the
surface, to get dry, with
the result that invariably
the crop fails. Manures
should be applied in greater
or lesser quantities accord-
ing to the state of the soil
—one of the best fertilis-
ers for Pea culture is well-
rolled stable manure. Fowl
manure as a surface dress-
ing sprinkled between the
rows and hoed in after the
seedlings are two inches or
more above the ground
does a great deal of good.
Superphosphate as an arti-
ficial manure can be used
to advantage on the Pea
plot.


In planting Peas the height of the variety should regulate the
distance between the rows; that is to say, that a variety growing to
a height of about 18 inches should be sown in drills about 18 inches
apart, and so on. In the rows the Peas should be planted neither too
thickly nor too thinly, and about an average distance for each seed
is one and a half inches apart. In sowing take out drills six inches
wide and three inches deep. Such a drill will have a flat bottom and
the Peas should not be in a direct line, but in rows one on either side
of the drill. Before putting the seed in water the drill well so that
the moisture goes down at least five to six inches. Cover the seeds
with about three inches of soil and then topdress the drills with a
good covering of compost heap material. Many prefer the dwarf
varieties because no staking is required, but the majority bear best
with staking, and even the dwarf sorts appreciate staking. Varieties
from which a selection can be made are The Daisy, Yorkshire Hero,
Richard Seddon, Stratagem, William Hurst, and Little Gem.
POTATOES
In growing Potatoes for the home garden, the objective should
be to have the tubers maturing at a time when Potatoes are scarce.
In planting it is well to have the tubers in a forward sprouting con-
dition, and if the seed is at all backward, sprouting through the aid
of a damp bag should be encouraged. The advantages of sprouting
the sets prior to planting are numerous, resulting in better yields and
earlier maturity, and ensuring the planting of vigorous, productive
tubers only, with a uniform development of crop. When unsprouted
sets are planted, especially during cold weather, it will generally be
found that some tubers will be much slower in starting in growth and
a certain percentage often rot. Before planting, especially for early
crops, it is always well to see that the seed is clean. Any seed carrying
signs of disease or scab should be discarded. A solution of formalin
into which the potatoes are steeped is often used as a check against
disease. Half a pint of formalin in eight gallons of water is a suitable
strength. If the temperature of the solution can be brought to 120
deg. Fahr., a two-minute immersion will be long enough; otherwise,
twenty minutes may be allowed. Potatoes stored away for seed pur-
poses should be examined regularly and any diseased tubers removed.
Potatoes will not keep if stored while wet. It is therefore advisable
to dig them during fine weather, and leave them exposed to the sun
and air for a day or two before removing them.
Loose or sandy soil heavily manured with decomposed stable
manure is best for potatoes. A handful of bonemeal sprinkled in the
trenches will increase the yield considerably. Failing stable manure,
good crops can be grown with bonemeal and super. Carmen and
Up-to-Date are the best varieties for the amateur, but as a late crop
on stiff soils. Red Skin, Pink Eye or Mannistee can be grown. Potatoes
must have room to develop, and the rows should be at least eighteen
inches apart and twelve to fifteen inches between each plant.


RHUBARB
Every home garden should grow a root or two of Rhubarb.
Whether used for a pie or stewed, Rhubarb makes an inviting dish,
and is particularly valuable as a first course appetiser at breakfast.
The flavour can always be improved by adding a little piece of orange
peel to the cooking. Several varieties are marketed, but Topp’s Winter
and Mould’s Cherry are varieties that stand out. As the plant is a
perennial, and can be left in the same spot for a few seasons, it is
necessary to prepare the ground carefully. Any suburban soil seems
to suit it, providing it has been abundantly fertilised. Rhubarb will
take any amount of stable manure and deep digging. The best scheme
is to trench the plot, and in five feet there is room for two rows.
Remove the first foot of top soil; then incorporate with the bottom
soil a liberal quantity of good old rotted stable or cow manure. A bed
may be prepared in early autumn, and this will allow the ground to be
turned over at least a couple of times before the roots are planted. It is
important to select an open situation, as Rhubarb does not do well
under trees or in places which do not receive the maximum of sun.
Established beds will begin to throw up shoots towards the end of
winter, and it is then necessary to spread a thick layer of manure over
the bed and dig it in.
SPINACH AND SILVER BEET
Two of the good vegetables easily grown, and as a rule fairly
pest-proof, are Spinach and Silver Beet. With some the English
Prickly Spinach is preferred because of its distinct flavour, while there
are those who lean towards the Silver Beet because of its white succu-
lent leaves. In growing either, select a bed well out in the open, that
gets plenty of sun. The soil should be fairly good and well enriched
with stable or cow manure. The seed can be sown in boxes and
transplanted, but the usual method is to sow thinly in shallow drills
a foot apart, and if the plants come up thickly, thin them out
to about six inches between the plants. When growing strongly the
plants can be stimulated with liquid manure. The leaves are picked
separately (not cut), and if care is exercised in this direction the plants
will continue to crop for quite a long period.
TOMATOES
Tomatoes are essentially summer growing plants, requiring much
heat and moisture to promote quick growth, but planted out early
and given a little shelter from cold winds, they can be established
outside during the colder weather. Although they make but slow
growth, strong, sturdy bushes form on which very early fruit sets


with the first warmer days of early spring, and ripe fruit is obtained
when most people just begin to plant out. Many of the failures come
about through trying to grow the Tomato repeatedly in the same
place or in land that has become impregnated with fungoids. Like
most of the other summer vegetables, Tomatoes do best in new ground,
and they should never be grown in the same soil two years following.
Nor is it wise to even plant in ground that has carried a Potato crop.
Tomatoes and Potatoes are closely related, and liable to the same kinds
of disease, and it is therefore best to plant either in land that has
carried an entirely different class of crop altogether. Previous to
planting it is a
good plan to
treat the soil
to 1 a heavy
dressing o f
lime; this not
only tends to
destroy many
germs, but,
acting chemic-
ally, makes the
insoluble plant
foods available
for the roots.
It should also
be remember-
ed that Toma-
toes are gross
feeders and the
richer the soil
the quicker
and more vig-
orous the growth, and with the lime liberating many of the salts, the
result is quick growing plants that are less likely to become diseased.
If the soil is poor it must necessarily be heavily manured, and if well
decayed stable manure is not available, chemical manures, such as
bonedust or super, or potash, can be used. Rather than use fresh
manures, these are the more safe, as experience has proved that fresh
stable manure causes the roots to rot off, especially so in wet sodden
soil. Beds that have carried Cabbage and Cauliflower, if heavily
manured at planting time, make good positions for Tomatoes, no
further manures being necessary, except a handful of bonedust dug in
with the trowel at planting time. Early failures with many amateurs
occur in planting out plants that have been grown on a hot bed or
under glass, and have not been properly hardened off. Such plants
are generally pale in colour, drawn and sappy in substance. It is
always best to choose small thick-set stocky plants with dark green
or even browning-looking leaves. These can be depended upon to
make good bushes; rarely does the forced tall spindly plant stool out
into i good robust bush. For early planting the dwarf varieties


PERTH'S LEADING
HOUSE FOR
GARDEN TOOLS
Lawn Mowers
Qarden Hose and Filliaqs
Lawn Sprinklers
Sprayers and Sqrinqes
Hedqe Shears
Spades, Rakes, Hoes
Diqqinq Forks
.Atomizers
Sole Agents for
CARTER’S ENGLISH
TESTED SEEDS
Flower, Ueqelable & Farm
Send for Cataloguc-'Post Free
We want you to call
and see our
Assortment of these
Goods
cst>
Secateurs
Pruninq Knives
Pruninq Saws
Qarden Trowels
IPeed Forks
IDaler Cans
Qarden lUheelbarrows
Blood and Bone
manures
BETHELL THURSTON LTD.
WXL.LIA M STREET, PERTH
should be used, but even these should be staked, so as to keep the
fruit when setting off the ground. All the air and sunlight possible
hastens the maturing, and while three and four stems can be left,
quicker results come from growing only one stem. All laterals should
be cut, and as fast as they appear, and if this is done the bunches of
flowers are made larger and nearly every bloom sets fruit. If no
pruning is done, and all laterals are allowed to develop, the flowers are
starved, only a few open, and most of them drop off before the fruit
sets. Staking plays a most important part, as it keeps the plants off
the ground, thus preventing disease, while it also does away with over-
crowding. If the plants are trelllsed and grown to the single stem the
rows should be 2ft. 6in. apart, and the plants spaced out to about 18in.
apart, but if grown as bushes the rows should be fully 4ft. apart.


PART VI
Monthly Calendar of Operations
January—
Care of Summer Beds; Watering, etc.
February—
Autumn Preparations; Summer Spraying; Early Veget-
ables.
March —
Bulbs; Dahlias; Chrysanthemums; Plant Houses.
April—
Roses; Mulching Beds and Boxes; Bulbs; Annuals.
May—
Autumn Work; Flowers; Vegetables; Fruit Garden.
June —
Winter Plants; Perennials; Shrubs and Climbers.
July-
Rose Pruning Time; Shrubs; Vegetables.
August—
Half-hardy Annuals; Summer Seeds; Flowers and Veg-
etables.
September—
Spring Operations; Herbaceous Perennials; Lawns.
October —
Aphis and Pests; Plant Houses; Summer Annuals.
November —
Watering and Mulching; Summer Beds, etc.
December —
Dahlia Planting; Autumn Preparations.


CALENDAR
The preceding sections and the field of operations covered (within
the limits possible) have been written expressly for the amateur. In
conclusion, for ready reference and general guidance, the introduction
of a calendar setting out the operations for each month will doubtless
prove acceptable.
In the broad sense, the information will be found suitable for
most districts in all States, but with gardening, as in all other walks
of life, individuality, commonsense and judgment must be used in the
application as regards much of the advice given, especially as locations,
situations, and climatic conditions vary.
JANUARY
The Flower Garden
Usually this is one of the hottest months, when little else but watering,
mulching and surface cultivation can be done.
Transplanting into the open beds will be found difficult, but seeds of
Miniature Sunflowers, Zinnias, Balsam, Cosmos, African Marigolds
and Amaranthus can be sown in the open, providing that neces-
sary thinning out is done and attention given.
In shaded and protected seed boxes, seeds of Primula, Pansy, Coleus,
Cineraria, Cyclamen and Iceland Poppy can be raised for early
winter flowering.
Bulbs and corms for division should be lifted, carefully cleaned and
stored away in a cool, dry place.
Dahlia tubers and green plants from cuttings can be planted, but must
in the early stages be shaded from the hot sun’s rays.
Chrysanthemums, perennials and herbaceous plants in the borders
should be securely tied and staked.
Hedges should be kept well trimmed.
Lawns must be well watered, closely cut and rolled.
Roses may be budded. Bushes that flowered well in the spring should
be rested and water restricted. It is a mistake to force the Rose
into action through the dry months.
Verandah plants, such as Aspidistras, Palms and Ferns inside should
be copiously watered and the leaves kept clean of insect pests.


Plant out Tomatoes for autumn crops; also Cucumbers, Marrows,
Pumpkins, etc., along with Sweet Potatoes.
Sow Beet, Carrot, Cabbage, Cauliflower, Brussels Sprouts and Lettuce.
Guard against all insect pests by spraying.
Sow a little Early White Flat Onion seed.
With water plentiful, in shady spots sow a small quantity of Radish,
Mustard and Cress seed.
Plant and water a few Shallots for early greens.
* * *
The Fruit Garden
All fruit trees and vines will require close attention with watering.
A thorough soaking at least once a week should be given.
Water and mulch Orange and Lemon trees, pruning out weak, sickly
or dead wood.
Top long canes of Vines and tie securely to trellis. If the crop is too
large, thin out bunches to improve the balance.
Bud Peaches, Apricots, Nectarines, Plums, Apples, and Pears.
Summer prune Peaches and Apricots.
FEBRUARY
The Flower Garden
Commence to prepare all ground for autumn planting.
Continue to water thoroughly during dry weather.
Stake, tie and thin out all lateral shoots on Chrysanthemums and
Dahlias.
Layer the Carnations.
Put in cuttings of Fuchsias, Verbenas and Begonias.
Sow in pans Cinerarias, Primulas, Petunias, Calceolarias, and Delphi-
niums; also Ranunculus and Anemone seed.
In pots or boxes raise Pansies, Violas and Iceland Poppies, along with
Primula Malicoides, for early bedding effects.
Spray all Roses showing signs of disease.
Feed, thin and disbud the Chrysanthemums. From about the middle
of the month select all crown and terminal buds for show pur-
poses.
Keep-all annuals well watered, removing all spent blooms regularly.
Re-pot Zonales and strike cuttings.


Start to prepare all ground for Sweet Pea planting in March.
Continue to sow seeds of Phlox, Stocks, Carnations, Antirrhinums,
Pansies, and Violas.
Liquid manure freely used now will greatly increase the quality of all
growing and flowering plants.
The Vegetable Garden
Growing crops and beds should receive a good mulch of old stable
manure, litter or lawn clippings.
Growing crops of Beans, Tomatoes and the Melon tribe should be
well watered.
Manure, dig and work all vacant ground for autumn planting.
Continue to sow Dwarf and Runner Beans (Epicure and Kentucky
Wonder).
The Vegetable Garden
If possible, water heavily all growing crops, renewing mulcjh where
necessary.
Peg down long shoots of Sweet Potatoes, covering with mulching.
Sow Cabbage, Cauliflower, Kale, Savoy, and Lettuce seed in sheltered
positions.
Sow Lettuce where plants are to grow, thinning these out when making
secondary leaves.
Sow early White Onions for first crop.
Make small sowings of Carrot and Parsnip in a sheltered place.
Sow early Swedes.
Plant French Beans for succession crops.
Water foliage of Beans and Melons of an evening during dry weather
to check red spider.
The Fruit Garden
Attend to all summer spraying of Fruit Trees and Vines.
Summer prune Peach and Apricot trees.
If necessary, thin out Orange and Lemon.
Stop laterals of Vines, and, if on trellis, thin out too dense foliage to
allow the fruit to ripen evenly.


MARCH
The Flower Garden
This is the month that Dahlias and Chrysanthemums should receive
every consideration. Staking, tieing and disbudding must receive
constant attention.
Plant out all varieties of spring flowering bulbs, such as Daffodils,
Narcissus, Freesias, Anemones, Ixias, and Ranunculus, reserving
a few for late blooms.
Shrubs and Creepers raised in pots can safely be planted where the
water supply is good.
Put in cuttings of Verbenas, Penstemons and Carnations.
Sow Sturt Peas. Scald the seed prior to sowing.
Divide and re-plant Polyanthus and Auriculas.
Take up, divide and re-plant various herbaceous Iris.
Cut back Petunias, Antirrhinums, Verbenas; and supply liquid manure
for a second crop of bloom.
Sow Sweet Pea seeds; stake and liquid manure early sowings; pinch
back to produce stronger lateral growth.
Bed out Cinerarias, Primula Malacoides, Iceland Poppies, Canterbury
Bells, Foxgloves, and other early perennials.
* *
Plant Houses
Re-pot Cyclamens. Pot up Cinerarias, Primulas, Calceolarias, and
other seedling plants for pot culture.
Examine cuttings of Daphne, Petunias, Pelargoniums, and others, and
single-pot when rooted.
Pot up a few bulbs of Hyacinths, Narcissi, Freesias, and Daffodils for
winter blooming.
Supply Begonias and Gloxinias with liquid manure to help on flowers.
APRIL
This is the month that ushers in autumn and is generally regarded
as the gardener’s busiest time. Not only have all summer displays to
be cleared away, but all vacant spaces must be refilled for the spring
display. All bulb planting must be completed, and Chrysanthemums
fed for show purposes; Roses well cared for, for the final lot of blooms;
and seed boxes kept well stocked with all lines. In short, there should
be no spare minutes throughout the month.


The Flower Garden
Roses. —Keep the soil stirred where the trees are not protected with a
mulch. Apply stimulants. Dried fowl manure or dried blood
applied sparingly, to the surface soil will help to produce better
blooms.
Dahlias. —Carefully stake and tie the plants to prevent destruction by
wind. Thin out weak growths. Disbud for larger blooms. Give
more and more water now. Scatter dried fowl manure or dried
blood over the surface and water it in. Liquid made from cow
manure and soot may be given once a week, but the dry manure
scattered over the surface will dispense with this attention.
Mulching. —Renew the mulch where it has, become thin. Half-decayed
manure will serve the purpose and add a stimulant as the water
passes through it.
Carnations. —Plant in prepared soil, or prepare new ground for planting
out young plants at the end of the month.
Beds and Boxes. —Prepare these for general seed sowing. Seed sowing
in winter will not give best results. Sandy soil is best for sowing.
Manures must not be added, but a sifting of spent manure to
the surface after sowing will help.
Bulbs. —Plant out Anemones, Babianas, Gladioli, Daffodils, Freesias,
Hyacinths, Ixias, Lachenalias, Ranunculus, Spanish Iris, Snow-
flakes, Tulips, and Watsonias.
Flowers. —Sow in seed beds or boxes Antirrhinum, Aquilegia, Arctotis,
Beilis Perennis (English Double Daisy), Calliopsis, Candytuft,
Canterbury Bell, Carnation, Centaurea (Cornflower), Chrysan-
themum, Clarkia, Dianthus, Delphinium, Eschscholtzia (Cali-
fornian Poppy), Forget-Me-Not, Foxglove, Freesia, Gaillardia,
Geum, Gerbera, Godetia, Gypsophila, Heliotrope, Helichrysum
(Everlastings), Hollyhock, Larkspur, Leptosyne, Linaria, Lobelia,
Lupin, Marigold, Mimulus, Nasturtium, Nemesia, Nemophilia,
Pansy, Penstemon, Polyanthus, Poppy (Iceland and Shirley), Prim-
rose, Pyrethrum, Rhodanthe, Scabious, Schizanthus, Sweet Wil-
liam, Stocks, Verbena, Violet, Viola, Wallflower.
Sow where plants are to flower: Hunnemania, Nasturtium, Mignonette,
Sweet Pea.
Cuttings. —Prepare and strike in boxes Pelargoniums, Marguerite
Daisies, Evergreen Shrubs.
Hedge Plants, Shrubs and Climbers. —Any of the evergreen plants may
be put out if attention is given to the watering and the plants
are shaded for a few days from the hot sun. Deciduous trees
and shrubs are best planted in the winter, when they are dormant.
Trim the hedge. Supply with water. Plant new hedges.
Plant out shrubs. Water well, and mulch.


The Vegetable Garden
Lime and rough dig all vacant ground.
Continue planting Cabbages, Cauliflowers, Lettuce, Broccoli, Brussels
Sprouts, etc.
Plant Onions, Leeks, Shallots, Garlic, Peas, Broad Beans, and Potatoes.
MAY
May generally brings to a conclusion the autumn display, and is
the end to the summer garden. Towards the end of the month Dahlias
can be cut back and the tubers left in the ground for a while to
mature. Chrysanthemums that have finished can also be cut back.
Roses can be rested prior to pruning in June. Early Pansies or Iceland
Poppies coming into flower can be assisted with waterings of weak
liquid manure. Autumn leaves as they fall should be carefully gath-
ered and removed to the compost heap to rot for leaf mould.
The Flower Garden
Sow seeds of all varieties of annuals, biennials and perennials.
Bed out seedlings of every description.
Make cuttings of Carnations, Geraniums, Penstemons, Antirrhinums,
and various shrubby perennials.
Bed out early rooted Carnations.
Divide and replant herbaceous perennials.
Cut back straggling shrubs and creepers.
Dig in between shrubs and herbaceous plants.
Plant all manner of shrubs, creepers and climbers.
Establish new hedges, watering freely during dry weather.
Plant bulbs stored during summer.
Lift and store late-flowering Gladioli.
Rose cuttings put in now root readily and will be in bloom in the
spring.
Prepare the ground for planting Roses when wet weather sets in.
Hoe in between early seedlings and apply fresh mulching. Liquid
manure should be applied if at all backward.
Rake and remove summer leaves to compost heap.
Layer shrubs and climbers if stock is wanted.


The Vegetable Garden
Dig all vacant beds, leave surface rough, and dress with lime.
Sow seed of Onions, Peas, Broad Beans, Beet, Carrots, Parsnips, Turnips,
Lettuce, Radish, Leek, and Cress.
Sow Tomato seed on heat for early fruiting under glass.
Plant Onions, Potatoes, Garlic, Shallots, Potato and Tree Onions, and
Mushroom Spawn, to prepared beds.
Water early vegetables heavily during dry spells, renewing the mulch-
ing where necessary. Watch for Cabbage Moth in early plants,
and spray with arsenate of lead when first noticed.
Keep Sweet Potatoes well supplied with water to increase the size of
. tubers.
Trombones, Marrows, Pumpkins and Melons stored when fully ripe
will keep in good condition well into winter.
The Fruit Garden
Commence planting all kinds of deciduous trees if the foliage has fallen.
Early varieties of Peach trees can be pruned at the end of the month.
Plant Oranges, Lemons, Loquats, Medlars, and Guavas.
Hoe in between Strawberries, applying a dressing of bonedust at the
same time. Unless wanted for stock, cut out all runners.
Plant out strawberries in dry districts. Strong rooted runners give
early fruit.
JUNE
June is the month when, generally speaking, the garden is a
thing of barren spaces, almost reduced to stem, stalk and fallen leaves,
with very little in the way of blossom to cheer the eye. Unless it is
for Iceland Poppies, Jonquils and a few early Sweet Peas, June is no
month for flowers, and can be written down as the Omega of flower
life. Winter, however, teaches its lessons—though grey days, leafless
trees and blank spaces are things to hastily brush aside, they are in
reality only the forerunner of good times ahead. The pruning of
Roses must be started, fruit trees planted, and plant life generally
encouraged by constant hoeing and cultivation. Other operations
are given.


The Flower Garden
Seed sowings should be restricted to the hardiest annuals. Sow in
boxes covered with glass, placed in a warm position.
Perennials such as Chrysanthemums, Delphiniums, Asters, Rudbeckias,
etc., should be cut back hard. Polyanthus and Primroses may be
taken up, divided, and re-planted.
Shrubs and Climbers: Plant all varieties.
Cut back straggling shrubs and creepers.
Dig in between shrubs and herbaceous plants.
Make cuttings of Carnations, Geraniums, Penstemons, Antirrhinums,
and various shrubbery perennials.
Many of the ornamental shrubs may be pruned during this or next
month, but not the flowering shrubs—prune them after flowering.
The Vegetable Garden
Sow Peas, Beans, Parsnips, Carrots, Cabbage, Cauliflower, Radish, Let-
tuce, Onion, Leek, and Beet. Sow Tomato seed on heat.
The Fruit Garden
Plant new trees. Defer planting Oranges in cold localities until spring.
Commence pruning trees when leaves have fallen.
JULY
Certainly July is one of the coldest months of the year and the
one in which there is little activity with plant life; nevertheless, it is a
month for sustaining effort in the way of clearing up pruning, and
spraying, and planting, and making preliminary preparations for
spring. Ail R.ose pruning should be completed and the planting of
Roses and deciduous fruit trees be completed by the end of the month.
After pruning the fruit trees should receive a dressing with lime and
sulphur wash.
The Flower Garden
Continue sowing hardy annuals and perennials under glass in warm,
sheltered positions.


Mignonette, Sweet Peas, Nasturtiums and Virginian Stock (for edg-
ings) may be sown in the open.
Plant Roses, ornamental trees and shrubs, flowering fruits, hedge plants,
climbers, and seedlings of hardy annuals.
Cultivate vacant ground and frequently stir the soil around plants
when conditions are favourable.
The Vegetable Garden
Sow more culinary Peas for succession crops.
Transplant Onions.
Sow Broad Beans, Lettuce (all varieties). Parsley, Radish, and early
varieties of Carrots.
Plant Asparagus, Horseradish, Mint, Rhubarb, and Choko (in a warm
position).
AUGUST
This is sometimes called the month of opportunities. Roses will
be breaking into leaf, Sweet Peas will be at their best, and before the
month is out the fruit trees will be clothing themselves anew with leaf
and blossom. Sweet Peas growing in exposed positions must be
securely tied and staked as a protection against high winds. This is
the month when those intending to grow Dahlias from seed should
sow.
The Flower Garden
Seeds.—Sowings of half-hardy annuals may be made in pans or boxes
that are protected by glass-covered frames.
Sow seed in the open, where the plants are to flower, of quick-growing
annuals such as Nemesia, Candytuft, Collinsia, Poppies, Mignon-
ette, Nigella, Schizanthus, Centaureas, Cornflowers, Godetias,
Clarkias, Linum, Linaria, and similar.
Bulbs.—Plant Gladiolus and Tuberose. Give liquid manure waterings
to Daffodils. Keep the surface soil stirred.
Plant shrubs, climbers, Gannas, Delphiniums, Perennial Phlox, Peren-
nial Aster, and similar herbaceous plants.
Propagate from cuttings Heliotropes, Petunias, Verbenas, Iresine, Ager-
atiums, bedding Begonias, Carnations, Penstemons, Geraniums,
etc.
Lift, divide and re-plant Chrysanthemums and all varieties of herba-
ceous perennials.


The Vegetable Garden
No further time should be lost in sowing the root crops—Globe Beet,
short and intermediate Carrots, Parsnips and Turnips. Sow also
Cabbages, Broccoli, Lettuce, Broad Beans, and Peas, Leeks, and
Spinach.
Under glass may be sown Tomatoes, Cape Gooseberry, Cucumber,
Melons, Pumpkins, and Vegetable Marrows.
The Fruit Garden
All the citrus trees do well when planted in spring.
Grafting may now be commenced.
Spray Peaches for curl leaf when the flower buds begin to show colour.
Use Bordeaux mixture sprayings for all trees. This will help to
free them from fungoid trouble.
Use resin wash for spraying scale on Lemons, Oranges, etc. Two
sprayings at intervals of about ten days give best results. Use
the liquid slightly warm if possible.
SEPTEMBER
From the mixed gardening standpoint, the beginning of September
may be regarded as the advent of spring, and not only should all
maturing beds receive attention in the way of watering, weeding and
mulching, but arrangements should be made for features that will
keep the beds gay through the warm months. Apart from permanent
attractions, such as Rose bushes and different kinds of flowering shrubs,
plots must be reserved so that seedlings of warm weather annuals may
be planted at suitable intervals. Dahlia seedlings should be well
on the way and ready for transplanting, and the tubers can be taken
from their wintering quarters and divided prior to planting in
December. Warmer days will bring the Rose aphis along and all
spraying should be carefully done.
The Flower Garden
Seed Sowing.—Seeds of the following may be sown in sheltered beds,
pans or boxes: —Phlox, Petunia, Aster, Diascia, Zinnia, Celosla,
Chrysanthemum, African Marigold, French Marigold, Salvia,
Heuchera, Salplglossis, Dianthus, Carnation, Delphinium, Ama-
ranthus, annual Sweet William, Ageratum, Sunflower, Balsam,
Foxglove, Antirrhinum, Aquilegia, Centaurea, Imperialis, Mina


Lobata, Ipomea, Heavenly Blue, and Cardinalis, Kochia, Dahlia,
etc.
Sow also Phlox, Zinnia, Hunnemania, and Salpiglossis direct to the
flowering beds.
Bulbs.—Plant Gladiolus, Liliums, Tuberose, Agapanthus, Hippeastrums,
Amaryllis, and other summer-flowering bulbs.
Herbaceous Perennials.—Plant out Delphiniums, Perennial Phlox, Per-
ennial Aster, Geum, Shasta Daisy, Chrysanthemum, Heuchera, and
Rudbeckia.
Hedge plants, climbers and shrubs may be planted if watering can be
attended to.
Roses. —Spray with a soapy compound to destroy aphis. Disbud for
larger blooms, and apply liquid manure.
Lawns. —Cut close and topdress with soil after dressing with bonedust,
super., or dried blood. Bonedust is the longer-lasting—blood and
super, are quicker in action. Plant new lawns with couch or
buffalo grass. Seed of couch may be sown.
The Vegetable Garden
Seed Sowing. —Sow French Beans (dwarf and climbing), Cucumber,
Marrows, Pumpkins, Melons, Trombones, Tomato, Egg Plant,
Cape Gooseberry, Sweet Corn, Cabbage (Improved St. John’s
Day and Chinese), Beet, Lettuce, Radish, Herbs, and Onions for
salads.
Plant out Lettuce, Tomatoes, Melons, etc., Sweet Potatoes, Jerusalem
Artichokes, Chokos, and Horseradish.
Mulch Asparagus, Rhubarb, and Sea Kale.
OCTOBER
When the sun gains strength, as is usually the case in October,
the management of the garden involves a deal of careful attention
and something more than simply distributing water is necessary to
produce satisfactory results. Aphis and pests of all kinds generally
start to multiply with the warm days, and continuous spraying is
necessary. Soil stirring to conserve the moisture will be necessary,
and from now on hoeing in the summer garden must play an important
part. Ferns and pot plants of all kinds will require constant attention
with watering, and tender plants growing in the shadehouse will need
protection. The spring display of the Banksia and rambling Roses will
be over and it is after the blooming period that pruning should be done.


The Flower Garden
Sow seeds of Coleus, Begonias, Petunias, Gloxinias, and other tender
greenhouse plants.
Make cuttings of Rex and Herbaceous Begonias.
Start Gloxinias, Achimenes and Tuberous Begonias into growth.
Pot on Pelargoniums, Fuchsias and other shrubs, flowering or orna-
mental-leaved plants.
Plant Chrysanthemums, Carnations, Verbenas, Penstemons, and An-
tirrhinums.
Cut back flowering shrubs when the blooms are finished.
Cut Cupressus and other hedges if required.
Cut lawns and topdress with soil or artificial manures.
The Vegetable Garden
Sow French Beans, Capsicums, Tomatoes, New Zealand Spinach.
Get ready for Cucumbers; Sweet, Rock and Water Melons; Trom-
bones, Pumpkins, Marrows, and other Gourds.
Sow for continuation crops Lettuce, Radish, Mustard and Cress.
On moist soils in sheltered positions a few Peas may still be sown.
Plant out Tomatoes, a few Cabbage, Cauliflowers, Silver Beet, and
Lettuce.
With plenty of water available, Onions for keeping can still be
planted.
For late cropping try a few Potatoes.
Keep the hoe working freely amongst growing crops, loosening the
top soil and checking weeds.
NOVEMBER
Watering and mulching will be chiefly the work for this month,
with perhaps a little attention to the budding of Roses. November
can also be made an excellent month for planting out any of the
good summer shrubs, but it will be necessary to procure from your
nurseryman good strong plants raised in pots. With the spring bulbs,
keep them going as long as possible by watering, so as to allow the
bulbs to mature, and do not cut the foliage down, but let it die off
naturally.
M M M
♦ ♦ ♦♦ ♦♦
The Flower Garden
November is an excellent month for planting many of the summer-
flowering shrubs. Hibiscus will grow freely directly they are
planted out.


Lantanas can be put in, also Erythrinas, and all varieties of Tecomas
and Bignonias.
The various kinds of Oleanders are valuable summer-flowering shrubs,
and, planted now, they will soon make rapid growth.
Flower Seeds.—Sow Amaranthus, Antirrhinum, Aster, Balsam, Begonia,
Brachycome (Swan River Daisy), Carnation, Celosia, Cockscomb,
Cosmos, Dianthus, Didiscus, Dimorphotheca, Eschscholtzia, Gail-
lardia, Kochia, Marigold (French and African), Mesembryanthe-
mum, Petunia, Phlox, Poinciana, Portulacca, Rhodanthe, Picinus,
Salpiglossis, Salvia, Sunflower, Tritonia, Zinnia.
The Vegetable Garden
Sow Beans (climbing and dwarf), Beetroot, Capsicum, Carrot, Pump-
kin, Radish, Spinach, Squash, Sweet Corn, Sweet Potatoes, Toma-
toes, Turnips, Vegetable Marrow.
DECEMBER
This is the month where the list of operations dwindles down, as
in the gardening world it is regarded as the quietest period of the year.
The exception, however, is with the Dahlia grower, who should be
busy planting out his tubers. The last two weeks of the year is the
best time of all for planting, especially where the desire is to time the
flowering for the autumn shows. Through the holidays perhaps a
start can be made in preparing the Sweet Pea trenches, but, outside of
watering and hoeing, and attention to the pot plants, December does
not offer much inducement for gardening operations.
The Flower Garden
Sow Petunias, Iceland Poppies and Violas for early planting.
Sow in borders Zinnias, Sunflowers, Celosias, Phlox, Salpiglossis, Bal-
sam.
Plant Dahlias and late Chrysanthemum cuttings.
Water regularly and freely all growing plants.
Sponge the leaves of Aspidistras, Palms and large-foliaged plants.
Watch for mealy bug and aphides on Ferns and small-foliaged plants,
and spray or dip in tobacco wash.
Root surplus shoots from Gloxinias and Tuberous Begonias in sharp
sand. Potted up when rooted, they will make good late-flowering
plants.


CROQUET LAWNS, TENNIS COURTS
AND BOWLING GREENS
Under congenial climatic conditions, with a love for outdoor
games so natural to the Australian-born, one of the important adjuncts
to the modern suburban home of to-day, with its spacious grounds, is
the tennis court, croquet lawn, or bowling green. This, when sur-
rounded with ornamental shrubs, pergolas and an arbour, or some
other structure suitable for spectators, lends a general charm to the
appearance of the home.-
As a general rule, most soils are well suited to grass production,
but it is imperative that the initial work be well and carefully done,
as the " greens ” will be required to last for a number of years. As
with other plants, grasses require good treatment, and expense and
trouble will be avoided if the soil is enriched with manures of a
nitrogenous nature.
Croquet Lawn


Qardeners
and Euerqone Else
mill obtain the
best Results
by reading
“The Western Mail”
djDesiet n s Cfttemier
(Oeedfy
i
l
i
i
i
BODICE AND INFORMATION.—
for the Home
for the Farmer
for the Qardener
for the Poultry Farmer
IS THE "MAIL’S” SPECIAL FEATURE
♦
Price SIXPENCE IDeekly
duisday i$ ‘dJ/Vaif* < Z2)az/
Kt


The following diagrams show the lay-out of a tennis court: —
The regulation measurement of a single tennis court is 78 feet
by 27 feet, and a double or four-handed one is 78 feet by 36 feet;
but extra space at each end for a "run back” is necessary, while, a
further space at each side will prove advantageous.
In selecting the location for the tennis court, it should be re-
membered that the sun rises in the east and sets in the west, and to
avoid having the sun in one’s eyes in the morning and again late in
the afternoon, the court should run north and south.
The space required for a croquet lawn is 3 3 yards by 28 yards.
For a bowling green, the length of 120 feet should be provided,
with an 18 feet width as the playing area.
In sowing seed, the approximate quantity required is 1 lb. for
300 square feet.


INDEX
PAGE
Anemones - - - - - 33
Annuals, Biennials and Perennials - - - 85
Annuals, Hardy - - - - - 85
~ Half-hardy - - - 8 5
„ and Perennials - - - 86
Aquilegia - - - - - - 86
Amaranthus - - - - 87
Alyssum - - - - - - 87
Antirrhinums - - - - - 87
Ageratum - - - - - 88
Asters - - - - - - 88
Agapanthus - - - - 129
Aspidistra - - - - -130
Bulbs - - - - - - 32
Begonias - - - - - - 33
Bush Roses - - - - - 70
Budding Roses - - - - - 71
Biennials - - - - - - 85
Balsam - - - - - - 89
Beilis Perennis - - - - - 91
Beets, Red ----- 146
Broad Beans - - - - - 147
Bowling Greens - - - - -172
Colour Contrasts - - - - - 12
Complete Manure - - - - - 20
Cyclamen - - - - - 34
Cannas - - - - - - 34
Chrysanthemums - - - - - 45
Carnations - - - - . - 48
Carnations from Cuttings - - - - 50
Climbing and Rambling Roses - - - 68
Calendula - - - - - 91
Cosmos - - - - - - 91
Cineraria - - - - - - 92
Clarkias - - - - - - 93
Calliopsis - - - - - - 93
Carnation ’(Marguerites) - - - - 93
Coreopsis - - - - - - 94
Cyclamen - - - - - 94
Cockscomb - - - - - 95
Candytuft - - - - - 95


PAGE
Clianthus Dampieri - - - 95
Coleus - - - - - 96
Creepers and Climbers - - - - 12 5
Cabbage ------ 147
Cauliflower - - - - 148
Cucumber - - - - -151
Calendar - - - - - -159
Croquet Lawns - - - - -172
Digging and Trenching - - - - 14
Damping Off - - - - - 18
Destroying Weeds - - - 28
Daffodils - - - - - - 35
Dahlias - - - - - - 51
Dahlia Types - - - - - 54
Dahlias from Seed - - - - - 56
Dimorphotheca - - - - - 96
Delphiniums - - - - - 97
Dianthus - - - - - - 99
Dwarf Edging Plants - - - - 123
Eschscholtzia - - - - - 99
Freesias - - - - - - 35
Fuchsias - - - - - - 99
Ferns ------ 129
Fruit Trees - - - - 130
„ „ Varieties - - - - 131
Fungus Remedies - - - - - 140
French Beans - - - - - 149
Gardening Terms Explained - - - 29
Gladioli - - - - - - 36
Gloxinias - - - - - - 39
Godetias - - - - - -101
Gaillardias - - - - - 102
Gerberas - - - - - -102
Gypsophila - - - - - 103
Gardening Proverbs - - - - 120
Ffints on Manuring - - - - 20
Hyacinth - - - - - - 39
Hippeastrum* - - - - - 41
History and Evolution of the Sweet Pea - - 77
Herbaceous Perennials - - - 8 5
Hunnemania - - - - - 103
Hedges - - - - - -122
Home Fruit Garden - - - - 130
Handy Spraying Mixtures - - - - 139
Iris - - - - - - 41
Iceland Poppies - - - - - 104
Insect Pests and Remedies - - - - 13 5


PAGE
Kochia Tricophylla - • - - 105
Lime in the Soil - - - - - 14
Liquid Manures - - - - - 20
Layering Shrubs - - - - - 25
Liliums - - - - - 40
Lachenalia - - - - - 42
Larkspurs - - - - - -105
Leptosyne - - - - -105
Lupins - - - - - -105
Linaria - - - - - -106
Lawns - - - - -120
~ Seed Sowing - - - - 120
„ Root Planting - - - 121
„ Top Dressing - - - - 121
Mulching - - - - - - 15
Manures and Manuring - - - - 19
Manure Cask - - - - 23
Manures in Small Quantities - - - 23
Making a Hotbed - - - - - 27
Marigolds - - - - - 106
Mignonette - - - - - 106
Melons - - - - -150
Water - - - - - 150
~ Rock - - - - 151
Nemesia - - - - - - 107
Nemophila Insignis - - - - 108
Nigella - - - - - 108
Preparing for Seedlings - - - - 17
Plants from Cuttings - - - - 24
Par.sy - - - - - -108
Penstemon - - - - - 109
Petunia - - _ . -110
Phlox - - - - - -112
Pyrethrum - - - - - 113
Primula - - - - - -113
Pot Plants - - - - - 127
Palms - . ■ - - - - 128
Planting Citrus Trees - - - 132
Peach Tree Pruning - - - 132
Pruning the Shrubs - - - - 133
„ Vines - - - 135
Pumpkins - - - - - -151
Peas - - - - - -153
Potatoes - - - - -154
Ranunculus - - - - 42
Roses 57
~ Varieties - - - - - 61


PAGt
Rose Plebiscite Selection - - - -63
. „ Pruning - - - - - 66
Roses, Climbers - - - - - 68
„ Bush - - - - 70
~ Budding - - - - 71
„ Spraying - - - - - 74
Rudbeckias - - - - -112
Red Beets - - - - - -146
Rhubarb - - - - - -ISS
Soil Preparation - - - - - 13
Seed Sowing - - - - - 16
Seedlings - -.- - - - \7
Soap in the Garden - - - - 26
Spraying Roses - - - - 74
Sweet Peas - - - - - 77
Sweet Pea Culture - - - - - 80
Sundry Scintillations - - - - 85
Sturt Pea - - - - - - 95
Shirley Poppy - - - - -112
Salpiglossis - - - - - H 4
Salvias - - - - - -114
Scabious - - . - - - -114
Schizanthus - - - - -115
Stocks - - - - - -116
Sweet Sultans - - - - -116
Shrubs - - - - - -123
„ Pruning - - - - -133
Spinach - - - - - -155
Silver Beet - - - - -155
Tomatoes - - - - - -155
Tennis Courts - - - - - 173
Vine Cuttings - - - - 25
Verbenas - - - - - -117
Violas - - - - - -117
Verandah Plants - - - - - 129
Vegetable Fragments - - - - 143
~ Soil Preparation - - - 144
~ Seed Sowing - 146
~ Marrows - - - - 152
Window Box Plants - - - - 27
Wisdom in Dont’s - - - - - 28
Wattle Time - - - - - 32
Wallflowers - - - - -118
Zinnias - - - - - -118


9
*
Rabbit
Keeping
3-or i 'Profit
In France during 1930
£42,000,000 worth of
Angora Wool and
Rabbit Furs was
produced.
Australia is just
ing to the possibilities
of Breeding Rabbits
' for Profit.
Typical Wool Bearing Angora Rabbit
3Zead the SYew 3300/t
“Angora & Chinchilla Rabbits”
By “An chi 11 a ”
You can join up in this industry by commencing
in a small way and growing as time goes along.
The initial cost is small and no block of land is
required, for rabbits are kept in hutches.
Published hi ;
CARROLL’S
LTD.
BOOKSELLERS, etc.
566 Hay St., Perth
Price 5/-, Posted 5/3
Send to us for
your Books and ~
Stationery
Requirements
t
Typical Fur Producing Chinchilla Rabbit


&
'*f «
.'V. . r w
4 v A
A few trees,
flowers and
shrubs make such
a difference! All
the difference between an un-!
inviting' honse and a home that
welcomes from a lovely set-
ting’ of colorful, fragrant
growing things. And plan-
ning it is all so fascinating!
Boans can give you every as-
sistance in your planning.
Every bloom that you want—
every variety of plant or bulb
—and priced lower than you’ve
ever paid before. Skilled
nurserymen in Boans Roof
Garden Conservatory will
gladly advise yon too, just
what varieties to plant to
give any desired effect.
Pay a visit to
Boans Conser-
vatory to-day!
