

Evolution
AND
Sociology.
By Dr. FAUSET MACDONALD.
At the SEVENTH CONURESS of
The Australasian Association
. . FOR THE .
Advancement of Science.
CO-OPERATIVE PRINTING WORKS, 225 CASI’LEKEAGH STREET




Evolution and Sociology
By Dr. T. F. Macdonald.
A t Chicago, during the great World’s Fair in 1893,
a congress of evolutionists was held ; and with a
view to facilitate matters the following questions
had been some time previous to the date of meeting sent
to most of the prominent evolutionists of Europe and the
United States, with the request that answers should be
sent in as briefly as possible :
1. Can the doctrine of Evolution in its Sociological
aspects offer wise suggestions for the solution
of the grave social problems of our time ?
and 2. What should be the next step of Society in view
of those suggestions?
Some two hundred replies were received ; and, as
you may imagine, they furnished most interesting matter
for study ; and, I may say of some of them, for
amusement also. However, what surprised me very
much was the apparent ignorance of the evolutionists
themselves, upon what might be called up-to-date
theories of evolution One and all of them, without a
single exception, stood by the “ struggle for existence,”


u survival of the fittest,” “ tooth and claw,” or “ natural
selection,” as the one and only principle of evolution.
As a result it happened that the “ wise (?) suggestions
for the solution of the grave social problems of our time ”
were either, as those of Mr. Alfred Wallace, reserved,
or misleading, or pernicious in the extreme, as when
they urged with all effrontery the remorseless commercial
axiom of the day, that since “ survival of the fittest ” is
the law of nature the weak among: men as among:
O o
animals must go to the wall.”
In the face of such terrible thoughts, which have
unfortunately written themselves in the best blood of
this 19th century, no apology is needed, I am sure, to
review critically, if briefly, the origin and development
of the evolution theory.
This century came into existence in all the sunrise
glory of song of perhaps the greatest poets that ever
lived ; for they were essentially the poets of Hope,
Shelley, Wordsworth, Byron, Keats, Landor, Burns.
But a blighting influence soon followed in the shape of
Malthus, who turned the thoughts of men to pessimism
and despair, when he convinced the most potent thinkers
of his time that population has a tendency to out-grow
its food supply. V\ r e now know that the greater
the population among men the greater is the
food supply ; that, as a matter of fact, population is
only limited by our ignorance ; and, that the more of
us there are the wiser we become ! But the damage
was done before these truths were realised ; for Charles
Darwin, then a student, had become a convert to
Malthusianism. Darwin went out into the world
reading, into everything he saw the necessity for
struggle among animals ; and ultimately arrived at his
completed conception of survival of the fittest by a
process natural selection. Darwin states in the “ Origin
of Species” that the struggle for life is greatest among
members of the same species. This however is a fallacy,
as will presently be proved beyond all doubt.


The idea of struggle for life which thus originated
with Malthus, and .was adopted by Darwin, received
particular emphasis from Huxley, and was finally
developed and elaborated into the so-called synthetic
philosophy of Herbert Spencer. And now American
millionaires swear by Spencer and call him friend,
shielded as they are by his philosophy in their struggle
for monopoly, which they misname a struggle for life.
Just in the same spirit that Darwin went out to see
the world in the Beagle, impressed by the works of
Malthus, in 1860 Pierre Kropotkin, then a young
enthusiastic explorer, went travelling in Siberia full of
Darwin’s then newly-published book the “ Origin of
Species,” prepared to see everywhere the struggle for
life among animals. But he saw something else; and
his heart lept for joy as with a flash of genius he realised
that the struggle for life is only a half-truth : not even
that On every hand he saw the animals, with which
Siberia teems, not only not fighting, but actually
assisting each other in a thousand ways ! He saw herds
of deer which would pass signals of common danger for
miles; he saw the bulls of wild cattle herds form rings
round the cows and calves showing a solid front of horns
to an enemy. Birds were seen on every hand flocking
together on utmost terms of friendship, assisting each
other in building nests, or catching fish, by common
effort. Crows parliaments were observed with their
watchful sentinels posted on convenient trees. The
humble bees, and humbler ants, in their myrial forms of
mutual work all spoke to Kropotkin of a deep underlying-
principle of mutual aid, a principle which he has so ably
proclaimed and proved to exist, beyond the shadow of a
doubt, universally throughout the animal world. As a
friend and disciple of Kropotkin it has given me
unbounded pleasure to verify to my own complete
satisfaction the truth of his magnificent discovery that
associated animals have survived in the great struggle,
while those of more pronouncedly individualistic instincts,


however strong 1 , have gone to the wall, and are still con-
tinuing to go that wfty. Rabbits, kangaroos, pigeons,
sparrows, rats, are familiar examples of progressive
survivors, while eagles and the great solitary prowlers of
desert and jungle, strong as they are and howsoever
magnificent, are going, and will soon be gone altogether.
Lest I may not have said enough to convince on this
point, let me mention how monkeys cross a river by
forming a suspension bridge, by clasping each other,
and swinging from tree to (ree ; and, again, how beavers
cut down trees by common effort, float them down stream,
and make dams and houses so mathematically correct in
proportion as to astonish architects and engineers. Nor
have the beavers specialists among them ; nor authori-
tarians of any s«.rt; no bosses, nor gangers—they work
in harmonious fellowship, in terms of strict equality.
There are no lazy ones among the beavers. They love
work —so much so that a beaver in captivity has been
known to build a dam of boots, shoes, bushes and
sundries when the opportunity offered.
I have watched prairie-dogs for days in the Rocky
Mountains, but never saw a fight, only play, or
strict attention to duties of sentry. Who has not seen
cockatoos rob by concerted action ? And, lastly, man is
the most social of animals. Through being so he lms
risen to the top, and keeps there. Yet the despised
worm patiently waits for him, and will doubtless survive
him in the long run unless he gives more attention to the
problem of how to preserve the species than he has
hitherto done.
My reason for thus rapidly touching upon the
history of the philosophy of evolution was mainly to
show that there has been a dual principle at work in the
development of the animal world including man. First,
we have the struggle for life, which is the basic principle
of all individual rights. No one questions the right of
an individual to self-preservation : but men do not
so readily grant to individuals their natural right of


preserving their individuality. All tyrannies of the
past have been encroachments upon the rights -of the
individual. He was denied the privilege of thinking for
himself, and of speaking his thoughts; and he is still
denied the right of acting as he thinks best to a very
orave extent.
o
In the name of social rights the individual has been
crushed and kept down in all ages to the detriment of
the race. But again the individual has reacted against
his cruel environment. All revolutions of the past bear
evidence of his power to obtain justice when his con-
sciousness of wrong has once been aroused. I can
conceive the existence of no ethical principle apart from
the desire to preserve and develop individuality. We
have in this conception a touchstone to test the spurious-
ness or otherwise of all the great questions of the day,
such as those concerning government, the equal rights
of men and women, the equality of all, compulsory
education, et cetera.
The truth is, if we respect the rights of the indivi-
dual to live a complete life, instead of recognising his
bare right to existence only (sometimes not onty that)
there is no room for authority in any shape or form on
this our planetary home. The ethics of freedom, the
only true ethics of life, forbid compulsion of any kind, as
inconsistent with the best interests of men. and in so far
as it infringes one of the fundamental laws of social
evolution.
It naturally follows that any association of indi-
viduals should only exist upon terms of absolute freedom.
The principle of society is an economic one as that of
individualism is ethical. If society does not exist for the
mutual benefit, and equal rights of all individuals com-
posing it, it has no rights of existence at all and must be
looked upon as immoral.
Instinctively the animals in their long history of
development have felt this ; as one can trace in studying


the species of termites. Their earlier colonies show
more or less inclination to the use of authority.
Political government of a socialistic nature has in the
process of evolution of the termites given place to a
completely autonomous or anarchical form of society. It
is well known also that the intelligence of advanced
termites is greater than that of the less free societies.
They harvest grain, keep milkers, and build most
beautifully.
Altho’ it is of the utmost importance to bear in mind
the part association of animals plays in evolution of the
animal kingdom, it must not be overlooked that associa-
tions are strong only from an economic point of view.
The moment they use their strength for any other
purpose they must be ruled out of bounds; and indivi-
duals have a right to protest, and rebel, against their
authority.
Purity of principles can alone make a pm’e society :
and so it happens in offering suggestions as an evolutionist
to those engaged in social reform, I urge the great
t n°°•• 7 O O
necessity for recognition of the ethical principle of
individual freedom and the economic demand for
associations of men for mutual assistance.
If the associations of men were maintained pure by
operations of the law of freedom, what a beautiful process
of action and reaction for mutual advance one can
conceive. One year of freedom in the world would be
worth centuries of authority. For there is plenty of
everything and to spare for all: the supply of earth is
unlimited.
In answer then to the first question proposed, viz.,
can the doctrine of evolution in its sociological aspects
offer wise suggestions for the solution of the grave social
problems of our time, a consideration of the principles
of evolution will give, as an ideal for sociologists to work
for, this final conclusion : that society can only truly exist
when it is composed of free individuals freely associated.


In answer to the second question, viz,, What is the
next step society should take in view of those suggestions
from evolution ? I would say, abolish all institutions of
authority, and trust implicitly to the honor and ability
now spoiling for want of use in the hearts and brains of
all men and women.
When have volunteers for any service failed if called
upon by the spirit of honor, freely to help ? See how
the life-boats are rushed by willing hands ac the call of
rescue ! Do not men, women and children save life at
the risk of their own every day ? Men will do for honor
and love that what they never would or could for money.
In conclusion, I for one believe that if the call were
only made to-morrow, every'bit of essential work in the
world would be cheerfully, and with enthusiasm, per-
formed by countless bands of social volunteers.
“ Before the slave when he breaks his chain,
Before the free man tremble not! ”




3 1508 00075408


