

Difficulties of Belief. No. 2.
Evolution and to Antiquity of Man
A SERMON
BY THE
REV. JOSEPH CAMPBELL, M.A., F.C.8., F.C.S.
Principal of S. Nicolas' G.ollege, Randwick, and
Vicar of Coogee.
cSflblUg ;
ANGUS * ROBERTSON, 89 Castlereagh Street
|Cmtbon :
Y. J. PENTLAND,, 38 West Smithfielcl,
18 9 5., *


'■'A
* .


Difficulties of Belief. No. 2.
Evolution and the Antiquity of Man
A SERMON
BY THE
REV. JOSEPH CAMPBELL, M.A., F.C.S., F.C.S.
Principal of S. Nicolas' College, Randwick , and
Vicar .of Coogee.
cSglmeg :
ANGUS & ROBERTSON, 89 Castlereagh Street
IConbon ;
Y. J. PENTLAND,, 38 West Smithfleld.
1895.


PREFATORY NOTE
The subject with which this Sermon deals, viz.,
“ Evolution and the Antiquity of Man,” is of such
deep importance that, impelled by a desire to spread
the glorious truth far and wide, I am allowing the
Sermon to be published.
I do not claim to have contributed anything new
either to Theology or Science ; though I hope I may
claim that 1 have, in some measure, popularised the
great subject of Evolution , viewed from a Christian
standpoint, and that I have presented the truth in a
somewhat new light.
While I have freely made use of the results of other
observers, I cannot acknowledge my indebtedness to
any special work or works. I have read much, and,
perhaps, thought even more on the subject; and this
Sermon may be regarded as an example of Mental
Evolution.
If I may judge by my own experience, the grasping
of the truth as herein set forth will lead to a more
perfect understanding of the Bible, and to greater
enthusiasm in the cause of Christianity. God grant
it may be so ; and to Him be all the praise.
St. Nicolas’ College,
Randwick, May 30th, 1895.


EtfOLUTlOpl # THE i|MTipiiy OF MUfl
“That was not first which is Spiritual, but
THAT WHICH IS NATURAL ; AND AFTERWARD
THAT WHICH IS SPIRITUAL.”
1 Cor. xv., 46-
We have a great subject before us to-night—the
greatest, 1 take it, in Science and Theology. If I
can but state the truth clearly there will be no
doubters; there will be no drones in Society ; but all
will be active and enthusiastic followers of Christ.
Our subject is Evolution and the Antiquity of
Man.
Most of us present to-night have, I suppose, listened
to a full orchestra playing some great piece of music—
a piece of Beethoven’s, for example; or, can we not more
appropriately say, Handel’s “Creation”? All the varied
instruments are in tune with one another; they must
be, or the most distressing discord will result. As
the sweet strains fall upon our ear, we perceive that
throughout the whole runs one idea, which is worked
out through all the changes of measure and of key—
now almost hidden, now breaking out in rich natural
melody; whispered in the treble, murmured in the


bass, dimly suggested in the prelude, but growing
clearer and clearer as the work proceeds, winding
gradually back till it ends in the key in which it
began, and closes in triumphant harmony. So it is
with that magnificent composition, Creation, as set
before us by the science of Astronomy, Geology, and
Biology; and as set before us by Moses iir the first
chapter of Genesis.
“From harmony, from heavenly harmony,
This universal frame began ;
From harmony to harmony,
Through all the compass of the notes it ran,
The diapason closing full in man.”
The verses of the first chapter of Genesis are, in the
one case, the instruments of the orchestra; the strata
of the earth’s crust are, in the other case, the instru-
ments. The glorious composition which they are
rendering is the Creation ; the great idea which runs
through the whole, and which is worked out through
all the changes of measure and of key is— Evolution.
Before we had any scientific knowledge we did not
understand this. It was a truth hidden from our
eyes; but now, in the new light of Science, the old
article of our faith : “ I believe in God the Father
Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth,” comes to us
with irresistible force. In the light of Evolution we
must accept this truth, or do violence to reason and
the undisputed facts of Science. Evolution teaches
the “ Unity of Nature,” “ the Divine Plan,” the
Omnipotence and Omnipresence of God.
4
Evolution and the Antiquity of Man.


What Evolution really is, I tried to show you in a
few words last Sunday evening when proving to you,
from the ascertained facts of Geological Science, the
accuracy of the “ Mosaic account of Creation.” I
then said that, whatever may be the common view,
Evolution really teaches that “the Universe, as we
see it now, is the result, not of sudden creative acts,
but of a slow and gradual change and development of
the same sort as we see going on to-day.”
You know that the surface of the earth is con-
tinually being altered. The “Everlasting hills” are
being worn down ; the valleys are being eroded
silently, but irresistibly, in accordance with natural
laws—which are God’s laws. Hence we conclude,
that the whole of nature, inorganic and organic, has
come to its present condition by age-long processes
of change, extending backward to a primitive condition
of matter diffused through space.
Will you here allow me to quote some eloquent words
from Prof. Drummond’s latest book, “ The Ascent of
Man,” which I read with deep interest. In concluding
his chapter on the “Arrest of the Body ” he says
(p. 150): “Beginning with the panorama of the
nebular hypothesis—(rather, I should say, theory)—
run the eye over the field of Paleontology, Geology,
Botany, and Zoology. Watch the majestic drama of
Creation unfolding scene by scene, and act by act.
Realize that one power, and only one, has marshalled
the figures for this mighty spectacle ; that one hand,
5
Evolution and the Antiquity of Man.


and only one, has carried out these transformations ;
that one plot, and only one, has controlled each
subsidiary plot and circumstance ; that the same great
patient unobtrusive law has guided and shaped the
whole from its beginning, in bewilderment and
chaos, to its end in order, harmony, and beauty.
Then watch the curtain drop. And, as it moves to
rise again, behold the new actor upon the stage.
Silently, as all great changes come, Mental Evolution
has succeeded Organic. All the things that have been
now lie in the far back-ground as forgotten properties.
And man stands alone in the fore-ground, and a nevy
thing , Spirit, strives within him.”
“ That was not first which is Spiritual, but that
which is Natural; and afterwards that which is
Spiritual.”—Paul.
Inorganic preceded organic ; the lower forms of
organic preceded the higher forms ; organic preceded
mental ; mental preceded spiritual; spiritual was
consummated in that highest development of spiri-
tuality which came through Jesus Christ. This was
the plan of God. The object of my discourse to-night
is to prove this Evolution from Science and the Bible,
which really go hand in hand.
Last Sunday evening we saw how the world was, in
process of time, fitted for the advent of life. Life!
What is life ? The best definition that I know is this
—“ Life in physical organisms is the exercise of the
power which co-ordinates the movements of germinal
6
Evolution and the Antiquity of Man.


matter” ; but, I am free to admit, that this definition
requires some explanation. I wonder if I can make
it clear ; I will try. Forgive me if I lay a little more
strain than usual upon your attention and your
thought. Remember—“ in the beginning God.”
That has been, I think, clearly demonstrated. Very
well, then, that clears the way for the solution of all
difficulties—even the great difficulty concerning the
origin of life. But I will not grant that which many
demand, viz. : that, at this point in the earth’s history,
there was a special interposition of God. It is not
necessary to do so ; the origin of life is all in accordance
with the plan which He Himself laid down “in the
beginning.” When the right time came for the
appearance of life it was evolved by the operation
of those laws which He gave. Just as we read, sub-
sequently (Gal. iv. 4), concerning that marvellous
power which was to give “ more abundant life ’’
(Jno. x. 10) : it did not come into action till the
world was fit for its reception—“ When the fulness of
the time was come God sent forth his Son.” So now,
He guided those laws in the production of life,
just as He had previously, in the inorganic world,
guided His laws in the production of—let us say,
for the sake of illustration—Crystals.
The laws of Crystallography are indeed wonderful,
and there is a slight analogy between them and the
the laws of life. I cannot, of course, enter fully into
the matter now ; but I will just mention, en passant,
7
Evolution and the Antiquity of Man.


that, if you take a crystal of Chrome Alum, and,
having broken off' one of its corners, place it in a
solution of Chrome Alum, it will first restore the
damaged part and then proceed to grow. Its growth,
it is true, is different from that of living creatures ;
but that does not affect the analogy : God is behind
those laws of Crystallisation. One set of law s governs
the growth of crystals, another set of law’s governs the
growth of living beings. Neither does the fact of
our being able to produce Crystallisation in our
laboratories, while we fail to produce life out of
inorganic matter, affect the question. We do not,
ourselves , produce Crystallisation ; we are only instru-
ments in bringing it about. It is the result of law •
and the law only operates when we fulfil the conditions
necessary for its operation : thus it is God who makes
the Crystal; and so it is with life. If, with the
advance of chemical knowledge and electricity we
should ever produce life in our laboratories out of
inorganic matter, it will only be because we have
learned more about the laws of God and their
application : but it will still be God who produces
life. I feel very strongly about this, and no wonder ;
it is a fundamental truth. Perhaps, I have expressed
myself in a somewhat crude fashion, but I hope that
you, in some measure, realise the truth.
Now, I will refer again to the definition I have
giyen “ Life in physical organisms is the exercise
of the power which co-ordinates the movements of
germinal matter.” Germinal matter is bioplasm.
8
Evolution and the Antiquity of Man.


which is the physical basis of life. It consists of
inorganic matter—of Carbon, Oxygen, Hydrogen,
Nitrogen, Phosphorous and Iron, united in definite,
but peculiar, proportions. It is the same in plants,
and in the lowest forms of animal life as well as in
the highest. Of every living thing only about one-
fifth is really alive ; the remainder is formed matter,
which was, however, once alive. The truth, so far as
it has been revealed by science, is this, viz. : —That
the substance of every living organism consists of
three parts :—l, Nutrient matter or pabulum; 2,
Germinal matter, or bioplasm ; and 3, formed matter,
bone, muscle, etc. Into the centre of each cell,
making up living bodies, there flows a current of
nutrient matter or pabulum ; and tins may be wholly
inorganic, or it may be gas, or it may be a mineral
compound, or it may be formed material from the food
we consume. Jn these cells the nutrient matter is
first transformed into living matter, and then the
living matter is thrown off', as formed matter, to make
the cell wall. There are thus two currents in an
organic cell—one flowing inward and conveying nutri-
ent matter with it; the other outward, and bearing
with it the formed material. In the centre of the cell,
by a power unknown to chemistry, or any physical
science, the nutrient matter is changed into living
matter. Marvellous ! Here is the not-living matter ;
there is a change; it becomes a mass of bioplasts—
living matter ! These bioplasts so co-ordinate in one
9
Evolution and the Antiquity of Man.


case as to produce a plant; in another, an inverte-
brate ; in another, a vertebrate ; in another, a man.
As I behold these things I feel that I am in the
presence of Almighty God. God is the power
that co-ordinates the movements of germinal matter :
therefore, God is Life. What a presumption in
favor of Immortality ! Life existed before it was
manifested in matter; surely it must exist after
the matter ceases to be organised. Life then is
immortal.
Now let us see how far we have advanced along
the line of Evolution. We begin with an Azoic
or lifeless world evolved from a formless, a gaseous
condition. This is the first , the inorganic kingdom.
Crystals there were, but not life. When a certain
stage is reached, living matter appears in the form
of bioplasm —the result of the chemical combination
of inorganic elements under the hand of God. At
first it is only a mass of slime, a mass of organisms
without organs, which appears to form the connec-
ting link between the inorganic and the organic.
This is a Second Kingdom, to which the name
Regnum Protisticum has been given. In this king-
dom plant and animal life developed, giving rise to
the two other great kingdoms, the third and fourth ,
viz., the vegetable and animal. You know, perhaps,
that these two kingdoms include all ordinary living
things.
The Vegetable Kingdom is divided into two great
divisions, viz. : —l. Cryptograms, or flowerless and
10
Evolutioii and the Antiquity of Man.


fruitless plants, e.g., algae, lichens, ferns, mosses'; and
2. Phanerogams, or-flowering and fruit-bearing plants.
The earliest fossils of the Vegetable Kingdom are
met with in the Cambrian rocks ; but the pre-cambrian
give evidence of great vegetable growth in the beds of
graphite and deposit of iron ore. From that period
upwards there has been development—Evolution,
resulting in the magnificent flora of to-day.
Early in the history of vegetable life, however,
animal life appeared. As there was a connecting link
between the inorganic and the organic, so also there
is a connecting link between the vegetable and the
animal in low forms of life called Protista, which
possess the essential characteristics of both the
vegetable and the animal kingdom. From these simple
forms we trace the evolution of animal life, through
the various sub-kingdoms up to man. These Protista
belong to the first sub-kingdom Protozoa, which
signifies “ first life,” i.e., of course, first animal life.
Then proceeding from these we have the second
sub-kingdom, the Coelenterata, a name meaning
“ hollow within or hollow bodied,” and given because
of certain peculiarities possessed by members of this
group. Next we have the Third, the Annulosa or
joint-bodied animals; and, proceeding from them, the
fourth, the Echinodermataorspiny-skinnedanimals;
and also the fifth, viz., the Moll USCa or soft-bodied
animals: in all, five great divisions, including all
the Invertebrate members of the Animal King-
11
Evolution and the Antiquity of Man.


dom, i.e., the creatures, without a back-bone. But
just as animal life appeared early on the scene
in the evolution of vegetable life, so, Vertebrates,
or animals having a back-bone, after a roll of ages,
appeared on the scene in the evolution of animal
life, and have accompanied the invertebrates and
plants up to the present time. But there is this great
fact to be noticed, viz., that the lowest forms of
vertebrates are of a higher order of living creatures
than the highest of the invertebrates. You might
think, for example, that beetles are more highly
organised creatures than fish ; but they are placed in
a lower class, because the fish has a perfectly arranged
skeleton and a nervous system which the beetle has
not: hence the fish is regarded as belonging to a
higher type. Yet the fish belongs to the low est class of
vertebrates, which are thus divided : —l. Fishes;
11., Amphibians; 111., Reptiles; IV., Birds; V.,
Mammals, to which class man belongs—his nervous
system being the highest. The lecture hall, and not
the pulpit, is the proper place to trace the evolution
of the higher forms of life through these five classes ;
though, inasmuch as all these marvellous changes
show forth the Wisdom and Goodness and Power of
God, I cannot think that I am dishonouring this sacred
place and these robes I wear by thus reminding you of
the stages of evolution, and the gradual upward
progression. Nay ; I feel constrained to pursue the
subject a little further.
12
Evolution and the Antiquity of Man.


I have spoken of the two great kingdoms' the
Vegetable and the Animal, and I have referred to
their divisions into sub-kingdoms. These are again
divided into classes, classes into families, families
into genera, genera into species.
Each separate kind of organism, whether plant or
animal, which produces others like itself, is called a
species ; and all species which have a good many
characters in common are grouped into a genera.
Genera again are grouped into families, and families into
classes. How can I make this absolutely clear ?
Perhaps an illustration which I have seen used some-
where will help us here. Imagine a tree with a
short trunk growing in the ground—the first kingdom.
Here the organic, the tree, is in contact with the
inorganic, the ground, depending upon it for its
sustenance. The short trunk represents bioplasm,
and is what I have called the second kingdom, to
which the name “ Regnum Protisticum ” has been
given. The short trunk divides into two large trunks,
representing the Vegetable and Animal Kingdoms,
the third and fourth, which have a common origin in
the Regnum Protisticum, which itself, you observt,
proceeds directly from the inorganic. From each of
these large trunks start large branches representing
classes. These large branches give off smaller
branches representing families, and so with smaller
and smaller branches representing orders and genera,
till we come to the leaves which represent the species.
13
Evolution and the Antiquity o / Man.


the higher ones representing the higher forms of life.
And shall 1 not add that the fruit is the fifth
Kingdom, the most perfect —scattering fragrance
among all species ? I mean the Spiritual Kingdom.
Now I think this makes the truth very clear. I
have told you something about the origin ..of life—
that it is produced from inorganic matter (Kingdom I.)
by the regular action of God’s law. In the Regnum
Protisticum (Kingdom II.) two forms of life have
been met with, viz., the Monera, which bridge the
gulf between the inorganic and the organic, and
the Protista which bridge the gulf between the
Vegetable Kingdom 111., and the Animal Kingdom
IV.; and the highest species of the highest genus
of IV., shade into the Spiritual Kingdom V. To
that we have to lead up. But first go back for a moment
and see with what rapid strides life advances.
It passes from the invertebrates to the vertebrates,
the connecting link being still represented in the
lancelet or amphioxus, a fish found in the shallow
waters of the Mediterranean Sea, the backbone of
which is so rudimentary that it does not contain any
bone at all ! The invertebrates now branch off, and
form species on their own account, and life develops
through the vertebrates, as I have already pointed
out, through the Fish to the Amphibians ; then to the
Reptiles—the Ichthyosaurus being the connecting link
between Fish and Reptiles. From Reptiles branch
off Birds—the connecting link being found in the
14
Evolution and the. Antiquity of Man.


now extinct flying lizard, the Pterodactyl, whose
remains are met with from the Lias to Cretaceous.
The first true bird was the Archceopteryx, which
had a toothed beak and a jointed tail with two
feathers growing from each joint. Thence the species
increase. We have followed this branch along to the
leaves and there we leave it. Then, coming back to the
main stem, life develops through the reptile to the
Mammals. These advance in order, throwing off
branches as they proceed, till they reach a certain
point, whence they branch off into smaller branches,
representing the three highest genera of Mammals, viz.,
tailed monkeys, tailless apes, and perfect man ; the last
being physically distinguished mainly by his perfectly
erect form, by the enlargement of the brain, and by a
development of the larynx. Clearly with the en-
largement of the brain comes mental evolution. Now
what I am telling you is all proved by the well-known
facts of Embryology ; but I insist that science does
not prove that man has ascended from an ape—
either a tailed or a tailless ape. You have as much
reason for saying that dogs have ascended from cats,
horses from cows, as you have for saying that men
have ascended from apes. Man, through his evolu-
tion owes no more to the ape than he does to a seal
or an elephant, though it is quite clear that all these
have a common origin if you go back far enough
to find it. Go back—back —back—back—through
the various sub-kingdoms —till, in the beginning,
God.
15
Evolution and the Antiquity of Alan.


Evolution is a glorious subject. Is it in any way
inconsistent with the Christian Faith ? My answer
is an honest and confident No !
But it is now time that I directed your attention
to that other portion of my discourse—l mean the
Antiquity of Man. I feel I must be brief, though
there is indeed much to tell you.
Perhaps you ask me when did man appear upon the
scene 1 I have no doubt whatever that he appeared
at a period vastly anterior to that which uninstructed
people think the Bible assigns to him. I would re-
mind you that, as a matter of fact, the Bible does not
say anything at all about the age of man. You will
observe that the date 4004 B.c. is only in the margin
of the Bible, not in the text, and is only an example
of human ingenuity. I feel quite safe in saying,
from geological considerations, which I need not stop
to lay before you now, that man dates back 10,000
years 8.C., perhaps 100,000 years—possibly even
500,000. He is certainly of Pleistocene age, perhaps
he is of Pliocene age, (Tertiary), and possibly, though I
do not think so, even of Miocene Age.
It is commonly supposed that the Bible teaches
that Adam was the first man. It does not so teach.
In fact it teaches quite the reverse, for see Gen. iv. 17.
We are there told that Cain married a wife in the land
of Nod. Commentators try to explain it away ; but
the fact remains that there were people besides the
Adamic race, among whom Cain, a member of the
16
Evolution and the Antiquity of Man.


Adamic race, went and dwelt. Then, again, logic at
Gen. vi. 2 :—“The Sons of God saw the daughters of
men that they were fair ; and they took them wives
of all that they chose.” By Sons of God are
meant the Adamic race; by daughters of men are
meant the women of other races, and alliances were
formed between them. So then there were other
races.
Now, in one sense, it is quite true that Adam—the
term I take it stands for a race and not an individual
—was the first man ; that is to say, he was the first
of the higher species of men, spiritualised men. He
was a new species of the genus Homo— the basis of
what I call the Fifth or Spiritual Kingdom. Adam
represents the first men in whom the Spirit of God
was implanted ; and thus the seventh verse of Gen.ii.
marks a stage in the evolution of man. “ That which
was natural is first and afterwards that which is
spiritual.” Man—natural man—was first formed;
and then, perhaps thousands of years afterwards, when
the proper time came, God breathed into the selected
race the breath of life, the Holy Ghost; and thus one
division of the genus man advanced from the mental
to the spiritual. That he was destined to advance
still further in spirituality —and that through a
power yet to be introduced, viz, Jesus Christ—is
clear from St. Paul’s teaching, Ephesians, i. 4. Ho
tells us that this was God’s eternal purpose regarding
man ; for, before the foundation of the world, He had
17
Evolution and the Antiquity of Man.


“chosen mankind in Christ, that they should be holy
and without blame.” And one point more. As each
species of each Order of each Kingdom originated in
a “ specific centre,” as biologists call it, whence, with
many checks, it spread far and wide in accordance
with the laws of natural development, or Evolution,
which God had imposed ; so the new species,
spiritualised man, in the person of Adam, originated
in Eden, (Asia Minor) by God’s act—a more definite
act than in the case of the origination of other species,
rendered necessary by the higher development—and
spread thence, arrested by Si Fa.ll and many falls;
so, also, what St. Paul calls (in Ephesians, iv. 13) the
reAetos dvyp translated the perfect man, literally the
full grown man, originated in Jesus Christ, in
Palestine, by a yet more special act of God owing to
still higher development, and is destined to spread
over the “earth as the waters cover the sea.”
And this extension is to be effected through the instru-
mentality of the visible Church, the organization of
which was laid down by God for this purpose ; for,
as we read Ep. iv,, 11 and 12, “And he gave some,
apostles; and some, prophets ; and some, pastors and
teachers ; for the perfecting of the saints, for the work
of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ.”
Stripping this passage of its inspired phraseology, its
gist and upshot is this, that by means of the Church
—another natural power given by God, just as He had
given all the preceding powers which were to work
18
Evolution and the Antiquity of Alan.


out His will—by means of the Church, by means of
her Sacraments, her clergy, her teachers, her members,
her philanthropic institutions, all the world might
“come in the unity of the faith and of the knowledge
of the Son of God, unto a perfect (full grown) man,
unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of
Christ.” When we attain that measure; when we
advance towards it, even in some degree, there is
produced in us a fitness for that highest development
of the Spiritual Kingdom, which is Heaven.
To conclude. Do you not now see the stages of
Evolution mentioned in the Bible 1 First, the inor-
ganic ; then, when the fit time arrives, the organic,
divided into two Kingdoms, the Vegetable and the
Animal, including man with his mental development;
then, when the proper time comes, the Spiritual
Kingdom is set up, of which Christianity is the
highest development on earth, and which prepares
men for the highest possible development of Spiri-
tuality in Heaven. In spite of seeming chaos, in
spite of constantly recurring catastrophies, eg.,
earthquakes, volcanoes, pestilences, &c., in spite of
“ Falls,” the world progressed from Kingdom to
Kingdom—from lower to higher; but in each of
these, whether higher or lower, we trace the operation
of that “ Reign of Law,” the unifying principle of
which was long ago expressed by S. Paul in the words :
“ One God and Father of all, Who is above all, and
through all, and in you all.” With these facts before
us, who can deny that Evolution is a Bible truth ?
Granted, it required the light of science to enable us
19
Evolution and the Antiquity of Alan.


blliiLio
p 7^06
20 Evolution and the Antiquity of Man.
to see it; but science is the gift of God, and it is to
be used for the revealing of the truth to His honor
and glory.
Now why have 1 said all these things to you
to-night ? What is to be the practical effect upon
our lives of this teaching? The stirring of us up to
renewed effort in performing our part in the
development and extension of the Spiritual Kingdom
—the Kingdom of Christ—by encouraging philan-
thropic movements, by assisting missionary enterprise ;
in short, by carrying out the programme of Christ
(Luke iv., 18 and 19), which is the best way of
bringing about the fulfilment of that very natural
prayer which Our Master taught us to use “Thy
Kingdom Come ” —Thy Spiritual Kingdom, in all its
fulness, in all its beauty, come.
As the humble members of the lowly protozoa, and
other sub-kingdoms of Invertebrates had their
part to perform in preparing the way for the higher
sub-kingdoms of vertebrates : as each member of each
succeeding sub-kingdom did its part to prepare the
way for something higher, viz., man; even so must
man, in his turn, perform his part in preparing the
way for the highest development of the Spiritual
Kingdom by making men Christlike.
However humble or however exalted our position
in life, one feeling and only one should dominate our
actions in reference to every undertaking ; and that is
—I must act so as to develop in myself, and in those
around me, the reAetos dvyp — the perfect, the full
grown man. — Amen.


3 1508
00750332


