

Examinations : A
Their Uses & Abuses
A LECTURE
fK'lioeml at (l.hiccit's of
BEFORE THE
ILLI AM j^LUB,
Professor Kernot,
25th JUNE, 1889.
lUdljountc :
Stillwell and Co., Printers, 195 A Collins Street.




Examinations
Their Uses & Abuses.
A LECTURE
at (|ue«ii's Hitiwfsitj tl
BEFORE THE
Professor Kernot,
25th JUNE, 1889.
Pdbounu :
Stillwell and Co., Printers, 195 A Collins Street.




- /F IffXo
X7Z7T
EXAMINATIONS: THEIR USES and ABUSES.
The present time may be called the age of examinations
and competitions. At schools, colleges, and universities,
from the humblest centre of primary instruction, domiciled
in a weatherboard shanty in the depths of a Gippsland forest,
to that great focus of intellectual light and leading, to which
Queen’s and its sister colleges stand in the relation of planets
to their central sun, do we, at frequently recurring intervals,
observe the familiar spectacle of crowds of anxious young
people awaiting the fateful hour that finds them face to face
with a series of cunningly devised questions that constitute
the test of months or years of work. And if we leave the
educational institutions, and proceed to the palatial buildings
where the officers of our Government ply their busy pens, we
still find the entrance guarded by examination, and promo-
tion in some cases dependent upon a similar test. Spend a
social evening with a party of friends, and you will find one
has just passed his examination, and is therefore jubilant; a
second has a son who has most unfortunately failed; while
a third, who was expected to have added by his presence to
the pleasure of the rest, is unavoidably absent because he is
preparing for an examination. Go where you will, you hear
of these never-ending examinations. Clergymen are exam-
ined, medical men are examined, teachers are examined,
lawyers are examined, engineers, surveyors, sea captains,
mining managers, and civil servants are examined ; pharma-
cists are examined; so are engine-drivers, guards, and
porters on our railways—the high and the humble alike
have to face the ordeal. Pass the examination, and honour
and emolument await you ; fail, and you find yourself dis-
qualified and rejected. The doors of lucrative employment
are closed, and you must accept a subordinate position—if
indeed you are allowed to earn your living at your chosen
profession at all.


And not only are human beings examined, but also natural
products and manufactured articles. At our agricultural
shows, we examine horses, cows, pigs, and other animals; we
submit them to certain tests, assess their relative deserts
numerically, place them in order of merit, and thereby
influence their future career. At Flemington, on one great
day in each year, do we hold a competition between swift
horses, the result of which is awaited with breathless
interest by the whole of Australia; and similar, but less
famous, tests are made on every little local racecourse.
Not many months ago we held a great Exhibition, the
cost of which in pounds, shillings, and pence we are now
engaged in considering, when all kinds of manufactured
articles, if not from the proverbial needle to the equally
proverbial anchor, at any rate from the largest locomotive
engine to the tiniest watch ; and from the loveliest product
of the artist’s brush to the most utilitarian article of house-
hold use, were examined, adjudicated upon, and classified
into first, second, and third order of merit; and the distinc-
tions so awarded are cherished most highly, and are now
being loudly advertised by the more fortunate exhibitors.
If we wish to erect a public building, be it town hall,
college, church, or what not, we hold a competition, submit
the various proposals of the architects to a court of judges,
and award the prize, but not always, I fear, to the most
meritorious design.
The prevalence and wide extent of application of the
examination and competition system might at first be taken
as an evidence of its intrinsic value, and of the satisfactory
nature of the result it leads to, were it not for a very steady
and apparently growing undercurrent of dissatisfaction, that
from time to time forces itself upon our attention. Were the
complaints evidently inspired by unfortunates that have
failed, or their personal friends, they would count for little,
but this is by no means always the case. We find some
whose career in the examination room has been a uniform


and brilliant success, and who therefore might naturally be
expected to be the wannest advocates of the system, express-
ing grave doubts as to the reliability of the results ; we
have heard learned and distinguished professors calling
examinations a necessary evil, a cumbrous and uncertain
test, defensible only in the absence of something better ; we
hnd eminent and successful manufacturers declining to
exhibit, or if exhibiting, declining to compete at our
exhibitions, and justifying their course by impugning the
system of adjudication ; we find architects of the highest
standing raising their voices and denouncing the competition
system as the curse of their profession, as something utterly
rotten and unreliable; and lastly, in the pages of one of thebest
known British periodicals we find an alarming list of names,
including some of the highest eminence in educational circles,
appended to an emphatic protest against the whole system
of examining in schools and colleges as at present conducted.
The objections raised by these gentlemen are briefly as
follows :
Ist. That the laborious preparation for, and excitement
and mental disturbance during examination, are inimical to
the bodily and mental health of the candidates.
2nd. That the idiosyncrasies of individual minds are
obscured and lost, original thought discouraged, and an
injurious uniformity fostered, which is opposed to true
progress.
3rd. That under the constant pressure of examination,
teaching becomes mechanical, and the teacher suffers. His
mental sympathies are narrowed, and his sole aim becomes
at last the raising of his pupils to some arbitrary standard.
As one who has happened to have had a somewhat
extended experience as examinee and examiner, both in the
University and outside academical circles, your lecturer
ventures to hope that he may be able to throw a little light
on this important and vexed subject; to point out some of
the difficulties that attend the conduct of examinations, and


to offer a few suggestions that may tend toward the reduc-
tion of the evils and the enhancing of the benefits derived.
One thing is tolerably certain at the outset, and that is,
that we cannot abolish our present machinery at one stroke,
and without providing a substitute, as some of our critics
appear to wish us to do. Such a drastic proposal is compar-
able only to the views of the anarchists, who try to persuade
us that the abolition of government is all that is needed to
usher in a social millenium.
Examinations, like governments and many other things
in this imperfect world, are full of faults ; but it is far better
to endeavour to discover and remedy, or at any rate minimise
the defects, than to advocate utter abolition. He would not
be a wise man who, finding that his coat was ragged and let
in the cold, indignantly threw it away, instead of by careful
patching, rendering it a better protection against the incle-
mency of the weather. '
To illustrate the difficulties attending the organisation
and conduct of examinations, let us suppose we are engaged
in sketching out a system of tests of competency for a doctor,
lawjmr, engineer, or any other profession. The first thing
to settle is, in what subjects the candidates are to be examined.
It is an inexorable fact, though sometimes overlooked, that
the amount of knowledge our human head can contain is as
strictly limited as are the cubic inches of volume of the brain
cavity. A candidate cannot know everything, and the greater
the number of subjects he has to take up, the less the pro-
ficiency attainable in each. Concentrate his attention on a
few branches, and you can demand a much higher standard
than if it was spread over many.
Each examiner or teacher is usually an enthusiast in his
special subject, and is apt to over-rate its importance, and to
under-estimate the value and the difficulty of other studies.
To the mathematician, mathematics is the chief end of
man; to the chemist, chemistry; to the classic, the
humanities, which outside the University qualifications of


an entirely different order, are accorded the highest place.
Take for example our Engineering course, of which as Dean,
I naturally know most. In one quarter, I have heard it
objected to, because it did not include Latin; in another,
because it did not include anything beyond mere office
routine. What ought a properly qualified engineer to
know, and what subjects may he safely let alone, is the
great and vital question. The University of Melbourne,
very properly as 1 think, says he ought to have a fair
knowledge of the great sciences of mathematics, physics,
chemistry, and geology, as a basis upon which to erect the
superincumbent edifice of professional knowledge, and so say
all the other Universities in Europe, America, and 'lndia
that profess to train engineers. The Institution of Civil
Engineers of London, the most powerful professional body
in the world, is however of a different opinion, and some
engineers and heads of departments in the Australian
Colonies agree with it in regarding a knowledge of these
sciences, such as the University imparts, as by no means
essential. “Very nice and elevating,” as one of the most
eminent engineers in Australia repeatedly said to me, “ for
people of leisure and means, but quite useless to the
engineer, and objectionable as occupying time that ought to
be spent in obtaining practical knowledge in the office, the
workshop, or the survey camp.” According to him, I had
made a fatal mistake, and entirely frustrated all my hopes of
ever becoming a competent engineer, by spending several
years at the University.
Practical experience, expertness in drawing, computing,
surveying, and so forth, are according to these gentlemen
everything, and scientific knowledge nothing, or next to
nothing. If we want any scientific fact or law say they, we
can go to the books and get it, without spending years in
tile physical or chemical laboratory. If any one seeks
admission to the Institution of Civil Engineers, the question
is not asked, “ Has he had any systematic training in the


sciences underlying engineering workbut only the
question, “ Has he had so many years of engineering
practice,” and men of no scientific qualifications whatever
are welcomed to the highest grade of membership; while
others, of sound scientific attainments, find difficulty in
obtaining recognition. And yet, members of this body are
generally regarded as standing far higher than any graduate
of any engineering school in the world.
The various Australian Governments take a somewhat
similar view. They have established examinations in
Surveying and Engineering, passing which admits a candidate
to lucrative practice ; while failing to pass, relegates a man
to a very inferior position indeed. No University degree is
recognised, but all must pass through the government mill.
Against the way in whicli these examinations are at present
conducted, I have not a word to say. The examiners, many
of whom I know, are honourable gentlemen, skilful in their
particular branches, and most anxious to guard the profession
against the entrance of inferior men. But the scope of the
examinations is entirely dissimilar to that of the University
tests ; they are not scientific in any sense, but simply
technical or practical. If a candidate is very expert in
handling his theodolite and chain; if he possesses a
mechanical facility, attained only by long practice, in making
certain calculations, involving no mathematical knowledge
beyond trigonometry and the 6th book of Euclid, but which
are bewildering from their length and intricacy ; if he knows
the best kind of stone for metalling roads, and the right time
of the year at which to apply it; if he is familiar with the
details of kerbing and channelling, and of the construction
of small bridges and culverts of conventional form ; and is a
neat draftsman ; in fact, if he knows what a man of moderate
intelligence can hardly help knowing, if he has spent a few
years in an office where this kind of work is daily practised,
he will pass easily, and obtain a most valuable legal
qualification, even though he should have never heard of


Differential Calculus, and should labour under the most
hopeless misapprehension of the first principles of Physics.
While on .the other hand, the ablest and most highly
educated man will find that his scientific knowledge and
breadth of mental grasp counts for nothing, as against a little
clumsiness in handling instruments, and a few slips in a
tedious and involved calculation, easy enough if ample time
were given, but confusing in the limited period and
unaccustomed surroundings of an examination. Thus it will
be seen that these examinations, reasonable as they appear
from the government point of view, constitute a distinct
obstacle in the way of the University engineer. The exami-
ners are themselves so expert in their particular specialties,
and come so constantly in contact with others similarly
trained by years of practice in a comparatively narrow groove,
that they cannot understand how any man, who is not
correspondingly expert, can be fit to be trusted with responsi-
ble work ; and think it a disgrace that a student, claiming
to have had a specially high and perfect training, should be
inferior to others whose opportunities have been far more
limited, and whose pretensions are of a much humbler sort.
But the explanation is very obvious. It is the very breadth
and comprehensiveness of the University training that
renders the University man inferior in matters of every-day
practice and routine. Nothing would be easier than to
satisfy most abundantly the requirements of the govern-
ment examiners, were the University prepared to ruin the
Engineering course from an educational point of view. The
method is simply this—sweep away half the Lower, all the
Upper, and all the Advanced Mathematics ; all the Natural
Philosophy, all the Geology, all the Chemistry, three-fourths
of the Applied Mechanics, and about half the Civil Engineer-
ing ; and spend the time so gained in giving the students
ah immense amount of practice in surveying,computing areas,
drawing, designing and specifying roads, streets, small
bridges and other works of a similar character, and in


answering over and over again back papers from the Govern-
ment examinations. In brief, it would mean abolishing
three-fourths of our present course, and concentrating the
whole efforts of the teachers and pupils on the remaining
fourth—in my opinion, a most disastrous proceeding. This
illustration will show how examinations, arranged from one
point of view, may prove a great obstacle to men educated
on a different scheme.
It cannot be too clearly recognised, that the natural result
of the examination system is to assimilate the examinee to
the examiner. Every examiner, no matter how competent
or honourable, has his pet subjects, his specialities; excellence
in these is strongly insisted upon and highly rewarded ;
excellence in other, and possibly equally meritorious direc-
tions, counts for little. A survival of the fittest takes
place, and the fittest are those whose range of knowledge and
mode of viewing questions, agree most closely with those of
the examiner. The more limited and technical the training
of the examiner, the narrower the groove in which he works,
and the greater the disadvantages that attend the examina-
tion. Much of the difficulty experienced, and dissatisfaction
expressed in connection with examinations would disappear
if examiners were always men of liberal training, and wide
experience in educational matters, rather than specialists, no
matter how eminent in their particular walks.
Assuming then that we have settled the subjects in which
candidates are to be examined, the next thing is to determine
whose views in each subject are to be considered orthodox.
Quot homines tot sententiae is an old remark, and is as true
to-day as it ever was. It is a melancholy fact that directly
we leave the most simple and elementary subjects, we are
met with the most extraordinary and bewildering conflict of
opinion. In theology, there are I know not how many
different schools of thought, each claiming the exclusive
possession of the only true and complete solution of the most
important question that any man has to consider. In


medicine, we have allopathy and homoeopathy, and the
differences of doctors have passed into a proverb. In law,
we are too often reminded of the “glorious uncertainty” of
that most distinguished profession ; while I can testify from
abundant experience, that engineers are not one whit behind
the doctors of theology, medicine, and law, in the diversity
of their opinions, and the reckless vigour with which they
maintain them.
I can well remember the frightful perplexity that
attended my early efforts to comprehend the problems of
Engineering practice. So long as I remained at the
University, all went fairly smooth, I was under intelli-
gent teachers, who did not try to overwhelm me by
authority, but to convince me by reason. When I left the
academic groves, and entered the busy practical world, my
troubles commenced, for I found the most eminent authority
in the colony building a bridge, some parts of which were
four times as strong, and others not half as strong, as the
most careful calculations I could make showed to be
desirable. I was utterly bewildered; and when I discovered
another experienced and highly-paid officer condemning as
dangerous a structure that my calculations showed to be
abundantly strong, and at great expense altering it in a
way that my investigations led me to believe would rob
it of half its strength, I was almost tempted to doubt my
own sanity. As a further illustration that the differences
of engineers are well worthy of being set beside those of
medical men, let me mention the following curious fact.
Everyone will no doubt readily admit that to the railway
engineer the strength and proper mode of testing the quality
of iron is an enormously important matter. Well then ?
until very recently, the prescribed test for iron for the New
South Wales railway bridges was so related to that of the
Victorian railway bridges, that every sample that passed
the one test would be infallibly condemned by the other.
Now, when you take into account the vast cost of these


structures, and the indescribably awful result of the
failure of a large bridge under the weight of a train,
you will, I think, agree with me that this fact constitutes a
most interesting topic for a passenger to meditate upon
during the tedious journey by rail between Melbourne and
Sydney.
Many years ago, I had to take part in conducting an
examination in a certain branch of Engineering. I was very
young and inexperienced, but there were two other
examiners, engineers of great experience. The questions
were prepared and submitted to the candidates without any
hitch, but when the answers came to be adjudicated upon, a
curious trouble arose. My two colleagues held diametrically
opposite views as to the correct answer to a certain
important question. Each wanted to judge the answers
from his own point of view, and each endeavoured to enlist
me on his side against the other. I wonder what the
candidates would have thought could they have witnessed
this little scene.
Again, I was once present in a court of justice where an
important trial depended upon a question in hydraulics.
Two engineers gave evidence so contradictory, that it was
certain that at least one of them must wholly misunderstand
the first principles of the science he professed ; and yet,
strange to say, they were both examiners in hydraulics ar
certain examinations held by order of one of our colonial
frovernments. The fact is, that examiners are sometimes
chosen who, though high in official position, and deserving
of all respect for long and arduous service, do not possess a
sound knowledge of first principles; and these men substi-
tute imperfect or erroneous ideas of their own, for those
great laws of nature which have been certainly ascertained
and are of universal application.
At the University, where men are properly taught by
expert teachers, and where anyone who will take the trouble
can learn from the lectures delivered, or the books prescribed,


what are regarded as the correct opinions on any subject,
this difficulty does not press ; but in government or depart-
mental examinations, where there are no antecedent lectures,
and no books prescribed, there has been, in instances I have
actually observed, a distinct danger of the result of the
examination coming to depend upon whether the candidate
happened to agree with, or differ from, his examiners on
points with regard to which, those who ought to have been
the very highest authorities were at variance.
The subjects being fixed, and also the set of opinions in
each subject that are to be taken as standard, the next
thing is to choose the questions. A very simple and
straightforward matter this many a man having no
experience as examiner might say. But it is nothing of
the sort. There is an endless variety of different ways of
doing it, each calculated to favour some particular class of
candidate. You may have many questions, or few. Easy
questions to be answered without hesitation by any man of
good memory, or difficult ones requiring long and careful
consideration. You may require the men to pass independ-
ently in every question, or you may forbid them to answer
more than a half or a third of the paper. You may give
ample time, or limited time ; and lastly, you may ask the
candidate to take up every subject at once, or allow him to
pass in instalments spread over a period of months or years.
Suppose you desire to hold an examination that a bank
clerk of two or three years’ experience could pass, but at
which the most learned professors of mathematics would
certainly fail, nothing is easier. Make the whole examina-
tion to consist of adding up very long columns of pounds,
shillings, and pence, and require a large amount of work to
be accurately performed in a limited time, and what you
desire is accomplished. The bank clerks, possessing by
virtue of incessant practice great mechanical expertness,
would leave the professors miles behind in the race against
time.


I well remember how anxious I was as to an examination
in simple arithmetic, which a paternal government compelled
me to undergo, after I had taken honours in mathematics in
the third year of the Arts course at the University. I knew,
of course, that they could not set me a question that would
present the slightest difficulty, provided there was time
enough ; but I also knew that the questions would include
multiplications and divisions of frightful length, where I
should be at the greatest possible disadvantage, when
compared with schoolboys who had been doing little else for
weeks and months. I passed the examination, but, I
believe, by the skin of my teeth, for it took me so long to
make certain of the absolute accuracy of the part that I did,
that nearly half the paper was untouched when the bell rang.
Had any little contretemps occurred to delay me further,
the public would have had an opportunity of moralising, as
they are not slow to do, on the disgraceful spectacle
of a mathematical honourman who could not do simple
arithmetic. And while speaking on this point, it should be
remembered, that some men are constitutionally slow and
ponderous in all that they do—intellectual tortoises, so to
speak, from whom their swifter companions at first run
away like hares, but who in the end often do by far the
most thorough work. One of the deepest thinkers of my
acquaintance was of this class, and consequently suffered
much in examination, being beaten regularly by others of far
less mental power. His very thoroughness, the intellectual
conscientiousness that prevented him from giving his assent
to any proposition without an amount of scrutiny that
others of lighter and more careless mind were quite
incapable of, retarded him most seriously.
I must say that, except perhaps in the case of the most
elementary subjects and the youngest of candidates, 1 do not
like examinations that are little more than a race against
time; neither, except in the same cases,do I think an exami-
nation should be made wholly, or even mainly, a test of


memory. Before writing was invented, and in a less degree
before printing was introduced, it was a valuable thing to
possess a capacious and accurate memory. Now, it is no
longer so. In my own business, I carefully avoid loading
my memory. Perhaps a dozen or score of very generally
applicable numerical constants, such as the weight of a cubic
foot of water, the average strength of iron or steel, and so
forth, I remember in an approximate form correct to the
first two, or at most, three figures ; everything beyond that
is in the books. I possess a large and constantly growing
stock of accurate numerical data, as to strength, elasticity,
and ductility of materials used in engineering construction,
obtained by means of the magnificent testing machine, the
finest appliance of its kind in Australia, that most of you
have seen in the Engineering lecture room. Examine me on
those results at present, and I should be hopelessly plucked.
I don’t remember them, and don’t mean to try. They are all
recorded in great books like a merchant’s ledgers, and these
books constitute my memory. When Melbourne merchants
think it essential to learn off by heart the contents of all the
books in their counting houses, I may begin to consider the
propriety of burdening my memory with the results of my
own original work, but not before.
One of the most valid objections to examinations, as at
present conducted, is that they put a man in an utterly
unnatural position. They deprive him of all legitimate
aids, and then expect him to do good work. He must make
bricks without straw, or rather, he must do work without
tools—a thing he is never asked to do in actual practice.
What would you think of testing the skill of a number of
carpenters by locking them up in a room, and compelling
them to make tables and chairs without tools, by the use of
fingers and teeth only. Why should not the candidate in
classics be allowed his dictionary, as his mathematical
brother is allowed his logarithm book ? In fine, as regards
a great many of the more advanced professional examinations,


why should not a man be allowed to bring all the books,
notes, and other aids that he would employ in actual
practice ? I see no reason against, and every reason for, this
course.
Do you want to examine me in Engineering, and judge of
my competency? Very well, lam willing to be examined,
but it must be in my own way. Firstly, you must allow
me to bring all my usual appliances, consisting of two
calculating machines, a considerable outfit of drawing
instruments, a large number of specimens, a library of books
and notes, and perhaps a hundred sheets of lithographic
drawings of engineering works. Then you must give me
all the time I desire. When I am asked, as I frequently
have been by our colonial governments, to report upon some
important point of Engineering practice, I do not consider
myself bound in honour to seal up and post my final
decision exactly three hours after the time of first setting my
eyes on the question. No, I often take three days. I
never, as a matter of principle, give any important decision
without sleeping over it. So the least you can do is to
provide me a comfortable room, where I can pass the
evening looking over the questions and hunting up
references and precedents. Then I must have a comfortable
bed, a good night’s rest, a good breakfast next morning, and
by mid-day, if I feel up to the mark, my answer will be
ready ; but if lam not up to concert pitch, you must give
me a day or two longer. Examine me thus, and I am
prepared to submit to your decision; but otherwise,
decidedly not.
I fancy I hear some one reply, that if examinations were
conducted with such aids, no one would fail. But it is not
so. Many of the worst mistakes in engineering,—mistakes
leading to fearful loss of life, or tremendous waste of money,
have been due to the fact that men, surrounded by every
imaginable assistance from books and drawings, totally
misapplied the information they possessed ; while on the


oilier band, there is no instance on record of an engineer
failing simply because be did not recollect some statement
that be knew where to find in his library. To know where
to find your data, and to intelligently use them when found,
is all that is needed. To carry them all in one’s memory is
as useless and absurd as, for example, a carpenter or black-
smith to carry all the tools of his trade at all times in a
knapsack on his back.
An interesting departure has been made in the Victorian
government examination for hydraulic engineers, and has
been found to work well. Every candidate is allowed to
bring into the examination room all books, notes, &c. that
he desires; but once in, he cannot go out for any more.
This is a move in the right direction, and I hope to see its
application extended.
Get rid of the mere memory element from our examina-
tions, and you have gone far to abolish cram. A style of
question that has obtained in certain history examinations
appears to me very bad from this point of view. It
consists in naming half-a-dozen dates, and then asking the
candidate to comment at length on the events happening on
those dates. Now suppose, as sometimes happens, that a
man, otherwise good, has an incurable inability to remember
numbers, his prospects are ruined. I recollect once going
into an examination when I had reason to expect questions
involving the exact recollection of a series of numbers. I
found my memory incapable of retaining them for any
length of time. Had I been of less tender conscience, I
might have neatly written them on my thumb-nail, or on
the wrist-band of my shirt, but this I felt to be wrong.
After some consideration, I adopted the following course
I took the book containing the information to the door of
the examination room, and read it over and over until the
door was opened. I then threw down the book, rushed to
the nearest table, and before looking at the questions, jotted
down all the numbers I found it so hard to remember. My


mind thus disburdened, I was at leisure to study the
questions and frame my answers. Now, whether this
course was justifiable or not, is a question in casuistry that I
have not yet been able to decide, and would now hand over
as an interesting topic for the young theologians of Queen s
College to debate. But of one thing I am quite clear, and
that is, that an examination giving rise to such a difficulty,
is not a desirable kind of examination to have.
Next, as to the number of questions that have to be
answered. I know of one examination where every question
has to be answered satisfactorily, or else the candidate is
rejected, and others, where a very large number of
questions are set, and candidates are not expected, nay, in
some cases are forbidden, to attempt more than half the
paper. The former plan assumes that a man s knowledge
extends no further than his actual answers ; the latter is
based on a more liberal view. It regards quality I’ather than
quantity. It was the plan of the late Professor Wilson, the
late Professor Andrew, of Professor Warren at Sydney, and
other good examiners. To attempt to gauge the whole of a
man’s knowledge at an examination is useless. It is far
better, in most cases, to test his mental calibre by the style
of his answers to selected questions he is familiar with.
The next point for discussion is, as to oral as a substitute
for, or as supplementing written examinations. In the
University, regular oral examinations are a specialty of the
Medical School, though occasional ones have occurred under
peculiar circumstances on the Arts side. Much is to be said
for oral examinations, if judiciously conducted. At a
written examination, a student misreads or misapprehends
a question, and so loses many marks; at an oral, the
examiner repeats the question perhaps in other words, and
so greatly aids the candidate. The system our medical
friends adopt, of a written followed by an oral examination,
is well worthy of our attention. Most of the fairly good men
will pass on the written examination, while the subsequent


oral gives the examiner a valuable opportunity of satisfying
himself as to otherwise doubtful cases.
All preliminaries settled, the men enter the examination
room, and take their seats at tables separated as far as
possible from each other. But as they enter, some will be
heavily handicapped compared with others —one has come
from a distance, and had a great rush to catch his train ;
another is suffering from the effects of a badly-cooked
breakfast; a third has caught a cold ; while a fourth, from
undue study, has a splitting headache. We cannot allow
for these things, and yet they often make all the difference
between success and failure. It is one of the necessary and
unavoidable evils of the system, that should never be
forgotten, that the whole outcome of a year of hard study
may hang upon the accident of the hour.
But there is one thing that might be done, and that is,
to record the temperature of the room. I honestly think
that the standard for passing should be somewhat relaxed
when the temperature is over 80° or below 55° Fahrenheit.
The answers complete, are handed in to the officer in
charge, bearing, is it to be the name or the number of the
o * o 7
candidate ? The University authorities, anxious to take
every possible precaution against bias, say the number.
But I question whether such precaution is really needed,
while certainly it increases clerical work, introduces possi-
bilities of error, and a reduced safety against personation.
The number system, unless effectual, is useless. In the case
of a large class, with whom individually the lecturer does not
come in contact, it probably answers well; but with small
classes, such as my own, it continually fails. A peculiar
handwriting, a favourite expression, a casual allusion,
breaks down the incognito.
Some years ago, I had one man in my advanced class that
came from Ballarat. I did not recognise anyone’s hand-
writing, but one set of papers bristled with illustrations
from Ballarat and its vicinity. If a reservoir was referred


to, it was a Ballarat reservoir; if a railway, the Ballarat
railway. This was the case with only one set of answers.
How could I fail to recognise ray Ballarat friend ?
And now begins the tug-of-war, the terrible work of
analysing and classifying the answers, and separating the
successful from the rejected. To judge from newspaper
articles, and common hear-say, there is very great public
ignorance as to the nature and difficulty of this operation-
It seems to be generally assumed that between the good
and the bad there is a great and impassable gulf fixed, and
that nothing but the most outrageous incompetency, or the
most criminal negligence on the part of the examiner, could
ever lead to a man failing who ought to have passed, or
passing who ought to have failed. But the reality is far
different. The distinction between the successful and the
rejected is often a most delicate one, as to which the best
examiners may easily differ. To illustrate this fact, let us
suppose that the passing standard is 50 per cent. You
value the answers, and find several are above 70, or below
30 per cent. There is no difficulty about them—their fate
is decided at a glance almost; in fact you need not, if pressed
for time, trouble to read the answers through, for if you find
after perusing a portion that the candidate has already
scored so much as to have undoubtedly passed, or scored so
little as even with perfect answers to the remainder to have
unmistakeably failed, the matter is settled. When all, or a
large majority of the candidates, are in this case, the
examiner rejoices over his easy task, and sends in his return
without misgiving. But when, as too generally occurs,
most, or all of the answers, are so near to the standard that
a very small variation in the value of that standard would
either include or exclude them all, or a very small variation
in the estimate of the value of a given candidate’s answers
place him above or below the line, the most curious
anomalies may occur. One examiner, who is in a slightly
lenient mood, may pass everybody; another, equally honest


and competent, but a little more exacting, may reject all;
or one may pass those the other rejects, and vice versd. I
have often been astonished at the enormous variation in the
value attached to the same answer by two examiners, who
did not differ at all as to their idea of what a perfect answer-
should be.
To take an actual case. I found, of two most honourable
and competent men of high University standing, one had
marked a certain answer at three-fourths full value, and the
other, at only one-fourth. Taking the answer itself, I found
that three-fourths of it was absolutely perfect, while the
remaining fourth contained a huge blunder. One examiner
mercifully regarded the blunder as a slip of the p6n, and
gave full value for the correct portion of the answer. The
other said, “ This answer shows the incompetency of the
candidate. The good part has been learnt by rote, but with-
out understanding the subject; and the blunder reveals
want of comprehension of first principles. ” Now, who could
say which of these examiners took the right view ? And
yet such a difference as to only one answer might profoundly
affect the result of the whole examination.
One of the very greatest difficulties to an honest examiner,
is to arrive at a satisfactory conclusion as to imperfect and
ambiguously worded answers, which may represent sound
knowledge expressed in a hurried and obscure manner, or
may hide under their involved phraseology, fatal ignorance
of vital points. It is in such cases as these that an oral
examination presents vast advantages, for there the question
may be repeated and in slightly varied form, until the
examiner is satisfied.
In bygone years, before the number system was introduced,
1 frequently went through the papers with rejected candi-
dates, and I have more than once found, that under most
apparently erroneous answers, a really fair knowledge of the
subject was concealed. In the hurry and excitement of the
examination, the candidate misreads or misconceives the


question, and so fails to do himself justice. I would there-
fore advocate the adoption of oral examinations in the case
of a certain portion of the candidates ; say, assuming 50 to
be the passing standard, that all obtaining over 60 or below
40, be dealt with summarily on their written answers ; and
all between 40 and 60 be examined orally, the examiner
having the written answers before him at the time.
A recent proposal to improve University examinations
consists of having; a consultation of examiners in the various
subjects of each year, before finally rejecting any candidate.
This suggestion was received with favour by representatives
of several colonial Universities that sat in informal conference
early this year, but has been somewhat roughly criticised in
certain quarters recently. My vote is in its favour, and for
this reason : I have more than once regretted having rejected
a man who was only just below standard in my subject,
when I found he was far above standard in all his other
subjects.
A final point on which I would say a few words, is the
enormous labour involved in the unweildy examinations we
now possess. Few but those that have tried it, can imagine
the fearful wear and tear of brain, resulting from perusing
hundreds of sets of answers to the same questions—answers
containing the same ideas, but in every imaginable form of
grotesque distortion. I do not know how many ex-exami-
ners are to be found inmates of lunatic asylums, but I
never felt more fitted for such a destination myself than
after examining a fairly large batch of matriculation
answers. I have ceased such work now, and shall certainly
not for one moment entertain any request to resume it at any
fee less than ten times what is at present paid. Examinations
in my own subjects, where the number of candidates is not
very large, and the questions of an advanced character, are,
on the contrary, not unpleasant work.
The time reasonably allowable for such a lecture as this
being limited, the subject of competitive, as distinguished


from pass examinations, cannot be now entered upon. I
will therefore conclude with a set of propositions, which
I submit to my audience in the hope that they may aid in
some slight degree in clearing up certain popular misappre-
hensions about examinations, and in promoting improve-
ments in the way of conducting them.
(1.) In the present state of things, examinations are
necessary, and are beneficial in their effects in the case of
the majority of the candidates, by absolutely excluding the
hopelessly incompetent who otherwise might, by personal
influence, or sheer impudence, force their way to positions
they are wholly unfitted to fill, and by constituting a very
wholesome spur to a vast number of easy-going and indolent
persons of average intelligence, leading them, while their
minds are yet plastic, to form habits of continuous
application, and ensuring that they shall not be absolutely
unacquainted with the subjects that it is desirable they
should know.
(2.) In the case of the students that stand in the first
rank as to intelligence and industry, they are less necessary,
and more likely to lead to undesirable results, by diverting
their attention from studies for which they are by nature
specially fitted, and forcing them to undergo tests that are
distasteful, and in their case, not very necessary. Genius
can take care of itself, provided you give it what it wants,
and do not hamper it with mechanical restrictions.
(3.) Examinations, no matter how carefully conducted,
tend to encourage certain qualifications, and pari passu, to
discourage others, and there is a distinct danger that higher
and ultimately more valuable studies may be discouraged
by undue stress being laid on lower and more mechanical
matters. Examinations should be arranged from a broad
and liberal point of view, and clear comprehension of great
scientific principles should not be sacrificed, as it too often
is, to mere memory cram, or mechanical facility in routine
operations.


(4.) The fate of a candidate should never be made to
depend upon his agreeing with his examiner in disputed
points, unless that examiner’s opinion is certainly ascertain-
able from lectures, or prescribed books.
(5.) It is desirable that the use of books, notes, and other
aids that any man would employ in ordinary practice be
permitted as far as possible, at any rate in professional
examinations ; and also, that ample time be allowed.
(6.) Oral examinations are useful as supplementing written
ones, in the case of weak candidates.
(7.) The number system is not effectual in preserving the
incognito, especially in the case of small classes. It is better,
therefore, to trust to the honour of the examiner, than to
hedge the examination round with costly and cumbrous
precautions, which themselves may involve danger of con-
fusion between different candidates. And should the exami-
ner, consciously or unconsciously, take into account the
student’s general intelligence and industry during the year’s
work, good, rather than harm is done, and a fairer decision
arrived at.
(8.) Improve examinations as much as we may, they will
still remain but an imperfect test, liable to be vitiated by
many accidental circumstances. Let, therefore, those who
succeed be not two highly elated, nor those who fail too
deeply depressed ; and let everyone remember, that to arrive
at a sound judgment of any man’s character and acquire-
ments, one needs to consider, not the results of a few hours
in the examination room, but the whole course of his life
and work.
STILLWELL AND CO. PRINTERS, 1 95 A COLLINS STREET, MELBOURNE.




