



Ls (c'U-f'
EXCERPT
MINUTES OF PROCEEDINGS
THE INSTITUTION OF CIVIL ENGINEERS.
Vol. Ixxx.' Session 1884-85. Part ii.
The Hon. JAMES HENRY THOMAS, J.P., Director of Public
Works, Commissioner of Railways, Member of the Executive
Council and of the Legislative Assembly, Perth, Western Australia,
was born in London, March 2, 1826. He was the fourth son of
Mr. William Thomas, of Berners Street, Oxford Street, and was
educated at the University College School. Having completed
his education, he was articled to Messrs. Evans and Sons,
mechanical engineers, who were famous for their good work and
for making thoroughly efficient workmen. After serving his
time, he was appointed to superintend the erection of the gun-
machinery manufactured at Messrs. Evans’ works, for the
arsenal of Trubia, in Spain. Here he was engaged for about two
years, and during this time acquired a sound knowledge of the
French and Spanish languages. In supervising the erection of
the gun-machinery he acquitted himself to the entire satisfaction
of the Spanish Government. On his return to England he was
selected to be the Engineer to the Imperial Gas-Company’s works
at Yauxhall, which post he held for several years. This appoint-
ment, however, did not offer sufficient scope for his ambition. He
accordingly resolved to push his fortune in the colonies, embarking
for New South Wales in the ill-fated “ Sarah Sands.” After
remaining in Sydney nearly a twelvemonth, occupied in desultory
work, he was appointed in 1863 Engineer to the notable Fitzroy
dry-dock, which was hewn out of the solid rock of Cockatoo
Island, situated in the centre of Sydney Harbour. In superintend-
ing the carrying out of this great work, his natural self-confidence
and readiness of resource stood him in good stead; for in colonial
works of this magnitude, where recognised appliances are not
always at hand, rough and ready methods have frequently to be


[Memoir.
THE HON. JAMES HENRY THOMAS.
devised; moreover, the dock had to he executed by convicts,
who had, with considerable difficulty, to be drilled and instructed
in their work. More than once his life was in danger from
convict machinations. The basin of the great dock was blasted
by the usual means, but when the dock entrance had to be cleared
below water, other means had to be resorted to. The petards
ordered for the purpose had not arrived. A number of oil-cans
were therefore collected and roughly converted into torpedoes ;
with these the mouth of the dock, in spite of adverse predictions,
was forced, the Fitzroy dock completed, and the caisson placed
ready for the opening ceremony. This work occupied Mr. Thomas
until 1857. His next appointment was in the Railway Department
of New South Wales, first as Inspector, and finally as Director
of all the railway-lines in the colony. In this capacity he
had the control of all the trains that conveyed H.R.H. the
Duke of Edinburgh to various points in New South Wales. In
1872-3 Mr. Thomas passed some months in England in connection
with domestic affairs. Of his voyages from, and back to, Australia,
he published on his return to Sydney, a short but interesting
account. About twelve or eighteen months after his return to
the colony, finding that an engineer was required to carry out
extensive works at Perth, Western Australia, he competed for and
obtained the appointment under the first administration of his
Excellency Sir William Robinson in 1876. He was thus esta-
blished in what was to prove the most important field of his
labours. Here he was successively gazetted Director of Public
Works, Commissioner of Railways, justice of the peace, member of
the Executive Council and of the Legislative Assembly. His duties
were, indeed, manifold; he had to design and superintend the erec-
tion of lighthouses, public edifices, and to plan and superintend
the carrying out of the railway and telegraph lines. As one of the
Commissioners for Western Australia for the English section at the
Paris Exhibition of 1878, he had the honour of receiving a medal,
accompanied with an autograph letter from and a photograph of
H.R.H. the Prince of Wales. But his duties were too onerous, and
manifold, even for a constitution such as his. His health gradually
gave way; a second voyage to England was had recourse to as a
remedial measure; this appeared to have restored him, but on his
return to Perth and to his numerous duties his health again broke
down. A voyage to Sydney was then tried, and was thought to have
thoroughly reinstated him, but it was unavailing. His friends
began regretfully to perceive that he was doomed. Still, with his
usual courage, he bravely held on to his duties till he fainted in


his place in the Legislative Assembly, whence he was borne to the
home he was never again to leave. He died on the 16th July,
1884.
On Mr. Thomas’s death becoming known the House immediately
adjourned, the Colonial Secretary and the Commissioner for Crown
Lands both uttering warm tributes to his memory. On the day
of the funeral the public offices were closed, and the hushed aspect
of the town testified to the great respect in which he was held.
Mr. Thomas was elected a Member of the Institution on the 14th
of January, 1879.


LONDON:
PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED,
STAMFORD STREET AND OHABING CROSS.
