

EXCERPT
K&OMTHE
» SOUTH AUSTRALIAN JUBILEE HANDBOOK, 1887.




BXOBEPT
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN JUBILEE HANDBOOK, 1887.




ADELAIDE WATERWORKS.
The following description of the Adelaide Waterworks and the
Sewage Farm at Islington has been kindly supplied by Mr. Charles
W. Smith, A.M. Inst. C.E., of the Hydraulic Engineer’s Depart-
ment. This department has under its control all water supplies to
country towns within the province, and the Adelaide sewers.
The City of Adelaide is situate on the Adelaide Plains, which
reach in a westerly direction from the foot of the Mount Lofty
Ranges to the sea.
The city is four miles west from the ranges and six miles east
from the sea. From the Thorndon Park reservoir to the city the
distance is six miles, and from the Hope Valley reservoir seven
miles, both in a north-easterly direction. The area supplied by
these two reservoirs extends for distances varying from two and
three-quarters miles to twelve miles from the city, and covers over
100 square miles, supplying a population of from 90,000 to
100,000.
The levels of the city vary from 175 ft. to 100 ft. above the level
of the sea. The more elevated of the suburban townships have
supplies independent of the Hope Valley and Thorndon Park
reservoirs.
The marine township of Glenelg has a fairly large population,
and is only 17ft. to 25ft. above sea level. Port Adelaide, the chief
port in the province, is situated on the Port Creek, within two
miles of the sea, and from 13ft. to 18ft. above its level.
The source of supply is the River Torrens, where it issues from
a gorge in the western slopes of the Mount Lofty Ranges. The
catchment area equals about 150 square miles, and consists of very
hilly ranges of a slate and sandstone formation, covered with poor
soil, and sparsely timbered with “bastard box” and stringybark.
The flow in the river is constant but very variable, the quantity
during the summer months not amounting to more than 7,000
to 10,000 gallons per hour, while in time of heavy winter rains the
water flows from 4ft. to 6ft. deep over a weir 140 ft. wide.
The head works consist of a heavy masonry weir, about 15ft.
high, constructed in a narrow gorge of the river at a point where


it is about 200 ft. wide, and at such an altitude as suffices to give
the necessary inclination to an aqueduct for conveying the water
to the two reservoirs, one of which is situate at Thorndon Park
and the other at Hope Valley. The level of the weir is 359 ft.
above low water (sea level).
No filtering appliances are necessary, as the water, after the first
of the winter floods have passed over the weir, becomes clear and
quite fit for domestic use. The sluice-valve in the weir which
governs the intake is then opened, and the water allowed to flow
along the aqueduct to the reservoirs. The flow of water is regu-
lated by this valve, which is 4ft. square, and which can be opened
or closed in two minutes. No bye-washes are therefore needed
for the reservoirs.
The aqueduct i§ • about three and three-quarter miles long, and
consists of half a mile of cast-iron pipes 42in. in diameter, laid
partly on masonry piers, and for the greater part in a bench
excavated along the rocky and precipitous side of the gorge. At
one point it crosses the river by an aqueduct bridge 200 ft. long.
This pipe delivers into an open channel, which is continued round
the spurs of the hills. To avoid any long detours, the channel is
taken in a direct course through two tunnels of an aggregate length
of one-third of a mile. This channel is 10ft. 6in. wide at the top,
4ft. deep, excavated in solid ground throughout, and lined with
cement concrete, 9in. thick rendered. It is provided with all
necessary under and over culverts, road bridges, scour-valves,
bye-washes, &c., and has a fall of Ift. 9in. per mile, and when
running full delivers 1,000,000 gallons per hour. The aqueduct
terminates at the second tunnel, the end of which enters the Hope
Valley reservoir. At a point, however, along the aqueduct, the
water can be wholly or partly diverted from the channel and con-
veyed to the Thorndon Park reservoir by a 21 in. cast-iron pipe.
The Thorndon Park reservoir was constructed in the year 1857,
and from that time until 1872 was the only reservoir supplying the
City of Adelaide, Port Adelaide, and the numerous suburbs with
water. The increase of the population and the rapid extension of
the suburbs demanded greater storage capacity. The larger
reservoir at Hope Valley, with the aqueduct, was
therefore determined upon, and so to ensure rapidity of
filling. The Thorndon Park reservoir is now only considered
supplementary to the larger one, but it is also intended as a reserve
in the event of any accident occurring to the other reservoir or its


outlet works. Each reservoir is in direct connection with the city
and suburbs, Either can be used alone or together. The two
reservoirs are also directly connected by a 21 in. and 18in.
compound main. The Thorndon Park reservoir is situated in a
valley, which has been spanned by an earthern dam constructed
with a core or wall of good puddled clay, supported on either side
with selected clayey materials, well punned in 12in. layers in-
clining from the exterior slopes towards the puddled wall. This
wall is 4ft. 9in. in thickness at the top, increasing in thickness by
a batter of 1 in 12 to the natural surface of the ground,
whence it diminishes by a similar batter to various depths. The
outside slope is horizontal to Ift. vertical, and is covered
with a compact turf. The slope of the inside is (Ift. horizontal mad.'tS
lft. vertical, the entire surface of which is heavily pitch-paved
15in. in thickness. The dam is of a total length of 47 chains,
its greatest height being 44ft.; the centre portion is straight and
19 chains long; the two ends of the dam—one being 9 chains and
the other 19 chains long—are curved inwards to meet suitable
portions of banks of the valley. The outlet works consist of a
brick-in-cement valve tower, erected within the reservoir and close
to the toe of the inside slope, with outlet valves at various heights
to suit the level of the water. From the tow r er there is a brick-
in-cement tunnel, 6ft. 6in. x 6ft., carried through solid ground
immediately below the base of the dam to a valvehouse situate at
the foot of the outside slope of the dam. Two mains, one 18in.
and the other 12in. in diameter, are laid in the tunnel. This
reservoir contains at high water 140,500,00 C gallons, the depth^ l
being then 40ft. The high-water level is 323 ft. above the sea. At
this height the water covers an area of acres. The Hope
Valley reservoir is formed by an earthern dam crossing the valley
at a point just below* the junction of two others, thus giving the
maximum storage capacity with the minimum length of dam. The
dam is straight and nearly half a mile in length; its greatest
height is 70ft., and greatest breadth base 355 ft. It is formed
of good selected clay for about two-thirds of its solid contents, «m 4
Orwell punned in 12in. layers by means of heavy corrugated iron
rollers drawn by four horses. The core or central wall consists of
first-class puddled clay 6ft. in thickn|ss at the top, increasing in
thickness by a batter of 1 in 12J*ip»r A the natural surface of the
ground, thence diminishing by a similar batter to various depths.
The inner slope is three to one; it is protected bv a layer 9in. in


thickness of 2Jin. broken metal, on which is laid heavy pitch-
paving 12in. thick. The outer slope is covered with turf. At
the foot of the inner slope a cast-iron valve tower lined with brick-
in-cement and cement concrete is built, with valves at different
heights to suit the varying level of the water. This tower is
connected with a strong outlet culvert of masonry lined with iron,
built in the solid ground under the seat of the dam. This outlet
leads by a connecting main gne and three-quarter miles long, 21in.
and 18in. in diameter, the subsidiary reservoir at Thorndon
Park. The Hope Valley is constructed to hold 886,915,752
gallons, the depth then being 51ft. 6in.; the high-water level is
347 ft. above the sea ; the surface of the water at the 51ft. 6in.
level comprises an area of 162 acres.
By careful evaporation gaugings carried out daily during several
years, it is found that the evaporation from these reservoirs is 70in.
during the year, about one-half occurring during the three hottest
summer months, and the total amount being almost the same in
each year.
In connection with the two reservoirs there has been constructed
on the northern boundary of the city a service tank for the supply
of water to the suburbs between the city and Port Adelaide and
the townships between it and the sea. This tank is placed at a
level of 170 ft. above the sea, and when full contains 1,041,000
gallons ; it is 107 ft. 6in. square and 17ft. deep ; it is constructed of
pressed bricks set in cement and roofed over with brick-in-cement
arches resting on brick piers, the whole being earthed over and
laid down in lucerne, and surrounded with ornamental shrubs and
trees. The tank is filled during the night from a 15in. main ; the
outlet pipe is 15in., and supplies two loin, mains, carried along two
roads parallel to each other and a mile apart, to Port Adelaide.
In case of any extra pressure being required at the Port, or of
repairs, &c., to this tank, a direct supply can at once be established
between the Hope Valley and Thorndon Park reservoirs and the
Port, the inlet and outlet mains at the service tank being so
arranged that the supply to it can be at a moment’s, notice cut off
and diverted to the Port mains. A somewhat similar tank, con-
taining 850,000 gallons, has been built to supply the town of
Glenelg and other suburbs lying between it and the city.
Two mains 1 Bin. in diameter convey the water from the two
reservoirs to the city, while secondary mains branching therefrom
supply the various suburban townships. These two 18in. mains


have hitherto been sufficient for the demand ; but another main of
18in. in diameter is urgently required to be laid, taking a new line
of route towards the suburbs lying to the south and south-east of
the city.
The primary mains of from 15in. in diameter to 21in. in diameter
have a total length of sixteen miles; the secondary mains of from
15in. to lOin. in diameter have a total length of twenty-two miles;
while the distributing or street mains from lOin. to 3in. in diameter
have a total length of 462 miles. The furthest point supplied is
at the seaside, distant fifteen miles from the Thorndon Park
reservoir.
The service is high pressure with constant supply, and for
domestic use unstinted, the only restraint being, in time of drought
or a dry summer, and the prevention of gross waste / and
stoppifcgethe more or less / for irrigation.
The consumption fluctuates from about 1,750,000 gallons in
winter to about 6,000,000 gallons per diem in the
summer months. '
The meter system of supply is largely in use, a meter being
supplied to everyone desiring it, whether for domestic or manufac-
turing purposes. A rent, now abolished, of Is. per month was
formerly charged for the use of the meter, the price of water being
Is. 6d. per 1,000 gallons passed through it when situate outside the
deep drainage area, and Is. 3d. per 1,000 gallons if within the
proclaimed drainage area. LVtifc
Telephonic communication is established kMk the residence
of the manager at the Water works-yard, Kent Town ; the Head
Office, Victoria-square ; Police Station ; Fire Brigade Station; the
reservoir-keeper (residing at Thorndon Park), under whose control
the two reservoirs and head works are placed, Kensington Pump-
ing Station, and the superintendent at the Port Adelaide office.
At the foot and partly on the western slopes of the Mount Lofty
Range are situated several townships considerably higher than the
Hope Valley or Thorndon Park reservoirs. To supply these
townships and their environs (area covered, about ten square
miles), the waters of several springs and creeks rising in the
ranges, and flowing therefrom through rocky ravines and gorges,
have been utilised. In three cases wells have been sunk in the
detritus which now fills the old creek bed and adjacent to present
creek, and the water 41 conveyed thence by a main to covered ser-
vice tanks containing about 270,000 gallons each, and placed at


such levels as to command the several townships. These supplies
are taring the winter months, but for a few months in
the summery—December to May—the supply has more or less to be
augmented by pumping water from the Kensington pumping
station. The quantity pumped during each season amounts to
about 25,000,000 gallons, the average cost for the past four years
pumping being 4Jd. per 1,000 gallons. The rate charged in these
high-level districts is now 2s. per 1,000 gallons.
In addition to the above described auxiliary works, a water
tower containing 66,000 gallons has been erected at the Sema-
phore. This was found necessary to keep a constant service on
in the district west of the Port River. The leading main is
carried over the Port creek or river by means of the swing bridge.
The main is disconnected on each occasion of opening the bridge
to allow of the passage of vessels, and water is then drawn from
the tank in water tower until the connection with the main source
is again resumed upon the closing of the bridge.


ADELAIDE SEWERS AND SEWAGE FARM.
The city of Adelaide can fairly claim to hold the unique position
of being the best drained city in the southern hemisphere. The
system of deep drainage, which has now been completed for nearly
two years, has come up to the expectations of its most sanguine
advocates; and the concensus of opinion is that it is a pronounced
success.
The drainage area—that is, the entire district which can, by
reason of the configuration of the ground, be benefited by these
works —includes the city of Adelaide, the corporate towns of
Hindmarsh, Thebarton, St. Peters, and Kensington and Norwood.
The work of connecting with the sewers is still proceeding in the
two last named corporations.
The main sewer which receives the street sewers, is constructed
for the greater part of its length of cement concrete. That por-
tion which extends easterly from the Frome-road, Adelaide, is of
earthenware pipes of a maximum diameter of 24in. The size of
the concrete sewer varies from 3ft. 6in. by 2ft. 4in. to sft. by 3ft.
4in., and is of oviform section. It is designed to discharge 23,000
gallons per minute. Another main sewer, 3ft. 6in. by 2ft. 4in.,
traverses Bowden to receive the drainage of Bowden, Brompton,
Thebarton, Southwark, &c. Where sewers join, the
section is changed to a trough perpendicular sides and
semicircular top and bottom; it is sft. wide and 3ft. 9in. deep.
This section is continued until it reaches the straining shed at the
sewage farm, Islington.
The sewage farm is situate about four miles to the north of the
city, and contains altogether about 470 acres, including roads.
The sewage from Adelaide and adjacent towns flows on to the
farm by gravitation. The height of Adelaide at the post office is
154 ft. above sea level, that of the farm at the point where main
sewer enters being 41ft. above the sea. At the northern end of
farm the height is 28ft. above the sea. All the sewage is strained
before being distributed over the land.
The farm is worked on the broad irrigation principle, combined,
in the winter months, with intermittent downward filtration.


The filter beds are thoroughly underdrained, and work most
effectually, the effluent carried off therefrom being perfectly clear
and pure.
The sewage, after being strained, is conducted over the farm by
means of cement concrete carriers and wooden troughing.
The farm has been divided, by fencing, into twenty-one pad-
docks, varying in area from eight to twenty-five acres; and water
has been laid on to each for the use of cattle depasturing thereon.
The whole of the farm, excepting about twenty acres of land above
the level, is now irrigated. The soil varies from a stiff clay to a
sandy loam.
A large sum of money has been spent upon buildings on the
farm, including manager’s house, dairy, stables, cowsheds, pigsties,
&c., and the arrangements are most complete.
The dairy, for which most of the buildings were erected, had,
after being brought into good working order, to be abandoned by
reason of the strongly expressed popular prejudice against the
produce. The farm is now, therefore, farmed with a view of
grazing and fattening of stock and the growth of root crops and
other fodder plants.
The production of the land treated with the sewage water has
been extraordinary, and it is generally considered that more
luxuriant crops could not have been obtained.
The Italian rye-grass, lucern, and mangolds, find a ready sale
at high prices.
At present the live stock upon the farm consists of about 300
cows and bullocks, 30 horses, 300 sheep, and 160 pigs.
The rate charged for depasturing large cattle ranges from 3s. 6d.
to ss. per week. Cattle, bought as stores, after heingon the farm
for three months double their market value. The pigs are well
worthy of notice, being ,as fine a lot as could be seen anywhere;
they are fed on mangold leaves, pulped mangolds, lucern, and a
little meal, and also the skim milk purchased from a neighboring
dairv farm at a nominal price.
The following is a description of last year’s cropping of the
farm. Many other cereals, fodder plants, and roots not mentioned
here, were sown for experimental purposes, and the result of such
experiments will doubtless influence the manager in his next year’s
cropping :
Lucern. —About 150 acres have been laid down in lucern.
The paddocks are watered every three weeks to a depth of 3in.


The soil varies from a sandy loam to a stiff clay. The yield
obtained at each cutting is from four to ten” tons per acre, cut
eight times a year. The lucern brakes let readily for £lO per
acre, but is found more expedient for the manager to retain all the
land in his own hands in order that the watering may be better
controlled and distributed over a larger area.
Italian Rye-grass. —About 150 acres are devoted to Italian rye-
grass, watered about four times in the year with a 3in. watering.
The average yield is about eight tons per acre.
Mangolds. —About twenty-five acres with mangolds.
They were drilled in ridges about 30in. apart. The plants
were watered about every three weeks, 3in. deep. The soil varies
very much in quality, consequently the crop was not very uniform.
The yield was, however, tremendous, giving an average of fifty-five
tons per acre, and a maximum yield of eighty-five tons per acre.
Some of the roots can be seen in the Northern Annexe of the
Jubilee Exhibition. They are quite brobdignagian in size.
Sorghum. —Twenty-five acres of recently levelled land
with sorghum, and received waterings 3in. deep every six weeks.
Although the crop was patchy the total yield gave an excellent
average. The plants were cut twice, giving twenty-four tons per
acre at each cut, and afterwards grazed. Undoubtedly this is a
most invaluable fodder plant, either for chaffed feed, grazing,
or ensilage.
Wheat (for hay).—Fifty acres under wheat yielded about two
and a half tons per acre. Three waterings 3in. deep were given
to this crop.
Barley.— About thirty acres of land sown with barley
for seed. This crop mhj had one watering 3in. deep, and thi3
when the plant was 18in. high. It yielded twenty bushels to the
Vines. —Sewage water has proved to he gaaHaiiy suited to the
production of the grape. About two acres of trellised vines of all
the table varieties gave a splendid yield, about ten tons to the
acre, notwithstanding the depredations of the sparrows. About
three waterings were given during the season.
Wattles. —Owing to the success which has attended the growth
of the wattle on the farm, some of the paddocks have been planted
therewith, in widely distanced rows, the usual annual cropping of
the land going on at the same time.


There is little doubt that under good management, such as the
farm now enjoys, this property must become most valuable, and
the income that will he ultimately derived therefrom go a long
way towards paying interest upon cost of the works carried out
bothon the farm and in the towns benefited by the deep drainage
system. The last half-year’s balance-sheet indicated a profit of
£7OO.


■8
d
‘rt
1
o
-p
jj
P 4
ft
P
X
1
1
I
«0
*k
-«<s
fiq
4
g N
s 5
H ~
S 3 **
p 1
50 g
P 5 §
» *
s I
O «
fe «
k;
•H ■“
a
o
gf
-g g
fl 3 s
£
*
2
I
I*
S
o
CO
I
I
*o
|
f
I
a
J 8
u
£
o
§
|
5
S-«
£
ce
£
■S
o
s
si
•• •••• • • ••• C 4H
• * •••• •• • • • ©
E. Spiller, Government Printer, North-terrace, Adelaide.
...
60 W) bo 0
■g .9.9.9 P 4 A 1
TO© ©rd>*
l£ Ii J 03 03 GO |Oo5 60 ®g Übb'i'S §
ff § pH P-l P-l 60tpW).9 ortf 60.0 60§ fI.S £o <j s
1* 111 1111 I?t| If !|Si4?
Ii ii& K "" Ir 1 5 ril i
5 111 * * |
.t? 000000000000 0000 <P> o 0000 o
o .000000000000 0000 oo 0000 o
£ 2® ® ® ® ® c L°. c l c is °,
«g OOOO3 (NO Or-100 o
O
O r 3 O O O 00 tN lO (N (N <N <N CO (M O <-> O
«N *N «s r. «
e 8 rh 00 rH HIO CO <M o
O CO (M o
S CO H oo
GO
S>S) ~ _ g .a g
.Sfe S S-S -3.9 la JS
v,nilg’g's 02 "!*^ Ha2- I“>* h o^£'S)o )
3 S .gH|||fE3-g1 JS| Is!
™ ® J§g 14.!I 4 .! S$ i a.aj S laS'SitiJ
** § 5 ® *fS S««0(g ilrt c |w-i3 *
00 8 a-- 00 - & g
OO D O Sh o*3 .H Pn 53 >
00 gOoo® tSk? 1 ®
6o g « |
8 o 3
te- S -0 OH 'o gj
«1t !i i I .1 ■».! I
3^!^|.'7- m gsg'o” SO © ? Pl'dOiH S”
§«£ o|a §J i|‘|'S 2^'SoS' 5 1 0
►sfl r 0 r 2O“ .s si s sahi -s 53 21= - £ J:
2sf-l|i3ig s
© ri t-i rH o ,H h /v 5 H Sj c rt} r—t P r> ri O P 4 M
S”|a <! =g t
rt H!§!=r!J if a * Ig*|,gs| a
“•ii" i& $ m "i £*§j
»- i “ *►
s ~ . c 3 CH CD
Q. jT)
5T •• •••• •• • • • Qjj
0 _ -S • • .... • •••03
c 3 t-* •• • • • • •• • • • H
pQ©*•••• • •• • • • P
5 > a: : :: : : : : :: :8
r© Q> • • ••• • • •••_,
P CQ •••tj •• • • • H
OQ © <tf • # • • 5> • •^
* >» : : : :s'£ .9 jj H: : |.|
g is 3:: ** a | S'h 2::§t3
o & o• * *-e |« m r^oSa
J | 111 £IIJ 1| &S|lB|
< K Hcucb


t ’ ; • ' ‘
1




FiS7?4v~
3 1508
00074063




