

rwSfesTr? 2."' 1
EXECUTION
OF -
o F A R H EL L.
Sydney Morning Herald Office ,
Tuesday, Noon.
3 he terrible penalty of the law for the crime
committed bj the assassin OTarreil upon the
perscn of Bis Royal Highness the Duke of
-Edinburgh, at Clontaif, on the 12th of March,
was exacted at Darlinghurst gaol this morning’
and ihe convicted felon died an ignominious
death upon the scaffold. The authorities, not
knowing what desperate deeds might be
attempted, made arrangements for any out-
% . ak (Il ® t cculd possibly occur, and in addi-
% ,0 a lal 'g e number of police, who were for
the most part stationed in the Lunatic Receiving
Bouse, opposite the western wall of the gaol,
they had a large body of soldiers of the 50th
Regiment posted in the Court-house. It is
hardly necessary to say that although large
crowds of people congregated in the vicinity of
Ine gaol, the utmost decorum and good order
prevailed. A large number of gentlemen,
including members of the Legislature, Justices
ol the 1 cacc, and well-known private citizens,
were admitted into the gaol by order of the
client), anel when the execution took place
there were upwards of a hundred persons pre-
f;pnt - ", e understand that- O’Farrell slept
Roundly all night, as he has been accustomed
to do since his incarceration, and up to the last he
preserved that cheerfulness of manner that he
lias exhibited ever since his arrest.
It is so far satisfactory to know that within the
mH lew days lie several times expressed glad-
ness (hat the shot fired by him at the Prince
did not inflict a mortal wound; and he stated,
moreover, that it he were liberated he would
not attempt, it again, but should consider the
hte oi his Royal Highness sacred. He also
gave expression to a fcclhtg of satisfaction that
the Duke did not go to New Zealand, as he
team! that another attempt upon his life would
uave been made there.
. I'm roll rose at about six o’clock this morn-
ing, and conducted himself as he has been ac- •
pustemed to do since his conviction; but as
the hour fer his execution approached he shook
hands with the officers of the gaol who had
been in attendance upon him, and thanked them
tor the kindness and consideration with which
they had treated him. Shortly after eight
o dock, the Rev. J. Dwyer, Roman Catholic
Chaplain of the gaol, arrived, and remained
seme time m -conversation vvitTi me prisoner.
It is stated that O’Farrell left a written state-
ment in reference to the commission of the
crime lor which he was doomed to suffer, but
this requires confirmation. As the sound of
the bell striking nine o’clock died away, the
two executioners, JSlliot and Ward, entered the
wing in which the prisoner was confined,
and commenced to pinion him. At
the termination ©1 this process, a pro-
cession was formed, and the solemn cor-
began to move towards the gallows,
which was erected in the usual place,
in the corner of the yard near the workshop
and kitchen. The prisoner, who walked by the
side of the Rev. Mr. Dwyer, was preceded by
two of the officers oi the gaol, and followed bv
the Sheriff (Mr. M‘Lean), the governor of the
gaol (Mr. Read), the Under-Sheriff, the Visiting
Magistrate, and other officials. The spectators
locked in vain upon the face of the culprit for
any indication of emotion ; but it was observed
that his lips moved in response to the prayers
which were being offered by his rev. attendant.
On arriva at the foot of the gallows the pri-
soner and attendant priest knelt a few moments
in prayer, and then O’Farrell rose and meuntod
whh a quick step—which might almost be
called a run—the steps to the scaffold. One of
the executioners took hold of his atm with a view
to assist the pinioned man up the steps, hut the
latter spurned the preferred help and appeared
to regard the touch of the grim functionary as
an insult. On reaching the platform the
minister of religion offered another short prayer,
which was inaudible to the spectators, and then
finally shaking hands with the condemned
culprit, left him to his fate. It was confidently
expected by many persons that the prisoner
would make a statement on the scaffold, but no
word did he utter after he had shaken hands
with the clergyman who had been attending
him. 'lhe adjustment ofthe rope, and drawing
the white cap over the unhappy man’s head
were but the work of a tew seconds, and barely
had these preparations been made by one of
the executioners than the other withdrew the bolt,
and O’Farrell fell a lifeless mass, his neck having
evidently been broken by the sudden jerk.
The only motion observable in the body tvas a
slight drawing up of the feet immediately after
the drop fell, but this was simply the action of
the muscles without conscious pain. It will be
seen from the foregoing that while there was an
absence of everything like bravado in the de-
meanour of the prisoner in the last hour of life,
he met his richly merited doom in the most
calm, cool, and collected manner. It was evi-
dent that he was entirely self-possessed to the
last moment.
After hanging about half an hour, the body
was cut down, and, it is understood, handed
over to the ofder of his sister for interment.
