

EXHIBITION BUILDING, MELBOURNE.
ILLUSTRATED
OFFICIAL
TO THE
AQUARIUM, PICTURE GALLERIES,
AND
MUSEUM COLLECTIONS
UNDER THE CONTROL OF THE EXHIBITION TRUSTEES,
ALSO DESCRIPTION OF
CYCLORAMA OF OLD MELBOURNE.
COMPILED BY JAMES E. SHERRARD,
Secretary, Exhibition Trustees.
Melbourne:
BY AUTHORITY: ROBT. S. BRAIN, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
PRICE 6D. 1894.






GROUND PLAN OF EXHIBITION BUILDING


EXHIBITION BUILDING, MELBOURNE.
ILLUSTRATED
pFFICIAL j^ANDBOOK
TO THE
AQUARIUM, PICTURE GALLERIES,
AND
MUSEUM COLLECTIONS
UNDER THE CONTROL OF THE EXHIBITION TRUSTEES,
ALSO DESCRIPTION OF
CYCLORAMA OF OLD MELBOURNE.
COMPILED BY JAMES E. SHERRARD,
Secretary, Exhibition Trustees.
JEtelbmmte:
BY AUTHORITY: ROBT. S. BRAIN, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.


The Exhibition Trustees.
The Hon. L. L. SMITH, M.P., Chairman.
G. R. FINCHAM, Esq.
J BOSISTO, Esq., C.M.G., M.P.
The Hon. THOS. BENT, M.P., Speaker op the Legislative
Assembly.
G. H. BENNETT, Esq., M.P.
The Right Worshipful the MAYOR OF MELBOURNE.
Councillor JOHN ANDERSON.


INTRODUCTORY.
The Exhibition Aquarium is an institution of quite recent growth,
as its construction was not commenced till 1884, when several
small experiments were made as to the practicability of establishing
a salt-water Aquarium at such a distance from the coast. These
experiments were successful, and the Trustees of the Exhibition
Building considered themselves amply justified in proceeding with
the preliminary works, which have been added to from time to
time until the present result has been obtained.
A great deal of the success of the Aquarium has depended on
the personal interest which has been taken in it by the Trustees.
The Chairman, the Hon. L. L. Smith, when on a visit to Europe,
caused exhaustive inquiries to be made from all the existing
Aquaria as to the best method of conducting these establishments,
and obtained a quantity of information which has been most useful
in various departments.
The Melbourne Exhibition Aquarium has the honour of being
the first established in Australia, but our neighbours in Sydney
were not slow to follow the example given, and Aquaria have also
been built at Bondi and Coogee.
This establishment of Aquaria is an evidence of the progression
of education which is taking place in every department of economic
production, and there is little doubt that the experiments which
will be conducted from time to time in this Aquarium will be
exceedingly useful, and, it is hoped, will lead to a further development
of the fishing industries of the colony.
In compiling this small work for the convenience of visitors to
the Aquarium, an endeavour has been made to give the greatest
possible amount of information about the fish of Victoria generally,
which may, perhaps, be found interesting to the general public. Of
course, every kind of fish which is mentioned in the book is not to
be seen in the tanks; the difficulties attending the capture of
some of the rarer kinds being enormous, and, when they are taken,
there is the attendant risk of transit from the shore to the
Aquarium.
A 2


The Aquarium
Was commenced in 1884, and was opened in 1885. Since then
additions and alterations have constantly been made until it has
been brought into its present state of perfection. The difficulties
attending the construction and carrying on of such an establish-
ment in the first instance can only be imagined by one who has
gone through the ordeal, as everything at first seems to combine
for the mortification and disappointment of the manager. As a
matter of fact, the public have very little idea of the difficulties to
be overcome. Nearly every one knows that fish are most delicate
creatures, and very soon expire on being removed from their native
element. Here they live in an imitation sea, and all the conditions
are artificial. The greatest difficulty is not to keep the fish alive
when they get to the Aquarium, but to get them to the Aquarium
alive.
The Tanks.
The two tanks which are situated in the eastern corridor are
constructed of Castlemaine slate slabs—a material, however, which
has not been found suitable, as the chemical action of the sea-water,
after a time, causes exfoliations and consequent leaks —and it has
been found necessary to have these tanks faced with bricks. The
slate is, however, excellently adapted for smaller tanks (such as
those which are found in the entrance vestibule, between which
and the Fernery may be seen a tank entirely constructed of
iron and glass, the bottom being plate-iron, riveted together, the
pillars, of T iron, being covered by cast-iron columns). The 60-ft.
tank is also constructed of iron, but on a different principle, the
bottom consisting of cast-iron plates, riveted together, the design
being from the late Hon. J. Woods, M.P., a former member of
the Trust. The glass is best plate, inches thick, and is fixed
in place with a mixture of red and white lead, with the addition
of a little oil or Russian tallow, to prevent it setting too hard.
The Water.
The water which is used in the tanks is, in the first instance,
obtained from the Bay, and pumped into 400-gallon tanks on carts,
and then allowed to run into three underground reservoirs con-
taining in the aggregate over 100,000 gallons ; thence it is pumped
into the tanks and allowed to return to the reservoirs. At the


first inception of the Aquarium there was a great difficulty in
getting the water free from turbidity, and it was some considerable
time before experience taught that the cause was insufficient cir-
culation and aeration. Once the cause was known the difficulty
was easily overcome.
The underground reservoirs always contain three times the quan-
tity of water that is in the show tanks, and it is on the maintenance
of this proportion that the successful management of the Aquarium
principally depends. As soon as a show tank becomes turbid,
the water is at once run off and fresh water supplied from the
reservoirs.
System of Aeration.
The system of aeration adopted is, as far as I can learn, different
to that in use in any other Aquarium, and has so far proved most
successful. The air is compressed by one of R. G. Ford’s com-
pressors, and stored in two cylinders 30 feet long and 3 feet in
diameter, up to a pressure of 150 lbs. to the square inch. The air
is then carried to the backs of the tanks, and being taken down to
the bottoms in gutta-percha pipes, is seen by the visitor to rise in
tiny silvery bubbles to the surface. This constitutes a vital prin-
ciple, and if the supply of air is stopped for half-an-hour all the
fish in the tanks will be seen to be distressed, and in a short time
would rise to the surface for air and die. The reason of this is
obvious. The fish breathe through their gills, and rob the water
in which they are of its oxygen, which has consequently to be
artificially supplied to keep them alive.
In establishing Aquaria, the great difficulty has always been to
regulate the supply and demand of oxygen in the water. In small
Aquaria this can be accomplished by adjusting the proportion of
animal and vegetable life. The water-plants and seaweed give off
the oxygen which is the life of the fish, and consume the deleterious
carbonic acid gas. In large public Aquaria, however, it has been
found preferable to employ systems of artificial aeration. This
may be accomplished in several ways —by a constant flow of water;
by the water being driven into the tanks, so as to impinge on the
surface, and carry down minute air particles; by keeping up a con-
stant motion in the surface of the tanks, as by having a small
water-wheel revolving and lifting the surface water continuously ;or
by forcing direct volumes of air into the tanks. This latter system
has been adopted at this Aquarium as the most economical and


least likely to stoppage or derangement, whilst under its use it is
possible to maintain the true character of an Aquarium; that is,
the employment of certain quantities of sea-water which are stored
and renewed from time to time, the actual waste being reduced to
a minimum.
Any person wishing to commence a marine Aquarium on a scientific
principle, in which zoophytes and the lower forms of marine life
may be kept, can do so very easily by getting a glass dish about the
size of a wash-hand basin, placing on the bottom sand and a few
stones covered with seaweed growth, the specimens desired to keep,
and a complete aeration can be secured by filling and emptying a
glass syringe full of the water several times a day, injecting sharply
at a distance of say 6 inches from the surface, by which means
enough air is carried into the water to keep it fresh and in a natural
condition.


In fact, in an Aquarium it is necessary to simulate the action of
the sea, where the constant action of the waves and tides acting
under natural laws is absolutely necessary to prevent the stagnation
of the ocean.
In several of the European Aquaria artificial sea-water has been
used with varying success, prepared according to the following
formula: —
Common salt ... ... ••• 81 parts
Epsom salts ... ••• ••• 7 „
Chloride of magnesium ... ... 10 „
Chloride of potassium ... ... 2 „
The real sea-water, however, is naturally preferable, and is
always used where it can be obtained. It may be interesting to
give the composition of sea-water according to analysis:—
Water ... ... ... ••• 964-744
Common salt or Chloride of Sodium ... 27-059
Chloride of magnesium ... ... 3-666
Chloride of potassium ... ... 0‘765
Bromide of magnesium ... ... 0-029
Epsom salts or Sulphate of magnesium ... 2-295
Gypsum or Sulphate of lime ... ... 1 '407
Carbonate of lime ... ... ••• 0-033
Unaccounted for ... ... ••• o*oo2
1000-000
The last-mentioned component parts occur in infinitesimal quan-
tities in both sea and fresh water, and are therefore not used in
producing the artificial fluid.
Artificial Sea-water.
I have made humorous experiments with a view to keeping fish
alive in artificial sea-water, with only partial success.
In sea-water, prepared according to chemical analysis, the fish
became blind and only lived a few days. In water brought up to
a standard strength with refined salt made from sea-water the


more hardy kinds of fish did very well, and in water made with
Southall’s sea-salt, the fish seemed as much at home as in their
natural element, and in this water I also got seaweeds to grow;
so that the possession of a marine Aquarium is not obligatory on
proximity to the sea-shore.
Machinery.
Not the least important department of the Aquarium is the
Machinery Room. Here is the lung of the establishment in the
shape of a Ford’s air-compressor, which condenses atmosphere up
to a pressure of 150 lbs. to the square inch, and which is stored
in two cylinders or receivers, 30 feet long and 3 feet in
diameter. This is one of the features of this Aquarium, and
renders it distinct from all others, where a constant stream of
water has to be kept running through to the tanks, as the air is
regulated by a system of pressure gauges, and the attendant, on
leaving in the afternoon, simply sets his taps, and the air is
supplied in proper quantities till the next morning.
In order to assist in maintaining the proper condition of the
tanks, the water is circulated for an hour or more every morning,
a separate stream being poured into each tank and carried off
by overflow pipes.
The Fishes
Are obtained from Queenscliff, Western Port, and other points in
the Bay ; and it is in obtaining such specimens, and landing them
safely at the Aquarium, that the great difficulty exists. In the
first place, if a fish has been hooked the hook must be gently
removed, and the fish placed in the well of the boat, and then kept
in a floating cage for some time, to become accustomed to captivity
of course, the same applies to fish caught in nets—and for
transit to Melbourne are placed in tins of various shapes, which
are provided with an inner compartment of stout calico, which is
stretched all round to prevent the fish being hurt. The moment
the tins are stocked they must be sent off, and a constant agitation
kept up in the water to retain the fish alive. As an illustration of
the amount of oxygen required by a fish, I may state that almost
any ordinary fish the size of one’s hand would exhaust the oxygen
in a bucket of still salt-water in a quarter of an hour, and would
then die unless an artificial aeration was given to the water by


some vessel being dipped into the bucket and its contents being
allowed to fall some distance through the air to entangle oxygen or
forcing in air through a tube connected with a pair of bellows.
Feeding the Fish.
The fish are fed regularly every day, and their food consists of
fish or meat chopped up into pieces about the size of the top of one
finger; they especially favour pilchard. Visitors should make a
point of watching the fish at feeding time, as the various methods
of the different species in taking their food can be watched with
interest. Others feed on small Crustacea, or on the seaweed which
is placed in the tanks. They also eat mussels very freely. When
possible they are always provided with live food, in order to pre-
vent any detritus accumulating. A favorable food is boiled
crayfish.
The Amphibians.
At the present time these are only represented by one specimen
of the Sea Lion. Eight of these were brought at great trouble
and expense from San Francisco, where they were captured on
Santa Barbara Island, by Captain Eastman, and when landed in
Melbourne were in very low condition, the supply of fresh fish
having run out on the voyage. In fact, only two were landed at
the Aquarium, one now survives, having been an inmate of the
Aquarium for over seven years.
General Remarks.
Although Aquaria, as we now understand them, are institu-
tions of a modern growth, the purpose which they serve was in
very active operation many years ago. Independently of the
Chinese and Japanese, who, from the earliest times, have been
in the habit of keeping domestic fish for their amusement, the
ancient Romans carried the art of pisciculture to a very high
pitch of perfection, and spent enormous sums in making channels
from their villas at Bake and Naples to the sea-shore, in order to
lead the fresh salt-water every tide to the intricate system of ponds
which existed in connexion with their houses. Advantage was
also taken of the habits of those fish which enter fresh water to
spawn, as small rivulets were sometimes turned into the channels
to simulate a natural river, and the fishes used to go up these
channels to spawn, thus stocking the ponds, as the exit of the


fry would be stopped by sluice-gates. It was a common feature to
have a pond in the banqueting hall, so that guests could see the
fish caught before being prepared for the feast, and amuse them-
selves by watching the dying agonies of their greatest dainty,
the Red Mullet, which, in its death, takes the varied hues of
the rainbow. The cultivation of this fish at one time became
a mania, which must have resembled the tulip fever, which
occurred early in this century, as in the reign of Caligula we
read that as much as <£24o was given for a single Mullet, and
that the fish ponds of C. Herius were sold for an amount greater
than £30,000.
THE SEAL
(Phoca vitulina.)
These animals, which belong to the genus carnivora, and are
often misnamed fishes, are found along the sea coasts of all the
temperate parts of the globe. The specimens shown in the
Aquarium are the hair Seal in contradistinction to the fur Seal of
commerce, which only exists in the colder regions. The term
vitulina arises from their calf-like bellowing, and is applied to this
species on account of the bleating noise made by the young Seals.
The illustrations are taken from Sir Frederick McCoy’s Prodromus.
Seals are strictly amphibious; they exist equally well on land or


water, and only frequent the latter element because their limbs
are better adapted for swimming than walking, and because their
food is found entirely in the sea. Their marine life is not abso-
lutely necessary for their existence. All members of this family
are piscivorous, and the amount of fish a Seal can devour is aston-
ishing ■ and, notwithstanding the fact that they must do enormous
damage to the fisheries, they are now protected by law. They
cannot breathe below water, but inflate the lungs as does the human
animal. The power of the lungs is larger in comparison than in
man, and the Seal, taking a bigger breath, has the power of
compressing a large quantity of atmospheric air, and so remaining
a longer period under water. The nostrils have a beautifully-
arranged valvular construction which enables an absolute closure
of the air passages, and so prevents the pressure of water enter-
ing the lungs and causing suffocation. It may not be generally
known that pearl-divers and others who do not use the diver’s
dress, in order to attain this object, are obliged to close the
nostrils with an instrument resembling the common clothes-peg.
The eye is also specially protected, having a secondary transparent
lid which covers the pupil when below water. The ears are also
protected with valves. The senses of smelling, hearing, and
vision are extremely acute. In the water the fore and hind flippers
are used in the same manner as the fins of fishes, and their rate
of progression in the water is very swift, as visitors can see for
themselves. When they come on land a complete metamorphosis
takes place, as the hind legs are tucked under them, as in the
accompanying sketch, and the arching of the spine enables them
to travel as quickly as a man can run.


The fore and hind flippers are provided with nails, as shown in
sketch.
Their colour when out of the water is a whity-brown, darker on
the back than elsewhere. The specimens shown in the Aquarium
all come from Julia Percy Island, where they resort in great
numbers every year. Mr. W. H. Dusting, of Portland, who has had
great opportunities of watching the habits of these animals, informs
me that during December and January there are about 3,000 or
4,000 of them on Julia Percy Island. The breeding does arrive
there heavy in young, and remain on the island till April or June.
For about a month before they leave the young are taught to swim
by dabbling about amongst the holes in the rocks. They are poly-
gamous, and during the rutting season the bulls are very savage.
Each bull selects a favorite camping spot for himself and family,
and woe-betide any unfortunate young buck who strays within the
charmed circle, as he is promptly killed or severely treated. When
the Seals are leaving the island and taking to the sea, their great
delight is to sport in the billows which surge round the rocks, and
here the young get the finishing lessons in the natatory art.


Visitors may be astonished to learn that the Seals become accli-
matised to living in fresh water, the only discoverable drawback,
so far, being that a few have died from hydatids ; but whether
this is due to their being kept with fresh water or not, I cannot
say. In captivity they become very docile, and can be taught any
ordinary tricks like dogs are.
EDUCATED SEALS
AND
THEIR TRAINER.
The principal element of their treatment is that which applies to
all animals, i.e., kindness combined with firmness, and a cultivation
of that which is known in children as “ cupboard love.” In cap-
tivity their ordinary allowance of food is 10 to 12 lbs. of fresh fish
daily. Up to the present they have not bred in the Aquarium.


THE CROCODILES.
(Crocodilus porosus.)
These saurians occupy a large den at the further end of the
Aquarium. The larger and darker specimens have been obtained
from IS orthern Queensland. The smaller light-coloured reptile is
a native of Siam. Crocodiles are oviparous, and deposit their eggs
in the sand or mud near or on the banks of the rivers they
frequent, and the young when hatched immediately proceed to the
water, but the major part of them are, by a wise dispensation of
Providence, shortly devoured by ichneumons, birds, and even by
their own parents, otherwise, as each female lays from about 50
to 100 eggs, crocodiles would be too plentiful to allow of other
inhabitants of the parts they frequent. The eggs, specimens of
which are on view, are no larger than those of a goose. The North
Queensland blacks, and also the Solomon Islanders, consider
crocodiles’ eggs a bonne louche , and the further they are advanced
towards maturity the better they like them. On the other hand,
nature provides its own revenges, for old-man crocodile is very fond
of young black, male or female. They also like dog. In the
Queensland rivers, however, their principal food is fish. When
killed their stomachs contain quite a small curiosity shop in the
way of odds and ends, stones of all sizes, nails, bits of fencing wire,
&c., &c. The case containing these can be seen in the Fisheries
Court. The largest specimen which has been kept in the Aquarium
was 16 feet long, and is now exhibited stuffed in the Museum.


SKELETON OF CROCODILE.
In close proximity can be examined the
perfect skeleton of a somewhat smaller
reptile. The skin is very tough, but has
been erroneously stated to be bullet-proof.
This belief has arisen from the fact that
each excrescence on the skin is caused by
the presence underneath it of a flat hard
bone, which in some cases would turn a
bullet. Their greatest strength lies in the
tail, which is one mass of muscle, and it
is their habit to strike any animal they
may come in contact with a sweep of their
tail, disabling them, before seizing them
with the jaws. The eyes are provided with
a nictitating membrane or transparent
movable pellicle, as in birds. The articula-
tions of the jaws are very peculiar, being
placed so far back as to cause the observer
to think that the upper and not the lower
jaw is moved in opening the mouth. The
legs are very short, but strong and mus-
cular; the hind feet have only four toes,
which are united towards their base by a
strong web, the two interior toes on each
of the fore feet and the interior one on
the hind feet are destitute of claws. Con-
sidering the disproportion between the
size of their bodies and their legs it is
astonishing how they can travel, as a
crocodile can go as fast as a man at a brisk
walk. Mr. Bosisto, M.L.A., of Richmond,
had a peculiar experience, which he
narrates. On a visit to Queensland, he was
presented w'ith some crocodile eggs, which he brought home and
placed in his window, where, to his great surprise, he became the
possessor of quite a small family of crocodiles, the eggs having
been hatched out by the solar heat.
It may be as well to explain the difference between crocodiles
and alligators, which is always easily discerned by the shape of
their jaws and teeth, the lower canine teeth of the crocodiles


fitting into a notch in the edge of the upper jaw, those of the alliga-
tors fitting into a pit or cavity in the upper jaw. In crocodiles also
the hind legs have a fringe of compressed scales.


THE PLATYPUS.
(Ornithorhynchus paradoxus.)
The Platypus pond will be found in the outside enclosure. As
these mammals are very difficult to keep in captivity, it does not
always happen that there are specimens in the pond ; unfortunately
also their habits are nocturnal, and when specimens are doing well
they are difficult to be seen by visitors. The interior of the earth-
work of the pond is laid out in a series of channels, somewhat in a
manner resembling the sketch on next page, which illustrates the
manner in which they construct their burrows.
The full-grown animal is about 20 inches long, having a long
flattened body covered with a beautiful thick soft fur, dark-brown
above and whitish beneath. The muzzle is elongated, enlarged,
and flattened, resembling the beak of a duck; the teeth are situ-
ated in the back part of the mouth, two on each side, with flat


tops and no roots. The feet are furnished with a membrane
uniting the toes, and in the anterior feet extending beyond the
nails. The male has a spur on each of the hind legs. Its food
THE HOME OF THE PLATYPUS.
consists of frogs, worms, and insects. Recent researches have
proved that they are oviparous, and the eggs have been foun m
various stages, but the scarcity of the animal and the inaccessi-
bility of its habitat has rendered it difficult to obtain much reliable
information on the subject. A number of stuffed specimens can be
inspected in the Zoological Department of the Museum.


MUD TURTLES.
The curious reptiles known by the generic name of Tortoises are
remarkable for being an example of the skeleton being brought to
the surface of the body, as the upper shell or carapace and the lower
s e or plastron are in reality a broadening out of the ribs and of
the chest bones, a complete box being formed into which the animal
can completely withdraw its legs, head, and tail
wil f “ mber of l he va ? ties foUnd in the Mu ™y and other rivers
een in the ponds of the Fernery and tethered outside on
B 2


the grass. One variety is known as the long-necked variety, the
neck being twice or three times as long as in the variety shown in
the sketch on page 19. The young are produced from eggs.
SKELETON OF TORTOISE.


FISHES.
(Pisces.)
This class embraces all those inhabitants of the water who
cannot live any time out of it; they swim by means of fins,
breathe by gills, where the blood, which is cold, comes in contact
with the oxygen in the water for the aeration of their system.
Their gills breathe water as the lungs of other animals breathe air.
The reason a fish dies when it is taken out of the water is because
the delicate gill membranes become dry and collapse against each
other, so that the circulation of the blood is stopped and the
oxygen of the atmosphere can no longer act upon it. The blood
is circulated by a heart with two chambers, an auricle and
a ventricle, which lies just behind the gills. In nearly every
instance fish propagate their species by means of eggs, and are,
therefore, called oviparous. The propelling power of the fish is
almost entirely supplied by the tail, the fins being almost
exclusively used for balancing. The fins are termed “dorsal,”
“pectoral,” “anal,” “abdominal,” and “caudal” or tail. The
dorsal fins are situated on the back, the pectoral on what might
be called the shoulders, the anal near the vent, the abdominal
or ventral may be said to correspond with the hinder limbs of
quadrupeds, whilst the caudal is commonly known as the tail.
The scales are beautifully constructed, overlapping each other
closely, and forming a natural sheathing, to allow of swift pro-
gression through the water. The skin of the fish is supplied with
pores, which permit of the exudation of a secretion of a mucous
substance which nature supplies as a lubricator. On most fishes
will be observed a lateral streak or line extending from the head
to the tail, whence this lubrication principally exudes; the scales
on this line are perforated. The lateral line is supplied with
nerves, and is termed the muciferous system. The optic nerve
of fishes varies in different species; in some cases the nerve leads
straight to the brain, in others the nerves cross so that the right
eye is connected with the left side of the brain, and vice versd;
whereas in the case of rays, sharks, &c., the optic nerves join, and
lead in a united band to the brain. The arrangement of the


bones is so complicated and peculiar that reference to the illus-
tration below will give a better idea of the subject than pages
of description.
SKELETON OF FISH.
Fish are of distinct sexes, and are almost entirely oviparous,
the eggs being deposited by the females, fertilization by the male
taking place immediately afterwards.
As can be well understood, the majority of fish in this Aquarium
are those which are termed littoral or shore-fish; pelagic or deep-
sea fish being difficult to obtain, and also more difficult to
maintain alive under artificial conditions, as they are not so
accustomed to changes of temperature and density of water as the
fish which frequent the shores of our coasts.
By the naturalist, fish are classed under a number of orders,
such as—Acanthopterygii or spine-finned, which is the most com-
prehensive; Acanthini, with vertical and ventral fins, without
spinous rays; Physostomi, with reticulated fin; Lophobranchii,
with gills branched together and attached to branchial arches;
Chondropterygii, with cartilaginous skeleton; and many other
orders, which are again divided into classes and families.
This handbook is merely intended as a cursory guide for
visitors to the Aquarium, and is not to be regarded as having any
scientific pretension at all, consequently the descriptions of the
fish relate entirely to their popular habits and features, and are
not given in accordance with any ichthyological classification, but
simply as the specimens occur in the tanks.


THE SCHNAPPER.
(Pagrus unicolor .)
This is one of the finest fish that come to the Melbourne market,
and is a universal favorite, both with the angler and the gour-
mand. At one time they could be caught in any part of Hobson’s
Bay, but now are exceedingly scarce. The principal fishing-
grounds for this fine fish are off Rickett’s Point, beyond Brighton;
and if one can only get on to the reef around which a “ school ”
of Schnapper has started to feed a very lively quarter of an hour
can be obtained. The “ old man ” Schnapper runs up to about
30 lbs. weight, and with age developes a peculiar lump on the
nose, which is entirely missing in the younger specimens. In
colour it is a beautiful pink, with iridescent spots. They are
gross feeders in the tanks, and when once acclimatised give no
trouble. The specimens in the tanks have been obtained with
great trouble, and are denizens of the Aquarium for over three
years.
The Schnapper is found in almost all Australian waters, from
New Zealand to Norfolk Island, and haunts the reefs contiguous
to the coast. The favorite bait is salted pilchard or squid. The
native name of this fish is “ Wollomai.”


THE BOAR FISH.
(. Histiopterus recurvirostris.)
This most singular fish is, unfortunately, not frequently captured,
and specimens can consequently be rarely seen in the tanks. It
belongs to the “ Dory ” family, which have been immortalized by
the legend of St. Peter having taken Caesar’s tribute from the
mouth of one of these fish.
The shape of this fish is most peculiar, the head being extended
in a long muzzle, the nostrils being situated at the base.
The upper parts are of a greyish hue, and the lower ones of a
dirty white, broad bands of a dark hue crossing the sides from
dorsal to caudal fins. Those specimens which have been exhibited
in the tanks have excited a great deal of curiosity through their
remarkable shape and structure, and it is to be regretted that
their rarity prevents their more frequent exhibition.


THE BASTARD TRUMPETER.
(Latris Fosteri .)
This beautiful fish claims our attention, not only on account
of its graceful appearance, but by the beautiful colours which it
possesses, and which, unfortunately, do not long last when the
specimens have been inmates of the Aquarium for any length of
time. This is doubtless due to the want of the natural conditions
in which they ordinarily live. The higher part of the body is
generally of a dark greeny brown, tending to a purple, transverse
lines of bright colours running from head to tail, and the belly and
tail yellow, while a rainbow iridescence of colours is seen from time
to time when the specimens come under the direct rays of light.
It is an excellent table fish.
THE TASMANIAN TRUMPETER
Is marked with dark and light green longitudinal stripes. The
specimens shown are brought over from Hobart in a well-boat, and
do extremely well in the tanks.


THE BUTTER FISH.
(Chilodactylus nigricans.)
This fish varies a good deal in colour, the general tinge being of
a slaty blue, mottled with white. The pectoral fins are elongated,
and terminate in single rays, which are used to enable the fish to
cling to the rock or seaweeds on which it rests whilst awaiting its
food.
THE PILCHARD.
( Clupea sagax.)
The Pilchard, which belongs to the Herring tribe, is represented
by the bottom figure, the smallest being the sprat, and the largest
the Herring, which are not found in these waters strange to say,


although so closely allied to the Pilchard. These fish are but
seldom seen alive in the tanks owing to the extreme delicacy of
their texture, the scales coming off, and so causing injury on the
least handling. It is a pity that some practical use cannot be
made of this splendid article of food supply which sometimes visits
our coasts in such enormous quantities.
THE BLENNY.
( Cristicips sp .)
A number of varieties of this little fish will be seen in the
various tanks. It has the depending barbels, which are used for
seeking out its food. It is commonly found amongst the small
rocky pools and on the grass beds, and does not attain any large
size.
THE SALMON TROUT.
(Arripis truttaceus.)
This well-known fish is, when young, called “Trout,” or
“Salmon Trout,” by the fishermen, and when full-grown and about
2 feet long is designated “Salmon.” In the cold weather it dis-
appears almost entirely from the coast, but re-appears again in the
summer, when sometimes immense shoals are met with. The flesh
is rather dry and insipid, except when cooked immediately after
capture, but owing to its being caught in large quantities it
is an important factor in the supply of fish food. It has an
unfortunate predilection for “ going bad” on the shortest notice, and
nearly all cases of fish-poisoning have been traced to this fish and
its congeners. The young are prettily marked with dark bands
and yellow spots, but the adults, as a rule, take a dull silvery
colour. It is caught both with hook and line and with nets.


THE ROUGHY
(Arripis Georgianus )
When young is very similar to the Salmon Trout fry. It can,
however, be always distinguished by the touch—the skin being
rough, owing to the scales being strongly ciliated. It generally
travels in shoals, and is occasionally taken in great quantities.
It is highly esteemed as a table fish when fresh caught, but,
like the Salmon Trout, very soon goes wrong. It is very difficult
to keep specimens of this fish any length of time in the tanks, as
it seems to be subject to a peculiar disease of the head, which
causes it to dart about and hurt itself against the sides of the
tank.
THE BREAM.
(Chrysophrys Australis.)
A well-known fish, and highly esteemed for the table. It is a
sea-fish, but sometimes enters the rivers, where it affords good
sport to the knights of the rod. It resembles the Schnapper in
shape, and in colour is a leaden grey, darker on the upper parts.


THE SILVER BREAM
(Caranyx Georgianus)
Is to be seen in quantities at the market, as sometimes large
takes are made in the Bay with the nets. When alive and
just caught it has the most beautiful iridescent colours, which
vanish a short time after death.
THE MAGPIE PERCH
( Chilodactylus gibbosus)
Will be readily recognised from its peculiar appearance. In
colour it is a pinky white, with two large transverse bands of brown


or black colour. Its natural habitat is amongst the weeds, as can
be seen from the peculiar formation of the pectoral fins, which are
elongated in the rays to permit of their being used for supports, as
in the case of the butter-fish. It is more plentiful in the warm
months of the year, but at no time is it taken in large quantities.
The specimens shown are from the back beach at Queenscliff.
THE ROCK PERCH.
(Melanichthys tricuspidata.)
This fish may very easily be confounded with the Zebra
owing to the transverse bands running from the dorsal to caudal
fins. It lives principally amongst the reefs contiguous to the
coast, and, owing to its scarcity, is not a common article of food.


GIPPSLAND PERCH.
(Lalris colonorum.)
This fish abounds in the Gippsland Lakes, whence large quantities
are forwarded to Melbourne. It exists equally well in salt or
brackish water.
THE ZEBRA FISH
(. Neotephroeops zebra)
Is a nice lively little fellow, of a dark-grey colour, with eight or
nine transverse black bands from back to belly. The specimens
shown in the tanks are obtained from the vicinity of Ricketts


Point, between Mordialloc and Brighton, but the fish is not by
any means rare. It is peculiar in that the head is covered with
tiny scales. It is very little bother in the tanks—feeding well,
and being easily acclimatised.
THE OLD WIFE.
( Enoplosus armatus .)
This lovely little fish is one of the most popular of the varied
denizens of the Aquarium. Ic is beautifully marked with dark
bands, on a ground of silvery grey, and pursues a majestic course,
the motion of its fins being hardly seen. It is mostly caught
about the sandy reaches at Queenscliff, and is very sensitive to
cold, disappearing always on the approach of winter.
THE WHITING-
( Silago punctata )
Is one of the best-known fish in the Melbourne market, and one of
the most toothsome. Fried Whiting is as well known a feature of
our “bills of fare ”as ox-tail soup. It sometimes attains a large


size, and scales 3or lbs. It frequents mostly nice sandy
patches, and gives excellent sport with the line should the angler
happen to drop on a school just at the turn of the tide. It is
a nice silvery colour, dark on top and speckled, something like a
trout, with brown spots.
THE STRANGER
(Odax Richardsoni )
Is sometimes called the “ Rock Whiting,” and resembles the ordi-
nary Whiting something in shape, but has longer jaws, and is clad
in a variety of beautiful tints. It has a peculiar method of swim-
ming, caused by a lateral motion of the dorsal fin. There are
several varieties, which differ considerably in colour. It is not
esteemed as an edible fish, the flesh being soft, and having a
peculiar coppery taste.
THE PARROT FISH
( Ldbrichthys )
Obtains its generic name from its many and bright colourations
so similar to its feathered compeers. It would be almost
impossible to describe the many varieties and differences of this
c


family. It possesses all the colours—sometimes mottled, some-
times in bands, and occasionally almost all one colour. Its
natural habit is to “roost ” or rest on the rocks or bottom of the
tanks, and make sudden excursions in search of food. It is pro.
vided with sharp prominent teeth, and is very fierce, fighting-
like the Kilkenny cats, until generally only one specimen is left
in any tank in which they are placed. Visitors will note that
nearly all specimens carry scars, silent witnesses to their com-
bative valour.
THE FLATHEAD
( Platycephalus Icevigatus)
Is almost too well known to need description, as it is the com-
monest fish in Hobson’s Bay. There are several varieties. The
Sand Flathead is the commonest, and can be caught nearly all over
the Bay. The Grass Flathead frequents the grass beds along the
coast line, while the Rock Flathead (which is figured above) may
be found amongst the seaweed growing in the rocky reefs, when-
ever such occur. The latter variety attains a large size, scaling up
to 8 or 9 lbs., and is, if anything, of a better flavour than the
other varieties. The colour varies, as they have the same property
as the Flounder of assimilating their tint to that upon which they
rest.
THE ROCK LING
(Genypterus Australis)
Must not be confounded with the “salted ling” of commerce, which
is a different thing altogether. This fish is provided with barbels,


is of a light-pink colour, marbled with dark-purple or black
blotches, and is white on the belly. It is found amongst the
rocks, and hides itself in the holes and crevices. It is nocturnal
in its habits, and all the holes of the rock work in the tanks in
which it is shown have to be carefully filled up, or the specimens
would retire from the public gaze. A peculiar parasite, which
sometimes attains the size of the top of one’s thumb, is often
found in its gills.
THE FLYING GURNET
( Trigla polyommata),
Sometimes called “Butterfly Gurnet,” from its many and beauti-
ful colours. The pectoral fins are very large, and when distended
give the fish a most peculiar appearance. It is also provided with
feelers, which enable it to crawl about on the bottom.
C 2


THE GURNET
( Centropogon Australis.)
This well-known fish has little to say in its favour. It is
nearly all head, fins, and bones, and is an awkward customer to get
hold of, as the dorsal spines are sharp, and inflict a nasty sting.
THE FLOUNDER
(Pleuronectes Victories)
Is the commonest of the flat fishes. It is greatly esteemed for the
exquisite flavour of its flesh; lives mostly along the sandy reaches


of the sea-shore; and is always caught in nets, although it will
sometimes take the bait. It is a curious fact that the very young
of this fish swim in the same wayjis other fish, and it is only on
taking to living on the sand that they adopt the appearance under
which they are generally known —the uppermost side being
coloured, the lower not, and, stranger still, the eye works round
from the lower, or “blind ” side. This fish swims with a graceful
undulating motion, and has the capability of taking the colour of
the ground upon which it settles, nature having thus provided
it with a means of escaping the attention of its enemies.
THE LEATHER-JACKET.
(Monocant hus.)
Monocanthus signifies “one-horned,” and for aught we know
here is the origin of our unicorn which appears in the Royal coat
of arms; at any rate, the rhinoceros has not got it all his own
way. This fish has no scales, but a rough skin. It is not
bad eating if cooked after being skinned. There are numerous
distinct varieties, having different colours and shapes, but all being
easily recognisable as members of the same family. It exists in
immense quantities in the Bay, and is the angler’s curse, as no
sooner is the hook in the water than it swarms round and com-
mences to nibble the bait. It is easily caught in a hoop net,
for which the favorite bait is a piece of raw potato. When dying
it has the chameleon characteristic of changing its colours.
The above specimen is one of the varieties known as the ‘ ‘ tooth-
brush,” from the peculiar ridge of bristles which grow on each side
of the body, near the tail.


This is another variety of this species, and differs considerably
from the “ toothbrush ” variety described before. This variety is
generally a very dark blue, with other beautiful iridescent spots,
streaks, or lines, whilst the fins are of a beautiful pale yellow.
Some of this variety attain a large size, being caught up to -2 feet
long. Instead of the “ toothbrush,” on each side of the body
near the tail may be seen a row of horny excrescences. These seem
to be merely a freak of nature, and are not used for offensive or
defensive purposes.
THE COBBLER.
(Pentciroge marmorata.)
This little fish is sometimes called the “ Scorpion ” by the fisher-
men, and is much dreaded by them when engaged in dragging the
nets on the grass beds which he frequents. Each gill terminates
in a sharp spine, with which it inflicts a nasty sting, causing intense


agony for some hours. It is not provided with an air bladder, and
consequently sinks to the bottom when not in motion.
THE STONE-LIFTER
(Kathestostoma Iceve)
Is popularly supposed to possess the power of turning over stones
for the purpose of finding its food, but this is doubtful. The top
of the head is covered with very hard plates, which would
certainly withstand a great pressure. It is a ground fish, and
attains a size of 2 or 3 feet, when it is a horrible-looking
fellow. It belongs to the family of “ Star-gazers,” so called from
the peculiar position of the eyes, which are always turned upwards.
It is seldom eaten, owing, doubtless, to its repulsive appearance ;
but in flavour the flesh somewhat resembles that of the flathead.
THE COW FISH.
(Ostracion ornatus.)
The wood-cut above represents the female; the male being very
similar in shape, but very different in colouration. Instead of the


light-coloured bands, being covered with beautiful iridescent spots,
showing all the colours of the rainbow, and being sometimes called
the “ Peacock Fish.” It does not exist in numbers in all parts
of the coast, the only place where the specimens for the Aquarium
can be obtained being from Western Port. It is very hardy,
feeding well, and living for a long time in captivity. It derives
its common name from the two horny excrescences growing on
the top of the head. The male, with age, acquires a pronounced
Roman nose. The whole of the body is merely a hard carapace,
with the exception of the space occupied by the intestines.
THE PORCUPINE.
(Diodon histrix.)
This common species is well known to all who have ever watched
the fishermen landing their seine nets on the beach. The minute
it is landed on the sand it inflates itself like a bladder, the
spines sticking out in all directions, at the same time grinding the
teeth as if in a dreadful rage, something after the manner shown
on next page.


The teeth are really bony jaws with immense strength, and
evidently used for detaching its food, which consists of shell-fish,
(fee., from the rocks. It is also peculiar in having very flexible eye
muscles, being able to roll its eyes about in a manner very
uncommon amongst members of the finny tribe. . The Rev. Tenison
Wood states that he has seen the blacks devour the liver of this
fish with great gusto. However this may be, the rest of the fish
is poisonous.
THE TOAD FISH
(Tetrodon hispidus)
Is commonly caught all along the coast, amongst the rocky or
stony grounds. Its food is principally shell-fish, and, like the
Porcupine Fish, it is furnished with strong teeth for the pur-
pose of crushing shells, &c. It has the unfortunate capability


of distending itself into a round ball or bladder when landed
on shore, and so becomes the sport of cruel boys, who wait until
it is fully distended, and then jump on it to hear it go “pop.”
The skin is covered with minute spiny asperities, and the colour is
dark green, mottled with black on the upper parts, the belly
being white.
THE TOAD FISH.
(Tetrodon Ilamiltoni.)
This is one of the commonest fishes in Hobson’s Bay. At
certain seasons it can be seen in thousands along the beach
between Sandridge and Picnic Point. The upper part of the body
is of a velvety appearance, mottled with black and white spots;
the belly is of a pinky-white colour. Its common name amongst
the fishermen is “the publican,” owing doubtless to its rotund
and rubicund appearance. It is decidedly poisonous, and several
cases are known where children have died from eating it by mistake.
THE PIG FISH.
(Cestracion Heterodontus. )
This fish is oviparous. The egg, of which an illustration is here
given, is pyriform, with a ridge twisted around it, and 4 inches in
length.


PIG FISH EGG.
The Pig Fish is familiar to most persons who have wandered
along the shores of Port Phillip. It is mostly nocturnal in its
habits, and lives on all kinds of shell-fish. Its jaws are covered
with laminated plates of great hardness, which are specially
adapted for crushing up mussels and other shell-fish. Mr. Saville
Kent has found them very destructive to oyster beds. They are
very tenacious of life, and have been brought alive from Picnic
Point to the Aquarium, wrapped up in a wet bag. Several speci-
mens are always kept in the large tank in the Stalactite Cavern.
THE FIDDLER.
(Trygonorhina fmciata.')
This fish belongs to the Shark family, but has no vicious pro-
pensities. It lives on the bottom, and feeds on shell-fish and


Crustacea. It is very tenacious of life, and is cordially hated
by the fishermen in the Bay, as it is almost omnivorous in the way
of baits. Like all members of the Shark family, it i§ very keen
of scent. The mouth is situated on the under side, about 3 inches
from the end of the snout, and when the fish is seen swimming
up against the glass, presents a very comical appearance.
THE ANGEL SHARK
(SquaMna Angelus)
Is doubtless so called from the resemblance of its side fins to
wings, or the name is chosen on the “ lucus a non lucendo ”
principle, as it is as ugly a customer as is to be found.
THE THORNBACK RAY.
{Raja Punctata.')
There are numerous varieties of Rays, different specimens of which
are shown in the tanks from time to time. When swimming they


present a very interesting sight owing to the graceful wavy motion
of their side fins.
THE STING RAY.
(Trygon violacens.)
In this variety the tail’is furnished with a serrated bone or sting
with which the fish can strike any object over its back. The sting
causes a nasty wound, which is difficult of healing. Some very
large Sting Rays are found—some of them weighing over a couple
of hundredweight.
The Skates and Rays produce their young in egg-cases or capsules.
These are furnished with long tentacles, evidently to enable them
to moor themselves to spaweed or some such object.
SKATES’ EGGS.


THE CARPET SHARK-
( Crossorhinus bcirbatus. )
THE BLUE SHARK.
(.Notidanus Indicus.)
The Carpet Shark is only sometimes to be seen alive in the tanks,
as specimens are seldom taken by the fishermen around the Bay,
but some perfect stuffed specimens are to be seen in the Aquarium
and Fisheries Court. When it is in the tanks it leads a very


sluggish life, and hardly evinces any sign of life; although some-
times called the Tiger Shark, it has never been known to attack
human beings.
The Blue or Serengellea Shark is an uncommon specimen, not
very often caught in the Bay. It must not be confounded with
the man-eater, which can always be known by its large dorsal fin.
MURRAY COD.
(Oligorus Macquariensis.)
This fish abounds in the Murray and its tributaries. It grows
to a large size, having been known to weigh 120 lbs. It forms an


important item of food to the aboriginals and to the swagmen,
who when going “on the wallaby” on the river never forget, as a
part of the equipment, a stout line and a supply of hooks.
MURRAY PERCH
(Oligorus Mitchelli)
Very much resembles the Cod, but never reaches a very large
size.


THE GOLDEN PERCH
(Dules Auratus) «.
Is found in a number of the rivers ; it attains a weight of 6 or
7 lbs., and is splendid eating. When fresh, its colour is a bright
yellow.
THE CAT PISH.
(Copidoglanis tandanus.')
One of our native fresh-water fishes, found principally in the
Murray, where it is pretty plentiful. The flesh is good for eating,
ut its repulsive appearance prevents it being much of a favorite
o


with the public. The colour is generally a dull olive-green, tinged
with brown; but it varies very much, scarcely two specimens being
found exactly alike.
THE TENCH.
(Tinea tinea.)
This is one of the fresh-water fish that has been introduced
from Europe, and successfully acclimatised here. The colour is a
dark sage-green. It prefers stagnant water, with a soft muddy
bottom, and is not esteemed as an article of food, the flesh being
soft and of a muddy taste. It is extremely prolific, 297,000 ova
having being counted in one female. Its spawn is of a greenish
colour.


THE CARP.
(Cyprinus carpio.)
Another acclimatised fish, which, with age, grows to an immense
size. Bloch mentions one taken in the Oder which weighed 70 lbs,
It becomes very tame if kept in ponds, and will soon learn to
take food from the hands of any one who is well known to it.
D 2


THE SIAMSSS GOLD r -£E
(Cyytrvwm auratvs.)
This peculiar little fish, vith its extraordinary development of
T , fl nl is ohlt a variety of the common gold-fish, and has been
obtained by breeding to secure the peculiar form orhich has been
arriTed at The specimens in the Aquarium were brought from
Siam.


THE PERCH
{Perea Jluviatilis)
Has been acclimatised, and may now be found in nearly all our
fresh-water lakes and rivers. It gives very good sport with the
rod and line, and in the season is not to be despised for table
purposes.


THE BROWN OR LAKE TROUT.
This fish has been successfully acclimatised in Victoria, the breed-
ing station at Ballarat having been exceptionally fortunate. The
lake there is well stocked, and every year large numbers of fry are
distributed. The process of artificial fish-breeding is a most inte-
resting one, and one that should be more largely pursued than it
is. The process briefly is as follows : —ln the spawning season the
female fish is caught and the ova exuded into a shallow basin or
dish containing water, in the manner as shown in the sketch.
The milt of the male fish is then pressed into the dish over the eggs
in the same way, and, mixing with the water, is gently brushed over


and amongst the eggs with a feather, and by this means they are
quickened. They are then placed on shallow trays containing well-
washed fine gravel, and a constant stream of fresh water is run
over them for six weeks, when the process of hatching is completed,
the fish, when hatched, producing the appearance of a tiny fish
attached to a bladder about the size of a pea.
The umbilical appendage is retained for a few days, until the
young trout has absorbed the nutriment therein contained, and
swims about the shallow tray a perfect little fish, living for a few
weeks on grated boiled liver, until strong enough to be moved into
a small pond with running water, where they are kept until three
or four months old, when they are fit to be set loose in a suitable
lake, river, or creek.
MOLLUSCA.
The term mollusca, i.e., soft-bodied animals, is applied to snails,
slugs, poulps, bivalves, and their allies, because they have no
skeleton which enters into the mechanism of their movements ;
neither an internal one like that of the vertebrates, nor an external
one like that of many of the Crustacea. Most mollusca are provided
with a shell, and have a head very distinctly marked off from the
body, and bearing eyes and tentacles.
Cephalopoda or head-footed, to which all the octopus and squid
family belong ; Gasteropoda or belly-footed, such as the whelk,
periwinkle, limpet ; Conchifera , shell-bearing, such as the oyster,
mussel, clam.


THE OCTOPUS.
(Octopus vulgaris.)
It is only occasionally that specimens of this curious creature
are on view in the Aquarium, as it is only caught about the
rocky fishing grounds about the Heads, and is difficult to trans-
port without injury. The body has the form of a round bag, half
of it is hollow and performs regular respiratory contractions. At
one end is a toad-like head, provided with two large eyes, and with
eight arms united at their base by a web; each arm bears two rows
of suckers. Hidden in the middle of the arms is the mouth, fur-
nished with a pair of jaws resembling the beak of a parrot, with
which it can tear open the shell of a lobster. In fact, the
specimens brought in by the fishermen are generally taken in the
lobster pots. The arms are used for crawling about and for cap-
turing its food, their under surface is covered with multitudinous
suckers, and any person who has once felt the clasp of one of the


tentacles can vouch for their wonderful strength. To the same
family belong the Cuttle-fish (Sepia officinialis), the white bone of
which is so often found on the sea-shore, and the Squid (Loligo
vulgaris), which can generally be observed swimming around all
the piers at the watering places. These two latter are decapods,
and are so delicate in structure that but few specimens have been
successfully landed at the Aquarium.
Various specimens of shell-fish can always be seen in the various
tanks, and the visitor will find a most complete collection of shells
in four large cases in the Museum, which are all labelled true to
name and will well repay inspection.
The best known of all molluscs is the Oyster (Ostrea edulis),
which is an article of daily consumption. Great Britain is said
to consume 2,000 millions annually, and on the Continent large
amounts of capital are embarked in the culture of this succulent
bivalve, especially in France; the breeding of the Oyster has been
carried out on an enormous scale, as can readily be imagined from
the accompanying sketch of an oyster claire or park.
In England Oysters are kept in pits and subjected to a regular
course of feeding with oatmeal, &c., to prepare them for market*


Any mode of progression that Oysters may have is obtained by the
opening and shutting of the shells and the ejection of the water
contained. Some time back a discussion arose in the newspapers
as to whether Oysters rested on the flat or round shell, but experi-
ments were unable to demonstrate any fact except that they did
both or either, at their own sweet will.
CRUST ACEÆ.
All members of this order are protected with a shelly covering,
and to it belong all Crabs, Crayfish, &c.
THE HERMIT CRAB
(Cenobita Diogenes)
Is one of the most interesting of Nature’s caprices. This gentle-
man, not having been provided with a house of his own, annexes
a large shell which has been vacated and ensconces himself therein-
As he grows he changes his habitation. When in possession of his
shell he is a warlike individual; when evicted through the course
of circumstances, or necessity or a change of lodging, he is most
shame-faced. His hinder parts being only covered with a soft
shell, which leaves him unprotected when without his shell-house.
It may be noticed that the right claw is the larger, and this is
used for the purpose of closing up, as with a door, the entrance
to his domicile.


CRAYFISH
(Homorus vulgaris)
Has a very different appearance alive to what they have when
boiled and lying on the slab of a fishmonger’s shop ready for sale.
It crawls about the tanks in a stately dignified manner, as if
quite insulted at the idea of being exhibited for show. The
English Lobster, with its large front claws, is not found in Aus-
tralian waters, its nearest prototype being the prickly fresh-water
Murray Lobster, to which is akin the little Yabbie found in all our
creeks and lakes.
There are also a great variety of Crabs, different sorts of which
are seen in the tanks from time to time. The little blue Crab,
which is found in such quantities on the sand when the tide is
out, is a very favorite food with all the fish, so as soon as it is
placed in the water it is quickly gobbled up.


ECHINODERMATA.
To this family belong the Sea-urchins, Starfish, &c.; the numer-
ous spikes of the Sea-urchin and the under surface of the Starfish
are provided with suckers, by which they attach themselves to the
rocks or other objects ; an opportunity can generally be got of
observing their structure minutely, as some of the specimens will
generally be found attached to the glass of the tanks in which
they are kept.


THE SEA BIRDS.
Amongst the most remarkable will be found the King
Penguins, which come from the Macquarie Islands to the south-
ward of New Zealand, and the colder the latitude the larger these
birds seem to grow, till at the South Pole they attain a height of
4 feet and a weight of 70 or 80 lbs. When they are of this size
they are largely taken for the oil they yield. In these birds
nature has modified the wings into flippers, apparently only of use
for swimming on the water.
The Pelicans are caught on various shallows about the coast,
and become very tame in confinement. They have large appetites
as will be readily seen at feeding time.
Gannets, Gulls, and other varieties of sea birds will also be seen
in the pond.


ZOOPHYTES
Are, as the name denotes, animal plants. To this class belong all
the beautiful organisms known as Sea Anemones, to the description
of which alone a book might be devoted. Some of these will be
seen on the bottoms of the tanks with their tentacles waving
about in quest of food ; they are fed daily, a small piece of fresh
fish being given to them with a pair of forceps. The Anemone
Tank will be found near the entrance to the Engine-room.
PORIFERA,
Or pore-bearing, are the connecting link between the animal and
vegetable kingdoms. The common Sponge is the best-known
illustration of this class.


PICTURE SALON AND GALLERIES.
The Picture Salon is situated immediately to the right on
entering from the porch, and together with the Picture Gallery—
the entrance to which is on the left—in which is a large number
of objects of Art and Yertu, which have been loaned by various
prominent citizens. All the large pictures are labelled in a legible
manner, and comprise those named in the following catalogue: —
Loaned by Mbs. L. L. Smith.
Hawking Party ... ... ... Wolverman.
Return from the Chase ... ••• ... Gow.
The Enthusiast... ... ... ••• Barclay.
Spagnoletto.
Bridge on the Tiber.
Judith with the head of Holofernes ... Kahler.
Nero at the Burning of Rome ... ... Haydon.
Australian Sunset ... ... ••• Kahler.


Flight of the Israelites from Egypt.
The Martyr ... ... ... ... Schwartz.
The Colosseum ... ... ... ... Zucarrelli.
Death of Mazeppa.
The Betrayal of Christ ... ... ... Flandering.
Apollo and Python ... ... ... Benvenuti.
Portrait of Rembrandt’s Wife ... ... Rembrandt.
The Nativity .. ... ... ... Rembrandt.
Portrait of Rembrandt.
Cupid’s Dart.
Effect of Light.
Hughtenburg.
The Medical Conference.
Berghem.
David with head of Goliath.
Birds and Poultry ... ... ... Handicooter.
Bird Descending.
Girl.
The Fortune Teller ... ... ... Valentine.
The Ascension.
Cupid’s Dart.
Infant Saviour and Angels.
St. Ambrose repulsing the Emperor Theodosius
from Milan Cathedral.
The Hermit ... ... ... ... Spagnoletto.
Portrait of Hon. L. L. Smith, M.P. ... Roberts.
A Terrible Story ... ... ... Cattermole.
The Cobbler.
The Wayfarer ... ... ... ... Vanderburg.
Un Billet de Logement ... ... ... Girardet.
Worshipping the Bull.
Head.
Infant Cupid.
Mother’s Pet.
Mother’s Pet.
The Woman taken in Adultery.
Mars and Venus.
Cottage Scene.
Man and Woman Drinking.
After Teniers.


The Nativity ... ... ... ... After Rubens.
The Saviour and the Woman of Samaria.
Sphinx and Pyramids.
The Market Place.
The Duke of Milan and the Papal Legate ... Giannetti.
The Descent from the Cross ... ... Rubens.
The Bathers.
The Entombment.
Cavaliers and Roundheads ... ... Mevelner.
Deucalion and Pyrrha ... ... ... Rubens.
Massacre of the Innocents.
William Crammond ... ... ... Hamilton.
Landscape and Horses ... ... ... Barker.
Dan O’Connell Lecturing ... ... ... Haydon.
Clandestine Meeting ... ... Kahler.
The Crucifixion... ... ... ... Rembrandt.
Rembrandt.
Presenting Gifts to Infant Christ.
Changing Pasture ... ... ... Scheltima.
The Old Mill ... ... ... ... Stanfield.
Head.
Christ Crowned with Thorns.
The Music Lesson ... ... ... Dow.
Flowers ... ... ... ... Inygens.
Water Nymph.
Cleansing of the Israelites ... ... Croyer.
Calcutta.
Classic Landscape.
Banishment of Aristides ... ... ... Haydon.
Game at Cards.
Water Nymph.
Aurora.
Adi Lobbie.
Head.
Head of Dog ... ... ... ••• Armfield.
Raising the Widow’s Son ... ... ... Haydon.
Legendary ... • - •• • •• • Lairesse.
The Annunciation.
A Murillo.
Franco-Prussian War ... ... ... Koekkoek.
E


Classic Landscape.
The Infant Christ ... ••• ••• Rubens.
The Holy Family ... ... ... Murillo.
Gentleman and Parrot ... ... • . Legoni.
The Fruit Market ... ... ••• Stefano.
Tax Gatherer.
Mars and Venus.
Madonna and Child.
Landscape.
Statuary , &c.
Bronze Bust of Prince Albert.
A Screen of Old Engravings.
Crimean War Scenes in Armament Court.
Kahler’s Studio.
Casket, formerly the property of Marie Antoinette. .
Case of Breakfast Service Cups and Saucers, &c., Capo di Monte
very rare.
Case of Dresden China Dessert-plates, hand-painted.
Loaned by Mrs. F. Katzenstein.
Landscape near Norwich ... ... ... Stark.
Dutch Interior ... ... ... ... Teniers.
Italian Mountain Scene.
Belgian Landscape ... ... ... Paupeteau.
Landscape .... ... ••• Rouse.
Landscape ... ••• ••• ••• Constable.
Oil Painting ... ... ... ••• Danby.
Italian Garden Scene.
Dutch Interior ... ... ... ... Teniers.
Loaned by Mr. F. W. Nalder.
Preparing for Dinner ... ... ... Morrish.
The Silver Streak.
Harvesting in Devonshire.
Water Colour ... ... ... ... Morrish.
Loaned by Mr. A. Fletcher.
The Pet Canary ... ... ... Frith.
Lady at Garden Door.
Portrait.
Mary, Queen of Scots ... ... ... Ward


Girl’s Head.
Landscape .. ... ... ... Rattray.
Landscape ... ... ... ... Gainsborough.
The Cyclone ... ... ... ... Bennetter.
Fruit.
Classic Landscape.
Landscape.
Water Colour.
Venus and Satyr.
Venus and Cupids ... ... ... Brockley.
Sea Piece ... ... ... ... Lunny.
Canterbrunnen... ... ... ... Marshall.
Classical Landscape ... ... ... Turner.
Valley of Glasslyn ... ... ... Marshall.
Sanctuary ... ... ... ... Holyoake.
Landscape ... ... ... ... Marshall.
Fruit Girl ... ... ... ... Roberts.
Landscape ... ... ... ... Marshall.
The Reprimand... ... ... ... Verbias.
The Girl I left behind me... ... ... Holyoake.
Landscape ... ... ... ... Marshall.
A Spanish Cavalier ... ... ... Holyoake.
Landscape ... ... ... ... Marshall.
Landscape ... ... ... ... Marshall.
Female Study ... ... ... ... Vida.
Landscape ... ... ... ... Marshall.
Landscape ... ... ... ... Marshall.
Cattle ... ... ... ... Koomans.
Disgrace to the Family ... ... ... Holyoake.
Windmill ... ... ... ... Marshall.
Forbidden Literature ... ••• ... Ad. Azi.
Landscape ... ... ••• ••• Hooper.
Landscape ... ... ... ••• Marshall.
Sheep and Ponies ... ••• Horler.
Wild Flowers ... ... ••• ... Sanzaij.
Woodland Scene ... ... Baker.
Scene on a Dutch Canal ... ... ... Laan.
Landscape ... ... ... ... Marshall.
Figure Piece.
Landscape ... ... ... ... Marshall.
F. 2


Landscape ... ... ... ... Marshall.
Dancing Lesson ... ... ... Baccain.
Landscape ... ... ... ... Marshall.
Landscape ... ... ... ... Manzoni.
Italian Girl ... ... ... ... Pelham.
Lovers’ Quarrel ... ... ... Hillingford.
A Reverie ... ••• ••• ... Conlon.
Salt Marshes ... ... ... ... Rizzi.
Shanklin, Isle of Wight ... ... ... Hine.
Landscape ... ... ... ... Calcott.
Landscape ... ... ... ••• Marshall.
Landscape ... ... ... ... Turner.
Woodland Scene ... ... ... Baker.
Landscape ... ... ... ••• Marshall.
Tilford Bridge ... ... ... ... Holyoake.
Landscape ... ... ... ••• Marshall.
Sketch of the Old Gateway ... ... Landsen.
Early Summer ... ... ... ... Sheffield.
Borrodale ... ... ... ••• Percy.
Landscape ... ... ... ••• Hooper.
Landscape ... ... ... ... Rowe.
Old Stage Waggon ... ... ... Haring.
Wharf Rats ... ... ... ... E. M. Lloyd.
Head,.. ... ... ... ... E. M. Lloyd.
Cockle Flat, Beaumaris ... ... ... A. M. Lloyd.
Sunset ... ••• ... ••• A. M. Lloyd.
Sea Piece ... ... ... ••• A. M. Lloyd.
Figure Piece ... ... ... ... A. M. Lloyd.
Garden Holly, Mount Malvern ... ... Bates.
On the Wye ... ... ... ... Bates.
Hay Field ... ... ... ... Bates.
Apple Orchard ... ... ... ... Chester.
Cattle ... ... ••• ... Corguard.
Winter’s Eve ... ... ... ... Meissner.
Landscape ... ••• Koekkoek.
Sea Piece ... ••• ••• Thomas.
Children in Boat ... .. ... Servais.
Landscape ... ... ••• ••• Short.
Story of a Saddle ... ... ... Steele.
Hay Field ... ... ••• ... Chester.


Loaned by Mr. R. R. Woolcott
Pictures.
Canal Scene.
Drawing Room.
Music Lesson.
Curiosity.
Venice.
Prussians Entering Paris.
Return from Ball.
Ballet Dancer.
Landscape.
Landscape.
Game ...
Drinking Scene.
The Alhambra, Granada.
George Earl.
Statuary, Vases, &c.
The Proposal (marble).
The Quarrel „
Slave Listening ~
Triton „
Susanna „
Pan
Mercury „
Venus „
Bride „
Head „
Corinna „
Loaned by Dr. Summers.
Marble Bust of gentleman.
Loaned by Mr. John Ford Patterson.
Sea Coast, Sorrento.
Loaned By Mr. W. Sayer.
Picture—Gamekeeper and Pony.
Loaned by Messrs. Ppaff, Pinschof, and Co.
Portrait of Lady ... ... ... ... Kahler.
The Opera Box ... ... ... ... „
The Studio ... ... ... ... „
The White Terrace ... ... ... ~
Reverie ... ... ... ... ... „


Loaned by Hon. W. I. Winter-Irving, M.L.C.
A Devonshire Farmyard ... ... W. Hunt.
On the Blackwater ... ... K. Halswelle.
Romeo and Juliet... ... ... G. Sabing.
Malta ... ... ... ... F. R. Unterberger.
Valley of Glencoe... ... ... A. di Brianski.
The Studio ... ... ... G. Barbudo.
Court Scene ... ... ... A. Tejedor.
Salutation ... ... ... R. Sorbi.
On Guard ... ... ... W. H. Trood.
Lavat Castle, Beauly ... ... D. Farquharson.
LaSenorita ... ... ... J. M. Burgess.
Loch Inverness ... ... ... D. Farquharson.
STATUARY, ETC.
Property of the Trustees.
Love and Innocence (marble).
Flight from Pompeii „
Temper.
Calypso.
Charity.
Boy and Basket (terracotta).
Cain and pedestal (bronze).
Gamin and pedestal „
Victory and pedestal (terracotta).
Scratchley in New Guinea.
Stand of Indian Photos., presented by J. Bosisto, Esq., C.M.G.,|M.P.
Sevres Vase, presented by French Government.
Two Japanese Vases, presented by Japanese Government.


THE MUSEUM.
The Museum opens from the Picture Gallery, and contains a
large number of interesting exhibits, some of which are detailed
below. Immediately on entering the visitor will find the
South Kensington Art Collection and the South
Kensington Technological Collection,
which comprise a large number of studies for the use of students
of art, which were handed over to the Trustees by J. Bosisto, Esq.,
C.M.G., M.P., when the Technological Commission was disbanded.
The studies are from the life and from the antique, and will be
found very useful by students in all branches of art.
To the left the visitor will find the
Economic Entomological Court,
the following description of the exhibits in which has been prepared
by Mr. C. French, F.L.S., Government Entomologist: —
“The advantages to be gained by a study of Economic Entomology
are so many that to enumerate only a few of them would take up
more space than we have at our command for the present cata-
logue or handbook.
“ In a colony where agriculture plays so important a part in the
every-day life of its inhabitants, and is by nature destined to hold
a much higher position than it has hitherto done, it must be patent
to all thinking people that any help we can give to those who live
by the soil must be appreciated.
“ In the first place, we must be able to show growers, by means
of specimens, plates, &c., the differences between the insects which
are destructive to crops and those which are beneficial, so that the
first may be destroyed and the latter protected. The above
remarks will also apply to the birds, the destruction of many of
which has been, without a doubt, the cause of a large increase in
the number of our insect pests.
“ In this court, amongst the principal specimens of insects both
injurious and beneficial, may be mentioned the Codlin Moth, Pear
Slug, Apple-root Borer, Woolly Aphis, Locust, Fire-blight of the
Wattle, Peach Aphis, Green Beetle, and numerous others of the
destructive class. Amongst the beneficial ones are many insects
which are parasitic on the destructive kinds, as scale, carval of
moths, &c., &c., including the wonderful little lady-bird, Vedalia


cardinalis, which tiny insect has been so successfully introduced
into the orange groves of America, Africa, &c., for the purpose of
combating the attacks of the Icerya Purchasii or cottony-
cushion-scale. A few years since the whole or a greater part of the
orange groves of the above-named countries were threatened with
extermination, but the Vedalia with its wonderfully voracious
nature has arrested the progress of the plague, and the cottony-
cushion-scale has in many parts been altogether eaten up and
destroyed by the Vedalia.
“The Wood Borer, of which three illustrations are here given,
are amongst the most destructive of our noxious insects, and pre-
ventive and remedial measures for which are given in the illus-
trated handbooks, Parts I. and 11., just issued by the Victorian


Department of Agriculture. Three of them, viz., Uracanthus
triangularis, Piesarthrius margined us, and Diadoxus pistacina,
being amongst the most destructive.
“ The cases in an horizontal position show the various insects at
work on timbers of different kinds.
“ One of the most instructive exhibits in this court is a case
containing the external dissections of the parts of various insects.
They have been prepared for the use of schools, and have already
been largely availed of by pupils and others interested.
“ The charts which line the court represent the life-history
forms of many of our most destructive insects, also illustrations of
some which are parasitic on same. An enterprising American
fruit-grower has said— ‘ Our watchword must ever be: Onward


and upward, and falter not, although difficulties apparently insur-
mountable arise, he who will may overcome them. The time was
when our glorious climate, fruitful soil, and exemption from all
diseases and pests, made our golden State the wonder of all who
were conversant with its fruits and flowers. Now, alas, the
spoiler’s hand is felt; a change has come over the spirit of our
dream. It seems as though all that is detrimental to the fruit in-
terest is here or coming, making eternal vigilance the price of success
in this, the chief industry of the State. The time has come when
every one who by this occupation would thrive will find ceaseless use
for both head and hand : even then the fittest only can survive.’
“ When a person takes up land for the purpose of making a
living, whether it is for growing anything from wool to special


products, he will find that there are leisure moments which may be
profitably spent in the interesting and eminently useful study of
Economic Entomology. An acquaintance with the life-history and
* manners and customs ’ of insects, either noxious or beneficial, is
to help us in suppressing certain pests, and to preserve from de-
struction such as are of use, and which consequently should be pro-
tected. The trained man, for example, knows the insects are on
the roots of his trees, w T here they hybemate as well as on the
branches, and he at once concludes that he should first strike at
the ‘ root ’ of the trouble ; whereas the man who knows nothing of
the subject, and probably cares little either, proceeds to lament,
and not infrequently winds up by quite unnecessarily chopping out
his trees. Of late years great attention has been given to spraying
the trees with various insecticides, and nowadays a good spraying
gear is a part and parcel of every well-regulated orchard, farm, or
vineyard. It has been estimated that for Codlin Moth alone no
less than 70 per cent, of fruit has been saved by timely application
of the arsenites, as Paris green, which should be used in a propor-
tion of 1 lb. to from 150 to 200 gallons of water. For full instruc-
tions, see Parts I. and 11. of Handbook of the Destructive Insects of
Victoria , issued by the Victorian Department of Agriculture.”
The next object of interest is the
Zoological Court,
containing, amongst others, the following exhibits of Australian
fauna: —
Native Cats,
Bower Birds,
Native Companions,
Birds from New Guinea,
Parrots and Cockatoos,
Emus,
Wallabies,
Native Bears,
Kangaroos,
Platypi,
Large Queensland Python.
A number of the cases of birds were presented to the Trustees by
the Hon. R. Burdett Smith, C.M.G., M.L.C., at the close of the
Centennial International Exhibition.


Economic Botany.
This Court, which contains a varied collection of vegetable pro-
ducts, were got together for the Trustees by Baron von Mueller
K.C.M.G., M. and Ph.D., F.R.S., &c., Government Botanist.
The following are amongst the exhibits :
Book specimens of Australian and New Zealand Woods.
Articles manufactured from Australian and New Zealand
Woods.
Articles of Turnery.
Samples of products of economic value, which can be grown in
Victoria.
Fruits and seeds of Plants of economic value.
Frames containing specimens of Australian Fodder Grasses.
Frames containing specimens of Australian pastoral salt-
bushes.
Frames containing specimens of Australian Plants collected
by Dr. Robt. Brown, at Port Phillip, in 1802, during
Captain Flinders’ Expedition.
Frames containing specimens of Victorian Ferns.
Album of Plants suitable for binding sand on the sea-shores.
Album containing dried specimens of Economic Plants.
Framed pictures of Edible Fungi.
Several frames illustrating tree vegetation.
Ethnological Court.
Here will be found a collection of Aboriginal weapons and imple-
ments from all parts of Australia and the various Islands of the
South Seas, and they will well repay a lengthened inspection. All
the various articles are individually labelled.
The Mineralogical Collection.
This is a complete collection of the Department of Mines of Vic-
toria. Any further information that may be desired can be
obtained on application to the attendants.
The Armament Court.
The collections of uniforms and arms used in the various regi-
ments of the British Army will be found very interesting. This
collection was presented to the Trustees by the British Commission
at the close of the Centennial International Exhibition.


Here is also shown the iron armour worn by Steve Hart, who
was a member of the famous, or rather infamous, band of outlaws
known as the Kelly Gang, which was the terror of the North-
Eastern District until their final destruction at Glenrowan. For
some considerable time this gang held the Police and all authority
at defiance. They were finally brought to bay by the Police, under
Superintendent Hare, after a stubborn resistance. Three members
of the gang were killed, and Ned Kelly taken alive and afterwards
executed. It was on this occasion that the members of the gang
appeared in the armour here exhibited, which were made by a
local blacksmith from old mouldboards. The excitement in
Melbourne may be judged by the telegrams appearing in the
public press headed “ Outlaws in Armour.” The set of armour
here shown was secured for the Trustees through the good offices
of Mr. T. R. Wilson, the Under-Secretary.


The Fisheries Court
Contains a varied and interesting collection of exhibits, included
amongst which are the following :
Skeleton of Porpoise.
Skeleton of Crocodile.
Stuffed Crocodile.
Stuffed Sea Leopard.
Glass Models of the Lower Forms of Marine Life.
• Models of Boats.
Models of Fish.
Stuffed Carpet Shark.


EXHIBITS IN THE CENTRE OF THE HALL.
CONCHOLOGICAL COLLECTION.
This very complete collection is classed and scientifically named
on the same principle as adopted in the Melbourne University
Museum.
Products of Eucalyptus,
Exhibited by J. Eosisto, Esq., C.M.G., M.P., Pharmaceutical
Chemist, Melbourne.
ESSENTIAL OILS AND RESINS.
Bluegum.—Essential Oil of Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus globulus).
Therapeutic uses —For internal and external use, and sanitary
purposes.
Peppermint Gum.—Essential Oil of Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus
amygdalina). Therapeutic uses—External and sanitary. (Yields
Phyllandren.)
Mallee Gum.—Essential Oil of Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus
dumosa). Therapeutic uses—Various. Produces Eucalyptol in
great abundance.
The most valuable product in the series is undoubtedly the Oil
of Eucalyptus, prepared from the leaves of the “Mallee” or
Eucalyptus dumosa, a stunted species of Eucalypt, especially
favouring the district of the north. Mr. Bosisto has devoted the
best part of a long life to the study of the question of how to
extract this valuable product in a perfectly pure state, and he
has so far succeeded that the result of his efforts is recognised by
chemists as the standard oil of commerce. His investigations
commenced in 1853, and have been published from time to time


in all the leading scientific journals. The peculiar feature of
the oil of Eucalyptus dumosa is, that the exceedingly valuable
camphor-like substance called Eucalyptol can be obtained from
it in great abundance ; but irrespective of this, the preparation is
regarded as one of the most valuable discoveries in modern
chemistry.
Essential Oil of Eucalyptus —Mallee gum (Eucalyptus oleosa).
A desert species found with Eucalyptus dumosa; this species, in
common with Eucalyptus dumosa, produces Eucalyptol in large
quantities, and has also the same valuable therapeutic uses.
Essential Oil of Eucalyptus —Eucalyptus fissilis.
Australian Kino—Eucalyptus obliqua.
Yellow Grass-tree Resin (Xanthorrhoea hastilis). Produces
Picric Acid.
Australian Pepper-tree Bark (Drimys aromatica).
Australian Sassafras (Antherospermum moschatum). Thera-
peutic uses—ln cases of heart disease.
Red Gum (Eucalyptus rostrata). Therapeutic uses —Various.
See British Pharmacopoeia.
Essential Oil of Melaleuca, Ti-ti Tree (Melaleuca uncinata).
Therapeutic uses —Similar to Cajuputi Oil of India.
Eucalyptol—From Eucalyptus oleosa and Eucalyptus dumosa.
Extract from Eucalyptus amygdalina —Phyllandren. Thera-
peutic uses—Various.
Australian Catechu (Acacia mollissima). Therapeutic uses —
Astringent.
Eucalyptus Potash.
Red Gum Lozenges.
Eucalypti Sideroxylon Ess.
Syrup of Red Gum.
Liquor Eucalypti Globuli, or the Fever and Ague Remedy.
Eucalypti Citriodora.
Morphia; Hydrochloras (obtained from Victorian-grown Opium).
Antherospermine (the active principle from Australian Sassafras).
Specimen Eucalyptus Leaf. Length, 18 inches.
Essential Oil of Eucalyptus (Leucoxylon). Ironbark.
Australian Juniper Gum (Pinis callitris), to be obtained in
quantity from the Murray Pines.
Eucalyptus Perles.
Esprit Baronia megastigma.


Essential Oil of Menth® Gravilis (an indigenous Mint).
Melaleucse Ericifoli® Ess. (Oil in the Ti-ti tree).
Oil of Spearmint (Menthse viridis).
Oil of the Leaves of the Native Sassafras (Anthosperm. mosch.)
Eucalyptus Balsam. (Employed for Veterinary purposes.)
01. Eucalypti Stuartian® Ess. (Apple-tree gum.)
01. Eucalypti Fabrorum Ess., or Stringy-bark.
Eucalyptus Oil standard test. (Supplied throughout the world
as the recognised medical product.)
Essential Oil of Eucalyptus (Percifol®).
Melaleuca Genistifol® Ess.
The True Oil of Peppermint (Menthse Piperitse Essent.). Grown
in Victoria.
Esprit Wattle Blossom.
Collection of Australian Snakes.
(Prepared for Purpose of Instruction by Mr. C. French, F.L.S.)
The practical and most important study of Ophiology is one,
amongst many others, which has been neglected in Victoria, and
popular works based on the excellent remarks by Dr. Gunther, of the
British Museum, and in a smaller but practical manner by the late
Gerard Krefft, of the Sydney Museum, seem to be sadly in request.
Those who live in the bush are often perplexed by the local names
used, for instance, the true Carpet Snake of the Murray border is
known to be quite harmless, while the so-called Carpet Snake
of Westernport, Gippsland, &c., is no other than Hoplocephalus
curtus, our Tiger Snake, one of the most deadly species in Australia ;
and these remarks apply to many other kinds. It is with a view of
familiarizing the public in this most important respect that the
Trustees have resolved to form a general collection (as complete
as possible) of all known Australian snakes, with scientific and
common names, and localities added j also short remarks as to
their food, from authentic sources. In this way much information
may be gained, which plates, however correct, would fail to convey.
In a framed tablet near the case will be given practical instructions
re treatment of persons suffering from snake-bite, also some useful
remarks as to the structure and position of the fangs, poison
glands, &c., &c.
F


Here are also to be found —
Bryant and May’s Collection of Wax \ esta Manufacture.
Model of Sydney Harbor.
Model of Melbourne Railway Station.
Model of Torpedo Boats (presented by Thornycroft and Sons).
.EGYPYIAN MUMMIES.
The Egyptian Tomb
Has been constructed to represent an Egyptian Tomb, and has
been erected by Mr. John Hennings. The ceiling is taken from
Owen Jones’ work, “ The Grammar of Ornament.” The wall on
the north side depicts a funeral boat passing a river or lake on its
wav to the entombment of the body contained in the vessel. This
sketch is taken from George Ebers’ work “ The Burial place of


Forty Kings.” The west wall gives a representation of a double
figure of Anubis, a wolf or dog-headed god, watching before a
sepulchre which is securely locked and bolted. This is taken from
a German work by H. Kobb. On either side of the central group
are portraits of daughters of the King attending the rites in honour
of the dead. They wear the lotus-shaped wand and elaborate head-
dress according to their social station on earth. The southern wall
shows a picture of a sarcophagus containing a mummy being con-
veyed to its resting place, while various fruits and vegetables are
taken with it on its last journey. This, as well as the ornament on
the east wall, is taken from Sir J„ Gardner Wilkinson’s work, last
published in 1854. The latter picture represents a King and his
attendants in a war chariot leaving or entering a city. The porticoes
are ornamented with the well-known Scarabams with wings ex-
tended, and which is worshipped as a holy beetle for its healthful
habit of destroying unwholesome offal.
The mummies 'which are shown in the glass case in the centre
of the tomb were purchased and sent from Egypt to J. S. Gotch,
Esq., a resident in Melbourne, and presented by him to the
with the desire that they would be of interest and afford instruction
to the public generally.
They were amongst an extensive find of mummies lately exhumed
in the tombs discovered in the Faiyoum district, near Lake Moeris,
40 miles south-west of Cairo, and belong to the middle period of
ancient history in Egypt, some 2,000 years before the advent of our
Saviour Jesus Christ.
One, m a state of decomposition, is the mummy of a man who
was probably a governor or ruler of one of the seven nomes or
districts into which Middle Egypt was at an early period divided.
The outer sarcophagus contained two others beautifully coloured
and decorated, as can be seen in the glass case at the side. The
inscriptions found upon it, according to the opinions of learned
savants, and the researches of Dr. S. Birch, of London, and others,
and the mode of embalming, point to the period between the
Dynasties XII. and XVII., or that of Abraham’s descent to Egypt.
The fact of this mummy having its knees drawn up as in a sitting
posture also points to its early date. When first opened in its case,
much of it fell to dust j and at the bottom of the case, or inner sar-
cophagus, were found blue, yellow, and brown beads, and bugles of
enamelled clay, which had formed the necklace ornament or covering
O
F 2


of the breast, and which was the insignia of high rank. Various
seeds and dried beetles were also found amongst the dust, composed
of the decayed body and linen, mingled with pieces of the bitumen
which had been used in the process of embalming. These are now
visible in the glass case close by. The upper part of the body has
not yet been uncovered, fearing it may also fall to dust.
In hieroglyphic characters round the outside sarcophagus, which
contains the funeral epitaph and the prayer for the departed spirit,
can be deciphered his name, viz., “ Amion, son or servant of Ptali ”
(meaning both priest and esteemed of Ptah, that form of deity
worshipped in both Middle and Lower Egypt), “ a good man made
like to Osiris, whose life justifies his expectation of eternal bliss.”
The female mummy unwrapped is that of a priestess of the Apis
or bull, which was worshipped principally at Thebes, and is of a
much more recent date, probably about the time of Pharaoh Necho,
who lived in the Dynasty XXVI., about 700 years 8.C., near the
days of King Josiah in Palestine, and a century before Cambyses
the Persian conquered Egypt.
Down the centre of her coffin lid is the inscription “ A Royal
gift to Osiris, of Pet Amenti, the great God and Lord of Upper Egypt
(Thebes), consisting of the best of drinks, many oxen, haunches of
gazelle, that the great God of the land of the Nile may be propi-
tious to the Osirified, and declared to be justified, Le Seb ” (*.«.,
her name).
She was a young lady probably about 17 years of age, whose
purity of life entitled her to a welcome in the abode of the blessed.
This mummy is in a perfect state of preservation, and is remarkable
for the absence of bitumen, so freely used in the chief embalmings
of Egypt, and also for the quantity of fair hair adhering to the
skull at the time of unrolling, which took place on the 26th January,
1893, in the presence of a large gathering of distinguished citizens
of Melbourne. Some hundreds of feet of linen wrappings were
taken off the body by Dr. Neild, assisted by several medical gentle-
men, after the third lecture on Egyptology had been publicly
delivered by the Rev. David Meadowcroft.


The Machinery and Manufactures Hall
Opens from the Museum, after passing from the Mineral Collection.
The first object of interest that meets the view is the —
Model of St. Peter’s, Rome.
MODEL OF ST. PETERS ROME
The foundation stone of St. Peter’s, in Pome, was laid on the
15th April, 1506, in the presence of 35 cardinals. The ceremony
of consecration was performed by Pope Urban VIII. on November,
1626, the 1,300 th anniversary of the day on which St. Sylvester
is stated to have consecrated the original edifice. By the end
of the seventeenth century the cost of building the Cathedral
had amounted to upwards of £9,400,000, and the present cost
of maintenance amounts to about £7,500 per annum. The
new sacristy, erected by Pius V., cost about £IBO,OOO. The
result is that St. Peter’s is the largest and most imposing, if
not the most beautiful, church in the world. Its area is
about 18,000 square yards. The fagade is yards long
and 165 feet high. It is surmounted by a balustrade, with
statues 19 feet high of several of the Popes; the inscription
records that it was erected by Paul V., in 1612. The portico, the
ceiling of which is magnificently decorated, is 78 yards in length,


lLjj y ai ’ds in width, and 66 feet in height. The interior of th'e
cathedral is strikingly impressive, and this effect is produced not
so much by the vastness as by the harmony and symmetry of
its proportions. The magnificent and plainly decorated dome rests
on four huge buttresses 234 feet in circumference, the niches in
which are occupied by statues 16 feet high. Above them are the
four loggie of Bernini, in which the greatest relics are exhibited on
high festivals, on which occasions the loggie may be entered by
none but the canons of St. Peter’s. The height from the ground
to the top of the cross is 470 feet. The dome is 630 feet in
circumference. A narrow iron staircase leads to the lantern, which
commands a view of the whole of Rome and its surroundings. In
order to institute a comparison, it may be stated that the dome of
St. Peter’s is over 100 feet higher, from datum level, than that of
the Melbourne Exhibition Building.
The area of the church is 212,321 square feet. The areas of
other great churches are here given for comparison:—
Square Feet.
St. Paul’s, London ... ... 108,982
Milan ... ... ... 107,782
Seville ... ... ... 100,000
Cologne ... ... ... 81,464
York... ... ... ... 72,860
Amiens ... ... .. 71,208
Lincoln .., ... ... 66,900
The number of columns, including those in the colonnade, is 756,
the greater part of which were taken from the buildings of ancient
Rome.
Here are also to be found—
The Model of Parliament House, Melbourne, as when com-
pleted.
Earl of Dudley’s Iron Exhibit.
Lowmoor Company’s Iron Exhibit.
W. H. Blakely’s exhibit of Iron.
Consett Iron Exhibit.
Swallow and Ariell: Exhibit illustrative of Biscuit manufacture.
J. F. McKenzie and Cos.: Exhibit of Coffee, Cocoa, Oatmeal,
and various products.
Jas. Miller : Exhibit illustrative of Rope manufacture.
Arthur Tilley: Exhibit of Soaps and Perfumes.
Lewis and Whitty: Samples of Starch, Blue, Soap, &c.


From this Hall at the extreme northern end is the entrance to
the
CYCLORAMA OF MELBOURNE
IN 1842,
a description of which will be found in the concluding pages of this
brochure. Around the entrance to the Cyclorama will be found a
number of illustrations referring to the early days of the colony,
which have been presented by the Hon. L. L. Smith, M.P.,
G. R. Fincham, Esq., and others. From the north-west corner of
the Machinery Hall opens the entrance to the
Aquarium Machinery Room,
where will be found the mechanical appliances used in pumping
the salt-water from the reservoirs into the tanks, and for compressing
the air which is kept in the tw T o long wrought-iron cylinders, w hich
will be seen working one against the other. The Machinery com-
prises the following :
Two Gas Engines, 16 and 8 H.P.: Used for pumping air, water,
&c., for Aquarium; also for use in case of fire.
One Salt-water Pump : For circulating water through show
tanks, &c.


Two Air Compressors : For compressing air for show tanks.
One Force Pump: Capable of raising 150 lbs. pressure per
square inch in one minute. For use in case of fire.
Two large Air Receivers : Tested to stand pressure of 150 lbs.
to the square inch, and capable of containing air sufficient
to supply the show tanks for 60 hours.
On the walls of this room will be found a number of engravings
and drawings of various fishes, giving representations of a number
of the finny inhabitants of Victorian waters as shown in the
following list:—
LIST OF FRAMED PAINTINGS AND ENGRAVINGS OF
FISH, ETC., IN ENGINE ROOM.
Name. Scientific Name.
Garfish ... .... ... Hemiramphus Melanochir.
Sand Mullet ... ... ... Mugil Waigiensis.
Kelp Fish ... ... ... Chironemus marmoratus.
Sergeant Baker ... ... Aulopus purpurisatus.
Carpet Shark... ... ... Zygsena Malleus.
Fresh Water Gippsland Perch ... Lates Colonorum.
Rock Whiting, or The Stranger ... Odux Richardsoni.
Skip Jack ... ... ... Temnodon Saltator.
Stone Lifter ... ... ... Kathestostomea lseve.
Parrot Fish ... ... ... Labrichthys Bleekeri.
Leather Jacket, brush tail ... Monocanthus.
Barracouta ... ... ... Thyrsites Atun Euph.
Black Bream ... ... ... Chrysophrys Australis.
Eel... ... ... ... Anguilla Australis.
Red Gurnet ... ... ... Upeneichthys porosus.
Mackerel ... ... ... Scomber Antarcticus.
Sand Flathead ... . ...* Platycephalus Bassensis.
Parrot Fish or Blue Head ... Labrichthys Bleekeri.
Cow Fish ... ... ... Ostracion omatus.
Cat Fish ... ... ... Copidoglanis tandanus.
Cray Fish ... ... ... Palinurus hugelii.
Salt Water Trout ... ... Arripis truttaceus.
Acclimatised Perch (English) ... Perea fluviatilis.
Pig Fish ... ... ... Cestracion heterodontus.
Whitebait ... ... ... Engraulis Antarcticus.


Kock Ling ... ... ... Genypterus Australis.
Butter Fish ... ... ... Cheilodactylus nigricans
Golden Perch ... ... Dules auratus.
Whiting ... ... ... Sillago punctata.
Flounder ... ... ... Pleuronectes Victorise.
Travale ... ... ... Neptonemus Travale.
Sand Eel ... ... ... Gonorhynchus Greyi.
Salt Water Pike. ... ... Sphyrsena Novge Hollands.
Flying Gurnet ... ... Trigla polyomata.
Butterfly Gurnet ... ... Trigla Vanessa.
Leather Jacket ... ... Monocanthus.
Siamese Fighting Fish ... Cristiceps multifenestratus.
Pilot Fish ... ... ... Naucrates ductor.
Zebra Fish ... ... ... Neotephroeops zebra.
Cow Fish ... ... ... Ostracion ornatus.
Rock Flathead ... ... Platycephalus lsevigatus.
Toad Fish ... ... ... Tetrodon Hamiltoni.
Black Fish ... ... ... Gadopsis marmoratus.
Rock Perch ... ... ... Glyphisodon Victoriae.
Cobbler ... ... ... Pentaroze marmorata.
Porcupine Fish ... ... Diodon histrix.
Fiddler ... ... ... Trygonorhina fasciata.
Silver Bream ... ... Caranyx Georgianus.
Mullet ... ... ... Mugil grandis.
Fan tail Gurnet.
Rock Cod Fish ... ... Pseudophycio barbatus.
Red Mullet ... ... ... Upeneoides vlamengii.
Mountain Trout ... ... Galacias ornatus.
Elephant Fish ... ... Callorhyncus antarcticus.
Acclimatised Trout (English) ... Salmo Fario.
Siamese Gold Fish ... ... Cyprinus auratus.
Roughy ... ... ... Arripis Georgianus.
Pilchard ... ... ... Clupea sagax.
Cod Fish ... ... ... Pseudophycis barbatus.
Gar Fish ... ... ... Hemiramphus Melanochir.
Toad Fish ... ... ... Tetrodon hispidus.
Australian Tooth-cupped Cuttlefish Sepeoteuthis Australis.
Yellow-sided Dolphin ... ... Delphinus Novse Zealandise.


Southern Mackerel ... ... Scomber pneumatophorus.
Horse Mackerel ... ... Trachurus trachurus.
Ludrick ... ... ... Girella simplex.
Spring-sided Butterfly Gurnard ... Lepidotrigla Vanessa.
Australian Sea Bear or Fur Seal... Euotaria cinerea.
jl. Australian Rock Ling ... Genypterus Australis.
(2. Yarra Black Fish... ... Gadopsis gracilis.
White Shark... ... ... Carcharodon Rondeletii..
Salmon Arripis ... ... Arripis truttaceus.
Murray Tortoise ... ... Chelymys Macquaria.
fl. Leafy Sea Dragon ... Phyllopteryx foliatus.
\2. Short-headed Sea Horse ... Hippocampus breviceps.
Australian Bream ... ... Chrysophrys Australis.
jl. Carpet Shark ... ... Crossorhinus barbatus.
(2. Seven-gilled Shark ... Notidanus (Heptanchus)
Indicus.
Murray Golden Perch ... ... Ctenolates ambiguus.
Picked Dog Fish ... ... Acanthias vulgaris.
Murray Cod Perch ... ... Oligorus Macquariensis.
Murray Tortoise ... ... Chelymys Macquaria.
( Salmon Arripis, of the younger
‘| forms and colouring ... Arripis truttaceus.
|l. Hammer-headed Shark ... Zygsena malleus.
)2. Common Australian Saw Fish Pristiophorus undipinnis.
Australian Rock Cod ... ... Pseudophysis barbatus.
jl. Long-toothed Bull Shark ... Odontaspis taurus.
12. Australian Tope Shark ... Galeus Australis.
Murray Lobster ... ... Astocoides serratus.
Small-scaled Rock Cod ... Lotella callarias.
Kumu Gurnard ... ... Trigla Kumu.
Australian Sea Bear or Fur Seal ... Euotaria cinerea—Peron sp.
Australian Smooth Hound ... Mustelus Antarcticus.
(1. Barracouta ... ... Thersites atun.
(2. Tunny ... ... ... Thynnus Thynnus.
Australian Aulopus ... ... Aulopus purpurisatus.
Banded Red Gurnet Perch ... Sebastes percoides.
Australian Tooth-cupped Cuttlefish Sepioteuthis Australis.
Yabber Crayfish ... ... Astocoides bicarinatus.
Australian Aulopus ... ... Aulopus purpurisatus.


KING PENGUIN.
Opening from the Machinery Room will be found the
Australian Bush Scene,
which gives a vivid tableau of a Digger’s Hut at the foot of the
Ranges. The figure of the Digger himself, washing for gold
in close proximity to an Aboriginal Camp, presents a very natural
appearance. On the walls will be found some interesting litho-
graphs illustrative of early bush life in the colonies.
Returning from the Aquarium, or by the Museum, the visitor
enters the
MAIN HALL,
which is 500 feet long and 160 feet wide, with galleries and large
cellars.


The western end has been partitioned off to form a concert hall
and here is found
THE EXHIBITION ORGAN,
manufactured by Mr. G. Fincham, of Richmond, for the 1880-81
Exhibition, at a cost of £5,560 95., and sloping down from it to
the ground there is a gallery, containing seats for from 700 to
800 adult choristers, but upon which 1,000 children have fre-
quently been seated. Viewed from the nave the organ presents
a most imposing appearance, and the decoration of the front is
extremely rich and graceful. It fills up a frontage of 63 feet by a
height of 45 feet from the floor on which it stands. In the base-
ment of the building is fixed the gas engine which works the
feeders or bellows from a minimum of 4-inch pressure to a maxi-
mum of 10 inches. These feeders supply great reservoirs, from
which great wind trunks convey the necessary supplies to other
reservoirs within the body of the instrument, and from these
different channels the sound-boards are fed with air of the required
pressure and equable current, free from pulsation or other
fluctuation.
VIEW FROM THE DOME.
To a stranger the view from the Dome must'be one of the sights
of Melbourne, as from this position a splendid panorama meets the
view on all sides.
Looking down into the gardens, the flow T er beds, which are laid
out in panels, have the effect of a beautiful carpet.
From this height, the visitor may form an accurate idea of the
extent and general arrangement of the City, whilst all the
principal buildings are distinguishable. The Parliament Houses,
Government Offices, St. Patrick’s Cathedral, Government House,
the spires of the Independent and Scots Churches, the Town Hall,
the new Post-office Tower, and the dome of the Law Courts are
the principal objects standing out from the plainer warehouses and
other buildings of the City. On a clear day, a view of the blue
water of Hobson’s Bay and the shipping may be obtained.
On the left hand may be seen the suburbs of Hawthorn, Kew,
Richmond, South Yarra, St. Kilda, &c., extending round to West
Melbourne on the right hand, encompassing the City proper, which
lies directly in front.
Ascending to another platform, about 20 feet higher, an exten-
sive view on all sides is obtained.


THE FOUNTAIN.
The grounds lately covered by the buildings of the Centennial
Exhibition have been freshly planted and sown with grass, and
in the quadrangle between the permanent annexes a new asphalt
bicycle track has been laid out, with kiosks, flower beds, &c.
On the east side the visitor, looking through the suburbs of
Fitzroy and Collingwood, sees the Kew Asylum and the Doncastei
Tower in the distance. On the north side rises a forest of chimnej
stacks, where the brick-works of Northcote and Brunswick con-
tinually send up clouds of smoke ; while nearer at hand, on the
north-west, are the University Buildings, the Wilson Hall, and
National Museum, Ormond, Trinity, and Queen’s Colleges; on the
west are seen the green fields surrounding Essendon and Moonee


Ponds. The chief features of interest on this side are the
Flemington Race-course and training grounds and the Saltwater
River.
In the spring-time there are numerous patches of green on all
sides, which give an agreeable diversity to the scene, and, as the
Exhibition is surrounded by gardens, the air at this height is
always fresh and invigorating.
Access may also be had, if desired, to the summit of the Dome,
by means of an iron ladder leading from the platform.
The Sports Ground
Takes a prominent place in the internal economy of the Exhibition
Building. Here are held many of the galas and monster demon-
strations, when all Melbourne turns out of doors for amusement
and recreation. The bicycle track is five laps to the mile 18 inches
from the inside edge. Seating accommodation has been erected
around the sides for about 4,000 spectators, and the grand stand
will comfortably hold 1,200, whilst 9,000 or 10,000 more can see
all going on inside the ring fence. Behind the grand stand will be
found nice sheltered nooks, and an ornamental verandah has lately
been erected connecting the main building and the western
annexe.


THE QUADRANGLE WITH GRAND STAND.




THE CYCLORAMA
OF
EARLY MELBOURNE.
(AN HISTORICAL SKETCH.)
“GARRYOWEN.”
(EDMUND FINN.)




THE CYCLORAMA OF EARLY MELBOURNE.
In the lives of nations a century is but as a day in the life of
an individual. The history of Melbourne, therefore, may not un-
fairly be compared to that of the palace which sprang up in a
single night by the magic power of the genie, so dear to the reader
of children’s fairy tales. It is generally admitted that no city
in ancient or modern times can boast of having achieved the
magnitude and importance of Melbourne during the life-time of
its pioneers. At the time these lines are written (1892) there are
men living amongst us who were actually present at the birth of
the queen city of the south. Indeed, one of the “ oldest inhabi-
tants” now living prepared the layette for the then unborn
“welcome little stranger,” for Mr. Robert Russell was the first
person to lay a surveyor’s chain over the wilds which have since
become the streets of a city, admittedly important, and one which
a world-travelled litterateur has designated “Marvellous Mel-
bourne.”
To the younger generation, and to those who only know Mel-
bourne as it is, a brief historical sketch of what it w*as, and from
what it sprang, will in all probability prove interesting.
Over a hundred years ago, namely, in the year 1770, that part
of the Australian continent now known as Victoria was sighted
by a member of Captain Cook’s party, one Lieutenant Hicks, who
beheld that part of Gippsland called Cape Everard. Some
eighteen years afterwards, a young surgeon named Bass went
from Sydney on an adventurous exploring expedition in a whale-
boat, and eventually made Western Port. In 1802, Lieutenant
Murray discovered Port Phillip. In consequence of Murray’s
report, the Sydney authorities sent down their Acting Surveyor-
General, Mr. Grimes, with a small party to “ walk round Port
Phillip,” the object being to find a site suitable fora convict settle-
ment. On the 9th of October, 1803, a convict expedition, under
the command of Lieut.-Col. Collins, entered Port Phillip and landed
g 2


at Sorrento, with the object of founding a penal settlement.
Fortunately the spirit of freedom, which appears to have watched
over this choice portion of the British dominions, threw objections
in the way, and Collins, declaring the country unsuitable for a
convict colony, a decision with which few of us will feel inclined
to quarrel, sailed away with his soldiers and convicts to
Tasmania.
His visit, however, was to have an important bearing upon the
future history of Melbourne. It seems highly probable, if not
absolutely certain, that the first white man to walk over the site
of the future city was one of the convicts who came out with
Collins. During the brief stay at Sorrento, four of the convicts
made their escape. One returned and gave himself up, two perished
miserably in the bush, and the fourth was William Buckley,
who for 32 years lived with the aborigines, learnt their customs
and language, and forgot his own. As he too “walked round
Port Phillip,” not in a perfunctory and official way, but wandering
with the blacks through scrub and forest, he must often have
climbed the hills and trod the gullies upon which the city now
stands.
Whilst Buckley, escaped from justice, was dwelling with the abori-
gines, plans for the settlement of the southern portion of Victoria
were being matured in the mind of more than one man. Amongst
Collins’ batch of convicts was one named Fawkner, whose wife,
son, and daughter had been allowed to accompany him. The son,
then eleven years of age, was John Pascoe Fawkner, whose name
and personality are indissolubly connected with the history of
Melbourne. As he grew to manhood in Tasmania, his thoughts
often turned to that new land beyond Bass Straits, and he was
firmly convinced that, as a settlement, there was a future before it.
This conviction grew so strong in his mind, that he resolved to
become its pioneer. The same resolve had, however, fixed itself
in the mind of another, one John Batman, who lost no time in
forming a small company and getting the start of Fawkner.
Batman was born in Parramatta, N.S.W., in 1800, and was cut
out for a pioneer by nature. He was a thorough bushman. He
went to Tasmania, and rendered such signal services to the
Government of that colony in capturing the bushrangers who had
become a terror and a menace to the community, that he was
rewarded by a grant of 1,000 acres of land. Although he shortly


afterwards received a further grant for his efforts in subduing and
pacifying the hostile blacks, his earth hunger was unsatisfied, and
on 29th May, 1835, a 30-ton schooner (the Rebecca) bearing on
board Batman, three white companions, and seven Sydney abori-
gines, entered Port Phillip Heads and anchored near Indented
Head. Landing, the party explored, found the Yarra and the
Saltwater rivers, and penetrated as far as Northcote, where, upon
the 6th June, Batman purchased 600,000 acres of land, including
the sites of Melbourne and Geelong, from the native chiefs. The
price paid was a number of blankets, beads, provisions, and other
articles, estimated as being worth about £2OO, and an annual
tribute or rent of similar goods to the value of £l5O. The
English Government afterwards annulled the purchase. Batman
explored the country for some distance round, and kept a diary of
his trip. On the 11th of June, he'rowed up the Yarra as far as the
basin below the Falls-bridge. “ This,” he wrote in his diary, “ will
be the place for a village.” Leaving provisions with his party he
returned to Launceston to make known the result of his enter-
prise.
Meanwhile Fawkner’s preparations had been going on. He
purchased a 55-ton schooner, the Enterprise, loaded her with
horses and other animals, farming implements, fruit-trees, seeds,
and stores, and, with six followers, set sail from Launceston. But
though Fawkner had an adventurous spirit he had a weak stomach.
After setting out he became so seasick that the schooner had to
put back, land Fawkner, and proceed across the straits without
him. After a little exploration and delay, the Enterprise came
up the Yarra, the first vessel of the kind that had ever floated on
that stream. The schooner was made fast by a cable tied round
a large tree on the river bank opposite the site of the present
Custom House. The party landed and put together a kind of
structure of sods, earth, and branches, thus erecting the first
“ house ”on the site of Melbourne. The live-stock then landed
consisted of two horses, two pigs, three kangaroo dogs, and a cat.
On the 10th of October, 1835, Fawkner himself, his wife and
family came over to the new land of promise.
During a varied career in Tasmania he had practised as an
advocate in the police court, and had started a newspaper in Laun-
ceston. From the time of his arrival in Port Phillip he took a
prominent part in all public movements, established the first


newspaper, which was at first published as a manuscript sheet, was
an Honorable Member of the Legislative Council, and died on the
4th September, 1879.* He was generally regarded as the father of
Melbourne. As a matter of fact, he personally was not of the
party who actually founded the future city, although he fitted out
the expedition that did so.
As may be supposed, the site of Melbourne was in a very
“ natural ” state. The Yarra was so choked up with fallen trees,
snags, and obstructions that its navigation was a matter of
difficulty, even to the smallest of coasters. The banks were
fringed with tall trees and a thick ti-tree scrub, and parts of the
river were skirted with low-lying marshes. Eastern Hill was a
virgin forest of wattle, the western hill was covered with sheoak
trees, and the ravine between the rising grounds, namely, Elizabeth-
street, was a gully in summer and a creek in winter. As for the
land south of the Yarra, it was an immense wilderness. Forest
was everywhere, and the grass reached up to the girths of the
horses of any of the pioneers who rode out to explore any of the
(now) suburbs. Kangaroos skipped fearlessly about, the marshes
were filled with ducks and other wildfowl, whilst the trees were
brilliant and noisy with brightly-plumaged parrots and parroquets.
A strong rivalry naturally existed between the followers of Batman
and those of Fawkner; but, wiser and more sensible than the Mon-
tagues and the Capulets, the factions refrained from open warfare.
Both of these white “tribes” settled down in peace, if not in
actual friendship, and the birth of Melbourne may be said to have
been successfully accomplished. The “ unnamed village ” was
known by the blacks as “ Narr-m ” and by the whites as
“ Bearbrass.”
Gradually rumours of the new settlement crossed the straits
and brought further population. Other enterprising persons soon
followed the pioneers, and at the close of the year 1835 the census
of Bearbrass stood thus : —Population, 501 ; cattle, 100 ; sheep,
1,400; horses, 6; some poultry and dogs, a few rabbits, and
Fawkner’s cat. There were about sixty acres of land under cultiva-
tion, and some good wheat was grown. The habitations consisted
of two weatherboard huts, considered in the light of palatial
♦ After returning to Port Phillip Batman’s health gave way, and, after
a lingering illness, he died at Batman’s Hill, on the 6th of May, 1839.


residences because they possessed brick chimneys; and besides these
two erections there were about a dozen sod cabins or hovels. The
total shipping numbered eight crafts, viz., one barque, two brigs,
four schooners, and one cutter; whilst the pastoral interest was
represented by three squatting stations —Connolly’s, Swanston’s,
and Solomon’s.
The little settlement quickly grew and extended. In the follow-
ing year the south side of the Yarra was taken up as a grazing-
station by a Mr. Gardiner, and Batman established his first sheep-
station on the site of St. James’ Church in William-street, moving
his “homestead” shortly afterwards to the then distant wilds of
Flemington Hill. Intelligence of the new land reached England.
The transfer from the chiefs to Batman was annulled, and he and
his associates received £7,000 compensation. Men came out from
the crowded old world, sheep and cattle were brought from Sydney
and Tasmania, and a brisk trade sprang up with the latter colony.
Although there was neither law nor government in those primitive
days, the people were all honest, and theft and crime amongst the
white people were unknown.
In the middle of the year 1836, Captain Stewart, a police
magistrate, from Goulburn, was sent down from Goulburn by the
New South Welsh authorities to put the place into some kind of
civilized constitution, and with the assistance of the residents, in
public meeting assembled, the following was framed as the Magna
Charta of Australia Felix :
1. That Mr. James Simpson, J.P., be appointed as arbitrator
upon all disputes between individuals, excepting such
as might relate to land, with power to name two
assistants to help him if necessary.
2. The arbitrator to have power to inflict such fines as he
might consider proportionate to any injury sustained.
3. The subscribing parties bound themselves to bring no
action at law or in equity for any act of the arbitrator;
and all residents not at the meeting were to be invited
to join in the action taken.
4. They bound themselves to communicate to the arbitrator
any aggression committed by or upon the aborigines
that might come to their knowledge, and that the arbi-
trator be empowered to proceed in all such matters as
he might think fit.


5. All subscribing parties pledged themselves to afford all the
protection in their power to the aborigines; not to
teach them the use of firearms, nor allow their ser-
vants to do so; nor allow the aborigines to possess them.
6. That the arbitrator should collect all fines, and hold them
till the next meeting on the Ist of September.
7. That a reward of five shillings be given for every head of
wild dogs killed; that a fund be raised for that
purpose; and that the master’s certificate be sufficient
proof.
8. That a petition be forwarded to Governor Bourke, asking
for the presence of a resident magistrate at Port
Phillip; and also for the appointment from the
residents of other gentlemen to assist the resident
magistrate.
This limited autocracy worked well, for Mr. Simpson was an
upright and impartial man. According to Captain Stewart’s report,
the population of Bearbrass consisted in 1836 of 142 males and
35 females. There were 26,500 sheep, and 57 horses, and he esti-
mated the value of the whole, including farming implements, at
£BO,OOO.
Civilization progressed rapidly, for spirits and tobacco were
smuggled in, and the aborigines, acquiring the vices of the white,
soon developed criminal and hostile proclivities. Raids, robberies,
and murders were perpetrated by the blacks, and those settlers
who moved out into the country parts were compelled to experience
adventurous and dangerous times. Towards the end of this year
(1836), Mr. Chas. Franks and his shepherd were cruelly murdered
at the Werribee by a tribe of aborigines. Their bodies were
brought to Melbourne and buried in the cemetery reserve, which
was a portion of Flagstaff Hill, at the western end of the settle-
ment. This was the first public funeral, and all the residents of
the place turned out to witness the mournful obsequies. Other
aboriginal murders followed, and eventually a black protectorate
was formed to ameliorate the condition of and educate the abori-
ginals into the manners and ethics of civilization; but it was never
a popular institution either with the settlers or the general public.
In March, 1837, Sir Richard Bourke, the Governor of New South
Wales, came down from Sydney, and was enthusiastically received
by the young colonists. He named the streets of the infant


settlement, and called the place Melbourne, after the then English
Premier. Thus was the baby-township, born in 1835, permanently
christened in 1837. Although the name of the future capital was
altered, the river on which it stands still bears a native name,
though not its native designation. The aboriginal name for the
stream was “ Birrarung,” but one of Batman’s party, questioning
an aboriginal as to what the river was called, received for answer,
“ Yarra-yarra ” (flowing, flowing), and Yarra it was and is still
called. Further acquaintance with the aboriginal tongue, however,
made the pioneers acquainted with the fact that “Yarra-yarra”
was applied by the tribes to any running water.
It was decided that there should be three townships in the new
district —one at Melbourne, one at Williamstown, and a third at
Geelong. The three started practically equal in the race for the
capital, but Geelong was handicapped by its bar, Williamstown by
the absence of a freshwater stream, so that Melbourne soon became
first favourite.
During Governor Bourke’s visit, the streets were laid out and
named. The township of Melbourne, as originally designed, was
practically rectangular, having a frontage of about a mile to the
Yarra, with a breadth of about three-quarters of a mile. Few
persons of those early days but believed that its dimensions were
extensive enough for ages to come; but there was one prophet
who held a different opinion, for as far back as 1840, a Mr. George
Arden, an able journalist, declared that Sir Richard Bourke could
not have formed an adequate idea of the probable growth and
importance of Melbourne when he laid it out on such a meagre
scale. Governor Bourke named the streets of Melbourne thus: —
Flinders, after the captain of that name, who was one of the earliest
navigators of Port Phillip Bay; Collins, after the commander of
the convict expedition that landed at Sorrento; Bourke, after
himself; Lonsdale, after Captain Lonsdale; Spencer, after the
English lord and statesman ; King, after Governor King, of New
South Wales; William, after William the Fourth; Queen, in honour
of his consort; Elizabeth, as a tribute to the memory of the Virgin
Queen; Swanston, after a captain who was chairman of the Batman
Association; Russell, after Earl Russell; Stephen, in compliment
to a permanent Under-Secretary of State for the colonies; and
Spring-street, it is believed, after a family name of Lord Mount-
eagle, a distinguished English statesman, and friend and patron of


Governor Bourke. When Mr. La Trobe arrived as Superintendent
of the settlement, in 1839, he gave his own name to the “northern
boundary road ” of the town, which became La Trobe-street.
The smaller thoroughfares were called “lanes,” and took their
designations from the wider streets to which they were affiliated.
The first Government land sale took place on Ist June, 1837,
and the second on November the Ist of the same year. The land
was in half-acre blocks, but the bidding was not of a very spirited
kind. At the first sale lots in Melbourne and Williamstown were
submitted, those in Melbourne averaging £35 per half-acre, whilst
curiously enough the Williamstown allotments averaged £46. At
the second sale only Melbourne land was submitted, the average
being £43 per block. The first block sold was bought by Mr.
Fawkner for £33. It was the half-acre at the south-east corner of
King and Flinders streets. Batman purchased the south-west
comer of Collins and William streets. The north-east corner of
Collins and Queen streets was bought by Mr. Umphelby for £6l,
and was purchased a few years ago by the English, Scottish, and
Australian Chartered Bank for £60,000, almost a thousand to one
increase and multiplication of the pounds invested some fifty years
before. Mr. Sylvester John Browne, better known as Paddy
Browne, bid £4O for a Collins-street block, repented his rash offer,
and forfeited his deposit of £4. As nobody could be found to
take up his contract, the land was literally “ given away ” to the
Wesleyan denomination, by which body it was, after many years
sold, and the despised £4O lot realized exactly £40,000. The four
half-acre blocks at the intersection of Collins and Elizabeth streets
brought £32, £42, £4O, and £SO. The corner of Collins and
Swanston streets, opposite the Town Hall, went for £45. The
Beehive corner, opposite the Post Office, brought £2B. Half-an-
acre, where the Albion Hotel now stands, realized £39, and a
Captain Synnot, who bought a half-acre in the heart of the block
for £l9, was regarded as a lucky man in being able to sell
on the day following the sale at the huge profit of £6 on his
bargain.
The bidding was not considered as sufficiently spirited by the
authorities, and it was resolved to hold the sales next year in
Sydney. Prices consequently went up, and the town half-acres
averaged over £IOO each. What were called “country lots ” were
also submitted for sale in 25-acre blocks. The country blocks in


Newtown (now Fitzroy) averaged about £7 per acre. Lot 1,
25 acres, Newtown, brought only £6 10s. per acre. This lot was
the corner of Nicholson-street and Victoria-parade, and composed
the land bounding the Melbourne Exhibition on the east from the
parade to Gertrude-street. In 1839 the first land boom set in.
Allotments were cut up and sold by the foot, blocks that had cost
£IOO realizing on subdivision as much as £2,000; but, as in other
booms, the reaction came, and there followed a severe but temporary
depression.
The following is a comparison of the prices originally paid for
lands in Melbourne with the present value, estimated on amounts
actually paid, or on figures furnished by careful valuators before
the late land fever had reached its height: —
1. The north side of Collins-street, from Queen to Swanston
streets, constituting the whole of the fashionable “block,” was
originally sold for £4ss—about one-fourth of what a single foot of
it is now worth.
2. The corresponding or south side of the same street was sold
for £555, and w T ould now realize an equally increased price.
3. The north side of Bourke-street, from Elizabeth-street to
Russell-street, omitting the Post Office Reserve, brought £1,892,
and the south side £1,397 18s. These increased prices were owing
to several forfeitures by the original purchasers, and a resale in
better times by the Government. The highest price thus realized
for a half-acre block w r as £635. A single foot of the ground would
now be worth twice the price of an original half-acre.
4. The land in Elizabeth-street, from Bourke to Flinders streets,
is at present amongst the most valuable in the city. All the
eastern side was originally bought for £283, the whole space from
Bourke to Little Collins streets, including the Beehive and Colonial
Bank comers, going for £56. The price for the western side
of Elizabeth-street, from Bourke-street to Flinders-street, was
£290.
5. The following prices were actually realized by sales prior to
1877, and therefore cannot be taken as “inflated land boom”
value:—The “Leviathan” corner, Bourke and Swanston streets
(the half-acre originally sold for £3O), sold on the 29th January,
1873, to Mr. J. B. Watson, for £517 12s. 9d. per foot. The area
sold was only a small part of the original block, which, computed
on the price, would have been worth £IBO,OOO. Hall of Commerce


and other buildings in Collins-street (original half-acre cost £231),
sold 4th December, 1873, at £40,000. Value of half-acre on this
basis would be over £70,000.
Two shops in Collins-street, between Elizabeth and Swanston
streets, sold in December, 1874, at the rate of £9O per half-acre.
On 22nd of March, 1876, the site of the old Bank of Australasia in
Collins-street, part of the half-acre originally sold for £SO, was sold
for £33,000, or at the rate of £73,000 per acre; and a portion of
the Criterion block (half-acre costing but £l9) was, in February,
1877, sold at the rate of £70,000 per acre. Instances might be
multiplied indefinitely, but the above are some of the most remark-
able instances on record of “ unearned increment ” in land.
The new settlement advanced steadily, and, comparatively
speaking, rapidly, for the next few years. Churches and banks,
temples for the worship of God and Mammon, rose, and there seemed
every prospect that Melbourne had an assured and permanent
future before it, although the most sanguine of the pioneers could
not, in his wildest dreams, have foreseen the gigantic growth in
wealth and population that was to follow upon the discovery of
gold.
The Cyclorama of Early Melbourne, now in the Melbourne Ex-
hibition, was painted by Mr. John Hennings, from sketches taken
in the year 1841, by an old colonist, and it brings vividly before the
spectator the settlement at that time. The beholder is supposed
to be standing on the scaffolding of the Scots’ Church (then in
course of erection), at the intersection of Collins and Russell streets.
This site had been obtained by the Presbyterian denomination from
the Sydney Government for church purposes some time previously,
but it was held to be of little value, as it was so far out of town.
A weatherboard room was, however, erected to serve the double
purpose of school and church. In January, 1841, the foundation-
stone of a more permanent structure was laid, and it is upon this
partially-erected building that the visitor to the Cyclorama is
supposed to be standing to gaze upon the Melbourne of the past.
It will be seen that the objection as to the site being too far out
of town was not without reasonable foundation, even in 1841, for
almost the whole of the buildings are in the western part of the
township. So far as population was concerned, Swanston-street
might be regarded as the eastern boundary of the town, for the few
adventurous spirits who risked going further towards the rising


gun were regarded as dwellers on the extreme of the suburban
radius, whilst the fewer still who “camped” where the present
northern suburbs stand, were solitary hermits with a morbid love
of seclusion. What in 1841 would be equivalent to a suburban
residence of to-day, may be seen at the Cyclorama in the tenement
just beneath the spectator on the west, where the early inhabitants’
washing is drying on the block of land whereon the Town Hall now T
stands. The west having monopolised all the business, and, practi-
cally, all the houses and population, the other points of the compass
were, with the exception of the necessary clearing and a little
cultivation, in a primitive state of nature. “Emerald Hill ” received
its name from its verdancy, a feature that has now no existence in
the appearance or in the residents of that shrewd and go-ahead
suburb. Sandridge was also called after its natural appearance,
and was chiefly remarkable to “ new chums ” for two small pubs,
and a rough sandy track which was the main road to Melbourne.
Richmond was regarded as a desirable if somewhat distant place of
residence for those prosperous folks who could afford to dwell so far
away from business. The Rev. Joseph Docker who bought the
heart of Richmond at one of the sales in 1839 for an average price
of £29 per acre, cut it up into eligible country residence sites, and
realized a handsome profit.
In “ walking round ” the infant settlement from Richmond, the
suburb of Newtown was reached. What was then called Newtown,
but is now known as Collingwood and Fitzroy, was not very highly
esteemed by the old folks in their new r home. It was the first of the
suburban lands operated upon at the public sales, but its average price
was only about £7 per acre. The limits of Newtown were originally
from Nicholson-street to Smith-street, and from Victoria-parade to
Moor-street. The name was afterwards changed to Collingwood,
when the suburb burst its swaddling clothes and overran the “ flat.
It was then divided, the western portion receiving the name of
Fitzroy from the Governor of New South Wales.
Looking to the north there is practically nothing but bush
interacted by the occasional tracks for horses and bullock-drays.
Along one of these tracks the pioneer, Fawkner, has been repre-
sented by the artist as taking a lonely meditative stroll. In 1841
there was no sign of Carlton, North Carlton, or Hotham Hill, with
their scores of streets and thousands of residences. There was no
trace, or even suggestion of that Melbourne Cemetery, where, in a


space of one generation, one hundred thousand dead have been
buried. All that region up to the horizon was known vaguely as
North Melbourne. The old Supreme Court in Latrobe-street, when
erected, was so lonely and distant that suitors and jurymen used to
take their lunches with them, and at the mid-day adjournments,
would stroll out into the bush at the rear of the gaol and eat an
al fresco meal under the trees.
This year, 1841, was an important one legally, for it was then
that the Supreme Court, as an off-shoot of the N.S.W. judicature,
was established here in a temporary court-house at the comer of
Bourke and King streets. Judge Willis, of afterwards unenviable
notoriety, was the first resident judge. Every month the criminal
sessions were opened with prayer offered up by the then Church of
England clergyman, who attended the court once a month for the
purpose. The old Supreme Court, now the City Police Court, was
not in existence till much later than 1841, but its site seemed to be
marked out as the abode of justice and retribution from this year,
for in December two aboriginals were tried for the murder of a
couple of white sailors, condemned, and afterwards publicly hanged
on the green eminence on which the Melbourne Gaol now stands.
This was the first execution in the colony, and all the white and
black population took part in the procession to the gallows. This
procession started from the then gaol in Collins-street, near Spencer-
street, and wound slowly to the place of execution. Men, women,
and children were present. A clumsy temporary staging and
scaffold were erected, and the execution was carried out in a
bungling and revolting manner. The bodies of the murderers were
buried outside the old cemetery, somewhere about the site of the
now Victoria Market.
Further round to the west was one of the great resorts of the
colonists of those days, “ Flagstaff Hill.” Here, upon a Sunday
afternoon, the people of the district would congregate, and with
telescopes eagerly scan the southern horizon to catch a glimpse of
an incoming vessel from the old world on the other side of the
earth. The electric telegraph was unknown, and there was only
the optical telegraph to give notification of the arrival of news from
that land beyond the sea which the settlers still affectionately called
“ home.”
Still further west, w r here now the ceaseless neighing of the iron-
horse is heard by day and by night, lay the West Melbourne swamp


It was called Batman’s swamp in those days. Batman himself
wrote of it in his famous diary : —“ I crossed on the banks of the
river, a large marsh, about one and a half miles wide by three or
four long, of the richest description of soil—not a tree. When we
got on the margin the quails began to fly, and I think I can safely
say I saw a thousand quail flying at once —a perfect cloud. I never
saw anything like it before. I shot two large ones as we walked
along. At the upper end of the marsh is a large lagoon. I should
think from the distance I saw that it was upwards of a mile across,
and full of swan, ducks, and geese.”
As before remarked, the business and chief residential portion
of the city (that was to be) settled in a nest of habitations round
the old Market Square (Western Market), and the western portions
of Flinders, Little Flinders, Collins, and Elizabeth streets. The
buildings were in some cases of brick and in others of weatherboard,
but the majority, whether for business or residential purposes,
were of wattle-and-daub, roughly shingled or roofed with sheets of
bark. The thoroughfares were wretched apologies for streets, and
most of them were, at times, impassable. During the winter
season they were more like chains of small waterholes than
streets. Trees, fallen and erect, and tree stumps, were to be found
in many of them ; and the economical housewives utilized them as
nature’s props from which to spread clothes-lines. In the wet
season Elizabeth and Swanston streets could only be compared to
a couple of dangerous gullies with ruts and holes abounding.
Flinders-street was partly a swamp, and the Collins-street “ Block ”
was such a “ glue-pot ” that it was as necessary to wear long mud-
boots then in winter as it is now to carry an umbrella or overcoat.
Some idea may be formed of the state of the thoroughfares from
an advertisement-skit which appeared in one of the papers of the
time, calling for a thousand pairs of stilts “ for the purpose of
enabling the people of Melbourne to carry on their usual avocations,
the mud in most places being now waist-deep.” Although this
advertisement was published as a jest, it was but little of an
exaggeration.
It is curious to note, by the light of to-day, how mistaken the early
settlers were in forecasting which would be the important streets.
It was their firm conviction that Little Flinders-street would
monopolize all the business, and that Collins and Bourke streets
would be comparatively unimportant and second-rate thoroughfares.


The knowing ones, therefore, were anxious to secure sites in Little
Flinders-street west, and one remarkable instance of a division of
property in that quarter is on record. W. F. Rucker, one of the
shrewdest of business men, was a partner with J. P. Fawkner, of
the land at the corner of Collins and Market streets (the Union Club
block). When a division was agreed upon both partners wanted
the valuable half having a frontage to Flinders-lane, but Rucker
had such a wheedling way with him that he persuaded Fawkner to
take the Collins-street moiety, and let him, Rucker, have the Lane
portion. It is needless to say that Fawkner, though submitting
at the time with a very bad grace, had no reason in after years to
regret his complaisance.
So much more was the west run after than the east that all the
township above Swanston-street was known as Eastern Hill, and
was considered as only a moderately good investment for dwelling
houses or timber yards, and suitable for churches. Otherwise it
was looked upon as valueless, and the inducements to tempt pur-
chasers to invest in land there were curious. An auctioneer of the
time in puffing a block for sale, the corner of Russell-street and
Collins-street, now occupied by Cromwell House, announced, as a
bait, that there was a valuable and apparently inexhaustible stone
quarry on the ground.
Crime is a weed that grows up with all civilization, and even in
the early times there was a seamy side to Melbourne. Though
Emerald Hill was for the most part a sheep pasturage, there were
some brickfields on the southern bank of the river, and the dwellings
round them were a veritable Alsatia, where any person who was
“ wanted ”by the police could almost invariably be found. If not
there he was certain to be discovered in a disreputable nest of huts
and cabins about Moor and Brunswick streets, which shared with
“the brickfields” the unenviable notoriety of containing the whole
of the scum and rascality of the settlement.
In every street aboriginals in twos and threes were to be met
with, clad in the scantiest of clothing, and with the “gin” generally
carrying her dusky offspring slung over her back in a tattered
opossum rug or dirty blanket. Male and female blacks had great
craving for “ white money,” for they were not long in learning its
power in obtaining the luxuries of civilization. As the white
population increased the blacks died out, illustrating, from the
European point of view, the “survival of the fittest.” Steadily


and gradually the population increased; buildings went up, and
comforts and conveniences increased, until the beginning of the
fifties, when the golden age began. With the discovery of gold
the whole aspect of the place became changed. Adventurous gold-
seekers poured in from all parts of the civilized world. The
unknown colony became the best known and most valuable spot
upon the globe, and in the rush and turmoil of those mad, golden
years, a new Melbourne was born, and Early Melbourne passed
into history.
Such is a brief and necessarily imperfect and fragmentary out-
line of the beginnings and the infancy of a city whose rapidity of
growth is unparalleled in history, ancient or modern. Within the
memory of man it has passed from a wilderness inhabited only by
the savage and the kangaroo, to one of the important cities
of the world, and the most important in the southern hemisphere.
Where I have seen wattle-and-daub cabins I now see many-storied
palaces; where I have wandered timidly into the bush the spacious
Exhibition building now stands, and from its dome I look around,
see suburban cities, rivalling the parent Melbourne from which
they sprang, and extending for miles north, south, east, and west
as far as younger eyes than mine can reach. I have stood, telescope
in hand, upon the Flagstaff Hill, striving to catch a glimpse of an
English sailing ship that would bring late news from Europe, and
that news would be only four months old. I now read in the Mel-
bourne papers the cabled information of events which took place
in England yesterday, and ; —“ mirabile dictu ” —the difference in
longitude places this information in my possession actually before
the time when it is read at English breakfast tables. When I re-
member what early Melbourne was, and see what “Marvellous
Melbourne ” is, I may be pardoned for wondering at times whether
I am not a man in dreamland instead of a staid colonist who has
H


lived to see the fulfilment of a prophecy published by an anonymous
Melbourne poet in the year 1839. He was regarded as a very
sanguine dreamer when he wrote—
Melbourne will rise in mighty state,
And though a bantling now,
Will shame her parent and create
A lustre round her brow.
Melbourne, left in her infant state,
To flourish as she may,
Shall, notwithstanding this hard fate,
Behold a brighter day.
Melbourne will flourish ; Raise the cup ;
Loudly hurra to her glory ;
Her day now dawns ; her sun is up ;
And success will be her story.
“GARRYOWEN”
(Edmund Finn.)


INDEX TO CONTENTS.
Aeration, System of ... ... ... ... Pag g
Amphibians, The ... ... ... ... g
Angel Shark, The (Sqnatina Angelus) ... ... ... ... 44
Aquarium Machinery ... ... ... ... gy
Armament Court ... ... ... ... . yg
Artificial Sea Water ... ... ... ... ... y
Bastard Trumpeter (Latris Fosteri) ... ... ... ... 24
Blenny Fish (Cristicips sp.) ... ... ... ... ... 27
Blue Shark (Notidanus Indicus) ... ... ... ... 43
Boar Fish (Histiopterus recurvirostris) ... ... ... 23
Bream (Chrysophrys Australis)... ... ... ... ... 28
Brown Trout ... ... ... ... ... ... 54
Bush Scene ... ... ... ... ... ... 91
Butter Fish (Cheilodactylus nigricans) ... ... ... ... 26
Carp, The (Cyprinus carpio) ... ... ... ... ... 51
Carpet Shark (Crossorhinus barbatus) ... ... ... .. 46
Cat Fish (Copidoglanis tandanus) ... ... ... ... 49
Cobbler Fish (Pentaroge marmotata) ... ... ... ... 38
Conchological Collection ... ... ... ... ... 79
Cow Fish (Ostracion ornatus) ... ... ... ... ... 39
Crayfish (Homorus vulgaris) ... ... ... ... ... 59
Crocodiles, The (Crocodilus porosus) ... ... ... ... 14
Crustacese ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 53
Cyclorama, The (Historical Sketch) ... ... ... ... 81
Dome, The ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 92
Echinodermata ... ... ... ... ... ... 60
Economic Botany ... ... ... ... ... ... 76
Egyptian Tomb ... ... ... ... ... ... 82
Entomological Court ... ... ... ... ... ... 71
Ethnological Court ... ... ... ... ... ... 76
Eucalyptus, Products of ... ... ... ... ... 79
Exhibition Trustees, The ... ... ... ... ... 2
Fiddler, The (Trygonorhina fasciata) ... ... ... ... 43
Fish, Drawings of ... ... ... ... ... ... 88
Fish, Feeding the ... ... ... ... ... ... 9


Page
Fisheries Court ... ... ... ... ... ... 78
Fishes (Pisces) ... ... * ... ... ... ... 21
Flathead, The (Platycephalus lsevigatus) ... ... ... 34
Flounder, The (Pleuronectes Victoria) ... ... ... ... 36
Flying Gurnet (Trigla polyomata) ... ... ... .., 35
General Remarks ... ... ... ... ... ... 9
Gippsland Perch (Latris colonorum) ... ... ... ... 31
Golden Perch (Dules auratus) ... ... ... ... ... 49
Gurnet, The (Centropogon Australis) ... ... ... ... 36
Hermit Crab, The (Cenobita Diogenes) ... ... ... ... 58
Introductory ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3
Leather Jacket (Monocanthus) ... ... ... ... ... 37
Machinery and Manufactures Hall ... ... ... ... 85
Machinery, The ... ... ... ... ... ... 8
Magpie Perch (Cheilodactylus gibbosus)... ... ... ... 29
Main Hall 91
Mineralogical Collection ... ... ... ... ... 76
Mollusca ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 65
Murray Cod Fish (Oligorus Macquariensis) ... ... ... 47
Murray Perch (Oligorus Mitchelli) ... ... ... ... 48
Museum ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 71
Octopus (Octopus vulgaris) ... ... ... ... ... 56
Old Wife Fish (Enoplosus armatus) ... ...• ... ... 32
Organ, The ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 92
Parrot Fish (Labricthys) ... ... ••• ••• ••• 33
Perch (Perea fluviatilis) ... ... ••• 53
Picture Salon and Galleries ... ... ... ••• ••• 63
Pig Fish (Cestracion Heterodontus) ... ... ... 42
Pilchard, The (Clupeasagax) ... ... ... ... ••• 26
Plan of Building ... ... ... ••• •••
Platypus, The (Ornithorhynchus paradoxus) ... ... ... 17
Porcupine, The (Diodon histrix) ... ... ••• 40
Porifera ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 62
Rock Ling (Genypterus Australis) ... ... ••• ••• 34
Rock Perch (Melanicthys tricuspidata) ... ... ... ... 30
Roughy, The (Arripis Georgianus) ... ... ... ... 28
Salmon Trout (Arripis truttaceus) ... ... ... ••• 27
Schnapper, The (Pagrus unicolor) ... ... ... ••• 23
Seal, The (Phoca vitulina) ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 10
Sea Birds ... ... ••• ••• ••• 84
Siamese Gold Fish (Cyprinus auratus) ... ... ... ••• 52
Silver Bream (Caranyx Georgianus) ... ... ••• ••• 29
Snakes, Collection of ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 81
South Kensington Art Collection ... ... ••• ••• 71
South Kensington Technological Collection ... ... ••• 71
Sports Ground ... ••• ••• •••


Sting Ray (Trygon violacens) ... ... ... ... a ||
St. Peter’s, Rome, Model of .. ... ... ... gg
Stranger Fish (Odax Richardsoni) ... ... ... ... 33
Stone Lifter (Kathestostama lasve) ... ... ... ... 39
Tanks, The ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4
Tasmanian Trumpeter... ... ... ... ... ... 25
Tench, The (Tinea tinea) ... ... ... ... ... 59
Thornback Ray (Raja punctata) ... ... ... ... 44
Toad Fish (Tetrodon Hamiltoni) ... ... ... ... 42
Toad Fish (Tetrodon Hisipidus) ... ... ... ... 41
Whiting, The (Silago punctata) ... ... ... ... 32
Zebra Fish (Neotephrceops Zebra) ... ... ... ... 31
Zoological Court ... ... ... ... ... ... 75
Zoophytes ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 62


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.
Page
Aeration, System of ... ... ... ... ... ... ”6
Angel Shark ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 44
Aquarium Machinery Room ... ... ... ... ... 87
Bastard Trumpeter ... ... ... ... ... ... 25
Blue Shark ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 46
Boar Fish ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 24
Bream ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 28
Brown Trout... ... ... ... ... ... ... 54
Butter Fish ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 26
Carp ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 51
Carpet Shark ... ... ... ... ... ... 46
Cat Fish ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 49
Cobbler Fish... ... ... ... ... ... ... 38
Cow Fish ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 39
Crocodile ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14
Crocodile, Skeleton of ... ... ... ... ... 15
Crocodile’s Den ... ... ■ ... ••• 16
Echinodermata ... ... ... ... ... ... 60
Egyptian Tomb ... ... ... - ... ••• ... 82
Fiddler, The ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 43
Fish Breeding ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 54
Fish, Skeleton of ... ... ••• ••• ••• 22
Flathead, The ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 34
Flounder, The ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 36
Flying Gurnet -• ••• ••• ••• ••• 35
Fountain, The ... ... ••• • ••• ••• -• 93
Gippsland Perch ... ... ... ••• ••• 31
Golden Perch ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 49
Gurnet, The ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 36
Hermit Crab ... ... ... • - - •• • • • • •• •
King Penguin ... ... ••• ••• ••• 91
Leather Jacket ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 37
Mud Turtles ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• *9
Magpie Perch ... ••• ••• ••• ••• •••
Murray Cod ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• •••


Murray Perch ... ... ... ... ... Pa^
Old Wife *" " 32
Oyster Claire ... .. ... gy
Parrot Fish ... ... ... ... ... ... 33
Pelicans ... ... ... ... ... ... 77
Penguins and Pelicans ... ... ... ... 01
Perch 53
Picture Salon and Galleries ... ... ... ... 63
Pig Fish ... ... ... ... 42
Pig Fish, Egg of ... ... ... ... ... ... 43
Pilchard ... ... ... ... ... 26
Platypus ... ... ... ... ... ... 17
Platypus, Home of the ... ... ... ... ... ig
Porcupine, The ... ... ... ... ... 40
Rock Ling ... ... ... ... ... ... 34
Rock Perch ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 30
Roughy, The ... ... ... ... ... ... 28
Salmon Trout ... ... ... ... ... ... 27
Seal ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10
Seal on Land ... ... ... .. ... ... n
Seal, Flippers of ... ... ... ... ... ... 12
Seals and their Trainer ... ... ... ... ... 13
Siamese Gold Fish ... ... ... ... ... ... 52
Sports Ground ... ... ... ... .. ... 95
Sting Ray ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 45
Stone Lifter ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 39
St. Peter’s, Rome ... ... ... ... ... .., 85
Stranger, The ... ... ... ... .. ... 33
Tench, The ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 50
Thornback Ray ... ... ... .. ... ... 44
Toad Fish (Tetrodon Hamiltoni) ... . .. ... ... 42
Toad Fish (Tetrodon Hisipidus) ... ... ... ... 41
Whiting, The ... ... ... ... ... ... 32
Wood Borers ... ... ... ... ... ... 72
Zebra Fish ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 31
By Authority: Robt. S. Brain, Government Printer, Melbourne.






