



EXHIBITION
OF
CHINESE ARTS
C. T. LOO & CO.
41 EAST 57TH STREET 595 MADISON AVENUE
NEW YORK
SPECIAL SALE
November 1, 194.1 to April 30, 1942


COPYRIGHT 1941 G. T. LOO & CO.
PRINTED BY THE WILLIAM BRADFORD PRESS, NEW YORK


INTRODUCTION
I have been interested in Chinese Art for some forty years ; during that period
I have accumulated a large number of collections but now it seems desirable to effect a
clearing sale so to allow me to establish a proper statement of the firm. While there were
profits made on the objects sold, losses will be inevitable on certain of the remaining objects
and also it will enable me to make place for whatever new things I may be able to secure
in the future.
I understand that our Gallery has been considered an exclusive place with
high prices. So I am trying to prove that although we have usually high-valued objects,
which, because of their rarity and worth warrant their price, we also have other objects
that can be sold at extremely low prices. I even dare say that a classical decorative object,
that is common on the market, can be bought at our Gallery even at a more reasonable
price than one expects to pay. I have always consistently tried to present each individual
type of object at its best period and highest quality and to avoid objects that only have
an effective appearance with uncertain authenticity.
I have gathered here an important selection representing all branches of the
Chinese Art from the earliest period to the 19th Century and made an illustrated cata-
logue with a list of prices at a 40% or greater reduction, regardless of the original cost
price. These prices are to be definitely net to all purchasers and the sale is to last for six
months, beginning November Ist, 1941, and ending the last of April, 1942. The remaining
collections not catalogued will also be sold under the same conditions.
I may regret one day that our Gallery has offered these fine things at such
low prices, as we may never be able to secure similar objects again, and some of our
patrons may also regret that they did not benefit more by this unusual opportunity. As
you know, Chinese works of art are becoming more and more scarce each year and soon
no important objects will be obtainable, due to the fact that China has already prohibited
the export of the majority of the antique works of art and doubtless, after the war, laws
will be extended and enforced.
May I take this opportunity to say that some of the illustrations do not do
justice to the objects and so a seemingly high price may be understood only after the


actual item has been examined. Even after examination a few of the objects at high prices
may still not be understood because certain objects which have a sound background, either
because of their rarity, period, refinement, color or shape do not give an appealing effect
and thus, though rare or unique, their importance is not always understood and their
value approved or appreciated. Fortunately the understanding of a genuinely fine object
always marches parallel with the gradual improvement of our knowledge, thus a fine work
of art eventually will be understood, loved and treasured.
C. T. LOO


PREFACE
We have tried to arrange this catalogue so that it will be both comprehensive
and convenient for the reader’s reference. You will note that the individual illustration is
placed directly opposite the descriptions on the opposite page.
We have endeavored to follow a chronological arrangement of periods and
have adhered to this as nearly as possible. Each description carries the name and date of
the Dynasty and our descriptions are as complete as space would allow. As mentioned on
our price list, three per cent of the gross sales will be given to the Chinese War Orphans
so anything that you purchase will not only allow you to acquire an object that you desire,
but will also help a great cause.
BRONZES
Bronze is one of the earliest and greatest creative achievements in Chinese art and due
to the texture of the material it has been the most successfully preserved. We have tried
in this collection to include specimens of most types in the now accepted periods. However,
as excavations go on, far more ancient bronzes may be discovered, as those found so far
have shown the caster’s skill in an advanced stage. Also dating may be changed as great
ritual services, treasures and gifts to Emperors and high ranking individuals, protected by
the earth for centuries, are little by little coming to light to tell their silent story.
The dating of the bronzes, even with the dynastical cycles, is still rather vague, but we
are trying here with the best of our knowledge to classify each vessel tentatively, according
to the inscriptions or style of design and shape, into what we consider the four most com-
prehensive periods following the evolution of the metal craftsmanship, then follows a
selection of Buddhistic objects of the best period, while avoiding all bronze that is purely
decorative or of late periods.


1. BRONZE VASE (hu)
Undecorated at top, the shoulder is encircled
by a band of conventionalized dragons below
which are two bands of geometric designs in tri-
angles and scrolls. Green patina with reddish
splashes.
Shang, 15th to 12th B.C. H. 7/2 ins.
2. BRONZE VESSEL WITH COVER (I)
In the form of a house with flanges at the cor-
ners and center, decorated with t’ao t’ieh masks
on the sides and cover and a band of dragon
motif at base and rim. Green patina. Typical
of bronzes from the Shang Capital at Anyang.
Shang, 15th to 12th B.C. H. 9 ins.
3. BRONZE FOOD VESSEL (ting)
Resting on three undecorated legs, the body is
decorated with a strong mask design against a
meander pattern background with six flanges
interrupting the design. Inscribed.
Shang, 15th to 12th B.C. H. with handles 7J/2 ins.
4. BRONZE VESSEL (tsun)
Large squat body with flaring mouth, all over
decoration of t’ao t’ieh masks interrupted by
three flanges, three high relief heads decorate the
shoulder while a snake design terminated by a
conventionalized cicada band encircles the under
part of the lip. Traces of inscription not deciph-
erable. Green patina.
Late Shang, 15th to 12th B.C. H. 9 ins.
5. BRONZE FOOD VESSEL (kuei)
The base is encircled by a bird-like design with
tiger masks, surmounted by a band of birds with
turned heads and triangle cicada designs encirc-
ling the rim. The two handles are covered with
dragon scale motif and finishes with a ram’s
head in high relief at the top of the handle. Tur-
quoise green patina. This type of squat round
body seems to dominate the earliest group. In-
scribed.
Late Shang, 15th to 12th B.C. H. 4)4 ins*
6. SMALL BRONZE JAR WITH COVER
(chih)
Decoration of t’ao t’ieh masks in high relief
encircle the center of the body, flanked by an up-
per and lower band of dragons or birds (Karl-
gren’s “beaked dragon”) with turned heads,
above at the neck is a band of so-called conven-
tionalized cicadas. The cover carries a decoration
of t’ao t’ieh masks terminated by a knob in the
form of a whorl wheel. Turquoise patina.
Late Shang, 15th to 12th B.C. H. 634 ins.
7. BRONZE VESSEL (chia)
Resting on four legs, the body on the lower
part shows the t’ao t’ieh masks on all sides, above
encircling the entire vessel is the dragon motif
terminated by a palm leaf conventionalized ci-
cada design. The two handles are surmounted by
square knobs with roof-like tops decorated with
the cicada triangle and the handle on the body
is attached by a ram’s head. Light green patina.
Late Shang, 15th to 12th Century B.C. Inscribed.
Height inches.
8. BRONZE FOOD VESSEL WITH COVER
(kuang)
In the form of an animal with long neck and
standing on three round undecorated legs. The
lower part of the vessel is plain with an elon-
gated conventionalized bird decoration encirc-
ling the top. The cover’s spout is designed in the
form of a dragon with elongated curled body and
uplifted horns and open mouth showing teeth.
Smooth yellowish green patina. Inscribed.
Late Shang, 15th to 12th B.C. H. ins.
9. BRONZE VESSEL WITH COVER (tou)
Resting on three legs terminated by a mask,
the body and cover are decorated with horizontal
grooves and a conventionalized dragon band in
high relief around the rim. Cover removes to form
a receptacle. Conventionalized dragon head
handles. Greyish green patina. Inscribed.
Middle Chou, Bth to 6th B.C. H. 9 ins.
10. BRONZE FOOD STEAMER (hsien)
Standing on three plain legs which are term-
inated by three bulbus animal masks. The body
of the steamer is decorated with stylized cicadas
forming a huge leaf-like pattern and encircling
the rim is a mask design of a dragon. Two upright
rope handles. Grey, green and blue patina. Picto-
graph inscription.
Shang, 15th to 12th B.C. H. ins.
11. WINE VESSEL WITH COVER (yu)
Four flanges around body decorated in the
center with large bold t’ao t’ieh masks and en-
circled at the top and bottom by elongated dragons
and two ram heads in relief on the upper band.
The flanges and design are repeated on the cover
which is terminated by four masked knobs. The
handle is attached by two ram heads in high re-
lief. Smooth olive green patina. Inscribed.
Early Chou, 1 ith to 9th B.C.
H. with handle 15 ins.
12. BRONZE FOOD VESSEL (kuei)
Resting on four legs resembling the hoof of
an animal and terminated by a ram’s mask. The
lower part of the vessel is encircled by a band
showing t’ao t’ieh mask and around the center
triangles of the meander pattern holding centers
of bosses. Two handles are formed by animal
heads. Light greenish patina. Inscribed.
Early Chou, 1 ith to 9th B.C. H. *]/ 2 ins.




13. BRONZE FOOD VESSEL (kuei)
The lower part of the vessel is encircled by a
band of elongated birds surmounted by a band
of triangles of the meander pattern holding
centers of plain bosses and terminated at the
top by a conventionalized mask design and two
ram’s heads in relief. Two handles are formed
by animal heads. Light greenish patina.
Early Chou, 1 ith to 9th B.C. H. 6/4 ins.
14. LARGE FOOD VESSEL (kuei)
Resting on four high legs with animal’s hoof
and terminated by a dragon’s head. The vessel
is undecorated except for a band at base and top
of the meander pattern.
Early Chou, 1 ith to 9th B.C. Inscribed. H. 9 ins.
15. BRONZE FOOD VESSEL (kuei)
Round fluted body encircled at the top by a
band containing ram’s head at center front and
back, and whorl wheel in relief against a con-
ventionalized dragon background, the base is en-
circled by whorl wheels and a floral motif. The
two handles emanate from the heads of deer-like
animals each having two short horns. Green pa-
tina. Pictograph inscription.
Late Shang, 15th to 12th B.C. H. 6 ins.
16. FOOD VESSEL (kuei)
Resting on a low round base with turning drag-
ons, above which is a diamond-like pattern with
a lozenge patterned field centered by bosses, en-
circling the rim is a conventionalized dragon
band interrupted by three dragon heads and three
flanges in relief. Greyish green patina.
Late Shang, 15th to 12th Century B.C. Picto-
graph inscription. Height 7 inches.
17. WINE VESSEL (hu)
Resting on three legs with decoration of bovine
t’ao t’ieh masks on the body and terminated by
a band of conventionalized dragons near the rim.
The spout is decorated with a conventionalized
cicada while the cover holds a finely designed
curled dragon on a meander pattern background.
The cover is attached to the body by a movable
chain cast into an animal head handle on the
body. Inscribed.
Late Shang, 15th to 12th B.C. H. ins.
18. FOOD VESSEL (kuei)
Resting on a low round base decorated with
turning dragons, above which is a diamond-like
pattern with a lozenge patterned field centered
by bosses, around the rim is a conventionalized
dragon band interrupted by three flanges and
three dragon heads in relief. Dark green patina.
Late Shang, 15th to 12th Century B.C. Picto-
graph inscription. Height 7 inches.
19. BRONZE FOOD VESSEL (ting)
Resting on three legs showing conventionalized
cicada decoration, the body is decorated with a
strong mask terminated by a dragon band at the
rim, all against a meander pattern background
with six flanges interrupting the design. Designs
filled with a black composition. Two plain
handles. Repaired.
Shang, 15th to 12th Century B.C. Pictograph in-
scription. Height to rim 7% inches.
20. BRONZE FOOD VESSEL (ting)
Resting on three legs terminated by a t’ao t’ieh
mask. The body of the vase is decorated by a
strong mask against a clear meander pattern
background, the rim is encircled by a band of
dragons while the two handles on the top carry
the same design highly conventionalized. Smooth
olive green patina.
Late Shang, 15th to 12th Century B.C. Inscribed.
Height with handles 7 /i inches.
21. BRONZE FOOD VESSEL (ting)
Resting on three plain legs the lower part of
the body undecorated. Encircling the rim is a
band of finely executed masks interrupted by
whorl wheels below which is a conventionalized
cicada design forming a fringe. Silver and green
patina.
Late Shang, 15th to 12th Century B.C. Inscribed.
Height to rim 5% inches.
22. BRONZE JAR (tsun)
Large squat body with flaring mouth, all over
decoration of t’ao t’ieh masks interrupted by
three large flanges, three high relief ram’s heads
decorate the shoulder while a snake band ter-
minated by a conventionalized cicada band en-
circle the upper part of the lip. Green patina.
Shang, 15th to 12th Century B.C. Inscribed.
Height inches.
23. BRONZE FOOD VESSEL (ting)
Resting on three legs terminated by strong
bovine masks. The body of the vase is decorated
with a geometric design of plain wide lines against
a meander pattern background and encircled at
the top by a line of conventionalized animals
(Karlgren’s “beaked dragon”). Two rope-like
handles appear on the rim. Light bluish green
patina.
Shang, 15th to 12th Century B.C. Inscribed.
Height to rim 11 inches.
24. LARGE BRONZE JAR (tsun)
Square body with flaring lip, the vase is built
in three sections. The lower and center parts of
the vase are decorated with t’ao t’ieh masks in-
terrupted by eight flanges at the corners and sides,
while the flaring upper part is decorated with ci-
cadas forming a long leaf-like motif. On the
shoulder are masks and birds in high relief.
Light green patina.
Shang, 15th to 12th B.C. Height 15 inches.




25. BRONZE WINE VESSEL (tsun)
The vessel is undecorated except for a narrow
band design at the base and a band of small
panels containing a highly conventionalized bird
design encircling the center. To one side is at-
tached a handle representing an animal swallow-
ing a snake. Black and green mottled patina.
Early Chou 1 ith to 9th Gentry B.C. Inscribed.
Height 794 inches.
26. BRONZE FOOD VESSEL (kuei)
Resting on a low base with raised lines the
body is decorated with a beautifully modeled,
clear cut mask surmounted by encircling raised
lines. Two handles representing an animal swal-
lowing a snake. Light smooth turquoise patina.
Early Chou, nth to 9th Century B. C. Picto-
graph inscription. Height 7 inches.
27. BRONZE WINE VESSEL (tsun)
With flaring lip and slightly flaring base the
vessel is undecorated except for a strong bovine
mask design encircling the center. Light green
patina.
Late Shang, 15th to 12th Century B.C.
Height 9/2 inches.
28. WINE VESSEL WITH COVER (yu)
Resting on a low foot encircled by lines the
cover and the body of the vessel are without dec-
oration except for a band of conventionalized
dragons against a meander pattern background
and two animal masks on the band on the body.
Attached to the vessel by two horned animal
heads is a handle decorated with a dragon-like
animal with elongated plain body. Black-silver
patina spotted with red.
Shang, 15th to 12th Century B.C. Inscribed.
Height with handle g/ 2 inches.
29. BRONZE VESSEL (ku)
Resting on a low plain foot and decorated
around the base and center with four flanges and
masks against a meander background. Under the
flaring lip at the lower part appear a circle of
large eyed serpents surmounted by a long palm
leaf design in the meander pattern. Light green
patina.
Shang, 15th to 12th Century B.C. Pictograph
inscription. Height 12% inches.
30. WINE VESSEL WITH COVER (yu)
Resting on a low foot encircled by lines, the
body of the vase shows a bovine mask surmounted
by a band with masks and an animal head. The
cover is encircled by a band of oblong masks and
attached to the vase is a handle which repeats
the decoration on the cover. Mottled blue and
green patina.
Late Shang, 15th to 12th Century B.C. Picto-
graph inscription. Height with handle 834 ins.
31. BRONZE FOOD VESSEL (square ting)
Resting on four legs which are decorated with
masks at the top, the body of the vessel is flanged
at four corners, on each side appears a blank
panel which is bordered at the top with conven-
tionalized animal and whorl wheel band while
the remaining sides are framed by bosses. Two
plain handles appear on the rim.
Shang, 15th to 12th Century B.C. Inscribed.
Height with handles 8% inches.
32. BRONZE VESSEL WITH COVER (I)
In the form of a house with flanges at corners
and center, decorated with t’ao t’ieh masks on
the sides and cover and a band of dragon motifs
at the base and rim all against a meander pat-
tern background. Green patina. Typical of the
bronzes from the Shang Capital at Anyang.
Shang, 15th to 12th Century B.C. Inscribed.
Height 11 / 2 inches.
33. BRONZE FOOD VESSEL (square ting)
Resting on four legs which are decorated at
the top with bovine masks, the body of the vessel
is flanged at the four corners, on each side ap-
pears a blank panel which is bordered at the top
by a double bodied snake while the remaining
sides are framed by pointed bosses. Two handles
appear on the rim.
Shang, 15th to 12th Century B.C. Pictograph
inscription. Height with handles 9/2 inches.
34. BRONZE WINE VESSEL (tsun)
The lower part of the vessel is encircled by a
conventionalized bird design interrupted by four
flanges above which is a mask and a continuation
of the flanges, the upper part of the body is un-
decorated. Light green smooth patina.
Early Chou, 1 ith to 9th Century B.C.
Height 11 3/4. inches.
35. WINE VESSEL WITH COVER (hu)
Bulbus body narrowing at the neck around
which is a t’ao t’ieh mask design, the balance of
the vessel is undecorated except for a snake
handle which starts at the center of the body.
Rough green patina.
Late Shang, 15th to 12th Century B.C.
Height 12 *4 inches.
36. BRONZE WINE VESSEL (tsun)
Two bands of conventionalized animals form-
ing a mask surround the body while the upper
part of the vessel remains undecorated. Light
green patina.
Early Chou 1 ith to 9th Century B.C. Inscribed.
* Height 11 inches.




37. WINE BEAKER (tsun)
With four flanges decorated around the base
with a fantastic bird-like animal, the center reg-
ister with conventionalized dragons in high relief
surmounted by a band showing bird-like design
and terminated at the top by a t’ao t’ieh mask
(turned upward toward the lip) arranged in a
leaf design. Smooth brown patina.
Early Chou, 11th to 9th B.C. Height 11 inches.
38. BRONZE LIBATION CUP (chueh)
Resting on three slender legs and decorated
around the center with a conventionalized mask
design with a meander pattern background, the
meander pattern forms a palmation leaf on the
under lip.
Early Chou, 1 ith to 9th B. C. H. 8)4 ins.
39. BRONZE WINE VESSEL (tsun)
The body is undecorated except for a narrow
central band of conventionalized dragons with
turned heads which is interrupted by two relief
heads of a bovine. Black silver patina with green-
ish spots. Pictograph inscription.
Early Chou, 1 ith to pthß. C. Height 7% ins.
40. BRONZE FOOD VESSEL (Four handled
I or kuei)
Conventionalized dragon masks decorated the
whole body, interrupted by a whorl wheel design
on the upper band. Four vigorously formed bo-
vine heads swallowing a bird form the handles.
Light green patina.
Early Chou, 11th to 9th Century B.C. Picto-
graph inscription. Height 5 inches.
41. FOOD VESSEL (chia)
Resting on three legs delicately decorated with
conventionalized masks in the meander pattern.
The same motive encircles the body which is
terminated at the rim by a band of convention-
alized dragons topped by cicada with background
of the meander pattern.
The cover is encircled by a stylized dragon band
in the center of which are two standing birds
forming the handle. Two knobs form handles on
the rim while an animal head forms the handle
on the body. Green patina.
Shang, 15th to 12th Century B.C. Pictograph
inscription. Height 11 inches.
42. FOOD VESSEL (kuei)
Decorated with two confronted animals (ele-
phants?) on the body banded by dragon motifs
at the base, flanges are cast in the front and back
and on either side are two handles in the form
of an animal swallowing a bird. Silver patina.
Late Shang, 15th to 12th Century B.C. Picto-
graph inscription. Height 6 inches.
43. SACRIFICIAL VESSEL (hu)
The entire body entirely covered with bands
of huge t’ao t’ieh masks separated by bands of
conventionalized dragons on the meander pat-
tern background. A flange appears at front and
back and on the shoulder two animal heads in
high relief. Turquoise patina.
Shang, 15th to 12th Century B.C. Inscribed.
Height 15 1 / 2 inches.
44. WINE BEAKER (ku)
With flanges on four sides and decorated
around the base with dragons confronted to form
t’ao t’ieh masks bordered by dragon motives.
Around the center the design is repeated and
the top has a decoration of stylized cicadas form-
ing a leaf-life pattern. Black patina.
Shang, 15th to 12th Century B.C. Inscribed.
Height 10 inches.
45. BRONZE WINE BEAKER (tsun)
Resting on a square base decorated with a
finely cast band of meander pattern, the entire
vase is undecorated except for a narrow band of
dragon masks around the center and four plain
flanges. Smooth light green patina.
Early Chou, 1 ith to 9th Century B.C. Pictograph
inscription. Height 7)4 inches.
46. BRONZE FOOD VESSEL WITH
COVER (ting)
Standing on four legs decorated with a cidada
design, the lower part of the body is decorated
with a mask against a meander background bor-
dered at the top by a conventionalized animal
forming the mask which is interrupted by light
flanges in high relief. The cover is undecorated
except for a high relief ornament which forms
legs when the cover is used for a receptacle. Green
patina. Inscribed.
Shang, 15th to 12th B.C. Height 14/2 inches.
47. BRONZE FOOD VESSEL (ting)
Resting on three plain legs and holding two
plain handles on the rim. The body is decorated
with strong bovine conventionalized masks di-
vided by flanges which are bordered by a band
of cicadas near the rim. Green patina.
Late Shang, 15th to 12th Century B.C.
Height with handles 7% inches.
48. BRONZE FOOD VESSEL (kuei)
Resting on a square base the sides of which
have an oblong decoration of raised lines and at
each corner on the top a cicada in relief. Encirc-
ling the body at the lower part are raised lines
above which is a band containing whorl wheels
and terminated by a band of conventionalized
petal design. Two cords or fluted handles match
a long fluted spoon. (Spoon recently added).
Greyish green patina showing traces of blue.
Early Chou, 11th to 9th Century B.C. Picto-
graph inscription. Height 9 inches.




49. COVERED FOOD VESSEL (tou)
Resting on a high slender flaring foot the body
and cover is encircled by a band of a basket weave
motif terminated on either side by a mask design
in a leaf-like pattern forming a fringe effect.
Decorating the dish-like handle on the cover is
a design of dots and scrolls, possibly a conven-
tionalized dragon. The cover removes to form a
receptacle. Two ring handles with a snake design
and inlaid with turquoise are attached to the
vessel. Dark green and brown patina.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Height inches.
50. BRONZE LIBATION CUP AND TRAY
A tray resting on three legs supports two birds
with outstretched wings and claws firmly grasp-
ing the tray in order to firmly support a libation
cup resting on its head. Its closed bill holds a
movable ring. Rough dark greenish patina.
Han, 206 B.C. - 221 A.D. Height SJ/2 inches.
51. BRONZE VESSEL (hu)
Resting on a low foot the base and body of the
vase is encircled by bands showing a convention-
alized serpent arranged into a triangle and bor-
dered by a scroll design. The neck of the vessel is
decorated with a conventionalized serpent in a
high leaf-like motive. Two movable rings attached
by masks are on the shoulder. Greyish green
patina.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd B.C. H. 12 ins.
52. BRONZE FOOD VESSEL WITH
COVER (tou)
Resting on a low foot encircled by a band of
walking animals (Karlgren’s “beaked dragon”)
which design is repeated on the cover and the
lip of the body of the vase. The central part of
the body is fluted while the form of the two
handles is an animal’s head swallowing a snake.
The cover removes to form a receptacle. Black
and green patina. Inscribed.
Late Shang, 15th to 12th B.C. H. 8 ins.
53. LARGE BRONZE WINE VESSEL (hu)
Rather squat body resting on a slightly flaring
base which is decorated with a highly conven-
tionalized bird motive. The lower part of the
body containing four panels holds highly conven-
tionalized dragons against a meander pattern
background while the upper part of the vase
holds undecorated panels, all of which are
framed with a geometric wide line design. Around
the lip of the vase a beautifully cast design of
a conventionalized dragon and attached at the
lower part of this decoration is an animal’s head
with curled nose and short horns in high relief
holding rope rings. Mottled green patina.
Middle Chou, Bth to 6th Century B.C.
Height 14 inches.
54. BRONZE FOOD VESSEL WITH
COVER (ting)
Resting on three squat legs the entire vessel and
cover is encircled by a band of small panels hold-
ing fishes which is completed on the top of the
cover by a round scroll medallion in the meander
pattern. Two handles are attached to the body
while three loop handles are on the cover, form
legs when used as a receptacle. Greyish patina
splashed with green and turquoise.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Height BJ/2 inches.
55. PAIR OF SMALL BRONZE JARS WITH
COVER (hu)
Resting on a plain slightly flaring base, the vase
is decorated with one wide band holding t’ao
t’ieh masks which is bordered at the top by a
band of whorl wheels against a meander pat-
tern. The cover carries the same pattern and is
terminated by a small animal in the form of a
ring. Green patina with reddish splashes.
Early Chou, 1 ith to 9th Century B.C. Inscribed.
Height 6 inches.
56. BRONZE WINE POT
Three short legs terminated by a mask holds
a plain bulbus body with short spout terminated
by a dragon’s head. The plain cover holds as the
handle a reclining deer which is attached by a
chain to a savage looking dragon with head
turned over his back. Dark green patina.
Han, 206 B.C. -221 A.D. Height 6% inches.
57. PAIR OF COVERED VASES (hu)
Rectangular and ovoid in form with slightly
flaring base. The entire vase is decorated with
panels showing masks framed with a plain broad
line, the design on the neck becomes a high tri-
angle holding the same mask design. Movable
rings with an animal motive are held to the vase
on its four sides with low relief animal masks. The
cover is ornamented with four phoenix, their
long tails touching their heads which form the
handles for the cover.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd B. C. H. 19 ins.
58. BRONZE VESSEL (hu)
Resting on a foot decorated with geometric
designs, the body is decorated with eight bands.
The band at the top depicts a snake about to be
swallowed by a bird followed by a band of scroll
designs. Two bands of hunting scenes encircle the
shoulder which is again interrupted by the scroll
design. The three lower bands show hunting
scenes with humans, demons and fantastic ani-
mals. Attached to the shoulder are two movable
rings. Greyish green patina.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd B.C. Height 15 inches.




59. FOOD VESSEL WITH COVER (tou)
Resting of a flaring stem-like base of openwork
interlaced serpents, the body is encircled by bands
of minute abstract scrolls. The removable cover
is terminated by an openwork interlaced serpent
design matching the base and the abstract scrolls
design is also repeated on the cover.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Height 734 inches.
60. BRONZE VASE (hu)
Decorated with three bands of curled, stylized
birds in silver inlay separated by plain gilt bands.
Two masks holding rings. Found in Chin T’sun.
Late Chou, 6th or sth Century B.C.
Height 5 inches.
61. STEM CUP
In the form of a lotus flower in repousse, each
petal decorated with a bird amongst flowers. Gilt
bronze with green patina.
Tang, 618 - 906 A.D. Height 2 inches.
62. VASE AND COVER (hu)
Decorated with nine bands of fantastic tigers,
dragons and birds which are inlaid in copper
plate on a white metal. Two animal head masks
holding movable rings form handles. Large parts
are covered with a rough green patina.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Height 22 inches.
63. BRONZE FOOD VESSEL (tou)
An egg shaped vessel on three legs. The lower
part of the body is plain while the upper part is
decorated with abstract motives inlaid with gold
and silver and four t’ao t’ieh masks holding mov-
able ring handles in relief. The cover removes to
form a receptacle. Brown patina. Found in
Loyang.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Height inches.
64. STEM CUP
Resting on a low foot and decorated all over
with a chased design of hunting scenes and
flowers on a grained background. Gilt bronze.
Tang, 618 - 906 A.D. Height 2/2 inches.
65. WINE VESSEL (hu)
The entire vessel is encircled by three bands
decorated with an abstract pattern inlaid with
silver and separated by two plain bands which
have been coated with a vivid green patina. The
neck carries a geometric design which terminates
with a gold inlay at the lip. Two silver animal
masks hold movable ring handles on the shoulder.
Found in Chin Ts’un.
Late Chou, 6th or sth Century B.C.
Height inches.
66. UNIDENTIFIED OBJECT
Decoration of abstract motives inlaid with gold
and silver. Tentatively considered to be part of a
cross-bow set and also a reconstructed Royal
loom. Hooked ferrules which fit into tubes may
well be considered butt projectiles. Found in
Chin Ts’un.
Late Chou, 6th or sth Century B.C.
Height 18 inches.
67. GILT BRONZE HALO
Open-work flame design in gilt bronze in the
lower center of which is set a small painting of a
monk behind a round crystal.
Tang 618 - 906 A.D. Height 6inches.
68. COVERED BRONZE VASE (hu)
Rectangular ovoid form with all over decora-
tion of lozenges centered by gold bosses against a
geometric background which was probably origin-
ally inlaid with turquoise or malachite. The mo-
tives on the lozenges have been filled with copper
nielle. Two masks holding movable rings orna-
ment the shoulders. Greyish green patina.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Height ig/2 inches.
69. BRONZE WATER BUFFALO
Standing figure of a water buffalo with a long
squat body. The body if decorated with a lined
scroll design. The horns lie flat against its head
and its square stupid face seems to smile.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Length 9 inches.
70. PAIR OF BRONZE VASES (hu)
Resting on a low foot decorated with a geo-
metric pattern, the vase is encircled by four bands
of scroll designs (probably the elephant motive)
and three bands with conventional dragons alter-
nating with six bands without decoration, the
decoration near the base is terminated by a mask-
like design forming a fringe. Four movable rings
held by upturned masks decorate the neck while
two vigorous masks holding movable rings dec-
orate the shoulder. Green, blue and brown patina.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Height 18 inches.




71. BRONZE FINIAL
Standing figure of a hunter holding in one
hand a long staff topped by a falcon while the
other hand holds a net at arms length. Around
the waist is a tight belt and the hair is tied in
the back at the shoulder. With stand. Green
patina.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Height without stand 7 inches.
72. BRONZE FIGURE
Kneeling figure of an attendant in Mongolian
dress. Wearing a plain dress with a flat hat tied
under chin, he holds in his strong square hands
a round receptacle as an offering. Rough green
patina. From the Eumorfopoulos Collection.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Height 11 /-x inches.
73. BRONZE FIGURE
Dancing figure of a boy on a frog. His smiling
face turned toward the right, his left leg kicking
backwards and his two arms raised giving the feel-
ing of rhythm. With wood stand.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Height without stand 4 inches.
74. BRONZE WINE VESSEL (tsun)
In the form of a phaesant with horn-like crest
and tail turned down to form a back support.
Finally cast designs of wings and feathers cover
all but the neck where the inscription appears.
Green and brown patina.
Early Chou, nth to 9th Century B.C. Picto-
graph inscription. Height inches.
75. BRONZE WINE VESSEL (tsun)
In the form of a goose with long neck and up-
turned bill. The body is undecorated except for
a feathery decoration on the tail and a slight
eyebrow effect over the eye. The handle is at-
tached to the body by two tigers, one of which
rests his paws on the goose’s neck. Green patina.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Height 11 inches.
76. BRONZE INCENSE BURNER
In the form of a phoenix with open-work back
which allows the incense fumes to escape. The
outstretched wings have open-work lines on one
half while the tale is cut with open-work holes in
the form of a feather. A high comb appears on
the top of his head and in his mouth he holds a
grain of food. Brownish green patina.
Hans, 206 B.C. —221 A.D. Height inches.
77. PAIR OF
BRONZE FOOD VESSELS (kuei)
Mounted on a large square base decorated on
all four sides with a low relief wave design. The
body of the vessel repeats this decoration and the
cover is terminated by a flaring open-work
motif of the same feeling. Two large high relief
dragons with ferocious faces and open mouths
extend from two sides. Their strong standing
horns resemble flames and biting their body is a
vigorous tiger. The cover is used as a receptacle.
Light green patina. This kuei is one of the few
types that continues in use throughout all periods
of early Chinese bronze art, square bases, as in
this case, as well as round bases occur, the latter
type usually having three or four feet.
Middle Chou, Bth to 6th Century B.C.
Height inches.
78. BRONZE BELL (chung)
Decorating the bell are eight horizontal car-
touches showing elongated conventionalized
animals, separated by high relief bosses carved
into the form of an owl-like bird, the decoration
at front and back on the base is of a conventional-
ized mask. The handle is formed by an animal
motif.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Height 14% inches.
79. BRONZE BELL (tueh)
Decorating the bell except for four vertical
strips are eight cartouches showing dragons look-
ing backward in profile separated by high relief
cartridge-like bosses without decoration. The
shield at the bottom shows a mask with two bird-
headed dragons with wings biting the horn of
the mask.
The pillar-like handle is encircled by three
plain bands and three bands with S-shaped spiral
designs, terminating in dragon heads in profile,
and supported by an animal in high relief whose
head and fore paws protrude. Green and blue
patina.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd B.C. H. 18 ins,
80. BRONZE BELL (chung)
Decorating the bell are eight horizontal car-
touches holding a low relief conventionalized
bird design separated by high relief bosses re-
sembling whorl wheels, a conventionalized mask
decorates the front and back at the base. The
handle is formed by two finely decorated and
cast dragons with heads turned over their backs.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Height 11 /% inches.




81. BRONZE DAGGER
High relief animal mask with uplifted horns
forms the guard, the handle carries a deep in-
scription. Green patina. Found in Anyang.
Shang, 15th to 12th Century B.C.
Length inches.
82. BRONZE HALBERD (ko)
Undecorated except for a floral-like decoration
£ that seems to be an inscription. Silver, green and
blue patina.
Shang, 15th to 12th Century B.C.
Length BJ/0 inches.
83. BRONZE DAGGER
A bird, the body of which is formed by a t’ao
t’ieh mask with turquoise eyes, and the tail a con-
ventionalized dragon, decorates the blade while
the head of the bird in relief forms the guard.
The handle has an oblong plaque design which is
also studded with turquoise. Green patina.
Early Chou, 11th to 9th Century B.C.
Length 9/2 inches.
84. BRONZE DAGGER
A short curved handle is cast with a bird de-
sign with long raised tail and a high crest. Green
patina.
Shang, 15th to 12th Century B.C.
Length 10/2 inches.
85. BRONZE DAGGER AXE
Decorated across the blade at the top with a
t’ao t’ieh mask. Rough green patina.
Shang, 15th to 12th Century B.C.
Length inches.
86. BRONZE DAGGER AXE
A plaque-like indentation ornaments the blade
which is decorated at the top with whorl wheels
bordered by three conventionalized cicades.
Rough green and brown patina.
Shang, 15th to 12th Century B.C.
Length 7/2 inches.
87. BRONZE SPEAR HEAD AND HANDLE
With bevelled edge and undecorated except
for a raised line down the center of the blade.
The spear is held by a handle with a raised cord
encircling one end, the other with a deep three
lined gash. Light green mottled patina.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Length 5/2 inches.
88. BRONZE HALBERD (ko)
With bevelled edge and without decoration.
Green patina splashed with brown.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.G.
Length 15 inches.
89. BRONZE HALBERD (ko)
With bevelled edge becoming wide near the
handle and a saw edge finishing the end of the
blade. Olive green patina.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Length 9% inches.
90. BRONZE HALBERD (ko)
The blade and handle with an open-work de-
sign of intertwined snakes, birds and dragons and
surmounted on the top with a small squat animal
with turned up snub face and a long heavy tail.
Green patina.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Length 6 inches.
91. BRONZE HALBERD (ko)
Undecorated except for a bovine head sunk
into the unsharpened end. Green patina.
Early Chou, 1 ith to 9th Century B.C.
Length inches.
92. BRONZE SPEAR HEAD
Undecorated except for a raised groove down
the center and a small ring handle. Rough green
patina.
Shang, 15th to 12th Century B.C.
Length 10 inches.
93. DAGGER AXE IN BRONZE AND JADE
Jade blade decomposed to brown and pale
green mounted with a bronze handle decorated
with dragon and t’ao t’ieh masks. Rough green
patina. Found in Anyang.
Shang, 15th to 12th Century B.C.
Length 8 inches.
94. BRONZE KNIFE
The handle decorated with relief lines of
bosses. Rough green patina.
Shang, 15th to 12th Century B.C.
Length gj/4 inches.
95. BRONZE SPEAR HEAD
The handle is plain except for a band holding
a slightly raised ring handle. Down the center of
the spear the knife has a wide line in relief.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Length 11 ]/i inches.




96. BRONZE SPATULA
Undecorated blade with a scroll hilt, the
handle of the knife in the form of a snake with
open-work designs which were originally inlaid
with turquoise. The mouth of the snake is open
and from which protrudes a movable tongue or
fangs. Green patina. Lrom the Ordos Region.
Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D, Length 12% inches.
97. BRONZE DAGGER
Curved blade with a dragon handle. The
dragon’s neck has a diagonal line decoration
down either side of a long open-work slit. The
mouth is slightly open and over his two horns
and under his mouth is a loop. Green patina.
From the Ordos Region.
Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A, D, Length 12 ins.
98. BRONZE DAGGER
Plain blade except for a short raised line which
represents the knife blade of a sword whose mask
handle forms the hilt of this knife. Handle with
a rope-like design studded with dots and termin-
ated by two conventionalized tigers facing one
another. Green patina. From the Ordos Region.
Han, 206 B.C. 221 A.D. Length ioj4 inches.
99. BRONZE SCALE
Knife-like instrument in the form of a long
dragon on whose back has been attached six
loops. Dark green patina. From the Ordos
Region.
Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D. Length 11 inches.
100. BRONZE SPATULA
Plain knife-like plaque terminated by two
heads with grotesque faces, large round mouths,
hugh round eyes and a high headdress dotted
with beads. Green patina. From the Ordos
Region.
Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D. Length 7/2 inches.
101. SWORD
Iron blade terminated by a mask-shaped guard
studded with small rosettes. The handle is
wrapped with a silver braid topped by a disc of
white jade encircled by a gold band holding
raised lines.
Early Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D.
Length 22J/4 inches.
102. BRONZE SWORD
The guard in the form of a mask is undecorated
above which the plain hilt has two rings and the
top flares into a concave disc. Dark green smooth
patina.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Length 20 inches.
103. LONG BRONZE SWORD
Plain blade with white decade jade guard
beautifully carved with a bovine mask. The hilt
is terminated by a white jade ornament with
raised spiral designs, partly disintegrated.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Length inches.
104. BRONZE SWORD
The guard is inlaid with a bird’s head motif of
turquoise and two raised rings with a scroll snake-
like design around the hilt. In two rows down the
entire blade is an inscription of pictographic
“toad” characters inlaid with turquoise. Pound
at the border of Anhwei and Kiangsu.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Length 19/2 inches.
105. IRON SWORD
Decayed iron blade with a chicken bone jade
guard, beautifully carved with a curled dragon in
relief, the jade hilt top decorated with a whorl
wheel in the center surrounded by raised spirals.
Together with this object are two jades,
original ornaments on the sheath. Both of chicken
bone jade, one is decorated with a powerful drag-
on in high relief and was mounted in the center
to which cords and tassels were attached. The
other decorated with a low relief mask design,
terminates the end of the sheath.
Late Chou. Length of sword 17/2 inches.




106. BRONZE PLAQUE
A standing lion is attacking a small animal,
little decoration except for his paws which show
all the claws. Silvered bronze. From the Ordos
Region,
Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D, Length 4 inches.
107. BRONZE ORNAMENT
An elongated horse with head lowered and the
back, hoofs and tail slightly upturned form the
base of two horses standing back to back. Both
with long tails and short manes, they stand peace-
fully without harness. From the Ordos Region.
Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D. Length 6 inches.
108. BRONZE PLAQUE
Depicting two animals fighting, both are
standing while one bites into his foe’s neck the
other attempts to bite off his enemy’s leg. Green
patina. From the Ordos Region.
Han, 206 B.C. to 22 1 A.D. Length inches.
109. BRONZE PLAQUE
Depicting a frog surrounded by four snakes.
Brown and green patina. From the Ordos Region.
Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D. Length 3 inches.
no. BRONZE APPLIQUE
Flat standing figure of a tiger with head in
the round. His tail is curled over his back and
the entire body is grooved in curves to form the
hair. Underneath his body can be seen the casting
of a leaping deer. From the Ordos Region. Green
patina.
Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D. Height 3/2 inches,
in.BRONZE PLAQUE
A round frame encircles the head of a bear
who holds in his mouth an elongated double
headed bird. Silver and brown patina. From the
Ordos Region.
Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D. Height 3 inches.
112. BRONZE PLAQUE
In the form of a half crouched lion with pierced
holes through the metal to represent the ears,
eyes, nose and claws. Green patina. Found in
Yu-ling-fu.
Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D. Length 4J/4 inches.
113. BRONZE PLAQUE
Oblong in shape showing two animals fighting,
one with his forepaws about the others foreleg
and stomach bites vigorously at his neck while the
other retaliates by trying to gnaw away his fore-
paw. Brown patina. From the Ordos Region.
Han, 206-221 A.D. Length inches.
114. BRONZE PLAQUE
In the form of a standing lion, his claws are
formed by pierced holes as is his eye and slits are
made over the entire body giving the feeling of
the hair. Green bronze. From the Ordos Region.
Han, 206-221 A.D. Height 2j4 inches.
115. BRONZE PLAQUE
Depicting a heavy black bear with a rosette for
an ear about to eat the head of an animal on
whose body he stands. Brown patina. Found in
Yu-ling-fu.
Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D.
116. BRONZE PLAQUE
Depicting two long horned animals facing each
other with perforated holes completing the open-
work. Green patina. Found in Yu-lingfu.
Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D. Length inches.
117. BRONZE PLAQUE
Depicting a much ornamented tiger with
scrolls and small dots attacking a deer, between
the fore and rear legs is another animal which has
evidently already been killed. Green patina. From
the Ordos Region.
Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D. Length 4*4 inches.
118. BRONZE PLAQUE
Open-work design of a floral and petal motif.
Brown patina. From the Ordos Region.
Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D. Length 4 inches.
119. BRONZE PLAQUE
Depicting an open-work plaque of a huge eagle
with enormous wings biting the neck of a lion
who in turn is attacking the bird’s leg. Brown
patina. From Siberia.
Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D. Length inches,
120. BRONZE PLAQUE
Crouched on a low table base are two long
beaked birds each of which holds the foot of an
animal in its beak, between the two birds can be
seen the head of the attacked animal. Brown
patina. From the Ordos Region.
Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D. Length 4 inches.
121. BRONZE PLAQUE
Depicting an open-work design of two camels
face to face with a long cord-like decoration
draped from the mouth to the back legs. Brown
patina. From the Ordos Region.
Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D. Length 4 inches.
122. BRONZE PLAQUE
Depicting in open-work the figure of a stag in
the forest. The mouth is open in an attempt to
bite a small animal which seems to attack his
neck, entirely framed by a cord design border.
Yellowish green patina. Caucasion.
3rd to 1 st Century B.C. 4 inches square.
123. BRONZE PLAQUE
Depicting two standing deer in the forest the
heads turned outward. Brown patina. From Si-
beria. Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D. L. 4J/2 ins.




124. PAIR OF GOLD PLAQUES
Grooved button-like discs with a sunken center
medallion of dark colored glass “revolving eye”
decoration. Found in Chin T’sun. Gilt with green
incrustations.
Late Chou, 6th to sth Century B.C.
Diameter 2/2 inches.
125. MONSTER MASK
Depicting a fierce face with the horns separated
by a floral motif, large ball-like eyes and the
mouth cut into a small square opening. Gilt
bronze with green patina.
Han. 206 B.C. to 221 A.D. Slight restoration.
9 inches square.
126. PAIR OF BRONZE
DOOR KNOCKERS
In the form of a strongly cast t’ao t’ieh mask
the mouth of which is formed into a loop and
holds an undecorated ring. Gilt bronze.
Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D.
Height with ring, 6 inches.
127. BRONZE MASK
Depicting a monster with lips drawn back
showing large square teeth above which horns
protrude from directly above the eye, forelegs
with clawed feet are lifted and bent on either
side. Gilt bronze with green patina.
Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D. Height 4/2 inches.
128. PAIR OF BRONZE
MONSTER MASKS
Depicting a fierce face with flaring nose and
large movable ball eyes encircled by heavy lined
eyebrows, the horns end in a heavy scroll com-
pleting the design. Green patina.
Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D. Height 7/2 inches.
129. BRONZE MONSTER MASK
Depicting the face of an ox, the ears and up-
lifted horns show a cross and lined decoration.
Red patina.
Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D. Height 7 inches.
130. BRONZE MONSTER MASK
Hugh curved open mouth with large round
eyes. Brown and green patina with traces of
mother of pearl inlay on the border. Slight restora-
tion.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Height 9/2 inches.
131. BRONZE DEMON MASK
In two parts each in the form of a curved bird,
the beak is large and curved, the crest low and
down the center of the remaining part is an open-
work line. Green patina.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C. Restored.
Height 9 inches.




132. BRONZE MIRROR
A scroll design encircles the inside decoration
which in clear cut relief shows the two Taoist
Divinities, T’ong Wang K’ong and Si Wang
Muo, intercepted by two chariots drawn by six
prancing horses.
Late Han, 25 A.D. to 221 A.D.
Diameter 8/2 inches.
133. BRONZE MIRROR
A scroll band encircles the edge which is fol-
lowed by a saw-like design bordered by a line of
characters, the center holds a square floral medal-
lion from which protrude four small oblong
handles on either side of which are birds and
animals. Black patina.
Early Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D.
Diameter 5 inches.
134. BRONZE MIRROR
The outer circle contains a cloud design while
the entire inside decoration shows seated Taoist
Divinities, T’ong Wang K’ong and Si Wang Muo
with Princess and messenger boys amid a back-
ground of Taoist symbols, attendants, dancers
acrobats distinctly cast in relief. Characters also
appear which indicate the name of the divinities
while other characters Wang Nie and (?) Shin
Long indicate the word Princess and messenger
boys. Black patina with green splashes.
Late Han, 25 A.D. to 221 A.D. Diameter 8 ins.
135. BRONZE MIRROR
A saw-like design bands a central decoration
of Taoist divinities, a chariot drawn by four horses
and a large vigorous dragon with wide open
mouth. Silver patina splashed with green.
Late Han, 25 A.D. to 221 A.D. Diameter 7 ins.
136. BRONZE MIRROR
In the form of a flat lotus leaf lined with
raised veins.
Tang, 618 - 906 A.D. Diameter 4 inches.
137. BRONZE MIRROR
Encircling the outside is a floral design bor-
dering a wide band of animals and birds among
grapes and leaves, the central band holds reclin-
ing animals while some of them are being at-
tacked by foes. Silver patina.
Tang, 618 - 906 A.D. Diameter 8)4 inches.
138. BRONZE MIRROR
Plain band encircling the outer edge, the entire
back is decorated with a large “T” design inter-
rupted by a floral spray against a spiral back-
ground. Black patina. Broken.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Diameter 6)4 inches.
i 3- SQUARE BRONZE MIRROR
Decoration of four birds seemingly biting a foe
are in open-work backed by the mirror and
framed by a band with an abstract pattern.
Green and silver patina.
Early Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D. 3 inches square.
140. BRONZE MIRROR
Three fantastic and long tailed dragons en-
circle the mirror against a background of geo-
metric designs filled with a tiny grain motif.
Green patina. Repaired.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Diameter 6)4 inches.
14 1. BRONZE MIRROR
Decorated with a quadrufold floral design
against a spiral background. Black and green
patina.
Early Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D.
Diameter 4/ 2 inches.
142. BRONZE MIRROR
Decorated with an all over t’ao t’ieh mask de-
sign. Green, brown and red patina.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Diameter 4% inches.
143. BRONZE MIRROR
Encircled by a plain band at the edge are four
fantastic animals with long curled tails so ex-
ecuted that there is a feeling as though they were
flying, a background of tiny spirals complete the
decoration. Dark green patina. Broken.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Diameter 7)4 inches.
144. BRONZE MIRROR
With a plain border, the inside square holds
an interlaced scrolled design arranged in gold
inlay to form a floral motif. Brown patina. Four
characters at the right upper corner read “T’on
Ao K’wan”. The first two characters are a place
in Shantung Province, the third K’wan means
“official” while the fourth is not distinct enough
to be deciphered.
Early Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D.
5 /<x inches square.
145. BRONZE MIRROR
The inner circle shows an interlocked dragons
design in scrolls which is bordered by a plain
band encircling the edge. Black patina.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Diameter 7)4 inches.




146. BRONZE TALLY OR “Hu Fu”
Sphinx-like figure of a tiger with square mouth,
and crouched on his haunches and forepaws. The
body is decorated with lines and down the back
appears an inscription written on a plain line.
Green patina.
This tally was never used, but was buried with
the dead Emperor before he assumed his throne.
Usually only half of the tally is found as it was
carried by special envoys or military officials to a
destination where the other half of the tally was
sent previously as identification. Inscriptions
have been published in Chinese by Mr. Loh Chen
Yi giving full detail of the history of the tally.
Wei, 386 - 557 A.D. Length 3/2 inches.
147. BRONZE LION
Reclining figure of a lion, beautifully modeled,
he rests with raised head looking slightly to the
right. No vigor is felt in the modeling but the
calm relaxation which is often seen in the cat
family. Dark green and reddish patina.
Late Han, 25 A.D. to 221 A.D.
Height 2 inches.
148. BRONZE BOAR
Standing with her curled tail close to the
body, her long ears drooping and two tusks
practically encircling her long nose. Dark mot-
tled green patina.
Six Dynasties, 222 - 589 A.D.
Height 2j4 inches.
149. BRONZE SLEEVE WEIGHT
Depicting a curled lion on a round base. His
tail is curled on the back and his sorrowful square
mouthed face seems to be appealing for pity.
Green and brown patina.
Late Han, 25 A.D. to 221 A.D. Height 2 inches,
150. BRONZE CANE HANDLE
In the form of a bird with slightly raised long
tail, black patina with a feather decoration over
the entire body of inlaid silver lines.
Western Han, 206 B.C. 25 A.D.
Height 4 inches.
151. BRONZE SLEEVE WEIGHT
Depicting a tiger attacking a bear. The tiger
has his teeth well fastened into the flesh while the
open mouthed bear seems about to be over-
powered. Brown patina appears on the tiger, the
bear inlaid with gold showing the individual
hairs.
Late Han, 25 A.D. to 221 A.D. Height 1 % inches,
152. BRONZE RAM
Standing with his head high, his body is un-
decorated except for a raised surface on his chest
giving the feeling of heavy wool. Green patina.
Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D. Height inches.
153. BRONZE HARNESS ORNAMENT
Decorated on the center shaft with two human
figures stylized to resemble cicadas. From this
central bar come two curved arms on the ends
of which are open-work knobs holding rattles.
Light green patina.
Early Chou, 11 th to 9th Century B.C.
Length 14 inches.
154. BRONZE ANIMAL
Figure of a dog, jauntly walking with long tail
and head on a long neck raised high. Light green
patina.
Six Dynasties, 222-589 A.D. Height 2J/4 inches.
155. CURVED BRONZE APPLIQUE
In the form of a dragon, a teeth-like decoration
borders the inside of the curve, while the entire
body is covered with the meander pattern inter-
rupted by wide plain scrolls. Green patina.
Middle Chou, Bth to 6th Century B.C.
Length 6 inches.
156. IRON HANDLE
Depicting a snake attacking a bird. The tail
of the bird forms one end of the handle while
the other shows the bird being attacked by the
snake, a gold abstract pattern in wide scrolls can
still be plainly seen on the front, while the de-
sign has been entirely erased from the other end.
Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D. Length 7 inches.
157. BRONZE PAPER WEIGHT
A round bronze disc decorated with a dragon
design on which is mounted in high relief a long
nosed animal with long uplifted tail being at-
tacked by a tiger, encircling the body of this at-
tacking animal is a snake.
On the base appears seven characters, Wu
Ying Koo T’an Chiang Tsun Tse, the first two
indicate the cycle date, the three following the
name of the owner and the last two the words
paper weight. Dark green patina.
Late Han, 25 A.D, to 221 A.D. Length 6 inches.




158. GILT BRONZE BELT HOOK
Depicting a dragon with a curled tail swallow-
ing a snake. The back of the dragon is inlaid with
a turquoise band and its eye is a pearl.
Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D. Length 5 inches.
159. GILT BRONZE BUCKLE
Depicting the Spirit of Thunder with a human
face and body of a curled dragon with a deep
striped skin, terminated by a bird hook. Gilt
bronze with green patina.
Han 206 B.C. 221 A.D. Length inches.
160. GILT BRONZE BUCKLE
Depicting a curled dragon biting its own back.
Green patina.
Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D. Length 4% inches.
161. BRONZE BUCKLE
In the form of a bat with spread wings, the
wings and body of the bird set with turquoise.
Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D.
162. GILT BRONZE BUCKLE
Depicting a curled dragon in a scroll-like de-
sign, with open mouth and glass eyes, the body
decorated with a flowing groove and scrolls in
low relief, where the hook connects is a small
serpent’s head.
Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D. Length y/4 inches.
163. GILT BRONZE BUCKLE
In the form of a bird, a triangle forms the
bird’s body from which the wings protrude, three
small turquoise are mounted in the design.
Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D. Length 2/2 inches.
164. SILVER GILT BUCKLE
Open-work design of a knoted cord forming
the intertwined, elongated body of two birds
whose heads appear at one end, finishing the
curve at the other end of the buckle is an aminal
head.
Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D. Length 6/ 2 inches.
165. GILT BRONZE BUCKLE
Depicting a tiger attacking a snake, the snake’s
head forms the end of the buckle while the tiger,
which is inlaid with turquoise, bites his body.
Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D. Length 4 inches.
166. GILT BRONZE BUCKLE
In the form of a serpent the design on the back
being inlaid with turquoise and a large agate
bead.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Length 7 inches.
167. GILT BRONZE BUCKLE
In the form of a serpent whose back is decor-
ated with three birds, their wings inlaid with
turquoise.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Length *]/ 2 inches.
168. GILT BRONZE BUCKLE
A spiral design forming masks with glass eyes
repeats itself in a beautifully executed arrange-
ment on the entire buckle.
Late Chou sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Length 6 inches.
169. GILT BRONZE BUCKLE
Decorated all over with an abstract design of
scrolls and angles done in a wide plain gold line
against a brown patina background.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Length 9/2 inches.
170. BRONZE BUCKLE
The entire buckle is set with panels of jade in
tones from a dark green to a light yellow, each
one of which is carved with a snake-like design
resembling a mask, the rounded end piece is un-
carved. Along both sides of the buckle is a dragon
carved in low relief. Found in Chin T’sun.
Late Chou, 6th to sth Century B.C.
Length 9 inches.
17 1. IRON BUCKLE
Decorated with a repeating decoration of a
square made from a triangle, one side of which
is silver the other gold. The triangle holds in the
center a double scroll with tiny scrolls completing
the design on each side.
Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D. Length ioj/2 inches.
172. INLAID BRONZE BUCKLE
Depicting an all over conventionalized decora-
tion of dragons in wide and narrow gold lines in-
tercepted by a mask-like motive. At both ends of
the design may be seen tiny animal heads, the
lower one showing a part of their bodies.
Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D. Length gj/ 2 inches.
173. INLAID BRONZE BUCKLE
Decorated with a beautifully executed abstract
design in malachite of repeated diamonds and
half diamonds holding circles and scrolls and
terminating at the end in the face of a snake.
Green patina.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Length 8/ 2 inches.
174. INLAID BRONZE BUCKLE
Decorated with a beautifully arranged pattern
in silver inlay of lines,bands and scrolls giving the
effect of a floral motif.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Length 6 inches.




175. PAIR OF GILT BRONZE BEARS
Used as supports the bears are seated on their
haunches with their forepaws resting on their
knees, the open mouth giving a ferocious look to
their faces. Studded with turquoise beads the
body is also chased to depict the hair.
Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D. Height 2)4 inches.
176. BRONZE DRAGON
Standing low on his bent legs he seems to be
crawling away from a foe. His head is turned
back over his left side as though giving challenge
to what may be approaching him. Brown patina
flecked here and there with gold.
Six Dynasties, 221 - 589 A.D. Height 1 3/4 inches.
177. PAIR OF GILT BRONZE BEARS
Used as supports the bears are seated on their
haunches with their forearms lifted to support
their burden. Their finely cast faces seem to have
an expression of resignation rather than strain
under the weight. Gilt bronze showing splashes
of green patina.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Height 2 inches.
178. BRONZE HANDLE
Depicting a tiger attacking a large bird who in
turn is swallowing a snake. Although furiously
attacking the bird with his claws the tiger appears
to be also trying to acquire the snake. Brown
patina with the feathers and hair in gold inlay.
With stand. Chin T’sun.
Late Chou, 6th to sth B.C. Height 3)4 inches.
Published by Dr. Anderson, Stockholm.
179. GILT BRONZE PHOENIX
Standing with head raised high, the open-work
wings are outstretched and the upraised tail meets
the crest on the head .The body of the bird is
finely decorated with feathers in gold inlay. With
stand. Slight restoration.
Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D.
Height without stand 5)4 inches.
180. BRONZE DRAGON
The body curled and head raised high in the
air. The head is thrown back and mouth open
showing plainly the teeth and tongue. The neck
has a definite scale decoration while the body has
a smoother covering. Greyish green patina.
Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D. Height 4)4 inches.
181. PAIR OF BRONZE RABBITS
Seated with long ears and a calm inquiring ex-
pression on their gold flecked faces. Black patina.
Tang, 618 - 906 A.D. Height 3)4 inches.
182. SMALL SILVER POT
WITH COVER
Resting on a low base with a petal-like de-
sign the body is finely chased with round medal-
lions holding a full blown flower in each. The
cover is decorated with a floral design and holds
a small acorn-like finial.
Tang, 618-906 A.D. Height 2)4 inches.
183. SILVER GILT CUP
Resting on a flaring base which is encircled
with a petal-like design. The outside of the ob-
long ovoid cup is plain, the inside being decorated
with raised curved lines between which is finely
etched floral designs.
Tang, 618-906 A.D. Height 2)4 inches.
184. SILVER STEM CUP
In the shape of a peony, the base represents a
flattened flower and is decorated with a leafy
design. Each petal of the cup is beautifully etched
with a floral and scroll branch design against a
tiny grain background.
Tang, 618-906 A.D. Height 2 inches.
185. PAIR OF BRONZE CHARIOT HUBS
Decorated by encircling cords and an animal
in high relief, between the cords are bands of
geometric designs inlaid in gold and silver. Found
in Chin T’sun.
Late Chou, 6th to sth Century B.C.
Height 4 inches.
186. PAIR OF BRONZE HORSES
Standing with head raised. Rough green
patina.
Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D. Height 2)4 inches.
187. GILT BRONZE SHEEP
A three legged sheep standing on an oblong
base, the long narrow face with small horns is
enhanced by large ears and enormous eyes. On
the back appears an opening which shows it was
originally an incense burner.
Six Dynasties, 221 to 589 A.D. Height 5 inches.




188. GILT BRONZE WOMAN
Kneeling figure of a donor with hands in the
attitude of adoration. Simply clad with a shawl
about her shoulders and her dress decorated with
a series of straight lines. Wood stand.
Tang, 618 - 906 A.D.
Height without stand, 3 inches.
189. SILVER FIGURE
Seated figure of Kuan Yin with left arm bent
resting on the knee and the hand holding a sym-
bol. The benevolent face with downcast eyes is
framed by a high complicated headdress with
flowing streamers and from a festooned and ruf-
fled skirt the foot protudes on the left. With stand.
Tang, 618 - 906 A.D.
Height without stand 3)4 inches.
190. PAIR OF GILT BRONZE FIGURES
Two donors holding lotus buds in their hands.
On their high hats is a cross design while their
long plain robes hang gracefully around them.
With stand.
Wei, 386 - 557 A.D.
Height without stand 3)4 inches.
191. GILT BRONZE STATUE
Resting on a double base with four legs, two
sides of one inscribed with characters, stands the
figure of Buddha. Hands in the attitude of as-
surance. The flowing robes have a flame-like ap-
pearance which feeling is carried out in the dec-
oration on the halo against which the figure
stands.
Dated Western Wei, 548 A.D.
Height 8)4 inches.
192. STANDING FIGURE OF
MONGOLIAN
With a simple dress and his belt tied in the
back, the one hand fingers the belt while the
other is at his waist. The face is remarkably well
preserved. Gilt bronze.
Wei, 386-557 A.D. Height 3)4 inches.
193- STANDING FIGURE OF A
BODHISATTVA
With the left hand raised holding a pearl, en-
circling the shoulders is a scarf, with long ends,
one of which is wrapped around the wrist. The
headdress is pointed and simple with long stream-
ers hanging to the knees. A halo is behind the
head on which their is a floral decoration. With
stand.
Tang 618 - 906 A.D.
Height without stand inches.
194. GILT BRONZE FIGURE
Resting on a square base, the front with two
foo dogs, a figure of a Bodhisattva stands on a
lotus pedestal with attendants on either side. The
right hand is raised in the attitude of assurance
and the high crown is in the form of petals. The
trio is backed by a pointed halo with a scrolled
flame-like design. An inscription on the base in-
dicates that the Buddhist believer Chang (?) Tso
and his wife made this Bodhisattva in hopes that
all living creatures will become diafied imme-
diately.
Six Dynasties, 221 to 589 A.D. Height 7 inches.
195. BRONZE FIGURE
Standing figure of Avolokitesvara holding in
the left hand a vessel containing ambrosia and in
the right hand a switch to be used as a wand. The
complacent face is framed by a crown with
streamers over the shoulders and the complicated
dress is ornamented with rope-like trimmings.
Brown patina showing gold, originally gilded.
With stand.
Tang, 618 - 906 A.D.
Height without stand. 12)4 inches.
196. SMALL GILT BRONZE STATUE
Depicting Kuan Yin standing on a low round
pedestal which rests on a base with four legs.
The high head-dress and flowing robes are
simply executed and the figure leans against a
high halo decorated with flames. Inscribed “In
the spring of year of Kai Yuan (581 A.D.
to ) the Wu family made this stele to
Kuan Yin.” Splashes of green patina.
Sui Dynasty 589 - 618 A.D. Height 7 inches.




JEWELRY
It seems inconceivable that such an important art as jewelry which has been cherished
ever since the beginning of Chinese history by both men and women, has not attracted
more attention from the art lovers.
Jewelry has always been used as an ornament even for gentlemen in ancient China,
embellishments such as Yu Pei: (a series of jade pendants) and other ornaments made
of different materials were used on hats, armors and daily attires. The materials used for
decoration by women are, naturally, much more varied, including jade, agate, bone, ivory,
amber, pearl, glass, tortoise shell and shell-fish of all kinds. Various names designated as
jewelry are often mentioned in the Chinese classics Li Chi (a book of ceremony), and
then again the specified names often appear throughout famous Chinese literature.
Sou-chi means head-pin mentioned in Shuo Wen, the book on the evolution of words
in the Han period. 800 Yao, which is another name for a string of pearls with gold setting,
once offered as a present by her sister to the most famous and beautiful Imperial concu-
bine Chao Fei Yien of the Han Dynasty, is recorded in the book Si Ching Tsa Chi (Mis-
cellaneous of the Western Metropolitan) and several others.
We have long taken special interest in jewelry and thus have been trying to accumulate it
for the last thirty years; our collection now comprises about 350 pieces covering all periods
until Ming and thus constitutes the largest collection of historical jewelry.
197. TWO BONE HAIR PINS
Mounted with head of bird.
Shang, 15th to 12th Century B.C.
Length 6 inches.
198. TWO BONE PINS
One surmounted by a bird with a high crest,
the other by a dragon.
Shang, 15th to 12th Century B.C.
199. TWO BONE PINS
One surmounted by an owl-like bird with a
saw-like carving surrounding the edge. The other
with an archaic dragon design.
Shang, 15th to 12th Century B.C.
Length 7 inches.
200. BONE COMB
Seated on the top are two ducks facing one
another.
Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D. Height 4 inches.
201. TWO BONE COMBS
Both mounted by two pigeons.
Tang, 618 - 906 A.D. Height 2 inches.
202. DOUBLE KNIFE SHEATH
The entire sheath encircled by bands of gold
and silver with exquisitely etched floral, animal
and bird designs.
Tang, 618 - 906 A.D. Length 6 l / 2 inches.
203. BONE COMB
The semi-circular top encased in a gold band
with an all over beaded decoration.
Han, 205 B.C. to 220 A.D. Height 2 l / 2 inches.
204. BONE COMB
Top without decoration, emerald green patina
on one side.
Han, 205 B.C. to 220 A.D. Height 234 inches.
205. LONG SILVER GILT HAIRPIN
Surmounted by a beautifully executed phoenix
with open-work feather background.
Tang, 618 - 906 A.D. Length 1 i/ 2 inches.
206. TWO PINS
Two large pearls inserted in a finely executed
filigree petal mountings.
Sung, 960 - 1279 A.D. Length 4 inches.
207. CIRCULAR GOLD PLAQUE
With raised decoration of interlaced snakes.
Found in Chin T’sun.
Late Chou, 6th to sth Century B.C.
Diameter 2J/4 inches.
208. TWO PINS
Surrounding a piece of disintergrated colored
glass is a floral filigree design which was origin-
ally set with turquoise.
Tang, 618 - 906 A.D. Length 2 inches




209. GOLD HAIRPIN
Short bronze pin the top of which carries a
beautifully executed phoenix in gold. The breast
of the bird holds tiny wires forming a flower in
which pearl and turquoise originally were mount-
ed, the filigree tail and wings originally held tur-
quoise of which some few fragments still remain.
Tang, 618 - 906 A.D. Length 5% inches.
210. GOLD HAIRPIN
Surmounting a long gold pin is an irregular
open-work circle depicting a phoenix with spread
wings and flowing tail about to take flight from a
rock from which grows a floral branch used to
complete the upper part of the design.
Tang, 618 - 906 A.D. Length g l / 2 inches.
211. GOLD PHOENIX
A beautifully executed bird with body entirely
covered with minute line carvings. The wings
with separate feathers on the ends seem held close
to the body while the separate feathers of the
tail are spread and cast with tiny feather edges.
The wings as well as the tail have mountings for
precious stones.
Tang, 618 - 906 A.D. Length 4 inches.
212. GOLD AND BRONZE PLAQUE
Applied to a plaque of silver is a cicada wrought
with tiny beaded gold wire surrounded by a nar-
row frame holding a leaf-like ornament and the
two eyes depicted by two large pearls.
Tang, 618 - 906 A.D. Height 2 inches.
213. PAIR OF GOLD APPLIQUES
Encircled by a beaded edge are two running
dragons, their scales beautifully executed and
with open mouths showing their vicious teeth.
Han, 205 B.C. to 220 A.D. Length 3inches.
214. SMALL GOLD HEADDRESS
A solid piece of gold around the edge of which
have been applied a petal design, the top is or-
namented with grooves and lines finished by a
wave design at the back.
Han, 205 B.C. to 220 A.D.
215- CIRCULAR PLAQUE
A bronze plaque on which a gold floral design
has been applied. The central small flower is set
with jewels while around it each individual scroll
effect is set with a turquoise.
Tang, 618 - 906 A.D. Diameter 2 inches.
216. GOLD AND BRONZE HAIRPIN
A long bronze pin surmounted by a beautifully
executed gold open-work design of a phoenix
surrounded by a scroll motive.
Tang, 618 - 906 A.D. Length 12% inches.
217. GOLD APPLIQUE
Depicting a seated Diety against a background
of long slender leaves and flames. His two arms
are held bent at his shoulders and his high crown
has been set with three large jewels. His stomach
is set with a large pink jewel and mountings for
precious stones appear on the floor at his feet.
Tang, 618 - 906 A.D. Height 4J/2 inches.
218. PIN FINIAL
A large pearl is held in a beautifully executed
floral mounting of tiny flowers and long stems.
Sung, 960- 1279 A.D.
219. GOLD PIN
A long pin surmounted by a little boy with
crossed legs, holding in his hand the stem of a
flower.
Sung, 960 - 1279 A.D. Length inches.
220. GOLD CROWN
Attached to a band with finely etched scrolls
are curved bands of gold decorated with a tiny
beaded edge and a single line of tiny rosettes. In
the front is a lower plaque holding a floral design
while at the back is attached a beautifully ex-
ecuted butterfly which shimmers on its wire at-
tachment.
Tang, 618 - 906 A.D. Height %/ 2 inches.
221. PAIR OF GOLD FINIALS
In the form of a dragon’s head with elaborate
decoration around the eyes and ears. Found in
Chin T’sun.
Late Chou, 6th to sth Century Height 1 inch.




JADES
The creation of jade objects is somewhat paralleled in period to the bronze but their
functions are not altogether the same because besides the objects used in ritual services as
symbols of Heaven, Earth, Cardinal Corners, Power, Dignity, Military and Civil Ranks,
most of the small objects were charms or adornments for official dresses and ornaments
for personal attire.
The jade ended at the same time as the ritual bronzes, but while the ritual bronzes were
succeeded by the Buddhistic objects, the jades, due probably to the lack of material,
ceased to appear from the end of the Han period (205 8.C.-220 A.D.), to the end of
the T’ang period (618-906 A.D.), when they reappeared in the form of decorative objects.
The theory is that the famous jade mines of Chinese Turkestan were exhausted and only
after the discovery of other mines in Yunnan was it possible to continue work in jade.
Jade was extremely rare, therefore, precious and employed only for objects used in the
royal households. As proof of this we have the fact that they were found almost exclusively
in Royal tombs.
We have included here all the jade objects from the earliest period to the present time.
The reason is that, unlike ceramics and bronzes whose authenticity of antiquity is of
prime importance, the jades are admired more for their natural color and luster and
fineness of workmanship. Thus most collectors of hardstones are more interested in their
artistic beauty than in their dates.
222. JADE PLAQUE
In the form of a mask with the motives finely
carved and edged by flanges. Chicken bone
jade. Shang, 15th to 12th B. C. H. 3 ins.
223. JADE BLADE
Undecorated except for three holes, mottled
with blues and brown.
Shang, 15th to 12th B.C. L. Bj4 ins.
224. JADE ORNAMENT
Standing bird with a high crest. Brownish
jade. Shang, 15th to 12th B.C. H. 53/2 ins.
225. JADE HANDLE
Plain white jade with small delicate lines
carved at the top, several splashes of green.
Early Chou, 11th to gth B.C. L. 6 ins.
226. JADE KNIFE
The handle with a sketchy scroll design and the
bevelled blade terminated by a scroll effect. Buff
colored jade.
Middle Chou, Bth to Gth Century B.C. 7 inches.
227. DECOMPOSED GLASS PI
All over raised grains design. Broken.
Han, 205 B.C. to 220 A.D. Diameter 7 inches.
228. JADE PENDANT
Curled fish. Green and white mottled jade.
Middle Chou, 9th to Gth B.C. L. 3 ins.
229. JADE PENDANT
In the form of a fish. Green mottled jade.
Middle Chou, 9th to Gth B.C. L. 4 ins.
230. JADE PENDANT
Curved bird with high crest, cut on outside
with irregular juts. Green and white mottled
jade. Shang, 15th to 12th B.C. L. 3/2 ins.
231. JADE ORNAMENT
Green jade bird partly decayed.
Early Chou 1 ith to 9th B.C. H. 2 ins.
232. LARGE JADE BLADE
Plain except for a lined and basket weave de-
sign at the guard, terminated by a saw-like edge.
Green mottled jade showing red pigment.
Shang, 15th to 12th B.C. L. 15/0 ins.
233. JADE BLADE
Undecorated mottled brownish jade showing
flecks of red pigment.
Shang, 15th to 12th B.C. L. gj/ 2 ins.
234. JADE BLADE
Plain except for a lined design at the handle
and the edge with irregular juts. Beautifully mot-
tled jade with brown, blues and greens.
Shang, 15th t<p 12th B.C. L. 11 ins.
235. STONE FISH
White with fragments of earth still remaining
on the body.
Shang, 15th to 12th B.C. L. 4% ins.
236. STONE BLADE
With bevelled edge. White chicken bone jade.
Shang, 15th to 12th B.C. L. 13 ins.




237. JADE SHEATH FINIAL
Decorated with a dragon in relief, head and
neck is turned far back over its back with full
face looking forward, one forepaw flung high
in the air and his left hind legs rest on a pedestal,
the body, except for a few scrolls is undecorated
but the tail is twisted to resemble the hair. White
jade.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd B.C. H. 1 / 2 ins.
238. JADE RING
Undecorated and of beautiful texture. White,
creamy jade showing here and there a natural
vein-like design together with light green blotches
fading into white.
Early Chou, 1 ith to 9th B.C. D. ins.
239. JADE BUCKLE
Decorated in relief with a strongly carved
dragon, his head high facing outwards. Greenish
jade with a touch of tan at the extreme end.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd B.C. L. 3 ins.
240. JADE ORNAMENT
Rounded jade mask cut into the form of a tube
with flattened ears and wide set eyes, the mouth
is cut into a wide slit which connects with the hole
through the center. Greenish jade.
Early Chou, 11th to 9th B.C. H. IJ/4 ins.
241. JADE ORNAMENT
Two birds, nestling close together, their feath-
ers depicted by lines filled with a red pigment.
Han, 206 8.C.t0 221 A.D. Height 1 inch.
242. JADE SWORD GUARD
Of pure white jade, high relief decoration of
a dragon with long curled tail facing a bird with
head turned back.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd B.C. L. 4 ins.
243. JADE PIG
Reclining in a flat position with his head rest-
ing on his forepaws. His oversized ears and face
are smooth and plainly cut, the remainder rough-
ened and discolored through the burying.
Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D. Length 4/2 inches.
244. JADE ORNAMENT
Curved piece of greenish jade carved into the
form of a mask.
Early Chou, iith-pth B.C. H. 1 in.
245. JADE LIBATION CUP
Ovoid cup with ear-like handles, entire out-
side decorated with a spiral design ending under
each handle with a bird motif. Inside is plain
except for a two-lined circle in the bottom and a
delicate floral line design on the handle. Buff
color with splashes of brown and black.
Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D. Length 4 inches.
246. JADE PLAQUE
Flattened bird with lines and scrolls depicting
feathers, head is undecorated except for two
large circles forming eyes. Greyish jade.
Middle Chou, 9th to 6th B.C. H. 2 ins.
247. JADE BUCKLE
Terminated by a dragon’s head, the flat top of
the buckle is decorated with three panels of sim-
ple raised lines. The jade has disintegrated into a
beautiful buff color with traces of brown enhanc-
ing the simple beauty of the design.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd B.C. L. 5 ins.
248. JADE HANDLE
Decorated all over with a spiral motif forming
masks on the front which are separated by rope-
like bands. Greyish green jade.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd B.C. H. 2 ins.
249. JADE ORNAMENT
Large circular piece of undecorated mottled
green jade, probably used as a high headdress or
possibly some type of musical instrument.
Early Chou, nth to 9th B.C. H. 4% ins.
250. JADE ORNAMENT
Oblong tube, each side decorated with a verti-
cal spiral. Brown and yellowish mottled jade.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd B.C. H. 2 ins.
251. JADE BUCKLE
Terminated by a dragon’s head, the flat top is
decorated by four panels of fluted lines separated
by three panels without decoration. Disintegrated
to chicken bone jade with traces of green and
brown.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd B.C. L. SJ/2 ins.
252. JADE TSUN
The square band encircling the disc is deco-
rated on all sides with an abstract pattern formed
by scrolls and spirals. Chicken bone jade.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd B.C. H. 1/% ins.
253. JADE TSUN
Symbol of Earth, undecorated greyish green
jade which has been flecked all over with various
sized dots interrupted on one side by irregular
crossed lines.
Middle Chou, 9th to 6th B.C. L. ins.
254. JADE TSUN
Symbol of Earth, yellowish jade, the upper
and lower rims splashed with brown.
Middle Chou, 9th to 6th B.C. H. ins.




255. JADE ORNAMENT
In the form of a flattened turtle. Dark green
jade.
Middle Chou, 9th to 6th Century B.C.
Length 2 inches.
256. JADE ORNAMENT
In the form of a standing animal, with large
ears turned back and the body undecorated.
Han, 206 B.C. to 221 A.D. Height ij4 ins.
257. JADE PLAQUE
Depicting Si Wong Muo, Queen Mother of
the West, seated with hand clasped under long
sleeves. Green jade with incrustations of earth.
Han, 205 B.C. to 220 A.D. Height 3 inches.
258. PAIR OF JADE ORNAMENTS
Flat oblong tubes with an irregular edge made
by double scrolls which cover the surface of the
entire piece. Green jade.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Length inches.
259. JADE PENDANT
In the form of a dragon with high crest. The
body is so curved as to show great strength and
is decorated all over with a cloud design. Green
jade.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Length 4/2 inches.
260. JADE ORNAMENT
In the form of an owl with a hooked beak and
the feathers outlined. Green jade with markings
of white.
Early Chou, 1 ith to 9th Century B.C.
Height 2/2 inches.
261. JADE AXE HEAD
Undecorated except for a saw-like carving on
a small portion of the edge. Dark green jade.
Early Chou, 1 ith to 9th Century B.C.
Length <$ l A inches.
262. JADE PENDANT
Cut in the shape of a semi-circle terminated by
a dragon’s head at either end and entirely covered
with a cloud design. Brown jade.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Length inches.
263. JADE ORNAMENT
A round bracelet-like ring of undecorated black
jade.
Early Chou, 1 ith to 9th Century B.C.
Diameter inches.
264. JADE PI
Symbol of Heaven, the entire surface is covered
with spirals, and large brown splashes on the jade
enhance the beauty of the object.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Diameter 4 inches.
265. JADE PENDANT
Two curled dragons are so arranged as to form
a t’ao t’ieh mask, the tails and wings are decorated
with lines and the entire body with spirals. Blue
jade. Broken.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Height 2J/2 inches.
266. JADE PI
Symbol of Heaven, decorated all over with
crossed trellis-like designs holding raised dots.
Bluish grey mottled jade.
Han, 205 B.C. to 220 A.D.
Diameter SJ/2 inches.
267. JADE PENDANT
In the form of a dancing girl in flowing robes,
her long skirt trails far behind her and framing
her head is her uplifted arm concealed in a long
sleeve. Green jade with brown coloring.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Height 2 inches.
268. JADE PENDANT
In the form of a curled dragon with head
turned back, the wings and tail are traced with
lines while the entire body on both sides is covered
with spirals. Green jade.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Length 7J/4 inches.
269. JADE PENDANT
In the form of a flat conventionalized animal
his back lined like a beetle and the tail with
feathers of a bird. Green jade.
Middle Chou, 9th to 6th B.C. L. 1/ 2 ins.




270. JADE PLAQUE
A conventionalized bird with a large beak form
the upper part, the neck and body making the
lower part of the plaque leaving an opening in
the center. Brown jade.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Height inches.
271. JADE PENDANT
In the form of a dragon carved into a semi-
circle, the face is carved in low relief while the
body is plain. Green jade with a black splash.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Length inches.
272. JADE PLAQUE
In the form of a bovine mask, the center of the
face of green jade is border at the mouth and end
of horns by a lighter color which greatly enhances
the decoration of lines.
Early Chou, 1 ith to 9th Century B.C.
Height inches.
273. PAIR OF JADE PENDANTS
In the form of conventionalized dragons with
long slender head and broad tail hung low to the
ground, the entire body covered with a cloud
design. Greenish yellow jade.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Length 2/2 inches.
274. JADE ORNAMENT
In the form of a dragon with head turned back
while he rests his back paw against the head of a
small human figure. Green jade.
Middle Chou, 9th to 6th Century B.C.
Length 2 1 /\ inches.
275. JADE ORNAMENT
In the form of a semi-circle, the ends of which
are terminated by a conventionalized dragon’s
head carved all over with a cloud design. Green
jade.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.G.
Length 4% inches.
276. JADE PENDANT
In the form of a fantastic man standing on the
head of a monster and leaning against its back.
Brownish jade with lines filled with a reddish
pigment.
Middle Chou, 9th to 6th Century B.C.
Length 2/2 inches.
277. SET OF THREE JADES
Two pendants and one tube. The pendants in
the form of semi-circles are terminated on either
end by a conventionalized dragon’s head, the
tube and the entire surface of the pendants arc
decorated with a cloud design. Greenish jade.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.G.
Length of tube inches.
Length of pendants 3/2 inches.
278. JADE ORNAMENT
A squat conventionalized dragon with lines de-
picting his face and legs. Probably a musical pick.
Green jade.
Middle Chou, 9th to 6th Century B.C.
Height 2 1 /\ inches.
279. JADE PENDANT
In the form of a semi-circle terminated on each
end by a dragon’s head, the entire object covered
with a cloud design. Brownish jade with dark
brown splashes.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Length 2J/2 inches.
280. JADE PENDANT
In the form of a semi-circle terminated on each
end by a dragon’s head, the entire object covered
with a cloud design. Green jade with brown
splashes.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Length 3% inches.
281. JADE ORNAMENT
In the form of a conventionalized dragon
curved to form a scroll, the entire piece is covered
with a raised cloud design. White jade with a
touch of brown.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Height 2/4 inches.
282. JADE ORNAMENT
In the form of a crouched dragon and with the
head bent to the forepaws. The entire body on
both sides is decorated with a cloud design.
Brownish jade.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Length inches.
283. JADE ORNAMENT
Curved ornament with small juts cut from the
edge at intervals, the entire body of the piece is
carved with spirals. White jade with slight traces
of earth.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Length 5% inches.
284. JADE PENDANT
In the form of a crouched dragon with his
mouth about to touch the forepaw, the entire
body is covered with spirals while the face is lined
to depict the features. Brown jade.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Length 3J/2 inches.




285. JADE ORNAMENT
In the form of a curved dragon, the face and
the entire body decorated with a cloud design.
Greenish and white jade.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Length 3J/4 inches.
286. JADE ORNAMENT
In the form of a bird, its large head with a high
crest is thrown back against a strong body and the
wings are depicted by lines. Brownish jade.
Middle Chou, 9th to 6th Century B.C.
Height 1 / 2 inches.
287. JADE ORNAMENT
Chicken bone jade handle decorated with a
conventionalized bird design in scrolls and spirals
terminated by a standing bird with a large beak
at the top.
Early Chou, 1 ith to 9th Century B.C.
Length 4 inches.
288. JADE ORNAMENT
In the form of a dove. Greenish jade.
Middle Chou, 9th to 6th Century B.C.
Height 1 / 2 inches,
289. JADE ORNAMENT
In the form of a curved dragon, decorated all
over with a scroll design. Brownish jade.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Length $/ 2 inches.
290. JADE ORNAMENT
In the form of a buck. The horns are high and
his head is turned far back over his undecorated
body. Brownish mottled jade.
Early Chou, 1 ith to 9th Century B.C.
Height inches.
291. JADE DISC
Flat disc entirely decorated on both sides with
spirals and finished by a bevelled edge. Brownish
jade disintegrated on one side to a grey.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Diameter inches.
292. JADE ORNAMENT
In the form of a double headed curled dragon,
the lined decoration on the body is filled with red
pigment. Greenish jade.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Length 2 inches.
293- JADE ORNAMENT
In the form of a parrot with a low crest and
long tail, etched lines portray his eyes and wings.
Tail is sharpened for carving. Brownish jade.
Shang, 15th to 12th Century B.C.
Height 2j4 inches.
294. JADE ORNAMENT
In the form of a parrot with a low crest and
long tail, etched lines portray the eyes and wings.
Tail is sharpened for carving. Brownish jade.
Shang, 15th to 12th Century B.C.
Height 2j4 inches.
295. PAIR OF JADE ORNAMENTS
In the form of a disc on which is carved a
curled dragon in open-work surmounted by an
open-work dragon with head thrown far back.
Probably charmed coins. Brownish jade.
Six Dynasties 221-589 A.D.
Height 334 inches.
296. JADE PENDANT
In the form of a dragon decorated on each side
with lines forming the contour of the body and
spirals over the entire body. The head is held high
and proudly with the mouth touching the chest,
the tail terminating in the head of a phoenix.
Greyish green jade.
Late Chou, sth to 3rd Century B.C.
Height 5 inches.
297. JADE DISC
Round flat disc with blunt teeth like decorated
encircling the edge. Known as an astronomical
instrument. Green jade with brownish blotches.
Early Chou, 1 ith to 9th Century B.C.
Diameter inches.
298. ROUND JADE DISC
Undecorated except for groups of lines encir-
cling the object. Decade white jade.
Shang, 15th to 12th Century B.C.
Diameter inches.
299. JADE DISC
Flat round disc with blunt teeth decoration
interrupted by deep juts and sections of undeco-
rated rim, known as an astronomical instrument.
Green jade with flecks of cream and splashes of
black.
Early Chou, 1 ith to 9th Century B.C.
Diameter 4/2 inches.




300. JADE TEAPOT
Undecorated except for a large splash of brown
on the body and cover, which is done by nature
but enhances its beauty. Greenish jade.
Ming, 1368-1643 A.D.
Height without stand 4 inches.
301. JADE VASE
In the form of a gourd on the front of which
is carved in high relief a diety seated on a cloud
of incense which is released from an incense
burner held in the hands of an attendant. White
jade with brown spots.
Ming, 1368-1643 A.D. Height 5% inches.
302. JADE TEAPOT
The body of the object is undecorated except
for the handle which is carved in the form of a
dragon’s head. The cover is surmounted by a
reclining buffalo. Greyish jade. With teakwood
stand.
Ming, 1368-1643 A.D.
Height without stand 2*4 inches.
303. JADE ORNAMENT
In the form of a lotus pod showing the seeds on
the top and encircled by stems and blooms of the
lotus flower in high relief. White jade with traces
of light brown. With teakwood stand.
Ming, 1368-1643 A.D.
Height without stand 2j4 inches.
304. JADE ORNAMENT
Carved to represent two ducks resting on a lily
pad, their heads are turned back so that they face
one another and in the mouth of each is held the
stem of a lotus, the flower of which ornaments
their bodies. White jade with traces of light
brown. With teakwood stand.
Ming, 1368-1643 A.D. Length 6*4 inches.
305. JADE BOX
Cut in the form of Buddha’s fingerfruit on
which is carved a leaf and branch design. White
jade. With teakwood stand.
Ming, 1368-1643 A.D.
Height without stand 2 *4 inches.
306. JADE VASE
In the form of an old bronze, resting on a low
foot the body of the vase is carved with a large
cicada motif, around the shoulder is a beast with
head turned back and mouth open, surmounted
by a band of triangle cicadas at the lip. Two
mask handles adorn the shoulder. Yellowish
jade with brown splashes.
Sung, 960-1279 A.D. Height 7 inches.
307. JADE DISH
A long undecorated ovoid shaped dish on a
low foot, holding two handles carved in the form
of a t’ao t’ieh mask from which hang movable
rings. Mottled green jade. With teakwood stand.
Sung, 960-1279 A.D. Length 11 inches.
308. JADE VASE
Undecorated in the form of an old bronze,
resting on a low foot, narrowing neck and slightly
flaring lip. Mottled yellowish jade.
Sung, 960-1279 A.D. Height 5/2 inches.
309. SQUARE JADE VASE
In the form of an old bronze, the high foot is
carved with conventionalized cicadas which
motif repeated on the long flaring neck. Around
the center is a band in relief holding finely ex-
ecuted t’ao t’ieh masks. Greyish white mottled
jade. With teakwood stand.
Ming, 1368-1643 A.D.
Height without stand 8/2 inches.
310. JADE COVERED COUPE
Resting on four low feet, the body is encircled
by a band of conventionalized birds which motif
is repeated on the cover. Four elephant head han-
dles holding movable rings surround the lip. Yel-
lowish white jade.
Sung, 960-1279 A.D. Height 5 inches.
31 1. JADE VASE
In the form of an old bronze, the base and
upper part are carved with a design of conven-
tionalized cicadas and meander pattern, while
the center of the vase holds a mask. Crawling up
the sides, their heads in high relief above the lip,
are two dragons who seem ready to spring at each
other across the vase. Light brownish white jade.
Teakwood stand.
Sung, 960-1279 A.D.
Height without stand 8 inches.




312. JADE ORNAMENT
In the form of a heavy set elephant with head
turned facing outwards and his thick skin de-
picted by wavy lines. Across his back clings a fat
squat boy holding in one hand a pendant and in
the other a spray of flowers. White jade.
18th Century. Height 4 inches.
313. JADE DEER
Reclining with his legs bent under him and
the head with long horns thrown back so they
touch the back, the whole object is undecorated
except for wavy indentations down the back.
White jade. With teakwood stand.
17th Century. Height without stand 5 inches.
314. JADE ORNAMENT
In the form of a reclining horse with his fore
feet bent under him, the body is undecorated
while the tail and mane is depicted by fine lines.
White jade. Teakwood stand.
18th Century. Height without stand 2/2 inches.
315. JADE ORNAMENT
In the form of two lotus blossoms held by stems,
leaves and buds, while standing on the stem, at
the base, and enjoying the shade of the giant
flowers is a duck and a crane. White jade. Teak-
wood stand.
19th Century. Height without stand inches.
316. JADE FIGURE
Seated figure of Buddha with crossed legs,
tightly curled hair and holding in his hand a
sceptre, the flowing robes are simply carved ex-
cept for a high rippled frill around the shoulders.
White jade. With teakwood stand.
17th Century. Height without stand 8 inches.
317. JADE ORNAMENT
In the form of a lotus pod with the seeds on
the top, and carved beside the pod in high relief
a half opened lotus blossom and leaves. White
jade. With teakwood stand.
17th Century. Height without stand 3J/4 inches.
3 18. PAIR OF JADE COUPES
In the form of an open gourd and resting on
three legs. The stem is in high relief and across
the gourd in the center is carved a bat, Symbol
Happiness. White jade.
17th Century. Height linches.
319. JADE ORNAMENT
In the form of Buddha’s fingers fruit curved
into a semi-circle, on the top and back of which
has been carved a branch with leaves. White jade.
Teakwood stand.
17th Century. Height without stand 2 /<x inches.
320. JADE STEM CUP
Resting on a foot carved with petals the cup
itself is in the form of a flower, each petal forms
a panel on which is a delicate floral design topped
at the lip by a wide opened chrysanthemum.
White jade. With teakwood stand.
17th Century. Height without stand 4 inches.
321. JADE KORO WITH COVER
In the form of an old bronze resting on a low
foot, the body of the vase is fluted and surmounted
at the rim by a band containing masks and drag-
ons separated by flanges, on the sides are two
bovine heads forming the handles. The cover is
encircled by a highly conventionalized design of
masks made with lines and spirals, the cover re-
moves and forms a receptacle. White jade. Teak-
wood stand inlaid with a silver wire in a scroll
design.
Ming, 1368-1643 A.D.
Height without stand inches.
322. JADE VASE
Carved in the form of an old bronze it stands
on a low foot, the lower part of the vase holds a
mask which is topped by a band of facing dragons
separated by a flange. Two half ring handles are
supported on the shoulder by open-work dragons
in relief. The cover is surmounted by a standing
dog foo, with uplifted tail and open mouth. Yel-
lowish white jade. Teakwood stand.
Ming, 1368-1643 A.D.
Height without stand inches.




323. JADE DISH
Carved to represent a three petaled flower. The
inside is plain except for a low partition which
forms three sections, while the reverse side shows
an artistic design of a floral motive. White jade.
With teakwood stand.
18th Century. Length inches.
324. JADE SNUFF BOTTLE
Without decoration. Greenish jade with coral
top.
18th Century. Height 3 inches.
325. JADE SNUFF BOTTLE
Bulbous in shape, decorated on one side with
Lao Tze riding a mule followed by an attendant
and on the reverse side two sages in conversation.
White jade with coral top.
18th Century. Height 3/2 inches.
326. JADE BOX
In the form of a lichee nut, up one side of which
crawls a beetle. Branches and leaves complete the
decoration and interlaced branches hold the two
parts of the box together. White jade. Teakwood
stand.
17th Century. Height inches.
327. JADE ORNAMENT
A mother and young crane nestle close together
with the mother’s head turned backward looking
at her young. Surrounding their entire bodies in
high relief are branches and blossoms of which
both of them hold a twig in their mouths. White
jade. Teakwood stand.
18th Century. Length 7 inches.
328. JADE FIGURE
Figure of a dancing girl, her body slightly bent
back, one hand, hidden by long sleeves, is behind
her back while the other is thrown high over her
head. Her rather simple gown is enhanced by a
long slender scarf which loops high on the shoul-
der. White jade. Teakwood stand.
19th Century. Height without stand 11 inches.
329. JADE PITCHER
Fluted around the lower part, the upper part
carved into petals which hold four handles in
high relief holding movable rings. Under the
spout and the handle is a well designed floral
spray terminating in an open flower. White jade.
Teakwood stand.
i yth Century. Height without stand 3*4 inches.
330. JADE CRANE
Standing with head bent slightly downward
as though contemplating its next morsel of food.
The bill is of coral and the tail and wings are
evidenced by fine lines. White jade. Teakwood
stand.
18th Century. Height with stand 4 inches.
331. JADE DISH
In the form of an open peach, the two pieces
attached by branches and leaves. White jade.
Teakwood stand.
17th Century. Length inches.
332. JADE BOAT
In the form of a Chinese junk, its one sail up
and on the deck two men stand, one of whom
propels the boat with a long oar. White jade.
With stand.
18th Century. Height without stand 4 j/2 inches.
333. SQUARE JADE BOX
The top is decorated with a figure of Lao Tze
astride a mule followed by his attendant carrying
high a branch with flowers. White jade. Teak-
wood stand.
17th Century. 2 % inches square,
334. JADE KORO AND COVER
Resting on three low legs terminated by t’ao
t’ieh masks, the body of the vase is encircled by a
band of conventionalized bird designs against a
meander pattern, two strongly executed dragon
head handles ornament the shoulder. The cover
repeats the decoration on the vase and is topped
by an open-work floral knob. The cover removes
and becomes a receptacle. White jade. Teakwood
stand.
18th Century. Height without stand 4 inches.
335. ROUND JADE BOX
Undecorated except for a floral medallion
carved on the top of the cover. White jade. Teak-
wood stand.
18th Century. Diameter 4 inches.




336. JADE FIGURE
. Standing figure of the Goddess of Flowers hold-
ing in her hands a basket of flowers. Her hair-
dress is high on each side and about her shoulders
is a narrow scarf which hangs to the ground and
is attached to the dress by flowers. Greenish white
jade. With teakwood stand.
19th Century. Height without stand 8 inches.
337. JADE ORNAMENT
In the form of a twin vase which is supported
on the back of a dragon. The vase is decorated
all over with a fret design topped by a band of
conventionalized birds. With his claws in the
supporting dragon a phoenix, with spread wings,
divides the vases and his tail forms a handle at
the back. White jade.
Ming, 1368-1643 A.D. Height 4% inches.
338. JADE WINE POT
High slender body with an elongated petal
decoration that ends close to the shoulder, the
handle is in the shape of a long scroll and the
cover is topped by an open flower. White jade.
With teakwood stand.
Ming, 1368-1643 A.D.
Height without stand y/4 inches.
339. JADE VASE
In the form of a double vase, the vase is un-
decorated except for two dragons in relief, one of
which curls about the base while the other climbs
up the side. Four scrolled dragons form the han-
dles which are carved near the lip. Yellowish jade.
18th Century. Height 5 inches.
340. JADE FIGURE OF A WOMAN
Standing figure of a donor with downcast eyes,
her two hands protruding from flowing sleeves arc
clasped and hold a rosary. Yellowish jade. With
teakwood stand.
18th Century. Height without stand 6 ins.
341. PAIR OF ROUND COUPES
WITH COVERS
The body is undecorated while the cover is
carved in open-work with a beautifully executed
dragon whose head forms the center and his long
body curls around it. White jade. With teakwood
stand.
17th Century. Height without stand 334 inches.
342. JADE COUPE
With a low squat body and flaring lip the vase
is undecorated. White jade. With teakwood stand.
17th Century. Height without stand 2 inches.
343. JADE ORNAMENT
In the form of an elephant with his head turned
forward, standing by his side is a sage holding a
branch of peaches and a sceptre, while climbing
on his back are four hoho boys, two of whom,
hold a vase full of flowers, symbol of Longevity
and Happiness. White jade. With teakwood stand.
18th Century. Height without stand 7 inches.
344. SQUARE JADE CUP
The surface is undecorated while the handle is
finely carved with a mask attached to a scroll
handle. Greenish jade. With teakwood stand.
Ming, 1368-1643 A.D.
Height without stand 1 /% inches.
345. JADE LIBATION CUP
Standing on three slender legs the body of the
vase is carved with a bovine mask interrupted
with teeth-like flanges, while the flaring lip and
handle hold a conventionalized cicada design.
Greenish white jade.
19th Century. Height 7% inches.
346. JADE KORO
Resting on three low legs terminated at the top
with a snake design, around the center of the body
is carved a conventionalized bird motive and on
the shoulder are two strong but simply carved
animal heads holding movable rings. The cover
repeats the decoration on the body and is topped
by a curled dragon in relief. White jade. With
teakwood stand inlaid with ivory.
17th Century. Height without stand inches.
347. JADE COUPE AND COVER
The vase is tubular and undecorated except for
lines depicting petals and the cover is carved to
represent an inverted flower topped by a bud.
The long oblong handle is carved with the mean-
der pattern and topped by a seated deer, while a
floral design connects the handle to the vase at
the lower end. Greyish jade. With teakwood
stand.
17th Century.
Height without stand 5% inches.
348. PAIR OF JADE SCREENS
Decorated on one side with a mountainous
scene with figures in the foreground and a pagoda
and pine trees completing the picture, the reverse
side has a poem by Emperor Chien Lung carved
and gilded. Greenish jade.
18th Century. Size 11x7 inches.
349. JADE CIRCULAR TABLE SCREEN
One side depicting a mountain scene with a
pagoda in front of which runs a river, a sage
crosses a bridge in the foreground while the high
mountains are seen in the background. On the
reverse side is a wind blown pine tree beside a
rock. Celadon white jade. Teakwood stand.
18th Century. Diameter 7*4 inches.




350. PAIR OF JADE WINE CUPS
Carved in the form of a chrysanthemum and
egg shell in texture. White Jade.
18th Century.
Height without stand 1 / 2 inches.
351. JADE PENDANT
Carved on either side with a conventionalized
dragon design forming a mask at the top. White
jade. With stand.
18th Century. Height without stand 2 inches.
352. PAIR OF JADE SNUFF BOTTLES
Without decoration. White jade with coral
tops.
18th Century, Height inches.
353. JADE DISH
Eggshell in texture, the dish is decorated with
encircling bands of petals depicting a chrysan-
themum, enhanced by two open-work handles
holding movable rings. Celadon jadite.
18th Century. Diameter with handles 7J/2 inches.
354. JADE PLAQUE
Circular plaque with a conventionalized
goose and two characters indicating Longevity
on one side and two sheep and three characters
indicating Prosperity on the other. White jade.
With teakwood stand.
18th Century. Diameter 2 inches.
355. JADE BOWL
Eggshell in texture, the bowl is carved with
narrow flutes to give the effect of a chrysanthe-
mum. White jade. With teakwood stand.
18th Century. Height without stand 2 inches.
356. JADE BUCKLE
With a dragon head hook, the buckle is
carved with a conventionalized open-work
curled dragon in relief. White jade. With teak-
wood stand.
18th Century. Length 3J4 inches.
357. JADE COUPE AND COVER
Resting on a low petal base, the entire body is
carved with a floral spray design, with two floral
handles at the lip. The cover is carved with a
leaf-like medallion and is terminated at the top
by a floral knob. White jade. With teakwood
stand.
18th Century. Height without stand inches.
358. WHITE JADE ANIMAL
In the form of a reclining horse with his head
resting on his foreleg. White jade. With teak-
wood stand.
18th Century. Length inches.
359. JADE BOWL
Carved in the form of a flower, each petal
being enhanced with veins. Celadon white
jadite. With teakwood stand.
18th Century. Height without stand 1/ 2 inches.
360. PAIR OF JADE
CRICKET CAGES
With an all-over open-work fret background,
one tube is carved with the figure of a man, the
other of a woman. Greenish jade.
17th Century. Length j/4 inches.
361. JADE VASE
In the form of an old bronze, the center of
the vase is carved with a mask, bordered at the
top and bottom by a conventionalized cicada
motif divided by teeth like flanges. Up one
side of the vase crawls a dragon in search of the
pearl. White jade. With teakwood stand.
Ming, 1368- 1643 A.D,
Height without stand SJ/2 inches.
362. JADE KORO
Standing on three legs elaborately carved with
floral design, the entire body is decorated with
an open-work arrangement of flowers, scrolls
and leaves. Around the lip are four floral handles
holding movable rings. The cover is in three
parts, each repeating the open-work design on
the body, the upper portions have four loops
holding rings while the top two movable rings
and an open-work floral knob. White jade.
With teakwood stand inlaid with silver wire.
18th Century. Height without stand 6/2 inches.
363. JADE VASE
In the form of a slender beaker, the flaring
base and top is carved with a cicada motif
while the band in the center holds running
dragons. Celadon white jade. With teakwood
stand.
Ming, 1368- 1643 A.D.
Height without stand 6 inches.
364. PAIR OF JADE KOROS
Resting on three short legs and terminating
in a flower, the entire vase is carved with a
floral scrolled spray. On the lip are two open-
work floral sprays forming handles and holding
movable rings. The cover is in two sections, the
first an open-work band of floral scrolls, the
rounded top carries the same decoration and is
terminated by a floral knob. Light greenish
white jade. With teakwood stand.
18th Century. Height without stand 8 inches.
365. JADE MOUNTAIN
One side depicting a water scene with men
fishing, which is topped by the river flowing
before a tiny village and a man with an um-
brella crossing a bridge. On the reverse side the
jagged surfaces have been carved with growing
pine trees. Finely executed into a pleasing ar-
rangement. Greenish white jade.
17th Century. Height 7% inches.




366. BEAKER SHAPE JADE VASE
Undecorated with flaring mouth and a slight-
ly buldging band around the center. White jade.
With old teakwood stand.
18th Century. Height without stand inches.
367. JADE TRAY AND CUP
A plain jade cup rests on a lotus pedestal
which is attached to a petal shaped tray, un-
decorated except for a line of the meander pat-
tern around the edge. White jade. Teakwood
stand.
17th Century. Height without stand 3 inches.
368. JADE BRUSH HOLDER
Circular in form without decoration and
standing on three low legs. White jade. With
teakwood stand.
18th Century. Height without stand 3*4 inches.
369. PAIR OF JADE VASES AND
COVERS
Hexagonal in shape, the vases are without
decoration, except for six loops with movable
rings on the shoulders and loop on the cover.
White jade. With teakwood stands,
18th Century. Height without stand 4 inches.
370. JADE VASE
Resting on a low base, the body of the vase
slenders at the neck, Undecorated except for
two tubular handles at the neck. Light greenish
jade.
18th Century Height 6J/2 inches.
371. PAIR OF WINE CUPS
Without decoration. White jade. With teak-
wood stand.
18th Century Height 2*4 inches.
372. AGATE COUPE
Low round dish with fluting around the entire
body, two handles composed of a flower and
stem hold movable rings.
Diameter 3% inches.
373- AGATE SEAL BOX
The entire lower part and cover decorated
with fluting, finished with a round medallion
in the center giving the effect of a chrysanthe-
mum. With teakwood stand.
Diameter 3 inches.
374. JADE VASE
A small vase with animal handles is held on
the back of a much beplumed standing phoenix
whose head is turned looking forward. Stand-
ing on the wing of the phoenix, and with head
peering around the side of the vase, is a finely
carved dragon in high relief. White jade. Teak-
wood stand.
18th Century. Height without stand 444 inches.
375. PAIR OF JADE RICE BOWLS
AND COVERS
Without decoration. Greenish jade. Teak-
wood stands.
18th Century. Diameter 4/4 inches.
376. JADE VASE
The flattened vase is undecorated except for
two conventionalized dragon handles, in open-
work at the neck. The cover is also plain and
carries a small rope-like knob as a finial. Beauti-
fully grained celadon white jade. With teakwood
stand.
Ming, 1368- 1644 A.D.
Height without stand Q l /o inches.
377. JADE VASE
Oblong in form, the center is encircled by a
band holding raised grains, crawling up one
corner, in high relief, is a dragon whose head
with open mouth extends above the top of the
vase. White jade. Teakwood stand.
17th Century. Height without stand, 5/2 inches.




378. AGATE SNUFF BOTTLE
Decorated on the front and back with two
panels holding a floral spray, the same motive
repeats on the rounded sides. Jade top.
18th Century. Height inches.
379. JADE BOX
Undecorated round box cut from a beautiful
shade of Pi yu or morse green jade. With teak-
wood stand.
18th Century. Diameter 234 inches.
380. JADE HORSE
Standing with bent head and one foreleg
lifted off the ground. The tail is knotted and
lines evidence the hair on the tail and mane.
Emerald green jade with white markings. Teak-
wood stand.
19th Century. Height inches.
381. JADE BOX
In the form of a standing duck the back and
tail carved with feathers, the head turned look-
ing forward and in his mouth he holds a floral
spray. Fei Tsui or emerald green jade. With
teakwood stand.
18th Century. Height without stand 2> l A inches.
382. AMBER SNUFF BOTTLE
With an all decoration of fishes and two
mask handles in low relief. Jade top.
18th Century Height 3 inches.
383. AMETHYST VASE AND COVER
Elaborately decorated with a floral spray in
high relief on the back, the front holds a spray
of wheat and birds while three figures complete
the decoration. The cover is topped by a lotus
flower and birds who cling to the petals. Teak-
wood stand.
19th Century. Height 7 inches,
384. SEATED FIGURE
Holding a sceptre in his hands, one of the three
Auspicious Stars, the God of Prosperity is seated
on a rock pedestal with his right knee bent. The
finely cut face is modelled with a beard and his
simple robes are incised with medallions giving
a brocaded effect. At his side on the base ap-
pears a crouched kylin. Soapstone. With teak-
wood stand.
18th Century. Height without stand Bj4 inches.
385. LAPIS LAZULI WATER POT
A squat round jar on which is carved on one
side a phoenix, while peering across the top
from the other side a ferocious dragon seems
about to leap at its prey, curled waves and
rocks about the base complete the decoration.
With teakwood stand.
18th Century. Height without stand 3 inches.
386. PAIR OF JADE ORNAMENTS
Depicting a standing crane and her young.
The smaller one faces the mother who stands
proudly with the head thrown back and holding
in her mouth a floral branch. Lavender jade
with a splash of brown. Teakwood stand.
19th Century. Height 7 inches.
387. JADE COUPE
Ovoid in shape and carved underneath with
a leaf and floral design. A floral motive gives a
spout-like effect to one end while the other holds
a curved handle. Spinach green jade. Teakwood
stand.
18th Century. Length 5 inches.
388. LARGE JADE BASKET
Resting on a low petal-like foot the basket is
decorated with low relief panels showing ducks
and fishes in the water. From the basket and en-
twined about a standing handle are growing
lotus and pads on one of which pads is carved
a small duck in emerald green. Fei Tsui or
emerald green jade. Height 10 *4 inches.
389. JADE CUP
Decorated with a low raised hexagonal panel
from the side of which two lines jut out. The
handle is in the form of a monster who appears
to be biting the side of the object. Spinach
green jade.
18th Century. Height inches.
390. JADE DISH
Resting on a low foot the plate is undecor-
ated, except for an irregular edge forming petals.
Spinach green jade.
19th Century. Length 11 inches.
391. LARGE JADE VASE AND COVER
In the form of an old bronze, the body is un-
decorated except for two masks with rings in
relief and two t’ao t’ieh masks in high relief
holding movable rings on the shoulder. The
cover is also undecorated except for three small
rams in high relief which encircle it on the top.
Fei Tsui or emerald green jade. With teakwood
stand.
19th Century. Height without stand 10% inches.
392. JADE DISH
Very flat and shallow with an encircling petal
design around the edge. Celadon green jade.
18th Century. Diameter 9*4 inches.




393. PAIR OF JADE BOXES
In the shape of a flattened mellon the grey-
ish jade is streaked with white resembling
marble. 19th Century. Diameter 434 ins.
394. JADE VASE
Slender in form and decorated at the base
and rim with a band of pointed leaves, encircl-
ing the center is a mask design formed by spirals
and attached to the side of the vase are two
elongated dragons in relief forming the handles.
Fei Tsui or emerald green jade. With teakwood
stand. Height without stand 6 inches.
395. JADE COUPE AND COVER
In the form of a fantastic bird with the bill
forming the spout, it rests on a low pedestal with
a petal design, while the body is carved with a
stylized animal. The handle is like fret work,
topped by turtle and under the spout a dragon’s
body holds a movable ring. The cover is sur-
mounted by a nesting bird and two movable
rings. Spinach green jade. With teakwood stand.
19th Century. Height without stand inches.
396. JADE VASE
Beaker shape with slightly flaring base and
lip, the lower and upper section is ornamented
with a cicada design and the center carries a
bovine mask. Fei Tsui or emerald green jade.
Height 6/4 inches.
397. PAIR OF JADE VASES
In the form of an old bronze, resting on a
flaring foot the body of the vase is encircled with
ridges and two masks in relief. Attached to the
neck near the rim are two dragon heads hold-
ing movable rings and the cover is surmounted
with a floral rosette. Fei Tsui or emerald green
jade. Height 8 ins.
398. JADE DISH
In the shape of a half gourd encircling one
side of which is beautifully cut leaf and branch
design in open-work. Fei Tsui or emerald green
jade. With teakwood stand. h. y/4 ins.
399. JADE PAGODA KORO AND COVER
Resting on three legs terminated by a floral
scroll design, the body of the vase is carved with
a branch, leaf and flower motif, while on the
shoulder two beautifully carved open-work
sprays form the handles holding movable rings.
The cover is in the shape of a pagoda with flar-
ing fluted roof hanging from which are tiny
bells, tiny open-work panels form the house
below and the roof is topped by a round open-
work knob. Light spinach green jade.
19th Century. Height without stand 8% inches.
4 00. JADE COUPE
In the form of a leaf the edge of which is
carved in points, connecting the two sides is an
open-work floral design enhanced by a grass-
hopper and a spider about to walk across. Fei
Tsei or emerald green jade. With teakwood
stand. 19th Century. Length 5*4 inches.
401. TURQUOISE VASE AND COVER
Their tails encircling the base, two tigers in
relief crawl up the vase to the lip, and the
cover is surmounted by a curled seated dragon
looking forward. With teakwood stand.
18th Century. Height without stand 4J/2 inches.
402. AMBER ORNAMENT
Carved to depict two ho ho boys, one stand-
ing and holding a bird, the other seated holding
a basket in his lap. With teakwood stand.
18th Century. Height without stand 3 inches.
403. AMBER VASE AND COVER
In the form of an old bronze, the base is en-
circled by a scroll design which is repeated on
the shoulder and at the lip, two dragon head
handles holding movable rings are attached at
the shoulders. The cover is surmounted by a
standing dog foo and pup. Teakwood stand.
19th Century. Height without stand SJ/0 inches.
404. ROSE QUARTZ TEAPOT
Oblong in shape and undecorated except for
a reclining animal as the finial of the cover.
19th Century. Height 2/4 inches.
405. AGATE VASE
In the form of a tree trunk about which is
growing fungus, branches and leaves. Red agate.
18th Century. Height 4J4 inches.
406. CRYSTAL ORNAMENT
Hugh frog with two of its young, one of whom
crawls on her back, the other playfully puts its
leg in her mouth. White crystal.
18th Century. Height 2/2 inches.
407. CRYSTAL ORNAMENT
Depicting two birds, one with his claw on a
rock, the other standing on the larger one’s
back. White crystal except for the smaller bird
which is smoky crystal. Beak restored.
18th Century. Height without stand g/\ inches.
408. ROCK CRYSTAL ORNAMENT
Crystal ball and resting on a rock base, en-
hanced by three rabbits, flowing from the base
is a cloud-like effect which terminates in a scroll
on the top of the ball. Pure white crystal.
18th Century. Height g/ 2 inches.




CERAMICS
China has always been a pioneer in ceramics from the Neolithic period beginning in
2500 B.C. up to to-day. Always encouraged by the patronage of the Court, the art of ceramic
making has steadily and continuously improved, so much so that the word “China” is
now synonymous with ceramics. The continuity of development of this branch of Chinese
art through forty-five centuries is unique and exceptional, providing us with a chance to
follow the Chinese creative mind through the ages.
Many collectors will agree that the peak of perfection was reached at the Ch’ien-Lung
period ending 1796 A.D. when the famous Ku Yiieh Hsiian objects were produced and
the colors, designs and porcelain became finest and purest. On the other hand, many
prefer the strength and vigor of the earlier periods so much so that certain kilns, especially
of the Sung period, 960-1280 A.D. have their special devotees. We have endeavored to
include a few representative pieces of these kilns, as well as a group covering this art,
through the ages.
409. LARGE POTTERY JAR
Coated all over with a dark green glaze show-
ing iridescense, the shoulder is encircled by a
molded design of fantastic animals.
Han, 206 B.C. - 220 A.D. Restored.
Height 14 inches.
410. LARGE POTTERY POT
Decorated in relief with an encircling band
of scrolled flowers and leaves, the top with pro-
truding curled points in high relief and a groove
decoration, terminated by flat and raised petals
finishing the design at the lip. Brown terracotta
with traces of brown glaze. From Indo-China.
15th Century A.D. Height 13/2 inches.
41 1. LARGE POTTERY JAR
Coated all over with a greenish brown glaze,
the shoulder encircled by a molded design show-
ing hunters and animals in the forest.
Han, 206 B.C. to 220 A.D.
Height 15 inches.
412. POTTERY JAR
Brownish pottery jar with a high neck and
ring handles in relief, the shoulder of the vase
is painted with a circle design in red and black
on the unglazed pottery. Found in Kansu
Province.
Neolithic, 2,500 to 1200 B.C.
413. LARGE POTTERY JAR
The black pottery body is entirely covered
with a tiny basket weave pressed design and
holds two small scroll shaped appliques near
the lip.
Late Chou, Bth to 3rd Century B. G.
414. TERRA COTTA JAR
With bulging shoulders and ring handles
in relief. From the low shoulder to the top a
geometric pattern is painted in a dark brown.
Found in Kansu Province.
Neolithic, 2500 - 1200 B.C. Height 12 inches.
4i5- TERRA COTTA ANIMAL
Seated on a low base with the right leg high
in the air, the winged and horned monster is
defying the evil spirits. Red terracotta coated
with a white pigment.
Tang, 618-906 A.D. Height inches.
416. TERRA COTTA ANIMAL
A seated animal with a human face, large
ears and a high headdress. White terracotta
with the face and neck showing traces of red
paint and the beard black.
Tang, 618 - 906 A.D. Height 12/2 inches.
417. TERRA COTTA MONSTER
With a ferocious face and high horns, his
front legs terminated by wings he sits, with
open mouth, repelling the attack of an evil spirit.
White terracotta showing red pigment.
Tang 618-906 A.D. Height inches.
418. STANDING TERRA COTTA
FIGURE OF A WESTERNER
Standing clad in a simply long waisted coat
with his right arm held high and under his left
a package. Light terracotta coated with brick
red pigment.
Tang, 618-906 A.D. Height 13 inches.
419. TERRA COTTA CAMEL
Standing with his proud head high and hold-
ing on his back a hugh round pack. White terra
cotta coated all over with a thin creamy glaze.
Tang, 618-906 A.D. Height 12/2 inches.
420. TERRA COTTA FIGURE OF
A TRAVELER
With body bent forward and pack on his
back the wanderer treads his weary way. White
terracotta with red pigment.
Tang, 618-906 A.D. Height inches.




421. PAIR OF TERRA COTTA
DANCING BOYS
Dressed in a belted coat with hands high and
outstretched, their knees are bent in the attitude
of the kossak’s dance. This type of dancing was
doubtless copied from this technique and many
Sythian plaques show the same rhythm proving
that Central Asia has used this form of the
dance for many centuries. Black terracotta.
Wei, 386-581 A.D. Height inches.
422. TERRA COTTA ACTOR
Standing with feet apart and pointed out-
ward, one knee slightly bent and the body with
outstretched arms swung slightly to the right.
His face is clear cut and his short jacket is open
at the chest.
Tang, 618-907 A.D. Height 14% inches.
423. POTTERY DOG
Standing on four long legs, his ears forward
and the heavy short tail curled over his back.
The body is carved with a floral design and a
half ring is attached at the neck. Reddish pot-
tery showing iridescence, originally glazed.
Han, 206 - 220 A.D. Height inches.
424. TERRA COTTA OX CART
A strongly built ox with the shaft attached
to the horns, pulls a covered wagon resting
on large solid disc wheels with a rounded roof
protruding over the front and rear. The bridle
of the ox is studded with discs and the trappings
across his back hold low knobs bordered by a
line of pendants which hangs below the shaft.
Terra cotta showing red pigment.
Wei, 386 - 581 A.D.
Height 7% inches, length iGy. inches.
425. TERRA COTTA ANIMAL
In the form of an archaic animal standing on
four low feet, his head is held high with open
mouth and large square teeth protruding, the
body of the beast is undecoratcd except for a
spine-like modelling down the back.
Wei, 386-581 A.D. Height inches.
426. TERRA COTTA MONGOLIAN
Wearing a long plain coat and with his hands
clasped at his chest. Terra cotta showing traces
of red pigment.
Tang, 618 - 907 A.D, Height ioj/4 inches.
427. PAIR OF BLACK TERRA COTTA
FIGURES
Kneeling with their hands stretched in front
of the body, one is clad in a belted dress while
the other has a panel decorating the front of
his coat.
Wei, 386-581 A.D. Height 6/2 inches.
428. STANDING TERRA COTTA
WOMAN
Her head slightly bent to the side and her
hair arranged in two high knots, one arm, con-
cealed in a long sleeve, hangs at her side while
the other is held at her high waist line. Terra
cotta showing traces of red pigment.
Tang, 618 - 907 A.D. Height inches.
429. STANDING TERRA COTTA
WOMAN
Her hair piled high upon her head and held
across her left arm are folds of her flowing dress.
Showing Greek influence.
Tang, 618 - 907 A.D. Height 10/2 inches.
430. TWO TERRA COTTA STANDING
MEN
Wearing a long cape which covers the neck,
their long coats hang almost to the ankles and
the hands are clasped in front at the waist
line.
Tang, 618-906 A.D. Height 10 inches.
431. TWO TERRA COTTA
DANCING GIRLS
Standing with their bodies slightly bent, their
heads turned, and one arm high in the air,
the effect of a swaying rhythm is gracefully
depicted. Their headdress is high and elaborate
but their flowing gowns arc simple and orna-
mented only by a sash across one shoulder.
Tang, 618-907 A.D. Height ioj/4 inches.
432. STANDING TERRA COTTA
WOMAN
With fine well modelled features and her hair
topped by a high headdress. The folds in her
high waisted dress are painted in red and around
her shoulders she wears a scarf. Terra cotta.
Tang, 618-907 A.D. Height 12 inches.




433. TWO STANDING TERRA COTTA
FIGURES
Wearing a flat high hat, one hand rests at
the waist and probably originally carried a staff.
Wei, 386-581 A.D. Height 7)4 inches.
444. TWO STANDING TERRA COTTA
WARRIORS
Wearing a tight grooved hat and the body,
to just above the knees, clad in armor. Terra
cotta with traces of red pigment remaining on
the sleeves.
Wei, 386-581 A.D. Height 8% inches.
445. TERRA COTTA STANDING FIGURE
Wearing a high plain hat and the arms
clasped in front at the waist line under long
flowing sleeves. Terra cotta with red pigment.
Wei, 386-581 A.D. Height io)4 inches.
446. FIVE TERRA COTTA SIGNS
OF THE ZODIAC
Five of the existing set of twelve figures, each
standing with a human body and the head of a
different animal or bird, under the folds of
their simple robes the hands are clasped.
Tang, 618-907 A.D. Height inches.
447. PAIR OF STANDING TERRA
COTTA FIGURES
Wearing a high hat and standing with their
hands clasped in front of them. Their high
waisted dresses fall in folds about their bodies
and around the shoulder a cape hangs to their
knees on the sides. Terra cotta coated with
a creamy white glaze. With teakwood stand.
Early Tang, 618-907 A.D.
Height without stand 8 inches.
448. FOUR TERRA COTTA SEATED
FIGURES
Depicting four men seated on a low stool
each their hands raised in different attitudes.
Tang, 618 - 907 A.D. Height 5 inches.
449. TERRA COTTA STANDING MAN
With head slightly bent, his heavy hair is cut
long and frames a smiling face, one arm hugs
his side while the other is raised in the air and
holds a flat cake, his coat becomes tight at the
waist line and ends just above the knees. Terra
cotta glazed with creamy white.
Tang, 618 - 907 A.D. Height j/4 inches.
450. TERRA COTTA STANDING
WOMAN
Her hairdress is arranged in folds becoming a
slight peak on one side, in her hands she holds
a vase and her closely fitting plain dress is or-
namented only by a belt which hangs below her
knees in the front. Terra cotta.
Sui, 581 - 618 A.D. Height io)4 inches.
451. BLACK TERRA COTTA
SEATED FIGURE
Wearing a high plain hat, the figure is
depicted squating on the ground and holding in
front of her a wide pan for sifting rice. Terra
cotta with white and red pigment.
Wei, 386 - 581 A.D. Height 6 inches.
452. TERRA COTTA KNEELING
FIGURE
With her knees bent to the floor and her
body leaning slightly forward she holds her arms
in an outstretched attitude. Her plain dress
clings closely to the body and the sleeves from
which her hands protrude terminate in large
muff-like cuffs. Terra cotta with red pigment.
Wei, 386-581 A.D. Height 7/2 inches.
453. TERRA COTTA FEMALE FIGURE
Kneeling figure of a woman with a high top
knot on her head holds in the left hand a large
flat musical instrument. (Bi Pa).
Wei, 386-581 A.D. Height 5/2 inches.
454. TERRA COTTA STANDING
WOMAN
Her hairdress is arranged in folds becoming
a slight peak on one side, in her hands she
holds a box and her close fitting plain dress is
ornamented only by a belt which hangs below
her knees in the front. Terra cotta.
Sui, 581 - 618 A.D. Height 10 / 2 inches.




455. STANDING TERRA COTTA
FIGURE OF A DIGNITARY
Depicted with a smiling face, scolloped beard
and a high headdress, his hands protrude from
the long sleeves and are clasped at his waist.
White terracotta, showing traces of earth.
Tang, 618-906 A.D. Height 24 inches.
456. LARGE TERRA COTTA FIGURE
Standing figure of a woman with long hair
looped off her face and hanging to her shoulders,
her long flowing dress is well modelled and her
hands clasped under her long sleeves at her
chest. Brownish terracotta showing traces of
white pigment.
Tang, 618-906 A.D, Height inches.
457. LARGE STANDING TERRA COTTA
FIGURE
Standing figure of a woman with small fine
features and simple hairdress, her long plain
robe flares at the foot to form a base and the
sleeves carry holes in which something she car-
ried was once inserted. Brownish terracotta
with red pigment tracing the outline of her robe.
Early Wei, 4th Century A.D.
Height 25/2 inches.
458. STANDING TERRA COTTA
WARRIOR
With helmet and a simple armor he stands
with his hands in front of him as though carry-
ing a staff. White terracotta showing traces of
earth.
Tang, 618 - 906 A.D. Height inches.
459- TERRA COTTA HORSE AND
RIDER
A female figure is seated astride a horse, terra
cotta showing traces of red and black pigment.
Tang, 618 - 906 A.D. Height 13/2 inches.
460. LARGE TERRA COTTA HORSE
In a reclining position with the head turned
toward the left, the saddle cloth is ornate and
around his chest and back are tassels in relief.
White terracotta showing red and purple pig-
ment and traces of earth.
Tang, 618-906 A.D. Length 23 inches.
461. TERRA COTTA RUNNING HORSE
A riderless horse with saddle and head turned
toward the left. Light terracotta with the sad-
dle painted red. Mounted on teakwood stand.
Legs restored.
Tang, 618 - 906 A.D. Length 13 inches.
462. TERRA COTTA HORSE
Well modelled with his right leg raised and
his head turned toward the left. Brownish terra
cotta showing white pigment and traces of earth.
Tang, 618-906 A.D. Height 13 inches.
463. LARGE TERRA COTTA HORSE
Standing with the right fore leg raised high.
White terracotta with traces of red on the sad-
dle and the mane and tail painted black.
Tang, 618-906 A.D. Height 21 inches.
464. TERRA COTTA HORSE
Standing with head slightly drawn in and
ears back, the saddle with high pommel and
back. White terracotta showing traces of earth.
Tang, 618 - 906 A.D. Height 1234 inches.




465. ROUND POTTERY JARDINIERE
Resting on three low feet the entire outside is
molded into circular grooves, coated on the out-
side with a brilliant green glaze and on the
inside with a strong yellow.
Tang, 618 - 906 A.D. Fleight 5 inches.
466. POTTERY EWER
Conventionalized into a dragon, the head be-
ing the spout, the tail the handle, around the
body are lines resembling the scales and a band
of rosettes encircle the shoulder, coated all over
with a reddish brown glaze.
From Jehol. Sung 960- 1280 A.D.
Height 61/4 inches.
467. ROUND POTTERY JARDINIERE
Resting on three low feet the entire outside
is molded into circular grooves, coated on the
outside with a deep greyish blue and on the in-
side with yellow.
Tang, 618 - 906 A.D. Height inches.
468. PAIR OF POTTERY VASES
Pear shape with long necks, the lower part
is unglazed while the neck has a thin creamy
glaze and encircling the body is a carved floral
and leaf design in yellow and green.
Sung, 960 - 1280 A.D. Height 81/4 inches.
469. SMALL FLAT ROUND POTTERY
BOX
White pottery body coated all over with a
deep blue glaze.
Tang, 618-906 A.D. Diameter 2/2 inches.
470. POTTERY SEATED FIGURE
OF A LADY
Seated on a pedestal she holds a bird in her
right hand, her face is unglazed as is also the
high headdress, while her short jacket and long
skirt, exposing upturned shoes, is coated with a
flowing glaze of greens and browns.
Tang, 618-906 A.D. Height 16 inches.
471. SMALL FLAT ROUND
POTTERY BOX
White pottery body coated all over with a
mottled green and white glaze.
Tang, 618 - 906 A.D. Diameter 2/4 inches.
472. POTTERY FIGURE OF A
WARRIOR
With his right arm lifted and standing on an
animal (depicting his enemy) the entire armor
coated with three color glazes.
Tang, 618-906 A.D. Height BJ/4 inches.
473. LARGE POTTERY DUCK
Its feathers and wings modelled under the
glaze, the cover on the back topped by a seated
frog, coated all over with the brown and green
glaze typical of the Tang period.
Tang, 618-906 A.D. Height 111/4 inches.
474. POTTERY FIGURE OF A BOXER
Standing with his right arm flung high in the
air, his chest thrown forward and head back he
depicts a feeling of great strength, the body is
coated with a dark brown glaze and his skirt
is of a dull green. With teakwood stand.
Ming, 1368- 1644 A.D.
Height without stand 13/2 inches.
475. LARGE POTTERY HORSE
Standing on a low pedestal with the head
turned toward the left, the body is entirely
coated with a creamy glaze splashed with light
green, while the saddle cloth is a darker green
with a brown glazed saddle.
Tang, 618 - 906 A.D. Height 20 inches.
476. POTTERY PLATE
Resting on three short legs the inside of the
plate is decorated with a floral medallion sur-
rounded by a scroll design of floral and leaf
medallions pressed in an exquisite design and
coated with brilliant blue, green and yellow
glazes against a creamy white background. With
teakwood stand.
Tang, 618 - 906 A.D. Diameter 1 1/4 inches.
477. LARGE POTTERY HORSE
Standing on a low pedestal with the head
turned toward the left, the body is entirely
coated with brown, the nose glazed white, while
the saddle cloth is yellow with a green saddle.
Tang 618 - 906 A.D. Height 20 inches.




478. TOMB RETINUE
Comprising a set of ten, including two digni-
taries, two warriors, two camels, two horses and
two monsters. The base of the figure is white
terracotta which is coated with a brilliant three
color glaze typical of the Tang period.
Such a retinue was buried with a military chief,
the two dignitaries to help him in a civilian
capacity, the two military warriors to aid him in
war, the two horses to carry him on his journeys,
the two camels to carry the necessary packs for
his journeys and the two demons to attack any
evil spirit that might appear.
Several larger sets (in height) are known, one
of which was found in Honan in 1906 during
the excavations for a railway. This set was pur-
chased by Mr. Eumorfopolous of London and is
now in the British Museum.
Tang, 618 - 906 A.D. Height of demons 18 ins.,
figures 21 ins., horses 14 ins.,camels 16 ins.




479. POTTERY INCENSE BURNER
Resting on a tray with three animal feet, the
edge of which is decorated with a tiny band of
rosettes, the incense burner has the base of a
stem cup supporting a dish on the top. Coated
all over with a greenish crackled glaze.
Yueh Ware, Early Tang, 618 - 906 A.D.
Height inches.
480. ROUND POTTERY DISH
Outside undecorated, inside with cut peony
encircled by a large leaf. Coated all over with
an even green glaze.
Yueh Ware, Five Dynasties 907 - 960 A.D.
Diameter SJ/2 inches.
481. DEEP POTTERY BOWL
With low base and flaring wide at the top,
coated all over with a soft green glaze and
lined at intervales on the inside.
Yueh Ware, Tang 618-906 A.D. H. 5 ins.
482. POTTERY BOX AND COVER
Coated with a yellowish green glaze under
which on the top is a panel showing a floral
incised design encircled by a scrolled border. Yueh
Ware, Tang 618-906 A.D. D. 6 ins.
483. POTTERY JAR
Coated all over with a greyish green glaze
running short at the base, the vase is undec-
orated except for a rope-like design in relief
around the flat shoulder.
Yueh Ware, Early Tang, 618 - 906 A.D.
484. ROUND POTTERY JAR
Coated all over with a yellowish green glaze
and undecorated except for a line of stars, three
small low motives of a man on a horse and three
half ring handles around the shoulder.
Yueh Ware, Six Dynasties, 221 -589 A.D.
Height BJ/2 inches.
485. POTTERY LOTUS CUP
On a low petal base, the undecorated cup is
held in a flower whose petals are modelled in
relief. Coated with a light greyish glaze.
Yueh Ware, Tang 618 - 906 A.D. H. 3 / 2 ins.
486. POTTERY URN
The body is undecorated at the lower part
and on the shoulders appear in low relief floral
sprays, emerging from which are two dragon
head handles with their horns bent back and
their hugh mouths biting the lip of the jar.
Coated all over with an even greenish grey glaze
running short at the base.
Yueh Ware, Sui 518-618 A.D. H. 15% ins.
487. POTTERY WATER POT
Lion, crouching with the head bent back and
chest thrown forward, the hair is depicted by
lines and the strength of the legs by scrolls. Coated
with a yellowish grey glaze.
Yueh, Six Dynasties, 221 - 589 A.D. L. 5 ins.
488. POTTERY VASE
Short neck and flaring lip, undecorated except
for two small masks and ring handles on the
shoulder. Coated with a yellowish glaze.
Yueh Ware, Early Tang 618-906 A.D.
Height BJ/2 inches,
489. POTTERY GALLIPOT VASE
With short neck and coated all over with a
soft buff glaze with minute crackles. On one
side appears a large spot of iron rust caused by
the burying. Found in Chi-Lo-Hsien.
Tzu Chou, Sung 906- 1279 A.D. H. 13 ins.
490. POTTERY PILLOW
Medallion decoration holding a spray of peonies
and leaves ornaments the top which is edged
by a creamy white frame.
Tzu Chou, Sung 906- 1279 A.D. L. 11 ins.
491. POTTERY GALLIPOT VASE
With a slender base enlarging at the shoulder
and terminated by a short neck, the brownish
pottery body is coated with a buff glaze which
has been cut away to form an exquisite design
of petals at the base and two large peony flowers
separated by a branch and leaf design. The dec-
oration on the vase is white except for splashes
of iron rust crackled glaze due to the burying.
Lip repaired. Found in Chi-Lo-Hsien.
Tzu Chou, Sung 906 - 1279 A.D. H. 12/2 ins.
492. DEEP POTTERY BASIN
Undecorated but coated all over with a finely
crackled buff glaze. Found in Chi-Lo-Hsien.
Tzu Chou, Sung 906- 1279 A.D. D. ins.
493. TALL POTTERY VASE
With long slender neck and trumpet shaped
lip, the lower part of the vase is decorated
with a deeply cut petal on the slip, the body of
the vase is encircled by panels holding flowers
and a beautifully arranged scroll surrounding
the panels, on a flattened shoulder a similar
floral motive is cut to complete the design.
Coated with a thin creamy white glaze.
Tzu Chou, Sung 907 - 1279 A.D. H. 17 ins.
494. DEEP POTTERY BASIN
The outside coated with a white glaze run-
ning short at the foot, the inside holds a floral
central medallion surrounded by petals encircled
on the deep side by a floral band and leaves
sut on the slip. Found in Chi-Lo Hsien.
Tzu Chou, Sung 907 - 1279 A.D. D. 14% ins.




495. POTTERY VASE
On a slightly flaring black foot the body is
decorated with an etched peony coated with
black encircled by scrolls of leaves against a
background of creamy white.
Tzu Chou, Sung, 906- 1279 A.D. H. 8 ins.
496. PAIR OF POTTERY BOWLS
The greyish pottery body coated on the in-
side and out with a deep unctuous jet black
glaze bordered at the rim by a white band.
Tzu Chou, Sung 960 - 1279 A. D. D. ins.
497. POTTERY PILLOW
Encircled at the base by a raised design of
flowers under the glaze, the top ornamented
with a panel containing a peony against a black
background encircled by a floral scroll in black
under the white creamy glaze.
Tzu Chou, Sung 906- 1279 A.D. H. 5 ins.
498. HIGH SHOULDERED POTTERY
VASE
With a short neck and the body decorated
with a leaf, open-work scroll at the shoulder
cut on the slip showing the unglazed yellowish
pottery as a background, the lower part is a
plain black glaze running short at the foot.
Tzu Chou, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D. H. 8 ins.
499. ROUND POTTERY BOWL
Flaring bowl on a low foot and the edge
nicked to resemble a petal, the outside is plain
while the inside holds a fish and floral motif
cut under the glaze. The glaze is thin and has
taken on a beautiful buff patina.
Yin Ching, Early Sung 906- 1279 A.D.
Diameter 8 inches.
500. LOW BULBOUS POTTERY COUPE
In the form of a melon with a low base and
wide at the lip, white pottery body coated all
over with a thick white glaze.
Sung, 906 - 1279 A.D. Height 3/2 inches.
501. POTTERY GALLIPOT VASE
With small neck, the yellowish pottery body
is coated with a fine buff glaze under which a
beautifully executed floral spray with leaves and
butterflies is painted in brown. Lip repaired.
Tzu Chou, Sung 906 - 1279 A.D. H. 15J/2 ins.
502. BULBOUS POTTERY BOWL
With a wide opening at the lip the inside of
the bowl is etched with a petal, encircling the
outside is a scroll design finely etched against
a background of tiny circles under a white glaze.
Tzu Chou, Sung 906- 1279 A.D. H. 2/2 ins.
503. TRIPOD POTTERY DISH
Resting on three paw-like feet the entire sur-
face is coated with a white glaze.
Sui Dynasty, 581 - 618 A.D. D. 634 ins.
504. POTTERY, ROUND PLATE
The brownish pottery is unglazed on the out-
side while against a background of green, a
leaf design in white encircles a central medal-
lion holding a white lotus with yellow leaves.
Five Dynasties 906 - 960 A.D. D. 7 ins.
505. ROUND POTTERY BOWL
Resting on a low foot, the white pottery body
is decorated on the outside with a plain white
glaze while the inside holds a peony and leaves
in the center in green and rouge de fer sur-
rounded by a circle of lines in yellow, red and
green.
Tzu Chou, Sung 906 - 1279 A.D. D. 634 ins.
506. ROUND POTTERY PLATE
The brownish pottery is unglazed on the out-
side while against a background of green glaze
a leaf and floral design in white and yellow en-
circles a. central medallion of a white phoenix
among yellow clouds.
Five Dynasties, 906 - 960 A.D. D. 7 ins.
507. POTTERY FIGURE OF A BOY
Standing on a low pedestal with his hands
clasped in front of him and his black hair done
in tiny knots on his head. The upper part of
his coat is white, while a long scarf and trim-
ming on a green apron is in brilliant red.,
Tzu Chou, Sung 906 - 1279 A.D. H. 12*4 ins.
508. SMALL POTTERY FEMALE HEAD
Beautifully modelled white glazed face framed
by jet black hair which is topped by an elabor-
ate headdress with bird and feathers in scarlet.
Tzu Chou, Sung 906 - 1279 A.D. H. 3/2 ins.
509. POTTERY VASE
With slightly flaring base, long neck and flar-
ing lip, encircling the base is a band of black
while under a green glaze, much of which has
disintegrated, is traced a bold peony and scroll
leaf design in black. Lip repaired.
Tzu Chou. Sung 906 - 1279 A.D. H. 11/2 ins.
510. SMALL POTTERY HEAD OF A
DIGNITARY
Beautifully modelled white glazed face with
black moustach and beard and the hair com-
pletely covered by a jet black cap.
Tzu Chou, Sung 906 - 1279 A.D. H. 2/2 ins.
51 1. SEATED POTTERY EMPRESS
Her black hair topped by a red, green and
yellow headdress and her robe with long sleeves,
from which protrude her clasped hands, is or-
namented with medallions and designs matching
in color the headdress. The face and hands are
coated with a pure white glaze as is also the
lower back of the figure.
Tzu Chou, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D. H. 9J/4 ins.




512. POTTERY VASE
Pear shaped vase with slightly flaring lip and
two handles holding rings, coated all over with
an even dark celadon glaze splashed with iron
rust spots. With teakwood stand.
Lung Hsuan, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D.
Height without stand inches.
513. SMALL POTTERY DISH
Resting on a low foot the dish is molded into
a petal form, coated all over with a brownish
grey glaze.
Yueh Ware, Six Dynasties 211 - 589 A.D.
Diameter 5 inches.
514. POTTERY PEDESTAL
Coated all over with a dark celadon glaze
which is splashed with iron rust spots.
Lung Hsuan, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D.
Height 3 inches.
515. POTTERY BOWL
With small low foot and flaring at the open-
ing the entire piece is coated with a crackled
buff glaze.
Hang Chou, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D.
Diameter 5% inches.
516. POTTERY VASE
With a low shoulder and slightly flaring rim-
med lip coated all over with a fine even buff
glaze.
Lung Hsuan, Sung 960- 1279 A.D.
Height 5% inches.
517. SWALLOW POTTERY DISH
Modelled into the form of a flower, coated
all over with a bluish-grey crackled glaze and
rimmed at the edge with copper. With teakwood
stand.
Kuan Yao, Sung 960- 1279 A.D.
Diameter 5 inches.
518. POTTERY DISH
Resting on three legs and coated all over with
a light greyish crackled glaze. With teakwood
stand.
White Ko Yao, Sung 960- 1279 A.D.
Diameter yj/2 inches.
519. SHALLOW POTTERY DISH
In the form of a flower resting on a low foot,
coated all over with a grey crackled glaze. With
teakwood stand.
Kuan Yao, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D.
Diameter 6 inches.
520. POTTERY VASE
Resting of a flaring foot, the vase is lined
into plain panels and holds two small handles
at the shoulder, coated all over with a bluish-
grey glaze,
Kuan Yao, Sung 960- 1279 A.D.
Height inches.
521. SMALL SQUARE POTTERY COUPE
Coated all over with a greyish crackled glaze.
Ko Yao, Sung 960- 1279 A.D.
2/2 inches square.
522. ROUND POTTERY SEAL
AND COVER
Coated all over with a greenish grey glaze
showing large crackles on the lower part. With
teakwood stand.
Kuan Yao, Sung 960- 1279 A.D.
Diameter 4 inches.
523. SMALL SQUARE POTTERY COUPE
Coated all over with a crackled blue glaze.
Ko Yao, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D.
2/2 inches square.
524. POTTERY VASE
With low shoulder and flaring lip, the entire
piece is coated with a light bluish glaze with
buff crackles. With teakwood stand.
Kuan Yao, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D.
Height without stand SJ/4 inches.
525. FLAT POTTERY DISH
Modelled in the form of a flower coated all
over with a bluish-grey crackled glaze. With
teakwood stand.
Kuan Yao, Sung 960- 1279 A.D.
Diameter 6 inches.
526. POTTERY VASE
In the form of an old bronze with tube
handles on the shoulder and coated all over with
a grey glaze with large crackles. Cut at neck and
repaired with teakwood. With teakwood stand.
Ko Yao, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D.
Height without stand 9% inches.
527. FLAT POTTERY DISH
Modelled into the form of a flower, coated
all over with a fine greyish crackled glaze and
rimmed at the edge with copper. With teakwood
stand.
Ko Yao, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D.
Diameter 6*4 inches.




528. POTTERY VASE
Low body resting on a low foot and termin-
ated by a long neck coated all over with a soft
greyish-green crackled glaze.
Hang Chou, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D. H. 634 ins.
529. POTTERY POT AND COVER
The white pottery body is quoted all over
with a fine pure celadon glaze.
Lung Hsuan, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D. H. 2*4 ins.
530. PORCELAIN VASE WITH COVER
Decorated on the lower part with a low petal
design, the upper part and shoulder is en-
circled with grooves and around the neck in
high relief crawls a dragon with open mouth.
The cover is surmounted by a bird, coated all
over with an even celadon glaze.
Lung Hsuan, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D. H. 8 ins.
531. PORCELAIN BOX AND COVER
Decorated on the top with a low molded
floral design, the body is coated all over with a
crackled green glaze.
Lung Hsuan, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D. D. 3/2 ins.
532. PORCELAIN VASE
Body with slightly slooping shoulder, long
neck and flaring lip, the entire object coated
with a greyish-green glaze of fine texture.
Lung Hsuan, Sung 960- 1279 A.D. H. 6 ins.
533. POTTERY BOWL
Resting on a low base and flaring at the open-
ing, the entire outside is encircled by a low
molded petal design coated all over with a
celadon glaze.
Hang Chou, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D. D. 6% ins.
534. SQUARE PORCELAIN VASE
Low foot and short neck, the vase is orna-
mented with the Pa Kwa design and coated with
a large crackled celadon glaze.
Lung Hsuan, Sung 960- 1279 A.D.
Height inches.
535. PAIR OF POTTERY VASES
On a low foot, the base of the vase is dec-
orated with a leaf design, the body holds a scroll
motif of flowers and leaves and on the neck,
under a flaring lip, are two handles holding
rings, coated with a light celadon glaze.
Sung 960-1279 A.D. Height 5/2 inches.
536. PORCELAIN BOWL
On a low base and flaring at the opening,
the entire outside is encircled by a low molded
petal design coated with a celadon glaze.
Lung Hsuan, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D. D. 7 ins.
537- POTTERY VASE AND COVER
Resting on a low foot, the body of the vase is
decorated with a large leaf design and the cover
terminated by a standing animal, coated all over
with a dark green glaze. Northern Celadon,
Sung 960- 1279 A.D. Height 10J/2 inches.
538. POTTERY BOWL
Resting on a low foot the outside is decorated
with an etched petal design around the base and
lines around the rim while the inside holds a
sketchy floral design under the dark green glaze.
Northern Celadon, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D.
Diameter inches.
539. PORCELAIN TEAPOT
With short spout and half ring handle, coated
with an even light celadon glaze.
Lung Hsuan, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D. H. 3 ins.
540. POTTERY BOWL
On a low foot and flaring at the opening, the
outside ornamented with a bold leaf design un-
der the glaze while the inside holds a decoration
of peonies and leaves cut on the paste, coated
with a dark green glaze.
Northern Celadon, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D.
Diameter 9 inches.
541. HEXAGONAL PORCELAIN VASE
On a low foot with a mask design under the
glaze, around the shoulder are two animal heads
in high relief holding rings, coated with a light
celadon glaze with large crackles.
Lung Hsuan, Sung 960- 1279 A.D. H. 9 ins.
542. PORCELAIN VASE
On a low foot and terminating in a bulb lip,
coated with an even celadon glaze.
Lung Hsuan, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D. H. io*4 ins.
543. SMALL PORCELAIN COUPE
Coated all over with a bluish-green glaze with
large crackles. With teakwood stand.
Lung Hsuan. Sung 960 - 1279 A.D. D, 5*4 ins.
544. PORCELAIN PLATE
The outside is encircled by a low molded
petal design while the inside shows a dragon
in relief encircled by large molded leaf scrolls,
coated with a light celadon glaze.
Lung Hsuan, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D. D. 13 /% ins.
545. SMALL PORCELAIN COUPE
Coated all over with an even celadon glaze.
Lung Hsuan, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D. D. ins.
546. PORCELAIN GALLIPOT VASE
Coated with a smooth even eladon glaze.
Lung Hsuan, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D,
Height 11 inches.




547. PAIR OF VASES
Mounted on a pedestal the vase holds scroll
handles on its shoulders and the lip is irregular
to form a petal, coated all over with celadon
glaze. With teakwood stand.
Lung Hsuan, Sung 960- 1279 A.D.
Height without stands. 5*4 inches.
548. WATER POT FOR BIRD’S CAGE
Decorated around the center of the small re-
ceptacle with a molded prunus design, the hard
porcelain body is coated all over with a shadowy
blue glaze. With teakwood stand.
Ying Ching Ware, Sung 906- 1279 A.D.
Height without stand inches.
549. ROUND BOWL
Hard porcelain body coated all over with a
bluish glaze under which on the inside is a
wave design with fishes. With teakwood stand.
Ying Ching Ware, Sung 960- 1279 A.D.
Diameter 634 inches.
550. ROUND BOX
Plain on top and decorated by a petal design
encircling the entire body.
Yin Ching Ware, Sung 960- 1279 A.D.
Height inches.
551. DEEP ROUND SHALLOW BOWL
With a petal edge and holding in the center
a large low relief peony and branch under the
glaze, hard porcelain body coated all over with
a bluish glaze. ~
Yin Ching Ware, Sung 960- 1279 A.D.
Diameter 8 inches.
552. INCENSE BURNER
In the form of a tray resting on a low scol-
loped base on which a duck is on a lotus ped-
estal, the feathers are molded in low relief under
the glaze and the mouth is open so as to allow
the incense to escape. Hard porcelain body
coated all over with a light bluish glaze. Found
in Chi-Lo-Hsien.
Yin Ching Ware, Sung 960- 1279 A.D.
Height 794 inches.
553. DEEP ROUND BOWL
Resting on a low foot flaring to the rim, the
inside holds a design of cartoon-like infants
separated by beautifully designed medallions
worked out with scrolls molded under the glaze.
Hard porcelain body coated all over with a
bluish-white glaze. With teakwood stand.
Yin Ching Ware, Sung 906- 1279 A.D.
Diameter 8 inches.
554- ROUND POT AND COVER
Undecorated and coated all over with a light
bluish glaze.
Yin Ching Ware, Sung 960- 1279 A.D.
Height 2% inches.
555. PAIR OF STEM CUPS
Resting of a low foot and modelled with an
irregular edge depicting petals, the hard porce-
lain body is coated with an even bluish glaze.
Yin Ching, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D. H. 2 ins.
556. STEM CUP
Resting on a pedestal with scolloped base and
two round tiers with fluting, the cup is held in
the center of a lotus flower whose petals en-
circle the base. Hard porcelain coated all over
with a light bluish glaze.
Yin Ching Ware, Sung 960- 1279 A.D.
Height 3/2 inches.
557. SMALL BOWL
Hard porcelain body coated all over a bluish
glazed under which is cut a sketchy lotus flower.
Yin Ching Ware, Sung 960- 1279 A.D.
Height inches.
558. SMALL ROUND BOWL
Resting on three low feet, the center of the
vase is decorated with a low molded floral
branch under the glaze and at the top and
bottom with a line of small rosettes.
Lung Hsuan Ware, Sung, 906- 1279 A.D.
Height inches.
559. SMALL ROUND DISH
Resting on a low foot the hard porcelain body
is coated all over with an unctuous bluish glaze.
Yin Ching Ware, Sung 960- 1279 A.D.
Diameter 4 inches.
560. BOTTLE SHAPED VASE
Hard porcelain body coated with a greyish-
white glaze under which at the front and back
is painted a floral spray in iron rust tones.
Yin Ching Ware, Sung 960- 1279.
Height 6 inches.
561. SMALL ROUND DISH
In the form of a flower, the hard porcelain
body is coated with a light bluish glaze, becom-
ing buff at the dividing lines of the petals. With
teakwood stand.
Yin Ching Ware, Sung 906- 1279 A.D.
562. SMALL ROUND JARDINERE
Resting on three low feet, undecorated and
the entire object coated with a light bluish
crackled glaze.
Yin Ching Ware, Sung 906 - 1279 A.D.
Height 2*4 inches.




563. ROUND POTTERY JARDINERE
Resting on three low feet, the body of the
vase is encircled by groups of three lines, coated
all over with a pure white glaze.
Ting Yao, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D. H. ins.
564. POTTERY STEM CUP
Resting on a slightly flaring base ornamented
with encircling grooves, the entire object is
coated with an even creamy white glaze.
Sung 960 - 1279 A.D. Height 3 inches.
565. POTTERY COUPE
In the form of a peony coated all over with
a creamy white glaze. With teakwood stand.
Ting Yao, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D. D. 434 ins.
566. POTTERY STEM CUP
Resting on a pedestal with three tiers, the
upper two in the form of petals, the cup has a
wide flaring lip and the entire object is coated
with a pure white glaze.
Sung 960 - 1279 A.D. Height inches.
567. POTTERY BOWL AND COVER
The outside flutetd to resemble petals, the
cover is incised with a lotus leaf under the glaze,
a small scroll handle adorns the top, coated
all over with a creamy white glaze.
Ting Yao, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D, H. 5 ins.
568. DEEP POTTERY BOWL
Coated with a white glaze running short at
the foot. Spur marks show on the inside.
Tzu Chou, Sung 960- 1279 A.D.
Diameter 7j4 inches.
569. SMALL ROUND POTTERY POT
Coated all over with an even white glaze and
showing two lines encircling the rim.
Sung 960 - 1279 A.D. Height inches.
570. ROUND POTTERY PLATE
Decorated under the white glaze with an in-
cised design depicting a graceful peony spray.
Ting Yao, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D. D. io*4 ins.
571. SMALL ROUND POTTERY VASE
Modelled in the form of a melon and carry-
ing two small loop handles on its shoulders,
coated with a greyish-white glaze.
Five Dynasties, 907 - 960 A.D. H. ins.
572. DEEP POTTERY BOWL
Coated all over with a thick creamy white
glaze bound by a copper rim at the edge.
Ting Yao, Sung, 960 - 1279 A.D.
Diameter 9 inches.
573- ROUND POTTERY DISH
Decorated with a cut design of lotus and
leaves, coated with a creamy white glaze.
Ting Yao, Sung 960- 1297 A.D. D. 634 ins.
574. PAIR OF POTTERY BOWLS
Flaring out from a small foot the dishes are
decorated on the inside with a cut lotus motif
and leaves, coated with a creamy white glaze.
Ting Yao, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D. D. ins.
575. BOTTLE SHAPED POTTERY VASE
Resting on a low base with a long slender
neck, the entire object is beautifully decorated
under the glaze with molded interlaced branches,
fungus and leaf design, coated all over with a
creamy white unctuous glaze. Soft paste.
Sung 960- 1279 A.D. H. 8/ 4 ins.
576. ROUND POTTERY DISH
With a slightly irregular edge forming a
flower and coated all over with a white glaze.
Ting Yao, Sung 960 -1279 A.D. D. ins.
577. ROUND POTTERY DISH
Cut on the paste on the inside with a peony
and leaf design and coated with a creamy white
glaze.
Ting Yao, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D. D. 7% ins.
578. SMALL DEEP POTTERY COUPE
Modelled into a flower and coated with an
even pure white glaze.
Sung, 960 - 1279 A.D. Diameter inches.
579. ROUND POTTERY PLATE
Decorated on the inside with a beautifully ar-
ranged molded design of peonies and leaves
under a creamy glaze. Metal rim.
Tu Sing, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D. D. 1 ij4 ins.
580. SMALL POTTERY BOWL
Encircling the inside is a molded floral dec-
oration on the slip, coated all over with a creamy
white glaze.
Sung 960- 1279 A.D. Diameter 4 inches.
581. ROUND POTTERY DISH
The center decorated with a cut design of a
dragon which is encircled by a molded design
of waves under a creamy white glaze. Metal rim.
Ting Yao, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D. D. g 1 ins.




582. SMALL ROUND POTTERY BOWL
Coated all over with a greenish-blue glaze
and splashed with reddish lavender inside and
outside.
Chun Yao, Sung, 906- 1279 A.D. H. 2 ins.
583. PEAR SHAPED POTTERY VASE
Resting on a low foot with slender neck and
flaring lip coated all over with a light sky blue
glaze with crackles.
Ma Chun Yao, Sung, 960 - 1279 A.D.
Height 5)4 inches.
584. ROUND POTTERY PLATE
Coated all over with a bluish, red and lav-
ender glaze. With teakwood stand.
Hang Chou, Chun Yao, Southern Sung 1127-
1280 A.D. Diameter 6)4 inches.
585. POTTERY RAM VASE
Standing on six legs, depicting ram’s legs, the
body is decorated with the heads of three long
horned rams in relief and terminated by a short
neck with slightly flaring lip. Coated with a light
blue crackled glaze splashed with red.
Ma Chun Yao, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D. H. 4)4 ins.
586. SMALL ROUND POTTERY BOWL
Coated all over with a blue glaze, the outside
splashed with reddish lavender, the inside mot-
tled, reddish lavender ending with a yellowish
edge. Repaired.
Chun Yao, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D, H. i)4 ins.
587. POTTERY VASE
With short neck, the entire body is coated
with a blue, lavender and reddish glaze.
Chun Yao, Yuan 1280 - 1367 A.D. H. 7 ins.
588. PAIR OF POTTERY PLATES
Coated all over with a beautiful soft greyish
blue glaze leaving a brownish edge at the rim.
Chun Yao, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D. D. 5 ins.
589. POTTERY VASE
In the form of an elongated melon with
slightly flaring base and a short neck, coated
with a light sky blue glaze with crackles.
Chun Yao, Yuan 1280 - 1367 A.D. H. 8)4 ins.
590. PEACH SHAPED POTTERY COUPE
Half peach stone, the outside modelled to depict
the stone, the inside coated with a blue glaze
showing flecks of lavender at the rim.
Ni Chin Chun Yao, Ming, 1368- 1644 A.D.
Length 7)4 inches.
59i- ROUND POTTERY PLATE
Coated with a mottled blue and lavender
glaze leaving a brownish edge at the rim.
Chun Yao, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D. D. 7)4 ins-
-592. POTTERY VASE
With small base flaring to a wide shoulder
and very short neck, the vase is coated all over
with a light blue finely crackled glaze.
Chun Yao made in Ni Shing, Yuan, 1280-
1368 A.D. Height 4 inches.
593. DEEP POTTERY BOWL
Coated with a greyish green crackled glaze.
Chun Yao, Sung, 960 - 1280 A.D. H. 3)4 ins.
594. ONION SHAPED POTTERY POT
Resting on a low base, coated with a brilliant
turquoise blue glaze with tiny crackles.
Ma Chun Yao, Yuan, 1280- 1367 A.D.
Height 2)4 inches.
595. ROUND POTTERY DISH
Coated with a light sky blue crackled glaze,
Chun Yao, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D. D. 7)4 ins.
596. DEEP POTTERY BOWL
Coated with a light sky blue glaze.
Chun Yao, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D. D. 8)4 ins.
597. POTTERY POT WITH COVER
Coated with a greyish green crackled glaze.
Chun Yao, Yuan, 1289 - 1367 A.D. H. 3)4 ins.
598. POTTERY VASE
With slender base and short neck, the entire
vase is coated with a thick, unctuous sky blue
glaze splashed with reddish lavender running
short at the base.
Chun Yao, Sung, 960 - 1269 A.D. H. 13% ins.
599. POTTERY BOX AND COVER
Standing on a very low foot the box is en-
tirely coated with a greyish green glaze splashed
with lavender. Repaired.
Chun Yao, Sung, 960 - 1279 A.D. H. 2 ins.
600. ROUND POTTERY MORTAR
Undecorated except for a band of rosettes at
the rim and base, coated all over with an unctu-
ous sky blue glaze showing a vein-like design
under the glaze.
Chun Yao, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D. H. 3)4 ins.




601. ROUND POTTERY BOWL
The hard greyish pottery body is coated all
over with a black and grey souffle glaze, the grey
color predominating. From Fu-Kien Province.
Chien Ware, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D. D. 6 ins.
602. POTTERY LAMP
Resting on a low petal base with a cup-like
top having long slits and an opening in the
front, coated all over with a brown glaze.
Probably Tzu Chou Ware, Sung 960-1279
A.D. Height 3% inches.
603. DEEP POTTERY BOWL
The yellowish pottery is coated on the outside
with a brown glaze splashed with yellow while
on the inside against a brown and yellowish
souffle glaze are sprays of cherry blossoms in
dark brown.
Chien Ware, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D. D. 6/2 ins.
604. POTTERY JAR
With a large opening at the lip the greyish
pottery body is coated with a dark olive glaze
running short at the base.
Tzu Chou Ware, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D.
Height 4 inches.
605. ROUND POTTERY BOWL
The yellowish pottery body is coated all over
with a black glaze splashed with irregular yel-
lowish spots.
Chien Ware, Sung 960- 1279 A.D. D. 6 ins.
606. POTTERY BOWL WITH COVER
Greyish pottery coated all over with a brown
glaze flecked with silvery oil spots, glaze running
short at base. From Honan Province.
Sung 960- 1279 A.D. Height 6 inches.
607. PAIR OF POTTERY BOWLS
The outside is entirely coated with a mottled
brown and yellow glaze while the inside holds
three flying phoenix and a central flower painted
in brown under the yellowish glaze. Repaired
at lip.
Chien Ware, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D. H. ins.
608. PEAR SHAPED POTTERY VASE
With long slender neck and flaring lip, coated
with a dark olive glaze under which is painted a
floral spray in light brown.
Sung 960- 1279 A.D. Height inches.
609. POTTERY VASE
Round body with a short neck and flaring lip,
the greyish pottery is coated all over with a black
glaze showing silvery oil spots, glaze running
short at base. Found in Honan Province.
Sung 960- 1279 A.D. Height 6}4 inches.
6 io. ROUND POTTERY BOWL
The greyish pottery body is coated all over
with a dense dull black glaze under which on
the inside is a large yellowish buff leaf. Found
in Kian-Fu, Kian-Si Province.
Sung, 960 - 1279 A.D. Diameter 6 inches.
611. COVERED POTTERY MORTAR
Black pottery body, round in shape with a
spout, coated all over with a dull black wash.
Han 205 B.C. to 220 A.D. D. 8 ins.
612. POTTERY BOWL
Decorated on the outside by an unctuous black
glaze flecked with yellowish spots, the inside
holds a yellow, blue and reddish souffle glaze
carrying a prunus branch in black under the
glaze. Found in Kian-Fu, Kian-Si Province.
Chien Ware, Sung 290 - 1279 A.D. H. ins.
613. ROUND BOX AND COVER
Black pottery body, undecorated except for a
bevelled effect at the edge of the cover and
coated all over with a dull black wash. Cracked.
Han, 205 B.C. to 220 A.D. D. 5% ins.
614. POTTERY BOWL
Decorated on the inside with a floral design
in buff and brown, the outside is coated all over
with a dense black glaze running short at the
base. Found in Kian-Fu, Kian-Si Province.
Chien Ware, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D. D. 5 / 2 ins.
615. DEEP ROUND BOWL
Yellowish pottery body coated all over with
a reddish brown glaze on the inside and running
short about half way down on the outside.
Sung 960 - 1279 A.D.
616. ROUND POTTERY BOWL
Coated all over with a black glaze holding
rain drop splashes in the inside. Found in Honan.
Sung 960- 1279 A.D. Diameter 4% inches.
617. DEEP ROUND BOWL
Black pottery body entirely coated with a
black glaze rubbed to a brown in spots.
Han, 205 B.C. to 220 A.D. H. 5 ins.
618. SMALL POTTERY BOWL
Coated all over with a black and brownish
souffle glaze running short at base. Found in
Honan.
Chien Ware, Sung 960 - 1279 A.D.
Diameter 3J/4 inches.
619. DEEP POTTERY BOWL
Dark pottery body coated inside and outside
with a black glaze and brown hare’s hair mark-
ings.
Chien Ware, Sung, 960 - 1279 A.D. D. 8 ins.




620. PAIR OF POTTERY FIGURES
Two standing men with unglazed faces and
painted pink hats, their simple long coats with
flowing sleeves are coated green while around
their waists appear a pink belt.
Ming 1368- 1644 A.D.
Height 10J/2 inches.
621. POTTERY ORNAMENT
Figure of P’ou-hien (Samantabhadra) riding
an elephant, he holds in his hands a sceptre, the
top of which is unglazed as is his face, hands,
chest and the elephant’s tusks, the elaborate
crown as well as his flowered robes are coated
all over with an even celadon glaze.
Ming 1368- 1644 A.D. Height 9% inches.
622. OBLONG INK PAD
The sides panelled in dark blue surrounded
by turquoise, the top holds an unglazed wave
design. The lip is cut out and peeping through
this are the heads of two fishes glazed yellow.
With teakwood stand. Ming biscuit.
Ming 1368- 1644 A.D. Length BJ/2 inches.
623. POTTERY ORNAMENT
Figure of P’ou-hien (Samantabhadra) riding
an elephant, the face, neck and hands unglazed,
the high crown and flowing robe elaborately
decorated and coated all over with a clear cela-
don glaze.
Ming 1368- 1644 A.D. Height 10 inches.
624. INCENSE BURNER
Resting on three legs coated with a turquoise
glaze, the body is coated with a deep aubergine
glaze on which creamy flowers and turquoise
leaves form the decoration. Fa Hwa.
Ming 1368- 1644 A.D. Height 5 inches.
625. SMALL VASE
In the form of an old bronze resting on a low
foot with a short thick neck, undecorated except
for three sets of encircling lines and coated all
over with a aubergine glaze.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. Height 4/2 inches.
626. GALLIPOT VASE
Heavy pottery body coated all over with a
deep turquoise glaze under which has been
painted a spray of peony and leaves in black.
Tzu Chou, Sung 960- 1127 A.D.
Height 10/2 inches.
627. SMALL POTTERY VASE
Resting on a low foot with flaring body and
long slender neck, undecorated and coated with
an aubergine glaze and for a short distance inside
the vase with a turquoise blue.
Ming 1368- 1644 A.D. Height 6/2 inches.
628. INCENSE BURNER
Resting on a high foot, with two unglazed
elephant head handles, coated with an aubergine
glaze and decorated with a large creamy and
yellow floral spray enhanced by turquoise blue
leaves. Fa Hwa.
Ming, 1368- 1644 A.D. Height 5 inches.
629. PAIR OF POTTERY VASES
With slightly flaring base, high shoulder and
high neck, the body is decorated with two
creamy lotus intercepted by turquoise leaves on
an aubergine ground. Fa Hwa.
Ming, 1368- 1644 A.D. Height 7 inches.
630. PAIR OF FOO DOGS
Seated on a high pedestal, one with his paw
resting on a ball, the other on a pup, the base
is coated with turquoise and lavender while the
pottery body of the dogs are turquoise with
yellow tail and mane. Fa Hwa.
Ming 1368- 1644 A.D. Height 7 inches.
631. STANDING FIGURE OF A SAGE
With unglazed hat, epaulets and shoes, he
stands bent slightly over clasping his hands
under the long sleeves of his turquoise robe.
With teakwood stand. Ming biscuit.
Ming 1368- 1644 A.D.
Height without stand inches.
632. STANDING FIGURE OF A SAGE
With high headdress and a long beard, he
holds in his right hand a wand, and on his back
a sword, all of which are unglazed, while his
robe and base are coated all over with a light
turquoise blue. Ming biscuit.
Ming 1368- 1644 A.D. Height 15/2 inches.
633. SQUARE BEAKER SHAPED VASE
Outlined and panelled in dark blue, the
panels on the base hold turquoise blue waves
while the panels decorating the rest of the sur-
face hold the meander pattern and geometric
designs. Two animal head handles ornament the
neck. Ming biscuit.
Ming 1368- 1644 A.D. Height 12/2 inches.
634. FIGURE OF A HOHO BOY
Standing on an oblong turquoise base, the
hair is curled in two knobs and held with a
turquoise ornamentation which matches in color
the glaze on the coat, the face and chest is un-
glazed as also is the skirt under the coat. Ming
biscuit.
Ming 1368- 1644 A.D. Height inches.


Cat.
*1 600
Cab,
cat
i.
Cab.
Cat.
♦
cat. #.
cab.
4
Cat.
4 Cat -
Cat.
i.
X
45
4 oo
89
50
133
150
178
4 50
245
450
289
160?
334
160
378
12
422
160
2
4 500
46
4500
90
BO
134
600
179
420
246
loo
290
ISO
335
SO
379
40
423
80
3
1500
47
1250
91
60
135
1 80
180
550
247
12 5
291
191
336
150
380
ISO
424
230
4
7500
48
ihoo
92
60
136
150
181
180?
248
150
292
150
337
50
381
75
425
30
5
2500
49
425
93
800
137
500
182
200
249
150
293
100
538
150
382
13
426
15
6
15 00
50
300
94
60
138
150
183
ISO
250
120
294
125
339
200
383
AO
427
250.P.
r
8000
51
250
95
hO
139
125
184
350
251
125
295
500?
340
60
384
125
426
50
8
3200
52
1 600
96
250
140
160
185
100T.
252
200
296
250
341
4 00?
385
150
429
50
9
600
53
1200
97
250
141
AO
186
150.r.
253
75
297
150
342
80
386
150?.
430
30?
10
1500
54
225
98
I 60
142
ZOO
187
600
254
120
298
100
343
300
387
25
451
250?
li
2500
55
220Of
99
150
143
ZOO
i 88
36 0
255
120
299
160
344
25
388
300
432
LOO
12
1500
56
4 00
100
350
144
500
189
260
256
160
300
125
345
60
389
65
433
50?
1J
ZOO
57
8 00.1
101
450
145
200
190
6 SOI.
257
150
301
25
346
500
390
100
444
35?
14
/ 500
58
7200
102
100
1 46
A 00
191
600
258
ZOO?.
302
65
347
40
391
750
445
100
15
750
59
1500
103
aoo
147
400
192
280
259
200
303
30
348
720?
392
150
446
100.5
16
500
60
2250
104
8 00
148
100
193
280
260
180
3o4
60
349
300
393
200?
447
30?
17
5000
61
500
105
1000
149
80
194
380
261
125
305
30
350
100?
394
60
440
120.5.
18
500
62
7500
106
1 50
150
550
195
750
262
100
306
100
351
9
395
30
449
35
19
600
63
2 800
107
ZOO
151
500
196
550
263
70
3 07
85
352
40.E
396
€0
450
ISO?.
20
/ 200
64
425
108
1 SO
152
125
197
(About 350
1 of Jewels
264
225
308
35
353
250
397
600?
451
50
21
4 80
65
16000
109
75
153
2 00
221
.36000
265
4 00
309
120
354
7
398
30
452
200
22
2 500
66
5500
110
600
154
120
222
160
266
LOO
310
100
355
55
399
Sold
453
40
23
6 000
67
Jc.vse.1
111
80
155
450
223
100
267
350
311
75
356
10
400
25
454
150 ?
24
6000
68
3200
112
1 25
156
500
224
500
268
4 00
312
60
357
250
4 01
Sold
455
3Z0
25
280
69
1200
113
60
157
400
225
120
269
60
313
130
358
30
4 02
50
456
350
26
6000
70
8000?
114
550
158
250
226
150
270
40
314
ho
359
J60
403
75
457
460
27
600
71
1500
115
2 00
159
260
227
125
27J
120
315
75
360
15 OR
404
40
458
250
28
600
72
1800
116
150
160
260
228
AO
272
100
316
60
561
125
405
100
459
75
29
hOO
75
800
117
I 60
161
125
229
AO
273
ZOO.T.
317
40
362
850*
406
125
460
500
30
2500
74
2500
118
150
162
2 75
230
200
274
200
318
100?
363
70
4 07
250
461
350
31
650
75
2800
119
hoo
163
120
231
140
275
90
319
60
364
JQOO.P.
408
75
462
150
32
2ooo
76
M 60
120
L 60
164
3 00
232
1200
276
125
320
50
365
ISO
409
LOO.
463
450
33
8 00
77
8000. ?
121
250
165
80
233
150
277
400.5.
321
225
366
120
410
200
464
loo
34
1200
76
1500
122
500
166
30
234
1000
278
125
322
45
367
ISO
4U
120
465
150
35
2750
79
2800
123
580
167
ISO
235
35
279
40
323
25
368
46
412
LOO
466
120
36
800
80
1000
124
10QE
168
100
236
250
280
60
324
38
369
4 50?
413'
280
467
200
37
2000
81
50
125
800
169
180
237
100
281
80
325
25
370
12
414
120
468
600?
38
480
<82
4 5
126
200.?.
170
1200
238
80
282
60
326
50
371
160?
415
120
469
ZOO
39
1000
83
'80
127
280 0
171
k 00
239
80
283
160
327
Sold
372
Sold.
416
50
470
1500
40
650
84
60
128
500?
172
200
240
60
284
250
328
225
373
8
417
45
471
Ho
41
4800
85
40
12 9
160
173
174
160
IIS
241
80
285
180?
329
120
374
130
418
120
472
150?
42
600
86
50
130
400
175
1200X
242
200
286
120
330
50
375
230?
419
160
473
1200
43
6500
87
75
131
250?
176
SO
243
90
287
150
331
25
376
12 0
420
160
474
300
44
500
68
90
»32
50 0
177
160?
244
100
288
100
332
333
40
S4
377
120
421
260. P
475
300
C. T. LOO & COMPANY
N EW YORK
•41 EAST 57 th STREET
TEL PLAZA 3 2106
CHINESE ART
N EW YORK
PARI S
48 RUE OE COURCEUES
CABLE ARCHAIC
PRICE-LIST OF ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE
Of
CHINESE ARTS
This list of prices is good from November Ist 191j.l to April 30th 1 9)1?
and, despite the exceptional reductions, it already includes a three
per cent contribution for relief of the WAR ORPHANS in China


Cn
cn
cn
cn
cn
Cn
cn
cn
cn
Cn
tn
Oi
Ol
a
Cm
Ol
Cn
cn
509
tn
u>
cn
cn
cn
cn
Cn
cn
cn
VD
VO
to
0o
J>
4^
Jr
♦fc*
J*
Jr
Jr
Jr
j*
4*
Jr
J»
n
TV)
O
ro
cn
ro
4r
ro
Cm
ro
ro
N>
fV)
O
S
Oo
-4
O'
cn
*4>
ro
0
O
Oo
0
01
0
tn
O
►J*
0
Cm
O
TM
0
O
O
vo
*4
vo
Oi
CD
tn
VD
Cm
vo
TM
vo
VO
0
CD
VO
cp
Oo
CP
'J
0D
Ol
0d
cn
OD
4>
CD
CM
0D
JNJ
Oo
Oi
0
2
s
v*
N
Ov
bi
Ni
Vm
jr
4>
cn
K*
o
Jr
Cm
Cm
a^.
Cm
►t-
CP
TVi
U
vn
K*
05
Vo
TM
cn
K.
tM
s
K»
Cm
Oi
Cl
o
d
d
cn
ft
Cn
cn
T\)
4?
TM
Kj
Cm
CD
0Q
Cl
0
N>
0o
Ol
O
0d
Cl
Cl
N N
TM
c>
Oc
C>
0,
cn
Cn
Cl
TM
Jr
Cm
Vn
Js
Vn
U
Qo
N*
ol
d
§
*<>
d
d
o
o
d
Cl
o
0
Cl
cn
O
C)
cn
O
Cl
Cl
Cl
vn
0
Cl
O
Cl
O
Cl
C5
vn
vo
cn
Cl
§
Cl
C>
Cl
O
Ci
O,
Cl
Cl
Oc
d
cn
d
Oo
d
vn
Cl
.d
]«A
0\
0
Os
d
tn
cn
tn
cn
cn
cn
cn
cn
cn
tn
cn
cn
cn
tn
cn
tn
tn
cn
cn
cn
Cn
cn
V)
cn
cn
cn
cn
cn
Cn
cn
Cn
Cn
tn
cn
Ol
cn
CP
cn
vn
tn
tn
cn
cn
vn
Oi
tn
Us
cn
cn
r»
— 4 -vj
•wj
-~4
'— I
VJ
cn
CP
CP
CP
CP
ov
CP
CP
<P
CP
cn
cn
cn
cn
cn
cn
cn
cn
cn
cn
Ji-
Jr
Jr
Jr
Jr
Jr
VP
O*
CM
CM
VP
CM
Cm
Cm
Vm
Cm
TV*
ro
rvj
-■^4
CP
Vn
4?
Cm
ro
n-
o
ci>
Oo
CP
cn
4>
O*
ro
*—
0
tx>
C 6
Ol
01
Jr
CM
TO
r—
0
VD
Of — I
CP
Cn
Jr
CM
ro
0
CD
00
N
Ol
cn
CP
ro
k*
O
CO
0B
-4
rr
Cm
Ov
TM
Jr
o
Vn
0>
no
cn •
hs.
Or
Tm
Or
o.
0d
-4
Cjo
0
Cm
J>
Ol
4>
Cm
Nj
V*.
00
Os
Ol
0
TM
Cn
??
cn
4n
0
K,
O
Nc
cn
V^.
Cn
vi
Kj
O)
TM
Vn
Jr
Vm
v
<n
Jr
CP
VD
Vn
■P
u
tm
d
TM
d
.d
rtj
o
O
rxJ
O
d
cn
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl
vn
Cl
Cn
Cl
O
cn
Cl
<C>
Ci
O
0
o
Sj
Cl
Cl
ci
Ci
c>
Cn
O
Cl
cn
o
Cl
cn
vn
Cn
vn
Sj
CD
d
d
vn
bo
d
d
cr>
cr>
CP
CP
CP
CP
cp
o>
CP
Cl
on
on
CP
CP
CP
Oi
on
Ol
CP
Ol
CP
Ol
cp
(P
CP
g
CP
CP
CP
cn
cn
Cn
Cn
cn
O'
cn
tn
vn
01
vn
tn
tn
cn
g
cn
cn
cn
(jy
IT
cn
vn
0
TNJ
ro
ro
N
ro
ro
ro
PM
ro
mrnrn
mrnm
0
s
0
0
c
0
O
0
O
VD
to
to
CO
CO
tD
CO
vo
<0
to
n&
8
0d
CD
2
Co
on
00
Cp
s
rL
Oo
CD
tn
►fc*
CM
ro
0
vO
CD
(T>
cn
4>
CM
ro
0
CD
Oi
tn
»>•
Cm
ro
O
CO
Oo
O'
Ol
Cm
ro
0
to
v!
Oi
vn
CP
ro
0
to
Cb
Cm
Cl
Cl
Cm
00
Cl
Vm
OQf
<P
o
TM
Cn
Cl
cn
TM
TO
cn
CD
o
ft. °
Oo
Ol
Cl
vn
0
Vn
0
0>
0
►->
N>
<p>
0
•**
0
0
TVs’
O
Cm
O
O
Vn
o
0
Vm
O
Q
TM
Cl
.Cl
,SJ
J>
Oo
cp
Cl
vn
Cl
cn
cn
Oi
ro
cn
No
Cl
Cl
Cl
Nj
Cl
TM
Cn
M,
N
Ol
TM
cn
Cl
OO
Cl
N)
O
tM
OD
Cl
NO
O
Ol
d
Oo
.d
"ti
vn
d
Ci
Cl
TM
0
Jr
00
d
Jr
d
d
T\i
vn
o
vn
d
d
vn
§
Cm
d
<p
O')
CP
CD
CP
cn.
CP
CP
CP
<P
o>
<p
CP
CP
<p
<p
CP
CP
CP
CP
CP
CP
<P
CP
CP
CP
p
CP
01
CP
CP
P
CP
CP
CP
CP
CP
CP
<p
CP
CP
CP
<p
ai
CP
<p
CP
CP
n
oo
vi
vt
M
>4
74
r4
*4
O'
O'
<r*
Oi
<p
<p
CP
CP
<31
01
cn
cn
cn
cn
cn
cn
tn
tn
Cn
tn
Jr
Or
Jr
Jr
Jr
Jr
jr
Jr
Jr
CM
o*
%M CP CM
tp
CM
O*
Ol
ft
O CO
Oo
V|
CP
cn
Jr
Cm
0
to
00
vi
Os
tn
j?
O*
ro
1 —
O
CD
05
CP
cn
J-
CM
N>
0
to
0d
O'
tn
Jr
O-
p»
O
(X>
Qc
O' tn
Jr
iM
ro
0
to
•M
No
Ol
O
Oo
o
o
Sj
Jr
Cl
d
S
hi
V
tm
Co
Sr
►-»
Cl
Cs
c
Vo
0
.0
SJ
f\>
r\i
Co
Cl
vn
Cl
c>
O
TV)
C»
Oo
0
St
Cm
O
Ci
Vn
.Cl
cn
»s
Cl
Cl
k.
Cl
.Cl
s>
K*
No
TM
vn
TM
Cl
Vn
Ci
Cl
■s>
TM
Cl
Oi
Ci
<P
Cl
*^4
cn
j-
Cl
J>
cn
Oo
Cl
Vn
o
K.
O)
Cl
C)
K.
cn
Cl
VJ
Cn
*
S
p.
cn
Cl
§
d
Cl
Vm
vjt
d
vn
,c>
S)
vn
TM
vn
Cl
N
O)
4r " TM
N> mCC
vd Vn d
Cm
vn
d
TM
d
d
Jr
cn
d
Jr
d
s
Nj
O'
.d
.'TJ
S S
vi
vl
Vl
s
;-4
-4
«-4
“-4
-4
-4
*«4
— l
-J
74
~4
■M
~4
74
CP
CP
<P
CP
d
ci <p
01 d
d
d
CP
8?
N
CP
Oi
<T>
Os
Os
cp r>
CM
O'*
o
ro
ftO
no
00
ro
VI
ro
cr>
Si
cn
ro
CM
ro
10
ro
ro
O
3
CP
cn
ro
0
0
VD
O
0
O'
O
tn
O
Jr
O
tM
O
p>
0
g,
CO
vo
V£
0°
vo
N
CD
O'
CD
tn
CO vo
Vm
vp tD
TO —
tD
O
00
VD
as
QO
O'
o>
tn
0o
Cm
CD
TM
CD
V
r p
tm
O
CP
o
CP
c
v
Vn
ci
cn
o
TM
Cn
vo
d
on
cn
O)
CP
.0
C)
C5
CP
0
vn
CP
0
ro
vn
0
TV!
0o
0
VO
0
$
Jr
Cl
Cl
tn
Cl
-t
cn
0
TM
cn
CP
0
O
Cm
Cl
Cl
J5
Cl
Cl
.—
<-n
C)
.S»
Cm
Cn
0
CP
Cl
05
cn
TM
Cl
0
CP
O
Cm
cn
0
Cm
Cl
Od
Cl
0}
'J
cn
cn
o
TM
d
d
Vp GO
Cl Cl
Jr
d
Ni
vn
K.
Oo
d
v*.
O)
d
0 5
d
TM
tn
d
TM
Cn
O-
No
fN>
cp
d
•Sj
•n»
h>
.‘TJ
_£2t
r?
_3L
SI
bL
bL
Sj
>4
03
-4
Vl
•^4
Vt
*^4
7-V
*vl
H
"4
"4
•^4
>4 r-4
>4 >4
>4
•rj
-4 "vl
*54
•vj
•vl
•^4
s
■vl
vT
Vsf
'-J
pi n
cw
*5
00
>4
-V
VJ
7^4
— 4
74
— c
-^4
CP
CP
cys
CP
Ov
CP
CP
CP
Ol
<p
cn
cn
cn u Ci
IK
Cn
cn
cn
cn
J?
J>
*4>
Jr
Jr
Jr
Jr
Jr
CM
Cm
Vm
Vm
Cm
Cm
Cm
Cm
K
o*
4
o
CO
Oo
~-4
cn
4>
CM
ro
J
O
V£>
00
Ol
cn
CM
r->
0
CD
00
O' tn
0*
ISJ
r—
O
CO
Oc
O'
vn
Jr
CM
ro
O
CO
OP
(P
vn
Jr
CM
TM
rv>
d
3
Qc
o
no
cn
CO
Oo
o
.Cl
m
Ol
o
To
o
o
V*
Sj
Ck.
CD
cn
Cl
0
cn
O
fn»
cn
Ci
p»
Vn
C>
0.
cn
4>
O
hi
►t-
cn
Od
0
CD
.O
S'
Oo
c>
S)
N>
Ci
Jr
Od
No
Cm
Cl
Cm
O
vn
Cl
Cm
Ol
Ci
K)
O'
Cl
§
N> \j
0)C» cn
Q d Cl
Cm
Os
O
vn
Cl
NO
Oi
TM
tn
Q
Jr
Q
Jr
0d
Q
cn
Cl
s
•».
cn
Cl
,s
TV)
c
0
vn
Sj
Oo
d
•Sj
Cm
vn
SJ
•>*
O'
.O
00
d
d
Cm
Tm
d
No
d
«P
o
M)
Ov
vn
•■nj
VO
d
Cl
•s.
Jr
d
CP CO
CP
CP
Co
CP
CD 0D CD
Oo
no cp
03
CX
CD
OO
0C
CP
00
CP
00 <P
00
CD CP
CO
OO
00
OD
0d
0o
CC
0D
00
00
■vj
V?
■rj
s
<1
•*4
si
Vt
M
'J
VI
ri
o»
cm
CM
CM
Cm
no
ro
TO
TO
TO
ro
TO
TO
ro
TO
VD
oB
O
O
0
O
O
O
O
0
0
0
VD
vo
CD
vD
VD VD
to
VD
VD
VD
0d
CO
Oo
0o
OD OD
V
*4^
CM
TO
O
tD
Oo
vj
Ol
tn
4>
CM
ro
c
-4
d
cn
Jr
CP
ru
0
to
OD
■*4
<P
cn
j?
tM
M
0
vo
CP
■rj
Oi
vn
Jr
VP
TM
O
CD
■J
CP
CD
rr
<>i
Vn
v-n
INO
cn
No
u
No
U
do
Ks.
Nj
to
05
O
N>
Vm
Vn
p.
TV)
Vj
K>
N>
cn
TM
p
Vn
0d
Vm
<p
<XS
►n.
Ni
Vo
C.
CP
vn
>4
Qo
cs
NJ
Jr
Cl
U
>3
vn
CP
d
Cm
TM
Cn
CX
■s
Tv*
d
o
c.
Cl
Cl
Cl
vn
.O
J2_
,s
C)
0
Cl
Cl
Vn
vn
vn
.0
S)
a>
Cl
Vn
vn
c>
vn
C)
Cl
O
Ol
c>
Cn
.Cl
DB
c
*n
No
.<n
bL
0
Od
Vi
vn
CX
Cn
d
Cl
S
«n
{5
Op
CP
(X
00
CO
CP
00
OO 00
oc
OC
00
Oc
00 CO
CP
6o
OD 00 CP
#
0o
CD
00
00
OD
CO OC
v>
0D
OD
ou
CO
oc
OO
0D
(Jd
0D
00
OD
&
OO
On
0D
€0
CM
CO
0d
CP
-J
Od CD
7T
CP
Oo
oo
Oo
CO
CD
v| >4
~-4
■^4
7-4
•^4
ri
*~4
*-4
(P
CP
CP
<31
p
p
CP
d
cn
cn
cn
01
cn
tn
tn
cn
cn
o»
Jr
Jr
Jr
Jr
Jr
Jr
J>
Cm
t.
cn
CP
ro
O
V0
CM
Ol
•fc*
O
CO
iL
CP
VI
CM
ro
<p
VD
UD
•^4
d
Oi
Jr
CM
N)
0
to
Oo
J
O'
tn
Cm
TM
0
tD
Ov
cn
Jr
d
Co
o
Sf
cn
O
tm
O
Ov
o
0d
o
Oo
O
m
0
O
.Sj
Ni
vn
vn
0
T\>
Cl
■ni
0>
0
St
Ol
0
Vn
Ol
TO
Cl
h<
c>
0
Cm
O
Cm
O
TM
Od
cp
Cl
.Cl
p»
No
Oi
To
cn
p»
K>
Ci
•-tf
N)
vn
U.
P°
■~V
Vn
,C1
•M
No
NJ
Cl
Cl
o>
Cm
O
TM
VP
O
K-.
No
Vm
0d
0
c?
bL.
vn
C)
No
Cl
§
K>
a
Cl
Vi
d
2
O
Cm
ci
d
vn
d
Or
d
No
n
on
Cl
g
(m
vn
0
4*.
CO CO
CO
CD
VO
VO
VO
vo
CO Vo
VD
CD
VD VC
VD
VD
VO
VD
VD
VD
VD
VD VO
VO CD
VD
VC
CO
CO
VO VD
CO
CD
VD VC
CD
CD
OS OC
Oc
OO
OO
Pr. ro
OD
On
CD
to
CD
8
On
6> s
u»
CP
CM
CP
CM
Jr
Cm
cm
Cm
N>
Cm
Cm
O
ro
VC
ro
(X
TM
TM
CP
ro
cn
ro
Jr
N>
CM
ro
M
M
c
VC
OD
CP
CP
Jr
CM
ro
—
O
0
CD
0
OD
O
"*4
O
d
0
cn
O
Jr
O
Vm
c
Sj
C
r—
O
O
CD
VD
CD
00
CD
CD
CP
CD
Vn
vD
Vp
CD
TV*
vD
VD
O
0d
CD
3
sp-
(5s •
CP
Vn
00
vl
cn
N)
TV>
CP
tn
d
o
o
o
C
o
o,
O
o
o
Cl
d
-4>
K,
o
Cm
Ol
vp
0c
Cm
Cm
a
vn
No
0
u
u
Oi
Vm
Q
v^
>4
TM
u
cn
V4
CP
Os
Ol
O)
N>
N
vn
N
>4
d
Co
tm
>.
vn
d
to. Ol
vn
to
•P
ft
ft
o
Cl
o
o.
c
cn
vn
vn
0
Cn
Vn
.0
u
CP
cn
.bL.
.Vn
bL
0
0
0
0
0
JO
bL
O
S»
<-n
Cl
0
.Cl
bL
CT
.O
S
cn
O
0
0
vn
d
vn
d
d
Vn
vn
d
d
d
•S
<n
VC
VD
VO
VD
to
to
VD
CD VD
CO
vo
VO
VD
to
VO
vo
VD
CO
CO
VD
CO
CD
VD
VD
CD
VD
CO
vo
VD
CO
CD
vo
VD
CD
CD
VO
bO
VD
CD
O
CP
Ol
£
V
CM
-4
N>
70
CP
VD
CP
OD
0.
-^4
§5
Ol
cn
Oi
Jr
Os
o»
Cs
ro
d
s- g
cn
£E_
cn
*4
cn
d
tn
cn
in
Jr
Cn
CM
cn
TM
Vn
vn
0
jr
VC
Jr
CP
Jr
*r|
Jr
d
Jr
cn
Jr
Jr
Jr
Cm
Jr
to
Jr
Jr
O
Cm
CO
tp
0D
Cm
J
P
rr
no
TO
vn
TV)
c
0
TM
vn
Cl
bn
Xjx
0
£
Vn
Jr
TM
Cm
Vm
Nj
v4
*
vn
C3
tn
C)
0
05
O
0}
O
c.
£
Oi
Cl
vn
Q
cn
0
<p
0
Cm
vn
Cm
O
on
O
*-n
R>
Cn
d
Cm
TM
0i vi
O no
Ci Cl
•t
O
Cl
c
0
<n
Cl
Cl
vn
Cl
0
d
d
Cl
d
d
d
d
Cl
O
d
.Sj
•4:
Jr
Oi
TV*
0s
cn
d
d
vn
$
Jr
d
Ov
d
»n
Cl
Ov
d
.d
n
Vn
'*-rt
Nrt
d
O
d
d
St
Cl
d
Cl
0
0




635. PORCELAIN JAR
The body is encircled by running dragons
among the clouds, incised under a deep cobalt
blue glaze.
Chia Ching, Ming 1522 - 1566 A.D. H. 4J/2 ins.
636. PORCELAIN BOWL
Inside glazed white while the outside is in-
cised with an all over floral design with leaves
and branches coated with an ash of roses glaze.
Ming, 1368 - 1644 A.D. Diameter SJ/2 inches.
637. FLOWER POT ON STAND
The round vase, holding two green handles, is
decorated with dragons among the clouds in au-
bergine and yellow against a green background.
Handle repaired.
Ming, 1368- 1644 A.D. H, 4)4 ins.
638. SQUARE PORCELAIN DEEP BOWL
The inside is bordered by a scroll design,
while, on the outside, each side holds a central
curled dragon surrounded by floral sprays in
blue against a light yellow background.
Chia Ching, Ming, 1522 - 1566 A.D. H. 3 ins.
639. ROUND PORCELAIN JAR
Band of petals and scrolls encircle base and
rim in blue and white, while the body is en-
circled by a peony medallion design in blue with
green leaves against a white background.
Ming, 1368- 1644 A.D. H. ins.
640. DEEP PORCELAIN BOWL
The outside holds a wave design background-
in blue and white among which are over glaze
iron red dragons, the rim is banded by a blue
and white geometric design with tiny flowers.
Chia Ching, Ming, 1522 - 1566 A.D. H. 4 ins.
641. PAIR OF PORCELAIN PLATES
Decorated on the outside with two running
dragons and on the inside with one curled
dragon among the clouds in a strong green
against a pure white background.
Hung Chih, Ming, 1488 - 1505 A.D. D. ins.
642. CUT PORCELAIN BEAKER
Against a lavender blue background a large
over-glaze scroll design of aubergine flowers
with green leaves and branches decorate the
entire vase. Cut at the neck.
Ming, 1366- 1644 A.D. Height 10 inches.
643. PORCELAIN BOWL
Decorated inside and outside with molded
running green dragons against a pure white
background.
Cheng Teh, Ming, 1506 -1521 A.D. D. 6j4 ins.
644. DEEP PORCELAIN BOWL
Bowl is decorated all over with a floral spray
in green and aubergin outlined in black against a
yellow background. Cracked.
Chia Ching, Ming, 1522 - 1566 A.D. H. 4 ins.
645. LOW BEAKER SHAPED BOWL
The body and under the lip hold running
dragons in green against a strong yellow back-
ground. Slightly restored.
Cheng Teh, Ming, 1506 -1521 A.D. H. 5 /> ins.
646. PAIR OF PORCELAIN BOYS
They stand on a small pedestal holding a pot
of flowers, their suits are decorated with Bud-
dhistic emblems and flowers in red, green and
yellow against a white background.
Ming, 1368- 1644 A.D. Height 11 inches.
647. ROUND FLAT PORCELAIN BOX
The box is decorated on the top and bottom
with an overglazed wheel-like floral design en-
circled by a leaf border in red, green and blue;
the inside is glazed in deep green.
Ming, 1368 - 1644 A.D. Diameter 5% inches.
648. DEEP PORCELAIN BOWL
Decorated outside with a large running dragon
among the clouds in a strong green with a bright
yellow background inside glazed white.
Cheng Teh, Ming, 1508 - 1521 A.D. H. 4 ins.
649. LARGE ROUND JAR
Decorated at the base with a scroll medallion
and at the rim with a petal design, the body
is encircled with fishes among water plants in
yellow, blue, green and over glaze iron red
against a white background.
Chia Ching, Ming, 1522 - 1566 A.D. H. g J / 2 ins.
650. LARGE PORCELAIN JAR
Decorated with encircling bands of floral
sprays, dragons and phoenix in green and over
glaze iron red on a white background. Repaired
at neck.
Ming, 1368- 1644 A.D. H. 11/4 ins.
651. PORCELAIN VASE
Decorated on one side with actors depicting
historical events while the reverse holds the city
wall and tents in green, blue and over glaze iron
red against a pure while background.
Ming, 1368- 1644 A.D. Height 9% inches.




652. PORCELAIN PEN REST
Decorated in blue on a white background
with scrolls in the middle of which is a round
medallion holding an Arabic inscription.
Cheng-Teh, Ming, 1506 - 1522 A.D. H. 5 ins.
653. BLUE AND WHITE BUCKET
Decorated on the lower part with a peony
spray and a scrolled band encircling the top,
the handle is ornamented to resemble a rope
with a scroll design on the cross bar.
Hsuan-Teh, Ming, 1426 - 1435 A.D. H. 5 ins,
654. BLUE AND WHITE PEN HOLDER
In the form of a drum with decorations of
floral sprays, clouds and raised dots. The top
holds six removable receptacle^,
Ming, 1368- 1644 A.D. Height 2% inches.
655. BLUE AND WHITE BRUSH
The porcelain handle ornamented with scrolls,
a fret band at the bottom and the meander pat-
tern on the top.
Hsuan-Teh, Ming, 1426 - 1435 A.D.
Length of handle 5/2 inches.
656. BLUE AND WHITE PEN REST
Floral scrolls ornament the object with a
diamond shaped medallion holding Arabic char-
acters in the center.
Cheng-Teh, Ming, 1506 - 1521 A.D. H. 4 ins.
657. BLUE AND WHITE JAR
Encircled at the top and bottom by a scroll
design, the body decoration depicts a garden
scene with sages and attendants under pine trees
and bushes.
Chia Ching, Ming, 1522 - 1566 A.D. H. 5 ins.
658. PAIR OF BLUE AND WHITE POTS
Encircled at the base by a petal-like design,
the body is decorated with a peony and leaf
scroll.
Hsuan Teh, Ming 1426 - 1435 A.D. H. 3 ins.
659. BLUE AND WHITE VASE
In the form of an old bronze with blue animal
head handles, the vase is ornamented with a
morning glory floral scroll.
Ming, 1368- 1644 A.D. Height 5% inches.
660. BLUE AND WHITE JAR
Encircled at the bottom by a band of Budd-
histic symbols and at the top by a scroll fringe,
the body is ornamented with fishes swimming
among water flowers.
Chia Ching, Ming, 1522 - 1566 A.D. H. 5 ins.
661. PAIR OF BLUE AND WHITE VASES
With long slender necks ornamented with un-
glazed animal handles. The body of the vase
holds a decoration of ladies in a garden with
rocks and foliage.
Kang Hsi, 1662-1722 A.D. Height 7 inches.
662. PAIR OF SMALL JARS AND COVER
Decorated with dragons amongst clouds in
blue on a white ground, the top holds two Bud-
dhistic symbols and is topped by a small blue
knob. One cover repaired.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. H. 4/2 ins.
663. PORCELAIN PILGRIM BOTTLE
Decorated all over with branches of peonies
in peachbloom with leaves in blue, surrounding
a central curled dragon in peachbloom on a
white ground.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. H. gl/4 ins.
664. PAIR OF BLUE AND WHITE PLATES
The outside decorated with prunus, pines and
bamboo, the inside holds a central medallion of
twisted pine trees and bamboo.
Chia Ching, Ming, 1522 - 1566 A.D. D. 6 ins.
665. PAIR OF SQUARE BLUE AND
WHITE SWEET DISHES
The outside decorated with a floral spray, the
inside holds a central panel with a prunus
branch and birds bordered by a peony scroll
band and edged with the meander pattern.
Ming style.
Ming, 1368- 1644 A.D. inches square.
666. LARGE BLUE AND WHITE PITCHER
Encircling the body are floral panels topped
by a band of petal-like fringe around the
straight shoulder.
Ming, 1368- 1644 A.D.
667. PAIR OF BLUE AND WHITE PLATES
Decorated on the outside with a floral spray,
the inside holds a central medallion of animals
in the forest encircled by a band of fishes swim-
ming among water flowers.
Wang-Li, Ming, 1573- 1572 A.D. D. 6 ins.




668. SMALL BISCUIT SHOE
Coated with a brilliant green glaze, the sole
unglazed and a black relief line down the
center front. Cracked.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. Length 4 inches.
669. SMALL LIBATION CUP
Resting on three curved legs terminated by
a mask, the body holds an aubergine and yellow
mask against a green background dotted with
small flowers, the inside and outside of the lip
shows running dragon and mask in aubergine
and yellow and the center base holds a Chinese
character. Three color biscuit. Cracked.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. Height 3 inches.
670. FOUR SIDED BLACK HAWTHORNE
JARDINIERE
Each side is ornamented with a beautifully
executed floral design in yellow, aubergine and
green against a black background and outlined
with a wide line in Imperial Yellow. Repaired.
Kang Hsi, 1662-1722 A.D. Height inches.
671. SMALL LIBATION CUP
Resting on three curved legs terminated by
a mask, the body holds an aubergine and yellow
mask against a green background dotted with
small flowers, the inside and outside of the lip
shows a running dragon and mask in aubergine
and yellow and the center base is ornamented
with a crouched rabbit. Three color biscuit.
Handle missing.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. Height 3 inches.
672. SMALL BISCUIT SHOE
Coated with a brilliant green glaze, the sole
unglazed and a black relief line down the center
front.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. Length 4 inches.
673. PAIR OF FOO DOGS
Seated on a square green pedestal, one has
his paw on a pup, the other on a ball, the fierce
face is coated green as is his body while his
mane is yellow and the tail aubergine. Three
color on biscuit.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D.
Height 16/2 inches.
674. LARGE SQUARE BLACK
HAWTHORNE VASE
Outlined with a narrow white band each side
is decorated with a beautifully arranged design
of blossoming flowers of each season amid rocks.
The flowers predominate in white, while the
branches are in aubergine and the leaves and
rocks in greens against a black background.
The neck is encircled by a floral spray repeating
the colors on the vase. Repaired.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D.
Height 1 inches.
675. PAIR OF PLATES
With a petalled edge encircled by a fret
border in black against a green background
interrupted by white flowers, the center is dec-
orated with a spray of lotus in blossom in auber-
gine, green and pink against a yellow back-
ground. With teakwood stands.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D.
Diameter 7% inches.
676. PAIR OF SQUARE DISHES
The outside painted with a leaf design in
black under a green glaze, the outside edge is
decorated with a white flower and scrolls against
a green background, the central panel depicts
boys playing a game in white, yellow, aubergine
and green, framed by a sloped side coated with
a yellow glaze. Three color biscuit.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. 2% inches square.
677. GALLIPOT VASE
Decorated around the base with a fret design
in green, the entire body of the vase decorated
with a landscape and mountain scene with
rocks, trees, water and figures in greens and
aubergine against an Imperial Yellow back-
ground. Repaired.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D.
Height 7J/4 inches.
678. PAIR OF BEAKER SHAPED VASES
With hexagonal panels, the base is encircled
by a line of meander pattern topped by an
inverted fringe-like scroll design which is re-
peated around the neck, the upper part of the
body holds an intricate and ornate decoration
containing panels with landscapes, masks and
clouds against a meander pattern in five colors.
Famille Verte.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. Height 17 inches.
679. SEATED FIGURE OF A DIETY
Holding in his left hand a yellow bowl, his
simple robe is decorated with a floral medallion
on a green ground while a floral band finishes
the edge. Famille rose.
Chien Lung, 1736- 1796 A.D.
Height i6}4 inches.




680. PAIR OF PORCELAIN FRUITS
A group of Buddha’s fingers fruit piled high,
coated with a yellow glaze, the leaves a bluish
green. Three color biscuit.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. H. 6*4 ins.
681. PORCELAIN LI TA PO
The poet with his face glazed white and
aubergine robes reclines against a turquoise
peach shaped wine pot. Three color biscuit.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. Length 4 ins.
682. SEATED FIGURE OF KUAN YIN
Goddess of Mercy with downcast eyes holds
a small child on her lap, her headdress and cape
are light pink with green leaves bordered by a
fret design in green. Her dress is bordered by a
yellow meander pattern and decorated with
phoenix medallions and floral sprays in auber-
gine on a green ground. Three color biscuit.
Fingers damaged.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. H. 7 ins.
683. PORCELAIN BOAT
Holding an ornate cabin with a high gate
entrance, in the small open door stands the figure
of a woman. The deck and sides of the cabin
are unglazed while the roof and boat are green,
yellow and aubergine. Three color of biscuit.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. Length inches.
684. PORCELAIN FISH WINE POT
A curled white and yellow carp, Symbol of
Promotion, rests on a base of green waves, the
handle and spout is green as is also a small
curled lotus pad that makes the cover,
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. H. 5% ins.
685. PAIR OF PORCELAIN PARROTS
Seated on a white rock with splashes of
green and yellow, the bodies of the birds are
entirely coated with a green glaze becoming
slightly lighter on the breast. Three color biscuit.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. H. *]/ 2 ins.
686. PORCELAIN DIETY
The smiling face is unglazed, his right arm
is coated with a thin white glaze, his right arm
is raised holding a ball and he wears a well
modelled green robe with a brocade design of
flowers and butterflies in light yellow and auber-
gine. Three color on biscuit.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D.
687. PORCELAIN FISH WINE POT
A curled yellow and white carp, Symbol of
Promotion, rests on a base of green waves, the
handle and spout is green as is also a small
curled lotus pad that makes the cover.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. Height 6 inches.
688. PORCELAIN WATER BUFFALO
With head slightly forward the entire body
is coated with large splashes of browns, greens
and yellows.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - -1722 A.D. Height 5 inches.
689. SMALL PORCELAIN ATTENDANT
Standing boy holding in his hands a bowl, the
face unglazed, and the pleated skirt and coat is
coated with green except for splashes of yellow
on the sleeves.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. H. \/ 2 ins.
690. PORCELAIN BOX WITH COVER
Lower part is coated with aubergine, cover
holds a small foo dog in high relief inlaid green
in yellow. Three color biscuit. Repaired.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. Length 4 inches.
691. SMALL PORCELAIN ATTENDANT
Figure of a standing woman holding in her
hands an incense burner, the face and hair is
unglazed, while her coat is yellow, and the flow-
ing skirt is coated with a green glaze.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. H. ins.
692. PORCELAIN WINE POT
In the form of an aubergine lobster crawling
on a white rock encircled by green waves and
ornamented by a green and yellow lotus, the
spout and handles is formed by the green stem
of a lotus. Three color biscuit. Slight restoration.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. H. 734 ins.
693. PAIR OF PORCELAIN BIRDS
Standing on an unglazed rock painted black,
the feathers deeply incised under a strong green
glaze. Three color biscuit.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. H. 7/2 ins.
694. PORCELAIN BRUSH HOLDER
In the form of separate bamboo stalks coated
green and ornamented in relief with a yellow and
white prunus spray.
Kang Hsi, 1662- 1722 A.D. Height 5 inches.
PORCELAIN DRUM BOX AND
COVER
Undecorated except for a band of large raised
dots at the top and bottom, coated with a deep
green glaze.
Kang Hsi, 1662-1722 A.D. Height 3 inches.
696. PORCELAIN BAMBOO TEAPOT
Entirely coated with a strong green glaze, the
cover holds a small branch in high relief attached
to which are low relief bamboo leaves.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. H. ins.




697. PORCELAIN BRUSH HOLDER
Coated all over with an even deep yellow
showing a decoration in low relief of a sage
and attendant looking toward three geese, the
reverse side shows a poem.
Tao Kuang, 1821 - 1850, H. 4% ins.
698. PAIR OF PORCELAIN FOO DOGS
Seated on a round base with snarling face and
right paw resting on an openwork ball, the body
is coated with a yellow glaze while the head,
tail and back is green. Slight restoration.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. H. 6*/ 2 ins.
699. PORCELAIN LIBATION CUP
The lower part holds two masks in yellow
against a green and aubergine background, two
small dragons crawl up the handle, one in
aubergine, the other in yellow and two tiny
frogs under the spout are in relief.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. Height 2 inches.
700. PORCELAIN INCENSE BURNER
Against a mottled background encircling the
vase in high relief are eight Taoist Dieties, called
the Eight Immortals, in aubergine, light green
and yellow, interrupted by a yellow mask en-
circled by rosettes on each side.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. Height 4 inches.
701. PORCELAIN LIBATION CUP
The lower part holds two masks in yellow
against a background of green with white prunus
flowers, two small dragons crawl up the handle,
one in yellow, and the other aubergine, and two
tiny Kylins in relief appear under the spout.
Kang Hsi, 1662- 1722 A.D. H. i*4 ins.
702. PORCELAIN BRUSH HOLDER
In the form of bamboo and coated with a
deep yellow with a low relief decoration of a
pine tree and needles in aubergine and green.
Tao Kuang, 1821 - 1850 A.D. H. 5 ins.
703. PAIR OF PORCELAIN PLATES
The outside decorated with a floral spray in
red and green against a yellow background, the
inside shows a huge green rock on which a
pheasant stands, surrounded by branches and
flowers in green, red and aubergine against a
light yellow background.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. Diameter 8 inches.
704. PAIR OF PORCELAIN BIRDS
Seated on a rock with prunus blossoms, the
body coated with brown, aubergine and green
glaze, the lower part glazed in yellow.
Ming, 1368- 1644 A.D. Height 4% inches.
705. PORCELAIN PAINTER’S BOX
With rounded corners, the lower part is
decorated against a yellow background with
two beautifully executed dragons facing one
another in aubergine and green, the cover holds
one large dragon in deep green among auber-
gine clouds. Fitted on the inside with four re-
ceptacles, three with small covers,
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. Length B*4 inches.
706. PAIR OF PORCELAIN FOO DOGS
Seated on a pedestal, carrying a candle stick
on the back, one with his paw on a ball, the other
with a pup crawling up his leg, the body is
coated with yellow while the candle is glazed
with aubergine and green.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. H. 8 ins.
707. PORCELAIN ORNAMENT
Water buffalo standing and holding a man on
his back, his horns are black while the balance
of the glaze is a mottled green and yellow.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. H. 3% ins.
708. PORCELAIN MOUNTAIN
With a background of high brown rocks in
front of which in yellow and green is modelled
pagodas and a high gate before a mote over
which is a small bridge.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. H. 10J/2 ins.
709. PORCELAIN COUPE
Lotus leaf, showing the veins and coated all
over with green, beside which is the pod en-
circled by white petals in high relief. Restored.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. H. 2*4 ins.
710. PAIR OF PORCELAIN PLATES
Decorated all over with large sprays of
pomegranates, Symbol of many Children, and
peaches, Symbol of Longevity, in green, yellow
and aubergine against a white background in
which designs of dragons have been incised.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. D. ins.
71 1. DOCUMENT WEIGHT
The sides, ends and tops hold a floral medal-
lion encircled by leaves against a background
of tiny dots in red, green and blue. Surmount-
ing the top in high relief is a branch encircling
a small base on which rest three tiny birds.
Famille Verte.
Kang Hsi, 1662-1722 A.D. Length 14 inches.




712. PAIR OF PARROTS
Seated on an openwork rock mottled with
aubergine, green and white, the parrots with a
red bill are entirely coated with green becoming
slightly lighter on the breast under which
painted in black are the feathers and wings.
Kang Hsi, 1662- 1722 A.D.
Height 8% inches.
713. PAIR OF HEXAGON SWEET DISHES
The outside holds a mottled splash design in
white green, yellow and aubergine while against
a green background kylins, Buddhistic emblems
and clouds decorate the entire surface in yellow
aubergine and light green on the inside. Three
color biscuit. With teakwood stands.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D.
Diameter 4% inches.
714. PORCELAIN BOWL
Resting on a low foot and against a green
and black wave background the outside is dec-
orated with two bands of white waves and
flowers, while the inside shows central prunus
encircled by running horses and waves in three
colors. Three color biscuit. Repaired.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D.
Diameter 5% inches.
715. PAIR OF JARDINIERES
In the form of a book resting on green bam-
boo feet, the front and back sections are dec-
orated all over with a weave design in green
holding tiny yellow flowers, the white side are
lined with black and edged with blue. With
teakwood stand.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. Length 9 inches.
716. LARGE PORCELAIN PLATE
Resting on a low foot, the entire surface
decorated with a black wave background coated
with green on which is arranged three horses,
Buddhistic symbols, flowers, waves and clouds
in three colors. With teakwood stand. Three
color biscuit.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D.
Diameter 10% inches.
717. BEAKER SHAPED VASE
Resting on a slightly flaring base with wide
flaring lip, the body of the vase is decorated
with a returning warrior talking to the Emperor
and ladies of the court while on the neck stands
a military man with his horse, the scene is com-
pleted by tree and rocks all in light shades of
famille rose against a background of white.
Chien Lung, 1736-1796 A.D.
Height inches.
718. PAIR OF BOWLS
Resting on a low foot and coated with a pure
white glaze, the outside is decorated with a
spray of peaches and pomegranates in famille
rose.
Chien Lung, 1736- 1796 A.D.
Height inches.
719. HIGH SHOULDERED SQUARE
VASE
Decorated on each side with two small round
panels depicting landscapes surrounded by a
rose floral decoration with a background of blue
with white scrolls, the sloping shoulder holds a
pink peony with green leaves on a yellow
ground.
Yung Cheng, 1723 - 1736 A.D.
Height 11 3/4 inches.
720. CLUB SHAPED VASE
Coated all over with a white glaze, the body
is decorated in famille rose with a scene with
ladies and children in a boudoir completed by
a branch with leaves and encircling the neck
are two small children at play in delicate shades
of the, same colors.
Chien Lung, 1736- 1796 A.D.
Height 1 6*4 inches.
721. PAIR OF TEMPLE JARS WITH
ORIGINAL COVERS
Coated all over with a pea green glaze under
which has been incised a leaf design, the front
is decorated with two large phoenix standing on
a rock looking upward toward a spray of mag-
nolia, from the side of the rock grows a branch
with a large peony which is balanced on the
other side by a larger spray with a profusion of
the same flowers all in famille rose.
Chien Lung, 1736 - 1796 A.D. Height 16 inches.
722. PAIR OF BOWLS
Resting on a low foot and entirely coated
with a pure white glaze, one is decorated on
the outside with a beautifully drawn design of
cranes, flowers and butterflies, the other with
a peony spray in light shades of famille rose.
Famille Rose. With teakwood stand.
Chien Lung, 1736- 1796 A.D,
Height inches.
723. SQUARE BRUSH HOLDER
Each side holds a panel decorated with figures
in famille rose on a white ground, framed by a
floral band on a yellow ground.
Yung Cheng, 1723 - 1736 A.D. Height 5 inches.




724. PORCELAIN BOWL
Resting on a low foot, coated with a pure
white glaze and decorated on the outside in five
colors with an encircling line of boys at play.
Yung Cheng, 1723 - 1736 A.D. H. 2/2 ins.
725. PAIR OF SEMI-EGGSHELL CUPS
Coated all over with a white glaze, the
outside is decorated with a finely executed
motif with flowers and a poem in five colors.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. H. 2 ins.
726. PORCELAIN TEAPOT
Coated with a white glaze decorated with
panels holding flowers and birds in five colors.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. H. 4/2 ins.
727. PORCELAIN DEEP CUP
Resting on a low foot, coated all over with
a pure white glaze and decorated in five colors
with figures depicting a lover’s meeting,
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. H. 4J/4 ins.
728. PORCELAIN TEAPOT
Coated with a white glaze decorated in pan-
els, holding flowers and birds in five colors.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. H. 4/2 ins.
729. PORCELAIN BOWL
Resting on a low foot, coated all over with
a pure white glaze and decorated on the outside
with a floral spray in five colors, surrounding a
small blue and white phoenix medallion
Yung Cheng, 1723 - 1736 A.D. H. z/ 2 ins.
730. DEEP PORCELAIN BOWL
Coated all over with a pure white glaze and
decorated on the outside with floral motifs each
holding an insect in greens, aubergine and over-
glaze iron red.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. H. ins.
731. PORCELAIN BRUSH HOLDER
Coated all over with a white glaze and dec-
orated on the outside in five colors with the
God of War seated on a lion with rocks and
trees completing the arrangement.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. H. ins.
732. PORCELAIN PLATE
Coated all over with a white glaze and dec-
orated at the rim with Buddhistic symbols in-
terrupted by floral designs, the center holds a
large basket of flowers in five colors.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. D. 11 ins.
733- PORCELAIN BRUSH HOLDER
Decorated in five colors with ladies and a boy
on a white ground.
Kang Hsi, 1662- 1722 A.D. H. 5/2 ins.
734. PORCELAIN SQUARE BOWL
Coated with white and banded on the inside
with a floral and butterfly motif in five colors.
The outside holds panels interrupted by strips
holding flowers of the four seasons repeating
the colors of the inside band.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. H. 3% in.
735. PAIR OF PORCELAIN PLATES
Coated with a white glaze, the outside dec-
orated with a spray in over glaze iron red, the
inside with a spray of chrysanthemums in five
colors beside which is a poem.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. D. ins.
736. PAIR OF PORCELAIN VASES
Decorated on the front with a peony in over
glaze iron red surrounded by a leaf spray in
green against a pure white background.
Kang Hsi, 1662- 1722 A.D. H. 6% ins.
737. PORCELAIN DISH
The rim holds over glazed gold dragons inter-
rupted by a yellow diamond against a seeded
green background. In the center against a large
character of Longevity is a peach, Symbol of
Happiness, in five colors.
Kang Hsi, 1662- 1722 A.D. D. g/ 2 ins.
738. PAIR OF PORCELAIN JARS
Coated with a white glaze, the decoration in
five colors shows rocks among flowers on which
stands a phoenix peering to the side.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. H. g : / 2 ins.
739. PORCELAIN CLUB SHAPE VASE
Decorated all over with an elaborate design
of a garden party with figures in a pavillion
which is flanked by rocks and trees blending into
a water scene with boats holding ladies. Little
of the white background shows and the over
glaze iron red, greens, blues, aubergines and
yellows of the Famille Verte type of decoration
is used in profusion. The neck is encircled by a
floral panel design against a basket weave back-
ground holding flowers.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. H. 17/2 ins.




740. PAIR OF JARDINIERES
Oblong in shape resting on four low legs, the
outside is coated with a beautiful light yellow
glaze and painted on the four sides with an art-
istic arrangements of branches and birds in
pinks, greens and black. The border at the rim
is a mottled light cobalt blue edged with gold
and decorated with round medallions in gold
and overglaze iron red, the inside has a light
green even glaze.
Chien Lung, 1736- 1796 A.D.
Height 4J/2 inches,
741. PAIR OF CUPS
Coated all over with a pure white glaze and
decorated on the outside with a famille rose
decoration of leaves and flowers. With teakwood
stands.
Yung Cheng, 1723- 1736 A.D.
Height without stands inches.
742. DEEP BOWL
Resting on a low foot, the inside glazed in
a light sea green and decorated with tiny birds
on a branch in pink, green, and black, the
outside is glazed a bluish white and holds in
the front a large pink peony enhanced by green
leaves and sprays of flowers and rimmed at the
edge with gold. With teakwood stand.
Chien Lung, 1736- 1796 A.D.
Height inches.
743. PAIR OF JARDINIERES
Resting on four low feet, the entire vase is
covered with a mille fleurs decoration in delicate
shades of famille rose, the inside glazed with a
pale sea green.
Chien Lung, 1736- 1796 A.D.
Height 5*4 inches.
744. PAIR OF RICE BOWLS AND COVER
Glazed on the inside with white, both bowl
and cover are decorated in the center with a
medallion design surrounded by tiny bats in
gold and over glaze iron red, while the out-
side is decorated with a mille fleurs design
in famille rose. With teakwood stands. Private
mark Ching Nih Sang Tzu.
Tao Kuang, 1821 - 1850.
Height without stands 2 inches.
745. GOURD SHAPED VASE
Decorated all over with a mille fleur design
against an Imerial Yellow background, tied in
the center by a petal design in pink. With teak-
wood stand.
Chien Lung, 1736 - 1796 A.D.
Height inches.
746. PAIR OF GINGER JARS WITH
ORIGINAL COVERS
Coated all over with a pure white glaze, dec-
orated at the base with a fringe design, the
body encircled with medallions of curled drag-
ons among the clouds interrupted by a floral
design and topped by a band of Buddhistic
symbols on the shoulder in five colors. With
teakwood stands,
Yung Cheng, 1723 - 1736 A.D.
Height 8 inches.
747. PAIR OF DEEP CUPS
Coated all over with a fine pure white glaze
delicately decorated in famille rose with a beau-
tifully executed design of a cock and a boy
amid rocks and flowers, while on the reverse
side a hen with tiny chicks and characters of a
poem by Emperor Chien Lung complete the
decoration. With teakwood stands. Marked Ta
Ching Chien Lung Fan Ku.
Chien Lung, 1736- 1796 A.D.
Height inches.
748. SQUARE INCENSE BURNER
Resting on four mask feet, built in three tiers,
each of openwork fret panels, coated with a
light yellow and framed by a finely executed
floral design in light shades of polychrome. A
narrow shelf extends on top of the lower tier
holding scroll and floral decoration in green,
yellow and over glaze iron red and the foo dog
finial, terminating the cover, is glazed in yellow.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D.
Height B*4 inches.
749. PAIR OF ELEPHANT
CANDLESTICKS
Coated all over with a buff glaze flecked with
tiny black lines, they carry on their backs a
candlestick in the form of a beaker vase resting
on a saddle on a highly decorated saddle cloth
in famille rose.
Chien Lung, 1736- 1796 A.D.
Height 11 / 2 inches.
750. PORCELAIN GOD OF EARTH
Seated on a low ornate pedestal with legs
crossed and soles of feet turned upwards she
holds in the hand an incense burner, the body
and face glazed in a pinkish hue while the
elaborate crown and robes are in deep shades
of famille rose. Showing Tibetan influence.
Came from Imperial Palace.
18th Century. Height 11 / 2 inches.




751. PORCELAIN WATER RECEPTACLE
With short neck, decorated with three conven-
tionalized dragon medallions under a peach-
bloom glaze.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. Height 3 inches.
752. PORCELAIN WATER RECEPTACLE
With a low bulbous body and large opening
at the mouth, entirely coated with a fine soft
peachbloom glaze showing tiny spots of the green
unripened peach on one side.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D.
Diameter 4% inches.
753. PORCELAIN PLATE
Resting on a low foot and coated all over with
a peachbloom glaze showing mottled green dots
to resemble the unripened peach. With teak-
wood stand.
Ming, Hsuan-Teh, 1426- 1435 A.D.
Diameter inches.
754. PORCELAIN WATER RECEPTACLE
Resting on a low foot with a low bulbous
body and large opening at the top, the entire
surface is coated with a beautiful clear sky blue
glaze.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D.
Diameter 4/2 inches.
755. PORCELAIN INCENSE BURNER
Resting on a low foot with wide opening at
the top, undecorated except for two animal
masks on the side and coated all over with a
light peachbloom glaze. Two fire cracks.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. Height 3 inches.
756. PORCELAIN VASE
High shoulder with a short neck coated all
over with an even dark apple green crackled
glaze. With teakwood stand.
Ming, 1368-1644 A.D. Height 6*4 inches.
757. ROUND JAR
With high shoulder and very short neck
coated all over with a light apple green crackled
glaze. With teakwood stand.
Ming, 1368-1644 A.D.
Height without stand 4 inches,
758. GOURD SHAPED VASE
Coated all over with an even unctuous strong
apple green crackled glaze. With teakwood
stand.
Ming, 1368- 1644 A.D.
Height without stand 7*4 inches.
759. BOTTLE SHAPED VASE
With a bulbous body and a long neck coated
all over with an even strong apple green crackled
glaze. With teakwood stand.
Ming, 1368- 1644 A.D.
Height without stand 6 inches.
760. PORCELAIN JAR
Pear shaped with large opening at the top,
coated all over with a deep apple green crackled
glaze. With teakwood stand.
Ming, 1368- 1644 A.D. Height inches.
761. PORCELAIN BOWL
Resting on a low foot, the outside is coated
with an even deep coral red, the inside with a
pure white glaze. With teakwood stand.
Yung Cheng, 1723-1736 A.D.
Height without stand 2J/2 inches.
762. FOUR SIDED VASE
With a high shoulder and a short square
neck, undecorated except for two masks in high
relief on the shoulder and coated all over with
a deep Rose du Barry glaze.
Chien Lung, 1736- 1796 A.D.
Height 6/2 inches.
763. LARGE BOWL WITH COVER
Resting on a low foot, the outside coated all
over with a deep Rose du Barry glaze, the inside
with a pure white. With teakwood stand.
Yung Cheng, 1723- 1736 A.D.
Height without stand inches.
764. SMALL ROUND BRUSH HOLDER
Coated on the inside with a bluish white and
on the outside with an even coral red.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D.
Height 3/ 2 inches.
765. PORCELAIN BOWL
Coated on the inside with a pure white glaze,
the outside is covered with an even Rose du
Barry glaze terminated by a gold rim at the
edge. With teakwood stand.
Yung Cheng, 1723- 1736 A.D.
Height without stand 2 inches.
766. PAIR OF PLATES
Encircled with a petal design, the entire plate
both inside and out is coated with an even deep
Rose du Barry glaze. With teakwood stands.
Yung Cheng, 1723 - 1736 A.D.
Diameter 7 inches.
767. PAIR OF SMALL BOWLS
The inside coated with a bluish white and
the outside with an even Chi Hung or sacrificial
red glaze. Marked Ming. With teakwood stands.
Yung Cheng, 1723 - 1736 A.D.
Height without stands 1 /% inches.
768. PORCELAIN JAR
With a high shoulder and short neck, the
entire surface coated with a brilliant Rose du
Barry glaze, the inside glazed with a robin’s egg
blue.
Chien Lung, 1736- 1796 A.D.
Height 6 inches.




769. SMALL WATER RECEPTACLE
In the form of a reclining foo dog with long
ears, a ferocious face and mane and tail in low
relief, coated all over with a peacock blue glaze.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. Length 3 )4 inches,
770. PAIR OF WATER RECEPTACLES
Two reclining foo dogs coated all over with
a dark turquoise blue glaze.
Kang Hsi, 1662- 1722 A.D. H. 2)4 ins.
771. SMALL DISH
In the form of a flower and coated all over
with a turquoise blue glaze, on the inside in
high relief is modelled an insect coated with a
deep blue glaze. With teakwood stand.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. Diameter 4 inches.
772. SMALL PORCELAIN MIDO
Seated figure of the God of Happiness, with
a smiling face and coated all over with a tur-
quoise blue glaze.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. H. 2)4 ins.
773. PAIR OF ROUND BRUSH HOLDERS
The entire vase modelled in openwork
branches, leaves and flowers, coated all over
with a brilliant turquoise blue glaze.
Kang Hsi, period, 1662 - 1722 A.D. H. 4 ins.
774. PAIR OF FOO DOGS
Seated on deep aubergine pedestals one rests
his paw on a ball, the other with a pup, holding
on their backs a candlestick. The fierce opened
mounted face is glazed turquoise blue as is the
candlestick and the body, while the curled mane
and tail are glazed with deep aubergine.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. Height 7)4 inches.
775. FIGURE OF A KUANYIN
On an elaborate pedestal, the lower part
glazed in dark aubergine holding a fenced plat-
form in turquoise blue which supports a lotus
seat, the Goddess of Mercy is seated with crossed
legs holding a small child in her lap, the high
headdress encircling a serene white glaze face is
deep aubergine, while the cape on her shoulders
is yellow and her flowing robe is brilliant tur-
quoise blue. Neck and lotus pedestal restored.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D.
Height with pedestal 0)4 inches,
776. PORCELAIN VASE
With a slightly flaring oblong base, high shoul-
ders and flaring lip, the entire vase is coated with
an even light celadon glaze, on the front and back
of which is a branch with peaches in peachbloom
and blue under the glaze, two elongated bird
handles ornament the sides.
Chien Lung, 1736- 1796 A.D.
Height 7/2 inches.
777. PAIR OF PLATES
Decorated on the outside with an underglaze
molded cloud design while the inside holds a
molded phoenix among clouds and scrolls under
a bluish white glaze. With teakwood stands.
Kang Hsi, 1662- 1722 A.D. D. 6)4 ins,
778. PORCELAIN VASE
With high shoulders, short neck and flaring
lip, the vase is undecorated and coated all over
with a brilliant mirror black glaze, the inside lip
glazed white forming a perfect white line around
Kang Hsi, 1622 - 1722 A.D. H. io)4 ins.
779. GOURD SHAPED VASE
With a low raised petal decoration in the cen-
ter and two long curved handles terminating in
a serpent’s head, coated all over with an even tea
dust glaze.
Chien Lung, 1736- 1796 A.D. H. io)4 ins.
780. PAIR OF STANDING FEMALE
FIGURES
With one hand held high in the air holding a
vase, their hair unglazed, an elaborate crown is
worn while their rather simple robe is tied with
a wide sash hanging in folds and about the shoul-
ders is a scalloped cape, coated all over with a
bluish white glaze. Crown slightly chipped.
Chien Lung, 1736- 1796 A.D. H. 17/2 ins.
781. PORCELAIN VASE
Resting of a low foot with expanding body
and heavy neck, undecorated and coated all over
with a fine mirror black glaze.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. Height 7/2 inches.
782. TWIN FISH VASE
The two mouths making the opening of the
vase and the back fins the handles, coated all over
with a pure white glaze under which the eyes and
scales are molded in low relief.
Chien Lung, 1736- 1796 A.D. H. 12 )4 ins.
783. BOTTLE SHAPED VASE
With a long slender neck, the vase is undeco-
rated and coated with an even brilliant mirror
black glaze, the inside lip glazed white and form-
ing a narrow band at the top.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. H. 7/2 ins.




784. PAIR OF PLATES
Decorated on the inside and out with molded
petals design under a celadon glaze. With teak-
wood stands.
Yung Cheng, 1723 - 1736 A.D.
Diameter inches.
785. LOTUS SHAPED COUPE
Resting on three legs, the stems form the
handle, and on the inside in relief sits a small
brown frog, the flower is coated with a light
bluish white glaze and the stem is buff. With
teakwood stand.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D.
Height without stand 2 inches.
786. GLOBULAR VASE
With short neck the entire body coated with
an even fine light celadon glaze. With teakwood
stand.
Yung, Cheng, 1723 - 1736 A.D.
Height without stand inches.
787. PILGRIM BOTTLE
Decorated with a low raised knob as a central
medallion and two animal handles, coated with
a light blue crackled glaze. With teakwood stand.
Chien Lung 1726- 1796 A.D.
Height without stand inches.
788. PAIR OF PORCELAIN VASES
Tall cylindrical shape with a small opening and
short neck, coated all over with a light even cela-
don glaze.
Yung Cheng, 1723- 1736 A.D.
Height ioy 2 inches.
789. PORCELAIN WATER RECEPTACLE
In the form of a shell and coated all over with
an even bluish green glaze. With teakwood stand.
Chien Lung, 1736 - 1796 A.D, Height 2 inches.
790. LARGE PORCELAIN SQUARE VASE
In the form of an old bronze, decorated with
molded bands of conventionalized dragons and
terminated by a band of cicadas, the neck holds
two square hollow handles coated all over with
an even shadowy blue glaze.
Yung Cheng, 1723- 1736 A.D.
Height 1 inches.
791. DEEP PORCELAIN COUPE
In the form of a fungus and coated all over
with a fine light celadon glaze. With teakwood
stand.
Chien Lung, 1736 - 1796 A.D.
Height without stand 2 inches.
792. HIGH SHOULDERED VASE WITH
SHORT NECK
Decorated with an incised peony scroll under
a soft pure celadon glaze.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. Height inches.
793- SMALL DEEP COUPE
In the form of a half gourd with the stem and
a floral spray molded to form the decoration,
coated all over with a clear even light celadon
glaze. With teakwood stand.
Chien Lung, 1736- 1796 A.D, Length 4 inches.
794. DEEP BOWL
Resting on a low base, with a flaring opening,
the inside in plain while the outside carries an
underglaze raised decoration of a band of con-
ventionalized dragons and a scroll design of
fungus and tendrills. Shadowy blue glaze.
Yung Cheng, 1723 - 1736 A.D.
Diameter 7% inches.
795. SMALL TRIPOD WATER PdT
Standing on three bird feet and decorated with
a brown unglazed fish and dark blue bird on the
shoulder coated all over with a light celadon
glaze.
Chien Lung, 1736-1796 A.D.
Height inches.
796. BEAKER SHAPED VASE
Undecorated except for encircling flanges
about the base and center and coated all over
with a deep claire de lune glaze. With teakwood
stand.
Chien Lung, 1736- 1796 A.D,
Height inches.
797. PAIR OF VASES WITH COVERS
Undecorated, except for two small molded
handles, and coated all over with an even
soft celadon glaze. With teakwood stand.
Chien Lung, 1736- 1796 A.D.
Height without stands Bj4 inches.
798. SMALL CLUB SHAPED VASE
With high shoulder and flaring lip, the entire
vase is coated with an even light celadon glaze.
With teakwood stand.
Kang Hsi, 1622 - 1722 A.D.
Height without stand 5/2 inches.
799. GLOBULAR VASE
With a short neck, the center of the body is
decorated with a molded design of a knotted rope
and handle, under an even shadowy blue glaze.
With teakwood stand.
Yung Cheng, 1723 - 1736 A.D.
Height without stand inches.
800. BEAKER SHAPED VASE
Decorated around the base and top with a
molded band of palm leaves and encircling the
center a floral design coated all over with a soft
even celadon glaze. With teakwood stand.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D.
Height without stand 5 inches.




801. PAIR OF PORCELAIN BOWLS
Undecorated and coated inside and out with
an even yellow glaze. With teakwood stand.
Cheng Teh, Ming 1506 - 1521 A.D.
Height without stand 3 inches.
802. PAIR OF PORCELAIN CUPS
Coated on the outside with an even light yel-
low glaze, the inside glazed white. With teakwood
stands.
Yung Cheng, 1723- 1736 A.D.
Height without stands 2 inches.
803. PORCELAIN DISH
Resting on a low foot and coated all over with
a deep yellow glaze. With teakwood stand.
Chia Ching, Ming, 1522 - 1566 A.D.
Diameter 7 inches.
804. PORCELAIN VASE
With two small tube handles on the neck the
vase is incised with a design of chrysanthemums,
floral sprays and butterflys under a deep yellow
glaze. With teakwood stand.
Tao Kuang, 1821 - 1850 A.D.
Height without stand Bj4 inches.
805. DEEP SQUARE BOWL
Petal shaped and decorated on the outside and
inside on the base with a curled dragon, coated
all over with a deep yellow glaze.
Ming style, Tao Kuang, 1821 - 1850 A.D.
Height 2/2 inches.
806. PORCELAIN STEM CUP
Incised under a light yellow glaze with a floral
design hanging in pendants around the rim and
scroll design at the base, the inside glazed white.
With teakwood stand.
Yung Cheng, 1723 - 1736 A.D.
Height without stand 5 inches.
807. LOW PORCELAIN INCENSE
BURNER
Coated all over with a yellow glaze and dec-
orated on either side with an aubergine mask
surrounded by green rosettes.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D.
Diameter inches.
808. PORCELAIN VASE
With a long slender neck, undecorated and
coated all over with a deep yellow glaze. With
teakwood stand.
Tao Kuang, 1821 - 1850 A.D. Height 7 inches.
809. PORCELAIN VASE
With a bulbous body and long slender neck,
the entire surface is coated with an even light
cucumber green glaze. With teakwood stand.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D.
Height without stand 6 inches.
810. PORCELAIN WINE CUP
Undecorated and coated all.over with an even
cucumber green glaze. With teakwood stand.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D.
Height 2 inches without stand.
811. PORCELAIN DISH
Resting on a low foot, decorated all over with
an incised floral spray and coated with a green
glaze. With teakwood stand.
Ming, 1368 - 1644 A.D. Diameter B}4 inches.
812. SMALL ROUND POT
Coated all over with a deep green glaze run-
ning to a black line at the short neck. With teak-
wood stand.
Kang Hsi, 1662 -1722 A.D. Height 2 inches.
813. PORCELAIN JAR
With a short neck and the straight shoulder
lined at the edge, the entire piece is coated with
an even fish roe cucumber green glaze. With
teakwood stand.
Yung-Cheng, 1723 • 1736 A.D.
Height 5 inches.
814. PAIR OF GOURD SHAPED VASES
Undecorated with the pottery body coated
all over with a deep cucumber green glaze.
Ming, 1368 - 1644 A.D. Height 9/2 inches.
815. PORCELAIN DISH
Incised under the glaze on the outside with
two floral bands interrupted by two raised lines,
the inside with a central floral spray and coated
all over with a deep green glaze. With teakwood
stand.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D.
Diameter 6J4 inches.
816. PORCELAIN BOTTLE
Resting on a low foot with a long slender neck,
the entire vase is coated with a cucumber glaze
showing the wheel lines on the slip under the
glaze.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D.
Height gj/2 inches.
817. PORCELAIN COUPE
In the shape of a peony, the petals outlined in
black and coated with a deep green glaze, an
aubergine stem makes a handle. With teakwood
stand.
Kang Hsi, 1662- 1722 A.D.
Diameter 5 inches.




818. PORCELAIN VASE
Resting on a low base with slender neck, the
entire surface is coated with a brilliant claire de
lune glaze. With teakwood stand.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D, H. 5*4 ins.
819. PORCELAIN PEN REST
Seated on a pile of shells between two rocks is
the Taoist Immortal Luihai, with the three-
legged toad, Symbol of Longevity, coated all over
with a light blue glaze. With teakwood stand.
Chien Lung, 1726-1796 A.D. Made by Hu
Yiu (potter’s name). Length 4 /2 inches.
820. PORCELAIN DISH
In the form of a boat, the entire body undec-
orated and coated with a Robin egg blue glaze.
Yung Cheng, 1723- 1736 A.D. L. 5/2 ins.
821. PORCELAIN ORNAMENT
Seated on an oblong rounded pedestal are
three boys, coated all over with a lavender blue
glaze. Teakwood stand.
Chien Lung, 1736 - 1796 A.D. L. 4 / 2 ins.
822. PORCELAIN GOURD SHAPED VASE
Undecorated and coated all over with an even
claire de lune glaze. With teakwood stand.
Kang Hsi, 1662- 1722 A.D. H. 5/2 ins.
823. PAIR OF PORCELAIN PLATES
Encircling the rim to a plain central medallion
is a petal design, coated all over with an even
pine green glaze. With teakwood stands.
Chien Lung, 1736- 1796 A.D. D. 7 ins.
824. PAIR OF PORCELAIN BOWLS
Coated on the outside with a Robin egg blue
glaze, the inside glazed with white. With teak-
wood stands.
Chia Ching, 1796- 1820 A.D. H. 2/4 ins.
825. PORCELAIN BOTTLE
Coated all over with an even dark sky blue
glaze. With teakwood stand.
Chien Lung, 1736- 1796 A.D. H. 5*4 ins,
826. PORCELAIN DISH
Undecorated with a pure white glaze coating
the outside, the inside covered with an orange
skin surface coated blue. With teakwood stand.
Chien Lung, 1736- 1796 A.D. D. 5 ins.
827. PORCELAIN WATER BUFFALO
With the head bent toward the earth and the
entire figure coated with a blue glaze.
Chien Lung, 1736 - 1796 A.D. H. 2/2 ins.
828. PORCELAIN TEAPOT
Undecorated and coated all over with a
powder blue glaze, the handle with a basket
weave decoration of brown stripes on a yellow
ground.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. H. ins.
829. PORCELAIN COUPE
Coated all over with an even cobalt blue and
decorated on the inside in white with a three-
legged toad, Emblem of Longevity, breathing
into the air five tiny bats, the Emblem of Five
Everlasting Happinesses.
Chien Lung, 1736- 1796 A.D. D. 4/2 ins.
830. PORCELAIN BOWL
Coated all over on the outside with an even
dark sky blue glaze, the inside with white.
Yung Cheng, 1723 - 1736 A.D.' H. ins.
831. TWIN PORCELAIN VASE
Bango shaped body with a long slender neck,
undecorated and coated all over with a dark sky
blue glaze.
Chien Lung, 1736- 1796 A.D. H. B*4 ins.
832. PORCELAIN MELON WATER POT
Coated all over with an even dark sky blue
glaze. With teakwood stand. Private Hall Mark.
Hao-Tza-Tong, 18th Century A.D. H. 1 ins.
833. PORCELAIN STEM CUP
Undecorated and coated on the outside with
a dark sky blue glaze dnd on the inside with
white. With teakwood stand.
Yung Cheng, 1723- 1736 A.D. H. 4*4 ins.
834. ROUND PORCELAIN BOX
In the form of a drum, on the cover appears
a dragon and encircling the box Buddhistic em-
blems in white under a cobalt blue glaze.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. D. ins.
835. PORCELAIN VASE
Resting on a low base with a low bulging body
and a long neck, undecorated and coated all over
with an even unctuous sky blue glaze.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. H. 8 ins.




836. PAIR OF PORCELAIN BOWLS
Decoration of phoenix medallions in peach-
bloom on a white glaze.
Chien Lung, 1736 - 1796 A.D. H. ins.
837. PORCELAIN WATER RECEPTACLE
Coated with a greenish white glaze and dec-
orated with three medallions of dragons and
scrolls in peachbloom.
Yung Cheng, 1722 - 1736. Height 2 inches.
838. PAIR PORCELAIN CUPS
Coated all over with a fine white glaze, the
outside is decorated with four cocks, beautifully
executed in over glaze iron red while the inside
shows swimming fishes in the same color.
Yung Cheng, 1722- 1736 A.D. H. i/ 2 ins.
839. PORCELAIN VASE
Coated with a bluish white glaze and decora-
ted with two ferocious blue dragons with peach-
bloom manes seeming in pursuit of one another.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. H. 434 ins.
840. PORCELAIN EGG SHAPED POT
For water in a bird’s cage, coated all over with
a white glaze and decorated with a peony and
branch design in peachbloom.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. H. 3 ins.
841. PORCELAIN WATER POT
Coated all over with a white glaze and dec-
orated with a dragon pursuing the pearl in peach-
bloom.
Kang Hsi, 1662- 1722 A.D. H. 2*4 ins.
842. PORCELAIN VASE
With long slender neck and coated all over
with a bluish white glaze, a leaf band as well as
four medallions in peachbloom encircle the vase.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. H. 9J/4 ins.
843. PORCELAIN STEM CUP
Coated with a white glaze and decorated
around the center with three fishes in a dark red.
Yung Cheng, 1722- 1736 A.D. H. 4 ins.
844. PORCELAIN VASE
On a low base with long neck and flaring lip,
coated with a white glaze and decorated in
peachbloom with two foo dogs amongst the clouds.
Cheng Hua Ming, 1465 - 1487 A.D. H. 8 ins.
845. PORCELAIN STEM CUP
Coated with a white glaze and decorated with
three fruits in dark red.
Yung Cheng, 1722 - 1736 A.D. H. 4 ins.
846. PORCELAIN PEAR SHAPED VASE
Long neck and sloping shoulder, coated with a
bluish glaze, with decoration of prunus branches
and bold pine tree in peachbloom and blue, sep-
arated by growing bamboos with green leaves.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. H. ioj4 ins.
847. PORCELAIN STEM CUP
Resting on a high stem the vase is entirely dec-
orated with floral scrolls and leaves in white
against an over glaze iron red.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722. Height BJ4 inches.
848. PAIR OF PORCELAIN DOGS -
Seated with their long ears down and mouths
open, the side face and underneath part of the
body glazed white, with an over glaze iron red
on the back and touch of green at the color.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. H. 9ins.
849. PORCELAIN PLATE
The outside decorated with flying dragons and
birds above clouds, the inside with dragons and
waves encircled by a band of phoenix in over
glaze rouge de fer and blue on a white glaze.
Wang Li, Ming, 1368 - 1644 A.D. D. 7 J/4 ins.
850. PORCELAIN PILGRIM BOTTLE
Decorated with a floral medallion on the front
and back in over glaze iron red against a white
background, the bulbous neck and long loop
handles carry the same decoration.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 H. g l / 4 ins.
851. PAIR OF PORCELAIN BOWLS
Coated with a bluish white glaze and decora-
ted on the outside, with three fishes in sacrifical
red.
Yung Cheng, 1723 - 1736 A.D. H. 3/2 ins.
852. PORCELAIN WATER POT
Coated all over with a light bluish white glaze
and decorated at the base with a peony and leaves
in peachbloom and green.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D, H. 3/2 ins.
853. PORCELAIN PEAR SHAPED VASE
Around the base is a petal band while a bold
bamboo design decorates the body, terminated at
the top by a palm leaf and scroll design in peach-
bloom on a white background.
Chien Lung, 1736- 1796 A.D, H. ins.
854. PORCELAIN POT
Coated with a white glaze and decorated at
the base with a peony in dark peachbloom and
green leaves. With teakwood stand.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. H. ins.




855. FIGURE OF A POTTERY RABBIT
Seated with his ears back and head slightly
forward, coated all over with a greenish crackled
glaze. With teakwood stand.
Chien Lung, 1736 - 1796 A.D.
Height without stand 5 inches.
856. PAIR OF SWIMMING DUCKS
Coated all over with a bluish mottled glaze
with brown spots depicting the wing feathers.
Kang Yao, Chien Lung, 1736 - 1796 A.D.
Height 5 inches.
857. PORCELAIN DEER
Reclining with the front leg bent, lines drawn
in the body depict the hair which is coated with
a very thin buff glaze, becoming darker at the
spine and here and there showing a white dot.
Chien Lung, 1736 - 1796 A.D.
Length 7 inches.
858. PORCELAIN BIRD.
Seated on a rock with his head forward peer-
ing with a startled attitude into space, the entire
body is coated with a dark red glaze. j
Tao Kuang, 1821 - 1750 A.D.
Height inches.
859. PAIR OF POTTERY ROOF TILES
Resting on a green tile is seated a horse with
upturned head, the body is coated with a green-
ish glaze while the mane and tail are black.
Ming, 1368-1644 A.D.
Height 10 inches,
860. PAIR OF POTTERY BIRDS
Seated on a rock, the brownish pottery is un-
glazed and the feathers depicted by cutting into
the paste.
Chien Lung, 1736- 1796 A.D.
Height 7J/2 inches.
861. STANDING PORCELAIN DUCK
With head turned toward the left, coated with
a flambe glaze about the neck and blue mark-
ings on the wings and tail.
Chien Lung, 1736 - 1796 A.D.
Height inches.
862. PAIR OF BISCUIT RABBITS
With their heads turned toward the right they
hold in their mouths a buff colored branch, the
body of the animal is unglazed and has numer-
ous lines to depict the hair. Unglazed biscuit. One
ear repaired.
Chien Lung, 1736- 1796 A.D.
Height 7 inches.
863. PAIR OF PORCELAIN DOVES
Their bodies coated with a greenish white and
the wings and feathers painted over the glaze in
yellow, red and black.
Chien Lung, 1736 - 1796 A.D.
Height 6 inches.
864. BISCUIT HORSE
Standing with his right leg bent and his head
thrown far over his back, the ears are glazed
black while the body is white, unglazed biscuit
with lines depicting the hair. With teakwood
stand.
Chien Lung, 1736- 1796 A.D.
Height without stand inches.
865. PAIR OF PORCELAIN COCKS
Standing on a brown stump, the body of the
bird is coated white while the chest and crest are
painted red.
Chien Lung, 1736- 1796 A.D.
Height 12 *4 inches.
866. PORCELAIN ORNAMENT
Depicting a seated duck, coated with a bluish
glaze, with his bill inserted in the opening of a
brown clam.
Chien Lung, 1736 - 1796 A.D.
Height 3 inches.
867. PORCELAIN VASE
Depicting two cranes on a tree stump orna-
mented with prunus, the stump is coated with a
flowing bluish souffle glaze while the cranes, as
well as the prunus, are white. With teakwood
stand.
Kang Yao, Tao Kuang, 1821 - 1850 A.D.
Height without stand 10 inches.
868. PORCELAIN ORNAMENT
In the form of a standing horse, coated with a
white glaze, with tassel ornamentation around
his body and a blue saddle.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D.
Height 4J/0 inches.




869. CROWING PORCELAIN COCK
Standing with his head thrown high in the
air, the feathers on the body and tail are' def-
initely carved under pure white glaze. Fukien
Ware.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D.
Height BJ4 inches,
870. PAIR OF PORCELAIN CUPS
Resting on three short legs with a plain body
flaring slightly at the lip, coated all over with an
even pure white glaze. With teakwood stands.
Fukien Ware.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D.
Height without stand inches.
871. STEM GUP
In the form of a peony with the petals molded
in low relief under a pure creamy white thick
glaze.
Ming, 1368 - 1644 A.D. Height 3% inches.
872. SMALL PORCELAIN VASE
Resting on a low base with a low expanding
body terminated by a flaring lip and coated all
over with a pure white glaze, under which is a
spray of raised peonies.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D.
Height inches.
873. PORCELAIN WATER BUFFALO
With his front legs bent under him and his
head forward he holds on his back a hexagonal
cup, coated all over with a bluish white glaze.
Chien Lung, 1736 - 1796 A.D.
Length inches.
874. TWO PORCELAIN HOHO BOYS
Standing on low pedestal with smiling faces
and holding in one hand a bowl, their hair is
turned into two knobs and they wear a short
plain coat, pantaloons and turned up shoes,
coated all over with a bluish white thick glaze.
Ming, 1368 - 1644 A.D. Height inches.
875. PAIR OF PORCELAIN CUPS
Molded into a magnolia and coated all over
with a pure creamy white glaze. Fukien Ware.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D.
Height inches.
876. PORCELAIN COCK
Standing on a brown rock, the comb glazed a
mottled red and the body a bluish white under
which are incised a design to resemble the feath-
ers. With teakwood stand.
Chien Lung, 1736 - 1796 A.D.
Height without stand 14*4 inches.
877. PORCELAIN KUAN YIN
The Goddess of Mercy depicted seated on a
rock, a book and scroll on a small limb beside
her. Her eyes are downcast and her clasped
hands protruding from her flowing sleeves hold
a small bowl, coated all over with a pure creamy
white glaze. Fukien Ware.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D,
Height 11 y 4 inches.
878. PAIR OF PORCELAIN PARROTS
Standing on a blue rock their entire bodies
coated with a creamy white glaze except for a
touch of yellow on their legs.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D.
Height 6*4 inches.
879. PORCELAIN LOHAN
With downcast eyes and a curled beard he is
seated with his legs crossed under him, the long
flowing robe covering his hands, coated all over
with a creamy white glaze. Fukien Ware. With
teakwood stand.
Chien Lung, 1736 - 1796 A.D.
Height 83/4 inches.
880. PORCELAIN SAGE
Standing on scrolled waves in relief his flow-
ing robes conceal his hands, his head is turned
slightly to the left and on his thoughtful face is
a curled beard, coated all over with a pure
creamy white glaze. Fukien Ware.
Chien Lung, 1736 - 1796 A.D.
Height inches.
881. LARGE PORCELAIN VASE
With sloping shoulder and flaring lip, the base
is decorated with a molded leaf design, while the
entire body carries a low relief molded floral pat-
tern topped by a scroll fringed design and a band
of palm leaves, coated all over with a pure creamy
white glaze.
Chien Lung, 1736 - 1796 A.D.
Height 13 inches.
882. GLOBULAR PORCELAIN VASE
With a short neck, incised around the base with
a scroll, the body of the vase entirely incised with
an interlaced floral pattern and coated all over
with a pure creamy white glaze.
Chien Lung, 1736 - 1796 A.D.
Height 11 inches.
883. PORCELAIN VASE
With a high slightly sloping shoulder, short
neck and slightly flaring lip, the base is decorated
with a molded relief leaf design, while the body
carries a floral relief pattern terminated on
the shoulder with bats and a leaf band at the
neck, coated all over with a glossy pure white
glaze.
Chien Lung, 1736 - 1796 A.D,
Height inches.




884. PAIR OF PORCELAIN CUPS
Resting on four low legs with each of the eight
panels holding a Taoist Divinity, coated all over
with a pure white glaze. Fukien Ware.
Chien Lung, 1736- 1796 A.D. H. ins.
885. PORCELAIN INCENSE BURNER
In the form of an old bronze, resting on three
high legs, with mask terminals and coated all
over with a pure white glaze.
Chien Lung, 1736 - 1796 A.D. H. 3 ins.
886. PORCELAIN TEAPOT
The body and the cover molded in the form of
a petal on which the top is decorated with a
prunus branch in low relief, coated all over with
a pure white glaze.
Chien Lung, 1736- 1796 A.D. H. 3/4 ins.
887. PORCELAIN INCENSE BURNER
In form of an old bronze, the body holds two
small floral motifs in relief, coated all over with
a white glaze. Fukien Ware.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. H. 3/2 ins.
888. PAIR OF PORCELAIN SEALS
Depicting two foo dogs, coated with a pure
white glaze.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. H. 4*4 ins.
889. SMALL PORCELAIN VASE
The body tapering to a long slender neck
around which in high relief crawls a dragon,
coated with a pure white glaze. Fukien Ware.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. H. ins.
890. PORCELAIN BRUSH HOLDER
Decoration of horse and tree in relief, coated
all over with a pure white glaze.
Chien Lung, 1736- 1796 A.D. H. 4/2 ins.
891. SEATED FIGURE OF KUAN YIN
Seated on a lotus stand the Goddess holds
in her left hand a scroll while beside her stands
a child with a lotus bud on his shoulder. Her
simple head covering is attached to her flowing
robes, coated with a light creamy glaze.
Chien Lung, 1736 - 1796 A.D. H. 5/2 ins.
892. PORCELAIN BOWL
On a low foot, the lower part decorated with
a basket weave design while the upper part is en-
circled by open work floral medallions separated
by a fret work, coated with a pure white glaze.
Chien Lung, 1736- 1796 A.D. H. 2 ins.
893. ROUND PORCELAIN BOX
Decorated with a central medallion holding a
pine tree with high branches, coated all over with
a pure creamy white glaze.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. D. 3/2 ins.
894. PORCELAIN PILGRIM BOTTLE
Resting on a low foot and with a short neck,
the entire vase is decorated with a low raised de-
sign of curled dragons amongst leaves and fungus
beautifully executed under a soft creamy white
glaze. Two small handles ornament the shoulder.
Soft paste. Repaired at neck and shoulder.
Chien Lung, 1736- 1796 A.D. H. 6*4 ins.
895. PORCELAIN INCENSE BURNER
In the form of an old bronze, body encircled
with two raised lines and flat animal heads form
the handles, coated with a creamy white glaze.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. H. 2*4 ins.
896. PORCELAIN TEAPOT
Resting on a floral base, the fruit shaped body
is decorated with a branch design in relief, the
cover carries a decoration of the same design,
coated all over with a pure white glaze.
Chien Lung, 1736- 1796 A.D. H. 3/2 ins.
897. PORCELAIN INCENSE BURNER
Copy of a bronze, body is encircled by three
lines and holds two loop handles on the rim,
coated with an even light bluish white glaze.
Chien Lung, 1736- 1796 A.D. H. 7/2 ins.
898. PORCELAIN JAR
With high shoulder and short neck, decorated
with an incised dragon design amongst the clouds,
coated all over with a creamy glaze. Soft paste.
Ming, 1368 - 1644 A.D. Height 4J/4 inches.
899. PORCELAIN VASE
Pear shaped with slender neck around which
a dragon is curled in high relief, coated all over
with a creamy white crackled glaze. Soft paste.
Ming, 1368 - 1644 A.D. Height 8% inches.
900. PORCELAIN POT
Encircling the body is a finely etched dragon
under a pure white glaze. Soft paste. Slight res-
toration on edge.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. H. 2j4 ins.
901. PORCELAIN POMEGRANATE VASE
With short petal lip, the lower part with a
low relief dragon design under the glaze and en-
circling the neck two crawling dragons in high
relief, coated with a creamy white glaze.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D. H. 6% ins.




902. PORCELAIN VASE
With low flat body and slender neck terminat-
ing in a bulbous lip, coated all over with a unctu-
ous flambe glaze fading to a light pink at the lip.
With teakwood stand.
Chien Lung, 1736 - 1796 A.D.
Height without stand SJ/2 inches.
903. PORCELAIN COUPE
Coated all over on the outside with an even
sacrificial red glaze, the inside with a bluish white
glaze. With teakwood stand.
Cheng-Teh, Ming, 1506 - 1521 A.D.
Height without stand 2 inches.
904. PORCELAIN STEM CUP
Coated on the inside and outside with an even
pigeon blood glaze. With teakwood stand.
Yung Cheng, 1723 - 1736 A.D.
Height without stand 4 inches.
905. PAIR OF PORCELAIN BOWLS
Coated on the outside with a sacrificial red
glaze and on the inside with white. Teakwood
stand.
Yung Cheng, 1723 - 1736 A.D.
Height without stand 1 /% inches.
906. PORCELAIN MELON SHAPED VASE
Coated all over with an even unctuous flambe
glaze interrupted by white lines, showing the sec-
tions of a melon. With teakwood stand.
Chien Lung, 1736 - 1796 A.D.
Height without stand 6J/4 inches.
907. PAIR OF PORCELAIN PLATES
Coated all over with a Chi Hung or sacrificial
red glaze. With teakwood stand.
Chien Lung, 1736 - 1796 A.D.
Diameter inches.
908. ROUND PORCELAIN WATER POT
Coated all over with an even Chi Hung or
sacrificial red glaze. With teakwood stand.
Yung Cheng, 1723 - 1736 A.D.
Height without stand 3J4 inches.
909. PORCELAIN GALLIPOT VASE
With high shoulder and a short neck, the en-
tire body coated with a fine even cherry red glaze.
Chien Lung, 1736 - 1796 A.D.
Height 7J/2 inches.
gio. ROUND PORCELAIN POT
Coated all over with an even pigeon blood red
glaze. With teakwood stand.
Yung Cheng, 1723- 1736 A.D.
Height without stand 4 inches.
91 1. PAIR OF PORCELAIN PLATES
Resting on a low foot the entire body coated
with a Chi Hung or sacrificial red glaze termin-
ated by a white line at the rim. With teakwood
stands.
Chien Lung, 1736- 1796 A.D.
Diameter 8 inches.
912. PAIR OF PORCELAIN STEM CUPS
Coated on the inside with a bluish white, the
outside is coated with a Chi Hung or sacrificial
red. Marked in the inside center Ming, but the
correct period is:
Yung Cheng, 1723- 1736 A.D.
Height 3J/2 inches.
913. PORCELAIN BOTTLE >
With long slender neck, the entire surface is
coated with an even Chi Hung or sacrificial red
glaze. >
Yung Cheng, 1723 - 1736 A.D.
Height 9/2 inches.
914. PAIR OF PORCELAIN BOWLS
Resting on a low foot and coated all over with
a ox blood red glaze, terminating with a white
line at the rim. With teakwood stands.
Ming, 1368- 1644 A.D.
Height without stands 4 inches.
915. PORCELAIN FLOWER POT
Round body with short round neck and
slightly flaring lip coated all over with a ox blood
glaze showing crackles. With teakwood stand.
Ming, 1368- 1644 A.D.
Height without stand inches.
916. PORCELAIN PLATE
Coated all over with an ox blood glaze, termin-
ating in a white line at the edge. With teakwood
stand.
Ming, 1368 - 1644 A.D. Diameter Binches.
917. SMALL PORCELAIN BOTTLE
Coated all over with an ox blood red glaze,
running dark around the shoulder and terminat-
ing in white at the lip and base. With teakwood
stand.
Ming, 1368 - 1644 A.D.
Height without stand inches.




918. PAIR OF PORCELAIN BOWLS
Resting on a low foot, the outside is coated
with a coral glaze and decorated with an en-
circling design of white bamboo stalks and
leaves, the inside coated with white.
Chien Lung,, 1736 - 1796 A.D.
Height 3J/2 inches.
919. PAIR OF PORCELAIN PLATES
Coated all over with a coral red and decorated
on the inside and out in white with bamboo
stalks and leaves. With teakwood stands.
Tao Kuang, 1821 - 1850 A.D.
Diameter 5J4 inches.
920. GLOBULAR PORCELAIN VASE
With a short slender neck and coated all over
with an even coral red glaze, on it is painted,
which in the front is a finely painted bamboo
spray in gold, while on the reverse side is a poem.
With teakwood stand.
Chien Lung, 1736 - 1796 A.D.
Height without stand 6J/2 inches.
921. PAIR OF PORCELAIN PLATES
Coated all over with a coral red terminating in
a white line at the rim and base, the outside is
decorated with a floral scroll in blue, while the
inside holds a blue central scroll design of the
same motif. With teakwood stands.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D.
Diameter inches.
922. PAIR OF PORCELAIN PLATES
Coated all over with a coral red and decorated
on the outside with a floral spray in white, the
inside holds a peony spray with leaves and butter-
flies in greens, white and over glaze iron red.
With teakwood stands.
Tao Kuang, 1821 - 1850 A.D.
Diameter 6 inches.
923. PORCELAIN VASE
Resting on a low foot with a long slightly flar-
ing lip, coated all over with a light coral red and
decorated on the body with an encircling design
in blue, depicting a man fishing by a river with
rocks, trees and mountains completing the scene.
With teakwood stand.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D.
Height 7j4 inches.
924. PORCELAIN CLUB SHAPED VASE
Resting on a slightly flaring foot with low
molded line about the shoulder, undecorated and
coated all over with an even coral red glaze.
Chien Lung, 1736- 1798 A.D.
Height inches.
925. GLOBULAR PORCELAIN VASE
With a high slender neck, undecorated and
coated all over with an even coral red glaze.
Yung Cheng, 1723 - 1736 A.D.
Height 5 inches.
926. DEEP PORCELAIN BOWL
Resting on a low foot, the inside glazed white
and the outside coated with a dark coral red.
Kang Hsi, 1662 - 1722 A.D.
Height inches.
927. SMALL PORCELAIN JAR
Undecorated and coated all over with an even
coral red glaze.
Yung Cheng, 1723 - 1736 A.D.
Height 3 inches.
928. PORCELAIN VASE
Resting on a low foot with flaring body and
slender neck terminating in a bulb shape, un-
decorated and coated all over with an even coral
red glaze.
Chien Lung, 1736 - 1796 A.D.
Height 7 inches.
929. PAIR OF PORCELAIN TEMPLE JARS
WITH ORIGINAL COVERS
Undecorated and coated all over with an even
coral red glaze.
Chien Lung, 1736 - 1796 A.D.
Height 16J/2 inches.
930. PORCELAIN JARDINIERE
With a narrow concave band around the top,
the piece is undecorated and coated with a deep
coral red glaze. With teak wood stand.
Chien Lung, 1736- 1796 A.D.
Height 6 inches.




SCULPTURE
Through excavations of the last decade some pieces of sculpture of the Shang period
(circa 1766-1122 8.C.) have come to light. Nothing indicates that they depicted a
religious theme; the figures, as well as the animals, give the feeling of bold solidity, with
little if any ornamentation.
After the downfall of Shang, unlike the constant production of ceramics, stone sculpture
disappeared for a thousand years, although it can be assumed that this gap in its history,
will in time be filled through the progress of excavations in China.
Beginning again in the Han period (206 8.C.-220 A.D.) the well-known Wu Liang Tse
wall panels in low relief depicting historical events contributed to the sculptural art, but
not until the Buddhistic era (after 350 A.D.) did the religious influence make itself felt,
at which time the figures took on proportions or modulations of flesh and blood. Thus from
the Han period continuously through the T’ang Dynasty (618-906 A.D.) the transition
of styles has been portrayed and the greatest sculptures executed, many of which have
been removed from China to the Western World.
931. VOTIVE STELE OF BUDDHA IN
HIGH RELIEF
Standing with a simple robe ranging in pleats
from the shoulder, the halo is decorated by a
semi-circle behind the head depicting the seven
Buddhas of former existence, incised in the asym-
metrical arrangement of four on one side and
three on the other, while encircling this is a
band of flames.
The back holds a seated Buddha flanked on
each side by a kneeling Apsara, while the upper
portion holds the Hundred Buddhas seated in
horizontal lines.
Inscription reads, “The 19th Year of T’ai Ho,’*
which equals 496 A.D.
Height 11 */> feet, width 7 feet.




933. MARBLE STELE
Standing Bodhisattva in high relief on a low
lotus pedestal which rests on a plain oblong base,
the figure rests against an undecorated pointed
halo, the serene face, topped by a low plain head-
dress, has downcast eyes and a quizzical expres-
sion about the mouth, dressed in a plain robe
with a deep cape tied at the waist, the one hand
is missing while the other holds a tablet. White
marble with polychrome. From Ting Chou.
End of 6th Century. Height 27 inches.
-932. STONE BODHISATTVA IN
FLAT RELIEF
The features of the face are finely chiselled and
topped by a simple headdress, the robes are heavy
and flowing and protruding from the sleeves, the
right hand is in abhaya mudra (fearlessness) the
left holds the garment. From T’ien Lung Shan,
Shansi.
Second half of the 6th Century.
Height 46 inches.




934. SEATED BODHISATTVA
Seated on a high lotus pedestal with the feet
crossed. The finely executed face shows a smil-
ing expression and around the neck is a neck-
lace holding tassels. From the low plain head-
dress hang streamers over the shoulders and the
flowing robes are further ornamented by stream-
ers which pass through a disc at the waist and
form drapery around the legs and knees. Arms
missing. Sandstone with polychrome on dress
and gilding on the face and chest.
Second half of the 6th Century.
Height 4 feet 4J/4 inches.




935. SEATED BODHISATTVA
Seated on the rocks, the right knee bent and
holding the arm while the hands grasps a piece
of the garment, the face is finely chiselled with a
thoughtful expression about the eyes and the
scrolled crown is centered by a Buddha. A seal-
loped cape with flowing sleeves below matches
the pleatings on the skirt, while hanging festoons
of jewels complete the costume. Greyish stone
with polychrome in full round.
6th Century. Height 6 feet 3 inches.




936. VOTIVE STELE WITH BUDDHIST
TRINITY IN HIGH RELIEF
In the center Sakyamuni Buddha seated on the
lion throne while two Bodhisattvas stand on lotus
flowers, one holding a lotus bud with two hands,
the other the bud in the left hand and a fold of
the garment with the right. The seven Buddhas
of former existence are incised in the halo of
the main figure in the asymmetrical arrange-
ment of four on one side and three on the other.
The incisions above the halo include an incense
burner with a lotus bud supported by a grotesque
figure surrounded by four flying apsaras placed
in the midst of tendrils and flowers, at the top
two intertwined dragons. The incisions on the
base repeat the unusual asymmetrical details of
the composition. At the base the center is again
marked by the incense burner, while at the right
side four niches are filled by donors followed
by servants holding parasols; only three of such
groups are to be found on the left side. There
the square near the edge is occupied by a fantastic
lion usually found on both sides. Above the ani-
mal is a scene with a large vase standing on the
ground, a child climbing a tree and a griffon-like
animal above. It is possible that this scene refers
to one of the stories of the former existence of
Buddha.
On the back seven rows of donors, followed by
servants holding parasols are incised, above a
seated Bodhisattva. At its right donors and ser-
vants and at the left an inscription bearing the
date. Above the Bodhisattva appear two grotesque
figures holding discs with symbols of the sun
(crow with three legs) and moon (toad), and
on the pointed top a bird is devouring a snake.
Donors followed by servants appear again on the
narrow sides. The section near to the bottom un-
derneath the line of the throne shows a stag at-
tacked by a tiger, the opposite side a snake attack-
ing a toad. Dark limestone.
Dated 522 A.D. Height 7 feet 5 inches.




937. STONE FLYING APSARA
Framing the serene face is long hair sur-
mounted by a high ornament, the right arm is
bent and rests at the waist line while the other
held close to the side carries an offering. Greyish
stone. From Lung Men, Honan.
6th Century. Length 12 inches.
938. REDDISH GRANITE BODHISATTVA
Seated on a pedestal with one knee bent, the
hair is knottted high on the head, frames a serene
face with downcast eyes. The upper part of the
body is undraped except for a necklace and cape
while the skirt hangs in heavy folds about the
feet. With stand. Neck, waist and arms repaired.
Tang, 618-906 A.D.
Height without stand 24 inches.
939 STELE WITH SEATED BUDDHA IN
HIGH RELIEF
Seated on a pedestal against a high pointed
halo, the right hand in abhaya mudra (fear-
lessness) the left in varada mudra (compassion).
Greyish stone with polychrome.
Early 6th Century. Height inches.
940. STONE BODHISATTVA
Standing on a circular base with high head-
dress and the simple carved dress enhanced with
long festoons of necklaces. Both arms missing
and showing traces of polychrome and gilding.
Late 6th Century. Height 17 inches.
941. MARBLE BUDDHIST MONK
Standing on a lotus pedestal his face well
rounded and the head shaved, his simple robe
hangs in folds from the shoulder and protruding
from the sleeves his clasped hands hold an offer-
ing at his chest. In full round.
11th- 12th Century. Height 24 inches.
942. TWO MARBLE BODHISATTVAS
Two magnificently carved figures with well
chiselled serene faces, their headdress is high
and corresponds to the simple carving on the
dress, their chests are bare and around the
shoulder is a scarf tied at the waist line and
ornaments of long necklaces hang to the knees.
Without arms or feet. White marble in full
round. Neck broken. From Ting Chou.
End of 6th Century. Height 27 inches.
943. STANDING STONE BODHISATTVA
Leaning against a low pedestal with a high
back, the hair is carved to form a scroll at the
top, the skirt is tied with a cord-like belt holding
a scalloped drapery encircling the hips. Both
arms missing. Dark grey stone in full round.
Tang, 618 - 906 A.D. Height with stand 22 ins.




944. STONE HEAD OF A BUDDHA
With a slightly smiling expression and the
plain headdress in a huge knot. With stand.
Greyish stone. Yung Kang.
Early 6th Century.
Height without stand 15 inches.
945. STONE HEAD OF A BODHISATTVA
With roughly chiselled features and high flar-
ing headdress. Greyish stone. From Lung Men,
Honan.
Late 6th Century. Height inches.
946. STONE HEAD OF A MAITREYA
With a high crown showing a small Buddha
flanked with low relief scrolls on the sides, the
beautifully chiselled face shows the eyes down-
cast and a full placid mouth. With stand. Grey-
ish stone.
Early Tang, 618 - 906 A.D.
Height without stand 18 inches.
947- PAIR OF SLABS
Cut on a square base, a flat, square pawed
and square faced animal heavily reclines on its
rock bed depicting utter relaxation. Originally
forming the cover of an epitaph. Greyish stone.
Dated by inscription 173 A.D. 20 inches square.
948. WINGED CHIMERA
Depicted standing on a circular base, its body
braced slightly backwards, its wings in relief and
the fierce face with open mouth challenging the
attack of evil. Cover of an epitaph. Greyish
stone in full round.
6th Century. Height 25 inches.
949. STONE SLAB
From a funeral chamber, decorated in relief
(flat relief on a higher level over a sunken and
striated ground) with a procession of dignitaries
riding in covered chariots and pulled by heavy
prancing horses led by a horseman. Blackish
stone. Executed in the style of Wu Lian tz’u.
2nd Century A.D. Length 5 feet.




950. PAIR OF MARBLE BODHISATTVAS
Standing on a low base, with downcast eyes
and clearly chiselled features, the head is covered
by an elaborate crown, the dress is simple ex-
cept for the ornamentation of tassels, hanging
festoons and necklaces. White marble with traces
of polychrome. Bases not original but of the
same period.
Tang, 618-906 A.D.
Height with base 5 feet 9 inches.
95i. STONE TORSO OF A BODHISATTVA
The body is slightly bent to the right adding
to the beauty of a graceful torso which is orna-
mented with festoons of drapery and necklaces.
In full round. From Then Lung Shan, Shansi.
Late 6th Century. Height 4 feet.




952. DRY LACQUER FIGURE OF A
BUDDHA
Standing on a lotus pedestal, the face is
beautifully executed with downcast eyes and a
small mouth, the hair framing the face in small
twisted knots, the long flowing robe is thrown
over the left arm while the other arm hangs
away from the body with the palm of the hand
turned outward. The face is painted gold while
the garment shows traces of red lacquer and
gold.
Tang, 618-906 A.D.
Height with pedestal 51 inches.
953- DRY CLAY BODHISATTVA
Standing on a low base with a high head-
dress under which a clear small featured face is
modelled, the two arms are bent above the waist
and the flowing robes are enhanced with festoons
of jewels. Right hand missing. Dry clay painted
with gold and polychrome. From Kansu Prov-
ince.
Tang, 618 - 906 A.D. Height 5 feet 1 inch.




954. TERRA COTTA BRICK
With a low relief decoration of a Dignitary
and attendant driving behind a prancing horse
balanced by a tree and pagoda. Brownish terra
cotta.
6 Dynasties, 221 - 589 A.D.
Length 17 5/2 inches, height 6% inches.
955. TERRA COTTA BRICK
Molded in high relief depicting a Dignitary
with attendants, one of whom carries a parasol
over his head, another carries a huge banner
while a third leads his heavy prancing horse sad-
dled and ornamented with many trappings. This
brick forms part of a wall in a Buddhistic Sanc-
tuary and depicts a donor arriving to pay re-
spect to the Buddha. Reddish clay.
Tang, 618 - 906 A.D. Size 26J/2 x 14J/2 inches.
956. PAIR OF BRICKS
ist Tile. Incised in a greyish clay are prancing
horses, one following a man with a long staff,
the other being followed by a tiger who force-
fully walks behind with uplifted tail and head
turned to the back, the center of the tile holds
a large bird in a tree, probably the Tree of Life.
2nd Tile. The central motive in this tile is a
tiger with high raised paw and head turned back
looking in the direction of a horse who stands
with his back to him, to his left the horse is re-
peated looking towards him. The background is
dotted with flying phoenix. Greyish tile with red
and white pigment.
Han. 206 8.C., 221 A.D. 52 x 18 / 2 inches.




957. SET OF FOUR SMALL WOODEN
FIGURES
Standing figures of officials wearing small
hats and carrying symbols painted with poly-
chrome. With teakwood stand.
18th Century A.D.
Height without stand 4 inches.
958. WOODEN FIGURE
Figure of a woman standing on a pedestal,
one hand hangs by her side and is concealed by
the sleeve, the other arm bent at her waist.
Wood with polychrome.
Ming, 1368- 1644 A.D. Height 9 inches.
959. PAIR OF WOODEN BODHISATTVAS
Standing figures of Bodhisattva on a low lotus
pedestal, an elaborately carved crown covers the
hair and the folds of the dress are heavy and
flowing, one hand is raised with out-turned
palm while the other is held at the waist. Wood
with polychrome.
Late Sung, 960- 1127 A.D.
Height with stand 17 *4 inches.
960. STANDING FIGURE OF A
MAITREYA
With a high headdress and a crown holding a
tiny Buddha, the robe is carved with streamers
and folds. Wood without paint.
Tang, 618-906 A.D. Height inches.
961. STANDING FIGURE OF
BODHISATTVA
Dressed in flowing robes and standing on a
low lotus pedestal, the hair is plainly combed
and hangs on the shoulders, the face is finely
modelled with downcast eyes and the right hand
is raised in the attitude of benediction. Face,
chest, and feet painted gold and the remainder
of the figure covered with a dark red lacquer.
Wood.
Ming, 1368- 1644 A.D. Height 12J/2 inches.
962. DRY CLAY ACTOR
With legs spread wide and holding in his
right hand a whip, elaborately dressed, the en-
tire figure is painted in pastel shades of poly-
chrome. With teakwood stand.
18th Century.
Height without stand 10 / 2 inches.
963. DRY CLAY BODHISATTVA
With high headdress and the right arm bent
at the waist line, the other holding the bottle of
ambrosia, the upper part of the dress is plain
while the lower part hangs in heavy folds about
the hips, the face and feet show traces of red
lacquer while the balance of the figure is gilt.
With teakwood stand.
Ming, 1368 - 1644 A.D.
Height without stand io l / 2 inches.
964. PAIR OF DRY CLAY MUSICIANS
With high headdress carrying ball-like orna-
mentations, dressed in white robes, edged with
gold and blue and each carries in her hand a
musical instrument. With teakwood stand. Clay
with polychrome.
18th Century.
Height without stand 11 /\ inches.
965. DRY CLAY DANCING GIRL
With high gold headdress atop her black hair,
the body is bent slightly to the left and in her
hands, concealed in long swirling sleeves, she
carries a spear-like ornament. The dress is red,
edged by a black and greenish border showing
traces of gold and a scarf swung out from her
shoulders matches the green of the border. With
teakwood stand. Clay with polychrome.
18th Century.
Height without stand 14J/2 inches.




966. WOODEN FIGURE
Figure of a Lohan standing on a low base, the
head is without hair and the long flowing
sleeves conceal his hands which he holds at the
waist line. With polychrome. Paint.
Ming, 1368- 1644 A.D. Height inches.
967. DRY LACQUER KUAN YIN
Seated on her swirling skirt the Goddess of
Mercy rests one hand on her bent knee while
the other holds a scroll. Her high headdress is
topped by a scarf which hangs to the shoulders
and the entire robe is bordered by a scalloped
scroll design. Dry red lacquer showing traces of
gold.
Ming, 1368- 1644 A.D. Height 25 inches.
968. WOODEN FIGURE
Figure of a Lohan standing on a low base,
the head carries an oblong black hat and one
arm is held bent in front of his body while the
other hangs at his side concealed by the long
sleeve. With polychrome. Paint.
Ming, 1368 - 1644 A.D. Height 24 inches.
g6g. WOODEN FIGURE
Seated Lohan with face painted white and
glass eyes, his left hands rests on his knee and
the right is raised, the flowing robes are painted
red while a border design of polychrome scrolls
encircle the neck line and a geometric design
decorates the skirt.
Ming, 1368- 1644 A.D. Height 23% inches.
970. SEATED DRY LACQUER BUDDHA
Seated on a low lotus pedestal with legs
crossed and hands resting one upon the other,
in the attitude of meditation, the face has a
quiet expression with downcast eyes and the hair
is curled in small shell-like knots over the entire
head; the dress is simple with flowing sleeves
and a necklace surrounds the neck. Dry lacquer
with red and gold pigment.
18th Century, Height 17 inches.
971. SEATED WOODEN FIGURE
Seated figure of Wen Chi on a rock with one
leg crossed and his left hand patting a lion. His
head is bent slightly forward and the smiling
face has a benign expression. Right hand miss-
ing. Wood with polychrome. Paint.
Ming, 1368- 1644 A.D. Height 22J/2 inches.




972. FRESCO PAINTING
Against a creamy white halo is seated a
Bodhisattva with one leg bent, the other resting
on a small lotus pedestal, the hands in the atti-
tude of Compassion and encircling the head,
which carries an elaborate crown, is a halo,
the flowing robes of green and red are edged
by a border holding green floral medallions and
the background is a mottled cloud effect in dull
black. Painted on plaster.
Sung, 960- 1127 A.D.
Size 11 feet x 5 feet 1 o inches.




973. HANGING PAINTING
Painting of a Dignitary seated on a high chair
covered with a tiger’s skin, his finely executed
face is topped by a jet black hat, his long robe
is buff with darker all over brocaded decorations
finished by a touch of bright green at his belt
and the lower side of his robe. Painted on paper.
Ming, 1368 - 1644 A.D. Size 60 x 36 inches.
974. HANGING PAINTING
Depicting an arrangement of huge pink and
white lotus and pads on tall strong stems in light
and dark green under which stand two cranes
with black bills, one devouring an insect while
the other looks on with envy. Painted on paper.
Ming, 1368 - 1644 A.D. Size 34/2 x 68 inches.
975- HANGING PAINTING
The center of the painting depicts a blue rock
around which grows an encircling mass of
peonies with red and white blossoms completed
at the top by a large magnolia tree in full bloom.
Painted on silk.
Ming, 1368 - 1644 A.D. Size 63 x 36 inches.
976. HANGING PAINTING
Standing on a rock surrounded by magnificent
branches of pink and white peonies and mag-
nolias, stands a gaily colored pheasant who looks
down at his drab mate standing below. Painted
on silk.
Ming, 1368 - 1644 A.D. Size 80 x 42 inches.




