

1892. Second Edition.
ONE SHILLING.
EXHIBITION
OF THE
British Art Gallery
BY THE
ROYAL ANGLO-AUSTRALIAN SOCIETY
OF ARTISTS,
WITH WHICH IS ASSOCIATED THE
GERMAN ART GALLERY
AND A SELECTION OF PICTURES BY
Australian Artists.
Illustrated Catalogue.
EXHIBITION BUILDING, MELBOURNE.
OPEN FROM 10 TILL 6.
ADMISSION. . . . . . ONE SHILLING.
J. LAKE, Manager in Australia.
Printed by EDGERTON and MOORE, 241 and 243 Little Flinders Street, Melbourne.




BY SPECIAL
APPOINTMENT.
3t.James’s Oall^ry,
4-\ KING STREET, St. JAMES’S, LONDON.
JUST PUBLISHED:
mm
w
m
A.. A
“POLO,”
From the picture by J. C. DOLLMAN, R. 1., exhibited at the
Royal Academy.
Artist’s Proofs of the above important Plate may now be had of all
Printsellers, and of the Publisher—
I. P. MENDOZA,
|)rintscl(ci' anti |htblisj)cr to ,10ft. tljc djuccn,
ST. JAMES’S GALLERY ,
4A King St., St. James’s, LONDON.
A Choice Collection of High Class Pictures, by British and
Foreign Artists, always on view; together with all
the Newest Engravings and Etchings.
ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE POST FREE ON APPLICATION.


SECOND EDITION.
EXHIBITION
OF THE
British Art Gallery
by THE
ROYAL ANGLO-AUSTRALIAN SOCIETY
OF ARTISTS,
WITH WHICH IS ASSOCIATED THE
GERMAN ART GALLERY
AND A SELECTION OF PICTURES BY
Artists.
1892.
Illustrated Catalogue.
COMPILED AND EDITED FOR THE SOCIETY BY
J. LAKE,
Manager in Australia.
EXHIBITION BUILDING, MELBOURNE.
OPEN FROM IO TILL 6.
ADMISSION ONE SHILLING.
Printed by Kdghkton anii Moork, 241 and 243 Little Flinders Street, Melbourne.


CONTENTS.
Royal Anglo-Australian Society of Artists, Patrons, Honorary Members, Foreign page
Members, Officers and Council ... ... ... ... ... 3
Members ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4
Introductory .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5
Notices, Sale of Pictures, Explanations of Artists' Titles, &c,... ... ... 8
Catalogue—British Oil Paintings, Main Gallery, I. ... ... ... ... 9
Do. do., Square do., 11. .. ... ... 39
Do. Water-colours, 111. ... ... ... ... ... 63
Punch Drawings ... .. ... ... ... y r
Chalk Studies and Engravings... ... ... ... ... 82
German Gallery, IV. ... ... .. ... ... ... $8
Australian Artists, V. ... .. ... ... ... 100
Art Union ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 107, 108
Index of Exhibitors ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 109
Advertisements... ... ... ... ... ... ... 117, 120
The Art Pottery appointments are by Messrs. Thomas Webb and Sons Limited.
The Concert Grand Piano by> Steinway is kindly lent for the season by Messrs. Allan
and Co.




THE ROYAL ANGLO-AUSTRALIAN SOCIETY OF ARTISTS.
VICE-REGAL PATRONS.
HIS EXCELLENCY THE EARL OF HOPETOUN, G.C.M.G., &c.
HIS EXCELLENCY THE EARL OF KINTORE, G.C.M.G., &c.
HIS EXCELLENCY LORD CARRINGTON, G.C.M.G., &c.
HONORARY MEMBERS.
HER ROYAL HIGHNESS THE PRINCESS OF WALES.
HER ROYAL HIGHNESS THE PRINCESS LOUISE (Marchioness of Lorne.)
Sir FREDERICK LEIGHTON, Bart., P.R.A.
Sir JOHN GILBERT, P.R.W.S., R.A,
Sir JAMES LINTON, P.R.L
Sir J. E. MILLAIS, Bart,, R.A.
G. F. WATTS, R.A.
K. L. MONTEFIORE, Esq.
OFFICERS AND COUNCIL.
President.
W. AYERST INGRAM. R.B.A.
Honorary Secretary.
E. WAKE COOK.
Vice-President.
R. W. ALLAN, R.W.S.
Honorary Treasurer.
CHAS. E. HERNE.
Council.
WILFRID BALL, R.S.P.E.
R. GOFF. R.S.P.E.
EDWIN HAYES, R.H.A., K.L
G. P. JACOMB HOOD, N.E.A.C
T. B. KENNINGTON.
FRANK WALTON, R.I.
ERNEST WATERLOW, A.R.A.
A W. WEEDON, R.I.
G. F. WETHERBEE, R.L
Secretary in London.
R, F. McNAIR.
Secretary to Manager.
JOHN JENVEY.
JManager in Australia.
J. LAKE.
FOREIGN HONORARY MEMBERS.
P. A. J. DAGNAN, Paris.
J. P. LAURENS, Paris.
F. VON UHDE, Munich.
JOSEF ISRAELS, Holland.
H. K. MESDAG, Holland.
BOLDINI, Paris'
A. PASSINI, Paris.
A. L. ZORN, Paris.
ALBERT EDELFELT, Paris.
ALFRED STEPHENS, Paris.
V. JOHANSEN, Copenhagen.


MEMBERS.
Allan, R. W.—R.W.S.
Armstrong, Miss E.— R.S.PE.
Aumonier, J. E. — R.I.
Ball, Wilfrid— R.S.P.E.
Bartlett, W. H.
Bishop, W. Pollen .—R.B.A.
Bourdillon, F. — N.E.A.C.
Bramley, F. — N.E.A.C.
Breakspeare, W. — R.B.A.
Brewtnall, E. F. — R. W.S.
Broadbridge, Miss A.
Bromley, J.M. — R.B.A.
Carter, R. H.’
Cattermole, C. — R.I.
Charlton, J. — R.B.A.
Combes, E. — C.M.G., Hon. R.I.
Cook, E. Wake.
Craft, Percy.
Dawson, Nelson.
Detmold, H. E.
East, Alfred, — R.I.
Earle, Chas. — R.I.
Farquharson, J.
Fisher, S. Melton.
Forbes, Stanhope. — N.E.A.C.
Forbes, Mrs, Stanhope.
Garstin, Norman — N.E.A.C.
Gill, Harry P.
Goft, R. — R.S.P.E.
Gogin, C.
Gotch, T. C.- R.B.A.
Grace, J. E.— R.B.A.
Hacker, Arthur.
Hall, Fred
Harris, Ed.
Hartley, A.
Hayes, Claude. — R.I.
Hayes, Ed.— R.l., R.B.A.
Herne, Chas. E.
Hill, James. — R.B.A.
Hood, G. P. Jacomb. — N.E.A.C.
Hunt, Aubrey.
Huybers, J,
Ingram, W. Ayerst.— R.B.A.
Kennington, T. B.
King, Yeend R.B.A.
Knight, J. Buxron.
Knowles, Davidson. — R.B.A.
Laidlay, Walter J.
Leighton, E. Blair.
Lewis, C. J. —R.I.
Lindner, Moffat P.
Llewellyn, W. S.— R.B.A.
Ludby, Max.
Macallum, Hamilton.— R.l.
Macintosh, J. M.
Menpes, M.— R.S P.E.
Moore, Albert.— R. W.S.
Moore, Henry. — A.R.A.
Morgan, W.— R.B.A.
Mosler, H.
Parsons, Alfred. — R.I.
Parton, Ernest.
Pickering, J. L.
Rixon, W. A.
Roussell, Theo. — N.E.A.C.
Schmalz, Herbert.
Short, Frank. — R.S.P.E.
Solomon, J. Solomon.
Stokes, Adrian.
Stokes, Mrs. Marianne.
Stott, W. (of Oldham.)
Strutt, Alfred.— R.B.A.
Strutt, William.— R.B.A.
Symons, W. Christian.
Tayler, Chevalier. — N.E.A.C.
Thomas, Percy.— R.S.P.E.
Thomson, Leslie, — R.B.A.
Trood, W. H.
Tuke, H. S.— R.B.A., N.E.A.C.
Waite, R. Thorne.— R. W.S.
Walton, Frank.— R.l, V.PI.
Waterlow, E. A. — A.R.A., R. W.S.
Watson, C. J.
Weedon, A. W. — R.I.
Wetherbee, G. E. — R.I.
Whistler, J. McNeil.
Wilkinson, Hugh.
Yates, C. B.


PREFACE.
The British Art Gallery ot the Royal Anglo-Australian Society
constitutes the Second Season of what it is hoped will become an
annual Exhibition of British Pictures in Australia.
A brief note on this National Undertaking may be of service.
Two years ago twelve gentlemen in Melbourne formed a Guarantee
Fund to procure a British Exhibition of Pictures in Melbourne ; they
were afterwards joined by a similar guarantee in Sydney and Adelaide,
and the joint funds were finally entrusted to the Royal Anglo-Australian
Society of Artists in London, who sent out an Exhibition of 250 works.
These were exhibited in Melbourne, Sydney and Adelaide, and the
total number of visitors in the three Colonies exceeded 33,000, of
which 17,000 were Melbourne visitors. Pictures were sold for a sum
of over and the National Galleries selected twelve important
Works from the Collection.
To simplify finance the present Exhibition (our Second Season)
is arranged for Melbourne alone, though it will probably be after-
wards taken over by guarantors in Adelaide.
In May last year the following twenty-two gentlemen entrusted
Mr. Byron Moore and Mr. J. Lake with a new Guarantee Fund, viz.:
Chairman —R. Murray Smith, Esq., C.M.G.
The Mayor of Melbourne.
Mr. Justice a’Beckett.
W. Attenborough, Esq.
William Brown, Esq.
Mars Buckley, Esq.
F. B. Clapp, Esq.
J. G. Duffett, Esq.
Gowen Evans, Esq.
Alfred Felton, Esq.
Molesworth Greene, Esq.
Bowes Kelly, Esq.
Professor Kernot.
Edward Miller, Esq.
H. Byron Moore, Esq. (Treasurer.
Professor Nanson.
William Peterson, Esq.
A. W. Robertson, Esq.
Edmund E. Smith, Esq.
John Wagner, Esq.
William H. Welch, Esq.
E. L. Yencken, Esq.


The object of the guarantee was to arrange for a general
Exhibition by this Society which should comprise all the various
English schools of painting, with Continental pictures, and local
works by Melbourne, Sydney and Adelaide artists.
The Trustees of the Exhibition Building, Melbourne, placed
these galleries at our disposal on liberal terms just three weeks
ago, and the collection now on view represents the following
Galleries and Societies, viz.: —The Royal Academy, Royal Institute
of Painters in Water-colours, Royal Society of Painters in Water-
colours, Royal Society of British Artists, Royal Hibernian Academy,
Royal Scottish Academy, the New English Art Club, the New
Gallery, the German x\rt Association, and leading artists of nearly
every School, with the Art Staff of the London Punch.
The Guarantors believe that the project will be now nearly self-
supporting, as this enlarged Exhibition ought to attract and delight
many thousands of visitors. It should be added that the Guarantors
take no pecuniary profit whatever Jrom the undet taking. They incur the
financial risk, but in case of any profit arising, they donate such profit
to the Melbourne National Gallery, or set it forward to an enlarged
Guarantee for another Exhibition, and they hope eventually to make
the Gallery an Animal Institution.
It is hardly necessary to say how great social and educational
advancement must accrue to Australia from such a scheme; it will
commend itself to the kindly interest and support of all Australians.
THE CATALOGUE
A word on our Catalogue. Our best thanks are due to many who
have helped it to its complete form. And first to the proprietors of
the Australasian , who most kindly furnished advanced sheets of a
critical letter on the Pictures written for th & Australasian by Mr. Henry
Blackburn , of which free use has been made in our notes. Next to


that eminent critic himself and to the Proprietors of the Fall Mall
Gazette , who have furnished blocks lor illustrating the Pictures, from
their publications on the Futures of iht Year. The Editor has endea-
voured to supply throughout such short notes, stories and descriptions
of the Pictures and their Painters as should give interest and help to
visitors in the better understanding of the works and their aims.
Lastly, the Gallery has been hung in three weeks and the Catalogue
compiled in four nights. Such necessary haste is offered as excuse
for errors which may occur in this First Edition.
J. L.
28 th February , 1892.
NOTE TO THE SECOND EDITION.
Our Exhibition has been attended by over 4000 visitors in ten
days, and. the First Edition of 2000 Catalogues has been nearly sold
out. This Second Edition contains some more Illustrations, additional
Notes, and an Index of the Exhibitors and their Works. Any
former errors have also been corrected, and a Plan of the Galleries
added.
J. L.
13th March, 1892.


Notice.
The Gallery of the British Art Exhibition will be open daily from 10
a.m to 6 p.m , until the days draw in, when it will close at 5.
Admission, One Shilling. Catalogue, One Shilling.
Season Tickets, admitting at all times when the Gallery is open,
Half-a-Guinea.
Sale of pictures.
All communications respecting the purchase of Pictures must be
made to the Manager, Mr. Lake, at his office in the Gallery,
A deposit of 25 per cent, on the price of the work must be made by
any purchaser directing a Picture to be marked sold. This regulation
must be strictly observed.
The balance of the purchase money must be paid at the close of the
Exhibition, of which due notice will be given. Sold Pictures will be
delivered in the Gallery, or elsewhere by arrangement, at the close of
the Exhibition in Melbourne. No Picture can be delivered until
after the close of the Exhibition.
The payment of purchase money must be completed within fourteen
days from close of Exhibition, or the deposit will be forfeited for the
benefit of the artist.
The Copyright of all works is reserved, unless arrangement be
made to the contrary.
2Inion.
For sale of Pictures by Art Union, see pages 107, 108.
Explanation of Letters following- Artists’ Names.
PR.A. —President of Royal Academy.
R.A. —Royal Academician.
A.R.A. —Associate of Royal Academy.
R. W. S. —Member of Royal Water Colour Society.
A.R. IV.S. —Associate of Royal Water Colour Society.
R.I. —Member of Royal Institute of Painters in Water Colours
VP.I. —Vice-President of Institute of Painters in Oil.
R.B.A. —Member of Royal Society of British Artists.
R.S.A. —Member of Royal Scottish Academy.
R.H.A.- Member of Royal Hibernian Academy.
N.E.A.C. — Member of New English Art Club.
R.S.P.E. —Member of Royal Society of Painter-Etchers.


CATALOGUE.
“ With your National Gallery, and the many important English pictures im
private collections, the art student in Australia need not be misinformed"
as to the importance of English art at the end of the nineteenth century.
As to how it has advanced during the fifty years of the reign of Queen
Victoria, a glance at this London Exhibition, collected for Melbourne,-
tells us eloquently to day.”— Henry Blackburn, in Australasian.
I. —MAIN GALLERY.
BRITISH OIL PAINTINGS.
[Note. — The numbers begin in the Main Gallery, on the left hand side of the-
entrance, and continue always to the right round the room.]
An asterisk (*) in front of a number denotes that the picture is illustrated in the
Catalogue.
A red wafer denotes that the Picture is sold.
E. G. Warren, R.I.
PRICK.
1. “ Burnham Beeches ” - £2OO o o
Mr. Warren is already familiar to Melbourne from his
beautiful water-colour works. The picture is a thorough type
of his favourite subject,—beech tree glades in height of
summer. Their autumn tints may be seen in the picture of the
same title (No. 50) at the opposite end of the Gallery.
B


No. 5. “ Tantallon Castle.” EDWIN HAYES, R. I., R.B.A.


W. Ayerst Ingram, R.B.A.
PRICE.
*2. “ The Flying Dutchman ” ,£126 o o
“ ‘ The Flying Dutchman ’ is a spectral ship seen in stormy
weather off the Cape of Good Hope, and considered ominous
of ill luck. Sir Walter Scott says she was originally a vessel
laden with precious metal, but a horrible murder having been
committed on board, the plague broke out among the crew,
and no port would allow the vessel to enter. The ill-fated
ship still wanders about like a ghost, doomed to be sea-tossed,
but never more to enjoy rest.”— Brewer : “ Dictionary of
Phrase and Fable P
No. 2. “ The Flying Dutchman." W. A. INGRAM, R.B.A.
H. Fantin-Latour.
3. “ Grapes ” - - - - - 52 10 o
C. Napier Hemy, R.W.S.
4. “ The Anchor Watch ” - 105 o o
[See note to No. 112.]
Edwin Haves, R. 1., R.B.A.
*5. “ Tantallon Castle ” - 300 o o
“ Tantallon vast extending far,
And held impregnable in war.”
— Scott's Mat m on.
“The veteran sea-painter, Mr. Edwin Hayes, sends his
picture of ‘Tantallon Castle;’ also, ‘Fishing Vessels off
Granton.’ (See No. 247.) Mr Hayes is well known for his
Dutch trawlers and rolling seas, and I suppose few collections
of English pictures are without one of his works. Two or three,
he tells me, are in Melbourne, and an important one in the
Adelaide National Gallery. Without going into detailed
criticism, or comparing Mr. Hayes’ pictures in quality with
the great [sea-painters of Holland and Denmark, it may be


PRICE.
worth while pointing out that his boats ‘sit upon the water,’
and that he can represent what few even of the Dutch painters
have succeeded in doing, the straining of a heavily laden barque
beating to windward in a high sea. As he says, ‘to know the
ropes and what they are doing ’ is an essential part of the
sea-painter’s art.” — Blackburn , in Australasian.
Mr. Hayes specially reserved this picture for Melbourne,
and refused it to all the English Provincial Exhibitions,
regarding it, he said, as his best work.
Edwix H. Fahey, R.I
6. “Autumn” - - -£ 2 S° ° °
This picture had the place of honour in the last
Drosvenor Exhibition. The centre of the main room was
occupied by Burne Jones, while Watts and the “Autumn ’
hung as pendants on either side.
C. j. Lewis, R.I
7. “A Fishing - Village, Sussex” - 105 o c
IVYSTAX H ETHERIXGTOX
8. “An Old Orchard, Dorset” - - 52 10 o
Leslie Thomson, R.B.A.
9. “ Devonshire Coast ” - - 26 10 o
Johx MacWhirter, A.R.A.
*lO. Edinburgh, from Arthur’s Seat ” 450 o o
“ This is a very interesting picture of Edinburgh, viewed
from the high ground near St, Anthony’s Chapel, by Mr.
John MacWhirter, A.R.A., a grand view of the “Modern
Athens,” half veiled in mist, and it may be relied upon as an
accurate rendering of the scene.” - Blackburn .
Claude Haves, R.I.
11. “Across the Common” - - - 36 15 o
Mr. Hayes is the son of the marine painter, Edwin Hayes,
Alfred W. Strl'tt, R.B.A.
12. “ Dinner at Last” - - - 36 15 o
Mr. Strutt is the son of William Strutt, the painter of
“ Black Thursday.” His picture in our Exhibition last season
was purchased on the Private View Day by the Countess of
Hopetoun.
Percy Craft,
*l3- “Saturday” _____ 136 IO o
By the painter of “ Heva, Heva,” incur last Exhibition.
One of the Newlyn men.
['See Illustration , page 14. 1


No. 10. “ Edinburgh, from Arthur's Seat." JOHN MAC WHIRTER, A.R.A.


No. 13 “ Saturday . ’ PERCY CRAFT.
Edwin Haves, R. 1., R.B.rV.
PRICE.
14. “ Brixham Trawlers outside Harbour ” - - 15 o
Lucien Davis.
15- “Who is it?” - - - - - 880
Edwin Hayes, R. 1., R.B.A
16. “Trevose Head : A Grey Sunset ” - “ 26 5 o
Luciex Davis
17- “ A Midsummer Reverie ’ - - 880


Edwin Hayes, R. 1., R.B.A.
PRICE.
18. “ Trawlers In Harbour, Brixham ” - - o o
R. Ansdell (the late,) R.A.
19- “ Passing Clouds ” - - 400 o o
The Tate Sir Edwin Landseer heads the list of those
English artists who have excelled in the painting of animal
life ; and he was also the first
To make men feel the links that hold them bound
In love, and joy, and grief, with those dumb things
Till hidden depths of sympathy were found,
Where human kindness flowed from secret springs.
The path he opened up was soon trodden by the late Richard
Ansdell, of whom it has been justly observed that “he con-
trived to invest his dumb creatures with that look of reality
and mobility which appeals to all, whilst in expressing the
fiercer and more savage attributes of their nature he is unsur-
passed.
H. Fantin-Latour.
20- “Geraniums” - - - - 52 10 o
Fantin-Latour is the most brilliant flower painter now
exhibiting in London. At the last Institute he had four
pictures on the line. The daring scheme of scarlets and pinks
should be noticed.
Oliver Rhys.
21- “Meditation” - - - - -45 00
H. Fantin-Latour.
22- “Marigolds ” - - - - 52 10 o
Joseph Farouharson.
23- “The Eastern Question - - - - 210 o o
Alfred Parsons, R.I.
24- “ The Red Canoe ” - too o o
Ada Bell.
25- “Peonies”- - - - - - 31 10 o
“ Full of summer warmth.”
Tennyson .
Ada Bell.
26- “Chrysanthemums” - - - 42 o o
“ Flowers from the Land of the Rising Sun.’ 5
In the Royal Academy of 1888 Miss Bell had five works
hung on the line. This is the third time she has been hung
side by side with the President.


PRICE.
Sir Frederick Leighton, P.R.A.
2T. “ Solitude ” ----- Not for sale.
The Society and the Melbourne public are deeply indebted
to Mr. Frederick W. Arrnytage for the loan of this master-
piece.
The President of the Royal Academy was anxious to be
represented in this Exhibition, but had no unsold work
available. At one of his Sunday afternoon receptions he told
Mr. Lake that “of all the single-figure subjects he had
painted, he set the highest artistic value on Mr. Armytage’s
purchase. He had,” he said, “brooded over the motif for
years, reconsidered it many times, and he himself regarded
the result as the most poetic and successful ideal that he had
created. He would prefer to be represented in Australia by
that picture rather than by any other, if Mr. Arrnytage would
be so good as to lend it for the Exhibition.”
A copy of the fine mezzo-tint of the work, published by
Messrs. Tooth, is on view in the Gallery (see No. 354), as
well as Sir Frederick’s original study for the work (see
No. 350) on the Square Gallery screens.
The picture is its own interpreter ; but if there be any
who should ask the interpretation of the theme, they may be
commended to Mr. Blackburn’s anecdote: “I remember,”
he says, “atone of the president’s crowded receptions last
season, when ‘ The Return of Persephone ’ was on view
in his studio, Sir Frederick—a little weary of answering the
oft-repeated questions as to the subject, painter's aim, 6-v. —
rather puzzled a lady questioner by saying, with the utmost
courtesy, “My aim was to paint a beautiful picture; if I have
succeeded that is my subject."
Alfred Parsons, R.I.
28. “ The Thames, from Shiplake Hill ” - - o o
Ada Bell.
29. “Iris” - - - - - - 31 10 o
J. W. Waterhouse, A.R.A.
30. “Summer” ----- 5 2 5 0 0
By the painter of the “Sirens,” and in this connexion
Mr. Blackburn’s note on that fine picture is of interest:
“The large single-figure picture called ‘Summer, by J, W.
Waterhouse, A.R.A., calls to mind the ‘Sirens,’ that most
original and perplexing work, which is now in your National
collection. Some of the comments upon the ‘ Ulysses and
the Sirens,’ as they appeared in the papers at the time of its
exhibition in the Royal Academy last May, would be worth
collecting now. Mr. Waterhouse is such an original and
thorough artist, and has such a long record of good work, that
anything from his hand must be interesting, and Mr. Herkomer
no doubt acted wisely in recommending its purchase. Never-
theless, the mixture of the possible and the impossible, the
real and the ideal, in the ‘ Ulysses and the Sirens,’ the
peculiar lighting and colour, raise troublesome questions in
the critic’s mind. As a creation —a poetic conception merely
—I think it is a great possession for Melbourne, and cannot
be too highly regarded. We may enjoy it, just as we may
rejoice with the happy pagans in Mr. Weguelin’s two pictures
(Nos. 35 and 115), now on their way to Australia ."-Blackburn,
in Australasian.


J. B. Burgess, R.A.
PRICE.
31. “La Senorita ” - £6O o o
Alfred Hartley.
32. “ A Suffolk Pastoral” - - - 26 5 o
Davidson Knowles, R.B.A.
33. “ A Moorland Flower ” - - - 30 o o
Frank Walton, R. 1., V.P.I.
*34. “Summer has Gone on Swallows’ Wing's” - 310 o o
** I am afraid of using too many words of praise in speaking
of one picture (when so many must of necessity be passed over
ia these notes,) but it seems right to draw special attention to
this. Nothing that I have seen lately is better in tone and
quality, or more true to nature, and I think this was the general
opinion at the private view of the Royal Academy Exhibition
last May.”— Blackburn.
The picture was hung as a pendant to Leader’s ‘ Solitude/
in the last Academy, and engraved also as a pendant by the
Pall Mall Gazette.
[See Illustration , page 18.]
J. R. Weguelin, R.I.
*35. “ The Rite of the Gardens of Adonis ” - - 300 o o
“ The works of Mr. J. K, Weguelin are graceful, poetic,
and refined, classic and full of vivacity. In 4 The Gardens of
Adonis 5 the beautiful Greek maidens are seen tripping over
the sands in their flowing robes of pink, purple, green, and
lemon colour, bearing offerings in memory of the early death
of Adonis, The delightful conception and abandon , so to
speak, of such works as this and ‘ Springtime’ (See No. 115)
have real charm, whatever experts may say of the colour and
technique.”— Blackburn , in Austi'alasian.
The Garden of Adonis is a Greek expression for a perishable
blessing, a fleeting pleasure. The allusion is to jars of cress,
or other quick-growing herbs, prepared for the annual festival
of Adonis. They were quickly grown and soon thrown away.
“For all flesh is as grass, and all the glory of man as the
flower of grass. The grass withereth, and the flower thereof
falleth away.”
[See Illustration , page 19.]
Edwin Hayes, R. 1., R.B.A.
36- “Mumble’s Lighthouse, off Swansea ” - - 26 5 o
Leslie Thomson, R.B.A.
37- “ Grey Day, Rye, Sussex” - - - 15 1; o
Florence A. Saltmer.
38. “ Golden Gorse ” - - - - 18 18 o


No. 34. " Summer has Gone on Swallows' Wings.” F RANK WALTON, R.I., V.P.I.
[Purchased for the Melbourne National Gallery.]


No. 35. “ The Rite of the Gardens of Adonis.' J. P WEGUELIN, R.I.


James E. Grace, R.B.A
TRICE.
39. “ A Surrey Common ” - - - A'47 5 o
H. Faxtin’-Latour.
40- “ Roses” - - - - - -84 00
James E. Grace, R.B.A.
41. “ Elstead Church, Surrey” - 15 15 o
Robert Noble.
42. “By Twilight Willows ” - - - 65 o o
No. 44. “ The First Love-Lelter." MARCUS STONE, R.A.


Moffat P. Lindner.
PRICE.
43- ‘‘Arundel Castle” - £s° ° c
March's Stone, R.A.
*44. “ The First Love-Letter” - 1260 o o
“ Marcus Stone is the well-known painter of last century
garden scenes. Probably no exhibit will attract more atten-
tion for the delicacy and finish of its execution, its grace of
line and tenderness. The artist has many admirers in Eng-
land, and, whatever may be the critical estimate of it, I can
vouch for the anxious and earnest labour involved in every
work from this artist’s hand. The flowing white “ empire”
dress worn by the girl on the left will be the envy of many
visitors to the exhibition. But the feeling for the soft dia-
phanous folds in which our great grandmothers sat in their
old-fashioned gardens in summer time are not a heritage of
the present generation. The atmosphere of quiet and refine-
ment depicted in Mr. Stone’s pictures may be found in
England, it is true, but at rare intervals, behind high walls,
approached by private parks, through groves of elms and
beeches. In the England of the present some young ladies
(alas !) wear cock’s feathers in their hats, all-round collars,
horseshoe pins, and tailor-made coats with large buttons !
(Perhaps they do these things also even in Melbourne.”)
Henry Blackburn , in Australasian.
“ The Love-Letter” is spoken of by the London Press as
“probably the best picture Marcus Stone has painted.”
It has been obtained for the Melbourne Exhibition with great
difficulty, and only by consenting to a special agreement that
if it is not at once sold it shall be returned to London by the
Ist of June, in time for special exhibition during the London
season. The Proof Engraving, just completed, may be
ordered in the gallery.
Anderson Hagle, R. I.
45. “Springtime of Life” - 210 o o
This vigorous work vies in its brilliance and force with the
attractive “Hayfield,” by the same artist, in our last Exhibition,
Hugh Wilkinson.
46- “ Near the Coast, Wales” - - - 50 o o
H. W. B. Davis.
47* “Dewy Eve” ----- 250 o o
Henry Moore, A.R.A.
48- “A Grey Day” - - - - - 31100


S. E. Waller.
price.
*49. “ Home from the Honeymoon ” - - - o o
“I am glad to see that Mr. S. E. Waller, who is as well
known in Australia as in England, is able to send one paint-
ing. It is called ‘ Home from the Honeymoon,’ and is one
of that popular series which includes ‘ The Day of Reckoning,’
‘ The Ruling Passion,’ &c. This picture, which has never
been exhibited, will, if it serves no other purpose, show the
value of the study of horses in action. ‘ Few of us can draw
a horse in motion,’ said a well-known animal painter to me
lately, ‘and so we lend our students Muybridge’s photographs
of horses —the most delusive method that could be devised !’
To counteract all this they now have horses at the Slade
School, at University College, in Gower-slreet, London, and
encourage the students to learn first the anatomy of the
animals, and then to make studies of them in motion. Such
a method of teaching should commend itself in Melbourne.
Out of 100 students here it is difficult to find one who knows
the points of a horse ! If success may be taken as a test of
merit, Mr. Waller should take high rank, for he has his hands’
full of commissions, both for pictures and equestrian portraits.”
—Blackburn , in Australasian.
A fine mezzo-tint of this picture (by Gilbert Hester) is
published by Messrs. Dowdeswell, and may be ordered at the
office in the Gallery.
W. Pollen Bishop, R.B.A.
*5O- “ Burnham Beeches ” - 220 o o
Mr. Bishop and his wife —also an artist—live under the
Beeches in a travelling studio on wheels, modelled after a
Gipsy waggon. They both thus finish all pictures direct
from Nature. Nothing could be truer than these English
autumn tints.
No. 50. "Burnham Beeches." FOLLEN BISHOR, R.B.A.


Mr. Waller has oainted two editions of this picture, one for the use of the engraver,
from which our illustration is taken. In the present edition he lias added higher finish
and made many improvements notably in the pose and more refined and gentle senti-
ment of the bridegroom.
No. 49. " Home from the Honeymoon." S. E. WALLER.


John Parker, R.W.S
PRICE.
*5l • “ Lancashire Cockle Gatherers ” - /,200 o o
No. 51. “L aucashir'e Cackle Gatherers." JOHN PARKER, R.W.S.
Val Davis.
52. “Tenants of the Wastes” ... 2 io o o
R. H. Carter.
53- “Home before the Gale” - 200 o o
David Murray, A.R.A
54. “ Spring in Brittany ” - - - 40 o o
Mr. Murray’s canvases are generally “ large.” It is a
rare thing to persuade him to paint little gem cabinets like the
present work He is the latest elected Associate of the
Academy.
J. Haynes Williams
55. “The King's Page” - - - - 50 o o
Mr. Williams has abandoned his Spanish series of Mata-
dors, Picadors, and Caballeros. He has devoted two years
to a famous series of interiors at Fontainebleau, the larger of
which have been eagerly bought up at immense prices by
American connoisseurs, and which form also an edition-de-luxe
of engravings of the French palace. This tiny specimen of
the series was secured with difficulty. The artist is noted
specially for “always painting beauty” and a series of the
most lovely women and exquisite beaux of the 17th century
filled every printseller’s window in London last season, under
the titles of “The Last Dance,” “ The Honeymoon,” “One
More Couple,” “ Noblesse Oblige,” &c.


Alfred W. Strutt, R.B.A.
PRICE.
56. “Perplexity” - - - - - ,£l5 LS 0
On the line at the Academy and much praised by London
critics.
Edwix Douglas.
-*57. “ British Matrons ” - 150 o o
“Mr. Edwin Douglas, the painter of Jersey cattle, sends a
picture of some brood mares, shown in the pen and ink sketch.
An engraving of this picture is published by the Autotype
Company in London.”— Blackburn .
No. 57. “ British Matrons." EDWIN DOUGLAS,
Richard Beavis.
*5B- “ Cattle Pasturing ” - 100 o o
“ There is no better or more experienced painter of horses
than Mr. R. Beavis, who sends several beautiful Eastern
studies of goats and cattle, and one larger picture of cattle
pasturing. It is an autumnal scene in Buckhurst Park, near
the New Forest, painted entirely out of doors,”— Blackburn.
[See Illustration, page 26.]
Solomon J. Solomon.
59. “October Sun” - - - - - 6000
Frank Walton, R. 1., V.P.I.
60. “ The Valley Farm ” - - - - 17 17 o
G. B. O’Neill.
61. “ Kitty : The Language of Flowers ” - - 35 o o
c


No. 58. “ Cattle Pasturing." R. BEAVIS.
T. B. Kennington.
PRICE.
*62. “The Streets of London ” - - - - o o
Its original title was “Homeless.” Mr. Kennington has
received a French training. His truth of tone is the result.
His mission is to paint the sorrows of the London poor. A
noble work by him from these same two models was presented
lately to the National Gallery in Adelaide, under the title of
“The Pinch of Poverty/’
Henry E. Detmoed.
63- “An Eastern Courtyard ” - - - - 100 o o
The finest example from his studio ; specially selected to
show the brilliance of his late work in the East.


No. 62. “ The Streets of London." T. B. KENNINGTON.
R. Beavis.
PRICK.
64. Milch Goats, Granada - - - - o o
[See note to No. 58 ]


W. H. Bartlett.
*65- 44 By the Committee Boat. 4 Are You Ready ” - 262 10 o
44 Clever in arrangement, strong in action, and in the draw-
ing of the nude, is Mr. W. H. Bartlett’s swimming match,
called 4 Are You Ready?’ His pictures of the Irish sea
coast are well known in Melbourne. Mr. Bartlett has a great
reputation for so young a painter.”— Blackburn.
No. 65. “Are You Ready?” W. H. BARTLETT.
Colin Hunter, A.R.A.
66. “As they Roar on the Shore” ... 650 c o
“There is little need, of course, to dwell upon the merits
of well-known men in their own department of art, but it is
always interesting to hear them talk. This is what Mr. Colin
Hunter, A.R.A., says about the picture he has sent to the
Melbourne exhibition— 4 1 call it,’ he says, 44 As they Roar on
the Shore.” It is a rough sea breaking on a stony shore.
. . . The stones represent many different specimens to be
found on the north coast of Scotland, serpentine, granite,
marble, &c. The last two vessels out of a fleet of fishing
boats are just getting into harbour.’ I quote his own des-
cription, because I have not had an opportunity of seeing this
picture before it was packed up, and I am told by experts
that this is 4 the best picture of the kind ’ by Mr. Colin Hunter,
the painter of 4 Their only Harvest,’ and similar works, so
well known by the etchings.”— Blackburn , in Australasian.
Mr. Lake spent a Sunday afternoon in Mr. Hunter’s studio,
looking at every picture on his easels. He was unwilling to
send any smaller work. He wanted a few more days’ time, he
said, and then he would send out only such a work as he should
be proud to be represented by in a National Gallery. The
picture must itself speak the fulfilment of the promise.


Alfred East, R.I.
PRICE.
67- “On the River Ochy. Dalmally ” - £&3 0 0
One of the most popular and poetic painters in London.
A thorough type of his manner and style.
Claude Hayes, R.I.
68. “ The Frozen Pond” - - - 21 o o
Herbert Schmalz.
*69. “ Christiana; ad Leones” - 1050 o o
(“ Faithful unto Death.”)
“ The sect who were first called Chrisiians in Antioch had
that day borne good witness to their faith in Rome. The
grim work was over for the strong ; only the tenderest, the
most innocent, saved from that death they envied for a
crueller fate, had been borne to the circus with ribald jest
and vile indignity. In the fierce glare of tlie arena waiting for
the end—wailing there under the pitiless eye of the populace,
from senator and patrician dame to low buffoon and parasite,
weary of slaughter but insatiate lor further blood, —waiting till
fear was hope and shame grew shameless before the presence
of death.” — 'John Cameron Grants author of “ So;ys from the
Sunny South P
Herbert Schmalz has always been a great Australian
favourite. 11 is ‘‘Too I.ale” (from the Grosvenor collection)
is owned by the Sandhurst Art Gallery. “Zenobia” (from
our last Exhibition! passed to the Adelaide National Gallery.
The ‘‘Christian Martyrs” had only returned from a two
years' tour, on special view, through England, when it was
secured fur this Exhibition. It would lake many pages of
our catalogue to annotate Mr. Schmalz’s career. Last
November all London was ringing with his praises. He
was the artist-hero of tlie hour, and the Exhibition of bis new
picture, “ 'The Return from Calvary.” at 1 )o\vdeswell's, blocked
New Horn! Street with carriage-folk. The Pall Mall and the
Illasti'alcei Papers devoted pnges to illustrating his picture,
his studio, his wife and himself. The critics called him “the
new Lore,” and Mr. Blackburn prophesied for him Academy
honours,
[See Illustration , page 30.]
Henry Le Jeuxh, R.A.
70. “By the Waters of Babylon ” - - - (>5 o o
“ By the waters of Babylon we sat down ai d wept, when
we remembered Thee, oh Zion ! ” — The Psalms .
Lucten Davis.
71. “The Lesson” - - - - -20 00
S. Melton Fisher.
72. “A Venetian Girl” - - - 65 o o
This artist’s picture of the “ Interior of a Venetian Calc
was purchased from the last Exhibition, by the Sydney National
Gallery, for
Moffat P. Lindner.
73- “ Portsmouth ” - - - So o o


No. 69. "Faithful unto Death." HERBEK T SCHMALZ.
W. S. Jay.
PRICK.
74- “ Old England’s Dawn of Spring ” - - A l s° ° o
A most charming painter of old English woodlands. A
similar picture by the same artist was purchased for the
Ballarat Gallery from the Gro-wenor Collection.
W. A. Bkeakspeark, R.E.A.
75- “The Coquette' 1 - - - - - 21 o o


W. A. Breakspeare, R.B.A.
FRICF.
76- “ The Fairhaired Page ” - £36 5 o
“ A curly shepherd lad,
A long-haired page, in crimson clad,
Goes by to towered Camelot.”
The Lady of Shalott.
This charming little cabinet picture, together with Nos. 80
and 85, belongs to a series of twenty similar illustrations of the
poems of the Laureate, painted by Mr. Breakspeare, and
exhibited at the Dowdeswells’ Galleries in Bond-street.
T. B. Kexxixgton,
77. “ A Small Student ” - - - - 21 o o
A portrait of Mr. Kennington’s favourite sitter, one of his
little children. [See note to No. 62.]
James Saxt, R.A.
*7B. “ Oliver Twist: he walks to London ” - - 750 o o
“London! —that great place! Nobody—not even Mr.
Bumble —could ever find him there ! Fe had often beard the
old men in the workhouse, too, say that no lad of spirit need
want in London ; and that there were ways of living in that
vast City which those who had been bred up in country parts
had no idea of. It was the very place for a homeless boy
who must die in the streets unless someone helped him. As
these things passed through his thoughts, he jumped upon his
feet, and again walked forward.
“ He had a crust of bread, a coarse shirt,and two pairs of
stockings, in his bundle. He had a penny, too —a gift of
Sowerberry’s after some funeral in which he had acquitted
himself more than ordinarily well —in his pocket. ‘ A clean
shirt,’thought Oliver, *is a very comfortable thing; and so
are two pairs of darned stockings; and so is a penny; but
they are small helps to a sixty-five miles’ walk in wintertime.’
So, after a good deal of thinking to no particular purpose, he
changed his little bundle over to the other shoulder, and
trudged on.
“ Oliver walked twenty miles that day ; and all that time
he tasted nothing but the crust of dry bread and a few
draughts of water. ” Charles Dickens.
“ Mr. Sant’s pictures will be remembered as very popular
in the ‘fifties,’ notably his ‘lnfant Samuel,’ engraved in
mezzo-tint by Samuel Cousins, which made his reputation for
works of this kind.’ — Blackburn.
[Atv Illustration , page 32.]
W. A. Breakspeare, R.B.A.
79- “A Dalmatian Beauty'’ - - - - 21 o o
W. A. Breakspeare, R.B.A
80. “ The Prince in ” - - - 36 ] 5 o
“ The many fail, die on ■ succeeds,
The Beauty.
Alfred Hartley.
$l, “ A Capri Contadino ” - - - - 12 12 o


No. 78. “Ohver Twist: he walks (o London.” JAMES SANT, R. A.
Charles J. Watsox.
prick.
*B2. “ From Charing Cross to the Temple ” - - 105 o o
[The Thames Embankment and Plackfriars Bridge.]
No. 82. “From Charing Cross to the Temple ." C. J. WATSON.


Edward H. Fahey, R.I. puicf.
*B3. ‘‘Sea-fog Blowing over Oulton Broad, Norfolk” - o o
Mr. Fahey is well known to Melbourne. He has painted
over sixty of this series of the Norfolk Broads, which were
exhibited at the Academy, the Grosvenor, the Institute, and
at a “one-man show” in London and Yarmouth. The
present picture is a companion to “ On the Bure,” purchased
here from the Grosvenor Collection. He chose it from his
series to represent him at the Paris International Exhibition,
where it gained the medal.
No. 83 “ Sea-fog blorving over Oulton Broad." ED. H. FAHVY, R.I.
[Purchased for the Melbourne National Gallery.]


James Grace, R.B.A.
PRICE.
84. “On the River Wey ” - £*3 J 3 o
W. A. Breakspeare, R.B.A
85« “ Lady Godiva ” - - - - 36 15 o
“ Then fled she to her inmost bower, and there
Unclasped the wedded eagles of her belt,
The grim Earl’s gift; but ever at a breath
She linger’d, looking like a summer moon
Half-dipt in cloud. Anon she shook her head,
And showered the rippled ringlets to her knee ;
Unclad herself in haste ; adown the stair
Stole on ; and, like a creeping sunbeam, slid
From pillar unto pillar, until she reached
The gateway ; there she found her palfrey trapt
In purple blazon’d with armorial gold.
Then she rode forth, clothed on with chastity.”
Tennyson's “ GodivaT
[See Note to No. 76.]
E. Koberwein Terrell.
86. “ The Squire’s Daughter ” - - 31 10 o
Mrs. Koberwein a* Beckett Terrell is the daughter of the
famous portrait painter, Koberwein. As an artist she is a
great favourite of Her Majesty’s, from whom she has had the
honour of twenty commissions, among them the portraits of
H.R.H. the Duke of Connaught and his family. Mrs. Terrell
is married to the Hon. T. T. a’Beckett’s nephew, who is
a leading barrister in London.
F. G. Cotman, R.l.
*B7* “ The Obstinate Model” - 840 o o
An able critic has remarked of this picture that “ it has the
full flavour of Sir Joshua Reynolds.” It was hung in the
principal room of the Academy on the line, and was after-
wards selected by the President for Liverpool. Mr. Cotman
has repeatedly refused to sell it as it was a very lovingly studied
portrait of his little girl. He only surrendered it under per-
suasion after he had painted a fresh portrait of the same child
in a more literal manner. Even then he was reluctant to place
it for sale. Its Academy title was “ Rebellion on the Throne,”
and it was suggested by the difficulty he had at first in getting
the child to sit as a model, notwithstanding all the blandish-
ments of story-books, guitars, peacock’s feathers, dolls, et hoc
genus omne. It gained him the gold medal at Edinburgh, and
the Corporation of Oldham and the Walker Art Gallery of
Liverpool both purchased pictures from him as the result of
this one. Mr. Cotman took the Historical Gold Medal at
the Royal Academy. (See his Water-colours in Room III.)
J. Clayton Adams.
88. “Spring” - - - - - -65 00
G. Koberwein Terrell.
iB9-L “Day Dreams” - - - - -26 50


No. 87. “The Obstinate Model." F. G. COTMAN, R.I.
Rupert C. W. Bunny. price.
9Q. “ A’Sea Idyll” ----- o o
“ In the course of last season a few pictures by Australian
artists have appeared on the walls of London Exhibitions.
That highly interesting painter, Mr. R. C. W. Bunny (a son
oi the late Judge Bunny, of Melbourne,) had a picture of
‘ Mermaids ’*in Gallery 11. of the Royal Academy.”—Black-
burn.
[This is the picture referred to.]
Ernest A. Waterlow, A.R.A., R.I.
*9l. “ A Resting-place, Bavaria” - 400 o o
“ Datur hora qui,eti.'’
“ Now fades the glimmering landscape on the sight,
And all the air a solemn stillness holds.”
Gray.
“ Mr. Ernest Waterlow, A.K. A., is well represented (ashe
was in the former Royal Anglo-Australian Exhibition.)
‘ The Orphan ’ is a Scotch scene showing a shepherd with his
sheep coming to feed a lamb with milk, set in a broad land-
scape with mountains and sea loch. It was engraved by the
Art Journal (see No. 139.) His other picture is ‘A Resting-
place,’ in Brittany, with peasants at the roadside near a
calvary; sheep and distant church spires—very picturesque
and true.”— Blackburn, in Australasian.
[See Illustration , page 36.]


No. 91. "A Resling-place," in Brittany. E. A. WATER LOW, A.R.A.
price.
Leslie Thomson, R.B.A.
92. “ Mending Nets, Anglesey” - - - o o
James E. Grace, R.B.A.
93. “ Late Autumn ” - - - - 47 5 0
T. C. Gotch, R.B.A.
*94. “’Twixt Life and Death - 500 o o
“For men must work and women must weep,
And there’s little to earn ami many to keep,
Though the harbour bar be moaning I ”
— Kingsley.
Mr. Gotch was the painter of the largest painting in our last.
Exhibition, “ Destiny,” which was purchased by the Adelaide
National Gallery.


No. 94. “T wixt Life and Death." T. C. GOTCH, R.B.A.
R. Thorne Waite, R.W.S.
PRICE.
95. “Open Fields, Hampshire” - ° °
Mr. Thorne Waite is a broader Birket-Foster. He
paints the country life and landscape of England with
even a truer pastoral charm than his prototype. His special
strength lies in his skies and his rustic figures. Last November
he held a “one-man show” at Dowdeswell’s of eighty-eight
water-colour pictures illustrating “ English Pastoral Land-
scape.” [See his Water-colours in Room lII.]
R. W. Allan, R.W.S.
96. “Parting Day” - - - - -6300
James E. Grace, R.B.A.
97. “A Surrey Cornfield ” - - - 21 o o


Frank Bourdillon.
PRICE.
98. “The Pilot” o o
The painter of the “ Duel on Bideford Sands ” of our last
Exhibition, which was purchased by the National Gallery of
New South Wales.
Ernest Parton.
*99 “On the River Kennet —Summer” - - 315 o o
One of the most popular landscape painters of the day. This
is the first important canvas by him which has come to Aus-
tralia, though the Ballarat Gallery owns a very fine smaller
work of his.
No. 99. “ On the River Kennet —Summer." ERNEST PARTON,
Hugh Wilkinson.
100- “ Awaiting the Return ” - 105 o o


II.—SQUARE GALLERY.
BRITISH OIL PAINTINGS.
[Note. —The visitor should now return to the western end of the Main Gallery and
pass through the archway, when the following numbers will be found, commencing as
before, on the left hand side.]
Alfred Parsons, R.I.
TRICE.
101. “The Road to the Farm - o o
Mr. Parsons commenced painting later in life, having been
previously engaged in a commercial house in the city. He is
now “at the top of the tree.”
Edwin Douglas.
102. “ A long way from the Kennels ” - 150 o o
A thoroughly English scene. The young whip has pulled
up with the tail of the pack at a way-side inn, while mine
host, the country Boniface, dispenses a pint of that delicious
draught ale which only English taverns can boast. .The
bread and cheese handed by the landlord’s daughter is the
envy of the pack.
C. B. Yates.
*lO3 “ A Cosy Couple " - - - - -42 00
No. 103. " A Cosy Couple." C. B. YATES


W. Christian Symons.
PRICE.
104. “ A Village Smithy, Sussex” - o o
Yeexd King, R.I.
105. “ Haddon ” - 210 o o
W. Christian Symons.
106. “Winter” - - - - - -3000
Alma Broadbkidge.
107. “ Mine are Prettier than Yours ” - - - 26 10 o
Florence A. Saltmer.
108- “ A Surrey Bayfield ” - - - - 36 15 o
Miss Saltmer had a most charming fresh breezy hayfield on
the line in this year’s Academy. It is sometimes not easy at
first sight to distinguish her work from that of Clayton Adams.
F. D. Hardy.
109. “ A Friendly Visit ” - - - 60 o o
Adrian Stokes.
110- “ Passing Storm ” - - - - - 100 o o
“ A comparatively young artist, who will be as great as, or
greater than, Frank Walton, because his art is less limited;
who paints cattle, and flat land, sea and sky like the Dutchmen
of old, is Mr. Adrian Stokes, whose ‘ Off St. Ives ’ has been
sent to Melbourne. (See No. 143.) A picture by him of
‘ The Setting Sun,’ with cattle on the sea-shore, had the place
of honour in the New Gallery last season, and was purchased
by the Royal Academy under the Chantrey bequest. We are
in a truly artistic atmosphere in the company of these two
young painters.”— Blackburn, in Australasian.
C. T. Garland
*lll. “ Thou art so near, and yet so far ” - - no o o
A very famous picture. The engraving of it is published by
Dowdeswell and Co.


No. 111. “ Thou art so near, and yet so far." C. T. GARLAND.
C. Napier Hemy, R.W.S.
PRICK.
112- “ The Morning Light ” - ° c
“Mr. C. Napier Hemy, the well-known painter of sea-coast
and fishermen, writes me to-day respecting his contributions:
‘ The two little pictures going to Melbourne are quite new.
One, “The Morning Light,” is the finished study of my last
years Academy picture, and the “Anchor Watch” (see No.
4) is an oil of which the study was in the Royal Water
Colour Society’s Exhibition.’”— Blackburn , in Australasian.
Claude Hayes, R.I.
113. “Going to the Fair” - - - - 52 10 o
Walter Laidlev.
114. “ Gisli, the Outlaw” - 210 o o.
“ Gisli, the Outlaw,” is the name of one of the Icelandic
Sagas which has been translated into English by Sir George W.
Dasent. It is often called “ Gish’s Saga,” which means partly
that he was the hero, partly that he was the author of it. It
is not, however, autobiography, for at the end Gisli’s death is
described. The Saga is in prose, with verse embedded in it,
and the poetry is by Gisli. Dasent, in his introduction,
speaks of Gisli as “ the man of thought and works who toiled
day and night, whose poetry was the best of its kind, and
whose arm was no weaker when he struck his last blow than
when he began the fight.”
This picture has been engraved by Messrs. Grover, Notting-
ham, to whom the copyright was sold while the picture was
in the Academy.
J. R. Weguelix.
*ll5. “Spring-time” - 210 o C’
[See note to No. 35.]
o


Spring, the sweet Spring, is the years pleasant king ;
Then blooms each thing, then maids dance in a ring,
Cold doth not sting, the pretty birds do sing
Cuckoo, jug-jug, pu-we, to-witla-woo ! :5 — T. Xash,
“And therefore take the present time
With a hey and a ho and a hey nonino I
For love is crowned with the prime
In spring time, tlie only pretty sing time,
When birds do sing hey ding a dong:
Sweet lovers love the Spring." — Shakspcarc.
No. 115. “ Springtime ." J. R. WEGUELIN.
TRICE.
David Murray, A. R. A.
116. “The Cross of the Shepherd, Plcardv ” - - £j2 0 o o


Solomon J. Solomon.
PRICK.
117. “The Market-place, Tangiers” - ; Aiio ° °
“Mr. S. J. Solomon and Mr. Arthur Hacker are two
ambitious young painters whose pictures are well known, in
Australia, and from whom we are accustomed to look for
original and vigorous work. Mr. Solomon was to send some-
thing from Tangiers. [ mention these artists together because
they are always together; also because I think that one or
other will soon receive Academy honours.'s—Blackburn, 5 — Blackburn , in
Australasian.
Hugh Wilkixson.
118. “Sunlight in the Forest" - 105 o o
GEO R G F \V E TIIK RBE E, R . I .
*H9. “Glad Spring” ----- 200 o o
No. 119. “ Glad Spring.” C. WETHERBEE, K.I.


Ho\. John Com.irr.
I'Ricr,.
120- “An Incantation " ----- o o
This picture was chosen lu represent Mr. Cuincr m tnc
Berlin International Art Exhibition last year.
“Bold, vigorous, and successful in the study of the nude
are the works of two younger painters, the Hon. John Collier
and Mr. Herbert Sciimalz. The first-named —a son-in-law
ol Professor Huxley, and a son of Lord Monkhouse —is an
experienced artist. 1 do not know if any of Mr. Collier's
pictures are already in Australia, probably you have several ;
but he has a long record of successful work. Like Mr.
Schmalz, he may soon attain Academy honours." — Blackburn.
Henry E. Detmolp
121. “Spearing" - - - 120 o o
Joseph Farol'harsox,
122- “On the Banks of the Nile" - 150 o o
Claude Calthrop.
*123 “An Old Head and a Young Heart - - 157 10 c
As an interesting variation in the treatment of the same
sentiment, we may compare this with Marcus Stone’s u Fimt
Love Letter” (No. 44.) The question is, will the very
benevolent-looking old gentleman give his consent ?
“Claude Calthrop, an artist of great ability, sends a genre
picture called “An Old Head and a Young Heart.” The
painting was in the Royal Academy in 1890." Blackburn ,
[_Scc Illus/ralicn, 46.]
Henry E. Detmolp
124. “ Hauling up the Boats - - * - 90 o o
Val. C. Prinsep.
*125. “ Diva Theodora Impenitrix" - - - 420 o o
“ The possessor of the line picture ‘ The Linen Gatherers,'
by Mr. Valentine Prinsep, exhibited in London in 1876, and
now in Melbourne, painted before the artist s election to the
Academy, and before his visit to India, will be interested to
see the change in style and technique in the new work called
‘Diva Theodora ImperatrLx.’ The Empress Theodora stands
fronting the spectator (as we see in the sketch) with rich tiara
of jewels, pendant pearls and breastlet, her right hand upon a
bronze lion. She is attended by two maids of honour, one
holding a large fan of peacock's feathers. In the background
is the figure of a saint, surrounded by apostles and martyrs.
The character of the ‘ Diva ’ empress and comedian—is well
conceived, and ‘the richness of the East’ the result.'’ —
Blackburn , in Australasian.


The story of Theodora is now much belter known because
of Sardou’s play, in which Sara Pernhardt acted. 'Theodora’s
father was a keeper of the wild beasts for the circus at Pyzan-
tium. She, by the charms of her person ami her skill in
acting, became one of the great favourites of the stage. The
Emperor Justinian, the great legislator of the Roman Empire,
fell in love with her, married her, and raised her to be empress.
Gibbon, in the Decline and Fall (chap. 40) gives a graphic
account of her ; but it is now generally held that Gibbon was
unfair to the beautiful empress, gaining piquancy for his
narrative by crediting the unsupported stories of an unscrupu-
lous enemy. Theodora’s time is the first half of the 6th
century of our era.
No. 125. “ Diva Theodora Imperatrix." VAL. C. PRINSER, A.R. A.


No. 123. " An Old Head and a Young Heart." CLAUDE CALTHROT.
R. H. Carter.
TRICK.
126. “A Breezy Day, St. Magnus’ Bay, Shetland " - o o
Charles Stuart.
127. “ Moor and Mountain " - - - - 45 o o
A smaller study for his large picture in last year's Academy.


Paling.
PRICE.
128 “ Cottage Industry ” - - ,C 47 to o
Frank Dillon, R.I.
*129 “An old Roman Mole, Assouan, Egypt” - 200 o o
Mr. Dillon has regularly exhibited Nile scenes in the
Academy for the past ten or twelve yeais.
No. 129. “ The Old Roman Mole, Assouan, Egypt." FRANK DILLON, R.I.


T. L. Benham.
PRICE.
130. “Ocean Breezes" ----- T. 30 o o
C. B. Yates.
131. “ Good-hye, my Son” - - - - 52 10 o
Anna Lea Merritt.
132. “St. Cecilia’s Dream” - - - - 150 o o
“ Or in a clear-wall’d city on the sea,
Near gilded organ-pipes, her hair
Wound with white roses, slept St. Cecily;
An angel look’d at her.”
Tennyson's “Palace of Art.''
Mrs. Merritt is an American artist, whose picture, “Love
Locked Out,” was bought by the Royal Academy last season,
under the Chantrey Bequest.
Charles Stuart.
133. “ Sunshine on Snowdon” - - - - 40 o o
134- “A North Wales Goro-e” - - - - 40 o o
Tennyson Cole.
134 - “ How Very Funny” - - - 36 10 o
J. Clayton Adams.
135. “The Village of Axmouth ” - - 60 o o
C. J. Lewis, R.I.
136. “The Boathuilder's Children” - - - 42 o o
137. “ A Barley Field” - - - - - 42 o o
Alfred Fast, R.I.
138- “Summertime in Fngland ” - - - 730 o o
[ See note to No, 67.]
Ernest A. Waterlow, A.R.A.
'■■‘l3 J - “Th Orphan, Connemara” - 600 o o
[See note to No. 91.]
Anderson Hague, R.I.
’.40. “A Welsh Trout Stream”- - 105 o 0


No. 139. “ The Orphan." ERNEST WATERLOW, A.R.A.


Hon. John Collier.
price.
*l4l- “Lilith” ------ o o
“ There was nothing of her that was human,
Hut she was made like a soft sweet woman.”
Posetti.
Haring Gould, in his Legends of the Patriarchs and Prophets ,
writes “That Kve was Adam's second wife was a common
Rabbinic speculation. . . . And they say that Adam's
first wife was named Lilith, but she was expelled from Eden,
and after her expulsion Eve was created.” Abraham Ecchelen-
sis gives the following account of Lilith and her doings: “ There
are some who do not regard spectres as simple devils, but
suppose them to be of a mixed nature —part demoniacal, part
human, and to have had their origin from Lilith, Adam's first
wife, by Eblis, prince of the devils.” Again Burton, in his
Anatomy of Alelancho/y, says ; “ The Talmudists say that Adam
had a wife called Lilis, before he married Eve, and of her he
begot nothing but devils.”
It is always interesting to hear a great artist talk. Thus
the following extract from a letter by Mr. Collier, written to
Mr. Lake, about this picture, will be entertaining as showing
the curious difficulties which beset a work of this kind, and
the conscientious perseverance with which the artist copes
with them. Mr. Collier says: “I have followed Rossetti’s
poem, ‘Eden’s Bower,’ m my picture. According to
Rossetti, Lilith, being jealous of Eve, conspires, with her
former lover, the Snake, and finally coaxes him to lend her
his form, so that she may be revenged on Adam. And it is
really Lilith who, in the form of the Snake, so successfully
tempts Eve. So that she is really the reason why so many of
us are still no better than we should be. In my picture
Lilith is coaxing the Snake. I made studies for the back-
ground at Kew Gardens, guided by the advice of the Director,
Mr. Thiselton Dyer. The vegetation is all of a sub-tropical
kind, such as might reasonably be supposed suitable for the
Garden of Eden.
“For the snake I went to Liverpool, where Cross (the
greatest importer of wild animals in the world) lent me a
fine boa-constrictor, with a man to hold it for me ! It was
when the man went out to lunch that the incident occurred
that I told you of. The snake began exploring the studio
that I had hired at Liverpool, and finding a door leading into
some inner rooms just a little open, he slowly glided through
the opening. As I didn't know where he mightn’t get to, 1
seized hold of his tail and tried to pull him back ; but he had
got hold of something in the other room, and I couldn’t move
him. Then a friend of mine who had been watching me paint
held on behind me (tug-0.-war fashion,) but the snake was
too much for both of us, and we had to let him go. Fortu-
nately he only curled himself up in the inner room, where the
man was able to seize him by the throat —in which position
snakes are powerless. He was so restless, however, that I
finally chloroformed him, and so was able to finish my
studies.”
Alfred Hartlhv.
142- “Winter” - - - - - 31 10 0


No. 141. “Lilith." HON. JOHN COLLIER.


Adrian Stokhs.
PRICK.
*143. "Off St. ivos, Cornwall - ,£>2oo o o
[See note to No. 110. ]
No. 143. “ Off St. Ives , Cornwall." ADRIAN STOKES.
[The next two pictures hang at the top of the next wall to the right of you.]
G. P. Jacomb Hood,
■*l44- " Jhwus’ Daughter" - 275 o o
“ And he cometh to the house of the ruler of the syna-
gogue, and seeth the tumult, and them that wept and wailed
greatly.
“And when he was come in, he saith unto them, Why
make ye this ado and weep ? The damsel is not dead but
sleepetb.
“ And they laughed him to scorn. But when he had put
them all out, he entereth in where the damsel was lying.
“ And he took the damsel by the hand, and said unto her,
Tabitha, cumi; which is, being interpreted, Damsel, I say
unto thee, arise.
“ And straightway the damsel arose, and walked; for she
was of the age of twelve years. And they were astonished
with a great astonishment." 1
—Si. Mitthcic*s Gos pel.
1 See note to No. 174.3
\Ft.sox Dawson.
145. “ A Southerly Gale" - - 73 10 o
Southwold, Suffolk, November, 1890. — The lifeboat takes
the crew off a waterlogged vessel.


No. 144. “ Fairus’ Daughter.” G. P. JACOMR. HOOD.
Fkeh Hall.
I’KICK.
*146. 11 Beside the Severn Sea” - o o
[The scene is at Porloch, Somerset, j
No. 146. “ Beside the Severn Sea.” FRED HALL.


W. S. Jay.
TRICE.
147* “The Fringe of an Fnglish Wood" - - ° °
[See note to No. 74. ]
G. K. Hicks.
“Dividend Dav in the Bank of England” - 180 o o
W. Avekst Ingram, R.B.A.
149. “Breakers” - - - - - 21 o o
150- “ Early Moonrise ” - 20 5 o
W. L. Wyllie, A.R.A.
151- “Near Rochester” - 40 o o
Ai.ma Broad bridge.
152. “ A Shipyard where Small Jobs are Done ” - 17 17 o
Claude Hayes, R.I.
153- “ Crossing the Ford” - 10 10 o
Davidson Kxowi.es, R.B.A.
154- “ Dittisham Mill ” 73 10 o
W. P. Frith.
*155- “ Poverty and Wealth ” - 320 o o
“ At least one picture sent to Melbourne will call up memories
of the past. The painter of the ‘ Derby Day,' Mr. \V. P.
Frith, sends one of his latest works, which he calls ‘ Poverty
and Wealth,’ showing ‘carriage people’ and a group of
children outside a fishmonger’s shop, a scene to be witnessed
any evening in Bond-street, London, when unsold fish is dis-
tributed to the poor for a few pence. In spite of his age Mr.
Frith is in full vigour and activity, painting, teaching, and
writing memoirs—the last, of his friend John Leech.”—
Blackburn , in Australasian .
W. A. Trood, R.B.A.
166- “ Babes in the Wood” - - - - 35 o o
There is always a sly humour in Mr. Trood’s titles, as well
as an exquisite finish and tenderness in his work. Kverybody
will remember his “ twa dogs” in last Exhibition, entitled
“ The Course of True Love never did Run Smooth.”
W. H. Trood.
157- “ Possession Nine Points of the Law” - - 31 to o


No. 155. “ Poverty and Wealth W. P. FRITH, K. A.
Elizabeth Stanhope Forbes.
TRICK.
158- “ The Burden and Heat of the Day” - - o o
Hegh Wilkinson.
159. “Marigolds” - - - - - 15 15 o
Eowin’ Doloi.as.
160- “Prizewinners” - - - - - 52 io o
Mr. Douglas is a true sportsman as well as an artist. He
is one of the best judges of a dog in England, and always
paints his models up to their “points. 5 ’ Living in the bracing
air of the Sussex Downs at “Foxdown 55 in Findon, lie owns
kennels and stud and farm, and revels in field sports. In the
“dogginess 55 of his art, apart from its sentiment, artists
regard him as rivalling Landseer. In addition to his other
contributions, this vignette was painted by special request,
expressly for this Exhibition, with a view to please Australian
sportsmen and fanciers. The models are from Mr. Douglas’s
own kennels, and have a long pedigree and prize list at the
most noted English Shows.
Edwin Douglas.
161. “ Train up a Child in the Way he should go ” - y- 0 0
See note above. The picture was hung on the line at the
Academy last year, under the title of “ Brothers of the
Brush, 55 with the present title as motto. A fox-terrier watch-
ing her puppies at a tug-of-war over a fox's brush.


Bl’rtox Barber.
PRICK.
162. “My First Partner" - /A2O ° °
The name of the artist is a household word in all nurseries,
from the many of his pictures which have been published as
coloured supplements to illustrated papers. But no better
example than the present could be adduced of the immeasur-
able value ot the human hand over the printing machine. All
Mr. Barber’s models are his own children,—except, of course,
his dogs.
S. F.. Wallf.r.
163. “Defence''- - - - - - 31 to o
Compare this with Waller’s “ Honeymoon’' (No. 49,) and
also his purring, “ strokable” cat picture at the last Exhibi-
tion.
William Strutt, P..8.A.
164. “ Waiting for the Train ” - - - - 42 o o
By the painter of “ Black Thursday. ’
J. L. Pickering.
165. “ A Northern Harvesting” - - - 4 00 0 0
SuHREIBER.
166- “ Ecclesiastical Treasures ” - - - 35 0 0
Edward H. Fahey, R.I.
167. “ Umbrella Pines and Poplars ” - - - 15 15 o
V.VTES CA R RIN GTO N.
168- “ Puzzled Puppies ” - - - - - 21 o o
Those who want to know this artist personally may do so
most intimately if they will read the charming story of his
long-time friend and model, “Teufel, the Terrier,” —price,
one shilling, at Mullen's Library.
Ada Bell.
169- “ Pansies ” - - - - - Not for sale.
'fhe picture bears the signature of the Empress Frederick
of Germany, Princess Royal of Great Britain, an enthusiast in
art.
F. Bourdillon.
170- “ Choosing a Weapon” - - - - 20 o c


J. B. Burgess, R.A.
price.
171- “ Women, like Moths, are ever Caught with Glare ” o o
G. Koberwein Terrell.
172- “ Stella - - - - - -84 00
A Grosvenor Gallery favourite. (See note to No. 86.)
W. H. Bartlett.
173. “ A Healing Shrine ” - 210 o o
G. P. Jacomb Hood, N.E.A.C.
174. “In Summer Time” - 210 o o
Dolce far nieute \ua Hampshire village. The picture was
exhibited in the Royal Society of British Artists’ Winter
Exhibition. Mr. Jacomb Hood has just been painting a
portrait of the Duke of Argyll in robes of The Thistle for
Inverary. He has lately taken, in Tite-street, Chelsea, the
studio which was once Frank Miles’s in the days when he and
Oscar Wilde were the high priests of the worship of the
beautiful. His first picture, “ St. Simeon Stylites,’ was hung
on the line in the R.A. about 1880. He studied at the Slade
School and afterwards in Paris under J. P. Laurens. His
“Portrait in Black” of his sister, obtained “Honourable
Mention” at the Paris Salon. His list of commissions for
portraits is a long one, and includes Lord Norton, Cunning-
hame Graham, and Miss Shaw-Lefevre for Somerville Hall,
Oxford, where she is president.
Alexander Johnson.
175. “The Cotter’s Saturday Night ” - - - 130 o o
Probably the finest example of the painter yet seen in
Australia.
Elizabeth Stanhope Forbes.
*176. “ Mignon ” - - - - -84 00
“Amongst the best figure pictures in this collection is
4 Mignon,’ by Mrs. Stanhope Forbes, better known as Elizabeth
Armstrong. It is a skilful and graceful composition, painted
in a low key of colour. The pen and ink sketeh in the Cata-
logue was drawn by Mrs. Forbes for The Australasian , and
indicates the picture well. Mrs. Forbes and her husband
(whose picture of an auction in the Royal Academy of 1890
was a great are both of the Newlyn school.”—
Blackburn , in Australasian.
[See Illustration , page 58.]
E


No. 176. "Mignon.” MRS. STANHOPE FORBES.
J. Buxton Knight.
PRICE.
177' “ Plymouth” - ,£l5O o o
Edwin Douglas.
178. “ Grej' Hack and Greyhound” - - - 84 o o
[See note to No. 60.]
Frank Boukdillon.
179. “ Fair Pledges of a Fruitful Tree : Why Do Ye
Fall so Fast"- - - - - 15 o o
W. A. Breakspeakk, R.B.A.
180' “ A Surrey Pastoral ” - - - - 21 o o
Norman Gakstin, N.E.A.C.
181. Maids of the Mill ” - - - 12 12 o


S. Anderson.
price.
182. “Primroses” - £3O o o
J. Buxton Knight.
183- “ Sunday Morning ” - 160 o Q
Visitors will remember Mr. Knight’s fresh picture of an
“ April Day,” purchased by the Ballarat Gallery from the
Grosvenor collection.
Claude Hayes, R.I.
184- “ Royal Common, Surrey” - - - 52 10 o
R. Beavis.
185- “ Scipio’s Tomb ” - - - - - 35 o o
S. Melton Fisher.
186- “ A Garden in Venice ” - - - - 84 o o
Ada Bell.
187- “ Sweet Primulas ” - - - - 12 12 o
188. “ The Nodding Violet ” - - - - 10 10 o
E. M. Osborne.
189- “ A Breezy Evening on the Bure ” - - 35 o o
J. Haynes Williams.
*l9O. “ Feeding Pigeons, Fontainebleau ” - 105 o o
[See Illnsti ation, page 60.]
Hamilton Macallum, R.I.
191. “ The Barbican, Plymouth” - - - 85 o a
This is the painter of the popular picture in our last year’s
Exhibition, entitled “Fledglings,” which was purchased by
Sir William Clarke.
Henry S. Tuke.
*192. “Euchre” ------ 525 o o
One of the most rising of the younger men. His picture,
“All Hands to the Pumps,” has been purchased by the Royal
Academy under the Chantrey Bequest.
[See Illustration , page 6t.]
R. Thorne Waite.
193 “ Danbury Common, Essex” - - -8000


No. 190. “ Feeding Pigeous, Fontainebleau." J. HAYNES WILLIAMS.
Chari.es J. Watson.
PRICE.
194. “ St. Martin’s, Charing Cross ” - - - 10 o
Charles Stuart.
195' “ Sunny August ” ----- 200 o o
J. Mulcaster Carrick.
196- “ Isleworth on Thames ” - - - 25 5 o


No. 192. “ Euchre.” HENRY S. TUKE.


[Note: The remaining six British Oil Paintings will
be found on the Screen.]
James E. Grace, R.B.A.
PRICE.
197- “A Surrey Pond” ----- £l4 14 o
Frank Walton, R. 1., V.P.I.
198. “Haymaking-” - - - - - 16 16 o
Ernest A. Waterlow, A.R.A., R.I.
199. “ Gathering Wrack, Connemara- - 157 10 o
Jan Van Beers.
200- “ Jester in Green ” - - - - 17 17 a
20L “ Jester in Red” - - - - - 17 17 o
Jan Van Beers had an exhibition all to himself last London
season, and he is better known from his “one-man shows”
than from his gallery exhibits. He is one of the most striking
and original artists of the day, and as will be seen from these
examples, is a vigorous caricaturist. His “ Lady Killer,” in
scarlet, issued in the last Chrismas edition of the cleverly
drawn little paper called Pick Me Up, is perhaps the best
bit of colour printing issued in London this season.
Arthur Hacker.
202. “ The Serpent Charmer ” - - - - 65 o o
203.
[Note. —The visitor should now go back through the Main Gallery and cross the
German and Australian galleries, where the Water-colour Room will be found opposite
the main entrance. The numbers begin on the left hand side.]


III.—SOUTH-EAST PAVILION.
BRITISH WATER-COLOURS.
“ Of the numerous English Water-colours, as a separate section of the collection, I
am unable to speak in detail, but those I have seen are representative of the English
school of transparent water-colourists—impressionists, in the true sense of the word, not
to be confounded with French aquarelles , works in. gouache, and many clever and scholarly
productions of foreign schools. These English water-colours are the outcome, for the
most part, of a study of nature, pure and simple, in the woods and fields of England ;
they come to you, as Ruskin says, from “ the silence of thatched cottages and the voices
of blossoming fields.” That the pigments are permanent, and that a water-colour
drawing will last as long, if not longer, than an oil painting, is all I have space to say
about them at present.”—Henry Blackburn.
“The selection has been made with excellent judgment. The aquarellists represent
the flower of the English school.” —London Daily News.
W. Pollen Bishop, R.B.A.
PRICE.
20i “ A Glimpse of the Upper Thames ” - - 10 o
[See note to No. 50.]
Ernest Barton.
205- “On the River Brathay, Windermere ” - - 65 o o
John M. Bromley, R.B.A.
206- “The Road that Skirts the Common” - - 84 o o
Rose de Crespigny.
207. “ The Docks, St. Helier’s ” - - - 15 15 o
Rixon, W. A.
208. “ Snowballing at Cookham ” - - - 15 15 o


Charles E. Herne.
PRICE.
209. “ Along the Spanish Coast ” ... £lO 10 o
Mr. Herne is the instructor in Water-colour painting in the
family of H.R.H. the Prince of Wales. Of his six drawings
now exhibited here, five were selected from the collection of
twenty which he had the honour of exhibiting lately at Marl-
borough House by Royal command.
Charles E. Herne.
210- “ The Ypres Tower, Rhyl” - - - 10 o o
Harry P. Gill.
2IL “ Souvenir of Chelsea ” - - - - 6 6 o
F. G. Cotman, R.I.
212. “ Holy Island ” - 15 15 o
Mr. Cotman is quite new to Melbourne. His brother
artists regard him as one of the most deft and delicate of their
profession. His drawing is exquisite, and his methods most
pure and simple. In November last he held a Conversazione
at the Hogarth (Arts) Club on Saturday night, when, of
nearly forty works, all except four or five were sold on the
walls before the next Monday evening.
[See note to No. 88.]
F. G. Cotman, R.I.
213- “ Bamburgh Castle: Morning” - - - 21 o o>
Charles E. Herne, R.I.
214. “ Rochester, from Wickham Marshes ” - - 31 10 o
A. W. Weedon, R.I.
215- “ Haymakers Resting ” - - - - 31 10 O'
Harry P. Gill.
216- “ Wattle Birds and Curlews ” - - - 7 o o>
F. G. Cotman, R.I.
217- “St. Cuthbert’s Shrine, Holy Island” - - 12 12 o
218- “The Church, Holy Island” - - - 18 o o


R. W. Allan, R.W.S.
PRICE.
219. “Jubilee Day” ----- ,£73 10 o
The Royal procession is passing up Victoria Street, West-
minster. To the right of the picture is the “ Horse Guards.”
Mr. Allan is a most vigorous and rapid worker, and this
picture was nearly completed on the spot. Last London
season he held a large “one man show” at the Prince’s Hall,
in Piccadilly, when the prolific results of his tour last year in
India attracted great attention. His training is Parisian.
W. Eyre Walker.
220- “Thornton Glen, Ingleton Fells, Yorkshire” - 60 o o
Anderson Hague, R.I.
221- “In the Heat of the Day ”- - - no o o
This is a larger water-colour amplification of his oil sketch
in our last Exhibition, which many people regarded as the
cleverest landscape in the gallery.
A. W. Weedon, R.I.
222. “ Changing Pasture ” - - - - 84 o o
Out of twelve pictures by Mr. Weedon in our last Exhibi-
tion, ten were immediately sold. He has accordingly reserved
this, his most important work of the season, especially for
Melbourne. Mr. Weedon held a much-praised “ one man ”
show last October, at Dowdeswell’s, of 60 water colours,
illustrating the “County of Kent.”
E. Wake Cook.
223. “Tivoli and the Campagna of Rome ” - 65 o o
Our old Melbourne favourite, Mr. Cook, has just completed
a Swiss tour, and at his private view, on his return in Novem-
ber last, every one of his sketches was taken up, and he was
entrusted with commissions to last him for the next two years.
A study of some of his smaller works in this Gallery will show
what a remarkable eye he has developed for wealth of colour,
while his former literal topography has grown to the full flower
of the imaginative ideal.
224. “Venice” (evening) - - - - 63 o a
Charles Earle, R.I.
225. “At Pagano’s, Capri” - - - 26 5 o
The famous inn in Capri where English artists resort. Mr.
Earle is one of the veterans of the Royal Institute, and was a
favourite exhibitor in the old galleries opposite Marlborough
House.
Charles E. Herne.
226. “On the Thames ” - - - - - 15150
[The Lower Pool.]
227- “ Fishing Boats, Rhyl” - - - - 63 o o


Frank Walton, R. 1., V.P.I.
PRICE.
228- “ Cambridge, from Grantchester Meadows ” - £2l o o
Hamilton Macallum, R.I.
229. “ A Misty Headland ” - Not Jor sale.
[An artist’s autograph, the property of Mr. Lake.]
E. Wake Cook.
230- “ Durham, from the Meadows ” - - - 35 o o
Frank Short, R.S.P.E.
231 “ The Breaking-up of the Great Eastern" - - 26 5 o
R. W. Allan, R.W.S.
232. “ Kirkwall Cathedral ” - - - - 31100
Wilfrid Ball, R.S.P.E.
233- “ Somerlayton Mill, Norfolk” - - - 15 15 o
John M. Macintosh.
234. “A Breezy Day” - - - - -10 00
J. Lake.
235- “In the July Fields ” - - - - 990
“ Whe'i wheat is green and life is young.”
Wilfrid Ball, R.S.P.E.
236. “ The Thames, Lechdale ” - - - 12 12 o
A. W. Weedon, R.I.
237- “ Peat and Crofts ” - - - - 31 10 o
George du Maurier, R.W.S.
238. “Time’s Revenge” .... 300 o o
Sir Doughty Fitz-Bayard has much pleasure in presenting
his second Love (whom he is going to marry next week,) to
his first (who jilted him a quarter of a century ago for a
wealthier suitor.)
[See note on Mr. du Maurier on page 72.]


Edward H. Fahey, R.I.
PRICE.
'239. “ Rapallo, looking towards Chiavari ” - - I ,£63 o o
'240- “ Rapallo, looking towards Porto Fine ” - ■ J the pair.
W. Ayerst Ingram, R.B.A.
'241. “ Whipping for Mackerel ” - - - 36 15 o
Charles Earle, R.I.
.'242- “In the Upper Garden, Haddon Hall ” - - 26 5 o
Mr. Earle’s favourite water-colour of Haddon Hall in our
last Exhibition was purchased by Mr. Joseph Clarke.
Cuthbert Rigby.
'243. “ A North Country Fell Side ” - - - 52 10 o
Solomon J. Solomon.
:244. “ The Leaves of Memory seemed to make a
Mournful Rustling” - - - - 65 o o
This lovely pastel-drawing is a study from the same girl who
served as a model for his noble oil-sketch of “ Lucille” in our
last Exhibition.
A. W. Weedon, R.I.
.245. “ River Ewe, Rosshire ” - - - - 31 10 o
Charles Earle, R.I.
246. “ The City of Norwich ” - - - 26 5 o
Edwin Hayes, R. 1., R.S.A.
'247- “ Fishing Vessels off Granton ” - - 70 o o
A. W. Weedon, R.I.
248. “Twilight, Loch Ewe” - - - - 15150
249. “ The Southdowns ” - - - - 15150
Nelson Dawson.
250. “ Cornish Wreckers ” - - - - 26 5 o
R. W. Allan, R.W.S.
25L “Venice” - - - - - ■ 52 10 o


Wilfrid Ball, R.S.P.E.
PRICE.
252- “ Cley, Norfolk” ----- £8 8 o
E. Wake Cook.
253- “ A Paradise of Blossom ” - - - - 13 13 o
John Parker, R.W.S.
254- “Miss Hardcastle” - - - - 52 10 o
E. Wake Cook.
255. “ A Daughter Of Eve ” - - - - 14 14 o
Wilfrid Ball, R.S.P.E.
256- “ Witley, Surrey”- - - - - 880
Charles E. Herne.
257- “ A Boom Raft, Chelsea Reach ” - - - 35 0 o
Charles Earle, R.I.
258- “Stratford-on-Avon” - - - - 26 5 o
Frank Walton, R. 1., V.P.1.,
259- “Carradale” - - - - -26 50
W. L. Wyllie, A.R.A.
260- “ North Woolwich Pier ” - - - - 35 o o
M. Winifride Freeman.
261- “Old Friends” - - - - -15 00
J. Lake.
262- “ The Millstream Cottages, Downton, Wilts ” - 12 12 o
Edward H. Fahey, R.I.
263. “The Farm” - - - - 42 o o
Alfred Parsons, R.I.
264. “ Somersetshire Hills ” - - - - 80 o o


Harry P. Gill.
PRICE.
265. “Blue Bush” ..... .£ 2 6 5 0
Wilfred Ball, R.S.P.E.
266. “ Cley Mill, Norfolk ” - - - 12 12 o
Ernest A. Waterlow, R. 1., A.R.A.
267. “At Stonehaven, East of Scotland ” - - 26 5 o
John M. Bromley, R. B.A.
268. “December” - - - - - 45 o o
Rose de Crespigny.
269- “ Cashendun, County Antrim ” - - - 10 10 0
William Callow, R.W.S.
270- “ The Molo, Venice ” .... 210 o 0
One of the oldest and most famous representatives of the old
Water-colour Society. A thoroughly typical work.
R. Thorne Waite, R.W.S.
271. “ A Welsh Peasant ” .... 10 0 o 0
[See note to No. 95.]
John M. Bromley, R.B.A.
272- “ Leaving Behind the Solemn Shadows of the
Woods ” - - - - -45 00
Rose de Crespigny.
273. “ Fishing Boat ” - - - - 7 7 0
Off Mont Orgueil, Jersey.
Harry P. Gill.
274 “ Rocks rough hewn by Nature’s Hand ” - - 18 18 0
E. Wake Cook.
275. “ Bellagio, Lake Como ” - - - 21 0 o
John M. Macintosh.
276. “ The Farmer’s Daughter - - - - 15 15 o
J. Lake.
277- “ The End of his Holidays - - - 21 o o
A twilight in Essex.
278.


W. A. Rixon.
PRICE.
279. “The Old Oak” ----- o o
In Moore Park, Rickmansworth.
Charles Earle, R.I.
280- “On the River Yare, near Norwich ” - - 36 15 ©■
Harry P. Gill.
281. “Idlesse” - - - - - - 31 10 o
F. G. Cotman.
282- “Durham” - - - - - 10 0 0
Wilfrid Ball, R.S.P.E.
283. “ Griffin Inn, Danbury, Essex” - - - 880
Ernest Parton.
284- “ Norfolk Broads ”- ... - 105 o o
John M. Bromley, R.B.A.
285- “ A Cornfield in Kent ” - - - 50 o o
Charles Davidson.
286- “ Morning after a Storm ” - - - 50 0 0
Frank Walton, R. 1., V.P 1.,
287- “Arran” - - - - - ■ 37 10 0
W. Pollen Bishop, R.B.A.
288. “ The Pool, Burnham Beeches ” - - - 31 10 O'
Mrs. E. Gray.
289. “ Pilchard Fishing Boats ”- - Not for sale.
[The property of Mr. Charles Gray.]
Nelson Dawson.
290. “ Looking Westward ” - - - 17 17 o
Over the Atlantic, from the north Cornish coast.
[Note. — The Black-and-white “Punch Drawings” will be found on the
Screens in the Galleries Nos. I. and 11. J


ORIGINAL BLACK-AND-WHITE
PUNCH-DRAWINGS.
THE ART STAFF OF PUNCH.
Note. —The following interesting sketch of the five leading men of the Art Staff of'
“Punch” has been specially written for this Exhibition by Mr. James Webb.
Among artists in black and white, the galaxy of stars that shine about Mr.
Punch's throne form by far the most brilliant constellation yet discovered.
Their number was five until the death of Charles Keene, and the length of
years during which four of the five have continuously contributed to Mr. Punch’s
pages is absolutely without a parallel. I speak of Keene, Tenniel, du Maurier
and Sambourne. Harry Furniss was not born when Keene and Tenniel had
both been on the staff for several years.
Charles Samuel Keene was born in 1833, and passed a few years of his
youth in an architect’s office, but showed while yet a boy the bent of his genius
by continually producing humorous sketches. In 1849, at the age of 26, he
joined the staff of Punch and from that date until shortly before his death (4th
January, 1891) he was one of the most valued contributors to the London
Charivari. During 41 years little variation took place in the style of Keene’s
drawings, the one notable feature being that, unlike most of his compeers, he
steadily improved year by year, ever striving towards technical perfection and
absolute truth of expression. Unattractive as his work often appears to the
average observer, it is the unanimous verdict of artists and critics that as a
master of all the resources of black and white line drawing, he had no superior
and only one equal (the German, Menzel). His subjects have always been
taken from the middle and lower classes, his greatest successes being achieved
in portly old gentlemen and “little vulgar boys;” for the Scotch character he
had a rare appreciation, and many a choice gem of humour, graphic and liter-
ary, he has extracted from the Hielan’man’s peculiarities. Charles Keene was
probably the deepest and truest humourist Punch ever knew, except perhaps
Douglas Jerrold. As a man he was very plain living and hard working, caring
nothing for society, loving his art and labouring with enthusiasm. I remember
seeing him in his workshop of a studio, puzzling himself to understand the
wishes of some provincial publisher who wanted him to make an alteration in
a drawing; he could not alter it without spoiling it, but he unquestioningly set
himself to make a fresh drawing, although, as I knew well, the publisher was
only paying a small lump sum for the illustrations. It was the work he thought
of—not the money; he never could do anything but his best. Besides his art,.
Keene chiefly concerned himself with music, vocal and instrumental; he had
an excellent voice and was for many years a prominent member of Leslie’s
choir. He was also an enthusiastic volunteer, taking an active part in the
inception of the movement.
All the drawings here exhibited were afterwards made on the wood block,
and it was often his custom to make several trial drawings of a subject before
finally settling upon the best possible way to give effect to his conception.
Examples of this method are shown in Nos. 297, 298, 300, 310, 311, and 312.
Next in order of seniority (as a contributor) comes John Tenniel, who
joined Punch in 1851, and has been for 40 years the acknowledged king of.
cartoonists. To characterise that which makes Tenniel great is extremely


difficult, for he is great in spite of many grave faults —faults which his numer-
ous imitators are foolish enough to blindly copy. His drawing is often far
from correct, his portraiture is rarely even moderately true, and his manner-
isms in the drawing of modern dress and of boots in particular are only to be
pardoned. The virtue of his work may be said to consist of a certain indefin-
able distinction of style, a fine dramatic instinct and a matchless intuition
what to do and what to leave undone, an instinct and intuition which have
made him a leader of leaders, a power in the land more potent in shaping the
public mind than a generation of preachers and teachers, as well as a mighty
upholder of the dignity of the British flag. It is at moments demanding
tragic power that Tenniel rises supreme, and his greatest cartoons have been
those to which his great strength as an animal draughtsman has seconded this
unrivalled dramatic power in producing a work in which the very air trembles
with the awesome voice of strife or is heavy with forebodings of the storm.
John Tenniel himself does not look the artist, but rather the retired Anglo-
Indian officer, on whom, however, no tropical climate has ever made its
ravages. At seventy years of age he looked scarce sixty. He was born in
1820, followed art from his boyhood, and at the age of 25 painted a fresco for
the painted chamber in Westminster Palace (the Houses of Parliament).
For many years Tenniel has done no work in Punch besides the cartoons, and
since he first drew these, only three numbers have appeared with cartoons by
another hand than his. Book illustrations he has done from time to time, the
best being perhaps those to “ Alice in Wonderland.’ 1
George Louis Palmblla Busson du Maurier has been a constant con-
tributor to Punch for about 30 years, his first drawing appearing in iB6O, and
for the past 20 years Punch without a du Maurier is like a four-in-hand with
three horses. Unlike Keene’s, du Maurier’s style has so changed from what
it was in the early days that no one but an expert could possibly recognise the
same hand. Originally a master of method, taking infinite pains and producing
finished results to make the student wonder whether the limit of the power
of lines to express form were not stretched to its uttermost, it was a moot
question whether Fred. Walker, or J. E. Millais, or du Maurier was the “ coming
man.” At the present time he is content to work within narrow limits and to
be the chosen one of society. As a recorder of the fashions, fads, foibles, and
follies of the upper strata of English society, du Maurier stands alone without
a peer and leaving no hope for a rival in time to come. His wit, less kindly
than Keene’s, is of the strong suppressed sardonic kind, and hits hard when he
allows himself to strike. Often, however, his “cuts” depend for their value on
their faultless social tone more than on any particular joke, the humour always
underlying his work being subservient to the characterisation of his graceful
and dignified social personages. His satire has had fullest play in whipping
the toady, the nouveau riche, and the cranks of “ aestheticism.”
Du Maurier is 57 years of age, a Frenchman in everything except his work.
Born in Paris in 1834, he came to London at the age of 17 and studied chem-
istry at University College, but his bent was for art, and he returned to Paris
and entered the studio of Gleyre ; here he met Whistler, with whom he
returned to London a few years later. Like Whistler, he would have certainly
shone more conspicuously in literature than in art; in his few magazine
articles the lightness of touch, the purity of style and the grace of wit combine
most happily all that is best in French and English models. As a verse writer
his too rare appearances have proved him to be capable of distancing many
established favourites; and now his first novel, Peter Ibbetson, bids fair to
become a classic of English fiction.
Epward Linley Sambourne, the “Junior Cartoon’’ of Mr. Punch’s staff
being, unfortunately, only represented here by a reproduction of his Jubilee
drawing of the “ Mahogany Tree,” must yield to the exigencies of space and
occupy but a brief note. Born in 1845, he first drew for Punch in 1867. He


was brought up to engineering, hence his somewhat hard and mechanical
method in drawing. Sambourne’s knowledge of the figure is unfortunately
limited, and hence he sometimes lapses into impossible forms; his style, how-
ever, is often full of a classical dignity and his design so original and masterly
that in his line he also stands alone. His drawing of animals is above praise
or criticism, simply wonderful.
I may here shortly allude to the “ Mahogany Tree.”* Ever since the
mencement of Punch in 1841 the staff have met weekly on Wednesdays to
discuss the cartoon for the following week. A bare list of the great names
associated with this function would overflow our space. The drawing shows
the gathering on the occasion of Mr. Punch’s jubilee. At the head of the table
stands F. C. Burnand, the editor, and opposite to him also standing are Messrs.
Bradbury and Agnew, the proprietors. On Burnand’s right sits Tenniel, and
next to him Sambourne ; passing Arthur a'Beckett and Anstey Guthrie, the
fifth from the chair is Harry Furniss, and next sits du Maurier. On William
Agnew’s right is E. J. Milliken, the poet, then Gilbert a'Beckett. Henry Lucy
is second from Burnand’s left. The other two on either side of Toby M.P. (Lucy)j
I am not certain of; presumably they are the two new men, E. G. Reed (artist)
and R. C. Lehmann (writer). Upon the easel is a portrait of Charles Keene,
with a votive wreath below; this is certainly the best likeness of those with
whose features lam familiar, excepting perhaps Burnand. On the wall hang:
portraits of Tom Taylor (next to Keene) and Shirley Brooks; then comes a
bust of John Leech, and on Punch's right one of Thackeray. Over Burnand’s
head is the counterfeit presentment of Mark Lemon, the first editor, and
Burnand’s left hand appears to touch the face of Douglas Jerrold. Above the
last named hangs, I think, Gilbert Abbott a’Beckett, and finally Tom Hood,
and Dickey Doyle figure dimly in the background.
Harry Furniss is the name that brings us to the close of our subject. Last
of the little band of masters he is by no means least in point of genius, and in
one important branch he is indeed facile princeps. In portraiture and caricature
Harry Furniss stands far and away beyond every competitor, either within or
without this magic circle; and in drawing the figure Keene alone came near
him, whilst in the expression of movement, especially of figures in rapid,,
boisterous action, his power approaches the miraculous. The great caricaturist
is best known by his drawings, which contain numberless small figures, in
which mere dots and microscopic strokes have a magic power to transform
white paper into living portraits. Harry Furniss’s illustrations to the “ Essence
of Parliament ’ form a gallery of portraits unapproached in any age. I have:
already hinted that Furniss is by a long way the youngest of the band. He
was born in 1854, and is therefore nearly 38. He first drew for Punch in 1880,.
and his advent put new life into the paper at a time when it was sorely needed
Harry Furniss is above all a live man, and he is the only one of the staff who-
does not make Punch his alpha and omega, for he has spent much of his time-
of late years lecturing, besides which his Comic Academy—the work of several
years—still is well remembered as a tour de force, unexampled as a “one man”
art show. He has illustrated several books and written and illustrated,
innumerable articles in magazines and illustrated papers. In person, Harry
Furniss is a short, stout, merry-looking man who enjoys life and its good things,
with a hearty zest and looks at the world with eyes as bright as his mind is=
broad, and with sight as keen as his wit is kindly. As an example of his work,
No. 346, “ Salvation Armitage,” is interesting, as it shows at once his power of
drawing, his vigorous satirical humour, and likewise nis singular facility
of assimilating his style with that of another artist, the painter here imitated,
being Mr. Armitage, R.A.
In concluding this brief and inadequate notice of England’s celebrated,
school of humorous black-and-whitists, I may remark that Mr. du Maurier
has categorically denied the rumour which had been spread that he had;
severed his connection with Punch, or was about to do so.
* See No. 349 A.
F


LIST OF PUNCH DRAWINGS.
Foriy-two original drawings for illustrations to London “ Punch f by
the late Charles Keene.
PRICE.
291. Liberal to a Fault ----- 5 o
The Missus (affably:) “My husband is out just now, Sir.
Can I give him any message?’’
Liberal Candidate: “I’ve called with the hope that he’d
promise me his vote at the approach ”
The Missus: “ Oh, yes ; I’m sure he’d promise if he was in,
Sir, ’cause when the two Conservative gents called the other
day he promised ’em d’reckly, Sir.”
292. A Pleasant Prospect - - - - 5 5 o
English Tourist: “I say, look here, how far is it to this
Glenstavit ?”
Native : “ About four miles.”
Tourist : All bog, like this ?”
Native : “ Eh-h; this is just naethin’ till’t!”
293. The Connoisseurs - - - - -550
Groom : ‘ 1 Whew’s beer do yew like best—this ’ere o’ b isk’s,
or that there ale they give yer at the White Ho’s?”
Keeper (critically:) “Well, o’ the tew, I prefers this ere.
That there ’o Wumwood’s don’t pare to me to taste of nawthen
at all. Now this ’ere dew taste o’ the cask.”
294. Legitimate Criticism - - - - 550
Aged Village Matron (to sympathising visitor:) “It's
a cookery book as Mrs. Penewise, our District lady, give me this
Christmas, Miss. I’d a deal sooner a had the ingridiments,
Miss.”
295-296. Heading, Vol. 55 - - - - 10 10 o
(Finished drawing and an experimental drawing of the same
subject.)
297. Five o’clock Tea - - - - - 10 10 o
(Finished drawing and a trial sketch.)
Lady (to relative from Australia:) “Will you take any
refreshment, Cousin George ? ”
George: “Thanks, Bella, don’t mind if I do. Give us a
billy o’ water and I’ll boil it while you make me a damper.”


PRICE.
298. Whose Fault? - £lO 10 o
(Finished drawing and a preliminary drawing.)
Wife (reproachfully:) “Oh, Charles!” (She had returned
to the dining room wondering why he had not come upstairs to
tea.)
Charles (who had evidently taken a little too much wine:)
“ V’y well, my dear, ’sh not my fault! 'sh your fault! cooksh
fault! Bisque soup was salt! ’sh ’preme d’la v’laille was
smoked, and orange frittersh tough as leather! What did
Capt’n du Cane shay ? Bad cookery cause of all sorts o’ crimes.
’Shamed of yourshelf!”
299. Complaisant- - - - - - 10 10 o
(Finished drawing and a trial drawing.)
Artis t (after trying for half an hour to get the expression
he wanted:) “ No ! No ! it won’t do, Smithers ; I want you to
look drunk, you know ! ”
Model : “Well it’s difficult to make believe, you know, Sir;
but if you should ’appen to ’ave ’alf a bottle of spirits in your
cupboard we could manage it in no time, Sir—l should be most
’appy!”
300. A Poser - - - - - -10100
(Finished drawing and a preliminary sketch.)
Mivvens (who doesn’t take well) thought there was a chance
for him, having heard that Partouche and Co. “ retain a staff of
artists, exclusively engaged in studying to impart an uncon-
strained grace of pose to their numerous sitters. ”
Artist (fixing M’s hand to show diamond ring:) “ ’Enery,
bring the ’ead rest! Now Sir, fix the heyes and imagine you
are welcomin’ a friend.”
(No ! It was a failure ; Mivvens does not “ take well.”)
301. Heading, Vol. 54 - - - - 5 5 0
302. Heading, Index - - - - “55°
303. Management - - - - *ss°
(Joint stock bank party breaks his Sunday excursion to call on
a clerical friend.) Parson: “ Afraid I shall not be able to give
you more than ten minutes, old fellow; I have my morning
service.”
Joint Stock Bank Party: “Oh, can’t you do as we do
with our reports and get ’em to take it as read ?”
304. A Parthian Shaft - - - - 55°
Cook : “ Now I’m a leavin’ of yer, Mum, I may as well tell
yer as the key o’ the kitching door fits your store room.”
305. Hibernian Veracity - - - - "55°
Paterfamilias (with his family in Ireland:) “Have you
any West Indian pickles, waiter? ”
Paddy: “ We’ve not, Sor.”
Paterfamilias : “No hot pickles of any sort?’’
Paddy: “ No, shure they're all cold Sor.”


PRICE.
306. A Misnomer ------ 5 o
Country Valetudinarian : “Oh yes, Mum, I’ve had the
lumbago terrible bad, Mum ; ketches me in the small o’ the back
’ere, Mum.”
307. A Good Listener - - - - "55°
Reverend Gentleman: “Well, Tim, did you leave the
letter at the Squire’s ?”
Tim : “ I did, your Riv’rence ; I belave they’re havin’ dinner
company to-day.”
Reverend Gentleman (angrily:) “ What business had
you to be listening about? How often I’ve told you ”
Tim ; “ Plaze, your Riv’rence, I only listened wid me nose."
308. A Note and Query - - - - -550
Farmer Drennidge (meeting his rector at the Royal
Academy;) “Have you noticed this picture, Sir, o’ the evil
spirits that entered into the herd o’ swine, and they rushed down
an’ perished in the sea. There’s one p’int about that, Sir, as
has weighed upon my mind, and I’ve often thought of astin’ of
you ”
Rector ; “ I shall be most happy to explain.”
Farmer D. : “ Well, it’s this ’ere, Sir—whew paid for they
drowned pigs, Sir ? ”
309. A Cool Customer - - - - -550
Tradesman (creditor ;) “ Glad to see you, Sir.”
Swell (debtor:) “Augh, Mr, Skimpidge, you’ve reminded
me more than once of an account. Augh, would you prefer a
cheque which will not be honoured, a bill at three months
which will not be taken up, or a notice from the Bankruptcy
Court that I'm going up on the l6th?”
310-311-3 12. Exclusive - - - - - 15150
(Finished drawing and two preliminary drawings.)
Jones (quite at his ease, having learnt that his partner is a
country girl;) “Do you know the Bradshaws of Middchester ?
awfully jolly people, I——”
Haughty Beauty : “Oh no, we only visit the county
families and we weed them ! ”
(Jones tacet for the rest of the first set.)
313. A Rash Refusal - - - - -550
Customer (flying from unfortunate tradesman:) “No,
thank you, nothing more, really, not another article thank you !
Good morning !” (Escapes—refusing his own umbrella.)
314. Precautions - - - - - 550
Farmer Lavender (starting for London, with Mrs. L., for
the cattle show week:) “My dear (solemnly,) I hope you
haven’t forgotten the Insecticide.”


PRICE.
315. Music without Charms - 5 o
“ Poor little Brown ! that his holiday in the Bavarian High-
lands should have ended so unhappily! He had joined Dr.
Mavis and his charming daughters, the youngest of whom he
had long loved. He was the light tenor of their musical parties.
They were delighted with the scenery and the people, and she
was enchanted by the wild melodies of the mountaineers.”
316. Out of Place - - - - - 5 5°
Miss Flouncey : “ You’ll go to church with us this morning,
Mr. Pippins?”
Mr. Pippins : “Haw—weally—tha-anks, no ! I—l weally
shouldn’t know a soul there.”
317. The Coal Famine - - - - "55°
Wife; “ Oh, Charles, how kind of the Browns !” (Reads:)
“ Mrs. Brown presents her compliments to Mr. and Mrs. Jones,
and hopes that they will give her the pleasure of their company
at a Fire party, on Monday, March 3rd. Fires lighted at 6.30.”
318. Our Auxiliaries - - - - "55°
Fusilier (on the Gold Coast:) “ Houssah? By George,
you’d look a rum un among the hussars at Aldershot! ”
Houssa (responding cheerfully:) “Dam coffee! Yah!
Yah! Yah!”
319. On His Dignity - - - - - 5 5°
Affable Old Gentleman (whohas unintentionally entered
a smoking carriage:) “Dear me, how long is it since you
learned to smoke, my boy ? ”
Precocious Young Gent: “Sha’n’t condescend gratify
impertinent curiosity.”
320. Getting His Answer- - - - - 5 5 0
Important Old Gent (from the country, who thinks these
London barmaids ought to be taken down a bit;) “ Glass of
ale, young woman, and look sharp, please?”
Haughty Blonde (blandly:) “Second class refreshments
lower down, Sir ! ”
321. Corporal Enrolment- - - - - 5 5°
Militia Officer : “ Ah, this is Smithers ; you’re getting
very fat, Smithers. Let’s see, this is your fifth training, isn’t it! ”
Stout Private : “Yes, Sir, after we was disembodied, Sir,
the Adj’tant he took and reintestined me, Sir.” (Note. —
Militiamen, after serving four trainings, can be “re-attested’’
for another five years.)


PRICE.
322. Officers’Grievances - - -£3 3 o
Lieutenant de Bogeyns (ordered to the Gold Coast:)
“ Plaguy nuisance, you know, Major ; ’tisn’t the scrimmage one
minds —enjoy that—it’s the beastly climate ; why can’t a wich
country like this ship this blank fellow, Chicowy, and all his
niggers over here in the autumn, and let us polish them off
quietly on Salisbury Plain in the manoeuvres?”
323. A Degenerate Son - 5 5 o
The Governor: “George, I’m surprised at you ! It's dis-
graceful ! Is it for this I’ve paid hundreds of pounds to give
you a university education ? ”
Son and Heir : “ Why, governor, what have I done ?”
The Governor: “ Done! Dared to smoke, Sir, while you
are drinking my ’34-port ! ! ”
324. Festivities of the Season - - -530
Mrs. Smith {2.30 a.m :) “ What do you mean, Sir, by
coming home in such a state at this untimely hour? ”
Mr. S. (fresh :) “ S-s-sh-shtate ! —’timely hour ! Eh—(with
intense dignity) forshinate for you, Ma-ram, friend took me to
Bri-sh Musheum (hie) an’ if we hadn’t come out ’fore lasht act
Pan’omine shouldn’ a* been home for very conshi’rable [hie.")
326. Outbreak of Humanity - - - - 550
Jarvey (who has been well treated during the drive :) “ Tt
a ’orse about the ’ead ! I’d give a man a month for ’ittin’ a
’orse about ’is ’ead! (hie) —’ead’s principal membran’ ’iiman
body ! If a man’s got’s ’ead can carry ’is legs ; but if a man
ain’t got’s ’ead can’t carry ’is legs—don’t care ’OO it is !”
326. The Hanging Committee - - - - 5 5 o
327. Bereaved - - - - - -550
First Pitman : “ Thou hissent been at the town lately,
Geordie ; hoo’s that, man ? ”
Geordie : “Thou knaws the dogs deed, and aw kennt
getten another, an’ a chap leaks sa fond arvout a dog.”
328. Adjustment - - - - - "55°
Maude (to the Colonel from India:) “ Uncle, why don’t you
wear this chignon on the top of your head ? ”


JOHN TENNIEL, ESQ., R.I.
“ A veteran artist in black and white —a familiar figure in
London society, a worker always at his post, is Mr, John
Tenniel, from whom Mr. Lake has received some drawings.
My friend, Mr. Tenniel, has drawn the weekly cartoon for
Punch for more years than he, or I, would like to count.
This portrait of him, by Mr. Edwin Ward, is the ‘ very
image’ of the artist as he is seen to-day. Mr. George du
Maurier, Mr. Linley Sambourne, and others of the Punch
staff, tell me they will be contributors ; so that if the black
and white section of the exhibition is not as extensive as might
be wished for, it will at least show the work of eminent men.
A complete history of “Mr. Punch ’’and his contributors is
being compiled at the present time by an eminent journalist.”
— Blackbtirn, in Australasian.
[See list of his Drawings overleaf. ]


Six anginal cartoon drawings for London “ Punch ,” by John Tenniel, R.L.
329 “ Advance Australia ” - - -
330 “ Turning- the Tables ” -
33 1. “ What will he do with it? ”
332. “ The Awakening of Father Christmas ” -
,333 “ Pegasus and his Trainer ”
334 “ That Con-foundland Dog ”
Not for Sale, except
by Private Con-
tract. Apply to
Mr. Lake.
Eleven original pen and ink drawings for illustrations to London “ Punch," by
George du Maurier, R.W.S . price.
.335- Hardly Fair - - - - - - £l5 15 °
“ Our artist paints an interesting study of a furze bush.”
336. Our Imbeciles - - - - - 15 15 o
Elderly Masher (who can’t see that his attentions are
unwelcome ;) “ I’m sure you’re fond of music, now.”
Persecuted Fair One: “„Oh yes—very; when it puts a
stop to conversation.”
,337. A Connoisseur - - - - - 15150
Sir Pompey Bedell : “ This bottle of Romane-Conti seems
rather cloudy, Brown ! It ought to be all right; I know it stands
me in twelve guineas a dozen ! ”
The New Butler : “There certainly his some sediment, Sir
Pompey, but it’s of no consequence whatever ; 1 tried a bottle
myself the other day, and found it first-rate.”
338. Rather Late in the Day - - - - 15 15 o
“Oh, Grandpapa ! such fun ! the fortune-teller’s come ! Do
come and have your fortune told ! ”
339. Out of Town - - - - - 15150
(Unfashionable intelligence.) “ Mr. and Mrs. William
Nupkins and family are spending the Sunday afternoons on
Hampstead Heath.”
340. Feline Amenities - - - - - 15 15 o
Fair Hostess (who is proud of her popularity;) “Yes ; I
flatter myself there’s not a door-bell in all the street that’s so
often rung as mine.”
Fair Visitor : “ Well, dear, / had to ring it five times.


PRICE.
341. A Soft Answer - - - - - * 1 5 1 5°
Mistress : “Jane, I saw that policeman speak to you ; that’s
the third policeman I’ve seen speaking to you this morning. I
can’t allow that !”
Jane: “No, ma’am; but the policemen always do admire
baby so, they can’t ’elp stoppin’ and askin’ about ’im ; they all
say as they never see such a fine child.”
342. Popping under Difficulties - - - - 15150
“ Whatever Gus had to say to Lucy, he had to say it under
the circumstances depicted. (They were both much moved.”)
343. Having a Good Time - - - - 15150
Mama: “It’s very late, Emily—has anybody taken you
down to supper?”
Fair Debutante (who has a fine healthy appetite:) “Oh
yes, Mama—several people ! ”
344. Window Studies - - - - - 15150
“ The Struggle for Life. (Three Cabrunners after one small
portmanteau.”)
345. Speeches to be Lived Down, if possible - - 15 15 o
Digbv : “ I had hoped for the pleasure of taking you down
to supper, Mrs. Masham.”
Rigby : “Too late, my dear fellow, it’s the early bird that
catches the worm ! ”
Four original pen and ink drawings by Harry Furniss.
346. Salvation Armitage - - - - "33°
(Illustration to Harry Furniss’s Royal Academy Catalogue.)
347. Miss Molly Coddle - - - - - 220
(Illustration to Harry Furniss's “ How He Did it.”)
348. Baby Hungwell - . .. . . 220
(Illustration to Harry Furniss's Royal Academy Catalogue.)
349. Old Neptune at Home - - - - 220
(Illustration to “ Romps.”)
Linley Sambourne.
349 A. “ The Mahogany Tree ” .... Not for sale.
[l’rint of the Punch Jubilee.]
Drawing of the complete Art Staff of punch. [See preface
to this section, by James Webb, page 73.] Mr. Sambourne’s
Original Drawings have, unfortunately, not left London in
time for exhibition.


CHALK STUDIES.
[Kindly lent for Exhibition by the President of the Royal Academy.]
Sir Frederick Leighton, P.R.A.
*3s°. “ Original Study for Solitude” - Not for sale .
The illustration of this, printed here, is from the first nude
study, made by the President, according to his invariable
practice, before superimposing the Drapery.
“First Nude Study for Solitude." LEIGHTON.
[Only the draped study is exhibited. The above picture
has not left London. 1


No. 350. “ Original Study for Solitude." LEIGHTON.


3 5, 1. “ Original Study for the Figure of Persephone ” - Not for sale.
No. 351. “ Study for Persephone.” LEIGHTON.


-35 2 - “ Original Study for the Figure of Demeter ” - Not for sale
No. 352. “ Study for Demeter." LEIGHTON.
The next illustration is from the President’s completed
picture of the “Return of Persephone.” The picture itself
was a commission by a private gentleman in England, for
presentation by him to the Walker Art Gallery in Liverpool.
Though not included in our Exhibition, the illustration is
printed for the purpose noted on page 87.


“ The Return of Persephone” LEIGHTON.


PRICE.
“ 1 am glad you are to have an illustration of Sir Frederick
Leighton’s great picture, ‘ The Return of Persephone, 5 which
occupied the place of honour in the large room of the Royal
Academy this year. The picture itself is not coming to
Melbourne, being in the hands of the engraver, but Sir
Frederick Leighton has lent some studies of the draperies.
These ‘ studies 5 in white chalk on dark paper will be of
interest to students, seen by the light of the illustration,” —
Blackburn , in Australasian .
Persephone in Greek, Proserpina in Latin, was the daughter
of Demeter, or Ceres. She is described as wonderfully
beautiful ; and Pluto, the god of the shades, despairing of
obtaining her mother’s consent to his suit, determined to carry
her off by force. Milton, following the Latin poets, speaks of —
“that fair field
Of Lima, where Proserpin gathering flowers,
Herself a fairer flower, by gloomy Dis
Was gathered, which cost Ceres all that pain
To seek her through the world.”— Paradise Lost y iv. y 268.
To assuage the mother’s trouble it was at length found neces-
sary for the King of the Gods to interfere, and a compromise
was made by which the time of Persephone was divided
between the world above and the world below, between her
mother and her husband. This gives the meaning of the story.
Persephone is the symbol of vegetation returning to the earth
in Spring, then again hidden for a season beneath the ground.
353. “ Engraving- of Solitude ” (India Print) - - -jQ 4 4 o
This fine mezzotint, just published by Messrs. Tooth, has
been rapidly taken up and the copies have greatly advanced
in price in London. Ten copies have been, however, retained
for Melbourne, as well as a few copies of the next “state” of
the print, at a lower price of £1 I is. 6d. These copies may
be ordered by written application to Mr. Lake, and the appli-
cations will be dealt with in order of precedence.
Herbert Schmalz.
354. “ Christianas ad Leones ” - - - - 700
[“Faithful unto Death.”]
Artist’s Proof Engraving, mezzotint. Six copies of this
and a few of the next “state” have also been retained for
Melbourne, and may be ordered in the same way as No. 353,
Edwin Douglas.
355- “Jersey Cattle” - - - - -55°
Portraits of the celebrated cattle, Rosy , Sweet Secret and
Perry Farm Daisy , prize winners all over the island of Jersey
and throughout England,
Artist’s Proof Engraving, mezzotint. Copies of this engrav-
ing have been sold in London and America to the amount of
Four copies have been retained for Melbourne,
and may also be ordered as in No. 353.
Frank Short, R.S.P.E.
356. “ Orpheus and Eurydice ” - - - - 20 o o
[Artist’s Proof Etching.]
357» 358, 359 and 360 are blank numbers.


IV.
GERMAN GALLERY.
[WITH SELECTED CONTINENTAL PICTURES.]
Under the Distinguished Patronage of Professor Karl von Werner
R.A., Director of the Royal Academy, Berlin; and Herr Hugo
Schnars-Alquist, co-Director of the International Art Exhibition
of Berlin, 1891, and of the National German Art Association.
Schnars-Alquist.
PRICE.
361. “ Moonrise in the Indian Ocean ” - - - o o
Herr Schnars-Alquist will be well remembered in Mel-
bourne as the Special Commissioner of the German Art
Association at the late Centennial Exhibition. He is now a
very famous man in Berlin and has his hands full of commis-
sions. He has given the chief assistance in collecting the
present German Exhibition.
Professor Eugene Bracht, R.A., Berlin.
362. “On the City Wall of Jerusalem - - 150 o o
[Great Gold Prussian State Medal.]
Fedor Encke.
363. “Psyche” - - - - - -50 00
Edward Fischer.
364. “ Domestic Landscape ” - - - 20 o o
Bedini.
365. “ The Convent Garden ” - - - 25 o o


VILLADOS.
PRICE.
366. “Wayfarers” ----- o o
ZIEBLAND.
367. “The Notary” - - - - 35 o o
Edward Fischer.
368. “Domestic Landscape” - - - 20 o o
Louis Douzette.
369 “ Fisherman’s Hut, Moonlight” - - 150 o O'
[Gold Prussian State Medal; Silver Medal, Melbourne, 1889.]
Vesin.
370. “ Returning from the Fair ” - - - 35 o o
Gonzales.
371. “Gossips”- - - ■ - - 30 o o.
Muller Kurzwelly.
372. “On the Swedish Coast ” - - - 55 ° °'
[Two Gold Medals, Melbourne, 1889.]
P. IVANOVITCH.
373. “After a Raid” ----- 850 o o
This fine picture is exactly the same size as “ The Traitor,”
by the same artist, now in our National Gallery.
August Fricke.
374. “Landscape” - - - - - 80 o O'
[Motive from the Baltic.]
Adolf von Meckel.
375. “ Flight to Egypt ” - - - 100 o o>
[Gold Medals, London, Berlin, Stuttgart.]
A. A. Lesrel.
376. “ A Favorite Song ” - 300 o O'
G


Vesin.
PRICE.
.377. “A Frolic” ..... o o
Adolf von Meckel.
*378. “ The Discovery of the Dead ” ... 325 o o
[See note to No. 375.]
Ernst Korner.
379. “ Pyramids of Gizeh ” .... 250 o 0
[Gold Medal, Melbourne, 1889.]
Edward Weichberger.
380. “In the Woods ” - - - - -30 00
[Silver Medal, Melbourne, 1889.]
A. Normann.
381. “ Evening in North of Norway ” - - 60 o o
[Silver Medal, Melbourne, 1889.]
T. Schmidt.
382. “ Going to the Fair ” - - - - 60 o o
Hans Hermann.
383. “ Choggia, near Venice ” - - - - 63 o o
[Silver Medal, Melbourne, 1889.]
WINDMAUR.
84. “ A Winter Evening, Bavaria” - - 25 o o
The artist was the teacher of Munthe, who was his favorite
pupil.
L. Von Flesch Brunningen.
385. “ Dinner-time at the Creche ” ... 150 o o
Carl Breitbach.
386. “ A Village Picnic ” - - - - 90 o o


No. 378. “ The Discovery of the Dead.” VON MECKEL.


Johannes Hermes.
price.
387. “ Landscape from the Markland ” - - - £9O o o
[Gold Medal, Melbourne, 1889.]
R. Weisse.
388. “ The Tapestry Seller ” - 150 o o
MiILLER KuRZ WELLY.
389. “A Moonlit Night in Bavaria” - - - 40 o o
390. “ Evening on Shore ” - - - - 42 o o
[Two Gold Medals, Melbourne, 1889.]
Louis Douzette.
391. “ A Moonlight Night in Bavaria” - - - 65 o o
[Gold Prussian State Medal; Silver Medal, Melbourne, 1889.]
SCHNARS AIQUIST.
392. “On the Beach ” - - - - -90 00
Professor Hans Gude, R.A., Berlin.
393. “The Shore of Ahlbeck ” - - - - 80 o o
[See note to No. 425.]
Franz Maecker.
394 “The Angler” - - - - - 30 o o
395. “ Boats on the Havel ” - - - - 30 o o
A. Normann.
396. “ Summer Night ” - - - - 30 o o
Staackman.
397 • “ The Entrance to Khartoum ” - - - 30 o a


Muller Kurzwelly.
TRICE.
398 “Winter Evening” - - - - 0 0
[See note to No. 390.]
Hermine von Preuschen.
399. “Hemlock” - - - ■ -35°°
[Gold Medals and Honorable Mention, Karlsrulie, London, Munich
and Melbourne.]
Robert Hans Schmidt.
400 “May Day” - - - ■ -68 00
Rasch.
401. “ Waiting for the Boats ” - - - - 80 o o
Professor Carl Becker, P.R.A., Berlin.
401 A. “ Vittoria, Female Head in Old Fashioned Italian
Costume - - - -60 00
[A pluralist in Gold Medals.]
Otto Weber.
402. “In the Forest, Fontainebleau ” - - - 50 o o
Gustav Pflugradt
403. “In a German Park” - - - - 75 o o
Muller Kurzwelly.
404. “By the Calm Sea ” - - - - 100 o o
[See note to No. 390.]
R. Senet.
405. “ Luncheon Time ” - - - - 50 o o
Eugen Herboth-Schmidt.
406. “ The Blossoms in the Reeds ” - - - 21 o 0


Hans K:sfi r.
PRICK.
407 “Landscape" ----- £ls 15 0
EnWARD Ockel.
40cS. “Sheep Resting" - - - - 37 10 o
Hermine vox Preuschex.
409. “Cornflowers” - - - - 710 o
[See note to No. 399.]
George H. Englehardt.
*4lO, “The Old Mill - - - - 63 o o
Marie Baass.
411 “ Rhododendrons" - - - 45 o o
F. Ribkxs
412. Market Day, The Rialto, Venice”- - - 75 o o
Professor Hermann' Eschke.
413. “Parliament House and Westminster Bridge,
London ----- 100 o o
[Gold Prussian State Medal.]
Georg Tvrahx.
414 “ The Old Song” - 100 o o
A. NoR.MANX.
W’s- “ Xarotjord, Norway” - 157 10 o
Illustration, pas' 96. J


No. 410. " The Old Mill." ENGLEHARDT.


No. 415. "Narofjord, Norway." NORMANN.


Charles Pavlik.
PRICK.
*416. “ Choosing - the Model” - o o
[A Studio —Pompeii in ancient times, j
The scene is before tiie devastation of the city, by the ashes
of Vesuvius in 79 a.d. The master of the Studio, an old
sculptor, is seated on the left of the picture, under the
marble columns of the Peristylium of his villa. The hot rays
of a southern sun, and the light of the bright blue sky, fall
through the open impluvium on a group of women waiting
their turn to serve as models for a new work. Two
younger artists, close to the seat of their master, are judging
the form of a model which another sculptor has posed before
them.
Unfortunately, this celebrated artist, who was born in
Prague, 1861, died suddenly, just as he had finished this
picture.
No. 416. “ Choosing the Model." PAVLIK.
[A sculptor's studio in Pompeii.]


Edward Weichberger.
I'KIC !■:.
417. “The Pond in the Forest” - £s 2 10 0
[Silver Medal, Melbourne, 1859.]
Rexe Gronlaxd.
418. “ Fruit for the Gods ” - 300 o o
[Gold Medal, Melbourne, 1889.]
CONSUELO FOULD.
419. “ Fresh from the Market” - - 40 o o
Walter Leistikow.
420. “ Ave Maria” - - - - 90 o o
[Silver Medal, Melbourne, 1889.]
Max Rabes.
*421. “ Arabian Market in Cairo ” - 200 o o
Dexxeulix.
422. “ Winding- the Skein ” - - - 75 o °
Johaxxes Hermes.
423. “On Schlonen See, Kerirgxlorff” - 173 o o
[Gold Medal, Melbourne, 1892.";
Sohxarh-Alquist.
424. “The Blue Wonder” - 450 o o
This picture has attracted much attention in Berlin, and
has excited there a keen critical controversy, one party attack-
ing the daring literalism, the other regarding Herr Alquist as
“ a new Hildebrandt.” The study was made in the tropics,
and the artist during the controversy obtained the signed
certificate of the commander and officers of the Royal Mail
Steamer that the picture was an accurate transcript of the
colour and appearance of the sea on the date of painting.
Those who have travelled much will be willing to allow that
the deep indigo of the mid-Atlantic, the rich vividian of the
North Sea, the emerald and crimson of the Gulf of Suez, the
almost unpaintable az,ure of the Mediterranean, and the foam-
ing, sandy fury of the channel are all equally true in their
places. Hesitancy to admit this in full, led the Berlin critics
to christen our picture “The Blue Wonder/’


No. 421. “Arabian Market in Cairo." MAR RABES.


Professor Haxs Gude, R.A., Berlin .
PRICE.
425. “Surge” ------ ,£315 o o
[Great Gold Medal for Art; Director of the Academic Society of
Studio Professors.]
The noble picture exhibited by this famous painter in the
Melbourne Exhibition of 1889, and entitled “After the
Storm,” was purchased by one of our present guarantors,
Mr. Molesworth Greene, and presented by him to the Mel- , ,
bourne National Gallery. This was succeeded by a conwniAtutH To
inirrnvin\ Professor Gude, from Mr. F. W. Prell, who also
lent his picture for some time to the National Gallery. The
strength and force of the present work assert themselves
without any descriptive note, and seem to echo the Homeric
thunder —para thinapoluphloisioio thalasses,
Muller Kurzwelly.
426. “Evening Glow” - - - - -60 00
Professor Carl Becker, P.R.A., Berlin.
427. “ Dalmatian Woman in the Church ” - - 95 o o
[See note to No. 401 A.]
Helene Nagel.
428. “ Yellow Roses ” - - - - -40 00
Hans Volcher.
429. “ The Elbe on the German Ocean ” - - 31 10 o
Walter Leistikow.
430. “ Autumnal Foliage ” (water-colour) - - 20 o o
Hans Volcher.
430 A. “ Flood on the Isle of Neuwerk, Caxhaven ” - 31 10 o


V.—ENTRANCE HALL.
AUSTRALIAN ARTISTS.
Note. — In June, 1891, and again in October of last year, the intention was
announced in the Argus of inviting Australian Artists to contribute selected
pictures to this Exhibition as soon as the British Collection should arrive. Until
these galleries were obtained from the Trustees of the Exhibition Building, it was
impossible to know what extra space would be available. Then only three weeks
remained to prepare for the opening day. Thus, it was not possible to invite a
large number of Australian Pictures, or to give Artists any longer notice, but it is
hoped that next year a large and thoroughly representative collection may be made
to associate with the British Pictures.
[The abbreviations Vic., N.S . IF., or S A., following an Artist’s name, denote that
the picture has been painted in Victoria, New South Wales, or Adelaide.]
It is believed that the pictures here exhibited are free from the defects implied
in the following notes by Mr. Blackburn and others; but the notes are here printed
as being of great interest in this connexion.
“ What a magnificent field for the landscape painter the yet unstudied bush of
Australia presents ! New scenes, new customs, new light and shade await the
students on their return from Paris, all seen in the light of French teaching. The
Australian Art School of the future will be a school of colonists,” &e., &o. Thus
does the Australian art student write home. Not a word about the land of Sir
Joshua Eeynolds, of Gainsborough, Turner, Constable, and the great landscape
painters ! Let us picture, if we can, Australian skies ‘in the light of French
teaching 1 ’ the skies of Israels and Carot transported to the antipodes 1 By all
means have a ‘ school of colonists,’ but let it be founded on observation from
nature in a country where outdoor study can be more easily practised than in
Europe.
“My object is not an idle one; it is to point out the evil of running into extremes
in art study, as the Americans have done, throwing back their own national art fifty
years. Unless the Australian artist preserves his individuality, there will never be
an ‘ Australian school ’of painters, as there should be. There is a note of discord
in all this French enthusiasm, which seems worth drawing attention to at the
present time.”— Henry Blaclcburn, in Greater Britain.
“ It has always been a trouble to me that English students still deem it necessary
to fly to France or to Italy for the completion of their art education. They come
back, most of them, bringing with them nothing but the worst faults and most
pronounced mannerisms of the foreign schools to which they have resorted; too
often with the disastrous consequence that their own natural talent is warped and
spoilt.”— The Art Critic of the " Times."
Jean L. C. Wilson {S A )
PRICE.
431. “ Copper and Brass ” - £ g 8 o
John Mather [Vic.)
432. “Autumn” - - - . 10 o o


J. C. Waite, R.B.A. (Vic.)
PRICE.
433. “Portrait, G. Downes Carter, Esq.” - - Not for sale.
[Lent by Owner.]
Mrs. Flamsteed.
434. “ Cleve on the Rhine ” - - - - 31 10 o
George Peacock ( Vic.)
435. “ Near Dandenong ” - - J 5 0 0
George A. J. Webb (Pic.)
436 “ Mount Wellington ” - - - - 42 o o
J. R. Ashton ( N.S.W.)
437. “ A Poem ” - - - - -75 00
Ugo Catani (Vic.)
438 “Frosty Morning, Woodlands” - - - 84 o o
George A. Reynolds ( S.A.)
439. “ Cutting Lucerne ” - - - - 10 10 o
J. C. Waite, R.B.A. (Vic.)
440 “ Portrait, T. Monkhouse, Esq.” - - - Not for sale.
P. Spence (A 7 ..5'. If.)
441 “ Landward in Haste, the Screaming Sea Fowls
Fly” - - - - - -31100
James Ashton (S.A.)
442 “ The Golden Footprints of Departing Day ” - 660
George A. Reynolds (S.A.)
443. “Laid Astray” - - - - - 660
A. J. Daplyn (N S.W.)
444. “ A Funny Story ” - - - - - 31 10 o


C. Rolando [Vic.)
PRICE.
445. “Summer Eve on the Buffalo River ” - - £72 10 o
Tom Roberts .( Vic.)
446. “The Last of the Roses” - - - - 15 o o
J. C. Waite, R.B.A. {Vic.)
447. “ Portrait, The Mayoress of Melbourne ” - - Not for sale.
[Lent by the Owner.]
A. H. Fulwood {NS. IV.)
448. “NearKiama” - - - - - 10 10 o
Harry P. Gill {S.A.)
449. “ Souvenir of Brighton” - - - - 660
Lizzie Armstrong {S.A.)
450. “Pets” - - - - - - 440
Miss H. Irvine {Vic.)
451. “Grapes” - - - - - - 660
W. T. Crosbie ( Vic.)
452. “Waterfall, Blue Mountains ” - - - 35 o o
James Ashton {S.A.)
453. “ Showery Weather ” - - - - 440
Miss H. Irvine {Vic.)
454. “By the Fireside ” - - - - 17 10 o
J. H. Scheltema {Vic.)
455. “ Drove of Cattle, Murray Flats ” - - - 73 10 o
Miss Irvine {Vic.)
456 “A Wet Monday” - - - - 31 10 o


J. H. SCHELTEMA [Vic.)
TRICE.
457. “ The Charge of the Bull ” ... 10 o
[An Australian Incident.]
(J. Rolando {Vic. )
458. “Sunset on Lake King, Gippsland ” - - 94 10 o
Tom Roberts [Vic.)
459. “ Melbourne before the Trams ” - - - 25 o o
A. COLLIXGRIDGE ( N.S.W. )
460. “ Giant’s Castle, Berowa Creek ” - - - 880
Arthur Streeton [Vic.)
461. “Heidelberg, Twilight” - - - - 20 o o
Rosa C. Fiveash [S.A.)
462. “ Waratah ” - - - - -770
[Rote. —The next two numbers are on the other side of the room.]
Ugo Catani [Vic.)
463. “Hallelujah” - - - - -84 00
A. S. McGregor [Vic.)
464. Sunset Near Ivanhoe ” - - - - 50 o o
[Note. —Return now to the opposite corner, left hand side of red screen.]


WATER-COLOURS.
C. H. Hunt (N.S.W.)
I'« ICE,
465 “ Purple and Gold ” .... 0 0
Gwendoline Bragg (S.A.)
466 “ Port Elliot Jetty ” - - - - 3 3 o
Elizabeth A. Cresswell (S.A.)
“Port Creek” - - - - - 10 10 o
J. W. Mather ( Vic.)
468 “At Drysdale ” - - - - - 10 io o
James Ashton (S.A.)
469 “An Evening- Glow of a Summer Sun” - - 4 4
W. K. Gold (S.A.)
470. “ Moon’s Dreaming Hour ” - - - 7 10 0
A. H. Fullwood (NS. IV.)
471 “ Illawarra ” - - - - 94 10 o
Mrs. E. Gray (London and Vic.)
472 “ Rocks at Rynana, Cornwall ” - Not for sale.
[Lent by Charles Gray, Esq.]
Mary A. Overbury ( S.A .)
473 “ Callickalinga Headland ” - - - 300-
James Ashton (S.A.)
474 “ Willunga Beach” - - - - 5 5 o
W K. Gold (S.A.)
475. “ Glenelg, Moonlight” - - - - 7io o
H


Elizabeth H. Meek (A. A.)
PKICE.
476. “ Port Elliot Rocks” - £6 6 o
Gwendoline Bragg (S.A.)
477. “ D’Entrecasteaux Channel ” - - - 3 3®
A. Laura V. Gee (S.A.)
478. “Gull Rock, Port Willunga” - - - 5 5°
W. B. Spong (Vu.)
479. “ Near Aldershot ” - - - 10 o o
480. “A Surrey Lane” - - - - 10 o o
Elizabeth A. Creswell (S.A.)
481. “Commodore Point, Port Elliot” - - 3 3°
Harry P. Gill ( S.A.)
482. “ Silver Gums ” - - - - - 330
483. “Travellers’ Rest” - - - - 440
J. W. Mather [Vic.)
484. “ St. Kilda Bluff” - - - - - 660
A. S. McGregor {Vic.)
485 “ Sultry Day, Beaconsfield ” - - - 10 o o
Arthur Streeton (P/V)
486. “ Valley of the Nepean, New South Wales - 26 5 o
Lister Lister (A S.W.)
487. “On the Coast, near Manley” - - - 10 10 o
W. H. Bragg {S.A.)
488. “ Lake Sorrell ” - - - 220
Harry P. Gill.
489 “Nature’s Funeral” - - - - 440


J. W. Mather {Vi:.)
PRICE.
490. “El wood Swamp ” - _£B 8 o
Herbert Teague {V/c. and Florence.)
491. “On the Arno, Florence ” - - - - Not for sale.
[Lent by Mrs. Gurner.]
Elizabeth H. Meek {S.A.)
492. “The Bluff from Granites Island” - - 10 10 o
A. S. McGregor (Vic.)
493. “ Winter Sunset, Hobson’s Bay ” - - - 10 o o
Gwendoline Bragg ( S.A .)
494. “ Lake Crescent” - - - - -33°
Mrs. Parsons {Vic.)
495. “On the Gippsland Lakes ” - - - 3 3
496. “At Fernshaw” - - - - -220
497. “On the Gippsland Lakes ” - - - 3 3 0
498. “At Marysville” - - - - -44 e
499 “At Heidelberg-” - - - - -.3 3°
500. “At Kalimna ” - - - - -44°
Harry P. Gill {S.A.)
301. “ Guardian of the Road ” - - - - 3 3°
Tennyson Cole.
502. “In Marble Halls ” - 210 o o
Mrs. Ellis Rowan.
503. “ Japanese Iris ” (oil painting)
504. “Japanese Iris ” (oil painting) -


ioB
Art Union.
Royal Anglo-Austraiian Society of Artists.
BRITISH GALLERY ART UNION
£5OO in 2000 TICKETS at FIVE SHILLINGS.
THIRTY FRIZES, Value £4OO, as given below.
Chairman— R. MURRAY SMITH, Esq., C.M.G.
Committee of Guarantors of ihe British Art Gallery :
THE MAYOR OF MELBOURNE.
Mr. JUSTICE a’BECKETT.
W. ATTENBOROUGH, Esq.
WILLIAM BROWN, Esq.
MARS BUCKLEY, Esq.
F. B. CLAPP, Esq.
J. G. DUFFETT, Esq.
GOWEN EVANS, Esq.
ALFRED FELTON, Esq.
MOLESWORTH GREENE, Esq.
BOWES KELLY, Esq.
Professor KERNOT.
EDWARD MILLER, Esq.
H. BYRON MOORE, Esq.
WILLIAM PETERSON, Esq.
A. W. ROBERTSON, Esq.
R. MURRAY SMITH, Esq.
EDMUND E. SMITH, Esq.
JOHN WAGNER, Esq.
WILLIAM H. WELCH, Esq.
E. L. YENCKEN, Esq.
Treasurer— H. BYRON MOORE, Esq. Manager —J. LAKE, Esq.
Bankers —THE BANK OF VICTORIA.
Ticket Agents —MULLEN’S LIBRARY and Messrs. ALLAN,
GLEN and NICHOLSON.
[For Full Prospectus see Catalogue .]
PRIZE WINNERS will have a wide freedom in their own choice
of Prizes, viz. :
(«.) They may select any unsold Picture up to the value of their
Prize.
( b .) Or they may select Two Pictures to make up the value of their
Prize.
(r.) Or they may select Pictures above the value of their Prize, and
pay the difference.
( d .) Or, in the case of Prizes and under, they may select, if
they prefer it, Engravings or other Objects of Art in the
Gallery.


Art Union.
109
The subscribed will be allotted in 30 Frizes of Pictures,
value as follows, viz.:
Amount of Prizes ...
A Commission of 20 per cent, to the Society to cover
Expenses, and Agency ... ... ... ... iqo
Total ...
The Drawing of the Issue will take place in the Gallery, in the
presence of the Press, on 2nd May, unless all Tickets are sold earlier.
If the Issue is not completely sold before that date, it will be drawn
pro rata. The result will be announced in the Melbourne daily papers
the next morning.
Prize Winners may then at once choose their Prizes in the Gallery on
presentation of their Tickets to the Manager, and Prizes will be ready
for delivery at the close of the Exhibition.
If the Winners do not present their Tickets in the Galleries within
seven days after the Drawing, their Prizes will be selected and allotted
by the Executive Committee, and deposited in the National Gallery.
Such Prizes, if not then claimed by the Ist of July, 1892, will become the
property of the National Gallery.
Application for Tickets made by post to The Manager,
British Art Gallery , Exhibition Building. Melbourne.” and accom-
panied by remittance in stamps, postal orders, notes, or cheque (with
exchange added) will receive immediate attention.
R. MURRAY SMITH, Chairman.
H. BYRON MOORE, Treasurer.
J. LA.KE, Manager and Secretary.
British Art Gallery,
Exhibition Building, Melbourne,
ist March, 1892.


ALPHABETICAL INDEX
OF
ARTISTS EXHIBITING,
With the NUMBERS OF THEIR PICTURES in the Catalogue.
A.
Adams, J. Clayton, Ewhurst Hill, Guildford. 68, 135.
Allan, Robert W., R.W.S., 2 Spencer Street, Victoria Street, London.—96, 219,
232, 251.
Alquist, Hugo Schnars-, Berlin.—26l, 392, 424.
Ansdell, R., R.A. (the late.) — 19.
Anderson, S., c/o Bourlet, 17 Nassau Street W.—182.
Armstrong, Lizzie, Adelaide. —450.
Ashton, J. R., Sydney.—437.
Ashton, James, Adelaide. —442, 453, 469, 474, 484, 490.
B.
Baass, Marie, Hamburg.—4ll.
Ball, Wilfrid, R.S.P.E., 398 Old Bond Street, London.—233, 236, 252, 256,
266, 283.
Barber, Burton, Princes’ Hall, Piccadilly.—l 62.
Bartlett, W. H., 113 Church Street, Chelsea, London.—6s, 173.
Beavis, Richard, R.W.S., 16 Netting Hill Square, London. —58, 64, 185.
Becker, Carl, Berlin.—4ola, 427.
Bedini. -865.
Beers, Jan Van.— 2oo, 201.


Bell, Ada. —l 9 Bayswater Terrace, Hyde Park, and “ Linden,” Geelong —25, 26, 29,
169, 187, 188.
Benham, T. L. —344 Campden Road N.W.—130.
Bishop, W. Follen, R.8.A., 41 South Hill Road, Liverpool.—so, 204, 288.
Bourdillon, N.E.A.C., Newlyn, Penzance. —98, 170, 179.
Bracht, Edgen, Berlin.—362.
Bragg, Gwendoline, Adelaide— 466, 477, 494.
Bragg, W. H , Adelaide—4BB.
Breakspeare, W. A., R.8.A., 13 King Street, St. James’s, London—7s, 76, 79,
80, 85, 180.
Breitbach, Carl, Berlin.—3B6.
Broadbridge, Miss Alma, 60 Brunswick Road, Brighton, England. —lO7, 152.
Bromley, John M., R.8.A., 36 Marlboro Hill, London. —206, 268, 272, 285
Bunny, Rupert C., The Priory, Huntingdon.—9o.
Burgess, J. 8., R. A ., 60 Finchley Road, London. -31, *7l.
C.
Callow, William, R.W.S., F.R.G.S., The Firs, Gt. Missenden, Bucks.—27o.
Calthrop, Claude, Beech House, The Mall, Hammersmith.—l23.
Carrington, Yates, 3 Hill Road, St. John’s Wood. —168.
Garrick, J. Mulcaster.—l96.
Carter, R. H., io Hill’s Road, St. John’s Wood. —53, 126.
Catani, Ugo, 463 Collins Street, Melbourne.—43B, 463.
Cole, Tennyson, Grosvenor Chambers, Collins Street, Melbourne. —134 a, 502.
Collier, Hon. John, North House, Eton Avenue N.W. —120, 141.
Collingridge, A., Sydney.—46o.
Cotman, F. G., R. 1., 10 Boscobel Place, Harrow Road N.W.— 87, 212, 213, 217
218, 282.
Cook, E. Wake, 41 Grove Road, St. John’s Wood, London.—223, 224, 230, 253
255, 275.
Craft, Percy, Stanmore Lodge, Newland’s Park, Sydenham.—l3.
Cresswell, Elizabeth A., Adelaide.—467, 481.
Crosbie, W. T., “ Euretta,” Esplanade, St. Kilda.—4s2.
D.
Davidson, Charles, R.IV.S., Perrar, Perth, W. Truro, Cornwall.—2B6.
Davis, Lucien, 160 New Bond Street W. - 15, 17, 71.
Davis, Val., R.8.A., 5 Langham Chambers W.—52.
Davis, H.W.8., R.A., 18 St. John’s, Wood Road.—47.
Dawson, Nelson, Wentworth Studios, Maurasa Road S. W. —145, 250, 290.
Daplyn, A. J., Sydney.—444.
De Crespigny, Rose, Round Hill, Lyndhurst.—2o7, 269, 273.
Detmold, Henry Edward, Pembroke Gardens, Kensington.—63, 121, 124.
Denneulin. —422.
Dillon, Frank, R./., 13 Upper Phillimore Gardens W. —129.


Douglas, Edwin, Fox Down, Findon, Sussex. —57, 102, 160, 161, 178, 355.
Douzette, Louis, Berlin.—369, 391.
Du Maurier, G., R. IV.S., New Grove House, Hampstead.—23B, and Punch Draw-
ings, 335 to 345.
E.
Earle, Charles, R. 1 ., 9 Duke Street, Portland Place, London.—22s, 242, 246,
258, 2go.
East, Alfred, R.I, R.S.P.E., Arts Club, Hanover Square W.—67, 138.
Eisele, Hans, Munich.—4o7.
Lncke Fedor, Berlin.—363.
Knglehardt, George H., Berlin.—4lo.
Eschke, Hermann, Beilin.—4l3.
F.
Fahey, Edward H., R. 1 ., 28 Dawson Place, Bayswater, London. — 6, 83, 167, 230
240, 263.
Fantin-Latour, c/o Mrs. Edwin Edwards, 26 Golden Square W. —3, 20, 22, 40.
Farquharson, Joseph, 2 Porchester Gardens W.—23, 122.
Fiveash, Rosa C., Adelaide—462.
Fischer, Edward, Berlin.—364, 368.
Fisher, S. Melton, 853 Campiello delle Strope, S. Giacomo dall’orio, Venice.—72,
186.
Flamsteed, Mrs. Wm. D., Ashley Lodge, Sydenham Street, Moonee Ponds.—434.
Flesch-Brunningen, L. Von, Munich.—3Bs.
Forbes, Elizabeth Stanhope, ii Elgin Avenue, London.—lsB, 176.
Fould, Consdelo.— 4l9.
Freeman, M. Winifred, 44 Kensington Square W.—261.
Fricke, August, Berlin. —374.
Frith, W. P., R.A., Ashenhurst, Sydenham Rise. —155.
Fullwood, A. H., Sydney.—44B.
Furniss, Harry, St. John’s Wood.— Punch Drawings, 346 to 349.
G.
Garland, C. T., 160 New Bond Street W.—III.
Garstin, Norman, N.E.A.C., Newlyn, Penzance, England. —lBl.
Gee, A. Laura V., Adelaide.- 478.
Gill, Harry P., North Terrace, Ade1aide.—211,216,265,274,281,449,482,
483, 489, 501.
Gold, W. K., Adelaide.—47o, 475.
Gotch, T. C., R.8.A., 70 Gower Street, W.C., England.—94.
Gonzales. —37l.
Grace, James E., R.B.A , Milford, Godaiming, Surrey.—39, 41, 84, 93, 97, 197.
Gray, Mrs. E., St. Ives, Cornwall.—2B9, 472.
Gronland, Rene, Berlin.—4lB.
Gude Hans, Berlin.—393, 425.


H.
Hacker, Arthur, 74 Fellowes Road S., Hampstead.—2o2.
Hague, Anderson, Deganway, Llandudno, Wales. —45, 140, 221.
Hall, Fred, Newlyn, Penzance. —146.
Hardy, F. D., 17 Brunswick Gardens, Kensington.—lo 9.
Hartley, Alfred, R.8.A., Wentworth Studios, Mauresa Road, Chelsea.—32, 81, 142.
Hayes, Claude, R. 1., Milford, Surrey.—ll, 68, 113, 153, 184.
Hayes, Edwin, R.H.A. , R. 1., Olive Villa, Quex Road, Kilburn.—s, 14, 18, 18, 36,
247.
Hemy, C. Napier, R.W.S., Churchfield, Falmouth, Cornwall.—4, 112.
Hkrboth-Schmidt, Eugen, Berlin.—4o6.
Hermann, Hans, Berlin.— 383.
Hermes, Johannes, Berlin.—3B7, 423.
Herne, Charles E., 9 Hyde Park Mansions, London.—2o9, 210, 214, 226, 227,
257.
Hetherington, Ivystan, 4 Steele’s Studios, Haverstock Hill.— B.
Hicks, G. E., “The Lodge,” Copford, Colchester.—l4B.
Hood, G. S. Jacomb, N.E.A.C., 26 Tite Street, Chelsea S.W. —144, 174.
Hunt, C. H., Sydney.—46s.
Hunter, Colin, A.R.A., 14 Melbury Road, Kensington.— 66.
I.
Ingram, W. Ayerst, R.8.A. , c/o Chapman Bros., 251 King’s Road, Chelsea.—2,
149, 150, 241.
Irvine, Miss H., “The Avenue,”East Malvern. —451, 454, 456.
Ivanovitch, P.—373.
J-
Jay, W. S., Brooklawn, Arundel, Sussex. —74, 147.
Johnson, Alexander, 62A, Westbourne Grove.—l7s.
K.
Keene, Charles, c/o Mrs. Edwin Edwards, 26 Golden Square W .— Punch Drawings,
291 to 328.
Kbnnington, T. 8., 8 Victoria Grove, Fulham Road, London.—62, 77.
King, Yeend, R. 1., R.8.A., 103 Finchley Road, St. John’s Wood.—los.
Knight, J. Buxton, iBia King’s Road, Chelsea.—l 77, 183.
Knowles, Davidson, R.8.A., 26 Glebe Place, Chelsea 5.W.—33, 154.
Korner, Ernst, Berlin.—379.
Kurzwelly, C. MUllbr, Berlin. —372, 389, 390, 398, 404, 425.
L.
Laidley, W. J'. —5° Circus Road, St. John’s Wood.—ll 4.
Lake, J., Bradley’s Studios, Fitzroy Square, London, and Middlefield, Malvern,
Melbourne.—23s, 262, 277.


Le Jeune, Henry, R.A. , 13 Goldhurst Terrace, Hampstead. —70.
Lewis, C. J., A’./., 122 Cheyne Walk, Chelsea. —7, 136, 137.
Leighton, Sir Fredk., Bart., P.R.A , Holland Park Road W. —27, 350, 351,
352, 353.
Leistikow, Walter.— 42o, 430.
Leorel, A. A.—376.
Lindner, Moffat P., 57 Bedford Gardens, Kensington.—43, 73.
Lister, Lister, Sydney.—4B7.
M.
Macallum, Hamilton, R. 1., Wychcombe Studios, Haverstock Hill, London. —
191, 229.
Macintosh, John M., R.8.A., 58 St. Mary’s Terrace, Paddington.—234, 276.
Maecker, Franz, Berlin.—394, 395.
MacWhirter, J., A.R.A., 1 Abbey Road, St. John’s Wood.—lo.
Mather, John W., Austral Buildings, Collins Street.—432, 468, 484, 490.
Meckel, Adolph Von, Karlsruhe. —375, 378.
Meek, Elizabeth H., Adelaide.—476, 492.
McGregor, A. S., Villa Argentina, North Terrace, Clifton Hi 11.—378,464,485,
493.
Merritt, Mrs. Anna Lee, c/o Mrs. Edwin Edwards, 26 Golden Square. — 132.
Moore, Henry, A.R.A., R. W.S., Collingham, Maresfield Gardens, Filzjohn Avenue
N.W.—4B.
Murray, David, A.R.A., 160 New Bond Street W.—54, 116.
N.
Nagel, Helene, Charlottenbcrg.—42B.
Noble, Robert, 160 New Bond Street W.—42.
Norman, A., Berlin.—3Bl, 396, 415.
O.
Ockel, Edward, Berlin.—4oB.
Osborn, Miss E. M., ioa Cunningham Place N.W. 189.
O’Neill, G. 8., 16 Young Street, Kensington. — 61.
Overbury, Mary A., Adelaide.—473.
P.
Paling. —l2B.
Parker, John, R.JV.S., i Holland Park Road, Kensington. —5l, 254.
Parsons, Alfred, R.T., 54 Bedford Gardens, Kensington. —24, 28, 101, 264.
Parsons, Mrs. George, Charnwood Road, St. Kilda.—49s, 496, 497, 498, 499,
500.
Parton, Ernest, 35 Acacia Road, Regent’s Park.—99, 205, 284.
Pavlik, Charles (the late).—4l6.
Peacock, Geo., 573 Victoria Street, Abbotsford.—43s.


Plugradt, Gustav, Berlin. —403.
Pickering, J. L., R.8.A., Hogarth Club, Dover Street West. —165.
Preuschen, Hermine von, Stettin. —399, 409.
Prinsep, Val., A.R.A., Holland Park Road, Kensington.—l2s.
R.
Rabes, Max, Berlin. — 42l.
Rasch. —4ol.
Reynolds, George A., Adelaide.—439, 443.
Rigby, Cuthbert, R. W.S., 21 Evernside, Kendal, Westmoreland. —243.
Rixon, W. A., i Westminster Chambers, 5.W.—208, 279.
Rhys, Oliver, 21 St. John’s Wood Road N.W. —21.
Roberts, Tom, Grosvenor Chambers, Melbourne.—446, 459.
Rolando, C., “ Reseda,” Jackson Street, St. Kilda. —445, 459.
Rubens, F.—412.
S.
Saltmer, Miss F. A., Warren Cottage, W. Cranley, Surrey.—3B, 108.
Sambourne, Linley, i 8 Stafford Terrace, Kensington.— 349 a.
Sant, James, R.A., 43 Lancaster Gate, Hyde Park.— 7B.
Senet, R.—405.
Scheltema, J. H., “ Reseda,” Jackson Street, St. Kilda, Victoria. — 4ss, 457.
SchMalz, Herbert, The Studios, Holland Park Road, London. —69, 354.
Schreiber, Dresden. —166.
Schmidt, Hans, Vienna.—4oo.
Schmidt, T., Berlin.—3B2.
Short, Frank, R.S.P.E., 8 Wentworth Studios, Mauresa Road, Chelsea.—23l, 356
Solomon, Solomon J., 2 St. John’s Wood Studios, Queen’s Terrace N.W.—59, 117
244.
Spence, P., Sydney.--441,
Spong, W. 8., Bijou Theatre, Melbourne. —479, 480.
Staackman. —397.
Stokes, Adrian, 13 Holland Street, Kensington, London. —llO, 143.
Stone, Marcus, R.A., 160 New Bond Street, W.—44.
Streeton, Arthur, 13 Erin Street, Richmond, Victoria. —461, 486.
Strutt, Alfred W., R.8.A., R.S.P.E., “Rhosille,” Wadhurst, Sussex.—l 2, 56.
Strutt, William, R.B.A , The Studios, Best Beech Hill, Wadhurst, Sussex.—l 64.
Stuart, Charles, The Hermitage, Cleve Road, Hampstead.—l27, 133, 134, 195.
Symons, W. Christian, Fletching Street, Mayfield, Sussex, England.—lo 4, 106.
T.
Teague, Herbert, Florence, Italy.—49l.
Tenniel, John, R. 1., 10 Portsdowne Road, Maida Vale. —Punch Drawings, 329
to 334.
Terrell, Mrs. Koberwein, 40 Redcliffe Gardens, S. Kensington.— B6, 89, 172.


Thomson, Leslie, R.8.A., 76 Charlotte Street, Fitzroy Square, London.—9, 37, 92.
Trood, W. H., 162 New Bond Street West.—ls 6, 157.
Tdke, Henry, Lyndon Lodge, Hanwell, England.—l 92.
Tyrahn, George, Karlsruhe.—4l4.
Van Beers, Jun. —200, 201.
Villados. —366.
Vesin. —37o, 377.
Volcher, Hans, Berlin. —429 430 a.
W.
Waite, J. C., R.8.A., Grosvenor Chambers, Melbourne.—433, 440, 447.
Waite, R. Thorne, R. IV.S., 7 Maitland Park Villas, Haverstock Hill, London.--95,
193, 271.
Walt er, S. E. —160 New Bond Street, W. —49, 163.
Walker, W. Eyre, R. W.S., 20 Fitzroy Street, W. —220.
Walton, Frank, R. 1., V.P.1., Holmbury, St. Mary, Dorking, England.—34, 60, 198,
228, 259, 287.
Warren, E. G., R. 1., 1 Coalville Mansions, Talbot Road, Bayswater.
Waterhouse, J. W., A.R.A., R. 1., 6 Primrose Hill Studios, Fitzroy Road, N.W.—3O.
Waterlow, Ernest A., A.R.A., 3 St. Petersburg Place, Bayswater, London.—9l,
139, 199, 267.
Watson, Charles J., S Wentworth Studios, Mauresa Road, Chelsea, London.—B2,
194.
Webb, George A. J., 263 Collins Street, Melbourne.—436.
Weber 0tt0. —402.
Weedon, A. W., R. 1., 193 Portsdown Road W.—215, 222, 237, 245, 248, 249.
Weichberger, Edward, Weimar.— 380, 417.
Weguelin, J. R., 3 Stratford Avenue, Kensington, London.—3s, 115.
Weisse, R.—388.
Wetherbee, George, R. 1., 37 Steele’s Road, Haverstock Hill, London. —ll9.
Wilkinson, Hugh, Valley, Anglesey, North Wales.—46, 100, 118, 159.
Williams, J. Haynes, i Maresfield Gardens, London W.—55, 190.
Wilson, Jean L. C., Adelaide.—43l.
Windmaur. —3B4.
Wylue, W. L., A.R.A., 160 New Bond Street W.— 151, 260.
Y.
Yates, C. 8., 70 Gower Street W.C.—103, 131.
Z.
ZIEBLAND. — 367.


A dveriisements.
Newman
Newman
MANUFACTURER
OF EVERY ARTICLE FOR
THE ARTIST IN WATER COLOURS.
THE ARTIST IN OIL COLOURS.
THE PHOTOGRAPHIC COLOURIST.
OF SUPERIOR QUALITY.
24 SOHO SQUARE, LONDON.
Catalogues and Circulars Post Free.
minium.
SPECIAL
“SLOW DRYING TUBE MOIST WATER COLOURS”
FOR
HOT CLIMATES,
In Tubes, Double Tubes, &c.
Prices the same as ordinary Moist Colours. All colours are ‘prepared in this form
These colours are as economical as they are pleasant to use, remaining
Moist and Serviceable on the Palette for days and weeks, even when exposed under
the Hottest Sun ; they wash well and easily with a flat, even effect, dry but
slowly during work, and have a “ firmness ” and “ poweb op bearing out ”
peculiar to themselves.
JAPANNED TIN BOXES, holding from 8 to 36 Tubes of Colour, and Improved
Folding Palette-lid with divisions for colour in use—which can be used as a
Pocket Sketch Box.
All Orders must he accompanied with a remittance, or reference to
a known London House, for payment on Shipment.
See Newman’s Advertisement, page 118.


A dvertisemeuts.
DRANG’S +
/. Art Studies, Water-colour Studies,
Pictures, &c
ENGRAVINGS and ETCHINGS, after eminent
Painters of the day, in proof and print
states,
Pn yiEW and fof; Sale.
%
JOIxIiEY,
CARSON PLACE,
287 a LITTLE COLLINS STREET.
Detailed Catalogue Post Free on Application.
NEWMAN’S
ARTIST LIQUID BLACK
FOR “BLACK AND WHITE” DRAWING.
In Bottles, 1/-, 2/6, 5/-, &c., each.
BRILLIANTLY BLACK, flowing easily to the finest lines.
PERFECT in neutral tone, when used with Chinese White, for
the Washing Process.
DRAWING BOARDS AND PAPERS of all sizes and varieties,
as used by the best Artists, with surfaces perfectly smooth or delicate
small grain.
Drawing Pens and other Materials.
THIS BLACK IS USED AND RECOMMENDED BY THE GREATEST PRESENT
MASTERS OF THE ART.
24 SOHO SQUARE, LONDON.
See 'Newman s Advertisement , page 117.


A dvertisements.
THOS.WEBB»SOBS
■-xa- L I Tvl I T IE ID
MAKE THE
LARGEST SHOW IN THE COLONIES
—OF
«Tart Froductiqns^
-IN—
Porcelain
and Glass.
THOS. WEBB & SONS
LIDVEITIEID,
(Biitsz Manufacturers*
STOURBRIDGE, ZEIsT CGL-ARsTID,
AND
236 COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE.


120
A dvertisements.
ALLAN & CO.’S
STOCK OF
PIANOS.
Organs & Music
J*ls of a distinctly higher class than that of
competing houses, without being any higher in
price; and. the very large variety enables every
purchaser to suit his requirements.
ANY INSTRUMENT SOLD on EASY TERMS.
INSTALMENTS FROM 30s. MONTHLY.
“- 1 —— % .
THE BLOCK
ALLAN & GO
COLLINS ST.
♦t
EDGERTON & MOORE, Printers, 341 and 343 Little Flinders Street, Melbourne.


Bf
R. I. \
* o«^
v
* **• m> 'V
TO
s
:V^
a?
" \
* %
O. I.
* °il CoU' I*v 1 * v
Soo't''' 0?
Society of Portrait Painters. Leicester Society of Artists,
FINE ART INSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED,
am
OF
LONDON
Ipacners an£> Conveyancers of jfine arts.
PICTURES CLEANED, LINED, AND RESTORED.
FRAMES MADE TO ARTISTS’ DESIGNS,
FRAMES RE-GILT, GLAZED, ETC.
F 1
If
XHIBITION Work in all its
OFFICES—
-gfjpmfo/
AND 3 SWALLOW STREET, PICCADILLY.
WAREHOUSES-
-2 TO 6 TOTTENHAM MEWS, FITZROY SQUARE, LONDON, ENGLAND.
its" NOTE.—BRADLEY & CO. are prepared to act as London Agents
for receiving Pictures from Australian Artists, to be sent into
Academy or other Exhibitions for approval of Hanging Committees
in the same way as Provincial Artists send pictures to their Agents in
London for the same purpose.


Arthur Tooth & Sons,
5 & 6 HAYMARKET, LONDON,
ENGLAND.
DEALERS IN HIGH-CLASS ENGLISH AND
CONTINENTAL PICTURES.
CHOICE WATER COLOUR DRAWINGS.
ENGRAVINGS AND ETCHINGS.
AGENT:
A. FLETCHER,
BUlLD c 'oLuks si.. MELBOURNE.
EDGERTON and MOORE, Printers, 341 and 243 Little Flinders Street, Melbourne.
