

fZ yj/rtb
f /(y n ‘ /
I r v
P EXPERIENCES
OF A
Victorian Manufacturer.


i
:
- ■ ' ■ - '


Experiences of a fictorian Manufacturer.
Reprinted from the “ North Melbourne Advertiser.”
Under the above heading a series of
most interesting articles descriptive of
the early reminiscences and after ex-
periences of Mr. John Buncle appeared
in our columns about two years ago.
Since the decease of our late re-
spected and highly esteemed townsman
we have been asked by numerous
readers to reprint the matter, the
first portion of which we append.
Those of our younger readers who have
not already perused the leading lines in
the life’s history of a man who rose to
a foremost position in business by sheer
perseverance and well-directed ability
could not do better than note the causes
of the autobiographer’s success. Whilst
the humorous side of his life is well
treated—and those who knew the late
Mr. Buncle ever found him genial,
witty, and happy—there are facts which
impress his history as one man in many
and who fully believed in the truism
“ There’s plenty of room at the top.”
—Ed„ N.M.A.
I left the old country in 1852 with
feelings of disgust at the treatment I
had received. I was chief draughtsman
and designer at the works of one of the
most important railway companies in
England, and bad long been promised
promotion. But, as vacancies occurred,
powerful influence on behalf of others
was too much for me, and, at length,
becoming wearied ot continual disap-
pointment, I determined to emigrate,
and on December 6, 1852, with my wife
and family I landed in Melbourne.
Passing over the various incidents on
board a ship since leaving Southampton
for Australia, I found myself in Port
Phillip Bay at noon on the above date,
and viewing the sandy shores, with a
few wooden houses and tents scattered
about, I felt my heart palpitating and
my thoughts much mixed as I turned
to my wife (and three daughters) and
asked her what she thought of the scene
before us. Of course, having left a
good situation and a comfortable home
at Crewe (Cheshire), and now the
prospective life in a tent, which I had
wisely (as it turned out) purchased in
London, I did not receive much encour-
agement from her looks, but saw rather
a watery appearance about her face.
On casting anchor our vessel was im-
mediately surrounded by numerous
watermen’s boats, each offering their
services to row passengers ashore—
about 15 minutes’ sail to Sandridge old
pier. Myself and family were the first
to hail a boat, and putting the tent and
a box, &c., &c., in it, we were soon put
ashore on the sandy beach. Putting
my hand in my pocket and gathering
about five shillings, I asked the boat-
man how much ? “ One pound,” he
said. I remonstrated with him on the
exorbitant charge demanded lor a
quarter of an hour’s sail, but he argued
that he sympathised with me as a new
chum, and was letting me off cheap,
and began enumerating myself, the tent,
the boxes, etc., etc., and that he threw
in the wife and lamily for nothing,
making them a cheap lot to me. Of
course there was nothing but to pay and
look pleasant. The boatman now left
us to return to the ship again, leaving
me to feel that in somebody else’s
trouble I might feel consolation by
mutual sympathy. As we were now
loft alone standing on the sandy beach
I turned to my wife, and said, “ Well,
my dear, what our future in life may be


X know not, but let us thank God that
safe, at any rate, from the perils of the
sea, we are on the shores of our pros-
pective adopted country.” Looking
round now to calmly view our position
from what I saw, I said to my wife, “ I
now know our immediate future ; come
with me.”
In five minutes we were comfortably
seated in a room of Liardet’s Hotel,
where I called for a bottle of English
ale, and placed half-a-crown on the table,
expecting to get a shilling back ; but
after the waiter had drawn the cork and
filled two glasses, he politely held
out his hand, “ Another sixpence, sir ;
three shillings a bottle.” This caused
the ale in the glass which I was drink-
ing to go down “my wrong throat” ;
for after the boatman with his “ pound,”
and now a bottle of ale three shillings,
it was some time before I recovered rny
wind again, and was able to look at the
dear bottle.
I now called for the landlord, and on
his entrance made inquiries as to the
possibility of ray renting a house about
the neighbourhood for a short time ;
but he told me there was not a house
for love nor money. You will have to
go to “ Canvas Town,” and pitch your
tent there, paying the Government five
shillings per week ground rent the
rent of a fairly comfortable house in
England, but now for twelve feet square
of ground only, and find your own tent.
I need scarcely say that I began to feel
that this was a warm country, and next
inquired how far Canvas Town was from
the hotel. He told me about a mile
and a-half, and that I would have to
hire a dray when I could find one. I
now went in quest of a dray, and found
one, the driver saying in reply to my
inquiry, “ I will let you off cheap ; say
fifteen shillings.” As there was no one
to catch me in their arms, it was no use
fainting, but the roots of my hair began
to have a tingling sensation, as at every
turn I found my “ colonial experiences”
making rapid inroads on ray private
account. At this perplexing moment
one of my shipmates and his wife came
ashore, close to where I was standing.
Learning my destination, they offered
to go with me and pay half of the dray
hire, if allowed to take their tent and a
box.
Fortunately, the drayman did not
increase the price agreed for, thus I had
the advantage of being let down gently at
half price. Arriving at Canvas Town, the
drayman told us we would have to settle
between ourselves who took the first
vacant tent ground, as none were allowed
to “ pick and choose,” but each take the
first space come to. By this time we
had arrived at the space, but so filthy
that I tossed up who should have the
choice. I won, and left my friend to
make the best of his site, whilst I pro-
ceeded on my way, rejoicing at my luck (?)
I reached a better spot ; but oh ! what
a sight ! The allotment now called
mine was covered by the last occupier
with the remains of bones, old clothes,
broken bottles, and sundry other ini-
quities, fearful to behold ; and here my
belongings were laid down, and the
cartage paid —left in sorrow, lamenting
and considering “ what next.” Lark
clouds were now hovering overhead, and
a man came and said, “ Mate, you’d
better look sharp and get your tent up ;
it’s going to rain soon.” With this
advice I borrowed a spade and vigor-
ously set to work, and soon had a lack
yard with heaps of objectionable matter
to start housekeeping. I had not got
my tent completely fixed before it rained
in torrents, and not having had time to
dig a trench around the tent to keep the
storm water out, it took an old water-
course right across the tent, nearly
flooding me out, and also made painfully
evident to the sight the meat worms, an
inheritance left in the gutter by my
predecessor ; but now they were passing
away with the receding waters. As it
rained nearly all night, the wife and
children, like myself, had to sit up on
our two boxes, propped up out of the
flood waters, and then reflect how de-
ceiving were the bookwriters at home
about Victoria, whose greatest drawback
was its scarcity of water, etc., etc.
Here we were, just landed, and nearly
drowned the first night on shore. I
there and then vowed I would never
believe any more guide books. Next
morning the weather was much im-
proved, and the second day we took a
4


stroll over Princes Bridge into Mel-
bourne, and on passing a nice-looking
fruit shop, my wife—notwithstanding
our home doctor’s advice not to eat too
much fruit on first landing—went into
the shop and inquired for a pound of
apples, and while they were being put
in the scales, inquired the price per
pound. “ Only 3s. 6d. per pound,”
was the reply. Never mind any just
now then, at that price, and out she
came about as astonished as if she had
been kicked out.
In about a week I turned my attention
to see what I was going to do. I did
not care much about going to the
diggings, or leaving the family, so I
called at Fulton’s and Langland’s
foundry and engineering establishments,
and sought a situation as designer and
draughtsman ; but neither wanted one,
so I enquired at Langland’s if they
could give me a job in the shop. Dow,
the manager, asked me what I could
do, but before replying I thought it
wise to ascertain the wages ruling. I
was told : fitters, £5 per week ; mill-
wrights and pattern makers, £7 10s.
I said I was more used to the latter,
and as one was fortunately wanted, I
was taken on at once. I had very few
tools, having lost the most of them
since my apprenticeship; but after
grinding and sharpening what I had,
the manager came out and asked me if
I understood, or ever “ cogged any
mortise wheels.” I said I did both
some years ago. He then said I must
go on board an American steamship
called the “ Rajah Wallah,” lying in
the bay, which, having been in a storm,
had stripped the wooden cogs off the
spur wheel which drove the pinion on
the screw shaft. I gently remonstrated
against sending me to such a job, being
a total stranger—not two hours in the
shop—and that he ought to send one
of the other men, whose skill in that
direction he could place reliance upon.
However, he said they were all busy,
and that he would take my word as his
guarantee. Not wishing to lose ray
newly-acqnired situation at £7 10s. per
week, I chanced the result, with prayers
for the future safety of the “ Rajah
Wallah” and my own character. The
next day I moved my tent to some
private grounds in Bourke Street west,
belonging to the manager, and after
making everything as comfortable as
possible about the “ house,” I left the
wife and family to go on board the
steamer. On board I found the officers
all American and the crew Lascars.
The captain, handing me a cigar, said
he hoped I would make a good job, and
be as quick as possible, as he wanted to
return at once. On looking down
where the wheel was I wished I was in
paradise or some other religious locality.
The place where I had to cog the wheel
was very dark and dismal. However,
the following day I set to work, the
engineer supplying the timber for the
cogs, which were 12 inches wide. When
1 o’clock arrived I enquired from the
engineer when lunch or dinner would
be ready. He replied that there were
only two meals a day on board, viz.,
breakfast at 8 o’clock and dinner at
6 o’clock. I told him that I must have
something to eat soon, or few cogs
would be put in the wheel during the
afternoon. He then went away to see
the captain, and came back with the
information that a lunch was to be
prepared for me, and served in the
“ engineer’s state cabin.” Shortly after
I was told lunch was ready, and having
washed and dressed suitable to a “ state
cabin,” I was shown to that part of the
vessel, and found a fair-sized com-
partment, with gilt mouldings as a
cornice to the same, and in ad-
dition, the table was laid with a
snowy-white table-cloth, and several
dishes with highly-polished table covers
hiding the contents. Allowing my
imagination t 3 luxuriate as to the
contents, two black waiters in white
clothing suddenly took their places at
the corners of the table, my cliair being
placed opposite them. Sitting down,
the waiters lifted off the covers, expos-
ing some nice food and vegetables, pre-
pared in pure American style, while
pepper, salt, etc., etc., were placed before
me, and every attention paid. Before I
knew what I wanted I was helped. I
thought this arrangement was very
good and convenient for a start, but
not being accustomed to such over
5


attendance, I wished for my own comfort
and enjoyment that the niggers would
clear out ; but no, there they stood till
I had finished and rose to depart.
While sitting and eating, I thought what
would my fellow-officers in the Crewe
Department say, if they could look
through a tube and see me so well
waited upon, with the same daily at-
tention, well fed, and paid at the rate of
£390 per year, employed simply as a
millwright. During the evenings I
kept the captain and officers in a
constant simmer with tales from Buncle’s
experiences up to date. I was about a
fortnight engaged on board. After
finishing and having a trial trip round
the bay i had the satisfaction of receiving
a letter from the captain and another
from the chief engineer, to the Laug-
land’s Engineering Company, stating
I had given every attention to the work,
excuted quickly, and after trial found
most satisfactory.
On my returning to the foundry and
seeing the manager (Mr Dow) he told
me that from the manner I had executed
the work, according to the letters, he
would now give me the charge of erect-
ing the first peal of bells in Victoria, viz.,
in St. James’s Cathedral, Melbourne.
I told him I had never hung a bell in
my life, except a small one, when about
to order some “ Presbyterian tea” : but
on examining the drawings placed before
me, I said “ All right, I’ll bell the
church if not the cat.” So next day,
in Christmas week, 1852, I made pre-
parations for commencing the work
alter the New Year’s holidays of 1852-
53, my assistants being a millwright
and a laborer.
The peal consisted of six bells, the
largest one weighing about 16 cwt., the
other five being proportionately of lesser
weight and dimensions, and forming the
present peals so frequently heard in
Melbourne. During the time of erect-
ing the framework in the bell tower,
and fixing the bells in position, many
diggers, who had come to Melbourne to
put their gold in the treasury, and
leaving a fair balance on hand for a short
stay in town, on learning that the bells
were being put up in St, James’ tower
visited the same, and took great interest
in sitting for a time and watching
the work going on. This, from the fact
that in their younger days in the
country villages at home they had been
some of the enthusiastic bellringers in
their native village, and now spoke of
remaining in Melbourne and making up
a set of six to be first in bringing forth
the musical tones which in days long
gone by had so much interested them in
their native homes. When getting near
the finish of hanging the bells, and
almost the next job being to attach the
ropes to the wood pulleys in connection
with the axle of each bell to ring them,
I had observed that one of my visitors,
who seldom spoke, but sat like an owl
in one corner, was taking more than
usual interest as the time approached
for connecting the ropes. Taking his
pipe out of his mo ’th he said. What
Sally do you give your ropes ?” Now
as I had not the most distant idea what
“ Sally” meant, or even who this lady
was, I turned my head away not to
show my ignorance, and to wonder what
he meant by “ Sally.” Was he wander-
ing in his mind and thinking of his girl,
or what ? However, to make sure, I
turned round and asked what did he
say ? “ What sally do you give the
ropes ?” was his immediate reply. Still
painfully ignorant of what that meant,
I pretended to be looking for something
on the floor, while I mentally asked
myself what the “ colonial ale” did he
mean? Suddenly the thought struck
me that “ Sally” must be some technical
term in attaching the ropes to the
wooden pulley or wheel. With this
idea in my mind I turned round, and
putting on a knowing kind of look. I
said “ that question was still a matter
of much discussion even with experts ;
did he know anything about if ?” He
said Oh yes.” It appeared he had
often attached the ropes of the wooden
wheels, giving the correct “ sally” to
the connection. Under the imprsssion
that I was an expert church-bell hanger,
and knew all about it, he apparently
was glad of the opportunity to let me
know his knowledge of the matter, and
minutely described various experiments
made, and eventually the number of
degrees from the perpendicular line at
6


which the bell was at rest, and where
the rope should be fastened to the
wheel. Listening attentively while he
was informing me what I never knew
before, I saw in a minute what was the
key to “ Sally,” hut let him finish with
a satisfied smile of intelligence upon his
face. I said, with an attempt at a pro-
fessional look, “ My friend, very few
men who are merely bellringers have, in
my lengthened experience, acquired so
correct a knowledge as you have, for you
are only about an inch out of the most
scientific calculation upon that point,
and 1 am delighted to make your
acquaintance, so satisfactory to me to-
day ; and the near completion of the
whole job will soon, I hope, enable me
to appreciate your skill as o bellringer,
as well as your knowledge of Sally.” I
need scarcely say that I religiously
fastened the ropes exactly where he inti-
mated, which was the proper point, and
that he was correct is proved from the
fact that the bells erected in 1853 are as
they were originally hung, and ringing,
frequently call to memory many pleasant
home associations in the minds of those
who have emigrated from the old world.
In connection with the first ringing of
the bells by a scratch team picked from
amongst the visitors, I sat in the belfry,
overlooking the bells, so that while they
were ringing I could see if all was going
right. As soon as the bells began to
ring, there was such a great noise in the
confined space, that I felt I would like
to clear out before the drum of my ear
was burst. Looking round among the
bells, I heard the noise of stones and
lime dropping upon the floor of the
belfry. This drew my attention to the
walls of the tower, and, to my dismay,
I saw pieces of stone quietly leaving their
places in the wall, and followed by some
loam (lime ?), drop with a bang on the
floor. Now, what with the din of the
bells, and apparently the tower, like
myself, not being able to “ stand the
racket,” I did not wait for a minute’s
consideration, but squeezed myself
through one of the daylight openings
in the tower, leading to the ridge of the
roof. I was along to the other end of
the roof as fast as any man who had
everything to lose, and nothing to gain
by delay, could desire. Arriving at a
safe distance, I turned round and had a
look at the tower, and watched it foi
some time, while the bells were still
ringing merrily, and the ringers quite
unconscious of the scare wtiich caused
me to be at that distant point of
observation. After watching the tower
for some time, and not seeing it come
down by the run, as I thought seemed
likely, I cautiously made my way back
to the aperture I had so quickly emerged
from, and on looking inside the tower
again, I saw the floor quite covered with
small stones, etc., while the walls appar-
ently remained sound, and had given up
going to pieces by scaling off the inside.
On further observation, I noticed that
nearly all the stones on the floor were of
a flat, thin kind, and had evidently been
plastered on in hollow places to make a
more finished appearance to an otherwise
unworkmanlike interior surface. Getting
over my fears, I again entered the belfry,
but had scarcely got inside when I heard
a yell from one of the bell-ringers below,
and looking down the trap-door to see
what was the matter, noticed that he
was lying on the floor, while the others
were removing his necktie, etc., and
offering him a drop of something. On
inquiry, I was informed that the slack
of the rope, when ringing, had lapped
round his neck, and caused him to pay
a visit to the ceiling, from which he
came down “by the run ” to the floor,
fortunately, without his neck being out
of joint, which a drop , instead of a lift,
might have caused. After a short time
the “ medicine ” revived him, and after
a little more ringing the changes, the
first day’s trial was brought to a close,
and considered very satisfactory, except
to that particular individual.
During the time of erecting the bells,
some social phases of early colonial life
were to be witnessed in St.'James’
Cathedral, in the way of solemnizing
marriages, of which there were a con-
siderable number during the i-ix weeks
I was employed in the belfry. Of
course, when the work was going on, the
bells being moved about, and their tone
being tried, it was found to interfere
considerably with the reading and due
completion of the ceremony at the altar
7


in making the two into one. The “ I
will ” and “ Love, honour, and obey ”
were difficult to hear expressed, by the
weaker side, to the satisfaction of either
the clergyman or the happy man (?)
most interested in having it unmistak-
ably said in the hearing of all present.
Under these circumstances it was found
necessary to send the verger to stop all
work while the ceremony of “ for better
or for worse ” was being performed.
Naturally, the lost time in the belfry was
utilised in visiting the gallery to see
what the bride and bridegroom were like,
together with the visitors accompanying
them. On most occasions it was
generally some “ lucky digger,” who, as
before mentioned, had come to Mel-
bourne to deposit his “ find ” in the
treasury and casually meeting with some
fair damsel, took the opportunity of
completing a “ double event.” To show
how quickly marriages were made up
and the little time lost in bringing on
the crisis, the following instance will
show :—A couple of diggers went into
an hotel in Swanston Street, and called
for something short. It was brought in
by a strapping barmaid, who attracted
one of the diggers so much that it
was love at “ first sight.” Winking
to his mate, and allowing time
for her to be out of hearing, he said :
“ Bill, that’s a nice looking girl—fancy
she would make a good sort of wife ;
rather scarce in our parts—don’t mind
making her an offer ; but will first ask
the landlord about her.” Calling in the
landlord, he enquired about the character
of the barmaid. The landlord gave
her a splendid character, —“ but she’s
engaged to be married next week to a
very promising young man.” This news
suddenly upset all his arrangements, and
his castles in the air ; and, being like
the simple man at an auction sale,
taking as gospel all that the auctioneer
says with reference to what he wants to
part with, he asked the landlord if he
“ had e’er another girl about the house
of the same sort,” prepared, upon his
simple recommendation, to annex her at
once. From my own knowledge, many
marriages were celebrated with parties
not having much more knowledge of
each other than the foregoing illustration.
There was sometimes great fun in wit-
nessing some of the marriages. First,
was the style of the principal actors, then
the appearance of the parties accom-
panying them. The bride, probably,
had been a barmaid or a servant at some
public place, and it required but little
trouble for a visitor from the country to
an introduction to her in her humble
capacity. But now see her outward ap-
pearance ! Decked out in gorgeous
array ! Pretty white boots, silk or satin
dress made up in style and fashion
“ regardless of expense,” beautiful can-
ary coloured kid gloves ; topped with
such a hat, and trimmed with such lovely
feathers ! Oh my I she looked rain-
bowry ! What a change has a day
brought forth. But now behold ! look
at her fingers! what rings! One a
diamond, I declare ! What a dear girl
she must have been to the man she is
about to call husband. And how dees
he look at her side ? Dressed in a red
crimson shirt, or some other of an
elaborate get up, together with light
trousers, well-blackened boots, and the
finish given by a grand crimson-coloured
sash round the waist, and the ends
hanging down, terminating in tassels
swinging about the knees, not a bad
looking style of a man ; a sort of Italian
brigand, but evidently of a free and easy
disposition, induced by his line of life ;
also, at that time, easily-acquired wealth,
and untrammelled by social etiquette.
After the ceremony was over there was
the usual trying for the first kiss, and
there was “ no muckle ceremony aboot
that.” I thought some would nearly
pull the bride’s head off, or leave a per-
manent kink in the neck. That over,
then to the carriages in waiting—bride
and bridegroom and best man and
bridesmaid in the first carriage, an open
one, drawn by two, and sometimes four,
horses, and then others following ; but
as soon as started on the way for a drive
it was no uncommon sight, on passing
through the streets, to see the opening
of champagne bottles, previously stowed
away in the carriages, but now openly
poured into glasses and drank whilst
passing along, wishing each other eternal
happiness.
In connecting with erecting the bells,
8


a alight difficulty wag created by visitors
who, having plenty of money, would
insist on “shouting” as an equivalent
for permission to visit the belfry. Now,
as myself and assistants were nearly
teetotalers, we could not stand all that
was offered to us, bat managed, without
giving offence, to get out of taking too
much by purchasing a good wooden
American bucket and a half dozen tin
pannikins, so that when a half-sovereign
was put down, the labourer was sent to
McCracken’s brewery (close by) to fill
the bucket with ale for all comers, i'he
way I saw working men handling and
spending money was quite a refreshing
and pleasant sensation to what was
witnessed among the artisans at home.
Having in due course finished the
erection of the bells, and they having
been tested by various bellringers and
examined by the trustees of the church
and the manager of Langland’s foundry
together, were pronounced all right, and
accepted as such. My second job being
now completed, I wondered what I would
be sent to do next for colonial experience.
Attending the foundry the following
day, and rather nervous in case there
were no more peculiar jobs for me, and
thus lose my £7 10s. per week, I saw
the manager, who was rather busily en-
gaged with a customer, and waited
patiently, speculating in my mind as to
future prospects in successfully carrying
out whatever order was given me. On
the customer leaving, the manager came
towards me and said “ Well, all cleared
out from the church, and tools laid by ? ”
“ Everything correct, sir.” “ Well then,
as the present foreman is going to leave
on his own account, I will give you his
position. Your wages will be £8 per
week, and I trust that you will prove as
adaptable to that position as you have
proved yourself to what you have already
done.” Blushing all over at the con-
fidence I had inspired, I heartily thanked
him, and also hoped I would prove equal
to the position. So I was duly installed
as general foreman over the works, and
now felt quite at home, and no fear of
Sally haunting me again in the tower.
In my new position I got on capitally,
for as before leaving England 1 had not
to take my coat off unless I choose, and
to look after the work just suited me,
instead of having to do it. I
now mustered courage to think of
buying a piece of ground and build-
ing a wooden cottage. Making a
Sabbath day inspection, I wandered
over North Melbourne, and decided on a
piece or allotment of ground in Byron
Street, which was duly purchased at
£2 10s. per foot, and next to a corner
allotment, which the agent pressed me
very much to bay, saying I would double
my money in a few months. But I
hesitated, considering North Melbourne
was nothing but tree-stumps, with
scarcely a house to be seen, the North
Star Hotel in Howard Street, being the
only principal land mark viewed from
town, was the centre where all draymen,
bullock-drivers, etc., after loading in
town made this their first resting place
to square everything up in travelling
order for the morning start. High
jinks were carried on then by them. £lOO
per ton for taking goods to Ballarat,
Sandhurst, etc., made things lively. This
was good pay, but still it combined
plenty of hard work for the money.
Yet the free and easy sort of life gave a
charm to many, and when evening
advanced as they approached the camp-
ing ground of the day’s stages, merry
was the scene by the light of the camp
fires, and when boiling a billy, fast and
furious were the jokes on each other.
After tea and damper, and sitting round
a cheerful fire on a fine, though dark,
night, many were the tales told while
puffing the smoke from the social pipe,
and men were there who now sometimes
pass my works riding a fine horse,
gentlemanly in appearance and manner,
well educated and members of a liberal
profession, None but those who have
been pioneers in a new colony can
within their knowledge know how so
many changes in men’s lives,-either up
or down in the social scale, occur.
After having a stake in the country
measured as 30 feet frontage by 80 feet
in depth, I then became ray own archi-
tect, and designed a four-roomed cottage,
and having at the usual sales on the
wharf bought the wood, I engaged a
carpenter to assist in putting up the
house, paying him 20s. per day. I now
9


began to think of removing my tent
from Bourke Street to where I was
owner of an allotment, the first in my
adopted country. While residing in the
tent in Bourke Street we experienced
some awful dust storms at times. One
day it came a buster. The hot winds
blew the dust in clouds, a perfect gale,
so much that I had to sit inside with
the clothes pole grasped in my hand to
to keep from bending, while with it I
was supporting the ridge-pole, which
was nearly breaking from the force of
the wind on the canvas, and while I was
doing so, and the whole tent and family
nearly smothered with dust, I heard a
pitiful scream of a woman’s voice. Let-
ting go my hold for a moment, and
putting my head out of the door of my
tent, I saw a tent rising and floating
away on the wind over to Batman’s
swamp, while the unfortunate woman
was struggling hard on a colonial
stretcher to help to keep its equilibrium,
and the bed clothes upon it, against the
hurricane of wind and dust now going
straight at her. I told the wife that an
accident had begun, but not yet com-
pleted, and if she would hold the clothes
prop, I would endeavour to gather the
woman’s fixings, and help her into some
neighbour’s tent, but just as I approached
her stretcher in great haste, over she
went, and it came by a sudden extra gust of
wind, which caused unlucky me, blinded
by dust, to make a summersault right
over the heap made up by the stretcher;
The woman and the clothes I had
gathered, but let go in my endeavour to
balance myself. Of course there was
scream No. 2 going on in the confusion,
but I soon saw her safe out of danger
and in a tent all right—her’s was never
seen again, and many of the contents in
her abode followed likewise. This
experience decided my immediate re-
moval, it also being necessary to reside
on my own ground to look after the
timber and tools at night as well as to
do what work I could to the house
during the remaining daylight after
coming home from the foundry.
In due course the house, fencing the
yard, &c., were finished. We now looked
forward to enjoy a little more room to
ourselves, and Mrs. B. and I were
beginning to feel quite happy in having
a home of our own so soon. After tea
I took a stroll about the ground near
the house, when a man passing said, I
see your house is now finished, what rent
do you want for two rooms ? I said
“ Oh ! I am going to occupy the house
myself, and don’t intend letting any
rooms.” You don’t mean to say you
require the whole of that house after
living in that tent all right ?” “ Yes,
as you say, but always cramped up, and
had to endure what could not be avoided
till now.” “ Very good, but two rooms
are enough for you ; what will you let
the other two for ?” Now, to make sure
of getting quit of him I said two guineas
per week. “Well” he said “that comes
to the point,” and putting his hand in
his pocket, counted out 425., the first
week’s rent, and “take the rooms for
three months certain, and will move in
the morning.” I was quite taken aback,
I saw the money , and thought of Mrs.
8., what would she say ; however, I
also thought of the axiom, “ Never
refuse money in an honourable trans-
action,” so I performed a pass from his
hand to my pocket and said “ all right,
you will have a rent book and receipt in
the morning.” After he had gone, now
thinks I, John you’ve got yourself into
trouble ; let two rooms with separate
entrances, without consulting the proper
authority. Supper time, 9 o’clock, child-
ren asleep, Mrs. B. remarkably pleasant
and affable, and talking of moving the
things from the tent to the house, getting
the furniture required to make the four
rooms nice, something like home now,
plenty room, one could not turn in a tent
without knocking something over. I
was listening to all this, wondering at
what part I could come in and divulge
the fact that I had let two of the rooms
—would not that save buying any furni-
ture at present, and would not the boxes
“wanted on the voyage,”and “not wanted
on the voyage,” with some nice covers
over them, furnish two rooms, the biggest
box, dining table, and the smaller ones,
side tables, dressing tables, &c., &c.
Full of my excellent arrangements, I
tried to look pleasant and unconcerned,
and with a preliminary hem ! said, well
my dear ! your ideas are cheering ; but,
10


when outside this evening, I was just
thinking the same as you, but the cost
of furnishing the rooms was under my
consideration, when a man passing,
asked me if I would let two of the rooms.
“Of course not,” Mrs. B— chimed in.
“ Well, I said, we were going to occupy
them ourselves.” “Certainly,” was added,
but just to put a finishing stroke to him,
I named a rent to frighten him away ;
but it did not, and I have let two of the
rooms, and the couple are taking
possession in the morning. Well, I
declare— what next ? Let two of the
rooms without asking my opinion. And
may I ask what you have let them for—
what rent? Well, a moderate rent—
two guineas per week for three months.
Dear John ! you don’t mean to say you
named and got that rent for two rooms
only ! You never had the conscience
to do so. Well, I said, I don’t think
conscience was about at the time. The
sum was just named to try and keep the
rooms entirely for yon, my dear; but as
the rent will come in useful for the many
requirements of yourself, and you can
thus prepare for four rooms, with cash
on hand for the furniture. I think it’s
just as well to be content with the
position, and take the Yorkshire man’s
advice, “ Make money, honestly if you
can, but make it someway.” So having
now eased ray mind by saying what I
had done, I then assisted in an evening
removal from the tent into our two
rooms, and when everything was in its
place, there we found ourselves com-
paratively comfortable, and after a few
fine days, had rendered the tent quite
dry, it was proposed to pack it up and
keep it for any chance purpose we might
require it for.
During the evening after this con-
versation, I was having my usual pull
at a cigar round about the house, when
a workman in the neighbourhood spoke
to me, thusly, “ I see you have moved
out of your tent, will you let it fpr a few
weeks or more, and what will be the
rent ? Colonial experience had by this
time began to tell upon me, but con-
science was a foreign article in that
make up, so I ventured to say 7s. 6d.
per week, without the slightest doubt in
my mind but that he would either put
his finger to his nose, or do some other
artistic movement to express his feelings
—but no—he only said it was good rent
for a tent. Yes, I said, but look at the
quality of the canvas—best American
duck waterproof (that’s what was told
me and believed before ray experience.)
With that he handed me 7s. Gd. first
week’s rent in advance, occupation com-
mencing in the morning. I now walked
into the house to have a drink.
After my smoke, when Mrs. B. having
put the children to bed early that we
might set to work before the night dew
came on to pack that tent away while yet
dry. I said Oh ! let it stand, somebody
might rent it. Rent a tent ? Why you
must be “ going off.” Who would rent
a tent ? Pulling the 7s. 6d. out of my
pocket, I replied that man you saw
speaking to me has paid one week’s rent
in advance, and taken it for a month.
Is it possible. What will you not do in
this colony. That’s just what I am
beginning to think—just requiring a
little more colonial experience, taking it
up as soon as I can, and which, com-
bined with good health, may lead to my
being a useful member of society, and
the establishment of ourselves in a happy
Australian hopre. The following day
the tent was duly occupied, and now the
income stood thus—
Foreman’s salary per week ... £8 0 0
Rent of 2 rooms ... ... 2 2 0
Do do tent* ... ••• 0 7 6
Total ...' £lO 9 6
Nearly £5OO per anuum, and not
above five months landed. For a total
stranger, I thought this was not so bad
for a start, and as home comfort was
more to me than the chances of suddenly
wealth, I never thought of
running the almost universal race to the
diggings, like most new arrivals. No,
I kept steadily at my employment
through the day, and kept improving my
property as far as possible in the
evenings—no eight hours’ labour only in
those days, more like twelve to twenty
hours then, and jor many years after,
when industrious labour was my principal
capital, combined with good health, and
great hopes of future success. I never
idled hours away, but as the old saying
is ; “ Make hay while the sun shines.”
11


In the old days, except as before sistency, into which I involuntarily
named, the “ North Star Hotel,’' there
was scarcely a house between Latrobe
street and my own house, but there were
the old Cattle Yards, and plenty gullies,
so, that at night, when dark, it was
rather a dangerous road to travel, for
one might either drop into a gully of
some sort, or meet a footpad to demand
your money or your watch, failing
the supply of either, a knock-down
upon the ground with an expressive re-
mark regarding your impecuniosity.
Generally this was the fate of those who,
when in town, were a little on, and in
some place or other had shown their
possession of some money, etc. I never
being on, or credited with money, never
was bailed up directly, though frequently
was under a near inspection. I always
kept in the house a loaded revolver,
which, fortunately, never was required
to be used, and which after an eventful
accident, was never kept loaded. The ac-
cident was unique. One night, about 10
o’clock, it was whispered to me that 1
had better go for the doctor—Dr Silver-
man, who resided near the old Lamb
Inn, in Elizabeth street, not caring
much for my walk at that hour on a
dark night across no man’s land, except
the man that you did not want to meet.
I was rather reluctant, and enquired and
suggested daylight in the morning ; but
I got Lady Macbeth’s advice, “ Stand
not upon the order of your going, but
go at cnce.” With that I got my re-
volver, and started on my way, think-
ing which would be first, death or life.
Keeping my eyes and ears well open
while crossing the dreaded space, all went
well till reaching Elizabeth street, and
nearly opposite the old Lamb Inn, whose
oil lamp over the door gave forth its
sickly-looking light ; however, in its
presence I breathed freely, as out of
danger so far. Looking about before I
crossed the unmade street, I saw the
doctor’s door, and then made straight
for it, but just in the very middle of the
street 1 went a header into a hole caused
by a bullock dray having got stuck there,
and, as usual, by turning round several
times, trying to work its way out
of the hole, made it much deeper and
ground the mud into a bird-lime con-
made my impression, while the revolver,
thinking there was something wrong in
being so suddenly bailed up, went off,
shot one bang, but like myself, paralyzed
by the sudden immersion, and soft em-
brace of the glutinous mud, both were
quiet till I wondered how I had blundered,
and raising myself up, found my clothes
faced up with mud from head to foot,
and the revolver still in my hand, both
almost invisible from their slimy coat-
ing. Recollecting the object of my
journey, and as time was a consideration,
there was nothing for it but quick to the
doctor. My hands being so muddy, I
kicked at the door, which, on being
opened by the servant, who, when she
saw by the light of the hall lamp the
figure I cut and revolver in hand,
screamed out, and called murder.
Almost immediately the doctor came in
great haste and excitement, with an iron
bar in his hand, picked up from the cold
hearth, enquiring in a state of agitation
who I was, and what I wanted at that
hour. I could scarcely reply for laugh-
ing at the suddenness of the predica-
ment I was in, and how ridiculous must
be my appearance, and but for the
revolver, which I now held up to pre-
vent his coming down on my head with
his iron bar, he might have knocked the
power of explanation out of me, but I
said “ Don’t be alarmed, doctor, I am
only the visible result of an accident of
falling into a mud hole near your door,
while on my way to request your im-
mediate attendance at my house, as pre-
vously arranged.” My appearance, if
not altogether artistic,was now explained,
and I was requested to walk in, and
making my way to the kitchen, and
provided with a basin of water, when I
began to restore myself to a more pre-
sentable appearance. The doctor having
intimated to me that he would only go
with me conditionally that I accom-
panied him back to his house, I pro-
mised that, but looking at my revolver
with its muddy coating, I thought it
would be none the worse of some atten-
tion, so holding the barrel pointing into
the basin, I commenced rubbing the mud
off ; but by some accident when rubbing
the barrel, my finger must have caught
12


the trigger, for hang went the con-
founded thing again, and this added to
the awful crash and noise of the crockery
basin flying to pieces, and the muddy
water running on the floor, made a great
noise, I thought the Day of Judgment
had surely arrived, and a general dissolu-
tion was taking place now. Almost
fearing to move unless some other and
more horrible unforeseen accident might
come off, I was called again to my
position, on seeing the doctor nervously
putting his head inside the door, expect-
ing probably to see me stretched on the
floor, a victim to suicide—but no, I was
standing all right, yet so astonished
at the rapid course of events in so short
a time, that on looking at the still more
astonished countenance of the doctor,
who was evidently under the fear that all
the other barrels might go off and cause
a funeral of some one. However, I
assured him there was no more danger
unless we were stuck up on the way, but
there were four shots to the good yet.
When ready for a start he said, “ You
go first and I will follow, but take care
that revolver does no accidentally again
make any mistake by a back shot at me.
The doctor and I, however, arrived safely
at my house, and shortly after midnight
I escorted him back again to his home,
while he expressed, on us parting, he
hoped another night like this would not
soon occur again, and as for the servant,
the double fright she got made her 511
for several days from nervous excite-
ment.
Few of the inhabitants now resident in
the Northern portion of Elizabeth street,
in their modern houses and well-made
streets, have any idea of the look of the
place 34 years ago. There were cattle
yards (that used to be where the North
Melbourne Advertiser office and establish-
ments now stand), with their strong high
post and rail fence surrounding a space
of land which was ground up into the
most vile smelling mud by the cattle,
that it was almost impossible on a hot
day to pass it on the same side of the
street. Outside the cattle yards the
ground was rough and irregular, and
crossed and re-crossed by water worn
gullies, which was a feat of navigation
in the dark evenings to cross in safety
without making a header into some of
them. Another difficulty experienced
by those who, like myself, had settled
down in their own homestead a distance
from town, was that having carefully
noted by the morning daylight, on going
to work, which was the best track to
return in the darkness of the evening,
this was satisfactory so far if it remained
the same in the evening, but un-
fortunately I was frequently the victim
of misplaced confidence, for during the
day some carter, looking out for grass
sods to make a nice green for someone,
or bent on a surreptitious removal of
cart loads of sand, would make a hole
right across the path I had selected to
return by. To drop suddenly into one
of these holes was bad enough when dry,
but, as it frequently rained and filled
about a foot deep of water, it was no
joke returning home covered with mud ;
but this sort of thing not being uncom-
mon, a dry suit was always ready for me
in case of “one more dip in the colonial
porridge.” Everything was going on now
very comfortably with me, no rent to pay
but “rather” coming in. I used to
think, when having my smoke in the
evening, what is to be the future , when
will this wild tree stump looking place
ever be inhabited ? When will the
streets and reserves, so nicely drawn
and painted by land agents, ever be
realised as facts known and duly appre-
ciated now ? Never in my life probably
was my opinion, and, if not, what was
gained by leaving a town life in old
England and vegetating in this sort of
outlandish place ? Certainly I felt more
money coming ; roughing it under those
circumstances was fairly endurable, and
a pleasant future was before me if I
could only maintain health and energy
combined as my best hope-for success.
As we passed I was surprised to notice
cottages going up here and there, ap-
parently anywhere, but I found on en-
quiry that however distant from each
other that they all faced some street or
corner allotment. I also noticed that
there were many visitors wandering
about, seeking an allotment that might
induce them to settle and build a cot-
tage and make their home. Now, like
some of the attorneys attending the


various police courts, I felt ready to ease
anybody of a fee to assist them out of
one of their troubles, either to make a
drawing or a specification for a carpenter
to put up a cottage for them. In my
leisure hours in the evening I made
drawings of all kinds of imaginary
houses suited for the locality, and, hav-
ing coloured them in the most elaborate
style and framed them, I now, when I
saw a victim, offered to supply him with
elevation plan and specification for any
kind of house shown him for two guineas.
This was in those days a comparatively
moderate charge, but it paid me splen-
didly because I only gave him a tracing of
any of the drawings of the kind of
house he thought would suit him, and
then copied the specification referring to
the same, the whole occupying about
two hours’ time, unless some additions or
alterations were required, which from
‘ colonial experience,’ was an excuse for
charging 10s more, which was readily
given. I now began to see that at the
rate land was bought and houses put up
that what I thought would take a lifetime
to see accomplished, would in a very few
years develop from the mere imagination
of a town on paper to one of fact, as
witnessed in North Melbourne of to-day,
with its splendid Town Hall, Mechanics’
Institute, Library and its well-made
streets, &c., &c.
In connection with the rapid advance
of the town by the continued immigra-
tion from all countries in the world, I
now put together a lathe I brought with
me from England, and soon found
plenty of work to employ my evenings,
after coming from the foundry, for when
a two story house was to be erected,
wood newel posts were required in
connection with the staircase, and also
some ornamental turned work for other
parts of the house, so that valuing ray
labor at about four shillings per hour
for wood turning, I need scarcely say
that very few hours were passed in idle-
ness, as my connection was increasing
so fast that my evening hours were
getting insufficient in which to perform
the work. It was about this time Mrs.
B. caught a cold and was taken very
ill, and I had to send for the doctor,
who, in my last visit to him, I had
nearly frightened out of his mind. On
his arrival, and having felt her pulse, he
pronounced her very ill, and to get a
woman to attend her till better. Now
my troubles began. I hunted all round
the neighbourhood for some one to attend
her, but every application I made resulted
only in being told they had their own
business to attend and could not come.
Knowing I could not attend to ray
duties at the foundry in Flinders lane
till I got a person in the house, I offered
one pound per day to any woman to
nurse Mrs. B. till fully recovered, but
even then I failed to induce any any to
do so. Finding in the morning that I
could not leave the house, but had to
kindle the fire, prepare the breakfast, &c.,
I, before commencing my daily nurse
duties, looked about for a boy or man to
send word to the manager that I could
not attend that day, but not a soul could
I see or get to do the duty ; so returned
home and made up a splendid wood pile,
upon which I placed the kettle, then
setting fire to the pile, I devoted my at-
tention to the necessaries for breakfast.
Acting under constant remarks and in-
structions issuing from the invalid in the
other room, I now got the coffee pot and
was measuring out the quantity of coffee
to put in—again under instructions—
when I heard a fizzle in the fire place.
The steam was up, and just as I was
going to lift the kettle off before the
boiling water put the fire out I was
anticipated by the kettle taking a
somersault off the pile on to the hearth,
while I performed a high kick leap in
the air not to interfere with the boiling
water taking its own course.
The small “ still ” voice in the other
room now came forth in strong accents,
demanding to know what was up. I
said nothing, everything was just the
reverse— down, I was now informed
that probably I would set the house on
fire next just to frighten her to death.
Of course I objected to the insinuation,
but pleaded I had entered upon a “ new
industry ” without colonial experience,
which I found afterwards was amassing
in the shape of two bars of iron which
should have been laid over the wood on
to the sides of the fire place, and on
which the kettle should have been placed


so as to avoid coming down by the run
as the wood burned away. I now having
gained that experience at the loss of the
boiling water, took care in my next trial
for breakfast to see that'no mistake in
my housekeeping duties occurred again ;
but stepping with my slippers into the
water on the floor, which found its way
to my stockings, I was reminded by the
inner voice again, after a solemn observa-
tion to me, that I would find the “ wiper
up ” —that was me I thought, so I said
“ I’m here.”
“ There is no mistake about that,” was
the next remark, “ the blunders prove
you are a new chum at housekeeping.
But it is the cloth I mean ; you will
find it in its proper place ; make haste
and use it as quickly as possible, or it
will be dinner time before we see or taste
our breakfast.” I need scarcely say
that my new duties, of which to this
time I had been painfully ignorant, did
not present a pleasant aspect from my
point of view, and I began to realise that
there was a fitness in married life, that
each had duties to perform not to be in-
terfered with. However, here was a case in
which I was unexpectedly placed to do
double duty, owing to the circumstances,
but they were undertaken cheerfully as
the best way to get out of the difficulty
and assist my invalid to a speedy re-
covery. On the afternoon of the second
day I managed to visit the foundry and
see the manager, and tell him how I had
been unfortunately fixed, the wife ill, not
a nurse to be had, or a messenger to
send hkn word as to the cause of my
absence, &c. I expected, of course, that
he would sympathise with me, but no, he
didn’t, but began to use strong words
about my indifference to my position by
absenting myself without letting him
know, although 1 had only a minute be-
fore told him I could not possibly find a
messenger to do what I knew ought to
be done. His apparent indifference to
the health or comfort of my wife by the
attention I personally had to give rather
made me feel like the “ fretful porcu-
pine,” and, as I felt my wife’s health
and life were of more value to me than
all the gold in Victoria, I threw a per-
sonal pronoun and compound adjective
at him, to give my opinion of his want
of humanity under the circumstances,
and also informed him that another week
would find me gone like a happy dream.
This brought him up a little and led to
more reasonable conversation and better
understanding, but, although requested
to continue as before, I kept to the con-
clusion I had hastily come to, and said
that with no ill feeling between us I
hoped to past so that some day in the
Juture we might meet in the business as
friends. And so, in due course, we
parted, and I afterwards often met him
as a friend in my house. Having now
severed ray connection with Langland’s
Foundry at the end of the week, and the
wife being much better by this time, I
informed her of my position. She was
rather surprised at the sudden turn
affairs had taken owing to her illness
and my necessary attention to her when
no other aid could be got, but I told her
to be of good cheer, because I had col-
lected a large amount of “ Colonial
experience,” During the six months at
the foundry I took particular notice of
where all the different class of work
came from, the charges made, and the
general conduct of business in such a
colonial establishment, so that in giving
up my foremanship and the income
arising from it I felt that on my own
account 1 could do better, and, with
health and care, commence a career of
ray own independent of any employer
otherwise than my “ customers.” With
this in view, and naming it to various
acquaintances I had made, I was scon
engaged by my first customer to make a
complete set of patterns for various sizes,
copies of the well known American stoves
so generally in use in those days. My
customer was also going to start in busi-
ness as a “Colonial Stove Manufacturer,”
so that as he was aspiring to be a
feilow employer some day, I treated him
gently, let him down comparatively easy
in my charges and only charged him 30s.
per day of ten hours, for my labour ;
this made £9 per week to begin with,
and the job lasted three weeks, comfort-
ably at home, having turned one of the
rooms into a workshop, wherein the lathe
was also fixed up some time previously.
In the meantime I had to supply the
orders for newel posts and other odd jobs
15


in the neighbourhood, for by this time
I was getting pretty well known by all
new settlers about North Melbourne as
“ the man ” who could comparatively
speaking supply your wants from a
“ needle to an anchor ” but so as not to
fall behind in the due execution of the
orders I had frequently to work twelve
or eighteen hours, and in pressing cases
all night, rather than disappoint my
customers, for then, as now, punctually
keeping a promise leads to confidence
and further orders. Of course I did not
believe in working one’s self to death,
but being, as the saying is in sporting
phraseology “ in splendid form,” healthy
and strong, I knew that to confine my-
self to eight hours per day then and miss
the opportunity offered me in the shape
of plenty of work that I knew how to
accomplish, would never keep the house
going and leave a balance to contribute
to future prosperity. I gradually en-
larged my shop room, purchased more
tools, and got a trifle in hand to pay
weekly the labourer which I foresaw
must be engaged to save my own health
and to keep pace with increasing busi-
ness. At this time I was more engaged
in wood than machinery work, as it
required less tools, and, in fact, was
better paid for than odd jobs in
machinery. W hen, as it happened
sometimes, there was not much work in
hand, I used to take a walk to Melbourne
to look out for something to keep me
going, and I soon found out that my
previous “ English experiences ” turned
out most valuable to me in this early
stage in the progress of the city of
Melbourne towards future greatness.
Passing one day by Mr. Hood, the
chemist’s shop, and who was also a well
known gold buyer, in Collins street, near
Swanston street, I noticed that his cedar
counter was in an awfully dilapidated
state compared to the general appearance
of his shop; so I walked in and remarked
that a little attention to the counter
would improve the character of the place,
and be more pleasant to the eye. He
said “ Yes, if I could only get somebody
to plane it over and polish it up 1 would
get it done, but none of the carpenters
I have asked know of a polisher to finish
it properly ; but if you do, go ahead with
it, and be as reasonable in your charge
as possible.” I was not long in
beginning. By the following day he
stood smiling at seeing his face reflected
in the shiny counter top, and remarking
on the high polish, said I would now
likely polish him off—what was my
charge ? I replied his shop looked ten
pounds better, but I would only charge
five , the polish being very expensive.
He paid me at once, and recommended
me to Fulton, the gunsmith, and Pascoe,
the draper, near neighbours in Collins
street, as he thought they wanted some-
thing done. On calling upon Mr.
Fulton, he gave me an order at once for
a chest of drawers under his show case
to hold all the unmentionable things in a
retail gunsmith’s shop—contract price,
£l2. This finished, I looked in at
Pascoe’s, when I was shown into a dirty
back room behind the showy front shop,
and was asked if I could put down a
new floor, paint the ceiling, and paper
the walls, as the room was intended for
the “ young ladies ” engaged in the
millinery department. I said “Ho you
want me to contract for it, or day work ? ”
“ Oh ! either way, name a price if you
like.” So I named a price, guided by
early colonial experience, which I found
was not to be treated as a mere expression,
but a matter of much and increasing
value every day. The following day I
set to work with a crowbar to pull up all
the old rotten flooring from the joists,
and after lifting a few boards, discovered
some vile looking mud, which, on being
disturbed by some of the splinters falling
into it, smelt something horrible, and I
had frequently to go into the open air
to breathe freely. To get a footing, I
put down new flooring as I pulled up
the old. But, when nearly finished, I
missed my hold of the crowbar, which
was about three long, and it seemed to
descend straight out of sight, and the
smell, Ugh ! it was unbearable, and
while it was on, I called the proprietors
attention from the front shop, to the
“ young ladies ” intended work-room,
and the loss of my crowbar into the
abyss below. He advised me to let the
crowbar lie in peace, and get the floor
down in all haste, or there would not
be a customer remain in the shop if X
16


began fishing among the pptrid matter,
so I made no delay in nailing down the
boards, accompanied by many convulsive
contractions, during the remainder of
the time. The flooring finished, I now
went to a paperhanger and painter to
paint the ceiling and paper the walls,
but the price he asked, in reply to my
enquiry, took the breath from me,
my charges were modesty beautified com-
pared to his I could not think of
charging my customer his price, even
without a farthing of profit to myself.
It was now one of my home experiences
occurred to me, and which, under the
circumstances, might be made available
to get out of my difficulty. This
experience was gained soon after I was
engaged as draughtsman. On being
located in the house 1 occupied, I found
none of the rooms were papered, al-
though the walls clean, but, on being,
together with the wife, frequently invited
to the homes of my fellow officers, who
had been longer in the service, and had
made themselves as comfortable as
possible, rooms nicely papered, &c. I
said to the wife on day, “ we ought to
get our rooms papered before inviting
any of our friends ” —having little else
to do in the evening and to pass the
time, I said “What do you think of
papering the rooms ourselves, nice
amusement after tea—no family—day-
light till ten at night, capital idea, what
do you say?” “All right,” she said,
“ If you think you can do it Til do all
I can to help you.” Next day I bought
the paper for one room, as a trial test
of our abilities as paperhangers After
tea and table cleared, paste all ready,
and my assistant having edged the paper,
I now operated by spreading the paste
on the paper by the aid of a white-wash
brush, and having carefully smeared it
all over, caiefully caught the two top
corners with fingers and thumbs, then
standing upon a chair, and placing the
top edge close to the ceiling, while she
was guiding the edge to fit close and
plumb, in the corner of the wall, I could
not look down, but enquired if it was
hanging all right, and just as she said
“ Yes ! ” the whole piece except what
was between my forefingers and thumbs,
descended right upon the floor, while I
raised my eyes to the ceiling in silent
neditation, wondering how it happened ;
then looking down at the paper on ihe
floor, now partly pasted on both sides,
and unfit for further use, I stepped down
from the chair, remarking there was
something wrong with the paper ; but
Mrs. B. suggested that the paper was
probably all right; but the artist not
much good. However, I was determined
not to be discouraged, so prepared
another piece, pasting it all over on the
wall side, and repeating the performance
of trying to stick it on, but met with
the same result ; down came the paper,
except the small pieces between my
fingers. I now washed my hands of
the paste after two failures, and calling
for a refresher, sat down to meditate
how other people did to prevent similar
misfortunes. It then occurred to me,
that if I left a few inches across the
upper end quite dry, I could hold on by
that without teaiing the paper, as it
would not be softened by the saturation
of the paste, and so by turning it down
and pasting it after the other part was
fixed, I could then easily turn it up and
fix it to the ceiling. There was no time
now to be lost. I prepared another
piece, and fixed it first-rate, and having
put another piece up in a similar nanner,
1 felt now on a fair way to success, and
was just stepping on the chair to put
the next piece up, when —spirits of the
painters and paperhangers forgive me,
I found the first pieces put up had the
roots of the flowers in the air, and their
roses making their way to the floor.
In desperation I was thinking what to
do in this new calamity. This was no
fault of the paper, but insult to injury,
I thought of the remark, shortly before
suggested, “the artist is not much
good,” but not caring to hear that again,
I never let on, but said to Mrs. B. it
would be a fine corner to hang a large
picture to attract the eye (from the
paper upside down) and now proceeded
to paper the room, right end up now,
and when finished, it turned out a better
looking job than I expected.
From this circumstance, I thought I
would try my skill in painting and
paperhanging as an expert for the
benefit (?) of my customer. So I set to
17


work, and with the assistance of a small
boy, painted the ceiling and papered the
walls, making a pleasant looking room,
over the poisonous liquid below, the
danger to health, as I pointed out, being
completely ignored, as there was no
other room on the premises for the
young ladies. On presenting my account,
I was paid at once, and expression given
as to the satisfaction I had given, I was
further recommended to a few of my
clients business friends near neighbours
in Collins street, so that, independent of
my local North Melbourne business, I
was making a good connection in town
and between the two places, had plenty
of work of the most variegated kind.
I had to employ a man now to assist me,
paying him 20s. per day having now to
visit town often. I called one day upon
one of my friendly customers, who, as
soon as he saw me, said “ Where on
earth do you reside, I had a man looking
nearly all day for you yesterday for what
yon call North Melbourne, where does it
begin and where does it end ? ” I replied
“ From the swamp to Carlton, east and
west, and north to Flemington.” He
said “ Have you a sign up on your
house ? ” I said “ No ! ” “ Then why
don’t you have one, for nobody knows
each other over that wilderness of space
you mention, and when your wanted,
whose to find you ? You may often loose
a number of orders, but this time 1 have
still the order for you to execute.” This
I thought was sensible advice, and as
soon as I had the opportunity, I made
a sign 24 feet long, the length of the
house, and wide enough to contain all
the information of what I could do for
the benefit of the district in particular,
and everywhere else in general. Having
got it all ready for lettering, I then
called upon Mr. Slater or Salter, who
had opened a painter’s shop near the
North Star Hotel, and who was doing a
very good business. I enquired of him
what would be the cost of lettering a
sign on both sides. He curtly and
simply replied “ Twopence per inch for
letters as big and as many as you like.”
Not understanding this new method of
calculation, I humbly enquired what that
meant. “Well, you see,” he said,
il every inch in height your letter is, it
will be twopence,” With a feeling of
awe in my mind, I went home to solve
the problem how many twopences it
would take or cost to inform the public
of the valuable information I was about
to impart to them from the roof of my
house. The sum total upset me for the
minute, and I doubted if the information
would be worth the money, so let the
sign lie over for a while ; but hearing
another man enquiring for me while
close by the house, I thought then the
sign was a necessity for strangers and
my own benefit. Having been a
draughtsman and used to lettering the
particulars of the drawing as generally
done, I thought I would apply my
acquired knowledge in that way to
lettering my own sign. At odd times
in about a week I had it finished, and
shortly after securely fixed on the roof
of the house. Having just finished that
operation, I stepped into the middle of
the street to see how it looked in position,
feeling fairly satisfied it would stand
criticism. A man just then passing
during my examination, said “ Who
painted your sign ? ” I replied “ Oh, I
painted it myself.” “What do you charge
per inch ? ” “ Ah,” thought I, “ this
man has been to Salters like myself.”
So for a joke I said “ threehalfpence
per inch.” “Well now, that’s a little
more reasonable. That fellow that has
a shop near the North Star Hotel wants
twopence —a most unreasonable charge.
“ Yes,” I said, “ some men have no
conscience when they are under the im-
pression nobody can paint signs but
themselves in the district.” “ Well,”
said he, “ I want a sign painted, and
I’ll get one made and sent it to you,
and also a memo of what I want put on
it, I’m an undertaker, might also want
you to paint a coffin in the centre to
attract attention.” At first I hesitated
whether to laugh or look like business
upon this new industry opening to my
mind like the sunflower in the morning,
but, as I saw more money in the business
view of the position, I said “All right,
your order will be immediately attended
to. By the way,” I said, “ whose going
to make your sign-board, for if no one
is engaged I will make you one on the
same reasonable terms ? as the painting.”
18


“ 0 that’s first rate ! save me any
farther trouble. Here are the dimen-
sions ; when will I call for it ? ” I said
“ In about a fortnight as I want to
make you a first class looking sign, so
that you can recommend others to me.
Don’t call before a fortnight.” (I was
particular about this for I intended to
have it ready in half the time, but not
having any place but the yard to keep
it in, 1 thought he might call, and seeing
it finished so soon, think it should not
cost so much money.) In a fortnight
he called and all was ready, including
my account, to his expressed satisfaction,
and which was paid Soon after he got
his sign fixed on the top of the house,
it seemed to awaken the minds of all
the tradesmen in the neighbourhood to
the fact that it was the proper way to
let intending customers know what their
“ business ” was, and many enquiries
were made at the undertaker’s where he
got his “deadly” painted coffin from.
He referred them to me as the most
reasonable in charge, and the most civil
painter of the two for doing business
with. The result was 1 had to take
another man on to do any other kind of
work coming in, while I was engaged
off and on for nearly four months
painting and lettering signs of all shapes
and sizes, from two feet square to thirty
feet long. One fine day I was lettering
one of the large sign boards I had con-
tracted for in a lump sum, and after
completing the lettering I almost felt
ashamed ac the price I was going to
get compared with my time occupied
upon it. So to ease my conscience I
began to shade the letters to make them
look bolder, and to put in more labor in
return for the amount to be received.
While thus employed in front of my
house I heard some one passing, and on
looking round noticed the other painter
passing with his paint pots and brushes
to decorate some new wooden building.
He was looking very intently at my
work while passing, so I hailed him
saying “ Good morning friend, plenty
work I suppose in this neighbourhood
just now.” Coming towards me, I
invited him to sit down upon a stump,
telling him I was going to have a
refresher, and he might as well join in.
Having lubricated, he remarked “I
didn’t know you were a painter .” I
said I was not suprised at that, for it
took a long time in present society to
know what any man was ; but all fish
was taken in the same net to make up
a fair and honest income. He then
confidentially told me he was not a
painter by trade, but had been a laborer
in a large paint shop in England, and
on coming to Melbourne found painters
a high priced class of workmen. Some
of them he thought had scarcely ever
handled a brush before, but as he had
gained some knowledge in mixing
paints, he turned out as a painter also,
purchased a book with the different
kinds of letters, from which he copied
anyparticularkindordered for asign, and,
with practising cheaply upon poor cus-
tomers at first, had now reached the two-
pence an inch stage charged to better
customers (mentally had put me down
as one), and the amount was paid by
them without any great complaints re-
specting overcharge. He continued to
do first-rate up to the present time. The
natural enquiry came, “ How was busi-
ness in the painting line with myself?”
I replied “ No complaint whatever, but
I am afraid if our customers knew what
we were they would probably be the first
to complain.” “ Why so!” said he.
“Well,” I said, “you have been very
confidential to me under the circum-
stances, and it is possible some one
might use the information to your
future disadvantage, but with me you
are safe, and we are square when I tell
you I never painted or lettered a sign
in my life before I was driven to it by
your attempted imposition of twopence
an inch upon me. I couldn’t stand
you r operating upon my finances at that
so I tried my h ind upon my own
sign which you see over the house top,
and then other people’s sign boards
came in and I was forced to make money
—to be a painter too. Now we are to-
gether, shake hands—both frauds, but
useful in our day, and till time
rolls on and gives us another turn
in the wheel of fortune.” For a long
time we were always good friends in our
line , till orders for other work more in
my own business gradually increased.
19


F-floGc\ .
j and I had to engage another man or
two. At this time I had some work
sent me from the Argus printing office.
Knowing the engineer when at Lang-
land’s foundry, he afterwards came to
me with several small jobs at first that
required immediate attention, and as that
was very difficult to get at either of the
large shops in town, I made it a point
to attend at once to every order I re-
ceived, so gradually drew a considerable
quantity of their out-door work in my
way. Working for them had some in-
fluence with others to trust me with
their work, and now I fancied there
seemed a fair chance of my dreams and
castle building in the air returning me
something substantial. Melbourne was
increasing in size and population in
great strides, Forth Melbourne, not
long ago a desert broken only by tree
stumps, was now rapidly assumingshape
by its streets and houses going up as
fast as labour could be got to carry on
the work. Everyone and everything
seemed all on the move, even on the
Sabbath Day. Men otherwise engaged
during the week, instead of drinking
and taking a shingle off the roof, were
zealously endeavouring to put on as
many as they could during that day.
Time was precious, labour was dear, and
it was everyone “hanging on” to old
time to make the most money in the
shortest space. I may now just men-
tion here that although money was
easier made in those days, or rather
more paid for hard labour, yet there
existed another fact, neutralising to
a certain extent, the reward of labour,
that was the household expenses of a
healthy family blessed with uncontrol-
able appetites owing to our splendid
climate and freedom of the
open air. In those days there were
neither gas nor water, consequently the
water carts used to come with Yarra
water and retail it out at so much a
gallon, or if anyone had a barrel laid on
its side and sunk half way into the
ground it was filled for what would
seem a fabulous sum now. A square
hole was cut in the upper side of the
barrel to put the dipper in to get the
water, and when not required a wet bag
was thrown over the part of the barrel
above the ground, thus keeping the
water cool. For light the kerosene
lamp was the rule, vile kerosene often
it was, one was always afraid the lamp
would go off and set the house on fire.
For a time there was little difficulty in
getting firewood, shouldering a good
axe ar.d attacking the first obstructive
stump, soon made it “ look small,” but
when the stumps in due course were
chared out and we had to buy firewood
then the price was a caution, not a load
of firewood for less than £8 10s. Every
cablage for dinner each day, 2s. 6d. ;
eggs, 10s. per dozen ; 3s. 6d. for salt
butter, and 4s. fresh butter ; cheese, 3s.
6d. per lb.; milk, per quart, 3s, 6d.;
apples, &c., get along, don’t name
them, neither money nor love could buy
them. It was about this time, owing
to the distance from town to get odds
and ends, that I started an ironmonger’s
shop, Having built a large room in
front of my house for that purpose, I
laid in a sto( k of builders’ ironmongery,
then a stock of general domestic re-
quirements, and anything else I found
commonly enquired for. The addition
of this branch to my business did not
give such entire satisfaction as to be
considered an unmixed blessing, simply
because there was not sufficient trade to
keep a person constantly behind the
counter, and next, when a customer did
call, and, opening the shop door earned
a loud bell to ring, I had to leave off
whatever work I was engaged on, and
attend to the tale of a pound of nails, a
chalk line, some tacks, &c., all amount-
ing to about Is. 3d., and in payment for
which I was handed a sovereign request-
ing change. Now as this was adding
insult to injury by losing more valuable
time from my work, I scarcely knew at
the moment what to do, whether to lock
for a change a scarce commodity
generally—or whether to figuratively
kick the customer out of the door.
Kae Bros,, Piinters, 21 and 23)Elizabetb Street North, Melbourne.
