

toth PProo
A/, 2 'M'3
EXPERIENCES
OF A.
MEDICAL MAN IN NEW ZEALAND
OUK HOSPITAL AT SOPEMDOWN
PLACEBO ASPEN, M.D.
txm i
MELBOURNE & SYDNEY
GEOEGE EOBEETSON
1883


V


EXPERIENCES
MEDICAL MAN IN NEW ZEALAND
OUR HOSPITAL AT SOPEMDOWN
PLACEBO ASPEN, M.D.
MELBOURNE & SYDNEY
GEOEGE ROBERTSON
1883


PREFACE.
In launching upon the Sea of Public Opinion these Experiences of a
Medical Man in New Zealand, the author deprecates in advance any
severity of criticism upon his style or method ; he does not profess to
wield a practised pen.—The little story, though not consecutively
true, is'founded upon fact, every occurrence has taken place some-
where, at some time, within the knowledge of the writer ; he has
collected them, and referred them to one common scene, “ The
Sopemdown Hospital.” In doing this every endeavour has been
made so to alter names and descriptions as to avoid even the appear-
ance of personality. He would satirise no individual, discredit no
institution, while attempting to suggest to the able minds and long
heads in the Colony the general lesson, that room exists for broad
and liberal reforms in our hospital management, and that the doctor
should be looked upon as the natural, and the most interested ally, in
carrying them into effect.


EXPERIENCES OF A MEDICAL MAN IN NEW ZEALAND
OUR HOSPITAL AT SOPEMDOWN.
I arrived in New Zealand between the years 1865 and 1870, coming
out as medical officer in charge of Immigrants.
On landing I found myself with a diploma, a few letters of intro-
duction, most of them to persons several hundred miles away from
the port I was in, the colonial world before me, and about £l3O in
my pocket.
The landlord of my hotel was excessively civil and obliging, and
introduced me to some of his customers, whom he described as highly
connected, well to do, and smart men, who could show me the ropes
of the colony; but they became cold and distant on my objecting to
take a hand at Loo in some mysterious apartment after midnight.
Seeing an advertisement announcing a lodge meeting of the “ Ap-
proved and Notable Bricks,” a fraternity in which I had been initiated
at home, I wended my way thither on the night mentioned, and hav-
ing proved myself a brother, by certain facial contortions and caba-
listic sounds, was hospitably invited to their harmonious festival
about then to commence. The fun was great and the wine good, so
much so that before leaving I had to shake hands again and again
with our chief, “ The most illustrious Excellence,” and his officers,,
the “ Undercrust Grandees ; ’ some of whom insisted on escorting me
to the hotel, where, with parting glasses, an invitation from one, a
woolbuyer and feltmonger, was given and accepted for the following,
evening.
The entertainment next day was more limited than I expected, as
an accountant and his wife, a pimply-faced silent young man from
the customs, and myself, made up the party, exclusive of our host
and hostess with two marriageable daughters.
Of the victualling department I will only say the supply was solid
and as it was consumed, “Be mortius nil nisi bonum” forbids criti-
cism. The old people were very pressing in their hospitality, and the
young ladies full of fun and frolic. They played merry and under-
standable airs, sang songs one likes to listen to, and if a word or two
of colonial slang was interspersed, there was a charm to me in its
novelty, and in their good-natured explanations.
After dinner the accountant, Mr. Sims, and our entertainer, Mr.
Adeps, questioned me as to my movements, and on learning that I
was unattached and looking for an opening, they told me that the
guarantees advertised for medical men to reside up-country were


mostly mere traps to seduce a doctor into an unpleasant and gene-
rally ruinous position; and that the negotiations almost invariably
fell through where the applicant insisted upon protecting himself by
employing a solicitor.
Mr. Sims then said to Adeps, How about Sopemdown Hospital ?
Dont you think that would about suit our young friend ? There is
£2OO per annum with board and lodging, and the committee are
advertising for applications to be in by the end of the month.
The newspaper was obtained, but I observed with dismay on look-
ing at it that a Member of the Royal College of Surgeons would be
preferred, whereas I was a Licentiate of Durham with an M.D. degree
of St. Andrew’s. In a local paragraph there was also mentioned that
seven extremely eligible applications had been received.
I told my friends why I considered I had no chance, and also that
I had no testimonials except a complimentary letter from the Immi-
grants, most of whose signatures had been made with a cross. How-
ever, all I said was of little use, as they made me there and then
write an application and give it to one of them to post; after which,
and exchanging glances of intelligence, they said they would no
longer detain me from the ladies' while they prosed on politics.
For the next few days my time was pretty much taken up with
being shown the country by the young ladies, with an improvised
picnic on one day and a dance on another.
I then called on Mr, Sims, who congratulated me, and told me to
take a trip and look at my future neighbourhood at Sopemdown. I
stared, so he explained that Adeps’s brother-in-law, Mr. Hathastern,
was one of the Hospital Committee ; that he was interested through
his wholesale business with several of the tradesmen, being also on
the licensing bench he was a terror to the publicans, and as business
attorney for a loan company and some large landowners, he was a
power in the place too great to be safely opposed, and none the lees
influential in that he always had an opposition with two leaders who
could not agree—a freethinking locksmith, and a linen-draper who
was a notable “Plymouth Brother.”
Sims said that Hathastern had promised his support, and the thing
was done, but that I had better take a line from Adeps and have a
personal interview.
Armed with an introduction I hired a horse, and after a long and
wearisome ride arrived at the principal hotel in Sopemdown, just in
time for the evening meal.
After dinner five or six young and middle-aged men assembled in
the parlour, and from their talk I soon gathered that they were candi-
dates for the hospital, and discussing one another’s chances. I held
my tongue until one, a nautical looking man of about 35, bluntly
asked if I was a medico and after the hospital; I said Yes, but on
mentioning my want of experience and absence of testimonials, I ob-
served a look of pity go round. I was too tired to care to converse
much, so I retired, and next morning after breakfast wended my way
to Mr. Hathastern’s place of business.
While waiting in the outer office I learnt that two of the hospital
committee were with Mr. Hathastern, and that a gentleman who
came twenty minutes before was also there. Just then out came one


of my evening companions, who said, “ Then, Gentlemen, I am dis-
tinctly to understand that the appointment will be made according to
the bona fide merits of the candidates, and that no foregone conclu-
sion already come to, would make my waiting a waste of time.” The
reply was “ Most certainly, the appointment will be decided by the
qualifications and testimonials of the applicants.” I then went in, my
letter was read, and I was very warmly shaken hands with and asked
if I would like to have a look over the Hospital. I said I would, and
so perhaps might some of the other candidates, at which they smiled
and said “ certainly,” instructions should be given to show them
everything. After dinner the navy man and two others accompanied
me to see the institution. It was a large and straggling building
with less than a score of patients, and room for three times the num-
ber ; the accommodation presented an air of pretentiousness rather
than comfort. The half of a large ward being in use necessitated the
warming of the whole, while the bath-room accommodation was
meagre and so badly arranged, that in one wing the patients had to
pass through draughty passages to and from it, and in the other wing
was a small dirty looking composition bath in an inconvenient cell,
leading the patient and the steam through a door directly into the
ward. The floors were scrupulously clean and the bed-clothes with-
out creases. The patients were placed at regulation intervals, and
cheered by appropriate texts on the walls, such as DEATH is the
wages of SIN ; but with one defecfthat the large letters were alone
decipherable by those on the beds. The Hospital seemed in a transi-
tion state as to authority ; the attendants, grouped about in the en-
entrances or corridors, were either gossiping or larking, while the
piteous enquiring expression on some of the sufferers’ faces seemed to
speak what they dare not utter.
My companions criticised pretty freely, and loudly enough to cause
meaning glances to be exchanged by the attendants in hearing. Not
wishing to be identified with their remarks, I quickly left, and return-
ing to my original hotel, impatiently awaited results.
A week latter I received official notification of my election to the
position and emoluments of Resident Surgeon to the Sopemdown
Hospital, and a note from Mr. Sims, expressing a wish to see me
before I commenced my duties ; which I answered by asking him to
dine with me. A delicious native fish called trumpeter, a capital
joint, assisted by Alsop’s ale from home, and a celebrated Australian
wine from the opposite end of the world, formed a repast that we both
did justice to ; when the dishes were exchanged for a supply of nuts
and raisons, Sims lighting a pipe and taking possession of an easy
chair cried, in the language of the north, “ Noo for a wee bit crack.”
He talked freely and lucidly, told me who and what my committee
consisted of, what rocks and shoals I would meet with, and gave me an
insight and an amount of information that I could see must be valu-
able ; but to prevent being wearisome I will simply epitomise the more
salient portions of his discourse.
There were twelve committeemen, who by not convassing for sub-
scribers until after the annual meeting, quietly re-elected themselves ;
as of course the majority of the people kept their money in their
pockets until asked, and equally of course only those were called upon
before the election, who were wanted to be qualified.


The chairman, Mr. Hathastern, was a broad shouldered heavy man,
with a jovial manner, a shrewd eye, a florid complexion and the char-
acter of being energetic in everything; his business when he was at it,
his bottle when he was at it, his language at all times, and particu-
larly in his likes and dislikes ; though to do him justice his actions
were the more energetic for his friends, and his language for his
enemies.
His coadjutors were Crimlade the stationer ; Jobson a printer, and
part proprietor of a local paper; Sapsole the possessor of a boot and
shoe emporium; Battens, of Larkin and Battens the builders; Benlevi,
whose name did not belie his origin, and who kept a toy-shop, was
agent for sewing machines, patent medicines, &c., a busy body and
inveterate gossip ; Brassy the locksmith, a tap room orator and radi-
cal reformer; Grenadeen, of Grenadeen and Feesho drapers; and
the other four were Smith, Jenkins, Walker, and Hobbs—nobodies —
who did not attend if they could help it, and then only as supernu-
meries, to make a quorum or chorus to one of the others ; Jenkins
generally following Grenadeen, Hobbs an admirer of Brassy, and the
other two fluctuating as their instincts or personal interests dictated.
I also learnt that the house steward Scupperson was also called
dispenser, and that he had been engaged many years before, first as
occasional night attendant, next as odd man about the premises, and
afterwards, through the influence of Brassy the locksmith, had been
raised to his present position, and kept there through good and evil
report, and frequently in direct antagonism to the different Resident
Surgeons.
Mr. Sims described this man as possessing the confidence of most
of the committee, that he was extremely fat and had a fawning de-
meanour, that was to him very objectionable. We chatted late into the
night, when my kind friend said good night, and good-bye; as I had
to leave in the morning; but I promised should any difficulty occur
to communicate with him for advice.
I am Installed.
On arriving at Sopemdown I was introduced by Mr. Hathastern to
most of the committee, and accompanied by two or three of them
with the secretary, a pale young man with weak eyes and a fluffy
moustache, we proceeded to the hespital where for the first time I saw
the outgoing surgeon, a bronzed complexioned young fellow with a
sharp intellectual look and a constrained manner, as of repressed irri-
tation. He saluted my companions courteously, and offered to con-
duct me round and give me a description of the cases. Mr. Sapsole
muttered he thought he could judge a pair of boots without any tel-
ling, Grenadeen asked whether I considered it necessary, and Brassy
said something of which I only caught the words “tampering” and
“ packing traps.” But as I thanked Dr. Meriton and said I should
be much obliged for his kindness, we were left to go through the
wards together; and his ruffled countenance soon regained its usual
composure, whilst with great pains he entered into and gave me a
history oi each case. During the time I noticed a few of the patients


looking sullen, but most of them grasped his hand in saying “ good
bye,” and thanked him warmly for his care and hindness. After we
had done he told me, if ever he was in the neighbourhood, he should
feel great pleasure and some curiosity in calling to see how I liked it.
By this time a vehicle was at the door, and, having bundled in his
luggage, he left.
On going to my rooms I found a short and enormously fat man,
whom I had no difficulty in recognising as Scupperson the house
steward and dispenser, unpacking my luggage; I desired him to leave
it alone rather sharply, but the humble way in which he apologised
and urged his anxiety to serve me, made me sorry for being so abrupt.
I then went round the patients, and after re-arranging the pillows
and pads to relieve bedsores in a spinal case, I asked Scupperson
whether there was a water bed and was told “no.” I made a note of
the want and went to the dispensary to obtain relief from pain, for a
case of cancer. I asked for morphia, but Scupperson did not know
where it was kept, I then called for liq. opii. sed., and he handed me a
laudanum bottle. I told him that was not it, and asked where he
learnt dispensing, he said he had learnt hisself and that before Dr.
Meriton came and hinterfered to prevent his doing his work, he used
to save the doctors many a night’s rest by getting up and mixing
sleeping draughts for any patients who were troublesome. I then
told him that I would prefer attending to that myself, that it would
save him a lot of trouble and be more satisfactory to me. He seemed
so depressed and sorry that I tried to make things pleasant by saying,
I had been accustomed to do it and I thought his other work was
sufficient for any one man.
After breakfast the next morning I asked for the diet scale, and
was told all the doctors were supposed to set their own, so Scupperson
had removed Dr. Meriton’s, I insisted on its being reproduced and
adhered to, as without local experience of the people and the climate
it was a ticklish thing to meddle with, any alteration being sure to
lead to criticism and very likely to rows.
I found on enquiry that stores were ordered by Scupperson without
reference to anyone, and as anything that arrived was received by
whoever happened to be in the kitchen, without any weighing or
entry, the only check the committee had in their payments was by
making Scupperson certify to each account that was rendered. On
going through the kitchen one day, I saw a mat of sugar ticketed
lbs. 97 ; I told the cook to weigh it and it proved to be only lbs. 74.
The cook said Mr. Scupperson never weighed the stores, as she did
not think the tradesmen would stand it; and those who took public
wages had to keep sweet with their masters. I determined to see Mr.
Hathastern about it, as he had already told me that he trusted I
would make an effort to keep down the enormous expenditure. I did
not find him at home that afternoon, but as I was coming back in the
dusk through the principal street of Sopemdown, I passed Benlevi’s
shop where several men were congregated, and I could not help hear-
ing Benlevi saying : —What do you think of that ? gentlemen ! and a
voice like Sapsole’s replied : —The prying hound, so he’s coming his
airs !ishe ? well!! we’ll crop his comb for him, you may reckon.
That night I sat up till after midnight writing letters home, and to


Mr, Sims; and then feeling restless and sleepless I took a turn round
the wards. As I was passing noiselessly in my carpet slippers, I
could not help wondering at the absence of the nightnurse. I went
through a half opened door and saw a light in the steward’s window
at the rear of an unused wing. While I was deliberating as to my
actions, his door opened and with the sound of clinking glasses and
the murmur of several voices, the missing nurse came out and with a
shawl over her head, hastily crossing the grass, ran into my arms. A
smothered shriek and a shaking fit ensued, with prayers for forgive-
ness and beseechings to let her confess everything. I saw things
were wrong, and that the woman imagined I knew more than I did,
so I told her a clean breast would save her from immediate conse-
quences. She then told me that Benlevi, Hobbs, and Brassy were
with the steward; that they were talking about my wanting to know
things that did not concern me ; she said Mr. Scupperson was very
angry at my putting things down in a note book, and something I did
or said about a water bed had made him particularly spiteful. She
told me also that I was said to be sweet upon one of Mr. Hathastern’s
nieces, and it was agreed that they had better keep quiet until some
complaint or grievance got up, which was sure to be the case sooner
or later, and then things were to be made hot enough to clear me out.
I told the women she should not lose her place if she only held her
tongue, but that she must not be absent from her charge again ; I
then turned in, and after some hours of anxious wakefulness, I fell
into a sound sleep which lasted late into the morning.
On going my rounds I found that several of the patients had had
their bandages removed and re-adjusted after their sores had been
dressed, by Scupperson, who was bustling about in a very obsequious
manner and who said humbly that he hoped I would not mind the
liberty, as through my being late, there might have been complaints
made, I said, “very well,” as I did not know what else to say, but
I began to feel a smothering sensation as if something was coiling
round me.
I called on Mr. Hathastern the next evening and tried to open up
the subject to him, but I found him too impulsive and downright to
be safe. I verily believe that if I had once induced him to see matters
as I saw them, he would have started immediately for the hospital
and with his own hands packed every servant off the premises, turn-
ing upon me in a passion afterwards, if he could not find himself
justified for his arbitrary hastiness. As it was he just gathered that
things were not quite satisfactory, and that there was some sort of
dislike growing up in my mind regarding the steward; so he set to
work to lecture me —said that people with all angles were always
hurting or being hurt; that he dared to say the servants were not a lot
of angels, and that he did not believe a man would get so beastly fat as
Scupperson if he worked very hard ; yet he had his good points, and
his faithfulness was a bye-word and had gained him the confidence of
nearly every committee man.
He then turned the conversation to the subject of the Misses
Adeps, and rallied me on the fact of the fair Salina having become
dull and low in spirits, adding that he would get them over shortly on
a visit for a change when “we must set them up again my boy, I’ll


find grub and you the physic, Ha ! Ha ! Ha !!! and giving me a play-
ful drive in my ribs that nearly doubled me up, dropped the subject.
Nothing of consequence occurred for some time. I performed my
duties as punctually as I could, and by Sims’ advice took no notice
of the house committee referring to Scupperson in numberless trivial
matters, and ignoring me in things that I had a right to be consulted
in, nor of their communicating by messages through the servants
whenever they had anything to ask or to say. Sims told me the com-
mittee would support one another on principle if there was a row, and
as they could turn me out, and I could do nothing, I had better
pocket their manners as so much dross and verdegris, adhering to
their coin.
I received about this time complimentary visits from the two medi-
cal men in the neighbourhood, each of whom thought it necessary to
impress upon me the remembrance that in my engagement was a stipu-
lation not to practice privately. One was Dr. Coosher a tall man with a
big stomach, thin legs, and a wheezing voice, whose business lay chiefly
with the ladies; the other a Mr. Markham, an active abrupt little
man who had a great reputation for surgery and general practice.
The rich people complained that though undoubtedly clever, he was
not sufficiently refined, while the poor cared little for his queer ways
and blowings-up, as his skill and pocket were always open to the
destitute, and consequently he was not a little played upon. Of course
they hated one another. Markham terming Coosher an old Midwife,
and Coosher saying Markham was a bear, not fit to be under the
same roof with a refined female ; and most of his lady patients con-
sidered it the thing to quote and chorus it. I was frequently called
in to consultations by one or the other, and I found it pleasant and
remunerative, as I only had look grave or smile, and indulge in vague
platitudes prior to pocketing a guinea with a feeling that no un-
pleasant responsibility devolved upon me ; Coosher having had too
much experience in his own particular line for me to teach him, and
Markham possessing an energy in studying each case, and in reading’
up anything new that might bear upon it, which made it dangerous
for me to venture far, for fear of exposing my own deficiencies.
However, it became tremendously fashionable, if Coosher looked
grave, or Markham gave offence, for the Hospital doctor to be desired
in consultation, while the public little dreamed that any real inter-
ference with either of their medical attendants would be fraught with
danger to the patient.
About this time I became acquainted with the existence of a Ladies
Benevolent Society, a committee of which, generally consisting of the
same three or four ladies, found it requisite every few days to wait
upon myself, the patients, the servants, and the institution generally;
sometimes bringing tracts, and sometimes introducing indigestible
compounds to the patients; occasionally to investigate regarding
some rhodomontade gossip, and at all times to invite the patients to
tattle of my sayings and doings, incomings and outgoings, on which
subject the servants were privately and separately examined. One
was a spinster sister to the banker, another the wife of the Wesleyan
minister, a third the mother of Feesho, of Grenadeen and Feesho,
drapers, and occasionally they brought poor, comfortable, soft-hearted


Mrs. Battens, the builders wife, who instead of children, had tears of
pity and commiseration always ready on the shortest notice.
The chief object of the above ladies committee seemed to be of a
detective nature, always viewing ordinary actions and transactions
as deep designs for the purpose of suppressing sensational disclosures,
and I never met the severely righteous glare of old Mrs. Feesho’s eyes
without the impression that I was guilty of something, and sooner or
later was to be exposed. One day, indeed, after indulging in a game
of billiards with Markham, when I met that lady as I was leaving the
room, I was so overpowered with confusion that I did not regain my
presence of mind until the next morning.
An affair occurred about this time that caused me a good deal of
annoyance. When I took charge of the hospital I noticed two spare
rooms that were meant for isolating cases that from delirium, erysi-
pelas, or other causes, would interfere with the comfort or safety of
those in the wards. I found one occupied as a living and sleeping
room by a woman with a number of small children. The woman
was admitted through having a cut in the sole of her foot, and as she
was sole protector of her children, the Benevolent Ladies had in-
terested themselves to get the children allowed to remain with her.
Now this cut was only skin deep, but of such a peculiar nature that
whenever it was nearly healed it would break out again, festering, and
would apparently defy all attempts to cure it; so one day, after
poulticing had cleaned it, and the customary dressing had started it
healing again, I bandaged, covered the bandage with gummed paper,
and starch bandaged on the top of that, and at the end of a fortnight
I had the pleasure of seeing that there was nothing but a red mark
to show where the old wound had been. I then discharged her, and
with anything but grateful looks she left with her tribe next morning.
That same afternoon Mr. Battens, with Grenadeen and Benlevi, came
to my apartments in an excited state, and from what they said I
gathered that my late patient had, with a sore and bleeding foot,
fallen to the ground in great agony in front of a window where Mrs.
Battens happened, by the mercy of providence, to be standing.
I will pass over the row that arose, the committee meeting that
took place and the censures passed upon me, not I think on account
of the evidence, but because of the heartrending letters in the press,
in which I was stigmatised for unmanly conduct, cruelty, want of
skill, etc. Even Mr. Hathastern, with all his desire to befriend me,
was carried away by the popular clamour and excitement, and ex-
pressed himself strongly that I had done wrong, and hoped in the name
of humanity such a thing would never occur again. As to the Benevo-
lent Ladies, they came frequently, generally accompanied by others,
who apparently wanted to refresh themselves by a sight of the fiend
in human shape. The sensation did not last long, and a slight re-
action set in through Mr. Inspector Skruten, of the constabulary
dropping some items concerning my ex-patient’s former career not
greatly to her credit.
For some little time my affairs proceeded pretty smoothly, and only
one little incident occurred which did not become public, and rather
tended to my advantage than otherwise. One night I was anxious to
post a letter in time for the outgoing mail, and taking a short cut


across the garden in the dark, my hand came in contact with a man’s
head of hair, the owner of which was apparently stooping, I gripped
his neck with both hands with no defined object, unless it was to pre-
vent his gripping mine ; and I demanded his name and business on
peril of calling for the police. He turned out to be a poor devil of a
journalist, reporter, newscollector, and general hanger on to Jobson’s
printing office, who was always hard up and had a large young family,
for whose behoof he had nearly filled a big basket with vegetables. I
knew the man’s circumstances and what a strain it must be to make
his perpetual grind meet the necessities of the little crowd whose sup-
port devolved upon him, so I told him to send in the morning or
evening for the future and he should have what vegetables his chil-
dren wanted. He was very grateful and told me that he would not
forget it, and in future he would endeavour to prevent any portion of
the press making capital at my expense, and I believe I was indebted
to him for many an indirect act of kindness afterwards. I received a
message one morning to notify that my old friend the accountant, Mr.
Sims, would have business in Sopemdown during the day, and desir-
ing me to bespeak a dinner for him and myself at the Black Lion, at
6 p.m. I need hardly say I acquitted myself of his commission, and
waited the event with great pleasure; for many a time had I longed
to meet the sterling old fellow, whose genial kindheartedness and
shrewd knowledge of the world had won both my affection and re-
spect. We met with all possible warmth, and after doing ample jus-
tice to the comestibles, proceeded to indulge in that most enjoyable of
all smokes, a pipe after dinner. I then gave him a condensed history
of all that had taken place. About Scupper son he looked grave, and
told me he had other reasons for believing him to be a big rogue; he
said that part of his business was to make a valuation of the Lambing-
down Flat Hotel, with a view to money being advanced on a bill of
sale, and though he was not sure yet he had reason to believe it was
Scupperson’s money ; also, that a few years ago Scupperson had no
money, and since then his salary had not sufficed to place him in the
position of an investor. He said he considered the committee much
in fault, for protecting my subordinate from proper supervision; but
their adopting that measure, would in his opinion exonerate me from
interference with their wishes.
I mentioned more in full than I had been able to do in a letter,
that a system of petty slights and insults was carried on in the follow-
ing manner. A house committee of three or four would be appointed
at intervals, and as the time of the really valuable men was of import-
ance, the sub-committee generally consisted of Benlevi, with Sapsole
or Hobbs, and another. Their custom was to hold as little communi-
cation with me as possible, but on all points, trivial or not, to refer to
Scupperson for.information or opinions, and even to frequently send
me my cheque through Scupperson. In short their every act was
calculated to gall, and slight the medical officer in the eyes of the
servants. Sims told me that as hospital committees went, I had
little to complain of, and ought to consider myself in luck, and when I
received a bank note to pocket it thankfully, whether the donor was
dirty faced, dirty tongued, or dirty fingered; and I should find the
unpleasantness that accompanied colonial notes, though often palpa*


ble to the sight, smell, and touch, did not tend to depreciate them in
value as currency. I therefore understood that I had better make
the best of everything and resent nothing. He told me, also, I should
never know what it was to be properly patronized or bullied, until I
had obtained experience as surgeon to some large Benefit Society
where the women and children were included in the club doctoring.
He mentioned that there were few hospitals in the colony, where
the chief wardsman or steward did not occupy a false position, either
through long residence, or friends or kinsfolk on the committee ;
sometimes through inebriates being employed on the medical staff,
and often from collusion with some of the tradespeople who as sub-
scribers, generally exhibit considerable interest in the election of the
committee.
He added that in Medlister Yale Hospital the people are mostly
Scotch, and the chief wardsman and his wife are related to half the
neighbourhood. Whilst in the Bally O’Slattery District, Irish Eoman
Catholics prevail and the docthor must not thrid on the tail of one of
their coats, whether servant, patient, or subscriber.
Depend upon it! Dr. Aspen ! said Sims, until the superintending
medical man has a power of appeal beyond the immediate district,
and also sole and absolute control over his servants, he can never be
fairly held responsible for the good conduct of either hospital or subor-
dinates.
When we came to the subject of the Benevolent Ladies, Sims
laughed loud and long till the tears were in his eyes. God bless the
darlings ! he said. Its themselves all over. What would the world
do without them ? Not another word till we give them a bumper, and
throwing himself back in an ecstasy of laughter, I dont know how
long he would have kept it up had not the chair given way, and
floored him and the subject at the same time.
As soon as equanimity was restored my entertainer asked if I knew
anything about the hospital ways and means, I suspect, he added, they
are getting in a mess; I acknowledged my ignorance of all parti-
culars, except from little things that had dropped, I believed that one
or two tradesmen had heavy arrears against us, and that by some
liberal understanding these were allowed still to increase. He then
told me that the hospital was supported by voluntary contributions,
subsidised at the rate of £1 for £1 by the government. Of course, he
said, it is unfair all round ; the people within reach that are come-
upon for all charitable matters, are not generally the persons who re-
quire such a resource for themselves. It has not yet been a question
of large factories where the employers have to make regular provision
for their proportion of accidents and sickness. The sawyer or shep-
herd, whose only resource in need is a public hospital, knock down
their money in the shortest way by which they can enrich some bush
publican and qualify themselves for sickness, crime, or accident; and
a consequent call upon some public institution, towards which they
would perhaps have never contributed a penny.
We then had a talk on the mania for gambling, as shown by the
quantity of sweeps and lotteries, &c., which were coming so much
into vogue. Sims utterly ridiculed putting it all down by direct
enactments against them, and really what he said and the way he put


it carried conviction to my mind, and requires no apology I think for
repetition. He began by saying there was a natural itching in men
as well as boys for forbidden fruit, and he illustrated it by stating that
some famous apple trees of his own were robbed every year, until he
put up a notice that any person could have some by knocking and
asking for them, and he then found his loss only amounted to the
gift of a bushel and no one troubled to purloin the remainder. He
went on to say that a legal barrier raised against sweeps, &c., was
the very stimulus wanted to induce the public to recklessly venture
their money to anybody and on anything, without check or safeguard.
I asked what other weapon than legislation could be used effectively,
and he replied, None ! ! But that there were different ways to the
same end, just the same as could be shewn by one man going round a
corner while another endeavours to make a straight course to the
same point by climbing over two walls. He then sketched out what
certainly appeared both reasonable and feasible. It was to legalize
all sweeps and lotteries by bringing the tickets under the stamp act,
and to make promoters apply for a permit or license under which they
would be compelled to furnish the authorities with substantial and
satisfactory bail, for good faith ; and the whole proceedings to be
fenced round with such details in the management, as would reduce
the risk of swindling to a minimum. The stamps required would
bring down the profits, and the legal sanction and dry business pro-
cedure, would very greatly lessen the romance and pleasure of such
things. On the contrary a cast-iron law can be made, the police set
in motion, and a few silly but well infentioned people mulcted in
penalties, while the rogues will be quite clever enough to evade the
consequences, and can revel in the knowledge that their victims are
deprived by the law itself of an appeal to the law against fraud.
Sims also was very strong on the freedom of the franchise having
been carried to such extreme limits, as to enable any ex-gaol bird or
illiterate and impecunious idiot to be on an equality with others in
returning representatives to the legislature ; and he instanced several
degrading scenes, that had occurred in different colonial legislatures,
as exemplifying the grievance as well as the adage “ Show me your
company, and I will tell you your manners,”
I was very much amused as well as interested by the old fellow’s
rabid denunciation of things he disapproved of; but I must not allow
the intention of this tale of a Medical Man’s experience, to be diverted
into a political disquisition.
Now ! Doctor ! ! Sims added, I am tired and it is getting late, so
let’s have a nightcap to that delicious Ladies’ Committee, and we will
adjourn the meeting to the earliest opportunity possible.
Just as we were parting, a woman, who turned out to be a servant
from the hospital, ran screaming into the Black Lion calling out
Doctor ! Doctor !! ! make haste they will all be killed, and then be-
came hysterical.
I said ! come along Sims, and ran for the hospital which was only
a few hundred steps off. When we reached we found Scupperson
speechless with fright pointing to the men’s casualty ward from which
a great uproar could be heard. The door was locked and too strong
to be easily forced. Round to the windows said Sims and simulta-


neously throwing up each a window, we essayed to enter. When half
in—a man, who had been in a few days with a broken arm, ran at
me, and brandishing the heavy ward poker made a blow that de-
molished the best of the window frame, and would have settled me if
I had not thrown myself backwards. Almost the next second he was
struggling to free himself from Sim’s arms, that had clasped him from
behind, the old boy calling to me to put out the fire first. I then saw
the cause of a smoke was from a heap of bedclothes in the centre of
the floor that had been set on fire, but fortunately being chiefly wool-
len they were smouldering more than flaming. I unlocked the door,,
called to the servants to bring water to douse the fire, and then ran
to assist Sims who was nearly exhausted. We quickly had the pa-
tient down on his back, and having sorted his arm he was transferred
to the “restraint bed,” which I may describe to the uninitiated as an
ordinary bedstead of a little extra strength, with an arrangement by
which, over the bedclothes, a strong canvas counterpane is strongly
secured, but having a hole over the pillow for the patient’s head.
The patient is not tied in any way, but restrained from getting out of
bed or throwing the clothes off; and it also renders destroying the
bedclothes too difficult and troublesome to be persevered in. The
origin of the disturbance was evident, the man had broken out sud-
denly with an attack of “ delirium tremens,” and as occasionally hap-
pens, without previous notice. He had watched the nurse out, then
securing the door, he had proceeded to make a bonfire to destroy the
imps his imagination was troubled with, meanwhile threatening the
rest with the poker to keep them quiet. Poor old Sims who had be-
haved valiantly, complained that it was a little unfair to be called
upon for such frantic exertions without notice, and said he would go
into training prior to paying me another visit.
There was some little talk of calling the committee together and in-
vestigating my conduct, but Brassy and Benlevi threw cold water on
the idea when they found that Mr. Scupperson did not shine in the
matter, but rather the reverse, and that I could produce testimony
independent of the servants as to what did occur.
The Misses Adeps at last paid their promised visit to the Hatha-
sterns, and, as it is no use beating about the bush, I may as well say
at once that Selina and I came to a satisfactory understanding. She
was not ethereal and I was not poetical; and neither of us aiming at
aßstheticism, the materials for a proper romance were wanting. But
she was a dear good girl, and I was very fond of her, which I trust I
showed without any unnecessary exhibition of spooning.
The heartiness of Mr. Hathastern, and the gracious approval of the
ladies in the neighbourhood, would have made it a little dangerous,,
about now, for anybody to cast a slur on the hospital doctor or his
charge; and for a few weeks I think I could hardly have spent a hap-
pier time in my life. It was arranged that as Mr. Hathastern’s busi-
ness would compel him to visit Melbourne and Sydney shortly, Selina
was to go with him and her Aunt, who would assist in her purchases
for the coming event, which was to take place in about a year.
Before they left an occurrence took place that resulted in a change
in my establishment. It was the custom whenever a patient came in
with money or valuables for me to take charge, and after entering the-


particulars in a book, I used to place the articles in a large cask box
of which I had the key, and the box was kept in a drawer where the
stewards papers and books were, of which Scupperson possessed the
key. Now a man had died who had packed up some rings—a wed-
ding and a mourning one—some cheap photographs and other odds
and ends of old treasures and relics. He had handed me the packet,
a five-pound note and a few shillings, and I placed them in the usual
receptacle, after entering them as a packet having a certain address
and so much money. After his death his relatives claimed, and the
five-pound note was missing. I was very much put out and went to
Inspector Skruten, who finding I had taken the number and date of
the note, sent round to the banks and business houses to enquire, but
without success, and bringing a constable with him he came to the
hospital, having asked Battens and Brassy as members of the com-
mittee to be present. He first heard my statement and ascertained
that the amount had been made up by me, and that I was not embar-
rassed for want of it in any way, all of which he got at while he was
chatting and asking questions in an incidental way. Turning on
Brassy suddenly, he asked if there was anyone on the staff that was
thoroughly trustworthy and reliable, Brassy said yes ! he would stake
his life on Scupperson. Ah ! well ! ! said the Inspector, as he is be-
yond suspicion we will make use of him as an example and examine
his things first. The search was conducted without my presence or
Scupperson’s either, he having been desired to remain in the dispen-
sary with me. Presently Skruten came in with a small greenstone
cross mounted with gold, that I had observed hanging from the pa-
tient’s neck when he first arrived. I was asked if it was a portion of
the trinkets that w 7 ere in the packet, but I could not say as the owner
had made up the parcel and given me no inventory. I had only
casually seen some of the things on his bed previously. Scupperson
declared positively that the dying patient had given him the cross a
few hours before he breathed his last. No bank note, nor indeed any
money at all was found amongst Scupperson’s effects, but the Inspec-
tor called afterwards and told mo that the Priest said he had lent the
patient a small ivory crucifix on his telling him he wanted to put his
own cross with other things safely aside for his children. One cir-
cumstance transpired that looked suspicious, which was, that Scup-
person possessed a key that fitted the lock of the cash box, and that
the key bore the appearance of having been filed to make it fit.
A committee meeting was called in consequence of what I have just
related ; but Scupperson, instead of being present as requested, chose
to be virtuously indignant, and tendered his resignation as preferable
to being suspected or cross-questioned. I need hardly say it was
accepted, not even his intimates raising their voices in dissent, when it
was found that the steward had monopolised for his own use a much
required water-bed, and always denied that there was a capable one
in the establishment. I may state here that at the following meeting
I laid before the committee a small tradesman’s tally book which had
been overlooked and left behind by the late steward. It contained in-
stead of trade entries a very nice little diary, though highly-coloured
and sensationally worded, of the movements, remarks, and occasional
non-successes (in the treatment of cases) of the Resident Medical


Officer—myself. There were also frequent and uncomplimentary
comments written with a pencil by a different hand in the margin,
which some of the committee thought they recognised as the hand-
writing oi Benlevi, but it was so violently denied that no more was
said on the subject.
Recent events were bound to produce an alteration in the conduct
of the establishment, and Mr. Hathastern who had been thoroughly
roused into giving more thought and time, now insisted that there
should be no divided authority. He said he considered if the Resi-
dent Medical Man was worth his salt he should be competent to rule
over so small an establishment, and he therefore moved that the Sur-
geon for the future should have the engaging and discharging of the
servants, and be held by the Committee to be alone responsible for
the good conduct of the staff. There were some who said a servant
should have the right of appeal to the committee, but the majority
supported the chairman in refusing to allow even the colour of inter-
ference with the authority of the head. And so I was at last placed
in the position I should have held from the first.
The cook resented the change and left, becoming as after circum-
stances proved, first housekeeper and then wife to Robert Scupperson,
eventual landlord of the Lambing-down-Flat Hotel; which Sims told
me was conducted on the orthodox system of moral suasion. I will
give his description of it. “An approaching traveller is notified by
some noisy dogs chained in position for viewing. He is then bound
to pull up to prevent a snapping mongrel charging at his horse’s
heels, while, under cover of quieting the noise or repressing the cur,
there stands the landlord bowing and smiling if you alight, but giving
you black looks and evil scowls if you dont, and leaving you to be fol-
lowed next quarter of a mile by his yelping nuisance unchecked,
and knowing perfectly well that his master turning his back means
that you are fair game.” Sims used to theorise on many of these
sort of things, and say heaps of evils could be chocked if the police, by
possessing more than a bumpkin intelligence, could be allowed a little
latitude to exercise their perceptive faculties instead of being tied
down to the letter of instructions and official routine. In speaking
as he did I am sure that Sims never meant his remarks to convey a
sweeping denunciation, as both to his and my knowledge there were
some men attached to the police department in New Zealand that
would have been ornaments to any service, but the lowness of the
pay and the red tapeism, has filled the ranks with strong built,
clumsy, thick-headed men who are capable of curt insolence to
strangers whom they think to be nobodies, and only able to shine-
in a rough and tumble scrimmage, for to do them justice they have
plenty of pluck.
Having referred to Inspector Skruten, I will here mention that a
friendly feeling sprang up between us which led to mutual calls and
much pleasant intercourse, and during it I learnt that he was an old
Rugbeian where he received his tuition under Bonamy Price, then
master at Rugby. After leaving it for college, some wild escapade,
coupled with austere relatives, caused his exodus to the colony, where
friendless, with hot blood and little ballast, he would no doubt have-


come to some terrible grief, had not he accidentally attracted the
notice of Mr. Commissioner Serjon who had a genius for distinguish-
ing between the worth of educated cleverness and of ignorant cunning
in the detection of crime ; and had given him opportunities which he
had availed himself of to rise ; and now he was a steady family man,
whose only weakness was to yarn about his youthful scrapes and de-
tective adventures, which were to me both entertaining and instruc-
tive.
Skruten spoke very highly of my predecessor and expressed consi-
derable disgust at his being hounded away by such men, as the
steward and his friends. He told me that Dr. Meriton had once done
him good service, and given him a wrinkle he would never forget.
They happened to be together when one of his men reported, a drunk-
and-incapable having been locked up. The doctor had strolled with
him, but on seeing the man’s eyes dilated he placed his pocket ther-
mometer in the cheek, and ascertaining that his temperature was
over 98° F. (blood heat), he pointed out that it was not a case of
stupor from drink but a patient for the hospital. Skruten added, I
invested a few shillings in a doctor’s thermometer, and it has saved my
district from having it said, that a chuckle-headed policeman had mis-
taken a case of illness for one of liquor.
Ah Doctor Aspen! he added, a smart policeman ought to be well
paid, as he is so necessarily occupied all his time, in learning a little
of everybody else’s business, as to generally unfit him to follow any
one occupation. Why Sir ! I had to go and work for a drunken
cooper for a fortnight, before I could find out how a cask of spirits
was broached without a hole being made or the hoops meddled with ;
and one or two other trade secrets, that circumstances made it neces-
sary for me to know. But to return to myself. I succeeded in ob-
taining some very good servants, and as my experience by this time
enabled me to draft necessary and effective rules for their guidance,
I should have been thoroughly comfortable and happy, if (Sims says
there is always an “if ” in this life) THAT Ladies Benevolent Society
would only have left me alone. It occurred thus. Mr. and Mrs.
Hathastern with their niece (my intended) and her mother had been
away some time, when a poor schoolmaster came to me in sad trou-
ble, His young wife a few months after the birth of her second child,
showed signs of aberration ; not violent or extreme, but neglectful of
her children, and expressing doubts as to the youngest having been
changed. She was very gentle but appeared to have an occasional
lapse of memory as to who she herself was, and regarding the identity
of her friends. The poor thing had no relatives beyond her husband
and children in the colony, and her husband could not afford a com-
petent companion for her, and would have been inexpressibly shocked
at the idea of laying an information before a magistrate, and getting
her committed to legal custody, as a lunatic. With the consent of
the committee I offered to take her into the hospital, for two or three
weeks, and see what an entire change of faces and surroundings
would effect. The first night, I placed her in one of the separate
rooms and arranged that a convalescent female patient should remain
with her during the day, and the housemaid sleep there at night.
For a day or two the journey and novelty of her surroundings had


a beneficial effect in tiring and causing natural sleep at night; but
one evening on visiting before retiring to rest I found that my precious
housemaid, having been talking of mad people with the cook and gar-
dener, had worked herself into such a state of nervousness that before
going to sleep she, by means of the clothes line and some bandages,
had tied the unfortunate lady so that she could not get out of
bed or even move. On my having everything loosened, the girl
refused to stop with the patient. I could not take the night nurse
from the ward, and the day nurse was out that night. 1 sent for the
cook, but cooky and the girl had mutually frightened themselves with
stories of what they called ravening madfolk, so I could do nothing
with either. I was very angry, but the women were right in saying
it was not the work’ they were engaged for; I accordingly made
them bring in a large folding screen and having partitioned off the
patient’s bed, I drew another bedstead across and inside the door and
laid down in my clothes with a lamp and the last “ Retrospect ” pre-
pared to solace myself until daylight would enable me to obtain the
services of a competent woman. For sometime I was aware of my
patient peeping round the screen at me, but that ceased and I could
soon hear that she was soundly sleeping. I read on till just before
daylight when having freshened the fire and trimmed the lamp I must
have fallen asleep myself, as I awoke in broad daylight through my
supposed dangerous lunatic gently lifting my head to insert her own
pillow under it. She nodded .and smiled and showed me that she
had stripped a counterpane and blanket from her bed and covered me
up. I could not help laughing and proceeded to rouse up the ser-
vants whom I told the joke to, before I turned in for an hour or two.
They chatted and gossiped as a matter of course, and, as I ought to
have known, equally as a matter of course, the Benevolent Ladies set
to work and before twenty-four hours were over, I found base motives
and scandalous conduct attributed to me, with the truth and falsehood
so admixed as to render it impossible to give a flat denial without
appearing to falsify oneself. I foresaw that distorted facts and sensa-
tional paragraphs would be the “ order of the day” and I heard that
officious friends were already writing condoling letters to my Intended.
Oh ! How I cursed those Benevolent Ladies, their parents, grand-
parents, and all belonging to them. Only one thing stopped the row
and prevented the peace of mind of the poor schoolmaster being
ruined for ever, and that one thing, fortunately for all concerned, was
the complete restoration to mental health of his wife. She remem-
bered everything, and in mentioning my kindness and care, she re-
lated with great glee the episode of the watcher being watched.
Before Mr. Hathastern returned I had gained great “ kudos ” with
the committee in general by showing, without any alteration in effi-
ciency or diet, that a little reasonable care had reduced the expendi-
ture from 295. per head per week to 175., inclusive of everything but
the surgeon’s salary. Of course some of the tradesmen kicked against
a scrutiny they were not accustomed to, but public opinion was too
strong for the grumblers to have any sway ; and besides, it was be-
coming generally known that the hospital had been getting into
arrears a few hundred pounds, and their banker was a little pressing
in his requests to have their overdraft reduced, which caused a special


committee meeting to be called in a week, to consider ways and
means. The day before the meeting was held, Markham asked me
to go with him to see some children in a filthy hut at the lower end
of an undrained swamp. He said they had all been down with a
species of typhoid fever, but that one had an eruption so like scarlet
fever that he would like my opinion. We saw the case which was
sufficiently like scarlatina to make it advisable to report it to the
Board of Health.
The town council were ex-officio the Board of Health, and as most
of the same persons were on the Hospital Committee, it was only
natural that the subject should become a topic of conversation at the
meeting next day; and the suggestion arose to take advantage of the
circumstance to take a rise out of the government. One child had
died that morning and the others were ill, and I was requested to
give an opinion as to the probable infectiousness of the disease. I
was also asked to draw up a report, which stated that I had no de-
tached building for a fever ward, and that the residence of the people
affected was unfit for human habitation, &c., &c. The report of Mr.,
or as he was more generally called Dr. Markham, to the Board was
attached, with mine, to a strong representation that was sent to the
government, in which all the facts were exaggerated and a rather
broad assertion made that the efforts of the hospital authorities, to
cope with and stamp out so dire a visitation, were paralysed for the
want of credit for the most ordinary supplies and absence of the
necessary accommodation. Before these communications could reach
Wellington, the colony rung from end to end with sensational tele-
grams—that Sopemdown was a hot bed of typhoid and scarlet fever.
Deaths were occurring, and superhuman efforts were being made by
the Board of Health and Hospital Authorities, ably seconded by the
available medical talent, to prevent it spreading. Also that urgent
application would be made to Wellington for assistance, should local
bodies require it. The public and governmental mind having been
properly prepared by the foregoing, I need hardly say that the cry for
help was promptly responded to by a draft for £5OO. In the mean-
time two of the children had died, and the rest on removal to a clean
residence, pure air, and wholesome diet, had recovered; and as no
one else had caught any infection, Markham agreed with me in
thinking that a great deal had been made out of very little, and that
it was not scarlet fever at all.
A portion of the money came in useful to settle some old and press-
ing accounts, a portion went to sweeten the bank and, to save ap-
pearances, about forty five pounds were spent in running up a weather
board building 14 ft. x 20 ft. that was dignified with the name of
“ Detached Fever Ward ” and which with the addition of a boiler was
made to answer admirably as a washhouse.
The above circumstances seem to have established a better under-
standing between the committee and myself, a sort of bond of union,
as it were, that would render useless any attempts to put us at vari-
ance with one another. Such a change had come over the spirit of
my dream, that my salary was raised fifty pounds per annum, on a
motion proposed by Brassy and seconded by Benlevi; and an illu-
minated testimonial was presented to me in acknowledgment of my
services, during a period of such severe trial as the late visitation.


The Hathasterns, with my intended, returned in time, the latter
having been furnished with her trousseau, which her sister mischiev-
ously described as consisting of a dozen of everything; our wedding
took place soon afterwards. The jollification, feasting, crying, laugh-
ing, speechifying, and throwing shoes, that usually accompany the
ceremony, all took place in their proper order. We spent our honey-
moon in a long tour of the two islands, and from Eotorma to Lake
Wakatipee, visited every place of interest, by which we learnt how
little those who do not travel know of the land they live in. We en-
joyed ourselves, as people only can once in their lives, and then
settled down into a prosaic Darby and Joan existence in my apart-
ments at Sopemdown Hospital.
The hospital finances soon afterwards again became embarrassed,
and though by getting up Amateur Theatricals, a Soirde Musicale
and hospital sports, we managed to supplement the funds, yet the
colony was getting older, and, with an increasing population of poorer
people in the district, the claims on the institution were extending
faster than the voluntary support.
I also foresaw a probability of my apartments becoming too limited
for my family requirements, so that I, as well as the committee, was
very much exercised in my mind as to the future. That a change
must occur was certain, and a change did happen.
It was brought about by a conversation at Mr. Hathastern’s one
day, after dinner ; a legal friend who was a visitor to the neighbour-
hood being the chief agent. The result of that after-dinner inspiration
was a contract being entered into with Larkin & Co., for handsome
additions to the building ; an extensive order was sent to England for
furniture, books, instruments, medicine, and a large assortment of
druggist’s sundries. More ground was enclosed, and by broad gravel
walks, an ornamental fence, and a large supply of novel trees and
shrubs, a sort of ornamental botanical garden was created ; my salary
was raised seventy-five pounds per annum ; and then, having pledged
the credit of the hospital to the utmost, the committee gracefully
threw the whole on the hands of the government.
Of course the government of the day could not shut up such a
necessary establishment, they could not allow bailiffs to go in, nor
were they in a position to repudiate liabilities incurred by a body who
had been acting under their authority, and sanctioned by their sub-
sidy. They became morally, and in many opinions legally, responsi-
ble as partners in the firm. After a deal of vapouring about deducting
the cost of maintenance, from subsidies to be granted to the district,
(though they knew such subsidies would under any circumstances
become curtailed and gradually cease), the government appointed
a local board, consisting of some of the prominent members of the
late committee, with a few ex-officio and other additions, to manage
the hospital for the future, under the name of commissioners, the ac-
counts to be paid monthly by voucher from Wellington. All the
debts were paid, and the staff remained in position and salary as the
change found it. People also ceased to be worried for contributions,
and the late improvements supplied me with ample accommodation and
made a picturesque embellishment to the neighbourhood. The
change from an elected committee to a nominated board of commis-


sioners had excluded the small men and introduced the mayor, ex-
officers, two retired Government officers, and a squatting Justice of
the Peace.
The mayor elect happened to be a political watchmaker, or rather
watchseller, who was quite a character in his way and as a specimen
of a class, that may be met in many small places and one or two of
whom are sure to be found in all large ones, is entitled to more than a
cursory description. He was a man of some shrewdness and a clever
though dogmatic style of making his opinions known ; obstinate and
too violent to discuss or argue temperately, his vanity made him per-
vious to ridicule, intensely touchy and irritable, and always ready to
construe a smile or look into a deadly affront, not to be spoken of but
never to be forgiven. His unfortunate inability to understand, much
less appreciate, a joke or indeed wit in any shape, unless it was coarse
and personal, was perhaps partly the reason for his frequently taking
offence where none was intended. This man’s very soul hungered
after parochial distinction and political oratory. The wonderful man-
ner in which he would harangue any small assembly in or out of
season about the unearned increment and the incidence of taxation,
(pronouncing the second syllable in incidence long), made him an
oracle to the working classes ; and having a retentive memory he
could quote Adam Smith’s “ Wealth of Nations ” in a very effective
manner. I knew him well for years, and in my own small way oc-
casionally had dealings with him, but I could never account, through
my acquaintance with him, for his always being held up at election
times as the “ honest man,” which was repeated often as his claim
for support. I sometimes thought the reiteration of the statement
impressed the belief, and sometimes that people looked upon his ex-
treme obstinacy and pugnacious irascibility as a necessary outcome
and proof of honesty.
It was chiefly owing to this gentleman, and two of the new com-
missioners, that another alteration was to take place.
The establishment was placed under a superintendent appointed
independently of the Eesident Surgeon. The medical men of the
neighbourhood were asked to act as an honorary visiting staff, and
my salary was reduced, and my duties confined to professional mat-
ters only. A W., or Sergeant, Buckram was appointed Major domo
under the designation of superintendent. He had been a commissary
clerk and orderly in the Crimean War where he obtained a medal,
and a supreme contempt for anything not military. He was an un-
bending martinet to himself and everybody else, and the precision
with which the household had to move was as nearly like clock-work as
possible. He was a perfect martyr to his own discipline, and took his
meals, his sleep and exercise, strictly officially and as a duty. The
rest of his time was employed in his office checking, entering, docket-
ing etc., in which bunches of keys, an immense lot of books and many
pigeon holes were always in requisition. I bowed to the changes with
as good a grace as I could and endeavoured to achieve friendly rela-
tions with Buckram, but was placed at a distance at once by official
civility combined with military brevity—a manner that never changed
during my knowledge of him, neither during our great dispute as to
whether the diets should be separately allotted in the kitchen accord-


ing to the patients’ cards, as I wanted, or whether the quantity should
be sent up in bulk to be divided in the wards as he insisted; nor on
another occasion when I interfered to prevent a discharged porter
from assaulting him.
The medical men of the neighbourhood having become an honorary
staff, it behoved me to keep up friendly relations with them ; so after
some trouble owing to their dislikes to one another, I succeeded in
initiating little periodical supper re-unions at which I held the posi-
tion of Amicus Curse. Their good fellowship when they met was
only to be equalled by the spite and bitterness they exhibited behind
each others back. I have often felt ashamed at the enjoyment I af-
fected at Markham’s stories of Coosher’s mistakes, or Coosher’s some-
what filthy and frequently false anecdotes against Markham. It was
after all a necessary act of policy with me, for while they worked hard
for but moderate remuneration, I could pocket the consultation guineas
for doing very little more than looking and acting the “correct thing,”
and maintaining civil terms with the medical attendants. In per-
forming my part on the above and many other occasions, I found a
youthful proficiency in amateur theatricals stand me in good stead ;
and, to ensure success, I should recommend young medical men to
cultivate the art of acting as possessing a far larger worldly value than
sore eyes and abstracted looks from over study.
The alteration in our establishment under the new, or what I may
call the red tape, regime, soon made a prodigious show, and requires
something more than a brief description. I will take the medical de-
partment first. The honorary staff were of course honorary as far as
receiving no payment in money went, but, as no wheel will go with-
out grease, the lubricating material in this instance was a “ carte-
blanche” to order, and try, every new remedy, instrument and con-
trivance that caught their eye, or fired their imagination. Now as
new things are constantly arriving, a twentieth part of which only
stand the test of time, and as that twentieth part, directly its value is
ascertained, is immediately improved out of its original crude form, it
may be imagined how soon we became lumbered up with the results
of the requisitions of our honorary medical staff.
Shelves upon shelves were being taken up with herbs or their pre-
parations from the four quarters of the globe. American eclectic
remedies, Indian, Abyssinian, Pacific, Australasian, all parts in fact
of the known world were contributing something in medicine, employ-
ment to the manufactory of new and strange names, and to the ex-
pense and lumber of our hospital, every month of the year.
We were likely to have one case of Tapeworm in five years, so
fifteen specifics for that complaint had been obtained, and probably
before the next case of the kind applied for relief, some new remedy
will have superseded all the rest.
We obtained, regardless of expense, an enormous number of differ-
ent drugs alone, but when I come to the instrument department, I
am unequal to an adequate description. The ingenious forms and
different patents for putting up every variety of fracture would have
furnished a different apparatus for every fracture we were likely to
have for several years, and no two of them alike. From complicated


Laryngoscopes and delicate Sphygmographs down to all the items of
the Listerian system; the honorary staff gave the authorities lots of
opportunity to admire their honorary energy and extravagance. I
was nearly forgetting one thing that was requisitioned by Markham
and cost about sixty pounds. It was a mechanical triumph called an
“operating table.” It was full of screws, levers, racks, and pinions,
and wonderful dodges by which each leg and every six inches of the
surface could be elevated, depressed, elongated, doubled, detached, or
made to assume a different form. By fastening a patient in a certain
way and moving a fly-wheel, he could be turned about horizontally as
if he was on a spit, or by a lever and crank system, adjustments be-
tween the vertical and recumbent posture could be obtained. We
tried it once, but I suppose for the want of a mechanical engineer to
work it, we got rather in a mess. The patient on recovery from
chloroform found that, instead of operating on her, we had been hurt-
ing ourselves. Coosher with a black eye and his spectacles broken,
Markham’s finger crushed, while I was trying to repress the agony I
felt from a violent blow on the shin, through one of the levers flying
out in an unexpected direction. We never employed it again. From
what I have described, it will be seen that the medical expenses were
increased, but that was a flea-bite compared to the household. Buck-
ram’s office was to introduce method and discipline, and he did it,
but cast iron rules are costly. A Ward used to have a day nurse and
a night nurse, who would run in and help one another when neces-
sary, and used to give-and-take to accommodate one another, for
their meals, or at other times ; but now they were tied down to dis-
cipline and signing a book in going on or off duty; it required three
to the twenty-four hours with supernumerary assistants for help or
messages. One cook and assistant used to do the work with casual
aid from convalescents; but with no such help, and keeping military
time, the cook required two assistants and a scrubber. The house-
maid and porter staff was increased, an extra hand in the garden, and
a gate-keeper to keep entries of outgoings and incomings. The pro-
visions, though strictly requisitioned for, entered, tallied, and in-
dexed, were not stinted, and besides frequent servant’s parties, beer
and spirits were hospitably offered to all visitors at the kitchen offices.
It was not my business to interfere, and the servants having ceased
to consider me their head, would have resented anything of the kind
by adopting that passive species of opposition and dumb impertinence
so easy to perform, and difficult to resent or even describe. Buckram
did not profess to understand catering for the hospital. The Com-
missioners had done their part in assisting to bring about a system
that they were proud of. No one, however, was particularly inter-
ested as to the cost, as that was nobody’s business.
We all saw that the advantages of the hospital were beginning to be
made use of by a numerous loafing class, who under pretence of rheu-
matic pains, or some invisible complaint, would come in during bad
weather, or in the winter, when their occupations as sand-owners or
general cadgers could not be so pleasantly pursued. No one having
proper authority, of course, prevented any making themselves in-
vidious by attempting to resist it, so we were quietly drifting into
being a ruinously wasteful and expensive establishment.


The notice of the Government was soon attracted to the extravagant
cost of the hospital, and various abortive efforts were made for re-
form. Inquiries were held at different times resulting in various
serving members of the staff, who without efficient control had taken
liberties, being dismissed and replaced by others new to their duties.
Next poor Buckram was kicked out for being what he was, first rate
in his own line, but impracticable out of it. Then the salaries were
all reduced, and the experienced nurses gave place to cheaper substi-
tutes. A professional lecturer on invalid cooking was then induced
by a handsome salary to take charge of the domestic part of the esta-
blishment, under the title of Matron ; and I, fairly frightened of the
results of any more experiments, and doubting my possession of
sufficient tact for the pandemonium likely to ensue, closed with the
offer of a practice in a populous district and sent in my resignation,
leaving the Sopemdown, with many other hospitals, in anything but a
cheerful and satisfactory state, awaiting legislation from a “ Hospital
and Charitable Aid Act,” that is brought forward every session, and
as carefully dropped by each successive government, to the apparent
relief of many members of the House, who evince little desire for dis-
cussing a difficult subject that very few understand.
For reasons set forth in the preface, in concluding my narrative,
with Selina’s kind regards to the reader, I must crave permission to
still remain under the nom de Plume
PLACEBO ASPEN, M.D.




■■■v - * „ i
*
