

ROYAL
GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY
OF AUSTRALASIA,
QUEENSLAND.
Expedition to the Gulf of Carpentaria.
(With 27 Plates.)
By J. P. THOMSON,
LL.D., Hon. F.R.S.G.S., etc.
Outridge Print, Brisbane.


The Royal Geographical Society of Australasia.
QUEENSLAND
FOUNDED 1885.
yf.
ftjHIS Society lias been established in Brisbane for the last twenty-five years. It
T was instituted with the view of promoting the interests of Geographical science
in its widest sense, of encouraging exploration and pioneering enterprise in
Australasia, and of furthering the study of Physical and Commercial Geography.
While these objects cannot fail to commend themselves to the scientific, com-
mercial, agricultural, and other industrial classes of the community, and to many
persons engaged in extending pastoral and mining enterprise into distant parts of the
Continent, the great educational advantages to be derived from the establishment of
this Society will be no less apparent to all intelligent citizens of the Commonwealth.
Any lady or gentleman may become an Ordinary Member, subject to election.
subscription, £1 is. por annum, due on the Ist July in each year.
Life Membership, £lO IO».
The usual Entrance Fee is not charged at present.
Memhers' Privileges
To receive the Society’s Diploma.
The right to be present at, and to introduce two friends to, all meetings of the
■Society.
The privileges of admission (without additional fee) to the meetings of the Itoyal
Geographical Society, London, and of the use, for the purpose of reference, of the Map
Room and Library.
To be allowed to purchase copies of all the publications of the Royal Geographical
Society, London, on special terms.
Membership of the Royal Scottish Geographical Society when in North Britain
without payment of additional fee, and the privilege of purchasing The Scottish Get-
graphical Magazine on special terms.
To have access to the Library and other public rooms of the Society.
To receive a copy of the Society’s official publications.
Diplomas of Fellowship.
Section IV, Clause 3, Constitution and Rules
The Council may confer the Diploma of Fellowship upon such eminent persons
as have rendered valuable services to geographical science ; on persons of distinguished
scientific attainments ; on those who have promoted the objects of the Society ; and
on Honorary and Honorary Corresponding Members of the Society, without the pay-
ment of diploma fees. On Ordinary Members, on payment of a nominal diploma fee,
subject to the following conditions, namely;—(a) Upon written application. Those
who have compounded for life membership and are deemed worthy of the distinction
by the Council, (h) Upon written application ; Those who are not in arrears with
their annual subscriptions, and are, upon the recommendation of the Council, approved
by the Society at an ordinary monthly meeting. Of the honorary class the number
of Fellows shall not exceed ten. Each Diploma, after being approved by the Council,
shall be signed by the President and by the Hon. Secretary of the Society. Members
who receive the diplomas shall have the privilege of designating themselves “ Fellows
of the Society and may use the initials F.E.G.S.A.Q. after their names as long as
they continue to be members of the Society.
Ladies or gentlemen who wish to become Members of this Society may do so by
handing in or posting their names to the Hon. Secretary, at the Rooms, Public
Library Building, Brisbane, or to any Member of the Society, who will arrange for
their nomination.






VIEW OF GLADSTONE HARBOUR, NORTH COAST RAILWAY, CENTRAL QUEENSLAND.
VIEWS OF MACKAY, NORTH QUEENSLAND,
1. Sydney Street. 2. Flat-top Island Anchorage. 3. Victoria Street.
Plate I.
Queensland Geographical Journal, Vol. XXV.


THE FAMOUS WHITSUNDAY PASSAGE, NORTH QUEENSLAND.
Plate 2
Queensland Geographical Journal, Vol. XXV,


VIEWS OF TOWNSVILLE, NORTH QUEENSLAND,
1. The Strand, North Ward. 2. The Harbour. 3. Centre of the City.
Plate 3
Queensland Geographical Journal, Vol. XXV.


FISHER'S FALLS, NEAR TNNISFATL. NORTH QUEENSLAND.
VIEWS OF CAIRNS, NORTH QUEENSLAND.
1. Abbott Street. 2. The Esplanade. 3. The Wharves.
Plate 4.
Queensland Geographical Journal, Vol. XXV.


EXPEDITION TO THE GULF OF CARPENTARIA.*
By J. P. THOMSON, LL D., Hon. F.R.S.G.S., etc.
(WITH 27 PLATES).
At a Special Meeting of the Council of the Royal Geographical
Society of Australasia, Queensland, held at the’rooms of the Society,
on Thursday. September 23rd, 1909, the following resolution, moved
by the Vice-President, was unanimously adopted:—“ Whereas,
Mr. T. Graham, the Manager of Magoura Station, near Normanton,
having reported that he had found certain marked trees on the
eastern bank of the Bynoe River, at a spot about 22 miles S.W. from
Normanton, and as there is every reason to believe that the trees
were marked by the explorers, Burke and Wills, at their most Northern
camp, No. 119, the Council resolve that the necessary steps should
be taken by the Society to verify the trees and the position of the
camp, and that to that end the Secretary, Dr. J. P. Thomson, as
the person most qualified for the duty, be requested to proceed to
Normanton at an early date, in order that the genuineness or otherwise
of the discovery be definitely and surely determined ; (a) by critically
examining and carefully photographing the trees; (b) by determining
the correct latitude of the site by stellar observations; (c) by ascertain-
ing the rise and fall of the tide in the Bynoe River ; (d) by photo-
graphs of the river and immediate locality of the site, and generally
in such other ways as Dr. Thomson may consider necessary or
advisable; and that the expenses connected with the investigation
be borne by the Society, with the help of such aid as may be
afforded by the Government and by private subscription.”
Acting in accordance with this resolution, preparations were
speedily made for the expedition to the Gulf country, and with the
active co-operation, and valuable assistance of the Vice-President,
Mr. Geo. Phillips, and the Surveyor General, Mr. A. A. Spowers,
• Read at Special General Meeting of the Royal Geographical Society of
Australasia, Queensland. February 17th, 1910.
Reprinted from the Proceedings and Transactions of the Royal Geographical Society of
Australasia, Queensland, Vol. XXV.


the necessary arrangements were soon completed, as it was very
desirable that an early start should be made before the wet season set
in. The instrumental equipment consisted of a Sextant, a Box
Sextant, Mercurial Artificial Horizon, Aneroid Barometer, Prismatic
Compass, Solar Black Bulb Thermometer, Fahr. Thermometer,
one five chain steel band, a one chain steel band, and a Chesterman
Metallic 66 ft. tape, one half-plate Camera by J. Lancaster & Son,
Birmingham, with a Lichtner & Co. Rapid Rectilinear Lens, an
Eastman, No. 3 A Folding Film Kodak, a liberal supply of plates
and films, together with the necessary chemicals for developing
same, all made up in packets ready for use. With everything packed
up securely, a start was made from the Central Station
by the Northern Mail train on Friday night the Ist October. On
arrival at Gladstone the following day, I embarked on board the S.S.
“ Maranoa,” and in the afternoon sailed for Townsville, via ports,
the weather being delightfully fine with cloudless sky andgentle breeze.
The town of Gladstone, 328 miles north of Brisbane, is pleasantly
situated at the mouth of Auckland Creek, on an elevated ridge over-
looking the harbour, with good natural drainage, and high hills and
ranges away in the background giving the place a picturesque setting.
It is an important shipping port for extensive pastoral and mining
areas, with a deep water harbour protected on the outside by Curtis
Island, and forming one of the safest and most commodious harbours
in Australia, “ inferior only to Port Jackson and Hobart Town,”
according to Colonel Barney, who reported to the Government on
the matter in July, 1817 ; and this view has more recently been
confirmed by another authority, who considered that the harbour
“ of Port Curtis offers safe anchorage for 1,000 of the largest vessels
alloat.” It is certainly an excellent sea-port, and has recently figured
very largely in Roman Catholic literature, in consequence of the
remarkable theory postulated by Cardinal Moran, who claims for
the Spanish Navigator, De Quiros, the honour of its discovery, in
. 606, or more than one hundred and fifty years before Captain Cook.
His Eminence’s views upon so important a geographical discovery
are altogether too extravagant for serious consideration, further
than to remark that the physical and general local conditions of Port
Curtis are such as to render any reasonable comparison with those
of the Bay of Santo, in the New Hebrides, out of the question.
After leaving Gladstone, we steamed northerly along the pictures-
que shores of Central Queensland, and passing through the interesting
Beverly Group, anchored off Flat Top Island, at the mouth of the
Pioneer River, about half-past nine o’clock on the following morning.
Here the first cocoanut palms were met with. Port Mackay is the


outlet of a fine pastoral and agricultural district, vfith extensive areas
of rich alluvial soils in the bottom lands of the Pioneer River Valley,
now occupied by numerous cane plantations, the locality being for
many years the seat of an important sugar industry. Although
lying within the tropics the mean shade temperature is only 73 degrees,
and the average annual rainfall but 7.1 inches.
After leaving Flat Top Island the “ Maranoa ” steamed northerl}’,
hugging the coast line, and winding through the beautiful Whitsunday
Passage, reached the pretty town of Bowen on Sunday afternoon.
The whole population of the place seemed to be down on the jetty
when the steamer arrived, both sexes having evidently turned out
in holiday attire to do justice to the occasion. Bowen occupies
an advantageous position on the shores of Port Denison, and is favour-
ably situated as the outlet of an important agricultural and pastoral
district, famous for its excellent fruits. The harbour is commodious,
and affords splendid accommodation for all kinds of shipping. In
point of fact, there are physical reasons why Port Denison should
rank as one of the finest harbours on the Eastern coast of Australia.
After landing the mails and passengers the “ Maranoa ” cast off
from Bowen jetty and steamed away at full speed for Townsville,
which was reached on the following morning at daybreak. Here the
oversea and coastal vessels berth alongside the outer breakwater
jetty, separated from the town by a long, dusty road across an
uninteresting stretch of bare flat land, at the mouth of Ross Creek,
which is probably one of the least imposing tidal streams at low water
to be found near any of the important coastal towns of Northern
Queensland. There can be little doubt that the material improvement
of this area and its intersecting road of access would be greatly
advantageous to the town, and contribute considerably to the
convenience and personal comfort of visitors. Townsville, although
a seaport of great importance and unlimited possibilities, is less
favourably circumstanced, on account of its exposed position and
physical disabilities than some of the natural harbours on the Pacific
Coast line of the Australian Continent. Commercial enterprise and
engineering skill combined, have, however, contributed to the
extensive improvements of the inner harbour, by the construction of an
immense breakwater at a heavy cost, and this is placed so as to afford
ample accommodation and complete protection for coastal and oversea
shipping of every description. Townsville may, therefore, be
considered as the commercial capital of North Queensland, with
ample resources and unlimited potentialities for development. At
present, it is an important distributing centre for oversea imports,
and the natural outlet of an extensive district,whose mineral areas


include the famous Charters Towers and Ravenswood goldfields,
and the copper deposits of the Cloncurry region. It is also backed
by vast pastoral and agricultural areas, including the fertile sugar
lands of the Burdekin delta and large station properties, where
the finest quality of wool is produced, and stock of every description
raised annually in large numbers, while railroads stretch out from
the town to Richmond, Cloncurry, Hughenden, Winton, and other
important industrial centres. At Townsville the passengers and
cargo for northeni ports were transhipped into the S.S. “ Kuranda,”
an up-to-date twin-screw steamer, which left, as usual, about o’clock
on Monday morning, or some five or six hours after the arrival of
the “ Maranoa.” The run to Cairns, which was reached about noon
on Tuesday, was accomplished in ideal weather without any
remarkable incident or mishap. The intermediate ports of call
included Lucinda Point, Cardwell and Geraldton, at the mouth of
the Johnstone River. This part of the journey embraces the most
interesting and picturesque section of the coast line, comprising the
diversified beauties of the Hinchinbrook Passage and the lofty
ranges in the neighbourhood of Battle Frere and Bellenden Ker
amongst the highest elevations in Australia. Favoured by a
copious rainfall of over one hundred and forty inches, the Cardwell
district and neighbourhood, extending North to Cairns and Port
Douglas, is covered with dense tropical vegetation, in striking contrast
to the other coastal districts of Queensland, the general appearance
of the country very much resembling the jungle clad islands of Poly-
nesia. The J ohnstone and Mulgrave Rivers are the principal streams
of this district, whose low lands are flanked by rugged ranges and
precipitous mountains, clothed to the summits with forest and
scrub. Large areas of the alluvial flats are under cultivation, and
sugar cane is grown extensively, especially in the valley of the
Johnstone, where important sugar industrial centres have long been
established. The general aspect of the country is very beautiful,
a succession of plains, hills, and mountains, marked with gorgeously
tinted vegetation, whose ever-changing colours reveal themselves
to perfection in the slanting rays of early morning sunlight, when
the heavy dew-drops are dripping from the foliage, and with the
cloud shadows passing over all.
The town of Cairns, located on the shores of Trinity Bay, occupies
a site barely above sea level, and but for the protection afforded
by the Great Barrier Reef would probably be rendered unhabitable
by periodical invasions of the sea. As it is the place is absolutely
secure, and seems to be one of the most prosperous seaport towns
in the State, with every prospect of development as the main


BARRON GORGE, CAIRNS RAILWAY, NORTH QUEENSLAND.
Plate 5.
Queensland Geographical Journal, Vol. XXV.


STONY CREEK FALLS, CAIRNS RAILWAY, NORTH QUEENSLAND.
SURPRISE CREEK, CAIRNS RAILWAY, NORTH QUEENSLAND.
Plate 6.
Queensland Geographical Journal, Vol. XXV.


ST. PAUL'S GAP, NEWCASTLE RANGE.
SIX-HORSE MAIL COACH, CHARLESTON TO GEORGETOWN.
Plate 7.
Queensland Geographical Journal, Vol. XXV.


DURHAM POST OFFICE AND MAIL COACH, NORTH QUEENSLAND.
FIVE-HORSE MAIL COACH, GEORGETOWN TO CROYDON.
Plate 8
Queensland Geographical Journal, Vol. XXV.


CROYDON, NORTH QUEENSLAND.
Plate 9.
Queensland Geographical Journal, Vol. XXV.


NORMANTON ABORIGINES —NORMAN RIVER IN THE BACKGROUND.
10
Queensland Geographical Journal, Vol. XXV.


LAST OF THE BYNOE NATIVES, SHOWING ORNAMENTAL MARKINGS.
LAST OF THE BYNOE NATIVES IN WAR PAINT.
Plate 11
Queensland Geographical Journal, Vol. XXV.


LAST OF THE BYNOE NATIVES, SHOWING BOTH SEXES.
Plate 12.
Queensland Geographical Journal, Vol. XXV.


outlet of an extensive and most important mining and sugar-growing
district. The streets are wide and shade trees were seen growing
in some of the principal thoroughfares. It is the initial point of a
railroad system extending to the Barron Falls at Kuranda, the Mul-
grave, Mareeba, Atherton, Mt. Garnet, Chillagoe, and Etheridge
goldfields. The climate is moderately tropical in the town, but
a rapid eool change is experienced on the edge of the Herberton
Tableland at Kuranda, a two hours’ journey by train. The rich soils
of the coastal belt are rendered extremely fertile in the neighbourhood
of Cairns by a bountiful rainfall of 77 inches. The land in the
neighbourhood of the town, and extending as far as the Barron River,
and up the slopes of the foot hills Westerly and Northerly, is under
cultivation, the whole being laid out into comparatively small
plantations, mostly in the hands of Chinamen, who supply the market
with a variety of fruits and vegetables unprocurable from any other
source. Indeed, there seems to be little doubt that in the agricultural
industry of the State, the celestial settlers would have no difficulty
in establishing their claim as being at least among the earliest pioneers.
Anyway, their carefully cultivated plantations lend beauty and
animation to the scenic attractions of the locality, and at the same
time serve a very useful and, in point of fact, indispensable purpose
in the economy of pioneering life.
From Cairns I travelled overland to Normanton by rail and
coach, most of the journey being over interesting though extremely
dry country. The railroad as far as Mareeba J unction is the property
of the Government, but from there on to Almaden Junction, and
right across the Etheridge Gold Field to Charleston, it is owned and
operated by the Chillagoe Company. At the time of my visit the line
was, however, only open to traffic as far as Reedy Springs, about
fifteen miles from Charleston, the journey thence to Croydon, via
Georgetown, being by coach across country for probably 135 miles.
One distinctive feature of the private railroad is noticeable in the
absence of elevated platforms at the various stations and sidings
along the line, which corresponds with the American system, and
is probably well adapted to existing conditions of settlement in a
comparatively new country. With the exception of a few widely
scattered mining centres, the whole of the territory under consideration
is unsettled, its present accessibility and much of its development
being due to the enterprise of the Chillagoe Company, whose extensive
operations in opening up a vast wilderness to industrial occupation
is an object lesson to the public of Queensland, and a monumental
example of the immense advantages derived to the country at large
by well directed private effort. The first stage of my overland journey


from Cairns to Normanton embraced the Barron Falls and Gorge,
the former being,yery disappointing on account of the comparatively
small volume of water in the River, long stretches of the Channel
above and below the falls being quite dry, in the absence of much
needed rain, a condition only too apparent over the whole of this
Northern part of the State. The Barron Falls are responsible for
much good, bad, and indifferent local literature, descriptive of their
scenic beauties under conditions as varied as are the authors themselves.
In most cases the descriptions are ridiculously extravagant. Even
when the Barron River is in full flood the Falls can bear no possible
comparison with any of the world’s greatest cataracts. On the other
hand, the Barron Gorge, and associated physical features below the
Falls are most impressive in their natural beauty, which is probably
unsurpassed in any other part of the world. I have traversed the
famous Royal Gorge and the Grand Canyon of the Colorado region,
have passed through the rugged and precipitous defiles of the
Drachenbergs, and the profound chasms of the New Zealand ranges,
but to my mind they are not so attractive in point of natural beauty
as the Barron Gorge, whose beautifully tinted mantle of rich tropical
vegetation imparts to the rugged landscape a charmingly animated
appearance, lovely to the eye and seductive to the senses. The
railroad hugs the edge of this Gorge, so that the physical structure of
the country, the details of the landscape, and the panorama spread out
to the astonished gaze of the traveller, may be studied with great
advantage from the carriage platform or window. In a long, wide,
and varied experience all over the world, nothing similar seems
to have impressed me so much as the Barron Gorge and locality,
so much so that I felt half inclined to give expression to my feelings
in the words of a famous author who must have been brought face
to face with a similar nature picture when he wrote; —
“ So wondrous bright the whole would seem.
The scenery of a fairy dream.”
To my mind, as a disinterested observer, it would be more desirable
in tourist’s literature to emphasise the beauty and attractiveness
of the Barron Gorge in preference to the Falls, which according to
the natural order of things must always vary very greatly in volume,
and consequently in general appearance. This would disarm
criticism, and leave no room for disappointment on the part of tourists
who might probably visit the locality, as I happened to do when the
Falls bore little resemblance to their pictorial representations.
Geographically considered, the whole of the country from
Kuranda, at the head of the Barron Gorge, to Croydon, is what may


be described in general terms as an extensive undulating tableland,
whose elevation above sea-level varies from 1,000 to 3,400 or 3,000 feet.
In places where the area is intersected or traversed by such features
as the Newcastle Range, the Gregory Range, the Featherbed Range,
and other unimportant topographical representations, the variations
in elevation are comparatively slight, and probably rarely exceed
a few hundred feet above or below the general surface level, which,
extending over a large area of country, is barely perceptible. These
local physiographical conditions mainly contribute to the extreme
dryness of the atmospheric air, and the comparative coolness of
the climate on the whole. It is true that the vertical rays of the
summer sun greatly intensify the general heat of the season, and
render outdoor life less agreeable than during the cooler months
of the year, but there is a modifying influence exercised by the excessive
dryness of the climate. The sky is generally cloudless, the radiation
after sunset is consequently great, the temperature falls rapidly,
and the nights are usually cool. The winter climate is said to be
perfect.
On the whole the country is poorly and lightly timbered with
scattered and stunted forest trees. There is consequently very little
shade, and the glare from the sun baked surface of the ground is
usually uncomfortable to the unprotected eyes.
The geological structure of the territory indicates an extensive
development of the Palaeozoic formation, in which the granites pre-
dominate, and this is associated with comparatively narrow belts
of basaltic and other igneous rocks. The known mineral areas are
both rich and extensive, being widely distributed over the whole of
the country, but there are other vast tracts still awaiting examination
by the pioneer prospector, notwithstanding the numerous goldfields
along the railway lines and elsewhere. The soils vary considerably
in distribution, quality, and composition. In most places they are
rich, and only require an adequate water suppl} - to render them
extremely fertile. There are, however, patches of country where the
soil is poor, and barely capable of sustaining a scanty vegetation.
This is particularly noticeable in what is known locally as the tea tree
belt, where the white clayey soil is met with, and on the ironstone
ridges, where the timbers are stunted and poorly nourished. The
country is infested with white ants, by which every thing and place
are invaded—telegraph poles, railway sleepers, houses, fences, forest
trees, and the surface soils bear striking evidence of their depredations
in all directions. Indeed, there seems to be far more termites’
nests to the square acre tha n trees, and this holds good all over the
country. Generally speaking, the nests are not large, being usually


from one to three feet high, and thickly dotted over the whole surface
of the ground, like spring mushrooms. Occasionally some remarkably
large examples are met with, but these are not numerous.
At present this northern part of the State is given up to pastoral
and mineral occupation, large interests of the former industry being
widely distributed over the whole territory. But there is no dairy
farming, no local milk and butter supply, these indispensable
commodities being either imported or derived from domestic goats
which are numerous at most settlements. This seemed incomprehen-
sible in a country where cattle raising is the principal industry of
enterprising pioneers. Although agriculture has not yet been
attempted there can be little doubt that with irrigation, or an adequate
system of water conservation, large areas could be profitably cultivated,
and thereby be made to contribute materially to the welfare of the
people, and the revenue of the State at large. This is indeed an
industry which should be encouraged in these parts as much as
possible, for although there are abundant indications everywhere that
the mineral wealth of the country is unlimited and practically
inexhaustible, it ought to be borne in mind that it is the farmer,
the man who cultivates the soil or grows sheep or cattle, upon
whom the permanent future industrial and agricultural welfare of
the State must depend. Viewed in this light, in the light of experience
and progressive human knowledge, I feel confident that there is a great
future for Northern Queensland. The country is easily accessible
in all directions. The whole way from Mareeba J unction to Charleston
the railway line traverses a comparatively flat tract free from any
formidable physical obstacles, and stations have been erected at
convenient places where local settlement exists. The accommodation
for travellers and goods traffic provided by the Chillagoe Company
over their lines is more than is necessary at the present time. In
this respect, it may be said, that the rai'ways have been built to
develop the country, and not because the country was in need of the
railways, and this should be the policy in every undeveloped country
where settlement is needed.
A trial line for a projected railroad has been surveyed between
Georgetown and Croydon, over a comparatively flat country, and
the permanent way will no doubt be constructed in due course, when
the former town will be linked up with Normanton, and on completing
the railway connection with Charleston there will be direct railroad
communication between the Gulf of Carpentaria and Cairns. This,
to my mind, is essential to the development of the country, and
ought not to be delayed any longer than is absolutely necessary.
The unconnected sections are comparatively short and free from


physical obstacles, with the exception of one or two shallow river
channels, mostly dry during the greater part of the year. Indeed,
at the Gilbert Telegraph Station, the river bed where the coach crossed,
was found to be a broad stretch of dry hot sand, and this was charac-
teristic of all the watercourses met with between Cairns and Normanton
The town of Croydon is the administrative centre of important
mining interests, and until lately was one of the largest gold producing
areas in the State. It is 94 miles from the seaport town of Normanton,
and situated in the very heart of a rich mineral and pastoral district.
At the time of my visit some of the mining plant was out of commission,
but indications were not altogether wanting to inspire the hope that
Croydon will soon resume its former position, as one of the most
active mining centres in the State. The site of the town is favourable
both from geographical and climatic considerations, the streets being
wide and well laid out, the drainage natural, and the elevation
considerable. The railway line to Normanton traverses for the greater
part of the way a low-level sparsely timbered plain, much of it being
liable to flood in the wet season. The decrease in level from Croydon
is gradual, and the rails are placed near the natural surface of the
ground on a slightly raised roadway. By some happy professional
inspiration steel sleepers are laid down over the greater portion of
the line, their superiority over the wooden sleepers being apparent
to the most casual observer. Combined with the steel rails, they
are about the only material used in the construction of the line to
resist the attacks of the w'hite ants, and this is a very important
consideration in a remote part of the country where suitable timbers
are not plentiful.
On arrival at Normanton, I was met by Mr. A. V. Allom, the
courteous local Manager for Messrs. Burns, Philp and Co., and Mr.
Whittaker of Magoura Station, who kindly represented Mr. Graham, the
Station Manager, unavoidably absent at the time with the Pastoral
Manager in some remote part of the run. The town of Normanton, it
may here be remarked, is situated on the left bank of the Norman River,
about 80 miles from its mouth, on the shores of the Carpentarian
Gulf. It is built on a slightly elevated site along the slopes of
an ironstone ridge, having natural drainage, and the streets are wide,
well laid out, and regularly formed. There is good wharfage
accommodation on the river bank, and communication with the sea
is by steam tender. The tidal influence extends for some distance
above the town, but the tide rises and falls only once in the twenty-
four hours, this phenomenon being similar along all the shores
of the Gulf. The surrounding country is poorly timbered, low lying,
and subject to inundation when the neighbouring rivers overflow


their banks in the rainy season, and there is scarcity of water in times
of drought, a condition by no means peculiar to this locality, for then
water is unhappily scarce over most of the northern territory under
reference. Owing to the poor quality of the soil, being chiefly of a
sandy nature, the land is mostly utilised for pastoral purposes, being
hardly suitable for agriculture, its carrying capacity being from
fifteen to thirty cattle to the square mile, and this estimate may be
said to hold good for the whole of the Gulf country. After a couple
, of hours delay in Normanton, I proceeded to Magoura Station by
buggy, in charge of Mr. Whittaker, to whom I feel under obligation
for subsequent valuable assistance.
Magoura is situated on a slightly elevated ironstone ridge about
18 miles south-west from the town of Normanton, and commands fairly
extensive views of the surrounding country, mostly consisting of
immense open grassy plains, with alternating narrow' belts of stunted
timber. On the following morning, I drove out to the Bynoe River,
to make a preliminary inspection of the marked trees discovered
by Mr. Thos. Graham, and supposed to indicate Burke and Wills’
most northerly camp, known as No 119. The trees were found to be
located on the right bank of the Bynoe River, about 7 or 8 miles in
a south-westerly direction from Magoura Station, and at the junction
of a creek or a branch of the River. It may here be convenient
to remark that the Burke and Wills expedition, which left Melbourne
in 1800, to cross the Continent from South to North, succeeded in
reaching a point within the influence of the tidal w'aters of the Gulf
of Carpentaria. The identity of this point has always been in doubt.
King, the sole survivor of the ill-fated expedition, said that Wills,
the surveyor, believed the explorers were on the Albert River. This
was discredited by the late Baron Sir F. von Mueller, who, having
examined Wills’ notes and observations, gave it as his opinion that
it was the Flinders River, which is over 70 miles to the East of the
former. In expressing this view, it must be remembered that Baron
von Mueller was speaking from personal local knowledge, having as
an officer of Gregory’s North Australian expedition, traversed and
explored the Gulf territory, and was therefore familiar with the
rivers and other geographical features of the country.
In his evidence before the Commission appointed by the Governor
of Victoria, to inquire into and report on the circumstances associated
with the sufferings and death of Robert O’Hara Burke and William
John Wills, the Victorian Explorers, King said, that at Camp
119, situated on the Eastern bank of a tidal river, “ There were some
small box trees. We cut the bark eighteen inches by four, and cut
the letter B on the trees; some fifteen trees were marked, but with


no date.” Under the impression that the Expedition was on the
Albert River, King, in answer to a former question, No. 812, stated,
inter alia : “It was quite impossible for us to make the sea on the
East side (of the Albert River) as the country was all under water ;
had we crossed the river and gone to the West side, there would have
been no difficulty in reaching the sea ; but as our provisions were then
getting so exhausted, we were unable to do so. Mr. Burke thought
he had quite fulfilled his task ; we had the tide flowing, rising and
falling to the extent of eight inches, and the water was quite salty.”
And further, in answering question 832 ; “ There were some rocks
in the bed of the river; on the East side there was some large rocks
in the water, and we could see that those rocks were covered when
the tide was up, and when it went down we could see the rocks.”
In Mr. Wills’ journal, Field Book, No. 9, it is stated; “ Sunday,
February Ist, 1861. —Finding the ground in such a state from the
heavy falls of rain that the camels could scarcely be got along, it
was decided to leave them at Camp 119, and for Mr. Burke and I
to proceed towards the sea on foot. After breakfast we accordingly
started, taking with us the horse and three days’ provisions. Our
difficulty was in crossing Billy’s Creek, which we had to do where
it enters the river, a few hundred yards below the camp. In getting
the horse in here he got bogged in a quicksand bank so deeply as to
be unable to stir, and we only succeeding in extracting him by
undermining him on the Creek’s side, and then lunging him into the
water. Having got all the things in safety we continued down the
river bank, which bent about from East to West, but kept a general
North course. A great deal of the land was so soft and rotten that
the horse, with only a saddle and about 25 lbs. on his back, could
scarcely walk over it. Finding that the river was bending about so
much that we were making very little progress in a Northerly direction,
we struck off due North, and soon came on some tableland, where
the soil is shallow and gravelly, and clothed with box and swamp
gums. Patches of the land was very boggy, but the main portion
was sound enough; beyond this we came on an open plain, covered
with water up to one’s ankles.”
After an absence of three days Burke and Wills returned to Camp
119, on the 12th February, having been fifteen miles farther North,
but “ could not get a view of the open ocean,” although within the
influence of its tidal waters. They were as a matter of fact about 10
miles from the sea-shore when they turned back to Camp 119, but
had apparently not marked any trees or left any permanent record
behind them to indicate their position or the point they had reached.
King in his evidence, said they ” took no knives or implements to do so.”


From the foregoing remarks it will be understood that the identi-
fication of Camp 119 becomes necessary to settle the doubt which
had arisen at the time as to whether the explorers were on the Albert
River or the Flinders River For this purpose the available evidence
afforded by marked trees and local geographical conditions, must be
considered as well as the information supplied by Mr. Frederick
Walker, the leader of an expedition from Rockhampton to the Gulf
of Carpentaria in search of Burke and Wills. On striking the Flinders
River near its junction with the Bynoe, thought at the time to be the
Norman, Walker found the well-defined tracks of four of Burke’s
camels and a horse, coming down the stream, and afterwards going
back in the opposite direction. He then pushed on Westerly to the
Albert River to meet the relief steamer—Captain Norman—and
on returning to the Bynoe other traces of Burke were found, and a
tree marked B. CXIX was also discovered, and another branded
S.S.E. 14 was picked up at a place farther South. Walker at first
thought the former was Burke’s 119th Camp, but the floods and young
grass had probably obliterated the camel trails, and no further traces
were met with, on renewing the search from the latter tree, the
letters on which he fancied meant, “ to dig fourteen feet south-south-
east of the tree. They tried this, but the ground was hard, and had
evidently never been opened before. The explanation probably
was that it was either the fourteenth day or camp of the south-south-
eastern route followed on their return.” He had, however, previously
come across boot marks with naked feet following, which was no
doubt evidence of the blacks having stealthily followed Burke and
Wills when they made their three days’ foot journey North from Camp
119, endeavouring unsuccessfully to reach the sea. From the sth
till the 20th January, Walker continued the search, moving up along
the Eastern side of the Bynoe and Flinders Rivers, but without
success ; Burke’s donwward tracks being all that could be seen, but no
indications of the return. It was then decided to make for the
Norman River, as no good purpose could be served by following up
the Flinders, and so Walker disappeared from the locality, being
the only white man who had found traces of the ill-fated Victorian
Explorers in the Gulf country, but having singularly failed to
establish the identity of their most northern camp, 119. Having
thus briefly alluded to the localisation of Burke and Wills, it may
perhaps be permissible to offer some remarks concerning my own
investigations in locating the position of the marked trees on the
Eastern bank of the Bynoe River, in accordance with my instructions.
On first inspection, the most noticeable feature of the locality
was a Coolibah tree, marked “ F.W., 12th January, 1862.” This


MAP SHOWING RELATIVE POSITION OF BURKE AND WILLS’ CAMP, NO. 119, BYNOE RIVER.
Plate 13,
Queensland Geographical Journal, Vol. XXV.


PLAN SHOWING RELATIVE POSITION OF MARKED TREES, BYNOE RIVER.
Plate 14.
Oueensland Geographical Journal, Vol. XXV.


SECTION OF TREE MARKED BY F. WALKER, SHOWING THE MARKS, AT CAMP ON THE BYNOE RIVER.
Plate 15.
Queensland Geographical Journal, Vol. XXV.


TREE MARKED " B,” AT CAMP ON THE BYNOE RIVER.
SECTION OF TREE MARKED “B”—SHOWING THE MARK —BYNOE RIVER.
Plate 16.
Queensland Geographical Journal, Vol. XXV.


BILLY’S CREEK, BYNOE RIVER.
Plate 17.
Queensland Geographical Journal, Vol. XXV.


BYNOE RIVER, LOOKING UP STREAM FROM CAMP.
BYNOE RIVER, LOOKING DOWN STREAM FROM CAMP.
Plate 18.
Queensland Ueographical Journal, Vol. XXV.


CAMP, BYNOE RIVER —GENERAL VIEW.
Plate 19.
Queensland Geographical Journal, Vol. XXV.


MAGOURA HOUSE PARTY AT CAMP ON THE BYNOE RIVER.
CAMP ON THE BYNOE RIVER,
Plate 20.
Queensland Geographical Journal, Vol. XXV.


inscription had been deeply and clearly chiselled on a shield cut out
of the side of the tree facing the East, and was grown over except
the letter F. and the figure 8, which were quite exposed, but perfectly
sound, and showing only the slightest signs of weathering, the whole
being the work of a skilful hand, and of great interest from its original
associations and extreme remoteness. Mr. Thos. Graham, who dis-
covered the marked trees, had cut out the overgrown portion of the
shield before my arrival, so that I merely had to clear out the particles
of decayed wood along the original chisel marks before taking a
photograph. This tree, which is comparatively small, being only 3
feet 5 inches in girth, was marked by Walker, and doubtless indicates
the place where he found Burke and Wills tree marked B CXIX
at a spot which we now know to be identical with Camp 119. Its
position is 84° 30' by compass, and distant 14 chains 19 links from a
pear tree marked R.G.S.A.Q. on the lower side of Billy’s Creek,
where it joins the Bynoe River. Besides Walker’s trees, fifteen trees
were found to be marked at this camp, and in most cases the marks
were facing the East. Five of these were Coolibah trees, one being
dead, and the other ten are Guttapercha trees, the whole being small
and not exceeding three feet in girth. The latter variety is, however,
a very slow grower, and nowhere in the locality was it found to attain
to any large dimensions. The former also grows slowly, but several
comparatively large specimens were scattered about in the camp
and immediate neighbourhood, and one could not help wondering
why the smaller trees had been selected in preference for marking.
Contrary to what might have been expected from a hurried glimpse
of the locality, the timber growths were sparse and stunted, showing
but slight indications of tropical vigour. On a close inspection, it
was, however, seen that the soil was chiefly of a white clayey substance,
and apparently not at all rich in its component parts, the sub-soil
being a stiff and highly tenacious clay. On the Western side of
Billy’s Creek, and extending down along the right bank of the Bynoe
River, there seemed to be a much better quality of timber, the trees
being larger and taller. The Guttapercha is apparently not only
an extremely slow growing tree, but comparatively soft, the wood
not being durable when cut. Back from the river and tributary
creeks, the country mostly consists of extensive open plains inter-
spersed with belts of timber and slightly elevated ridges, the flat areas
being usually flooded during the rainy season. The area at the
junction of Billy’s Creek with the Bynoe River is, however, slightly
higher than its environment, and admirably adapted for camping
purposes, the waterholes in the Creek abounding with an interesting
variety of wild duck.


The first examination of the fifteen marked trees was not too
encouraging, beyond the apparent fact that the original marks had
been cut with an axe or other sharp edged tool, traces of which were
still visible on close inspection. Each tree having been carefully
examined, the overgrowth was cut away from the old mark, but
with one exception the results were negative, it being evident that
all traces of probable original inscriptions had long since disappeared
from the soft and but slightly durable Guttapercha wood. The
exception proved to be a Coolibah, bearing by compass 274° 30',
and distant one chain eighty-five and a half links from Walker’s
tree. A critical examination of the old mark on the Eastern side
of this Coolibah, revealed the rather faint but clearly traceable outlines
of the block letter B. This happy discovery seemed to have a vitalising
effect on the investigations of the Expedition, stimulating individual
effort to the highest pitch, and creating enthusiasm when least
expected. Unlike the original marks on all the other trees, the shield
cut out of the Coolibah was only slightly overgrown, so that most
of its surface had been left fully exposed to the wind and weather
of a severe tropical climate for fully 48 years. After all this lapse
of time, it is only reasonable to suppose that an inscription which
had, perhaps, been originally, but very superficially chiselled, would
have suffered materially, and probably have disappeared in whole
or in part.
While King in his evidence stated that the letter B. was cut into
some fifteen trees at Camp 119, no date and presumably no other
marks, Walker found a tree at wha* he at first fancied to be the
same place marked B. CXIX, being the more likely inscription for
the Explorers to have left behind them, at what was practically
the objective point of their overland journey. Should this view
be correct, and it is entirely borne out by the history of Australian
exploration, then we are justified in assuming that the latter part
of the inscription (CXIX), probably not quite so deeply cut as the
former, must have naturally disappeared from the Coolibah tree.
And I have no doubt whatever this is what actually occurred.
The whole of the trees having been photographed in groups or
singly, as circumstances suggested, the geographical conditions of
the locality were fully investigated, it having been found more
convenient to camp on the ground till the work was finished. Carried,
out as it was at high pressure in the shortest possible space of time,
under the most rigorous climatic conditions, being fully and continu-
ously exposed to the maximum intensity of heat and light, the
photographic work, it is gratifying to note, was very satisfactory..
This, however, was only accomplished after much trouble and


experiment. The task of changing the plates *in the daytime was
very disagreeable and sometimes distressing. For this purpose a
dark enclosed space had to be improvised in the shape of an old
packing case, covered with several layers of woollen rugs and other
heavy material, the sunlight being so intense. The plates were
developed at Magoura Head Station, where an old empty iron water
tank took the place of the camp packing case. But even under
the improved auspices of the Station the conditions were unfavourable
for work of the kind, there being usually experienced a strong hot
wind charged with minute particles of dust, which settled on the
films, and the intensity of light and heat was a constant menace
to success.
On exploring the environs of the camp the physical conditions
were found to correspond with King’s description of the locality.
There is an outcrop of rocks in the bed of the river on the East side
and in the water, a little above the camp, and the water was quite
salty. The tidal movement was, however, barely perceptible. But
there is probably an appreciable rise and fall, synchronizing with
the maximum and minimum lunar phases, especially when the strong
northerly -winds are blowing or during the rainy season, when the
river is running, and the channel freer from obstruction. At the
time of my visit the country was suffering from drought, most of the
rivers were comparatively dry, and the Bynoe was very low, there
being no strong influence from the North to force the tidal water
of the Gulf up its snag-studded channel. It must, of course, be
considered that material physical changes have occurred in the bed
of the river since Burke and Wills’ time, there being abundant indica-
tions that the carrying capacity of the channel has decreased by
the ever-increasing deposition of silt, and the erosion of the banks,
which would have a retarding influence on the tidal waters. And
similar changes have been going on in Billy’s Creek, especially at its
mouth, where a large deposit of silt has accumulated, forming a bar
of heavy, soft, clayey soil, which blocks out the waters of the Bynoe,
and cuts off the creek when both are low. This is no doubt the
identical spot where Burke and Wills had their horse “ Billy ” bogged,
as here the natural conditions would be eminently favourable for
such an occurrence, especially in the rainy season, when the place
would be little better than a quicksand. At the time of my visit
the surface of the deposit was sun-baked, and hard enough to be
crossed, but from the trail of crocodiles and other indications, it was
evidently treacherous ground when submerged. The Bynoe, to all
appearances, is really the main channel of the Flinders River, and
was first surveyed by Mr. George Phillips, Vice-President of the Society,


who, in 1867 made a boat traverse of the channel from the mouth to
within a short distance of Billy’s Creek. Above the first 20 miles,
the banks of the stream are bold and in places, the channel is
obstructed by snags. The volume of water carried by the stream
when in flood must be immense, and the sediment brought down
enormous, as indicated by the marks along the banks and the silting
up of the channel. It is perhaps not generally known that the Flinders
River is one of the largest streams in Australia, its length being
some 500 miles, and drainage area over 47,000 square miles, including
tributaries. At the time Burke and Wills camped on the Bynoe
the heavy monsoonal rains had set in, and the river was probably
in flood when the Explorers left the locality on the return journey,
as in the following year Walker found flood marks eighty feet above
the ordinary level of the waters. In pursuing their journey north-
wards for about fifteen miles from Camp 119, Burke and Wills reached
some high ground near the river. This w r as no doubt the Western
end of the Stokes Range, whose position corresponds fairly well
with the approximate distance from the Camp at Billy’s Creek.
Many blacks w r ere seen by the Explorers, and it w r as noticed that wild
yams were very plentiful in the locality. These latter are still to be
met with along the river banks, and although the blacks have now
dwindled down to a miserable straggling remnant, they were numerous
and aggressive enough to give Walker a good deal of trouble forty-eight
years ago. Before leaving the locality several stellar observations
were obtained, by which the position of the camp was found to be
in 17° 53' South Latitude. This agrees with the position given by
Burke and Wills. Taking therefore into consideration the sum of
the foregoing conditions, it seems to me there is no reason to doubt,
but that this is identical with the ill-fated Victorian Explorers’ camp
119, and that its identity would have been established from the very
first had Walker made the necessary astronomical observations
when on the spot. He did not, however, know the circumstances
and conditions surrounding the camp, much having to be left to
conjecture, and this may be accepted as an excuse for the absence
of more definite information on his part at the time. And mention
may now be made of the fact that the existence of the marked trees
at this camp was quite unknown to the oldest settlers of the Gulf,
and their discovery came as a great surprise to them.
Having accomplished the work entrusted to me by the Council of
our Society, nothing further remained to be done but to break up camp
and prepare for the return journey. Before leaving the locality
the camp was visited by a house party from Magoura, including
the genial host and hostess, with their children, who animated the


scene and enlivened the last hours spent on the site occupied by
the ill-fated Burke and Wills half a century ago. A couple of days
were spent in Normanton, and the first stage in the homeward
journey was traversed in the mail tender “ Dugong,” from the Norman
Wharf to the mouth of the River at Karumba, some eighty miles
or thereabouts, including the distance over the bar where the mail
steamer was boarded. An interesting feature met with at the mouth
of the river was an original native camp occupied by the last
remnant of the Karumba tribe, including both sexes in child-
hood and old age. The chief wore an ornate brass plate, between
which and the children his attention seemed to be equally divided.
The camp was on a fully exposed, barren spot, and the gunyahs,
which were circular and quite open at the top, had a most
unattractive and primitive appearance. The occupants, however,
seemed to be well nourished and healthy, and some of the younger
females, no doubt, wishing to add to their natural attractiveness,
dressed themselves with European blouses and skirts when preparing
to line themselves up in front of the camera, although they were told
that this was not necessary, or even desirable.
The Gulf country is under pastoral occupation, for which it seems
eminently adapted, the immense grassy, open plains, and lightly
timbered belts being ideal pasture land, capable of raising millions
of cattle for the markets of the world. One of the most urgent needs
of the present day appears to be railway communication from deep
water at Karumba to Normanton, Cloncurry, Burketown, Camoow r eal,
and the rich mineral areas of the Leichhardt district, for which the
people are striving, and the linking up of the Croydon and Etheridge
lines through Georgetown. While these will no doubt come in time
as the country gets more settled, and industrial life develops, it would
serve the best interests of all concerned and the State at large were
the matter to receive attention with as little delay as possible. Already
an area of 30,000 square miles of the district has been inspected
by Mr. George Phillips, C.E., whose valuable report thereon forms
an interesting and welcome - addition to the official professional
literature of the State.
It may here be noted that the origin of this Gulf territory is
suggested by the plentiful occurrence of fossilifarous deposits of
ancient marine life over a large extent of the country, remote from
tidal influence. In its present condition animal life is numerous,
birds especially being met with in great variety, w'hile the rivers
and tidal charnels are mostly infested with crocodiles of forbidding
appearance and enormous proportions.


The run up the Gulf was pleasant and unattended with any notable
incident, the first point of interest met with being Booby Island,
at one time the Torres Strait Port Office, the repository of an
interesting Log Book, and other historical memoranda now gone,
no one apparently knowing where. At Thursday Island one’s attention
is at once arrested by the diversity of racial types met with on first
landing on the coral bound shores of that commercial centre of the
pearl industry, and other absorbing interests. The Southern side
of the Island is occupied by the business and residential quarters
of the mixed community, and at the extreme South-Western end
the Government residency is located on a point commanding a view
of three-quarters of the compass, the place being an ideal look-out,
and admirably adapted for its special purpose. At the back of the
town on the summit of the ridges forming the centre of the island
the fortifications occupy a dominating position, with an unobstructed
range in all directions. On a slightly lower spur of the main ridge
there stands the grave of the former Government Resident, who as
one of the first Hon. Members of our Society, was a greatly valued
contributor to its literature, an able administrator, and an accom-
plished public speaker —the Hon. John Douglas. A little way back
from the beach, in a pleasant position, is the Quetta Memorial Church,
erected in commemoration of the ill-fated mail and passenger steamer
“ Quetta,” wrecked in Torres Strait on the homeward bound voyage
from Brisbane to London, in 1880. With other interesting relics,
the bell of the vessel was afterwards recovered, and is now suspended
from a detached wooden framework in front of the place.
The business life of the island seemed to be animated and
prosperous, and although industrial activity is not what it used to
be in former times when the harbour was the home of a large pearling
fleet, the town showed no outward and visible signs of decline.
Although the strategical position of the place is now well recognised
by military experts, its great value to the Commonwealth as a naval
station is, perhaps, not so generally understood or appreciated,
notwithstanding its important geographical situation as the gateway
of the great maritime trade route through Torres Strait to the East.
On leaving the harbour for the South, it was necessary to steam
round the opposite side of the island on account of the exceptionally
low tide in the early morning. The weather was calm and the sea
as smooth as glass, there being little change all the way down the
coast. We passed close to Cape York, the most northerly point of
the Continent, and steamed under ideal conditions through Albany
Pass, with Somerset on the right and Albany Island on the left The
latter is interesting from its position as the site of an unpretentious


monument in the form of a wooden cross, to the ill-fated Explorer,
Kennedy, who was speared by the blacks on the Escape River, while
on the same side of the Island, facing the Pass, is the abandoned
Station, formerly occupied by the late Mr. Savile Kent, when conduct-
ing his experiments in the artificial cultivation of pearls. At the
Southern end of the Pass a projecting point of the mainland furnishes
an excellent example of the mound building activities of the termite,
and may be taken as typical of the white ant topography of North
Queensland, to which I have already alluded. From here the coast
line trends away Southerly in a succession of bays, points and head-
lands, being devoid of any remarkable topographical features, and
with little to interest the eye, save long stretches of sand ridges that
mark the shore line. On passing Cape Melville, my attention was
called to a considerable area of rich sugar land along the Southern
shores of Bathurst Bay, and I was assured by the Pilot, who knows
the locality thoroughly, that this is supposed to be an excellent
place for tropical agriculture. We reached the mouth of the
Endeavour River, about 8 o’clock in the evening, and left on the
following morning early, thus affording but little time to inspect
the place, which Iso greatly desired. However, the available couple
of hours daylight from 5 o’clock till 7, before the “ Warrego ” cast
off from the wharf, enabled me to expose a dozen kodak films, and
to note the leading features of the town, so intimately
associated with the name of that famous British circumnavigator,
who discovered the Australian continent. Here, not more than
a hundred yards from the foot of our gangway, he careened his tiny
battered ship, the mutilated tree stem to which the vessel was moored
being labelled by a plate inscribed; “ This tree was used to moor
the ‘Endeavour’ by Captain Cook, June 1770. Seagren, Mayor.
Plate presented by Captain W. C. Thomson, F.R.A.S.” A little
way farther along, on the river side of the main street, stands the
Captain Cook Monument, a gracefully sculptured column bearing
the following inscription: “ In Memoriam Captain Cook who landed
here June 17th, 1770. Post cineres gloria venit.” The top of this
monument is in an unfinished state, the original intention evidently
being to have the column surmounted by a bust or statue of the
illustrious navigator. But whether this will ever be done or not,
is of no great importance to anyone, the incomplete Monument
as it stands, being doubtless preferable to the complete form with
an indifferently executed statue. Anyway, the enterprising citizens
of Cooktown cannot reasonably be accused of undue haste in the
matter, and let us hope that rising generations of young Queenslanders
will fully appreciate the good intentions of their forefathers in a


movement so closely associated with the early history of the State,
and the discovery of the Continent. But they are a patriotic people
with deep and practical sympathies, as evidenced by the public
monuments that adorn the main thoroughfares of their picturesque
town, the most interesting of which is perhaps the Memorial erected
to Mrs. Watson, whose death under the most tragic and distressing
circumstances occurred in 1881, on a lonely desert island North
from Cooktown, and almost due West of Cook’s passage, in the Great
Barrier Reef, the incident being locally referred to as “ one of the
saddest of all the sad tales of the sea.*” The Eastern side of the
Memorial has this inscription; “ Memoriam. Mrs. Watson, the
Heroine of Lizard Island, Cooktown, North Queensland, A D. 1881.
Edward U’Arcy, Mayor, 1885. Erected 1886.” The inscription
on the opposite side runs :
“Five fearful days, beneath the scorching glare,
Her babe she nursed.
God knows the pangs that woman had to bear,
Whose last sad entry showed a mother’s care,
Then—‘ Nearly dead with thirst! ’ ”
“John Davis, Mayor 1886.”
Cooktown is the natural seaport of the Laura, the Coen, and
the Palmer River Gold Fields, and other important mineral areas,
including Maytown and the Collingwood Tin Mines. It is the outlet
of an extensive coastal belt of rich, tropical, agricultural country,
and supplies the Southern markets with large consignments of luscious
fruits, of which the banana is not the least significant. The town
is situated in a healthy position, with good natural drainage, and the
main street is shaded by a beautiful avenue of trees. From the top
of Grassy Hill, on the South side of the Harbour, a magnificent view
may be obtained of the Great Barrier Reef on the one hand, and the
*Mrs. Watson was left on Lizard Island by her husband, a beche-de-mer
trader, with a baby and two Chinese servants. On the 27th September, the
blacks came, and next day speared one Chinaman, and on the 30th speared
the other in seven places, but the dauntless woman defended herself so
resolutely with firearms as to drive them temporarily away. But to remain
was certain death, and on the 3rd October she escaped in an iron tank, with her
child, the wounded Chinaman, and a supply of provisions. They floated all
night, and next day landed on a bare reef, where she remained till the 6th
October. Water gave out, and the poor hunted woman pulled the tank and
its contents over to No. 1 Island of the Howick Group. Search for water
there was in vain, but natives were there, so she again started, and reached
No. 5 Island, 40 miles away on the Bth. There, surrounded with water—but
all salt—with plenty of provisions, which her parched and swollen throat could
not swallow; with her child, only a few months old, dying before her eyes,,
while she herself suffered the tortures of Tantalus, she died of thirst.


NORMAN RIVER.
Plate 21.
Queensland Geographical Journal, Vol. XXV.


LAST OF THE KARUMBA TRIBE —MOUTH OF THE NORMAN RIVER.
Plate 22.
Queensland Geographical Journal, Vol. XXV.


Plate 23.
GOODE ISLAND, TORRES STRAIT.
Queensland Geographical Journal, Vol. XXV.


ALBANY ISLAND, SHOWING ABANDONED ARTIFICIAL OYSTER CULTURE STATION, IN CENTRE.
1’late 24.
Queensland Geographical Journal, Vol. XXV.


SOUTHERN ENTRANCE TO ALBANY PASS, SHOWING TERMITE HILLS.
Plate 25.
Queensland Geographical Journal, Vol. XXV.


THE “ ENDEAVOUR TREE,” COOKTOWN, NORTH QUEENSLAND.
Plate 26.
Queensland Geographical Journal, Vol. XXV.


MRS. WATSON, THE HEROINE OF LIZARD ISLAND.
Plate 27.
Queensland Geographical Journal, Vol. XXV.


far away mountains on the other, with intervening hill and dale,
island, palm and strand. The Botanical Gardens afford a convenient
place for recreation, and within easy distance of the General Post
Office are some places of interest to the appreciative and sympathetic
observer, or those wiio wish to become familiar with the geographical
conditions of the district.
The run to Brisbane, via Townsville and Mackay, was
accomplished under similar ideal w r eather conditions to those
experienced on the outward journey. And, now r let me here remark,
that in no other part of the world are these conditions more
favourable than along the Queensland coast, especially during the
winter months, steaming all the w r ay in smooth water, under the pro-
tection of the Great Barrier Reef for over a thousand miles, the
traveller may enjoy the pleasures of a glorious inland sea trip, free
from the distressing symptoms of mal de mer right from Gladstone
to Torres Strait, and even down the Carpentarian Gulf, for days or
even w'eeks at a stretch. It is an ideal run, and in time is bound to
become immensely popular for those seeking health and relaxation.
Already, the citizens of Victoria and New r South Wales are patronising
this Northern winter tour, and are beginning to appreciate the
advantages of a smooth sea and mild warm weather, at a time when
the rigorous climatic conditions of the Southern States suggest
something milder and less trying. A summer cruise in the Mediter-
ranean lacks its advantages, and the much over-rated Inland Sea
of Japan suffers badly by comparison. The great desideratum is to
make this part of the Queensland coast more widely known, and to
this end no pains should be spared, no expense should be considered
too great, and no trouble too much, for in the long run it will yield
a handsome return to the State.
In conclusion, it only remains for me to express my ow r n personal
obligations, and, with the concurrence of my fellow Councillors
and Members, the cordial thanks of the Society to those who have
helped fonvard the enterprise, of which the foregoing is merely the
outcome. Although it is always difficult to differentiate in a matter
of this kind, I may, perhaps, be permitted to allude to the helpful
services rendered by the Hon. Digby Denham, Minister for Public
Lands, whose material aid was greatly valued, the Hon. Sir Arthur
Morgan, our distinguished President, Mr. George Phillips, our worthy
Vice-President, who was really the originator of the movement,
Mr. A. A. Spowers, Surveyor-General, whose sympathetic assistance
was much appreciated, Messrs. Alexander Corrie, George Fox, E. C.
Barton, James Stodart, and E. E. Edwards, who contributed to
the expenses of the expedition, to Mr. and Mrs. Thomas Graham,


and Mr. Whittaker, of Magoura Station, Normanton, for valuable
services rendered, and to Mr. C. V. Allom, also of Normanton,
whose attention to the interests of the Expedition contributed much
to the success achieved; and finally, the best thanks of the Society
are due to Mr. Scriven, the courteous Under Secretary for Agriculture,
to whose kindness we are indebted for having the lantern slides
prepared; to the Chief Secretary for assistance rendered in the
preparation of the accompanying illustrations, and to Mr. T. C.
Troedson, Director of the Intelligence and Tourist Bureau, for
helpful attention.
NOTE BY MR. GEORGE PHILLIPS, VICE-PRESIDENT.
The finding by Mr. Thomas Graham, of Magoura Station, near
Normanton, of the trees marked by Burke and Wills, at their most
Northern Camp, No. 119, together with the complete and unquestion-
able verification of the trees and camp by Dr. J. P. Thomson, the
Hon. Secretary of the Royal Geographical Society of Australasia,
Queensland, finally sets at rest all doubts as to the exact spot where
the ill-fated Victorian explorers reached tidal waters on the Gulf of
Carpentaria.
The locality of Camp No. 119, is now marked on the official
maps of the State, and is a record of the Surveyor-General’s office.
Application has been made to the Government to have the site
of the camp permanently reserved, in order that at some future time
a suitable memorial may be raised to the memory of the men who
first crossed the Australian Continent from sea to sea.
Previous to Mr. Graham’s discovery and Dr. Thomson’s verifi-
cation, there was not a living person who could have indicated the
exact locality of the camp, and I may add that the universal impression
of old hands in the Burke district, during the last forty years, was
that Burke and Wills reached tidal water on the Albert River, at or
near the site of Burketown.


THE THOMSON FOUNDATION GOLD MEDAL
OF
The Royal Geographical Society of Australasia.
QUEENSLAND.
FOUNDED 1885.
Established in honour of J. I’. Thomson , LL.I)., Hon.F.R.S.Q.S., etc.,
Founder. See pnijest 132-135 of Journal, Vol. XVI.)
CONDITIONS.
This Medal shall be a,warded annually, or at such other times as the
Council may approve, to the author of the best original contribution to
Geographical Literature, provided it be of sufficient merit, approved and
accepted by the Council. Special awards of the Medal may also be made
from time to time to such persons as have gratuitously rendered eminent
services to the Society.
The Council may award a silver or a bronze impression of the Medal
to the Author of a contribution deemed to further the interests of the
Society and add to the value of Geographical Literature.
The Council may name from time to time the subject of such con-
tribution for which the Medal is to he awarded, preferential consideration
being given to the Geography of Australasia.
All contributions must be written in the English language, and every
contribution for which the Medal, or a silver or bronze impression of it,
may he awarded will become the property of the Society absolutely.
It shall not be competent for any Officer of the Society or Member
of the Council for the time being to compete for the Medal.
The administration of the Medal shall be entirely in the hands of
the Council of the Society, who will make such additional rules and
regulations for awarding the Medal as from time to time may seem
necessary.


The Royal Geographical Society of Australasia,
QUEENSLAND.
FOUNDED 1885.
Conditions of Competition for The Thomson Foundation
Gold Medal.
The Thomson Foundation Gold Medal of this Society will be
awarded to the Author of the Best Original Paper (provided it be of
sufficient merit) on the following subject
To he sent in not Inter than Ist July, 1911.
1. —The Economic Utility and Distribution of the Sub-Marine Fauna of
Queensland.
The competition is open to Members and Non-members oi the
Society alike, whether residing in Australasia or elsewhere, but not to
any Officer of the Society or Member of the Council for the time
being. No award of the Medal will be made for a mere compilation,
no matter how meritorious.
All competitive communications for the Medal should be written on
one side of the paper only, with marginal space on the left hand side
thereof, and limited to, say, about 32 pages of the “ Queensland Geo-
graphical Journal,” Royal Bvo. Instead of the writer’s name each paper
must he identified by a motto. A sealed envelope with such motto
written outside, and the writer’s name and address inside, should ac-
company each paper.
The successful papers will be printed and published in Ihe Journal
of the Society, fifty reprint copies of each being supplied to the author,
free.
All communications, with illustrations, must be written m the English
language, and every communication for which the Medal, or a silver or
bronze impression of it may be awarded, will become the property of the
Society absolutely.
Papers may be illustrated by such maps, diagrams and pictures as
are considered by the authors thereof to be necessary and useful.
Additional subjects for future papers will be announced from time
to time.
All communications should be addressed to the Hon, Secretary of
the Society, Brisbane
J. P THOMSON.
Hon. Secretary
