

BISHOP CROWTHER'S
EXPERIENCES
IN WEST AFRICA.




BISHOP CROWTHER’S EXPERIENCES.


T HE LATE BISHOP CROWTHER
From a Photograph by SAMUEL A. WALRER, 230 Regent Streep W


EXPERIENCES
WITH
HEATHENS AND MOHAMMEDANS
IX
West Africa.
MY THIC I.ATi:
Right Rev. SAMUEL ADJAI CROWTHER, D.D.
LISHOF OF THE MGER REGION'.
PUBLISHED UNDER THE DIRECTION OF THE TRACT COMMITTEE.
LONDON:
SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE,
NORTHUMBERLAND AVENUE, W.C. ; 43, QUEEN VICTORIA STREET, E.C.
BRIGHTON; 135, North Street.
New York: E. & J. B. YOUNG & CO.
1892.


EDITORIAL NOTE.
This little work was prepared by the late Bishop
Crowther when he was in this country attending the
Lambeth Conference. The English of the Bishop’s
simple narrative is sometimes defective, but it has been
thought better to print the work as the Bishop revised
it for press than to present it to the public corrected
by another hand. Bishop Crowther died on the last
day of 1891. He was consecrated Bishop of the
Niger Territory on the West Coast of Africa in the
year 1864. He had been engaged in the work of
evangelisation in this region from the year 1829, and
at his death had completed a missionary career of over
sixty years. The Bishop attended the Lambeth Con-
ferences in 1867, 1878, and 1888, and was known and
respected b}’ a large number of English Churchmen,
ED. SEK. S. P. C. K.


BISHOP CROWTHER'S EXPERIENCES
WITH HEATHENS AND MOHAM-
MEDANS IN WEST AFRICA.
After much consideration of the repeated
wishes of many Christian friends, both in Ping-
land and Africa, that I should put in writing
some accounts of my intercourse, both with
Mohammedans and heathens during a period of
over fifty years as a Christian teacher, yielding
to the judgment of Christian friends, I have
overcome the diffidence which led me for a long
time to decline doing so. If such statements
w'ere appreciated as trustworthy missionary in-
formation at public meetings, giving the audience
an insight into missionary tactics, and shewing
how missionaries dealt with their mixed con-
gregations abroad, they might not be less
interesting if printed, and might perhaps be
helpful to young inexperienced Christian Native-
teachers who may have to do with shrewd aged
Mohammedan and heathen countrymen already
armed with strong prejudices against Christianity,


and inclined to despise the inexperienced young
teacher.
I myself was similarly situated at the com-
mencement of my work as a Christian teacher
at Sierra Leone, when sent out from the Fourah
Bay Christian Institution at the end of 1829.
I had been well drilled, as I then thought,
by reading and collecting arguments against
Mohammedanism and heathenism, and went out
with zeal, not yet tempered with experience,
thinking I could carry everything before me
among my Mohammedan and heathen country-
men by my knowledge, after my own conversion
to the true religion.
My parents were heathens, and, of course, I
was brought up in heathenism, and would in all
probability have become an Ifa priest, as an Ifa
priest was particularly fond of me, who used
to employ my services very often at the time of
asking counsel of the oracles by casting lots.
Through God’s grace, however, I was early
snatched away from the practice of this delusion,
and brought within the reach of the only true
religion planned for the salvation of mankind.
My wife’s mother was a Mohammedan, but she
was early delivered from the poisonous doctrine
of that great imposition, which makes man
dependent upon his own merits for salvation.


I shall give only one instance of each of such
defeats both by Mohammedans and heathens in
my early efforts.
I was removed as schoolmaster from Regent
to Wellington in about 1831, where was a large
population of Mohammedans and heathens
liberated from slavery, with whom we had to do.
For the Yoruba heathens, who did not under-
stand English, I held services in the Yoruba
language at Allen Town and other out stations
on the Lord’s day, when the Scriptures were
expounded to them in their mother tongue.
One day I had to do with a Mohammedan who
had sent his little boy to school with a charm
sewn in a piece of leather tied to his neck as a
protective; as I would not countenance this in
the school, I cut it off from the boy’s neck and
gave it to him to take home to his father, and
told him to say that such superstition was not
countenanced in any Christian school. On the
boy’s return home and reporting to his father
what I had done, he was fired with rage, and
came to my lodging in great indignation to
demand what right I had in meddling with his
religious belief.
As he was angry, I would not answer him
then, but promised to do so in a meeting of the
elders of his profession, which was to be con


vened on an appointed evening, when the sub-
jects of Mohammedanism and Christianity would
be fully discussed on both sides with delibera-
tion and calmness; which was accordingly done.
Although I tried to convince my opponents
by arguments from the Bible, and from the
translations of Sale’s Koran, that the Bible
was perfectly consistent with itself in all its
parts, and in all the points of doctrines which it
teaches ; and that Mohammed could not have
denied this if he had carefully studied, and
compared one passage with another; yet my
Mohammedan countrymen would not listen to
any but the one argument, that it was contrary
to the Koran to believe that “ God could have a
Son.” We had to separate, when they said no
human being was able to settle the matter in
this world till the day of Alkiama, judgment.
This sobered me down a great deal in my zeal,
though I did not yet despair of doing some
good among the less bigoted among them, in a
more friendly and persuasive way.
A bold attempt was made at one time by a
Wesleyan missionary of Sierra Leone to convince
the Mohammedans who were residing at a
village on Fourah Bay Road, Freetown, by
preaching the Gospel to them once every Sun-
day, At the appointed time, the missionary


proceeded to the Mohammedan village, accom-
panied by a large number of the members of
their church, and entered the enclosure in which
the mosque stood, where a Christian service was
held, and a telling sermon, which dwelt par-
ticularly on the errors of Mohammedanism, was
preached. The Mohammedans on this occasion
remained quiet all the time, till the missionary
and his church members had returned home.
Next Sunday a similar course was pursued by
the missionary, but the Mohammedans, who
would not be converted to Christianity by storm,
had secured the sacred precincts of their mosque
by a strong fence, to exclude the zealous mis-
sionary and his followers from further profana-
tion of their holy ground : this was attempted
for three or four Sundays, but, as the Mohamme-
dans would not be so converted, the attempt was
given up as a failure. Here was another example
of injudicious efforts to convince ignorant bigoted
Mohammedans as it were by storm ; one cannot
reason effectually with these uneducated people
by referring to books for comparison, because
Mohammedanism, according to their belief, is
superior to all other existing religions.
One example of my defeat by infuriated
idolaters, worshippers of Shango, the god of
thunder and lightning, may also be given.


As we were preparing for our Abbeokuta
mission at Freetown, in 1844, and I had no
charge of a church or congregation, I made
myself useful on Sundays, wherever I thought
I could do any good. In the Circular Road,
behind the Barrack hill, was a notorious party
of Shango worshippers, who made it a point to
employ drummers from Saturday night till Sun-
day morning in the worship of Shango, beating
drums and singing the praises of their gods till
the dawn of the Sabbath. One Sunday morning,
about service time, I made towards the house
where the Shango party was assembled; after
salutation, I broached the object of my visit.
A long debate took place. Their defence was
that their gods were inferior deities commissioned
by the great god to superintend inferior matters
on earth. Having received the same from their
forefathers, they insisted upon continuing their
worship as they found it was good for them.
Since they had not slept all night, several of
them who had been making up for lost time
in the morning, were roused up by our rather
loud talk; of course, although they had not
heard the beginning of the subject, yet joined
in loud roaring in defence of the gods. As no
good could be done just then to such an excited
audience, I left them with a promise to return


the next Sunday when we would quietly talk
over matters. On the next Sunday morning I
went to them according to promise ; but they
had made their plan how to receive me. On
my entering the house, and saluting them ac-
cording to custom, the women burst out in loud
praises of Shango, and the drummers took to
their drums, which they beat as loud as possible
with great rapidity and noise, so that my voice
was completely drowned. At the same time
others were boisterous in telling me that the
gods against whom I spoke were the gods of
my forefathers ; and that I could not dare to
oppose the worship of the gods at Abbeokuta.
Matters were coming to an unpleasant state,
when a man, sober and more reasonable than
the rest, took me by the hand, led me out, and
begged me not to take the matter to heart, as
the people were not sober; so I had to return
home completely defeated. If such circumstances
can take place in the colony of Sierra Leone,
under British protection, where religious liberty
is tolerated, how much worse w r ould it have been
where no protection, no toleration is allowed;
this consideration led me to seek for a school
where I might learn lessons from teachers more
experienced than myself in dealing with such
characters. I began to see that the spirit of


James and John, when they said, Lord, wilt
thou that we command fire to come down from
heaven and consume them as Elias did ? will
not accomplish this; and why ? Christ the
heavenly teacher, whose is the work, gently re-
buked them, saying, “Ye know not what spirit
ye are of.” The high priest and his council
were of the spirit of James and John when they
took counsel to slay the Apostles. Then Gama-
liel, a doctor of the law, of great reputation
among the people, at whose feet Paul used to sit,
interposed and taught the council a true and
better lesson. “ Refrain from these men, and
let them alone : for if this counsel or this work
be of men, it will come to nought. But if it be
of God, ye cannot overthrow it ; lest haply ye
be found even to fight against God.” Thus
Gamaliel checked for a time their wild and
furious proceedings.
But Paul, his zealous disciple, thought his
master was too mild and lenient, as if he would
have said, “ O ! if I had been in his place, I
would have put an end to the matter at once.”
Restless in mind, fiery in spirit, and not content
with consenting to the cruel death of Stephen
only, he could not brook these mild proceedings;
“ he yet breathed out threatening and slaughter
against the disciples of the Lord, went unto the


high priest, and desired of him letters to Da-
mascus, to the synagogues, that if he found any
of this way, whether they were men or women,
he might bring them bound unto Jerusalem.”
The result of these proceedings we need not
repeat here. “ Let them alone,” was strictly
applicable to the teachers of the Christian re-
ligion ; but another course must be pursued with
the heathens and Mohammedans. The servant
of the Lord must not strive; but be gentle unto
all men, apt to teach, patient to convince and
ready to rescue those who are misled. In meek-
ness instructing those who oppose themselves.
Hence I was led to take a seat at the feet of
the doctors, to learn lessons from them accord-
ing to the instructions of St. Paul to Timothy,
‘‘ Give attention to reading, to exhortation, to
doctrine.” I Tim, iv. 13.
Quest. Who are the Doctors, at whose feet we
are invited to sit ?
Ans. 1. Christ is the chief Doctor, both of
the Law and the Gospel; who came purposely
from Heaven to this end. For thou art a
teacher come from God; “We know that thou
art true, and teachest the way of God in truth.”
Then the lesson from Christ our great teacher
is, Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think
ye have eternal life, and they are they which


testify of me : this must be done by comparing
spiritual things with spiritual, by a skilful ap-
plication of the Scriptures to the subject in point,
and thus let the word of God speak for itself.
2. By studying how the Apostles acted in
such cases, both with the Jews and the Gentiles
dispassionately, calmly, and in the spirit of
meekness, instructing those who opposed them-
selves. Peter’s sermon on the Day of Pentecost
is an example of their dealings with the Jews,
and St. Paul’s sermon at Athens is an example
of their dealing with the Gentiles.
3. The Fathers of the Church are our modern
Doctors, at whose feet we must sit to learn
through their experience and riper knowledge
what they have committed to writing for our
instruction. The study of such lessons and the
imitation of such examples, will greatly sober
down our young and inexperienced spirits, when
we have to deal with those who think differently
from us, if we desire to convince and win them
over to the truth.
If we judiciously use the aid which we receive
from the Fathers of the Church, we shall at
least gain the hearing of our mixed audience,
while through the effectual operation of God’s
Holy Spirit, their hearts will be touched, and
fruits of conversion must follow.


In our dealings with the Heathens and Mo-
hammedans we employ the Scripture examples
for their information and instruction, without
rudely and contemptuously attacking their super-
stitious objects of worship or their erroneous
creed.
The history of the worship of Baal, which was
supported by King Ahab and Queen Jezebel,
as well that of the golden image of Nebuchad-
nezzar, is very instructive and telling on all wor-
shippers of false gods, if related in the spirit of
sympathy and love, as an example of like mis-
takes in olden times.
The exposure of the folly of image-worship by
the prophet Isaiah, is applicable to idolatrous
worshippers of all ages, and no less to those with
whom we have immediately to do: Isaiah xliv.
8-20 inclusive.
Psalm cxv. 4-8 is another passage, the truth
of which cannot but strike the consciences of all
idolaters who hear it. Such passages from God’s
holy word we read distinctly and expounded to
the people with feelings of sympathy, which never
failed to lead them to examine whether their
own objects of worship were not similarly weak
and useless.
A kind appeal to their own senses and con-
sideration whether those statements from God’s


holy word were not literally true, never pass
unheeded. The idolaters, having nothing to
support their religion, beyond that it was the
custom of their forefathers, are sooner brought
to reason than Mohammedans.
With these latter the case is different: they
have the Koran, which is believed by them to
be the last revelation from God through the
ministry of the Angel Gabriel to Mohammed
his messenger, to back them. The Koran ac-
knowledges the existence of only one true God,
who alone is to be worshipped; this is the
foundation of their faith. The Koran denies
the doctrine of the mysterious Trinity in Unity ,
which no human understanding can compre-
hend ; the Mohammedans therefore can only
be argued with upon the ground of what the
Koran admits, in order, if possible, to convince
them of the inconsistency of that book, which is
the foundation of their faith. Islamism admits
the miraculous conception of Christ, and that
he was a great prophet; also that the Angel
Gabriel was God’s faithful messenger to this
world from time to time ; well, we must build
upon this foundation.
Another opportunity I had with the Mohamme-
dans in public was in Ilorin, at the king’s palace,
in 1872, by special invitation from his majesty.


Before I began to answer the king’s questions,
I first got them to acknowledge that they be-
lieved in the Koran of the Angel Gabriel
Yibirila), who was always the faithful messenger
of God to this world, and was sent to the pro-
phet Mohammed with portions of the Koran
from time to time ; all this they readily admitted.
After this recognition of Gabriel as God’s faithful
messenger, I asked, whether Gabriel was capable
of making a mistake, and whether having de-
livered one message in the morning, and another
in the evening he could deny his having done
so in the morning? The reply was, “It was im-
possible for him to do so.” This concession was
the opening to our consideration of the doctrines
of the two religions, as follows, commencing with
the miraculous conception of Christ, and in con-
sequence his Sonship to God, declared by the
Angel Gabriel, more than six hundred years be-
fore Mohammed commenced his mission. The
king himself was the leading person during this
discussion; the Lemamu, Chief Priest, next in
position.
I opened my bag and took out my English
Bible and the Yoruba translations, the English
Prayer Book and the Yoruba translation, and
my pocket English dictionary, and the Yoruba
vocabulary ; having classed these six books side
B


by side, I explained to the audience that the
Yoruba translations of the Scriptures would
always interpret the English, by my reading the
same passages in both; that the same prayers
in the English language, have been translated
into Yoruba, which we have been using in all our
mission stations in the Yoruba country.
The subject which I first broached was the
Sonship of Christ, as declared by the Angel
Gabriel; I opened St. Luke i. 38-35, which I
first read in English, after which I turned to
the same passage in the Yoruba translations and
read it, and told them that it had been so before
the era of Mohammed. The second subject I
brought before their notice was the doctrine
which Christ taught of Himself, John xiv. 6, “I
am the way, the truth, and the life; no man
cometh unto the Father, but by Me.” Having
read that in English, I turned to the same
passage in the Yoruba translations, which I
distinctly read to them. The third subject was
His commission to His disciples, Matt, xxviii.
18-20, which I read in like manner.
This passage elicited the question from the
king, whether Anabi Isa (Jesus the Prophet)
was not to be the Judge of the world?
I replied that I would not answer the question
offhand, but would read it to them from the word


of Christ Himself; so I turned to Matt. xxv. 31-34,
which I first read in English, and then from the
Yoruba translations, to which profound attention
was paid. This again elicited the question, How
soon will He come? The reply was given by
turning to Acts i. 7. “ It is not for you to know
the times or the seasons which the Father hath
put in His own power.” Also Luke xii. 39-40,
“and this know, that if the good man of the
house had known what hour the thief would
come, he would have watched, and not have
suffered his house to be broken through. Be ye
therefore ready also: for the Son of man cometh
at an hour when ye think not.” I supported
this by reading the Rev. xxii. 10-12, “For the
time is at hand. He that is unjust, let him
be unjust still: and he which is filthy, let him be
filthy still: and he that is righteous, let him
be righteous still: and he that is holy, let him
be holy still. And, behold, I come quickly; and
my reward is with me, to give to every one
according as his work shall be.”
Having read this portion from the Yoruba
translations, there was a long silence, when some
one near the king suggested the question : what
does your (Litafi) Bible say of Mohammed ? I
replied that, as it was not till six hundred and
twenty-two years after Christ that Mohammed
B 2


established his doctrine, our Bible is quite silent
about his name. I was then asked which was
the fuller, our (Litafi) Bible, or the Koran ? I
replied that our Bible was very full, containing
the Taureta, the Pentateuch, the Sabura, the
Psalms of David with the Prophets; and the
Lanjil, the Gospel; showing each division from
my English Bible; from which books certain
subjects were picked out or alluded to in the
Koran when it was composed. I told them that
Christian missionaries are now in Stamboul
(Constantinople), and in Mizra (Egypt), and
Smyrna, where the truths of Christianity are
being examined and inquired into by many
Mussulmans, who desire to know them. I told
them also that we have established schools at
Lagos, Abbeokuta, and Ibadan, as also at Bonny,
Brass, Nun, Onitsha, and Lokoja, with a view
of carrying out Christ’s commission: “Go ye
therefore, and teach all nations.”
Then I was requested to read a prayer to
them out of the Prayer Book, so I read the
one for the Queen’s Majesty, first in English;
when I was reading it in Yoruba I told them
that the name of the sovereign in whose do-
minions we reside may be substituted as occasion
requires. They admired the prayer as being
very suitable.


I then explained to them the use of the
dictionaries to illustrate difficult words which
may be met with in either language, without
the aid of a teacher. The king asked to see
my Yoruba Testament, which I handed to him ;
he opened it and looked at it; the type of course
was quite different from Arabic characters. After
it was examined by the Lemamu, it was returned
to me with the remark, that I was truly a learned
Lemamu ! and then was put the query how I
came to know so much of book knowledge?
The readiness with which I turned to passages
in the Bible to answer any question put to me,
rather astonished them. There was no argument,
no dispute, no objection made, but the ques-
tions asked were answered direct from the Word
of God. After a general conversation about
other matters, it began to get dark, and the
king expressed regret that I had not been earlier
at the palace. On leaving I promised to send
him a copy of an Arabic Bible, in which he
would find those passages which we had referred
to on this occasion in my English and Yoruba
Testaments. We parted with good feelings on
both sides. It should be known that the Mal-
lams, supported by political influences, are
staunch upholders of Mohammedanism in Africa.
With the exception of the priests or Mallams,


a large number of converts to Mohammedanism
are uneducated, and to these the doctrines of the
Koran are explained by the priests in the Hausa
or any other language spoken by the converts,
for all are taught to say their prayers in Arabic,
because the Koran is not translated. The short
sentences which are taught them from the Koran
as the rule of faith, are now and then repeated
in Arabic with appearance of great solemnity
and reverence. The adult Christian converts,
who are taught to read the Bible in their own
language at the Sunday schools in our mission
are much better informed in Scriptural know-
ledge than their countrymen of the other faith
in their Koran: hence what the Mohammedan
converts lack in knowledge through ignorance
of book reading, they make up in bigotry,
fanaticism, and scornful denial of what they
cannot understand in the doctrines of the Chris-
tian religion. To meet them therefore by quo-
tations from the Holy Scriptures, it is necessary
to know something of what the Koran admits of
Jesus Christ, and of what it denies; and to be
able to do this with the greatest advantage, we
must sit at the feet of the Doctors. We then
commence with the Bible as it was written by
the holy men of God when moved by the Holy
Ghost: and we must also be apt scholars at the


feet of the Fathers of the Church, by whose co-
pious writings we may be greatly helped.
If, after all the explanations we can and dare
to give of that great mystery of the Christian
religion, the doctrine of the Trinity, they will
not yet believe, there is no alternative but to
leave them to God our Creator and Judge of all
the earth who must do right.
They must be dealt with and spoken with in
their own language as Christ did to the multitude
by His plain parables through objects understood
by them all. Some of the present leaders and
upholders of the old religion may shut their ears
and hearts to the plain truth of the Gospel, yet
in spite of them the common people will receive
the glad tidings readily.
In spite of all the fascinating allurements of the
flesh allowed by Mohammedanism and heathen-
ism to their votaries, yet many have attended
and are attending our places of worship in the
Upper Niger Mission: chiefs and princes have
several times ridden up to the mission station
with their subordinates and attendants, to hear
the preaching of the Gospel; these chiefs have
advised their followers to avail themselves of the
opportunity of hearing our preaching, and one
of the princes has promised us a place to build
a schoolroom on at his farm village for the in


struction of his people. Some of the constant
attendants have frankly confessed to us that
they have learnt more of true religion from us
than from all their priests put together.—An
old Mohammedan priest had asked for a copy
of an Arabic Bible for a long time, but it was
not given him from fear that he would make
a bad use of it, in making charms from it as
they did from the Koran. However after many
years’ urgent request with faithful promise that
he would not make a bad use of it, a copy was
given him which he received upon his knees
in the presence of his sons and pupils, who ac-
companied him, as a token of gratitude for the
possession of the precious book, not to be other-
wise used than for instruction. Other priests
have become regular visitors to read Arabic Bible
with mission agents at the stations.
Mohammedan kings were very glad to receive
Arabic Bibles from me ; so much are they valued,
that one of them was very reluctant to part with
his copy, to gratify the request of his master the
Sultan of Sokoto, till I had promised to bring
him another copy at my return next season.
An adjusted hand-book like the one now pro-
posed, which may bring the system of the
Christian religion more closely before their minds
in the native languages, will be of very great


value, especially when such texts can be com-
pared with the Arabic Bible. I have long
considered the subject, and felt convinced that
the first book of this kind should be adjusted
quotations from the Bible itself, to reveal to the
reader God’s mysterious plan for man’s salva-
tion.
This little hand-book aims at no intellectual
production, but is a compilation of copious
quotations from the Holy Scriptures, arranged
systematically under certain heads to be referred
to, as authentic evidence of sure witnesses from
sources which no reasonable man ean deny, if he
at all believes that there is a God, the Supreme
Being, and that He has a right to communicate
His mind and will to man as He thinks proper,
and that He has done so at sundry times and in
divers manners, as recorded in the Bible, the
volume of holy inspiration. These quotations
are written out in full, so that he who wishes
to make use of any passage may have it near
at hand full before him, instead of having to
refer to his Bible for a correct quotation, which
at times may be very inconvenient, especially
when it is desirable that the thread of conversa-
tion should not be broken ; unless the Christian
teacher has his texts, not only at his fingers’
end, but impressed in his memory, which cannot


be expected to be the case with every young
Christian teacher.
The texts in full will furnish him with facility
of quotation with readiness and appropriateness
of application. To gain this advantage he must
make himself well acquainted with the heads of
subjects which the texts quote.
These texts are intended to be translated into
the Hausa and Yoruba languages for the use of
the converts who always influence their Mo-
hammedan and heathen brethren in their family
and social relations better than any Christian
teacher can do.
Thus we must begin to provide suitable read-
ing books to meet the wants of this uneducated
people, in the same way as they are provided to
meet the capacity of children. They must be
led, as it were, by the hand, to know passages
of Scripture from the Bible itself, which is
not darkened by counsel without knowledge;
arguments will be a secondary thing, as mere
feeble illustrations. This quiet and reasonable
manner of dealing with Mohammedans by suit-
able application of the Scriptures cannot but
do some good to them as well as to the heathens,
who must all be met and instructed from the
same source.
It may be said that there are many books


already written on Mohammedanism which may
be used to advantage, and that it appears useless
to attempt another.
This is very true, but it should be known that
many of these books are not accessible to our
young native teachers, much less to our converts
to Christianity on this coast and in the interior
countries, who daily argue with their Moham-
medan countrymen. And if such books are
accessible to some of them, they have not been
trained up to meet and combat with Moham-
medans, who have been already armed with the
old fatal weapon, the denial of Christ’s Sonship
and the Fatherhood of God. In this fatal doctrine
they have been trained up to regard Christianity
with abhorrence as blasphemy, contrary to the
doctrine of the Koran, which teaches, “There
is no God but God, and Mohammed is his
prophet.” This creed is maintained with deep-
rooted bigotry, and armed with such ignorance
that no manner of argument will convince its
upholders, especially from inexperienced Chris-
tian teachers, who have not been previously
trained up how to wield the sword of the Spirit
skilfully on such a subject, leaving the result to
Him who has assured us, “My word shall not
return unto me void, but it shall accomplish
that which I please, and it shall prosper in the


thing whereto I sent it.” Isa. Iv. n. Besides
this, a large proportion of the Mohammedan
population on the West Coast of Africa are no
readers at all; those who acquire a little reading
of the Koran know scarcely anything else beyond
the routine of reading or repeating passages out
of it in Arabic, and on these they ground their
faith as interpreted to them by the Mallams.
They have no access to any book in the English
language, nor in the vernacular, and so all argu-
ments to convince them of their error seem but
vain labour.
Having been once defeated by Mohammedan
priests at Sierra Leone (1833), from want of
knowledge how to handle with skill this most
important but difficult subject, after many years’
experience, I have found that the Bible, the
sword of the Spirit, must fight its own battle,
by the guidance of the Holy Spirit.
Our experience ought not to be lost to the
young and rising generation who are to be our
successors in the evangelization of the West
Coast of Africa, where Mohammedanism prevails
to a very great extent.
With the heathens we argue from the Bible
against the vanity of their gods, their inability
to do good or to do evil, by reading such
passages as expose the folly of their worship,


and these have never yet failed to convince
the greatest idolaters whom we have met,
although some have attempted to resist con-
viction for a time, till they can stand against
it no longer. So we must deal with our Mo-
hammedan friends and countrymen from the
Word of God, leaving the results to Him who
is able to subdue the stubborn and unruly will
of man to the obedience of faith.
As the Koran allows certain doctrines in the
Christian Bible, and God’s method of commu-
nicating His will to man, so from these vulner-
able parts we must wage our good warfare in
support of the great Christian doctrine of the
Trinity, which the Koran flatly denies, from the
Bible direct. Having no other ground of faith
but the Koran, to which they cling with un-
flinching tenacity, saying “ God can never have
a Son,” they must be rpet on that ground ;
nothing will change them from this belief, ex-
cepting conviction from the Holy Spirit, whose
existence they deny. They believe in the exist-
ence of a being called Yibirila (Gabriel), as a
faithful messenger from God to the world, who
always brought chapters of the Koran to Mo-
hammed as occasion called them forth. They
believed Adam, Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus
and Mohammed as the six great prophets, as


classified and recognised in the Koran. That
Jesus was conceived by the wind of a virgin,
thus much was recognised. But Mohammed
represents God in the Koran as addressing Jesus
in these words, “Is it possible that Thou dost
teach Thy disciples that Thou and Thy mother
are two Gods?” and Jesus as indignantly deny-
ing that he did so.
It is of the greatest importance that provi-
sions be timely made to meet these evils at this
early stage of introducing Protestant Christianity
on the West Coast of Africa; and all the more
earnestly since the Roman Catholics are fol-
lowing our wake with their erroneous doctrine of
Mariolatry, and have established themselves at
Lagos, Abbeokuta, and may shortly be expected
in the Niger Mission also.
This is the time to bring in the Angel Gabriel,
who stands in the presence of God, as a faithful
messenger from God to the Virgin Mary. “And
in the sixth month, the Angel Gabriel was sent
from God, unto a city of Galilee, named Naza-
reth, to a virgin, espoused to a man whose name
was Joseph, of the house of David ; and the
virgin’s name was Mary.” Luke i. 26-35, in full
quotation.
That it was neither Mary who named her son
the Son of God, nor Jesus who named Himself


the Son of God, but the Angel Gabriel who was
sent from God, to name that mysterious infant
before He was conceived in the womb. “Yet
have I set my king upon my holy hill of Zion.
I will declare the decree; the Lord hath said
unto me, Thou art my Son ; this day have I
begotten thee. Ask of me, and I shall give thee
the heathen for thine inheritance, and the utter-
most parts of the earth for thy possession.”
The Angel Gabriel faithfully delivered this
message in obedience to the decree of God him-
self declared to the prophet so many hundred
years before that mysterious Child was con-
ceived in the womb. To this I may add two
other passages more, no less mysterious; “ There-
fore the Lord hirriself shall give you a sign;
Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son,
and shall call his name Immanuel.” Isa. vii. 14;
Matt. i. 23.
“ For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is
given : and the government shall be upon his
shoulder; and his name shall be called Wonder-
ful, Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlast-
ing Father, the Prince of Peace. Of the increase
of his government and peace there shall be no
end, upon the throne of David, and upon his
kingdom, to order it, and to establish it with
judgment and with justice from henceforth even


for ever. The zeal of the Lord of hosts will
perform this.” Isa. ix. 6, 7. This was foretold
more than seven hundred years before Christ
came into the world. Who dare deny this
prediction ?
Shall man dispute God’s prerogative to name
Himself or any parts of His Essence as He
pleases ? Passages of Christ’s titles and attri-
butes may be copiously quoted.
Among the numerous names by which Jesus
is called in the Old Testament by the Prophets,
and those by which He called Himself in the
New, none is so much disputed and objected to
as that of Son.
“ Out of the mouths of two or three witnesses
shall every word be established.”
Arrangements of Texts to prove God’s plan of
salvation, the Sonship of Christ , and the
Fatherhood of God.
1. Ps. Ixxxv. 10, ii: “Mercy and truth are
met together; righteousness and peace have
kissed each other. Truth shall spring out of
the earth ; and righteousness shall look down
from heaven.”
In these verses our attention is called to God’s
eternal plan by which mankind was to be saved


through His mercy, by the punishment of a sub-
stitute, that thus the justice of the law might
be satisfied. This plan was mysterious.
i Pet. i. io-i2: “Of which salvation the
prophets have enquired and searched diligently,
who prophesied of the grace that should come
unto you searching what, or what manner of
time the Spirit of Christ which was in them did
signify, when it testified beforehand the suffer-
ings of Christ, and the glory that should follow.
Unto whom it was revealed, that not unto them-
selves, but unto us they did minister the things,
which are now reported unto you by them that
have preached the gospel unto you with the
Holy Ghost sent down from heaven; which
things the angels desire to look into.”
2. God’s own declaration of His Son, through
the prophets, the Angel Gabriel, and by the Spirit
from heaven.
Ps. ii. 7,8, 12: “I will declare the decree;
the Lord hath said unto me, Thou art my Son ;
this day have I begotten thee. Ask of me, and
I shall give thee the heathen for thine inherit-
ance, and the uttermost parts of the earth foi
thy possession. Kiss the Son, lest he be angry
and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is
kindled but a little. Blessed are all they that
put their trust in him.”
C


B.C. 742. Isa. vii. 14: “The Lord himself
shall give you a sign ; Behold, a virgin shall
conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name
Immanuel.” Ch. ix. 6,7; “ For unto us a
child is born, unto us a son is given : and the
government shall be upon his shoulder ; and his
name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, The
mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince
of Peace. Of the increase of his government and
peace there shall be no end, upon the throne of
David, and upon his kingdom, to order it, and to
establish it with judgment and with justice from
henceforth even for ever. The zeal of the Lord
of hosts will perform this/’
B.C. 603. Dan. iii. 25; “He answered and
said, Lo, I see four men loose, walking in the
m'dst of the fire, and they have no hurt; and the
form of the fourth is like the Son of God.”
Messages by the Angel Gabriel to the Virgin
Mary before Christ was conceived.
Luke i. r 9 -. “I am Gabriel, that stand in the
presence of God ; and am sent to speak unto
thee (Zacharias), and to shew thee these glad
tidings.” vv. 26-35 ; “ And in the sixth month
the Angel Gabriel was sent from God unto a city
of Galilee, named Nazareth, to a virgin espoused
to a man whose name was Joseph, of the house
of David; and the virgin’s name was Mary.


And the angel came in unto her, and said, Hail,
thou that art highly favoured, the Lord is with
thee; blessed art thou among women. And
when she saw him, she was troubled at his say-
ing, and cast in her mind what manner of salu-
tation this should be. And the angel said unto
her, Fear not, Mary: for thou hast found favour
with God. And, behold, thou shalt conceive in
thy womb, and bring forth a son, and shalt call
his name JESUS. He shall be great, and shall
be called the Son of the Highest; and the Lord
God shall give unto him the throne of his father
David : and he shall reign over the house of
Jacob for ever; and of his kingdom there shall
be no end. Then said Mary unto the angel,
How shall this be, seeing I know not a man ?
And the angel answered and said unto her, The
Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power
of the Highest shall overshadow thee : therefore
also that holy thing which shall be born of thee
shall be called the Son of God.” ver. 37 : “ For
with God nothing shall be impossible.”
Matt. i. 20-23 : “And the angel said, For that
which is conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost.
And she shall bring forth a son, and thou shalt
call his name JESUS : for he shall save his peo-
ple from their sins. Now all this was done, that
it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the
C 2


Lord by the prophet, saying, Behold, a virgin
shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son,
and they shall call his name Emmanuel, which
being interpreted is, God with us.”
3. Declaration of Christ’s Sonship by the Spirit
from heaven.
Matt. iii. 16, 17; “And Jesus, when he was
baptized, went up straightway out of the water :
and, 10, the heavens were opened unto him, and
he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove,
and lighting upon him : and lo a voice from hea-
ven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom
I am well pleased.” See parallel passages:
xvii. 5-7 ; “ While he yet spake, behold, a bright
cloud overshadowed them: and behold a voice
out of the cloud, which said, This is my beloved
•Son, in whom I am well pleased ; hear ye him.
And when the disciples heard it, they fell on
their face, and were sore afraid. And Jesus came
and touched them, and said, Arise, and be not
afraid.”
2 Pet. i. 16-21 : “For we have not followed
cunningly devised fables, when we made known
unto you the power and coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ, but were eyewitnesses of his ma-
jesty. For he received from God the Father
honour and glory, when there came such a voice
to him from the excellent glory, This is my be


loved Son, in whom I am well pleased. And
this voice which came from heaven we heard
when we were with him in the holy mount.
We have also a more sure word of prophecy ;
whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto
a light that shineth in a dark place, until the day
dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts :
knowing this first, that no prophecy of the scrip-
ture is of any private interpretation. For the
prophecy came not in old time by the will of
man ; but holy men of God spake as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost.”
4. Declaration by Christ of His Sonship and
Fatherhood of God.
, John iii. 16-18,35,36: “For God so lo\*ed the
world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believeth in him should not perish,
but have everlasting life. For God sent not his
Son into the world to condemn the world; but
that the world through him might be saved. He
that believeth on him is not condemned ; but he
that believeth not is condemned already, because
he hath not believed in the name of the only
begotten Son of God. The Father loveth the
Son, and hath given all things into his hand.
He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting
life : and he that believeth not the Son shall not
see life ; but the wrath of God abideth on him.”


Ch. v. 17, 19-39: “Jesus answered them, My
Father worketh hitherto, and I work. Then
answered Jesus and said unto them, Verily,
verily, I say unto you, The Son can do nothing
of himself, but what he seeth the Father do : for
what things soever he doeth, these also doeth
the Son likewise. For the Father loveth the
Son, and sheweth him all things that himself
doeth : and he will shew him greater works than
these, that ye may marvel. For as the Father
raiseth up the dead, and quickeneth them ; even
so the Son quickeneth whom he will. For the
Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all
judgment unto the Son: that all men should
honour the Son, even as they honour the Father.
Fie that honoureth not the Son honoureth not the
Father which hath sent him. Verily, verily, I
say unto you, He that heareth my word, and
believeth on him that sent me, hath everlasting
life, and shall not come into condemnation ; but
is passed from death unto life. Verily, verily, I
say unto you, The hour is coming, and now is,
when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of
God : and they that hear shall live. For as the
Father hath life in himself; so hath he given to
the Son to have life in himself; and hath given
him authority to execute judgment also, because
he is the Son of man. Marvel not at this: for


the hour is coming, in the which all that are in
the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come
forth ; they that have done good, unto the resur-
rection of life ; and they that have done evil,
unto the resurrection of damnation. I can of
mine own self do nothing : as I hear, I judge :
and my judgment is just; because I seek not
mine own will, but the will of the Father which
hath sent me.” ver. 36 :“ I have greater witness
than that of John ; for the works which the Father
hath given me to finish, the same works that I do,
bear witness of me, that the Father hath sent
me. And the Father himself, which hath sent me,
hath borne witness of me. Ye have neither heard
his voice at any time, nor seen his shape. And
ye have not his word abiding in you: for whom
he hath sent, him ye believe not. Search the
Scriptures ; for in them ye think ye have eternal
life: and they are they which testify of me.”
John viii. 28, 29 : “ Then said Jesus unto them,
When ye have lifted up the Son of man, then
shall ye know that I am he, and that I do no-
thing of myself; but as my Father hath taught
me, I speak these things. And he that sent me
is with me : the Father hath not left me alone ;
for I do always those things that please him.”
John viii. 35, 36 ; “ And the servant abideth not
in the house for ever; but the Son abideth ever.


If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall
be free indeed.” ver. 38 : “I speak that which I
have seen with my Father: and ye do that which
ye have seen with your father.” ver. 42 : “Jesus
said, If God were your Father, ye would love
me : for I proceeded forth and came from God ;
neither came lof myself, but he sent me.” ver.
49: “Jesus answered, I have not a devil; but I
honour my Father, and ye do dishonour me.”
John ix. 35~35: “Jesus heard that they had
cast him out ; and when he had found him, he
said unto him, Dost thou believe on the Son of
God? He answered and said, Who is he, Lord,
that I might believe on him? And Jesus said
unto him, Thou hast both seen him, and it is he
that talketh with thee. And he said, Lord, I be-
lieve. And he worshipped him.”
John x. 29, 30, 36-38: “My Father, which
gave them me, is greater than all; and no man
is able to pluck them out of my Father’s hand.
I and my Father are one. Say ye of him, whom
the Father hath sanctified, and sent into the
world, Thou blasphemest; because I said, lam
the Son of God. If I do not the works of my
Father, believe me not. But if I do, though ye
believe not me, believe the works : that ye may
know, and believe, that the Father is in me, and
I in him.”


John xi. 4: “ When Jesus heard that, he said,
This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory
of God, that the Son of God might be glorified
thereby.” vv. 41, 42 : “Jesus lifted up his eyes,
and said, Father, I thank thee that thou hast
heard me. And I knew that thou hearest me
always: but because of the people which stand
by I said it, that they may believe that thou
hast sent me.”
John xiv. 1-7 ; “ Let not your heart be troubled:
ye believe in God, believe also in me. In my
Father’s house are many mansions: if it were
not so, I would have told you. Igo to prepare
a place for you. And if Igo and prepare a place
for you, I will come again, and receive you unto
myself; that where I am, there ye may- be also.
And whither I go ye know, and the way ye know.
Thomas saith unto him, Lord, we know not whi-
ther thou goest; and how can we know the way.
Jesus saith unto him, I am the way, the truth,
and the life : no man cometh unto the Father,
but by me. If ye had known me, ye should have
known my Father also : and from henceforth ye
know him, and have seen him/’
John xiv. 8--11 : “ Philip saith unto him, Lord,
shew us the Father, and it sufficeth us. Jesus saith
unto him, Have I been so long time with you, and
yet hast thou not known me, Philip ? he that hath


seen me hath seen the Father; and how sayest
thou then, Shew us the Father. Believest thou
not that I am in the Father, and the Father in
me ? the words that I speak unto you I speak
not of myself: but the Father that dwelleth in
me, he doeth the works. Believe me that lam
in the Father, and the Father in me : or else be-
lieve me for the very works’ sake,” &c., to the end
of the chapter, from which numerous similar quo-
tations can be made.
John xv. i, 8-10 : “ I am the true vine, and my
Father is the husbandman. Herein is my Father
glorified, that ye bear much fruit ; so shall ye be
my disciples. As the Father hath loved me, so
have I loved you: continue ye in my love. If
ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in
my love; even as I have kept my Father’s com-
mandments, and abide in his love,” &c., to the
end of the chapter.
John xvi. 3, 10,15: “And these things will they
do unto you, because they have not known the
Father, nor me. He, the Comforter, will reprove
the world. Of righteousness, because I go to
my Father, and ye see me no more. All things
that the Father hath are mine: therefore said I,
that he shall take of mine, and shall shew unto
you,” &c., to the end of the chapter.
John xvii. 1-5: “ These words spake Jesus, and


lifted up his eyes to heaven, and said, Father,
the hour is come ; glorify thy Son, that thy Son
also may glorify thee ; as thou hast given him
power over all flesh, that he should give eternal
life to as many as thou hast given him. And
this is life eternal, that they might know thee
the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou
has sent. I have glorified thee on the earth : I
have finished the work which thou gavest me to
do. And now, O Father, glorify thou me with
thine own self with the glory which I had with
thee before the world was/’ &c., to the end of the
chapter.
These are His declarations after His
resurrection.
John xx. 17, 21 ; “Jesus saith unto her (Mary),
Touch me not; for lam not yet ascended to my
Father : but go to my brethren, and say unto
them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father ;
and to my God, and your God. Then said Jesus
to them again, Peace be unto you ; as my Father
hath sent me, even so send I you.”
I shall close these select quotations from
Christ’s own declaration of His Sonship and
the Fatherhood of God, with His last commission
to His disciples in the doctrine of the Trinity in


Unity, before His ascension to His Father in
heaven.
Matt, xxviii. 18-30: “And Jesus came and
spake unto them, saying, All power is given
unto me in heaven and in earth. Go ye there-
fore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost: teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever I have commanded you : and, 10, I
am with you alway, even unto the end of the
world. Amen.”
Let ns hear also of others confession of Christ
as the Son of God , from achial conviction.
John the Evangelist. John i. 18; “No man
hath seen God at any time; the only begotten
Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he
hath declared him.”
John the Baptist. John i. 33-34 : “And John
bare record, saying, I saw the Spirit descending
from heaven like a dove, and it abode upon him.
And I knew him not: but he that sent me to
baptize with water, the same said unto me,
Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descend-
ing, and remaining on him, the same is he which
baptizeth with the Holy Ghost. And I saw,
and bare record that this is the Son of God.”


Nathanael. John i, 47-49: “Jesus saw Nathan-
ael coming to him, and saith of him, Behold an
Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile ! Nathan-
ael saith unto him, Whence knowest thou me ?
Jesus answered and said unto him, Before that
Philip called thee, when thou wast under the fig
tree, I saw thee. Nathanael answered and saith
unto him, Rabbi, thou art the Son of God ; thou
art the King of Israel.”
Mark the Evangelist. Mark i. 1, 2 : “ The
beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son
of God ; as it is written in the prophets, Behold,
I send my messenger before thy face, which shall
prepare thy way before thee.”
Peter in the name of the disciples. J ohn Vi. 69:
“ And we believe and are sure that thou art that
Christ, the Son of the living God.”
The men in the skip. Matt. xiv. 33 ; “ Then
they that were in the ship came and worshipped
him, saying, Of a truth thou art the Son of
God.”
Simon Peter. Matt. xvi. 15, 16 : “He saith
unto them, But whom say ye that lam ? And
Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art the
Christ, the Son of the living God.”
Martha. John xi. 26, 37 ; “ And whosoever
liveth and believeth in me shall never die. Be-
lievest thou this? She saith unto him, Yea,


Lord: I believe that thou art the Christ, the Son
of God, which should come into the world.”
The Centurion. Matt, xxvii. 54 : “ Now when
the centurion, and they that were with him,
watching Jesus, saw the earthquake, and those
things that were done, they feared greatly, say-
ing, Truly this was the Son of God.”
The Eunuch. Acts viii. 36-38 : “ And as
they went on their way, they came unto a cer-
tain water : and the eunuch said, See, here is
water ; what doth hinder me to be baptized ?
And Philip said, If thou believest with all thine
heart, thou mayest. And he answered and said,
I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God;
and he baptized him.”
Saul. Acts ix. 19, 20 : “Then was Saul cer-
tain days with the disciples which were at
Damascus. And straightway he preached Christ
in the synagogues, that he is the Son of God.”
John the Evangelist. John xx. 31 : “ But
these are written, that ye might believe that
Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God ; and that
believing, ye might have life through his
name.”
Testimonies from the teaching of the Apostles.
1 John i. 1-4, 7 : “ That which was from the
beginning, which we have heard, which we have


seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon,
and our hands have handled, of the Word of
life ; (For the life was manifested, and we have
seen it, and bear witness, and shew unto you
that eternal life, which was with the Father, and
was manifested unto us. That which we have
seen and heard declare we unto you, that ye
also may have fellowship with us: and truly our
fellowship is with the Father and his Son Jesus
Christ. And these things write we unto you
that your joy may be full. If we walk in the
light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship
one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ
his Son cleanseth us from all sin.”
I John iii. 8,23 : “He that committeth sin is of
the devil; for the devil sinneth from the begin-
ning. For this purpose the Son of God was
manifested, that he might destroy the works of
the devil. And this is his commandment, That
we should believe on the name of his Son Jesus
Christ, and love one another, as he gave us com-
mandment.”
1 John iv. 9,10, 14, 15 ; “In this was manifested
the love of God towards us, because that God
sent his only begotten Son into the world, that
we might live through him. Herein is love, not
that we loved God, but that he loved us, and
sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins.


And we have seen, and do testify that the
Father sent the Son to be the Saviour of the
world. Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is
the Son of God, God dwelleth in him, and he in
God.”
i John v. 5: 9, io, ii : “ Who is he that over-
cometh the world, but he that believeth that Jesus
is the Son of God. If we receive the witness of
men, the witness of God is greater: for this is
the witness of God, which he hath testified of
his Son. He that believeth on the Son of God
hath the witness in himself: he that believeth
not God hath made him a liar ; because he be-
lieveth not the record that God gave of his
Son.
“And this is the record, that God hath given
to us eternal life, and this life is in his Son. He
that hath the Son, hath life; and he that hath
not the Son of God hath not life. These things
have I written unto you that believe on the
name of the Son of God ; that ye may know
that ye have eternal life, and that ye may be-
lieve on the name of the Son of God.”
1 John v. 20 : “ And we know that the Son of
God is come, and hath given us an under-
standing, that we may know him that is true,
and we are in him that is true, even in his Son
Jesus Christ. This is the true God, and eternal


life. Little children, keep yourselves from idols.
Amen.”
St. Paul the Apostle. Rom. i. I -4, 9 : “ Paul,
a servant of Jesus Christ, called to be an apostle,
separated unto the gospel of God. Which he
had promised afore by his prophets in the holy
scriptures. Concerning his Son Jesus Christ our
Lord, which was made of the seed of David ac-
cording to the flesh; and declared to be the Son
of God with power, according to the Spirit of
holiness, by the resurrection from the dead. For
God is my witness, whom I serve with my spirit
in the Gospel of his Son, that without ceasing I
make mention of you always in my prayers,”
&c.
II Cor. i. 18-20: “But as God is true, our
word toward you was not yea and nay. For the
Son of God, Jesus Christ, who was preached
among you by us, even by me and Silvanus and
Timotheus, was not yea and nay, but in him was
yea. For all the promises of God in him are
yea, and in him Amen, unto the glory of God by
us,” &c.
Gal. ii. 20: “I am crucified with Christ :
nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ liveth
in me : and the life which I now live in the flesh,
I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved
me, and gave himself for me,” &c.
D


Eph. iv. 10-13; “He that descended is the
same also that ascended up far above all hea-
vens, that he might fill all things. And he gave
some, apostles ; and some, prophets ; and some,
evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers :
for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of
the ministry, for the edifying of the body of
Christ; till we all come in the unity of the
faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God,
unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the
stature of the fulness of Christ,” &c.
Heb. - iv. 14: “ Seeing then that we have a
great high priest, that is passed into the heavens,
Jesus the Son of God, Jet us ho.M fast our pro-
fession.” vi. 4-6 ; “ For it is impossible for those
who were once enlightened, and have tasted of
the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of
the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word
of God, and the powers of the world to come, if
they shall fall away, to renew them again unto
repentance ; seeing they crucify to themselves
the Son of God afresh and put him to an open
shame.” x. 28, 39 : “He that despised Moses’
law died without mercy under two or three wit-
nesses : of how much sorer punishment, suppose
ye, shall he be thought worthy who hath trodden
under foot the Son of God, and hath counted
the blood of the covenant, wherewith he was


sanctified an unholy thing, and hath done de-
spite unto the Spirit of grace,” &c,
I Tim. iii. 16 : “ And without controversy,
great is the mystery of godliness: God was
manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen
of angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed
on in the world, received up into glory.”
Rev. ii. 18 : “And unto the angel of the
church in Thyatira write ; These things saith the
Son of God, who hath his eyes like unto a flame
of fire, and his feet are like fine brass ; I know
thy works, and charity, and service, and faith,
and thy patience, and thy works.”
Rev. xxii. n-ax : “ He that is unjust, let him
be unjust still: and he which is filthy, let him
be filthy still: and he that is righteous, let him
be righteous still: and he that is holy, let him
be holy still. And, behold, I come quickly ; and
my reward is with me, to give every man ac-
cording as his work shall be.
“ I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and
the end, the first and the last. Blessed are they
that do his commandments, that they may have
right to the tree of life, and may enter in through
the gates into the city. For without are dogs,
and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murder-
ers, and idolaters, and whosoever loveth and
maketh a lie. I Jesus have sent mine angel to
D a


testify unto you these things in the churches.
T am the root and the offspring of David, and
the bright and morning star.
“ And the Spirit and the bride say, Come.
And let him that heareth say, Come. And let
him that is athirst come. And whosoever will,
let him take of the water of life freely.
“ For I testify unto every man that heareth
the words of the prophecy of this book, If any
man shall add unto these things, God shall add
unto him the plagues that are written in this
book :
“ And if any man shall take away from the
words of the book of this prophecy, God shall
take away his part out of the book of life, and
out of the holy city, and from the things which
are written in this book.
“ He which testifieth these things saith, Surely
I come quickly. Amen. Even so, come, Lord,
Jesus.
“ The grace of" our Lord Jesus Christ be with
you all. Amen,”
Satan had succeeded in depriving Adam of
that holy state of innocency, and thus ruined
his race ; he now attempted to beguile Christ to
follow his suggestive advice under a cloak of
deep interest for his personal comfort and hon-
our, and an anxious desire for his reputation


and popular acceptance in the world, as the ex-
pected Messiah. But it was with the intention
of casting a doubt upon his mission as being
from God inasmuch as it was aided by Satan:
so all his after works would have been with
greater plausibility ascribed to the power of
Satan, from which insinuation they were not
altogether free. “ This fellow doth not cast
out devils, but by Beelzebub the prince of the
devils. 1 '
But Christ knew his subtle adviser and his
wicked deep-laid scheme: he met him with that
never failing weapon, the sword of the Spirit
which is the word of God ; with it he repelled
Satan’s wiles and exposed him in his true cha-
racter, as the enemy of God and man. “ Get
thee hence, Satan : for it is written, Thou shalt
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt
thou serve. Then the devil leaveth him.”
Quotations of Christs Sonship from Satan's
insinuation.
Matt. iv. 3-1 1 : “ And when the tempter came
to him, he said, If thou be the Son of God, com-
mand that these stones be made bread.
“ But he answered and said, It is written, Man
shall not live by bread alone, but by every word
that proceedeth out of the mouth of God.


“ Then the devil taketh him up into the holy
city, and setteth him on a pinnacle of the temple,
and saith unto him, If thou be the Son of God,
cast thyself down : for it is written, He shall
give his angels charge concerning thee: and in
their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any
time thou dash thy foot against a stone. Jesus
said unto him, It is written again, Thou shalt
not tempt the Lord thy God.
“Again, the devil taketh him up into an ex-
ceeding high mountain, and sheweth him all the
kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them ;
And saith unto him, All these things will I give
thee, if thou wilt fall down and worship me.
Then saith Jesus unto him, Get thee hence,
Satan: for it is written, Thou shalt worship the
Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve.
Then the devil leaveth him.” See also Luke iv.
i-L3-
Devils also were obliged to acknowledge him
as the Son of God, but Christ would not permit
them, but commanded them to hold their peace,
because he would not receive honour from Satan.
Luke iv. 33-37* “And in the synagogue there
was a man, which had a spirit of an unclean
devil, and cried out with a loud voice, saying,
Let us alone; what have we to do with thee,
thou Jesus of Nazareth? art thou come to de


stray us ? I know thee who thou art; the Holy
One of God. And Jesus rebuked him, saying,
Hold thy peace, and come out of him. And
when the devil had thrown him down, he came
out of him, and hurt him not.”
Luke viii. 37-33. “And when he went forth to
land, there met him out of the city a certain man,
which had devils long time, and ware no clothes,
neither abode in any house, but in the tombs.
When he saw Jesus, he cried out, and fell down
before him, and with a loud voice said, What
have I to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of God
most high ? I beseech thee, torment me not.
For he had commanded the unclean spirit to
come out of the man. For oftentimes it had
caught him; and he was kept bound with chains
and in fetters; and he brake the bands, and was
driven of the devil into the wilderness. And
Jesus asked him saying, What is thy name?
And he said, Legion: because many devils were
entered into him. And they besought him that
he would not command them to go out into the
deep. And there was there an herd of many swine
feeding on the mountain: and they besought
him that he would suffer them to enter into
them: and he suffered them.
“Then went the devils out of the man, and
entered into the swine: and the herd ran vio


lently down a steep place into the lake, and
were choked. When they that fed them saw
what was done, they fled and went and told it
in the city and in the country.” Matt. viii.
28.
Mark iii. 11, 12. “And unclean spirits, when
they saw him fell down before him, and cried
saying, Thou art the Son of God: And he
straitly charged them, that they should not
make him known.”
The Jews indignantly sought his death, be-
cause he made himself the Son of God, and
sarcastically demanded of him whether he was
the Son of God? if so, he should miraculously
come down from the cross, that they might
believe him.
John xix. 7. “ The Jews answered him (Pilate),
We have a law, and by our law he ought to
die, because he made himself the Son of God.”
Luke xxii. 69-71. “Hereafter shall the Son
of man sit on the right hand of the power of
God. Then said they all, Art thou then the
Son of God? And he said unto them, Ye say
that I am. And they said, What need we any
further witness? for we ourselves have heard
of his own mouth.” See Matt. xxvi. 63-66 :
“ And the high priest answered and said unto
him, I adjure thee by the living God, that'thou


tell us whether thou be the Christ, the Son
of God. Jesus saith unto him, Thou hast
said: nevertheless I say unto you, Hereafter
shall ye see the Son of man sitting on the
right hand of power, and coming in the clouds
of heaven. Then the high priest rent his clothes,
saying, He hath spoken bl sphemy; what fur-
ther need have we of witnesses ? behold, now ye
have heard his blasphemy. What think ye?
They answered and said, He is guilty of death.”
Ch. xxvii. 35, 39, 40, 43. “And they crucified
him, and parted his garments, casting lots : that
it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the
prophet, They parted my garments among them,
and upon my vesture did they cast lots. And
they that passed by reviled him, wagging their
heads, and saying, Thou that destroyest the
temple, and buildest it in three days, save thy-
self. If thou be the Son of God, come down
from the cross. He trusted in God ; let him
deliver him now, if he will have him: for he
said, I am the Son of God.”
Luke xxiii. 34, 44-46. “Then said Jesus,
Father, forgive them ; for they know not what
they do. And it was about the sixth hour, and
there was darkness over all the- earth until the
ninth hour.
“And the sun was darkened, and the veil of


the temple was rent in the midst. And when
Jesus had cried with a loud voice, he said,
Father, into thy hands I commend my Spirit:
and having said thus, he gave up the ghost.”
Rules how to deal with Mohammedans. From
George Sale’s Address to the Readers of the
Koran.
“The writers of the Romish communion, in
particular, are so far from having done any
service in their refutations of Mohammedanism,
that by endeavouring to defend their idolatry
and other superstitions, they have rather con-
tributed to the increase of that aversion which
the Mohammedans in general have to the
Christian religion, and given them great ad-
vantages in the dispute. The Protestants alone
are able to attack the Koran with success ; and
for them, I trust, Providence has reserved the
glory of its overthrow. In the mean time, if
I might presume to lay down rules to be ob-
served by those who attempt the conversion of
the Mohammedans, they should be the same
which the learned and worthy bishop Kidder
has prescribed for the conversion of the Jews,
and which may, mutatis mutandis , be equally
applied to the former, notwithstanding the de-
spicable opinion that writer, for want of being


better acquainted with them, entertained of those
people, judging them scarce fit to be argued
w 7 ith. The first of these rules is, To avoid
compulsion; which though it be not in our
power to employ at present, I hope will not
be made use of when it is. The second is, To
avoid teaching doctrines against common sense ;
the Mohammedans not being such fools (what-
ever we may think of them) as to be gained
over in this case. The worshipping of images
and the doctrine of transubstantiation are great
stumbling-blocks to the Mohammedans, and the
Church which teacheth them is very unfit to
bring those people over. The third is, To avoid
weak arguments: for the Mohammedans are
not to be converted with these, or hard words.
We must use them with humanity, and dispute
against them with arguments that are proper
and cogent. It is certain that many Christians,
who have written against them, have been very
defective this way: many have used arguments
that have no force, and advanced propositions
that are void of truth. This method is so far
from convincing that it rather serves to harden
them. The Mohammedans will be apt to con-
clude we have little to say, when we urge them
with arguments that are trifling or untrue. We
do but lose ground when we do this: and in


stead of gaining them, we expose ourselves and
our cause also. We must not give them ill
words neither: but must avoid all reproachful
language, all that is sarcastical and biting: this
never did good from pulpit or press. The softest
words will make the deepest impression; and if
we think it a fault in them to give ill language,
we cannot be excused when we imitate them.
The fourth rule is, Not to quit any article of the
Christian faith to gain the Mohammedans.”
The West African Mohammedans must
be met dispassionately when discussed with
about the Christian religion as the Apostles
dealt with the Grecian Jews or Hellenists: with
a desire to inform . . . from the Scriptures of
God’s plan of salvation by Jesus Christ’s Sermon
on the Mount to the mixed multitude is a
perfect rule to follow how he impressed the
minds of such members of his audience, as the
prejudiced Scribes and Pharisees who were
watching to find fault with his doctrine, as ob-
jectionable. “When Jesus had ended these
sayings, the people were astonished at his
doctrine.”
OXFORD I HORACE HART, PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY


PUBLICATIONS
OF THE
SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE.
Alone with God; or Helps to Thought and Prayer. For
the Use of the Sick; based on short passages of Scripture. By the Rev.
F. Bourdillon, M.A. i2ino, cloth boards , is. 6 d.
Being of God, Six Addresses on the. By C. J. Ellicott, D.D.,
Bishop of Gloucester and Bristol. Small post Bvo, cloth boards , is. 6d.
Bible Places; or, the Topography of the Holy Land. By the
Rev. Canon Tristram. With Map and numerous Woodcuts. Crown
Bvo, cloth boards , 4r.
Champions of the Right, By the Rev. E. Giluat, M.A.
Crown Bvo, cloth boards , 2 s.
Christians under the Crescent in Asia. By the Rev, E. L.
Cutts, 8.A., Author of ‘Turning Points of Church History/ &c. With
numerous Illustrations. Crown Bvo, cloth boards , ss.5 s.
Church History in England, from the Earliest Times to the
Period of the Reformation. By the Rev. Arthur Martineau, M.A.
J2mo, cloth boards, ss.
Church History (Sketches of), from the First Century to the
Reformation, By the late Rev. J. C. Robertson. With Map. j2mo,
cloth boards , 2s.
Daily Readings for a Year. By Elizabeth Spooner. Crown
Svo, cloth boards, 3 s. 6 d.


Englishman’s Brief (The), on Behalf of his National Church.
New, revised, and enlarged edition. Small post Bvo, paper boards, 6d.
Faithful Soldiers and Servants. Twenty Addresses to Young
Men. By Mary A. Lewis. Post Bvo, cloth boards , is. 6d.
Friend’s Hand (A). Short Texts and Simple Prayers as Con-
solation for the Sick and Weary, and Comfort for the Lying. With five
page woodcuts. Royal i6mo, cloth boards , is.
Gospels (The Four), arranged in the form of an English Har-
mony, from the Text of the Authorized Version. By the Rev. J. M.
Fuller, M.A. With Analytical Table of Contents and four Maps.
Cloth boards, is. 6d.
History of the English Church. In short Biographical Sketches.
By the Rev. Julius Lloyd, M.A. Author of “Sketches of Church
History in Scotland.” Post Bvo, cloth boards , 2 s.
History of the Jewish Nation (A), from the Earliest Times to
the Present Day. By the late E. H. Palmer, Esq., MA. With Map of
Palestine and numerous Illustrations. Crown Bvo, cloth boai'ds> 4 s.
Land of Israel (The), a Journal of Travel in Palestine, under-
taken with special reference to its Physical Character. By the Rev. Canon
Tristram. With two Maps and numerous Illustrations. Large post
Bvo, cloth boards , Jo s. 6d.
Lesser Lights; or, Some of the Minor Characters of Scripture
traced, with a View to Instruction and Example in Daily Life. By the
Rev. F. Bourdillon, M.A. First and Second Series, Post Bvo, cloth
boards, each 2 s. 6 d.
Litany (The). With an Introduction, Explanation of Words and
Phrases, together with Illustrative and Devotional Paraphrase. By the
Rev. E. J. Boyce, M.A. Fcap. Bvo, cloth boards , is,
Narrative of a Modern Pilgrimage through Palestine on
Horseback, and with Tents. By the Rev. Alfred C. Smith, M.A.
Numerous Illustrations and four Coloured Plates. Crown Bvo, cloth
boards, §s.


Northumbrian Saints (The); or, Chapters from the Early
History of the English Church. By the Rev. E. C. S. Gibson. Post Bvo.
cloth boards , is.
On the Nature and Office of God the Holy Ghost. By die
Rev. S. C. Austen. Reap. Bvo, cloth boards, i s.
Paley’s Evidences. A New Edition, with Notes, Appendix, and
Preface. By the Rev. E. A. Litton. Post Bvo, cloth boards , 4 t.
Paley’s Horse Paulinse. A New Edition, with Notes, Appendix,
and Preface. By the Rev. J. S. Howson, D.D. Post Bvo, cloth boards , y.
Peace with God. A Manual for the Sick. By the Rev. E. Bur-
iiidge, MA. Post Bvo, cloth boards, T,r. 6d.
Plain Seasons against joining the Church of Some, By the
Rev. R. F. Littledale, LL.D., &c. Post Bvo, cloth boards, is.
Plain Words for Christ. Being a Series of Readings for Working
Men. By the Rev. R. G. Dutton. Post Bvo, cloth boards, it.
Prophecies and Types of Messiah. Four Lectures to Pupil
Teachers. By the Rev. G. P. Ottey, M.A. Post Bvo, cloth boards, It.
St. Chrysostom’s Picture of his Age. Post Bvo, cloth boards, 2 s.
St. Chrysostom’s Picture of the Religion of his Age. Post
Bvo, cloth boards, it. (d.
Scenes in the East. Consisting of Twelve Coloured Photo-
graphic Views of Places mentioned in the Bible, beautifully executed, with
Descriptive Letterpress. By the Rev. Canon Tristram. Cloth, bevelled
boards, gilt edges , •js. 6d.
Seek and Find. A Double Series of Short Studies of the
Eenedicite. By Christina G. Rossetti. Post Bvo, cloth hoards, 2 s. 6 d.
Servants of Scripture (The). By the Rev. John W. Burgon,
B.D. Post Bvo, cloth hoards, it. (id.


Sinai and Jerusalem; or, Scenes from Bible Lands. Consisting
of Coloured Photographic Views of Places mentioned in the Bible, in-
cluding a Panoramic View of Jerusalem, with Descriptive Letterpress. By
the Rev. F. W. Holland, M.A. Demy 410, cloth, bevelled boards, gilt
edges, 7 s. 6d.
Some Chief Truths of Religion. By the Rev. Edward L.
Cutts, 8.A., Author of ‘ St. Cedd’s Cross,’ &c. Crown Bvo, cloth boards, 3 s.
Time Flies: a Reading Diary, By Christina G. Rossetti,
Authdt of ‘ Letter and Spirit,’ See. Post Bvo, cloth boards, 2 s. 6 d.
Thoughts for Working Days. Original and Selected. By
Emily C. Orr. Post Bvo, cloth boards, is.
Turning-Points of English Church History. By the Rev.
Edward L. Cutts, 8.A., Vicar of Holy Trinity, Haverstock Hill.
Crown Bvo, cloth boards, y. (id.
Turning-Points of General Church History. By the Rev.
E. L. Cutts, 8.A., Author of‘Pastoral Counsels,’ See. Crown Bvo, cloth
boards, s s.
Under His Banner. Papers on Missionary Work of Modern
Times. By the Rev. W. H. Tucker. With Map. Crown Bvo, cloth
boards, s s.
Ventures of Faith; or, Deeds of Christian Heroes. By the
Rev. J. J. Halcombe. With six Illustrations on toned paper. Crown
Bvo, cloth boards, 2 s. (id.


[?]
[?]
[?]
[?] 19 1828


// _ „ 'V.J
'■2 '2 —,
■p '
. pu uMs 2--.
/ } U
/ X
y ei j~ lLA ~ * Ld
&■ /"*
.i />*-*
..,-% / f ,/£ qu.» -/<O/"
,1 ' j ‘ — i iJf , 2e , ' }
/ 7 ',t€- ‘ ■’ - I £
.-. ■■*■-
„ ~ •/ /- CLi;C/».' r£ «-<5 ll_ , «*/ -cl
A 7 - \ / Y id •-'- <st /
1 o ,/
Y/ , r'd'Y X**-. /WV ‘-ii ‘'t t
y “■ w
f\ V\
ft <LAe ij ~-
y ? £ «.V J A'


' '/V " ;
j‘ , f
J /W \ * \.,f 5..,- 1
, tr' a ■ ,■
; 1 ■ v - v
* ' k ' i , , /I / i , ‘ (
.4/ />j j "v ■ ■ '/% „
,; . • • ■ , . ; ij~ ■ /
SIJ ;
u /A-... ■%-. > . y ,
/; ■ , ■ . •
1 * f • - ■
f-~f % Nr-’ A ' /? /* /, (‘ » »
/ / | v/ -
v ' ■.’ "...
C
. ,// , ‘ f ■ -
' ■• V*
- # A|fA<T <- - ■■• ;•


1 "* j/ /
■*' ' ' jj
■ '*t ■■ { J /. .
. v 7 : : ; a dtV) u/c
./m ■ . ■ . / *.
, / /v " ‘‘'
~ ■ ■ TtT ■ ■V S , . . ■ ■ ■
y ; ••' ■ !&“•■ ■ , ' ■' / j*\ ./ ,> .
" ' ■ ■ . , // /%/%... /
■ ,^ t i«i3 ; '""‘ ‘ ’
jf f J?,' '/ A :M
/? // n
:, ; •:... , .• v/ J.. c/ .
/**•'■■■■"■' f^n^ 1 /' 7 > ~,
■ • / < \f * Lfr. \ ,
■■■ . . / / /
■;•■ := ■ ■ w .. ■ j ■


MISSION TO THE 500,000 BLIND OF CHINA.
pI,EN - }3 A I : \M fl OUS IE
C; / / A
'
A . c / '/cS/ r
A«,J C. iX'-y* <J/
fy* /
v 7 j(T>* --'.J *-y
ti-Ku. , <4r A/F„- & 7 vw/wW.
#<c y' /A r A*"-’ '“/ Ji,w^ : 7
7 ZJa * -
/.,, 7*7,7 A *«•*£•/»A-
-"? ' ■ ■'' ,7 Z ;w//<s«r /- s< “
“*“ ; ■ r ,
/u/lL’fU4 ' • 7
A* " '
; .' 7 * , i, / 4. -
7W/ 7/ ■ f <r '-'>' ,
a , • . ... ■ .. 4,v7
- J . , ~ , ‘ •
, ■' ■ 7 :
/ ,7 „ 1,7/ > ?ctc£*<n~i AcfiA)
A" 4/Z.is- 1" iif o \
. . ;/J- 7 -'"•
ii4,i.<-/E '‘V ‘ l/khd',
' ' f f s 7 A- „ /
fu 7 • v // ‘^ 7r 7 A,
c


luA,h /&•
£ **
(/ ■ if / *
Lt S ' </J fa /l¥ 4
/ /
A -,U f ~
Au f /4
j ,>. <J ,„ r , . <SV- •'•'H
. /7 /f I 1 i
/
c
1 /V ' 1 4 i ‘ /Vr '
€/ li, 4-W.-J y i/
«j *"
/t4.»^f''4-4.-<-A'l-i, 4,«,. w / /% / *T’■'•■ '■ t *’*~ J
| ■ /
V 1 - J jf- c / "1 |l £ ?'<' t-- £', 4/,
V C*, /'*•
- r A: ‘s
4/ < ’
i^ r Mm / *
-»# * • « /i/’ . (/i ’/**
c 1A uA ruc /L 'r
z'7 4'
/ 4V« /^*'Aj„
/ sn J < ’' J- A) if yf
/oi>
;. * / <T
Sec y


'’testimony, lohdon:'
CHURCH ' /
M. SS -, ry. ‘-S'"'-'- '
■ A'.r.
r\ / „ # oopo
JtSfJf'ivn.&ttsr, , A'
q , ■
„/j JcU(- O- /j 6“
' '■ r^p^p'
t 0 //I ed^p-ULf
* * <f / 9
Jl- ■' ‘ 1 -) ,
' #
Cu**~oC,<U*~t^- *-> 'fi-dP'
/- L:■ ■■ : -O' ■ '"'‘CT
, 0 V U
st ./-9 /< :' I fr^3t/^i^-e^t,€LL
'-■'’= ,r .. /■ p 7 #
j. . ', ■ , ix~d-~ >' • ~<.-• > *d-
■ * <’■'<" ,/ r / /
Cr f<, a /{. i '. /\ :■■ I'7 1 ' 7
~ ... L . - '■'■•'*"
‘L 7P'A\JI..%.,-kj jt 1 —1
/t £* ,* .* >•■ . * ' <?V3 *» I
• , - S * 1 < •■ y
W\J 'f'i.-Hk/t' Jd &s\A~ PAje^J , <


' fa-C
Isxi/L (x. /£■■ , . ' • ‘ x i' t , //L.k^
• ■ ’ " ' ! '‘ ' ' ' ■ - >1 e^y&_,
t/Z/iyt.' - ■’ ' ■ . - */'■ - ,
/d c «>/. c V
/ , ' £'
/vu-oC-^et. ■/• ■ *' -
fy Cct^~(/yxrtsisKj
tcte/'r
7 x/ tf V_- ' • y / ■
‘ /<!VWC
''•'''" V ' & . , <wt £ xl
h jiiZ\ji^/tz^x r j x c _
a, /^e-.
s /^aeX X/ ™. '?a_cx' «c-'-s f -t '' '/■' '" x' X ; X.', . ,
/V a/^,^£fxc<Q ztzzz
,} ' - - - ■ . ~ .; , t j>
/, ...-ij>-t^., t ... /c 5 *.,.... _/•
. 'i
&Ls&£~C<y'
.
eCo r-c?, _JL . , trujzzi^
c. i , .
T f-rixt-c. €x'jxi,_je, #t_x- if>-rx c^-C'(^
(f-Ctst*-oCs c-tfyt hx-lx^
: ( ■' '


/V
f >-*<■' CtsO ,/1 /V - . ~
U. ,/ - ■/. /? /o ' r A r^
a~.eC «.
i>4 , u
cf) ' K '
■ J<-v\*, 77^
~edf, ■
COistsKj t
// > 'lAyt t
' U*-‘ _ t
' - ‘ * - > : , ’


■f . / y.,/' a
: ........ / p A'fl'A y /~
~l< A J ~ •/ -
/ ,/'i vj aai . £ r u /''fafl
V-" y ■■ /
-■7 y / ,/ fc-"
, -ft—-” (I y a ,,‘- / **? 4m.
1' _,;>■■ -y' y/j-
-if „
, /
/ y-X
(\y r r X~-
jjX * 1"""""
yt- 1 it'Ji^'T^' p lf
* ' />
<6-/
6'^
/*_.
/ / /X-
-#-v.. '7X>
XX
<£' /
/>;(? V // z
Z/ 7 //
/V 7 />'* Z-J---,
/ ~'/ y /-;
X" X-v J>’T &




