

1861-2.
VICTORIA.
EXPLORATION EXPEDITION.
REPORT
OF
COMMANDER NORMAN, OF H.M.C.S. “VICTORIA,”
TOGETHER WITH
COPY OF HIS JOURNAL ON THE LATE EXPEDITION
TO THE
GULF OF CARPENTARIA.
PRESENTED TO BOTH HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT BY HIS EXCELLENCY'S COMMAND.
BY Authority:
JOHN FERRES, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE.
No. 109.




REPORT.
H.M.C.S. Victoria,
Hobson’s Bay, 1st April, 1862.
Sir,
I do myself the honor to forward the accompanying- copy of my journal on the late
expedition to the Gulf of Carpentaria, for the purpose of rendering- relief \ if possible, to the
missing- explorers under the command of Mr. Burke; and directing- the movements of the two
(2) land parties organized and despatched on the same mission of humanity, from Brisbane and
Rockhampton ; and beg to submit the following condensed remarks and observations of the
voyage and expedition which 1 had the honor to command for the information of the
Government.
1. The voyage from Brisbane to the Barrier Reef (eight days) augured well for a quick
passage to the head of the Gulf ; but the strong gale which commenced on the 1st of September
separated the Victoria from the Firefly, and proved the cause of the sad disaster to the latter,
which was most unfortunate, as well as unusual for that season of the year.
2. The Firefly being found a complete wreck on a reef off the weather side of North
Sir Charles Hardy Islands, required considerable exertion and care to get her afloat and refitted,
so as to continue the voyage. The officers and crew were exposed to considerable danger while
performing these duties, and worked very hard in order to get the wreck off before she fell to
pieces; but I regret that before this could be done, I found it necessary, with the consent of the
master to destroy the spirits and wines which were floating- about the wreck, his crew having-
become quite unmanageable in consequence of their having obtained access thereto.
3. The loss of stores and provisions through this disaster necessitated my victualling the
shipwrecked crew and Mr. Landsborough’s party in addition to my own. This increased
demand on my stores not being provided for, I considered it expedient to reduce the allowance of
provisions at once, so as to enable me to remain in the Gulf long enough to perform the duties
originally contemplated. For the short allowance the men were promised payment, as is
customary in Her Majesty’s service. By this timely precaution I was enabled to remain in the
Gulf a sufficient time to carry out the main object of the expedition.
4. After several days’ hard work, on the 12th September we succeeded in getting the
wreck afloat, and having prepared the vessel for the reshipment of the horses, we proceeded on
our voyage on the 22nd September, with the Firejly in tow, and anchored in Investigator Roads
on the afternoon of the 29th September, and found the brig Gratia and schooner Native Lass
waiting for us.
5. I fortunately found, upon examination, that the wreck could be got into the Albert
River, and far enough up to land the horses. The other course left would have been to build a
punt, for which I had provided all necessary materials at Brisbane; but this would have caused con-
siderable delay in landing the horses. On the 12th of October the hulk, in charge of Lieutenant
Woods, was, after grounding on the bar and laying a tide, towed by boats, and hedged up the
river a distance of about twenty (20) miles, where the horses were landed.
6. In consequence of the flood tides occurring during the night only, the labor in per-
forming this task was very great, and demanded the utmost exertions on the part of the officer
in charge, to perform that duty successfully and expeditiously
7. The Firefly was subsequently towed up about one mile and a half above Island
Reach, and was made a depot there.
8. I have the honor to forward herewith a tracing of this river for your information.
9. The colliers Native Lass and Gratia completed their charter party, and left on the
31st of October for their destination (Batavia), and by this opportunity I forwarded despatches
addressed to His Excellency Sir Henry Barkly, containing a full and complete statement of
proceedings to that date, which I find, however, have not yet been received.
10. On the 6th of November I left the ship in charge of the first lieutenant, and pro-
ceeded up the Albert River for the purpose of forming a permanent depot there,—starting Mr.
Landsborough on the south-west expedition,—and personally to make a thorough examination
of the country in the neighborhood of the river, as far as a boat could proceed, a distance of
about fifty-five (55) miles.
Journal.
Commencement
of the voyage.
Strong gale.
Wreck of the
Firefly.
Sir Charles Hardy
Islands.
Insubordination
of the crew of
the Firefly.
Crew put on short
allowance of
provisions.
The wreck got off
and repaired.
Fresh start for
the Gulf.
Arrived at Inves-
tigator Hoads.
Survey of the
Albert.
Firefly taken up
the Albert.
Horses landed.
Firefly converted
into a J6pst.
Tracing of the
Albert by Lieut.
G. A. Woods.
Native Lass and.
Gratia start for
their destina-
tion.
Despatches for-
warded.
Albert Kiver.


11. It will be observed, on a reference to my journal, that at every place I visited trees
were marked by us, or( Victoria ) together with date on most of them.
y
N
12. On the 7th and 8th of November I visited Chimmo’s and Gregory’s trees, but could
not discover the record left by Mr. Gregory. I have, however, since learned that it was
removed by the party sent in search of him.
13. On the last-mentioned date I also visited the Plains of Promise, which, to all appear-
ance, well deserve the name, although, in consequence of many months’ drought, not much grass
was to be seen on them at that time.
14. In the afternoon we returned to the junction of the Barkly and the Albert, and marked
a tree on the west bank, near a fine waterhole, about 300 yards distant from the river, so that
any party perceiving it would have no difficulty in finding the depot. I arrived there at 6.30
next morning.
15. During this exploration no traces of tracks of any kind were observed, and finding
that we had fixed" upon the very best site to form a depot, I made arrangements for permanently
securing the Firefly.
16. On the 16th of November I started Mr. Landsborough and party on the south-western
expedition.
17. On the 19th, after procuring supplies from the ship, I despatched the first lieutenant
to Bountiful Island to procure a fresh supply of turtle, whilst I remained at the depot to
despatch Walker on his arrival.
18. On the 25th, as Walker’s party had not made their appearance, I again proceeded
up the river, and explored its eastern bank, which I had not previously closely examined.
I also revisited the places already explored to search for any new track, taking with me the
two (2) black boys left behind by Landsborough, for the purpose of assisting to follow up any
trail which might be found,
19. After searching every point likely to be visited by Walker, I returned to the dep6t
on the 20th without any greater success than before, not having seen any tracks whatever.
20. On the 2nd of December we were visited by a number of natives.
21. On the 4th idem 1 started with the barge to examine the saltwater arm of the
river, and arrived at the head of it about 5 p.m. Here we were very severely molested by
myriads of mosquitoes and sand-flies.
22. The next morning I started three (3) parties to search for indications of
tracks. Trees were marked by us here as elsewhere. Having explored to a distance of about
five miles from the river, we returned, and on our way down the river, a large party of blacks
made an attempt to surprise us, and undoubtedly intended doing mischief, but the boat was
going too fast through the water to allow them an opportunity.
23. On the 7th of December Mr. Walker arrived with the welcome news of having found
traces of Burke on the Flinders. A heavy gale was blowing at the time.
24. On the 9th I took Mr. Walker on board, to procure a copy of his journal and a
tracing of his route ; in the meantime we proceeded to Sweer’s Island to obtain from the depot
the stores necessary for his further use, and that of the ship, and returned with Walker to the
depot on the 13th of December.
25. On the 20th, I despatched Walker and party to take up the tracks they had found of
Burke, and follow them up, arranging at the same time to meet him (at the place marked A on
the tracing herewith) on the eastern bank of the Flinders on the 28th or 29th idem, in order to
examine the tracks myself and obtain any documents which might be found.
26. I must here record my great satisfaction at the determination expressed by this
3arty to follow the tracks they had found of Burke, to wherever they mig-ht lead; and was
much gratified with the state of the party when they arrived, being in good discipline and
in excellent spirits.
27. I returned towards the ship the same day, got on board on the 21st, at 9 a.m., and
proceeded to Bountiful Island for a supply of turtle; having obtained which we returned, at
II a.m. on the 22nd, to Investigator Roads.
28. We left Investigator Roads on the 28th, at 6 a.m , anchored off the Flinders at noon,
and started immediately to keep my appointment with Walker. On arriving at the spot at
daylight next morning, I found, to my great dismay, that the place we had appointed to meet
each other was inundated during the spring tides, so that it would be impossible for horses to
come down.
29. After clearing a space around some mangrove trees, a flag was hoisted on one of the
most conspicuous, and a bottle containing a memo, for Walker was left, stating that I had gone
up the river in search of him.
30. I then proceeded up the river to within three miles of Burial Reach, landing twice
on my way up to explore the banks; but having some doubts in my mind as to my being in
the Flinders, from the fact of there being no marks to indicate the entrance, and from the great
difference in the courses of the reaches from No. 1 Island to that described by Stokes, I left a


record of my proceeding's, marked various trees in the vicinity, and returned to the ship on the
30th Oj. December.
31. On examining Stokes’ chart and works which I had left on board, I satisfied myself
that I had been in the Flinders; I therefore, on the following morning, despatched the second
lieutenant in charge of a few stores I had for Walker, with orders to examine carefully the
eastern bends of the river, at places marked on the chart.
32. On Saturday, the 4th of January, I sent up the whaler with provisions for the cutter,
and to assist in searching for Walker’s or Burke’s camp. The whaler returned, after this duty
was performed, on the 7tb idem.
33. On the 10th I left the ship with the barge and galley for the purpose of prosecuting
further search for the camps and relieving the cutter, taking with me eight (8) days’ provisions.
I left orders with the commanding officer, (Lieutenant Woods,) that as soon as the cutter arrived
he was to proceed with the ship to Sweer’s Island, to issue to the guard of the depot there one
month’s provisions; to call on his way at the Albert, and despatch a boat to obtain a report from
the officer in charge of the dep6t there of the state of his party, and to pick up the boat on his
return.
34. I met the cutter at Station A, on her way down to the ship. The officer reported
having found the track of camels at a waterhole, hut had not discovered any traces of the camps
of either Walker or Burke. T ordered him to return to the ship, and proceeded myself up the
river,
35. At 6 p.m. on the 10th we camped at the place marked E on the tracing, but the
swarms of mosquitoes and sand-flies so tormented us that we could get no rest.
36. In the morning explored the plains for three hours. We found them dry mud?
apparently overflowed at every spring tide, with the exception of some small rises.
37. During this morning we came across the tracks of a horse, together with the
footprints of a man walking alongside, going north; also, other tracks leading south.
38. We returned to the boats, and proceeded up the river to the place marked G*
Camped at 5 p.m,, on the east hank, and, guided by Wilson, who had previously seen them,
went to examine the tracks of the camels which the officer of the cutter had discovered, and
found them at a dry waterhole about 250 yards from the banks of the river.
39. At this camp the country assumed a more pleasing aspect, its features bearing
altogether a different character. Instead of mud and mangroves, we found acacia, box, gum,
wild plum, and other trees, while the soil was clothed with luxuriant grasses.
40. I started on the 13th in the galley to explore the river further up. After about
four miles we came to what proved to be the Burial Reach of Stokes; at the head of this reach
the banks of the river were of a rocky formation, and the bed of the same nature, with only six
inches water at low tide and very level, so that we had to carry our .boat nearly half a mile :
here the river divides itself into two arms, the one bearing south, and the other south-east.
I proceeded up the latter for about eighteen miles, passing over four rocky bars, at each of
which we had to get out and haul our boat over.
41. Finding no indications of any one having visited this neighborhood, we marked a
tree and returned to the first rocky bar; anchored there until the flood tide made, which was
10 p.m., and reached the camp at Burial Reach at 7.30 a.m. on the 14th of January. We marked
a laro-e gum tree prominently, and deposited a bottle containing a memo, of our search for
Walker.
42. On the 15th I returned towards the ship, making search on my way down and
examining the arms of the river, but without making any discovery whatever. I leached the
ship on the 16th of January, and started for Investigator Roads, where we anchored at 5 p.m.
43. At 11.30 a.m. on the 4th of February we anchored off the Albert, and sent the whaler,
in charge of Lieutenant Gascoyne, up to the dep6t.
44. At 11.30 p.m. on the 6th idem Landsborough returned with the whaler, and
reported his arrival at the depot on the 19th January, having penetrated in a south-west
direction a distance of about two hundred (200) miles, when he was forced to return for want
of water, as mentioned in his report already before you.
45. On the 7th I sent Lieutenant Gascoyne, in charge of the cutter and whaler, with
stores for Landsborough’s party, instructing him to render assistance in conveying the horses
and stores to the eastern bank of the river; after which he was to relieve the guard, take away
all stores with the exception of those he was instructed to deposit in the iron tank for the use
of any party falling back upon the depbt, abandon the depot, and return to the ship.
46. On the 9th of February the boats returned to the ship; on which date I proceeded
to Investigator Roads to complete the coaling.
47. On the 12th I left Investigator Roads and anchored at Bountiful Island at 8 p.m.
On the 15th arrived at Booby Island, landed and examined the stores, and found them as
mentioned in the journal.
48. Passed into the Straits through Prince of Wales Channel, and anchored at the
eastern end of Albany Island, at 7 p.m.
No. 109, o.


, . 4 + 9 - 116 16th wei n hed at 4 - 30 a - m -> and anchored, with Haggerstone Island bearing-
east, in ten fathoms. 5
50. At 5.30 a.m. on the 17th weighed, and anchored at No. VIII. Island. Here we dis-
covered a rock awash not noted in either chart or guide. Surveyed it the next day, and examined
the doubtful Chdcott Rocks, which I found to exist, and in nearly the same position as that
assigned them on the chart. This subject I will mike a special report upon forthwith.
i F ? ra henCe the Vo J a o e was continued by making the most of the small quantity of
coals on board, cutting wood to replenish the stock, and taking every advantage of tides winds
and weather; arriving at Port Dennison on the 27th of February. Having obtained a supply
of fresh provisions, we left on the 28th idem, and at 11.30 a.m. on the 6th of March anchored in
Keppel Bay. After procuring supplies from Rockhampton, I left on the 12th, and anchored at
Brisbane on the 14th,
52. We left Brisbane on the 24th, and arrived at Sydney on the 27th March.
63. We left. Sydney Harbor on the 28th, and reached Hobson’s Bay on the 31st March.
ip 1 haV ® the h p° nor t 0 reporfc further > for J our information, that the navigation of the
(riilf of Carpentaria was found free from danger, from Booby Island to Bountiful Island. From
the latter place to about eight (8) miles off the Albert River, the water shoals gradually to five
(6) fathoms at seven (7) miles from the shore, to three (3) fathoms at four (4) miles, and two
and a half (2J) fathoms at three (3) miles; the nature of the bottom being mud. Many dis-
colorations were seen and passed throug-h, with no perceptible change in the depth of water.
They are at first alarming, having all the appearance of sand banks with but few feet of water
on them.
°5. In the channel of the bar across the Flinders was found five (5) feet at low water
and at the Albert River four (4) feet; the rise and fall being nearly the same at each viz froni
six (6) to twelve (12) feet.
56. Inside the bars both rivers are free from dangers for the first nine (9) miles; beyond
which they are equal, if not superior, to the Brisbane and Fitzroy Rivers. ’
57. Ihere is only one tide in the twenty-four hours, and high water occurred between
9 p.m, and 4 a.m.
58. The winds in October and November were mostly from the S.E. in the morning-,
E. at noon, and N. towards sunset; calms during the night.
59. December 6th and 7th, a heavy gale set in from the N.E., with torrents of rain,
which flooded the plains for some days. This gale veered to north, clearing up at N.W.
leaving this monsoon all the month.
60. From January to the middle of February, the winds prevailed mostly from N.E.
and N. to N.W., but with no great strength ; frequent calms.
61. The country on the banks of both rivers, for the first fifteen to twenty miles from
the sea, is the same monotonous mangrove and mud, more or less flooded with the spring tides,
and swarming with insects. Hig-her up, as the land rises, vegetation improves rapidly, and
the scenery, although mostly very flat, is g-ood and promising for tropical vegetation. The
first rains produced good grass, which grew at the rate of an inch per diem, by actual measure-
ment ten days after the rain fell.
62. Alligators and crocodiles were seen, but they are neither large or numerous, and
were both shy and timid. Some few snakes on the banks of the river were seen; they were
supposed to be of the water species.
63. The mosquitoes, sand-flies, and the common fly were most numerous and troublesome.
Every scheme was resorted to to obtain rest at night, but to no purpose if there were not a
strong wind.
64. Investigator Roads, as is mentioned by Flinders and Stokes, I feund a good
anchorage, secure from all winds, easy of access, and having good holding- ground.
65. The natives of Bentinck Island numbered about sixty (60), are treacherous beyond
conception, and those seen up the rivers ought not to be relied upon with any confidence.
_ 66. I may here remark, with reference to the arrangement made between Walker and
myself as to our meeting on the Flinders about the 29th of December, it was distinctly understood
that, should any accident or unforeseen circumstance prevent my being at the place of meeting
at the appointed time, he was not to remain longer than four days after the date specified, but
to carry out his instructions, and follow up Burke’s track.
67. My impression is, that on finding no record he determined upon losing- no time in
pushing on, or, that finding the place of meeting to be what I have reported, viz., low,
swampy, and inaccessible, he decided at once upon abandoning- the fulfilment of the eng-age-
ment rather than delay his search for the missing explorers.
68. In concluding this report, it is my pleasing duty to express my high sense of the
very satisfactory manner in which the officers and, with very few exceptions, the crew, have
performed their duties : their conduct throughout the labors and exposures of the voyage has,
in my opinion, been most exemplary, and deserves every praise.


69. In particular I would invite the especial attention of the Government to the invaluable
services of the first lieutenant, the surgeon, and the chief engineer: to the energy of Lieu-
tenant Woods in examining and marking the river, and working the Firefly up to the depot
station, and his unremitting attention to the cleanliness of the ship; to Dr. Patterson’s careful
and close attention to the sick; and to the never-failing efficiency of Mr. Griffiths, I attribute
the safe return of the Victoria , and without the loss of any of the officers or crew, with the
exception of Mr. Frost, the gunner, who, I regret to report, lost his life from the accidental
discharge of his fowling-piece, and who, during his long service on board this vessel, com-
manded my unvarying approbation and esteem.
I have the honor to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
(Signed) W. H, NORMAN, Commander.
The Honorable the Chief Secretary,
&c., <fec., &c.




COPY OF JOURNAL
FROM
MELBOURNE TO ALBERT RIVER, GULF OF CARPENTARIA,
FROM 4TH AUGUST TO 29th OCTOBER, 1861.
Hohsoris Bay , Sunday , 4 th August. —At 8 p.m. cast off from the buoys, and proceeded
down the Bay.
Monday , s th August. —At 6.30 a.m. weighed, and after communicating at Queensclitf,
proceeded on through the Heads at 9 a m., and stood to the eastward under steam, with light
winds, rounding Wilson’s Promontory at 7.15 p.m.
Tuesday , Qth August. —At 6 a.m. stopped the engines, and feathered the propeller.
Made sail.
Wednesday , 7th August. —Shortened sail. Wind freshening.
Thursday , B th August. ) . , , „ , „
~ V, , h Blowing hard from the S.E.
Friday , 9th August. )
Saturday , 10 th August. —At noon this day anchored about six miles off the entrance of
Brisbane River, in five (5) fathoms water, and about one mile from the ship Mangerton , which
had arrived with emigrants; the steamer Breadalhane being alongside to tranship them for
Brisbane. I proceeded on hoard, and took passage up in her, and at 5 p.m. landed near the
Custom House, and proceeded at once to Government House. His Excellency not being at
home, I left Sir Henry Barkly’s despatches, with my name and card, and went to look for quarters
for the night. At 6.30 an orderly from the Governor came to inform me he was at home, and
wished to see me. I started from the Club House, where the members had very kindly received
me as an honorary member; dined with His Excellency, and communicated all the information
in connection with the expedition to him, returning at 10 to the Club.
From 10 th to 2%rd August. —Detained at Brisbane, awaiting the horses and Lands-
borough’s party.
Saturday , 24 th August. —Received bonded stores from Breadalhane steamer, and, all
being completed on board the Firefly , sent word to prepare for sea. At 2 p.m. weighed and left
the anchorage. At 5 p.m. pilot left. Seeing a steamer’s smoke to the southward, stood towards
it, to try if I could board her before dark, for the purpose of ascertaining if any news of Burke
had arrived; but finding, after standing on half an hour, she was too far off, bore up, and
rejoined convoy, not caring to lose sight of him.
Sunday , 25 th August. —A fine breeze from S. to S.E.; remaining under very easy sail
to keep company with our consort. Latitude 26° 25' S.; longitude 165° 30' E.
Monday , 2§th August. —Trade winds throughout. A little squally at times, with light
showers. Convoy from one to two miles astern. Latitude 22° 40'; longitude 156° 29'.
Tuesday , 27th August. —Squally from S.E. Wind drawing ahead E.N.E., but backing
again after to S.E. Latitude 20° IV S.; longitude 155° 20 / E.
Wednesday , 28 th August. —Steady trade winds, with very fine weather throughout.
Latitude 18° 7' S.; longitude 153° E. The Lihou Reefs being only sixty-five miles off, made
all sail to try and make them before dark; not so much for the sake of the longitude, which I
feel certain is very correct, but for the sake of ascertaining if there is such a strong south-west
current as the reckoning shows, or whether the course has been neglected. Not seeing anything,
hauled up, and rejoined our convoy at 7 p.m., shortening sail and heaving to for that purpose.
Thursday , 29th August. —The trade winds decreasing, and more easterly, with a very
confused sea on, rolling heavy at times. Convoy close to. Latitude 15° 46 / S.; longitude
151° 35 r E. Thermometer 80"; rather too warm for settled weather. Squally, with heavy rain,
during the night. Convoy reports all well.
Friday , 30 th August. —Squally, with very heavy rain from 9 till 11 a.m. Running with
topsails lowered to keep company with convoy, or we fly right away from her in them. Latitude
14° 55' S.; longitude 149° 42'E., showing a southerly set of twenty-two miles. Looking
cloudy and squally. Convoy two miles astern.
No, 109, b.


Saturday , 31s£ August. —Trade very light at sunrise, and freshening- towards noon.
Latitude 13° 32' S.; longitude 147° 51' E. Distance made only 139 miles, patent log showing
169'. No sign of any current to the southward either, which there must be. Weather very
close and muggy. Lightning to the eastward. The first part of the night squally, and I fear
unsettled weather for us to make the Barrier Reef,
Sunday , Ist September. —Moderate trade, with squally weather from S.E. to E.S.E.
Latitude 12° 3'S.; longitude 145° 24'E. Convoy astern. Hove to to speak him at 130.
Told him I should run on until 4 p m., and then stand to the S.Wh on a wind for twenty-four
miles, then N.E. until daylight, when, if fine enough, I would run to make the land, and that I
wished him to keep well to sea until I signalled “ hear up.” At 4 p.m. shortened sail to close
reefed topsails and double reefed trysails—not for the strength of wind, but to keep convoy in
sight, who was right astern and dropping. At 9 tacked to the N.E. At 10.20 convoy’s position
light seen to the north west in the squalls. Made signal to tack or wear, as squalls were
increasing fast, and the weather otherwise looking very unsettled and suspicious. Stowed the
fore trysail. Sympiesometer, 29 48 ; aneroid, 29 - 50.
Monday, 2nd September. —Strong gales from S.E. to S.S.E. Very heavy squalls during
the whole twenty-four hours, with a very heavy sea on, and no sign of any change. Decided on
not attempting to run for the entrance of Raine Island passage, as our convoy had not been seen
since 10 20 p.m. last night; and as I was fearful he would, should he see me, bear up, run also,
and in the event of his not being able to make a safe anchorage before dark, it would place him in
a verv dangerous position by leading him on a lee shore with so heavy a sea on. Latitude 12° 12'
S.; longitude 144° 50' E. Sympiesometer 29-58 to 29-62 ; thermometer 70° to 75°.
Tuesday, 3rd September. —Continuing strong gales with hard squalls as yesterday, wore
ship to keep her in position ready for running in when weather broke up. Standing four hours
to the N.E., and six to the S.S.W., with the topsails close reefed and double-reefed trysails,
found by observation we crawl to windward. Latitude 12° S.; longitude 145° 20' E, Glasses
generally showing 29-62 to 29-60; thermometer 78° to 80°; but all inclined to fall, and lowest
at 10 p.m. 29 - 50, and rising afterwards to 29 - 60.
Wednesday , 4 th September. —Gale continuing, with very heavy sea on, and ship laboring
very much throughout. Latitude 11° 49' S.; longitude 145° 24' E. No sign whatever of our
little consort. I hope she is safe inside, or the horses are in great danger of being most of them
killed. Took in the slack of the lower rigging this morning, as the foremast worked very much.
Thursday, sth September. —Gale more moderate, and looking like a change. Our dead
reckoning puts us seventy-five miles off. At 9.45 a.m. bore up to run for the beacon. Latitude
at noon 11° 31' S.; longitude 145° E. Steam and all sail set; going very fast; by patent log
fourteen knots and a half. At 3.45 made out the beacon ; but as it was bearing S.W., took
in all square sail to haul up four points. Passed in at 5 p.m., and anchored in eighteen
fathoms, sandy bottom, on the Great Detached Reef at 615 p.m. Lay very quiet, with
eighty-five fathoms of cable out, and a fresh gale throughout the night.
Note. —The course steered from noon showed a current of two knots an hour to the
northward. No great change in the appearance of the weather, which was as dark and squally
as ever after 8 p.m,, glasses showing from 29-60 to 29 - 50. Thermometer 78° to 81°.
Friday, Qth September. —Fresh gales, with successive squalls, lasting about half an hour
each. After one of them, weighed at 10 a.m., and steered for the fairway in Blackwood’s
channel or track, towards the Ashmore Banks, anchoring under the westernmost, to leave a
notice for Firefly, if he is still outside, to inform him I have gone on ; but on trying, I found
the boat could not effect a landing, it being so very rocky at low water. Boat returned. Lay
very uneasy all night, rolling in a cross sea ; so, although there was no change in the weather,
I determined upon moving as soon as 1 possibly could to a better, anchorage.
Saturday, 7th September.—At 8 a.m. sent notice on shore; boat got swamped in trying
to return, by not watching- for a favorable opportunity : she was afterwards bailed out and
returned safe. Weighed and proceeded for Pollard’s Channel; weather as unsettled as ever,
with squalls of rain. At 10 a.m. saw from the masthead a vessel apparently at anchor under
north Sir Charles Hardy’s Island; hauled up to ascertain if it -was our convoy, and, on nearing,
found it was a barque foundered; and at the same time saw a wreck, which proved to be the
Firefly on the reef at the weather side of the same island, also an ensign (union down) on the
highest peak. Stood, on and anchored between the two islands ; down boats and proceeded to
the wreck to examine the state she was in, and to see if there was any possibility of getting
her off. Found her on a coral bank, with a large hole cut in her side, and with five feet water
in her hold ; the horses all on shore, except three dead in her hold ; the decks were covered
with cases of spirits, wine, beer, and wreck; her masts, yards, cables, and anchors gone, in fact,
a complete wreck ; and the crew on the island, very much the worse for having access to the
liquor! Ordered an anchor to be laid out to hold lier in the same position, and proceeded to
the lee side of the island to land,•where Captain Kirby and Mr. Landsborough met me. From
the former I received the following report; —“That, on Tuesday last, finding his ship could not
hold her own to windward ag-ainst the gale, he had run for and entered the Raine Island
passage, under close reefed topsails and topmast staysail, which was split in doing so. JThat he
brought his ship up between these islands, and let go both anchors, to which she rode for some
hours, or until daylight next morning, when the cables parted one after another, and she drifted
on to the reef where she now lay, and that as the ship could not be got off, being full of water,


it was his intention to abandon her. That the barque lying' foundered on the western side was
the Lady Kinnaird, bound to India with horses.” Landsborough reported having- twenty-five
horses alive on the island, where fortunately there is plenty of g-ood grass, and water in sufficient
quantity for them at present. Returned on board, and decided upon using' every means in my
power to get the hull afloat, if it were possible, however much it might be damaged. There
being one sad thing to contend against: the wreck having a large quantity of wines and spirits
on board, they were loose all over the ship; and while it was so I knew it would be impossible
to do anything'. The crew of the brig had through- its abuse bid defiance to all authority the
night before my arrival. On pointing out the evil to Captain Kirby, he agreed with me that
unless it was destroyed nothing could bo done; and as it was impossible to take it on hoard the
Victoria, I came’to the conclusion that the next day (with his consent) I would destroy all that
was on hoard, as it only endangered the lives of every one and probably might lead to a
complete failure of the expedition.
Sunday , B th September. —Sent first lieutenant, mate, and gunner, with the barge, cutter,
and a party of thirty men, to lighten the wreck by every possible means, strongly urging their
preventing the men from getting at the liquor. The boats had great difficulty in getting n Q ar
the wreck, hut succeeded at last. At noon, I proceeded on board, myself, and, as I had.
dreaded, found many of the crew drunk. Captain Kirby being on board also, I again spoke
to him of the evil and danger to every one. He stated that he saw it, and expressed a wish
that I would destroy all that was on hoard, for the benefit of whom it may hereafter concern.
As there was no possibility of landing' it, or keeping it in safety even if it were safe on shore
above high-water mark, I set to work at once, destroying all that could he got at; Captain
Kirby and part of his crew (the carpenter and his mate) assisting in the destruction. Kept at
work until dark, not getting on board till 7.45 p.m. The trade being very strong, a heavy
surf broke round the wreck all day, making it very dangerous to pass to and from her, the boats
being swamped several times in doing- so.
Monday , 9 th September. —The wind strong, and the sea too heavy to approach the
wreck. Landed on the lee side with officers and twenty-eight men. Walked over, taking baskets
and other necessary implements to continue the lightening of her. Set pumps to work, and
found the water decrease in the hold. Worked on, throwing ballast and everything overboard,
to lighten the wreck; but as the tides are taking off, I do not expect to get the hull afloat for
a few days, but I wish by lightening to save her from knocking a hole in her bottom, so as to
float when she is off—or all labor and time will be lost. The crew of the brig have been
feasting on the grog again, and rendered no assistance, except the carpenter and mate.
Tuesday, 1( )th September. —The first lieutenant and twenty-four men started the first
thing this morning, to continue the work of lightening wreck, while I moved ship to a proper
position for heaving her off. Laid out the hawsers and stream cable with great difficulty, owing
to the heavy sea and rocky nature of the bottom. Having both bower anchors down, with
ninety and sixty-five fathoms of cable out in seven fathoms water, hove all taught before night,
and buoyed up the hawsers off the rocks with the barge and cutter, sending the second lieu-
tenant to see it done properly; and the boats were seen to ride very easy and dry for some hours
after. Moderate trade, with squalls, during the night. All returned on board at 7 p.m.
Wednesday , 11 th September. —At daylight the cutter safely at her moorings, but the
barge gone. Sent the first lieutenant to under-run the large hawser, to see if she was fast to it,
but he found only a piece of the painter. So my noble and best boat is gone. No sign of any-
thing belonging to her can be seen all round the island, nor from the top of the highest hill.
Captain Kirby abandons the wreck by letter, and asks for passage for himself and crew, as
distressed British subjects, to first port I arrive at. Tried to heave off wreck at high water, but
did not move it. Recommended Landsborough to set his men to work cutting grass for hay, as
they have nothing else to do.
Thursday, 1 2th September. —The work of lightening wreck continued by the same
officers and men until high water at 4 p.m., when all strength, and steam at full power, was
used to heave the wreck afloat, h} r windlass and capstan. At 5 p.m. she started, and was sooa
in deep water, and well secured for the night. On getting new hawsers in, found them chafed
and much injured by the recks. Had the pumps attended to, and found the wreck to make
between eight and nine inches per hour. Another tide would have injured her so as to render
her useless for any purpose whatever. I may now be able to keep her afloat long* enough to
take on the horses. Having got her so far, I will try very hard, and hope to succeed yet in
doing some g’ood with the remains of the wreck for the expedition, which I fear is ruined by the
loss of time, as well as stores belonging to each party —Walker’s and Landsborough’s.
Friday, 13 th September.—Sent for as many stores as could be got off in time to proceed
round by the ship. Weighed both anchors, and, with the wreck in tow, steamed round to the
lee side of the island. Afterwards sent boats to shift the camp round. One party on board
wreck clearing iij> and otherwise preparing for her being put in a position to receive water,
stores, Ac. Had both pumps up, to clean and repair.
Saturday, 14 th September. —The first lieutenant and thirty men on board the wreck*
getting her ready for set vice, and taking stock of everything found in her—a work of some
difficulty. From the marks of the packages being removed, it was found impossible to ascertain
what they contained or to whom they belonged without opening them, and most of them were
very badly damaged.


Sunday, 15 ih September. —As the crew and officers have been working very hard for
more than a fortnight, I keep this as a day of rest, performing only the Divine service of the
day, notwithstanding my anxiety to get the wreck ready for proceeding on.
Monday , 1 (Mh September. —At daylight a strong working party proceeded to continue
the work of preparing wreck for the reception of horses. Sent Landsborough and party in
cutter to fetch the horse from the South Island, which was landed here safely at 5 p.m. Engi-
neers found a very bad spot in port boiler, which will take them four days to repair; and it
must be done before steam is again got up. Set them to work night and day.
Tuesday , 17 th September. —The first lieutenant and working party away, as before,
ballasting brig. One of the best horses fell down a gully. Got a derrick up, and got him out,
hut he is apparently very much injured. Cutting hay on shore, and making sifme up.
Wednesday, 18 th September. —Completed ballasting brig. Building stalls, repairing-
boats, and binding up hay. Engineers doing the repairs.
Thursday, 19 th September. —Brought the hulk alongside, to fill up her tanks and to
take the remainder of coals out, which being completed took her to her berth again. Engineers
getting on with repairs, and condensing water.
Friday, 20 th September. —Commenced shipping the horses by swimming them off. Got
them all safe on board, twenty-five in number, by 3 p.m.; afterwards shipping the hay, &c,,
belonging to them; also the shipwrecked seamen. To-morrow we shall complete the water for
the horses, and have everything ready for starting at daylight on Sunday. The engineers having-
completed the repairs to the boiler, I moved ship further in shore, and placed Mr, Handheld
(mate) in charge of the hulk, with written instructions to guide him.
Saturday, 21 st September. —This day employed in finishing necessary preparations on
board the hulk, and filling up water on board her from our tanks; also condensing for ship’s use,
and removing- all things from the shore ready for a fair start in the morning. Left two sheep
on shore, which could not be caught.
Sunday, 22nd September. —At G a.m. left the anchorage, with the hulk in tow, and
passed round the north side of Cockburn Reef, steaming steadily (about seven knots), and having
a strong ebb tide against us did not reach Cairncross Island until 3 p.m. Anchored there for
the night, and, to my great joy, found our barge lying on the weather side of the reef, very little
the worse for having drifted the sixty miles by herself, and with everything complete in her. A
most fortunate find for us, and showing how strong the flood must he to the ebb tide at this
season of the year.
Monday, 23 rd September. —At daylight proceeded under sail, with the hulk in tow, owing
to some defect in the engine, the air-pump rod striking heavily. Upon examination found
one of the hearing's broken, which being replaced by a spare one, we steamed on at 10 a.m.,
passing Mount Adolphus at noon, Good Island at 4 p.m., and anchoring- at Booby Island
at G p!m., all safe, with the hulk astern, and the horses by report “ all well.” Proceeded to
the post-office, and brought off the report-book and the memorandums; but, as it was dark, I
could not see to take stock of the provisions, and therefore decided to do so in the morning.
Returned on board, and, upon examination of the report-book, found the annexed list of ships
which had passed through the straits [ Vide Appendix.]
Tuesday, 24 th September— At daylight proceeded on shore, and found the following-
provisions remaining;—six casks of water ; biscuit, ten tins ; beef, four casks ; pork, three
casks; one pound tea (bad); sugar, none; brandy, one bottle; in addition to which, I left two
pounds tea, twelve pounds sugar, two pounds tobacco, two bottles brandy, two bottles rum, one
quire paper, one box vestas, and one bottle ink; returning on board at 7.30 a.m. Weig-hed, and
proceeded immediately towards the Gulf of Carpentaria. At noon the latitude was 10° 55 S.,
with light winds and calms to sunset, and S.E. after 8 p.m.
Wednesday, 25 th September. —Light S.S.E. airs to noon, with very clear weather,
sounding every hour, going six knots. Distance run, 141 miles. I find the brig tows very
heavy head to wind, which is increasing-, and sea getting up very fast. A stiff breeze,
with heavy short sea on, from 4 p.m. At 7.50 p.m. strong- breeze, with a very nasty cross sea
on. Hulk laboring heavily, rolled her jury foremast over the side.
Thursday, 26th September.— At 2.30 a.m. had to stop the engines to tighten up the
connecting- rod. Proceeded again at 4 a.m., but very slowly, in consequence of the heavy
sea on; lying- from S.IA. by S. to S. by W. to noon, when the latitude was 14° 34 S., longitude
139° 46 / E., having made nearly a south-w-est course since yesterday. Ihermometer, 77|°.
Soundings taken every hour, and the hand-lead kept going during the night as a precautionary
measure, being in water unexplored or traversed before. The wind dying away fast to a calm
after sunset, steamed direct for Bountiful Island, steering- S.S.E. |S. The loss of provisions by
the wreck induces me to stop here on my way up, to get some turtle for Landsborough’s party,
to jerk as a substitute; also to save expenditure of salt meat to the crew.
Friday, 27th September. —Light easterly winds, drawing to N.E. after 8 a.m. All sail
set, and, being smooth water, going six knots. At 9.45 a.m. made the white cliffs of
Mornington Island. At 2 p.m. anchored in seven fathoms off Bountiful Island (Mount
Flinders bearing N.W.), for the purpose of collecting turtle, and, as it was too late to reach
Investigator Roads, I must have anchored outside. Proceeded on shore to the top of Mount
Flinders (a very insignificant mount to name after the great navigator, but the highest on the
island), which is all sand, or rotten sandstone, covered with a rank wiry grass, very thick and dry.


Summary of Passages and Detentions on the Voyag’e, from 5th August to
29th
September, 1861, from Melbouime to Sweer’s Island (Gulf of Carpentaria).
■ Detention.
Under
Weigh.
Date. From. To.
.Days.
Hours.
Days.
Hours.
1 to™ Oth August,‘noon. 111 ' } Passa S e from Melbourne to Brisbane
5
4
m 24th Augus^tpm 011 i } Detention at Brisbane
14
2
...
...
to' 7 th o' a m P m I j Passage from Melbourne to Sir Charles Hardy Island
...
13
20
SepCe lm a ' m ' 1 } Detention at Sir Charles Hard J Island
14
20
...
...
From 22nd Sept., 6 a.m. j Passage from Sir Charles Hardy Island to Booby
to 23rd Sept., 6 p.m. ) Island
...
1
12
Fr to 24U?Sept?8a.m. P m ' j } detention at Booby Island
14
Fr t°o m 27th t Sep b t e , P 2 , p.m a ' m ‘ > } Passa £ c to Bountiful Island
...
...
3
6
From 27th Sept., 2 p m. Detention at Bountiful Island ...
1
. 18
...
Passage to Sweer’s Island
...
8
Total ...
31
6
24
2
No. 109, c.
0 P- m -> and twelve more turned up on shore, so very numerous
"®& „ Left 5“. bar g? and cutter m charge of the first and second lieutenants, to remain
to asfiit t Z ° dunng ’ the night. Set fire to the grass, which illuminated the whole island,
to assist them in seeing the turtle, as the moon does not rise till 1 a.m.
W %&th September. Commenced at daylight bringing off the turtle, and
kept at t all day; but as the distance to pull to the N.W. side was great, and by far
ifi giea 61 num ei was turned there, it took all day to get on hoard ninety-six turtle,
a t lough every boat was employed in the work, even the dingy with her two at a time,
and the gig with three. ’
_ Sunday , 2dtk September. —At 6 a.m. sent on shore for the remainder of the turtle
(sixteen in number) and left at 9 a.m. for Investigator Hoads with the hulk in tow, having
on deck one hundred and eighteen turtle; the total number caught being one hundred and
wenty-six. At 3.30 rounded Locust Rock; at 4 p.m. anchored in Investigator Roads in five
atlioms. hound the brig Gratia , and schooner Native Lass lying here waiting; both captains
came on board on anchoring.
. r, wdlds d)r l three days have been N.E. during* the day, and southerly at
night. J he soundings, coming up on a direct course from Bountiful Island, were nine
o seven fathoms, due east of the Locust Rock. At a mile and a half to two miles off, various
discolored patches were rounded or passed, but no perceptible difference in the depths of
soundings were found, the water being of a very light color generally, makes the navigation
rather exciting. The changes in the color of the water this day has all the appearance of
sand shoals, or dangers of some kind, but nothing dangerous to navigation w*as met with on
our way up the gulf, every precaution being taken by a good mast-head look-out in the day—
the deep sea-lead used every hour throughout—also, the hand-lead kept g-oing- during the
night. Steering- a direct course for Bountiful Island, I was driven more westerly by a gale
from the S.E., and crossed Lieutenant Chimmo’s downward track in 15° S. The depths
found I have noted on the chart, they being generally very uniform, deepening- from the
eastern shore to thirty-eight fathoms towards the middle of the gulf, with generally mud
or sandy bottom; some few casts of rocky or hard bottom were found near latitude 12° 25' S.,
longitude 141° E., with some eighteen to twenty-four fathoms, and for thirty-five miles
in a S.S.W. course.
I now find our voyage from Melbourne has occupied us twenty-four days under weigh,
and thirty-one at anchor, —fourteen at Brisbane, fifteen at Sir Charles Hardy’s Island, and
two at other anchorages in the straits.
Had Captain Kirby, on my asking him at Brisbane, consented to go the inner passage,
we might, with no accident, have saved time, hut as I agreed with him I did not urge him to
do so, from knowing, as the voyage proved, we could reach the Barrier in about eight days,
and, with the ordinary weather, here in seven more. The heavy gale with which we were
overtaken off the Barrier is, I trust, most unusual for its strength or length, as very few sailing
ships could hold their own against the heavy sea and current to keep clear of danger. My
finding the Firefly a complete wreck, and getting her off, required great exertion and labor
on the part of both officers and crew, who were exposed to several dangers by swimming in
the surf doing their duty; but the willingness with which they performed their task (looked
upon as hopeless), and the exertions since made to assist me in getting the horses on, is worthy
of all praise, and I freely here record my thanks to them.


As the horses are in good health, I hope to enable Landsborough to start in time to
reach Central xMount Stuart and return before I am compelled to leave for want of provisions.
liavin ß- ra^on twenty-four shipwrecked seamen necessitates economy of dry stores,
bread and flour; I have therefore reduced the ration of each, and promised the' crew payment
01 short allowance. By this reduction being made at once, I gain twenty-two days on the
stock of each.
None of the stores belonging to the wreck being saved, and many belonging to Walker
and Landsborough s parties damaged or lost in the wreck, it is necessary that a reduction should be
at once made of the dry stores named. The turtle will supplement'the salt provisions to any
extent that may be found necessary.
Monday, 3Oth September.— Last night ordered the first lieutenant to prepare for pro-
ceeding as far up the Albert River as the difficulties of its navigation would admit of, with the
barge fully manned, armed, and provisioned for seven days, in order to ascertain if any informa-
tion can be obtained of parties having been there, and to leave a notice of our movements if they
were not seen or heard of: also to make a rough survey of the bar and river, to see if it is
possible to take the hulk far enough in to land the horses safely. The barge started at 430
this day, Landsborough and two natives going in her to search for water at the best landing
place they can find, that the horses may have a chance of picking up quickly when on shore.
Examined the two wells of Stokes and Flinders, and found both dry. ' Found the old tree with their
ships’ names cut on it, looking quite healthy. No natives have been seen on Sweer’s Island, but
some were seen yesterday on Bentinck Island. Proceeded on shore with the two masters of
Gratia and Native Lass to select a place for their cargoes. Half our crew on shore cutting’
timber to make a turtle pond, and collecting stones for the same purpose.
Tuesday, Dit October. —Started all hands at 6 a.m. to make a turtle pond, by building a
stone wall twenty feet below low water mark to high water line. This was continued through-
out the day until 6 p.m., but not finished, as it is a very heavy task, every stone having to be
brought from a distance. Hulk got her jury foremast up again. Ordered Mr. Campbell, who is
in charge of horses, to send on shore the two natives to get some fresh grass for the horses.
Wednesday, 2nd October. —The Native Lass has been busy landing tire coals to-day.
Crew employed about turtle pond, and bringing Firefly alongside to supply her with water;
when, after filling her up to 1000 gallons, she was dropped astern again to her own anchor. The
weather continues very fine, clear, and temperate : thermometer, in shade, 72° to 82°. A party
on shore from Firefly cutting grass for horses. Many of the turtle are dying daily, so that
the number is lessening very fast.
Thursday, 3rd, October. —Crew employed all day, and up to 8 p.m., about turtle pond.
Got some of them on shore and placed them in it during the afternoon; put others overboard,
with ropes fast to them, to try and save as many as possible. Threw away fifteen dead ones
this morning. Native Lass continues discharging coals ; and party from Firefly on shore
cutting g’rass.
Friday, 4 th October. —Finished the turtle pond, and landed all that were left alive,
which occupied nearly the whole day. Fifty-seven is the number put into it, but two died, and
two escaped. A party cutting grass for the horses, and others condensing water. Visited
Investigator Well with the chief engineer, to point out to him what I should like done when
his work will admit of his taking the firemen to do it; which is, to dig’ the well deeper, and to
secure the sides from falling in by planks, or spars, so that there may be a permanent supply for
some years for the natives when they are on this island ; as well as to water the two colliers,
who find the natives troublesome at the waterhole on Bentinck Island, being driven away
yesterday by them. No change in the weather, which continues very fine : thermometer, 76°
to 80° ; sympiesometer, 29’65; aneroid, 29’60. No illness, the only men on sick list being four
with cut feet, from working at the turtle pond.
Saturday, sth October. —Very early this morning a strong breeze set in from the S.E.,
which continued until 1 p.m., and died away to calm at sunset. One boat’s crew ashore, under
the gunner, to see all secure at the pond, as there was considerable sea on. Carpenter building
a house to receive stores, and for the party who remain in charge ; remainder of crew cleaning
and purifying ship. The late irregular duty has unavoidably prevented the daily routine
being carried out. The colliers being much in want of water, I proceeded over to Bentinck
Island with the galley, for the purpose of protecting them against the natives while they filled
some casks ; remaining there for full two hours without seeing a single native, although we
walked round for nearly a mile; saw plenty of their tracks. After leaving a few strings of
beads, some brass buttons, which had been intended for the Immigration Department of
Victoria, also a showy pocket handkerchief, at one of their camping places, I returned to the
boats, and found they had filled two hogsheads only of very stagnant, dirty water, by no means
fit lor drinking purposes; and, as it is the only water to be got, I told the two captains not
to allow their men to drink it, but to send on board the Victoria for some as soon as they could.
This is another unlooked-for expenditure, to supply both these vessels, in addition to the horses
and ourselves, —\tdll keep our condenser going night and day; but if it will do it, and prevent
sickness, I shall consider the condenser worth double its weight in gold to the expedition, as
without it I could not have taken the horses off Sir Charles Hardy’s Island and brought them
here. On returning on board, the second lieutenant reported having seen many natives about
a quarter of a mile to the south of us; they were seen by him and others, and estimated at about


sixty in number. As the colliers, with their small crews, will be without water, when I o- 0 over
sendins a party at once to * - the
N.w. round by N - E - t0
. ,1 y M(^ da Pl < tJl October.— ■ At 5 a.m., barge reported ;6, she came alongside, having been
I 16 lc ' a< ; of th e Albert and brought back a very favorable report of everything necessary for
°f B’° 8 ’°° d good grass ; g'od water, and every appeamnce
of the Firefly being able to go well up the river; but as it is not yet marked over the bar, it
will be necessary to have it done first. The report of the first lieutenant and Landsborough
icing both favorable, at G p.m., taking the dingy in tow, the barge started to mark the
entiance of the river. A party away under chief engineer, deepening Investigator Well for the
to iers. 1 ienty of good water was found after going about ten feet down. Another party,
under second lieutenant, landing provisions from Gratia to storehouse on shore. Firefly crew
cleaning out horses Carpenter building store. Ten turtle dead in pond this day, which were
of course removed from it as soon as possible,
Tuesday, Bth October. —Brought the Gratia alongside, and received about eighty tons
ot coals and the greater part of our provisions out of her. A party on shore for grass, and
another finishing turtle pond. Thirty-seven were seen alive this morning. Thermometer 82° to 86°.
Wednesday, 9 th October.— Employed finishing coaling, taking a total of 115 tons on
board. Had the hulk alongside to fill her up with water, and to put on board the stores for
land parties under her crew. All being completed, and a small party landed here to protect the
stores unler Mr. Law (mid.), and giving general instructions to the officer in charge of the hulk
(Aii. lanheld, mate), the boats were hoisted up ready for starting in the morning - to the mouth
of the Albert River. °
Thursday, 10 th October. —At 7 a.m. left with the hulk in tow, steering for the entrance
of the Albert River. At 10 anchored in three fathoms, with Flinders trees bearing S.S. W.
Distance horn nearest land, about eight miles. The barge not being - in s'ght to mark the
anchorage, as was arranged, 1 did not deem it prudent to stand into shoal water with a hulk
astein of me. At 2.30 p.m. 1 left the ship with the cutter to sound in-shore, and saw the barg’e
bearing 1 S.S L. Steered for her, keeping* the lead going, and found three fathoms for three miles
in-shoie of me, and two and a half for the next two, to where the barg - e was anchored, placing
a buoy on the elbow of a channel ; but the necessary marks are not finite finished for taking the
hulk in through the channel.
Friday , 1 1th October. —At 4 a.m. blowing - a strong - S.E. breeze. The hulk was reported
drifting to sea; sent the barge to her assistance, and finding - she continued drifting, got up
steam and proceeded after her, towing her in. On heaving in the cable found the anchor-stock
was gone; made another, and sent barge away with buoys to mark the channel, the cutter
following - at 0.30 p.m. with more to assist. At 3p m. shifted the ship two and a half miles
further in-shore, and proceeded with galley to examine the buoys and channel, returning on
board at 7 p.m. The weather continues very fine, the thermometer ranging* from 78° in the
night to 92° in the day, the wind g - oing - round with the sun, A strong - breeze in the morning
fi’om S R to north, and very light at noon ; calm at 8 p.m. As Landsborough reports but three
days’ hay left, and neither bran or corn remaining, gave orders that the crew should breakfast at
4.30 am., so as to be on board the hulk at daylight; for although the officers and crew com-
plain of being overworked, I have no alternative but keeping at it, trying as it must be to all.
The obvious necessity of doing so has determined me to try every means of getting her inside,
or at the time he states they'’ will be without food. Owing to the ship being - obliged to lay five
miles from the nearest land, and with the change of monsoon so near, I do not think it safe to
be far away from her myself without the first lieutenant and more of the crew on board ; all
the seamen except eight being away with the hulk, or at the depot on Sweer’s Island.
Saturday, 12 th October. —At 5 a.m proceeded with the first lieutenant, the barge, and
cutters’ crews on board the hulk. A strong breeze from S.E. Weighed and set sail on jury
masts; stood on very well over the ebb tide for about four miles, when in the channel steering
N.N.W. grounded at 7.15 a.m. in nine feet water, half an hour too late to get over this part,
which Woods tells me is the shoalest part of the bar. The tide will fall about five feet more,
but Ido not apprehend any injury to the hulk. Nothing further can be done until next tide.
Returned on board with the barge, to give her crew a few hours’ rest out of the sun, after their
long exposure for several days.
Sunday, 13 th October. —At 5 a.m. strong N.E. winds, with the thermometer down to
67°. The hulk over the bar. Signalled; being west of the bank, and in the channel. All
safe. Performed Divine service. The least water shown by the lead alongside was thirteen
feet six inches. At 3 p.m. wind decreasing. Calm at sunset, which was very grand.
Monday , 14 th October.— S.E. wind, more moderate, and dying away to calm at noon.
At 10 the hulk was seen standing in to the river, and a signal was made out by Mr. Gascoyne,
denoting the word “discovered:” the great distance off preventing anything else hoisted being
made out with any degree of certainty, I proceeded with the whaler after the hulk, hoping
they might have discovered some traces of Burke or Walker’s party. I left to ascertain the
truth myself, at 12.45 p.m., and after a long and heavy pull in the broiling sun, overtook the


hulk about six miles up the river, at 5 p.m , fast aground, opposite a steep bank, which had been
selected for landing the horses, if water could be found; but Landsborough had just returned
from exploring, without finding any, and there being a muddy creek which the horses could not
cross, I ordered Mr. Woods to take the vessel higher up, and only to land the horses where
they could have water. The signals I found were made out all wrong; no discovery had been
made, but Mr. Woods wished to inform me the borsss had eaten all their food up. When I got
on board a party bad been on shore collecting grass for them, and got plenty. Having now no
fear of their starving, and seeing everything was being done by Woods and Landsborough that
l was possible for their safety, I left them at 5.30 p.m. to return to the ship. The men pulled all
the way on board, where we arrived at 9.30 p.m.
Tuesday , 15 th October. —Moderate S.E. winds to noon, then calm. Putting boats in
order, and otherwise getting them ready for service. At 3.30 left the ship, with cutter and
galley, to try the seine in the entrance of the river; had three hauls, and succeeded in getting
about 190 lbs. of very good fish—enough for all on board. Got back to the ship at 9 p.m.
Thermometer 6 a.m. 75°, noon 80°.
Wednesday , 1 6th October. —Moderate easterly wind, which freshened to strong N.E.
breeze at noon, drawing gradually round, and dying away in the N.W. at sunset, with cool and
temperate nights. Nothing can be more healthy than the weather at present. Thermometer
78° at noon to 72° in the night. If all is going well, the whaler in charge of the gunner ought
to be back before the morning to say the horses are safely landed.
Thursday , 1 7th October. —The weather and winds as yesterday. Anxiously looking out
for the whaler all day, but seeing no sign of her I left the ship at 3 p.m. in the cutter, to meet
or cut her off by entering the inlet* bearing S. by W. \ W. from the ship, which I was under the
impression led into the Albert, through Landsborough Inlet crossed the bar of this entrance at
low water, with only two feet water on it pulled on, and kept the western shore a-board until
9 p.m., when finding we had not got into the Albert, and having gone at least fifteen miles in
the different bends of the river, (which it turned out to be) I anchored for the night. The
boat’s crew had been pulling for six hours, and required some rest, but to our great annoyance,
we no sooner made our boat as comfortable as possible for the thirteen who were in her, than we
were set upon by myriads of mosquitoes and sand-flies, whose tormenting attacks we had to
bear as well as we could, and the punishment they inflicted (although every scheme was tried
to evade them) will not soon be forgotten. Finding no rest was to be obtained, and that I was
clearly in another river, which I did not come in any way prepared to explore, expecting to
return on board by 9 p.m.
Friday , 18£A October. —I got under weigh again at 3.15 a m., taking care to keep
the same shore (western) on board until the ship was in sight, which I reached at 9.15 a.m.
This river, which I think deserves the name of one, is clear for navigation inside, and of good
breadth, with apparently good depth of water; it is also, in many places, very prettily timbered;
and the soil, as seen from the boats, looked very good, but from the appearance of salt over some
of the plains, it is no doubt overflown on the spring tides. It is as good, if not superior, to the
Albert, but very tortuous. I had only a pocket compass, no lead line with me, and did not
keep a record of the courses of the reaches or depths of water in them. Their breadths were from
100 to 400 yards. Not a native was seen, or any signs of them whatever. Fired the pivot gun
at 8 p.m,
Saturday , 1 9th October. —At 11.30 p.m. whaler came alongside, bringing the welcome
news of twenty-three horses being landed in safety and two weak ones kept on board, but
no intelligence of Walker. Fired the pivot gun at 8 p.m. Our distance from the shore being
good five miles, Ido not think it of much service. From my own observations the whole
coast appears to be intersected by rivers and creeks for some miles. Light N.E. and N.W.
winds, with very fine weather. Despatched the whaler to depot with stores at 3 p.m., and tried
the seine again at 4.30, but owing to the time of tide being flood, got very few fish.
Thermometer in shade 78° to 82°.
Sunday, '2oth October. —Wind from N.E. to N.W., light, with very fine weather
throughout. Thermometer All continuing very healthy on board. There are four only
on the sick list, with boils on their legs and hands. No duty performed this day, excepting
what is necessary for discipline and the health of the crew.
Monday , 21 st October.— The few sheep I brought to use as circumstances might require
for'any of the expedition, being without hay or anything to eat, sent the galley to cut some grass
for them, and at 2 p.m. whaler returned, reporting hulk ten miles further up, and that the horses
were doing’ very well. Wind N.E. and N., fine clear weather. Thermometer 81° to 79°. At
7.30 p.m. made out a signal fire on the beach, bearing S.S.W. \W. Fired a gun at 8 p.m., and
sent up a rocket at 8.30; also, burnt a blue light at 9. After the rocket, the fire not being kept
* up as before, I considered it was possible for Walker to be the party who were endeavoring to
call our attention. Made the necessary arrangements for landing’ at daylight, as the danger
from the nature of the coast, and our distance, prevented my doing so at once.
Tuesday , 22 nd October. —At 5 a.m. left the ship in the cutter for the place where the
fire was seen last night, but found on landing it was natives only who had camped there, and
they all disappeared on our approaching the shore. Returned on board rather disappointed by
* This inlet is not marked on any chart or noted in any work, but is supposed to be the mouth of the
Leichardt.


9.30 a.m., and weighed from off the Albert. Proceeded towards Sweer’s Island, where we
anchored at 2 p.m., and found all well at our depot. I was a little surprised to learn from Mr.
Law that our 8 o’clock gun had been heard very distinctly every night, the distance being
twenty-six miles in a straight line to windward. It was also reported by Mr. Frost yesterday
that it was very distinctly heard ten miles above the Norman Islands in the river, so that if Mr.
Walker is anywhere near he is sure of hearing- it or the howitzer on board the Firefly.
I am sorry to find the colliers are not nearly ready for starting on their voyage.
Wednesday , 23 rd October. —The master of the Gratia reported that some of his men and
the shipwrecked seamen of the Firefly had got drunk on the porter which he had on board as
cargo belonging to this vessel. Ordered the second lieutenant to take two of the warrant officers
on board, and to survey the same. At 10 a.in. started with cutter and dingy to lay down
three buoys to mark the dangers off the Locust Rock, Fowler’s Island, and a long- spit off this
island. All being done, returned at 3.30 p.m. on board. Also, ordered a trench to be dug at
depot to bury porter in, which was carried out, six hogsheads being landed.
Thursday , 2 4tth October. —Colliers discharging cargo; hauled cutter up to repair. Sent
two men to cut up turtle to cure for shore parties (Landsborough’s and Walker’s). Condensing
water and putting ship to rights a little with remainder of crew. A strong N.E. breeze from
6 a.m. to noon, with a windy appearance, but dying away to a light northerly air at sunset.
Thermometer 78° to 81°. Gratia discharging coals, and schooner ballasting-.
Friday, 26th October. —Party on shore cutting up and jerking turtle ; found that three
of them, of 3i cwt. each, will only yield about 80 lbs. of the meat dried, and that it is very
doubtful whether we can succeed in drying it, for the blow-flies kept one hand turning it the
whole day and driving away these enemies to our success. Carpenter repairing cutter;
engineers at work on boiler. Saw three natives on Bentinck Island from the ship to-day; they
appeared to be fishing. It has been reported to me that about thirty have been seen on this,
Sweer’s Island, and are at its north end, where a lake has been seen by some of the ramblers of
the colliers. Gratia discharging coals to-day,
Saturday, 26th October. —Party under the gunner jerking turtle, another under the second
lieutenant landing stores from Gratia to depot on shore. The captain reported his coals all out
to-day, and that about thirty-five tons of ballast would enable him to be ready for sea.
Cleaning bilges and other parts during the day with the rest of the crew.
Sunday, 27th October. —Wind from S.W., very light until 8 a.m., when it changed
suddenly to N.E.; lightning to the southward from 8 to 10 p.m., but not much wind throughout
the night or day. Performed the Divine service of the day. Very fine, but warm.
Thermometer 84° to 82°. Sympiesometer 29-50 to 29-45. Aneroid 29-53 to 29-50.
Monday, 28 th October. —Very little wind all day, and close, hot weather, with lightning
at sunset in the S.S.E. Gunner and party jerking turtle on shore; the the crew
employed as requisite on board. Thermometer 82° to 86°. Sympiesometer 29-50 to 29-45.
Aneroid 29-53 to 29-50.
Tuesday , 29 th October. —Very little wind all day and close hot weather; heavy cloud
to the N.E., with water spirts, fork lightning, and thunder, which all passed off to the westward.
Colliers report nearly ready for sea; preparing despatches to go by them. Gave them all
their receipts this day, so they can start at once if they choose. A party trenching in
storehouse.
Wednesday, 30 th October. —Weather much the same as yesterday; but no squalls, and
the wind from the eastward. Ordered a survey of all provisions to check expenditure, and
report to Government the number of days I could remain on the gulf. A party on shore
curing turtle, and trenching in stores landed. Thermometer 83° to 84°.
Thursday, 31«£ October —Light wind throughout going round with the sun ; threatening
for rain to S.W., but none came. Signed the clearance of colliers. Carpenters, examining and
caulking where necessary outside. Wrote an order to each master of collier, to take on with
them the shipwrecked seamen of Firefly, which was complied with, and at 2.30 p.m., they both
left for their destinations, Batavia and Sourabaya; and, passing out to the southward, were out
of sight at 4 p.m. The despatches and private letters were put on board Native Lass. The
Victoria is now left alone to continue her humane task, although it is a hopeless one, I fear,
from the length of time that has elapsed. It will be carried out so long as our provisions will
admit, which is 120 days from this day, with the hope that we may be rewarded by being
successful in recovering' our missing friends within that time, or some record of their having
succeeded in crossing the continent and returned.
Friday , November. —A S.E. wind to 2 p.m,, very light with cloudy weather, and
calm at sunset. Crew employed at general duties and one party on shore on fatigue duty,
digging the trench round stores and quarters of guard, which was increased by one man, making
a total of five, who are provisioned for one month from this day; brought off live turtle, and
prepared for starting for the mouth of the Albert to-morrow morning.
Saturday , 2nd November. —At 3 a.m. a heavy clap of thunder and a few large drops of
rain • but not enough to wet the deck, the clouds passing over to the N.W. from S.E., with the
wind’a little fresh. At 8 a.m. unmoored and left for the Albert River; at 0.45 p.m. anchored
in sixteen feet, about five miles from the shore, with high trees of Flinders bearing 8. 68° W.
No. 109, d.


Clump of trees off Gore Point S. 49° E. Inlet S. 43° W., all magnetic. At 3 p.m. despatched
the whaler to dep6t for news, and sent Dr. Patterson up to do anything in his way that might
be required.
Sunday , 3rd November. —At daylight a S.E. breeze, which continued all day, dying away
at sunset to nearly calm. At 7 a.ra. finding we were only in twelve feet six inches water, shifted
one mile further out to fifteen feet six inches. No work this day being Sunday: performed
Divine service at 10.30 a.m. Thermometer 98° to 84°.
Monday , 4 th November. —At 3 a.m. the barge with Lieutenant Woods, Dr. Patterson,
and Mr. Landsborough arrived from the depbt, bringing no intelligence of Burke or Walker.
The object of Landsborough’s visit being to confer with me on the inadvisability of his starting-
on the south-western exploration, for traces of the missing explorers; after well considering
the matter and instructions of the Committee, and as Walker was on his way from the S.E.,
I could see no good reason for altering the movements of his party, but ordered his departure
towards Central Mount Stuart so soon as possible.
Tuesday, bth November. —A moderate sea breeze to sunset. Preparing- stores for
Landsborough’s party to proceed on their route towards Central Mount Stuart; also stores for
the use of the depbt, all of which will go up to-morrow with me.
Wednesday , Qth November. —A moderate north-east breeze. At 2.30 p.m. left the ship
in the barge, taking Landsborough with me, also the cutter in charge of Lieutenant Gascoyne,
both boats being loaded deep with stores for the expedition and depot. Having a favorable
tide, arrived alongside the depbt at 11.30 p.m. The cutter by some neglect or mismanagement
did not get up for twenty-one hours after.
Thursday , 7th November. —At daylight, on boarding the hulk, found she had 3| feet
water in her hold ; set them to work to pump her out. Found only seven horses shod; set the
carpenter and two seamen to work to do the rest as fast as possible; gave orders they were not
to be taken off this job until it was done, as none belonging to the land party are willing to do
the work, stating they did not come to do it. lam quite at a loss to make out what they did
come for, excepting to get a knowledge of the country at the expense of the Government. At
9 a.m. I left the hulk in charge of Mr. Handfield, with orders to let her remain where she was
while I proceeded up the river for the purpose of ascertaining if a better position could be chosen
for her as a depot, and to make an exploration of its banks at different places for any traces of
Burke or Walker. When passing Gascoyne’s group some natives made their appearance, about
ten in number; they tried all their means to induce us to land, but, having a fine breeze, I did
not wish to lose time by doing so, being very anxious to reach the junction of the Barkly to
examine the trees marked by Gregory, and Chimmo, of the Torch. Landed twice on the
east bank, and marked trees with a broad arrow and a * so eav^n B‘ a memo-
randum tied to the tree to indicate where the depot would be found. We also blazed
many trees all round for the distance of miles, and anchored in the upper part of Hope
Reach, at 7.30 p.m., for the night.
Friday , Bth November. —At daylight landed on the east bank, and discovered Gregory’s
tree, well marked, but could not find anything by digging where he directed, u north, four
feet; ” and, after marking other trees near with a broad arrow over “ Victoria ,” with date,
and where depot was to be found, crossed over to the point of the fork which separates the
Albert and Barkly and found the Torch tree, but no sign of any one having visited it since
marked. Marked a large tree near as before, to indicate our visit, and where depot would
be found; also blazing a number of trees, to lead any one to that information, for three-
quarters of a mile inland. We then proceeded up the Barkly, which is about as broad as
the Yarra Yarra at its falls y and, after going up it for three miles, landed, in conse-
quence of the snags, being dangerous for the boat to go further. Proceeded with the gunner
and Landsborough up its banks, on foot, keeping from one hundred to three hundred fathoms from
it, marking trees on both sides with tomahawks for about three miles, passing many dry creeks,
and beds of water-worn ironstone pebbles, with a mixture of quartz and red sand, Lands-
borough then proceeded to the river bank, to mark a tree there, broad arrow over Y, as before,
while I walked about mile inland, to the largest tree I could find, on the Plains of Promise,
and did the same on it; also placed a flag on its highest branch to attract attention, keeping up
the plan of blazing trees at about every fifty to one hundred yards apart, in any direction we
took ; so that no explorer can pass in this neighborhood without crossing some of them, which
will lead him to the information cut on the large tree on the Plains of Promise, or on the bank
of the river. We then walked from the direct for the boat, blazing trees on going to as
well as from her, in the same manner, getting on board about 1.30 p.m., after a very trying and
fearful hot morning, under a vertical sun nearly. After dinner we proceeded downwards, with
a firm belief that the Plains of Promise well deserve the name given to them, and that ere
many years they will be occupied by some enterprising settlers. During the exploration we did
not see any marks or indications of any one having been in this part before on the east bank of
the Barkly. On reaching the junction landed on the west bank, just below the fork, to mark
a tree near a good waterhole, about three hundred yards from the river bank; which being done
so that Walker, or any one striking the Albert on either side, must see the information to guide
them to the depot, I left at 6 p.m. and pulled down until 11.30, and anchored for the night
within two miles of depot.


Saturday, 9 th November. —At 5.30 a.m. started for, and reached depot at 6.20. Found
Mr. Handheld had shifted her a little higher up, past a small island and sand-bank, on which
she was aground.
Sunday, 10 th November. —A day of rest. Divine service performed. Wind from
N.W., with a fresh breeze until sunset, then calm, with lightning- in the S.E. Thermometer
87° to 92°.
Monday, 117/i November. —At daylight, the hulk being afloat, tried to get her into the
berth I have determined on, so as to secure her there for good; but she grounded again in a few
minutes, and remained fast. Got all expedition stores on shore, so that the party may get on
preparing for their journey. Ordered the barge to be prepared to go down to the ship. At 3 p.m.
had a heavy squall from S. S.W., with much thunder, lightning, and rain, for one hour; after
which a calm and lovely night. Thermometer 98° to 85°.
Tuesday, 12 th November. —At 3 a.m. barge started to the ship for one month’s rations.
My presence being required on Walker’s arrival, to save time I remain here to despatch him at
once, or little good can be done if lam out of the way when he does arrive. It has been a very
hot and unsettled day ; a heavy thunder-storm broke over the depot at 3 p.m., with rain for
about an hour and a half, after which it cleared up and was fine. Started at 3.40 p.m., on
horseback with Landsborough, passing over some tolerable grassed land, also some very barren
mud flats, which show every indication of being flooded with sea-water at times. Thermometer
88° to 94°.
Wednesday, 13 th November. —Landsborough’s party sorting, weighing, and packing
their stores; part of crew sewing up and marking them; also finishing shoeing the horses. This
day has been very sultry, with a dry parching atmosphere, all books and papers curling into a
horny shape; but every one keeps well as yet. The barge returned at 11,30 p.m., bringing up
one month’s stores, and the paymaster to get his receipts from Landsborough for the stores he
supplied him. Thermometer 98° at noon, 104° at 2 p.m.
Thursday , llth November. —Another very hot-wind day. Overland party getting on
with their preparations. Barge’s crew pitching tents to camp on shore. Thermometer 96° to
102°.
Friday, 15 th November. —Another hot-wind day, and very trying. The flies are very
troublesome, also the mosquitoes at night. Overland party making a trial of some of their
worst horses, with pack saddles on them, at which they bucked and kicked several off, and the
bags to pieces. Barge’s crew rendering general assistance.
Saturday, 1 6th November. —Overland party at it early, packing and saddling for a start,
but owing to the horses being (some of them) wild on being loaded, they caused much trouble
and delay, party not getting off until 1 p.m. An unpleasant discussion between Landsborough
and Bourne took place, to which I was called, and it appeared to me that a breach loading gun,*
belonging to Bourne, was lent by him a few days ago to Landsborough, to take with him on this
expedition, and now, on his being on the point of starting, Bourne did not like to let it go
without a promise of receiving its value from the Government, if it got injured or lost. Mr.
Campbell was appointed second in command, and started in charge of the horses, Landsborough
and the remainder following shortly after,f Messrs. Bourne and Elliot accompanying them for
the first stage, to do anything which might require being done. Sent the whaler up the river
to meet the expedition at the Post-office Camp, and to bring down anything, and the two last-
named gentlemen, to-morrow. On bidding Landsborough “ God speed,” I strongly urged his
losing no time going out, so as to be back before the heavy rains in January. This he promised
to bear in mind.
Sunday, 17th November. —Performed Divine service in the camp, and proceeded to the
west bank at 4 p.m. to mark trees and leave a memorandum under them. Blazed many for a
mile south, and another mile west, and returned at 6.30 p.m.
Monday, 18 th November. —A strong north and north-west breeze to-day, with very dry
parching weather. Employed the men digging a garden, tto put vegetable seeds in, such as
cress, onion, radish, and sprout. Whaler returned at 5 p.m., with letters reporting expedition
safe at 11 a.m., and that no memorandum could be found at Gregory’s tree j they having taken
pick and shovel to examine for it more carefully than I could by hand.
Tuesday, 19 th November. —Employed the men as yesterday, and burning all grasses
round the camp, also cutting down the mangrove and scrub on the river bank to destroy the
flies and mosquitoes, which are very troublesome and annoying to every one. I consider it
better to clear all this scrub away before the rains come on. Sent the whaler to the ship at
2 a.m., with letters, instructing Lieutenant Woods to go for a supply of turtle at Bountiful
Island, place them in the pond at Sweer’s Island, and to return here about the 4th of December.
Sent Handheld down, and placed the gunner in charge of the hulk during his absence.
Wednesday, 20 th November. —The men cutting down and clearing mangrove scrub from
the river bank and island opposite the depot. Thermometer 97° to 102°. At 1 a.m., being high
water, had every one out to get the hulk off the sand-bank, but did not succeed this tide.
Thursday, 21 st November. —A strong N.W. wind during the day, with calm at 9 p.m.
At high water again tried to get the hulk afloat, and failed. Thermometer 88° to 98°.
* Landsborough, after his return, stated that it was his intention to replace the gun with a new one.
f Mr. W. Landsborough, leader ; Mr. H. N. Campbell, second in command ; Captain Allison, assistant;
Jemmie and Fisherman, two native police.
% Got nothing but a little mustard and cress out of it.


Friday, 22 nd November. —Strong northerly wind, with very hot dry weather. Thermo-
meter 99° in the shade. At 2 a.m. succeeded in getting hulk afloat; tracked her to the berth,
and secured her with four cables for good.
Saturday, 23rd November. —Calm and sultry to 10 a.m., then a fresh northerly wind.
Got the hulk’s boat up for her carpenter to repair, so as to enable them to fetch water with her,
if these waterholes dry up, as they are doing so very fast. Walked to Wood’s Lake; saw some
wallaby and many ducks.
Sunday, 2 Mh November. —A moderate S.E. wind. Performed Divine service. Another
week and no Mr. Walker, so I shall start up the river again to-morrow, and make further
explorations for traces of Burke or him; but the former, I fear, never got so far north as this.
Monday , 25 th November. —At nine, started with barge up the river. Noon, landed on
east bank, seven miles below Alligator Point, branded a large tree and blazed others on a south
line for about one mile; but, seeing nothing, returned to the boat, and after the men had got
their dinner proceeded on further, landing again one mile below Alligator Point, marking and
blazing for one mile and a half to the southward, leaving a memorandum at each of these places to
direct any one to the depot, and proceeding on upwards at 5.30 p.m., anchoring in Hope
Reach at 10 p.m. for the night. Vivid lightning to the eastward, but no rain. Thermometer
88° to 9 7°.
Tuesday, 2 6th November. —At 2 a.m. a thunderstorm hurst from the S.E., with plenty of
wind, hut no rain, leaving a strong S.E. breeze. At daylight we again proceeded upwards, and
landing at Gregory’s tree on east hank, with pick and shovel again tried to find his memorandum, but
could not; so. I conclude it must have rotted, or been taken away by the natives. Crossed over
to the point dividing the Albert and the Barkly to Torch tree (Point Inscription I shall call it),
and upon careful examination found a memorandum from J. Flood to Mr. Baines, which had been
underground five years. Leaving a memorandum of my movements, and the position of the depot,
proceeded up the Barkly for a further and more extensive examination for traces of any one ;
hut, it being a very hot day, we only pitched tents on shore as far up as the barge would go.
Much vivid lightning all night to the westward.
Wednesday , 2 7th November. —At 2 a.m. a squall, with rain, for about half an hour.
Daylight, started with Bourne, Smith, and Charlie to the E.S.E., crossing the belt of trees and
over much of the open Plains of Promise. After making nearly a circle of about seven miles,
and seeing nothing of any tracks but our own marks, which we crossed twice, we returned to
camp, quite knocked up with exhaustion from heat. Part of the boat’s crew, who have been on
the diggings in Victoria, amused themselves sinking a shaft to try the nature of the bottom.
Made large bonfires every night at 8 o’clock to attract attention all round, and which I am sure
could be seen for ten miles.
Thursday, 28 th November. —At daylight I again started with the same party, and
visited all the trees marked on this side of the river, also the one I put a flag on; but
everything was found as I left it, so made another line of marks, leaving memoranda to
direct any one to the depot, and got back to the camp by 9 a.m., all much distressed by the
heat. At 2 p.m. started for the Albert arm of the river, and proceeded up it as far as the
barge could get for snags (about four miles from the fork). Sent a party on shore to examine
the banks as we pulled up, who found some trees had been blazed with an axe and tomahawk
only a few days old. Found the water in this river was very stagnant and bad, being covered
with a putrid slime. Made a large bonfire, sent up a rocket, and burnt blue lights at 8 and
8.30 n.m. Had a very sultry night, which seemed to affect every one very much. Ther-
mometer, 98° to 110°.
Friday, 29 th November. —At daylight started Smith and Charlie to follow up the tracks
of marked and blazed trees (as I am passing blood, which I believe is from drinking this putrid
water). They returned at 8, without bringing any information, loosing the tracks and marks
on the plains towards the Barkly. I believe that these marks have been made by two of the
whaler’s crew (subsequently found to be done by them), one having an axe, the other a toma-
hawk. After marking trees on both sides of the river, and leaving a memorandum at each,
pointing out the place of depot and my movements, we returned downwards, anchoring at the
junction until 3 p.m., to rest the men from pulling in the heat of the day, when we again
started, and pulling to within two miles of the Red Cliff, where we anchored at 10.30 p.m. for
the night. Thermometer 97° to 107°.
Saturday, 30 th November. —At day dawn six of the boat’s crew proceeded to Wood’s
Lake for the purpose of shooting some ducks ; but they returned with only one amongst them.
Clarke, one of the number lost himself, and gave all hands a five hours’ search to find him. At
5 p.m. proceeded downwards ag’ainst tide and no wind. Did not get to the depot until 11 p.m.
Found all had gone on well. The natives had twice visited them during my absence, and had
been friendly. Thermometer 92° to 100°,
Sunday, Ist December. —All this last week we have not seen the least sign of a native
up the river; and not finding Mr. Walker, I begin to doubt his having started. Performed
Divine service. The wind at N.W. for the last two days, with much cooler weather. Ther-
mometer 92° to 98°.
Monday , 2nd December. —At 7 a.m. fifteen natives, men and youths, visited the camp. Gave
them some presents of handkerchiefs, beads, buttons, See., but no tomahawks, fearing they might
injure the marked trees. They were much pleased with everything they saw about us, which


they kept up by their signs of astonishment; hut on opening my umbrella it was a great
surprise to them, at which they kept peeping to see how it was done, until I showed one of them
who was more intelligent and brave than the rest, and who had the courage to do it himself,
very much to the astonishment of the others. Allowing them to remain at the camp two hours,
I ordered them to leave, which they did, going away very quietly. I thought it was best to
send them away, as they began to pilfer. One had got an axe, and another had made several
attempts to get at some of my clothes hung out to dry. Made preparations to go up the salt-
water arm to explore and mark trees there. At 10 pm. whaler arrived from the ship, bringing
two turtles, and reporting very had luck with them ; nearly all they had caught having died (a
total of 120) in the pond, or on board before they could be got to it. Thermometer 88° to 97°.
Tuesday, 3rd December. —Sent the whaler hack for provisions to complete deficiencies
found by taking survey of stock this morning.
Wednesday , 4 th December. —Left with barge for the saltwater arm, which was entered
at 3 p.m., and with the flood tide, got to the head of, at 7 p.m., so far as the boat could go to
turn round; and the mosquitoes set to work in such numbers that to eat or drink was quite
impossible, so everyone rushed on shore, and tried the plains with large fires all round. By so
doing we got through the meal; but to sleep, we tried in vain, and had a very bad night of it,
notwithstanding that the fires were kept up by the sentry on duty.
Thursday , s th December. —At day dawn I started with two of the boat’s crew and
Charlie, on a S.E. track for five miles. Marked a large tree broad arrow over Y, and where
depot could be found, and others with common marks, on our return to the boat. Mr. Bourne
and two others going by the river to explore it, and two others of the boat’s crew across the
plains for three miles; but nothing' being discovered we all got back to the boat at 8.30 and 9
a.m. Breakfasted, and left to return to the dep6t, after having been sorely punished for our
visit here by the swarms of mosquitoes which infest the place. Landed at the Junction* to
wait for flood tide, and found the place had been some feet under water last tide, and that for
miles the plains were then covered with saltwater, showing the place quite uninhabitable, with
no fresh water to be had for many miles round. I arrived at the depot at 9.30 p.m. The men,
having to pull the whole way for twelve hours, were quite done up. After we had passed two
reaches going down, we were suddenly surprised by an ambush of natives on both sides. They
were painted, and armed with long spears, womeras, and clubs. Our boat being under sail and
going with the tide, was going fast through the water; so I suppose they were disappointed in
their intended attack upon us; and from all that I have heard since from Walker, it is very
evident they intended mischief. I would not allow them to be fired at, as was asked of me, as
they had done us no harm, whatever they intended to have done by their defiant gesticulations
when they found we were out of their reach. Thermometer 98° to 109°.
Friday, 3th December. —At 2 a.m. whaler returned. Many clouds gathering, the last
two days threatening for rain, but clearing off without any; but to-day it commenced to fall,
with the wind light from every quarter of the compass, and continued to rain all day. The
wind settling in at N.E., latterly increasing, with squalls and vivid lightning and very heavy
thunder during the whole night. All day I employed the men in re-securing the tents for the
impending storm, and it was well I did so, for it blew very hard, with one continued down-pour
all night, and increased to a heavy set-in gale.
Saturday, 7th December. —At daylight, which kept us constantly on the alert, fearing
the tents would blow down, and to prevent which all sorts of measures were resorted to,
and at 8 a.m., while at breakfast, a shout from Charlie announced Mr. Walker being in sight.
On going out, I found him and his party were coming to the d6pot in very good order, and
as if some systematic discipline was enforced. I soon learnt of Burke’s track being found, and
decided on his immediate return to follow them up. He reported he had found one of my
memoranda at a marked tree below Hope Reach, which guided him straight to the depot. The
heavy rains continued all day, but the gale decreased after 8 p.m. At 10 p.m. calm and
clearing up, with a light E.S.E. wind. Thermometer lowest at 2 a.m. 68° to 72°.
Sunday, B th December. —A fine cool morning, but the plains around showing evidence
of the immense quantity of rain that fell, being more like a lake. Set the men to make a
clearance out of their tents of all wet clothes, &c. ; gave them quinine rum; dug drains a#d
re-secured tents.
Monday, 9 th December. —At 8.30 a.m. I left the depot with barge and Mr. Walker for the
ship, to obtain a tracing of his route, copy of his journal, and give him such stores as he
required. At 7.45 p.m. got on board ; found the ship had rode out the gale, but very uneasily
on the ebb tide. Thermometer 87° to 90°.
Tuesday , 10 th December. —At 1 p.m. started for Sweer’s Island to ascertain if any loss
was sustained there by the late gale. Anchoring at 4 p.m., found all well, and only a loss of
some thirty turtles, from the sea having washed part of the pond away. Thermometer
85° to 91°.
Wednesday, 11 th December. —Crew coaling ship; Walker making tracing of his route ;
Wilson copying his journal.
Thursday, 1 2th December. —Sultry weather, with light winds, and variable. The first
lieutenant proceeded to Bentinck Island to haul the seine, but with no success. Thirty-five
* This is the spot which was fixed upon for a depot on our leaving Melbourne.
No. 109, e.


natives came down while he was doing- so, and by their manner were suspected to be treacherous
and hostile. No collision took place.
Mr. Arthur Moore joined Mr, Walker’s party in lieu of John Horsfeldt, who is
afflicted with fistula. Thermometer 88° to 92°.
Friday, 13th December. —At 8 a.m. started for the Albert, anchoring- there at noon.
1.15 p.m., I left in the cutter, taking- Walker up to the depot, and the whaler in charg-e of
Gascoyne, with Dr. Patterson, and stores for Walker. It being- first quarter’s fiood, and a fine
breeze from the north, we arrived at the depot at 8.30 p.m. Found all well, except three men
with fly-blig-ht, so that the doctor’s services were not so much required as I feared they might
be. Thermometer 84° to 90°.
Saturday, 14 ih December. —Daylight, crossed the river with Walker, to examine and
select the best place for crossing the horses and stores over, so as to save the three days it will
take him to go round the head of this river again. Sent the whaler back to the ship with
surgeon at midnight. A strong N.W. breeze, and very fine day. Thermometer, noon 94°,
night 84°.
Sunday, 15 th December. —Very fine weather; performed Divine service. Thermometer,
96° noon, 76° midnight.
Monday, Wth December. —Walker’s black boys out for horses very early; but it was
2.30 p.m. before they were all brought down, and by 4.30 they were all taken safe over by the
two boats. On examining the horses as they came in, I was sorry to see what a bad state their
backs were in from being chafed by the pack-saddles, as Walker reported, and although they
are getting better fast, the poor animals will not be well and fit for work by the 20th.
Fourteen days more would no doubt heal them, but time is of so much importance it cannot be
allowed them for it.
Tuesday, 1 7th December. —Fine weather. All hands at work making bags, mending-
tents, and packing- stores for Walker. Thermometer 78° to 94°.
Wednesday, 18 th December. —All hands employed as yesterday. .Wind N.W., and calm
at sunset. Thermometer 82° to 94°. Musquitoes getting very troublesome ; no rest can be got
for them in the night.
Thursday, 19 th December. —Walker’s stores finished packing this day, and taken across
the river j himself and men camping there ready for to-morrow’s start. Thermometer 94° noon,
midnight 82°.
Friday, 20 th December. —At 11.30 a.m., all being ready, and the health and good wishes
for Walker and party drank with all honors, they left in good spirits for the Flinders River, where
it is my intention of meeting them on the 28th or 29th, D.Y., to see Burke’s tracks myself,
and obtain any documents he may have left there. Made the necessary preparations for starting-
in the night; wrote Landsborough a letter in the event of his coming in, to inform him that I
do not consider it necessary he should go overland after Mr. Walker has been gone too long
to be overtaken by him, and that he ought to return by sea to Brisbane. At 9.30 p.m., as the
boat’s crew were driven out of their tent by mosquitoes, and as no rest could be got by any
one, we retreated to the boat, and preferred pulling against the tide to remaining under the
punishment of so many of their stings; but a goodly number followed us up until daylight,
when we entered sea reach, in the middle of which the men were enabled to lay their oars in for
the first time, as there was a light southerly breeze which took us to within a mile and a half
of the ship; it then being a-head nearly, they pulled on board. This has been a very trying- pull
for the men; the close and moist air is so very relaxing, without any exertion.
Saturday, 21,s£ December. —Got on board at 9.30 a.m.; weighed at 10 a.m., and stood over
to Bountiful Island, and anchored there at 6 p.m. Despatched cutter to South Island in charge
of second lieutenant, for turtle, and landed gunner and boatswain at sunset abreast of ship.
10 p.m. whaler started with first lieutenant to bring off those turned.
Sunday, 22nd December. —4 a.m. we got thirty-six turtles on board; and at 5 a.m.
■weighed and ran down to pick up the cutter and her night’s work, but they only had one small
one in the boat, not having seen any other sort but that species. Stood on for and
anchored in Investigator Roads, at 11 a.m. Sent all the turtle on shore immediately to the pond.
Light S.E. winds and very sultry weather, which appears to sicken the turtle if they are more
than a few hours out of the water. Mr, Law returned on board with a pistol-shot wound
through the calf of his left leg: by accident. Sent the gunner on shore to take charge of
depbt. Thermometer 94° to 105°.
Monday, 23 rd December.- —Light N.E. and N.W. winds, with close sultry weather. No
luck with the seine this morning-. Coaling ship. Thermometer 95° to 106°.
Tuesday, 24 th December. —Close sultry weather, with thunder and lightning in the N.E,
quarter. Thermometer 88° to 95° in cabin.
Wednesday, 25 th December. —A very sultry and unpleasant day, ending in a heavy
thunder-storm, which commencing in the S.W., going round to N.E. at 9 p.m. Killed four of
the sheep for the crew. Performed divine service of the day in the morning. Thermometer
91° to 99°.
Thursday, 26th December. —Wind from N.E.; light and fine weather. Thermometer
89°. At 10 a.m. an alarm was given on shore of some accident. Dr. Patterson immediately


proceeded on shore, and found that Mr. Frost, the gunner, had shot himself through the right
side by taking hold of a loaded gun by the muzzle, and drawing it to him from under the bed
stretcher to clean. The wound was a very serious one, from the gun being loaded with swan
shot (and a double charge of powder), some of which it is feared may have turned off the hip
bone and gone internally. At 5 p.m. proceeded on shore for the purpose of attesting the will
of Mr. Frost, and, after drawing it out in accordance with his wishes, from a rough draft he had,
I carefully read it over to him before Dr. Patterson, when, having expressed himself clearly that
he perfectly understood it, and that it was in accordance with his wishes, he attested it in our
presence, which we witnessed in the presence of each other, and by Frost’s wish I took it in
'Charge for him.
Friday , 2 7th December. —At daylight Dr. Patterson came on board, reporting Mr. Frost
much easier. My first lieutenant being laid up with neuralgia, and suffering much pain,
two officers with wounds, and one in charge of the depot on the Albert, leaves me only one for
the duty on board, so I shall not start for the Flinders to-day as I had intended doing. Ther-
mometer 88° to 98°.
Saturday , 28 th December. —At 4,30 a.m. sent the boat on shore for Dr. Patterson, to see
first lieutenant and others. His report of Frost being as good as could be expected from
the nature of the wound, and none on board requiring his immediate attendance, after landing
him again I left the roads for the Flinders River, anchoring off there at noon in three fathoms
at half flood, at seven miles off the entrance bearing S. by W. First lieutenant stated he
was better, and fit for duty if necessity required him. Started with the barge, and entered the
river at high water. Proceeded up to within one mile of the appointed place of meeting [A]
Walker, but seeing no one, anchored at 9 30 p.m. for the night, with the hope of getting some
rest; but we soon found that the heat, mosquitoes and sand-flies were too much for sleep.
Sunday , 29tk December. —At daylight visited the place of meeting marked [A], and
found the nature of the country such that the tides overflowed it at the springs, with nothing hut
mud and mangrove in sight, so that no horses can get so far down for the mud and saltwater
creeks. After marking* a tree, hoisting a flag on a conspicuous one, and hanging up a bottle
with a note for Walker, I proceeded on further up, passing the one island that is marked on the
chart, and another ten miles further up which is not, and up to which, and for five miles
further, the country was of the same low mud banks and mangrove, with not the slightest sign
of any trees or fresh-water vegetation whatever. The river now became more tortuous, and
several sand-banks were passed, contracting the tide, which was running up strong, I continued
on with the hope of reaching Burial Reach; but, after going on to 1 p.m., we stopped to dinner,
when I landed, and found the country better, with grass and water in plenty. Left again at
2.30 p.m., and proceeded ten miles further, came to some cliffs on the eastern side (dark brown
clay), twelve feet high. Here I stopped again, at 4.30 p.m., and finding no sign of any one, marked
a large tree with a broad arrow over a V, and tied a letter round one of its branches for Walker.
I have now come by estimation thirty-five miles up, and have not got to Burial Reach, or
anything like it, by Stokes’s description; no “ grassy islands,” or “ sloping banks down to the
water’s edge clothed with grass,” but only mangrove and mud, and one or two sunken islands
with the tops of mang*rove a foot above water as we passed them, to indicate their position.
The country around here is the best I have seen in the Gulf, and the grasses, of which there
are varieties, very good, with the timber larger, and looking more healthy than any part of the
Albert; but, finding no traces of any one, and the upper part of the river here not agreeing
with its description, I began to fear I must be in a wrong river, so I determined to start on the
turn of tide, return to the ship, and make a further exploration of the coast to the eastward of
this entrance, as I may have entered a wrong river, there being no land-marks to guide any one,
and I have not my sea chart up with me to see if there is another like it. Ordered the crew to
rest at 8, as the tide turned at 10 p.m,; but again it was quite impossible for any one to sleep,
for the insects I have named, and the excessive heat. If you take the only remedy to keep
them off, wearing blanket clothing, or getting into a blanket bag, either of these, with the
thermometer at 95° to 100°, and not a breath of wind, is too much to sleep under, with sixteen
people in a boat of thirty feet, and nine days’ provisions in her. At 10.15 p.m. started with
the first of the tide downward, and in a dead calm, with much thunder and lightening all round
the compass. The men pulled to within two miles of the mouth of the river, when a heavy
thunder-storm made us anchor three hours for shelter and safety to the men, and give them some
rest.
Monday, 30 th December. —At 7.30 a.m. the storm having passed seaward, stood out of
the river to the bar, and waited until turn of tide and N.W. or sea-breeze to fetch the ship,
which we did at 3.30 p.m. On examining Stokes’s book and chart with the first lieutenant
(who I was glad to find somewiiat better), I found there could be no doubt of my having been
up the Flinders, and that the difference in time of tide in seeing these places makes so much
difference in their appearance. Stokes appears to have gone up and down at night. I passed
from the first position [A] right up, by daylight. Determined upon sending the cutter up the first
thing in the morning to convey the stores and meet Walker, A very sultry night, with lightning
all round.
Tuesday, December. —At 5.45 a.m. the cutter, in charge of the second lieutenant,
started for the river. At 7 a.m. a very heavy thunder-storm broke over the ship, blowing strong
from the west for half an hour, with heavy rain for one hour and a half. At 9 I saw the cutter
at anchor, all safe, and, getting under weigh, she steered into the river. Thermometer BH° at
8 a.m.; noon 86°.


Wednesday, Is/ January, 1862,—New Year’s Day, and a very fine one after the great
discharge of electricity from the heavens for the last four days. Crew drying sails, cleaning
boats and boats’ gear, bilges to sweeten ship as much as possible to keep off sickness, which up
to the present time has not been of a very serious form. Diarrhoea and some small blind boils
amongst a few of the crew only. Thermometer 85° to 88°.
Thursday, %nd January. —Men employed on general routine duty. Light winds from
N. to N.W., with fine though close sultry weather. Thermometer 87° to 92°.
Friday, Brd January. —No sign of the cutter yet. Made the necessary preparation for
sending up the whaler to-morrow morning, and as the first lieutenant is again laid up, I must
send the boatswain in charge. Fine throughout, with light variable winds. Thermometer
87° to 94°.
Saturday, ±th January. —Started off the whaler at 6.80 a.m. with four days’ provisions
for the cutter and six for themselves. lam now without any officers on board on duty, the
first lieutenant being ill, the second up the Flinders, the mate in charge of the depot on the
Albert, and the gunner and midshipman both wounded on Sweer’s Island, where the surgeon
has remained to attend to them; one man sick with diarrhoea, one of fever, and four others with
boils. Sent Mr. Wilson to assist in piloting the whaler, as he was up with me in the barge on
her trip. Light winds from the N. until 10.30 p.m,, then freshening to a stiff breeze from the
N.E. Thermometer 87° to 92°.
Sunday, 6th January. — a.m., strong breeze, with lightning in the N.E., but dying
away to light winds after 8 a m., and very fine weather. Sick list: —First lieutenant, Mills,
Mason, Walters, Dunk, and four others with small boils. Performed Divine service after
divisions at 10 a.m.
Monday, 6th January. —Lightning in the N.E. and N.W., but fine weather, though
sultry. Thermometer 85° to 92°. Sick list as yesterday. The general routine of duties
carried out,
Tuesday, 7th January. —Northerly winds, with damp muggy weather. Looking
anxiously for one or both boats’ return, but no signs of them up to dark. Lightning in the
N.E. and S.W., and weather looking very unsettled at 10 p.m. Sick list as yesterday. At
2 a.m. a very heavy squall from the N.E., with thunder, lightning, and heavy rain until 4 a.m.;
then clearing away with a fine easterly breeze after sunrise. At 0.30 p.m. the whaler appeared
in sight, and at 2 p.m. came alongside, bringing no news of Mr. Walker’s party, although both
boats have been far above Burial Reach, one on the southern, the other on the eastern arm.
Gascoyne writes to say he will be down on board on Friday night. Walker is now five days
over the time he named that it would take him. I hope all is going well, with them, as I ought
to be back to Sweer’s Island the end of this week to give them rations there. Thermometer
87° to 90°.
Wednesday, Bth January. —A very fine night, with light easterly winds. Rather warm,
but not oppressive. Sick all getting better; but there are eight of them afflicted with a sort of
boil, which is small, but very painful. Thermometer 84° to" 89°. A little rain at 10.30 p.m.,
with lightning in the N.E. quarter.
Thursday, 9th January. —Easterly and N.E. winds, with fine weather. No sign of the
cutter up to 4 p.m. Made the necessary preparations for starting myself to-morrow morning-
in the barge to relieve her, and continue the search for Walker or Burke’s depot,
Friday, 10 th January. —At 7.30 a.m., the cutter not making her appearance, I left the
ship with the barge and galley for the purpose of relieving her, and continuing the search
for marks or documents to find the camp of either party, taking Mr. Griffiths to assist me,
leaving orders with the commanding officer (first lieutenant) to proceed to Sweer’s Island
as soon as the cutter got on board; call off the Albert, and send a boat up for a report
from the officer in charge of the dep6t (Handheld) of their state and condition; to supply
the depot on the island with one month’s provisions, and pick up the boat off the Albert River,
returning here by the 17th instant. At 9 a.m. grounded on the bar, and had to wait one
hour to float over it. Five natives came to the boat unarmed and friendly; gave them some
presents, and we passed on at 11 a.m. Spoke the cutter on her way down; Lieutenant
Gascoyne reported having found tracks of camels; sent her on to the ship, and proceeded on
to Station A, taking with me Wilson as a guide, and to point out where the tracks had been
seen. Found the flag and bottle as I left them on the 29th. Took the latter down, and
put another memorandum in to say I was on my way up the river again. Stopped here to
dinner for two hours to rest and shelter the men, as the thermometer showed 124° at 2 p.m. and
95° at sunset, with light N.E. winds all day. At 6 p.m. camped on shore at E; but the
swarms of mosquitoes here allowed no rest to any of us all night. The nature of the country for
the first twenty-five miles by the river is nothing but one plain of mud flats, with little rises
above the reach of spring tides, which overflow everywhere else as far as the eye could discover,
with fringes of mangrove.
Saturday, 11 th January. —This morning at daylight I started out three parties to
explore the plains in different directions, taking Bailey with me to do the same. These
Elains are mud, and are mostly overflown on the spring tides, but with some of the rises above
igh water mark, on one of which we came upon the track of one horse and one man, with
shoes or boots on walking by it: these tracks were leading north, and on a further search we
found the same returning south. Marked trees, and left this camp at noon, pulling on upwards


in a calm, with very sultry weather until I reached G* at 5 p.m.,,we then camped on the east
bank of the river, and guided by Wilson, went to examine the supposed camel tracks which
were found round a waterhole about (250) two hundred and fifty yards off from the river bank.
The tiacks are well and clearly defined, and are much too larg’e for horses, or any other
animal. Griffiths very unwell from what is (I fear) a slight stroke of the sun. Gave
him some medicine, and traversed the plains as long as we could see, in very long g’ood grass,
but finding no trees marked, or sign of any one having camped, returned to camp, and by
having a fresh N.W. breeze, got some rest, which was much required, after the last two davs
heat. J
Sunday , 12 th January —At 6 a.m. started with Seeker and Desmore to make further
explorations, two other parties doing the same, in different directions; but after going over
many miles of very fine open country, slightly but very prettily timbered with box, acacia, gum,
and other timbers, we all got back to camp by 9 a.m., without seeing any marked tree, or sign
of any one having been in the neighborhood. At 10.30 inspected the men, and performed
Divine service. Wind dying away, it commenced to rain, which continued, more or less, all
day, with calm at night. Made large fires all round tents, but to little purpose, for the enemy
beat us owing to its being calm; the fires were useless to keep them off.
Monday , 13 th January. —At 6.30 a.m. started in the galley to explore further up the
river, taking Wilson to assist and point out the dangers. After going about four miles, came to
what I conclude must be the Burial Reach of Stokes, towards the head ot which there was not
more than six inches of water (low water) for half a mile, and it was necessary to carry and
launch the boat over it very carefully, it being of a jagg'ed and rocky formation. Proceeded
upwards by the S.E, arm, and after going’ over four other rocky bars by the same means,
(lightening the boat and carrying her) got up about eighteen miles by 3 p.m. The course made
direct being about S.E., and finding a dry ford close to us, I considered it likely Walker crossed
here, but on exploring found no tracks, or signs of his having done so. Marked a tree, and it
being then 5 p.m., had some tea, and returned to the first rocky bar, with the hope of getting
over it by the same means as coming up, but the water being much lower, and the rocks bare
and very rag’ged, I gave it up, and prepared to get some rest, but we were not able to get any
for the enemy, and as the tide had risen high enough at 9.30 p.m., we got over the bar and
pulled on down again, the men keeping on their oars all night.
Tuesday , 14 th January. —We were at the head of Burial Reach at daylight, and at
the camp at 7.30 a.m.; found Griffiths better, but two of the men unwell, and no further
discoveries made. Had some rest, and after dinner started with Griffiths, to take a pattern of
the tracks seen (supposed to be camels); this being done, marked a large gum tree with
A
V
N
Jany 14, 1862
put a memorandum into a bottle and buried it at its foot with arrow pointing at it, and the
word u Dig. ” In the memorandum I stated that as I had been eighteen days searching for him,
without success, I must conclude he had gone on ; that if all was well which I had no reason to
doubt, notwithstanding my disappointment at not meeting him, I trusted to do so in Mel-
bourne.
Wednesday , 15 th January. —At day dawn struck camp, and after early breakfast started
downwards with the tide. At 6.30 a.m. two natives made their appearance on the opposite
bank, but would not come near us; sent Wilson and two seamen to walk down from point to
point, while the boat was going slowly round the reaches, with the hope that some marks might
yet be discovered, and determined to explore any arms of the river I might pass. Afterwards
took Wilson and men on board at 9 a.m., they having seen nothing after going about five miles.
On passing the arms on either side, I found they were mere ditches, partly dry at low water, but
very different at high tide, so that no good end could be served by my tracking the boat up them
for a short distance. Determined at once to return to the ship. After dinner pulled on to
4.30 p.m., when the flood tide running too strong, anchored until it slacked at 10 p.m., then
continued pulling down, and at midmight anchored in sea reach.
Thursday , 1 6th January. —At 2 a.m. a heavy thunder storm with rain, clearing-off at
daylight; saw the ship bearing N. by E., started for her and got on board at 9.30 a.m. Started
at once with the ship and anchored at 5 p.m. in Investigator Roads. Found poor Frost had
departed this life at 6.30 a.m. on the 31st December, and that the news from the Albert
was “ All well.” A heavy squall from S.W. at sunset, ending with more or less rain during the
whole nig’ht. I took medicine on going to bed, but could get no rest, being very unwell after
the late exposure to the sun, and break of rest.
Friday , 17th January. —The wind at S.W. with squalls and rain all the twenty-four
hours. Got some sleep this morning and feel all the better for it. Thermometer 92° to 82°.
Saturday , 18th January— The wind round to N.E., with thunder, lightning, and
squalls of rain veering to N. and N.W. Feeling much better, I visited the grave of poor
* At G the country assumes quite a different appearance, from being higher land with good soil. It is
covered with several varieties of good grasses, timbered with acacia, box, gum, and the native wild plum,
with cliffs of brown clay twenty feet high on the river bank.
No. 109,/.


Frost, and saw that all which was necessary was being’ done by preparing' a headstone and
some fencing 1 for it. Squally, with rain, close damp weather ; very relaxing l . Thermometer
86° to 87°.
Sunday , 19 th January. —Strong- N.W. wind, with squalls and rain throug-hout.
Performed Divine service. Thermometer 87° to 82°.
Monday , 20 th January. —Strong- N.W. wind with sharp squalls of rain throug-hout the
twenty-four hours. Sent all the crew on shore to wash clothes, and have the rest of the day to
themselves as a chang-e ; which was made the most of I observed, by their having- several g-ames
on the sand, and returning 1 on hoard orderly and tired. Thermometer 85° to 82°.
Tuesday , 21 st January. —Squally with rain, but much less wind from W.N.W. Ordered
the annual survey on all stores to be held, and in the afternoon proceeded in the gig- to Bentinck
Island to try and get up a friendly feeling- with the natives there. On closing- in with the beach
they came down about thirty of them, men and boys, fully armed. Seeing- they were in hostile
inclination, I did not land, but proceeded further south away from them, and there landed, which
was no sooner done than they were after us. On their coming- up, tried to show them by every
means that we were not come to do them harm, but to give them some presents, which lat once
did by giving them two tomahawks ; they then laid their arms down, but would not leave them
for a moment, or come near us. Seeing they were so very suspicious, I thought it better to
leave them for the present, and did so, going- over to Fowler’s Island to look at it. I found it of a
rocky formation of the same nature as up the Flinders River, with some good dark soil on the
top, on which good grass was growing, but no timber but stunted mangrove, and no water
fit for anything.
Wednesday , 22 nd January. —South-westerly wind, with gloomy weather, and thunder
and lightning to the southward. The annual survey of all stores, ordered to be taken, is being
carried out. Thermometer 82° to 78°.
Thursday, 23 rd January. —Squally, with rain, from 4to 6 a.m.; then clearing up, with
a brisk south-east gale. Crew coaling- ship. Continuing the survey of all stores. Very fine
cool pleasant weather all night. Thermometer 82° to 79°,
Friday, 24 th January. —Strong S.E. breeze, increasing and decreasing with the sun,
as yesterday, giving us quite an agreeable change of weather. Thermometer 86° to 80°. A
general washing day for the crew on shore.
Saturday, 25th January. —Light winds and very fine weather throughout. A general
scrubbing day, inside and out, all over the ship.
Sunday, 26th January. —A very fine day, but sultry. Thermometer in sun 124°, in
shade 86° to 88°. Performed Divine service at 10 a.m. The fishing party having been very
successful with the seine, sent the galley over to Bentinck Island with fifty pounds for the
natives. There was no one in sight when the boatswain landed to place them under a tree; but,
immediately after shoving- off, they made their appearance, and rushed towards their feast. I
hope, by repeating the presents, to get them to look upon us in a more friendly manner ere we
leave.
Monday, 27th January. —l find myself g-etting covered with boils, the same kind as most
of the men have had; but mine are all over my head. This morning the fishing party have
been very successful with the seine, so I took over to the natives another fifty pounds, also a
turtle, at the sig-ht of which they were much pleased, but still very distant and shy. Crew
coaling- ship until noon, and then washing clothes on shore. Light northerly airs, with fine but
sultry weather. Thermometer below 88° to 84°.
Tuesday, 28 th January. —Calm and sultry weather. At 2 p.m. a light breeze from the
north. Part of the crew coaling ship before 10 a.m. and after 3 p.m. Thermometer 87° to
85°.
Wednesday, 26th January. —A S.E. breeze at daylight, veering to N.E., with sultry
weather, after 2 p.m., and lightning in the S. E. quarter after sunset. Coaling ship. Ther-
mometer, 88° to 84°. Sick list shows an increase, with two cases of dysentery among them.
Thursday, 30 th January. —Calm and sultry weather. Coaling ship from daylight to
10 a.m., and from 3 p.m. to 6.30 p.m. Thermometer 89° to 86°. A light north wind from
noon to midnight.
Friday, 6\st January. —Calm to 10 a.m.; then light southerly and S.E. airs, veering
to N. E., as yesterday. Coaling during the morning and evening, as above.
Saturday, 1-stf February. —Light winds and sultry weather. I am sorry to record our
sick list increases; two more down this morning with dysentery, and several, with myself,
suffering from boils and violent pains in the head. Finished coaling- this morning. Ther-
mometer 89° to 85°.
Sunday, 2nd February. —The weather the same as the last two days, very sultry and
relaxing. Our sick list much the same, but no worse, or increase in the number. Performed
Divine service. Thermometer 88° to 86°.
Monday , 3 rd February. —Light S.E. and N.E. airs, with sultry weather. Crew all on
shore, cleaning boats and gear, washing their clothes, &c. Thermometer 88° to 84°.
Tuesday, 4 th February. —At 8 a.m. left the Roads for the Albert River anchorage.
Arrived off there at 11.30. Sent the whaler up to the dep6t in charge of Lieutenant Gascoyne,


to bring- down Landsborough’s party, if they have returned ; this being the eightieth day he is
out. Wind steady at N.E., with fine weather. Thermometer 89° to 84° in the after cabin.
Wednesday, s th February. —Very light land and sea breezes, with sultry but fine weather.
Thermometer at noon, in the sun, 132°; in cabin, only. The general routine of duty per-
formed. Surgeon reports improvements in the cases of dysentery.
Thursday, Qth February. —At 11.30 pm. Landsborough arrived by the whaler, and
reported himself as having returned to the depot on the 19th January, with only a loss of two
horses, which were drowned in one of the rivers; otherwise his little party all well. He is now
anxious to go on the south-east expedition, but requires tea, sugar, and rum, none of which it is
in my power to supply him with, having but twenty days of either left for my crew on the
reduced scale they have been upon for the last three months; and as many of them are on the
sick list, and others debilitated from the effects of exposure, I do not consider it just towards
them to deprive them of their 1| oz. sugar per day, to give to those who have expended on the
average of 7 oz., especially as the heaviest of the work has had to be done by this ship’s company.
All other stores he requires will be supplied to him. Very sultxy weather, with a heavy thunder
storm and strong northerly breeze at midnight.
Friday, 7th February. —Cloudy, sultry, unsettled weather, with a northerly wind. At
1 p.m. staited the cutter and whaler, in charge of Lieutenant Gascoyne, for the depot, to assist
Landsborough in getting his horses and stores over the river to the eastern shore; also, to bring-
down ship’s stores and the guard of the hulk after everything necessary has been done to secure
the stores to be left at the depot for any party who might fall back or call there.* Sent Wilson
up to take a copy of Landsborough’s journal to date. Thermometer 88° to 85° below. Moist,
muggy weather. Nine men on the sick list.
Saturday, B th February. —Fresh northerly breeze, with heavy squalls of rain, thunder,
and lightning, from 1 a.m. to noon, and at intervals until sunset, when it cleared up and was
fine.
Sunday, 9 th February. —Fine calm weather, but very sultry. At 9 a.m. the boats
were sighted off Kangaroo Point, but owing to its being calm and the flood tide against them,
they did not both get alongside until 2.50 p.m., having been from 9 p.m. last night on their oars.
Weighed at once for Investigator Roads, where we anchored at 6.20 p.m.
Monday, 10 th February. —Calm. Employed coaling, and otherwise preparing to leave
the gulf, the men working throughout the day until 6.30 p.m. in the heat, which is very
trying; but to get away, every one is anxious to do all they can. Eleven hands on the
sick list.
Tuesday, 1 1th February. —Light winds and calm weather. Commenced coaling- at
4.30 a.m., and finished at 6.40 p.m. A strong party out most of the day after the eight
sheep reserved for this time, when all on board are suffering- from want of vegetable diet.
I am sorry to say that only two were got, and one of them had to be shot. Thermometer
92° to 86° in the shade, but in the sun 128°.
Wednesday, 12 th February.— At daylight, sent one watch after the remaining _ six
sheep, while the other was preparing- ship for sea. At 7 a.m. I started over to Bentinck
Island with the galley’s crew, taking with me the Firefly's old boat rigged, some tomahawks,
handkerchiefs, beads, looking-glasses, and about twenty pounds of turtle, as a farewell present
to the two families I had taken presents to before. On landing, there being only two natives
seen, with much persuasion I induced them to come near to receive the gifts after they had
been made to understand by signs and gestures that all was for them and their families. I
ordered the boat’s crew to go down to the boat, which was about three hundred yards off from
us, which they all did. I followed them myself about ten minutes after, with my back to
the two men, who had kept their spears in hand all the time. I had not got more than
twenty-five or thirty yards from them, when a noise behind made me turn suddenly round,
dropping at the same time my umbrella on my shoulder; as I did so, I discovered both these
treacherous savages in the act of poising a spear each, and stepping stealthily after me, not
more than ten yards off. My sudden discovery of their intended object by facing- them, put
them into confusion, and they stole away as if ashamed of being found out. Their wives and
children have always been kept at a long distance, but nothing seemed treacherous in their
behaviour further than that circumstance, and their not being inclined at any time to lay down
their arms. lam now satisfied they are treacherous and bloodthirsty. After leaving them, they
ran down and took charge of their boat and the presents, and seemed much delighted, judging
by the noise they made. The watch on shore after the sheep did not all get on board until
1.30 p.m., and four of them were then quite ill. They have not caught one, although twenty men
were after them; they are a great loss to the whole of the crew, more especially the sick. Left
the Roads at 1.45 p m., and anchored at Bountiful Island at 8 p.m. Sent two boats’ crews at
once away to turn turtle, and who brought off fourteen by 1.30 a.m. At 4.30 weighed and
took our departure from the island, with the wind light from the N.W., and sultry weather.
Latitude, at noon, 15° 65' S. j longitude, 140° 4' 45" E. Thermometer, 95° in cabin; on deck,
in the sun, 130°; stoke-hole, 145°.
* 20 lbs. biscuit, 2'o lbs. flour, 9£ Ibs.-can powder, 2 boxes percussion caps.


Friday, 14 th February. Light N.E. airs from sunrise to noon. Latitude was,
12° 52' S, j longitude, 140° 39' E. Thermometer, 89° below in cabin, and 145° in stoke-hole,
—very trying for the engine-room party. Light N.W. airs, and calm all night.
Saturday, 15 th February. —At 8.30 am. landed on Booby Island to examine stock of
provisions in the caves for the use of shipwrecked seamen, and found as per margin, or the
same as left by me on the 24th September. A heavy squall from N.W. coming on, made me
hurry on hoard ; this squall lasted until 11.30 a.m., when it cleared away. Stood on for the Prince
of Wales Channel, in the middle of which some three of our port boiler-tubes burst, and put
out all the fires; kept going with one boiler. There being but little wind, we did not get
further than the eastern side of Albany Island, off which, brought up for the night at 7 p.m.
in ten fathoms water, and had a visit from some natives in their canoes (Jemmy One Eye).
Sunday , 1 6th February. —At 4.30 a.m. shortened in, weighed at 5.15, and stood on
under steam and fore and aft sail until 2 p m,, when the wind drew to the S.E. Passed Cape
Grenville at 5.30 p.m., anchoring at 10 fathoms at 6.45, with Haggerstone Island bearing east.
A very sensible difference for the better in the state of the atmosphere since yesterday.
Monday, 17th February. —At 5.30 a.m. weighed and stood on at half speed, with a
fresh S.E. wdnd throughout the whole day. At 6 p.m. brought up under No. VIII. Islands in
six and a half fathoms water, with fifty fathoms of cable. On approaching the place to anchor,
observed a danger not noted on the Chart or Strait Pilot.
Tuesday, 18 th February. —Fresh S.E. gale with continued rain until 1 p.m. On ex-
amining’ the above shoal at daylight, and finding it to be a coral reef, with only eighteen inches
water on it, of about twenty yards diameter, steep all round, and right in the fairway of any
vessel anchoring at or passing this island, to avoid the doubtful rock to the eastward of it,
directed Lieutenant Woods to survey and fix its position; and the weather moderating in the
afternoon, took two boats, the galley and the cutter, to look for the doubtful rock* to the east-
ward. At 5 p.m. (low water) found them both, passing with galley over the northernmost, with
only eighteen inches of water on it, and pulled up to the south one, which is about 150 yards
from it, north and south, and with seven fathoms of water between them, and steep to all round.
This I found was awash, and had a lump of broken dead coral on it, and on to which the bow-man
held the boat while bearings were taken, which were found to agree in every way w r ith the
position marked on the Admiralty Chart, for the bank, with one fathom on it, and from which
Chilcott Rocks bear about north true 150 yards.
Wednesday, 19 th February. —Strong S.E. wind continuing. With the small quantity
of coals on hoard, we cannot afford to steam against wind and current too. At 11.30, being the
last quarter flood, and looking a little finer, weighed and stood on to the S.-eastward; but with
strong winds from the same quarter, we only reached No. 2 island at 5.30 p.m., anchoring there
for the night. Had strong S.S.E. winds, with continued heavy rain, to 5.30 a.m., and it then
cleared with more moderate weather,
Thursday, 20 th February. —At 4.45 weighed and proceeded on towards and passed
Flinders group of islands, off Cape Bathurst, at 9.30 a.m., and anchored under Low Woody
Island at 11, as it was then blowing a S.E, gale, with strong tide against us. The gale con-
tinued with heavy squalls all night, and much rain.
Friday, 21s£ February. —At 4 a.m. a very hard squall from N.E., with heavy rain. At
6.30 a.m. looking finer, weighed and continued our voyage with the wind at E.N.E., hut it only
lasted so for one hour, when it hacked to the S.E. and became squally again with heavy rain,
which continued at intervals throughout the whole day. Made the best of it, and anchored
under Lizard Island at 6.15 p.m., so that we have eighty miles out of this day’s work
notwithstanding.
Saturday, 22nd February. —The squalls, with heavy rain, continuing until 4 a.m. At
day-dawn it cleared up. Weighed and stood on with the wind at E.S.E. Set all square sail
for the first time since leaving Investigator Roads, hut the wind backing' again to S.E. at 11
a.m., took them all in again at 1. A heavy squall from S.E., with continued hard rain until 2
p.m., and with every sign of more, anchored in eight and a half fathoms, with Rocky Island on
with Walker Point to the southward.
Sunday, 23 rd February. —At 3.20 another hard squall, with heavy rain. Veered to
seventy-five fathoms of cable. Continuing squalls and rain until 4 a.m. At 6 weighed and
steamed on as before, with strong S.E. wind, and squally weather; brought up in seven fathoms
and a half, under Low Islands. Landed, and finding some good she oak fit for firewood, on the
small isle, gave orders for a strong party to go on shore for the purpose of cutting it down at
day-dawn. The weather looks like a change for the better.
Monday, 24 th February. —At 10 a.m. having cut and brought on board about seven tons
and a half of firewood, weighed and stood on our course towards Cape Grafton, which was
passed at 3.30 p.m. The weather again setting in squally from the southward, with heavy rain,
anchored under No. 2, Franklin group, in twelve fathoms, with seventy-five fathoms of cable,
and had another rainy night until 4 a.m.
Tuesday, 25 th February. —At day-dawn weighed, and continued our course as before.
Noon, passed Dunk Island, and at 6.30 p.m. anchored in six fathoms and a half, under the
Middle Palm Island. Our distance made ninety-two and a half miles. Seeing plenty of timber
on shore, ordered a strong party to go wooding in the morning.
* Chilcott Eocks.


Wednesday, 26th February. —Continued heavy rain all night until 5 a.m. Party wooding;
shifted ship to facilitate it; hut, in consequence of the tide falling, there was great labour to
carry the blocks of gum over coral to the boats. At noon weighed, and continued our voyage,
passing through between the islands, and at 5.30 passed Magnetical Island. At 10 off Cape
Cleveland.
Thursday , 2 7th February. —At 8 a.m. passed between Cape Gloucester and Middle Island,
anchoring in Port Denison at 10.30 a.m., to obtain a supply of fresh meat and vegetables; also
firewood, if possible, for fuel. The latter, I find, cannot be got without great delay; the former,
with other necessaries, will be on board to enable me to leave to-morrow morning after breakfast.
Squally, with rain and wind from the N.E. throughout the night, and until—
Friday , 2&th February. —lo a.m., when, having got two days’ fresh meat and some
vegetables (pumpkins and melons only), weighed, and proceeded over under Gloucester Island,
to cut firewood, anchoring at 11.15 a.m. Started a strong party away immediately on that
duty. Wind light and variable all day from N.E
Saturday, ls£ March. —Blowing hard from S. E. all night, with very heavy rain ; and,
as the gale continued all day from the same quarter, continued wooding until 7.30 p.m.
Sunday, 2nd March. —The gale continuing, with hard squalls, all night, at 5.30 a.m.
weighed, to make the best of it, which was bad enough for the first two hours, until clear of the
high land, and, on the strength of the flood tide, passed inside between the Molle Islands,
anchoring under Shaw Island at 5.30 p.m. In coming up towards this anchorage, passed over a
five-fathom bank, from fourteen to fourteen fathoms on each side of it. Saw also two rocks
awash; the one with a reef towards a small island, the other not connected apparently with, but
about three-quarters of a mile off the W.S.W. end of this. The gale continuing from S. E.,
with hard squalls all night, all hands away at daylight for wood, &c.
Monday , 3 rd March. —Continued wooding all day, and part of the night, to get it off at
high water.
Tuesday, 4 th March. —No alteration in wind or weather. At daylight weighed, and
stood on, having the whole flood tide in our favor, but only reached L. 1 Island at 2.60 p.m.,
where we anchored in a bay on the N.W. side, in sixteen fathoms water, the wind being as
strong as ever. Plenty of tea-tree for firewood here, but not a very good landing-place to get
it off. Had a party on shore cutting down, ready for morning.
Wednesday, 6th March. —A change for the better in the weather during the night.
Sent a boat for what wood they had cut at 4 a.m., and at 7 weighed and proceeded on, with
moderate S.E., or head winds, passing through between Nos. 2 and 3 Percy Islands at 5.30 p.m.,
where we began to feel the ocean swell for the first time for six months. Passed High Peak
Islands at 11.30 p.m,
Thursday, 6th March. —Moderate winds from the eastward. Passed between the
Keppel Islands at 11 a.m., and anchored in Keppel Bay at 11.30; started at once in the
galley to obtain supplies from Rockhampton, the cutter following to take them down. Arrived,
after a long and heavy pull, at 11.30 p.m.
Friday, 7th March. —The cutter arrived at 2 a.m.; left again, with fresh provisons, at
3 p.m.; and, as no coals were to be had, sent instructions to go on cutting wood enough to last
for steaming’ purposes for three days.
Saturday B th March. —Crew cutting and splitting wood. Clarence steamer arrived.
Sunday 9th March. —
Monday, March. —Upon enquiry of Captain Cottier, he promises to let me have ten
tons of coal. Closed accounts at night, and slept on board Clarence, to start at daylight.
Tuesday, 11 th March. — Clarence started at 6.30 a.m.; arrived in Keppel Bay at
11 a.m., and by Captain Cottier’s kindness he delayed twenty-five minutes to tranship the ten
tons of coal he had promised to lend me; also stores and provisions for the use of the ship.
Found that, in consequence of the weather, sufficient wood was not on hoard to continue the
voyage. Ordered wooding to be continued, so as to start for Brisbane with three days
steaming.
Wednesday, 12 th March. —Fine weather throughout. At noon ordered steam. 7.30 p.m.
weighed and left. 5, Hummock Island west. Light S.E. wind, with confused head sea;
making only five knots against it.
Thursday, 13 th March.—At 10 a.m. Lady Elliot Islands north four miles. Latitude at
noon 24° 11' S. 6 p.m., Sandy Cape S.S.W. 26 miles.
Friday, 14 th March. —Calm and fine. Sighted steamer Clarence coming out of Wide
Bay at 10 a.m. At 3.25 p.m. entered Moreton Bay, but no pilot being in sight, accepted the
services of Mr. Champion, mate of the Clarence, to pilot ship to her anchorage off the bar, where
we anchored at 6 p.m. Proceeded to town per steamer Clarence, and reported my safe arrival
by telegram to Melbourne. Waited upon His Excellency the Governor the same night.
Saturday, 15 th March— Proceeded on hoard the steamer Telegraph, and by the kindness
of Captain O’Reilly, sent supplies of fresh provisions down to the ship. Ordered of R. Towns
and Co. 120 tons of coal.
No. 109, g.


Sunday, 1 6th March , to Tuesday, 18£A March. —Fine weather. Sent a further supply
of provisions and stores down to the ship.
Thursday, 20 th March. —Accepted the invitation of the Queensland Club, His Excellency
the Governor being- also a guest.
Friday, 21s£ March. —Coals arrive alongside, taking- them in and refitting ship until
the 24th.
Monday, 2Wh March. —When all being completed, left Brisbane and Moreton Bay.
Pilot left ship at 8 p.m.
Tuesday, 25 th March. —Squally weather, with rain. All plain sail set. Engineers
report great difficulty in obtaining steam with the coals received at Brisbane.
Wednesday, 2 6th March. —Smoky Cape bore W. twenty-five miles. Stopped engines,
and feathered the screw. Thick and squally weather. After cleaning furnaces, outfeathered the
screw again, and steamed on at 4 p.m.
Thursday, 27th March. —With this inferior coal, I consider it is necessary to call at
Sydney for better fuel, not being able to obtain half speed with what we have on board. At
6 a.m. entered the Heads of Sydney, and anchored at Farm Cove at 7 a.m. Called upon the
Honorable the Colonial Secretary, and got coals alongside and on board by 2 a.m.
Friday, 28 th March. —At noon left Sydney, for Melbourne, with fine weather, and very
smooth water.
Saturday, 29 th March. —At noon passed Gabo Island.
Sunday, 30s th March. —At 10 a.m. passed Wilson’s Promontory. At noon, unsettled
weather. 2 p.m. strong westerly gale, with heavy rain, and in which the wind flew to the S. W.,
as usual blowing hard, but clearing up after 5 p.m,, moderating during the night.
Monday, 31s£ March. —Strong winds and squally from the S.S.W. At 3 a.m. made
Cape Schanck light, and at 6 a.m. entered Port Phillip Heads, anchoring in Hobson’s Bay
at 9.35.


LIST OF VESSELS, TAKEN FROM REPORT BOOK ON BOOBY ISLAND, 24th SEPTEMBER, 1861.
Ships’ Names.
Master’s Name.
Date of entering
Barrier.
Date of arrival
at
Booby Island.
Where from.
Where bound.
H. A. Barkschipp ...
J. Lowe
Francois
Julies Chaperon ...
—
—
—
—
H. E. Spier
Jno. Rogers
July 10, 1860
July 12, 1860
Newcastle ...
Singapore
Storm Cloud 1
Jas. Campbell
July 17, 1860
July 19, 1860
—
—
King Lear 1
W. T. Crondan
July 17, 1860
July 19, 1860
—
—
Zwaland
P. Blose
July 28, 1860
July 31, 1860
—
—
Dorothea
— Gartsheaun
July 28, 1860
July 31, 1860
—
—
Margaret Mitchell 2 ...
D. Stiles
Aug. 21, 1860
—
—
Chusurali
S. Gibson
Sept. 2, 1860
Sept. 4, 1860
Melbourne ...
Kurrachee
Le Tommy
A. Perrin ...
—
Sept. 5, 1860
Melbourne ...
Surveying
Herald, H.M. Ship 3 ...
Captain H. Denham
Oct. 1, 1860
Oct. 3, 1860
Sydney
Coromandel
E. Bandy
—
Oct. 7, 1860
Corner Inlet
Calcutta
Spec
J. Early
Oct. 27, 1860
Oct. 27, 1860
New Caledonia
Batavia
Bosworth
A. Nichols ...
May 13, 1861
May 14, 1861
New Zealand
Madras
Manuelitta
Manuel Burtamente
May 23, 1861
Sydney
Singapore and
Manilla
Minder
E. H. Marshal
July 7, 1861
July 12, 1861
—
Point de Galle
Mary Nicholson
W. E. Robinson ...
July 24, 1861
—
—
Carl
R. A. Gun
July 20, 1861
July 24, 1861
—
—
Jane ...
F. Le Bass
July 23, 1861
July 27, 1861
Port Adelaide
Madras
Lady Kinnaird 4
Andrew Chorley ...
—
Foundered at
Hardy Island
Melbourne ...
Calcutta
Cheetah 5
J. H. Holford
July 24, 1861
July 29, 1861
July 29, 1861
Sydney
Ceylon
Marchioness 6
H. Morris
July 24, 1861
Sydney
Mauritius
Jennie Oswald
Wm. Davis...
July 30, 1861
Aug. 2, 1861
Melbourne ...
Sourabaya
Native Lass ...
Victoria, H.M.C.S. 7 ...
A. Paton
Commander W. H.
Aug. 19,1861
Aug.23, 1861
Newcastle ...
Gulf of Car-
pentaria
Norman ...
Sept. 5, 1861
Sept. 24, 1861
Melbourne ...
Gulf of Car-
pentaria
APPENDIX.
1 Both ships in company; all well; landed a little paper, tobacco, matches, &c., and found a good supply of stores in
other respects.
2 Fourteen days at anchor at Boohy Island; encountered heavy gales on the coast of Australia; found a small rock or reef
at three-quarters of a mile from Cockburn Reef.
3 H.M.S. Herald touched here on the 3rd October, 1860; left plenty of provisions in store for the careful use of the distressed.
Herald had a very prosperous course of work completing the charts of the Coral Sea since she left Sydney on the 17th August; have the
satisfaction of defining the Barrier Reef; landed at Ralne Island, where she also left plenty of provisions; made the Middle Passage from
Raine Island to Mount Adolphus. If this is noticed by a ship going to Australia, Yan Diemen’s Land, or New Zealand, please post
accompanying letter to the Governor of Sydney. Found Flinders Reef to extend twelve miles to the north of those laid down, called the
Herald’s Surprise.
-t The barque Lady Kinnaird, of Dundee, Andrew Chorley, master, was wrecked on Cockbum Reef; got back to Hardy Island,
where she sank in seven fathoms. After being eight days on the island, escaped from thence by the schooners Cheetah and Marchioness , of
Sydney, bound respectively to Ceylon and Mauritius: —Twelve men to Port Louis; myself, mate, three men, three ladies, and two
children; one gentleman gone to Colombo in the Cheetah. One of the ladies was confined at Hardy Island of a stiil-bom child ; is recovering
fast, and will soon be well. Whoever finds this report will please forward it.
(Signed) Andrew Chorley, Booby Island, 29th July, 1861.
s The Cheetah, of Sydney, left Sydney 10th July; entered Barrier on the 24th, and on the 25th took on board the master, mate,
four seamen, three ladies, one gentleman, and two children, off Sir Charles Hardy Island (northern one), having been wrecked In the barque
Lady Kinnaird on the 17th July. The Cheetah Is bound for Ceylon. (Signed), J. H. Holford.
6 The Marchioness took half the crew and passengers of the barque Lady Kinnaird off Hardy Island, which vessel was wrecked on
the 16th instant, and the other half was taken on by the Cheetah. (Signed), H. Morries.
7 The Victoria entered the Barrier on the 5th September. At 5 p.m. anchored for the night, and the next morning proceeded on,
when two wrecks were descried on the North Sir Charles Hardy Island ; one on the lee side, which was found to be the barque Lady Kinnaird,
foundered, and the other the Firefly, our transport, with horses and stores for the expedition ; was afterwards lightened, and got off the reel,
and taken on. Took stock of the provisions, and completed the following list6 hogsheads of water, 10 tins of biscuit, 4 small casks beef,
3 small casks pork, 3 lbs. tea, 12 lbs. sugar, 1 keg butter, 3 bottles of brandy, 2 bottles rum, 2 boxes matches, a quantity of pens, a bottle of
ink, 6 pipes, 6 lbs. tobacco. The Victoria was detained at the Sir C. Hardy Islands until the 22nd, when, having shipped the horses on board
the hull, she arrived at this island, with her in tow, en route to the Gulf of Carpentaria, all well.
Brigantine Cheetah, off Booby Island,
28th July, 1861.
Left Sydney 10th July; entered the Barrier by Raine Island 25th July, and anchored under Ashmore
Banks 26th July ; weighed and proceeded to Hardy’s Island, in company with the brigantine Marchioness, to> rescue
the crew and passengers of the barque Lady Kinnaird, her boat having communicated with us ; divided them
between the two ships as follows, viz.:— Cheetah, Captain Chorley, Mr. Lincoln (mate), four seamen, Mr. and
Mrs. Berto, Mrs. Osborne, Mrs. Evans, Miss Evans, and Master Berto ; Marchioness, Mr. Wilson (second mate),
and eleven seamen, —in all, twenty-four souls. Wot having sufficient water for such a number of people, 1 intend
taking one hundred gallons from Booby Island. .
27th July.—Weighed at 6.30 a m., and at 5 p.m. anchored under Cairncross, blowing hard, with heavy
squalls of wind and rain since the 24th inst. . ,
Mrs. Evans having been confined of a still born child the night before we received her on board, sne is very
weak ; but I hope, with the blessing of God, she will recover. T i a
28th July.—Weighed at 4.30 a.m. Passed through Endeavor Straits, and anchored at Booby Island
at 5 p,m ’ (Signed), John H. Holford,
Master,
P S. The Lady Kinnaird struck on a six feet rock, S.W. of Hardy’s, when she was run into the anchorage,
where she sunk in six fathoms water. She was from Melbourne, bound to Calcutta, horses (twenty-three),
W Further P.S. in pencil.—There was too much surf to get the water off; therefore, I must trust to catching
some rain water. (Signed), J. H. Holford.
By Authority ; John Ferres, Government Printer, Melbourne.














