

f 4 J tgi v 5
EXPLANATI >ltY OBSERVATIONS
jij
J^///
ON THE
IMMIGRATION
REMITTANCE REGULATIONS
COMPILED BY THE AGENT FOR IMMIGRATION
FOR GENERAL INFORMATION.
PRINTED BY WILLIAM HANSON, GOVERNMENT PRINTER,
PIIILLIP-STREET.
♦
1 868.
107—a




iM-i-n
IMMIGRATION
REMITTANCE REGULATIONS.
The following remarks on the above Regulations have been
compiled by the Agent for Immigration, for the guidance of
Employers of Labour and all others desirous of availing themselves
of the advantages held out to them by these Regulations :
I. The Government being desirous of removing many
of the restrictions which interfered with the introduction
of the relatives and friends of parties resident in the
Colony, and at the same time to offer inducements to the
employers of labor to import, on their own account, persons
of the laboring classes suitable for their requirements,
the annexed Regulations, which have been framed on most Appendix
liberal principles, have been published by authority for the
purpose of carrying out their views.
2. It is contemplated that the benefits to be derived from
them will be mostly felt by the working classes, and it has
therefore occurred to me that, if put in a Pamphlet shape,
with a few prefatory remarks explanatory of them, they
would be more clearly understood by those for whose
benefit they were principally framed.
3. Emigration to this Colony having now been carried on
at the almost entire expense of the Government since the
year 1832, and there having during that period been intro-
duced about 110,000 souls, at a cost of about £1,700,000,
many opportunities have been afforded for considering the
several schemes which have been from time to time in
operation during that period, and for contrasting the opera-


tions of the Commissioners with the arrangements made on
board private passenger ships for the comfort of the passen-
gers, as well as of the superiority or otherwise of the class
of persons introduced by both.
4. As the Regulations now admit Depositors to get out
their nominees either in Government ships or in private
ones, it would perhaps be out of place here to draw any
distinction between such ships; but it may, however, be
advisable to point out that, under the present arrangements
made by the Commissioners in London for the outfit of the
vessels chartered by them, every precaution is taken not
only to afford proper protection to those of tender years,
who may require their assistance, but proper well-trained
medical men are placed in charge, and the vessel is found
in provisions and medical comforts on the most liberal terms
and in articles of undeniable good quality.
5. Of the private passenger ships much must, of course,
depend on the arrangements made by the Owners in the
United Kingdom ; but, on reference to the conditions
Appendix printed on the Bounty Ticket, it will be observed that the
E * Government here have taken all necessary precautions for
carrying out regulations identical with those adopted in the
Commissioners’ ships; and as, on their arrival in the Colony,
the Immigration Board must be satisfied (before the Bounty
will be paid) that these conditions have been carried out,
H will be seen that either of the opportunities afforded by
the Government will, as far as it is practicable to make
them, enable persons resident in this Colony to send for
their relatives or friends, and, under either system, get
them out with every degree of security.
6. To the employer of labor those regulations afford great
advantages, as under the Bounty Ticket no interference


can be made, or exception taken, prior to embarkation, as
to the qualification of the Emigrants he seeks to introduce,
and he can, by his agent in the United Kingdom, make
what arrangements he finds most convenient for the despatch
of his servants, and from whatever port he may find the most
eligible, the only precaution necessary being to take suffi-
cient care that the several persons belong to one or'other of
the respective classes enumerated in the Regulations, and
that they are sound in health and of good moral character,
and introduced into this Colony for the purpose of labor.
7. The Regulations arc to the following effect, viz. :
That persons resident in the Colon}'* may, by making the
following deposits at the Government Immigration Office,
Sydney, or if in the Country Districts, with the Clerks of
Petty Sessions, secure passages for their friends or relatives,
viz. : —for each Immigrant between 1 and 12 years of age,
<£2; between 12 and 40 years of age, £4; between 40 and
50 years of age, £B, provided that they consist of
mechanics, domestic servants, or persons of the labouring
class. Single men, however, above 40 years of age, and
single women above 35 years of age, and persons not
being of the above classes, or over 50 years of age, will
not be considered eligible, except on a deposit of £l2.
8. As the Regulations make it optional for the depositor
to decide whether he wishes the persons on whose account
he is making the deposit to have a passage provided in a
Government or Private Ship, he should at the time that
he makes the deposit declare in what way he wishes his
friends to be introduced, and the Officer to whom the applica-
tion is made will prepare the necessary Form accordingly.


9. If the passage is to he provided in a Government ship—
on the receipt of the money, and on the requisite particulars
Appendix heing obtained in the printed form in the appendix,
c ‘ marked C, a Passage Certificate will be issued, which
certificate will be available for a period of twelve months
only, and must be forwarded by the depositor to his or her
friends in the United Kingdom. No other expense need be
incurred by the depositor here, beyond making provision for
the reception of his relatives on their arrival in the Colony;
but should he be doubtful as to the means at the disposal of
his friends to meet the requisite expenses of outfit prior to
embarkation, he may, at the time of making the deposit, pay
any additional amount for that purpose to be handed to
his nominees, to whom it will be remitted by the Govern-
ment free of expense. He should also, in remitting the
Passage Certificate Home, instruct his friends to be careful
not to lose the same, and in the event of their not
intending to make use of it to return it to the depositor in
this Colony, in the same state as he received it, so that the
depositor may be in a position to receive back the amount
deposited by him without delay.
10. If the passage is to be provided in a private vessel
Appendix the Form in the Appendix marked D should be used, and
the depositor will be furnished with a Bounty Ticket, which
it will be necessary to indorse over to the Master or owner
of some passenger ship in which it is intended his nominee
should be embarked.
11. The Bounty Ticket may be transmitted cither to the
person nominated, or to some person acting as the agent of
the depositor, who will undertake to make the requisite
arrangements for the passage out, and on the arrival of the
vessel in the Colony, and on a satisfactory report having been
made by the Immigration Board as to the eligibility of the


person introduced in pursuance of it, the holder of the
Bounty Ticket will, on presentation at the Treasury, receive
the sum of £l2 for each adult described on the Ticket, and
half that amount for each child between the ages of one
and twelve introduced under the same conditions.
12. On the arrival of persons for whom passages have been
provided under these Regulations, their names will be adver-
tised in the Sydney daily journals, so that proper arrange-
ment may be made by the depositors for removing them
from the ship before the expiration of the ten days allowed
by the Regulations.
13. The different printed forms required by persons intend-
ing to make deposits under these Regulations are to be had
on application at the Government Immigration Office, Hyde
Park, Sydney, or, at the several Courts of Petty Sessions,
in the Country Districts, at which places any further
information may be obtained.
Government Immigration Office,
Sydney, ls£ February, 1858.
APPENDIX A.
Colonial Secretary's Office,
Sydney, 10 th August, 1857.
IMMIGRATION REGULATIONS.
With a view to facilitate and encourage the introduction
of Immigrants by Settlers and others, for employment in
their own hired service, their selection by means of private
Agency, and their passage in private ships, as well as in
those chartered by the Government, and also with the
intention of holding out inducements to persons resident
in the Colony to send for their relatives or friends, His
Excellency the Governor General, with the advice of the
Executive Council, has been pleased to direct the publication
of the following Regulations.


2. Any person resident in the Colony, who may be
desirous of introducing from the United Kingdom Immi-
grants of any of the classes hereinafter enumerated, will
be permitted to do so on the following terms and con-
ditions :
(Ist.) By making the following Deposits, viz.:—For
each Immigrant between 1 and 12 years of age, £2 ;
between 12 and 40 years of age, £4; between 40
and 50 years of age, £B. But single women above
35, and single men above 40 years of age, and
persons whose husbands or wives are resident in the
Colony, will not be deemed eligible under these
Regulations, unless upon payment of a deposit of
£l2 for each. Such deposits must be made, if in
Sydney, at the Government Immigration Office, on
any lawful day, between the hours of 10 am., and
half-past 2 p.m., and if the Country Districts, with
the Clerks of Petty Sessions during the usual
office hours; and at the time of making the deposit,
the depositor must declare whether he intends to
bring out the Immigrants in a ship chartered by the
Government or in a private ship, and will afford all
such other information respecting the Immigrants
he proposes to introduce, as may be necessary to
enable the Immigration Agent or Clerk of Petty
Sessions to comply with his application, and the
requirements of these Regulations.
(2nd.) The persons eligible under these Regulations
are mechanics of every description, domestic
servants, and all persons of the laboring class.
They must be of sound mental and bodily health,
and of good moral character. But no advantage
will be allowed in respect of any person brought
out as a cabin or intermediate passenger.
(3rd.) The Immigrants, on arrival in the Colony, will
be subjected to the examination of the Immigration
Board, who will require proof of their eligibility
under these Regulations.
(4th.) The Board will also require proof that the Immi-
grants, if brought out in private ships, have been


properly found during the voyage with an outfit of
suitable clothing, bedding, mess utensils, provisions,
water, medical comforts, medical attendance, and
suitable accommodation. As a general rule, the
outfit of clothing and dietary scale required under
the annexed extract from the Regulations of the
Land and Emigration Commissioners, will be adopted
as the criterion in judging of the fulfilment of the
requirements under these heads.
(sth.) In the case of single Females, they must (unless
accompanying their parents) be between the ages of
15 and 35; and proof will be required that they
have been placed during the voyage under proper
and effectual protection.
(6th.) The Separation of husbands and wives, and of
parents from children under 15 years of age, will in
no case be allowed.
(7 th.) Passages will not be granted under these Regu-
lations to children under 15 years of age, unless
forming part of a family, or unless their parents be
resident in the Colony. .
(Bth.) Families in which there are more than two
children under 7, or three under 10 years of age,
will be deemed ineligible, as well as all persons who
have not been vaccinated or had the small pox.
(9th.) Emigrants, however, having relations in the
Colony, will not be excluded from the benefit of
these Regulations, notwithstanding that the number
of children in the family exceed that specified above,
provided they be not otherwise ineligible ; but in
every such case an additional payment will be
required of £4 for each child in excess of the regu-
lated number.
(10th.) Depositors must undertake to provide for the
Immigrants they introduce after the expiration of
ten days from the time of their arrival, or pay to the
Government for their subsistence at the rate of Is.
per (fay for each adult, or half that amount for each
child under the age of 12 years, so long as they
may be maintained at the public expense after the
expiration of that period.


(11th.) In any case in which the amount deposited
shall exceed that required for the number of Immi-
grants actually introduced hy the depositor, the
excess will be returned to him at the expiration of
the period fixed for their introduction, on the return
to the Immigration Agent of the Passage Certificate,
or Bounty Ticket, as the case may be. But if the
deposit has been made with a view to obtain a
passage in a vessel chartered by the Government, it
will not be refunded unless instructions to that effect
are received in the Colony from the Land and Em-
igration Commissioners, and on proof that the
Passage Certificate has not been used.
(12th.) The arrival of all persons emigrating in pur-
suance of these Regulations will be duly notified in
the newspapers, for the information of their rela-
tives, friends, or employers.
3. The Clerks of Petty Sessions on receipt of any deposit
under these Regulations, will immediately' remit the
amount to the Immigration Agent at Sydney, with a
statement of the number and description of Immigrants
whom the depositor wishes to introduce. The Immigration
Agent will thereupon prepare and forward to the Clerk of
Petty Sessions, for delivery*to the depositor, a Passage
Certificate, if it be intended to bring out the Immigrants
in a ship chartered by the Government, or a Bounty Ticket
if they are to be introduced in a private ship. Similar
Certificates or Bounty Tickets will be issued to depositors
in Sydney on payment of their deposits to the Agent for
Immigration.
4. The Passage Certificate must be forwarded by the
depositor to his friends or agents in the United Kingdom,
and it must in every case be produced within twelve months
from the date of it to the Land and Emigration Com-
missioners in London, who will accordingly provide passages
to the Colony for the Immigrants proposed to be introduced.
5. The Bounty Tickets for the introduction df Emigrants
in private ships will not be available beyond the period of
eighteen months from the date of their issue.


6. If, on arrival of the Immigrants introduced in private
ships, in pursuance of any Bounty Tickets issued under
these Regulations, the Immigration Board shall be satisfied
that the several conditions hereby imposed have been
faithfully observed, they will grant to the person authorized
to introduce the Immigrants, or to Assign, being the
commander, owner, or agent of the ship by which such
Immigrants shall have arrived, a certificate to that effect,
endorsed on the Bounty Ticket, and on presentation thereof
at the Colonial Treasury, the authorized holder will be
entitled to receive the sum of twelve pounds for every
Immigrant between the ages of 12 and 50, and half that
sum for every Immigrant between 1 and 12 years of age.
7. Forms of application, as well as all other information
for the guidance of depositors, can be obtained from the
several Clerks of Petty Sessions in the Country Districts,
or in Sydney at the Office of the Agent for Immigration.
8. These Regulations will take effect from the Ist
October next, and the Government Notices of the 18th and
19th September, 1856, will be cancelled from that date,
excepting with reference to applications already made
under the same.
By His Excellency's Command ,
HY. WATSON PARKER.
Extract from the Regulations of the Land and
Emigration Commissioners referred to.
Outfit of Clothing.
For Males.
Six shirts'.
Six pairs of stockings.
Two warm flannel or Guern-
sey shirts.
Two pairs new shoes.
Two complete suits of strong
exterior clothing.
For Females.
Six shifts.
Two warm and strong
flannel petticoats.
Six pairs stockings.
Two pairs strong shoes.
Two strong gowns, one of
which must be warm.


But for each child nine shirts or shifts, four warm flannel
waistcoats, and one warm cloak or outside coat, six pairs
of stockings, two pairs of strong shoes, and two complete
suits of exterior clothing, are required. There must be
also, at least, three sheets for each berth, and four towels,
and two pounds of marine soap, for each person. The
necessary brushes and combs and clothes-brushes, for clean-
liness, must be provided by the Emigrants. Emigrants
must not have less than the above outfit; but the larger
the stock of clothing, the better for health and comfort
during the voyage, which usually lasts about four months;
and as the Emigrants have always to pass through very hot
and very cold weather, they should be prepared for both.
Two or three colored serge shirts for men, and an extra
supply of flannel for women and children, are strongly
recommended.
6. Rations, according to the following Scale, are to
be issued during the voyage, and until disembarkation, to
each Male and Female Passenger of twelve years of age and
upwards ; —to children of one year and under twelve years
of age, one half of such Rations*
sucn nations.
Dietary Scale.
ANIMAL BREAD I PRESERVED
POOD. STUPES, VEGETABLES.
s I l|£.
| B-l-S
A|| > I . Ilfll |
JII II .ill 9 lllg -S
PQrPHPMOJpQCqpHO Ph O O
oz. oz. oz. oz. Lz. oz oz. oz. pint oz. or. portion portion
... 8 ... 2 ... 6 8 ... i 1
...1... 8 2j 2 6 8 4
6 6 8 4 4 ... 1
... 8 ... 2'... 6 8 4 \
8 2 6 8 4 ... 1
8 2 ... 6 8 8
6 |... 6 8 ... i 4
| |
20 1616 8 44256 16 J 8 8 1 2
Jj ! !
giU 1 rSalt...Tw<
fan ounce V g PATmfITl i #
u
o
"8
07. 07. qt*.
... 2 3
4 2 3
4 2 3
Mixed Pickles One gill
Mustard Half an ounce
Lime juice ...6 ounces
1 -
r s
J £
4 2 3
ounces
r Salt... Two ounces
\ Pepper Half an ounce


Children between one and four years of age are to receive
preserved meat instead of salt meat every day, also a
quarter of a pint of preserved milk, and every alternate day
one egg, or two teaspoonfuls of condensed egg. Children
under one year old are to be allowed 3 pints of water
daily; and if above four months old, a quarter of a pint
.of milk daily; also 3 ozs. of preserved soup, and one egg,
or two teaspoonfuls of condensed egg, every alternate day,
and 12 oz. of biscuit, 4 oz. of oatmeal, 8 oz. of flour, 4
oz. of rice, and 10 oz. of sugar weekly. To infants under
four months old, the Surgeon may issue such nutriment as
he may, in any case, think necessary. The Surgeon may
draw an additional quart of water daily for the use of each
person sick in the Hospital.
While in any port of the United Kingdom, or in any
port into which the vessel may put before completing the
voyage, and, if practicable, for one or two days after sailing,
two-thirds of a pound of fresh meat, one pound and a half
of soft bread, and one pound of potatoes, per Statute adult,
are to be issued daily, with a suitable supply of vegetables,
in lieu of all the other Rations, except tea, coffee, sugar,
and butter.
Colonial Secretary’s, Office,
Sydney, 1 (sth September, 1857.
IMMIGRATION REMITTANCES.
With reference to the Notice published in the Government
Gazette of the 10th August last, headed “ Immigration
“ Regulations,” in which it is provided that “ persons,
“ whose husbands or wives are resident in the Colony, will
“ not be deemed eligible” for passages under the Regula-
tions unless upon payment on their account of a deposit of
twelve pounds each, His Excellency the Governor General,
with the advice of the Executive Council, has been pleased
to direct that so much of the aforesaid Regulations be re-
pealed, and that from and after the Ist October next, pas-
sages may be secured for the persons herein alluded to (if
not otherwise ineligible) on the same terms and conditions
as are provided in the Regulations for other persons.
CHARLES COWPER.


APPENDIX B.
CONDITIONS OF BOUNTY TICKET.
The Emigrant shall have been during the voyoge treated as a bond fide
Steerage Passenger.
During the voyage, and while in any port, the Emigrant shall have been
provisioned and supplied with medical comforts and water according to the
scale and quality required for the time being to be observed for Emigrants*
in ships chartered by the Colonial Land and Emigration Commissioners,
including fresh provisions and vegetables.
Ten clear running days reckoning from noon, after the arrival of the
ship at the usual place of disembarkation in the Colony, shall have been
allowed (if required) for the disembarkation of the Emigrant, during
which time he or she shall have been accommodated in the same manner
as during the voyage, and provisioned and allowed water and medical com-
forts as above required.
And, further, with regard to ships required by the Passengers’ Act,
1855, to carry a Medical Practitioner, the following rules shall have been
observed: —They shall be of the first class, and, from the time of arrival
in New South Wales, and during the above-mentioned ten days, such
directions shall be observed as may be given to the Master on the part of
the Colonial Government regarding the place of anchorage of the ship, the
admission of persons on board, and arrangements for the management,
hiring, or otherwise disposing of the Emigrants.
The Emigrant shall not have been introduced by the way of any of the
Australian Colonies.
Whether the ship be divided into compartments and fitted with enclosed
berths or not, the single women shall have been during the voyage berthed
in the after part of the ship, in a compartment divided off from the space
appropriated to the other passengers by a substantial and well-secured
bulk head.
There shall have been separate hospitals for males and females, at all
times clear and ready for use.
The Medical Practitioner shall have been required to keep a journal
similar to that required for the time being in ships chartered by the
Colonial Land and Emigration Commissioners.
When the number of single women on board, without natural protectors,
equals or exceeds five, a matron shall have been appointed to take charge
of them, subject to the directions of the Master, and liable to be removed
by him for misconduct or incapacity; and, in the care and superintend-
ence of the single women, the rules contained in the instructions issued for
the time being for matrons of ships chartered by the Colonial Land and
Emigration Commissioners shall, as far as possible, have been observed.
The Emigrant shall have been landed as directed by the Colonial
Government, with his or her baggage, at the expense of the ship.
These conditions having been observed, the Immigration Agent will
certify upon this Ticket to the arrival or death on the voyage of the Emi-
grant, and to the amount of passage-money payable ; which amount will
then be paid upon presentation of this Bounty Ticket at the Colonial
Treasury, within eighteen months after the date thereof (and not after-
wards), either to the above-named applicant himself, or to the Master,
Owner, or Agents of any vessel to whom this Ticket may be endorsed over
by the said applicant (in the form given below), and in which vessel the
Emigrant may be brought to the Port above-named.


APPENDIX C.
torm to he used when the persons intended to he introduced are to he nominated in the Colony } and the passages provided in a
Government Emigrant Ship.
IMMIGRATION REGULATIONS OF 10th AUGUST, 1857.
DESCRIPTION OF THE PERSON OR PERSONS FOR WHOSE BENEFIT THE REMITTANCE IS MADE.
Christian Name and
Surname at full length.
Age.
Whether Hus-
bands or Wives
resident in the
Colony.
Trades or
Callings.
Where living,
in Great Britain
or Ireland.
Names and Addresses of
some Persons of Note, to
whom references can be
made respecting the
Emigrants.
Proportion
to be applied to
Passage.
Proportion
to be applied
towards Outfit.
Total.
RECEIVED this day of ,18 , from of in this District, the sura
0 » , . . P oun ds _ < {£ ), to be remitted to the Colonial Land and Emigration Commissioners, for the purpose
ot being applied in the provision of Passages to this Colony, for the above-described persons.
, T r-. , t, . Clerk of Petty Sessions.
Witness to Payment, J
If more than one person s name be mserted in this Certificate, it should be distinctly stated to whom the money is intended to be paid, on account
of Outfit ] and its further disposal, in case ol the death or absence of the persons so named, should be also given.


“T ir f /v>
&/QUO || - NOV 1992 "
flUo-f „ Xtv *
• 5 H
o
«9 £
pc H
Co H
• M
»o
oo ® g
t-H -g P?
«i W
r 7) s W
S •'“V H
pT J
»3 -S^
C cc
Oos 53
53-, HS
fti eJc
r ~, CO "O
<3 00 _.
« o
hi
H K*
S *|-S
Pfa -8*
M° £ I
HM | |
P% 1^
650 «
M ph *•
W eh
P
P|p «o •»
<j p 8 «
P 5 ,S
H g 53
P 2 |-g
S <u
>5 .S.'S
C S s^
t—l ms O
E-i g
< s I
pH *S O
s
s s
s .-s
HH co
O
SH
C 5
P
HH
ft
ft
X
ft
w
ft
co
O
a
£
ft
o
ft
co
55
O
co
ft
ft
Ph
a
c
SZS
O
co
a
ft
a
w
a
H
Fh
O
co
a
o
I—l
H
a
H
a
o
CO
a
fi
fl
I
O
o
0
1
E
EH
fe
2 "S r s i
a 12
cs P S
d fld
3 g’S
® .0H
■o£ ojs
I •§ i
"ro O Tj
•g «d
»S
o **
VJ*C C* to
S' 0 O a d a »g ■**
*2 CO o % »
OQ P2*Sfl ,§£
»>. to *3j ® C 2 O q to S ■*■»
o+e .a>oSy ft 2 V? &
S 3 o «oi ft •>, a « ©
'h uij r <D -s -tj +-*
S >5 . ‘C a> "C Mg
£ (! *
8 «g ’I gg,
g£||gSgjH§ o j< £ s-g
o tw » -H , r T“J d^4
.t 2 to Ctf 4-' bD o O O fe 3
S.MS'S.sifr-a
§2 i ° S g
(y+- , c o> ,0 S
n ot3 a o S_S ® a
u i o O 2 -. c- 5 Ti d yj O*
<o ** ;o So
,C TJ rr, CJ 5° /-hO o. .
* 3 7C'S-*- , “Sb c3 o , s‘” 'c a®
«“S S s * i 5|
&>£ ofe -si 1 * 0°
cs B 3 .s-'s vc* J, a -go ® t 5
S «° 5 g+r
rH r T i -P 3 C >•«
O* ■g
0 “ d a S CO 0 g* as .» Us
o ! HoSPtaSj»Oj3'3 h ** oah l *'
m§ m g 2 5 g ■So "ig ° d
>‘*3 § § f)y ®d S bfi«3
S g B as S[o as g
| 11*3.
«« g-2 ®.®” ? ►» a g g *“5
ptp 0 g 5 a 5®
g. 2 2°ga.SSa «« g gw'g
O O j) O O «
c - >t b ® a Sbs‘3 .2 aoS^
10 0 2 *3 ® s ast » 'fetoaot.
H^34scsr w fn -r< f BdS
is®.,i!OW_Co _ oi* - *j.d.so
°3 o «** tf °o ■" ®d S
rt rt id .“ h ® « ~J S
-2 2H'|cg|§3g a fid**?
«
° k ft %m * A,: a
drt dSrg cs tfd <j 00 .2 °'S'S' 2
•rH O .2 Q< C •’i e_ «S ..
i'3|g l s3- rS I-
S6O B ,£)>-.« 2be g'S * S
"-I i«l||
ss sill’ll »£ tiffs
h«ct H l > '3£,« 30 0 d S 3
+*i »rH O grt d 3XD O r~4 1 oj 3 b
m Kh®s o “m «h OS Stdooi 0
BST3d*'3BsEca'T3»s O -55 Jfla'nO
s- 0 g ea ” g Bdip.®©
os d t*_4 t a . rnd
rj S'? OStSOO V «l d b
G-:IS s |ifa t f|||?
.Sa v fc®Hfl b |.9 S §
o2 ” <o-a”
d d pT-g ■£ a b^S*
§d . 00 “ •Bg>|
w* "S “‘S«
| *| g 'l&d a «lg
Q. m c 3 Jh +0 0) M . fai
g drS 2 0 -2 BrfS
,rttH MISpSS Oil d 3§s
O ,rH N -' / 2 o
■s<! s S g 0 a ♦»’ I B ’eJ
.9.1 If I?|
m - S -a a^S
• 2 ri S cfl 2 £ J! rrt -3 Oja -*3 O
se d &g - i- s S'g'g ® fl b= ss
£ 0 s m -
Ord d "tS *3 a d ’os 3*
it 2 ®a)fl 0 ,/! ® £’m a
§ | ill
®[OI«IHgpSO“ l -Brt
s H A,
mBS 1*8) Ph msSsh .S B pF » S
s
os
l-CS
s
Sydney: w. haneon, government frintbr.— lBsB.
