



.
.


EXPLORATION
NEW GUINEA.
AN INLAND TRIP.
The difficulties hitherto exporieneod in the attempts to explore, el-
even to arrive at, the Main or Owen Stanley Range of the South
Eastern Peninsula of New Guinea, have been chiefly duo to the
heavy nature of the country to bo traversed both before and after
arrival at Sogeri, (Mr. F. 0. Forbes last station.) The route
hitherto followed across the Astrolablo Range is a very severe one,
and is almost inacessible to horses.
Another groat obstacle to the explorer is the difficulty of
transport. Natives are never to bo relied on when you want them
to leave their own district, and unless an expedition is comparatively
independent of them, it is at all times liable to vexatious delays.
It was evident therefore, that if a route could bo found, by which
some point near the Main Range conld be reached with pack horses,
a great point would be gained for any future exploration of the
interior.
It was with this object in view, that the Special Commissioner
offered to equip a small party which should attempt to penetrate
inland from Kapa Kapa. This town is situated on the coast at
about 30 miles south of Port Moresby, at a point where there is a
fine extent of level country between the Southern termination of
Mount Astrolabe and the Northern commencement of the
Macgillavray Coast Range. Along this valley flow the waters of
the Kemp Walsh, and to trace this river to its source in the Owen


Stanley Range, was our ultimate intention. Our party consisted of
three, Mr. George Hunter, Peter a Lifu, man and the writer. We
were accompanied from each village by a band of natives who
carried our baggage, and the trade necessary for presents, and for
the purchase of food.
Peter had been 10 years in New Guinea, and was well acquainted
with the Motu and Korari dialect, but was a stranger in the district
to which wo were bound. Mr. Hunter had previously lived some
months at Kapa Kapa, and had been shooting on the
Main Kemp Walsh River on a former occasion.
Our equipment was a light one as our time was limited to 3
weeks. Each man carried a Breech Loading Fowling Piece and wo
had in addition a handy Winchester Rifle, and a couple of
revolvers in case of accidents. A good sized Fly, Canvas
Hammocks, Blankets and Mosquito Screens, an aneroid Barometer,
Pocket Sextant, Compass and Therometer, completed our field
outfit. The trade consisted of Tobacco, Knives' Beads, Tomahawks,
and Salt. All these, made up into various sized parcels, were
distributed among 20 or 30 native carriers, who wore mostly
changed from one village to another.
Our ostensible object was to shoot Birds of Paradise. To tell
a lot of New Guinea men that you want to see the country, or to
got to the mountains, would at once excite suspicion and debar all
progress except vi et armis. They are used to the trade in Birds
of Paradise, and are moreover passionately fond of decorating
themselves with cockatoos’ and parrots’ feathers. As they have
neither bows or arrows, the only way of getting these ornaments,
is by taking the young birds from the nest, domesticating them,
and when full grown plucking the feathers, much as the grey goose
quill is obtained in the Fen country. As both Mr, Hunter and
Peter were splendid shots, our following was established, for the
hope of a cockatoo crest turns an idle savage, who would not
otherwise do a hand’s turn, into a devoted adherent.
Wc left Port Moresby in the Cutter Daisy at 12.10 p.m. 14th
July, with a pleasant S. E. Trade breeze, and after a bent of 20
miles to windward, anchored off the village of Kaile at 0.30 p.m.
This is one of the towns built on piles some distance from the
shore. Wo went to the mission teacher’s house and found them all
in a state of alarm, expecting an attack from the hill tribes,
Hunter made every inquiry, and as it seemed to us that their alarm
was not merely counterfeited, wo sent aboard for our revolvers, and
tobi the teacher that we would camp with him.
The night passed off quietly. We started early, still boating,
lor Kapa Kapa, where wc arrived at 1 p.m. and there heard the
same news that the Garia natives, a hill tribe, were going to light
Kaile. Wars, and still more, rumours of wars, are normal features
of New Guinea life, and there is often a great deal of smoke without


much fire, but occasionally the fire breaks out with a vengeance,
and a cruel massacre of men, women, and children is the result.
At Kapa Kapa they had the same story but with somewhat varied
details, and as wo knew we should get more accurate news
inland, we made preparations for an early start next morning.
Hunter knew all these people well and had plenty of volunteers to
pack us to Rigo, 8 miles inland where wo arrived about 1.30.
This town both Sir Peter Scratchley and Mr. Douglas had visited,
and the road is well known. The route lies over alluvial plains,
some grassy, some with light scrub and alternated with limestone
hills, showing here and there evidence of intrusive rocks, quartz
and a kind of disintegrated granite. The whole country is well
watered and adapted for both grazing and cultivation, while to add
to its picturesque effect wo had the lofty peak of Mount Astrolabe
on our left, and the Macgillavary or rather its commencing spurs on
our right.
At this town supposed to bo 800 feet above sea level, our
barometer reading was 29'95 at 7 p.rn., while the thermometer
stood at 85. In the afternoon, Hunter after enquiring here,
returned to Kapa Kapa to send report to head quarters about the
threatened Garia War. I walked to Papaka a neighbouring town.
The houses are kept really clean and the streets swept. No
skulls here. As in many other New Guinea towns, the Dobus,
equivalent to our town halls, are ornamented with well executed
representations of natural objects. These are fashioned out of old
tree stumps and forks of branches, and by chiselling and fining
down, are made to represent alligators heads, the open mouth of
the snake, the curved pincers of the scorpion, fishes tails, &c. I saw
also a life like imitation of a whale’s tail, much as it is repre-
sented when in the “ last flurry.” All these are either life size,
or much exaggerated, but the curves of each figure are really
artistic in their workmanship, and true to nature. The cultivation
grounds about Rigo were the best 1 had seen. All are well
fenced and kept thoroughly clean. The sugar cane, arrowroot,
and cassava, were growing luxuriously, while some magnificent
mango trees were seen in the bush between the two towns. 17th
and 18th, still at Rigo waiting for carriers, 7 a.m., Thermometer
75°, Barometer 30.00°, 7 p.m., Thermometer 78°, Barometer
29.95°. Ascended high hill, about 1 mile eastward of Rigo, and
got a fine view of our surroundings. We saw delightful little
patches of grassy country well watered, and the hills just such as
would make a squatters heart rejoice. Both Mr. Hunter and
Peter as well as myself, knew Northern Queensland well, and we
were all agreed that only in a few choice spots could country
equal to what we saw before us be found. No fear of drought,
with the sea and the everlasting hills so near, and plenty of get away
in case of flood. On the afternoon of the 17th, we walked to


Sarua and Rovo Rovo. Here we had our first good look at the
almost Alpine range. It may be worth while to digress a moment
to give an idea of the height of these mountains as compared with
others better known. Mt. Blanc of the Alps, is some 15,700£t.,
Mt. Cook in New Zealand, ovor 12,000 ft., Mt. Owen Stanley,
13,203 ft., Mt. Obreo towards which we were steering, is 10,240 ft.
But in the centre of New Guinea, are Charles Louis
mountains, which are estimated as exceeding 16,700 ft. in height,
these are about 4° South. Now on the equator, the perpetual
snow line is at 15,000 feet elevation, so that an absolutely Alpine
region is to be met with by explorers in the far interior of this
island. How such an opportunity of distinction has been passed
over by our gilded youth in Australia, is difficult to understand.
While at Rigo we were the guests as regarded House accomoda-
tion of the Mission Teacher, The poor fellow was down with
fever and ague, and had a couple of months before, lost his wife
from the same disease. We were able toiloctor him up with
Liebig’s Extract and Quinine both invaluable articles for the
traveller in these regions.
Our real start was made from Rigo on the morning
of the 19th, our packers were 28 in number, and
we had only got as far as Sarua, 4 miles distant, when they pro-
prosed to camp till next day. This is a constant feature of New
Guinea travel, you can never depend on a native carrying out his
engagement, and he has no more idea of urgency a sloth.
However, I left Hunter to discuss the point, and thinking it
would add weight to his arguments, walked on. By the time I
had reached the next village, and had enjoyed a much appreciated
half hours’ rest, I saw the leading file winding along the narrow
path, and knew that our first days journey would be a success, as
regarded distance. It was scorching work, however, and wo were
glad of a midday camp, and a bathe in the delightful little creek,
shadowed with some magnificent sago palms. Wo reached our
No, 2 Camp, a little before sundown, and in a few minutes had
our tents pitched, fires lighted and supper under way. We were
soon visited by the inhabitants of a small neighbouring village,
and quickly found out, that all hands intended to make a night
of it. The scene was picturesque enough. Two or three bright
fires lit up the forest, at the edge of which our tent was placed.
In front was a narrow grassy plain bounded by a creek with its
thin belt of timber. Around us weie at hast a hundred naked
savages talking, laughing, singing till three o’clock in the morn-
ing. ~ Hunter' had a long conversation with them as to birds,
carriers, weather, the mysteries of the Hills, and what not. He
tried to instil into them, some idea of the Reign of Peace, which
the new Government would inaugurate, but on this point they
were evidently unimpressionable. Next morning out cairicis


returned to Kigo, except two or three, who announced their
intention, of sharing cur fortunes and we had to look out foi a
fresh lot. Two days were spent in patiently waiting, and
exploring the neighbouring scrub. Here 1 saw my first bird of
Paradise, and we had hardly been in camp an hour when two
magnificent Goura Pigeons were brought in. The crest of this
latter bird is of a beautiful lavender colour, and if once introduced
as an ornament for ladies hats and fans would become the rage.
I saw a very ordinary feather sold at Cooktown for ten shillings.
The banks of the Creek opposite are dotted with native gardens,
highly cultivated and carefully fenced in, to, guard against the
inroads of kangaroo and wallabies. How these people aie such
good agriculturists, and yet such a savage dirty uncivilized lot is
a puzzle. The more you see of them the more you long for the
power to govern them. The material is there for a civilized race,
and yet they are always at war, and perpetrating some diabolical
act of cruelty when the chance comes. They were very friendly
with us, but evidently did not want us to cross the river. One, a
young chief, declared that if we went there, we should get
covered with sores and die. The tribe ot which this village forms
but a small unit, is a largo and powerful one, but I fancy that
very little risk need bo incurred in travelling in the interior
(barring fever and accidents) if plenty of time is taken to
explain your motives, real or ostensible, to the natives. The
possession of fire arms, gives the white man such a preponderance
of power, that if a party is numerically strong enough to guard
against surprise, one is lar safer than in the wilder parts of
Queensland. There you cannot meet your enemy. He is here
to-day and gone to-morrow. Here you know where to go, and
commence negociations with the people you wish to visit, and it
is, with a little experience, easy to judge whether you can
proceed in safety. .At this camp we were detained till the 22nd,
by which time after many negotiations, vve had managed to
organize a fresh baud of carriers who agreed to take us to the
crossing of the river opposite a town called Teboura. Where this
place exactly lay, we were ignorant. We had ascertained
however, that the main river divided into two at a point some
ten miles further, that one branch the lesser and a comparatively
unimportant one took a westerly direction, while the othei
which had its source in the ranges near Mount 0 bree took a
North Easterly course.. It was this latter ot which we were to
attempt the exploration. Our route and the nature of the
country wo traversed, will be best shown by extracts fiom our
daily journal.
July 22nd.—Early this morning, we broke up our camp, and
started for the crossing of the Kemp Walsh. After a long walk
mostly through scrub, we found ourselves on the banks of a


broad rapid stream, muddy and discoloured, with flood water.
It was evident there was no crossing here, although our carriers
calmly deposited their burdens and claimed that they had
fulfilled their contract. However a little strong language and
expressive indignation, induced them to repack, and after a
toilsome walk of about 10 miles through alternative scrub and
grass lands, mostly hilly, we arrived at the real crossing place, to
which they had engaged to bring us. This was at one of the two
branches into which the river divides as you ascend from the
sea, but as the river was in flood, and evidently rising rapidly
we judged it would not be safe to camp on the bank as we had
intended, and therefore wended our way back to a grassy hill, we
had passed about two miles back. Here we pitched camp No. 3.
Next morning the Creeks were all up, and our further progress
stopped for a time. From the 22nd to 27th, No. 3. camp was our
home. It was raining and the creeks were up, so we could not
have travelled, but apart from this, we could see the natives did
not intend us to get further if possible. On the Friday we sent
for the Taboura natives from the other side to treat for carriers.
They promised to come to-morrow, but to-morrow came, and no
visitors at all, a most unusual thing and not of good promise,
there was evidently something up, To add to one’s pleasures I
had my first taste of New Guinea fever. This seems an almost
universal penalty of travel here, as in most new countries, but
the disease is certainly not of sufficient severity to be of serious
importance. I ascribed the attack to the effects of the three
nights we spent at the edge of the scrub at No. 2 camp. It was
the common fever and ague, missing one day and returning the
next. After three returns, I made up my mind that it would not
go away of itself, and I adopted the orthodox plan, ten grains of
calomel, and three ten-grain doses of quinine. After this I had
no return though frequently wet through, and otherwise
experiencing the little hardships incidental to a prolonged picnic
in a new land. Both of my companions though old hands,
suffered more or less in the same way. I would merely give the
advice to future explorers to treat the disease as early as possible,
as if it once gets a real hold of the system, a peculiar form of
Anoemia, or blood deterioration, sets in, and the patient is then
liable to future attacks on the smallest exposure. On the
Saturday, our former carriers sent word to say that they would
come and pack for us back to Rigo. This offer was indignantly
refused, and we sent word that we should wait where wo were
until they or the Teboura men packed us over, or as an
alternative, we should send to Port Moresby for horses. On
Sunday, Hunter who is an indefatigable walker, returned to
Suruake to find out what it all meant. We had heavy rain and
the river was still up. On Monday he returned with a scratch lot


of about 14 men, and these with some men from the other side,
took him and the heavy goods over on a raft to a camp about a
mile inland. Peter and myself remained behind to wait the
arrival of a promised second contingent to arrive next day. To
our agreeable surprise they turned up caily on iucsday
morning, and by 9 o’clock we had joined and after a
delay of 5 days we commenced our journey again. How we
longed for horses, and a dozen or so Queensland kanakas, to
make us free of all these vexatious delays.
27th.—Tuesday After leaving Hunter’s camp, we skirted a large
swamp, and then plunged into a belt of scrub which clothed some
steep hill over which our route lay. We saw plenty of cedar, but
hardly in sufficient quantities to pay. After about 5 miles of tins
country, we reached the right hand branch of the Kemp "Walsh.
It is here a broad stream, 150 yards in width, and having a
general North easterly direction. We forded it at about breast
hi"h, clear running water, and running so swiftly that I was glad
of°a helping hand from the natives to prevent being carried off
my feet. Both above and below, there are said to be alligators,
and many of the deep pools which we afterwards passed, seemed
very likely to be a resort of these brutes. On the further bank
we camped for lunch and a bathe, and then started off foi a walk
to a village which was looked on, as the Ultima Thule of
Civilization. No whiteraan has yet crossed this the N.E. branch
of the river, but a native teacher had once visited it. Wo were
now getting into thoroughly hilly, scenery, and weie walking
across country to meet the river again some miles higher up.
We were still in the region of the Eucalypti, but the scrubs were
more continuous and thoroughly tropical in their vegetation.
The open grass plains had disappeared, and it was only while
running up the banks of a creek now and again, that we had a
cessation from climbing. It was fatiguing work, though a good
pack horse wmuld have made nothing of it. The Limestone
formation too was absent. In the river and creeks were plenty
of manite and quartz, while on the hills were outcrops of iron
sandstone —and here and there, quartz leadeis thiough a kind of
disintegrated granite. After a toilsome march we arrived just at
dark at our No. 4 Camp, and had hardly time to get our tent
pitched and fires lighted, before darkness was upon us.
Wo had seen the village for which we were bound, on a high
hill opposite the one on which we camped, but in hopes of a
quiet nmht’s rest, preferred to defer our visit till morning.
Moreover, I must admit that fatigue was one of the reasons
which guided our determination to rest and be content. These
people are constantly at war with other hill tribes, and as a
consequence their towns are perched up on the most inaccessible
points they can choose. We sent a message-with presents of a


tomahawk, knife, and tobacco,—to announce our arrival and
explain our peaceful intentions, and in about an hour, had some
visitors. They brought food and presents in return, and
enlivened us with the information that they were daily or rather
hourly expecting to bo attacked by a neighbouring tribe.
Now Guinea warfare though by no means based on modern
scientific principles, is not without its points of interest. It was
here I first came across what is I believe a speciality in the Art
of Fortification. Small houses looking something like gigantic
crows’ nests thatched over, are built in the branches of the loftiest
tree they can find in or near the town ; these arc well supplied
with spears and stones, and thus serve the double purpose of a
look out and an arsenal. On the epproach of the enemy, these
“ dobus ” aie manned by the fighting men, who assail the
attacking force with a shower of stones, spears and sticks, not a
very fatal method of warfare it would seem, but the Papuan
certainly does not understand fighting at close quarters. The
Roman historians held that the nation which shortened its sword
would bo invincible. He would have had a poor opinion of
our New Guinea friends. They abstain religiously from hand to
hand fighting : two towns will be at war for twelve months, with
a list of killed and wounded, which might be counted on one
hand. Occasionally, however, a treacherous surprise is planned,
and some very ugly butchery results, so that it is never safe to be
off one’s guard. We had had a long day's work, and were not
in the mood for night watching, and therefore turned in, all
standing, taking the precaution to have our Winchester rifle
and two revolvers handy. Our men commenced their usual
chanting business, but lat any rate slept through it all. About
two in the morning, however, a messenger came from the town
to say that they could see the lights of the mountain men
coming down the opposite hills. As wo were well in their road,
there was no help but to rouse up. We fired a few shots to
let them know we were about, and I turned in for another
sleep, being rather done up with the hard days walk after the
previous days bout of fever. Wo mentally made the note that
an exploring party should be strong enough to spare a hand or
two to keep watch, and also when necessary to run up a rough
barrier of felled trees which should offer a defence against a sudden
shower of spears. Hunter, like a good fellow, kept watch till
daybreak. Next day on visiting the town, the tracks and camp
fires of the marauding party were found. To my disgust I was
down with fever, but as fresh carriers had to be hunted up, there
was no loss of time. The people were quite willing to go
further up the river, as they were friendly with the towns
there, their enemies being on the eastern side. This was the
first palisaded town we had seen, and was very similar in its


general arrangements to some of the hill towns of Fiji, Indeed
the people themselves present many points of resemblance to the
Kai-colos, or mountaineers of that country both in appearance,
customs, and palpably in language. Our verbal communications
with them are rather peculiar, there being three diflerent dialects
to be gone through. Hunter talks in Motu, this is translated
into Sarauke, and this again into Teboura, the dialect of our
present friends. At midnight, word was again brought that the
enemy were about. Wo suggested that some of the fighting men
should come down to our camp and keep watch. The result was
an experience I should have been sorry to have missed, about a
score of dusky warriors, came down in full fighting costume to
keep us company. They carried shields beautifully ornamented
with small red feathers of the parrot, long spears and clubs, and
with the peculiar black and red mask, only worn when on the war
path. As they grouped themselves round the fires, and the light
fell on their weird looking figures, my respect for the new Guinea
savage rose considerably. Certainly they were doing us a good
turn and earned our gratitude, inasmuch as they enabled us to get
a night’s sleep. We soon drafted them into outer darkness, about
GO yards from the camp, on a little hill which commanded the
position. Each of us kept a two hours watch with them, while
the others slept. I imagine it was the first time they had ever-
served on outlying picket duty, so that the experience was a
novel one on both sides.
The night passed off quietly, and we enjoyed our early coffee
none the worse for the little excitement. Our party however was
too small to be able to afford much night watching, so wo deter-
mined to shift our quarters. Wo pitched our next camp two
miles away on the river bank, and about a mile directly below
Teboura. We thus left the belligerents in our rear or rather on
our right flank, and had the advantage of being out of the way in
case of an attack. The enemy had been informed by the Teboura
men that white men were with them, but returned the character-
istic answer that a white man’s head was worth a dozen of theirs.
It is this infernal trick of looking on skulls as articles of vertu,
a characteristic of the Papuans, as if they were so many mu-
seum collectors or Gorman anatomists, that makes them such
undesirable “ compagnons de voyage.” Moreover, a white
man’s skull, as a coveted distinction, is equivalent to the
Premiership, the Garter, or the Victorian cross, and you can
never be sure but that the strapping savage who is talking to
you is not thinking how easy it would bo to retire to the
hills and gain everlasting “ Kudos ” for having treacherously
possessed himself of your cranium. However Rajah Brooke
was able to abolish head hunting in Sarawak where it was an
absolute passion, and it is to be hoped that the English Gov-


eminent may be able to do tlie same hero. Our new camp
was most picturesquely situated and a capital site for a spell
for any party wishing to get everything ship shape for fur-
ther work before attempting the real mountain region. The
river was in front of us about 90 yards broad, running about
4 miles an hour over a pebbly bottom, now shallow, now deep
in pools. A gigantic fig tree shaded our tent, and within
shot, we could hear the Bird of Paradise and the Goura Pig-
eon. Wo were surrounded with banana plantations and had
a plentiful supply of food for our carriers. Hunter went to
reconnoitre and to try and open up friendly associations with
the people higher up. He visited several towns on several
different hills, and had a long day’s tramp, making as observ-
ed with our aneroid an ascent of about 1800 feet. This was
our highest point and was at a town on the right bank of
the river.
Saturday 31st. Hunter paid the penalty of his long walk
yesterday, by an attack of fever to-day. Peter had already had his
turn, so wo were now all able to cry quits. ~ Spite this experience,
after having been over the route, I am still inclined to think that a
party might be taken across from sea to sea, without suffering
from fever, if they used due care. The country looks so healthy,
that the usual precautions seemed superfluous, and 1 must admit,
were occasionally neglected.
After long yarns and cross-examinations, we made out from the
natives who visited us, that by travelling on for two days, we should
come to deep water, then cross the range, and see the sea on the
other coast. They say that people come across to visit them, but
they arc alwavs fighting on the other side. I his sounds very
tempting : Any how, Hunter and I start on Monday to try and
find out what it means. As we look at the giant range, at least
our part of it, (for wo already feel a proprietary interest,) and
recollect that we are in the regions of tropical rains, it seems
impossible that this river can drain so large an extent of country as
that before us. Peter tells us that the Sogeri people assert that
there are deep water lakes at the foot of Mount Owen
Stanley. Judging from the contour of the country, it seems
extremely probable that there is a lake system which absorbs much
of the rainfall, and possibly by overflow, feeds this and the rivers
to the North-west, Either this must be the case, or there is a
remarkably small rainfall on the North-east side of the Range. We
have decided to return by water, and we leave Peter to superintend
the raft building, while Hunter and myself will run up the river as
far as we can.
Sunday, August I.—We spent quietly in camp, and on Monday
at 7 a.m. with the Thermometer at 80 in the shade, we started for
the “ terra incognita.” The old Garia chief who had followed us


from Rigo and four men from Tebnra, were our only escort. The
first tiling was to cross the river, then a plunge into the scrub, then
to recross, and so on ad infinitum. After five crossings nearly all
breast high, and with a current running four miles an hour, *ve
arrived at a most picturesque creek, known to our guides as Arume,
and about eight miles distant. Here we left the river bank, and
ascended the ridge of densely wooded hills. This was only the
commencement, hill after hill, rose in front ; our eyes being greeted
at each summit with a glorious panorama of forest, hill and valley
spread around us, while far below us ran a gleaming streak of
river, looking from our great height as if we could step across it.
About three o’clock we arrived at a village, and found a great
feast going on. The people were friendly and hospitable, but
considering that few if any of them had ever seen a white man, were
not over demonstrative. They were said to be cannibals, but we
saw no evidence of such being the case. The town was palisaded
and protected by the usual tree huts. We asked for guides, and
several offered their services, evidently attracted by the prospect of
a profuse supply of feathers. Among our new followers, was a
youngster, who was one of the brightest, jollicst little fellows we
had met. He was the Chief’s son, and brought out a pig as a
present. This was rather a windfall for us, as a prospective feed
on roast pork always means a full camp, and a full camp meant to
us, plenty of guides and a good report t(f our neighbours as to our
intentions. The boy was made happy by the present of a
tomahawk. I was rather surprised to see him wearing the peculiar
cane girdle, which, as a token of honour, is only worn by those who
have killed their man. It appeared that this lad had been
present at a surprise party, and had had the privilege given him of
sticking his own little weapon into the body of some poor wretch
who had been speared during the attack. To all appearance he
was just the boy who would have been introduced to the Bishop at
a gathering of Sunday School Scholars. In a few years time, ho
will most likely be an unmitigated young savage, unless either the
Missionaries or the Government step in and attempt his
civilization. While watching this lad and others like him, I could
not avoid thinking of the responsibility England has incurred in
annexing this country, and also of how little the Powers that lie in
Downing Street seem to appreciate the position. England has,
by her Act of Annexation, given a formal pledge to the civilized
world that these people arc under her protection, and that
consequently there will be safety to life and property in their land.
As yet not a single step has been taken to establish either
authority or influence over them, and Club Law is still the only
recognised institution in the land.
However, moralizing had to yield to the day’s work. We
then mustered up our party, and started again. After a


climb through hill country, densely clothed with forest trees, and
with magnificent views of the range above, and the river at our feet,
gradually descended till wo found ourselves on the river banks just
at sundown. Our guides quickly knocked up a lean to, and
thatched it with palm loaves. Wo killed our pig, and spite of a
thunderstorm, had a night under comfortable shelter. Hunter has
a very good method with the natives. He takes advantage of then-
propensity for sitting up all night, and spite of mixed interpretation,
instils into their minds vivid ideas of the benefits to bo derived through
the Government from the hospitable reception of white men. I can
follow but slightly, but the continual repetition of “ Gcberna ” anct
“ Victoria ” and “ Beritani,” and the assenting “ lo ” or yes of the
audience, is enough to show how the conversation is going. The
men are evidently friendly, and without any absolute evidence of
the fact, one could not but feel perfectly convinced that wo were as
safe as in Port Moresby.
Next morning wo started early, but with forbodings as to our
idtimate success. Hunter had gathered from our guides that
they were not sure whether the people above would receive us in
a friendly manner. Owing to our delays, our time had already
run out, and if there was any obstablo, wo should not bo able to
spare the few days which might be necessary for negotiations.
From seven in the morning till noon, we were walking at a good
four miles an hour. Then we again emerged on the river, and
our guides told us here was the place to build the rafts for our
return to our former camp, and that the people on the opposite
bank, did not wish us to visit them. This had evidently been
ascertained by messengers sent ahead ; we could hear shoutings
from invisible lookouts on both sides, and it was not difficult to
understand how in this clear mountain atmosphere news would
travel far and quickly. The Australian “Gooey” is absent, but
a peculiar shrill long cry takes its place, for the purpose of at-
tracting attention, and the resulting conversation is
carried on in a high key, which can bo heard over immense dis-
tances. Our friends distinctly refused to go further, and started
cutting down timber for the raft. On the opposite bank we saw
clusters of natives who were shouting replies back to our own
men. They were unarmed, and soon disappeared. We walked
up the river for about half a mile to reconnoitre, and soon saw
them returning with spears and shields. It was evident that
either we must frighten them by showing the effects of our
firearms, or wait a week for negotiations. The latter was
impossible, the former might have let us get a few miles further,
but would very likely have made difficulties, and prepared a
hostile reception to the next party. It was very disappointing,
but after a brief consultation, and jotting our position on our
track chart, we determined to join our party. We left our card


in the shape of a largess of tobacco and a message that we should
come again and see them, I have no doubt that next year they
will be as anxious for our visit, as they now are to avoid it. The
raft journey homeward was unique. Three or four logs lashed
together with vines, constituted the raft, of which there were
three, small-, and fragile enough, but as a capsize would have
only meant a swim ashore, it did not much matter. Paddles
were extemporized, and with two natives to each raft we
started, the rest travelling on shore and occasionally in a long
reach joining us for a swim alongside. From 1 p.ra. to
sundown, we travelled down at about 5 miles an hour, with
occasional halts to pick up a fern or examine some outcrop of
rock. The river scenery was gorgeous, palms, and forest trees
and creepers all in one mass of tropical verdure. Here and
there we passed bright flame spots of scarlet erythrisna, while
white and blue convolvuli were clustering round the massive
tree trunks. In the deep reaches, masses of basaltic rock
cropped up in mid-stream, alternated with long reaches of
pebble beach, while to show the geological vicissitudes, sharply
defined beds of slate lying at an angle of 45° would bo met on
the banks. The whole country had been grandly rumpled up
at some time. Every stone we came across, made one long to
bo in the mountains from whence they came.
At sundown we arrived at the camp, and found that Peter
had prepared two fine rafts for ourselves and our baggage,
while five smaller ones were for our men. It was disappointing
enough to have returned without crossing the range, but.we
had the consolation of being able to report that wo could
take pack horses as far, and probably a good bit further than
our extreme limit. For next year’s work, this is something
gained, and whoever trys the route a second time, will not bo
deterred by vexatious delays caused by native carriers. That
a good deal of tact will be necessary to avoid collision with
the people, is evident, but I am inclined to think that the
novelty of a pack horse team loaded with a fair quantity of
presents and trade, will enable the next party to get through
in a month, and solve one of the many problems which Now
Guinea exploration presents.
Our downward trip by raft was a carnival. The natives were
delighted with the chance of shifting their burdens, and made the
overhanging woods ring with their shoutings and yells. I must
admit too, that we ourselves found it far more comfortable
reclining on our tents and blankets watching the varying beauties
of each fresh bend in the river, thus escaping the fatigues of our
upward journey. The current was frequently swift enough to
compel those on the bank to a sharp trot to enable them to keep
up with the rapidly gliding crafts. From 8 a.m. till 4 p.m., we


must have travelled, counting stoppages, and an occasional
capsize of the frailer vessels, some 25 miles. We landed at a
point some four miles below the camp where we had been
detained so long, and started for Rigo. Three days after, wo
were again on the coast, and a days run in a whale boat brought
the writer back to Port Moresby and to its genial hospitality.
Scientifically our contribution to the history of New Guinea
exploration, can hardly claim importance. Extracts from our
meteorogical readings, I give below. They show weather
conditions which may be regarded as fairly typical of what may
be expected, during the comparatively cool season from April to
October,
As regards our route and the locality ot our furthest limit.
Captain Hennessy, of the Mission schooner, Ellangowan, was good
enough to supervise and correct our data. Wherever the weather
and 'atmosphere allowed, wo took cross bearings of the well
defined mountain peaks. Our last observation, taken from a high
hill near the main river, gave us, as follows : —Mount Owen
Stanley, bearing N. by W., Mount Obrce, N.E. by N., Mount
Brown, N.E. by E. From this point we penetrated about 16
miles in a straight N.E. line, which placed us, as computed by
Captain Hennessy, in Lat. 9.42.30., Longitude 148.1.0. This
position is I believe fairly correct, and tallied with the result of
our daily track sheet. Specimens of the Rocks met with,
together with some marine specimens from the coast, and a few
other objects of Natural History, are at present with Mr. Do Yis.
As to the prospects of future exploration, I may venture to add a
a few words. In 1883, in a communication to the Courier, I
wrote as follows 1 “It is to be hoped, that an exploring party
under Government auspices, will be one of the first fruits of
annexation. Enough is known already, to enable us to judge as
to the best route and plan of procedure. We know also many of
the difficulties which will be met with. These though great arc
not insurmountable, and should only suffice to stimulate enterprise,
I cannot but think however that a smaller expedition than that
projected by the Australian Geographical Society and referred to
lately in your columns, is more likely to do successful work. In
the first place, the expense would be less—an item of considerable
importance. Moreover the first exploration of an unknown
country, should be more geographical in its object than strictly
scientific. Three or four explorers well equipped, used to bush
life, and with a following of kanakas, would laugh at obstacles
which would fatally obstruct an expedition hampered with the
impedimenta of a scientific party with its staff of savants, artists,
and photographers as proposed. After experience of the interior
has been gained, and the natives are more accustomed to the
intrusion of white men, the Geographical Society may make a


7 r.M
Barometer.
+29-95
+29-95
+29-00
30-35
30-30
30-35
30-25
30-25
30-05
30-30
29-50
29-45
30-20
30-20
30-15
brilliant success of an expedition, which at present, would most
probably result in a fiasco.” I may say with certainty, that the
experience since gained has amply confirmed me in these views.
Our trip, howeverbarren ofresult, was instructive inone way. We
were able to report that the whole country side now supporting a
population of a few thousands, might in the near future, become
a province which the advent of civilization would make equal to
the richest agricultural districts in Australia ; this too not only
without detriment to, but to the infinite advantage of, its present
inhabitants. The mineral wealth of the Range country is at
present unknown and problematical; the arable and pastoral
capabilities of the land from the coast to the main Range, at any
rate in this district, are absolutely certain. They only await the
development which must follow on the establishment of New
Guinea as a British colony.
EXTRACTS FROM METEOROLOGICAL READINGS.
7 A, M
Date.
Barometer.
Ther.
Ther.
July 16.
17.
*3O 40
+36-00
Weather.
f. 30 00
+29-95
30'40
30-40
Fine.
Fine.
Fine.
Rain.
30-40
30-30
30-10
Fine.
Rain.
Rain.
30-25
30-25
30-30
29 50
29-50
Fine.
Rain.
Rain.
Fine.
Fine.
Fine.
Fine.
30'25
August 1.
2.
30-30
28'85
Aug. 2, noon
28-30
* At sea level
+ At Rigo, 800 feet above sea level
Our highest Thermometer reading
readings were in the shade of our tent
Fine.
Fine.
was 112° at noon. All the other
Printed at the “Standard” Office, Mackay,






