

Exploring in the
' Seventies
and the
Construction of the
Overland Telegraph Line
By ALFRED GILES


Exploring in the 'Seventies


ALFRED GILES (the author), 1878.
[?]


Exploring in the
'Seventies
and the
Construction of the
Overland Telegraph Line
By ALFRED GILES
W. K. Thomas & Co. (The Register), Printers, Adelaide.


Contents and Illustrations
Page
CHAPTER I.—My Ambition—l Join a Party of Well-sinkers —
How Anabama Run was Formed—Splendid Sheep Country
—All Night on Horseback—At Oulnina Station —Agitation
for Fencing—A Splendid Rider 1
CHAPTER 11.- —I Have Eyes on New Guinea —Idle Months—
Good News —A Red-letter Day—Hurried Preparations—Good-
bye to Adelaide —Crispe’s Thrilling Story 6
CHAPTER lll.—From Kapunda to Beltana—At Beltana—
Wretched Equipment—Splendid Horses —Arms and Ammuni-
tion 11
CHAPTER IV. —From Beltana to Mount Margaret—At Mount
Margaret—Good-bye to Civilization —Winkley’s Waterhole .. 15
CHAPTER V.—Detention Creek —First Blacks Seen —Varied
Country 18
CHAPTER VI. —Signs of Natives —Caught in a Storm—Heavy
Travelling—Searching for Water 21
CHAPTER VII. —A Sandy Stretch —The Returning Journey—An
Old Shirt Discovered —Blacks in the Camp 25
CHAPTER Vlll.—“Wugh-wughs ” and “ Wow-wows ” —Oasis in the
Desert —More Sandhills—Searching for Water—Glimpse of
Chambers’s Pillar—Three Grand Spectacles—On the Finke
River 150
CHAPTER IX.—Timid Natives —Short of Supplies—Return to the
Peake—Trial of Pluck and Endurance 35
CHAPTER X.—l Lose My Watch—A Day of Thrills—A Trying
Time—Water at Last 39
CHAPTER XL—Birds, Bees, and Butterflies —Christmas in the
Ranges—Central Mount Sturt 43
CHAPTER Xll.—New Year’s Day, 1871 —Stuart’s Horsetracks—
Central Mount Sturt—Ascending Mount Sturt—What was in
in the Bottle 46
CHAPTER Xlll.—Flock Pigeons Galore —Birds and Water Sup-
plies—Savages and Game—Running Out of Water—Scandalous
Outfit —Overcoming Water Difficulties 49


Page
CHAPTER XIV.- We Appreciate Euro Rumpsteak—We Lose Our
Survevor —Looking for the Lost Man —Picking up Tracks
Short of Rations —Bad Times—We Lose Our Plancase
Troublesome Blacks
CHAPTER XV. —We Meet the Supply Party—Link with Home
Again—Better Camps—Dispatch Riding—At Charlotte W aters 60
CHAPTER XVL- Goyder and Finke Rivers in Flood—Troublous
Times—The Hugh in Flood—Off to the Roper River—At Alice
Creek Camp—Without Water Again 65
CHAPTER XVII.—A Unique Experience—Good-bye to the
Mac Donnell Ranges—ln New Country—Hostile Savages .. .. 70
CHAPTER XVIII. —Bishop’s Creek —Through the Ashburton
Range—We Sight Newcastle Lake—At Newcastle Waters—At
North Newcastle —Ironstone Pond M
CHAPTER XlX.—Searching for Water— Still Searching for Water
—Chain of Ponds—Bobby’s Waterhole 79
CHAPTER XX —We Reach the Roper River—Our Mistake—Sup-
plies Running Out—We Reach the Telegraph Line—New Faces
at Last 83
CHAPTER XXl.—Death of Our Packhorse, Charlie—A Mis-
understanding—A Great Disappointment—Sickness and Death
- The Monkey and the Medicine 87
CHAPTER XXII. —Pine Creek--Destructive Natives —Buried
Treasure
CHAPTER XXIII —Hostile Natives An Attack that Failed—An
Error in Our Course —Panning for Gold —On Board the
Dauphine —Arrival of the Omeo —Great Doings at Darwin . . 97
CHAPTER XXIV— Messrs.Dalwood & Derwent’s Contract
Annulled —Planting the First Pole —Nine Months’ Work
Arrival of the Gulnare —A Great Procession—Adept Thieves —
Searching for Water —Hostile Blacks- Death of Stanley .. .. 105
CHAPTER XXV. —Mr. Packard’s Party Attacked by Natives —
Fired Through the Bunghole—Well-sinking —The Birdum Creek
—Probable Camp of Leichhardt’s —False Directions —News from
Southern Sections- Eclipse of the Sun HI
CHAPTER XXVl.—Pleasant Companions—Gentle Annie and the
Pig—Bav-o’-Biscav Country—A Surprise Party—Attacked
by the Savages—Christmas Day—Heavy Thunderstorms .. HG
CHAPTER XXVll.—Difficult Travelling—Fireflies Mistaken for
Blacks —Still Travelling Under Difficulties —Swimming in the
Birdum—A Deserted Camp—A Meal on Goanna 121
CHAPTER XXATll.—Crossing the Elsey—We Meet Mr. Bedford
Hack—Lagoon in the Forest—Bullock-hunting—Arrival of
Mr. Ralph Milner—“Dr.” Rix and "Dr.” Funnall —Union
Camp—“ Red Blanket ” .. 125


Page
CHAPTER XXIX.—AII South Australians—Millions of Mosquitoes
—Arrival of the Sheep—Shearing the Sheep—The Fan Palms
—We Resume Shearing—Still More Rain—Shearing Finished
—Crossing the Elsey River .. 131
CHAPTER XXX.—Shifting Camp—Boating the Sheep Over—
Providence Knoll—Starting With Burton’s Sheep—Mosquitoes
Worried the Sheep—On the Track on Burton’s Party—Arrival
at Burton’s Camp 135
CHAPTER XXXl.—Missed by a Mile—Cheering News —Arrival of
Mail—More Horsehunting 139
CHAPTER XXXII. —We Leave Daly Waiters for Tennant’s Creek
•—Savages Rushed the Camp—Creeks Named by Stuart—-A Sur-
prise—Starting an ExpresS'Service—Mr. Ray P. Boucaut—A
Camp-fire “Yarn” 143
CHAPTER XXXIII—We Reach the Hunter Creek—At South
Newcastle Waters—Meeting Burton’s Party—Savages Attack
the Hawker —Starting the Express Service —The Wounded
Hawker 149
CHAPTER XXXlV.—Breakdown of the British-Australian Cable
—Sh\- Natives—Nearing the End of a Great Work —Paying Out
the Wire—Mr. Todd’s Little Joke —We Meet Andrew Hume .. 153
CHAPTER XXXV.—Mr. R. C. Patterson 111 with Fever—Mr.
Burton’s Section Completed—Off Home! —Completion of the
Great Work—Dr. Renner and His Patients—Leaving for the
Roper—Arrival at the Roper Landing 15S
CHAPTER XXXVl.—First Overland Cattle Arrive—The First Court
Case—Good-bye to the Roper—Maria Island Described—Won-
derful Fare—Poisonous Beans —A Life-long Friend—Pleasant
Evenings 163
CHAPTER XXXVII. —The Omeo Homeward Bound —Rough Seas
• —A Lucky Rescue—Arrival at Brisbane—A Great Welcome—
Wonderful Old Brandy—Conclusion 167
Illustrations facing Pages 1, 48, 49. and 64.


Foreword
The author of this book is a good man. The fact that for
half a century he has lived in parts of Australia remote from
settled districts, and has retained the respect and goodwill of the
Northerners and others who know him, proves that statement.
There is a distinct code of conduct imposed upon the people who
live in the Interior of Australia. It may not be similar in all
respects to the code of the city, nevertheless it is high. Ihe chief
requirement may be summed up as doing the right thing between
man and man. If one fails to do that he is not wanted, and
sometimes is not tolerated. Therefore the respected Northerner
can with safety be regarded as a good fellow.
Moreover, the author is a consummate bushman. A journey
taken with him convinces one of this. He exhibits a knowledge
of bushcraft in his self-reliance, his forethought, his adaptability,
and in his marked care for his black helpers and for his horses.
Also he is modest, as are most really good bushmen. In cities
the work of man abounds, and more 'or less directs the mind to
materiahtv. In the silence of the vast uninhabited interioi, the
mind is unconsciously directed towards the spiritual, to the
mysteries of the boundless universe and of infinity. It impresses
one with a sense of his insignificance.
Because of this modesty the author wants a Foreword by way
of introducing him, just as a lecturer is introduced to his audience.
Fearless in his own domain, Alfred Giles has a diffidence in
undertaking a new role. In the book will be found confirmation
of this side of his character; for in it will not be found any
embellishments, any self-praise, any fairy tales. The story he
tells is simply a trustworthy account of what he and his associates
really did. Its verv straightforwardness reveals the man himself
—loyal, earnest, painstaking, and courageous. Exploring in the
’seventies was no coward’s work. \ ery little was then known
about the Territory beyond what had been revealed by John
McDouall Stuart. The eminence to which he gave the name of


Central Mount Sturt was practically the centre of a circle of
unknown lands the circumference of which was about 1,000 mile's
distant. The only known diameter of that great circle was the thin
line of his wonderful journey from Adelaide to Van Diemen
Gulf at what is now known as Point Stuart. Although Mr. Giles
has disapproved, I believe that most of those who are acquainted
with the labours of Stuart will approve of the changing of the
name to Central Mount Stuart, whether that change were made
intentionally or through ignorance. It presents a lasting and an
outstanding memorial of the greatest of the inland explorers of
Australia.
Some day surely there will arise one who, with a magic pen,
will revive among Australians a true appreciation of what is due
to Oxley, Wentworth, Mitchell, Sturt, Kennedy, Leichhardt.
Gregory, Grey, Stuart, Ross, Forrest, and others of the band of
braves who entered upon the unknown country, poorly equipped
with everything save stout hearts and loyal devotion. Some few
of us remain who remember the public reception given to Stuart
and his party on their return to Adelaide from Van Diemen Gulf
and the cavalcade led by Kekwick with the packhorses, canteens,
hobbles, packsaddles. and other well-worn paraphernalia. What
hopes were born at this time! What aspirations! How bravelv
the few inhabitants of South Australia set out to deal faithfully
with the then unknown land! For about twoscore years the
Province kept steadily on with the good work, but, alas, then our
legislator s exhibited a loss of the pioneering spirit. 1 hev ceased
to have the vision without which there could be no progress.
1 hey looked gloomily at the future, and were anxious to be
relieved of their trust. In an unwarranted belief that the
Federal Government would forthwith carry on the work of
development bettei than the State could, tliev parted with the
Northern 1 erritory on promises and covenants still unfulfilled.
There now does appear some sign that certain of the Federal
legislators are awaking to a sense of their duties, and perhaps the
turning in the long, long lane of procrastination is near at hand.
. In the Territory there is an area of 134,160 square miles, that
is, over 85 million acres, on which there is an annual rainfall of
trom 20 to 40 inches. No one person has seen more than a
relatively small portion of this vast area. So far as I can judge,
it is as good as the wheat lands of South Australia, and probably
its soil is as varied in quality. A comparison of this area with
lands in similai latitudes in other countries has convinced me that
it is suitable for culture of wheat and other cereals. If the fact
that there is such a favoured area awaiting development becomes
known to our farmers, perchance pressure from them might


overcome even the apathy of our legislators, and induce the
authorities to give heed to the question of making it available.
But this “ Chairman ” is overstepping his duty, which is chiefly
to introduce to the reader Alfred Giles, one of the trusted band
led by John Ross. His story deserves to be read by all who
admire heroic struggles against told and untold difficulties in
exploring unknown lands and in beating a track for generations
to follow, expand, and extend.
S. J. MITCHELL.
14th September. 1926.
[His Honour Mr. Justice Mitchell, Judge in Insolvency,
Adelaide, formerly Judge of the Supreme Court of the Northern
Territory, and the first Administrator under the Federal Govern-
ment of that Territory.]


Introduction
I little thought when scribbling in my notebooks fifty-six
years ago that some day I would have the temerity to publish it
in book form. Had such an idea been present it would have
induced me to have embellished it by adding incidents to heighten
the narrative. Such an idea, however, was not only absent, but
impossible, in proof of which anyone caring to do so should visit
the Archives Department, North Terrace, Adelaide, where they
will find my original notebooks, and the closely-written pages
will convince them that Central Australia at that time, and possibly
still, did not possess book or stationer’s shops—there was no hope,
say, at Central Mount Sturt in 1870, where there was not a
semblance of civilization for a thousand miles in any direction,
of obtaining pens, pencils, or paper. Scarcity of these com-
modities compelled the daily entries to be terse and brief. If,
then, I may have any pride or satisfaction in presenting the
following pages to my readers it is this very fact that they were
written on the spot and there is a total absence of anything feigned,
imagined, or invented —no romancing.
In 1870 the furthest outpost of civilization north of Adelaide
was the Peake Station. Between that point and Port Darwin
there was not a sign or mark of horn or hoof except the faint
one left by John McDouall Stuart in 1862, no communication of
any description, and, with the exception of savage tribes and a
sparsely populated coastal fringe, an empty continent.
In that year, however, South Australia, with a then population
of only 250,000 inhabitants, showed remarkable activity and a
genuine earnestness in a practical endeavour to conquer and
vanquish the silence of this vast wilderness.
As early as July and August of 1870 huge preparations were
made for linking Adelaide and Port Darwin by a telegraph wire
right across the continent, and the magnitude of this work will
scarcely be estimated by the present generation, but it should be


emphasized that it was carried out in sections, and solely financed
by South Australians, in the face of immense difficulties and
hardships, and that within two years.
It was on the 22nd August, 1872, that the ends of the two wires
were soldered at near Frew’s Ironstone Pond, one of Stuart’s
camps, and suffice it to say that on that day South Austiaha
touched a key and spoke to the British Empire—she had harnessed
the world.
Even by this great feat she had only divided the vast empty
spaces, she had not filled them; nor now, after more than fifty
years, are they filled, for the present population of the Northern
Territory is about one person to every 300 square miles!
The problem is not. as many people think, to find the land.
We have got that. It is there, idle, in the Northern Territory, a
comfortable little block of 82 million acres! For the past forty
years millions of these acres have been used for purely pastoral
occupation, and that for cattle only. But this is only the custom-
ary procedure in opening up new areas. The pastoralist is
always the advance guard, making the rough bush roads and
finding the waters, and years afterwards is slowly but surely
followed by the agriculturist. And so it will and must be in
regard to the Northern Territory, with the exception, of course,
that we have to deal with two climates —the tropical and sub-
tropical.
It was asserted in the early days that wheat would never be
a success even on the Gawler Plains. Yet we have now rich
wheat belts hundreds of miles north of those plains. At Alice
Springs there is an average rainfall of about 13 inches, increasing
northwards to the Katherine to 50 inches, and at Darwin sometimes
to 70 inches. Splendid vegetables, oranges, grapes, and other
products are grown at Alice Springs; then why not wheat? The
soil is there, and ample facilities for the storage of immense
bodies of water in the gorges of the McDonnell Ranges.
Further large areas of similar soils' are available on the Burt
Plains, and indeed right up past Barrow Creek, all waiting for the
plough and for mixed farming.
Sheep and cattle, combined with farming, would in a very few
years absorb hundreds of settlers, providing they were granted
large areas at a nominal rent after the first few years.
It would be idle and wasteful to introduce numbers _of
inexperienced migrants from Britain until a number of practical
Australian farmers had selected the lands and suitable soils and
sites for the farms.


Indian wheat has been sucessfully grown in the tropical
portions of the Northern Territory. This wheat was specially
introduced from India by His Honour Mr. Justice Mitchell when
he was the first Administrator in the Territory under the Federal
Government. One patch of this wheat was grown at Borroloola
under the supervision of Sergeant Stott, and was considered by
southern experts to be a sound and splendid sample.
All kinds of beautiful tropical fruits unknown in South
Australia can be grown in tropical Australia, and could with the
railway be brought fresh to these southern markets, as well as
the wheat and the wool and the minerals from Central Australia.
The problem how to settle hundreds of thousands of British
migrants in Australia is certainly not the scarcity of land, nor
should it be a question of water supply since artesian boring
has solved that difficulty. The problem seems to me to get the
right men to tackle the job. Few politicians know anything
about Central and Northern Australia, and many care less.
Nevertheless, it has got to be tackled, and that without delay,
otherwise other nations, with overcrowded populations, will want
to know the reason.
Over fifty years’ residence in the Northern Territory has
wedded me to it and anything attaching to its welfare and
progress, and the past and present inaction is inexcusable and
deplorable.
I should like to write much more on this subject, but,
unfortunately, bushmen as a rule are not forcible writers, being
much handier with the stockwhip than the pen.
I am indebted to many old friends for their assistance in
lending me photos, etc., and they have my warmest thanks.
ALFRED GILES.
22nd September, 1926.


MAP OF THE OVERLAND TELEGRAPH LINE FROM ADELAIDE TO PORT DARWIN,
showin ng all Telegarp Statoin en route, and Beltana, Ross's atating-point, the peake Station,
the Neales Creek, Macumb Creek, the Finke and Hugh River, Woodford and Hanson Creeks,
Central Mount sturt—not sturt—the Taylor creek, the Bormey River, Attack Creek, Newcastle
Waters, Daly Waters, the Bidum, Esey, and Roper Rivers and the king and Katherine Rivers,
Southport, Darwin.


Exploring in the ’Seventies
By ALFRED GILES
CHAPTER I
My Ambition—I Join a Party of Well-sinkers—How Anabama Run was
Formed—Splendid Sheep Country—All Night on Horseback—At Oulnina
Station —Agitation for Fencing—A Splendid Rider.
—My Ambition. —
I had always a great longing for the open spaces, and while
I had gained much insight into bush lore and stock and station
experience in the north and north-east of South Australia on
several stations, such as KetchowH, Nettalie, Anabama, and
Oulnina, as well as shorter terms on Yadlamulka and Wilpena,
in the north-west, the time came when these —in those days —vast
spaces did not appeal to me as being sufficiently large to gratify
my ambition for something still wider. I felt also that if, and
when, such opportunity should arise, my bush experience would be
a great fillip in any such future exploits.
—I Join a Party of Well-sinkers. —
At this time 1 was overseer on Oulnina Station, then undei
the management of the late Hon. John Lewis, and administered
by the trustees of Sprigg & Levi in 1868. Much earlier than
this, in the ’sixties, I had been on my father’s station, Ketchowla,
in which he was later joined by Hillary Boucaut, the well-known
barrister, of Adelaide. About this time the Anabama run was
taken up by the late Sir James Penn Boucaut, in conjunction with
his brothers, Ray Parkin Boucaut and Hillary Boucaut. It was
entirely new country, situated some 26 miles east of the Nettalie
Station. There were no stations east of Anabama, not a fence or
a dwelling between it and the Darling River. In fact, it had
never been traversed or explored and, I think, at that time only
one man had ever come through from the Darling to Bimbowrie


Station, a Mr. Urquhart. That, of course, was much higher up
than Anabama. There were no natural waters on Anabama
country, and I was appointed to proceed there with a party of
well-sinkers and select a place to sink the first well. We were
provided with a dray and three stanch horses, and a 200-gallon
tank and gear. So soon as the site was selected it became my
duty to keep the well-sinkers provided with water. My task was
not an enviable one, as the nearest water was 35 miles away to
the north, on Taltabooka Run, and the supply was obtained from
an old deserted well 70 ft. deep. There was no windlass. I had
to pull up the water with a rope, hand over hand, then get up
into the dray and pour it into the tank. This generally occupied
me from sundown well on to midnight. In the morning I would
water the horses, and proceed on the return journey. On passing
laltabooka homestead I usually obtained a live sheep to take to
the well-sinkers. The water at the Taltabooka Station well was
too brackish for my horses to drink; the station people procured
their water from an underground cement rainwater tank. I used
to camp about half-way between Taltabooka and Anabama, boil
my billycan, make a damper, and tether out the jumbuck. On
arrival at the well-sinkers’ camp I would give the horses one
bucket each of water, and if I stayed the night another in the
morning, but generally I returned back to my camp on the previous
night.
—How Anabama Run Was Formed.—
This work occupied me for several months until, on one
occasion, when returning through the gap opposite the well, I
saw one of the well-sinkers (Billy Owers) throw up his hat and
shout “ Hurray! ” When I got close enough he told me they had
just struck water at 90 feet. This was splendid news, especially
to me, as it meant no more water-carting. But in this I was
mistaken, as a very poor supply trickled in, and I was forced to
make three or four more trips before sufficient water was secured
for all purposes. When Billy Owers told me they had struck
water, I asked him if it were fresh or salt. He said it was fresh
because his mate, T. Bewley, at the bottom of the well, had
shouted up that “it was thick and muddy, which is always a
sign, he said, that it is fresh. Salt water is always quite clear
when first struck.” At 97 feet a supply of 2,000 gallons a day
was struck, and it was necessary to get extra appliances to cope
with the water. We all returned to Ketchowla to get bullocks
and erect a whip or whim in order to complete the contract, which
was to provide 3,000 gallons daily. Most unfortunately, when
all these things were provided and the sinking resumed, the


supply of water got less and less until the depth reached 150 feet.
All but about 300 gallons a day disappeared, and although a
drive was put in at the spot where the water was first struck
for a distance of 22 feet and 25 pounds of powder tamped in
the borehole at the extreme end and exploded, it caused no
increase to the water. At this stage it was almost decided to
abandon the lease, but it so happened that Tom Bewley and
I had, while out kangaroo-shooting, discovered another promising-
looking gap in the ranges, where we thought water could be got
at a shallow depth. So convinced were we that we proposed
to Mr. Boucaut that if the firm provided us with tools and
provisions we would sink a well at the spot indicated to a depth
of 100 feet, and if we got no water we were to get no pay.
This was agreed upon. We went to work, and at 45 feet we
struck 7,000 gallons a day. This put quite a different complexion
upon the state of affairs. A stone house was erected at the
old site, sheep were sent up with troughing, and so on, and
Mr. Ray Parkin Boucaut arrived with Mrs. Boucaut and their
little son (Willie Ray, now of Brighton), and a number of fine
horses assisted to stock the run. That is how Anabama Station
was formed, and' is probably the similar history of hundreds of
such ventures in subduing the arid north and north-east for
pastoral occupation.
—Splendid Sheep Country. —
Nettalie Station was our nearest neighbour. I often used to
drive over there for stores and the mail. My team was rather
a novel one, consisting of a dray with a jibbing mare in the
shafts and two bullocks in the lead. It was slow but sure; it
was useless for the mare to jib with those two bullocks in front.
She - had to go, and it ultimately cured her jibbing habits.
Nettaliei Station at that time was owned by the Browne brothers,
Robert, Sam, and John. Another of the brothers was murdered
by blacks on the Mount Arden Station, while shepherding a
flock of sheep, away back in the ’fifties. They came originally
from the Willunga district, and were a fine type of the genuine
Australian pioneer bulldog breed. After leaving Anabama I
was for two years with the Browne brothers at Nettalie as
overseer, and can always look back with pleasure to my happy
time with those splendid, hardworking battlers. The Nettalie
country was splendid for sheep, and I remember one lambing
that reached 103 per cent., but in those days lOd. and Is. per
pound for wool was considered a good price.
• —All Night on Horseback. —
I remember one day riding in from Anabama to Nettalie
with the late Mr. H. L. Sprigg, and upon our arrival were told


that Mrs. Sam Browne was dangerously ill. Mr. Browne asked
me if I would ride to Paratoo Station, 36 miles away, to meet
a doctor, who was expected there by the coach from the Burra,
or, failing the doctor, there would be medicines by the mail.
“ Take the little brown blood mare Peggy,” said Mr. Browne,
“ and don’t spare her.” I started at 7 o’clock the same evening.
The mare was very lively for the first eight miles, and I went
at a gallop, passing on the way the Grampus Station, which
was then owned by the Vickerys, brothers of Mrs. Sam Browne.
I arrived at Paratoo Station at half-past ten, only to find that
neither doctor nor medicine had arrived. Mr. Peter Waite was
then manager of Paratoo. Mrs. Waite kindly gave me some
supper, and supplied me with a bottle of brandy, together with
some instructions for the patient. I immediately commenced
my return journey. It was a very dark night, and I bumped
into a wire fence when going through the horse paddock, which
threw the mare back upon her haunches, but I stuck to the
brandy, and arrived safely at Nettalie at 3 a.m., thus doing the
72 miles in under eight hours. In the meantime Mr. Sprigg
had considerably relieved Mrs. Browne, and I was about to have
a few hours’ sleep when Mr. Browne asked me if I would catch
a fresh horse and hasten over to Mr. Mundy, at Panaramitee
Station, 17 miles to the westward, and try and procure medicines.
I started at once at a good gallop, and returned with some
restoratives before sunrise. Including the 26 miles from
Anabama, I had ridden 132 miles almost continuously. A
wonderful little mare was Peggy, and she looked as fresh as a
daisy the next morning.
—At Oulnina Station.—
After having completed my term with the Browne brothers,
I proceeded to Oulnina as head overseer under Mr. John Lewis.
At that time there were more than 30,000 sheep on the run, and
all sheep were shepherded in flocks of generally 1,500 each. There
were only three fresh-water wells on the run; all the rest were
very brackish, but the sheep thrived on it. This necessitated
keeping one man and a team of horses constantly employed
carting water to the different shepherds’ huts. The majority of
the shepherds were married men, and some with good large
families. Wages, compared with present-day rates, were
wretchedly poor. Married men were paid about £7O a year and
supplied with rations—flour, tea, sugar, and meat, and very
little else. The sugar was not white, not even brown; it was
black. On the whole, these old-time shepherds were a fine class
of people, hospitable and kind, and cheerfully putting tip with all
manner of inconveniences. Many of the huts contained only


one room, and the cooking was done outside generally. For
weeks at a time they would see no faces but their own. No
schools or amusements, and no news of the world, except what
they got when the ration cart arrived each month or the overseer
came to count the flocks. I often wonder what became of all
the hundreds of shepherds after the advent of the fenced-in runs.
Possibly they, or many of them, went on the land. My duties
took me frequently among them, week after week, with saddle
and pack horse, always camping out, counting the flocks, and
making returns -of the number of sheep each month, and ever
on the" track of lost sheep. Some of the shepherds were careless
and constantly losing sheep, which were sometimes picked up
by other shepherds. Often the dingoes would get among them
and scatter them far and wide. All shepherds were supplied
with strychnine with which to poison the dingoes, and were
credited with so much for the scalps produced. The shepherds
were principally Irish, English, and Scotch, some old soldiers,
and some Germans. One I remember was an American negro
bv the name of Solomon, a good-natured, jovial old fellow, and
married to a white woman. I remarked to hei one day that
Solomon was one of the good shepherds and rarely lost sheep,
and that I hoped he was as good a husband. Oh, yes, she
said; “ he’s not a bad old fellow at all. I have got used to him
now, but when I was first married to him I used to wake up in
the night and think the divil was alongside of me, he looked
that black.”
—Agitation for Fencing.—
Between 1867 and 1868 there was considerable controversy
between pastoralists, or squatters, as they were then in
regard to the advantage of fencing-in their runs and doing
awav with shepherds. I was not an advocate of this proposed
departure, and pointed out that sheep, especially weaners, would
never of their own accord come into the wells to water, and that
the ewes, especially maiden ewes, would never rear their lambs
without the usual oversight. The sheep would become wilder
and not so easily managed when mustering for drafting and
shearing-time. But I admitted that the wool would, possibly,
be clean and command a better price. Of couise, I was wrong,
and in a few years fencing became universal, although I was far
away when that happened, and have never had anything to do
with fenced runs. I have no doubt that it had a deterrent effect
upon the ravages of the dingo and later of the rabbits.
—A Splendid Rider. —*
On one occasion at Oulnina we ran in two black mares of
the P.L. (Philip Levi) brand. One stood over 16 hands, the


other was not much more than a pony. John Lewis said, “We
will break them in. Which one will you pick, Giles?” I said,
“ I will take the big one.” When we had got them fairly quiet
with the tackling, Lewis mounted his mare. She started to buck
viciously—nasty, twisty bucks—but John never shifted an inch
and even picked up his two stirrups and held them in his hand
until the bucking ceased. He was a fine rider, and I never
remember having seen him thrown. My mount did not attempt
to buck, but had a worse habit of turning a somersault back-
wards. I rode her on one occasion out to Mannahill, leading
a packhorse, and, as I approached the hut she started performing
one of her gymnastic tricks, coming right over backwards,
crushing the saddle, and as *she struggled to get up kicked me
on the head. Mr. Joyce, who was at the hut, dressed the wound.
It was New Year’s Day in 1870, and a new year’s gift that I
did not appreciate. I have the bump still. She was a dangerous
brute, and I shifted my saddle on to the packhorse and used the
mare as a pack. Some weeks later Joyce said he would ride her,
and started off to get the mail from Winnininnie, but in half an
hour came back on foot. She had not forgotten her tricks, and
Joyce was a wiser man.
CHAPTER II
I Have Eyes on New Guinea—Idle Months—Good News—A Red-letter
Day—Hurried Preparations—Good-bye to Adelaide—Crispe’s Thrilling
Story.
—I Have Eyes on New Guinea.—
In January, 1870, I began to get restless, and felt tired of
sheep an,d shepherds. I craved for something wider—greater
space and opportunities; a wish to see things no one else had
seen. In fact, I saw visions, and, moreover, had been reading
accounts of New Guinea, about which very little was then
known. It appealed to me as a most likely region in which
to gratify my appetite for great and wider spaces and marvels
new. W ith this idea ever prominent in my mind, I decided to
sever my connection with Oulnina, and I gleefully accepted
Mr. Lewis s offer that I should take a draft of fat wethers to
the Adelaide market, delivering them to a drover who would
meet me at Truro. On 27th January I drafted out 1,594
fat wethers, and started them on the first day’s stage to Alticoco,
engaging a man named Scott to drive the cart containing our
swags, provisions, and camp equipment. I had only one
shepherd, an old Indian soldier, named O’Keefe, and there and


then said good-bye to Oulnina, which I have never seen since.
Our trip to Truro was uneventful. I had occasionally to give
a sheep to the cockies along our route in exchange for the use
of their paddocks for grazing, and including what we killed for
rations, I was eight short when I delivered the flock to the drover
at Truro on 16th February, three weeks after starting. I
sent O’Keefe back with the cart to Oulnina, gave my saddle-
horse to Scott to bring down, and came to Adelaide myself by
train from Kapunda.
—ldle Months. —
From February to June I was walking the streets of
Adelaide waiting for something to turn up. I had made many
attempts, or inquiries, as to any possibilities of a move being
made towards a trip to New Guinea, but no information could
be obtained. People knew little or nothing about it, and my
visions of open spaces and new lands seemed as far off as ever.
But “the darkest hour is oft the harbinger of silver dawn,”
and the “ dawn ” with me was the arrival on 12th March at
Port Adelaide, of the ship Gulnare, on -her return from the
Northern Territory, with Mr. G. W. Goyder’s parties, who had
completed the survey of the landholders’ blocks around Port
Darwin. Among the returned surveyors was my brother
Christopher. His descriptions of that country, together with
many curios he had brought back, engaged my whole attention
and fired my imagination anew. It seemed also that it had
awakened the authorities to a sense of the value of the Northern
Territory, and it looked really possible that a move would be
made almost immediately towards the construction of the
overland telegraph, right across the continent to Darwin.
Consequently I devoured every scrap of news in the press
concerning such a momentous work. I frequently met Mr. Peter
Waite, and one day he told me he had seen Mr. Charles Todd,
and that there was a strong probability of an exploring party
being sent across the continent in advance of the construction
of the telegraph line, in order to report upon the timber, water,
and other conditions. Mr. Waite added that he had left my name
at the G.P.O. with Mr. Todd as an applicant for a position upon
the proposed party.
—Good News.—
Here, then, was a chance at last. If I could only get on that
exploring party my dreams and visions would become realities.
I would yet, I believed, explore those unknown lands and vast
spaces. What possibilities they might possess of undiscovered
wealth, of great rivers, of bold mountain peaks, canyons, and
waterfalls, and of new minerals, animals, plants, and blossoming


forests, and, not least, wild tribes of savages as yet untamed by
association with the white race! We might have battles, and
fight our way to the Indian Ocean! And then did I not
remember those lines :
“ Afar in the bush I love to ride,
With the silent greyhound alone by my side;
Away, away from the dwellings of men,
By the kangaroo’s haunt and the emu’s glen.”
My ambition was further stimulated by having read John
McKinlay’s diary of his search for Burke and Wills, and again
of his marvellous escape with his party from the Alligator
River, where he was surrounded by floodwaters, and escaped by
killing his horses and drying the flesh, and using the hides to
cover the frame of a frail boat, or raft, that he had constructed,
and which actually conveyed his party to safety at Escape Cliffs,
just in time before the rotting hides collapsed. I had also read of
Gregory, who, even before Stuart, had crossed from Victoria
River to Brisbane, by way of the Elsey and Roper Rivers. And
as for the great Stuart I I had read of his first attempt to cross
Australia with only two men, and his retreat from hostile savages
at Attack Creek. But not before he had planted the Union Jack
on Central Mount Sturt. When starting upon his second
expedition, had I not jumped upon my pony and followed his
party to North Adelaide, where he had said his farewell to one
of his stanch supporters, Mr. John Chambers, and received the
second flag from Miss Chambers, who had made it, and presented
to him to plant on the shores of the Indian Ocean. Nor did I
forget that two of my schoolfellows from Mr. J. L. Young’s
school in Stephens Place, Adelaide, were accompanying Stuart
in the persons of Stephen King and John Frew. As they
disappeared in a cloud of dust along the Gawler road someone
exclaimed:—
“ Go forth again, ye brave little band,
Explore the wonders of an unknown land.”
When I compared the attaining of such possibilities with that
of walking the, to me, dull streets of Adelaide, looking for
something to turn up, it fixed my determination to secure a
position upon the proposed expedition at all costs. There might
be plenty of life, of a sort, in Adelaide, but it was not the life
for me.
—A Red-letter Day.—
Mr. Peter Waite informed me the next day that Mr. Todd had
selected a leader for the exploring expedition to the Northern
Territory in Mr. John Ross, and added that I had better see the


latter at once at the York Hotel. I lost no time, but wheeled
round there and then, made a bee-line for the York, and there,
for the first time, met Mr. Ross, and took a liking to him
immediately. He appealed to me as one bushman to another.
A typical Highlander he was, standing over six feet in height,
with a full black beard and bald head. He told me that he had
got my name from Mr. Todd as one of the applicants for
membership in his party, and that Mr. Waite had strongly
recommended me to him. I remembered that he explained the
duties as well as the difficulties that might occur on the journey
he was about to undertake into an entirely new country, and
that I might expect many setbacks and obstacles. How I thrilled!
We might be often short of water as well as of provisions.
“ Are you,” he continued, “ sound in mind and limb ? Can you
live on bandicoot and goanna ? ” I said that I had already done
so. “ Then you’ll do,” said Mr. Ross. Hurrah! I was
appointed! My dreams had come true. It was the fourth of
July, a great day in America, but a greater one for me. That
was more than 54 years ago, but I still feel the thrill of that
moment.
—Hurried Preparations.—
Little time was allowed to prepare for the journey. We first
had to attend at Mr. Todd’s office to sign on, and were informed
that our wages w r ere to be £1 a week and found. The wage did
not trouble me in the least. Even had it only been ss. a week
it would not have deterred my going. My kit consisted of extra
clothing in the way of three pairs of white moleskin trousers,
several shirts, socks, and handkerchiefs, three pairs of boots, two
hats, seven yards of calico and mosquito netting, belts, pouches,
knives, pipes, a nightcap, and so on. All stores were to be
sent to Beltana Station, but we were to go on to Umberatana
Station to select the horses and return to Beltana for the stores,
and from there make our final departure. We assembled for the
last night in Adelaide at the Terminus Hotel, North Terrace, in
readiness for the next morning’s train, and thus my diary begins
on Bth July, 1870.
—Good-bye to Adelaide. —
Our party consists of the following persons; —John Ross
(leader), William Harvey (surveyor, and, for the time being,
second in command), Thomas Crispe, William Hearne, and
myself. Mr. Peter Waite will accompany us as far as Beltana.
Mr. Harvey will follow us up in about a fortnight, and join us
at Beltana after we have selected our horses at Umberatana.
Mr. Harvey was a member of Mr. G. W. Goyder’s expedition to


the Northern Territory in 1868-9, and is a first-class surveyor,
a typical Scotsman, hailing from Glasgow. So we have a
Lowlander and a Highlander for our leaders. I had never
previously met him, or indeed any of the party, except Mr. Ross.
Billy Hearne had previously been with Mr. Ross, and also on
Stuart’s Creek and Mount Hamilton cattle stations, and was
a good horseman and a rider, but was lame in one leg. Tom
Crispe’s chief recommendation lay in the fact that he had been
a member of John McKinlay’s expedition when that explorer,
in connection with Col. Finniss’s unfortunate attempts to form
a settlement at Escape Cliffs, in the Northern Territory, in the
middle ’sixties. McKinlay, with a party, including Crispe, was
instructed by Col. Finniss to explore the country between Escape
Cliffs and the Alligator Rivers. Unfortunately, through
ignorance of the seasons, or some such error, the time chosen
was in the middle of the wet season, and the party soon became
involved in difficulties with bogs and swamps, and were
ultimately hemmed in by floods, which resulted in their being
forced to slay their horses and convert the hides into coverings
for a frail raft sufficiently large to carry the whole party back
by sea to Escape Cliffs.
—Crispe’s Thrilling Story.—
Crispe’s remarkable personal experiences while on this
expedition he himself related to me as follows:—“We had been
travelling along day after day, and each day became worse and
worse, as the rain fell continuously and the country became a
mass of bogs and swamps and quagmires. We had two kangaroo
dogs with us, and one day, owing possibly to the heat, one got
lost. McKinlay told me to go back and try to find it. Thinking
it was not far away, I decided to walk rather than lead my horse
back through the bogs. .Anyhow, I could find no trace of the
dog, and, night coming on. I failed to pick up the tracks of the
party, and spent a miserable night. The next morning when I
awoke the country seemed all strange to me, and I could not
recognize any landmarks whatever. The further I went the more
puzzled I became, and with the terrible anxiety and want of food
there is no doubt I went clean off my head, and I became
suspicious of everything I saw or heard. I made myself a
barricade in some thick jungle, creeping out at times to get
water, yams, and lily roots. From my thick barricade I could
see men riding about—search parties—but I reckoned they were
armed Malays looking for me to kill me. How many days I
had been in this state I had no idea, but one morning I became
quite normal, and got out of my thicket, and without any apparent
difficulty I struck a bee-line for the camp, into which I walked,


and the first words I heard were, ‘ And how much am I offered
for poor old Tom’s trousers?’ They were selling my clothes at
auction. 1 had been lost for nine days, and they had been
hunting for me day after day, and at last given me up as dead.”
Poor old Tom! I think he never quite got over that shock.
Flis eyes would bulge out of their sockets when he was relating
his experiences, and he appeared to have a latent belief that
something similar would happen to him on the present expedition,
and before we had been long on our trip we used to refer to him
as “ Job’s comforter,” but he was nevertheless a good bushman
and a fine comrade.
CHAPTER III
From Kapunda to Beltana—At Beltana—Wretched Equipment—Splendid
Horses —Arms and Ammunition.
—From Kapunda to Beltana. —
The train took our party to Kapunda, where we transferred
ourselves and swags to the mailcoach, and on to the Burra.
The roads were in a fearful condition all the way. We only
stayed one hour at the Burra, got into the north mailcoach, and
travelled all through the night, arriving at the Pekina eating-
house at daylight. We had breakfast at Pekina, travelled on all
day and best part of the night, and arrived at Wilpena at
8 o’clock in the morning. We left Wilpena and arrived at the
Blinman for dinner, remaining there the rest of the day. There
Mr. Ross was fortunate to secure from Jones & Co. a buggy and
horse to take us to Umberatana. Crispe and Mr. Ross rode in
the buggy, and I was on horseback. We made an early start,
and camped at the Main Gap. From here we made another
early start, and reached Oweandra, where Mr. Woodcock enter-
tained us most hospitably. The country passed over seems to
have been visited by unlimited rains. We left Oweandra in good
time, and arrived at Illinawortina, and were again hospitably
entertained by Mr. and Mrs. McGregor. We left Illinawortina
at 10 o’clock and arrived at Umberatana at 4 p.m., and met a
Mr, Bruce, who is staying here. On the way up to-day we passed
about 80 camels, four miles from the station, but we managed
to take our horses past them without much trouble. A Mr. Mark
is also here to-day. So here we are at Umberatana on 15th July,
1870, only eight days from Adelaide, which is very fair travelling.
Mr. Bruce and Mr. Mark left for Oweandra. On the next day
we were busy shoeing horses. A Mr. Searle arrived, and Mr.
Mark returned from Oweandra, and left again this morning for


Yarraleena. Mr. Whitbread arrived from Mount Freeling.
On 18th July, Mr. and Mrs. Ross, Pat Long, T. Crispe,
and myself left with 22 horses for Beltana, and arrived at
Oweandra rather late, and left the next morning, camped for an
hour at a well, and starting again we camped at Patsy’s Springs,
and on 21st July we arrived at Beltana about dusk.
—At Beltana. —
Everyone was busy shoeing horses, oiling the gear, and making
flourbags. A buggy was also sent to the Blinman for ammunition
and also to fetch our surveyor, Mr. Harvey, and we wrote letters
home to go by the buggy. On 24th July Mr, Peter Waite
arrived, bringing with him a Mr. Griffin. I went out for a ride
with Mr. Phillipson (manager of Beltana), and on 25th July
Mrs. Ross left to return to Umberatana. All were busy shoeing
again, and preparing packs, and so on. We expected our
surveyor to-day, but he did not arrive. The next day we were
still busy preparing everything ready for a start. Mr. Harvey
arrived at last, and we were rather a large party here —nine of
us. On 27th July we finished packing the packbags, and propose
making a start to-morrow morning, and Mr. Phillipson kindly
honoured our departure by giving us a farewell dinner at the
station.
—Wretched Equipment. —
In comparison with present-day equipment for long journeys
in the bush, and especially the unknown bush, such as we were
about to penetrate, the outfit supplied to us by the Government
was simply abominable and totally unfit to withstand the rough
treatment it was bound to receive in such a prolonged trip as
ours, and to face unknown and unexpected obstacles in the way
of impenetrable scrubs, jungles, rocky mountains, and gorges.
The present-day cattle drover prides himself on his splendid
outfit, consisting of solid leather packbags and his strong and
durable packsaddle trees, with leather-bound pads and leather
pockets to receive the tree ends of the packsaddle; but in our
case the packbags were made of a poor canvas with short flaps
that would not cover the contents in the bags when full, and
the pads on which the tree rests were simply tied on with leather
thongs that were constantly breaking, resulting in the packs
slipping and ensuring sore backs. The bags were constantly
being ripped in the scrub or bumped against tree-trunks or
anthills. Even the girths were not leather, but a poor serge or
webbing, and the only things of leather were surcingles and
halters. Our water-bags were just plain canvas —not leather-
bound or with the present safety flaps of leather to prevent
chafing and the sweat of the horse —nor were they fitted with a


neckshape to fasten around the horse’s neck, but simply had two
dees to fasten on to the sides of the riding-saddles or to suspend
from the hooks of the packsaddle, and often when full it was
our horror, when longing for a drink, to see a packhorse bump
in between two trees, squash the bag, and throw up a jet of the
precious fluid that we expected to have on reaching camp. Our
cooking utensils were also of the most scanty and primitive kind,
and consisted of five quart pots with pannican to fit, one billycan,
a damper-dish, and a three-gallon bucket to boil beef in, a knife,
fork, and spoon each, and a small frying-pan. We had no tents,
but a couple of small calico flys and a strip of oilcloth six feet long
was supplied to each of us to lay our blankets on at night or to
put over us if rain fell. We had one shovel (as a fire shovel)
to use when making dampers. We had, however, 'several
tomahawks, chiefly to present to chiefs of wild tribes we might
meet, and also some beads and trinkets. We had hobble-chains
and spare leather for making hobble-straps, but no horsebells;
no baking-powder of any sort, and our dampers consisted only
of flour, salt, and water —and perspiration. We had eye lotions,
Holloway’s pills and ointment, castor oil and other oil for the
rifles, saddles, and so on. We had no blackboys or trackers,
and how we came to start without horsebells has been a marvel
and mystery to me ever since. Perhaps they thought they would
attract —or more probably frighten—'the savages; but we were
all good trackers, and did not miss the bells very much.
—Splendid Horses.—
If our saddles, packs, and other equipment were of the
poorest quality, it was quite the reverse with our horses. They
were indeed a splendid lot, and no better sample for the work
they had to do could have been selected in Australia. Mr. Ross
knew what he was about when he selected the mob. Having been
manager of Umberatana, he knew the qualities and stamina of
each horse. They were chiefly bred by the Messrs. Stuckey,
and, on account of them mostly being docked, were known as
Stuckey’s cobs. We were apportioned two saddle horses each,
and Mr. Ross three. That left 11 for carrying packs. Mr.
Ross’s horses were Stanley, Chester, and Rambler. Stanley, or
“ On, Stanley, on,” as we called him, was a beautiful chestnut
nearly 17 hands high, and Chester and Rambler were nearly as
high. All had a dash of the blood horse in them, good workers,
and carried Mr. Ross and his accoutrements without the least
fatigue. My two horses were Warlock of Warlock, a beautiful
bay and a fine worker, and a handsome chestnut mare, Eliza.
Mr. Harvey was given two of the quietest we could find in the
mob, as he was a poor horseman, and never could recognize his


own horse in the morning when saddling up. Then there was
Gentle Annie, probably so called because she would carry her
rider all day so gently until nearing camp, when she would,
without warning, start to buck like a raw colt, and often unseat
her rider when taken awares. She was selected as one of Billy
Hearne’s mounts, and was always fat, sleek, and sly. Then
there was Wanderer, I think the only grey we had in the mob.
I used sometimes to ride a little red roan cob, Sir James
Fitzjames, a hardy little fellow and very uncertain in temper.
The least thing would start him pig jumping. He was generally
packed. Then there was old Wombat, a big-bodied blue roan
cob. He had a vicious and wicked eye, and he was always
packed by Mr. Ross. He was ever on the watch, and had a
habit of, just before the surcingle was tightened, giving a
tremendous buck, and slinging the pack and bags off. On those
occasions he always got an extra 50-lb. bag of flour to carry,
but he was always uncertain right through the trip, and was
never ridden. Bobby was another saddle-horse of Crispe’s.
Bobby had formerly been the saddle-horse of a Mr. Acraman,
who was in charge of a string of camels, and was very friendly
with the ships of the desert. He would eat off the same bush
with them, and yet, strange to say, after he had been away from
them for a couple of years, was, when he again met them, the
most terrified horse in the mob, and far worse than those that
had never seen camels. Anyhow, they were a splendid lot, and
we got to love each and all of them, but some of them were
brutes to shoe.
—Arms and Ammunition. —
Goodness knows where the authorities obtained the old-
fashioned firearms from, and which we were supplied with—
probably from the old armoury on North Terrace. They would
be despised in these days. And yet they were good in their way.
We were each supplied with a long colt revolver of six chambers
and long barrels, with a ramrod fastened to the barrel with which
to force down the flimsy skin cartridges. The nipples had to
be capped, and boxes of these were supplied to us. In damp
weather they would commonly misfire, and we had, for safety,
to fire them off about once a week, and clean and oil them, as
there was no other way of extracting the cartridges. A carbine
each was supplied. They were the old Westly-Richards pattern,
and were breechloaders; the cartridges were also of flimsy skin,
and a large cap had to be used. The cartridges would frequently
break when loading them into the breech, and there was always
an uncertainty as to whether they would go off. The revolvers
were carried in pouches slung on the belt, and the carbines were


slung in short leather buckets, and lay across the kneepad and
thigh of the rider. Mr. Ross had a similar revolver,' but no
carbine, but, instead, had two double-barrelled shotguns. One
he kept wrapped up in his swag, and the other he carried on the
saddle like our carbines. Both guns were old muzzle-loaders,
which necessitated carrying powder-flasks and caps. He
generally loaded one barrel with buckshot and the other with the
old-fashioned round leaden bullet. We had bullet-moulds for
making bullets, but the supply of ammunition was wretchedly
small and inadequate, and no practising could be indulged in.
Mr. Ross was a splendid shot, and many wild turkeys did he
bring to our larder as a welcome change from our damper and
beef.
CHAPTER IV
From Beltana to Mount Margaret—At Mount Margaret—Good-bye to
Civilization—Winkley’s Waterhole.
—From Beltana to Mount Margaret.—
On 28th July, 1870, we commenced to pack the horses soon
after breakfast, and, with the exception of one young horse,
they all took their packs very quietly. Immediately after lunch
we saddled our riding horses, and put on our armour, consisting
of revolver and carbine, and a large sheath-knife each. Thus
formidably arrayed, we started from Beltana, bound for Mount
Deception. Mr. Ross and Mr. Harvey remained behind, and
intended to catch us up on the following day, Mount Deception
being only 10 miles distant. Our horses behaved well during
the night, only going about three miles away, and although we
made a good start, we missed the road, and got to Leigh Creek,
and had to cut across country until we got to a creek, and
camped, where Mr. Ross and Mr. Harvey joined us. On
30th July we made a good start, and got to Myrtle Springs
Station about midday, but made no stay, .and pushed on and
reached St. a Beckett’s, a fine sheet of water, all open country,
not a tree to be seen, and heavy travelling, but the horses behaved
well with their heavy loads. The horses made back in the night
in three separate mobs, and by the time all were gathered it was
too late to make a start, so we remained there all day. On Ist
August we got a good start, but one of the packhorses
(Miss McGilp) considered herself too heavily loaded, and in
trying to rid herself of it got the pack-saddle and two tin billies
under her belly, kicking them into fragments, and starting all
the other packhorses at full gallop, kicking and bucking in great


style. But after some trouble we got things righted again, and
made a-fresh start. Mr. Ross shot two ducks, which, when wrap-
ped in paper, feathers and all, and buried in the hot ashes, turned
out a treat. The feathers peeled off in one piece when cooked,
exposing the thoroughly cooked white flesh. Another good plan is
to cake the bird over, feathers and all, with a thick coat of mud,
and bury in hot ashes. The result is even better still. On 6th
August we arrived at Finniss Springs, and on account of one of the
horses straying away by itself, Mr. Ross left Hearne to look for it,
and follow on our tracks where found. We passed the Gregory,
a fine creek, but the water was brackish, and we went on and
camped at Stuart’s Creek, where Hearne overtook us with
the missing horse. A fine sheet of water here some 400
yards long, but salt. We just got a glimpse of Lake Eyre that
day. It might well be called an inland sea. On 7th August we
camped at Coward Springs, and after an early start on Bth August
arrived at Strangways Springs, a sheep station belonging to
Messrs. Hogarth & Warren, and which is surrounded by
beautiful mound springs, some fresh and others brackish, bitter,
and salt. Mr. Hogarth kindly gave us some dinner, and we then
travelled on seven miles to the Yellow Waterhole. among the
sandhills, and camped for the night. We got a fairly early start
in the morning, passing two small salt lakes with waterfowl on
them. We also passed the William Spring, the water of which
is drinkable, but impregnated with soda. We then crossed
Breakfast-time Creek, which was dry, and we camped on the
Douglas Creek, which was also dry, but we got water by digging rn
the sand. We covered 22 miles that day. Mount Margaret came
into view. Upon leaving the Douglas we passed the Lodon Spa
hot springs, and reached the station, which is about 20 miles
north-east from the mountain. There is a waterhole here
some half a mile long, and the native name for it is Humbum-
Brenellina.
—At Mount Margaret.—
On 10th August we were at the very last and furthest-
out settlement in the far north of South Australia. There were
no stations or settlements north of this place, but the Peake Sta-
tion, which was an out-station belonging to the same owner as
Mount Magaret (Mr. Philip Levi), is 45 miles a little north of west
from ? there. Mr. Ross had been more than 100 miles north of
this station two years previously on to a river he named the
Treuer, and no white man, with the exception of John McDouall
Stuart, had been beyond that point. That day Mr. Ross and I
sewed up flourbags and packed up a number of things to leave
there in order to lighten the packs, while Crispe and Hearne fitted


horseshoes and the surveyor took observations. Mr, Archie
Conway (manager of the Peake Station) arrived there in the
evening with a stockman. He informed us that meat was being
jerked and salted for us at the Peake. The day was very warm,
and flies and mosquitoes were very troublesome. Mr. Ross and
myself repacked and arranged the packs all day. Hearne finished
the horseshoes. The jerked beef (400 lb.) arrived, Mr. Harvey
took the latitude with the sextant. Mr. Ross and I packed the
jerked beef into the packbags. There were 100 lb. of jerked
and 300 lb, of smoked beef, Crispe and Hearne made breast-
plates and whips, and I made a leather pouch for Mr. Harvey’s
revolver.
—Good-bye to Civilization. —
On 14th August we prepared to leave Mount Margaret,
and were up at daylight, but, as is usual when camping at a
station, it is impossible to get an early start, and it was past
11 o’clock before we bid adieu to Humbum and left all signs of
civilization behind us. We had been travelling nearly due north
all day, and passed the Perry Springs, and camped that night on
the Neales Creek. The water was salt, but we got fresh by
digging in the sand. Blacks’ fires were visible two miles up the
creek. We started on the following morning at 8.30. Mount
Kingston and Mount Younghusband were in view far to the
westward. We struck Browne’s Creek at noon, which is a chain
of waterholes half a mile long, and we noticed some ducks on
them. The country round these waterholes was very poor, the
plains being spongy and stony, but there was good grass on the
sandhills. We camped on one of the waterholes. Mr. Ross
caught some nice fish, the largest 8 in. long. Hearne and I washed
clothes. From Browne’s Creek camp onwards all our camps
were to be numbered. Consequently, this camp was marked
No. 1. As a rule, when trees were available, the numbers were
to be cut in the bark with a tomahawk or chisel. We started off
at 9.30 a.m. on 16th August. Mr. Ross and Mr. Harvey left
us, and went to the summit of Mount Robinson to take observa-
tions. The country travelled over to-day is supposed to be a
portion of Sturt’s stony desert, although that explorer was far
to the eastward. It certainly deserves the name, for it is a
miserable country to travel over. For about 30 miles it is a mass
of loose stones, red and flinty looking, and one would think all
the loose stones in the universe had been scattered over these
plains. Not an inch of soil can be seen. Most of the stones are
quite flat and level. One would think an immense roller had
passed over them. The country is also destitute of timber, giving
a rather dismal appearance; and yet, strange to say, plenty of


grass peeps up between the stones, showing that the soil below
must be good, and, somehow, forbids one calling it a desert. We
reached the Frew River about half-past two that afternoon. This
river was discovered by Stuart, and named after Mr. John Frew,
a member of his party, and an old schoolfellow of mine from
J. L. Young’s school, Stephens Place. The native name is
Coocoolinah, and the main waterhole lies at the foot of Pool’s
Knob, and about 80 yards wide and a quarter of a mile long, and
apparently deep. There were a number of pelicans on the water,
and the mosquitoes were very troublesome.
—Winkey’s Waterhole.—
At the Frew River on 17th August Messrs. Ross and
Harvey left us again to take observations. A few more miles
and stones and the country improved wonderfully to a splendid
grassy tableland, extending eight miles to the Treuer River; a
fine piece of country, but in places very low, and at times subject
to immense floods, from which there is no escape, as the same
low country apparently extends as far as the eye can reach.
Mr. Ross informed us that when he first saw this country it
was one vast sea, about five miles wide. These immense
periodical bodies of water have all a south-easterly flow, ultimately
emptying into Lake Eyre, as also does the Treuer River. The
banks of the stream are lined with a stunted sort of gumtree,
and on tasting the leaves I was surprised to find them destitute
of that peppermint flavour so generally common in the eucalyptus
family. Crossing the Treuer, we travelled three miles up the
stream westerly to Mr. Ross’s old main camp, called Winkey’s
Waterpool, and named after the blackfellow who showed it to
Mr. Ross. The blacks have a superstitious dread of this water,
believing it to be the abode of certain devil-devils, and some tribes
will neither drink nor bathe in the water. Nevertheless, we found
the water excellent. We expected to find blacks there, but saw
no signs of any. We saw two emus with seven young ones—the
first we had seen on our journey. We had yet some 50 miles
or more to go before reaching Mr. Ross’s furthest point.
Instructions were issued to load our revolvers and rifles for the
first time.
CHAPTER V
Detention Creek—First Blacks Seen—Varied Country.
—Detention Creek,—
After leaving the bed of the Treuer on 18th August, 1870,
we skirted along the edge of the stony country for a few miles


.and entered better country, well grassed and with various herbage.
We crossed several tributaries of the Treuer, and after having
passed over a larger and deeper one than usual, Nigger, a pack-
horse, that carried Mr. Harvey’s instruments, the sextant and
artificial horizon, and so on, began playing up at a great rate,
getting the pack under his belly, and kicking the bags and some
of their contents into ribbons. Fortunately, little or no damage
was done to the instruments, as they were carefully packed, but,
alas! he succeeded in comparatively destroying our only billycan,
and we were reduced to quartpots. This kicking performance
delayed us more than an hour, and as we had to leave various
small things, such as copper rivets and so on, strewn on the
ground we thought the place should be called Quartpot Flat, but
as there was a nice creek of water ahead Mr. Ross thought it
better to call it Detention Creek, and as such I suppose it will
appear on our map. We followed this Detention Creek several
miles and passed some splendid waterholes, some a mile long,
on one of which we camped. Crispe shot at a fine turkey, but
missed it —and so did we —but managed to get four ducks.
We had not seen any blacks. Mounts Long and John became
visible in the distance, and far to the south-west we caught a
glimpse of the Hanson Range, named by Stuart after Sir R. D,
Hanson, a fromer Judge.
—First Blacks Seen. —
The country for some miles was very stony until we got on to
the flats, which run right up to Mount Alexander. These flats
are sandy, but well covered by mulga and herbage of every
description. We passed some fine waterholes along the Treuer.
We camped about three miles from Mount Alexander. This
mountain was discovered by Mr. Ross, and named after his eldest
boy. We came suddenly upon a mob of blacks, about 10, who,
as soon as they saw us, scampered away as hard as they could run
on to the sandhills; we could see them hiding in the bushes.
Mr. Ross went over to meet them, and brought a boy back to our
camp who could just speak a word or two of English. Shortly
afterwards a fine-looking fellow marched boldly into our camp
with his hair in long ringlets and tied at the back of his head.
He was perfectly naked, but had evidently been previously in
contact with whites, and made signs to me for tobacco, but sugar
he would not touch. Before night' their lubras came to the camp.
To one old woman, whose ugliness it is impossible to describe,
I handed a looking-glass, and she seemed very frightened when
she saw her face, probably for the first time in her life. She
kept looking behind it as a monkey would. None of them
wore a vestige of clothing. During Sunday, 21st August, we


spelled in order to allow Mr. Harvey to take observations from
Mounts Long and Alexander. Mount Long was also named by
Mr. Ross after Mr. Pat. Long, a well-known stockman and
bushman, on his former trip to the Treuer. Crispe and Plearne
did some shoeing, while I repaired packbags. A cob mare foaled
the previous night. The foal was quickly dispatched by Mr. Ross
with a bullet from his revolver, the report of which scattered
all the niggers off at their topmost speed, and we saw no more
of them. About the middle of the night Crispe fancied they
were about the camp, but it proved to be a false alarm, as nothing
but a wild dog or two could be seen. These prowling brutes were
very bold, and came right into the camp, but our supply of
cartridges was too precious to waste upon them. Two days later
we left the Treuer River for good. It was found by Mr. Ross
and named by him after A. von Treuer, an officer at Elder, Smith,
and Co.’s, Adelaide. We travelled over fine sandhill country,
well covered by mulga and cotton-bush and some really pretty
little lakes about 100 yards across. This we thought would
make a splendid cattle run. Just before entering camp Crispe and
I saw the tracks of a camel, which must have strayed a long way.
We were about 200 miles from Mount Margaret, and Mr. Ross
deemed it advisable to keep strict two-hours’ watch every night
for the future, and I had first watch, from 8 to 10 p.m.,,
and carried a carbine and revolver. Moving on, we came upon
a large creek running easterly, with one or two nice waterholes.,
Mr. Ross and Mr. Harvey went on to a high hill close to us,
which they named Mount Crispe, after our companion, Tom
Crispe. The waterhole on which we were camped was very
shallow, and we were surprised to find great quantities of fish,
and we caught numbers of them up to seven inches long; they
seemed far superior to those we caught in Browne’s Creek. The
fact that we were the first white people to pass through this
country added greatly to the pleasure we all experienced. We
struck a course due west from Mount Crispe to some distant
tablelands ahead. There the country changed from an apparent
stony waste to a rich and fertile and well-grassed piece of country.
It got better as we proceeded, until suddenly we came to a chain
of swamps which, on following up, led us, as we expected, to a
fine creek with a beautiful sheet of water, which gave it the;
appearance of being navigable, and upon either side was sandy
country most richly grassed. It was certainly the finest piece of
country we had seen.
—Varied Country.—
With fresh water, grass, and clover up to their knees, the
horses were in great fettle, and it spoke greatly in favour of the


country. We struck a large gum creek with water as clear as
crystal and fringed by large whitegums and a few. saplings
the first we had seen which might be suitable for telegraph-poles,
Hearne and I carved our names on a large tree over 1870. While
Hearne, Crispe, and myself were looking for ducks, the grass
around the camp fire caught alight, and had we not returned
when we did our packs might have been burnt. On Sunday,
28th August, we passed over some of the stoniest country we
had yet encountered. Ascending the top of a rise, we caught
sight of an apparently thickly timbered country, for which we
made tracks, and found it to be an immense swamp, most richly
grassed; in fact, it was like walking on a ball of down. Anyone
not having seen this country would scarcely credit what seas of
water occasionally visit this region. We found the timber to be
stunted swamp gum. Messrs. Ross and Harvey took a stroll to
the top of the tablelands after we had unpacked. Ihey reported
having found some of the best timber suitable for telegraph-poles.
Crispe boiled a lot of the leaves of what is known as the “old man,”
or “giant,” saltbush, which is an excellent substitute for cabbage,
and an agreeable addition to our constant diet of jerked and
salt junk. Pushing forward, we followed sandhills and ever-
lasting porcupine grass —a most dreary prospect on every side
as far as we could see, and without any sign of water, except
now and then a mulga-timbered gully, which would tempt us on
with the hope of finding water. We were all pretty thirsty, and
the day was scorchingly hot. Night came on without our finding
the precious fluid, and we were forced to camp and eat damper
and sugar without the salt junk. We saw several cockatoos with
pink topknots, which led us to hope water could not be far distant.
This was the most remarkable country I had ever seen. The
sandhills are very high, and run north and south, with long gullies
between each, and which did not appear to have been ever flooded,
and the soil was so spongy, and soaked up all the moisture.
CHAPTER VI
Signs of Natives—Caught in a Storm —Heavy Travelling—Searching for
Water.
—Signs of Natives. —
On 3rd September, 1870, we struck a watercourse with a
shallow, dry creek, which we followed for three miles, and found
two or three native wells and the blacks’ tracks as thick as a
sheepwalk. I imagined that by the size of some of them they
must be a stalwart race. We camped there, and unpacked.


Mr. Ross and I went into the creek to get water. We discovered
two wurleys on the opposite bank, with the camp fire still burning.
We must have disturbed a mob of blacks, and they had taken to
their heels and left their belongings behind them, which chiefly
consisted of large wooden scoops used for both carrying water
and the pounded seeds of the nardoo and other berries. On this
occasion they were filled with a kind of fungi or yam about the
size of an orange. These had apparently been just taken off the
fire, as some were quite warm. They had a very rusty appear-
ance inside, and smelt like rotten lobster. None of us cared
about tasting them, as probably they had just been chewed before
baking by the old women. Mr. Ross said he saw one fellow
flying up the sandhills, and we fancied we could hear the yelling
of piccaninnies. Our supply of water there was very small, and
Mr. Ross, with Hearne and myself, rode down the creek a couple
of miles in search of more, and found two or three more
native wells, but could only get a couple of waterbag-
fuls, and our horses had to go without that night. On
the next day we saw a number of places where the natives
had been digging in the sand for water. We passed a natives’
camp, where the fire was still burning, and our approach had
evidently given them a fright. While crossing the sandhills
Mr. Ross set fire to the grass, which was almost immediately
answered by a large smoke to the southwards. This is the
natives’ method of telegraphing or signalling to one another for
50 miles at a stretch. Three weeks after leaving Mount Margaret
we were at Sandy Creek. Mr. Ross was of opinion that this
creek might have been the Hugh, named by Stuart, or the same
creek as we had struck at the head of the high tableland a week
previously. We had seen no blacks yet, but they kept assuring
us of their presence by the large volumes of dense black smoke
that were continually being sent up. They fired the grass within
a mile of the camp, and we thought at one time of burning around
it, as the wind was rising, and we were among long grass, but
the weather completely changed, and there was every appearance
of rain and a cold night. The fires and the natives appeared to
have retired behind the ranges, where they seemed to have a big
illumination, possibly in order to invite their friends to have their
first view of whitefellows from a safe distance. They were a
very shy lot.
—Caught in a Storm.—
All hands got a thorough wetting during the night, but the
rain cleared off about midnight, giving place to a dense fog,
lasting until 9 o’clock the next morning, when we were able to
make a start. We went for miles over high sandhills when we


sighted a range, which we pushed for, hoping to reach it before
nio-ht. and to find water there. About 4 o’clock the sky became
overcast, and dense black clouds rolled up from the westwards,
followed by peals of thunder and vivid lightning, warning us
to prepare for another wet night. Being anxious to reach the
range, the warning was unheeded, and wei were caught in a great
storm, wetting us all to the skin and giving us more of that
precious fluid than we expected. At dusk we camped under the
lee of a sand ridge. We unpacked the horses; everything was
wet, and packs and saddles were as stiff as boards. We collected
a lot of firewood, and the next important matter was a fire, no
easy matter when everything is wet and the ground under water.
But bushmen are possessed of a large stock of patience, especially
when their favourite pot of tea hangs at the end of a lucifer
match. It was not long, therefore, before we were all standing
before a roaring fire, drying ourselves. The rain ceased just
long enough to allow us to arrange our blankets, which were more
like wet sponges, and we were soon fast asleep, without keeping
watch.
—Heavy Travelling. —
We had hoped to find some rock wallaby, but the only game
we brought back to camp was an immense grasshopper and an
owl’s egg. We were, however, daily discovering some new plants
and shrubs, and some of the flowers were of the most beautiful
description. Hearne and I decorated ourselves and horses every
day with bouquets of flowers of the most lovely colours, but it
seemed still too early to collect seeds. Everlasting and horrible
porcupine grass and sand! When would it cease? For the
whole day we had been travelling’ up and down sandhills, and
it had a most desert look about it, and no sign of water whatever.
The heavy travelling was beginning to tell a little on our horses,
most of them having been too flash recently. When nearing the
range we came upon some new trees of the oak species, with fine
straight barrels running from 12 to 15 feet to the lower branches,
and about 15 inches in diameter. We reached the range at
sundown, and a very high and rugged one it was, with sandhills
right up to the very foot of it. There was no water for the
horses, but, fortunately, we carried enough for ourselves in the
waterbags. We camped right under a rugged cliff. Theie was
a large cavern facing us, which, after supper, Hearne and I
explored with torches, but found nothing more remarkable than
the skeleton of a dingo.
—Searching for Water. —
For the second night in succession our poor horses had been
without water, after travelling over the very worst country. We


ourselves had just a quartpotful each, and then we should be in
the same plight as our horses on the morrow. Mr. Ross sent
me to follow up a gum creek to search for water. I followed it
up among the ranges, and passed blacks’ camps about a fortnight
old, with their pads leading to places where they had been getting
water, but which were now all dry. Mr. Ross followed the
cveek out on to the plain, but neither of us found water. We
then struck out in a direction we had noticed smoke on the
previous day, and after going round the range we could see
smokes at no great distance ahead. This gave us hopes that we
were not far from water, for, as we often used to say, “ where
there is smoke there is fire, and where there is fire there are
blacks, and where there are blacks there is water.” The
country also began to get less and less sandy, but was now on fire
on nearly all sides of us. Upon passing one of these patches of
burning grass we beheld a native walking slowly along with a
bundle of cooked goannas upon his head. He did not observe
us until Mr. Ross was within about four chains of him, when,
dropping his bundle of lizards, and throwing a firestick into the
dry grass he sped over the sandhill as only a terrified wild man
could and all our calling only increased his speed and terror.
Uur hopes of being near water were much raised. We kept
straight on for a peaked hill, where on reaching we also found
a large creek with magpies and black cockatoos 'flying about, but
not a drop of water. Hobbling out the poor horses, Mr. Ross
Hearne and myself went out in search of it. I took the shovel to
r ig in the sand, but all returned at dark with the same tale of
no water This was the third night our poor horses went without
3 drin ,u f at f> and we had not had a drop that day ourselves or
a mouthful of food. It was a most extraordinary country
showing all signs of water, but none was to be found. Crispe
had been away all day causing some anxiety, and did not return
until 10 p.m. Daylight had scarcely appeared when Mr Ross
and Hearne mounted their horses and started away down the
creek, in the direction where we had seen the blackfellow on the
previous day, in search of water. To our extreme delight they
returned in about three hours with a hag of water each, and
tidings of plenty more where thev had got it. They also reported
having surprised two camps of natives, who bolted in every
direction at their approach. Needless to say. we made a pot of
coffee each. This was the first water we had had for 36 hours,
and it was easy to imagine with what gusto it went down. No
time was then lost in packing our poor horses, which had been
standing disconsolately for hours beside the creek-bank and
partaking of the large green leaves of the native tobacco plant,


which grew in profusion, and which seemed to do them no harm.
Proceeding within a short distance of the waterhole we unpacked,
and allowed the horses to drink. They had been 72 hours without
it, through hot weather and heavy travelling. We are extremely
thankful to a kind Providence. We had a hearty meal of tea,
johnny cakes, and jerked beef, and were camped near a rocky
cliff, under which was the waterhole, but sufficiently far away to
allow the natives to obtain water without interference with us.
The blacks appeared on the top of a hill, and made signals to us
in various ways. There appeared to be a good mob of them,
judging by the numerous heads that were constantly being exposed
from behind the rocks. Their chief signs conveyed to us appeared
to be an urgent demand for us to depart, and more particularly
our horses, of which they seemed to have had the greater dread.
Mr. Ross, on the other hand, endeavoured to get them by signs
to come down, but they did not, or would not, understand, and
repeatedly pointed to us, and then to the horses, which they did
not like going near the water, but we were of opinion that they
would have to point a little differently to shift us from our
position.
CHAPTER VII
A Sandy Stretch —The Returning Journey—An Old Shirt Discovered —
Blacks in the Camp.
—A Sandy Stretch. —
The water upon which we were camped was swarming with
birds of all sorts, but the number of pigeons was almost incredible.
For some distance around the water the ground was perfectly
brown with them, and it was a beautiful sight to see them
marching at night down to the water. They are known as the
flock pigeon. Crispe shot 36, which we boiled to take with us.
They were capital eating, plump and fat, and provided an
agreeable change. We also shot a black cockatoo with scarlet
crest and yellow tail-feathers. The report of the gunshots
apparently scattered and scared the blacks, as none were to be
seen. I made two large cartwheel dampers for the next journey.
We passed over splendidly grassed country until we came to an
amphitheatre of ranges, which we attempted to cross, but found
it impossible. We turned northwards for about four miles, and
camped on a small gum creek emptying into a large, dry swamp,
but there was no water for the horses. That terrible sandy
region over which we passed could not be less than 90 miles
across the way we came through it. On 15th September, 1870,


we struck a large gum creek, which Mr. Ross kindly named after
myself. Blacks’ fires were in every direction, and range after
range rose ahead as far as we could see. Mr. Ross fancied he
saw tracks of horses, but they were very old. It w'as possible
that Stuart might have passed near here more than eight years
previously. There was no water for the horses again. " The
weather was very hot, and the big fires and smoky atmosphere
must have added greatly to the heat. We marked a tree with
the initials P.D.T.E., in addition to our names. We followed the
Giles Creek until it suddenly turned north, and we left it, and
made for a deep gorge, passing over well-grassed mulga flats
between two ranges. The highest peak of one Mr. Ross named
after W. Hearne.
—The Returning Journey.—
On 17th September we started upon our return trip,
having been about 500 miles from Mount Margaret or the Peake
Station. We passed a little water, but not enough for the horses,
and hoping to get more lower down neglected to fill, the waterbags,
especially as we saw numbers of flock pigeons where the creek
emptied out on to the plain. But we were wofully disappointed,
and water we could not find. The presence of so many thousands
of these pigeons was a sure indication of there being water in
the neighbourhood, but we could not spare the time to look for
it, and changed the course to south-east, passing over well-grassed
flats with mulga hushes. About sundown cut a large sandy
creek-bed, and which we believed to be the same on which we
had found the running water, although that must be 15 or 20
miles distant. We had to camp wdthout water. Crispe and I
went out different directions looking for it, but without success.
Hearne, Crispe,_ and I sunk deep holes in the sand, but although
we worked until 9 o’clock at night we could get no water,, and
the labour had only increased our thirst. The day had been
very hot, and we were all very thirsty. This was the second day
without water for our horses. The horses rambled a long way
up the creek in the night in search of water, and we had a most
fatiguing walk for four miles through heavy sand and under a
scorching sun, and not a sign of water. By the time we got back
and had packed the! horses we were pretty well parched up. We
kept a south-east course, making for the gorge we had entered
on striking the Giles Creek, three days before, and where we
knew we would get water. Upon reaching the gorge we found
Mr. Ross waiting for us, and there at a point of a cliff was a
little hole a foot or more deep, sunk in the sand, and full of
delicious cold water. With a quart of it in my hand, I said to
my companions. “ See that cliff up there? If it was solid gold


I would not exchange it for this quart of water.” Many times in
South Australia had I been hard pushed for water, but never had
I felt so parched and distressed, and in describing my own feelings
I know I described the feelings of each of us. About an hour
before sundown the pigeons began to flock in in tens of thousands,
and within half an hour Mr. Ross and Crispe had shot 108, and
all hands were busy plucking them. Some were dried in the sun
and others salted for future use. And so ended one of the most
trying days of our trip.
—An Old Shirt Discovered. —
While Hearne and I were in search of the horses we found
to our great surprise a piece of blue shirt hanging on a tree,,
under which was an old native camp. In several places the blacks
had sewn it with their hair, but one place was mended with
thread. It was not possible to say where or how they got it.
Perhaps it might have been thrown away by one of Stuart’s party
and bartered from tribe to tribe. It might even have been a
relic of Leichhardt’s expedition. While having breakfast one
morning we noticed four blacks poking their heads over a small
hill in front of our camp. We made signs to them, which they
answered. Their appearance assured us that water was not far
distant, and Mr. Ross, Hearne, and I mounted our horses and
struck off in different directions in search of water. Mr. Ross
met with most success, a mile and half from our camp. We
surprised a mob of blacks —five men, two or three women, and
about a dozen piccaninnies—but their only water was a muddy
claypan, and they had most ingeniously made the water to filter
through sand by digging holes on the upper side of the claypan.
Mr. Ross got off his horse to fill a waterbag, but while in the
act of doing so he became sensible of something from behind,
and was surprised on looking around to see three savages
flourishing ther spears and waddies, and making signs to him to
go away, which he very prudently did without firing at them.
The fact of about a dozen blacks subsisting upon so precarious
a water supply proved beyond doubt its scarcity in their neigh-
bourhood, and the hostile attitude in which they placed themselves
can be attributed solely to that cause, and not to any hatred,,
but to guard their precious supply, which was threatened by an
enormous animal and its rider which they had never previously
looked upon. Hearne and I searched the creek up and down and
returned to camp without finding a drop of water. This country
puzzled us greatly, as we saw every indication of water by the
crows and parrots in hundreds, and the pigeons by thousands.
They might have gone long distances to water, but it was certain
they did not go without. Upon returning to camp we drank all


the water we had left and mounted our horses again, and, taking
the waterbags with us, proceeded to the blacks’ camp Mr. Ross
had discovered. As expected, we found that the blacks had all
cleared out, but not before they had taken nearly all the water,
which they carried in large wallaby-skins. The skins were taken
off without cutting them and the leg and arm holes were tied up.
They turned the skins fur-side in and filled them with water at
the neck aperture. The bags would hold from two to four gahons,
according to the size of the animal. The water was perfectly
clean and good, and the bags lasted a long time with care. They
left us sufficient to fill our bags, but none for the horses.
—Blacks in the Camp.—
Upon reaching our old camp on Giles Creek we unpacked and
let the horses go down to the water. I followed them in order
to hobble them when they had finished drinking. As I approached
the waterhole I heard a lot of jabbering, and looking up the hill
saw several savages with spears and waddies gesticulating with
signs for me to clear away. I could only see five, but further
off were many more, principally women and children, but I soon
became aware of more by a great yabbering about 50 yards off,
screened by some thick bushes which prevented my seeing any for
some time. At last a short, well-conditioned old savage issued
forth with an enormously long spear and some waddies in one
hand and a big stone in the other. He seemed to be trembling or in
a terrible rage, shaking his weapons at me and making signs for
me to go away. This I did not choose to do until the horses had
had enough water, but I took care to unbuckle my revolver, as I
was within range of his spear, and might have to give him a fright
if he had put his threats into execution. The others on the hill
appeared to be laughing and apparently encouraging the old fellow,
but he evidently thought he was already too near, and was
•suspicious as to what those fearful big creatures might do that
were drinking up his water supply, and he moved higher up the
hill. I then drove the horses away, and by the time Mr. Ross
had arrived at the camp we were ready with our carbines to go
down and fill all the waterbags. This seemed to pacify the
savages, and they retired to their camp on the hilltop. They had
evidently become much bolder since our absence, and had fenced
in the waterhole with bushes, which, when the horses had gone,
one of them went down and pulled away, leaving two gaps
as if to allow the horses a passage to the water without
knocking the bushes in. Their object in fencing the
water might have been to keep the pigeons out. While
getting water next morning we noticed a blackfellow on the hill.
After many signs and gesturings he was induced to come closer


down, and Mr. Ross managed to get up to him. When he found
he was not going to be killed he seemed quite pleased and ceased
trembling, and was soon joined by two companions. A fourth
kept watch over them with spears and other weapons on the creek-
bank. They all seemed to be tremendously astonished, and began
feeling Mr. Ross all over. They were especially excited over his
red nightcap, which he was wearing. They were all perfectly
naked and trembling with fear or with the cold, or both. As I
approached they came to meet me, taking hold of my arm and
leading me to a small fire they had kindled, making signs and
yabbering at a great rate. They then made me stroke their
beards. Their hair was long, but tied back in the exact form of
the chignon which ladies were wearing when I left Adelaide.
The front part of the head was kept shaved. The red tail-
feather of the black cockatoo was stuck in their hair, and which
they presented to us, but which we merely looked at and returned
to them. They soon became very friendly, and shouted for their
lubras to come and see us, about 20 of whom we could see
watching us from some distance down the creek. The lubras
were too frightened, and bolted for their lives. Mr. Ross made
the old man a present of a brand-new and bright tomahawk, which
he examined very carefully, feeling the bright steel edge, and.
no doubt, wondering what sort of stone it could be. After he
had examined it, he returned it to Mr, Ross, seemingly unaware
of its use. Mr. Ross told me to go and lop ofif a small limb of
a tree near by, which I did with one blow, to the astonishment of
the old savage, who examined the limb and then eagerly took
back the tomahawk. One could imagine how he would prize it,
sleep on it, and, perhaps, worship it. Mr. Ross then invited the
four savages up to our camp, and they followed us, humming and
dancing as they came along. The first thing that seemed to
attract their attention was the long leather surcingles that go over
the packhorses, wondering, no doubt, what enormous animals
could have worn such long skins. There were so many things
so new and marvellous that it would fill pages to express the
wonder and astonishment they displayed. We soon found,
however, that our sable brethren were becoming too bold. They
rummaged among our swags, which we had not yet rolled up,
and pulled things about so much that it gave us all we could do
to take things away from them. They were constantly planting
small things under their armpits and in their chignons. Not-
withstanding all our watchfulness, they managed to baffle us, for
as we were finished packing up Mr. Ross missed, above all things,
his double-barrelled shotgun, and also Mr. Harvey’s carbine. To
our astonishment, there was one rascal with the carbine, holding


it by the nozzle, and shoving it butt first into some long grass
nearby. He showed no sign of fear or guilt when we took it from
him, but gave a loud laugh. We then made another savage show
us where the gun was. This he quite readily did, taking Mr. Ross
by the arm, leading him to the spot, and pulling the gun out,
muzzle first, from a very thick bush. They all laughed heartily,
apparently considering it a good joke. I also had much difficulty
in preventing another savage from walking off with my watch,
which I had left for a moment on my open swag. Fortunately,
I saw the chain hanging from his dirty armpit. I put it to his ear,
and when he heard it ticking he would have no more to do with
it. Of course, the savages had not the remotest idea as to the
value or use of the firearms, and were probably attracted by the
bright barrels, but had they gone off when poking them in the
bushes there would have been another tale. So soon as we
started for the horses the savages made off, but returned while
we were packing up with all their spears, and we noticed one
fellow pointing his spear at a horse two or three times. As the
horses approached nearer they all bolted off, being far more
terrified of the horses than they were of us. When we started
away all the blacks, lubras. and piccaninnies on the hilltop set up
a tremendous howling and crying. It was not, perhaps, a wise
course to allow the blacks into our camp, as it promoted their
covetousness, but I think Mr. Ross’s desire was to give them a
good impression of the first white people they had ever beheld.
Had we used harsher methods, it might have prejudiced them
against parties of whites who might follow in our wake.
CHAPTER VIII
“Wugh-wughs” and “Wow-wows”—Oasis in the Desert—More Sandhills
—Searching for Water—Glimpse of Chambers’s Pillar—Three Grand
Spectacles—On the Finke River.
—“ Wugh-wughs ” and “Wow-wows.”—
The blacks at our old camp on Giles Creek mentioned in the
previous article had a peculiar way of terminating their sentences
with a loud “ Wugh wugh ”or “ Wow wow.” What it meant
I cannot say, but because of this fact we called this place the
Wow-wow Waterhole among ourselves. I don’t know if Mr.
Harvey has it on the map as such. On 24th September, 1870, we
started due west along the foot of the range for a distance of
28 miles, and camped without water for the horses. On Sunday,
25th September, we kept the same course, still travelling west.
There was no sign of water until about 1 o’clock, when my spare


saddle-horse, Warlock, who was running loose with the mob,
suddenly turned due north. He bolted away for about a mile,
and led the whole party to a good swamp with a plentiful supply.
This is the second time Warlock has found us water. During
the day we crossed a large sandy creek bordered by nice grassy
flats, extending for a distance of 15 miles. We made Camp
No. 33 at Warlock’s Swamp on 26th September. High and hot
winds were blowing from the north all night. The horses
separated, and while Crispe was after one lot he came upon
15 savages about a mile from the camp. They ran a little way
off, and then faced round and called out “ Wugh wugh,” which
seemed a common expression. They are probably part of the
Wow-wows we left yesterday on the hilltop. They had evidently
been watching us from the sandhills. We started again at
8.45 a.m., following our tracks back two miles to the sandy creek
we crossed yesterday. We followed it for about seven miles to
where it appeared to end in a swamp. Immediately on leaving
it we entered the old porcupine sandhills, desert patch, and desert
oak —all of them indications of a dry and waterless region. After
a short distance a change took place in the form of low flinty
ranges, but there was no sign of water. Everything was silent
as the grave. There was not a bird to be seen or heard, and the
sun poured out his burning rays overhead.
—Oasis in the Desert. —
On ascending a low peaked hill the view to the south and
south-east was of a most interesting description. Sandhills
stretched as far as we could see, but Mr. Ross —who was on a
higher elevation —fancied he could see a glimmering, about three
miles away to the westward, that seemed like water, and induced
him to dispatch Crispe, with instructions to raise a smoke if his
belief should prove correct. To our great satisfaction, it was
not long before a welcome curl of smoke rose up. Losing no
time, we soon came in view of a fine sheet of water, with ducks
in abundance. It was a fine lagoon, filled by the thunderstorms
that overtook us on leaving Mount Daniel some three weeks ago;
indeed, it was an unexpected blessing, an oasis in the desert to us.
There were plenty of blacks’ tracks about. The distance was
27 miles nearly due east of the previous night’s camp at Warlock.
We reached Camp 34 at Claypan Lagoon on 27th September,
and spelled for the day before facing the sandhills. Mr. Ross
shot a crane and took a stroll to the top of a peaked hill about
a mile and a half away, where he built a trig of stones. Here
he also found another little lagoon of beautiful clear water.
Returning, Mr. Ross and Hearne took the waterbags over and
filled them, as the water at the camp was thick and muddy.


Hearne and I attempted to wash some clothes, but we had to
give it up, as they seemed to get dirtier. The day was very hot.
We did not see any blacks, but thought they were not far off.
We kept watch through the night.
—More Sandhills.—
Next morning we started at 7.45 on a westerly course, which
fortunately proved to be free of porcupine and sand. We passed
over some splendid, well-grassed country, crossing one or two
small gum creeks and dry swamps. Towards the afternoon we
passed over some low flinty hills, and again entered sandhills,
porcupine, and desert oak, and camped at 4.15 without water
for the horses. Clouds were rising to the northwards, which we
hoped would bring up a thunderstorm. The weather was close
and sultry all day. We set fire to the grass in several places,
but we got no response from the blacks.
—Searching for Water.—
On 29th September the horses rambled some distance away,
and got a late start. Appearances from this camp indicated
anything but a watered region, and our horses had no water last
night. Mr, Ross very prudently determined to avoid, if possible,
entering the sandhill country. Consequently, we steered a south-
easterly course, which we found to be good travelling, and gave
better signs of a watered district as we proceeded. We passed
over low, stony ridges with claypans and gum swamps between
them. A larger one than usual appearing some distance to the
westward induced Hearne to go across to it. He overtook us
again in about an hour with tidings of having found water, and,
further, that what we had supposed to be a large swamp was in
reality a large gum creek. Accordingly, we altered our course
and reached the creek in about two and a half miles. We found
it to be as large a creek as we have met with, and splendidly
timbered with whitegums and a fine sandy soakage, with plenty
of water for our horses, so we camped at 2 o’clock. Messrs.
Ross and Harvey took a ride up the creek and reported having
seen two or more waterholes and other places where water
could be got by digging in the sand. Mr. Harvey came to the
conclusion that this creek was the Hugh, named by Stuart.
Hearne and I mended girths and packs. The day’s distance was 11
miles, travelled in pleasant weather. The next day we started at
8.7 a.m., following the course of the creek and passing over good
cattle and sheep country. We crossed the river at intervals, and
at each crossing we found water either by digging or in pools.
The river is over 50 yards wide, with tableland hills on each side.
This is certainly a fine river for water, but still there is nothing


to indicate its permanency, as it is difficult to decide whether it is
the result of thunderstorms or of periodical floods. The absence
of blacks rather tends to show it is unusual for water to remain
so low down the river at so late a season of the year, or again
that they may have permanent water at other points on the river.
We travelled a distance of 20 miles during the day.
—Glimpse of Chambers’s Pillar.—
We left Hugh Camp 37 on Ist October, starting at 8.35, and
following the river in a south-easterly direction, crossing it twice,
and finding plenty of water each time. We camped at 2 o’clock,
and got water by digging. Mr. Ross and I rode out about six
miles north-east to some low hills, believing ourselves to be now
in the vicinity of Chambers’s Pillar, which we were all anxious
to see. We failed to sight this landmark. There are heavy
sandhills on each side of the river. We travelled 15 miles, and
then camped. Horses rambled down to the river in search of
water, which they fortunately found. We started at 10 o’clock
on 2nd October, and went two and a half miles to the waterhole
the horses had found in the night. Mr. Harvey took the lead
and struck west. Mr, Ross went south-west to some low hills.
We hoped to see some signs of Chambers’s Pillar, and about
2 o’clock we ascended a low rocky hill, and, far to the westward,
sighted a square pyramid, which we guessed was the long-
talked-off landmark. We judged it to be at least 12 miles distant,
but although we all made guesses, so deceiving is this sandhill
country that we were all several miles out. When we had
proceeded over 12 miles it was just dark, and we were still several
miles from the Pillar. We camped with nothing but porcupine
grass for the horses and no water, having travelled 21 miles.
No watch was kept.
—Three Grand Spectacles. —
The next day we started at 8 o’clock in the direction of the
Pillar, and upon gaining the top of a high sandhill we had
presented to our view three of the grandest sights probably we
had ever seen. There stood about two miles ahead three
remarkable objects, one of them presenting the appearance of a
square with small additions on each corner. This was the second
one of the trio. The most northerly one presented at this distance
a flat solid wall of rock with, a hole right through it, and to this
one we shaped our course. It was not long before we were
standing underneath it, and after some difficulty succeeded in
climbing it. I managed to reach the hole, and stood under what
I could no longer describe as a hole, for it was a magnificent
arch of solid rock some 20 feet high and 25 feet wide, with a


keystone some four feet thick, reaching to the summit of the rock.
I tried to persuade Mr. Ross to come up, but I could get no one
to venture. I then made an attempt to reach the top, still some
50 feet above me. After much difficulty I succeeded, and was
rewarded with a fine view of the country, I informed Mr. Ross
that a trig could be built without much trouble, so I set to work
and built one six feet high. I had just finished my task when
Crispe made his appearance. Descending the hill we found the
going more difficult and dangerous than the ascent; it is
composed wholly of rotten sandstone, and it constantly broke
away. We made search here for any signs or marks of Stuart's
party, but found none. We then proceeded a mile to Chambers’s
Pillar, which stands upon a sandstone mound about the same
height as the surrounding sandhills. On this mound a massive
pillar rises perpendicularly to the height of some 180 feet on all
sides. Mr. Harvey took a sketch of the three rocks, including
the pillar. We all carved our names an inch deep on the western
face of the pillar, and also on the date of our visit. This pillar
was named by John McDouall Stuart after Mr. John Chambers,
who was a enthusiastic and practical supporter of his expeditions.
Ours was the first party to visit it since he discovered it.
—On the Finke River.—
Proceeding on our course in a southerly direction, we cut, as
we expected, the Finke River, which is five miles from the Pillar,
and was also discovered and named by Stuart after another
■staunch supporter of his expeditions. We were surprised to find
running water and very boggy conditions. With all our care,
a chestnut pack mare got bogged, and gave us much trouble to
extricate from the quicksands. We got another surprise, for
on tasting the water we found it to be as salt as brine. We
proceeded on down the Finke for three miles, and camped on
a swamp of brackish water, where we shot some ducks. On the
morning of 4th October we made a good start, following the
course of the Finke. There are some tremendous bends, which
in some cases we were able to shorten by cutting across. We
kept on the northern side all day. From time to time we could
see large sheets of water in the bed of the river. We reached
the Hugh River about 3 o’clock at, I think, no more than five
or six miles above its junction with the Finke. We crossed the
Hugh and camped on its southern bank, close to a deep and large
waterhole, extending half across the river, and 100 yards long.
Down the creek we noticed several more holes of water. The
mere pressure of the foot on the sand will cause water to rise to
the surface; but, being quicksand, it is risky to cross horses, for
as soon as they break the surface down they go. Anyone


bringing stock to this country should exercise great care in
selecting safe crossing-places. The water is splendid and fresh,
but we have no proof that it is permanent. It may be that this
has been an exceptionally good season. A heavy thunderstorm
fell to the northward in the night, but we only got a few drops
of rain here. We covered 15 miles for the day. Next morning
we started at 8.45, steering a course south and 15 deg. west,
striking the Hugh again at 2 p.m. We camped near plenty of
water, with reeds along the edges. Some of the holes were a little
brackish. Lightning brightened the sky to the eastward. Next
day we kept a south-easterly course. There was thunder and
lightning most of the time. After going about six miles from
our camp we reached some capital grass country, with plenty of
bluebush and saltbush.- It is good sheep country, with a few
sandhills, which were well grassed. We passed three or four
table-topped hills to the westward, and the river on the same side.
The country on the western bank seemed just as good for cattle
or sheep. About 3 o’clock we struck a large watercourse about
two miles east of the main stream, and under sandstone cliffs.
There was a splendid lagoon, with plenty of ducks and other
waterfowl, which seems to be pretty deep and should last some
months. However, it is rather boggy. As _ soon as we had
pitched our camp the rain commenced, and set in for the night.
We all got a good soaking, and had to sleep in soaked blankets.
But it is all in the game, and we were glad to see it. The rain
was pretty general, and we shall find the benefit of it when
continuing our journey. We made 1 7 miles for the day. Every-
thing was soaking wet the next morning (7th October), and we
spelled all day to dry the things. The weather was close and
sultry, without a breath of air, and the sun scorching hot after
the storm. Hearne and I shot six ducks. Crispe and I had a
bathe, and we found the lagoon was not as deep as we had
thought; but still it was deep enough for a good swim. We
spent the afternoon in washing our clothes and mending the
waterbags. We had just got all our rugs and clothes nice and
dry for the night when thunder and lightning commenced again,
and in 15 minutes everything, including ourselves, was soaking
wet again.
CHAPTER IX
Timid Natives—Short of Supplies—Return to the Peake—Trial of Pluck
and Endurance.
—Timid Natives. —
The soaking described in the last chapter we endured philo-
sophically, for it cooled the atmosphere. We were getting very


short of tobacco, and we divided the contents of the tobacco-bag,
which yielded a stick and a half for each of us. We expected
to be at least a fortnight without the fragrant weed before we
reached the Peake. On Bth October, 1870, we struck camp at 10
o’clock, and proceeded on a southerly course, crossing the creek
a mile from the camp. Three miles beyond it we encountered
sandhills and porcupine. About noon Mr, Ross had a severe
attack of internal cramp. After lying down for an hour he was
able to proceed. We gave him two doses of chlorodyne. We
were going through sandhills. About 5 o’clock we sighted
Mount Daniel, 25 miles to the eastward. Shortly afterwards we
cut the Goyder River, named by Stuart after the late G. W.
Goyder, formerly Surveyor-General of South Australia. On
9th October we entered country changing from the sandhills to
low chalky and slate stone hills, far better for hauling, but rough
on the horseshoes. Several blacks showed in sight as we were
leaving the camp, but as soon as Mr. Ross tried to speak to them
they made off. We passed over a large creek, the Duffield, and
camped on another, the Coglin. Both creeks were named by
Stuart. We found plenty of w r ater, thanks to the thunderstorm.
The ground was quite boggy in places. Mr. Ross proposed
camping there to shoe up the horses, as we would soon enter the
stony country. Immense smokes were seen far to the westward.
We had just used the last of our tea. The 10th October was
spent in shoeing the horses and mending packbags. We were
drinking burnt flour—a poor substitute for tea. Two days later
we camped on a creek which we supposed to be the Hamilton,
a main branch of the Treuer. Mr. Ross resolved to follow this
creek down a few miles. We saw two or three old black lubras,
who bolted immediately, and we camped at noon. Messrs. Ross
and Harvey rode out a few miles and returned in two hours, and
reported having found a very large waterhole half a mile below
our camp. Hearne and I took the guns and fishing lines, walked
down to it, and found it to be about half a mile long and 50
yards wide. We shot two large wood duck and then caught two
or three dozen fish, some 10 in. long.
—Short of Supplies.—
Shortly after leaving the Neales Creek we got on to the
Palmerston Plains. We were now without tea, sugar, tobacco,
or beef, and cold water and damper was not nourishing. I was
feeling sick, and managed to scrape a few grains and dust out
of the old teabag, and made myself a weak quart of tea, and felt
much refreshed after it. I missed the tea more than the tobacco,
which was the case with all of us. On 17th October we
started at 7.45 on an easterly course for four miles to a round


table-topped hill, which we supposed to be Mount O’Halloran,
and then steered south-west, reaching the creek again. Mr.
Ross named this Anna’s Creek. There were some fine holes m
it, and we got an abundance of fish. Wq camped there. It was
a close, hot night, and there were myriads of mosquitoes. It
was the first night that we had been really worried by them. We
had small smoke fires around our beds, but got very little sleep.
Nothing seemed to keep them away, not even some strong
language; and both flies and mosquitoes seemed to get worse as
we got further from the tropics.
—Return to the Peake. —
We reached Mount Kingston on 19th October, at 11 o’clock,
and there met the first signs of civilization, being an
old sheepyard and some old dray tracks, following which for
about seven miles brought us to the Peake Cattle Station the
furthest-out station in South Australia. We found the advanced
construction party under the charge of Mr. Stephen Jarvis. Our
very first inquiries were for tobacco, and for half an hour we
were engaged in puffing the precious weed, and were then quite
ready for something more substantial, in the shape of good
bread, beef, and tea, and the extra luxury of fresh milk. _ All
received letters excepting myself, who had to be contented with a
pile of newspapers. It seemed quite strange to be in civilization
once again, and to see faces other than our own. Messrs. Ross
and Harvey started for Mount Margaret (Humbum), taking
one packborse with them. We made a camp, sorted out all our
things, put them in order, and spelled the rest of the day. We
were very glad of it. too, and enjoyed ourselves immensely.
About nine weeks had elapsed since we started into the interior
from Humbum. We had travelled considerably more than 1,000
miles, and for more than half of it through totally unknown
country. To me, it had been a glorious experience, and I felt
quite ready for more. We stayed at the Peake from 19th October
until 16th November, and during that time we were engaged in
principally making preparations for a fresh start. _ Several
bullocks had been killed, and we prepared quantities of it for the
trip by jerking, salting, smoking, and dry-salting it. Jerked
beef is prepared by cutting it into thin strips, hanging it to a
wire fence or rope, and exposing it to the hot sun for a day, or
perhaps two. according to the temperature. It then dries, curls,
and shrivels up. It is then packed in bags, denuded of all fat,
as fat will not keep good. We used to put handfuls of it on
the coals of a morning, but it was very much like eating one’s
bootlaces for breakfast. Sometimes we would eat it raw, or
pound it up with a tomahawk, and boil it as a sort of soup with


a few handfuls of the leaves of the old man saltbush. We also
fully repaired hobble-straps by the dozen, and sets of shoes for
the horses. I also made for myself a large mosquito-net for
sleeping in. I was the only one of the party so provided, and
that only through my brother Christopher, who had been a
member of Mr. Goyder’s expedition to Palmerston, impressing
upon me that it was absolutely imperative to be provided with
a net in those tropical regions where mosquitoes delight to bite
both day and night. I tried to prevail upon my companions to
do likewise, but they seemed to think their skins impervious to
the attacks of the pest. How bitterly they regretted it later on
is another story. During our stay quite a number of officials,
surveyors, storekeepers, and men arrived, in addition to numerous
wagons, drays, and buggies, and camels loaded with stores and
wire. Everything was being provided for starting the work in
sections of the great trancontinental telegraph line, commencing
from both ends —truly a stupendous work for the comparatively
small population of this colony.
—Trial of Pluck and Endurance.—
From our experience, so far as we had been and seen of the
interior, it meant facing tremendous and unforeseen difficulties.
It was impossible to guess when or where the two ends of the
wire would be joined, but in any case it would be a trial of
Australian pluck and endurance, and an accomplishment any
colony could be proud of. On 28th October several German
wagons arrived loaded with general stores. These wagons were
specially constructed for carrying the 20-foot wooden telegraph-
poles from various timber areas in the interior, and in the vicinity
of the proposed line. They were fitted with a long pole under
the carriage, by which the hind wheels could be extended several
feet, or shortened as required. The first surveyor to arrive with
his party was Mr. Gilbert McMinn, and he made his temporary
camp on the Blyth Creek, nine miles south of the Peake. This
was on the 2nd November. Then came Mr. Blood, one of the
Government storekeepers, and also four wagonloads of wire.
Five days later came 100 camels, with flour and wire, and on
10th November arrived Mr. Charles Todd (Superintendent of
Telegraphs and Postmaster-General), accompanied by Mr.
Babbage, a well-known explorer. The next day Messrs. Ross
and Harvey returned from their trip to Humbum, and were
accompanied by Mr. A. T. Woods, surveyor, and a former
member of Mr. Goyder’s expedition. On Sunday Mr. Todd held
church service in the station manager’s house. The following
day there arrived Mr. McMinn and Messrs. R. R. Knuckey,
J. LeM. F. Roberts, Tom Bee, Harley Bacon, and, wonderful to


relate we, the members of the Overland Telegraph Exploring
Expedition, were informed that we were henceforth to receive an
increase in our wages of Is. a day! Our pay was now 275. a
week and found in food and tobacco, not forgetting the jerked
beef.
CHAPTER X
I Lose My Watch—A Day of Thrills—A Trying Time—Water at Last.
—I Lose My Watch. —
After nearly a month’s spelling and working occasionally, we
felt to have had a surfeit of civilization, and, everything being-
ready Mr. Ross decided to start on 16th November for
the open spaces, which we did. After a parting glass with Mr.
Todd and many good wishes and much shaking of hands we
again bid adieu to civilization, and, mounting our same faithful
and refreshed old horses, turned our faces to the north. Crossing
the Peake Creek without difficulty and keeping the same course,
struck the Neales, which we followed up three miles above
Algebuckina and camped, when we heard some cooeeing, and found
that Mr. Babbage was also camped on the creek. On 19th
November we camped on a fine waterhole about seven
miles from Mount John. A few telegraph-poles could be got
there along this waterhole, which was 600 yards long and more
than 12 feet deep. On the following day we were spelling,
shoeing, and washing clothes. Just at sundown a blackfellow
came up. a half-wild sort of fellow, who could speak a few
words of English. He seemed rather excited, and said he had
just been killing wild blackfellows. and wanted us to shoot some
more, so that he could break their legs, but we declined to take
the job on. We moved on, and sighted Mounts Sarah and
Rebecca, which were named by Mr. Ross after his two daughteis
when he was in this country two or three years previously, and
for which we shaped our course. I had the misfortune to lose
my watch. Mr. Ross very kindly sent Hearne back with me to
search for it, and offered to stay pai tof the day and wait out
return. We went back 12 miles and searched and searched until
dark, but in vain. In the meantime, a thunderstorm had been
rising, rendering the night intensely dark, and it was with
considerable difficulty that we were able to pick our way over
numbers of creeks * for 12 miles with only light enough to
see our horses’ ears. However, w r e found the camp about 10 p.m.,
and just as the rain started.


—A Day of Thrills.—
Near the Finke we were at war with the ants. The whole
country was black with the little pests, and regiments invaded
every nook and crevice. We had to spread hot ashes across our
paths. Mr. Ross walked up the sand cliff in front of our camp,
and to his surprise, upon reaching the top, found five blackfellows
sitting down watching our camp. They made no attempt to
escape, but, leaving their spears and waddies, followed Mr. Ross
to our camp. At first they seemed rather shy, but one fellow
had not been sitting down very long before he managed to get
hold of one of our tomahawks and sat upon it. We gave them
some damper and sugar, which they seemed to relish. Mr.
Harvey made one of them a present of an old white shirt, with
which he seemed highly pleased. They wanted to camp with us
all night, but as it was getting dark we motioned them off, but
they only went to the top of the cliff, 150 yards off. Another
event occurred that day that might have proved more serious.
Crispe and I were sitting down by a packbag when I noticed,
as I thought, a large snake curled under the bag, but on turning
it over we found it to be a death adder of a light orange colour,
with hook on its tail and black rings around its body. It must
have been within six inches of Crispe’s foot, and was some 18
inches long. I broke its back, chopped off its tail, and put it
m the fire. Spelling on the Finke, I converted a pair of trousers
into pantaloons, and Mr. Ross the seat of a pair into the back
of his waistcoat. Our sable brethren were looking down upon
us from the top of the cliff at daylight. The most conspicuous
was the one with the shirt. 1 hey soon found their way to camp,
and were regaled with a pannican of coffee at our breakfast,
and remained the rest of the day, and again tried their hands at
pilfering. I discovered one fellow endeavouring to hide our
small bag of salt and some saddlestraps in the hollow of his
shield. C rispe and Hearne, while going for the horses, found
a fine waterhole jn the Finke 200 yards long. Mr. Ross carved
tne word ‘Dig’ on a tree, and buried a coffee-tin, containing
directions for the coming construction parties as to where
different waters would be found, as well as timber for poles.
\\ e had scarcely gone 200 yards before we saw the savages make
a dash for the buried tin, and as it was of no use replacing it
while they were in the neighbourhood we went on our way, hoping
they might return it after having satisfied their curiosity. The
river takes an immense bend in the form of a horseshoe—now
known as TTorseshoe Bend—right round to our old camp. Before
leaving our last camp I gave one of the savages a bucket and a
quart pot, and made signs for him to fill it at the lagoon. After


waiting for some time I went over to him to see what kept him
so long, and found him still pouring the water into the bucket,
which, of course, was running over, and after watching him for
some time found he was trying hard to fill the bucket up to the
handle!
—A Trying Time.—
On Bth December, as we were walking along the bed of
the Hugh River, we passed our old camp. We found, much
to our surprise, the case of Mr. Ross’s opera-glass, which he
lost during our last trip at a camp of ours some 14 miles north
of this one. Of course, this was the work of the savages, who
must have been following our tracks and found the glass and
carried the case all, the way to. this camp, and had thrown it into
the old embers of our fire, torn the lid, and knocked the bottom
out. They would, of course, break up the glass to see what was
inside. The next day was terribly hot. At sundown Hearne
and I recognized the sandy creek we had made back to last time,
and now called Phillipson’s Creek, after the general manager
of Beltana. To make sure, however, I rode across a couple of
miles to try and cut our old tracks, which, if I succeeded in
doing, 1 was to make a smoke signal, but I could not find the
tracks. They had been completely washed out, although I
hunted about until dark, through thick and tangled swamps, with
long grass and polygnum-bush sweeping my shoulders. I then
made back to where 1 had left Mr. Harvey and Hearne, only to
tind that they had gone. It was very dark, and I had difficulty
in finding which way they had steered, but after some searching
found their tracks and managed, with the help of my horse, which
kept smelling the tracks and neighing, to follow them for two
miles, where I saw the camp fire on the edge of the swamp, but
the first glance at the camp fire told me it was a dry camp.
Mr. Ross had been up to the old Warlock Swamp, but had found
it and others all dry, and, what was worse, the waterbags were
all nearly empty, leaking through the rubbishy canvas. We
unrolled our swags and flung ourselves on the blankets, drank
half a pint of water each, and slept until morning 4 without eating
anything. We were all very thirsty. It had been a fearfully
hot day, and we had come 30 miles. All hands awoke at
daylight from a hungry and thirsty and to me an uncomfortable
couch, as I found I had been sleeping on the shovel. We made
an early start. Our horses looked miserable and tucked up, and
apparently had not fed very much during the night, as the feed
was very dry. and they were very thirsty after the previous day’s
long and terribly hot journey. We kept following up this dry
creek. The weather was frightfully hot. Mr. Ross left us,


going towards a low range, and shortly afterwards Hearne left,
and a little later Crispe—all in search of water. Mr. Harvey
kept the course and the lead, while I drove the moh of packhorses
behind him until about 3 p.m., when so scorching and burning
was the sun that the horses kept clustering under every shady
tree, and my thirst was increased by my shouting at the poor
brutes to get them along. Mr. Harvey was so exhausted that
we both got off our horses; we felt so weak. We stopped for
half an hour. The horses clustered together nose to nose, and
sucked each other’s breath—a thing I had never seen or heard
of before. On parting earlier in the day we each had a mouthful
of water except Crispe, and we had left about a quarter of a
pannican in the bag for him, but we found it had all evaporated,
and the bag was parched and fla4. Mr. Harvey felt weak and
giddy, and feared he could not steer correctly.
—Water at Last. —
We determined, however, to make another push, but scarcely
had 1 risen to my feet before I exclaimed, “There’s a smoke!
A smoke!” And true enough, there it was, although I could only
see the top of it, but sufficient to assure me it was not far off.
I cheered Mr. Harvey up, but he said, “ It might only be blacks.”
“ Well,” I said, “ you know where there’s smoke there is fire,
and where there is fire there are blacks, and where there are blacks
there is water.” It raised our hopes, and in my own mind I
felt certain it was no less than a smoke signal from Mr. Ross
or the others, and we steered for it. In a short distance we
got into another creek with rocky bottom, and teatree growing
on the banks,'a good sign, and, better still, there were numerous
doves, crows, parrots, and the little diamond sparrow, the last
a sure sign of the nearness of water, although often only a very
small supply. There also was the fire blazing up not half a mile
away down the creek. Crispe overtook us. Both he and his
mare knocked up. He, too, had seen the signal, and steered for
it. Soon our hopes were confirmed, as we saw Mr. Ross
approaching, and heard his call of “ Plenty of good water just
ahead.” Readers of this, whoever they may be, and whether
they ever have or have not felt the pangs or, I might well say,
the agonies of thirst, will understand with what joy and thankful-
ness we listened to those few magic words, and then, only a
little further, we reached the water —a fine hole, too. Ihe good
old horses had smelt it, and rushed into it, wetting some of the
packbags. The water was about four feet deep, slightly brackish,
but delicious. We, as eager as the horses, dipped our pannicans
into the precious fluid without dismounting, and then, unpacking
the horses, soon had our quartpots on the fire boiling for the


coffee and a long-deferred 36 hours’ fast. What the conse-
quences would have been had we not found this water I dread
to contemplate. I, for one, must admit I felt as though I could
not have reached the gorge, and Crispe, some miles behind, with
a knocked-up horse, could not have followed us. Mr. Harvey
was quite done up, and Mr. Ross and Hearne equally so. Nor
did we think our horses would have carried us to the gorge, still
fully 25 miles distant. But God he thanked! He mercifully
ordered it otherwise, and we were saved from such a possibility.
Our only chance would have been to travel at night, no easy
matter, through unknown country. To city dwellers, and even
to some bushmen, it might appear that the sufferings of ourselves
and horses for want of water during only some 36 hours might
appear extraordinary, and even exaggerated, but bushmen
generally will quite understand and confirm the fact that while
on our former expedition we were 72 hours without water, we
did not suffer one-quarter as much as we did on this 36 hours’
trip, and this was only and entirely accountable to the difference in
the temperature. On the former occasion it was comparatively
cool most of the time, and the feed was then green and succulent.
But on the prseent occasion the days were scorchingly hot, the
nights close and sultry, and the feed dry and parched. Moreover,
had we had proper methods of carrying water, we ourselves
would not have suffered from either thirst or hunger. And food
is not tempting to parched mouths and swollen lips and tongues.
Mr. Ross ! believed this creek was the head of the Phillipson.
CHAPTER XI
Birds, Bees, and Butterflies —Christmas in the Ranges—Central Mount
Sturt.
—Birds, Bees, and Butterflies.—
Spelling here to-day to rest ourselves and horses —Crispe
and Hearne shoeing the horses, Mr. Ross mending packbags.
Going up the creek this morning. I found three good waterholes,
which appear to be permanent, hut slightly mineralized. Crispe
shot a young emu, and when cooked we found it an excellent
and agreeable change of diet. On the following day we sighted
high ranges, which Mr. Ross has named Edith Ranges, after
Lady Edith Fergusson, wife of the then Governor of South
Australia. Blacks’ smokes were in all directions, and the country
was on fire as we rode along. We saw for the first time the
wild orange-tree in blossom. It has a very pretty appearance,
not unlike the common orange. Birds of every description were


numerous also great numbers of wild bees and butterflies of
every hue. Mr. Ross took a walk to the top of a high mountain
and reported having seen very mountainous country ahead, and
hills of gigantic size on every side. Scenes like this recouped
the explorer for all the privations on such trips as ours, and
acted as a great reviver. The high range under which we
camped Mr. Ross named Hart’s Range, after the Hon. John
Hart, of Adelaide. We also passed a high mountain three miles
to the east, which was named Mount McLachlan, after a gentle-
man of that name in Glasgow, Scotland, who was Mr. Harvey s
first employer. Travelling for several days had been over very
rough country; it had worn off the horseshoes, and, what was
worse, we had used up all the nails. Should we have much
more stony country to pass over we feared some horses might
have to be left behind.
—Christmas in the Ranges. —
On 22nd December rain commenced just as we had all
turned in, and continued the whole night, soaking us and
everything else, and leaving our camp one huge puddle, obliging
us to spell the following day. It continued showery until 3 p.m.,
when it cleared off, enabling us to dry our blankets. These
unsolicited washing days were making our rugs and blankets
quite light and frisky. A flock of galahs flew over, and Ciispe
shot two, which we found good eating, especially as we were
short of meat, only having left a few pounds of jerked beef, or
“ bootlaces,” as we called it. On Christmas Day we saw plenty
of natives’ tracks, and soon after saw an old lubra and a boy or
girl digging yams. They crouched down in the grass out of
sight. 1 I saw a spear against a gumtree, spliced in three places.
Shortly after we came upon a small fire with a yamstick and a
number of parrots cooking on the coals, but the owners had
bolted. We could see Mr. Ross’s horsetrack on ahead of us.
Mr. Ross reported having seen nine natives in a mob, who bolted
in all directions. Lower down the creek he saw three blackboys.
Two ran away, but the third stood his ground, and allowed him
to ride up to him. Mr. Ross called out “ Whitefellow,” and
the youngster at once repeated it several times, and kept pointing
to the eastward in the direction of Queensland. Possibly he
had been with, or heard of, the settlers on the Herbeit River,
in that colony, which could not be a very great distance from
here, as distances go in that country. Mr. Ross shot four bronze-
wing pigeons, and so ended our first Christmas in Central
Australia. We saw for the first time what Stuart describes as
the corktree. It has a bright-green triangular leaf , with a very
thin and smooth grey or light-blue bark. The butt of the tree is


about eight inches in diameter, and running perfectly straight for
10 feet without branches or boughs. While I was mending
packbags Hearne took the gun and shot several teal. Bringing
them into camp, he threw them down behind me. Without
looking up I said, “So you got some ducks, Billy?” “ No,”
said Billy, “ I didn’t get no ducks.” Upon looking round, I saw
six teal on the ground. I said, “Why, weren’t those ducks?”
“ Oh, no,” said Billy, “ them’s teal. A teal’s a teal, and a duck’s
a duck.” Billy stuck to his contention in spite of Mr. Harvey’s
added assurance that teal is a species of duck. We were about
to sit down and enjoy them when I discovered our damper was
missing. It had dropped out of a torn packbag when passing
through the dense scrub. So we had recourse to flatjacks on the
coals. In addition, we found we had lost all our needles, twine,
and saddlers’ tools, and were unable to mend the torn bags.
—Central Mount Sturt. —
On 29th December Mr. Harvey, not having completed
his plotting up, Mr. Ross and I took a ride out to the top of
the range, from which we sighted a large mountain, apparently
some 20 miles distant. This Mr. Ross believed to be Central
Mount Sturt. The country between appeared to be dense mulga
scrub. There had been a very heavy rain here, as all the little
creeks running from this range northwards were full of water,
some of them still running a short distance on to the plain and
emptying on to fine flats with rich black soil and kangaroo-grass
seven feet high. Returning, we passed three small conical hills.
One of them, the largest and most northerly one, had so steep
a peak or point that there would be barely room for a man to
stand, and Mr. Ross had difficulty in raising a trig upon it. There
were immense smokes far to the westward and south-west of
Mount Sturt, and others a few miles to the north of us. We
passed several wurlies a week or two old. Mr. Harvey made
the latitude of this camp 22.28. Several native wurlies were on
the banks. When we reached the hill Mr. Ross set fire to the
porcupine grass, raising an immense smoke, which, no doubt,
puzzled the savages. We steered for another low range, five
miles distant through thick scrub, and passed over one or two
small creeks and some gum flats. We also noticed two patches of
pinetrees on the western side of the range, which is a continuation
of the black hill. (Note. —This range or black hill is possibly the
site of the recent silver-lead show south-east of Barrow Creek).
We came upon a splendid waterhole three-quarters of a mile
long and 50 yards wide, with plenty of fresh-water turtle and
crayfish, but no fish. We camped there under a large and shady
corktree. Little had I thought this time the previous year that


I should be 1,200 miles in the unknown interior of Australia, and
beyond the centre of this continent. It was a glorious con-
templation and a long ambition realized to the full, and one which
I can never forget nor regret.
CHAPTER XII
New Year’s Day, 1871—Stuart’s Horsetracks—Central Mount Sturt—
Ascending Mount Sturt —What was in the Bottle.
—New Year’s Day, 1871.
Although we were near the latitude of Mount Mann and
Mount Gwynne, it was difficult to distinguish them. Mr. Ross
rode out all the morning, but failed to locate the two mountains,
on account of the great similarity of the country. The nights
and mornings were very cold. We hardly expected such fine
weather on the tropical border at the season of the year, but
we were on high ground. New Year’s Day passed very quietly
with us. We hoped Adelaide might enjoy their picnics and
pastimes. Ours was a continual one, and we did not envy them
theirs or the pomp and ceremonies attached to them. We could
fly our kite higher than they could, and our view was .unlimited,
and the possibilities of the country were not comparable. Accord-
ing to Stuart’s description, this creek must be the Taylor, which he
named after Mr. John Taylor, of South Australia. We soon
found ourselves in an amphitheatre of hills, where the Stirling
Creek has its origin, commencing with almost a gutter, and
gradually swelling in size from a number of tributaries formed
by the saddle in the range. About two miles from the head of
the saddle is a gorge through which the creek runs to the south-
east, and on passing it the range on each side was seen to be
much higher. Mr, Ross informed us that the high hill on the
south side of the creek was Mount Gwynne, and the one on the
north Mount Mann.
—Stuart’s Horsetracks. —
On proceeding down the creek we found a surprising con-
firmation of this. Right along our course was a distinct pad made
by Stuart’s horses. We could follow it quite easily for more
than, a mile. When it is remembered that Stuart used this track
on each occasion, both backwards and forwards, and that in his


last expedition in 1862 he had 70 horses, it was quite feasible
that they should have been visible in portions of high ground
free from floodwaters, although eight or nine years had passed
since they were made, and that they should appear as only having
been made as many months. We sighted Central Mount Sturt,
and camped on the west bank of the Stirling Creek, under some
line corkwood-trees.
—Central Mount Sturt. —
The Stirling Creek was named by Stuart after Mr. Edward
Stirling, a member of the well-known firm of Elder, Stirling,
and Co., of Adelaide. When packing that morning, our genial
surveyor, Mr, Harvey, gave us an agreeable surprise. He
said, “ Well, comrades, you see yonder mountain. That is
Central Mount Sturt, discovered and named by John McDouall
Stuart, who led the first exploring party across Australia from
south to north and back again. Our party is the second to sight
it since he named it 10 years ago. To-night or to-morrow we
shall reach it, and I think that this being a very special occasion
we ought to celebrate it by drinking someone’s health and one
another’s too.” He then, to our intense surprise, went to his
swag and unrolled from a flannel shirt a bottle of O.P. rum.
We drank Mr. Ross’s health and each other’s. None of us had
the slightest suspicion that such a beverage was within 1,000
miles of us, and it certainly was a marvel to us how Mr. Harvey
had carried it safely all those hundreds of miles, through dense
scrub, rocky gorges, and bumping against trees and anthills
without smashing it. It certainly must have been the first rum
to reach Central Australia. The bottle was again securely
corked and returned to his swag. We then started nearly due
west, making for the northern base of Mount Sturt in order
that we might cut the Hanson Creek, which runs southerly along
the eastern base of the mountain. We passed over sandhills and
some claypans of a good size with water in most of them, and
the country all through was splendidly grassed. We discovered
some new wild fruit here, about the size of a pear. We ate six
or seven and found no ill-effects from doing so. We passed
through patches of mulga, some plains, and porcupine grass, until
we reached the base of Mount Sturt, and here Mr. Ross, who
had been away all day, joined us, and we then proceeded three
miles on a south-west course, when we again cut the Hanson
Creek, which is very wide at this point, having several channels,
all of which had running water. We camped at 4 p.m. on the
south-west base of Mount Sturt, and on the north bank of the
Hanson, which runs right under and alongside the base.
Distance to-day, 24 miles.


—Ascending Mount Sturt. —
The 4th January, 1871— Spelling all day in order that we
may ascend Central Mount Sturt. Mr. Ross started at 8 a.m.
to climb the mountain, and Mr. Harvey and Hearne started up
about an hour later. At 11..30 Mr. Ross returned, having found
the cairn of stones raised by Stuart, and brought with him the
bottle buried in the cairn by Stuart, containing papers. The
bottle was one apparently used for preserving French capers,
capped with oilskin, and sealed. Inside was a thin roll, also
wrapped in waterproof cloth, and tied with hemp; outside was
a copy of “The Adelaide Observer,” date 7th January, 1861—
all in excellent preservation. Mr. Ross said he would forward
the bottle unopened to Adelaide for the inspection of Mr. Charles
Todd. This was the first party to reach the centre since that
daring explorer planted the British flag in the centre of
this continent. Strange to say, there were many people who
disbelieved that he ever reached the shores of the Indian Ocean.
But were they to travel over the same country, and experience
the same dangers, difficulties, and privations that befell him,
they would assuredly give all the credit that his energy and
daring deserved. Mr. Ross took another walk up the creek to
endeavour to locate Stuart’s Camp, which was said to be on a
gum creek about two miles to the south-west, but he returned
unsuccessful. Standing on this historic mountain and within
a few feet of Stuart’s Cairn, we knew that from each point of
the compass for 1,000 miles there existed not a single white
human being—not a city, house, fence, or sign of civilization.
—What Was in the Bottle. —
In “ The Adelaide Observer ” on 14th October, 1905, appeared
the following reproduction of a letter by John McDouall Stuart,
announcing "the arrival of himself and party at Sturt Hill, in
the centre of Australia, on 21st April, 1860. This interesting
document was presented by Sir Charles Todd to the Public
Library:—“John McDouall Stuart and party, consisting of two
men and himself, arrived from Adelaide in the Centre of
Australia on Saturday evening, the twenty-first day of April,
1860, and have built this cairn of stones and raised this flag, to
commemorate the event, on the top of Mount Sturt. The Centre
is about two miles south-south-west, at a small gum creek, where
there is a tree marked, facing the south. —John McDouall Stuart
(leader), William Darton Kekwick, Benjamin Heed.”


Mr. HILLARY BOUCAUT,
of Ketchowla,
in the ’Sixties.
Dr. FREDERICK E, RENNER,
first practising physician in the
Wentworth District (1855-70);
also Government Medical Officer
to Die Overland Telegraph
Construction Parties, 1871-2.
Mr. W. G. STRETTON, 1870,
afterwards head of the Customs,
Darwin.
ARTHUR JOHN GILES, 1864.
ALEXANDER RINGWOOD
1871.
Mr. GILBERT McMINN,
who constructed one of the
Central Sections, 1870-1, also
Government Resident in the
’Eighties.
CHRISTOPHER GILES, 1873.
Mr. HENRY PINDER,
chief Officer of the
“Young Australian,”
1872.
Mr. WILLIAM McMINN,
who annulled the contract
between the contractors.
Dalwood & Darwent, and the
Government, 1871.


Mr. STEPHEN KING, 1870.
Also one of Stuart’s Party,
1862.
Mr. RAY PARKIN BOUCAUT,
Northern Sections, 1870, who
started the Estafette.
Mr. CECIL RIX,
Medical Officer,
Northern Sections. 1871.
Mr. R C. BURTON,
Northern Sections, 1781.
ANTHILL ON CULLEN RIVER.


CHAPTER XIII
Flock Pigeons Galore —Birds and Water Supplies—Savages and Game
—Running Out of Water—Scandalous Outfit—Overcoming Water
Difficulties.
—Flock Pigeons Galore. —
We left Central Mount Sturt on sth January, bearing
for Mount Freeling, named by Stuart. At 4 p.m., as there was
still no prospect of water, the course was altered to due west.
Then we noticed thousands of flock pigeons flying in the same
direction, and in three miles cut the Hanson Creek again, where
we found plenty of water, which we were very glad of, as we
were all very thirsty. The day had been scorchingly hot, and
the packhorses kicked up a lot of dust. Many thousands of
flock pigeons came to this water, but we camped too late to
shoot any. We had been without meat for a considerable time,
and anything in the shape of animal food was acceptable. The
munyeroo plant grew here luxuriantly, and we boiled a great
deal. It is thick-leafed, juicy, and a somewhat sour plant, and
makes an excellent sort of jam. The natives pound up the seed,
too. This is the same seed that poor Burke and Wills subsisted
on for some time, but under the name of nardoo, a title given
by the Cooper Creek blacks. Next day we started at 7.30, taking
a south-west course over splendidly grassed flats, as level as a
bowling green for six miles. We then entered mulga scrub,
still well grassed, but burnt in places by the blacks. At 11 miles
we struck the low granite spurs of a range running east and
west, with a high double-peaked hill thickly timbered with pines,
but of a stunted kind. At the end of the spur there is a mass
of granite rock. At 15 miles we again struck the Hanson, where
it branches into three. Here we found water plentiful, and
fresh tracks of blacks in numbers. At 17 miles we struck
another rough, irregular range of granite. The whole hills were
a mass of smooth and shiny granite, and the drainage, after rain,
is immense, soaking through the higher rocks and crevices fully
100 yards out on the plain, where there is a hard crust through
which, when broken, the water bubbles up in a white milky form,
but quite fresh and good to drink. At 18 miles we cut a small
gum creek, having an easterly course and plenty of water.
Here we camped, and all except Mr. Harvey went rock-wallaby
shooting. Crispe was the only successful one. He brought in
two, which provided us with a hearty breakfast. There were
immense smokes to the southwards.


—Birds and Water Supplies.—
' On 7th January we started at 8 a.m. on a south-west course.
At four miles we crossed a long granite range, which was very
rocky. The view from the top was not encouraging, showing
dense scrub and porcupine. About 20 miles to the west we could
distinguish a long range and several prominent hills to the
southward, but not the sign of a creek. At 15 miles we struck
another rise, and after crossing a mulga scrub and porcupine
plain we noticed many thousands of shell parrots all flying to the
south-east. At 20 miles we struck another rise, from the top
of which we could see, much to our delight, the course of a line
of gums a long way to the west, which we thought must be
Wickstead Creek, named by Stuart. We changed our course
immediately to due west. At three and a half miles we entered
mulga sprub, well grassed, and the change from the porcupine
was most agreeable to both men and horses. The grass under
the thick mulga was quite green. While going through the scrub
we noticed places that had recently been burnt by the savages,
and saw their fresh tracks in the sand. Such signs as these,
although apparently trifling, are most hopeful to the thirsty
bushman. Wes were now anxiously looking for a glimpse of the
line of gumtrees, but after going about three miles through scrub
Mr. Ross pulled up and decided to camp, having an idea that
we must have passed or been mistaken as to the line of gums.
But several of us had seen too much of the indications that a
creek or water was in the vicinity to be deceived, and we felt
confident that we were camping and punishing ourselves and
horses within reasonable distance of water. Fortunately, at
the moment several flights of pigeons passed over in the direction
of the supposed creek. This fact decided Mr. Ross to dispatch
Hearne and myself with a packhorse and waterbags. We lost
no time, and never pulled rein until we got to the bank of a creek,
three miles from the camp. We found plenty of water, filled
the bags, watered our horses, and returned to camp at dark,
when we were surprised to find that they had been well supplied
with water during our absence, Crispe having climbed a tree
and sighted the creek a mile nearer the camp than we had. We
had, therefore, an abundance of water, and were able to pass
a comfortable night’s rest, which otherwise would have been
most distressing, as the weather was so excessively hot here that
going all day without a drink, and the probability of going
without all night too, acts upon the mind, causing our bodies
R) become akin to a parched sponge. The distance for the day
was 29 miles.


—Savages and Game. —
The next day was Sunday, and as Hearne was going in search
of the horses in the morning he came upon 13 savages, who were
busily engaged examining Crispe’s horsetracks of the previous
night. All had spears and womeras. Hearne endeavoured to
coax them up to him, but they bolted off in the bush. We started
at 8.15 on a south-west course, and at two and a half miles
reached the creek, watered the horses, and followed it down for
five miles to the foot of a range, when it took a sharp bend to
the west, and emptied into swamps, one of which had water in,
with hundreds of ducks, cranes, cormorants, and other water-
fowl. We camped, and shot 18 ducks. Just as we struck the
creek we saw 11 more savages. They were not very tall, but
seemed to be plump and fat. They kept at a distance, waving
us away with thejj; arms. This creek is thickly timbered with
gums, but very crooked. The day was very hot, and the distance
covered was 10 miles. On Monday we started at 8.15, steering
a course of south-east of south through porcupine grass and
patches of mulga the whole day for a distant range, which we
suppose is the upper and western portion of the Mac Donnell.
A good way to the east of us we saw a prominent hill, which
we reckoned to be Mount Harris—named by Stuart. Although
travelling at the rate of three and a half miles an hour, night
overtook us before we reached the range, which was our only
hope of getting water. We kept on until we reached it, and
were disappointed in finding no creek, especially as the ranges
are very high and extensive. There was a small teatree creek
at the foot of the range coming out of a gorge. This the pack-
horses followed up briskly, and, it being so dark, we were nearly
losing three or four, as the scrub was very dense and the creek
rough and rocky. We managed to unpack and make a camp.
—Running Out of Water.—
We had just eight quarts of water for ourselves, which had
to be used sparingly, as the appearance of the range was not
encouraging for water. We had been hours in the saddle,
and had travelled 35 miles. \he day had been a scorcher, and
the country passed over so level and sandy that we saw no place
that would hold water for 10 minutes. There was a total absence
of bird life, showing that water was a scarce article hereabouts.
Next morning our poor horses were wretched. They had had
a long trying day on Monday without a drink, and this severely
tried them. We started at 7.30 for the south-east end of this
range. There were a few doves and bronze-winged pigeons
about, which probably got water in the gorges and rockholes in
the hills. At six miles we reached the point of the range,


crossing a small dry creek with a few gums. Everything looked
dry —nothing but porcupine ahead —so we changed our course
for another high range to the south, and apparently some 10
miles distant, crossing a grassy plain full of wide cracks and
holes, subject to inundations. About half-way across the plain
Crispe, who had been dispatched in search of water up a gorge
near the previous night’s camp, overtook us, having found water
in tw r o places, but we were too far ahead to turn back. At five
miles we passed the end of a high porcupine range. Here we
drank the remaining drop of water —two quarts (the bag had
leaked the rest —over two quarts).
—Scandalous Outfit. —
It was scandalous sending parties out with such an abominable
means of a water supply. We could never depend on any of
the bags. We often denied ourselves a drink all day so as to
reserve it for the night camp, only to find it had all leaked or
evaporated. Hearne was now dispatched on Crispe’s horse,
which had had a drink, to the high range we were approaching,
but which w r as still some five miles distant, to search for water.
At one and a half miles we cut a creek, as dry as a tropical sun
could make it. A hot north-east wdnd was blowing. We pulled
up here to await Hearne’s return. The horses looked terribly
tucked up. Mr, Harvey was exhausted, and declared he could
go no further. I volunteered to go up a small teatree creek in
the range just passed. I took a waterbag, and in half a mile
entered the mouth of a creek, which I found very rough with
rocks and boulders and dense teatree. I was scarcely able to
force my horse through the growth, and as she had no shoes I
made slow progress. I got torn and scratched, and lost my hat
several times; but from the number of doves and tin tacks
(diamond sparrows) I felt confident there was water near at
hand. I was not mistaken, for another quarter of a mile up the
gorge I found a little soakage from the rocks. I managed by
clearing away stones and rubbish to get a quartpotful, which
I emptied at a draught without the slightest inconvenience. Then
I waited for another quart to trickle in, which was disposed of
in like manner. Lighting my pipe, I proceeded further up the
gorge, and another quarter of a mile brought me, as I fully
expected, to more water —a nice little hole under an overhanging
cliff, where my good old mare, Eliza, was able to satisfy her long,
perishing thirst. I then quickly filled the waterbag and started
to return as speedily as possible to the party, but was surprised
to find Hearne at the first soakage I had found, he having been
to the opposite range and found no water. He had missed the
party, so we returned together, each with a bag of water, and we


found the party where I had left them, and they soon emptied
the waterbags.
—Overcoming Water Difficulties. —
Mr. Ross questioned me as to the possibility of watering all
the horses at the water I had found, and I thought it could be
done bv clearing out the waterhole and unpacking at the entrance
to the gorge. Anyhow, it was better than going back 15 miles
to the water Crispe had found. Hearne and I then piloted the
party up to as near as we could get the horses with their packs
on, where we unsaddled and hobbled them out. Mr. Ross,
Crispe, and myself then rode up, taking the shovel and waterbags
with us, and found another hole of water a little higher up the
gorge than I had been. We cleared out both holes, and returned
to drive up the horses, which Hearne, Crispe, and I did. It took
us until dark to give them sufficient, as we had to wait for the
water to trickle in. We hobhled them at the water, as some had
not had quite enough. We then returned to camp quite ready for
our damper and coffee —the first we had eaten since the previous
morning. The distance for the day was 15 miles.
The horses looked first rate next morning. We packed up
and proceeded four and a half miles to another gorge that Hearne
had found with a hole of water, but access to it was so rocky
and scrubby, and there was hardly a shoe on the hoises, so we
unpacked at the entrance and watered the stock. Nearly all the
teatree creeks in these gorges had small springs or soakages,
but manv of them were almost unapproachable for horses. Ihe
weather was sultry and cloudy. Ihe distance was five miles for
the dav. Next morning the horses were quite fresh again. We
started on a south-south-east course, hugging the range and
passing over well-grassed mulga flats. At 17 miles we reached
the point of the range, and sighted a deep gorge in an opposite
direction. This was a very high and rock-topped range, about
seven miles distant, and we reached it at 5.15 p.m. Following
the gorge up a mile, we found a running spring of fresh water
and camped. The gorge was rather narrow, and bound in by
high and rocky mountains, nearly all the creeks from which
have springs, which empty into the main gorge or channel in
times of flood. This may be a well-watered area, but the supply
is only to be found in these teatree gorges and gullies. One
might perish on the plains within cooee of water and not know
it. The distance for the day was 25 miles. On 13th January
we reached Mac Donnell Ranges, spelling all day. We were now
well provided with fresh meat, rock wallaby and a splendid euro
shot by Mr. Ross. We emptied a bucketful of delicious wallaby
soup, pronounced by all to be unbeatable among soups. While


Mr. Ross was up the gorge shooting he saw three savages, but
could not get anywhere near them, although they followed him
a short distance. The reverberation of his gun, echoing and
re-echoing among these, mountain chasms, was more than enough
to scare their lives for many a day.
CHAPTER XIV
We Appreciate Euro Rumpsteak—We Lose Our Surveyor—Looking for
the Lost Man—Picking up Tracks—Short of Rations—Bad Times —We
Lose Our Plancase—Troublesome Blacks.
■ —We Appreciate Euro Rumpsteak.—
On 14th January, 1871, after much.tacking about, we got
through the ranges and steered for a large gorge in an opposite
tier of the ranges to the south, and found abundance of water.
While passing through the mountains we noticed numerous
palmtrees growing on the slopes of the hills, and upon examina-
tion found many large, but apparently old, nuts, about the size
of the common fowl’s egg, with a smooth shell. These ranges
abounded with euro and black kangaroo of great size and
strength. They had beaten pads leading in all directions. We
found them to be quite a delicacy, and had a hearty meal of
euro rumpsteak. The head makes delicious soup. We were
very much in need of meat, having had only a damper diet for
a long time.
—We Lose Our Surveyor.—
At 3 o’clock there was no appearance of Mr. Harvey, who
had earlier in the day kept on a more easterly course, to run out
a bearing. He had the bearings of this gorge before he left us,
but he wanted to run out the course he was on for some distance.
In fact, there was only about four degrees difference between
his bearings and the one to this gorge. He might have mistaken
some other gorge for this one. Sundown, and still no appearance
of Mr. Harvey. We could not. account for his prolonged absence.
We lit the porcupine-grass at the foot of the range, and it quickly
spread to the top, lighting the country up for three miles round.
This we thought he could not fail to see, but he might attribute
it to the savages, as there had been immense thick smokes around
us all day. Mr. Harvey had not arrived during the night.
Mr. Ross and Hearne started in different directions to search
for him. Mr. Ross returned after a long walk up the creek, but
he failed to find any trace of our surveyor whatever. It was
now getting a serious matter. We feared if he were not found
that day he would be completely exhausted, as he was rather of
an excitable nature, not an experienced bushman, and not one
who could withstand unusual hardship. The worst of it, too, was


the fact that we had scarcely a horse fit to look for him, as they
were so tender-footed and the country so terribly stony that it
was difficult to get them along at all. Crispe started with his
horse, which had shoes on, back to the place where we last saw
Mr. Harvey. I made a big smoke on the range among the
porcupine-grass, which no one could fail to see for many miles.
Fortunately, Mr. Harvey’s horse was shod all round. We
could come to no definite conclusion as to which way he was
steering, and the only method of finding him was by running his
tracks, which was a difficult matter in this stony region.
—Looking for the Lost Man. —
At sundown Crispe and Hearne both returned without the
missing man. They tracked him with great difficulty about 12
miles lower down the range, and he then appeared to be keeping
a straight course through the rocks and precipitous gorges that
anybody would imagine no one in his normal senses would
attempt. They left his track crossing another range, and making
apparently for a high bluff some 11 miles further on. He had
apparently never camped or stopped anywhere they could see.
Whatever could possess him to go so far and over such country
that he must know we could never take packhorses along. His
tracks passed in several places within a few feet of water, but
he did not appear to have stopped, except to lead his horse
through rocks. We were exceedingly anxious and distressed on
his behalf, but fervently hoped he might stick to his horse, and
that he would choose such ground that would enable us to follow
his tracks easily, as he must have surely known we were trying
to do, but so far he had not done so, or they would certainly have
found him. It was hard to conceive what an inexperienced
bushman might do, but he must surely recognize that he must
reverse his course. We knew by this time that he must have
been too greatly exhaused to do anything. Fortunately he was
constantly near water, and he had also his carbine and revolvei
with him. He might easily shoot a wallaby, but it was doubtful
if he had any matches with which to light a fire, or he would
have made smokes to attract us. Two of us arranged to start
at dawn and carry a supply of food with us. The horses were
ready before dawn on the following day, and Hearne and I staited
along the north side of the range, and Crispe went along the
gorge to follow the south side, all taking a supply of tea, sugar,
damper, and a small bottle of essence of meat. We steered for
the range where Hearne left Mr. Harvey s tracks, passing over
rugged and porcupine country, and at the foot of the range
where his tracks were we found a gum creek with water in it.
This we followed down, so as to round the point of the range.


and, if possible, cut his tracks on the opposite side, as it was
better and quicker travelling. After proceeding two miles we
passed a high and rocky bluff, and found much difficulty in
ascending the spur, and upon reaching the top we found nothing
but a mass of wild and tangled little hills and deep, rough valleys
as far as we could see. The sight made us doubt, with all our
knowledge of bushtracking, whether it was possible to follow
the track of a single horse over such a jumble of rocks.
—Picking up Tracks.—
However, it had to be done, and we managed to proceed about
two miles northerly, and there struck the horsetrack still going
on an easterly course, which we followed for a short distance
and then lost it. I soon cut it again, and at the same time a call
from Hearne informed me that he also had cut a track going the
reverse way. This was splendid news, for it proved that Mr.
Harvey had at last turned back, and was reversing his outward
course. We decided, therefore, to proceed on the new return
track, and succeeded in following it to the water in the gum
creek we had passed in the morning. We watered our horses,
and I went on the bank and found the track of a hobbled horse,
and also that Mr. Harvey had camped there the previous night,
and had evidently made back to our camp. We had missed him
on the way out this morning. This was a most welcome
discovery, and on the strength of it we boiled our pots, had some
tea and damper, and again mounted and proceeded homewards,
keeping Mr. Harvey’s outward track as nearly as we could. We
saw nothing of his return track until within about four miles
of our camp, when we cut it and found he was running his own
track back, and occasionally Crispe’s homeward track of the
previous day, but at the very place where Crispe turned off for
our camp Mr. Harvey had lost it, and kept on his own outward
one, and consequently passing within two and a half miles of
our camp, until he cut the main trail of our packhorses and the
creek on which our camp was. There he appeared to have
recognized a large hill, turned short round, and followed the
creek, which at last led him right into the camp about 1 o’clock,
in a very exhausted state. Mr. Ross at once gave him a glass out
of that wonderful bottle of rum, a quart of coffee and some stewed
wallaby, which soon revived him, and he was able to go to sleep,
in which happy state we found him when we arrived at the camp
some two hours afterwards, having stuck to his tracks like
bloodhounds. His poor and trusty old horse had cast every
shoe, and his feet were cut and bleeding, so that he could scarcely
stand. We had not yet heard Mr. Harvey’s account of his
wanderings.


—Short of Rations. —
Mr. Harvey soon recovered, and we prepared to start on
17th January, but eight or nine of the horses could not be found
until after 10 a.m., and Mr. Ross decided to remain there that
day. We required to lose no time now in returning to Alice
Creek on the" Hugh River, as our rations were running very
short. It was nine weeks since we left the Peake, and we had
only one week more to complete our time of absence. Starting
off" next morning, we descended the range, and again followed
the creek for four miles, but were forced to leave it on account
of immense and impassable barriers of rock running right across
it and on either side masses of sharp-edged rocks piled one on
the other for some five miles, when we again struck the creek,
which led us into better country, but still rocky. Here, while
crossing a valley, we noticed a fire start up among the
porcupine, and a native standing by watching it. Upon seeing
us he bolted, but kept lighting the grass along our course ahead
of us, evidently with the intention of delaying our progress, but
I have no doubt we surprised him when he saw us pass by the
flames with our horses as if they had not been there. We passed
through terribly rough country, and our poor horses were sore-
footed and limped along like cats on hot bricks. It will take
some fossicking to find a route for the telegraph line through
these wonderful ranges. After leaving the gorge the timber
improved, and there were plenty of telegraph-poles on the creek
banks. We struck the junction of this creek with the Hugh,
which had also a good supply of suitable timber, some large
enough to split, and some full-length poles could be got from
single trees. We followed the flat of the Hugh, which was
capital travelling for the horses. Blacks signalled fires on each
side. We left the Hugh, and turned more easterly, passing
through porcupine and grassy hills and timber that looked like
mallee, and then a low range with the Hugh running through a
long and winding gorge, and, finding plenty of water, we camped.
We found from Stuart’s plan that this was the Laurence Gorge.
About a mile before entering the gorge on the north side are
Owen’s Springs, which are permanent and named by Stuart.
Native tracks and smokes were numerous. We had nothing left
to eat now but damper, and only enough flour for two days. Our
powder was also nearly finished, and our clothes were in rags. I
was barefooted, and we did not know where we were to get more,
as there were no Government stores, except in the eatable line,
where we are making for. Where we could get boots and clothes
to carry us to the Roper River was a mystery. We could all say,
however, that we enjoyed excellent health, and were quite jolly


at the idea of soon getting plenty of mutton when we met the
advance construction party.
—Bad Times.—
Just as we had passed through the gorge and were travelling
over splendid grass flats we suddenly came upon an old and
decrepit black lubra and several piccaninnies of various ages
digging yams. The youngsters set up a terrible howling, but
the old dame stood still and undecided what to do. She took
care, however, to put the youngest child on her back, and made
a few steps in the direction of the scrub, but again stopped,
muttering, wringing her hands, and calling out to a
younger lubra. who appeared from behind some trees. Mr.
Ross got off his horse and walked towards them, making friendly
signs, but this was too much, and they dashed off at once into
the scrub. We picked up some of the roots, or yams, which
were about nine inches long and as thick as a radish. We
followed the creek three miles, and saw another lubra and three
piccaninnies; but, like the others, they vanished immediately.
We kept on following the river for about 10 miles, and found
plenty of water, and here we struck another low gorge and
where the creek takes a tremendous bend, which we followed
for another eight miles, and ‘after some difficulty we found
sufficient water for all purposes, and camped. Distance, 26 miles.
We left Camp No. 97, on the Hugh River, on the 21st January,
at 7.20 a.m., and, leaving the river, steered across south-south-
east for a gorge in a low range, reaching it in seven miles, and
found a wide creek running through it and a capital passage for
the horses and a sandy bed all through. On leaving the
gorge we entered sandhills and porcupine for four miles, and
again struck the Hugh River close to some natives’ smokes, and
we saw two savages gazing at us from the sandhills. Here
the creek takes a bend to the north-east, but we kept our course,
and entered splendidly grassed country with flats and stony
ridges. Each side of us were low, table-topped hills. Not finding
any sign of the river, we changed our course still more easterly,
following for a short distance a wide watercourse, which
gradually formed into a creek of some magnitude, which I
followed some distance, hoping to get water, but found none,
but Mr. Ross followed it still lower down, and reached its
junction with the Hugh River, and he found a splendid waterhole
very much like that at Alice Creek, but much larger. He
quickly overtook us, and we returned and camped.
—We Lose Our Plancase.—
When unpacking we found that the leather case containing
all the plans of Stuart, and also our own plans of our former


expedition, together with Stuart’s journal, and so on, was missing.
Hearne was dispatched immediately in search of it. We had
completely exhausted our stock of provisions; our last damper
had been cooked on the previous night, our dried beef was all
gone, and no coffee. Barely a handful of tea and four pounds
of oatmeal was all we had left. What was still more mortifying
was that we had not a grain of powder. There were hundreds
of pigeons sitting and flying within a few yards of me, and I had
no means of getting them except with my revolver. Crispe,
Hearne, and myself started back on our track of the day before
to search for the missing plancase. We followed our tracks
back 15 miles to where we crossed the Hugh without finding it,
and returned, following the Hugh the whole way. When within
three miles of the camp we found two or three teatree waterholes,
all fenced in by the natives. Mr. Ross caught a dozen or more
fish about five inches long. We had not a speck of flour, and
were subsisting on a pinch of oatmeal stirred into boiling water
—a poor sort of burgoo. Should there be no one at Alice Creek
to meet us with supplies we would be approaching the starving
stage. We were about 18 miles from Alice Creek, but were
doubtful whether we would find anybody there. Upon our
arrival we were disappointed to find no one there, nor any message
for us as to where to find them with the provisions. We hoped
to see something of them at our old camp, three miles above the
junction of the Finke and Hugh. We rested there a short time,
and then started down the Hugh, and at nine miles reached our
old camp, and managed to catch a dozen or two of fish. There
was no sign of anyone having been there during our absence, which
was too bad, as the survey parties are fully aware we only had
nine weeks’ rations, and were 10 weeks out, and had nothing to
eat but what we could catch. One pot more of oatmeal, and we
would have to subsist upon roots and lizards. We feared we
might have to go right down to the Treuer River before meeting
anyone. It was very discouraging to find no one there, as the
arrangement was that if they could not succeed in sending drays
up they were to send packhorses. Our horses were showing
signs.of weariness more and more every day, although they had
little but the empty saddles to carry. Mr. Ross decided to
remain there for a day to rest the horses, and as we were sure
of a few fish we would fare better than if travelling.
—Troublesome Blacks. —
Just at dark we heard a cooee, and almost immediately after-
wards five natives walked boldly into camp, three of whom we
recognized as old acquaintances of the lagoon. The one to whom
Mr. Harvey had presented the old white shirt was not among them.


They seemed pleased to see us again, but knowing what adept
thieves they were we thought it better to motion them out of our
camp, especially as it was now quite dark. We gave them a
firestick to light them to camp, but they only went 30 yards away,
and there camped all night. We kept a strict watch, as usual.
During Crispe’s watch, from 10 to midnight, he noticed one
fellow creeping about the row of packsaddles. On seeing Crispe
he sneaked back to his mates. We managed to hunt up enough
food for breakfast, consisting of four ducks and a few small
fish. The savages were in our camp at daylight, and we tried
to find out if they had seen any whitefellows, but could not
understand them. Mr. Harvey and I remained to watch the
camp, while Mr. Ross and the other two went fishing. Our sable
visitors began to get troublesome, and we had to put everything
into a big heap and keep guard over it. Even then one bold
savage put a packbag on his shoulders and our bucket under his
arm, and deliberately walked off with them. We soon made the
scamp bring them back. He did so in a most surly way, taking
up his womera, flourishing it over Mr. Harvey’s head, and
intimating what he would like to do if 1 he had a little more pluck.
I think for boldness they beat the Wow-wow savages, and they
became so bold at last that we buckled on our revolvers, capped
all the carbines, and forced them to go ahead down to where the
others were fishing, about a quarter of a mile away. On the
way they picked up their spears, which they had hidden in the
sand and grass. They must have had some idea as to the
dangerous character of our firerams, and probably had seen us
shooting ducks, seen the ducks fall, and wondered. The best way
to handle wild blacks is never to allow them within spear distance
of the camp. We could have got rid of them quicker by sharp
and rougher methods, but our instructions were to treat them as
peaceably as possible everywhere, especially, as the first party
through, we should set the best example possible for the sake of
those to follow.
CHAPTER XV
We Meet the Supply Party—Link with Home Again—Better Camps—
Dispatch Riding—At Charlotte Waters.
—We Meet the Supply Party,—
We started for our old camp on the Finke on 26th January,
1871. At 10 miles, to our extreme delight, we cut five fresh
horsetracks hearing for the junction of the Finke and Hugh.
The tracks were about a day old and, we thought, must be those


of our expected supply party, who had probably camped
within three miles of us on the previous night. We immediately
turned back to camp, following our own tracks. There was no
sign of anyone having been there during our absence. We
unpacked, and Hearne was dispatched to the junction of the two
rivers, but he had only gone a short distance when he returned,
having seen fresh tracks of horses coming from the junction and
passing within a few hundred yards of our camp. This was
most unccountable, as it was barely a quarter of a mile between
this camp and a rocky ridge where they must have passed, and
it was hardly possible to do so without seeing the tracks of our
22 horses that had been hobbled and feeding over it for a day
or two. Hearne had followed up the tracks, which were bearing-
direct for Alice Creek. He had taken bags with him to bring
back some flour or something, as we were all very hungry, and
anxiously awaited his return. At 8 p.m, we heard a cooee, and
answered it by firing two carbine shots. Shortly Hearne rode
into camp followed by Messrs. A. T. Woods, G. R. McMinn,
Harley Bacon, W. W. Mills, and three men, and two packhorses
with supplies for us. They had been to this camp an hour after
we left that morning, but wishing to see Alice Creek, and not
knowing of our destitute condition, had passed on, and were just
about to encamp at Alice Creek when Hearne found them. After
the usual salutations we prepared for a long-deferred but hearty
supper of damper, mutton, tea, and cheese. Mr. Woods informed
us that his and Mr. Harvey’s parties were about 10 miles back,
making their wav up the Finke as fast as the heavy sandhill
country would allow. They had certainly been exceedingly
expeditious. The sheep were also with them, and in good
condition, which was evidenced by the splendid mutton we had
partaken of and enjoyed, the heartiest meal we had had for a
long time.
—Link With Home Again.—
We intended to remain at the Hugh old camp until the arrival
of the parties with the wagons at the junction. Messrs. Bacon
and Mills and one man returned to their respective camps near
Marchant’s Springs, Hearne and I took two packhorses to
meet the drays and get provisions enough to last until then
arrival. At* 10 miles we struck the Finke, and were fortunate
to meet the drays, and found all old associates well, who anxiously
inquired of us* what the country ahead was like. Our answers
were not always encouraging, especially with regard to the terrible
sandhills and* the impracticable portions of the Mac Donnell
Ranges that we were acquainted with, and that further exploration
would be necessary to find a passage for wagons. About 5 o’clock


we started back, and arrived at our camp two hours after dark.
I received long, welcome letters from home, but more than two
months old. Mr. Harvey rode down to see the party he was to
take charge of , but returned in about two hours with Sub-Inspector
Roberts and one man. They reported having left the teams at
the junction. During the afternoon Sub-Inspector of Construc-
tion S. Jarvis visited us, and Messrs. Woods and McMinn and
two men returned with him to the junction. But Mr. Roberts
remained with us that night. Two natives visited us. One we
remembered having seen 50 miles up the Hugh both on our
outward and homeward trips. Mr. Ross proposed joining the
other parties at the junction, where a general camp for all parties
would be made for some time, and the mails made up and
forwarded. We found that only one mail had been received by
the parties since leaving the Peake Station. Two natives showed
themselves on the sandhills. They were painted a bright red.
They must have wondered at so many white men and such curious
animals as bullocks, sheep, and goats, let alone camels, and they
would, we thought, probably gather in large numbers to gaze, at
a distance, at the coming of civilization. At the junction we
found Mr. Woods camped on the western side of the river. We
formed our camp on the eastern side, and shortly after were joined
by Mr. Harvey’s party, which was in charge of Mr. J. Roberts.
We were unable to obtain sufficient supplies there to carry us to
Roper River, and Mr. Ross resolved to start down as far as the
Peake so soon as we could get our horses shod, and where we
shall await instructions. Heavy thunder and lightning with much
rain commenced at night. Those who had tents fared well, but
Mr. Ross, Hearne, and I got thoroughly soaked all night. But
that was not a new experience by any means.
—Better Camps.—
At the junction of the Finke and Hugh Rivers on 31st
January Mr. Woods’s party started to build a depot store,
and Mr. Harvey’s party burnt charcoal. On 2nd February
Crispe and Hearne finished shoeing the 16 horses we were taking
to the Peake. I made 20 pairs of hobble-straps, but we decided
not to start until the arrival of Mr. Bacon with the mails. About
3 p.m. Mr. Hart, who had charge of the camels, arrived, and
reported leaving the camels about 10 miles back, but he brought
no mail, and informed us that it was 20 miles back on some of
the contract wagons. Two hours later Mr. Bacon arrived, also
without any mails, although he had been dispatched some days
previously for the express purpose of bringing on the mails.
There were five mails now due. Mr. Stephen Jarvis and a gang
of men were busy erecting a substantial store, which Mr. Bacon


would take charge of. Mr, W. W. Mills and party were camped
about three miles below this junction. Several of the bullocks
were attacked by pleuro-pneumonia. and two had died, but the
horses and sheep were thriving as fast as good grass and water
could make them, and the same might be said of the men,
especially those of Mr. Harvey’s party, who had a long way to
go before commencing their section, and had little to do but eat
the choicest of mutton, go fishing, or fire ofif their revolver
cartridges at cormorants for targets. Others had stretched their
hammocks between shady gumtrees, upon which hour after hour
was passed in reading old newspapers or worn novels, and
alternate dozes, from which they were awakened by the cook’s
cry of “ Roll up for dinner.” Everything in the camps was in a
state of confusion, as it was a case of waiting for further supplies
and instructions before proceeding northwards. Nearly every man
had a dog, and some two, whose sleek coats testified that scraps
from the cook’s galley were abundant, but this might have appeared
more apparent to us, who had been so long reduced to the most
meagre fare, and those same scraps would have been welcome.
Two hundred yards further on the south bank of the Hugh Avas
what was known as the Explorers’ Camp, and it made but a poor
show as compared with the others. A small rough shed or wurlie
and a row of a dozen packsaddles arranged on a rail was all it
could boast of. Our kitchen consisted of a fire, a bucket, and
five quartpots. Such is a picture of camp life, but a good,
healthy, and glorious climate, and wide, open spaces yet to
explore fully compensated one for lack of supposed comfort or
refinement.
—Dispatch Riding.—
On 4th February a hundred camels arrived and unloaded.
A list of articles had been made out and partly secured for
our trip to the Roper River. Mr, Ross submitted it to Mr.
Harvey, but he disapproved of it in many ways, and declined to
go as surveyor with such a supply. As his party for the
construction of his section was there, he took charge of it straight
away. Therefore, Mr. Ross decided] to dispatch me down to Mr.
Knuckey’s camp to endeavour to secure the services of my
brother Christopher to take Mr. Harvey’s place as surveyor.
Mr. Ross bought a horse from Henry Byng for me to ride to
Mr. Knuckey’s camp on the Wall Creek. After many delays
I managed to get a start, carrying an official dispatch for Mr.
Knuckey from Mr. Woods. I started across the sandhills, and
at nine miles struck the Finke, and followed the road to an old
camp. At 10 p.m. I felt thirsty and sleepy, and made in for the
Finke, which I reached and followed down, and found fresh


water, gave the horses a drink, and then went on to the east side
of the river and camped. It was a very hot night. On the next
morning I started at daylight. I steered for Mount Musgrave,
a double table-topped hill, and there struck the road, which I
followed for five miles, and met five of Bagot’s wagons, where
I got some breakfast and proceeded on seven miles to Mr,
McMinn’s camp, but found he had shifted on the previous day
for the junction, and I must have missed him at night somehow.
I remained there the rest of the day. Mr. McMinn had three
miles of poles erected, and nine miles cleared ready for erection.
I left McMinn’s camp on the 7th February at 8 a.m., following
the road, and at 10 o’clock I cut the line of telegraph poles and
reached the Goyder River at 4 p.m., watered the horses, and
proceeded on three miles, hobbled out the horses, made a pot of
tea, and saddled up again just at dark and travelled on until
II p.m., and camped until daylight, the distance from the
junction being 52 miles. I started on Bth February at sunrise,
and at 12 miles reached the Wall Creek and Mr. Knuckey’s camp,
and found him at home and looking jolly. He informed me that
my brother was 15 miles out superintending the cutting and
carting of poles, and he immediately dispatched a messenger to
bring him in.
—At Charlotte Waters.—
Mr. Knuckey’s camp was on the Wall Creek, and was named
Charlotte Waters, after Lady Charlotte Bacon (mother of Mr.
Harley Bacon, Government storekeeper at the junction). I
remained there for a few days, and took the opportunity to write
up my diary to send home by first mail. I had no more paper.
Heavy thunder and lightning and heavy rain made it too wet
and boggy for me to start back. My brother decided not to join
Mr. Ross’s party, and wrote to Mr. Woods and Mr. Ross to that
effect. I got my horses ready, but while we were having dinner
the creek came down a banker, cutting off any chance of my
making a start. On 15th February Mr. Aldridge and I started
for Mount Crispe with my packhorse to get the mail, as we had
heard from an Afghan that there were some teams there with
some mails on. We found the country between here and Adminga
Creek very boggy. We could not keep to the road, but had to
keep to the tableland. Upon reaching Adminga we found it
running bank high, and we had some trouble in finding a crossing-
place. It was just as much as our horses could do to keep on
their legs. We followed the creek for two hours after dark, and
camped on the tableland, and were almost devoured by mosquitoes.
We made a very early start next morning, crossed the tablelands,
and steered for Mount Crispe, cutting the road at Conical Hill.


LEICHHARDT’S BAR, ROPER RIVER, N.T., where Dr. Ludwig Leichhardt crossed, 1845.


We found no teams at Mount Crispe, and pushed on for the
Edith Springs, about seven miles south of Mount Crispe. These
springs were very fine ones, bounded on either side by soda flats,
and extending for 18 miles to the north-east. The water is quite
fresh. Some of them were a discovery by Messrs. Wood > Jarvis,
and Knuckey, and named after Lady Edith Fergusson, We
reached Lowther’s Creek and camped, and with an early start
next morning we, in three miles, met three bullock teams loaded
with wire. We were disgusted to find they had no mails, and
that we had ridden 70 miles through the bogs for nothing. We
returned and camped at a sandhill lagoon, near Conical Hill, and
were again tormented by mosquitoes, and neither got a wink of
sleep. We had even to keep our boots on. They stung through
everything, even our tempers. Our saddle-horses were both
without shoes and tender-footed. We went on to Adminga
Creek, had a pot of tea, camped late at the end of Hearne’s
Range, and were heartily welcomed by the mosquitoes once more.
Upon reaching Mr. Knuckey’s camp (Charlotte Waters), we
found Cadet Tom Bee, also Messrs. Hawdon, Hart, and Smith.
They reported the Finke flooded, and also the Goyder, and the
whole country in a state of bog, and they had great difficulty in
reaching here. Mr. Knuckey and my brother constructed a boat
for crossing this creek, but were unable to cross horses or bullocks,
and the camels had come down with a lot of trouble. Tom Bee
decided to leave the party and go to Adelaide.
CHAPTER XVI
Goyder and Finke Rivers in Flood-Troublous Times—The Hugh in
Flood—Off to the Roper River —At Alice Creek Camp—Without Water
Again.
—Goyder and Finke Rivers in Flood.—
On 29th February, 1871, Tom Bee, Carter, and myself started
to cross the Wall Creek, but found the camels in the act of doing
so, and we could 1 not get our horses near them, and had to follow
the creek down two miles before being able to cross them. The
morning was intensely foggy and misty, with rain falling, so that
we were unable to distinguish Mount Darnel, but steered a
north-west course. On reaching the Breakfast Plain, we weie
stopped by bogs and swamps, and had to go round a long way
and then strike the road at the foot of Mount Birrell. There
we met three of Rounsevell’s return teams. They reported
having had great trouble crossing the flats, and that both the


Goyder and Finke Rivers were running strongly. At sundown
we reached the Goyder, and found a wagon camped with the
driver, John Hallett. We crossed the river, and continued on
until midday, when we boiled our pots and proceeded to the
Finke, which we reached at dark. The flood was high, but we
ventured to cross, and got over with the water up to the kneepads.
We followed the road and the telegraph-poles for four and a
half miles. The night was intensely dark when we reached one
of Mr. McMinn’s flying camps, and remained with the men all
night, being wet through and tired. We left this camp,
and at four miles reached Mr, McMinn’s main camp. It was
necessary to spell our horses. The one I was riding was nearly
knocked up, and with a day’s spell would carry me to the junction.
At the head of the horseshoe bend on the Finke I camped for an
hour, and then proceeded on until reaching Mr. Mills’s camp,
three miles below the junction. Mr. Mills was away, but I
remained with Mr. Burt all night, and the next morning Mr.
Burt accompanied me to the junction, or depot, which is under
Mr. Bacon’s charge. We found that both Mr. Woods’s and
Mr. Harvey’s parties had proceeded two days ago to, Alice Creek,
but Mr. Ross was still in camp on the opposite side of the Hugh,
which I attempted to cross, but found it too deep, although I
tried several places. It was not until late in the afternoon that
I was able to cross and rejoin my party, after an absence of
three weeks, and in which I found some changes. Crispe had
left, or been discharged, and Robert Abrahams engaged in his
place. Mr. Harvey had given written reasons for not accompany-
ing Mr. Ross, and my brother declined the position, and so that
left us without a surveyor.
—Troublous Times.—
The flies were an awful pest, driving the horses nearly mad.
On Saturday, 25th February, the Hugh had risen two feet
during the night. Mr. Ross and myself packed the stores.
Nearly everyone had bunged-up eyes; the flies were a constant
torment and nearly all the party were attacked by severe vomiting.
I thought I was going to escape, but I got my share of it. At
sundown the river was 100 yards wide, running strongly. We
almost loathed the sight of food, for everything was black with
flies, and the only escape was to remain in the mosquito-net.
This idle camp life did not suit me. We had no books, no papers,
or letters from relatives or friends since the previous November.
Life in the interior was all right, but one wanted to keep moving;
it was less exhausting than idle camp life, and it dodged the flies.
Cadet C. Bagot and Mr. Burt visited us that day. Mr. Burt was
on his way to join Mr. Woods’s party at Alice Creek, he having


been sent down by Mr. Woods to see if he could cross his party
over the Hugh, but they found the river still impassable for
drays. Hearne and I went for the horses. I got six, and had
much difficulty in getting two over the quicksands of the river.
Hearne brought in another mob. The flies dispersed them in
every direction. Mr. Burt’s party arrived and camped at the
junction. Flies were still a torment, and bung eyes and vomiting
prevalent. In crossing the river with my clothes on after two
horses I lost a pound note; no doubt it was washed out of my
pocket, as the current was very strong. I was about to step on
a large snake in the dark and close to the camp fire, but I just
saw it in time. The scorpions there were an enormous size, and
I was stung twice within 15 minutes at Mr. Knuckey’s camp—
on my arm and back of, the neck. The sting is very painful, like
a coal of fire, and lasts for about 20 minutes, but fortunately
they were not large ones. On 28th February Mr. Ross and I
crossed the Hugh to the depot with two packhorses to get supplies
of flour for our expedition. Hearne and Abrahams were muster-
ing horses, but there were still 10 or 12 away. It was a great
trouble trying to keep the horses together, as the flies drove them
mad. Mr. Harley Bacon visited us that day. Vomiting was still
prevalent among some of the parties, for which we chiefly blamed
the flies, and also our inactivity. It was a wretched, do-
nothing life, and we wished we were out of the place. Yet the
nights were beautiful—no mosquitoes and no flies. One was loath
to go to bed, and I often sat on the cliff for an hour or more
of an evening looking at the beautiful and placid sheet of water
in the river, and watching the fish continually leaping out of the
water. With the exception of this and, now and then, the loud
screech of the large night owl, the call of the curlew, or mornful
howl of the dingo, there was nought to break the almost deathlike
silence of the night in this great bushland. But an ideal place
for the thoughtful-minded and the lover of solitude —and no flies!
—The Hugh in Flood.—
On Wednesday, Ist March, Messrs. Ross, Burt, and myself
rode over to Mr. Woods’s camp at Alice Creek. We
found that Mr. Woods had been out for two days, but was
expected back that evening. Mr. Burt returned to his camp,
but Mr. Ross and I stayed the night to await his return. He
did not come. Two of Mr. Mills’s men arrived, reporting that
they had left Messrs. McMinn, Jarvis, and Mills about 30 miles
up the Hugh River, having been delayed. By some means they
got separated by the flooded state of the creeks. The men did
not seem to know where they had been, but by their account they
must have been in the neighbourhood of the James Range. As


there was no appearance of Mr. Woods, Mr. Ross and I returned
to our camp at the junction, taking with us the saddle, bridle, rifle,
and revolver used by Mr. Harvey. We found that Mr. Burt had
crossed the Hugh with his party, and was proceeding to Alice
Creek. Mr. Ross engaged William Gregory to make up the
party to five, as there was no surveyor going with us. On sth
March Mr. Ross and I went across and had dinner with Mr.
Bacon, and I was also able to write letters home. On the
following day we were preparing to make a start, and got all the
horses mustered, but while finishing filling and weighing the
packbags, some of the horses, being very fresh, bolted. It took
us all day to muster them, and at dark there were still two missing.
This compelled us to stay another night in this horrid place.
The flies were terrible, and I believed if we were to stay there
much longer we would be all ill. As it was, Mr. Ross was very
unwell. Mr. McMinn returned from his trip to the Mac Donnell
Ranges, and reported having found a road through on the eastern
side, but we thought it would require considerable work before
drays could pass safely through. He also reported all the rivers
in the ranges to be flooded, which delayed him for several days.
—Off to the Roper River.—
On 7th March we bid adieu to all our kind friends and
to the junction, and followed the road to Alice Creek and camped,
thus commencing our third expedition. This would be our fifth
trip through the Mac Donnell Ranges, and each one by a different
passage. We were bound for the Roper River, some 1,100 miles
distant, through unknown regions.
—At Alice Creek Camp.—
As we were unpacking, Cadet Forster (of Mr. Harvey’s
party) came up and stayed for dinner with us. He was looking
for two missing bullocks. We struck Mr. Woods’s tracks, and
also Mr. Roberts’s. I rode on six miles to Mr, Woods’s camp
on the Hugh. Mr. Woods invited me to stay all night, which
I did, and he gave me some useful things for our expedition, and
performed acts of kindness I shall never forget. Mr. Ross sent
Hearne on to try to buy a horse from Mr. Woods’s bullock-
driver, but he wanted too much for it. I returned from Mr.
Woods’s camp. Mr, Ross sent Gregory to Mr. Harvey’s camp
to obtain Stuart’s plans. He did not return until late, and
reported that Mr. Burt was unable to find the plans, as Mr. Mills
had gone to the Reynolds Range, and had most likely taken them
with him, Gregory subsequently returned without any plans, but
Mr. Harvey promised to take a tracing of that portion of Stuart’s
map extending from Mount Mann to Newcastle Waters, and


Gregory started back to await its completion. We had but 11
weeks’ rations to carry us to the Roper, and every day we spelled
lessened it considerably, but we found that we must have the
plans.
—Without Water Again.—
We struck the James Range and steered for a distant blue
range, keeping the same course for 17 miles over sandhills, mulga,
and spinifex the whole day. There was no appearance of water
over the whole distance, and it was quite dark when we camped
within a mile of the range without a drop of water for ourselves
or horses. Midday had been very hot. After we had unpacked
I saddled my mare and proceeded on to the range, hoping to get
water, but although I followed several small creeks into the range
I failed to find any. It was too dark, and the country very rocky,
and I had to return to camp more thirsty than ever. This range
was the Waterhouse, named by Stuart. Up at daylight next
morning, Abrahams and I started in search of the horses, and
found their tracks going back the way we had come. After
trudging over sandhills for four miles and adding to our thirst,
we overtook them, but found only 16. Seven were still away.
I told Abrahams to go on ahead and make a circle round to the
west and see if the others had gone on, but while I was unhobbling
those I had got I heard a cooee apparently no distance to the
right of me, and which I answered, thinking he had found the
missing horses. As he repeated the cooee several times, I thought
it must be natives, but at the same time I saw Abrahams on a
sandhill, sufficiently near to distinguish the welcome cry of
“ Water! Water! ” Upon my coming up to him he said,
“ There is a sort of lagoon close by with plenty of water for the
horses.” We immediately drove them across to it, and found a
nice little hole with water in it as clear as crystal and as cold as
ice. Over the next sandhill we found another and deeper one.
After satisfying ourselves and horses, I took the bearings of a
rocky knob on the range, which I knew to be close to our camp,
in order to be able to find it again. We returned to the camp
with the horses, and found from Hearne and Gregory that Mr.
Ross had gone on foot to look for water. I advised them to
pack up the horses we had, and by that time Mr. Ross would
probably be back. I sent Abrahams to search for the seven missing
horses. Mr. Ross returned soon afterwards, quite exhausted.
He had been unwell for some time. The extra exertion and thirst
told on him, and I proposed that he should start at once with
Hearne and Gregory, and what packhorses we had, back to the
water we had found, and as I had had a drink I would stay and
mind the remaining packs until Abrahams returned with the


missing horses. This was done. I had been there an hour.
There was no sign of Abrahams, and I rode up a gorge near by to
see if there was any water, but as I was going up I met Abrahams,
who said he could not find the horses nor their tracks. I went
with him, and kept to the east of our tracks the previous night,
but could find no sign of them. We found the spot where Mr.
McMinn had camped, a curious deep valley between sandhills,
with immense boulders of granite. All the water had dried up,
but as we were abreast of the water found this morning, we rode
across and found the party camped. Hearne and Gregory then
started for the missing horses and returned with them.
CHAPTER XVII
A Unique Experience—Good-bye to the Mac Donnell Ranges—In New
Country—Hostile Savages.
—A Unique Experience.—
We reached what appeared to be the outer or the southern
tier of the MacDonnells, and camped on a small swamp. From
Waterhouse Range until camping we passed through splendid
grass country, a little sandy, a good bit of mulga, but all good
grazing land. We also crossed Mr. McMinn’s tracks at the
Waterhouse. We were again in the wild orange country, and
regaled ourselves on this fruit, which, by the way, can by no
means be despised in a climate and trip like this. On 18th March,
1871, when ascending a small hill, we were astonished to see three
horsemen and two packhorses coming over the same hill, and in
whom we recognized Mr. W. W. Mills, one man, and a blackboy,
who were returning from the Strangways Ranges some 45 miles
north-easterly. It was certainly a most extraordinary meeting in
so remote a part of the world as this, and would have formed a
most interesting sketch, but unfortunately none of our party was
gifted with that art. A few minutes’ chat and each party was
again on its way, going in opposite directions. Such a meeting
must have been unique in the world’s history of exploring, that
two parties should meet on the same but reverse bearing in the
unknown centre of a continent. This meeting-place was within
a mile or so of what is now Alice Springs. We kept the same
course for six miles, and camped on the head of the creek we had
been following up, and found plenty of water. In the afternoon
Mr. Ross ascended a hill north-west of our camp, and got bearings
from Mount McLaughlin, Brinkley’s Bluff, and Mount Sir
Charles —all named by Stuart —and reported having sighted the
Reynolds Range. We arrived at a beautiful camp with a nice


little creek of water surrounded by hills of granite and splendidly
grassed flats, quite green. This camp is known as Bond Springs.
-—Good-bye to the Mac Donnell Ranges.—
On 20th March we started at 7.35 a.m., and steered for the
Strangways, and thus bid good-bye to the great Mac Donnell
Ranges, which we had now crossed for the fifth time, and each
time by a different passage. Almost immediately after starting
we entered mulga scrub, but richly grassed, and at 9.30 a.m.
reached a gum creek running west from where we crossed; it
then lost itself, or ran into plains, or, perhaps, swamps. At
13 miles we entered stony rises with claypans, cotton, and
saltbush, which continued for six miles, when we reached a gum
creek running to the west, found water, and camped at 2.30. The
country we were camped on would, we thought, make a splendid
cattle or sheep run. It is now known as the Burt Plain. From
Mac Donnell to here was most richly grassed, and, I believe,
permanent water could be obtained in many places at moderate
depth. We proceeded on in the direction of the Reynolds Range,
and camped without water at 5 p.m. on a nice open, well-gras<ed
flat. Fortunately, we had carried plenty of water for ourselves.
While unpacking, we found that a packhorse was missing.
Hearne and Abrahams were dispatched in search of him. At
7 p.m. they returned without the horse, whose load consisted
entirely of our stock of horseshoes (25 sets). On the following
afternoon Mr. Ross and I went out shooting, and Mr. Ross shot
a euro and a wild dog. It was quite a treat to get fresh meat;
grilled euro steak was an esteemed luxury in our camp. About
4 p.m. Gregory and Hearne returned with the missing horse.
•His pack was all right, and none of the shoes was lost. On
gaining the top of the low range which runs east of the Peake,
we had a good' view of Central Mount Sturt. We could also see
the Woodford Creek, about three miles out on the plain. We
camped on the Woodford with plenty of water. We could hear
the natives shouting in the scrub on the opposite side of the
creek. Mr. Ross and I took a walk for a couple of miles to a
small hill composed of granite rocks, from which we could trace
the course of the Woodford running nearly east, but could not
get a sight of Central Mount Sturt on account of the dense
smokes the natives were raising. The timber there is poor and
stunted, and we saw none fit for telegraph-poles. We struck
the Hanson, found water and camped there. The Hanson here
has two branches, the smaller one being the main one. The
timber was plentiful but small, and unfit for poles. Just before
cutting the Hanson we passed through a lot of burning scrub, and
saw a savage tracking some animal in the sand. He did not


notice us until we were within 100 yards of him, and Mr. Ross
cooeed to him. He looked round, gave a loud “ Wugh,” and
vanished in the scrub and smoke, followed by two dingoes. On
28th March we started from our camp on the Hanson Creek
at 9.45 on a course of 40 degrees, and, steering for Central
Mount Sturt and keeping the eastern bank of the creek for
eight miles, we then crossed and entered mulga scrub, but not too
thick, and arrived at our old Camp No, 85 at 3 p.m. The bearing
from this camp to Central Mount Sturt is 340 degrees. On
29th March we started at 8.30, bearing for a lagoon on our
route to the Stirling Creek, and kept: a bearing of 35 degrees for
19 miles. The country consisted of porcupine grass and mulga
nearly the whole way. On reaching the lagoon we found plenty
of water, but very boggy, but we crossed it and proceeded three
miles, and camped one mile below one of our old camps on the
Stirling Creek, which we found had been flooded, and was still
running. Distance travelled to-day, 23 miles. On the next day,
the 30th, we spelled all day, in order to regulate the weights, etc.,
of the packs. The timber here is crooked and stunted.
—ln New Country.—
On 31st March we followed up the Stirling, and crossed
the saddle in the range, which is the head of the creek. This
saddle is only four or five miles from where Barrow’s Creek
Telegraph Station now stands. Later we struck the Taylor
Creek. We were now on country quite new to us, being about
eight miles above our furthest camp on the Taylor in the previous
January. It was a long way to the Roper. We wondered what
was ahead of us, and what would be our experience, and what
we would discover. We were all eager and ready. We reached
the Davenport Ranges on sth April, and on Sunday, 9th April,
thunder and rain occurred during the greater part of the night,
and soaked all hands as usual. By 10.30 next morning we had
dried all our rugs and clothes, and then started through a long-
gorge. We left the range behind, and sighted the Bonney Creek.
The close and steamy weather seemed to affect our horses very
much; even the spare saddle-horses were in a bath of sweat. I
had not previously seen our horses show such signs of weakness.
We reached the McDouall Range, named by Stuart.
—Hostile Savages.—
When about two miles from a waterhole we heard a yell.
Looking back, we saw a mob of savages, about a quarter of a
mile in our rear, armed with spears and boomerangs. When we
halted they made signs that they wanted to speak to us. One
youngish man took the lead, and held out a dead bandicoot in his


hand. Mr. Ross and Bill Gregory dismounted, and went to meet
him. They had a short conclave which neither party could
understand, so we proceeded on the same course. The savages,
of whom we counted 15 able-bodied young fellows, with one old
man, followed us, yelling and shouting, and making signs that
there was water a little way on ahead, and where we could “ sit
down.” We cut a creek with plenty of water. Here the savages
assembled on one side of the creek, and made all signs in their
power to induce us to “ sit down,” or camp. We only halted
for a few minutes, proceeded on our course, and entered very
high and dry porcupine grass, with low and thick gum scrub.
We fancied we had shaken off our dusky acquaintances, but after
proceeding a couple of miles we saw them again, and they soon
overtook us. and followed within 50 yards of our horses’ heels,
and shouted at the top of their voices. We believed they meant
mischief, which soon became apparent, for about a dozen fires
sprang up behind us. and two of the wretches with immense
bunches of flaming porcupine ran at their utmost speed, keeping
parallel with us, and endeavoured to make a ring of fire around
us. The wind Was blowing a gale from the south-east, and the
roaring of the flames in the tall dry grass and scrub, and the
dense columns of black smoke, coupled with the yelling and
shouting of the savages, with their naked and greasy painted
bodies, gave the whole scene a most demoniacal tinge. We took
no notice of them for a short distance, but they began to get
bolder and bolder, and set fire to the grass within a few yards of
the leading packhorses. The larger number followed behind,
under cover of the dense smoke. At last they got abreast of
Mr. Ross in the lead. He shouted out to them, holding up his
gun. They took no notice, but kept on firing the grass. He
then galloped to within 50 yards of the leading savages and fired
off both barrels of his gun over their heads, and the whole mob
turned and bolted for their lives, having had the biygest fright
in their experience and their first sound of a gun. There is no
doubt the savages fully intended to burn us, and had we camped
or halted while in the grass or scrub they might have achieved
their object, but we were well armed, and they had no idea of
our advantage in that direction. In any case, we were none too
soon in taking precautions to block them. Mr. Ross’s double-
barrelled gun always carried a large round bullet in one barrel
and buckshot in the other, and he thought the leading savage
might have got a pellet or two, which no doubt would amuse their
medicine-man to extract, and, I hoped, teach them a lesson. This
was about two miles south of where Tennant’s Creek Telegraph
Station now stands. At 18 miles we reached Bishop’s Creek,


named by Stuart, followed it up a mile, found water, and camped
at 2 p.m. We burnt a patch of grass round the camp, and kept
a strict watch all night. The whole country was in flames. Turn
our eyes which way we might, there was nothing but volumes of
dense black smoke to meet our gaze.
CHAPTER XVIII
Bishop’s Creek—Through the Ashburton Range—We Sight Newcastle
Lake—At Newcastle Waters —At North Newcastle—Ironstone Pond.
—Bishop’s Creek.—
On Sunday, 16th April, 1871, while at dinner, about 30 savages
set fire to the grass on which all our horses were feeding,
Mr. Ross and Gregory rode after them a little way, and found
them to be all lubras and piccaninnies. Mr. Ross fired off his
gun, and gave them a tremendous fright. He said that they were
the tallest native women he had ever seen; they all seemed to
be about six feet high! We did not think thev knew we were
there. Stuart camped on this creek (Bishop’s), but we did not
see his marked tree. Next morning we steered for Short's Range,
which was named by Stuart after Bishop Short, of Adelaide.
Just as we were starting, four savages appeared on the opposite
side of the creek, and we could see others at a distance, climbing
trees to get a better view of us. They made a terrible shouting.
The first four were in war-paint—pipeclay, red ochre, and
charcoal, with plenty of grease. They followed us for seven
miles, all armed with spears, boomerangs, and other weapons.
Each carried a bandicoot, which they kept holding up, we thought
as a sort of peace offering, and made numerous signs for us to
stop or “ sit down.” We took no notice of them, and when we
had come about four miles they made signs that water was close
to us, on our left. One fellow ran in that direction and returned
immediately, holding up his womera, which was all wet. They
called out “ Whitefellow ” most distinctly. At seven miles we
cut a creek with a north-west course, and the country on each side
was all on fire. The natives left us. and we proceeded on through
gum scrub and porcupine for nine miles, when we struck another
creek with fine waterholes, and camped. Next day we struck
Kekwick’s Ponds, named by Stuart after Mr. William Darton
Kekwick, a member of his first expedition. Mr. Ross requested
me to follow down the creek we were camped upon, which I did.
and found that it emptied into the ponds, where I found the


party had halted, and were shooting ducks. There was some
very good timber around these ponds for poles. Waterholes in
a large creek 10 miles on abounded with fish some eight inches
long. Mr. Ross shot two large ducks with black necks and
brown bodies. We also saw several native companions stalking
about. Long, rank canegrass grows nine feet high. We
believed this was Attack Creek, and, if so, it was where Stuart
and his little party of two men were attacked and turned back
by the savages in 1862. We had seen no sign of them so far.
—Through the Ashburton Range. —
Leaving Attack Creek on 19th April, we cut a large creek
with water flowing, probably the Morphett, named by Stuart.
Next day we left the creek and crossed the range, and at 3.30
found a creek flowing easterly, with water, and camped. About
two miles north of the camp was a long, low range—the
Whitington, or Powell, named by Stuart. The creek we camped
on was the Hunter. By nightfall we had reached, the commence-
ment of the Ashburton Range. cleared all ranges, and
stretching out as far as we could see to the west was what
appeared to be a dense, level forest country, and we could see
large smokes an immense way out to the westward. We cut a
large creek coming out of the range with large waterholes, and
we camped. This was Powell’s Creek. No range was visible to
the westward of the Ashburton. We were finding many new
trees and shrubs. One looked like a fig, and was deciduous;
others were like apple, plum, or pear with dark-green thick
foliage, and casting a beautiful shade. In fact, one could almost
imagine he was riding through an orchard. We could not have
been more than 45 miles from Newcastle Waters, named by
Stuart after the Duke of Newcastle. Mosquitoes were unusually
troublesome at night, and dispersed our horses in several
directions. We did not get them all until 3 p.m., too late to start.
We only had hobbles enough for 10, and all the others (13)
were loose. Mr. Ross rode three miles down the creek, and upon
his return reported that when within a quarter of a mile of the
camp and close to a large waterhole he had surprised 11 savages
of different sizes and sexes, who had apparently only just arrived.
One was a very old man with hair as white as a flourbag. They
bolted, as usual. Hearne and Gregory while out for the horses
cut Stuart’s tracks in several places, apparently keeping a north
course along the Ashburton Range. Considering that we had no
surveyor, we were not doing badly.
—We Sight Newcastle Lake.—
On 25th April we caught glimpses of what appeared to be
an enormous lake of water, but as we could see apparently


40 miles to the south-west and a long way to the north, and also
that there was no such lake marked on Stuart’s chart, we supposed
it to be an immense plain with long white grass, which, at that
distance, and with the reflection of the sun upon it, gave it the
appearance of water. As we proceeded, however, we could see
trees a long way out on the supposed plain, and flocks of birds
flying over it. We were determined to see what it really was,
and, accordingly, ascended the stony ridge we were following
along, and, to our astonishment, found it really was water, and
the shore could not be a quarter of a mile to the west of us. As
far as ever we could see was one unbroken sheet of water. It
was a grand sight, and certainly the largest sheet of fresh water
I had ever looked upon. It was a perfect sea, and the result,
no doubt, of abnormal floods. We discussed the possibility of
Ludwig Leichhardt and his party having met their fate by
being overtaken by such means. Mr. Ross shot a curious
bird, which we thought to be a jungle hen or pheasant.
Its colour was a fawn, and its head and beak similar
to the domestic fowl. Its tail was about 18 inches long,
and it flew very slowly and clumsily. It was the first of its kind
we had seen, but that was when our interest lay in hoping for
and discovering fauna and flora of these new regions and lakes.
We heard numerous flights of geese, gulls, and other waterfowl
flying over the camp during the night. We noticed, too, several
new trees, shrubs, and grasses, and the country was getting very
interesting. We hoped we had done with porcupine and sand-
hills for the rest of our journey. Mr. Ross estimated the distance
from here to Newcastle Waters to be 20 miles. On the 26th April,
the horses having rambled during the night, our start was delayed
until 10.50 a.m. We then kept a bearing of 340 degrees for 11 miles,
when we discovered that the little bay mare Gazelle was missing.
So Abrahams and I returned to look for her, following her tracks
back for six miles, but failed to find and we felt certain she
was missed in the thick scrub. We therefore returned to where
we had first missed the mare, and there we cut her track where
she had first branched off from the mob. We followed her tracks
only a few hundred yards, and found her taking a quiet spell
under a shady tree. Abrahams’s horse was knocked up, so he
changed his saddle on to Gazelle, and drove his horse behind me,
and we proceeded on the tracks of the party until stopped by a
bog, into which the knocked up mare must needs plunge
and get stuck fast. By main strength and the use of our stirrup-
leathers we hauled at her and got her on her feet, but she bogged
again almost immediately, and we got her out again and rolled
her over and over like a log. By this time the sun had set, and


we could only follow our party’s tracks a short distance before
dark, and were obliged to camp, minus water, blankets, or food.
We were loath to kindle a fire, knowing the blacks to be numerous
about this district, but the mosquitoes started to come in clouds,
and we preferred to make a fire and risk detection. On 27th
April we proceeded on the tracks at sunrise, and found the party
camped on the long-looked-for Newcastle Waters. I was
disappointed in Newcastle Waters, as it did not come up to
expectation after reading Stuart’s descriptions. I pictured it to
be a vast sheet of water seven miles long, and surrounded by
country superior to any we had met with, but it was simply a
large creek with sloping banks, and about 50 yards wide and
six or seven feet deep. On each side were swamps with
tali rank canegrass and patches of dense sedgetree and milkwood
scrub. The soil was black and rich-looking, and the timber on
the banks stunted gum. These, of course, were only first
impressions. Mr. Ross and I took a ride down the creek for
about five miles. The lagoons and swamps on each side appeared
to get larger and more numerous. All kinds of waterfowl
frequented these lagoons, several kinds of ducks, cranes, spoon-
bills, native companions, pelicans, cormorants, and Tasmanian
and the sacred ibis. There were plenty of fish, nine and 10 inches
long. They bit readily, and were capital eating, but the ducks
were very shy, and we could only shoot a couple. We saw no
natives, and no signs of their having been there, but there were
large smokes on Ashburton Range, two miles to the east of us.
So far as we saw it, I could not then recommend it as a sheep
country. It seemed to be too much subject to inundation. The
soil was rich, and might suit tobacco, sugar, and perhaps cotton..
On the higher ground there was also a species of wild rice in
the swampy areas. The whole plain was under water, and looked
to be impassable. All water went into the Newcastle Creek.
There could be no doubt that there had been an exceptional flood,,
as Stuart described no such lake in any of his trips. In fact,
his tracks on the chart showed that he crossed it when attempting
to make for the Victoria River, and it must then have been a dry
plain, and a very dry season.
—At Newcastle Waters. —
We left camp at 8 a.m., following the stream upwards, but
it was impossible to keep a straight course for any distance, on
account of the numerous swamps and bogs, but from casual
glimpses we got of the creek its course is from the north-east.
Our course during the afternoon was mostly easterly, until we
reached the extreme northern end of the Ashburton Range,
where we camped. On 29th April we started at 8 a.m., our course


being easterly until midday, passing through much scrub subject
to inundation and full of big crabholes. We then struck the
end of a large plain, with high, course canegrass, and on the north
side we could see dark lines of forest timber and apparently a
low range running north-west and south-east. The whole plain
was under water and impassable. The whole of this water flowed
into the Newcastle, and then into the big lake we discovered some
days ago. There is no doubt this was an exceptional flood. Our
only alternative was to return and endeavour to cross the main
creek at the north end of the range, and w r e retraced our steps
and arrived at our camp we had left in the morning. We found
the natives had been there during our absence, leaving their
footprints all over the camp and in the ashes of our fire, which
they had tossed about.
—At North Newcastle.—
Sunday, ,30th April, 1871.—Spelling all day. Mr, Ross shot
three ducks. We ate the last of our meat yesterday; it had
lasted well. Gregory and Hearne took a ride this afternoon to
look for a crossing-place, and they found it not so boggy as we
imagined, and they think the horses can cross, so we hope there
will be no further delay, enabling us to reach the Roper, still
some 200 miles away.
—lronstone Pond.—
On the Ist of May we left the North Newcastle at 10.30, and
crossed the sheet of water which is, no doubt, the main channel,
and about 100 yards wide. We then proceeded on a bearing
of 360 degrees, with thick scrub for three miles, and then entered
an extensive plain—Sturt’s Plain, named by Stuart. We could
see the timber on the western side. We kept to the open plain,
with the timber half a mile to the west of us nearly all day. The
plain is covered with tussock grass and full of wide cracks and
holes, some two feet deep. Towards evening we entered the
forest country. We followed a shallow watercourse to look foi
water, but found none. We then stopped to camp, but water
birds of all kinds being numerous, I volunteered to have another
took before unpacking, and in half a mile found plenty of water
in a large swamp with hundreds of ducks. I fired off my ride,
and returned and conducted the party to it, and we camped. We
started the next morning, 2nd of May, on a bearing of 340
degrees for 12 miles, and found the country more open. I took
a cruise to the west, and was again fortunate in finding another
swamp, or Ironstone Pond, and we made our camp upon it.


CHAPTER XIX
Searching for Water—Still Searching for Water—Chain of Ponds—
Bobby’s Waterhole.
—Searching for Water. —
On 3rd May, 1871, we left Ironstone Pond, but had to lack
about a good deal to avoid dense jungle and wattle scrub. I had
never seen timber growing so thickly before. Much of it was
mulga, but it grew to an enormous height and very straight.
This, although very thick, we could travel in, but the jungle—
composed of beautiful creepers, hibiscus, and trees and shrubs
new to us —neither we nor our horses could face. After altering
and realtering our course many times, we reached better travelling
country in white sandy soil. At eight miles we entered a shallow
swamp or watercourse, where we saw a native well with a little
water in it. Immediately upon leaving this we entered dense
scrub for two miles, when the country improved, with tall blood-
wood-trees and high kangaroo-grass, and also numerous birds
that frequent water. Here we halted to allow Hearne, Gregory,
and myself to search for water, proceeding in different directions.
I searched for two hours without finding any. It was most
puzzling country; there was no such thing as a creek, a claypan,
or a hill to guide one, but on every side was the same level and
thick forest country, and it needed care in steering, as the country
was all alike and impossible to see more than 50 yards ahead.
As there was no likdihood of getting water, Mr. Ross decided to
return to where we had seen the native well, and we retraced
our tracks back two miles, where Gregory drew our attention to
a gum swampy place half a mile to the east of our course as a
likely place for water. We found it to be dry. Gregory and 1
followed it in different directions, but found no water. But
while we were absent Abrahams had discovered a native well
some three feet deep, with apparently plenty of water for our
•own use. We therefore camped and filled the waterbags.
We found it did not diminish the supply, and thought
with a little labour we might water some of the horses,
rand accordingly dug away some earth so as to allow one
horse at a time to drink. By this plan we were able to water
nine or 10 of them, and even then lowered the supply very little,
and we hoped by next morning to water the remainder. The
water rose considerably in our well during the night, and by
10 a.m. next day we had watered every horse, and at 10.30 we
started, steering north-west for four and a half miles. We
passed through thick wattle or lancewood scrub and forest
country, and actually struck some low hills densely timbered.


Gaining the top, we found the country clipping north-east.
Gregory and Hearne were then dispatched in search of water
The former returned without success, but reported having dis-
covered a watercourse running easterly, which we followed, and
found it gradually formed into a creek, getting larger as we
proceeded, emptying into claypans and then forming again. We
followed this four miles, and passed several nice ponds and side
lagoons, on one of which we camped. Mr. Ross shot a native
companion, which we skinned, but no one seemed anxious to have
it cooked or eaten.
—Still Searching for Water. —
Next morning we followed the creek for five miles, when it
took an easterly course. We left it and entered open gum-
timbered country, and at 15 miles halted to search for water.
Gregory started north, Hearne east, and myself west. All
returned in an hour with the same story —no water; and Mr.
Ross decided t© camp and return in the morning to the last water
we had seen on the creek, about 10 miles back. But “ turning
back ” always grated on my ears, and I told Mr. Ross that while
they were unpacking and forming the camp I would have another
search. Getting his permission to do so, I saddled my favourite
chestnut, Eliza, and started east for two miles, but finding no
change in the country, I altered to north-east and worked round
to north-west, as I found the country dipping in that direction.
Proceeding two miles on this course, I found the country
becoming very stony, and this led me on to country that had
been swamped at no very distant period, as the grass was very
green, and I kept the base of the stony ridge, I had crossed
and found a swamp, bare of grass, with the exception of a very
green patch in the centre, but no water, and surrounded by
ironstone rocks. Crossing the end of this, I found a large basin,
and, to my delight, plenty of water, and further on more swamp,
with abundance of both water and all sorts of waterfowl. I
watered Eliza and myself, filled my pipe and also the waterbag.
By this time the sun was setting, and I had to steer my way back
through forest to our camp, no easy matter in this level country,
presenting such a sameness without landmarks or hills of any
kind. I started 20 degrees south-west for two miles, and here
my mare kept bearing so much to the north that I thought I
must have made a mistake, and so let her have her head, as she
had often brought me to camp in the dark. For half a mile she
kept north, and then turned east. This convinced me that Eliza
was bamboozled for once, and if I did not again assume command
she would bamboozle me too. I then steered west for a mile,
and knew I must be in the vicinity of our camp. I then cooeed,


but was only answered by a shrill mopoke. Proceeding another
half-mile, I fired my revolver, and was answered by the report
of a gun and a loud call right ahead. Soon after I saw the camp
fire and told my tale, while I disjointed the bones of a splendid
fat turkey that Mr. Ross had shot, but which had been untouched
by the others, who were too thirsty to eat. The introduction of
my full waterbag caused the pots to be boiled and the turke}
devoured. I now found that Hearne had, during my absence,
been out a short distance north and east, and it was his horse’s
tracks that good old Eliza had been nosing along when I thought
her bamboozled. There did not appear to be any natives in
this country, as we had seen no tracks or smokes since leaving
Newcastle/ Mr. Ross estimated the Strangways River, named
by Stuart, to be from 25 to 30 miles to the north of us. At
8 o’clock on Sunday evening, 7th May, rain commenced to fall
in earnest.
—Chain of Ponds.—
Our bay mare Gazelle was missing next morning. This
mare had been a nuisance throughout the trip. She was always
poking away by herself. We hunted in all directions for her
until 11 o’clock without success. Mr. Ross determined to wait
no longer, and left Hearne to continue the search and then
overtake us. It continued showery all day, making it slippery
for the horses. At 5 p.m. I found another swamp, and we
camped. We saw new trees every day; in fact, all the trees
and shrubs were entirely new to us, and it was very interesting.
At 5.30 p.m. Hearne returned without the mare Gazelle. The
rain cleared off, and the sun came out next day ten times hotter,
giving our rugs a sort of damp scorch. When we reached the
supposed head of Strangways River we spelled all day, in order
to shoe some of the horses. Mr. Ross took another walk, and
brought back a splendid fat turkey. These turkeys, or bustards,
were the fattest birds I had ever seen, and proved a welcome
addition to our meagre fare. It rained for about an hour
on the night of 12th May and wet us through. We started
at 10 next day, and passed several muddy waterholes of water,
and at 1.30 camped. At midday it commenced to rain, and
continued heavily for an hour. It was almost impossible to get
anything dry in this climate. The steam from the earth when
the sun came out kept everything in a state of moisture, and we
had the greatest difficulty to keep our firearms from rusting, as
the only oil we had was what we saved from the wild turkeys.
Through having no cases for our carbines and shotguns we
missed many fat ducks in consequence of their misfiring. At
4.30 p.m. it commenced to rain heavily, continuing without inter-
mission until 9 p.m.. by which time we presented a most pitiable


appearance, and everything soaking wet. Fortunately, Mr, Ross
had shot six ducks. These we managed to rub the wet feathers
off, and to keep the fire going, enabling us to cook them. With
our quarts of tea, these contributed greatly to the comfort of the
inner man. When the rain ceased we turned our attention to
making wet grass beds for the night, when a large brown snake
was seen by Mr. Ross to glide out from a hollow log that Hearne
and I were sitting on. It was quickly dispatched by Abrahams
with the fire-shovel and consigned to the fire, the warmth of
which had probably aroused it from a torpid state, or, perhaps,
the odour of roast duck. It continued to rain upon us at intervals
throughout the night, but we managed to sleep through it all
without further disturbance. We were compelled to remain in
camp all the following day, as thei ground was too boggy for the
horses to travel. The rain disappeared, and everything was dry
again. The 14th May, being Sunday, we rested as usual.
A beautiful morning after the rain. The next morning
we started on a course of 320 degrees through box forest,
and having the creek on the west. At four miles we
reached a stony mound some 30 feet high, which we climbed,
and also a tree on its summit, and from it we could trace the
course of the creek. The view to the north-west seemed to be
similar to that we have been travelling through—dense level
forest. After leaving the mound we entered red sandy
soil for a short distance, and then rich black soil, which
looked good enough to grow anything. At seven miles we
reached the creek again, and camped on a good waterhole. The
ground to-day has been very heavy travelling for the horses.
Some are so weak that a dozen miles a day is enough for them.
We left camp on 16th May, and passed through the same class
of country as yesterday. From a rocky mound we could see
large smokes to the north. We then entered stringy-bark timber,
being the first of its kind we had seen in these regions. The
smokes also were the first seen since leaving Newcastle 16 days
ago.
—Bobby’s Waterhole.—
On 17th May we had very heavy dew. The black saddle-
horse, Bobby, is missing this morning. We hunted for him until
10.15, but could get no trace of him, and, as he is knocked up.
Mr. Ross started without him on a course of 320 degrees, and we
have named this camp, after the horse, Bobby’s Hole. We
reached the creek again at 3 p.m,, and found it to have a much
wider channel. We camped at 3.30. About three miles to the
west is a long low range, on which are several smokes, and we
may possibly see something of the natives of this region
to-morrow.


CHAPTER XX
We Reach the Roper River—Our Mistake—Supplies Running Out—We
Reach the Telegraph Line—New Faces at Last!
—We Reach the Roper River.—
On 19th May, 1871, we reached the Roper River. On the
way we saw some natives. One fellow stopped and spoke to
Mr. Ross, but we could learn nothing from him regarding the
Port Darwin construction parties. We entered a palmtree forest,
interspersed with wattle and rich blue-black soil. We changed
our course, but proceeded only a short distance, owing to the
dense scrub, and went in another direction. Hearne and I went
in search of water, but the course I took led me into impenetrable
scrub, and I was forced to retreat and rejoin the party. We
proceeded only a short distance when we heard Hearne cooee,
and he soon joined us, having found plenty of water. We
followed him, and then reached the long-looked-for Roper River,
and after some difficulty watered the horses and camped. So
here we were on the great Roper River. Ten weeks had elapsed
since we left the junction depot of the Finke and Hugh. We
had struggled and battled through all sorts and conditions of
country, some good and some bad; but, taking all in all, a
wonderful country, and my early enthusiasm for exploring it had
not diminished in the slightest degree. We had been remarkably
well piloted, especially so when one considers that none of us
was a surveyor, and that Mr. Ross’s outfit for determining our
course consisted only of a prismatic compass, a protractor, a
tracing of Stuart’s map, and a carpenter’s lead pencil! Thus we
were quite unable to determine our latitude and longitude, but,
nevertheless, we passed close to, and sometimes camped on,
Stuart’s old camps.
—Our Mistake. —
There was no doubt, however, that the creek we had been
following down for a week was not, as we had supposed, the
Strangways River of Stuart, but an entirely different and new
one, and, moreover, the large and swampy watercourse into which
it emptied, and which we crossed two days previously and spoke
to the native, was undoubtedly the Elsey, which was discovered
by that great explorer Mr. Augustus Gregory, and named after
Dr. Elsey, who was surgeon to that expedition, which explored
its way from the Victoria River to Brisbane, I think, in 1845.
The junction of the Strangways and the Roper was at least 60
miles to the east of us, and we did not lose, but rather gained, by


not following the Strangways, as we should have had to come up
the Roper for that distance in order to attain our position. We
were, therefore, 60 miles nearer Port Darwin through following
the liew creek. This creek was afterwards named the Birdum
by Mr. R. C. Patterson, and which the telegraph line now follows.
Ludwig Leichhardt was. the first to discover and cross the Roper
in the early ’forties, on his expedition from Queensland to the
military settlement at Port Essington. There was little change
in the country to indicate the approach of this large river, and
it was not until we emerged from the dense scrub within a couple
of hundred yards of it that we were able to notice a long line of
gigantic paperbark-trees, interspersed with beautiful palms,
growing to a height of 90 feet, perfectly straight and without a
branch until surmounted by the umbrella-like fronds, and over-
topping all other trees. As we drew nearer, the long canegrass
amid screw palms grew stronger and thicker, and so tall that we
could scarcely see the packhorses. Arriving at the bank edge,
we looked down, but could see nothing, owing to the dense foliage.
Down and down we went, but could still detect no water. There
was nothing but a dense hedge of pandanus, and it was not until
we had forced our heads through that we could see the water,
running in a deep and dark shaded stream and about 10 yards
wide, with rugged perpendicular banks level with the water’s
edge. Linder the first, or main, bank we found a spring about
five feet in diameter, surrounded by crusts of limestone, and
emptying into the river. The water had a saline and sickly taste,
but we were able to water the horses, which was fortunate, as the
approach to the river was too dangerous for them.
—Supplies Running Out.—
We moved forward for several days, and Mr. Ross took a
stroll in the hope of getting a rock wallaby or kangaroo. We
had had no meat for a month, except three hawks, and we had
only three days’ tea left. The sugar supply had run out a week
previously, and we had barely three weeks’ flour left. It was
certainly time we saw something of the line contractors, Darwent
and Dal wood. Hearne and I went for a stroll, and saw a giant
Too not 40 yards from us, which had evidently been watching
us all the time. He hopped off at a great speed, taking what
ought to have been our supper with him. Our provision supply
was becoming a serious matter with us. We had less than 80
pounds of flour, 15 pounds of oatmeal, and no tea, sugar, or meat.
On 30th May we struck the Katherine, the sources of which
Stuart crossed and named. It was a magnificent stream about
60 yards wide, and flowing at a great rate. We followed it down
for six miles, crossing numerous tributaries, some equal in size


to many of the so-called rivers of South Australia. We camped
on the banks of this fine waterway. Mr. Ross took his usual
stroll in search of the much-needed game, and as we saw him
returning in the distance with a bundle under his arm we made
up the fire in anticipation of a great feed of fat turkey, but, to
our great astonishment, and, I must say, delight, the bundle proved
to he neither more nor less than a quantity of dry cow manure.
He told us with delight how he had discovered both horse and
bullock tracks along the river-bank. Although of an ancient
date it caused great satisfaction to us all, as we had only 40
pounds of flour left, and nothing else. We looked forward to
cutting the line of telegraph. It was Mr. Ross’s intention to
follow the line right into the settlement at Darwin, and there
take passage by the first vessel bound for South Australia.
—We Reach the Telegraph Line. —
We started at 9 a.m. on 2nd June, and followed the course
of the river. At two miles we struck numerous bullock and
horse tracks. We then entered some low rocky hills, and when
rounding one of these we, much to our gratification, struck the
Port Darwin telegraph line, but only the poles, no wire. Some
months must have elapsed since the parties had been working
there. Stumps of the trees which they had cut down were
sprouting again, and on the road, which was parallel to the line
of poles, we could find no indication of drays or of horsemen
having passed over it for a long period. We thought they had
gone back to bring wire along. We drove a stake into the road
and nailed a piece of board on the top, on which Mr. Ross
wrote: —“The Adelaide Overland Telegraph Exploring Expedi-
tion struck the telegraph line and road this day, 2nd June, 1871.
(Signed) John Ross, leader.” We turned northward and
followed the road en route for Port Darwin and at three miles
reached the Katherine River, where the construction parties
appeared to have had a large camp, and had even constructed a
punt for the landing of stores. On one of the telegraph-poles, at
the extreme edge of the northern bank, there was a piece of tin
nailed with the numbers 202 pricked into it, and just above it
the letters P.D., and so we were still that distance from that port.
Although this was not a beaten road, it was quite a novelty
to be on one again. Our good old horses jogged along most
happily. On 3rd June we continued following the telegraph line
of poles, but we did not get a start until 12.30, owing to the
horses rambling. We passed many deserted camps and one
empty wagon. The country we have been passing through to-day
consists of stony ridges and stunted gumtrees. We crossed
several creeks, most of them with water in them. At 4.40 we


camped at an old camp of the construction parties. Owing to the
very low state of our flourbag, Mr. Ross deemed it expedient
to travel on the Sunday. Towards evening four of our horses
knocked up. We were forced to leave them behind, and also
two packsaddles, which we fixed up in a tree alongside the road,
and left a note informing passers-by of the fact. Further along
the track our leading packhorse knocked up. This grand old
mare had never before shown any signs of distress, having always
taken the lead day after day throughout the trip, always following
behind Mr. Ross, never losing his track through dense scrubs,
mountains, and rocky gorges, and carrying her pack in safety for
hundreds and hundreds of miles since the time we left Beltana.
—New Faces at Last!—
Just as we had finished our prison fare of damper and water
we fancied we could hear voices, which reminded us that we were
still in the land of savages, but looking down the road, in the
opposite direction to which we had come, we saw, to our intense
delight, two horsemen approaching, and the first new faces we
had seen for many a day. They informed us that they were
mounted police troopers on their way to join Mr. McLachlan
on the Fergusson Creek, a large creek we had crossed 30 miles
back, and south of the Katherine. They were John Masson and
Kepler. They raised our spirits considerably by informing us
that there was a depot with plenty of provisions only seven miles
ahead of us, and that the distance from there to Fort Point or
Port Darwin was 125 miles, that the two places were connected
by telegraph, that a telegram had been received that morning at
the depot from Fort Point that the ship Gulnare had that very
morning sailed from the fort with Mr. McMinn and 60 of the
contractors’ men on board, and, further, that the line of telegraph-
poles had been carried 23 miles south of the Katherine, or 20
miles south of where we struck it; that the contractors’ men had
declined to continue, owing to the want of proper provisions; and
that the contractors, from a totally inadequate number of working
stock, were unable to complete their work to the satisfaction of
the Government supervisor, Mr. McMinn, who had consequently
seized all their stock' and plant and reserved as many men as
were inclined to remain with him. Mr. McMinn had proceeded
to Adelaide to acquaint the Government with the circumstances
and to bring back a competent party and plant to continue the
work under Government supervision, and at the expense of the
contractors. They further informed us that Mr. McMinn had,
according to arrangement, been to the junction of the Strangways
and Roper Rivers, and there buried dispatches and a large
assortment of provisions for our use, and blazed trees and made


other such marks that would attract our attention. There being
three Roper Rivers marked on the map, and we having no means
of obtaining our latitude, it is not surprising that we missed
the rendezvous. They further informed us that the Katherine
River, which we had followed down, was a tributary of the
Victoria or Daly Rivers; they were not sure which. They also
caused us some amusement by informing us that we had been
more than once reported as lost, killed by blacks, or perished from
thirst! These reports were later contradicted by the southern
parties having found our tracks and marked trees right on
Stuart’s old camp. All this information, and much more, was
accompanied by delicious and repeated pots of tea with sugar,
to which we had so long been strangers. In addition, the tinned
bouilli beef was quite new to us, but pronounced delicious, and
the assurance that we could get all these good things at the depot
was welcome news. It caused, too, no little surprise to our
visitors to learn that we had been weeks subsisting only on
damper and water, and the total absence or sign of any corpulence
on our bodies convinced them of the truth of our assertions. All
these things caused excitement in our little camp, and nobody
thought of going to sleep until the early hours of the morning.
CHAPTER XXI
Death of Our Packhorse Charlie —A Misunderstanding—A Great Dis-
appointment—Sickness and Death—The Monkey and the Medicine.
—Death of Our Packhorse Charlie. —
We bade our police guests farewell on 7th June, 1871, and
started at 8.30. At two miles, while crossing a bog, a favourite
old packhorse, Charlie, got bogged, and while endeavouring to
get him out he rolled over on his side and died without a struggle,
probably having broken a bloodvessel. He was a very old
favourite with us all. and I had been in the habit of giving him
crumbs and crusts of johnny cake every morning when we had
any. . Poor old Charlie! He had travelled more than 3,000 miles
with us, and, then, on the last day, died in a bog. Poor old
Charlie! At seven miles we reached the depot, and were kindly
received by the telegraph official (Mr. Stapleton) and his staff.
There we would stay a few days to recruit before proceeding on
to the settlement at Fort Point. Mr. Ross telegraphed our arrival
to Mr. R. C. Burton (overseer of works and Mr. McMinn’s
representative), who replied, congratulating Mr. Ross on the safe


arrival of himself and party, and the accomplishment of a
wonderful and strenuous trip. A telegram was also received from
Captain Douglas (Government Resident), which read, “Con-
gratulations to Mr. Ross on his safe arrival in the Northern
Territory after one of the most successful expeditions ever
undertaken.” This was most gratifying, and endorsed my
opinion of Mr. Ross’s leadership, and consequently the unbroken
comradeship that had existed among us all through the trip.
—A Misunderstanding. —
Mr. Burton and Mr. Ross had been telegraphing all the
afternoon, and Mr. Burton strongly recommended Mr. Ross to
return by a Dutch boat then in Port Darwin by way of Batavia
and Singapore. He would then arrive in Adelaide before the
departure of Mr. McMinn, and thus be able to offer all informa-
tion to Mr. Todd regarding the country we had explored. I
was also to accompany Mr. Ross, and the rest of the party to
await the arrival of another boat. But a misunderstanding
arose between Messrs. Burton and Ross in the telegram, causing
Mr. Ross to alter his plans and to turn back overland. Another
telegram was dispatched to Mr. Burton, asking him not to detain
the boat, as the demurrage would amount to £9 a day, and it would
take 10 days to reach the settlement, and requesting to be supplied
with requisite outfit, in order to undertake the return journey
overland, and that such supplies might be forwarded to that depot,
thereby saving our horses the trip to Fort Point. This arrange-
ment was partly agreed to, and Mr. Ross intended now to proceed
with four horses to Port Darwin, accompanied by Robert
Abrahams and myself. Several telegrams passed to and fro next
day, but no fresh arrangements were arrived at. We recruited our-
selves on bouilli meat and other restoratives. Fever and ague
had broken out at Darwin. One man was not expected to survive.
Two of Mr. Stapleton’s men were also attacked by fever and ague,
but not dangerously. I thought that, perhaps, as we had come
overland, coupled with the hardships and privations we had
experienced during the previous 11 months, these might act as a
preventive to catching the fever, as, unlike newcomers by a quick
sea trip, we were, or ought to be, quite acclimatized.
—A Great Disappointment.—
Mr. Ross decided not to go to the settlement, and so spare
the horses the extra journey. He therefore telegraphed Mr.
Burton to forward all supplies on by drays that were about to
start with stores for this depot. Our not going into Port Darwin
was a great disappointment to me after having come across the
continent, and got so close to the settlement without seeing it. I


was exceedingly pleased with the climate here. The nights were
so cold as to require two rugs to keep us warm. We were,
however, on very high ground, and surrounded hy stdl higher
tableland. I thought at the time that when I did make my home
in the Northern Territory I should choose either the hanks of
the Roper or Katherine Rivers, where there was some superior-
land intersected by well-watered creeks, and where almost any
climate could be obtained by having recourse to the immense high
tableland, where the hot, rainy months could be passed in perfect
health and security. I took a decided liking to the country, and
determined to return to it by the first opportunity I could get
after the termination of this trip. On Monday, 11th June, I
commenced to repair our old packsaddles and bags, and also the
riding-saddles, which were in a dilapidated state owing to our
having no material to repair them with on the journey over here.
A telegram came informing us that the drays with stores for this
depot and ourselves would leave Southport that day. Gregory
was still very unwell, but Bob Abrahams was improving rapidly.
The horses were not getting on well at all here, fwo of them
fell down, and were unable to rise without assistance. \\ e decided
not to remain there a day longer than we could possibly help, as
the feed did not seem to improve or suit the horses. They were
mere bags of bones, and we doubted if they could stand the icturn
journey across the continent. Mr. Ross intended to proceed to
the Roper and find the provisions planted by Mr. McMinn. and
there consume all that we could not carry, as well as give the
horses a chance to recoup. Should they not do so, we would
return to Port Darwin and take ship for South Australia. At
9 o’clock one night an alarm was given that someone was shooting
out in the scrub. All hands turned out of camp, supposing it to be
an attack hy natives. Two shots were fired into the air, which
were answered some distance up the road by two revolver shots,
followed by the arrival of Mr. McLachlan and our two former
police friends, Messrs. Masson and Kepler, who had returned
from an exploration of the Katherine River. I hey brought one
of our horses left by us on the Fergusson. Mr. McLachlan
reported that the natives had destroyed portions of two wagons
left at the Katherine, having removed all the ironwork of the
forecarriage and actually taken the heavy tyres off the four wheels
and carried them away.
—Sickness and Death. —
On 19th June Hearne and I commenced shoeing the horses.
The depot was quite a hospital. Gregory was still very ill, and
two men of Mr. Stapleton’s staff were suffering from fever and
ague. They appeared quite healthy on one day, and on the next


were helplessly ill, while a third,, a young German named
Nienaber, was attacked by periodic fits of epilepsy. This was
very high ground, and one would have thought a very healthy
place. 1 believe that so much sickness among so small a
community might largely be attributed to idle camp life. Exercise
I believe to be essentially necessary to health in a climate such
as this, but here these young men had not sufficient emplovment,
through no fault of their own. This was only a temporary camp,
lolling and lying about, eating heartily without the exercise to
caiiy it off. In the evening Nienaber went off into a very severe
fit, and was quite unconscious. At midnight there was no
improvement in his condition. He was insensible, and two men
were required to watch him. We feared he would not last
through the night. Next morning Nienaber was still uncon-
scious, but the convulsions were not so severe. Mr. Stapleton
wired the doctor at Fort Point for advice and treatment. At
11.15 a.m. Nienaber was no more. He died peacefully, but had
been unconscious since 8 p.m. the previous night. He' was only
19 years of age. The police troopers dug a grave and made the
coffin. \\ e buried poor young Nienaber on some rising ground
across the creek on the north side, under a beautiful fern
palmtree. The funeral service was read over the grave by Mr.
J. McLachlan. I finished shoeing the horses, as Hearne was
ell and Gregorv was very low and weak. MT. Ross tele-
graphed to the Government Resident (Captain Douglas) to
procure the use of a cart, in order to convey Gregory down to
Port Darwin. Ihe natives were burning the country all round
us. Gregory had improved and Hearne was better. Mr.
McLachlan proposed starting with two packhorses to meet the
drays. Abrahams and 1 were busy preparing ration-bags and
making hobble-straps. Mr. McLachlan started, but returned at
dinner-time, having met the drays at a creek named Yam Creek,
eight miles away. Gregory was soon well enough to get up.
The drays arrived about 3 o’clock, and we unloaded them. The
loading chiefly consisted of tinned meat. The meat was without
exception the most cleanly prepared and the finest flavoured I
had ever eaten, and we were glad to know that we were taking
a good supply with us across the continent. The nights were
very cold, and everyone crowded round the fire and wore thick
coats and even waistcoats!
—rThe Monkey and the Medicine. —
Mr. Stapleton owned a monkey named Jacko—a most
intelligent creature. It got off its chain, and was discovered on
a shelf in the depot storeroom busily engaged in pulling the
corks out of the medicine-bottles, smelling each one. and pouring


the contents on the floor. Nevertheless, Jacko had some good
and useful qualities apart from his mischievous ones, and, besides
contributing to the amusement of the camp, proved himself to
be a protector too. The natives, although not of a ferocious
nature, are adept thieves, and on two or more occasions had,
while everyone was inside the slab dining-room having dinner,
sneaked up to the men’s sleeping-tents and carried away various
articles, as well as blankets and even the mosquito-nets. It was
necessary to keep watch, and the natives were forbidden to cross
the creek. A number of them lined themselves along the creek
bank, and several of us went down to interview them, including
Mr. Stapleton. While doing so, Jacko, who no doubt considered
this must be some special occasion, managed to undo his chain,
and follow us. Now, these uncouth savages had never heard
of Professor Darwin, nor had they ever dreamt of, and much
less seen, such a living image of themselves. When they caught
sight of Jacko’s snarling face, hopping and dragging his chain
through the grass, they gave one united yell and sprang up the
nearest trees. Their terror was increased tenfold when Jacko,
chain and all, sprang up behind them, evidently believing that he
had, at last, discovered some of his long-lost tribe. This was
too much for the terrified blacks, and with shrieks and yells they
dropped from the branches to the ground, some a distance of
20 feet, and disappeared in the thick scrub. Jacko had dispersed
them with a grin, and his bombardment had proved more effective
and lasting than a previous, but more dangerous, dispersal, when
Mr. Willie Brock had detected two dusky thieves racing for their
lives carrying between them, above all things, a large camp-oven.
Willie Brock was a telegraph official, and noted as a splendid shot
with the rifle. When Willie saw the thieves they were quite
500 yards away, and. sighting his rifle, he fired, striking the camp-
oven in the centre between tbem. and smashed it into smithereens.
CHAPTER XXII
Pine Creek —Destructive Natives —Buried Treasure
—Pine Creek/ —
On Ist July, 1871, we started to recross the continent. Hearne
and I Went in search of the horses, and found them all four miles
on good feed, and by 2 p.m. we had packed up, hade all hands at
the depot a hearty good-bye, and once again tackled this great
continent, this time with our faces to the south. Next dav we


reached Mr. McLachlan's camp, and remained with him for the
night. He had prospected several places, and in every instance
found gold in the creek. This creek was later known as Pine
Creek Goldfields, from which wonderful values were obtained.
Bidding farewell to Mr. McLachlan and his troopers, we started
at 7.30 a.m., following the line of telegraph-poles. We reached
the Cullen Creek, which was named by Mr. McMinn after Mr.
Cullen, of Cullen & Wigley, solicitors, of Adelaide. Later we
crossed the Fergusson River and camped. This, like the Cullen,
was a fine one, and probably emptied into the Katherine. The
surrounding country was open forest and well grassed. We
passed several quartz reefs, and washed several dishes of dirt in
the creek-bed, but failed to get a speck of gold, owing, most likely,
to our total ignorance of goldmining methods. The Fergusson
River was named by Mr. McMinn after Sir James Fergusson, the
Governor of South Australia. We crossed the Driffield, where,
on the way up, we had left two packsaddles hanging in a tree,
and which we now found broken into splinters, and the ironwork
carried away by the savages. At 13 miles further on we crossed
Edith River. This was a fine stream, named after Lady
Edith, the wife of the Governor. We searched for gold, and got
two specks.
—Destructive Natives.—
On 6th July we passed the empty wagon we had seen on our
upward journey, and noticed then that it was nearly new and
perfectly sound. Now it was a perfect wreck, cut and hacked
about, all iron bolts and clamps having been carried away by the
savages, who prized any iron or metal work, and converted it
into knives, tomahawk-blades, and spearpoints. The labour
needed to sharpen the edges and points must have been prodigious,
but these would gradually displace the stone-age implements.
We reached the Katherine River, crossed it, and camped. There
we found another of the contractors’ wagons served in the same
way as the first one. Even the tyres had been carried away.
How the natives cut pieces of these thick tyres was a mystery,
but I believe they carried them up to the tablelands and placed
them between cracks in the solid granite rocks and worked them,
lever fashion, until they broke off. They must have then ground
the pieces on the sandstone boulders, and the work must have
demanded Wonderful time and patience. Next day we camped
at the end of the line of telegraph-poles (no wires), a total
distance of 225 miles from the settlement at Port Darwin. This
camp was afterwards known as Bacon’s Swamp, after Mr.
Harley Bacon. It was, we thought, a sad pity that the contractors
had failed to carry out the work. Five months of the most


beautiful weather had passed without a single stroke of work
having been done, and by the time of Mr. McMinn’s, return from
Adelaide the wet season would probably have set in, and so cause
no end of difficulty and delay, holding up all transport. Mr.
Stephen King having furnished Mr. Ross with the descriptions
and bearings of Mr. McMinn’s track to the Roper River, where
our provisions were buried, we were enabled to follow his
directions, as well as his horsetracks, which were still quite plain.
He had had 19 horses with him. At three miles from the end
of the poles we struck a large creek, named by Mr. McMinn, the
King, after Mr. Stephen King, a surveyor, and a former member
of Stuart’s expedition, and an old schoolfellow of mine. Exactly
12 months had passed since we started from Adelaide, and there
we were, at the opposite side of the continent, still wondering at
its vastness, with its marvellous changes of scenery and climate.
We had experienced the scorching heat of the sandhills, as well
as the icy chills of the vast gorges of the great Mac Donnell
Ranges, and the steamy nights of the tropic regions. Pangs of
thirst and pains of hunger had assailed us, but not impaired us.
Our bodies were still strong and lithe and our ambition undimmed.
Our clothes were scanty, but our minds enriched. Our track had
been parallel with that of Stuart, a faint line from south to north.
We had seen the centre and the trunk, but what of the branches—
the east and west? What possibilities are there? We could not
guess, but we felt it was the magnet that drew us on, and we
were ready. We reached the Waterhouse River on 11th July.
This river was named by Stuart after his botanist, Mr. Water-
house. We left the Waterhouse the next day on a bearing of
112 degrees, and at 4.30 p.m. we reached the Roper River, which
is, here, a magnificent sheet of water 80 yards wide, and with
very high and steep banks, densely timbered with pandanus and
paperbark trees. Several of the trees are marked with the initials
of Mr. McMinn, Stephen King, and Charley Wells. Half a
mile up the river is a rocky bar, where Mr. McMinn crossed his
horses, but owing to the height of the present stream we will have
to swim our horses over. So we packed up and proceeded to the
bar, and made a rope by joining the surcingles together, and
fastened one end to the halters while Mr. Ross and Abrahams took
the other end to the opposite side, while Hearne and I pushed
the horses in between two big trees at the water’s edge. They
took the water very well, and in an hour and a half we had the
whole 18 safely across. We then carried all the jDacks and gear
over on a paperbark bridge, and camped on the opposite eastern
side. This crossing is known as McMinn’s Bar. We had about
10 miles to go to reach the plant of stores.


—Buried Treasure.—
Nearly a fortnight after our departure from the depot we
reached a flagstaff at the end of a range on the Roper River. On
it a board was attached, with the following inscription;—Mr.
Ross, dig half a mile north 60 west. —W. McMinn.” We had
no difficulty in finding the cache, and everything in perfect order,
including flour, sugar, tea, biscuits, tinned meat, tobacco, rum,
quinine, oil, and so on, and there we camped. South and west
of us was an immense swamp, with the River Roper running
through the centre of it, but quite unapproachable by either man
or beast on account of the surface of the swamp being a dense
mass of tall reeds, seven feet high, and supported solely by several
feet of decomposed vegetable matter, which floated on the surface,
and would not bear the weight of a dog. We could not get
enough water to fill a quartpot, although there were acres around
us, as well as an unapproachable river. So we set to work and
dug a well, and obtained sufficient water for our own use. Hearne
went three miles along the swamp to find a place to water the
horses, but found it all alike —a floating mass of weed and wash.
The whole country was illuminated at night by native fires. The
mosquitoes were in myriads, and the foul effluvia arising from
such a mass of decomposing vegetable matter rendered this camp
a most undesirable place to remain in for any length of time.
Our horses had to go without water that night, but the feed was
green. Mr. McMinn named the hill where the flagstaff was
Rendezvous Hill, and about two miles, away are two hills, scarcely
a mile apart, which he kindly named respectively Mount Ross and
Mount Giles. Hearne and I started out next day to look for
water for the horses, but we found very little, not enough for
them, and returned to camp. Mr. Ross thought we could get
enough from a trench he had dug during our absence, and
therefore we decided to remain there for several days and
consume all stores that we could not carry, and so rest the horses.
During the night mosquitoes came in clouds again, and Mr. Ross,
still being without a net, determined to quit this camp.
Unfortunately, therefore, Sunday had been a day, contrary to
our custom, of busy preparation for a start. We were unable
to take all the stores with us, and left 120 pounds of flour, six
pounds of tobacco, matches, and salt buried there. I did not like
leaving the tobacco, but the flour was already so full of weevil
that it would be of little use to anyone but the blacks, who would,
no doubt, discover the plant before long. This was by no means
a healthy camp, and most of us had sores breaking out on our
hands. The mosquitoes and sandflies were intolerable at night,
scattering our horses in all directions, some of which we did not


recover until 10.30, and we started at 11 a.m. At half a mile
we reached the point of Rendezvous Hill, on which the flagstaff
is placed, and which bears from the camp S. 60, degrees E.
I then took the lead, and at two and a half miles reached the water
I had found on the previous Friday, There we met some savages,
but they all bolted into the scrub. After watering the horses, we
proceeded on a bearing of 120 degrees for four miles, and
reached the top of a sandstone ridge, and again changed the
course to 110 degrees for seven miles, passing over a great extent
of dry swamp country recently burned. We then changed course
to 90 degrees, and at four miles entered thick timbered country
and then a deep narrow creek with a little water, on which we
camped. Distance, 18 miles. On the 18th July we started at
9.30. crossing the creek on a bearing of 120 degrees, and passing
over the same low country as yesterday, but at five miles we
entered rough, rocky hills timbered with giant mulga, and
numerous creeks all dry. We then entered open plains, and at
17 miles reached a low sandstone tableland and several creeks
with small pools of water, soakages from the rocks, and we
camped. Distance, 17 miles. The 19th July.—We made a sad
discovery this morning. My old grey saddle-horse. Wanderer,
was found to have run a stake into his belly, and he was in such
pain that we had to shoot him. This was a great loss, as we had
not a spare saddle-horse, and out of the 25 we had started with our
total was reduced to 14 (11 for packs and four for riding). I
much feared that my chestnut mare Eliza would not stand much
more travelling. Started at 9.30, and in half a mile we reached
a large creek, which we left on a bearing of 120 degrees, and
descended into a low valley between rough, rocky hills, and
crossing two palm creeks. At 12 miles we struck another creek
with sufficient water, and camped at 1.45. Camp 178, 20th
July.—Mr. Ross having plotted up his course from Rendezvous
Hill to here, finds that he has overstepped the Strangways River
by about 12 miles. He therefore intends spelling to-day and
returning to-morrow to endeavour to locate the Strangways. On
Friday, 21st July, we started at 8.40, following our tracks. I
took the lead, and at 11.40 reached our old Camp 177. Started
again at noon, and at 2.35 reached the large creek we had crossed
two days ago, and which is undoubtedly Stuart’s Strangways
River. There is plenty of water in it, and its course is generally
north-east. The 22nd July, Strangways River.—The horses
rambled last night, delaying our start until 10.15. Mr. Ross,
who had been very unwell, and also considering, the low condition
and shortage of our horses, decided, and I think wisely, to give
up the trip of recrossing the continent. We accordingly followed


our tracks back, reached our old camp, and found that the natives
had been there during our absence and carried away the empty
bouilli-tins and other things. We started on again, intending to
reach a pond that Hearne had found about two miles from this
camp, hut, owing to the country having been burnt since we
passed. Hearne missed the spot, and led us about a mile beyond
it, where we halted while he went in search of it. After having
waited his return for an hour, I started to look for it, or any
other water I could find, but I failed to locate any, and returned
to where I had left the party, but found their tracks only, going
back. I followed these for half a mile, when I saw and heard
a number of natives and, shortly after, the report of a revolver.
Thinking the blacks might be inclined for hostilities, and as there
were only two with the horses, I hurried up, and soon overtook
the party, and found from Mr. Ross that while waiting for
Hear lie’s return several natives had shown themselves. Upon
his making signs to them that he wanted water, they pointed back
the way we had come. They then ran ahead of the horses, and
made signs for us to follow. The pistol report was one fired in
answer to Hearne. We followed the natives for half a mile,
and reached a fine pool surrounded by pandanus, and on one side
a jungle. The water was covered by the beautiful large pink
nelumbium lily. There was capital feed for the horses, and we
camped on an open space. The blacks made signs to us to
“ sit down ” —or camp-—at the foot of the jungle, but we knew
better. Nine or ten of the savages assembled at a short distance,
eagerly watching us while unpacking the horses, of which they
seemed very frightened, and they remained there until dark.
They were the finest-made savages we had seen since leaving
Mount Margaret. Several of them had a patch about two inches
wide shaved clean from their forehead to the back of their heads,
and it by no means improved their appearance. They made signs
to us that they would camp near us so soon as they could gather
together their lubras, who had been so terrified at our approach
that they had bolted off into the scrub; and by the shouting that
was going on it must have been nearly midnight before they had
collected all their spouses. They then camped about 150 yards
from us in the forest, and kept up an incessant yabbering the
whole night, with now and then a squealing from sundry young
black brats varying from a week to 10 years old. Should the
blacks behave themselves, we proposed to remain there on the
morrow—Sunday—but we kept a strict watch, and gave them no
chances.


CHAPTER XXIII
Hostile Natives—An Attack that Failed—An Error in Our Course-
Panning for Gold —On Board the Dauphine— Arrival of the Omeo— Great
Doings at Darwin.
—Hostile Natives.—
The natives paid us a short but early visit on the following
morning. After having been fully satisfied, by signs, that we
would remain there that day, they informed us that they were
all going hunting, and would be back to sleep with us in the night.
Up until 3 p.m. we saw nothing of them. This was a well-grassed
country, but water was scarce at this time of the year (July), so
far as we were able to judge. There was an immense smoke
about a mile distant, rising in a circle around the camp, and
gradually getting nearer. It could not, however, burn us out,
as we were camped on a small patch of burnt ground, but the
rascally savages might be meditating an attack on our camp that
night, which, it was w r ell known, they generally did under cover
of smokescreens. Their conduct, so far, had been entirely
different from that of others we had met with, and, I feared,
too good to last. I had already made preparations for any
possible attack, although unknown to the rest of the party, and
prepared a rocket to be fired at a moment’s notice. At 4 o’clock
three natives arrived, bringing with them five other young savages
that we had not before seen. By signs they gave us to understand
that they had been a long way to find them, so that they might
have a look at us. This, however, only strengthened my belief
that they intended to attempt an attack upon us, and that the
fresh arrivals were only portions of a reinforcement. The lubras
all having been sent away was a pretty sure sign that mischief
was brewing. The circle of smoke was also getting denser and
closer as the night drew on. I noticed also that several large and
hollow trees had been set alight at about even distances apart
on the east side of the camp to act, probably, as beacon lights,
and I intended to keep a very strict watch on the rascals during
the night. I mentioned my belief of a probable attack to Hearne
and Abrahams. Hearne, however, thought it very improbable, but
I suggested to him that he might as well have his rifle handy, as
I noticed it was propped up on his saddle, 20 or 30 yards away.
This he did, and brought it over to where his swag was lying.
Bob Abrahams, however, quite agreed with me that he did not
like the sweeping circle of smoke around us and the unusual
conduct of the blacks in keeping away from us all day. As a
rule, when once wild blacks lose their first terror of' the whites*


the job is to keep them out of the camp, and Bob promised to
keep an extra sharp look out during his watch. On mentioning
our suspicions to Mr. Ross, he thought “ they would never dare
to attack a party of white men like ours.” Mine was the first
watch at night, from Bto 10. There was not a sound but now
and then the falling of a blazing limb of a tree; not a yell or a
voice from the direction of the blacks’ camp.
—An Attack That Failed.—
We had been repairing saddles and packbags under the shade
of two immense paperbark-trees that stood about 12 feet apart,
and not more than 30 yards from our camp on the east side. On
the west side was a small creek and the jungle, along which our
horses were feeding. Knowing the fear these wild blacks had
of horses, it was not necessary to keep so vigilant a watch on
that side! so long as the horses remained in that vicinity. It was,
as I have said, my first watch, and, owing to my suspicions, I
was unusually alert. We had finished supper, and the others of
the party were reclining on their blankets, puffing the pipe of
peace. While watching, I directed my attention almost wholly
to the east side, where the two big trees were. I noticed what
I at first thought to be a black stump in the centre of, or between,
the two trees. I watched it for some minutes, but it did not
move. Yet I felt certain there was no stump there, or object
of any kind, while we were working there during the day. The
smoke circle was so thick it made the night intensely dark; but
I concentrated my gaze upon the “ stump,” and then distinctly
saw two more “ stumps ” come from behind the trees and join
the middle one. An instant later the whole gap was filled up by
“ stumps.” Being confident now that the savages were stealing
upon us with hostile intentions, I sprang over to and told Mr.
Ross —who, with his usual confidence in the natives, had read
no ill omen in their behaviour, the circle of smoke, or blazing
trees —to prepare at once, as the blacks were already upon us.
Thus alarmed, they all grabbed their firearms. I, being fully
armed and prepared, had only to buckle on my cartridge-belt.
Collectively, we could fire 31 rounds without reloading. I then
tied the rocket to a stick and stuck the stick in the ground, but,
owing to my ignorance of pyrotechnics, I unfortunately tied the
rocket on wrong side up. Consequently, upon applying a fire-
stick to it, instead of shooting up into the air it fizzled into the
ground! At the same moment a volley from my companions and
a shot from my rifle in the direction of the two trees were more
than sufficient to disperse the savages, and none too soon, either,
for on getting firesticks and proceeding to the two trees we
found bundles of spears, some of them 10 feet long, some barbed.


some double-pronged and jagged, and some with stone points,
ail freshly sharpened for the occasion. I kept one deadly-looking
spearhead as a memento, for no doubt the savage fully intended
to present it to me, but not quite in the same Therefore,
I had no qualms of conscience in retaining it. The rest we
burnt, and then fired the remaining rockets. Two of us remained
on watch, which was justified by the fact that about 2 o’clock in
the morning spears were thrown, but evidently from some
distance, as they lodged in the thick screw palms, and did not
reach the camp! We could see no signs of the natives next
morning, nor did we think any were hit. Most of the bullets
found their billets in the thick bark of the paperbark-trees, which
is often six or seven inches thick. There was, of course, no
doubt these savages fully intended to wipe us out, and that, too,
without the slightest provocation on our part. We had treated
them most kindly, giving them sugar, damper, matches, and other
trifles. Nor had any of us been near their camp, although they
had tried hard to induce us to do so, singly, on the first day of
our arrival. “ A bad, ungrateful lot,” said Mr. Ross. “ Dorn
them ; who’d V thought it ?” He ordered that all the empty meat-
tins or other refuse we left behind be battered up or destroyed.
—An Error in Our Course. —
It was now Mr. Ross’s intention to proceed to Port Darwin
in order that he might set right an error in his course from
Newcastle Waters to the Roper. He had believed, and given the
parties to understand, that wfe had followed the Strangways
River down to its junction with the Roper, whereas he now
knew that he was never on the Strangways, but some 35 miles to
the west of it. He prudently, therefore, resolved to return and
correct what otherwise might have led the construction parties
seriously astray. Moreover, it was also very important, owing
to the fact that the creek we followed down was a far, better and
much shorter route than the existing proposal, to take the line
down the Roper and then up the Strangways, thus forming an
immense right angle, as well as some extra 80 miles of
poles. We cut a large creek running into the Roper. After
crossing this creek we continued on along the bank of the Roper
for seven miles, and found it very stony, and camped. Three
or four savages came to the camp early next morning. I did not
think they belonged to our recent hostile tribe, or, if they had,
they might not have heard of that tribe’s recent hostilities towards
us. So soon as the horses were driven up they all climbed up
trees near by, and, in order to increase their fear of the horses,
wo led one or two up under the tree they were on and opened
their mouths and showed them their rows of teeth. The natives


fairly shuddered at the sight, and were still up a tree when we
started. On 27th July we started at 8,30 a.m., still following up
the Roper, and in a short distance we cleared the stony country,
and in five miles reached our first old camp, No. 150, at the fan
palms on the Roper. It was at this camp we lost the horse
Warlock, but we could find no traces of him; he had probably
gone back or was dead. We proceeded on up the river, and at
seven miles reached the wide valley of the river, on which are
the mainsprings of the Roper, and here we camped and shall,
D.V., remain until Monday, and then make tracks for Port
Darwin. This valley of the Roper has the richest soil we have
yet seen. On 31st July we started at 9.30 on an easterly course,
and at four miles reached the Waterhouse River, and followed
it five miles northerly, and passing our old Camp No. 172, and
also an old camp of Messrs. McMinn and King. On Ist August
we started at 8 a.m., and at 17 miles we struck a creek with a
south-west course and camped near our old Camp No. 171. We
hope to reach the telegraph line to-morrow night. We see fresh
tracks of the old packmare Lioness we left here. She may pick
up with the others during the night. The 2nd August. —The
old packmare is in the mob this morning, and she looks much
better for her rest. We started at 8.30, and in 15 miles reached
the King River, and at 18 miles reached the lagoon now known
as Bacon’s Swamp, at the end of the telegraph-poles, and camped.
On sth August we left Bacon’s Swamp (named after Mr.
Harley Bacon), followed the road and the line, and in six hours
reached the Katherine River and camped. This stage was the
driest one on the whole line of telegraph, there having been no
permanent water between here and the King River. About 14
miles of the road was heavy sand and rocks. We were now 202
miles from Port Darwin. As some of the horses required
shoeing, we decided to remain all day in camp. Mr. Ross vras
suffering from swollen. legs, and the motion of the horse
caused great pain. His left leg was discoloured from knee
to ankle, caused, no doubt, by long exposure and need
of change of food. Towards noon the sky became cloudy,
the first we had seen for several weeks. This river was
still running strongly, but had shrunk a good deal since we first
crossed it. The nights were still cool and pleasant, with light
dews, and fortunately there were no mosquitoes. On the next
day we crossed the river and followed the telegraph line. At
21 miles we reached our old camp, and rested. We would have
proceeded on to the Edith River, three miles further, but Mr.
Ross was in great pain and could not go further that day.


—Panning for Gold. —
On 9th August we reached the Cullen River, and camped.
During the afternoon I took a tin plate down to the creek to
wash some of the loose conglomerate gravel and sand that I
thought might contain gold. The creek-bed was composed of
large granite rocks full of hollows and pockets of various sizes
and depths, and partly filled with quartz and ironstone gravel.
I commenced at one of the smaller crevices, containing about
three shovelfuls of wash dirt. In the first plateful I got three
specks of gold, which I took great care to preserve, but eventually
lost. In the next plateful I got six specks, and in the third three
more. Hearne and Abrahams then caught the gold fever, and
obtained a dozen specks, all out of the same pocket of rubble. So
ended our first attempt at goldmining in the Northern Territory
or anywhere else. It was not a “ duffer,” nor would it cause a
rush. Twelve miles further on we reached Mr. McLachlan’s
camp, and found a party of men engaged in fixing wire on the
telegraph-poles. They informed us that Mr. McLachlan was
camped half a mile up the creek. We proceeded there, and
stayed the night. Mr. McLachlan informed us that he had
succeeded beyond all his expectations in his search for gold. The
natives, he said, had been stealing largely from both his camp
and No. 2 depot. We left all our provisions with Mr. Dodd, who
was in charge of the wiring party, and took sufficient only to
take us to the depot, a distance of 23 miles. We met horse and
bullock teams on their way to the Katherine River, and at 10
miles further reached the No. 2 depot, where we were most kindly
welcomed by Messrs. Howley, Wells, and Brock, the last having
charge of a party engaged in clearing the line. Mr. Brock
informed us that the natives had stolen several things from his
camp. As the country between this depot and Port Darwin is
quite new to us, I shall briefly describe it as we proceed. We
left the depot on 13th August, at 11 a.m. Mr. Charles Wells,
who has been very unwell, will accompany us to obtain medical
advice. At two miles we entered a long and winding gorge,
bounded on either side by high and thickly-timbered cliffs, at
the foot of which is a fine mound spring. At eight miles we
crossed Yam Creek, and noticed for the first time clumps of very
tall bamboo. We then entered open country with gum flats and
a capital hard road. At 18 miles we reached gum-flat lagoons,
and camped. Mr. Ross’s leg is very painful while in the saddle.
We started the next morning at 8.40 through open country, with
low rises composed of rich-looking quartz and ironstone. At
eight miles we crossed the Howley Creek, lined on each bank
with bamboo. At 13 miles we crossed Bridge Creek. We also


passed in the distance to the east Mount Paqualin, and at 17 miles
camped under Mount Darwent. We noticed many very large
anthills. On the 15th August we left Mount Darwent, and
crossed the Adelaide River plains, which have a delightful park-
like appearance, and very lightly timbered, and beautiful green
grass surrounding many ponds of water. At 12 miles we crossed
the Adelaide River, and camped. The river is running strongly,
and the water fresh and soft. The banks are lined with bamboos,
ironbark, and native figtrees. About two miles to the north is a
very prominent mountain, named Mount Carr, after the late Hon.
John Carr, of South Australia. The next day we entered
timbered country, and crossed the Stapleton Creek, with running
water and rich soil. At 11 miles further we entered the surveyed
lands of Mr. Goyder’s expedition, and at 12 miles reached
Banyan Camp. This was the first banyan-tree we had seen, and
as there was plenty of water, good feed, and shade, we camped
under the wings of the great tree. Leaving the Banyan Camp
at 8.30, we, at two miles, passed Darwent’s Pool, a fine deep
pond in the forest. At 12 miles we reached Collet’s Creek and
camped in company with ferocious bands of mosquitoes, and no
one slept until nearly morning. From Collet’s Creek we passed
through scrubby country and several quartz reefs, and at 11 miles
we reached Tumbling Waters, which is a tributary of the
Blackmore River and four miles from Southport, and here we
camped.
—On Board the Dauphine. —
Mr. Ross decided to remain there, while I, on the morrow,
proceeded to Southport, where there was a depot belonging
to the overland telegraph authorities, under the charge of
Mr. McAulay, to ascertain if Captain Douglas had forwarded
a boat from Palmerston to Southport to convey us to the settle-
ment, thereby saving our horses and ourselves an extra land
journey of 40 miles. Mr. Wells and I rode into Southport, and
learned from Mr. McAulay that the boat had not arrived by the
morning tide. We had to wait, therefore, for the evening tide.
In the meantime Mr. McAulay rode out to Tumbling Waters
with limejuice and other vegetable restoratives for Mr. Ross’s
use. At sundown we were pleased to hear a pistol report down
the river, and shortly after the boat, the Dauphine, hove in sight,
manned by a Malay crew. On its arrival we learned that a
telegram had been received by Mr. Stapleton in Port Darwin
from depot No. 2, informing him of the return of Messrs. Burton
and Knig from the Roper trip, and also that Mr. King had left
the depot again on the previous Sunday in company with Senior-
Surveyor McLachlan, and that they might be expected in a day


or two, when Mr. King would take delivery of our horses. We
were further informed that this boat would start back at 6 o’clock
on the following morning. On receipt of this intelligence I
started back for our camp, and "informed Mr. Ross of the arrival
of the boat. He was overjoyed at the news, and decided to go
down to Southport that night, so as not to detain the boat in the
morning. It was now dark, but after much searching we
managed to get a saddle and packhorse, and 1 returned with Mr.
Ross to Southport, arriving there at 10 p.m. Mr. Ross was
kindly received by Mr. McAulay, and the night was far advanced
before all hands had stowed themselves away in their respective
dormitories, such as empty wagons and swinging hammocks. All
hands were up at dawn next day, and by 6.15 we had lodged Mr.
Ross comfortably in the boat with Mr. Charles Wells, the crew,
and a most mirth-provoking ape on the mast-top. Should the
wind prove favourable they should reach the settlement at Port
Darwin about 2 p.m. We were very sorry to part with our old
leader, but he was suffering severely with scurvy, and needed a
thorough change and rest. The voyage south to Adelaide would
accomplish much in that direction. He had proved himself a
splendid leader and explorer, and it had always been a pleasure
to one and all of us to assist and work with him. A splendid
bushman and a grand comrade! After breakfast I returned to
our camp at Tumbling Waters, where we proposed to remain until
the arrival of Mr. Stephen King, to whom I would deliver the
horses and the whole of our equipment, reserving sufficient horses
only to take us to Port Darwin, a distance of 45 miles, which 1
hoped to accomplish in two days, and so bring to a close our long
and, sometimes, wearisome explorations, extending over a period
of 13 months. This camp was infested with mosquitoes, natives,
and wild dogs. The natives left us at sundown. They belonged
to the Aggerwallas tribe.
—Arrival of the Omeo. —
On 28th August, just as we were starting in search of the
horses, we heard the report of a rifle up the River Blackmore,
and soon afterwards the boat Larrakccya pulled up, having Mr.
King on board, who informed us of the arrival in Port Darwin
of the s.s. Omeo from Adelaide, with stock and supplies for
carrying on the work of construction, and to be followed shortly
by the Gulnare and two other vessels. Mr, King lost no time in
proceeding to the Adelaide River to meet Mr. Burton, taking
four of our horses with him. He intended to return in a day
or two and take delivery of the remainder. Through a letter
received by me from Mr. Ross I learned that the Omeo would
sail for Adelaide on Ist September, and it was optional with me


whether I returned by her or remained here. At 8 o’clock that
morning Messrs. Burton and King arrived, when I handed over
all our horses, arms, and ammunition, and all equipment belonging
to the Overland Telegraph Exploring Expedition. Having done
this, 1 ceased to number the camps. In the aggregate, of course,
our camps numbered on the overland journey many more than
194, which only represents actual new camps. We frequently
spelled in the same camp for a day or two, or at depots which
were never numbered, and 1 can safely say that during the
whole of our 13 months’ perambulations we never, at any time,
slept under a roof of any kind, not even a tent. Blazing sun or
soaking rain found us always in the open. Nor do I think we
felt the worse for it. We were brazened and browned, but
hardened and hale. Messrs. Burton, King, Hearne, Abrahams,
and myself started at 5.30 a.m. on 29th August by the Larrakeeya
for Port Darwin. Our progress was slow, owing to contrary
winds, and we did not arrive at the Port until 5 p.m., where we
found everything in a state of bustle. All hands were busily
engaged in unloading the Omeo, and also the Gulnare. I found
Mr. Ross comfortably housed in a two-roomed cottage, kindly
placed at his disposal by Senior-Surveyor McLachlan. I learnt
also that one of my brothers, Arthur, whom I had not seen for
nearly eight years, had arrived by the Omeo, and was at Knuckey’s
Lagoon, some seven or eight miles distant. I liked the situation
of Port Darwin exceedingly, and found the harbour something
to be admired.
—Great Doings at Darwin. —
Mr. Ross improved in health rapidly, and intimated his
intention of proceeding back overland until meeting the central
construction parties, and with a view to pilot the Port Darwin
parties along our overland track, and taking a surveyor with us.
All hands were busy unloading cargo. Eight or nine horse
wagons started by road for Southport, loaded with stores for the
line parties. A dinner was given on board the Omeo. A fire-
works display was provided, no doubt to the astonishment and
terror of the blacks. Many other amusements were resorted to
for the enjoyment of the small community of Port Darwin, and
the night was far spent before the pleasure-seekers reached the
shore. The ship Bengal was expected daily. There appeared to
be no sickness here, and the children, especially, had a most
healthy appearance. At evening there was always a breeze from
the sea, and the mosquitoes were, at what was known as the
camp, almost unknown, but not so on the tableland or top of the
cliffs. The natives appeared a quiet lot. Mr. Ross decided later
to return by the Omeo to South Australia, and take Gregory with


him. Hearne and Bob Abrahams engaged with Mr. Burton to
proceed up the line on construction work, and I engaged with
Mr. R. C. Patterson to pilot an advance party on our overland
route to Newcastle Waters or until the central parties were met
with, in company with Surveyor Mr. Stephen King, and possibly
Mr. Ringwood as draftsman. I was to receive £3 a week. 1
felt like a millionaire. On Ist September Mr. Ross took his
passage by the Omeo, in company with Mr. Charles Wells, Miss
Doughs, Mr. Timms, and five or six of Messrs. Darwent and
Dalwooci’s men. The steamer weighed anchor at 8 a.m., and,
after a little delay, steamed away with her living freight for
South Australia. 'That Was the last I ever saw of my good old
leader, John Ross. Although he did many minor explorations
afterwards, and lived to the ripe age of 86, he never returned
to the northern or tropical end of the Northern Territory, where
I did, and always said I would, make my home. I therefore had
no opportunity to again meet him. The depressing accounts I
had heard of the then conditions in South Australia were a
deciding factor in my remaining in the Territory until the
construction of the telegraph line from south to north was an
accomplished fact.
CHAPTER XXIV.
Messrs. Dalwood and Darwent’s Contract Annulled—Planting the First
Pole —Nine Months’ Work—Arrival of the Gulnare —A Great Procession —
Adept Thieves—Searching for Water —Hostile Blacks —Death of Stanley.
—Messrs. Dalwood & Darwent’s Contract Annulled. —
It should be remembered that the first section of the overland
telegraph line from Port Darwin southwards, for a distance of
some 350 miles, was let by contract to an Adelaide firm, Messrs.
Dalwood & Darwent. This firm planted the wooden poles from
Darwin to the King River, a distance of 223 miles. It was then
found that their supplies of bullocks and horses, as well as the
supply of provisions and general equipment, which they had
shipped from Adelaide, were most inadequate. This, coupled with
the heavy clearing of a thickly-timbered track and their total
inexperience of the conditions of such a work in a tropical climate,
convinced their superintendent of the impossibility of completing
the contract, and it was annulled by Mr. William McMinn, who
was resident supervisor, in behalf of the Government. There
was no means of communication with Adelaide except by sea,


and Mr. McMinn proceeded thither by the schooner Gulnare on
6th January, 1871, accompanied by about 60 of the contractors’
men, in order to acquaint the Government with the position.
—Planting the First Pole.—
The following extract is presumably taken from “The
Register,’’ as no paper was published in the Northern Territory
before 1873:—“ September 15. 1870. The first telegraph-pole
was erected to-day, close to the south-east end of Kavanagh Street,
Palmerston, in the presence of the Government Resident and
family, Mr. and Mrs. Dalwood, the officers of the expedition,
and many local residents. A photograph of the interesting scene,
taken by Captain Sweet, is here reproduced through the kindness
of Mr. K. J. Moody. Mrs. Dalwood broke a bottle of wine over
the pole and drove in the first insulator-pin. The pole was then
raised in an upright position in the hole, and Miss Douglas had
the honour to ram the earth round the base with a rammer (made
for the occasion) of hard, polished wood.”
—Nine Months’ Work.—
It will thus be seen that, from the planting of the first pole
on 15th September, 1870, some nine months was the period
occupied by the contractors in erecting the 223 miles of poles.
Probably the actual erection did not occupy the whole of that
time, but the waiting for the boat to convey them south, and
other numerous delays, all contributed towards’ the non-fulfilment
of the agreement between the Eastern Extension Cable Company
and the South Australian Government to complete the line by a
certain date; but. I believe, no trouble arose on this account, as.
strange to say, the cable company itself had a serious breakdown
in its operations, and were also much behind time, and there was
httle trouble in adjusting matters. It was the general belief that
Mr. R. C. Patterson would receive a bonus if he completed the
northern sections within the specified time, and it was not
uncommon to hear a workman sing out to his mate, “ Hurry up.
Jack! If we don’t finish this job in ’seventy-two, Patterson’s
bonus will look pretty blue.” The Gulnare, which left Port
Darwin with Mr, McMinn and the contractors’ men on 6th June,
18/1, did not return until Ist September of that year. Thus
another three months’ delay was caused, and during that time no
work whatever was done towards construction. Thus the whole
of the dry season had been lost, and fresh operations under
Government control had to be commenced with the approach of
the tropical wet season and all its concomitant obstacles.


—Arrival of the Gulnare. —
Turning to my diary of 2nd September, 1871, at Palmerston
I find it was decided to dispatch the Gulnare with a full cargo up
the Blackmore River to Southport, and that all hands were busily
engaged in loading her with stores and material for construction
work, and thus saving the teams hauling 45 miles by road. As
there were some horses to go by land. I volunteered to take them.
I got Billy Hearne to go with me. We started at 8 a.m., and
reached Mitchell’s Creek at noon, where we spelled for an hour,
and then proceeded to the Elizabeth Creek. We arrived there at
sundown, and passed 70 bullocks and some drays, and there we
camped, 25 miles from Palmerston. The next day, at 18 miles,
we reached Southport, and found that the Gulnare had not
arrived. Hearing that my brother Arthur, whom I had not yet
seen, was in charge of stock at Tumbling Waters, I took the
horses up there and camped with him for the night. On the
next day my brother and I rode to Southport, and on the way
we met Hearne and Bob Abrahams with a note from Mr. King,
asking me to send the bearers out to Collet’s Creek to look after
our old mob of exploring horses, which I accordingly did. On
reaching Southport, we found the Gulnare just towing up the
river, and having on board Mr. R. C. Patterson, chief engineer
in Adelaide, who was to take charge of the whole of the northern
construction work, and Mr. C. W. Rutt, an engineer, of Adelaide,
who was to have charge of the first section, commencing from
the point where the contractors left off. Also there arrived
Messrs. R. C. Burton, Stephen King, H. D. Packhard, and Mr.
McAulay and 30 men. We then returned to Tumbling Waters.
The next morning Abrahams returned from Collet’s Creek with
one of Mr. Bayfield’s men. I took Abrahams’s horse and rode
to Southport, but returned and went straight on to Collet’s Creek
with Mr. Bayfield, in order to bring in some saddle-horses.
Collet’s Creek is 16 miles from Southport. We found that
several bullocks were missing, but with the help of some natives
we managed to collect them all. We then started back to
Southport, and arrived there at 8 p.m., and found the Gulnare
still discharging cargo. On the next morning all hands were busy
loading drays with stores and material for Mr. Burton’s section,
and by 3 p.m. the teams started for Tumbling Waters.
—A Great Procession. —
The teams consisted of no fewer than 12 horse and 11
bullock teams and a wagonette. There were generally 10 bullocks,
as well as spare bullocks, and eight horses in each team, with
spare horses —a total of about 115 bullocks and 100 horses. The


bullocks were turned loose at night with a hell between every
four or five bullocks; but the horses were all hobbled out at
night, with the exception of three or four, which were tied up
and fed upon chaff and oats. These saddle-horses were for the
men who had to muster up the bullocks and horses in the
morning. It was no easy job to find them all in the thick forest
country. The hunters started at 4 o’clock in the morning, and the
drivers would start yoking up at about 8 a.m. Any stock missing
would be brought on afterwards. Messrs. R. C. Burton, S. King,
C. W. Rutt, J. McLachlan, H. D. Packard, J. I. Masson,
(police trooper), and myself preceded the teams to Tumbling
Waters and camped. The next morning, after some trouble in
collecting the stock, the whole strength of the expedition started,
but only proceeded four miles to White Hawk Jungle. On the
following day all the teams arrived at Collet’s Creek, and so on
day by day, in slow stages, the teams moved forward until they
safely arrived at Katherine River on 30th September, 1871.
—Adept Thieves.—
Not many natives were encountered on the trip, but they
availed themselves of every chance and opportunity to thieve from
the camps and wagons. On when north of (now)
Pine Creek, all hands were awakened long before daylight one
morning by the camp cook rushing around, shouting and using
most terrible tropical language and threats. It appeared that he
could not find a single cooking utensil. Buckets, pannicans,
dishes, plates, and shovels had all disappeared as if by a magic
wand! Nothing could be found and nothing done until daylight.
It was then seen that blacks’ tracks were thick all about the camp,
and, following these, nearly all the missing articles were discovered
about 200 yards from the camp, cleverly planted under the
hollowed bank of the creek. Although more than 20 men were
sleeping about the wagons, none heard a sound, and even two
or three dogs in the camp had not been disturbed. Above all,
two bullock-bells that had been placed at the head of one of the
driver’s hammocks had been removed without making a sound!
Messrs. Burton and King, who had preceded the teams, on arrival
at the Katherine had dispatched Mr. Willie Brock with a party,
taking boring-rods and an Abyssinian pump in order to search
for water on the dry stage lying between the Katherine River
and the King River. Although the distance was only 26 miles,
nearly the whole of it was through very heavy sand without a
watering-place, and it was thought this would prove a great
obstacle to the progress of heavily-laden teams. Upon my arrival
at the Katherine I was immediately transferred to the exploring
party, my duties being, as previously mentioned, to point out the


various waters and camping-places on our (Ross’s) overland
track. Our party consisted of Mr. Stephen King (surveyor),
Mr, A. Ringwood, affectionately known as “ Paddy ” (drafts-
man), Robert Abrahams, and myself as pilot. Messrs. King
and Ringwood had already proceeded to the King River, and
Mr. Brock, having failed to locate water, had also sent his party
on to that river. On 7th October 12 horse teams started
from the Katherine River, under the charge of Mr, Robert Price,
and on the following day Abrahams and I started with eight
horses, passing some of the horse teams 12 miles out from the
Katherine, the drivers having driven their horses loose on to the
King for water, where we also arrived about 7 p.m., and joined
Messrs. King and Ringwood’s camp. Next day Mr. King and
myself started back to meet the horse teams and also to endeavour
to find a less sandy road, but we did not succeed, and returned
to camp at 1 a.m. On 10th October Mr, Brock arrived with a
telegraphic dispatch from No. 2 Depot, addressed to Mr. Burton,
from Mr. R. C. Patterson, in Palmerston, informing him that
“ the schooner Gidnare had run aground on her trip round to
the Roper River on St. Vincent Island, and that the Government
Resident (Captain Douglas) had gone out to inspect her.”
—Searching for Water.—
On 11th October, Messrs. King and Ringwood, with Abrahams
and myself, started with packhorses and three spring-drays cn
route for some billabongs 16 miles distant, but the country
proving very sandy, we only made 12 miles, and camped near a
large natural basin (afterwards known as Providence Knoll),
with a little water in it. Leaving the basin, we proceeded a mile
to a small dry swamp surrounded by paperbark saplings, where
we put the Abyssinian pump down 18 feet, but got no water. In
the meantime, "Robert Price arrived with four of the horse teams,
and we all then went on three miles to another billabong (after-
wards known as The Gums), and camped. Mr. King and I rode
down the billabong creek for nine miles, searching for water,
and also for a road for the teams, as crossings had to be found
over numerous creeks, trees and scrub cleared, and a general
course provided for these first or pioneer wagons ever brought
to this country. We could find no water, excepting two native
wells, and we returned to camp at 4 p.m. On the next morning
Mr. King went in search of a better road from there back to the
King River, but he failed to find one less sandy, and on the next
day Messrs. King, Ringwood, and myself went down the fall, or
valley, towards the Roper, into which all these creeks trend, in
search of water. We reached an old camp of Messrs. Burton
and King’s on a good waterhole and we camped at 4.30 p.m.


Water was very scarce in the creek, which we followed down
that day for 16 miles. We returned to the billabong and found
that Mr. Burton had arrived safely with all his party. We had
thunder and rain in the evening. On 16th October Messrs.
King, Ringwood, Abrahams, and myself, with packhorses and the
three spring drays, wended out way down the creek for six miles
to one of the native wells, which the men enlarged, and obtained
sufficient water for the horses. Abrahams was dispatched back
to Mr. Burton to inform him of the fact, and we camped there.
We went on with the carts 10 miles to a billabong on a creek
named the Stirling, and Abrahams joined us later. We fenced-
in the billabong and then pushed on down the Stirling for four
miles, and camped on another billabong with fine feed for the
horses. We travelled eight miles to the Bitter Springs, which
are the main source of the Roper River, and passed Ross’s
Camps Nos. 151 and 183. At the latter camp was a fine
billabong, and I asked Mr. King to have it named after Robert
Abrahams, who was with me all through that long and memorable
continental journey, and was still my good companion. Mr.
Ringwood said that he would see that it was placed upon the
map, there to remain as Abrahams’s Billabong for ever. We
decided to leave the spring-drays at Bitter Springs until the
arrival of the main party, and, in the meantime, explore a
road ahead for them. On 22nd October Messrs. King, Ring-
wood, and myself left with packhorses with the intention of
striking across from the Roper River to the creek Mr. Ross
followed down from Newcastle Waters, and which is now known
to be a branch of the Elsey Creek, discovered by Mr. A. C.
Gregory. We kept a south-east bearing, and crossed Ross’s
tracks in several places. This bearing, however, brought us
several miles lower down the Elsey than where Ross crossed it,
but we found a magnificent sheet of water, nine miles long,
without a break, and some 60 yards wide, very deep, and so
clear We could see some beautiful spiral shells lying on the bed.
The banks were composed of black and rotten but rich soil, too
dangerous to water stock at. At the western end of this long
reach of water the creek widened out considerably, and formed
into disconnected billabongs.
—Hostile Blacks.—
At sundown we were about to make a camp on one of these
billabongs when a large number of savages suddenly appeared,
armed with spears and other weapons. They were shouting and
gesticulating in a decidedly hostile attitude. As there were but
three of us, and only armed with revolvers, we deemed it the
safer plan to withdraw, and we proceeded back three and a half
miles, camped at 9.30 p.m., and slept with one eye open.


—Death of “ Stanley.”—
On 23rd October we found, to our deep regret, that Stanley,
the horse that had carried Mr. Ross 2,000 or 3,000 miles across
the continent and had since been ridden by Mr. King, had a
severe attack of spasms, from which he died in two hours. It
might possibly have been caused by his eating some poison bush
or weed. He was a grand old faithful servant, and I, who had
been associated with him from our starting from Umberatana,
felt my loss keenly. This mishap left us short of horses, and Mr.
King had perforce to ride our packhorse Gentle Annie. Old
Wombat, the other packhorse, had to carry both packs. We
then went to the Bitter Springs, which we reached in 10 miles
on a due north bearing, where we found that Mr. Burton and
his party had arrived. The party proceeded south-easterly to
the Fan Palms, on the bank of the Roper River—Ross’s Camp
150—and w r here he, Ross, first hit the Roper on our overland
journey in 1870. On 24th October we left the Fan Palms Camp
with all the party and teams, and went down the Roper under
the pilotage of King, Ringwood, and myself. We found a camp
on the Elsey, at the big reach of water we had found two days
previously, three miles above and west of its junction with the
Roper, and 14 miles from Bitter Springs.
CHAPTER XXV.
Mr. Packard’s Party Attacked by Natives—Fired Through the Bunghole
—Well-sinking—The Birdum Creek—Probable Camp of Leichhardt’s—
False Directions—News from Southern Sections —Eclipse of the Sun.
—Mr, Packard’s Party Attacked by Natives.—
At the camp on the Elsey it was decided by Mr. Burton to
dispatch Mr. H. D. Packard (surveyor), together with a wagon
and team of horses, and six men, well armed, down the Roper
River as far as Leichhardt’s Bar, which is presumed to be the
head of the navigation of that river, and about 90 miles from its
mouth, in order to meet the Gulnare, which was on its way round
from Palmerston, loaded with stores and material for construc-
tion work. On 25th October, 1871, we got Mr. Packard and
party across the Elsey, and bidding him au revoir, started him
on his journey, thus according him the honour to be the first to
take wheels along the banks of the Roper. Although we were not
aware of it at the time, nor, indeed, for a long time afterwards,
it appears that Mr. Packard and party had onlv proceeded one or


two days’ stages, either at McMinn’s Bar or the Little Red Lily
Lagoon, and had formed his camp for the night, when a large
body of savages appeared from the banks of the river, fully armed
with spears, waddies, nulla nullas, and so on, and with so many
hostile accompaniments as to compel the party to itself.
Spears were thrown and shots exchanged. The wagon formed
a good break against the spears, and enabled the whites to
entrench themselves behind it.
—Fired Through the Bunghole. —
Among the provisions was a large cask, or hogshead, filled
with corned beef, which upon reaching camp was generally
emptied and the beef spread out to dry. Among the party was
a man, who, like Zaccheus, was of very low stature, and when
the shots were being fired and the spears flying he sprang into
the meatcask and fired his revolver through the bunghole. He
popped up his head now and again to see how the battle was
going—a real, live Jack-in-the-box. The attack was short and
sharp, but none of the party were injured, and the sound of the
guns probably frightened the savages more than the bullets.
Possibly they were some of the same tribe who attempted an
attack on our —Ross’s —party earlier in the year on the
Strangways River, 20 miles further east. •On 25th October,
1871, King, Ringwood, and myself proceeded ahead, westward,
up the Elsey Creek, with three spring-drays and one wagonette,
in order to mark a road for the teams. Seven miles out we
camped, but I returned to the main camp in order to give Mr.
Burton particulars of the road. I remained with him all night,
and started back early the next morning, and arrived at the camp
just as Mr. King and party were starting for Stanley Billabong.
We proceeded on for four miles, but found the road very sandy.
I then returned to conduct the bullock-wagons by a better route,
which, by hugging the creek closely, I succeeded in finding and
arrived within two miles of Stanley Billabong and camped. The
men drove their bullocks loose on to the billabong to water, and
we found King and Ringwood camped there. About three miles
west from, Stanley Billabong was another large sheet of water, in
the Elsey watercourse, which we named the Warlock Pond, after
my favourite old saddle-horse, Warlock, and which was lost when
Ross’s party first struck the Roper and never found. His
name is now perpetuated in this pond on the north shore of the
Elsey. On 27th October we left the teams in camp at Stanley
Billabong, and King, Ringwood, and myself started in search of
further waters, and to find a road for the teams. We started
south-south-west up the Elsey, and in 10 miles camped in forest
country without water. On the next day we returned to the


Stanley. On 29th October Mr. Burton joined us, and we
started on another search, taking a course of south-south-east for
21 miles, camping in forest country without water. Many other
trips in search of water in different directions were made by King,
Ringwood, and myself. We generally went some 30 miles,
returned the next day to water our horses, and then off in a
different direction, between south-east and south-west, but we
never found water in any instance.
—Well-sinking.—
It was now decided by Mr, Burton to start sinking a series
of wells at easy distances apart to enable the teams to proceed,
and with this object in view the spring-drays were started from
the Stanley to the Warlock Pond, and the well-sinkers proceeded
with the watercarts to Ross’s Camp (No. 144), which is about
seven miles west of the Warlock, and on the south bank of the
Elsey. On Ist November we proceeded to the well and
found the men had made a start and sunk four feet. We then,
in company with Mr. Burton, went 15 miles south-south-east in
search of water, camped in forest country without any water, and
returned the next day to the Warlock. On 3rd November we
again visited the well-sinkers, and found that the men had a good
supply of water at 27 feet. The water was perfectly fresh
and soft, but, owing to the crumbling nature of the rock —a sort
of limestone—it was decided to timber the shaft. Our esteemed
and jovial draftsman, Paddy Ringwood, informed us that the
water was cut on All Saints’ Day, and suggested that this, the
first well, should be so named, which was agreed to, and duly
placed on the map. There was plenty of good straight timber
along the creek, and the men were not long in timbering it, but,
unfortunately, it was timber known as gutta-percha, which exudes
a strong and bitter gum, like caoutchouc. As the water rose up
it was absorbed, and it turned the water quite black and bitter,
and nothing would drink it. Ultimately it had to be retimbered
with whitegum slabs. It was encouraging, however, to have
found good water at such a shallow depth, and Mr. Burton
decided to find another site or sites, along the proposed telegraph
line, at easy distances, for sinking wells. With this in view
we went up the Elsey Creek with the watercarts, and camped four
miles from All Saints’ Well.
—The Birdum Creek. —
It was decided, in accordance with the desire of Mr. R. C.
Patterson, that this creek should be named the Birdum—l think,
after Mrs. Patterson. This is the creek followed down by Mr.
Ross from Daly Waters, from which it heads. It is the southern


and main branch of the Elsey. Gregory, on his exploring trip
from Victoria River, followed the western branch and named it
the Elsey, after the surgeon of his party, Dr. Elsey. But when
the Elsey cattle station was formed by Mr. Abraham Wallace, his
nephews, whom he left in charge, called it the Fourteen Mile, or
the Western Creek, and the real Elsey begins at the junction of
the Birdum and Western Creeks, where it assumed large
proportions.
—Probable Camp of Leichhardt’s.—
It was just at these creek junctions that A. C. Gregory found
what he described as a white man’s camp. The trees that had
been felled were undoubtedly cut by axes, not stone
tomahawks, and the forked uprights used for tents, as well as
the ashheap and other evidences, seemed to convince him that
Europeans had occupied the camp for some considerable time,
and not aborigines. This was quite feasible, as such a party would
be leaving the well-watered district to face a dry stretch of country
across to the Victoria River, and would form a camp while
searching ahead for water. Moreover, Leichhardt was acquainted
with the Roper as far as the bar named after him during his
previous trip to Port Essington, and would follow up that river,
the Roper, and then the Elsey on his westerly course. Nor was
the period between his supposed camping on the Elsey and the
locating of it by Gregory sufficiently long to obliterate such
indications as were found and described by Mr. Gregory. I have
always been strongly impressed by the belief that Leichhardt did
reach that locality on his last mysterious journey, and whatever
disaster he met with was between that part and the western coast
of Australia.
—False Directions.—
Jhe late Mr. J. A. G. Little (formerly Superintendent of
Telegraph and Postmaster at Port Darwin), during one of his
many inspections of inland telegraph stations, was asked by the
Government to visit the supposed camp referred to. but, by some
official bungle the directions given to him were “to visit the
junction of the Elsey and Roper,” where, of course, nothing was
found. Turning again to my diary, I find that the site of the
second well was fixed on the Birdum Creek, 16 miles south-west
from All Saints’ Well, and was to he named No. 2 Well. It is
about two miles south of the junction of the Elsey and Birdum
Creeks. 1 his well was sunk to 72 feet, and an abundant supply
of water obtained, and store tents and a depot formed. On
sth December Mr. Stephen King was dispatched with horse
teams to the Roper (Leichhardt’s Bar), in order to obtain stores


from the Gulnare, 130 miles distant. I missed ray old school-
fellow and companion in our bush travels, but was glad to still
have Ringwood to keep me company.
—News from Southern Sections. —
On 7th December the watercarts returned late from All
Saints’ Well, and they reported that Mr, A. G. Burt, with
one man, Joseph Ewart, and a blackboy, Tommy, had arrived
there from the southern parties, having been three months on
the trip, in company with a Mr. Ralph Milner, whom he had left
on Strangways River with a flock of sheep, a mob of horses, and
a wagon. He also reported that Mr. Milner’s brother John was
killed by a savage on Attack Creek, while shepherding the flock.
This is the same creek where Stuart was attacked and forced to
return with his small party of two men, Mr, Kekwick and Mr.
Ben Heed. I could scarcely credit a flock of sheep being on the
Strangways. Fancy, real mutton not more than 60 miles away!
These were, undoubtedly, the first sheep ever brought overland
from South Australia, or anywhere else, to the Northern Territory,
and Mr. Milner deserved the highest credit for this great
pioneering feat. On 9th December the watercarts started out,
but had not proceeded far when they were met by Mr, Burton
and turned back. Mr. Burton was accompanied by Mr. A. G.
Burt and party. I learnt from Mr. Burt that all the southern
sections were completed with the exception of section E, and that
he had come on fully expecting to find the Port Darwin parties
at Newcastle Waters. He had not even heard of the contractors’
failure to complete their contract. He also reported water to
be plentiful along the Birdum Creek, there having been good
rain. It was now Mr. Burton’s intention to start across to Daly
Waters on the morrow, accompanied by Mr. Burt, and I received
instructions to get two packhorses and two saddle-horses for
myself, in order that I might accompany and pilot Mr. Burt back
to the central sections. Messrs. Burton and Ringwood would
travel with us as far as Daly Waters. I selected my old favourite
horses, Gentle Annie, Wombat, and Sir James Fitzjames, and
one other, and everything was ready on Monday morning, when
Messrs. Burton, Burt, and Ringwood, also Joe, Tommy, and
myself, started for Daly Waters on a south-east bearing for
10 miles, when we changed to south-south-east for eight miles,
and found water in a claypan, and camped. We started early
the next morning, bearing south-south-east for seven miles, and
there we struck Milner’s wagon-tracks and marked a tree. We
followed Milner’s track for 12 miles and soon after reached Daly
Waters, and camped under Stuart’s marked tree.


—Eclipse of the Sun. —
Almost a total eclipse of the sun occurred on 12th December,
1871. “Paddy” said that Jupiter was visible. Anyhow, the
crows, hawks, and the Darling larks started to roost in the trees.
This was followed immediately by very heavy rain, causing the
creek to run. As it rained all the next day, we remained in camp,
and talked politics. On 14th December we bade adieu to Messrs.
Burton and Ringwood, and Mr. Burt, Ewart, Tommy, and myself
started southwards for the head of Daly Waters Creek. We
found the country very boggy, and showing signs of its having-
had more rain, as we proceeded south. All lagoons and ponds
were full. I found that was the same creek that I had followed
up with Mr. Ross. We camped at 18 miles, near Auld’s Ponds,
named by Stuart. A drizzling rain fell all night. On 15th
December we started at 7.45 a.m., and were able to follow Milner’s
track in places. It continued showery all day. At 12.30 we
struck King’s Pond, of Stuart, but found it dry, but we unpacked
for an hour, and proceeded five miles over “ Bay-o’-Biscay ”
country, which we found as sticky as glue, and boggy. We found
rain water, and camped on the edge of the forest. We started
at 8.15 the next morning from the forest edge, once more
“ Bay-o’-Biscay ” and stunted gum scrub, until we reached Frew’s
Ironstone Pond, found plenty of water, and camped. We had
heavy storms of rain all through the day, and had travelled 21
miles.
CHAPTER XXVI.
Pleasant Companions—Gentle Annie and the Pig—Bay-o’-Biscay Country
—A Surprise Party—Attacked by the Savages—Christmas Day—Heavy
Thunderstorms.
—Pleasant Companions.—
I was always most fortunate to have most agreeable travelling-
companions. It was so in our long trip with Mr. Ross, and again
with Messrs. Burton, Ringwood, and Stephen King. And now
I had Mr. Burt and Joe Ewart, and Tommy contributed much
to our enjoyment with his quaint aboriginal ways. Tommy had
no time for any country but his own, which was the Peake Station,
and our stages were never too long for Tommy, provided we were
facing the south and each mile brought him nearer to his beloved
native hills. Mr. Burt was one of the most gentle, refined, and
polite companions I had ever travelled with. Nothing seemed to
ruffle him. Sometimes we would let Tommy take my place in


the lead, and I would remark to Mr. Burt that “ Tommy was
wobbling off the correct course a good deal.” “ Oh, yes,” he
would say, “ but he will soon make it up by wobbling the other
way i ” Joe Ewart was also a very entertaining companion, and
was, I believe, a member of Sturt’s expedition, and also, I think,
in Mr. Goyder’s expedition to Palmerston.
—Gentle Annie and the Pig.—
When we left No. 2 Well Mr. Burt was, among other things
in the provision line, supplied with a large ham, and, although
I am not a Jew, I have never to my knowledge partaken of any
part or form of that animal. Tommy, like a great many
Australian natives, fully shared my aversion. Consequently,
while we lived on tinned stuff and any game we could shoot, Mr.
Burt and Joe made almost every meal off this ham, until it was.
on this particular morning, little more than the bone, but still a
cherished one. At Frew’s Pond Mr. Burt, in packing his
provisions away on his packhorse, forgot the precious hambone,
and asked me if I would mind putting it on my packhorse. I
readily consented to do this, but casually remarked that “ Gentle ”
Annie might object to carry pig, which much amused Mr. Burt.
Nevertheless, when crossing Sturt’s Plain, which is 17 miles
across from timber to timber, I gave Annie, who was lagging
behind, unthinkingly a gentle smack with my stockwhip, a mere
flick, but an indignity she was not used to and which she resented
by bucking around the plain and scattering her pack and its
contents far and wide. We gathered up the most of it, but, alas,
there was no hambone. Even Tommy could not locate it!
—Bay-o’-Biscay Country.—
Sturt Plain is, with the exception of a few scattered bushes,
without a tree on its whole expanse, and composed of rich black
Bay-o’-Biscay soil, richly grassed with Mitchell and blue grass.
On this occasion the rain had made the soil terribly stocky and
boggy. The mare that Joe Ewart was riding had a very long
tail, reaching to the ground, and it became so clogged with grass
and mud and so heavy that Joe had to dismount and cut the hair
off level with her hocks. No wheeled vehicles could cross this
plain during the wet season. After having crossed the plain we
reached a creek six miles from the North Newcastle, but found
it dry. We then proceeded on to Newcastle, concluding a journey
of 27 miles. We left our camp at North Newcastle Waters on
18th December, 1871, and were able to follow Milner’s wheel-
tracks, which crossed the creek several times. There was plenty
of water all along the creek, and we camped at Central Newcastle
near Ross’s Camp No. 134. We did 20 miles that day. On


19th December we proceeded on to the South Newcastle, which
was a fine sheet of water two miles long. We went to the
Lawson Creek, hut found it was dry, but at the Fergusson Creek
we found plenty of water from recent rains. We experienced a
very wet night. We left the Fergusson on the next morning,
and were able to follow Milner’s track. We crossed the Watson
and Powell’s Creek, and reached the Gleeson and camped. There
was a fine spring in this creek with an abundant water supply.
We left the Gleeson on 21st December, partly following Milner’s
track, which in places was very circuitous. At 10 miles we
crossed the Hunter, and found plenty of water from recent rains,
but nothing premanent so far. At 18 miles we reached the Burke
Creek, and found it to be lately flooded. One mile below our
camp was a waterhole believed to be permanent, half a mile long
and 18 feet deep. There no timber fit for telegraph-poles
on this track. The country was sandy, and nearly all porcupine-
grass and low scrub. The distance from this track to the
Ashburton Range was from four to eight miles.
—A Surprise Party.—
W e left the Burke Creek at 8.15, following Milner’s track for
eight miles, when suddenly we came face to face with a party of
central and southern men. The party consisted of Messrs. R. R.
Knuckey, W. W. Mills, and Christopher Bagot, and four men,
a number of packhorses, and saddle-horses. They were en route
for our northern sections. We, naturally, had a great confab,
which ended in our whole party returning to the Burke, where
we all camped. It rained, nearly all through the night, and
flooded the creek. The night was far spent before we sought
our blankets, and much information was given and taken.
Ultimately it was agreed upon that I should return with the new
party to Mr. Burton’s camp on the Birdum Creek, while Mr.
Burt. Ewart, and Tommy continued their journey to Mr. Harvey’s
camp on Attack Creek. I was loath for some time to agree "to
this, as 1 had been instructed to accompany and pilot Mr. Burt
back to the Attack Creek, which was still 40 miles distant. Mr.
Burt, however, insisted that he would have no difficulty whatever
in reaching his destination, and pointed out what an opportunity
I would miss by not returning with Mr. Knuckey’s party, and
that I might remain an indefinite time at Attack Creek before
securing another party to return with me. Moreover, he said
he could do the 40 miles easily within two days, thus only
having to camp one night, and that no savages having been seen
by Mr. Knuckey’s party he did not anticipate any trouble from
them; and, as it is said “Among many counsellors there is
wisdom,” I gave in. It rained nearly the whole night, partly


flooding the creek, and on the morning of 23rd December
■we bade adieu to Messrs. Burt, Ewart, and Tommy on their final
stage to Attack Creek.
—Attacked by the Savages. —
It was long afterwards that we learnt that Mr. Burt and his
little party of two had not proceeded for many hours upon his
return journey when he was confronted by a mob of armed
savages, who were busily following up the horsetracks made by
Mr. Knuckey’s party of the previous day. They made a most
determined attempt to block his passage, shouting, yelling, and
shaking their spears, and, when attempting to go round them
peaceably, they again blocked his passage, throwing spears towards
the packhorses, and firing the grass. In self-defence, they were
obliged to use their carbines, and one, apparently the bold leader,
received a bullet from Burt’s rifle, which immediately caused
them all to scatter, wounded man and all. Mr. Burt, with his
usual kindly feeling, remarked, “ Oh, Joe! lam afraid I hit the
poor fellow.” “ Well,” said Joe, “ there’s not much fun in being
targets for stone spears.” They were not molested again, and
arrived safely the next day at Attack Creek. After having bade
good-bye to Mr. Burt, it was decided that we should all proceed
as far as the Fergusson Creek, and there Mr. Mills and his two
men would leave us and return to Attack Creek. And so we
left this camp on the Burke on 23rd December, and at
11.30 arrived at the Gleeson Creek, and camped, the day’s stage
having been 18 miles. It rained steadily all night, and we stayed
in camp all the next day. A number of savages appeared in
sight of our camp, but nothing would induce them to approach
nearer, and they quickly disappeared.
—Christmas Day.—
On Christmas Day we left the Gleeson Creek at 7.25,
Messrs. Knuckey and Mills skirted the base of the Ashburton
Range, and Chris. Bagot and 1 followed Milner’s track, crossing
the Powell and the Hawker Creeks, which we found both flooded.
We arrived at the Fergusson Creek at noon, and camped, and
shortly after were joined by Messrs. Knuckey and Mills, having
completed another stage of 18 miles and another Christmas in
our lives. Here, according to arrangement, Mr. W. W. Mills
and his two men left us, crossing over to the east side of the
Ashburton Range, thus returning by a new route to Attack
Creek, while Knuckey, Bagot, and Albert Hanns, John Lowther,
and I. with our eight packhorses, started at 8.50. We found the
country very boggy after the late rains, forcing us to keep to
the base of the Ashburton Range all day. We reached the South


Newcastle at 2 p.m., and camped, finishing at 21-mile stage. It
rained all night, wetting us through, and making travelling very
difficult. We started at 8.25, still keeping the base of the' range,
which was better travelling. We crossed the range at four miles,
kept the same bearing, and followed the eastern base for another
four miles, when we changed our course, which brought us to the
west side of the range again. We arrived at Newcastle Creek and
camped, after having concluded a 14-mile stage.
—Heavy Thunderstorms.—
We left our camp on 28th December, but, owing to
some of Mr. Knuckey’s horses rambling, we did not get a start
until 10.26. \\ e still kept the base of the range, as the flats and
low country were too boggy. At North Newcastle we camped,
after a stage of only 12 miles, owing to the heavy and boggy
state of the country. We had a tremendous thunderstorm at
daylight, and it continued showery, rendering travelling over the
Bay-o - Biscay plains very difficult, so we only crossed over to
some stony ridges on the north side of the stream, and on
Milner’s track, and camped for the remainder of the day, only a
mile from the previous camp. Next day we left the mulg'a ridge,
crossed a big plain, and struck the forest country, the edge of
which we followed. We found the country to have been recently
visited by very heavy thunderstorms, rendering the plains too
bpggy t° travel over, and we were compelled to follow the
circuitous windings of the forest, which had stunted gum flats.
We reached the head of these flats and camped. At the extreme
head of this plain was the swamp on which had been Mr. Ross’s
Camp Ro. 136. It was now full of water, but not permanent,
and was about eight miles south-east of Frew’s Ironstone Pond!
We travelled 19 miles that day. We left this, Ross’s Camp
No. 136, on 31st December, starting at 8.15 on a course for
three miles of 315 degrees, passing through dense scrub and
a stunted gum plain, on the edge of which is Frew’s Ironstone
Pond. We then proceeded along the edge of the forest, steering
for an open plain bearing 333 degrees, in order to cut Milner’s
track, but we found it to be completely washed out by late heavy
rains. We then changed our course to 45 degrees for two miles,
when the plain became too boggy, and forced us to make for the
forest again on a bearing of 70 degrees, and we reached it at
3-45, having only travelled 10 miles.


CHAPTER XXVII.
Difficult Travelling—Fireflies Mistaken for Blacks—Still Travelling under
Difficulties—Swimming in the Birdum—A Deserted Camp—A Meal on
Goanna.
—Difficult Travelling.—
On New Year’s Day, 1872, we left camp, and continued along
the forest edge for seven miles, when we crossed a narrow neck
of gum scrub and Biscay soil one and a half miles wide, but so
boggy that we had to lead our horses until again reaching the
forest, which was so dense that it was impossible to keep the
same bearing for more than 50 yards at a time. The forest
consists principally of lancewood and giant mulga. We kept in
the forest for five miles, when we again struck the plain, and
found Milner’s track, which we followed along for two and a
half miles to the north end of what we believed to be King’s
Ponds, named by Stuart, and there we camped, after a stage of
15 boggy miles. We left King’s Ponds on 2nd January at 8.30,
following Milner’s track, which was very faint and almost entirely
inundated by the heavy rain we had on the previous night. The
country was so terribly boggy that we were obliged to lead our
horses, and even then some of them sank to their bellies in bog,
we up to our knees in water, slush, and mud, and it was raining
torrents the whole time. Finding the country all alike, and
progress impossible, we were forced to beat a retreat to some
high mulga tableland, which formed the head of the Daly Waters
Creek. We camped there after a 14-mile stage of almost
continuous bog. We were, in these circumstances, somewhat
puzzled to know how we would get to Mr. Burton’s camp, still
25 miles distant. It was raining, with high winds from the
south-east, and should it continue all night we would be compelled
to stay there for some days or find a better track to the westward
of the Daly and Birdum Creeks. We had about three weeks’
supply of flour left. We camped all day on 3rd January, and
on the next day Mr. Knuckey and I took a walk on to the flat
below our camp and through a long cutting in the giant mulga
made by Mr. Milner to enable him to get his wagons through,
and known as Milner’s Cutting. Our object was to see if the
country was passable for horses, but at every step we sank nearly
to our knees. On returning to camp we proceeded on horseback
south-west, skirting the tableland for some distance, and we were
in hopes that we should find a passage on that course on the
morrow.


—Fireflies Mistaken or Blacks. —
We had all retired to our mosquito-nets for the night. Ail
the party had hammocks except myself, and I was sleeping on
the ground underneath Mr. Knuckey’s hammock within the tent.
We had not long been lying down when we were suddenly aroused
and startled by a yell from Mr. Knuckey, and the exclamation,
“ Look out; the niggers are on us! ” There was a simultaneous
rush to get out of our nets and grasp our revolvers and the
carbines, some of which would probably have misfired, owing to
the wet and damp weather. “ There they come,” said Mr.
Knuckey, “up through the mulga. See their firesticks, hundreds
of them! ” And then a loud chorus of “ Those are not niggers,
they are fireflies!” And so it was —myriads of fireflies, coming
through the giant mulga forest. We all had a good laugh at
the false alarm, and that Mr. Knuckey had overlooked the fact
that natives do not carry firesticks when attacking a camp. It
would be like a burglar ringing a bell! On sth January we left
our camp at Milner’s Cutting at 8.30 on a reduced bearing of
north-west to west for 12 miles, when the country again became
boggy, and we steered in another direction for four miles,
following a porcupine ridge timbered with mulga. a low range
to the west and forest country to the south-west, but were pulled
up by more bog. and were obliged to camp. Mr. Knuckey found
by calculation that we had travelled 18 miles. If so, we were
about 10 miles from Burton’s supposed camp, and about three
miles west of the Daly Creek. We had a tremendously heavy rain
during the night, putting a stop to our further progress. I took
a two-miles’ walk to see if I could find a passage on to the Daly
C reek, but found the flats would not bear my weight, so much
so that I was forced to divest myself of my boots and other
garments, wearing only my hat and shirt and revolver. I was
able to proceed at greater speed. I reached the creek, but found
the country becoming again knee-deep in bog. The long grass
made my feet sore, and I retraced my steps to an ant-hill, where
I had left my clothes, and returned to our camp.
—Still Travelling Under Difficulties. —
On 7th January we left our forest camp, followed the flats
on a north-east bearing for four miles, and reached the Daly
Creek, running bank-high. We followed it with much difficulty
until we reached Stuart’s Camp at Daly Waters, and camped
under his marked tree at 3.30. We were greatly disappointed,
after all our difficulties through slime, slush, and bog, at not
finding Mr. Burton’s party camped there, for we would now have
to try and find a way to his old camp on Birdum Creek, which
was about 30 miles away, the whole of the distance being Biscay


country, mostly under water. We left Stuart’s Camp at Daly
Waters the next clay with an endeavour to reach Ross’s track
and work to the west of the immense swamp caused by the over-
flow of the Daly and other creeks. We had good forest
travelling for seven miles, and then struck Bay-o’-Biscay country
with low gum scrub all under water. For three miles we twisted
and turned about to every point of the compass, leading the
horses, and up to our belts in water and bog. Our horses being
in good condition and strong alone prevented their becoming-
stuck fast, and even then some went down almost under water
through falling into deep Biscay holes. At nine miles from our
camp we reached a patch of good forest country, and camped,
but, strange to say. without any water. We left this camp on
9th January, at 8.30 a.m. Our course was set at all or any points
of the compass, in order to avoid the treacherous Bay-o'-Biscay
land, which was full of immense holes full of water, as well as
being hidden by the long grass. After about six miles of twists
and turns we struck the large strip of “ Bay-o’-Biscay,” entirely
under water, and one and a half miles wide. On climbing trees
we could see forest country on the opposite side. We resolved,
therefore, to make a determined push right through it, and,
accordingly, started, leading our saddle-horses and driving the
packhorses. The sun had been scorchingly hot all the morning,
and the water, which reached above our knees, was likewise hot
and steamy, and the black clay underneath had the consistency
of glue. It was difficult to keep our hoots on, and coupled with
the humidity of this tropical atmosphere, enforced us to stop at
times. At last we reached the forest, and immediately camped.
We found, upon plotting up our course, that we had travelled
nine miles, but really were only three miles nearer the place where
we supposed Burton might be. The mosquitoes were in clouds,
and every night drove our poor horses cranky. Leaving this
camp on 11th January, we immediately entered Bay-o’-Biscay
again, but this brought us to forest country with sandy soil
and splendid travelling. We kept a northerly course until
dark, when, finding no change in the country, we had to camp
without water. We must, however, have been very close to the
Birdum Creek. We left this dry camp on 12th January, and in
two miles struck water in the Bay-o’-Biscay, and there we had
breakfast and spelled for an hour. We then crossed the Biscay,
which was running strongly, to the north, causing me at first to
think that we had crossed the Birdum. but upon gaining the
eastern side the character of the country at once assured me that
this was not so, and we soon after cut the Birdum Creek and
camped. Mr. Knuckey and I walked across to the creek, and found
it running strongly. I assured Mr. Knuckey that if Mr. Burton


were camped in the neighbourhood of Daly Waters his dray-tracks
would be found right opposite to us. We accordingly stripped
off our clothes and swam across, and there, within 100 yards of
the creek-bank, we found his dray-tracks. We then reswam the
creek and returned to the camp.
—Swimming the Birdum. —
We found that it would not do to swim the horses across at
this part of the creek, on account of its width and the great
quantity of dead timber and submerged trees lying on the bottom.
We followed the creek southwards, until we could find a suitable
place to swim over the horses. We proceeded three miles, when
Mr. Knuckey, having to change his saddle-horse, some of the
packhorses strayed away, but we found them later. Mr. Knuckey
and myself left the party, and proceeded two and a half miles
to the edge of the swamp which, bordered the creek on each side.
I then went on to the main creek to find a suitable place to swim
the horses over, and which I succeeded in finding without much
trouble. I stripped off my clothes, swam over, and found trie
current stronger than I expected, and that I would be unable to
swim my horse over without a rope. I therefore tied my stirrup-
leathers on to the end of the bridle reins, and rode my horse in
up to the knee-pads, and then struck out for the opposite shore,
but found that I had miscalculated the length of my improvised
rope, that I could not touch bottom, and that the strain of the
current on the rope had drawn my horse out of his depth, and
he was being carried downstream. I slackened the rope, recrossed
the stream, and pulled my horse ashore. The rain then came
down in torrents, and the wind blew a hurricane. Being without
clothes, I shivered with the cold, and found the warmest place
was in the water, where I remained until the storm had passed.
Finding that the party with the packhorses were not coming, I
dressed myself in my wet clothes, trudged back a mile, and met
them, but the party had seen nothing of Mr. Knuckey. This was
strange, as he had left me art hour and a half before to fetch the
party. We fired several shots from our carbines, and in a short
time he appeared, and stated that the rain had washed out the
tracks, and he had missed his way. We started for the creek,
swam the horses safely over, and then proceeded half a mile on
to the forest land, and struck Burton’s dray-tracks. From the
appearance of the country I immediately concluded that we had
crossed the creek about four miles south of the depot where I
had left Burton. The fact of there being a road or track south
of it plainly showed us, to our extreme regret, that Burton had
shifted his camp, and made towards Daly Waters through country
that was now entirely under water and impassable to us by his


track. We followed the track southwards for two miles, but
seeing no sign of any encampment, we decided to follow them
northwards and search the old depot in thq hope of finding some
one or any provisions left there. We were thoroughly wet
through and tired out with the rain continuing throughout the
night.
—A Deserted Camp.—
The next morning, having to dry our clothes, we did not
get a start until 11.20, and in two miles we reached the old depot.
To our great disappointment, we found it entirely deserted, with
the exception of some drays loaded with wire. We had a
consultation, and found that we had but three days’ flour left,
and the country so flooded that it was quite impossible to follow
Burton. I suggested that we should remain there that day,
while two of us followed Burton’s tracks for nine miles to some
high ground 1 knew of, and where there might still be a chance
of finding him camped. In the event of his not being there, we
would then try to reach Mr. McLachlan’s camp, 40 miles distant
on the Elsey Creek. This was agreed to, and Albert Hanns and
I started and reached the high ground. This formed the edge
of a 10-mile stretch of Biscay plain, which was entirely under
water. There was no sign of anyone having camped there, and
we returned with the tidings to our camp. We left the old depot
the next morning, northwards, but found that we could not follow
the dray-tracks, as we were continually running into bogs and
bogging the horses up to their bellies. We had great difficulty
in getting some of them out, and we camped, but Mr. Knuckey
had to leave a grey horse of his two miles back quite knocked up.
We left this camp on the Birdum on 16th January, and
again began plunging into bogs, and sometimes having to unpack
the horses in order to haul them out to a dry spot. We had only
some tea, sugar, and a small tin of preserved meat left between
five of us. Mr. Knuckey proposed that we should kill one of our
horses, and suggesting that my packhorse, Gentle Annie, was the
fattest, I agreed that she was, but I added that I would have to
be fairly starving before I would agree to sacrifice Annie, and
that we might strike a camp at any time, and were not much
more than 20 miles from the Elsey, McLachlan’s camp, unless he
had shifted.
—A Meal on Goanna.—
When we got to about two miles north of No. 2 Well, we
cut the line of telegraph-poles erected by Mr. McLachlan’s party,
and shortly afterwards we thought we could hear a bell. After
plunging through some more bogs, we were delighted to see a
camp, and were met by Police-trooper Keppler and two men, who


informed us that Mr. McLachlan had run out of provisions
through the non-arrival of Mr. Bedford Hack and his teams,
and consequently had been obliged to beat a retreat with his party
of 30 men to Mr. Rutt’s camp, near to the head of the Roper.
Mr. Keppler informed us that he also was very short of provisions,
and that he could give us only one good meal; “ and,” said he,
“you are just in time for dinner.” Taking off the camp-oven
lid, he added, “ Look at that for a feed.” There, coiled round
the camp-oven, was an immense goanna, beautifully cooked. We
enjoyed it immensely with johnny cakes and tea. We remained
the night at this camp, and on 17th January, in company with
Trooper Keppler and a small supply of food we started for
No. 1 or All Saints’ Well, where we found Mr. McLachlan and
three men. Mr. McLachlan informed us that all his men,
with Mr. Willie Brock in charge, had started that morning to
walk to Mr. Rutt’s camp, where it was supposed Mr. Hack was
camped with his supply teams, about 45 miles distant, and that
before leaving they had constructed a boat to enable them to
cross the Elsey River. We decided to spell there until the
morrow, swim our horses over the stream, and endeavour to reach
Mr. Rutt’s camp. We heard, also, that Mr. R. C. Patterson was
down on the Roper, having bought 1,000 sheep and 16 horses
from Mr. Ralph Milner, who was camped 45 miles down that
river on the Red Lily Lagoon, but had been unable to deliver
the sheep, owing to the tremendous floods, impassable creeks,
and bogs.
CHAPTER XXVIII.
Crossing the Elsey—We Meet Mr.Bedford Hack—Lagoon in the Forest—
Bullock-hunting—Arrival of Mr. Ralph Milner—“Dr.” Rix and “Dr.”
Funnall—Union Camp—“Red Blanket.”
—Crossing the Elsey. —
On 18th January, 1872, Constable Keppler returned to his
camp with flour. This was 16 miles from where we were. The
next day our party started for the Warlock Ponds, four miles
from All Saints’ Well, and where we proposed to swim our horses
across. Mr. McLachlan sent a man with us to bring the boat
back. On reaching the crossing-place we found the Elsey more
than half a mile wide. We took the packs off the horses, put
them in the boat, and sent them across, towing one horse behind
the boat and driving the rest into the water. When half-way
across the stream the man leading the towed horse was forced


to let it go, as it was pulling the boat round and round. The
horse then turned right back and swam ashore, with the rest
following it. We then tried the same plan, but with a different
horse. All took the water beautifully, and safely reached the
opposite shore, where we camped for’ the rest of the day, and
were welcomed by myriads of flies, sandflies, and mosquitoes.
Mr. McLachlan had kindly given us nearly a week’s provisions,
and we intended to try and reach the Bitter Springs on the
morrow.
—We Meet Mr. Bedford Hack.—
We left Warlock Ponds on Saturday, 20th January, and
after having travelled for three miles we were not a little
surprised to meet Mr. Bedford Hack, Mr. Willie Brock, and
Mr. Cecil Rix. Mr. Hack informed us that he had succeeded,
after terrible and innumerable difficulties, in getting his bullock
teams, loaded with provisions, within two miles of where we then
were, or four miles from the Warlock Ponds, and that he would
he quite unable to proceed further. In fact, the Elsey alone
would prove a complete barrier to any further progress for teams.
We learnt also that all Mr. McLachlan’s men were camped with
Mr. Hack, where we also would have to remain until the state
of the country permitted us to travel. Messrs. Brock and Rix
proceeded across the Elsey with Mr. McLachlan, and Mr. Hack
returned with our party to a lagoon in the forest. Mr. Hack
camped a mile further north, and shifted to this spot later, and
formed a main camp until the drying-up of the floods.
—Lagoon in the Forest.—
A heavy rain, lasting several hours, fell during the night.
We obtained sugar and other little things from Mr. Hack, which
assisted us to make our varied and wandering lives happier. But
it was not pleasant to anticipate a month or two of idle camp
life. As I have previously pointed out, nothing was more
depressing and perhaps injurious in a climate like this than idleness
and inactivity. It was the mpther of discontent, disorder, and
dissensions contributory to disease in a climate where malarial
fever was prevalent, and where a number of men were camped
together for a length of time without books or occupation of any
kind. Mr. Brock returned from All Saints’ Well, and reported
that Mr. McLachlan’s three men were ill with rheumatism and
fever. Two of Mr. Rutt’s men arrived, and reported that Mr.
Rutt was very ill. Mr. Hack made a calculation as to the supply
of rations per man per week, which was six pounds of flour with
one pound of biscuits, one pound of sugar, half a pound of tea,
and possibly meat enough for eight or nine weeks—that is,
tinned meat in six-pound tins (“red blanket” we called it).


The tins were painted red, without labels or description of
contents. We found that out when we opened them. There
would be a reserve of 1,700 pounds of flour in case Mr, Burton
and party might have to beat a retreat to this supply camp, but it
was considered that if he ran short he would be more likely to
follow the Strangways River down until meeting with the Roper
teams, under Mr. Stephen King, from the Bar. Mr. Hack
estimated that, unless the sheep could be got up in the meantime,
the present supplies should last until the end of March. On
22nd January Mr. Hack shifted his camp and all the bullock
teams to this lagoon, and we now numbered about 50 souls. The
display of snowy-white flies with a hammock stretched beneath
each gave the camp a pretty appearance. We expected to be there
two months. Next day Mr. Hack’s men were busy putting up
a large store tent. No rain fell during the night and the sky was
much clearer, but during the next evening we had heavy rain,
much to the annoyance of everyone, and bringing clouds of
mosquitoes, sandflies, and other torments of humanity. It rained
heavily through the night. I took all the shoes off my horses.
On 25th January Messrs. Brock and Knuckey started off to see
how Mr. McLachlan was faring at All Saints’ Well. We oiled
and cleaned up our firearms, as well as our saddles and gear. On
27th January Messrs. McLachlan, Knuckey, Brock, and Rix
arrived, and they reported the Elsey to have fallen considerably,
enabling a man to walk across. Mr. Hack and I had a bathe in
the lagoon.
—Bullock-hunting.—
There were more than 100 working bullocks at this place
belonging to Mr, Hack’s Government teams. They were turned
loose on the 10-mile sandy patch of country between there and
Bitter Springs, and I often, for want of something to do, went
with Abe Dare, the stockman, to round them up and see that
they were not straying. They seemed to do remarkably well
in this country, and were looking quite fat and sleek. We often
thought how well a fat rumpsteak would go on the coals as a
change from “ red blanket.” The bullocks were very little trouble
to look after, and their condition, we thought, augured well for
this to be some day a great cattle country. The Ist February
dawned with a continuance of fine weather until towards evening,
when it looked very threatening, with thunder and lightning.
—Arrival of Mr. Ralph Milner.—
On 3rd February Mr. R. Milner and two men arrived.
He reported that, provided the weather kept fine for a few days,
he would be able to get his sheep up, which he had sold to Mr.
Patterson. Messrs. Knuckey, Rix, and McLachlan returned from


Mr. Rutt’s camp. They reported him to be much better, but
still weak, but several of his party were very unwell. Mr. Rutt
had to reduce the rations to three pounds of meat to each man a
week, but after Mr. Hack’s arrival it was increased to six pounds
a week. Next day Mr. Milner and his men started back to their
camp. A fine day again, but showery for part of the night. Mr.
Brock was to have started for the Elsey crossing, but decided_to
wait and see if the weather cleared up, but he staited on sth
February, with nine men and several packhorses, for the ciossing.
in order to meet the coming sheep and assist in crossing them.
Mr. Hack, with Messrs. Rix and McLachlan, started for All
Saints’ Well. 1 wrote home letters, and also to Mr. Stapleton,
but goodness knows, I thought, when they would reach their
destinations. Some of the men were busy making brush sheep-
yards, and others making and repairing packsaddles. On 9th
February we had tremendous thunderstorms, with heavy rain,
preceded by hot and sultry weather.
—“ Dr.” Rix and “ Dr. ” Funnall. —
Mr. Cecil Rix was one of the Government chemists supplied
to the parties, and controlled the medicine-chest, as well as
attending to patients. He was a favourite with all of us, and we
dubbed him doctor. Mr, Funnall, also a chemist, was, I thinx,
attached to Mr. Rutt’s party, and on Saturday the two “ doctors ”
accompanied me in a ride over to All Saints W ell to See how
Mr. McLachlan and his men were faring. Upon reaching the
Elsey, we found it to have risen several feet, and we were forced
to use the boat and swim our horses across, repeating the operation
on our return in the evening, and reaching camp about 7 p.m.
We found that Mr. Brock had returned, and he reported having
crossed the sheep over the Elsey safely. Some of the men
carried them over on their backs, as there was no boat wdiere the
sheep crossed, which was at a point about three miles above the
junction of the Elsey and Roper Rivers, whereas the boat or line
crossing was 10 miles higher up. Mr. Brock said that the sheep
might arrive on the following Monday, fie thought they were
in "fair condition considering they were carrying a fleece of more
than 18 months’ wool in and under tropical conditions, so foreign
to them.
—Union Camp.—
Owing to the meeting of sections of the different telegraph
camps—some from Mr. "Rutt’s, all Mr. Hack’s party, some of
Mr. McLachlan’s men, and our own overland party this camp
was henceforth to be known as Union Camp, instead of the
Lagoon in the Forest. Sometimes there Avere as many as 80
men in this camp, and they were divided into messes of five.


eight, or ten. Mr. Odgers was in charge of the stores, which
were packed in the large tent, and rations were issued by him
once a week. There were five members in our mess—Messrs.
Knuckey, Chris. Bagot, Albert Hanns, John Lowther, and myself.
We were on short rations—three pounds of flour, one pound of
biscuits, and three pounds of “ red blanket,” or tinned beef, to
each man weekly. The meat was in six-pound tins, but we only
got two tins a week and a third tin the second week to make up
the difference, so that collectively we got 15 pounds of flour, five
pounds of biscuit, one and a half pounds of tea. and five pounds
of sugar, with 15 pounds of meat, tobacco, and matches. The
tea was ample, but we always ran out of meat, sugar, and
biscuits. Some of the flour was packed in what were said to be
“ airtight ” tins, but it was abominable stuff, in many instances
quite uneatable, being black and sticky, while that in the 50-
pound bags was encased in about two inches of hard blue mould,
and it easily stood on end when the bags were removed; but the
centre portion of the flour was white and fairly good.
—“Red Blanket.”—
It was always difficult to say with certainty how a tin of six
pounds of beef would open up, and many arguments arose with the
storekeeper on ration-day as to the soundness or otherwise of
certain tins. We nearly always got Mr. Chris. Bagot to inter-
view the storekeeper on ration-day. He had a persuasive way
with him, and we relied upon his judgment regarding the
soundness of our tinned beef. Any tin that had dents on it, or
if the ends were bulgy, was held in suspicion as likely to be
tainted or rotten within, and in order to ascertain this it was
necessary to puncture the tin and then run away. Some of these
experiments, carried out within the precincts of the store tent,
had so affected the storekeeper, Mr. Odgers, that he had to forbid
such practices, and sometimes when Chris. Bagot had to return
with a bulgy tin an argument would ensue as to its soundness or
otherwise, and Mr. Bagot would say, “Well, look! I’ll open it
and prove it.” He would be met by Mr. Odgers, saying, “ No!
No! Take it away. I’ll give you another one,” and then, on
returning to camp, the bulgy tin would often be found to be
■quite good!


CHAPTER XXIX.
All South Australians —Millions of Mosquitoes—Arrival of the Sheep-
Shearing the Sheep—The Fan Palms —We Resume Shearing—Still More
Rain —Shearing Finished —Crossing the Elsey River.
—All South Australians. —
I think, without exception, the whole of the men in this camp
were South Australians. Indeed, I think it applied to the whole
expedition, which embraced the northern, central, and southern
sections. Mr. R. C, Burton himself was a “ Yankee,” but both
Mr. H. W. Packard’s and Mr. S. King’s parties that w'ent to the
Roper were South Australians. And what splendid fellows they
were! —free, easy, and sociable as they sat in groups in the
evenings, around each other’s camp fires, spinning their yarns
and experiences in this new and tropical land, cut off from all
communications with their distant homes and relatives, wondering
how the world was jogging along, how far the southern parties
had advanced northwards, where and when the wires would meet
and the first message he dispatched to England, and so on. Our
camp fire was a common evening resort, and besides our own
party the most frequent visitors were Mr. Hack, Willie Brock,
Cecil Rix, Abe Dare, Garshire, and sometimes Surveyors
McLachlan and McCaulay. Everyone found a seat —on the
ground.
—Millions of Mosquitoes.—
Although we were in the tropics and the nights often dose
and sultry, we were forced to have several fires within the camp
and often in between the visitors. These fires were almost
flameless, and were composed of cakes of cowdung, which
yielded a thick and pungent smoke. It baffled the millions of
mosquitoes that swarmed over the camps and viciously attacked
all that were without this smokescreen. As there were more
than 100 bullocks in camp when mustered, there was plenty of
this precious fuel, and it generally fell to my lot to gather the
evening supply before sunset. On one particular evening, when
the mosquitoes were unusually numerous and vicious, my visitors
rallied up as usual and sat down, hut not for long. They soon
started to slap their arms about and scratch their hands and faces,
and then, almost with one voice, exclaimed. “ Why, Giles, there’s
no smoke to-night,” to which I replied, “ Well, I thought I would
tell you a story instead.” Mr. Hack said, “ Will the story keep
the mosquitoes away?” I replied, “Not to-night, hut I think


it will to-morrow night; and,” said I, “ this is the story —Once
upon a time, away in Africa, on a very cold day, a mob of
monkeys were travelling- through a forest, and by and by they
came upon a fire. They all sat down around it chattering and
warming themselves, and by and by the fire died right out, and,
do you believe it, not one of those monkeys ever thought of
getting any more wood to replenish the fire! ” There was a
moment’s silence, then a general laugh, and each got up with
“ Good night, Giles! ” But the next night it was amusing as well
as gratifying to see each of my visitors approaching the camp
with an armful of the precious "fuel. Splendid mates they were,
one and all!
—Arrival of the Sheep. —
On 11th February, 1872, Mr. R. Milner arrived with 14
horses, being part of those he had sold to Mr. Patterson. Some
were for Mr. McLachlan, and some for Mr. Rutt’s parties. The
sheep also arrived at last, and all hands greatly enjoyed the fresh
mutton after the “ red blanket.” The sheep, mostly ewes, were
small and poor, averaging not more than 30 pounds dressed
weight. 1 did not attribute their low condition wholly to the
distance they had travelled so much as to their being heavily
woolled, carrying an 18-months’ fleece. The wool was of good
quality and staple; the outer, or surface, was frayed and some-
what perished, but, considering the unavoidable knocking about
the sheep had had, this was not to he wondered at. Mr. Milner had
heavy losses on his great journey. At the Davenport Ranges,
south of Tennant’s Creek, he lost 900 in one night through the
sheep eating the deadly poison bush (Gastrolobium grandi-
florum). Being a bit of a sheep man, 1 was deputed to count the
flock, and made the total 1,003. It was decided that 300 should
he sent, if possible, on to Mr. Burton, who was supposed to be
at or near Daly Waters. There were about 35 men in his party,
and it was feared that they were very short of provisions. I
arranged that his consignment of sheep should be shorn
immediately. Although I did not belong to any particular party,
I looked upon Mr. Burton’s as my main camp, and therefore 1
volunteered to take the sheep to him. On 12th February
Mr. Milner, accompanied by Mr. R. R. Knuckey, started back
for his camp, and on his arrival there immediately started for
the Roper River with 20 or more packhorses in an endeavour
to bring up rations for his party. Two men were dispatched to
Mr. Rutt’s camp with his draft of horses, which were a very
useful stamp, hardy and acclimatized. The next morning I
counted out 300 sheep, and two more men were dispatched with
them to Mr. Rutt’s camp.


—Shearing the Sheep. —
Shearing in the Northern Territory was a novelty indeed, and
among all the Government outfit no such article as sheep-shears
was catalogued or thought of. Fortunately, Mr. Milner was
aide to supply a few pairs. Another remarkable fact was that
out of more than 50 men in camp only one knew how to shear,
and he happened to be the cook. Under his tutelage, four or
five men started shearing, or, perhaps, I should say toma-
hawking.” The main thing was to get the wool off. There was
no sorting or preparing. It was just chucked over the fence to
rot, and would have grieved the squatter s heart. On 13th
February, as the country was drying up a bit, and the men were
now on'a full ration of meat, Mr. McLachlan’s party began to
clear the line south of All Saints’ Well in readiness for the
poles. Next day Mr. McCaulay and Mr. Garshire arrived from
Mr. Rutt’s camp. In the evening a terrific thunderstorm played
over the camps. Continuous peals of thunder with vivid and
inclement streaks of lightning were terribly grand, and were
followed by deluges of rain, which continued throughout the
night, leaving the whole district in an impassable condition. Had
the rain held off for a few days I should have started with
Burton’s sheep, but I had to wait another drying-up process.
These tropical rains were not showers, they were deluges, not
measurable by points, but by 1 feet!
—The Fan Palms. —
On 16th February Messrs. McCaulay and Garshire started
back to their camp at Mr. Rutt’s. Heavy rain again fell.
Next day Messrs. Willie Brock, Chris. Bagot, Abe Dare, and
myself took a ride to the Fan Palms, Roper River, about 10
miles to the north. There had been some camp-fire discussions
as to whether they were not the cabbage palm, and our object
was to procure some of the beautiful wood as well as some of
the cabbage heart of the tree, which was considered delicious
eating. On our arrival at the Palms (Ross’s Camp 150), Mr.
Brock pronounced them to be the giant fan palm, the wood of
which, although verv like the cabbage palm, is useless, being
mostly pith and strong fibres. We cut one beautiful tree down,
which measured 65 feet of straight barrel, and we got some of
the eatable portion from the crown of the tree, which is equally
as good as hte cabbage palm, but not yielding such large quantities.
We found the Roper flooded bank-high, but the approach, being
composed of limestone, enabled a horse to get close to the water s
edge without bogging. The soil was black and rich.


—We Resume Shearing.—
Sunday, 18th February, was my birthday, and my campmates
wished me many happy returns. There was heavy rain through-
out the night, and the country was very sloppy. We were able
to resume shearing in the afternoon. Mr. Brock came in this
morning from the line, and reported that savages had stolen two
axes and some clothing from his men the previous day while they
were at dinner. The sheep were too wet to shear, and we turned
it into a washing-day!
—Still More Rain. —
On 21st February we had another tremendous fall of rain,
which lasted all night, and again on the following evening. The
lagoon and the Elsey River were flooded higher than ever. It
looked as if w T e would all be hard up for rations before we could
reasonably expect any drays with supplies from the Roper, but
we had nine weeks’ supply of flour for all hands at six pounds
to each man a week. On 22nd February Mr. Brock returned to
his camp, in order to bring all his party to this camp, as the
country was in such a state of bog that the men could not work.
When lifting the poles into position they sank to their knees in
the soft soil, and the holes for the poles were full of water, and
could not be rammed securely. Fleavy rain fell again at night,
and it was showery all the next day. and we wondered when we
should get out of this, as the whole country was inundated.
Sixteen days had elapsed since Mr. Rutt’s 300 sheep started for
his camp, 40 miles distant, and they were still 18 miles from it.
However, the weather appeared like a break-up, and perhaps, we
thought the dry season was approaching, but we were only new-
chum weather prophets, and could give no guarantee.
—Shearing Finished.—
On Ist March we finished shearing the sheep early in
the morning. Messrs. McCaulay and Garshire returned to their
temporary camp on the Roper, where the sheep were stuck up.
The weather kept fairly fine. We had light showers with
thunder and lightning up to 6th March, with cool winds. On 7th
March “ Dr.” Rix and Mr. C. M. Bagot rode over to All Saints’
Well to see how Mr. McLachlan was faring with the floods and
bogs. Abe Dare and I took a ride over towards Ross’s Crossing,
on the Elsey, but we found the country still too boggy to reach,
and had to return. There was heavy thunder to the south-east
and some sharp showers of rain, but the lagoon was rapidly
diminishing in size. Next night, however, we had another heavy
downpour, which caused the lagoon to rise again several feet.


and just at the time I was contemplating shifting my camp to
the Elsey banks, in order to commence boating across Burton’s
sheep, but I now had to wait a day or two.
—Crossing the Elsey River. —
On Monday, 11th March. Chris. Bagot and I rode across the
Elsey River, and found it to have lowered considerably. We
took" the boat over, and sounded the depth in several places, with
a view to find out a suitable crossing-place for the sheep. It was
more than 200 yards wide, and in many places we could not
touch the bottom with the long pole we had for sounding. There
appeared to be no help for it but to boat the sheep over, which
would take a long time, as the boat was very small, and would
barely carry 10 sheep at a trip. Messrs. McLachlan and Hack
started away up to No. 2 Well.
CHAPTER XXX.
Shifting Camp-Boating the Sheep Over—Providence Knoll—Starting
With Burton’s Sheep—Mosquitoes Worried the Sheep—On the Track of
Burton’s Party—Arrival at Burton’s Camp.
—Shifting Camp.—
On 12th March I shifted my camp to the north bank
of the Elsey and built a yard at the edge of the river for the
sheep. Next day Mr. Chris. Bagot came early, and reported the
arrival at Union Camp of Messrs. Milner and Knuckey, and
the intelligence these gentlemen had brought was neither cheering
nor encouraging. In their attempt to reach the Roper Landing
they had found the Strangways River to be a complete barrier to
their further progress. They, with great difficulty and danger,
had crossed two branches of that river, but the third was
impassable, and Mr. Milner had the misfortune to see three of
his horses swept away by the flood with all their packs and swags.
The whole country along the Roper banks was inundated to a
width of six miles. In addition, there were innumerable swamps
and miles of inundated Bay-o’-Biscay plains. They made two
attempts to reach this camp, but each time were defeated by the
floods of the Elsey and its tributaries. Nothing daunted, Mr.
Milner started to return to his camp to endeavour to make another
attempt to reach the “ corn in Egypt,” and proposed to try and
cross the Strangways much higher up. in company with Mr.
Knuckey. Mr. Milner’s party at his main camp. Red Lily
Lagoon, were still subsisting on mutton and water. They had


not even salt to savour it with. I went up to All Saints’ Well
with a packhorse, and brought back two coils of wire, which 1
stretched across the Elsey and strained it to three trees and
about three feet above the water. I was fortunate in getting a
tree almost in the centre of the stream. By these means the boat
would be propelled with greater speed, and straighter than with
oars, Messrs. Hack and McLachlan returned from No. 2 Well,
and reported the road to be passable. Chris. Bagot and party
reached here that night from Union Camp to accompany me to
Mr. Burton's with the sheep. The position of Messrs. Rutt and
McLachlan’s parties, as well as Mr. Hack’s men, was becoming
critical. They had more than 60 men in camp, and about eight
weeks’ rations left at a reduced rate of three and a half pounds
of flour to each man a week and one pound of biscuits. The
chance of any further supplies arriving before the dry season set
in was very small.
—Boating the Sheep Over.—
On 14th March I made a yard on the opposite side of the
river, and went up to Mr. Hack’s at Union Camp, and stayed
the night. Next morning I took the 300 sheep for Mr, Burton
and arrived at the proposed crossing-place on the Elsey at about
3 p.m. We immediately started to boat them over. I found that
the boat would only hold 11 at a time, and then only by packing
them tightly in a sitting posture —in each other’s arms, as it were.
We had no oars, but one man stood in the end of the boat, and,
catching hold of the strained wire, pulled the boat along. When
half-way across with the first load, the man let go the wire, and
in trying to regain it capsized himself, as well as the boat and
all the sheep. It was not a strong current, and we swam in,
righted the boat, chased the sheep, and recovered them all, and by
dark we had got 124 across. We started to boat again at day-
break the next morning, and got the whole 300 over by 10 o’clock.
Half an hour later Mr. Hack and Willie Brock, with several men,
arrived in order to lend us a hand, and were astonished to find
them all over. We certainly had got them over quicker and easier
than we expected. The strained wire and the fine weather
contributed much towards our success.
—Providence Knoll. —
The torrential tropical rains that fell in February and March
along the Roper, and, indeed, all over the northern end of the
Territory, which formed such a formidable harrier to the progress
of Messrs. Milner and Knuckey in their endeavour to reach the
Roper Landing, had a more disastrous efifect upon Mr. C. W.
Rutt’s party. Every river and creek in the neighbourhood had


overflowed its banks, forming seas of water for many miles
in every direction. The 300 sheep which had been dispatched
from Union Camp for Mr. Rntt took a month to go 40 miles.
Mr. Rntt was camped about half-way between the Bitter Springs
and the King River on flat country, and the floods rose rapidly,
surrounding the tents, and carrying away all kinds of loose gear.
Fortunately, about half a mile away there was a stony ridge or
small hill, and it became evident that an immediate move to this
haven of safetv was the only possible hope of saving the stores,
tents, and perishable articles and preventing loss of life. The
whole force of the camp was employed to carry the stores,
bedding, and tents through the rising flood to the point of safety,
while all the drays, heavy tools, harness, and other gear had to
be left behind. ' The sheep had already been kept up the high
ground, and were safe, as well as most of the horses. From this
vantage-point the party watched the flood gradually rising around
their quarters, and were deely thankful; so much so, indeed, that
Mr. Rutt named the spot Providence Knoll, and it remains as
such on the map to this day. It is a picturesque spot, surrounded
by pines and jungle, and near by was a deep pool, which held
water for a considerable part of the year.
—Starting With Burton’s Sheep.—
On 17th March I started from Warlock Pond. Elsey River,
with the sheep for Mr. Burton at daylight. My party consisted
of Mr. C. M. Bagot, Albert Hanns, John Lowther, Dave Johnson
(shepherd), and myself. We arrived at All Saints’ Well at
10.30 a.m., and camped for the day. I left three sheep there for
Mr. McLachlan. The road was still very boggy, but the sheep
travelled well in the cool of the morning. On 18th March we
started the sheep very early, while I rode ahead for about eight
miles to what was known as The Water-tanks, and made a yard
ready for the sheep. Late in the evening it began to rain, with
high, cold winds, continuing throughout the night. The sheep,
having been recently shorn, suffered considerably from the cold,
so much so that we had to leave two behind. It remained
showery all the next day, and we arrived on the following day
at Constable Keppler’s camp. The country was very boggy, and
we were unable to follow the road, and could not make more than
six miles for the day. We camped on Birdum Creek, which we
followed up day by day. The next morning we got an early
start, but there was still too much water to allow us to follow the
road, and we were forced to follow the higher ground in the
forest country, and were again only able to make six miles for
the day’s work. There were numerous tracks of the savages
having been there, but we saw none. The next day we made


seven miles before camping. The weather was warmer, with a
cloudless sky. We could only travel the sheep in the early
morning and cool of the evening. We managed to make another
seven miles on 23rd March, and camped about a mile south of
No. 3 Well, on Birdum Creek. The country was drying up
rapidly and the weather getting hotter.
—Mosquitoes Worried the Sheep.—
The next day we made the same distance, and camped on the
edge of the “ Bay-o’-Biscay,” in the company of millions of
mosquitoes. They worried the sheep, biting their bare bellies
and their ears. The grass was so long that we did not require
to make a yard for the sheep. If we camped them on the road,
we put a few bushes across the road in front and behind them,
and the long grass forming the sides held them safely. The next
day we did another seven miles, passing the old depot, and then
on to the Ironstone Pond, where we camped alongside the
Birdum Creek. The next day we did another seven miles, and
we reached the big stony ridge near the head of the Birdum
Creek and camped. The Birdum had nearly ceased running,
and I purposed leaving the sheep there on the morrow and riding
on ahead a few miles to see what direction Burton had taken
from there to Daly Waters, also to find out if the road was fit
for the sheep to travel. I was very doubtful about it, as it was
all Bay-o’-Biscay country between there and Daly Waters, a
distance of 30 miles.
—On the Track of Burton’s Party.—
On the morning of 27th March, accompanied by Mr. C. M.
Bagot. I left the sheep camp to search for Burton’s party,
taking one packhorse and two days’ provisions. We found the
tracks of Burton s carts to be completely washed out in places,
and for six miles we steered a course of south-east, and cut the
draytracks, which we were able to follow in places for 10 miles,
and camped. Some portions of the Bay-o’-Biscay were quite
dry; others were inundated, and very boggy, and we had to lead
our horses. We came 22 miles, and the horses were very tired.
On 28th March we got a daylight start, followed the draytracks
for seven miles, and found it terribly boggy, and had great
difficulty in getting the horses along.
—Arrival at Burton’s Camp.—
On reaching Stuart’s Swamp, three miles north of Daly
Waters, we found fresh boot-tracks, and on following up the
Daly Creek, which filled the swamp, we came upon Burton’s party
camped at his depot at Daly Waters. The whole camp turned


out, and gave us a most hearty welcome. For more than five
months this party had been entirely cut off from the outside
world or any communication with the other parties, or news of
any kind. They were, in fact, marooned as securely as if on an
island. The central and southern sections were hundreds of
miles to the south, while the Roper landing was more than 200
miles to the north-east, and the Elsey and Union Camp over 160
miles to the north. Under these conditions economy was
imperative, and supplies of food and clothing had to be caiefully
weighed and eked out. 1 here were about 36 men in camp, and
thev were divided into messes of six or eight each. The stoie-
keeper was Mr. W. G. Stretton, and the absolute uncertainty as
to when or where they would receive supplies gave him and Mr.
Burton a most anxious time. Rations were cut down to the
lowest. Moreover, the rain and floods prohibited any work being
done on the line. No drays could work at pole-carting or any
construction work. The men, in order to eke out their rations,
caught hundreds of small fish from the creek and waterholes.
These were split open, smoked, and dried and strung on lines
stretched across the tents and cookhouses as a standby. The
camp was well arranged on the hank of the Daly, near Stuart s
marked tree, and kept remarkably clean and orderly. The men
were a cheerful and fine lot of fellows with the highest regard
for their chief, Mr. Burton. I was very proud to meet my old
companions. “ Paddy ” Ringwood, Boh Abrahams, and others.
CHAPTER XXXI.
Missed by a Mile—Cheering News—Arrival of Mail—More Horse-hunting.
—Missed by a Mile.—
It will be remembered that on the previous December (1871)
Messrs. Knuckey and Bagot and myself reached Daly Waters
from the southwards, fully expecting to see Burton camped there,
but were much disappointed to find no trace of him. I learnt
from Mr. Burton that on that very date and night he was camped
with his present partv within less than two miles of us upon the
opposite side of the creek, and they distinctly heard us firing
shots in the evening, but could not reach us on account of the
flooded state of the country, and that the wind, blowing towards
them, carried the sound of our shots, whereas it prevented our
hearing any answer from their rifles. Consequently, it was not
until some days after our departure for the Birdum Creek Depot


that they were able to visit our camp, only to find us gone and
without leaving any sign or intimation as to who we were or
where we came from! Mr. Burton also informed me that had
he on his upward trip been one day later in reaching his camp he
would have been entirely cut off by the floods.
—Cheering News.—
The news that I had 300 sheep within 30 miles was most
gratifying to the poor fellows, and they actually took off their
hats and cheered us. They had been subsisting for two months
upon three pounds of flour to each man a week, and any fish or
game they could catch. They had been without tea or coffee
during that time, and were drinking a substitute made from split
peas roasted and steeped in boiling water. They called it coffee
—most abominable stuff we thought it. Notwithstanding the
great hardships Mr. Burton had to contend with, he had
constructed 16 miles of poles, and it favourably compared with
any of the other parties, who had not had half the same obstacles
to contend with. On 9th March, 1872, I remained at Burton’s
camp while fresh horses were being mustered to take Mr. Bagot
and myself with some extra hands back to the sheep-camp, and
on the following day we started at 9.30. Our party consisted of
my old friends Ringwood and Bob Abrahams, also W. Edwards
and F. Foreman. We had proceeded about five miles when we
were overtaken by a man with a note from Mr. Burton, stating
that a man named Schockert, who had been ill for some time,
was suddenly taken very much worse, and requested Mr. Ring-
wood to proceed straight on to the Elsey, 103 miles, to Mr.
Hack’s camp, in order to fetch the medical officer, Mr. Rix. We
then proceeded on 18 miles and camped. The next morning wc
continued our journey, and about 4 p.m. arrived at my sheep-camp
and found everything all right. The country was drying up
exceedingly fast, hut the Birdum was still a fairly strong stream.
On 3rd March Mr. C. M. Bagot, with Albert Hanns and John
Lowther, left for Daly Waters, while Mr. Ringwood and F.
Foreman started for the Elsey. Mr. Burton’s horses being all
so poor, I was obliged to use my own in coming from the Daly.
Consequently, they were much in need of a spell, and I was
compelled to remain there and prepare for a start on the morrow,
while the weather continued beautifully fine. There were large
smokes to the south-east and south in the evening—the first we
had seen that year —and it was a sure indication of the drying-up
of the grass and swamps and the end of the tropical wet season.
On Tuesday, 2nd April, Johnson, the shepherd, and I started
with the sheep, leaving Abrahams and Edwards to bring on the
packhorses at their leisure. We found we could only get the


sheep three and a half miles easterly, as we had to dodge bogs
and swampy parts. We then camped. I tried to cross the
Bay-o’-Biscay country higher up and nearer the Birdum, but
found it still too swampy. The sheep travelled very well. Next
morning Johnson and I started at daylight, and at three miles
reached a sheet of water about a mile wide and from one to two
feet deep. It took us four and a half hours to cross the sheep
over it. We then reached a small patch of dry forest country
and camped, thoroughly tired out with wading through the water
backwards and forwards, often carrying sheep fiom hillock to
hillock, pushing them along, and pulling them out of bogs and
crabholes. After more than 12 years among sheep, I never
before encountered such difficulties when travelling as were
to be met with in this country and at this time of year, when
the grass was from seven to 12 feet high, twisted and tangled
together so that the sheep could not face it. This, together with
the floods, swamps, and bogs of the wet season, which they had
to be boated or dragged and tailed through, left it not only a
matter of surprise that they had any condition at all, but that
they lived through it! Notwithstanding all these drawbacks and
difficulties, I believed, with a better acquaintance with the seasons
and its tropical conditions, that this might ultimately become a
thriving sheep country when once a road was found and the
grass burnt, and then kept down by heavily stocking for two or
three years, which would change the coarse grass to a finer type,
as well as introduce a herbage, of which there was very little.
These sheep were merinos, and their hardiness was only too well
proved by the long travel and hardships over 18 months. We
got an early start the next morning with our sheep, and had
another terrible morning’s work through bogs, swamps, and sticky
Biscay mud. We made five and a half miles, and pulled up at
an old camp of Ringwood’s. We left a notice there at the
junction of the dry-season and wet-season tracks. The next day
we had a good track. The sheep travelled well, enabling us to
make eight miles before camping. It was rather far for them,
but I could not find water to camp upon sooner, as it was drying
up rapidly. We got to within three miles south of the Daly
Swamp.
—Arrival of Mail.—
On 7th April we reached Stuart’s Swamp. I walked on three
miles to Daly Waters, Mr. Burton’s camp, where I found Mr.
J. LeM. F. Roberts had arrived from the southern sections. He
informed us there that daily communication had been established
between Tennant’s Creek and Adelaide by wire. He brought
news of the steamer Orneo having been to the Roper Landing


with horses for the expeditions, also the steamer Young Australian
and another steamer. He further reported that Mr. Charles
Todd had arrived by the Orneo, and was at the landing. The
irony of it was that we had been all this time within 180 miles
of this scene of action, and had been entirely ignorant of all that
had been taking place. This went to show what a terribly flooded
state the country had been in for four or five months. Next day
all hands enjoyed a plentiful supply of fresh mutton. We built
a small hut, and put all our saddles, packsaddles, and gear in it.
Men were sent out to look for horses that had been away during
the wet months. 1 did not get a start until late the next day,
and had scarcely proceeded 300 yards when I met Ringwood and
Cecil Rix. who brought joyful news and a mail. At last I had
the pleasure of getting letters from home, after a silence of 12
months. Mr. Rix informed us of the arrival at Union Camp
of Mr. R. C. Patterson with about 40 packhorses, under the
charge of my brother Arthur, from the Roper Landing. These
packhorses were chiefly loaded with flour, sugar, and so on. The
teams under the charge of Mr. Stephen King were expected three
weeks later. This was good news, and we were all thankful for
it. Mr. Burton, acting on this information, supplied his party
with full rations. Everybody was pleased and reheartened,
feeling that the bogs, isolation, and uncertainty were at an end.
All looked forward to the speedy and uninterrupted completion
of this great work. On 12th April, accompanied by Abrahams
and Edwards, I started in search of the lost horses. We
travelled a northerly course for 20 miles, and then camped
without water. The next day we went three miles, found water,
and had breakfast. Shortly afterwards we tracked up and
found the missing horses, and made direct for the Daly, arriving
there at 3.30 p.m., much to the surprise of all. On 14th April
nine packhorses arrived with flour, tea. and sugar from the Roper
River, via Union Camp. These packhorses were under the charge
of my brother Arthur, and he was accompanied by Mr. W. G.
Stretton (late Collector of Customs and Special Magistrate in
Port Darwin), who was storekeeper to Section No. 4.
—More Horse-hunting.—
On 16th April both Abrahams and I started again in search
of more lost horses. Most of the horses and bullocks belonging
to Mr. Burton’s party had been turned out in the bush for three
months and, owing to the boggy nature of the country, had only
occasionally been seen, and some not at all. They took some
finding. We took one packhorse with us to carry our rations and
swags. We proceeded nine miles up the Daly Creek on the east
side, but, finding no traces of any horses watering at the creek,


we boiled our quartpots, and then went on an east course for
eight miles and camped on what was known as “ The Other Creek,”
which ran parallel with the Daly Creek. It was so similai in
appearance that it was frequently mistaken for the other; so
much so that nearly a mile of poles were, by some mistake,
erected along it at the starting of this section before the error
was noticed. My brother Arthur and I continued the search and
struck straight for Stuart’s Swamp. We arrived at the depot at
8 p.m. without having seen a horse. Abrahams had also been
out the whole day to the east and south-east without success.
Mr. Burton came up from his camp on the line while Abrahams
and I went up the creek and brought in two draught horses. We
saw the tracks of three others, but could not get them. We
started again, proceeding westward, and gradually working round
to the north, and we found three of the missing horses, and
returned to the depot at sundown. On reaching the camp we
found that Mr. R. C. Patterson had just arrived, and Mr. W, G.
Stretton was dispatched at once to Mr. Burton’s line camp to
inform him of the fact. The next day, Sunday, everybody rested,
and Mr. Patterson read the church service. On 25th April my
brother Arthur started for the end of the line of poles, while
Abrahams and I mustered horses and took them to Burton’s main
camp. We got all the horses shod and returned to the depot.
CHAPTER XXXII.
We Leave Daly Waters for Tennant’s Creek —Savages Rushed the Camp
—Creeks Named by Stuart —A Surprise l —Starting an Express Service—
Mr. Ray P. Boucaut—A Camp-fire “Yarn.”
—We Leave Daly Waters for Tennant’s Creek. —
I received the following instructions from Mr. R. C.
Patterson: —
“ Daly Waters, 26th April. 1872. Mr. A. Giles. Sir—You
are instructed to accompany and to pilot Mr. J, LeM. F. Roberts
to Tennant’s Creek Telegraph Station as soon as possible. Should
Mr. Roberts he detained at that place, you will make application
for assistance to return here as soon as possible.— (Sd.) R. C.
Patterson.”
1 , arrived at the depot at dark with Mr. Roberts and Mr.
Stretton, and on the same day Messrs. Patterson, Rix, Arthur
Giles, and J. Masson, with pack and saddle horse, started for Mr.
McLachlan’s camp on the Elsey, 103 miles. On Saturday Mr.


Stretton returned to the main poling camp, and I was busy all
day preparing packs and so on for our trip. Sunday was a quiet
day, resting and reading, but on Monday, 29tb April, Mr.
Roberts, W. Sadgrove, another man, and myself started from
Daly Waters for Tennant’s Creek. We had several packhorses
and riding-horses, but I had my three old cobs that I had on
Ross’s exploring expedition —ofd Wombat, Gentle Annie, and
Sir Tames Fitzjames. We crossed fhe line of poles opposite the
depot, and at 14 miles cut the Daly Creek again, passing the spot
where Mr. Knuckey and I had camped in January, 1871, and
we camped at Ross’s Camp No. 139. The next morning we
started at 8 a.m. on an easterly course, in order to try and cut
Milner’s old tracks, but we found them quite obliterated, and we
changed our course to south of west through dense mulga and
lancewood scrub, with rough rocky ridges. In three miles we
struck a small creek running strongly, and here we found
Milner’s track, which we were able to follow until we reached
the pond named after him, and we camped, having travelled 22
miles. We left Milner’s Pond on the Ist of May, at 8 a.m..
but we found the Biscay plain too boggy to ride over, and
were forced to keep the edge of the forest bearing south-south-
east for eight miles. We marked and blazed a tree here, from
which Milner’s Pond bears north-north-west. We kept the forest
edge until we camped, having come 18 miles, and a very warm
day. The next morning we started at 8, keeping the forest edge
m.ri; we reached Frew’s Ironstone Pond. This pond was quite
full, and about 30 feet deep. We left this camp on 3rd May,
still keeping the forest edge for four miles, then on a bearing of
south-south-east across Sturt’s Plain (named by Stuart) until
w'e reached a creek six miles north of the North Newcastle.
V\ e then steered south by east, and in four miles reached Ross’s
old Camp No. 135 (Ist May, 1871), which is at the extreme
northerly point of the Ashburton Range and a few hundred yards
from the North Newcastle Waterhole. We did 21 miles that
day.
—Savages Rushed the Camp.—
On the morning of 4th May my three old horses persisted
in a habit of entirely ignoring the other horses. They would
not feed with them, going by themselves in a different direction
every night. I went after them on foot, and while tracking them
up in the thick scrub and long grass I suddenly came face to face
with several savages, armed with spears and boomerangs. They
were all recently painted with the red and white ochre or war-
paint. They were quite as much surprised as I was, and quite
likely I was the first white man they had met with. I turned


slowly round and beckoned with my hand in the direction I had
come, so as to make them believe I had companions following
me. They then crept quickly into the thicker scrub, while I.
being alone, and with only three cartridges in my revolver, edged
off on to more open ground, and considered that as I was nearly
two miles from our camp, and not knowing how much further
I would have to go for my horses, and also that the savages
might have frightened them or even speared them, I deemed it
prudent to return to camp along the open country. On reaching
our camp Mr. Roberts informed me that he had seen several
natives near the camp. I borrowed a horse from Mr. Roberts,
and, accompanied by Sadgrove, we went in search of my missing
horses. When about 200 yards from the camp we passed a
number of savages concealed in the long grass, and we had
scarcely proceeded another 300 yards when we heard two shots
fir<M in quick succession and a lot of shouting. We paused for
a while, but, hearing no more shots, went on and found my
horses and returned to camp, where we learnt that the savages,
seeing two of our party going away, made a rush at the camp,
and received a warm welcome of shot and lead, which caused
them to retire quicker than they had come. They then set fire
to the porcupine grass in the range in order to make signal
smokes for their neighbours. There was apparently a large tribe
around these permanent waters, and an evilly-disposed lot the}'
were. We left our camp at 9.15, and in 10 miles reached Central
Newcastle, which was a long and fine waterhole about midway
between the North and the South Newcastle. We boiled our
quarts, and then proceeded along the base of the Ashburton
Range for 16 miles, having made 26 miles for the day.
—Creeks Named by Stuart. —
We left our camp the next morning as the sun was rising,
and in nine miles reached the Lawson Creek, and camped for
the rest of the day, being Sunday. On leaving the Lawson the
next morning we had a fine view of the big lake caused by the
overflow of the Newcastle Creek, and which was discovered by
Mr. Ross on our overland trip in 1871. In three hours we
reached the Fergusson Creek, crossed it, and proceeded on a
bearing of south by west, until reaching the Powell Creek, on
which we camped, having made a stage of 24 miles. We left
the Powell Creek at 7.30, and in four miles crossed the Gleeson
Creek, and at 12 miles crossed the Hunter Creek and camped
Two of Mr. Roberts’s horses were much fagged, and I feared
they would not do the 30-mile stage the next day. All the
creeks crossed were named by McDouall Stuart, and were all
full of water. We left the Burke Creek at 7.35, and at one mile


we passed an old camp of Mr. Milner s. W e left behind the two
horses that had knocked up. At seven miles some savages set
lire to the grass alongside our course, but did not further molest
us. It was near here where Mr. A. G. Burt and Joe Ewart had
been attacked the previous year after they parted from our party
at the Burke.
—A Surprise. —
When we had proceeded 10 miles we were surprised to see a
cart and several loose horses coming towards us. On reaching
it, we found it to be, above all things, a hawker by the name of
Chawner, who was on his way to the northern section with a
miscellaneous collection of goods for sale to the parties ahead.
He could claim to be the first in that line of business in those
regions, and, while he showed considerable pluck in attempting
it. he. at the same time, was quite ignorant of the difficulties and
even dangers he had to contend with in these parts with so small
a party (one man and a young hlackboy). We warned him of
the difficulties ahead, including the treacherous nature of the
savages he might meet with, and we strongly advised him to
remain at the Burke until my return from Tennant’s Creek.
Chawner informed us that Mr. Harvey was camped on the
Phillips Creek. We then proceeded nine miles to the Upper
Tomkinson Creek, and camped, the day’s stage being 19 miles.
We left the Tomkinson Camp on the 9th May very early, and at
11 miles reached the Lower Tomkinson, crossing three of its
tributaries. Here we halted for four hours, and proceeded
four miles further. The next morning we started at 7 a.m., and
were able to follow Milner’s and Chawner’s tracks, and at 21
miles we reached the Morphett Creek and also the portion of
telegraph line constructed by Mr. Harvey’s party. At one and
a half miles further we camped on a creek, the day’s stage being
23 miles. We left this camp very early on the 11th, and at 12
miles we crossed the Haywood Creek, and at 16 miles crossed
the Gihson Creek (Ross’s Camp No. 127). At 25 miles we
reached the Phillips Creek, and found Mr. Harvey with his party
camped there, where they had only arrived the day previously
from Bishop’s Creek. All the above-named creeks were named
by Stuart. Some heavy showers of rain fell here yesterday and
to-day. The next day, being Sunday, I remained here to-day to
rest the horses and ourselves, and will (D.‘V.) proceed to
Tennant’s Creek to-morrow. The next day I proceeded in Mr.
Harvey’s buggy, and arrived at Tennant’s Creek Telegraph Station
about 1 o’clock. This was the terminus of the overland telegraph,
and was in daily communication with Adelaide, and I had the
pleasure of speaking to my brother Christopher, who was at
Charlotte Waters, It seemed wonderful!


—Starting an Express Service.—
On 17th May it was decided to organize as soon as possible
an express service between this station and the end of the line
on the northern sections. The then terminus of the wire on the
latter section was at Daly Waters, 300 miles away. It was to be
performed with relays of saddle-horses. On 18th May three
horse teams left for the camp at the Phillips Creek, where they
would be joined by a fourth. I received instructions by wire
from the Government to take charge of the four teams, and to
pilot and proceed with them to the northern sections or as far as
Daly Waters. Take note that on Sunday, 19th May, we had
plum-pudding for dinner —the first I had tasted for two years!
We were getting too civilized. The next day Messrs. Harvey
and Roberts started for the Phillips Camp, and I received a
telegram from Mr. Cunningham (Acting Postmaster-General),
in Adelaide, having reference to dispatches for Mr. Todd. I
applied to Mr. Harvey for four men to enable me to return to
Daly Waters immediately, to which I received a written reply, and
on 21st May I received dispatches from Mr. Clark (telegraph-
master)..
—Mr. Ray P. Boucaut. —
On account of Mr. Ray Parkin Boucaut having all the men
on the way up from Barrow Creek, Mr. Harvey was unable to
spare me more than three men to accompany me back to Daly
Waters with the four teams. As I considered this number far
too small to make the trip without running some considerable risk,
I objected to proceed with less than four men. During the
discussion Mr. Roberts remarked that he thought three men quite
sufficient for me, whereupon I quickly reminded him that on our
late trip, when the blacks rushed the camp at the North New-
castle, he had vehemently declared that “ nothing would induce
him to travel that route again with less than four men well
armed.” “ Therefore,” I said, “ why is it safe for me to go with
three only?” Mr. Harvey then dispatched Harrison, one of the
drivers, with a note to Mr. Boucaut. and by the same bearer I
wrote a note to Mr. Clark, asking him, if he considered it urgent
that the dispatches should be forwarded without delay, to try
and detach a man from some of the parties to accompany me up.
I find that one of the wagons I am to take needs repairs to the
axle, which cannot be done until M'r. Harvey has shifted his camp
to Attack Creek, which he will do to-day, the first stage being 12
miles to the Haywood Creek. The next day the whole camp
arrived at Attack Creek. But Mr. Harvey will now shift further
on to about six miles north of the Morphett Creek, where he will
establish his main camp. I shall then be able to get the wagon


repaired. We left Attack Creek on 24th May. Mr. Harvey
and I rode on ahead of the teams, and proceeded seven miles north
of the Morphett to a small creek, which Mr. Harvey named
Cox’s Ponds, after the blacksmith of his party. There we found
a good pond of water, and returned and met the team and piloted
them to it.
—A Camp-fire “ Yarn.”—
A correspondent signing himself “ Interested ” has written to
me regarding a passage appearing in my Article No. 8 in “ The
Register ” (19th March, 1926), which refers to a creek which runs
parallel with the Daly Creek, and was known as “ The Other
Creek,” and on which a mile of telegraph-poles were erected by
mistake. “ Interested ” says:—“ I knew Mr. Stephen King and
Mr. W. Harvey well, and one of these gentlemen” (he does not
say which one) “ told me that a lot of poles were taken away
by the blacks and erected by them some distance away in imitation
of ‘ white man’s work ’ for nearly a mile, including an amount of
clearing. This was quite a creditable piece of work. Perhaps
superstition had something to do with it.” “ Interested ” goes
on to say;—“ Although I thought it strange that the blacks, who
are lazy and not given to manual labour, and would require tools,
should undertake such work, I have always given the story
credence, knowing that my informant was not in the habit of
romancing or pulling one’s leg. Your article, however, throws
quite a different light on the subject, and it is hardly likely that
circumstances above mentioned would escape your knowledge.
I would ask you in your next contribution to refer to the matter
again, as there is just a possibility that there is a coincidence.”
I can assure “ Interested ” that I never heard of the story of the
blacks erecting an imitation telegraph-line on “ The Other'Creek ”
or anywhere else, and I think if he got his story from my dear
old friend Mr. Stephen King he must have had a twinkle in his
eye when he told it. Mr. King, at the time of the mistake, was
down on the Roper River, and Mr. Harvey was completing his
section, 300 miles south, at Tennant’s Creek. No blacks had
been seen near the Daly for many months, as it was a heavy, wet
season. I personally saw the mile of poles on several occasions,
and, considering the facts that Mr. Burton, who was in charge
of that section, had no surveyor attached to his party, and that
the two creeks were little over a mile apart and almost equidistant,
and both emptied at the same spot into Stuart’s Swamp, the
mj stake was quite excusable. Such a “ storv ” may have been
made up by some of the party and retold by Mr. King or Mr.
Harvey, but those who know the blacks—especially wild blacks,
as they were—should remember that there were 16 poles to the


mile, and these poles were put four feet in the ground, and were
nearly 20 feet in length. How, then, could the blacks carry such
poles, let alone cut them down with stone tomahawks, dig the
holes, place the poles in line and at equal distances, as well as
clear the line? “Interested” must just accept it as a camp-fire
yarn.
CHAPTER XXXIII.
We Reach the Hunter Creek—At South Newcastle Waters—Meeting
Burton’s Party—Savages Attack the Hawker—Starting the Express
Service—The Wounded Hawker.
—We Reach the Hunter Creek.—
While we were awaiting the arrival of the Tennant’s Creek teams
Mr. Harvey and I took a ride out about four miles, with a view
to find a road for the teams I was taking up, and also a route for
the telegraph line. There was plenty of water in the claypans,
and we found a good passage for both the teams and the telegraph
line, and returned to camp in time for dinner, and were again
regaled with plum-pudding! On 28th May, 1872, I was
impatiently awaiting the arrival of the teams. Mr. Harvey
did some more surveying for the line, and the teams arrived at
10 a.m. I found that I was further delayed, as the horses
required to be shod. Four men came up in addition to the
teamsters, and they also brought 35 horses belonging to Mr. John
Lewis, 25 of which were hired by the Government for the express
service. Two of the men belonging to the express were to
accompany me to Mr. Burton’s, one to drive the loose horses
and the other the fourth team. I managed to get the horses
shod, and started out the following day. Among my party were
H. Harrison, J. Barwis, and Jacob Petersen. A great deal of
our course was through heavy sand. We made good progress
to the Burke, but had to leave because there was no grass for the
horses, and made a short stage to the Hunter Creek. We took
on with us from the Burke the two horses and packsaddles left
by Mr. Roberts. We had proceeded for only half an hour when
Barwis found he had left two double-barrelled guns behind, and
he had to return for them. Neither the horses nor the pack-
saddles had been interfered with by the savages, nor were there
any tracks of their having been in the district. We reached the
Hunter at 2.30 and camped. Four hours at two and a half
miles an hour—lo miles.


—At South Newcastle Waters. —
After leaving the Hunter Creek we travelled on. crossing the
Gleeson Creek two and a half miles from where it emerges from
the Ashburton Range. Here we left a notice at the crossing
with directions. We then reached the Powell’s Creek and camped.
We left this camp on the 4th June and at 11 a.m. crossed the
Hawker near its mouth. We then went on to the Watson Creek
for dinner, and at 2 o’clock we crossed the Fergusson Creek and
halted to look for water, which we found and camped on one
of Milner’s old camps. Leaving the Fergusson the next morning,
we arrived at the Lawson Creek and camped. Five hours
travelling—l2 miles. Leaving the Lawson Creek at 9.10 on a
bearing of N. 23 E., we arrived at the South Newcastle Waters
and camped at 4.10 p.m. Five and a half hours’ travelling—
-13 miles. We were now 106 miles from Mr. Harvey’s camp at
Cox’s Ponds, and 163 from Tennant’s Creek.
—Meeting Burton’s Party. —
We left the South Newcastle, and were just going to camp for
dinner when we were surprised and pleased to meet Mr. Burton
and all his party, drays, and so on, camped on a large billabong at
Central Newcastle. ' On Bth June, I received instructions from
Mr. Burton to proceed with my teams to Daly Waters, and there
load them up with wire and return to his party. I accordingly
started at once, and in eight miles met my brother Arthur, who
had 10 horse teams under his charge, all loaded with wire for
the telegraph line. I took with me from there George Medland
as an extra hand.
—Savages Attack the Hawker. —
Included in my instructions I had to take on the cart owned by
the hawker Chawner, whom we had met 10 miles from the Burke
when piloting Mr. Roberts and party to Tennant’s Creek on Bth
May. We warned him on that occasion concerning the hostility
of the natives along the Newcastle. Subsequently events proved
such warnings to be justified, although apparently unheeded, for
it appeared that Chawner reached the North Newcastle, the same
spot where Mr. Roberts was attacked, when the savages tried to
prevent him watering his horses, and on rushing to his cart for
his firearms seized a loaded and cocked double-barrelled gun by
the muzzle and discharged its contents through his left hand. The
late Hon. John Lewis, in his book “ Fought and Won ” refers
to this incident as follows; —“ Chawner was a hawker, who had
started from Port Augusta with a load of goods to sell to the
telegraph construction parties, and intended travelling through to
Port Darwin, thinking there was a road all the way. He was


joined on the Finke River by a Dane named Anderson, who had
with him a little hlackboy from the Macumha named Jim Crow,
only 12 years old. For a time they travelled together, then had
a row, and parted but eventually united again. On their arrival
at Mr. Harvey’s camp (the furthest of the construction parties’
going north) they were advised not to start through the Daly
Waters, as there was 200 miles without a track; but, as they were
short of rations, they could not wait until we came through, as we
had only just left the Mac Donnell Range 300 miles back. So
Chawner decided to go on to Daly Waters. Leaving Harvey’s
camp in the beginning of May, and after a great loss of time,
got to the Burke, where they met Mr. Alfred Giles on his way to
Mr. Harvey’s camp with a party. Mr. Giles advised them to
remain at the Burke until he returned, as they were too small a
party to travel alone on account of the natives, and that they would
probably get lost. Chawner would not he advised, and kept
travelling on until they reached North Newcastle, where Chawner
met with an accident. He was removing from his cart a gun
which was loaded and cocked, when the trigger caught in some-
thing. The gun went off, and he received a charge of shot
through his left hand, and it was with great difficulty they stopped
the bleeding. After travelling north again for about 10 miles
the natives refused to let them take their horses to water; in
fact, they attacked them, following them for about 12 miles. Up
to this time the little blackboy had followed the track of Alfred
Giles, but, being hard pushed by the natives, was unable to con-
tinue to do so, and they got too far to the westward. Finding
that they were wrong, they had left the cart at North Newcastle,
and, most fortunately for them, they hit on Frew’s Ironstone Pond,
where Mr. Stephen King was then camped. Had they crossed
the plains a little further south they would most likely have been
lost to the world. Mr. Burton and Mr. King were very kind to
Chawner, The former was on his way southwards, and when
he reached the place where the cart had been left he found the
natives cutting it to pieces with an axe while others were digging
up his stores. Mr. Burton kindly picked up the goods, dried the
clothes, and disposed of some of them to his party, and sent a list
of those he had sold to Chawner. He took the cart and the rest
of the goods south, and left them with Mr. A. Giles, who conveyed
them to Daly Waters.”
—Starting the Express Service.—
Early in May it was decided by the authorities to run an
express service between the ends of the north and south telegraph
wires. At that time the southern wire extended from Port
Augusta to Tennant’s Creek and the northern wire from Port


Darwin to the Daly Waters Depot, the intervening distance being
a little over 300 miles. Mr. Ray Parkin Boucaut was, with two
men and the requisite horses, appointed to start running the
Estafette, as it was called. There was, of course, no mail matter
in the ordinary sense, but telegraphic dispatches from the respec-
tive headquarters and private free wires for any members of the
construction parties. Mr. Boucaut had relays of horses at the
different camps and continued the work until Ist June, when the
Government arranged a contract with John Lewis, who was to
find all the requisite horses and three men at a fee of £2OO a month.
Even then Mr. Boucaut was employed for some time assisting the
contractor, and they would meet about half-way and exchange
dispatches and return to their starting-points. In the meantime
the wires were gradually approaching each other and lessening the
distance to be traversed. On 9th June I reached the North
Newcastle with the teams. The water was still running here
and a good width. The next day we got an early start, and
made 23 spiles across Sturt’s Plain, camped at Frew’s Pond,
and spelled there all the next day. On the following day we
made nine miles to Johnson’s Pond, and the next day we did 12
miles to Milner’s Pond, where Mr. Ray Boucaut caught us up.
Three miles further on we met Mr. Mitchell’s team, and then went
on to Auld’s Ponds. 17 miles, and camped. Messrs. Boucaut
and Lewis were with us, and the latter was to go on to Tennant’s
Creek with dispatches. We left Auld’s Ponds on 15th June, in
company with Mr. Boucaut, and arrived at Daly Waters at 3.30
in the afternoon, where we found Mr. Rutt’s party in camp. On
Sunday we took all the horses out on to good feed and rested for
the day.
—The Wounded Hawker. —
Most of the wagons needed repairs, and Mr. Rutt consented
to allow his blacksmith to remain here a day or two to do the
work. On 18th June I rode out with Mr. Tucker, who was in
charge of the Daly Depot telegraph, to show him some limestone.
We picked up a roan mare, one of Ross’s mob, and she provecj
very useful to me, as one of the wagon horses was too weak to
work. The next day the blacksmith finished repairs to the
wagons, but the mare I had found was missing. We loaded
the wagons and got the horses shod. George Medland went in
search of the roan mare, which he found late at night. We
started with the four wagons loaded with wire, and reached the
Eight Mile, and the next day proceeded to McGorery’s Ponds,
where Mr. Rutt was camped. We procured three sheep, and
went to Auld’s Ponds, nine miles, and canned. In the evening
Mr. Chawner, the hawker who had accidently shot himself


through his left hand at Newcastle Waters when attacked by the
natives a month previously, arrived in Mr. Rutt’s buggy from th?
Daly Depot. He was making all haste down to meet Dr. Renner,
who was somewhere on the road from the southern sections.
Chawner’s hand was in a terrible state, much swollen, and
continually starting to bleed and very painful. He had one
man with him, but he had been for several days trying to get a
man from Mr. Rutt or from Mr. Tucker to allow him to proceed
to Port Darwin. The former, after much delay, had allowed
him the use of his buggy if he (Chawner) would leave the cart
and one horse in its place, but declined to send an extra man,
although he had five spare men who had been willing to go. He
further said that Mr. Tucker would not on any consideration
allow any of his men to go, although he had eight or nine men
doing absolutely nothing. He also alleged that he had refused
to give him any rations, and he was so indignant that he
considered the conduct of these officers should be reported at head-
quarters. Anyhow, true or false, I gave the unfortunate fellow
sufficient rations, as well as the only spare man I had, and we
made him as comfm'table as possible, and started him ofif at day-
break. We proceeded with our teams 18 miles to Milner's
Ponds and camped. The weathei was very hot and the teams were
heavily laden. Late in the evening Mr. John Lewis and Albert
Hanns arrived with dispatches. Mr. Lewis reported the arrival
at the latter depot of Messrs. Charles, Todd and R. C. Patterson
and party, that the schooner Lucy had arrived at the Roper with
some diggers, and that cable news intimated that there was a
prospect of England and America going to war!
CHAPTER XXXIV.
Breakdown of the British-Australian Cable—Shy Natives—Nearing the
End of a Great Work—Paying Out the Wire—Mr. Todd’s Little Joke— r
We Meet Andrew Hume.
—Breakdown of the British-Australian Cable. —
On 25th June, 1872. we proceeded on with the teams to
Johnson’s Ponds, leaving Messrs. Lewis and Hanns at Milner’s
Ponds to await the arrival of Mr. Boucaut with later dispatches.
The next day we proceeded to Frew’s Pond, where Messrs.
Boucaut, Lewis, and Hanns arrived in the afternoon. Mr.
Boucaut reported that the British-Australian cable had broken
down. He left us at midnight, and we left next morning and
proceeding eight miles, camped until the moon rose. We then


travelled on for the remainder of the night, camped on Sturt’s
Plain, and reached the North Newcastle at 11.30 on the following
day. We found that Mr. Mitchell has shifted his camp, having
put up a considerable number of poles. The next day we
travelled nine miles, and reached Mr. Mitchell’s camp, where,
being Sunday, we rested. On Monday, Ist July, very early in
the morning, Messrs. Knuckey and Chris. Bagot arrived, carrying
a special express dispatch. They changed horses there, and
then proceeded on to the Daly Depot.
-—Shy Natives. —
Mr. Knuckey reported ‘ that Mr. Burton’s depot was on the
Powell’s Creek, and that Mr. Stephen King was very ill and Dr.
Renner was on his way up to attend him. Got some of our
horses shod, but we were unable to make a move owing to two
horses being away until too late to start. Messrs. Soward and
Hanns arrived in the evening. On 3rd July we got a good
start at 7.30, and made a new track for three miles, until cutting
Burton’s Road, and arrived at the south-east bend of the
Newcastle Creek. A number of natives visited us at a distance
while we were at dinner. Starting the next morning at 8
o’clock, we met Messrs. Charlie Musgrave and J. Aldridge, from
Barrow’s Creek, with a mob of bullocks. We proceeded
on to the Lawson’s Creek, where Mr. R. P. Boucaut had his
relay horse depot, and there we camped. We saw a number of
natives again, but they were too shy to approach. We left the
Lawson the next morning, and proceeded 12 miles to the
Fergusson and camped.
—Nearing the End of a Great Work. —
Two years had elapsed since 1 left Adelaide with Mr. John
Ross on the exploring expedition, and it seemed wonderful when
one contemplated the marvellous progress that had been made
in subduing the then unknown stretches of the continent and to
think that a continuous line of wire was now almost an accom-
plished fact. When we arrived at Mr. Burton’s camp on the
head of Powell’s Creek, Messrs. S. King and W. G. Stretton, who
had both been ill, were convalescent. Mr. Burton and party
returned from the south side, having finished their line within
five miles of Mr. Harvey’s section, and were now ready to begin
working to the north. Dr. Renner had been called back to
Attack Creek owing to a man named Moles having been
accidentally shot through the shoulder. I returned on a fresh
horse to five miles down Powell’s Creek to where I had left my
teams, and the next morning brought them to Mr. Barton’s camp,
and we drove all the horses out a mile on to good feed. On Bth


July I left three horses at the depot, and after dinner proceeded
with the teams three miles on the east side of the Ashburton
Range. The road was new and very heavy pulling for the
horses. We met Dr. Renner in his buggy, with his patient,
who was recovering quickly. I learned from Dr. Renner that
Mr. Burton was camped seven miles from this creek. Ihe next
morning the horses were late coming in, but in seven miles we
reached Renner's Springs, discovered bv Mi. Bruton and named
by him after our genial Dr. Renner. ' We found Mr. Burton
at the camp, and he was rapidly progressing with the construction
of his section. Several horses were poisoned at these springs.
—Paying Out the Wire. —
We left Renner’s Springs and in four miles arrived at another
spring found by Mr. Burton and named Helen Spnngs.
Leaving these springs on 12th July we arrived at the North
Tomkinson (Mr. Harvey’s camp), but found Mi. Haivey was
away, and we therefore camped, as, until he returned. I did not
know the exact distances at which we were to pay out the wire,
but the next morning we started early paying out the
wire. We started with two wagons, one of which I sent
back at five miles empty, and proceeded with the other one
to the South Tomkinson, and joined up at an angle pole, where
my brother Arthur had commenced to pay out wire. W e then
went three miles to the camp at the South Tomkinson and
camped, having laid out 13 miles of wire. On 14th July I
returned to the North Tomkinson, where I found Messrs. Charles
Todd and R. C. Patterson encamped, and through the kindness
of Mr. Todd I sent a telegram to my people in Adelaide, and also
wrote some letters. Ihe next day Alessrs. Knuckey and Chi is.
Bagot, who were camping there, started along the line southwards.
—Mr. Todd’s Little Joke. —
Travelling with Mr. 1 odd was a Mr. Wells- I think,
connected with Ihe Register, and probably a icpoiter to tbe
party. Some one told Mr. Todd that there was a long stretch
of countrv he would have to travel over without water. “ 1 hat,’’
said Mr. Todd, “cannot affect me, as I carry Wells with me!”
Another important member of the party was Caesar, the cook;
he was black, an Asiatic of some kind, but a first-class cook. He
applied one dav to Mr. Todd for some brandy, but Mr. 1 odd
said he did not think there was any to spare. “ Oh,” said Caesar,
“it won’t be lost. You’ll get it again in the plum-pudding!
The next morning Messrs. Todd and Patterson started for the
South Tomkinson, and my brother Arthur returned, having paid
out all his wire as far as Tennant’s Creek. He went to South


Tomkinson to see Mr. Todd. Late that evening Mr. Burton
arrived. Mr. Todd arranged that Mr. Harvey was to keep the
horse teams —three of mine and four of my brother’s —in order
that he might use them for pole-carting. Mr. Todd also
determined to have 20 poles to the mile instead of 16. This
would delay our getting out of the country, and greatly
disappointed the men. Mr. Burton returned to Renner’s Springs,
and on 18th July I started paying out wire for 12 miles, and
camped at Renner’s Springs. Next day I started early, and laid
out four miles of wire southwards, and also carted and laid out
two loads of poles. On 20th July I laid out wire northwards
for six miles, as far as Ringwood Creek. Mr. Burton overtook
us, and we proceeded back, cutting a new track for three miles
to Pegler’s Gully, where there was a fine spring of water under
the range. Mr, Burton returned to his camp at the Renner, and
we remained at the gully. On Monday Mr. Burton arrived early,
but returned to his camp, and we were idle, as no horses could
be found until sundown, but the next day we paid out several
loads of poles and then returned to the gully and loaded up all
the camp lumber and went on to Ringwood Creek and camped.
We proceeded to the Powell Depot, and loading up the next
morning with 12 miles of wire proceeded to Ringwood Creek,
paying out the wire as we went along. We returned to Powell
Depot, where we met Mr, R. P. Boucaut, from Daly Waters.
He reported that the English cable was still broken," and that
there was so far no sign of Mr. Bedford Hack with the supply
teams. For several days we laid out wire and distributed poles.
Mr. Burton and I rode out to search for suitable timber for poles.
—We Meet Andrew Hume.—
We proceeded five miles north of the Fergusson Creek, where
we met Andrew Hume on horseback. He had come from Mr.
Mitchell’s camp. What he intended to do he did not clearly state,
but informed us that he had been unfairly treated by the South
Australian •Government, they not having fulfilled their promise
to give him the necessary outfit for a journey of the kind he
proposed to undertake, and consequently he had lost the best
season of the year for so risky an undertaking. We told him to
go on to our camp, where he would remain for a few days. We
went on for a mile or two, and were fortunate to find a good
patch of timber suitable for poles. We knew little about Andrew
Hume except that he had been confined in a Queensland prison
on a long sentence, but, before it was completed, he very cleverly
impressed upon the Commissioner of Police, as well as Ministers
and members of Parliament, both in Brisbane and Sydney, that
he knew where Classon, a member of Dr. Ludwig Leichhardt’s


disastrous expedition, was living with the wild native tribes in
the far north-west of Australia. He had been out there, and
had seen him, and pleaded that as the South Australian Govern-
ment were constructing a telegraph line through the heart of
Australia it was a good opportunity to allow him to go out and
recover Classon. Anyhow, his plausibility and specious argu-
ments were sufficiently strong to convince not only the Brisbane
authorities, but a number of others, who, especially in Sydney,
inundated the newspapers with arguments supporting Hume’s
statements. And. so Hume was released, and sent over to the
telegraph line, plus a few pounds in his pocket and with a request
to the telegraph constructionists to supply him with rations and
a horse. He stated that he had been in the country before, and
could fluently speak the language of the north-west tribes of
savages. This, however, was proved to be false, as he was given
opportunities to converse with them, and failed to make them
understand. The man was a fraud, and was not even a passable
bushman. There was only one occasion when he was supplied
with rations and a horse at his own request, in order, as he said,
to go far to the west of Newcastle Waters, where he alleged he
would find Classon. He started and was away a week, turning
up at Tennant’s Creek with a plausible story of having been far
to the west, where, the savages told him, Classon was still further
west, but that there was a waterless desert to cross, which he
could not face at that time of the year, and so on. He stated
also that he had met some wonderful new savage tribes, who
were wearing strings of pearls, precious stones, and shells round
their necks and arms, but no clothes, and that they had idols
carved out of trees with rubies and precious stones in profusion,
and that they worshipped these, and so on, ad nausemn. It was
most clearly proved that Hume had never been out of sight of
the telegraph line, as between Powell’s Creek and Tennant’s
Creek he had kept a mile or so only west of the line and camped
at different waters off it. He was an uneducated man; indeed,
Ido not think he could read or write. I saw a good deal of him
at the time. Nobody placed the slightest confidence in him or
his tales, but recognized that he Had cleverly obtained his
freedom, which, indeed, was of short duration, for the unfortunate
fellow is alleged to have perished on a dry stage either on the
Darling Downs or Western Queensland some two or three years
later.


CHAPTER XXXV.
Mr. R. C. Patterson III with Fever—Mr. Burton’s Section Completed—Off
Home!—Completion of the Great Work —Dr. Renner and His Patriots—
Leaving for the Roper—Arrival at the Roper Landing.
—Mr. R. C. Patterson 111 with Fever.—
On Monday, sth August, 1872, we shifted camp on to the
Fergusson Creek, as the poles were erected right up to this camp.
The next day we paid out a lot of wire, shifted the polecutter s
camp five and a half miles north of the Fergusson, and the men
started cutting in the patch of timber we had found. We laid
out fresh poles and cleared and surveyed the line. Mr. R. C.
Patterson arrived ill with fever. The next day the cutting and
laying-out of poles continued. I found a fine spring of fresh
water up the Lawson Creek. There was an angle put in the
survey line in order to avoid a spur of the range, and we shifted
the camp a mile and a half south of the Lawson Creek. I started
for the Powell Depot with some tinned vegetables and two bottles
of brandy for Mr. Stephen King, who was still seriously ill, and
I returned five miles and camped with Mr. Dodd (foreman of
the wire-stretching party), I returned to our camp on the
Lawson, and found both Air. Burton's and Mr. Mitchell’s parties
encamped.
—Mr. Burton’s Section Completed.—
On 12th August Mr. Burton fully completed his section of
the overland telegraph line, and on the next day Mr. Bedford
Hack arrived with his teams loaded with stores, and there was
much confabulation in the evening. The next day I started with
three wagons to the Powell Depot, with most of Air. Hack’s
stores. We camped that night on the Fergusson Creek, and
arrived at the depot the next day, where I found my brother
Arthur had arrived from the southern section, Tennant’s Creek.
The next morning we took away Mr. Stephen King, who was
still in a critical state, in Dr. Renner’s buggy. I started with all
the teams, cleared out from the depot, and camped on the
Fergusson, arriving the next day at the Lawson, hut only found
Air. Mitchell’s party, Air. Burton’s party having made for the
Roper. Dr. Renner and Mr. King arrived late in the evening.
—Off Home !
The next day being Sunday, we remained in camp at the
Lawson, but on Monday everybody was astir early. There was
to be a general clear-out for the Roper Landing, for, with the


exception of joining the ends of the continental wires, the great
work was finished. The eagerness and striding faces of every-
one proclaimed it. All were homeward bound, and yet, while our
homes were in the south, we were facing the north, hut only
to enable us to round the great Gulf of Carpentaria, and, having
crossed the centre of the continent, we would also go half-way
round its shores. On 19th August we all scrambled out from
the Lawson camp, and had dinner at the South Newcastle, where
we met two men in search of lost bullocks from some of the
teams. They had orders from Mr. Patterson not to start
without them, and as they belonged to Mr. Burton's party, it
necessitated our remaining there until they were found. My
brother's and the doctor’s parties proceeded on. We remained in
camp. A complete skeleton of a native was found, and W.
Woods, one of the party, while duck-shooting had his gun burst,
and injured his hand. We got away from the South Newcastle
on 21st August, and travelled eight miles, camping again on the
Newcastle Creek. We had to leave three horses behind, they
having been speared by the savages. Johnston and Andrew
Hume camped with us. Mr. Flarvey’s teams from the south
sections were at our camp on the previous night. The next day
we camped at the North Newcastle, and Mr. Ringwood was
with us.
—Completion of the Great Work.—
On 22nd August, while I was camped with our party at the
North Newcastle, the final touch of this great work was being
performed at a spot about three miles east of Frew’s Ironstone
Pond (named by Stuart), which is 24 miles north of the North
Newcastle. Frew’s Pond is an old camp of Stuart’s, and it was
very appropriate that this, the final junction of the continental
wires, should be made so near to one of his camping-grounds.
It was an honour to the memory of him and his brave party who
blazed the first track through the heart of Australia. On this
great day South Australia added a lustre to and a recognition of
his exploits, as well as a world-wide approval and praise of so
stupendous a work, undertaken by a small colony of barely
250,000 inhabitants, and only 36 years since its foundation ! On
that historic day, at the final soldering of the wires, South
Australia touched a key and spoke to the British Empire and the
whole world. Our party would have esteemed it a high honour
to have been present at this historic ceremony, but, unfortunatley,
those wretched missing bullocks obliged us to remain in camp,
and we were a day behind. However, the late Hon. John Lewis,
in his book, “ Fought and Won,” gives the following account of
the ceremony, at which he was present:—“ On 22nd August. 1872,


I went with Patterson and Mitchell to a point a few miles east of
Frew’s Ironstone Pond, where the two ends of the wire were
to be joined, connecting Adelaide with Port Darwin. We met
with Harvey, who told us that the wires would not be joined
until 12 o’clock, so we returned to the camp, made for the last
joint, and arrived there about noon. At 10 minutes past twelve
on 22nd August the wires were really joined. Twenty-one shots
were fired from our revolvers and a bottle of supposed brandy
was broken over the last pole (I think it was tea). Among those
present were Messrs. Patterson, Rutt, Mitchell, Howley, Rix,
Hanns, Bayfield. Hack, and myself. It had long been a desire
of mine to see the wires connected between south and north, and
I was glad I had seen this accomplished.” I have often thought
this historic spot was well worthy of a stone or concrete pillar
to commemorate the completion of so worldwide a work under-
taken by the then small colony of South Australia for the benefit
of the world.
—Dr. Renner and His Patients.—
Turning again to my diary, I find that we left the North
Newcastle on 23rd August. Just before starting. Dr. Renner,
with his patient, Mr. King, arrived, and, with Mr. Ringwood,
started on ahead of us for Frew’s Pond. It was 2 p.m. before
we got our teams mustered and started out on to the big plain,
Sturt’s, camped there until the moon rose, proceeded on to Frew’s
Pond, and arrived there as the day was breaking. There we found
Mr. Dodd’s and my brother Arthur’s parties encamped. The
next two days, Saturday and Sunday, all hands were spelling,
except Dr. Renner and his patient, who proceeded on to Milner’s
Pond. Mr. J. LeM. F. Roberts’s party arrived, and on 26th August
Ringwood’s, Roberts’s, and my brother’s parties proceeded to
Milner’s Pond. We had to remain there to pick up stray stock,
but we got a start next day, and reached Milner’s, where we
found Mr. Rutt’s party encamped, as they had not yet quite
finished putting up the extra and intermediate poles. On the
next day, Wednesday, my party remained in camp, but Mr.
Ringwood’s and my brother’s parties started. Messrs. Burton and
W. G. Stretton accompanied them. The next day I started the
teams and party, and we arrived at McGorrey’s at dark, having
travelled 22 miles, with the weather very hot and the horses very
tired. Consequently, the next day we did not start until 2 p.m.,
and arrived within six miles of Daly Depot, and camped on the
Daly Creek, with good feed and water for the stock. We made
an early start the next morning, arrived at 9 a.m. at the depot,
and found a portion of Mr. Burton’s and some of Mr. Mitchell’s
parties, also Mr. R. C. Patterson and Dr. Renner. We left 19


horses, too poor to travel, there, and we got sufficient stores to
carry us to the Roper Landing. We then proceeded to Stuart's
Swamp and camped, and Mr. A. G. Burt arrived with 14 camels
and three Afghans. Mr. Burt was so pleased at meeting Mr.
Patterson that, forgetting he was on a camel, he neglected to
make it kneel down, and got off it as he would dismount a horse,
and fell on his back. It was a warm greeting, and no damage
was done. On Ist September we killed two bullocks and salted
the meat for our Roper trip. Mr. Mitchell’s party left for the
Roper.
—Leaving for the Roper. —
On 2nd September we left Stuart’s Swamp for the Roper
Landing, and at 20 miles arrived at Penelope Ponds. Next day
we reached Purdie’s Ponds (named by Stuart) and camped.
Sutart’s initials were carved on a tree to the east of the ponds.
We left Purdie’s Ponds early the next morning, and reached the
Strangways River (named by Stuart). There is not much water
at the crossing, but large holes half a mile up the river. This
river trends for a considerable distance to the north-north-west,
and the road follows it, crossing it at intervals. The country on
each side is fine and open, well-grassed forest land, with occasional
ridges of honeycombed limestone, but water is scarce at this time
of year. There is no water below this point to Stuart’s Rocky
Gorge, a distance of 26 miles, where we arrived this evening, and
found Messrs. Mitchell and Ringwood encamped. We shall spell
here to-day (6th September), but Messrs. Mitchell’s and Ring-
wood’s parties moved forward. The water in this gorge is con-
sidered to be permanent, being large and deep, hut the approach to
it is rocky and precipitous. A portion of Mr. Rutt’s party arrived
to-night. We left Rocky Gorge on 7th September, and camped
on a large lagoon on the west side of the Strangways. Mr. R. C.
Patterson arrived during the afternoon, and also Dr. Renner’s
party. Mr. King was recovering slowly under the doctor’s kind
attention. The country is still good, and the soil a rich black.
To-morrow being Sunday, we shall remain at this lagoon.
Messrs. Bayfield and John Lewis arrived about noon. On 10th
September reached Weaver’s Lagoon, named after Billy Weaver,
one of the party. After leaving there we met Edward Bayfield’s
five bullock teams loaded with stores for the inland depots.
Leaving Sandy Creek, we travelled 16 miles to Moles Hill, which
was the junction of the Daly Waters and Elsey roads. The great
Roper River ran within a mile of our camp. Moles Hill was, I
believe, named by Mr. PL D. Packhard after one of his party in
1871. We left this camp on 13th September, crossed the
McCulloch Ranges, and at 15 miles reached the Duck Ponds,


where we surprised a number of savages, women and children,
who raced off straight for the Roper River, which flowed a
short distance to the west of those ponds. Nearly all the country
we have passed through to-day is Bay-o’-Biscay country, black
soil, and almost impassable for teams in the wet season. We
left the Duck Ponds early, and at 17 miles reached Biscay
Billabong, about one mile north-west of the Roper. The road
we followed to-day crosses the Hart Ranges, which are very
rough travelling. We shall spell here to-morrow, being Sunday.
We left this camp early, and halted for dinner under Mount
McMinn, a beautiful and high table-topped mountain close to the
Roper River and 12 miles from the Roper Landing. On leaving
this we passed through a remarkable rocky gorge with immense
rocks and twisted stones of every conceivable shape. It has, for
some reason, been named Hell’s Gates. We also passed Butte’s
Bluff, and in eight miles reached and camped at the Fish Ponds.
—Arrival at the Roper Landing.—
We arrived at the Roper Landing on Leichhardt’s Bar. There
was no crossing of the Roper below this bar, which was 80 miles
from the mouth of the river. Another river, the Wilton, joined
the Roper about three miles on the north side, below the bar.
We found all the parties that had so far arrived from inland
congregated there. It was an immense encampment, and the
display of flies and tents, wagons, drays, carts, and buggies, as
well as horses and bullocks, and some 300 men, made it a busy
as well as a picturesque scene. Especially was this so when it
was fringed by the splendid river, wide and deep. Moored to
the bank, too, was the steamer Young Australian, which was
waiting for us to pack up and board her, when she would convey
us to the mouth to catch the larger steamer Omieo , and then to
our southern homes; but not all of us, for a certain number had
to he left there with all the stores, teams, and stock for supplying
the inland telegraph depots that were being formed at selected
sites along the just-completed line. A sort of ballot was taken
of those men willing to remain behind. Captain Douglas
(Government Resident at Port Darwin) arrived in the Young
Australian, bringing with him a party who were surveying a
township site, both there and at or near the river mouth.


CHAPTER XXXVI.
First Overland Cattle Arrive —The First Court Case-Good-bye to the
Roper— Maria Island Described—Wonderful Fare—Poisonous Beans—A
Life-long Friend —Pleasant Evenings.
—First Overland Cattle Arrive.—
On 18th September. 1872, Mr. Dillon Cox arrived with about
400 head of cattle, which, under the charge of his drover, Mr.
Wentworth d’Arcy Uhr, he had brought across from Queensland.
These were undoubtedly the first cattle ever introduced overland
into the Northern Territory, and it reflected credit upon Mr. Cox
and Mr. Uhr for their plucky enterprise and endurance shown
by droving stock across hundreds of miles of perfectly unknown
country, risking floods or dry stages, as well as contending with
hostile and treacherous savages. The first batch of returning
men, numbering 100, boarded the Young Australian , which landed
them on Maria Island, and then returned for another batch.
Maria Island is about 12 miles east from the mouth of the Roper,
and was uninhabited. For the next two or three days we were
all busy branding the working bullocks and horses with the
Government broad arrow. The Young Australian returned to
the landing, and on Sunday we rested, and Captain Douglas read
church service in the evening. On Monday everyone was busy
packing and preparing for our home trip. Edward Bayfield’s
teams returned from inland, and reported Mr. Harvey’s party to
be two days behind. A number of the men cut wood for the
steamer, and we also killed and salted down four bullocks. On
26th September Mr. Harvey arrived with his party and five
bullocks teams. Mr. Harvey brought late telegraph news, among
other things that Dr. Livingstone, the great missionary-explorer,
had arrived in London from Central Africa. General orders
were issued for all hands to be on board the Young Australian by
8 o’clock next morning.
—The First Court Case.—
The first Court case ever held on the Roper River was
presided over by Captain Douglas, S.M., in one of the large
mess tents, in order to settle a dispute between Mr. Dillon Cox
and his drover, Mr. Uhr. I think the matter in dispute arose
as to the destination of the cattle. The arrangement at the
start was that Uhr was to deliver the stock at the Roper, but on
arrival there Mr. found the telegraph line completed, and
all the men preparing to leave for home, and the market he
expected to find had disappeared. His only hope then was to
take them to the settlement at Port Darwin, but Uhr considered


this to be outside of his contract, hence the dispute. However,
everybody was so busy packing up, with their faces homeward
bound, that little interest was taken in the matter, but, anyway,
it ended by Uhr taking the cattle right on to the peninsula, west
of Port Darwin, where every beast was slaughtered, taken over
by boat to the settlement, and disposed of ; and the peninsula
was ever after known as Cox’s. D’Arcy Uhr was a well-known
man in the Northern Territory for many years, engaged in
mining, droving, and hotel-keeping. He subsequently proceeded
to Western Australia, and was a most energetic man, well
educated, and a thorough bushman.
—Good-bye to the Roper. —
On Friday, 27th September, all hands boarded the little
steamer Young Australian at 8.15 a.m,, and as the anchor, or,
rather, the shore ropes, loosened, three lusty cheers were given
by us for the men left behind. Down the river we steamed,
with 90-odd hands on board, and the luggage piled high on deck
occupying every inch of available space.
It was pitiful, however, to watch the poor dogs, many of
whose owners were on board, following the steamer along the
bank, howling mournfully for their masters, and attracting the
crocodiles. Captain Douglas and some of his survey party
accompanied us down the river, ana at 7.30 p.m. we arrived at
the site of the new township being surveyed on the north bank
of the river, 75 miles from the landing and five miles from the
mouth. Nearly all the men went on shore to camp. Several
crocodiles were seen during the day’s voyage. The next
morning Captain Douglas and his party left us. Before doing
so he made a speech, and we gave them three hearty cheers, and
proceeded on our journey. We soon passed the river mouth
and entered the open sea, and steamed away for Maria Island,
off which we arrived at noon. The men were immediately put
on shore with the officers of the different parties in order to form
the camps, and also to cut wood for the expected steamer Omeo.
The order to cut wood, however, was distinctly objected to by the
men, and quite rightly, for all these men had just finished a
magnificent national work, and were justly entitled to a rest.
The cutting of wood for a steamship company had nothing to
do with that work. But they were a splendid lot of fellows,
and they soon fixed it up by agreeing to work in batches of two
or three hours a day each, and they stacked up several hundred
cords of wood. The irony of it was that when the steamer
arrived not a stick of it was required, and probably the bush fires
destroyed it.


—Maria Island Described.-
It will not be out of place here to briefly describe this still
little-known island, and which I take from my diary exactly as
we then saw it at the end of 1872, when taking a stroll over it
with Mr. Bedford Hack and my brother Arthur. The island,
then, is about seven miles long loy from one and a half to four
miles vdde, the north end being the widest and the central portion
the narrowest. Its general shape resembles a huge hour-glass.
We found the principal timber to be stringy-bark, melaleuca, white
and spotted gum, and grevillias, as well as the screw and fern
palm. Among the birds we noticed the corella cockatoo, black
cockatoo, scarlet-winged parrots, doves, bronzewing pigeons, the
Darling lark, willie-wagtails, and various finches. A few snakes
and small lizards were also seen, but no emus, kangaroos, rats, or
dingoes. All kinds of fish M T ere to be had, and delicious rock
oysters were there for the mere trouble of opening them. It was a
common sight every morning to see our fellows strolling along the
beach with a little tin of pepper and one of vinegar, and sitting on
the rocks devouring the rock oysters. There were also numbers
of turtle of a great size, and turtle-eggs in galore. No natives
were seen, but it was evident that they occasionally visited the
island in their canoes, as parts of it had been recently burnt, and
also from the fact of our finding their old camps and piles of
mussel-shells. The chief feature of this island, and what
enhanced its value more than anything else, was the readiness with
which good fresh water could be obtained. Almost anywhere
along its western shore, within 200 yards of the sea, water could
be obtained at a depth of from two to four feet in abundance,
and in the creek which runs across the north portion of the island
there M r ere two or three apparently permanent billabongs of
good fresh water, and the grass on the flats was luxuriant.
—Wonderful Fare. —
In front of each tent the occupants had their own little well
of cool, fresh water, some two feet deep, which they baled up
with an empty jamtin on a string. All hands considered this
to be an ideal and healthy place to live in. We returned from
our ramble late in the evening, having thoroughly enjoyed our trip
pretty well ove& the whole island. Some beautiful shells were
picked up. but we were not among the fortunate searchers.
Some of the officers obtained the ship’s net, and in the evening
returned laden with about 300 lb. of splendid fish of all descrip-
tions. We made a large fire on the beach, and about 25 of us
set to Mmrk cooking and cleaning them, and at 9 p.m. we had a
delicious and substantial meal.


—Poisonous Beans. —
It was Mr. Mitchell’s party’s turn next day to cut wood for the
Omeo, which was due any day, but, for all that, everybody was
thoroughly enjoying his retreat on the island. On Ist October,
Mr. Burton’s party took their turn at wood-cutting, and
there was another fishing excursion. A flagstaff was erected
on a prominent bluff, and two men stationed at it to note and give
us timely warning of the approach of the Omco. The next day
Mr. Rutt’s party were the wood-cutters. A subscription hat
was handed round for the benefit of the widow of Hawkins, and
about £35 was collected. The next day everybody was engaged
in carrying and stacking the firewood above high-water mark.
This work was continued all the next day. Four volunteers
were wanted to proceed back to the Roper Landing, and thence
to the Katherine River with teams. Two men, Cox and Palmer,
exhibited all the symptoms of poisoning through eating a
quantity of native beans found growing near the beach. Exces-
sive vomiting, accompanied by cramp in the stomach and legs, were
the principal effects, but, under the careful and successful treat-
ment of the medical officer. Mr. Cecil Rix, they were convalescent
in a few hours.
—A Life-long Friend. —
When coming down the Roper from the landing in the Young
Australian I made the acquaintance of the chief officer, Mr. Henry
Pinder. That introduction grew into an affectionate and life-
long friendship. Mr. Pinder was a young Englishman, and had
had a long seafaring experience on different ships, large and
small. I think the Young Australian was about the last boat he
was engaged upon. Like many sailors, he took to the land and
the bush in preference to a town or city life. As early as 1873
he formed one of my most valued companions in a droving feat
of some 2,000 miles from Adelaide to the Yam Creek Goldfields,
80 miles south of Darwin. On that occasion we had 5,000 sheep
and more than 100 horses. We then did some prospecting at
Fountain Head, near Yam Creek. He joined me in a much
longer droving feat in 1887-8, right across the continent again,
this time with 12,000 sheep and more than 2,000 head of cattle.
My brother Arthur and the late F. H. Needham, subsequently
Chief Stock Inspector for South Australia, were in charge of
most of the cattle. We started from Booboorowie and formed
the Newcastle Waters, Spring Vale, and Delamere Downs
Stations for that grand old South Australian pioneer, Mr. W. J.
Browne. The late Mr. A. T. Woods was our financial manager.
Two years elapsed before some of the stock reached their
destination. It was the very first attempt at pastoral settlement


in the northern end of the Territory. Later, in the early ’eighties,
he joined the Customs Department in Darwin, which, at that time,
was controlled by Mr. Jones, whose eldest daughter Mr. Finder
afterwards married, and remained in Darwin for some years
until transferred to Adelaide, I think to the Semaphore branch,
where he passed to the great beyond. His widow, Mrs. M.
Finder, is living, and resides in the Goodwood district. Iwo of
her brothers are. and have been for many years, residents of the
Northern Territory. And I feel that these reminiscences would
be incomplete without a reference to my intimate and so valued
a friend and close companion in our many difficult trips and
hardships. He was, as we bushmen say. a white man.
—Pleasant Evenings. —
Our last few days on the island were chiefly spent in carrying
and piling up wood. It was not heavy work, shared by so many;
it kept our muscles supple and was healthy exercise, and made
the evenings all the more enjoyable. Some would go fishing' or
turtle-catching; others would gather round the camp fires and
relate their experiences, which were sometimes interspersed by
songs, in which Mr. Rutt would favour us with his ballad, “ My
Old Portmanteau,” and he was always applauded. A kindly and
religious-minded mjan was Mr. C. W. Rutt, liked and respected
by all his party.
CHAPTER XXXVII.
The Omeo Homeward Bound—Rough Seas —A Lucky Rescue —Arrival
at Brisbane—A Great Welcome —Wonderful Old Brandy—Conclusion.
—The 0 inco Homeward Bound. —
There was joy in the camp when our look-out men sighted
the Omco, commanded by Captain Calder, hearing down the gulf
for our island, and when she anchored we found she had already
70 passengers on board, including returned diggers from Darwin.
Consequently, most of her cabin-space was already occupied, and
as there were nearly 300 of us to go on board, it would be a
crowded ship, and tax the resources of the chief steward. On
the next day the men were engaged in loading a quantity of coal
that had been left here by the Young Australian for the Omeo.
Bv the evening all hands, with tons of luggage, boarded our


homeward-bound ship, and at 4 a.m. next morning the Omeo got
under way, and we were soon passing Groote Eylandt. On
Sunday, Mr. Patterson read church service. We passed several
very pretty islands, on one of which we saw some natives with
canoes, and we anchored for the night. We were soon in view
of the coast all day. It had a very high, rugged, and bold
appearance. We anchored again at sundown, and the next day
passed several more small islands, among which was Eclipse
Island, so named from it having been the site selected by the last
eclipse expedition from which to make their observations, but
the cloudy and stormy nature of the weather rendered their
efforts a total failure. We passed the ship Strathmore, bound
for Darwin, and three weeks out from Port Adelaide. We made
slow progress, owing to a shortage of coal and strong head winds.
We also sighted a cutter anchored off a small island, with which
signals were exchanged, and it was found to be the Frange, of
Shiels, from England, and she wished to be reported at Lloyd’s.
She had probably come through the Suez Canal.
—Rough Seas. —
On 19th October we reached Lizard Island, where Captain
Calder cut wood for the ship. So soon as we anchored,
the boats were lowered, and parties of our men proceeded on
shore to cut the wood, accompanied by several saloon passengers
in search of curios. On the sandhills near the beach were the
remains of a house built of stone, and near which we found three
graves. Two or three large wild pigs were met with, and the
island was covered with their tracks. No natives were seen, but
there was evidence of their having been there. There were
numerous wild fruits quite new to us, and some beautiful pieces
of coral were picked up. Near the old house there was a fine
spring of fresh water. Large fires and smoke were seen on the
mainland at night. The principal timber was melaleuca and
eucalyptus. The next day (Sunday) we got an early start, but
had showers of rain and very cold wind, with rough, heavy
squalls in the afternoon. Mr. Patterson read church service.
The rough weather caused Captain Calder to anchor nearly two
hours earlier than usual, and as night drew on the wind increased
so much as to make it necessary to keep steam up all night, so
as to prevent the ship dragging her anchor. Next morning the
high winds and squalls continued, and our captain deemed it
necessary to remain at anchor until the weather cleared up. Mr.
Taylor, one of the passengers from Darwin, held an auction of
shirts, trousers, and so on, which, while it afforded us much
amusement, enabled him to reap a fair profit. The next day we
had high seas and more squalls, and progress was very slow.


—A Lucky Rescue.—
At 10 o’clock the next morning we sighted a small boat, which,
upon our reaching it, was found to contain one white man and three
South Sea Islanders and a Queensland native. They informed
us that they belonged to a cutter called the Telegraph, from
Cleveland Bay, which was the trepang and beche-de-mer fishing
company headquarters. They reported that during the gale on
the previous Saturday they got adrift from the vessel, and owing
to the heavy sea and storms were unable to make the ship again,
being blown 25 miles along the coast to the north, and had had
nothing to eat during that time hut a few shellfish. They reported
the cutter to be launched off Green Island, about eight miles to
the east of Cape Grafton. Captain Calder immediately got the
castaways on board, gave them food, and towed their boat for
them. In about three hours we had sighted and passed Green
Island, and could distinctly see the cutter at anchor, but, as
Captain Calder intended woodcutting at Fitzroy Island, the briny
wanderers continued with us, and we anchored close into Fitzroy
Island, and our men commenced cutting wood at once. The next
morning our rescued wayfarers left us to rejoin their ship at
Green Island, about nine miles north. All our hands were engaged
in getting wood and ballast. This was a beautiful island, with a
bold mountain frontage thickly timbered to the top; the gullies
were a mass of beautiful ferns, creepers, and palms, as well as
numerous grapes. We left Fitzroy Island on 2ath October. T.he
Omeo got an early start, and made good headway, passing several
more islands, and we continued all night without anchoring,
passing the spot where the N.G. crew were murdered by the
savages. Early the next morning we passed opposite to Cleve-
land" Bay, Townsville. There were diggings five miles distant.
Amjong other products were sheep and wool, cattle, and coral.
On Sunday morning we entered Whitsuntide Passage, and passed
through some very pretty islands on each side of us all day.
There were numerous smokes on the islands made by the natives.
On Monday, towards evening, after passing more islands, we kept
out to sea with strong head winds, and by the morning were quite
out of sight of land. We then had a fair wind with fore and aft
sails set.
—Arrival at Brisbane. —
On 30th October the good old Omeo struggled into the mouth
of the Brisbane River. It was a struggle, because she had burnt
every stick of wood. She was even using up all the empty beer-
cases which had been unceasingly hauled up by the donkey-engine
ever since we left Maria Island to relieve the thirst of between
200 and 300 men—a thirst that had been intensifying for the last


two years. Judging by the immense cargo of beer on board, it
seemed clear that the ' chief steward or purser must have
anticipated meeting this beer drought when they sailed for Maria
Island. Therefore, if the beer served the toilers, so the cases
kept the fires alight on the Omeo, enabling her to pull herself
to anchor in the river. On 31st October the pilots came on hoard
early, and we entered the mouth of the river, which is 23 miles
from the city. There were some small hut pretty islands around
the mouth. Some of them cultivated sugar-cane and other
products. The scenery on the hanks was fine, increasingly so as
we neared the capital. The slopes and even the tops of the hills
were dotted with handsome villas and well-laid-out gardens and
plantations of trees.
—A Great Welcome.—
Our arirval having been telegraphed from the river mouth on
the previous night, our approach was not unexpected, and as we
steamed slowly upstream we were constantly, to our surprise,
and most lustily cheered by those on shore, accompanied by a
great waving and fluttering of flags and handkerchiefs by the
ladies, which we most heartily returned, feeling proud that our
own share in the construction of so great a national work had
been so gratefully recognized. Further up the river a whole
school of 200 or more children turned out and added gleefully to
our welcome. At 9.30 a.m. we arrived at the wharf, and all
hands raced on shore, hut were reminded to be on hoard again
at 7 o’clock the next morning. Mr. Cobham, a fellow-passenger,
left us there, and a dinner was tendered him by the saloon
passengers. On Friday, Ist November, we collected all our men
with the exception of one who could not be found, and then we
steamed away for Newcastle. We arrived there at 6 o’clock on
the morning of 4th November, and Messrs. Patterson, Putt,
Lambeth, and Roberts, Dr. Kempster, and all the Sydney men
proceeded in the steamer Maitland to Sydney. Others took the
train to Maitland, a large township about 25 miles distant. Mr.
Stretton and I procured two saddle-horses, and rode out four
miles in the country, passing the famous coal mines. We thought
Newcastle similar to all coal-mining districts, and it seemed dark
and uncommonly dirty and dusty in the town itself. There were,
however, a few good buildings, such as the Australian and Union
P>ank. Police Court, and the market. The principal hotel was the
Northern. The chief trade was. of course, connected with the
coal output, and we were told that 25,000 tons left the port in
one day for different parts of the world. On sth November
Messrs. Patterson. Rutt, and the others returned early in the
morning from Sydney. The two former gentlemen returned to


Sydney to complete the settling of the Sydney men’s accounts.
At 12.30 we got under way for the Melbourne Heads to tranship
our Melbourne passengers, and then proceed straight to Adelaide.
At sundown we passed Sydney Heads with a fair wind, and
continued all night at 11 knots. Upon our arrival at Queenscliff
a steamer met us, and all our Melbourne passengers were
transferred. We started on again, and on 9th November we
were off Cape Bridgewater.
—Wonderful Old Brandy. —
There is a bottle of Hennessey’s brandy in South Australia
at the present time which is certainly 55 years old, and probably
10 years older. The facts connected' with it are most interesting.
In 1870 Mr. Ray Parkin Boucaut left Adelaide with a party to
join the telegraph construction parties on the far northern and
tropical sections. When leaving Adelaide he purchased a bottle
of Hennessey’s brandy for medicinal purposes. This he carried
rolled up in his swag, continuously jolted about on packhotses,
wagons, and buggies, marooned on Maria Island, and back to
Adelaide on the Omeo, but never uncorked. On arrival at his
home in Adelaide Mr. Boucaut decided not to open the bottle
until his eldest son became of age, but, when this date was
reached, his son determined it should not be uncorked until such
time as he might have a son become of age, and, sure enough,
this came to pass in due course, and still that bottle remains
tightly corked and never opened, and is still in possession of the
first-named eldest son, Mr. Willie Ray Boucaut, of Glenelg.
How old the brandy was when purchased by Mr. Boucaut is not
known, but its mellowness and maturity must be unique and
unequalled in South Australia. And having travelled constantly
in company with Mr. Boucaut in the ’seventies in the Northern
Territory, I can certify to its being the same old bottle.
—Conclusion.—
After an absence of two years and five months, the people
of Adelaide gave us a right royal welcome. There was a great
meeting in White’s Rooms, where the Majestic Theatre now is,
and a" banquet, which was attended by His Excellency the
Governor (Sir James Fergusson) and Ministers and members
of Parliament. Mr. Todd’s and Mr. Patterson s and many othei
healths were drunk, and I think it was at this time that Mr. Todd
was given the well-earned honour of C.M.G., and later a knight-
hood. Sir James Fergusson gave all the officers a garden party
at Government House, which I attended with others, including
m!y two brothers, Christopher and Arthur. A.ll formed in
procession, and marched to the Old Exhibition Building. There


was still another important function for us to attend. We all
assembled at the G.P.O. to receive our hard-earned pay, and it
was a busy day for Mr. Birrell, the head accountant, and his
assistants to distribute thousands of pounds among the various
members of the expedition. Good-conduct certificates were
issued, in addition to bonuses, to those who had continued in the
work without a break from start to finish. I was fortunate in
being a member of the first exploring party under Mr. John Ross
—and received a bonus of £SO. It was a pleasant contrast to the
day I had stood in the same office two and a half years before,
when my services were accepted at 20s. a week. South Australia’s
great work was finished. She had harnessed the world, and her
sons had done the job! A few months later I was off again right
across from Beltana to Yam Creek with 5,000 sheep and 100
horses; but that’s another story.
W K. Thomas & Co. (The Register), Printers, Adelaide.




