

f *ty/~ </■*-
-<« c: . X XK a/, $O5- 3z~




There is a tradition that in old times caravans for Persia did go
by Batum, and from thence through Artvin or Adjarah; but I
could not trace the tradition to any authentic source, although it is
in the mouth of every one. When questioned on the subject, no
one can state more than that he had heard such was the fact.
The mountains near the Joruk are mostly limestone, and, like
the Taurus, may possibly be metalliferous; but I cannot state so
from my own knowledge, being ignorant of mineralogy ; there are,
however, no mines actually worked in Livaneh or the neighbouring
provinces.
IX. —Exploring Excursions in Australia. By Mr. Henry
Stuart Russell.
[The following account of some Exploring Excursions made by
Mr. Henry Stuart Russell, and his brother Mr. Sydenham Rus-
sell, is taken from a rough Diary, and Letters to their Mother,
and from a letter addressed by Mr. Glover to Rear-Admiral Sir
Charles Malcolm, by whom the narrative has been arranged, and
communicated to the Society; with a short description of the
country to which it relates.]
The Darling Downs, which from their extent, fertility, and
beauty, may be ranked amongst the finest districts of Australia,
are situated on the western slope of a portion of the great moun-
tain range which runs nearly parallel to its E. coast. They were
discovered by Allan Cunningham, who did not however proceed
further north than the Condamine, on the western side of the
range; and only took a bird’s-eye view of them from a height.
Their mean elevation at the station of his tents, in the valley of
the river, he determined to be 1877 feet; but Mount Mitchell,
the highest peak of the range above them, rises to 4100 feet.
Mr. Cunningham looked upon the Condamine as the southern
boundary of the Downs; but the settlers now place that river
further to the S., at Herries’s Range, which runs nearly E. and
W., making the Peel and Canning Downs of Cunningham to
form part of what are now called Darling Downs (though a strip
of scrubby land intervenes between them and the river). From
Herries’s range they extend northward to lat. 26° 50', six miles
beyond Jimba,* at present the most northerly station. Their
breadth may be estimated at from 30 to 40 miles, sloping gradu-
ally from the great eastern range down to the Condamine.
A stream which rises about 10 miles S. of Cunningham Gap,
is considered to be the main source of the Condamine. It passes
about 20 miles to the S. of Hodgson’s Station (Mr. Russell’s
* Scougall’s station, called by the natives Jimba, which name we shall retain,—C. M.


point of departure) ; and, after an irregular course, empties into
a lagoon having no apparent outlet, and which lies at a direct
distance of about 60 miles W. by N. from its head. From infor-
mation obtained from the Hon. W. Wrottesley we learn that
many streams join the Condamine on its way —the principal one
from Herries’s Range—and that its direction is to the S. of W.,
as far as the junction of Canal Creek, below which the road turns
off to Sydney. He states that, “as far as he knows the river, it is
a chain of ponds and reaches through which there is a perceptible
current ;* the ponds are separated from each other by necks of
land ranging from a few yards to miles in length, and beneath
which the water forces its way. The reaches are generally deep,
with high reeds fringing the edges of their banks. The waters
of the Condamine are clear and pure to the taste; but more to
the southward the western rivers are often brackish.”
Such are the distinguishing features of the country that borders
the western side of the dividing ridge, from Herries’s Range on
the S. to a little beyond Jimba on the N. The district on the
eastern side is of a very different character. Its breadth from the
base of the range to the sea may be estimated at from 50 to 80
miles : and the following description of it is given by Mr. Russell,
from a journey he made in February 1841, from Darling Downs
to Moreton Bay, which is the only sea port accessible to the
settlers for shipping the produce of the western country for Sydney,
and for receiving returns from thence.
After ascending by a gradual rise from the Darling Downs to
the summit of the range, the descent on the eastern side is by the
most dreadful road it is possible to imagine; the drays descend
by means of ridges or spurs thrown off from the main range; one
would scarce believe that the bulllocks or horses, much less drays,
could descend or ascend some off the ridges we travelled over;
this is the great obstacle to settlmrs on the Downs. Some of the
different ‘‘pinches” through amd down which a dray has to go
have received appropriate names,, such as Hell-hole, &c. When
the drays go down, the wheels arm locked together, and sometimes
heavy trees are fastened on to 1 lessen the rapidity ; even then the
weight sometimes overpowers thie pole bullocks, and away bul-
locks, dray and all go to destructiion. Twenty-six bullocks have
frequently to be yoked to one cln-ay. This sort of country con-
tinues for 6 miles, and causes mmch expense from the continued
smashing of drays. In it several rivers take their rise; some.
* In Australia the minor rivers are seldom in continuous streams. Where the soil
is soft the water forms for itself a deep hole, from which the current flows partly under
ground, partly above into another hole of the same description : so that in dry seasons
what is called a river is in reality merely a chain of ponds, similar to a series of fish-
stews in England, without any visible connexion.


like the Brisbane, are navigable for small craft. Having got
down this formidable road, says Mr. Russell, and reached the
plains, our way lay through a verdant though rather uninteresting
flat country. In a few days we arrived at the station belonging
to the Government overseer, Mr. Thorne, who takes care of all
Government stock, farms, &c. It is called Limestone, 4 and is
about 60 miles from the Downs. It consists of merely the over-
seer’s house, situated high upon the bank of Limestone Creek,
which runs into the Brisbane, on which a penal settlement is
established about 25 miles beyond this. These settlements are
formed generally at a distance from the colony as places of punish-
ment for men who have been convicted of some crime in the
colony, and here suffer a colonial sentence ; they can only be
entered by leave of the Governor. We stopped at Thorne’s this
day, and visited another Government farm about a mile distant,
called the Plough Station, and here saw fine crops of maize, but
the wheat had totally failed. The usual plan adopted in Australia
of ploughing-in the grain was not followed in this case; it was
merely harrowed-in, and the consequence is that the seed can
get no root, the heat turns the uppermost soil into dust, and the
grain cannot settle, so that in a dryish season wheat has no chance.
On the Darling Downs we seldom killed wethers under 70 lbs.,
or beef under 7 cvvt.; while here a sheep weighs barely 40 lbs.,
and a bullock is reckoned good at 5 cwt.
The next day we proceeded to Brisbane Town ; and passed two
Government stations on the way, one for sheep, the other for
cattle, both under the charge of prisoners working hard for their
ticket of leave, or temporary freedom. The country has nothing
but gum-trees, and a shrub which emits a most peculiar nau-
seous odour. After 4 hours’ ride we saw Brisbane Town, which
at first sight is very pretty, and situated upon the opposite bank of
the river, a large stream 360 yards broad, with 4 fathoms water
at high tide. The town is about 40 miles from the bay, which
extends 15 miles further before it reaches the open sea. The
first houses seen from this side of the river are the Government
stores, and close by the water-side is a large stone building; above
and along a pretty esplanade facing the river are the military
barracks, commandant’s house, and the hospital. At the back,
away from the water, were various houses, the postmaster’s, super-
intendent of works’, and female factory, in which the female
prisoners were formerly confined ; the latter, as well as the pri-
soners’ barracks, were at this time empty, the prisoners having
all been sent back to Sydney, the district being about to be
thrown open for public sale. The squatters have greatly bene-
* From some good limestone rock which is plentiful there.


filed tliis part of tlie colony; they have explored this fine tract of
land, and have formed a line of road over a most difficult country
from the Darling Downs to Morcton Bay.
[ The following is an account of an expedition from Darling
Doions, 'down the Condamine, through a country previously unex-
plored.]
On the 23rd of October, 1841, a party of four, viz., my brother
Sydenham, Glover, Isaacs, and myself, left Hodgson s station
with two pack-horses, besides those we were riding, with pro-
visions of flour, &c., for a fortnight. Our object was to find a
run for our sheep and cattle. We went northward for about
60 miles, when we reached Jimba, having crossed several creeks,
or streams, running W. This station we immediately left, and
entered upon land hitherto unknown. Our course was N.W.,
over some excessively hot and dry plains, the reflection from
which was very painful to the sight; Sydenham was terribly
blistered; and although the sun had not this effect on me, it
burnt any exposed part almost black. As evening was closing
in, we feared we should have to pass the night without water,
of which by this time we all stood greatly in need. I was
for changing our course, so we altered it from N.W. more
W., and soon beheld a beautiful reach of the river we were in
search of, the distance from Jimba being, as near as we could
judge, 40 miles; from this reach there was a continued water-
course, which I had no doubt was the Condamine. We followed
the river down for 5 days, say about 100 miles, in a N.W. direc-
tion, when the country becoming flat, without ridges, and covered
with a baramba, or bastard rose-tree, we halted; and having
satisfied ourselves that there was little or no chance of finding a
good run in this direction, we turned back; and reached Jimba
in three days. Here we separated, my brother and one of the
party returning home; Glover amd I made a harassing attempt
to cross the eastern range, and rceach Wide Bay, but in this we
failed; and our horses being knocked up in the thick scrub, we
returned to the Downs. I was wcry unwell after our first trip,
from having caught cold when (encamped ; it had rained three
days and nights, accompanied by terrific thunder-storms. The
effect of the lightning on some inn me use trees was truely awful;
it rent them asunder like twigs, sending the enormous branches
to a great distance. Our blankets were wet through, and the
grass, which was as high as the saddle, was not a very dry berth.
[ This endeavour to discover a run having failed, it was necessary
without delay to make another attempt; and Mr. 11. Russell being
too unwell to encounter fresh hardships, it was undertaken by his
brother, Mr. S- Russell, from whose letter to his mother the following
account of its success is obtained.']


Having accompanied my brother Henry in his late unsuc-
cessful expedition, in which we struck upon what we conclude
to be a portion of the lower course of the Condamine, I set
out, soon after our return, to explore the country in another
direction, Henry being unable, from illness, to join me. I
left Hodgson’s Station on the 7th of November, 1841, accom-
panied by Isaacs, a capital man for the bush. My object was
in the first place to discover, if possible, the reappearance of
the Condamine, after losing itself in the lagoon, being per-
suaded that as the latter had no visible outlet for the waters it
received, they must escape by some subterraneous channel, and
might somewhere be found to reappear upon the surface. On
the second day we reached Taylor’s Station on the lagoon, which
is 7 miles in length, and having followed it up to its furthest
extremity, we shaped our course from thence in a direction, as
nearly as we could judge, the same as the river had held before
it fell into the lagoon.
At the end of one day’s journey we came upon a small gulley
across which we could jump; this gradually widened, till it broke
into a deep, rocky river-bed, on both banks of which was a fine,
open, grazing country; and here we took up thirty miles on either
side, marking two trees with our initials, as having taken pos-
session by right of discovery; which would prevent any one else
from settling on it within three months from the date of the
licence given for it by the commissioner of the district. It re-
quires one to be well acquainted with the peculiar nature of the
rivers in Australia to trace out their true course, for some of
them, particularly in a dry season, present only long reaches,
or mere pools, and are here and there entirely lost; though
there are others which have a full stream throughout the year,
such as those on the eastern side of the Great Range, which run
into the sea. This river is a very fine one for this country,
its direction is first N.W. and then more northerly, of course not
running, except in floods, but having beautiful long reaches, with
deep watex - , and fine large lagoons branching out of it.* The
country on the W. side, though not hilly, is undulating, on the E.
flat and rich, the best for pasturage. There is plenty of the best
kind of timber, iron-bark, blood-wood, pine, swamp-oak, and,
the best I think of all building-woods, sti'ingy-bark; in fact we
have found a most beautiful spot for our head-quartei's, with this
great advantage, that we shall not be troubled by the natives,
as they never harbour where the country is open; and we have
no scrub on our station. By the bye, when we were following
down the river we came suddenly on a native encampment :
* Lagoons are small lakes lying off from the main stream.


Strange to say, we were within twenty yards of them before either
party saw the other; I galloped up to them, when they one and
all bolted into the river, leaving their opossum cloaks, spears,
bommerangs, tomahawks, and all kinds of things at our mercy.
1 bawled out ‘‘Bel coolot,” which means “not enemiesand
after a short time they came over to us, but we could not make
them understand, although we had a native boy with us, but he
was of another tribe, the languages of the tribes are so different.
Their spears are about 15 feet long, some slender, some very
heavy. They can throw them 40 yards, and can hit anything.
The mulla-mulla is the worst weapon; it is a short club about
2 feet long, which they throw with awful force. On our return,
the report we made of the country was hailed with joy. We
have called our new station, after you, Cecil Plains.
[ln the month of April , 1842, circumstances took Mr. Russell to
Moreton Bay; and being anxious to visit Wide Bay, of which
little was known, a party was formed for exploring that part of
the country. The following are extracts from hisjournal : —]
Brisbane, April 27 th. —Our party for exploring Wide Bay
consists of Mr. Petrie, the superintendent of Government works
here, Mr. Jolliffeof the navy, and the Hon. Mr. Wrottesley, with
seven convicts to man the boat. We expect to have some trouble
with the natives, of whom we know nothing beyond their having
murdered the crew of the • Stirling Castle,’ wrecked there some
years ago. We hope with a fair wind to reach Wide Bay in
three or four days. It is rather a hazardous experiment in an
open boat, only 32 feet in length, along a coast where heavy seas
prevail.
May 4th.. —Having completed our preparations last night, at
4 a.m. we embarked, with the addition to the party of two natives
as interpreters. We pulled down the Brisbane, receiving three
cheers from such as came to see us off. We were well armed,
and had nothing to fear but gales and rough seas ; we therefore
felt comfortable enough. At the mouth of the river we caught a
fine S.W. breeze, when, making sail, we ran through the bay to
the N. passage, between Cape Moreton and Brady’s Island. Our
intention to land in the evening was prevented by the wind rising,
and with it a considerable sea. We now found our boat by no
means fit for heavy seas, and began to look out anxiously for the
northern point of the island; it got too dark, however, to see it,
and being afraid of running among the breakers, we anchored
for the night, although the clouds to the eastward had a threaten-
ing aspect.
-sth .—After all we had a fine night, but a jumping swell by no
means easy to sleep upon. I managed to curl myself like an
opossum in the stern sheets, and had a good nap before my watch


came. At dawn made sail with a fair wind, making the mouth
of the Morouchidore (or Swan River), the farthest point N. as
yet explored. Here we meant to land, hut were again doomed
to disappointment, there was a double bar across, with heavy
breakers, which we could not venture through, for fear of the
boat being swamped in the surf, so, continuing our course, we
rounded a point of head-land, which we named Petrie’s Head,
Took the bearings of several remarkable mountains inland with a
Kater’s azimuth, but found to our great vexation the sextant had
been forgotten. Petrie, who had come out with the intention of
laying down a chart for Government, was much annoyed. We
continued to run three or four miles from the coast at a good
rate, and towards evening came to a headland, which formed a
small deep bay. This we supposed to be the Harvey’s Bay of
Navigators. We were not a little delighted at the prospect of
getting ashore for a night. Immediately on entering the bay we
saw a great number of the natives emerging from the bush, and
running unarmed along the beach to meet us ; but there was still
too much surf to run the boat on shore, so we anchored as near as
we could, when they immediately rushed through the surf to us,
one of them carried Petrie on shore on his back, and I mounted
another. As soon as we landed they began to examine our coun-
tenances to see if we were frightened. It is a remarkable thing
that if they cannot trace fear in the face of a white man it
returns upon themselves, and in this instance two or three
strapping fellows tried to conceal their fear by laughing long and
loud, whilst trembling in every muscle of their legs and arms.
These blacks knew a good deal about white men by report, and in
this very tribe we understood there was a runaway convict who
had been living with them ten years; on hearing this, Petrie
was anxious he should join our party, considering he might be-
come not only useful as an interpreter, but able to give us good
information of the country and of the native tribes. When ex-
treme severity prevailed in the penal settlements, many con-
victs ran away into the bush, to chance their lives amongst the
natives rather than suffer a living death whilst undergoing the
punishment of their crimes. Many had been immediately speared
from going to them with their clothes on, the natives being igno-
rant of what clothes are, supposed a clothed man to be some
strange creature. As soon as we got our arms on shore we
gave the natives a biscuit or two, and told them all to be off,
which they did not seem to like, detaining, however, two as
hostages; the blacks we had brought with us were in a great
fright. Kept a careful watch throughout the night.
6th. —Petrie wrote a note to the runaway convict, and per-
suaded some of the natives to take it to him at their encamp-


merit about 20 miles distant. We waited anxiously for a time,
and in the afternoon saw two or three men coming along the beach
towards the bay. By the telescope we could distinguish the run-
away, looking as much a savage as any of them, with his spear
in his hand. Petrie and Wrottesley took their guns and went
to meet him. Jollifife and I staid to guard our camp. The
scene at the meeting was curious; the man could not recollect
his own language for some time, but he afterwards told us that
when he saw the note, although unable to read it, he knew that
his countrymen were near, and felt overjoyed at the chance of
returning once more among civilized men. When pressed to
join us, and return to Moreton Bay, the cruellies he had suf-
fered filled him with dread, and it was long before we could
persuade him that it was no longer as when he had left; and
being at last convinced by what we told him, he expressed his
willingness to work his best if they would not flog him, and to
make himself useful as interpreter between us and the natives.
His name was Bracefelt, but he was called by the natives Wandi,
from a fancied likeness to a man who had died some years before,
the son of one of their fighting men, upon whom he was thus
fathered, and his life saved. He could speak four different
languages of the natives, and had been in the habit of taking his
part in the fights between them, but never could be persuaded
by them to turn cannibal. He was soon washed and clothed,
and in a few days became perfectly satisfied, and seemed glad to
have been rescued from his Hack life.
7th. —We took some observatioms northward from a high point
jutting out into the sea, upon which we supposed Brown, of
the ‘ Stirling Castle,’ to have Tbeen murdered by the natives
some years ago, on which accoumt we called it Brown’s Head;
but subsequently, on information! from the natives, finding our-
selves mistaken (Brown having breen killed 45 miles N. of where
we were), we called it Bracefelt’ss Head, it being the place where
Bracefelt had joined us. No aictual survey having been made
of the coast, of course we were ftully justified in naming places as
we thought fit; the names thatt Petrie marked down will be
duly printed in the Government clhart. By the assistance of Brace-
felt we took down the native names of the mountains seen in the
interior; Mandan, Carura, Cooillimew, Coura, Yure-Yuro, Ei-
range, and Boppol are the most remarkable.* The natives are
so observant of every thing in mature connected with their own
peculiar run, that they have a name not only for every tree, shrub,
grass, flower, bird, beast, or insect, although every tribe differs in
* These mountains are volcanic. We could also see, a few miles inland, some
large lakes, which Bracefelt told us were sailt, having communication with the sea.


its language, but they know every piece of ground in the same
district by its own peculiar name, every mile of river bears its own
appellation from the source to the mouth, and the mouth itself has
always a name ofits own. These are the streets and roads through
the bush, by which they can direct each other almost to within a
hundred yards of the intended rendezvous.
B th. Fair wind and fine weather. A pair of trousers belonging
to one of the crew were missing this morning. The guilty one
took care to get away, and we saw little more of our black friends,
as they were evidently afraid of our resentment on the discovery of
the theft. 3he coast which we ran up for about 35 miles was steep
and sandy, native signals in every direction ; in the evening we
came to a headland, which we soon found to be the scene of poor
Brown’s death, and landed without seeing any natives; altoge-
ther this small bay seemed to be the very picture of solitude and
desolation. We named the northern headland which formed the
bay Brown’s Cape.* From this cape we could see the mountain
called Boppol bearing N.W., as also the southern entrance to
Wide Bay, formed by the main and Sandy or Frazer’s Island: it
bore N. by E. about 5 leagues. This was our desired point. All
the charts, including that of the Admiralty of 1835, are so inac-
curate as to satisfy us that they have been laid down from vague
report, certainly not from survey.
ik/i.—Sailed away with a fresh wind towards the S. entrance of
Wide Bay, the natives following us on the beach. On nearing
the entrance we found a sandy spit running out a mile or more
from the main, round which we should have gone, instead of
keeping so much in-shore ; by this mistake we were in the surf,
which was breaking very heavily, before we knew where we were.
As it was, it looked unpleasant : had we been swamped the
natives on shore would have made a good dinner of us. Finding
ourselves in amongst the breakers, we out oars and soon got out of
our peril, and ran at a splitting pace into one of the most beauti-
ful harbours, to look at, one can fancy. Frazer’s Island, which
forms Wide Bay, or more properly speaking, “ sound,” for it is
25 miles long, runs nearly parallel to the main, trending more
easterly towards the northern extremity, thereby leaving a wide
open entrance. At the southern extremity the island is not
more than three-quarters of a mile from the main. A spit of sand
comes out both from the island and from the main ; but by not
attempting to run in until the round mountain, called Boppol,
is well open, between the two shores, the channel is clear and
good, with at least 6 fathoms water. We landed on the main.
Olt this lies a dangerous rock, just showing itself above vAter. It is about 350
yards N.N.E. from the headland. We always found a strong current setting to the
southward.
TOT.. XV.


on a beautiful sandy beach, near a camp of natives, who all
deserted their gunyas immediately on our approach. We saw a
canoe coming from the island. The canoe is called condol by
the natives : it is nothing more than pieces of bark tied together
with ropes also made of bark. Some went to examine the land,
some to look for water; I waited for the canoe, and after some
hesitation, on cooing to them, they approached unarmed to where I
was. They wanted me to go and visit their camps and see their
gins (wives), but, not being quite sure of my new acquaintances, I
declined. The water party now hove in sight, and Bracefelt, who
had lived also with this tribe for some years, brought one with him
to tell us all about the bay. The rest of them now came forward,
and were very desirous to exchange names, the greatest compli-
ment you can pay them. They rub their noses with their finger,
and mention their name, and you are then expected to follow the
example by rubbing your nose and mentioning your name ; then
rub again with names exchanged. I sung a song in English, to
which they listened with the greatest gravity and attention, as if
understanding every word of it, beating time by slapping their
hands upon their thighs; on finishing they all burst into a fit of
laughter. I dare say they thought it was a war-song, but it was
“ Oh, dear, what can the matter be!” They offered me the
greatest present they could think of, some native human bones,
which they take great care of, and from which they had lately
peeled the flesh : I declined the intended delicate present. Hav-
ing taken in our water, we sailed up the bay about 10 miles
along Sandy Island, which we named Frazer’s Island, after
the captain of the f Stirling Castle. 5 We landed on it, and en-
camped for the night. From this we could see the mountains
near which we had encamped on Brown’s Cape. This mountain
Petrie, the day before, had named, after me, “ Russell’s Cap,” from
some resemblance it had to a “wide awake” I was wearing. It
was very high, and a remarkably good land-mark from sea.
10 th. —No wind, up before the sun, and pulled out. We had
not started 10 minutes before we were enveloped in a dense
mist, and lost sight of the island, though close to it. Anchored
in the main channel, and attempted, but in vain, to catch some
fish with salt pork. We could hear the cooings of the natives in
the mist, they seemed to be all around us, little dreaming they
were so near such strange neighbours ; secure, however, in our in-
visible position, we disposed ourselves to sleep till the fog should
be dispersed; I soon woke up again, and finding we were still
in the clouds, and all but myself asleep, I amused myself by
watching the in pursuit of small fry, and in attempting
to get a shot at Nome enormous turtle that now and then put
their beads up, and went down with a splash like a porpoise.


Turtle-soup and steaks floated before my eyes in aldermanic gran-
deur; but my hopes were never realized. At about 12 o’clock
the sun “biggie” made its way through the thick mist. The
water was smooth as glass, and it appeared to be actually steam-
ing; to our delight and astonishment in a few minutes every
vestige of mist disappeared, and rolled over to the southward.
In the afternoon a strong north-wester set in, and we were forced
to pull against wind and tide ; our two native interpreters we now
found knew no more of Wide Bay and its rivers than we did; we
went poking about in different quarters, trying an inlet here, and
an inlet there, till we found ourselves bewildered amongst nu-
merous islets and shoals. From Frazer’s Island westward to the
main, at this part, is about 5 miles; the bay is filled with low
muddy islands covered with the mangrove, and with mud banks
uncovered at low water. In fact any one channel is so nar-
row at low water that I doubt much whether the southern part
will be found accessible to anything but steamers of small
draught. FI ere we nearly succeeded in procuring the most per-
fectly beautiful specimen of the gigantic crane I had ever seen,
but he took wing just before we got within shot of him. We
landed for the night on one of the small islands that had been
so puzzling to us: the fire-flies were so numerous that the
scrub seemed to be alive with them, the brilliant light (which
was the more beautiful from its not being a continued stream,
but emitted at intervals of a few seconds, as they flew about), is a
bright blue spark, lighting up the space around for the distance
of a foot. On this islet we were surprised to find a great quan-
tity of pumice-stone, although the islands themselves were evi-
dently formed by deposits caused by the tides meeting the out-
pouring of some river.
11 th. —This morning we once more attempted to run through
the maze of shoals and islets, but were unsuccessful, and re-
turned to our night quarters. Wrottesley proposed to call
them “ Humbug Islands.” Seeing a large fire on Frazer’s Island,
we started off for it under sail and reached the spot in an hour;
here we found many natives, who flocked down to see us, and
helped us to get a supply of water. Leaving a party with the
boat, Petrie and I went to a high point, about two miles distant,
to take a view of the country. We found (as I mentioned in my
previous journey from Jimba) that the mountainous country and
main range appeared to fall away to the northward, no rising
was visible beyond, and we were not a little delighted to see the
courses of two large rivers to the northward of where we stood,
running into the bay. The farthest part of the island seemed
distant about 25 miles : the lay of this great bay dr sound is about
N. and S. We only visited the more southern part, and cannot,
y 2


therefore give an opinion upon its capabilities. We certainly
found innumerable shoals and islets: we also found one large
navigable river, without a bar, I therefore think that it is well
worthy of a complete nautical survey. After taking the bearings
of some remarkable mountains inland, we returned to our boat,
which being supplied with water, we again started, and by dark
made the mouth of the long wished-for and long looked-for river,
which we afterwards found the natives called Monobocola. We
landed on the northern point, forming the mouth, where we
encamped, and, from its being very scrubby, called it Jolliffe’s
Beard, as he had the thickest beard among us. We found the
sharp stones rather a hard bed.
12 th. —Went to the top of the rising bank and discovered a new
species of pine, of which we cut a sample, and, as usual, marked
our names on the trunks of several of the trees with tomahawks :
saw no natives. Taking the flood-tide we pulled up the river
at 9 a.m., sounding as we went. As I have no map I will
only make a few remarks, so as to give a general idea. The
tide flows at least 30 miles up, and is navigable for vessels drawing
12 feet; whereas the Brisbane, running into Moreton Bay, is
only navigable for vessels drawing 8 feet. The river has no bar,
but at its mouth there are sand banks, dry at low water, and leaving-
only a narrow channel between them : we ascended about 50 miles.
The river after losing the tide soon becomes small; the banks are
low, but in most parts well timbered with large trees. We found
on the river plenty of ducks and black swans, but saw no natives.
However on this river there was a tribe, Bracefelt said, with which
a white man, named Davis, called by the natives Darumhoi
(kangaroo-rat), had lived. He had absconded from the penal
settlement 14 years ago, an id had not since been heard of. This
evening we encamped again on the banks of the river, the boat
being anchored in the stream.
14 th.—We now became very anxious to see some of the natives
who inhabit this part of the country, that through Bracefelt we
might get all the information we could, we therefore proceeded
up the river as high as a boat could go, say 50 miles from the
mouth: having reached this point we encamped on the left
bank; both banks were covered by a thick scrub, and a little
further back were sandy ridges. Petrie sent Bracefelt with the
black, to look for natives, he once returned and said he could see
nothing of them; he went out again and came back frightened,
stating he had found an encampment of natives, but had never ex-
pected to find them collected in such great numbers,* if, how-
* We afterwards found that this was the season when the natives resort thither to feed
on the fruit of the Bunya Bunya, and that no less than sixteen tribes had already
assembled. This tree is a noble pine, growing as straight as an arrow to the height of


ever, two men would accompany him to within a short distance,
and wait to see if any attack were made, he would enter their
camp and speak to them. Jolliffe and I offered to go, hut he said
he would rather take two of the crew armed ; I thought this rather
strange, as he could have depended more upon us than upon
convicts, but it turned out afterwards that he had fears of our
being speared, and he valued our lives more than theirs. The
natives were at this time only 1 mile distant. Bracefelt, who
had met this tribe ten years before at the Bunya Bunya, but
could not answer for their recollecting him, now stripped, took his
spear as he was wont among his own tribe, and accompanied by
the two men and by our native man Wallupe, who went very
unwillingly, approached cautiously, and saw that the natives thought
themselves in perfect security, little dreaming who were their neigh-
bours. Bracefelt halted the two men, and then, with Wallupe,
went over the creek between them and the camp, and walked
straight into the midst of them, calling out his name “Wandi;”
they were completely taken by surprise, and seizing their spears,
hundreds rushed out from every corner of the scrub yelling like
madmen. Darumboi at the moment was at the other end of the
camp with his adopted father, skinning a kangaroo they had just
killed. As soon as he saw Wandi he rose, and perceiving the
two other white men at a distance, he rushed by him and ran
at full speed to them ; he was unable to do more than say a few
words in English. Bracefelt’s surprise was great on seeing Davis
(as he had no idea that he was still living). He went to him and
told him in the native language how we had come, and also
that if he chose he might join us. Davis, who only remembered
the penal settlement in its days of tyranny, accused Bracefelt
of having brought the whites to take him, that he might get
off his own flogging, on his return. All this time they had
been walking towards our camp, and this was said just as they
came in sight. Bracefelt stepped back, and raised his spear,
Davis did the same; all the black devil seemed to rise in them
both, when Bracefelt sang a war-challenge at the top of his
voice, which we could plainly hear. It was truly a curious
scene, two white savages challenging each other to fight, their
spears raised on high, and with all the air, attitude, and ferocity
of natives; their bodies all coochee, or painted and tattooed across
the chest, besides large scars of former wounds in their backs and
legs. Davis, or Darumboi, was the finer man of the two, and
about 27 years of age, he had been transported when only eleven ;
on seeing us they paused, and after a little, both came towards
from 100 to 300 feet. It bears a large cone full of nuts, which are excellent when
roasted, but taste, when raw, like the horse chestmut. The natives of the district have
desperate frays to maintain their own against intruulers.


us. When Davis came to the top of the sandbank overhanging
our camp, he took a long frowning look at us, as in defiance.
On calling him he rushed down, and addressed himself to
Petrie, whom Bracefelt pointed out as being a Government offi-
cer. The first words he uttered were “My name’s Jem Davis
from Glasgow;” and unable to say another word in English,
he ran off into a most rapid black speech. Bracefelt afterwards
told us “ that he had escaped from the settlement, because
the prisoners were used so cruelly, that they cut each other’s
throats, that they might get sent to Sydney to be hanged. This
was a fact; he ran away at 13 years of age through fear of
being murdered by his messmates, who thought death prefer-
able to the cruelty with which they were treated. Davis was
wearing the necklaces and armlets of the natives. As he went
on, and saw we did not understand him, and he was unable to
express himself in English, he worked himself up into a violent
passion, tearing and clawing the ground with his hands, and
sinking his voice from the shrillest tone to a mere whisper, the
very picture of a Bedlamite. He has since told me his feelings
were so excited on once more meeting with his fellow-country-
men, that he cannot recollect what passed. After much talking,
Bracefelt, who was standing by, got him to be silent; and said that
Davis wished to explain to us that we should be in great danger if
we went up the mountain, from which we were now only 3 miles
distant, thus dividing our party. He told us the cause of the
mortal enmity of the natives to the white men arose from a fear-
ful crime committed by the latter some time back. The
natives, having a strong predilection for mutton, stole the sheep;
many came from a distance to feast on the white man’s flocks.
The shepherds seeing such numbers of fierce men, resorted, it is
said, to poison; at all events, from some cause about thirty
were reported to have died. They believed that those un-
fortunate men were poisoned,, and it created among them, far
and wide, a direful feeling of revenge, which to this day has not
subsided. Only two months ago two men of Mackenzie’s were
murdered; the watch of one of these murdered shepherds was
now in the possession of Darumboi’s father, and he promised to
get it if we would allow him to return for that night; he also said
that he would frighten them about our strength, and do all he
could to prevent an attack; he went, and we got all ready,
keeping sharp watch all night. Darumboi told us that the way
they would come upon us, would be by creeping through the long
grass, and if any white should fire a gun, they knew that it would
require reloading, and twenty or thirty would immediately rush
upon and spear him. This was all very fine; however after a
few hours we lost the anxiety we at first felt, and betook ourselves


to the boat, which we anchored for the night under the dark side
of the bank, fell asleep, and never woke till sunrise. Had the
natives attacked us in this position we should have fallen an easy
prey, as the banks were high and scrubby all around, and they
might have speared us without .our getting a shot at them in
return.
15th. —Next morning fired two guns as a signal for Davis to
come, and he soon made his appearance with his father and the
watch. The father was an ill-looking fellow, but said nothing,
and backed out of the water from us. Davis told us that he
frightened them with the account of our strength, which kept
them quiet. On his getting into tJhe boat he tore off his bracelets
and threw them into the water, brat I caught them and have kept
them as curiosities. In the evening we had Davis shaved, well
washed, and dressed; he was cut in every direction, either in
tattooing or with the stone knives in fighting; he had the wound
of a spear through his thigh, and a bommerang had smashed his
right knee. He was evidently well acquainted with the northern
country, and what we had previously heard from Bracefelt per-
fectly coincided with his statements 5 he knew of three other rivers
running into Wide Bay, and told us their names ; but what pleased
me most was, to hear him say there was a large river running into
the sea, many miles N. of Wide Bay. This river, the natives said,
came from the back of the Buny;a Bunya Mountains, which is
our Downs, but they could not say where the source was. Davis
became gradually civilized, caught up his own language quickly,
and by the time we got back to Moreton Bay no one could have
believed he was the same independent looking savage that startled
us on the night of the 14th.
The natives followed us a long way on the banks of the river,
keeping up a conversation with Darumboi, whom they were evi-
dently very sorry to lose; he told us they hung about his neck
and kissed him at parting, and cut their own heads as a sign of
grief. The various intonations of voice, according to the degree
of grief, were quite affecting at times ; we could see but little of
them, however, as they would not even show, but kept peering
from behind the trees at a distance, and moving as the boat
moved. On the 17th ran down to our former station on Frazer’s
Island, and on the 18th, getting a good N. W. breeze, we ran under
“ Russell’s Cap,” but we had baffling winds and a head sea till the
24th, when the wind changed, luckily for us, for our provisions
were out when we arrived at Moretom Bay.
The following singular account of tlhe cannibalism of the natives
of this part of the country I received! from Bracefelt and Davis,
who had lived so many years with tluem, and I have no reason to
doubt its general correctness and trutlh:—


The natives supposed all their own men who had died or
been killed in battle to become white men, because, before
eating them (for they are cannibals), they draw the skin off,
and roast the flesh before cutting it up. When flayed in this
way the flesh of a black man is perfectly white. They believe
he becomes a white ghost in another country beyond the sea.
Accordingly, when they first heard of whites, they supposed
them to be the ghosts of their own dead come back; and if any
one could fancy he traced a resemblance in a white to any de •
ceased relation or friend, he took the white man under his pro-
tection, in the full persuasion that it was his son, brother, or
whoever it might be, returned to him. In such a case, a white
man has nothing to fear from the tribe to which the patron be-
longs. I hey will kill a fat white man sometimes, to eat, if he is
not owned by any of the tribe as some ghost of a returned rela-
tion, but they will not skin him, as they suppose him to have
been already skinned when eaten as a black. In cutting a man
up they open Ins back, and having extracted the bones from the
legs and arms, these are eaten by the men as being the titbits.
They then cut the head open, and pick it, the viscera and heart
are given to the gins, whom they use worse than dogs.
After our expedition to Wide Bay I returned to the Downs;
and, on the 24th November following, again set out to explore a
part of the country of which I had heard much from Davis, the
runaway convict; but I can only give you a vague account of this
expedition, as I had broken my compass and have lost the diary
I kept for you. By his accoumt there was in the interior from
Wide Bay a fine country watered by a large river, and as we were
in want of another run for our cattle, I decided on setting out in
search of it. I accordingly engaged a man of the name of Orton,
of Worcester, to accompany me. I his man had been transported
when a boy of thirteen: a fitter person for my purpose could not
have been found ; for, besides possessing a great deal more general
information than half of the emigrants, he had the experience
of nine years in the bush: he was patient and persevering, always
had his wits about him, and was moreover an excellent shot.
\\ ith Orton, then, and a black boy, two good rifles, plenty of
ammunition, and three fresh horses, ive started on our search.
We made Wide Bay, where Mr. Bales had formed a station;
having recruited ourselves, and finding the country all round a
labyrinth of thick scrub and rocky ranges, and unsuited for a
station, I again set out, taking a course inland, say about W.N.W.
Day after day we went on, forced generally to lead our horses
through a country, of whose gloom and horror it would be impos-
sible for me to give you an adequate idea. We had now been
out a month from the Downs, our horses were tired, and our


stock of food exhausted, but I determined to proceed, depending
for subsistence upon our rifles, and these were soon tried upon
the largest kangaroo 1 ever saw.
After a few days we began to emerge into a clear country;
but our situation was scarcely improved, for every night, as soon
as the sun went down, there came on a most violent thunder-
storm. I had no other protection against the wet than an old
cloak, and Orton nothing but a threadbare blanket. On awaking
one morning I found myself in a pool of water, cold and cramped,
for we could keep no fire alight through the night; and my only
resource was to walk about till sunrise. I shall never forget the
awful thunderstorms, or rather hurricanes. The lightning, thun-
der, wind, and rain, were incessant: the thunder the loudest I
had ever heard, and the lightning the most vivid imaginable. Our
hats were blown over the trees, and the rain fell so heavily on
my uncovered head as to be hardly bearable; but, after all, I
was none the worse for it, and resolved on finding a run, if any
such existed. We felt convinced that the mountains we saw in
the W. must throw oft'water, and our - toils were at length rewarded
by finding ourselves upon the banks of a noble river running N.
This river I suppose to be the Boyne, which the charts* lay
down as running into the sea in 24° 30' S. The stream pre-
sented one of the finest bodies of fresh water I have seen in the
country, with beautiful open land on each side of it; but we were
not in a state to explore further, being quite unable to cope
with any strong party of the savages should we fall in with
them; and, though hitherto successful to the utmost of my
hopes, having found this noble river, we were thus compelled
(o defer the prosecution of our discovery till we could revisit
it (as I resolved to do) with a more numerous party hereafter.
We accordingly took our departure homewards in a direction about
S. by W„ getting to the westward of the great range. I can give
you no conception of the country we had to cross : in some places
we could scarcely see the sun for hours together. On the
15th day from that on which we turned back from the river,
we were somewhat surprised at finding ourselves on the Conda-
mine, and at no great distance from Jimba. I give the credit of
this to Orton, who, from his extraordinary knowledge of the lay
of the country, proved himself a most trustworthy guide. We
were right glad to partake once more of the good things of this
life, though kangaroo and wild honey are excellent food when
you can get nothing else. We received hearty congratulations
from every one; and got no little credit for our bold search
* The charts Mr. Russell here alludes to must be colonial, as no such river as the
Boyne is to be found on our maps at home.— Ed.


through so bad a country. In proof of the difficulties it pre-
sents, I must tell you that after my return, a party, with natives,
started off to take advantage of my discovery ; they followed our
tracks and reached Wide Bay; but two days’ subsequent travelling
in the bush was enough—their hearts failed them, and they came
back.
On this journey between Wide Bay and the Boyne we had
fallen in with a party of natives, which will show you how little
they are to be feared if they find you prepared and determined.
We were getting into the western country, and had been travelling
for about three weeks, when we got entangled in a thick brush-
wood, through which, with great difficulty, we forced our way.
After being in it for some hours, our attention was attracted to
some smoke that rose before us; and, approaching cautiously,
we saw in an open space from fifty to sixty blacks, with their
gins (wives) and children. The gins are very ugly, though beau-
tifully formed. Some were talking, some laughing, and others
were arranging their nets for kangarooing; some were practising
with the spear, others with the boomerang. We watched them
for some minutes, when I hallooed. Dreaming of no intrusion,
their wonder was great at seeing us: they stood their ground, and
we saw some of them hiding their weapons, to use, I suppose, if
they found a good opportunity. We halted within about 15
yards: they neither approached nor retreated, but one man, evi-
dently not belonging to them, came forward, and to my astonish-
ment addressed us with, “Who are you, white fellow ? ” This
man proved to be a runaway from the South, he had committed
some depredations, and was afraid of being shot; the others had
never seen white men before, though they had heard of them.
We allowed this fellow to come close up, desiring him to tell the
others to stand back. I stationed our native boy behind, to see
that they did not steal round us. They wished to be friendly,
but we declined further intercourse, upon which they gently re-
treated, making no attempt to molest us. Had they seen us first,
they would, in all probability, have tracked us unseen, and, taking
a favourable opportunity, have attacked us; but finding us pre-
pared, and coming boldly up, they left us. Such is their character.
If they see you are afraid, they will attack you; but advance
without fear, and they are cowards.
[On Mr. Russell’s return from this expedition he immediately
made arrangements to set out again with his brother, Mr. Glover,
Orton, and the black boy, to revisit the river he had discovered;
but of this journey, so interesting to geography, we have no account
from him. The following is given by his friend and companion,
Mr. Glover, to Sir Charles Malcolm.\ f
I shall have great pleasure in complying with your request.


by giving you such information as I possess with regard to the
Condamine and Boyne, and shall ffeel most happy if I can aid
in throwing further light upon myy friend Henry Russell’s dis-
coveries, than what you may have fomnd in his journal, kept, I
believe, merely to give his mother am outline of his rapid journies
in search of a good station, certainly/ with no view to publication.
You are already aware that I aiccompanied him on his first
expedition down the Condamine; and on his last, down the
Boyne—two rivers, as we have provted, in no way connected ; to
them, therefore, I will principally confine myself.
At the close of the year 1841, Htenry and Sydenham Russell,
Isaacs, and myself, started from Hodgson’s station on the Dar-
ling Downs, in search of a pasturage; for our flocks. Before de-
scending from the Downs we proceeded to Jimba, which lies, as
near as I can calculate, 60 miles due N. from our starting point,
and is the last station in that direction on the Downs. At this time
little or nothing certain was knowm of the Condamine below
a large lagoon, which lies 25 miless W. of Hodgson’s. Some
supposed it was lost in a swamp, otlhers that it was one of the
tributaries to the Darling; for vaarious reasons we were of
opinion that it took a turn northerly ssomewhere below the lagoon.
We went on this supposition frmm Jimba, which we left
at daylight, we took a N.W. couirse, and travelled all day.*
Seeing no signs of water we were camsidering what to do, when,
curious as it may appear, we were; guided by our horses, who
seemed from instinct to know where water was, for when we gave
them their heads they pushed rapidly forward; just before dark
we came on a beautiful reach of a large river, which we con-
cluded, from after observation, must be the Condamine.
There are convincing reasons, I think, that the Condamine is
an inland river; whether it is eventually lost in the sand, or takes
a turn to the southward, remains to be proved: it cannot turn
E. as the main range lies between it and the sea. I have already
stated that we came on the river in rather more than a day’s
journey from Jimba, say 30 miles; tthis station being about 10
miles below the plateau of the maim range, gives a distance of
40 miles from the summit. We foumd, on our journey along the
river, streams or creeks flowing into iit on both sides, the eastern
ones from the range, one from the soiuthward joined the Conda-
mine a few miles above where we tlurned back ; it is nearly as
large as the main river, and, I am imclined to think, is a stream
I came upon far inland from Hodgsom’s, whilst on an expedition
with Pemberton Hodgson. There iss a marked difference in the
* A day’s journey, where the bush is not very 1 thick, may be calculated from 25 to
30 miles. Sometimes, however, from dense undterwoods, it is much less.


character of the soil over which these rivers run, the affluent has
a sandy bed, the main branch is either chalk or clay; but to
return to our journey. We found the soil on both banks of the
river a rich loam; the timber is remarkably fine, consisting of the
black-but, apple-tree, flooded gum, myall, and swamp-oak. The
country is unfortunately very flat, there being few ridges, which
renders it unavailable for sheep-feeding; some of the open flats
are exceedingly rich, and covered with a fine fattening grass. It
would be a good country for cattle were it not for the" frequent
dense scrub, and for the innumerable hostile natives who find a
leady shelter in it. Finding no country that would answer our
purposes, we returned, in three days, in a straight direction to
Jimba. When we left the Condamine it was running W.N.W.
Ihe Condamine before this expedition was almost unknown
below the lagoon, though Mr. Scougal had some sheep on the
Myal Creek extending down to the river below. The distance
we went down the river might be 80 miles as the crow flies; we
returned, fully convinced that the Condamine was a western river
I have now given you a hurried, but I hope, clear account of this
expedition, and will proceed to that of the Boyne.
The Boyne was discovered by Mr. Henry Stuart Russell, hav-
ing with him his servant, Orton, and a native, in the following-
wayMr. Russell had heard from Davis, a runaway convict,
whom he found with the natives up the Monobocola on his expe-
dition to Wide Bay, that there was a very fine country immedi-
ately in the neighbourhood of Eales’s Station (which report he found
wrong, so far as to its being mear that station). He determined
on a journey down to Wide Bay, and from thence to prosecute
his research; having reached Eales’s he only remained long
enough to recruit, and started in company with an overseer and a
man of Mr. Eales’s in a W.N.W. direction, and had one of the
most formidable journeys that can possibly be imagined. The
overseer and his man very soon returned, disliking the dreary
waste and rugged country they encountered. It was indeed a
very hazardous undertaking, as they had to travel through the
Bunya Bunya country, which at that time was swarming with
natives, who assemble for the purpose of feeding upon the fruit.
After travelling over a broken and rugged country they came
upon a large flowing stream which he supposed to be the Bovne.
Fie found a lovely country upon the river, and left with the'dc-
termination of revisiting it. Delighted with the report he brought
in, we (the party before mentioned) started off with about a
month’s provisions in a due N. direction from Jimba, with the
full intention of tracing the river down to its very mouth, which
the nature of the country and want of ammunition afterwards
prevented us from entirely accomplishing.


On leaving Jimba the whole character of the country alters :
instead of the wide-spreading plains upon the Darling Downs,
the traveller comes upon a fine undulating country thickly tim-
bered, and covered with the most luxuriant grass ; the ridges are
chiefly granite. There is very little, indeed no standing water for
the first 12 miles; four miles further on is Hungry Flat, so
called from our suffering from hunger whilst there. Here
we found a chain of ponds running W., which supplied us with
water. At the end of this valley we with difficulty fought our
way through a scrubby pass, on clearing which we burst upon a
fine open forest glade with a rich dark soil. A stream from the
great range runs through it into the interior. Being now some
24 miles N. of Jimba we determined to change our course, and
cross to the eastern slope of the range; this we did, and
having descended about 4 miles from the summit, say 200 feet,
we came upon a creek,* which we followed; it zigzagged a good
deal, but its lay was decidedly northerly, becoming larger every
mile. We thought we had got on one of the main branches of
our wished-for river, the Boyne, and so it proved to be. The
bed of this river, near its source, lies in a valley, elevated above
the sea, I daresay, 1500 feet; receiving small tributaries from
the higher country both E. and W. Its bed is here sandy, with
much of the tea-tree growing in and about it; a great quantity of
high reeds grow also along the edges of the reaches. On our first
day’s journey down the river we passed over some lovely country ;
nothing can be more beautiful and luxuriant than the valleys. The
foliage of all the trees, amongst which is conspicuous the wide-
spreading apple-tree,f appears fresher and brighter than in any
other part of Australia that I have been in. Droughts we found
were unknown, the soil dark and rich, the grass chiefly oaten,
which is the most fattening ; the ridges high, always the sign of
good sheep ground, they are well wooded, chiefly with the broad-
leafed iron bark; here is also found some bad land consisting of
sandy ridges, with a thin and rank grass. The honeysuckle, forest
oak, dog-wood, and spotted gum, are found here—all signs of a
bad rotten soil. I lowcver, the bad country is very little compared
with the good. On our second day’s journey down we found the
reaches increasing greatly in length, a sure mark of a large river,
many streams, both from the E. and W., emptying themselves
into the main stream, the land becoming more mountainous, the
valleys richer and more fertile. The third day we passed Barren-
* It must be borne in mind that all the streams here about are chains of ponds or
reaches. The Boyne is of this character until joined by the Stuart, which at their
continence is a full flowing stream.
t This tree takes its name from its resemblance to our apple-tree at home, but it
bears no fruit.


dowen, a beautiful spot, which we afterwards made our station ;
it is 50 miles in a direct line N. from Jimba. On the fourth day
we came upon a river flowing in from the eastward in a full
stream, it is about 25 miles below Barrendowen; this we called
the Stuart, after the discoverer, Henry Stuart Russell. Not far
below this we came on tiis tracks where he discovered the Boyne,
from which he returned, crossing the main range, going down upon
the Condamine, and returning up the river, and so to Jimba, his
old place of departure.
We continued our journey down, keeping along or near the
banks of the river for about 300 miles, though the distance from
Jimba I do not think was above 180 miles direct, lying N. by W.
and S. by E. (this would place us about lat. 24° 15' S.), when we
turned back, having then been 16 days from that station. Our
return to our station on the Downs, taking a straight course, oc-
cupied 10 days. When we turned back, the river was flowing
considerably to the eastward of N.; and, to judge from appear-
ances, we were not far from the sea. From its size, lam of
opinion that at this part the river is navigable. Though the
Boyne, from the confluence of the Stuart, contains a larger body
of water than any river I know in Australia, still, for the greater
part of its course, it cannot be navigable, as it flows in many parts
rapidly over rocky beds. The trees growing on its banks are the
wild fig (excellent eating), the apple, western currajog, white and
red cedar, chestnut, and the tea-tree ; also the passion flower,
which is only found on eastern waters. The myall and western
currajog are western trees, and I have never found them before
on any eastern river. Where our journey terminated the climate
is too warm for the growth of wool, but excellent for the cultiva-
tion of rice, sugar-cane,, and other tropical productions. On the
upper part there is an expanse of the finest country for sheep
and cattle, and also for tthe cultivation of European productions.
I have now given you a hurried sketch of our two expeditions,
and shall feel pleased and gratified if any information I have been
able to contribute may be found of service to my sincere friend,
Henry Russell. Nothing would have delighted me more than
to have accompanied him on an expedition to the Gulf of Car-
pentaria, which would, I doubt not, have laid open a valuable
country into which Asiatic emigration might be introduced to any
extent required. I shall conclude this letter with a short account
of the natives who inhabit the countries which the Boyne and
Stuart, with their tributaries, water. I found them in consider-
able numbers, and have even seen 400 men at a time, with not’an
old man amongst them : they are generally a fine-formed race,
both men and women, many of the former six feet, and many of
both sexes far from ugly ; they are treacherous, cruel, and great


Jit, 3r?
« h*s*\jfa t%> /'t) #AA.S
) f hjuijzb /T**J^Lk~f\s«Aj<2
A Ae~a/~&<p4
f a *r *" e
fc*=, S' ~‘
'ytlUstU f
-t^sd
*. / /r u '^i t ** J f
k.<u~ 'T
j*T ~ SIU H‘
u>a* >_r
7-172
zl^"
*- e '^
y.
lu- r**, '■ % ~)
UKaJl'Le'br*#', **»
ttaft
M ti-ti* )
A ~y i ‘ i C "^T
Ljk- ?7
uuiUU^M
tujrt u. ~ *£!
nr.
< '*- *1


f 7 Y/.


