

Exploration of the Great Reserves
Set apart for Aborigines in South and Central
Australia.
Reprinted from The Register, September, 1928.
I. — By J. HUSTON EDGAR, F.R.G.S.
For some time the Aborigines’ Friends’
Association, Incorporated, had been desi-
rous of ascertaining direct information
about the aborigines in the interior of
Australia, and I was requested by that
body to travel with their agent in
Central Australia, Mr. E. E. Kramer,
with the definite object of ascertaining
the number of natives in the great reserves
set apart for aborigines in South and
Central Australia, information about their
food and water supplies, and the possibility
of founding missionary stations among
them. On June 11 Mr. E. E. Kramer
and the writer set out on a two months’
tour.
It was understood that we were to avoid
beaten ' tracks and venture into regions
generally regarded as unsafe for travellers,
in order to come into direct touch with
wild and wandering tribes, so as to report
on their conditions, needs, and necessities.
In the regions entered nearly four decades
ago, Carruthers’s party had trouble and
anxiety in the Tomkinsons; George had
two of his men speared in the Petermans,
and Warman had one of his men killed
in the Mann Ranges in 1900. These facts
being well known to residents of Alice
Springs, we were warned of the dangers
accompanying our venture, not only from
untamed natives, but also the serious
difficulties likely to arise from spiteful
camels, impenetrable scrub, and the
prevailing drought.
We had made up our minds to go 150
to 300 miles beyond the most western
tracks of wayward bullocks, and knew we
should have to carry all provisions, cooking
utensils, bedding and water supplies on
the backs of camels. Mr. Kramer organ-
ized the commissariat department well,
and his care and thoughtfulness in so
doing was manifest all the way through
the journey.
Organizing the Journey.
Our start was divided into sections. The
first was from Alice Springs on June 11,
and ended at Henbury, 90 miles south-
west on the Finke. The road passing
Owen Springs, some ranges, sandhills, and
plains, with the usual Central Australian
flora, is well known, and presents no
difficulties. At Henbury, a famous old
head station on the Finke, we were
hospitably entertained by Mr. and Mrs.
O’Brien, and obtained valuable information
from the wise and courteous Allan Braedon.
We then went on by easy stages over
plains and ranges, 50 miles to Erldunda,
where again a pleasant and profitable time
spent with Mr. and Mrs. Staines.
This was the final stage of the “ starting ”
programme, and ended in procuring meat
supplies which lasted until we arrived at
Buck and Butlers on the Palmer, 34 days
later.
As we intended to begin our examina-
tion at Opperinna, 180 miles south-west,
in the Western Musgraves, a few words
about personnel and methods will be
necessary. Mr. E. E. Kramer, a fine bush-
man, who has been over the greater part
of Central and desert South Australia, was
not only an experienced organizer, but in
a position to pass judgment on the regions
traversed. Then, apart from exploration
being my hobby, we had the best maps,
summaries, and some of the more simple
scientific instruments. We had a
thoroughly efficiently camel-driver, in an
Arunta named Barney, and it was hoped
that “ Douglas,” a very imperfectly civi-
lized Luritja, would bring us to strategic
points on native migrating routes, as well
as examine and explain tracks, camn-fires,
smokes, and abandoned camps. We also
endeavoured to visit all water supplies and
the more important game centres. Native
reports and European theories were also


investigated, and we made deductions from
a variety of unusual experiences.
Through Mulga, Sand, and Spinifex.
We went west, and later south-west,
through sandhills with thickets of mulga
witchetty, and occasional gidge and desert
oaks, to Mount Conner, a prominent
feature like a capsized ship in a dark sea
of scrub. Forty miles through similar
regions brought us to the C.A. reserve,
near the Kelly hills, where there was
much spinifex and a few well-grassed glens
in the ranges. Thirty miles further we
skirted beautifully grassed plains and glens,
and, finally, reached the fine spring in the
Western Musgraves known as Opperinna.
We saw no natives en route, but when
camped on the Britten-Jones Creek had
our attention drawn to some answering
smokes, which, by tracks plainly visible
the next day, proved to be a wandering
group of about ten At Opperinna,
the permanent water par excellence in
the reserve, we saw many abandoned
camps, but no natives. From the Springs
we went south-west through dense scrub
and sandy loam midway between a great
bight in the Musgraves 2,000 feet to Day’s
Gully at the eastern point of the Mann
Ranges, and then 60 or 70 miles along the
southern foothills through the heart of
important hunting grounds. But although
we were keenly interested in signs of
human occupation in the Mann Range and
Deering Hills, apart from some abandoned
camps and a few tracks, nothing was seen
until we arrived at Lake Wilson, 300 miles
from Erldunda station. We then went
south-west across a mulga-clad plain to
the Tomkinson Range, and, leaving the
baggage camels at the Strawbridge Spring,
Mr. Kramer and I made an excursion on
our camels through the heart of the hills
to the Harriet Spring in Western Aus-
tralia. Then passing round the western
end of Mount Hinckley, we returned to
Lake Wilson without meeting additional
natives, and saw' the tracks of only three
or four. From the lake our party pro-
ceeded north-east, via Butler’s Dome,
Foster’s Cliff, Mount Olga, Ayers Rock,
to Lake Amadeus, and finally, through the
Kernot Range and over scrub and sandhills
to Middleton Ponds, on the Palmer.
During this later journey of 270 miles,
only a wounded black from a Peterman
camp near the Duffield Rocks was seen,
and apart from this exception, all signs
of human occupation, camps, fires, or
tracks of a recent kind, were, as a rule,
wanting. We also saw remarkably small
numbers and indications of game in the
reserves. Even rabbits at times were
scarce. Our only bag was one emu and a
dingo. Strangely enough, of a score of
kangaroos seen, about 12 of them were
outside the reserves. Probably in the
pastoral areas the water supplies are surer
and the game have more respite from the
professional hunters.
The Shadow of a Dead Hand.
This experience of ours practically upsets
the ideas prevalent that there are now'
relatively important populations in
reasonably defined areas of this part of
nrtie-know'u Australia. But, ail the same,
any attempt to estimate the population
of north-west South Australia is beset
with peculiar difficulties. The population
is a visiting one, composed of hunters and
collecters of food, but not producers.
They are like the Britten-Jones, an inter-
mittent stream, the waters of which at
times may' be estimated. But if would
be unfair and useless to take the flood
volume as an estimate of the yearly flow.
So it is not surprising that the few who
are entitled to speak would suggest not
more than 250 natives for South Australia,
350 for Central Australia, and 200 for
Western Australia. We ourselves only
saw' 120 in the South Australian reserves;
and W’ade and Williams, who visited the
southern part of the Central Australian
and much of the South Australian reserve,
estimate 230 as the number actually seen
by them in native territory.
On a long journey, too, from west to
east, south of the ranges, they saw no
natives. I was relieved also to find that
many experienced exiles in Central Aus-
tralia agree with us heartily in our
estimate. The natives seen by us and the
others apparently' all belong to the
Luritja tribe, and the subdivisions and
groups seem to be equally at home north
of Amadeus, in the Petermans and the
Great Ranges near the northern border of
South Australia. The Pitchenturra, a
section of the Luritja, and seen by us, is
still organized, and its wanderings clearly'
defined. The horde had just left the
nortlirw'estern part of the Central Aus-
tralian reserve, and, moving round the
topmost arm of Lake Amadeus, passed the
Peterman tracts into the Mann and Mus-
grave regions. Their eastward course
would probably take them out of the
reserve to the east before the northward
trek begins.
Population Stationary'.
They- seem occasionally to form into a
group of over 100, but speedily' break up
again into families. The country south
of Amadeus to the twenty-sixth parallel
seems to be avoided. South of the ranges


tbere ia a small but important horde
which at times is allowed to visit
Opperinna. The natives in West Aus-
tralia, near South Australia, and Central
Australia seem to be of no great impor-
tance. Some of them, are apparently of
the Luritja tribe, but rather shy of the
Pitchenturra. The question naturally
arises, “ Could additional populations be
added to the regions in question?” It is
excusable to doubt it. Both infanticide
and sub-incision may be native devices
to keep the population stationary. Why
this should be necessary is not difficult to
understand. In a way, the permanent
waters are the true centres of the migrat-
ing tribes on their far-encircling rounds,
but the volume of springs decides the
strength of the concentration, and the
presence of large numbers depletes or
frightens the game, which eventually
controls the human movements.
Between the twenty-sixth parallel ranges
and the Deering Hills and Tomkinsons are
plains with splendid cover for game and
suitable for their free movement. Hence
even in this apparently admirable region,
savage man, not subsisting on water alone,
and without cereals or permanent supplies
of non-migrating game, must follow the
animals which have every reason to be
afraid of his presence. In this way the
rockholes and springs are only valuable as
long as the game linger in their vicinity.
The Social Condition of the Wild Native.
The social condition of the wild black
seemed to me astounding. It is true we
only met a few scores, but they were
certainly representative, and we were glad
there w r ere no more. These specimens
were entirely nude, with bodies smeared
with grease and ochre. They were devoid
of ornament or decoration except, perhaps,
the hair, which in the men was done up in
large chignons.
Only the spear with the ingenious
thrower was in use, and their pitcliies are
poor and inadequate vessels for carrying
and retaining water. They eat their meat
half, or almost entirely, raw, and they
cannot boil water. The main diet is
spinifex-fed rabbits, kangaroos, emus,
birds and smaller game, grubs, reptiles,
and almost anything with life not poison-
ous or injurious. This diet is augmented
by native fruits in season, vegetable ex-
crescences, honey, seeds, and occasional
herbs of a succulent nature. They neither
live in houses nor cultivate the land.
They sleep naked in the winter frosts be
tween fires without covering of any kind,
and even during the cold winds on table-
lands 2,000 feet above sea-level a blazing
firestick alone keens the stomach and
limbs warm. Their social organization is
weak, and to meet them in large num-
bers implies an important tribal gathering,
which soon splits up, and consistent dis-
ruptive forces send them wandering over
the land in small hunting groups. It will
be shown that this is really the result of
exceptional geographical conditions. The
marriage customs are complicated and,
from our viewpoint, extraordinary. But
the fact that so many tragic incidents
arise from jealousy, breach of laws regard-
ing private lights in women, indicates that
there are very definite regulations in such
matters. The only death noted by us
was plainly indicated in the form of a pro-
minent grave The men are all circum-
cised and subincised, and the maidens,
about puberty, are mechanically de-
flowered with a stone phallus or a cutting
instrument of glass or flint.
A Tribal Fight.
One afternoon a camp of 120 gave us a
sample of a tribal fight. Kipling speaks
of the dawn coming up like thunder;
this came like a hailstorm. We had just
arrived in the vicinity of the camp. Sud-
denly, men began to move to and fro
hurriedly, children scattered like rabbits,
women screamed and gesticulated, and 41
dogs began to howl dismally. Then men
began to move about stealthily, waddies
i attled on shields and parts of human
anatomy, and yells of pain and groans in-
dicated that the melee was serious. It
was a truly barbarous and dangerous dis-
play of wild emotions, and before Mr.
Kramer arrived on the scene a culprit
had been speared twice.
Justice, it seems, was then for the time
satisfied. The position of women may
be infeired from the following:—When we
moved out from Lake Wilson to the Tom-
kmsons, some of the natives, including a
woman with a baby, prepared to follow
us. A burly man and the woman began
voicing their opinions of each other in
public. Finally, the man. no match foi
her in oratory, began to chastise
her with untrimmed cudgels. He then
tried to injure the baby, but she held on
tenaciously and successfully. He was,
however, not to be vanquished so easily
Picking up his fiercely blazing firestick, he
applied it to the naked body in the region
of the liver, Kramer, later, interfered
and stopped the comedy, but days later a
wound, as large as a saucer, bore ample
testimony to the severity of the torture.
Indeed, in spite of much balderdash to
the contrary, the wild black in the regions
visited by us is in some respects a dis


gusting, useless creature, living a crude,
animal, anti-social existence; producing
not Jung, and frequently a menace to the
lives and property of men on the frontier,
.Moreover, they are slaves to unscientific
and harmful magic and superstition; the
victims of needless suffering and shameful
mutilations, and constantly shocking our
Christian ideas of decency and propriety.
A Land of Promise.
We were to examine the native re-
serves and report on their suitability for
mission stations and depots of a helpful
nature. The types of country traversed in
the South Australian reserve, and the
Central Australian one affecting it, were
of many kinds and potentially very varied.
In the Musgrave, Mann, and Tomkinson
Langes, we have to deal with expansive
glens in the ranges, and wide flood flats
and gaps along the foothills. Our course
lay east to west 150 miles over such coun-
try. and we found it as a rule not only
well grassed and covered richly with herb-
age, but also with thickets of mulga,
witchetty, quandong, and almost all stock-
fattening shrubs and trees. Indeed, from
the grazing viewpoint, in many places the
country is first class.
In the Tomkinsons as far as Western
Australia this is peculiarly so, and
Mitchell grass seems to grow to the tops
of the ridges, and fields of parakiha, in
one case two feet in diameter, could be
reckoned in scores of square miles. Be-
tween the branches of the western Mus-
graves, and the Western Australian meri-
dian, there is a heavily iungled plain with
triodia and a great variety of trees and
shrubs suitable for stock. North of the
ranges away from the grass-clad glens
and flats, there are wind-formed
ridges of yellow sand with
intervening him crescentic or circular hol-
lows, a mile or more across. Such coun-
try in the station areas is preferred by
many stockmen to any other. The
ridges usually had spinifex, shrubs, and
herbage, and the flats are beautified with
desert oaks, thickets of mulga, and many
other varieties of acacia and casuarmas.
We found travelling in such country—for
instance, north of the Mann Ranges and
between Olga and Amadeus —was by no
means unpleasant. It was certainly much
better than the reports of some of our pre-
decessors indicated.
A Question of Water.
But what about the water supplies, for
they- are of prime importance? In the
case of the South Australian reserve we
are informed by Carruthers that no per-
manent water supplies exist south of the
Musgrave, Mann, and Tomkinson Ranges.
This seems final, and only a thorough ex-
amination of the regions by specialists will
enable us to gainsay the testimony of such
a painstaking authority. As regards per
manent supplies we are sure of Oppermna,
a fine spring, 2,000 feet above sea-level,
and even now in a drought season with a
measurable supply of 6,000 gallons daily.
It is at the east of the reserve and flows
towards the Central Australian border.
Trained engineers might with little ex-
pense impound millions of gallons, and ir-
rigation drains would induce the glens
and flats 500 feet below to produce any
sub-tropical vegetable, fruit, or cereal. Out
side the reserve is Ernabella, 70 or more
miles to the east. It is a well-known and
important supply, but was reported dry in
1914, and M.C. Virgo himself found it
so in 1925. He considers that at ordinary
tunes Opperinna is of much greater volume
and value.
Lake Wilson, a Drainage Centre.
Lake Wilson, a dismal salt-encrusted fea-
ture, being the drainage centre of a large
tract of country between the more western
ranges, may prove to have abundant per-
manent supplies, but at present the soak-
ages are unsatisfactory and even inade-
quate for the prolonged residence of a mi-
grating group of one hundred and twenty
natives. The lake, however, here as in
other places probably owes its existence
partly, at least, to the slightly impreg-
nated springs in the vicinity. The Straw-
bridge supply and others in the Tomkin-
sons might be permanent if opened out,
but the amount we obtained after much
digging did not impress us. Indeed, quan-
tities sufficient to satisfy six thirsty camels
ladled out laboriously with a jamtin, was
a work not likely to engender enthusiasm
But a dam of an inexpensive kind might
give sufficient for limited numbers of stock
and ordinary domestic requirements.
Some other soakages in the same ranges,
and on the Western Australian border,
may be capable of improvement also.
Harriet Spring, for instance, in Western
Australia, if permanent, would not, in its
present condition, give an important sup-
ply, but again much might be done with
dams. It will be seen that the water
supplies are just now—a drought year—
inadequate.
The Question of Native Game.
This has a marked effect on the game,
the life of the migrating groups and occa-
sional centralizations. In our tour of


1,000 miles the scarcity of game, even
rabbits, was indeed a keen disappointment
to us and our natives. The severe drought
may have had something to do with this,
but we must also look upon the migrating
hordes as a more likely cause. The
natives are hunters, and follow the ani-
mals to their feeding grounds, and possess
the springs and the holes. The reaction
is quick and certain, and there is again
a flight to the unoccupied areas.
But the black is also on the offensive.
He goes out to search for his quarry
Moreover, he is a very boisterous hunter,
and 50 men spreading over the land with
dogs ? pressing their attacks, responsible
at times for much noise, and continually
lighting fires, must materially assist ner-
vous animals in their migrations. Of
course, when the animals depart, their
enemy, who cannot live on water alone,
must follow them up. In good seasons
the animals have opportunities to avoid
the serious risks of the occupied well, but
as a rule a strong and persistent attack
implies a retreat.
So game, the life of the hunting man.
naturally absents itself not only from
regions where food and water supplies are
inadequate, but also from centres where
its enemy resides for any length of time,
because they are abundant. It will be
seen from this that if our Government
improves the water supplies, and gives
greater numbers and permanency to the
migrating hordes, such actions would more
surely deplete or frighten the game, and
probably cannibalism, infanticide, and
war would be the native way of solving
the difficulty.
Can the Native be Saved —or Helped?
The Australian world is very anxious to
help the black man. How shall they go
about it? It may be said at once that
the sparse population and the wide range
of the migrations are not accidents or
exceptions. The black limitations and
geographical conditions inexorably demand
both. How then shall we help him?
The answer of many is “ Leave him alone/’
Such, I stuobornly insist, have no true
appreciation of moral and economic values.
The wild state is an impossibility in a
civilized compact continent. Sane and
sincere men of all denominations must
always look with suspicion on a solution
which implies the failure of Cnristianity.
The black is millenniums behind the times,
and in a backwash. As a sample of
Palaeolithic culture he is interesting to
scientists, but his native condition should
be recorded and ended. The wild state is
relatively a useless, barbarous, dangerous
state of things.
The lives of the uncontaminated hordes
are crude, cruel, and disgusting;
and superstition terrify tnem; suffering
and mutilation are their heritage. They
produce nothing, and exterminate game,
the skins of which they neither use nor
export. But that is not all. They have
just killed Brookes; and ask Erldunda,
Tempe, and other centres, and it will be
apparent that they are a real annoyance,
if not a menace, to tne brave taxpayers on
the fringes of the reserves.
Leaving Him Alone.
With this in view, we ask what right
has a Government to leave tliem alone?
Again, surely a conquering nation has
duties to the conquered. Can England
allow cannibalism, infanticide, murder,
shameful cruelties, and shocking immorali-
ties? Hindoos do not burn widows alive
now, nor do Thugs carry on as usual with
impunity; nor do Maories dine on human
flesh. No; a Government should ihstruct,
control, protect, and be responsible for
the well-being of the King’s subjects.
They should develop them to the limit
of their capacity. Ho the advocates
of leaving the wild man alone, or the send-
ing of the civilized ones with half-castes
back into the old backwash, really want
the Government to shirk its sacred respon-
sibilities and allow conditions to exist that
produce nothing, and shock our higher
ideas of law, order, and morality?
The Australian black may have been
treated atrociously by individual whites in
the past, but we must remember their
ignorance and superstition often made
them stupid and tactless aggressors.
Indeed, at times, practically a state of war
existed. Much, too, has been said about
the debauching of their women. But how
often have these same women been foisted
on the white men? and —not now discuss-
ing moral codes, but comparing human
conditions— even when they live with
white men temporarily, are their oppor-
tunities for happiness not infinitely better
than in the wild camps of the Petermans
and Musgraves, where they are crudely
deflowered, beaten, and terrorized, loaned
to strangers, forced at times to eat their
babies, and abused and enslaved in scores
of unseemly ways?
By all means effective legislation must
limit the opportunities of whites from
taking advantage of their simplicity, low
moral ideals, and lustful yearnings. But
emphatically also should the Australian
Government safeguard them from their
own anarchy, superstitions, immoralities,
and cruel and harmful practices. To leave
them alone uninstructed and uncontrolled
would be a clear case of colonial ineptitude.


What About the Cattle Stations?
But again the question exasperates us,
" What is to be done? ” At times it
seemed to me the remedy is staring us in
the face. Facts patent on many of the
cattle stations in the pastoral areas surely
suggest a solution. The wild life so
many advocate- i& unpopular to the wild
man himself. This is proved by the
continual drift to the stations and other
centres temporary or permanent; a true
movement along the lines of least resis-
tance. But this need not mean deteriora-
tion. The exiles have proved themselves
remarkably adaptable. These erstwhile
heartless, useless savages, after a few
years on the frontier station, will become,
not parasites, but an asset to the white
man, amenable to law, and in a position
to be a benefit to a Christian civilization.
They act as domestics, break in horses,
muster stock, drive camels, dig wells, and
undertake countless useful and exacting
duties. Moreover, they are free in a
sense from magic and superstition, dress
decently, live in healthy comfort, eat
regularly, and marry and rear families like
normal subjects of the King.
A real sense of responsibility is also
often developed. About 45 miles west of
Erldunda, south of the Basedow Range,
there is a lonely -well which ministers to
the wants of hundreds of cattle. A very
trustworthy caretaker is necessary in a
situation impossible for the ordinary white
man. But a black assistant carries on
efficiently and uncomplainingly. Again,
during our lonely pilgrimage to Western
Australia and back, our camel-boy Barney
w r as indispensable. This civilizing work
of the station, so startling and suggestive,
is to a large extent unknown, and where
known unappreciated. It would be
interesting also to furnish the public with
lists of the relatives and friends who
benefit by such individual changes of
habit. However, pertinent comments
wfill be made on the widespread concu-
binage. From the standpoint of ideal
English civilization, certainly it is a
retrograde movement. But that is not the
only consideration.
Facing Facts.
Face facts. Here are men with human
passions and fierce temptations cut off
from the refining influences of good white
women and the healthy censure of public
opinion. Moreover, such men have an
idea that white women could not endure
the lonely lives in the back blocks or the
rough-and-ready support they could offer.
So it is easy for such exiles to revert to
temporary or permanent irregular
alliances. Often a man with a true
appreciation of values could not call such
unions immoral. A man will live happily
for years with the native woman. He
treats her kindly and decently, and she
bears him children, who, as a rule, are
cared for in some way. As regards the
woman, she is undoubtedly, morally and
socially, in a better position than the
half-starved and at times ill-treated
drudge of the naked migrating horde.
The Half-caste Question.
But there is the half-caste question.
Yes; and it will reman a question until
society gives them a “ fair deal ” and our
Government gives them the recognition
due to every man who can add to the
wealth of the nation, and keep the laws
of the King. Again, I press a point.
From an economic standpoint the half-
caste is a more important asset to our
nation than the aboriginal trained or
untrained, and no Government should
remain blind to the fact, or act contrary
to justice and common sense. But after
admitting that the stations are the great
magnets to which the various drifts are
moving, and assured that a remarkable
work is being done in turning useless
menacing material into useful and
productive channels, and admitting also
the value of this work as a preparation
and opportunity for Christian effort, we
have to admit that in itself it falls far
short of the Christian ideal.
For the black man has spiritual and
moral needs as well as material ones, and
the station-owner does not, as a rule, con-
cern himself with the former. Conse-
quently, we find the station blacks badly
informed on the great duties of man to
God, society, and humanity, and, as a rule,
they are not in a position to receive the
benefit, comfort, and consolation
Christianity offers to all. Indeed, they
are poorly equipped to withstand the
temptations and trials of the transition
stage, even if they understand the require-
ments and standards of Christian culture.
But who is to blame? The stations at
least have begun the work. Will the
Government and the church fail to exploit
the opportunity? By the appointment of
teachers and broadminded, tactful mission-
aries, the initial work of the station
could be augmented and perfected, and
many of the deficiencies remedied. The
itinerant missionary could attend to the
moral and spiritual needs of the station
colonies, and the Government by legisla-
tion could protect them from injustice,
the temptations resulting from low moral
standards, and alcohol. In order that the


age of female consent might be raised,
births should be registered. Moreover,
prolonged residence and cohabitation with
a white man should give a woman some
legal claim if the partnership was disolved
without adequate reasons. Again, the
Government should sternly prohibit any
concentration around town settlements,
railway lines, and gold diggings, because
the unhealthy influence of indigence,
drunkenness, and immorality could never
be counteracted by the wTiite missionary
or Government official.
Or the Mission Station Beyond?
But, if suitable negotiations fail here,
there is still the possibility of opening
cattle and sheep stations in >‘:he reserves
with semi-centralized, self-supporting, law-
abiding producers. The station has already
proved that the material is awaiting us.
But have we the regions—and the beut
must be demanded —suitable for the ex-
periment? The well-giassed glens in the
Musg.aves, Mann, and Tomkinsons, amt
the gaps and flood flats of the foothills are
exceedingly promising. Moreover, the
water supplies of Opperinna, probably
Lake Wilson, and Mount Aloysius in
Western Australia, might prove sufficient,
even in drought years. But Opperinna
would be more than £OO miles from the
North-South Railway, and Lake Wilson
about the same from the East-West.
Mount Olga, another possible site, would
be about 200 miles from Horseshoe Bend
Such centres would control the migrations
and centralize the natives beneficially.
As no native alone could administer sucn
centres. Europeans would perforce be in
charge.
Wages would be paid to the woikers,
with the necessary deductions to support
their sick. aged, and needy centrum on
the estake. No one able to work should
receive charity. Their instruction muse
fit them to become useful and self-sup-
porting. They should be taught their
responsibility to God, fellowwnen. Govern-
ments, and themselves. Thrift and
industry should be daily emphasized.
But the weak points of the experiment
would be fa) tlie limited number that
could be profitably employed; fb| the
strong tendency to fouler parasites, and of
unfitting ever increasing numbers for the
hardships and expert activities incidental
to a hunter’s life; and (c) a wrong con-
ception of education and the kind of re-
ligious instruction necessary. The last
two require amplification. In a general
way no education should be stressed that
would not supply a demand in the future,
Book learning to a great extent would
seem to be unnecessary, as the aboriginal
is still in the crude picture-writing stage.
He should not at first be burdened with
an intellectual presentation of Christian-
ity. He walks by Faith. An appeal to
the emotions through music, singing, pic-
tures, parable and prayers will enable him
readily to profit by the truths and con-
solations of Christianity, and as magic and
superstition and devils haunt him day and
night and terrify him all his life, the
Christian doctrine of the Holy Spirit,
invulnerable and abroad everywhere in the
world, has a special reference to his needs.
But in another way the mission ranch
suggests failure because the site would be
so isolated that development must be
along the line of the greatest resistance.
Mandated Territory.
But if the reserves were considered as
a kind ot mandated territory, and thrown
open, on terms favourable to both natives
and experienced selectors, valuable work,
m conjunction with the extra reserve
centres, might be done towards solving
what is really an insolvable problem. Such
an attack would at least be along the lines
of least resistance. Suitable and even
tempting concessions would equalize the
difficulties arising from isolation, geo-
graphical anomalies, and other incon-
veniences in and around the reserves, and
the true welfare of the native would be
the primary object of the venture.
The black is a race sick unto death.
But it is not only contact with the white
man's civilization, bad and good, its sins
and misdirected sympathy and effort, that
is the cause. Their own cultural vagaries
are assisting in the bad work. Certain
sex mutilations are thought by many to be
a check to natural increase, and cannibalism
and infanticide probably at times adjust any
undue increase to local and seasonal diffi-
culties. Tribal fights, too, abominable
T’eatment of women, and the haunting
dread of magic, supersititions, devils and
cruel rites, must directly and indirectly
affect a man'- longevity. In anv case,
they prepare the ground for the ravages of
alcohol, change of diet, clothing, and other
peculiarities of a culture widely different
from their own and even conditions in the
pastoral areas. They are indeed a very
sick race, and require hospital treatment
with expert supervision. Not only should
suitable remedies be applied, but they
should be safeguarded from anything likely
to complicate the case-


Certainly, alcohol should be forbidden
them, and they should be kept far from
any artificial groupings other than the
centres in the pastoral areas where their
presence presupposes useful activities and
Government supervision. But there will
still remain the relatively small number
who remain permanent in the reserves.
On their behalf, representatives of law
and order —agents of the King—should
move over migrating routes and temporary
concentration zones, and by so doing, in
conjunction with the missionary, both
British culture and Christianity might
have an opportunity of bearing fruit.
Conclusion.
To sum up:—l. In a genera] way the
problem is insolvable.
2. There is no proof that anything will
be gained by a thorough-going segregation.
3. There is a real danger from mis-
directed sympathy and unwise missionary
activities.
4. The Government and the churches
would do well to encourage a scientific
study of the aborigines’ psychology, and
be prepared to profit by the same.
a. This would bear fruit in an earnest
endeavour
(a) to save the remnant from the
dangers of a new and puzzling
order of things;
(b) to free them gently and firmly
from tne accumulated results
of a hoary past; and
(c) to give them everv reasonable
opportunity to profit by the
best in our wonderful civiliza-
tion.
