

The
Egyptian
Decorations
Their
Meaning
By Profeatur W.J Woudhouse, M.A.
University of Sydney






Explanatory of the Decorations
of the Egyptian Room in the
Royal Arch Temple
22-24 College Street
Sydney
Narrative kindly supplied by
W. J. Woodhouse, Esq., M.A.
Professor of Greek
University of
Sydney
1927
THE KINGSTON PRESS LTD.
339-341 Sussex Street, Sydney




Description of the Mural Decoration
THE FRIEZE.
THE Frieze in coloured low relief consists of scenes
selected from what is popularly known as the
“Book of the Dead.” This title, which to our
ears comes with a vague suggestion of mystery and
solemn import, is not an ancient Egyptian title at all.
It is, as a matter of fact, quite modern, and has properly
no claim to the glamour which invests it; it is merely a
translation of the Arabic words used by the modern
Egyptian tomb-robber to describe the papyrus roil found
with a mummy, and it means just what it says, no more
and no less, namely, that it is a “dead man’s book.’’
Among the ancient Egyptians, there was no single
“book,” or collection of funerary texts, bearing that or
any similar title; there was apparently, so far as they
were committed to writing, no such thing as a Canon
of these funerary Scriptures, no fixed number or fixed
sequence of texts. Only quite at the end of four thou-
sand years of history did the order of a certain number
of Chapters become relatively fixed (in the Saite re-
cension of the 26th dynasty, about 600 8.C.). There
thus emerged a sort of standard edition of some 163
Chapters; but that was in only a very limited sense an
Authorised Version. The truth is that every man,
according to his means and taste, made for himself or
had made for him, from the current mass of material,
his own collection of texts for his own use, that is to
say, for his own mummy and tomb. Hence no single
extant papyrus contains all known Chapters; no two
papyri agree in their selection and order of Chapters,
or in the details of the pictures (or Vignettes as they
are usually called) with which it was in the later times
usual, though by no means, perhaps, obligatory, to
adorn the Chapters.


What then is this book of the “Chapters of Com-
ing forth into the Day,” as the Egyptians themselves
called one portion only of the great mass of funerary
texts available? Briefly, it is a large—we hardly know
how large—miscellaneous collection of texts, of very
various dates; these texts consist of spells, incantations,
words of power, hymns and litanies, ceremonial
directions and rubrics. The use of these by
the dead man himself, and by his successors on his
behalf, was essential if the various elements of his per-
sonality were to withstand the assaults of all manner of
evil Presences that beset the pathway of the spirit from
this world to the kingdom of Osiris.
In its oldest extant form, this collection of funerary
texts is found inscribed in hieroglyphics on the walls
of the chambers and passages in the pyramids of the
kings of the 3th and 6th dynasties (about 3000 8.C.) ;
but many of the Chapters are far older than that. The
texts in this their earliest known form are spoken of as
the Pyramid 1 exts. They were intended for the benefit
of the dead kings exclusively; they had no application
to ordinary men, however exalted their station.
Later, under the 11th and 12th dynasties (from
2400 B.C), we find a second great collection. Many
of these Middle Kingdom texts repeat more or less
completely certain Chapters of the Pyramid texts, but
there are many additional Chapters, presumably of later
origin. The important facts about these Middle King-
dom Coffin texts are two —firstly, they are no longer
confined to royal use, but are available for any and
every person that could afford to have them carved upon
the walls of his tomb or written on his coffin. Secondly,
Osiris and the beliefs centring upon his name are the
characteristic feature of these texts, as of all later forms,
A third phase of the evolution is seen when the
texts, or rather a selection of them, comes to be written
upon rolls of papyrus which are deposited with the
mummy. This was the fashion under the 1 Bth dynasty


(from 1 300 8.C.). The place of origin of the collection
in this form was the city of Thebes, so that in this form
it is spoken of as the Theban Recension. The total
number of Chapters known from one copy and another
is about one hundred and ninety; a few are derived from
the Pyramid texts, some are versions of Chapters found
on coffins of the Middle Kingdom, the rest are of Theban
origin. The whole collection, therefore, exhibits strata
of deposit; the oldest, according to the Egyptian tradi-
tion, which we have no reason to distrust, going back
to the Ist dynasty (4000 8.C.), and probably to a much
earlier date.
In some form or other, therefore, this collection of
texts is the oldest body of literature in the world. When
we first know it there is already a long history behind it.
It is interesting to find that this most ancient of docu-
ments is in essence a religious work, that is to say it is
a product of human thought engaged upon the most
tremendous of all problems—the relations between man
and God, and the meaning of Death. To the Egyptians
themselves the collection of texts was something much
more than a product of merely human speculation; they
assigned to it a much more ancient and august origin
than that would imply. The Egyptians believed that
all these spells and prayers and directions, of which even
the “great gods” were fain upon occasion to make use,
were delivered to men by Thoth, the personification of
the Mind of the Almighty—he who uttered the word
of his power that failed not of accomplishment. Ulti-
mately, therefore, the contents of the collection were
divine, and the gift of divine inspiration.
In a sense, then, the ancient Egyptians, like the
Jew, the Mohammedan, and the Christian, were “People
of a Book.” In other words, one of the great regulative
facts in the life of these peoples was, and is, certain
divine words written down in a book. In the case of
Egypt, however, this book was a book of the dead.
Historically incorrect and without authority, the name
by which this collection of divine words is most gener


ally known —the “Book of the Dead’ —turns out to be
essentially right. For the texts are concerned chiefly
with the dead and his experiences beyond the grave.
In the case of Jew, Mohammedan, or Christian, his book
of divine wisdom is meant to be strongly regulative of
conduct in this present life. Therefore much of its con-
tent is mandatory in form—“ Thou shait,” or “Thou
shalt not.” In the Egyptian “Book of the Ascending
into the Day,” i.e., the day of the after-life, there is
comparatively little direct reference to the duty of man
as a moral being under earthly conditions. Yet v/e
should not make too much of this difference, for the
specific intent of the texts from the outset was re-
stricted to dealing with the after-life. They do not aim,
in the form in which we possess them, at describing in
detail the content of the other world and the life there
of the justified, still less at elaborating the principles
that should govern life in this world, or their bearing
upon the life hereafter; for, at the moment at which
the “Book of the Dead” picks up the thread, all that
human life, for good or ill, is a thing that is past, and
the texts are concerned only with what then matters
at certain significant moments of the soul’s passage to
the realm of Osiris. To quarrel with the “Book of the
Dead” because it is not something different from what
it set out to be is idle.
Further, we must note that the texts tell us nothing
at all about the lives and works of the dead folk with
which they were buried. And, in general, we should
know very little about Egypt and Egyptian life if we
were limited to what we can extract from these texts.
There is in them no historical element such as in the
Old Testament, and to a far less extent in the New
Testament, serves so largely and so admirably as a
vehicle of moral and religious teaching. Nevertheless,
that a high standard of morality, call it religion or not,
was essential for admission to the kingdom of Osiris is
clear from the code of duties enshrined in that portion
of the Book that is commonly called by the curious and


illogical title of the Chapter of Negative Confession, in
which the applicant does not indeed confess, but dis-
claims, the commission of the long list of sins there
enumerated. Still more clear in this respect is the doc-
trine underlying the elaborate pictorial representation
of the Judgment before Osiris, which forms the char-
acteristic illustration in the great papyri of the Theban
Recension. The Book of the Dead proves beyond all
question that, from the time of the Middle Kingdom at
least, and most probably from a far earlier, pre-dynastic,
age the Egyptians believed that the future of a man’s
soul depended upon the manner of his life on earth. And
not only a man’s soul, but a woman’s soul also, was
covered by this doctrine. Osiris offered immortality and
eternal felicit}/ to all, without distinction of status or
sex, but each individual must prove morally worthy of
his saving mercy. Beyond this it is impossible for man
to go; this doctrine is the high-water mark of religious
thinking, and its corollary is of the profoundest import
for practical life. It is to the eternal honour of ancient
Egypt that she enunciated this doctrine for the first time
on earth and observed its practical import, that she
became conscious of the moral mandate at least as early
as the fourth millennium B.C. The Egyptians, perhaps
of all men least endowed with capacity for abstract
thinking, made here a discovery which the Greeks for
all their cleverness never made; just as in practical life
the Egyptians solved engineering problems that lay far
beyond the experience of the Greeks.
The Papyrus of Ani, from which the selection of
vignettes has been made, was acquired by the British
Museum forty years ago. The papyrus, though not the
longest roll in existence, measures seventy-eight feet
in length; for the number and beauty of its vignettes it
is unrivalled. It was written under the 18th dynasty
(about 1 450 8.C.), for one Ani, “Veritable royal Scribe,
scribe and accountant of the offerings of all the gods,


governor of the granary of the Lords of Abydos, scribe
of the offerings of the Lords of Thebes.” That he calls
himself a veritable’ scribe shows that his title was not
merely honorary, and there is no doubt that in part at
least this great papyrus comes from Ani’s own hand.
The wife of Ani was Tutu, “the Sistrum-bearer,” a
member of the college of singers in the temple of Amen-
Ra at Thebes. She died some years before Ani, but the
papyrus was meant to serve her purpose also, and she
appears with Ani in some of the vignettes.
The selection of vignettes has been made primarily
on artistic grounds; not all the vignettes are given,
though all the selected scenes are given in their entirety
as they apoear in the Papyrus, and they are given in
the order and with the colours in which they appear.
This order varies in the different papyri of this age. It
does not in its extant form tell a story. There is no
continuous and logical thread of connexion between the
Chapters, so far as we can see, no attempt to treat the
soul s journey systematically in a logical sequence or
supposed fixed order of events, in the way in which, for
example, the faring of the soul through this present
world is treated in the Pilgrim’s Progress. Above all,
in the collections as we have them, there is no attempt
to convey any ordered system of doctrine.
Nevertheless, the variation in the number and order
of the Chapters in the extant papyri, and the difficulty,
or in some cases the impossibility, of seeing the con-
nexion between the vignette and the text which it is
supposed to illustrate, suggest that we have in our
extant copies merely a selection of scenes or elements
in a Ritual. It is an ascertained fact that a Passion Play,
in which the incidents in the myth of Osiris were dram-
atically re-enacted, was performed at various places in
Egypt, and especially at his Holy Sepulchre at Abydos.
In the resurrection of the man Osiris who became divine,
because he was divine before he became man, the
Egyptian saw a pledge of his own resurrection from
death to everlasting life, if there was done for his body


The Master’s Dais




what had been done for that of Osiris. Hence every
burial ceremony was in itself essentially a re-enactment
of those divine mysteries that had been performed over
the mummified and swathed body of Osiris by his sis-
ters, along with Anubis, Thoth, and Horus. The great
Judgment after death also had its prototype in the his-
tory of Osiris. It is, therefore, highly probable that the
experiences of the soul between death and judgment
were imagined to reproduce those of the god-man Osiris,
and that instruction about them was conveyed through
actual ritual representation by masked figures. Mystic
initiation into a secret ritual is also suggested by the
fact that a large proportion of the Book is taken up with
familiar features of such ritual—gateways with stern
guardians, who allow passage only to those who give
correctly the name of the doorkeeper, and know the
correct reply to his challenge.
LEFT-HAND WALL (1), STARTING AT DOOR.
Funeral Procession and Ceremony at and in the Tomb.
The coffined Mummy lies under a funerary canopy
over a boat on a sledge drawn by four oxen; the rope
is held also by four men. The canopy is decorated with
papyrus or lotus, natural or artificial. Small figures of
the goddesses Nephthys and Isis stand on the boat’s
prow and stern respectively; on the sledge, by the side
of the bier, the wife of the dead man kneels and tears
her hair in grief. Close behind the sledge follow eight
male mourners, relatives or friends, clad in white. Be-
hind these, but depicted, according to a familiar con-
vention, on a smaller scale, four servants drag on run-
ners a funeral coffer decorated with lotus flowers and
surmounted by the figure of a jackal, the symbol of
Anubis; the side of the coffer is painted with two rows
of alternating mystic symbols, the so-called Buckle of
Isis and the Ded of Osiris. In the coffer must be under-
stood to be the four jars (Canopic jars) containing the


mummified intestines of the dead man. Behind the
sledge that bears the coffer walk two other servants;
above these, on a still smaller scale, are represented
attendants carrying vases of unguents and the de-
ceased’s staff of office, his couch, and chair, and writing-
palette, all to be consigned with him to the tomb.
In front of the funeral boat and mummy goes the
white-robed Sem priest wearing his leopard’s skin; in
his left hand he holds his bronze Censer, from the Vase
in his right hand he pours libations. In front of the oxen
marches a superior servant of the household, with staff
of office; he is preceded by two who carry on yokes
boxes of flowers, vases of unguents, and other offerings.
In front of these again is a group of ten wailing Women,
hired professional Mourners and female servants, who
with bared breasts and loosened hair beat their heads in
token of grief.
The heraldic arrangement, with a kneeling figure
facing outwards at either end of the central group of
female mourners, is adopted in order to effect a tran-
sition, from the procession in motion towards the tomb,
to the ceremony at the tomb itself. The tomb is repre-
sented by the slender pyramid on a base. This part of
the scene combines in one picture what went on in front
of the entrance to the tomb, and the ceremony below
ground in the tomb-chamber itself. A cow and calf are
there, to be slaughtered for the funeral feast held in the
outer chamber. The mummy is represented as now
standing upright, for it has been lifted from the funeral
sledge and taken down to the tomb-chamber, where it
is grasped from behind by Anubis (perhaps a masked
priest) who thereby claims the dead as his; before it the
weeping wife kneels and clasps it in a last farewell. At
a table piled high with funeral offerings stand two priests
—one, the Sem priest in his leopard’s skin, still holds
censer and libation vase; the other lifts his ram-headed
serpentine “Enchanter” to touch the mouth and eyes of
the mummy. His left hand grasps the iron adze-like
instrument also used in the ceremony now proceeding,


of “Opening the Mouth” of the dead that he may be
able to eat and drink in the next world. Behind the
priests are displayed other ceremonial instruments, and
a Reader recites the service from a papyrus roll. In rear
of the Reader are two folding tables of offerings, and a
ministrant carrying a haunch of one of the funeral
victims.
The picture is a kind of pictorial shorthand, in
which a few figures do duty for a multitude, and suc-
cessive moments and situations are represented as
though they were simultaneous. As a whole, this pic-
ture of the funeral procession does not directly illustrate
the Texts of the Book of the Dead, though it is appro-
priate as an Introduction. It is concerned with the facts
of this world, the final scene upon earth when “man
goeth to his long home.” What follows in the pictorial
series has to do with the invisible world to which en-
trance is made through the tomb.
Following the order of the Scenes, we must note
that the rest of the figures on this wall, together with
the whole of the scenes on Wall 2, as well as the first
two scenes on Wall 4, all refer to and are meant to
illustrate Chapter 1 7 of the Book of the Dead. This
is one of the most important Chapters of the collection,
as it evidently contains a summary of essential doctrines.
It is the only extant specimen of an ancient Egyptian
religious Commentary, for some portion of the Chapter
is couched in the form of question and answer, after the
manner familiar in the Catechism; it is clear, however,
that to some of the questions various answers were
given. As it stands, much of the Chapter is to us un-
intelligible—perhaps because it belongs to a secret and
mystical ritual that was revealed only to the initiated.
Within a hall or bower Ani sits with his wife,
whose hand rests on his shoulder. In front of Ani is a
draught-board, on which he is moving a piece. The


game of draughts was a universal favourite with the
ancient Egyptians of all classes from the earliest times.
It is employed here as a symbol of happiness and free-
dom from care; this purely symbolic intention accounts
for the absence of any indication of an opponent. Note
that neither Ani nor his wife exhibit in this scene any
insignia of office, thus emphasising the idea of ease and
happiness. Further, though Tutu had died some years
before her husband she is here shown re-united with him
in the enjoyment of domestic felicity.
The signification of this scene in juxtaposition with
that preceding it is that the tomb is the entrance to a
new life of happiness and reunion with those who were
loved on earth.
The souls of Ani and his wife, in the shape of
human-headed hawks, stand upon a low Pylon or monu-
mental gate. In the field are two pots of burning in-
cense; in front, a table of offerings with lotus flowers
and libation vase.
The hawk or falcon is the emblem of Horus, the
Morning Sun, and Osiris and Horus are one; so that
the human-headed hawk symbolizes the truth that the
justified dead has become one with Osiris. The picture
represents the emergence of the soul from the tomb
into its new world.
Two Lions seated back to back, supporting
between them the solar Disk on the Horizon, which
symbolizes Life that ever renews itself. Over all ex-
tends the Sky, in the shape of its hieroglyphic sign. The
lion on the right is named “Yesterday”; that on the left,
To-day.” The text identifies “Yesterday” with Osiris
(as god of the dead), and “To-day” with Ra, the re-born
Sun. The next figure is that of the Benu bird, the Heron
and fabled Phoenix, symbolizing the Rising Sun which
ever renews its youth. In the field is a table of offerings,
with lotus and libation vase.
The mystical interpretation is that the Soul comes
forth into the daylight of the divine life.


The S.W.’s End of Room showing also Egyptian Door




WE CONTINUE ON THE WALL OF ENTRANCE
(WALL 2), FROM THE LEFT.
A Mummy on a Bier, within a funeral shrine.
At the head is Nephthys, at the foot Isis—both of them
in the shape of the sacred falcon, the symbol of divinity.
The bier is lion-headed; the lion being a symbol of
Horus. Underneath stand vases, a palette, and a chest.
The symbolism may be thus interpreted. The
object of mummification was to make the dead like
Osiris; for Osiris the Man-god was the first that at the
hands of the divine physician and embalmer Anubis had
been embalmed, and thus rendered proof against bodily
corruption. Osiris was therefore the divine prototype
of the dead, and the dead were made like him, and bore
his name, that they might, like him, live again. He who
had himself lived on earth, and suffered, and died, and
risen again to reign as God, was able and willing to
raise his followers in like manner from the dead to ever-
lasting life, if they were made like him. The bier on
which the Osiris mummy lies bears the lion’s head as
the symbol of Horus who was the “Avenger of his
Father”; thus the dead would himself enjoy the pro-
tection of the divine Father and of the divine Son.
Nephthys and Isis, the faithful sisters, stand at head and
foot of the bier, just as once they stood and lamented the
death of Osiris and proclaimed his resurrection.
The mystical meaning of the picture, therefore, is
that the dead shall rise through the divine power to life
eternal.
The god of “Millions of Years,” bearing on
his head and in his right hand the hieroglyphic sign for
“years”; his left hand is outstretched over a pool in
which lies the “Eye of Horus.” Next follows the figure
of the “Great Green Sea,” with hands stretched out
over two pools.
There follows a representation of a great Pylon
with doors, the name of which is given as the “Gate of


the Passages of the Tomb.” Next, above a smaller py-
lon, is the sacred sign of the Utchat, or “Eye of Horus,”
perhaps the most widely-used of all the Egyptian sacred
emblems. Then follows a figure of Meh-urt, in the
shape of a Cow with the solar Disk between her horns;
she is adorned with collar and amulet of Fertility, and
armed with the Flail or Whip of Authority.
Primarily all these figures refer to the myth of
Osiris, but mystically also to the entrance of the Soul
to the other world through the portal of the Grave, and
its emergence to renewed life there through the divine
power and saving grace (typified by the sacred Eye of
God), which in this world is the Sun in the Sky—the
latter symbolized by the Cow representing the ancient
Sky-goddess, who is also the celestial Ocean.
This picture sums up in symbol the basic truth
grasped by Egyptian religious thought and symbolism.
It depicts a funeral Coffer such as contained the mummi-
fied intestines. From it emerge the Head of Osiris-Ra,
i.e., the dead man himself, and his two Arms and Hands,
each grasping the great symbol of Life (the Ankh). On
either side of the coffer stand, in pairs, the Four Sons
of Horus—man-headed Mestha and dog-headed Hapi on
the left, jackal-headed Tuamutef and hawk-headed
Qebhsennuf on the right; these are also painted, but
with human bodies, on the side of the coffer.
The four Sons of Horus were the gods of the four
Quarters of the world and their Winds, and of the four
Pillars of Heaven, which are also the four Cardinal
Points. In the myth they assisted at the mummification
of the body of Osiris. In the funeral practice of the
Egyptians the internal organs, after treatment with pre-
servatives, were distributed in four so-called Canopic
Jars; each jar was dedicated to one of the four Sons of
Horus, its lid also being fashioned in the shape of the
head of that one of the Sons to whom it was dedicated,
according to the nature of its contents.


The mystical meaning is that through Death comes
Life—“lt is sown a natural body; it is raised a spiritual
body.”
The position of the funeral chest, central between
the four Sons of Horus, is symbolic of the central char-
acter of the dogma of resurrection in the realm of faith.
On a pylon the Falcon of the Sun (Ra)
crowned with the Disk stands with a human-headed bird
wearing the White Crown, representing Osiris. The
text explains this as the souls of Osiris (the Sun below
the horizon) and Ra (the Day-Sun) meeting and em-
bracing, so that they become one. The pylon is placed
between two Ded pillars, which signify “stability.” The
Ded pillar was the oldest symbol of Osiris, and one of
the most sacred symbols of Egyptian religion.
The mystical meaning is that the god of the dead
and the god of the living are one; that Osiris is both
resurrection and eternal life, whose power is established
for ever.
A Cat cutting off the head of the great Serpent
Apep at the foot of the celestial Tree. The cat is ex-
plained in the text as emblematic of the Sun, who is also
Osiris. The serpent Apep is a form of Set, the Arch-
Liar and god of Evil.
Close at hand are seated three unnamed gods, each
holding a great Knife of Execution; they represent the
co-operation of the heavenly powers in the destruction
of the great enemy of God and Man.
Primarily the reference was to the Darkness into
which, as into the Grave, the sun descends daily. Mysti-
cally, the meaning is that Osiris, who is also the Tree
of Life, overcomes Death and Evil.
Ani and his wife kneeling in adoration before
the beetle-headed Khepera, who is seated in the boat of
the rising Sun travelling over the hieroglyphic sign for
Sky. On the boat’s prow is the sacred Eye. The boat
is going towards the left, i.e., East, as it is ascending


from the nether gloom to the sunrising. The curious
erect object in the stern is the hieroglyphic sign for
“Attendant” or “Follower,” and indicates that Ani and
his wife, being justified, may go in the divine bark across
the skies. Two Apes that greet the rising Sun are em-
blematic of Nephthys and Isis, who are also symbolized
by the two Stars—which in addition are the hieroglyphic
sign for “Praise.” In the field is the sacred Eye of the
living Sun.
The god Khepera, whose symbol was the Beetle,
was the Creator of all things, animate and inanimate,
himself self-created and self-existent. He is an ancient
form of the Sun-god, who is also Osiris. Osiris as Khe-
pera signifies the dead body about to burst forth into new
life.
The mystical significance of the vignette is that just
as the Sun rises upon earth giving life to all things, so
does Osiris give new life after death, and the blessed
share his life.
WE CONTINUE WITH THE RIGHT-HAND WALL
(WALL 3), FROM THE LEFT.
The god Temu seated within the solar Disk
in the boat of the setting Sun. The boat travels to the
right, i.e., to the West, over the hieroglyphic sign for
“Sky.” Temu wears the Red and White Crowns, of
Lower and Upper Egypt, signifying undisputed
sovereignty. The picture identifies him with Ra, who
is also Osiris.
Mystically the picture signifies that light and life
are brought to the dead, who are symbolized by the
lotus and libation vase on a stand.
The god Rehu figured as a Lion on a trun-
cated pylon overshadowed by a thicket of papyrus and
other plants; round the stem of one is coiled the serpent
Uatchet. In the field is the hieroglyphic emblem for
Fire.


The Great Bas-relief over the J.W.’s Chair




Uatchet was a great goddess of Northern or Lower
Egypt, and the papyrus was the emblem of the Nile-god
of the South or Upper Egypt; so that the figure indi-
cates Egypt as a whole.
The picture refers to the deification of Osiris, the
divine Man (the word Rehu means “man”) and his
identity with the Sun (symbolized by the lion also)
reigning over and giving life to the World.
Ani and his wife in adoration introduced to
the dread Portals by a priest clad in a leopard’s skin,
one leg of which he grasps in a hieratic gesture. On the
right side of his head he wears the Lock of Horus the
Child, a lock of hair symbolic of youth; he is thereby
indicated as being mystically the eternal Son who came
to his Father’s aid. Ani wears sandals, that he may with
pure feet tread the various Halls and Portals which, in
the Papyrus, he now enters and passes through by vir-
tue of his knowledge of the mystic passwords and names
of the Door-keeper, the Watcher, and the Herald who
guard them.
A Pylon, or great Gateway, through which
the soul must pass on its progress to the sacred Hall of
Osiris. It is guarded by three Watchers, one of which
holds a broom to sweep away impurity, the others hold
knives. They symbolize the dangers and difficulties
that beset the soul in its stages of progress towards full
initiation in the mysteries of the kingdom of the divine
Life.
Ani, clothed in white, and holding his Heart
in his right hand, in the presence of the jackal-headed
god Anubis, the divine Embalmer, with his sceptre and
the symbol of Life. In his left hand Ani receives an
elaborate necklace of several strings of beads, the pen-
dant of which shows the Beetle in a Boat, symbolizing
the Sun-god.
Ani with hands raised in adoration, with his
Heart, symbolized by the Vase on the sacred Pedestal


in front of four deities (perhaps the four Sons of Horus)
seated on the emblem of Truth and Rectitude (Maat —
originally perhaps the picture of a Chisel).
The Heart was regarded as the seat of life and
emotion; hence the importance attaching to it in the
funerary texts. These vignettes refer to the re-endow-
ing the dead with living power, through ceremonies
which owe their efficacy to the fact that they had been
first used in connexion with the death and resurrection
of Osiris himself.
Ani and his wife stand in the heavenly River;
each holds in the left hand the hieroglyph for Air or
Wind, while with the right scooping up water to drink.
Three date-palms grow by the stream, the central and
tallest with two bunches of fruit.
The picture is symbolic of the life of the justified
in the other world. There the justified suffered neither
hunger nor thirst, for they lived on the food of Ra and
Osiris; they were arrayed in white garments of fine linen,
and in company with the gods sat round the Great Lake
in the Field of Peace, and ate of the Tree of Life. Some
mystic significance probably attaches to the Trinity of
Trees, and to the mode in which Ani and his wife drink,
lapping, “putting their hand to their mouth.”
Ani kneeling beside the heavenly River, by
which grows a Sycamore fig-tree. In the midst of the
tree the sky-goddess Nut, the Mother of Osiris, pours
out water for Ani from a vessel in her left hand, while
with the right she offers him cakes.
The symbolism is the same—from the Tree of
Heaven by the celestial River the justified derive divine
sustenance.
Ani clothed in white, seated with feet on a
reed footstool; in his hands are sceptre and staff of
authority. In front is a table of offerings.
The mystic meaning is as before—that the justified
seated with the gods, and enjoy immortal food,


The Mummy of Ani embraced by the divine
Embalmer, Anubis.
This is symbolic of the office performed for Osiris,
which is pledge of the renewed life of man himself after
death.
The same idea is conveyed by this vignette,
which shows the door of a Tomb. At one side is the
Soul of the dead in the usual form, at the other the
sacred Heron symbolizing the divine life.
The meaning is that already indicated with refer-
ence to the vignettes of Wall I—that the tomb is the
portal to immortality.
Ani passes by the great Block of Execution,
with its blood-dripping knife.
The meaning is that the justified is delivered from
the Second Death, which overtakes those who are con-
demned in the Hall of Truth before Osiris.
The deceased in adoration before a company
of Three Deities, each holding in his left hand a sceptre,
in his right the emblem of Life.
This is symbolic of the life of the justified, who are
admitted to fellowship with the gods.
A Mummy on its lion-headed Bier, flanked
by tall standards of burning Incense. Upon the mummy
descends the Soul in the form of a human-headed winged
figure holding the sign Shen, emblem of Eternity.
The mystic meaning is that the soul is reunited
with its celestial body.
Ani, clothed in white, in adoration before a
Ram standing upon a low pylon. The ram wears the
great Atef crown. Before it is a blazing incense vase,
and a pedestal with lotus flower and libation vase.
The species of ram here depicted, with flat horns
projecting horizontally, appears to have become extinct
before the end of the 1 2th dynasty. It was the symbol


of the god Khnemu, the divine Master Potter who
fashioned man out of mud on his potter’s wheel. The
ram that symbolized Amen-Ra was a different type. In
the form of the Ram of Mendes, under the type here
seen, Osiris also was worshipped. It symbolizes the
power of Osiris as “Lord of Eternity and Everlasting-
ness.”
THE FRIEZE OVER DAIS, No. 4.
On the First or end Wall is exhibited the great
Scene of Judgment before Osiris, to which the whole
course of progression from the Funeral Procession with
which we started on Wall 1 must be supposed to lead.
It represents in pictorial symbols the fundamental
elements of the ancient Egyptian faith—belief in the
continued existence of the soul after death, and the doc-
trine of reward and punishment. However it might be
pictured, Judgment of the individual soul after death
stood in the centre of conviction, both in popular belief
and in the official creed. The picture is placed here,
therefore, symbolically as is Michelangelo’s great pic-
ture of the Last Judgment in the Sistine Chapel. It con-
fronts those who enter, as the dominant in the decora-
tive scheme, insistent and inevitable, in accordance with
its significance in the drama of ritual and of life.
In the Papyrus of Ani the picture of the Judgment
Scene follows upon two Hymns, one to Ra the Lord of
Light in this world, the other to Osiris the Lord of the
Dead.
VIGNETTE OF THE SUNRISE
from the sacred emblem of Osiris, the mysterious
Ded, standing in the Horizon, proceeds the Ankh, the
symbol of Life, which here has Arms that grasp and
support the solar Disk, Six Apes, representing Spirits
of the Dawn, greet the newly-elevated Disk with adora-
tion and praise. On either side of the symbol of Osiris,
upon cushions of the form of the hieroglyph for gold
(Nub), kneel Nephthys (right) and Isis (left). Arch-
ing over all is the hieroglyphic sign for the Sky.


side facing J.W.




THE JUDGMENT.
On the left, Ani and his wife stand making prayer
before a Table of Offerings. They must be supposed
to be at the entrance of the Hall of Maati (i.e., the two
goddesses of Law and Truth of Upper and Lower
Egypt). Within, in front of a Table of Offerings, are
twelve deities throned, singly or in pairs, each holding a
sceptre. The deities are the divine jury in the trial, and
are each seated on the emblematic Square.
Ani and his wife, she with her Sistrum in hand,
advance up the Hall of Judgment, both in an attitude
of deep humility. In the original, the hieroglyphs of
the Prayer of Entrance surround their figures. It be-
gins—“ Homage unto thee, O great God, Lord of Truth;
I have come unto thee, O Lord, that I may behold thy
mercy.”
Next follows the pictorial representation of the
Judgment Scene, according to the Egyptian conception
of it as a weighing of the Heart, i.e., the Conscience,
in the balance against the Feather, emblematic of Truth
and Righteousness (Maat).
On the standard of the Great Balance the dog-
headed Ape sits, the associate of Thoth. The balance
itself is in the charge of the jackal-headed Anubis
(Anpu) who kneels and tests the level of the beam,
steadying with his left hand the pan in which is the
Feather, the hieroglyphic symbol of Righteousness; in
the other pan is the tiny vase, the hieroglyphic sign for
“heart,” and here symbolizing the heart of Ani. Two
female deities stand near; they are Meskhenet and
Renenet, goddesses of birth and rearing and increase,
who contemplate the fate of the soul over whose birth
into the world they had presided, as they now do over
its re birth from the dead into new life with Osiris. The
symbol of Meskhenet stands in the field, above the head
of a figure of the Destiny of Ani placed near the pillar
of the balance. A human-headed bird on a pylon typifies
the soul of Ani.


Behind Anubis stands Thoth, scribe of the gods,
reed-pen and palette in hand in order to record the re-
sult of the weighing. Thoth (Tehuti) represents the
Intelligence of God, who speaks the Word voicing his
will. As the inventor of the art of writing he is the
Recording Angel of the the Egyptian Pantheon. Be-
sides being the Word or “tongue” of the Creator, Thoth
was also the Advocate with the Father; upon his ad-
vocacy all must rely to secure acquittal at the great
Assize.
Behind Thoth is the female Monster Amam, “De-
vourer,” or Ammit, “Eater of the Dead,” waiting to do
her dread office, of devouring and destroying the soul
that should be weighed in the balance and be found
wanting. She has the head of a crocodile, the fore-
quarters of a lion, and the hindquarters of a hippopota-
mus. In the weighing, the heart must exactly counter-
balance the feather of Maat, but not outweigh it.
Thoth then makes his proclamation—“ Hear ye
this judgment. The heart of Osiris (i.e., of the dead
man) hath in very truth been weighed, and his soul
hath stood as a witness for him; it hath been found true
by trial in the Great Balance. There hath not been
found any wickedness in him; he hath not wasted the
offerings in the temples; he hath not done harm by his
deeds; and he uttered no evil reports while he was upon
earth.” The Great Company of the Gods, the Asses-
sors, ratify his judgment—“ Osiris, the scribe Ani, whose
word is truth, is holy and righteous.” The falcon-
headed Horus, son of Isis and Osiris, wearing the Double
Crown of the North and the South, takes Ani by the
hand to lead him forward. Standing before his Father
he addresses him—“l have come to thee, O gracious
One, and I have brought the Osiris Ani unto thee. His
heart is found righteous coming forth from the bal-
ance.”
Next we see Ani kneeling on a reed mat before
Osiris; in front are tables of offerings. “Grant,” he


prays, “that I may be like unto those favoured ones that
are round about thee.”
Osiris is depicted throned at the upper end of the
Hall of Truth. He is bearded, and wearing the White
Crown with the Feathers of Truth on either side; in his
hands are the symbols of dominion and sovereignty—
the whip or flail, the crook, and the sceptre. The
shrine in which he is seated is in the form of a funeral
chest, the top of which is supported on pillars with lotus
capitals, and surmounted by rows of the sacred cobra.
The body of the throne is painted to resemble the doors
of a tomb. The shrine stands on a white plinth, the end
of which is cut to a slope of 45°; this reproduces the
outline of the hieroglyph for “law and truth” (Maat).
From the back of the neck of Osiris hangs the amulet
emblematic of “joy and strength.” Behind the god
stand Isis and Nephthys supporting him on his left hand
and his right respectively. In front, standing on the
lotus blossom, the plant of life and emblem of resurrec-
tion, are the four Sons of Horus; below them the mystic
bull’s-skin, itself also an emblem of Death and Resurrec-
tion.
The whole of the remaining decoration is derived,
in respect of its constituent elements, from Egyptian
sources.
THE GREAT RELIEF OVER THE J.W.’s CHAIR.
The great Relief in the centre of the right-hand wall
reproduces a painted sepulchral Stele or Tomb-tablet
of the 20th dynasty (about 1200 8.C.). It depicts
an Offering to Osiris. Before the god is a Table of
Offerings, of cakes and fruit, crowned with the Lotus
flower, emblem of life and immortality. The worship-
per in hieratic garb of leopard’s skin and apron, and
wearing black wig and Cone, pours libation over the
offerings.


Osiris, as god of the otherworld, is seated on a
throne painted to represent a funeral chest. He is re
presented in the garb of the dead, clothed in white
linen, with pectoral and head-mask in his usual form
resembling that of a mummy. He holds the symbols
of sovereignty, the Crook and Flail. On his head is the
solar Disk encircled by the sacred Cobra (Uraeus) wear-
ing the White Crown, symbols of the god as the Lord
of Light and Life. Behind him stands Isis. In the
field, in hieroglyphs, is a Prayer to Osiris. In the rounded
upper portion of the tablet is the winged solar Disk with
twin Uraei, emblem of Horus in his majesty as the noon-
day sun. Enclosing all is the hieroglyphic sign for the
Sky.
THE CANOPY.
The Canopy shows the blue band of the sky with
golden stars. Below is a band of Cartouches with twin
Uraei alternating with Triglyphs. The Cartouche, or
oval, is probably a modification of the hieroglyphic sign
Shen, which from its meaning “to encircle became a
symbol of Eternity. In its elongated or oval form it is
the determinative for the Egyptian word for “name”;
so that as here combined with the sacred Uraei it be-
comes symbolic of the sacred unwritten divine Name.
Above the band of Cartouches are triple solar Disks.




