

EXTENSION OF TELEVISION TO COUNTRY AND PROVINCIAL AREAS
STATEMENT BY POSTMASTER-GENERAL (C.W.DAVIDSON)
Npf 384.550994 D252
On 30th April, 1959, I made a statement in the House outlining
the Governments policy with respect to the extension of television services
to country and provincial areas in the Commonwealth. In that statement I
indicated that, as a first stage in the establishment of country stations,
applications for the grant of licences in thirteen specified areas would
be invited. I stated also that as far as practicable, priority in the
granting of such licences would be given to applications from local
independent companies not associated with metropolitan stations, provided
that the applicants demonstrated their capacity to provide, in the
circumstances prevailing in the areas concerned, services comparable to
those available to city viewers.
Fortyfive applications were received and, pursuant to the
provisions of the Broadcasting and Television Act, these were referred to
the Australian Broadcasting Control Board for public inquiry and report to
me. Prior to the Board's hearings, the number of applications was
reduced to 41.
The Board subsequently conducted extensive inquiries not
only into the appliestions received but also into such matters as the
availability of programme material and a number of technical aspects
including in particular the availability of frequency channels.
The Board's report on its inquiries, which I shall lay on
the table of the House, raises several fundamental issues. It has in
consequence been under consideration by the Government for some little
time, I am now, however, in a position to announce that the Government
has authorised me to grant licences to the following companies in the
areas indicated -
Canberra Area .. Canberra Television Ltd.
Newcastle-Hunter River
Area .. Newcastle Broadcasting and
Television Corporation Ltd.
Illawarra Area .. Television Wollongong Transmissions
Ltd.
Richmond-Tweed Hoads
Area .. Richmond Tweed T.V. Ltd.
.../2


Central Tablelands
Area .. Country Television Services Ltd
Ballarat Area .. Ballarat and Western Victoria
Television Ltd.
Bendigo Area .. Bendigo and Central Victorian
Telecasters Ltd.
Latrobe Valley Area .. ■ Eastern Victoria Television
Pty. Ltd.
Goulbum Valley Area .. Goulbum-Murray Television Pty. Ltd.
Darling Downs Area .. Darling Downs T.V. Ltd.
Rockhampton Area .. Rockhampton Television Ltd.
Townsville Area .. Telecasters Worth Queensland Ltd.
Noryi-Eastem Tasmania
Area .. Worthem Television Ltd.
The constitution of these companies is set out in Part 11
of the Board’s report.
It will be noted that, for one station only,
operated by a local independent company, is to be licenced in each of the
areas. I wish to make it quite clear that this does not involve a decision
that only one licence will be granted in any of these areas, or that there
is any understanding with any of the successful applicants for an exclusive
licence. On the contrary, as the service develops and tho need for and
ability to support a second independent station in any of the areas is
demonstrated the Government will entertain further applications and consider
the grant of further licences.
The licences to bo granted will be subject to a number of
conditions which I will notify shortly to the successful applicants. In
particular, modifications of the shareholdings in some of the companies
will be required to provide that at least 50 i° of the shares will be made
available to the public.
The licences will also be granted subject to the condition
that no exclusive arrangement may be entered into by the licensees with
any metropolitan station for the provision of programmes or for the sale
of station time or advertising. This confoims with the condition which
was prescribed in respect of the single commercial stations in Perth and
Hobart, a condition which I understand has operated successfully in these
areas.
.../3


Certain questions of detail in connection with the
extension of the service to country areas still remain to he settled.
I refer in particular to the question of the availability of frequency
channels which has been reviewed by the Boards and which is being examined
also by the Radio Frequency Allocations Review Committee, which I asked
some time ago to specially examine the question. Another matter to be
settled is that relating to the sites for some of the stations. These
aspects will be dealt with by a Cabinet sub-committee appointed by the
Government for the purpose.
The Government has also decided that, in conformity with
its policy of providing a national as well as a commercial service, work
should proceed immediately on the establishment of a national transmitter
in each of the thirteen areas concerned. The installation of thirteen
National stations in four different States is a project of some magnitude
and, although planning has been proceeding for some time, the work con-
stitutes a major task for the Departments involved - Department of Works,
Postmaster-General, Australian Broadcasting Control Board, Australian
Broadcasting Commission, Therefore, lam not, at this stage, in a
position to say precisely the time at which the stations can be brought
into operation or of their establishment. Practical considerations
will largely determine these matters but every effort will be made to have
the stations operating with as little delay as possible.
Canberra,
Bth November, i 960


