

/ * >
pern ppi-iy)
H-U
ft* 'far
nr^o.
W*JJd&~ &L*~k. *s?
.
ffc.? �-</ MJi
()




I ChctW lb o4 cryv^u^T^^^
% *? o&af sy&c (FiA&A^tel^
yir^A.^4 .
<JflfnV.oL4 .
( hsUje*3d*. Ty**-




Prouder scene never hallowed war?s pomp to the mind,
Than when Christendom?s pennons wooed social the wind,
And the flower of her brave for the combat combined,
Their watchword, humanity?s vow?
Not a sea-boy that fought in that cause, but mankind
Owes a garland to honour his brow !
Nor grudge, by our side, that to conquer or fall,
Came the hardy rude Russ, and the high-mettled Gaul;
For whose was the genius, that planned at its call,
Where the whirlwind of battle should roll 1
All were brave ! but the star of success over all
Was the light of our Codrington?s soul.
That star of the day-spring, regenerate Greek !
Dimmed the Saracen?s moon, and struck pallid his cheek :
In its first flushing morning thy Muses shall speak
When their lore and their lutes they reclaim :
And the first of their songs from Parnassus?s peak
Shall be ? Glory to Godringtoris name I ?
LINES
ON THE DEPARTURE OF EMIGRANTS FOR NEW
SOUTH WALES.
ON England?s shore I saw a pensive band,
With sails unfurled for earth?s remotest strand,
Like children parting from a mother, shed
Tears for the home that could not yield them bread ;
Grief marked each face receding from the view,
?Twas grief to nature honourably true.
16-a


And long poor wanderers o?er the ecliptic deep,
The song that names but home shall bid you weep ;
Oft shall ye fold your flocks by stars above
In that far world, and miss the stars ye love ;
Oft, when its tuneless birds scream round forlorn,
Regret the lark that gladdens England?s morn,
And, giving England?s names to distant scenes,
Lament that earth?s extension intervenes.
But cloud not yet too long, industrious train,
Your solid good with sorrow nursed in vain ;
For has the heart no interest yet as bland
As that which binds us to our native land ?
The deep-drawn wish, when children crown our hearth.
To hear the cherub-chorus of their mirth,
Undamped by dread that want may e?er unhouse,
Or servile misery knit those smiling brows ;
The pride to rear an independent shed,
And give the lips we love unborrowed bread ;
To see a world, from shadowy forests won,
In youthful beauty wedded to the sun ;
To skirt our home with harvests widely sown,
And call the blooming landscape all our own,
Our children?s heritage, in prospect long.
These are the hopes, high-minded hopes and strong,
That beckon England?s wanderers o?er the brine,
To realms where foreign constellations shine ;
Where streams from undiscovered fountains roll,
And winds shall fan them from th? Antarctic pole.
And what though doomed to shores so far apart
From England?s home, and e?en the home-sick heart
Quails, thinking, ere that gulf can be recrossed,
How large a space of fleeting life is lost;


Yet there, by time, their bosoms shall be changed,
And strangers once shall cease to sigh estranged,
But jocund in the years long sunshine roam,
That yields their sickle twice its harvest-home.
There, marking o?er his farm?s expanding ring
New fleeces whiten and new fruits upspring,
The grey-haired swain, his grandchild sporting round,
Shall walk at eve his little empire?s bound,
Emblazed with ruby vintage, ripening corn,
And verdant rampart of Acacian thorn,
While, mingling with the scent his pipe exhales,
The orange-grove?s and fig-tree?s breath prevails ;
Survey with pride beyond a monarch?s spoil,
His honest arm?s own subjugated soil ;
And summing all the blessings God has given,
Put up his patriarchal prayer to Heaven,
That when his bones shall here repose in peace,
The scions of his love may still increase,
And o?er a land where life has ample room,
In health and plenty innocently bloom.
Delightful land, in wildness e?en benign,
The glorious past is ours, the future thine !
As in a cradled Hercules, we trace
The lines of empire in thine infant face.
What nations in thy wide horizon?s span
Shall teem on tracts untrodden yet by man !
AVhat spacious cities with their spires shall gleam,
Where now the panther laps a lonely stream,
And all but brute or reptile life is dumb !
Land of the free ! thy kingdom is to come,
Of states, with laws from Gothic bondage burst,
And creeds by chartered priesthoods unaccmst ?


TJntracked in deserts lies the marble mine,
Undug the ore that midst thy roofs shall shine ;
Unborn the hands?but born they are to be?
Fair Australasia, that shall give to thee
Proud temple-domes, with galleries winding high,
So vast in space, so just in symmetry,
They widen to the contemplating eye,
With colonnaded aisles in long array,
And windows that enrich the flood of day
O?er tesselated pavements, pictures fair,
And niched statues breathing golden air.
Nor there, whilst all that?s seen bids Fancy swell,
Shall Music?s voice refuse to seal the spell ;
But choral hymns shall wake enchantment round,
And organs yield their tempests of sweet sound.
Meanwhile, ere Arts triumphant reach their goal,
How blest the years of pastoral life shall roll !
E?en should some wayward hour the settler?s mind
Brood sad on scenes for ever left behind,
Yet not a pang that England?s name imparts,
Shall touch a fibre of his children?s hearts ;


Bound to that native land by nature?s bond,
Full little shall their wishes rove beyond
Its mountains blue, and melon-skirted streams,
Since childhood loved and dreamt of in their dreams.
How many a name, to us uncouthly wild,
Shall thrill that region?s patriotic child,
And bring as sweet thoughts o?er his bosom?s chords
As aught that?s named in song to us affords !
Dear shall that river?s margin be to him,
Where sportive first he bathed his boyish limb,
Or petted birds, still brighter than their bowers,
Or twined his tame young kangaroo with flowers.
But more magnetic yet to memory
Shall be the sacred spot, still blooming nigh,
The bower of love, where first his bosom burned,
And smiling passion saw its smile returned.
THE DEATH-BOAT OF HELIGOLAND.
CAN restlessness reach the cold sepulchred head ?
Ay, the quick have their sleep-walkers, so have
the dead.
There are brains, though they moulder, that dream in
the tomb,
And that maddening forebear the last trumpet of doom,


Till their corses start sheeted to revel on earth,
Making horror more deep by the semblance of mirth :
By the glare of new-lighted volcanoes they dance,
Or at mid-sea appal the chilled mariner?s glance.
Such, I wot, was the band of cadaverous smile
Seen ploughing the night-surge of Heligo?s isle.
The foam of the Baltic had sparkled like fire,
And the red moon looked down with an aspect of ire ;
But her beams on a sudden grew sick-like and grey,
And the mews that had slept clanged and shrieked far
away?
And the buoys and the beacons extinguished their light,
As the boat of the stony-eyed dead came in sight,
High bounding from billow to billow ; each form
Had its shroud like a plaid flying loose to the storm ;
With an oar in each pulseless and icy-cold hand,
Fast they ploughed, by the lee-shore of Heligoland,
Such breakers as boat of the living ne?er crossed ;
Now surf-sunk for minutes again they uptossed,
And with livid lips shouted reply o?er the flood
To the challenging watchman that curdled his blood?
? We are dead ?we arc bound from our graves in the west,
First to Hecla, and then to ? Unmeet was the rest
For man?s ear. The old abbey bell thundered its clang,
And their eyes gleamed with phosphorus light as it rang ;
Ere they vanished, they stopped, and gazed silently grim,
Till the eye could define them, garb, feature, and limb.
Now who were those roamers ? ?of gallows or wheel
Bore they marks, or the mangling anatomist?s steel ?
No, by magistrates? chains ?mid their grave-clothes you
saw,
They were felons too proud to have perished by law :
But a ribbon that hung where a rope should have been,
Twas a badge of their faction, its hue was not green,


Showed them men who had trampled, and tortured, and
driven
To rebellion the fairest Isle breathed on by Heaven ?
Men whose heirs would yet finish the tyrannous task,
If the Truth and the Time had not dragged off their mask.
They parted?but not till the sight might discern
A scutcheon distinct at their pinnace?s stern,
Where letters emblazoned in blood-coloured flame,
Named their faction ?I blot not my page with its name.
SONG.
WHEN Love came first to Earth, the Spring
Spread rose-beds to receive him,
And back he vowed his flight he?d wing
To heaven, if she should leave him.
But Spring departing, saw his faith
Pledged to the next new comer ?
He revelled in the warmer breath
And richer bowers of Summer.
Then sportive Autumn claimed by rights
An Archer for her lover,
And even in Winter?s dark cold nights
A charm he could discover.
Her routs, and balls, and fireside joy,
For this time were his reasons ?
In short, Young Love?s a gallant boy,
That likes all times and seasons.


FAREWELL TO LOVE.
I HAD a heart that doated once in passion?s boundless
pain,
And though the tyrant I abjured, I could not break his
chain ;
But now that Fancy?s fire is quenched, and ne'er can
burn anew,
I?ve bid to Love, for all my life, adieu ! adieu ! adieu 1
I?ve known, if ever mortal know, the spells of Beauty?s
thrall, [them all;
And if my song has told them not, my soul has felt
But Passion robs my peace no more, and Beauty?s witch-
ing sway
Is now to me a star that?s fall?n?a dream that?s passed
Hail! welcome tide of life, when no tumultuous billows
roll, [soul !
How wondrous to myself appears this halcyon calm of
The wearied bird blown o?er the deep would sooner quit
its shore,
Than I would cross the gulf again that time has brought
me o?er.
Why say the Angels feel the flame 2?Oh, spirits of the
skies !
Can love like ours, that doats on dust, in heavenly
bosoms rise 2 [can tell,
Ah no ; the hearts that best have felt its power, the best
That peace on earth itself begins when love has bid
farewell.


LINES
a Picture of a Girl in the attitude of Prayer, by the
Artist Oruse, in the possession of Lady Stepney,
WAS man e?er doomed that beauty made
By mimic art should haunt him ?
Like Orpheus, I adore a shade,
And doat upon a phantom.
Thou maid, that in my inmost thought
Art fancifully sainted,
Why liv?st thou not?why art thou nought
But canvas sweetly painted 2
Whose looks seem lifted to the skies,
Too pure for love of mortals?
As if they drew angelic eyes
To greet thee at heaven?s portals.
Yet loveliness has here no grace,
Abstracted or ideal?
Art ne?er but from a living face
Drew looks so seeming real.
What wert thou, maid ??thy life?thy name
Oblivion hides in mystery ;
Though from thy face my heart could frame
A long romantic history.
Transported to thy time I seem,
Though dust thy coffin covers??
And hear the songs, in fancy?s dream,
Of thy devoted lovers.


250
FLO JUNE.
How witching must have been thy breatli?
How sweet the living charmer?
Whose very semblance after death
Can make the heart grow warmer !
Adieu, the charms that vainly move
My soul in their possession?
That prompt my lips to speak of love,
Yet rob them of expression.
Yet thee, dear picture, to have praised
Was but a poet?s duty ;
And shame to him that ever gazed
Impassive on thy beauty.
FLORINE.
COULD I bring back lost youth again,
And be what I have been,
I?d court you in a gallant strain,
My young and fair Florine.
But mine?s the chilling age that chides
Devoted rapture?s glow,
And Love ?that conquers all besides?
Finds Time a conquering foe.
Farewell! we?re severed by our fate,
As far as night from noon ;
You came into the world too late,
And I depart so soon.


ODE TO THE GERMANS.
ODE TO THE GERMANS.
THE Spirit of Britannia
Invokes across the main
Her sister Allemania
To burst the Tyrant?s chain :
By our kindred blood she cries,
Rise, Allemanians, rise,
And hallowed thrice the band
Of our kindred hearts shall be,
When your land shall be the land
Of the free ?of the free !
With Freedom?s lion-banner
Britannia rules the waves ;
Whilst your broad stone of honour *
Is still the camp of slaves.
For shame, for glory?s sake,
Wake, Allemanians, wake,
And the tyrants now that whelm
Half the world, shall quail and flee,
When your realm shall be the realm
Of the free ?of the free !
Mars owes to you his thunder
That shakes the battle-field,
Yet to break your bonds asunder
No martial bolt has pealed.
Shall the laurelled land of art
Wear shackles on her heart !
? ? Ehrenbreitstein ? signifies, in German, ? the broad stone of
honour.


The press?s magic letters,
That blessing ye brought forth?
Behold ! it lies in fetters
On the soil that gave it birth ;
But the trumpet must be heard,
And the charger must be spurred ;
For you father Armin?s Sprite
Calls down from heaven, that ye
Shall gird you for the fight,
And be free !?and be free 1
THE POWER OF RUSSIA.
SO all this gallant blood has gushed in vain !
And Poland by the Northern Condor?s beak
And talons torn, lies prostrated again.
0, British patriots, that were wont to speak
Once loudly on this theme, now hushed or meek !
O, heartless men of Europe?Goth and Gaul!
Cold, adder-deaf to Poland?s dying shriek?
That saw the world?s last laud of heroes fall?
The brand of burning shame is on you all?all?all 1
But this is not the drama?s closing act;
Its tragic curtain must uprise anew.


Nations, mute accessories to the fact!
That Upas-tree of power, whose fostering dew
Was Polish blood, has yet to cast o?er you
The lengthening shadow of its head elate?
A deadly shadow, darkening nature?s hue.
To all that?s hallowed, righteous, pure, and great,
Wo ! wo ! when they are reached by Russia?s withering
hate !
Russia, that on his throne of adamant,
Consults what nation?s breast shall next be gored :
He on Polonia?s Golgotha will plant
His standard fresh ; and, horde succeeding horde,
On patriot tombstones he will whet his sword,
For more stupendous slaughters of the free.
Then Europe?s realms, when their best blood is poured,
Shall miss thee, Poland ! as they bend the knee,
All?all in grief, but none in glory likening thee.
Why smote ye not the giant whilst he reeled ?
0, fair occasion, gone for ever by !
To have locked his lances in their northern field,
Innocuous as the phantom chivalry
That flames and hurtles from yon boreal sky !
Now wave thy pennon, Russia, o?er the land
Once Poland ; build thy bristling castles high ;
Dig dungeons deep ; for Poland?s wrested brand
Is now a weapon new to widen thy command?
An awful width ! Norwegian woods shall build
His fleets ; the Swede his vassal, and the Dane :
The glebe of fifty kingdoms shall be tilled
To feed his dazzling, desolating train,


But time will teach the Russ, e?en conquering
Has handmaid arts ; ay, ay, the Russ will woo
All sciences that speed Bellona?s car,
All murder?s tactic arts, and win them too ;
But never holier Muses shall imbue
Say, e?en his serfs, half humanised, should learn
Their human rights?will Mars put out his flame
In Russian bosoms ? no, he?ll bid them burn
A thousand years for nought but martial fame,
Like Romans?yet forgive me, Roman name !
Rome could impart what Russia never can ;
Proud civic rights to salve submission?s shame.


Our strife is coming, but in freedom?s van
The Polish Eagle?s fall is big with fate to man.
Proud bird of old ! Mohammed?s moon recoiled
Before thy swoop ; had we been timely bold,
That swoop, still free, had stunned the Russ, and foiled
Earth?s new oppressors, as it foiled her old.
Now thy majestic eyes are shut and cold:
And colder st,ill Polonia?s children find
The sympathetic hands, that we outhold.
But, Poles, when we are gone, the world will mind,
Ye bore the brunt of fate, and bled for humankind.
So hallowedly have ye fulfilled your part,
My pride repudiates e?en the sigh that blends
With Poland?s name?name written on my heart.
My heroes, my grief-consecrated friends !
Your sorrow, in nobility, transcends
Your conqueror?s joy ; his cheeks may blush ; but
shame
Can tinge not yours, though exile?s tear descends :
Nor would you change your conscience, cause, and
name,
For his, with all his wealth, and all his felon fame.
Thee, Niemoiewitz, whose song of stirring power
The Czar forbids to sound in Polish lands ;
Thee, Czartoryski, in thy banished bower,
The patricide, who in thy palace stands,
May envy ; proudly may Polonia?s bands
Throw down their swords at Europe?s feet in scorn,
Saying??? Russia, from the metal of these brands
Shall forge the fetters of your sons unborn ;
Our setting star is your misfortune?s rising morn.?


LINES
WRITTEN IN A BLANK LEAK OF LA PEROUSB?s VOYAGES.
LOVED Voyager ! whose pages had a zest
More sweet than fiction to my wond?ring
breast,
When, rapt in fancy, many a boyish day
I tracked his wanderings o?er the watery way,
Roamed round the Aleutian isles in waking dreams,
Or plucked th e Jleur-de-lys by Jesso?s streams?
Or gladly leaped on that far Tartar strand,
Where Europe?s anchor ne?er had bit the sand,
Where scarce a roving wild tribe crossed the plain,
Or human voice broke nature?s silent reign ;
But vast and grassy deserts feed the bear,
And sweeping deer-herds dread no hunter?s snare.
Such young delight his real records brought,
His truth so touched romantic springs of thought,
That all my after-life?his fate and fame
Entwined romance with La Perouse?s name.
Pair were his ships, expert his gallant crews,
And glorious was th? emprize of La Perouse,
Humanely glorious ! Men will weep for him,
When many a guilty martial fame is dim ;
He ploughed the deep to bind no captive?s chain?
Pursued no rapine?strewed no wreck with slain ;
And, save that in the deep themselves lie low,
His heroes plucked no wreath from human woe.
?Twas his the earth?s remotest bounds to scan,
Conciliating with gifts barbaric man??
Enrich the world?s contemporaneous mind,
And amplify the picture of mankind.


Far on the vast Pacific ?midst those isles,
O?er which the earliest morn of Asia smiles,
He sounded and gave charts to many a shore
And gulf of Ocean new to nautic lore ;
Yet he that led Discovery o?er the wave,
Still finds himself an undiscovered grave.
He came not back?Conjecture?s cheek grew pale,
Year after year?in no propitious gale
His lilied banner held its homeward way,
And Science saddened at her martyr?s stay.
An age elapsed?no wreck told were or when
The chief went down with all his gallant men,
Or whether by the storm and wild sea flood
He perished, or by wilder men of blood?
The shudd?ring Fancy only guess?d his doom,
And Doubt to Sorrow gave but deeper gloom.
An age elapsed?when men were d ad or grey,
Whose hearts had mourned him in their youthful day ;
Fame traced on Mannicolo?s shore at last
The boiling surge had mounted o?er his mast.
The islesmen told of some surviving men,
But Christian eyes beheld them ne?er again.
Sad bourne of all his toil?with all his band?
To sleep, wrecked, shroudless, on a savage strand !
Yet what is all that fires a hero?s scorn
Of death ??the hope to live in hearts unhorn :
Life to the brave is not its fleeting breath,
But worth?foretasting fame, that follows death.
That worth had La Perouse?that meed he won ;
He sleeps?his life?s long stormy watch is done.
In the great deep, whose boundaries and space
He measured, Fate ordained his resting-place ;
17-a


But bade his fame, like th? Ocean rolling o?er
His relics?visit every earthly shore.
Fair Science on that Ocean?s azure robe,
Still writes his name in picturing the globe,
And paints?(what fairer wreath could glory twine ?)
His watery course?a world-encircling line.
LINES
ON THE CAMP HILL, NEAR HASTINGS.
IN the deep blue of eve,
Ere the twinkling of stars had begun,
Or the lark took his leave
Of the skies and the sweet setting sun,
I climbed to yon heights,
Where the Norman encamped him of old,
With his bowmen and knights,
And his banner all burnished with gold.
At the Conqueror?s side
There his minstrelsy sat harp in hand,
In pavilion wide;
And they chanted the deeds of Roland.
Still the ramparted ground
With a vision my fancy inspires,
And I hear the trump sound,
As it marshalled our Chivalry?s sires.
On each turf of that mead
Stood the captors of England?s domains,


That ennobled her breed
And high-mettled the blood of her veins.
Over hauberk and helm,
As the sun?s setting splendour was thrown,
Thence they looked o?er a realm?
And to-morrow beheld it their own.
LINES ON POLAND.
AND have I lived to see thee sword in hand
Uprise again, immortal Polish Land ?
Whose flag brings more than chivalry to mind,
And leaves the tri-color in shade behind?-
A theme for uninspired lips too strong ;
That swells my heart beyond the power of song?
Majestic men, whose deeds have dazzled faith,
Ah ! yet your fate?s suspense arrests my breath ;
Whilst, envying bosoms bared to shot and steel,
I feel the more that fruitlessly I feel.
Poles ! with what indignation I endure
Th? half-pitying servile mouths that call you poor ;
Poor ! is it England mocks you with her grief.
That hates, but dares not chide th? Imperial Thief. 1
France with her soul beneath a Bourbon?s thrall,
And Germany that has no soul at all ?
States, quailing at the giant overgrown,
Whom dauntless Poland grapples with alone ?
No, ye are rich in fame e?en whilst ye bleed ;
We cannot aid you ?we are poor indeed !


In Fate?s defiance?in the world?s great eye,
Poland has won her Immortality !
The Butcher, should he reach her bosom now,
Could tear not Glory?s garland from her brow ;
Wreathed, filleted, the victim falls renowned,
And all her ashes would be holy ground !
But turn, my soul, from presages so dark ;
Great Poland?s spirit is a deathless spark
That?s fanned by Heaven to mock the Tyrant?s rave?
She, like the eagle, will renew her age,
And fresh historic plumes of Fame put on?
Another Athens after Marathon?
Where eloquence shall fulmine, arts refine,
Bright as her arms that now in battle shine.
Come?should ;the heavenly shock my life destroy
And shut its flood-gates with excess of joy ;
Come but the day when Poland?s fight is won
And on my gravestone shine the morrow?s sun?
The day that sees Warsaw?s cathedral glow
With endless ensigns ravished from the foe?
Her women lifting their fair hands with thanks,
Her pious warriors kneeling in their ranks,
The seutcheoned walls of high heraldic boast,
The odorous altar?s elevated host,
The organ sounding through the aisle?s long glooms,
The mighty dead seen sculptured o?er their tombs
(John, Europe?s saviour?Poniatowski?s fair
Resemblance?Kosciusko?s shall be there);
The tapered pomp ?the halleluiah?s swell,
Shall o?er the soul?s devotion cast a spell,
Till visions cross the rapt enthusiast?s glance,
And all the scene becomes a waking trance.


LINES ON POLAND.
Should Fate put far?far off that glorious scene,
And gull's of havoc interpose between,
Imagine not, ye men of every clime,
Who act, or by your sufferance share the crime?
Your brother Abel?s blood shall vainly plead
Against the ? deep damnation" of the deed.
Germans, ye view its horror and disgrace
With cold phosphoric eyes and phlegm of face.
Is Allemagne profound in science, lore,
And minstrel art ? ?her shame is but the more
To dose and dream by governments oppressed,
The spirit of a bookworm in each breast.
Well can ye mouth fair Freedom?s classic line,
And talk of Constitutions o?er your wine :
But all your vows to break the tyrant?s yoke
Expire in Bacchanalian song and smoke :
Heavens ! can no ray of foresight pierce the leads
And mystic metaphysics of your heads,
To show the self-same grave, Oppression delves
For Poland?s rights, is yawning for yourselves !
See, whilst the Pole, the vanguard aid of France,
Has vaulted on his barb and couched the lance,
France turns from her abandoned friends afresh,
And soothes the Bear that prowls for patriot flesh,
Buys, ignominious purchase ! short repose,
With dying curses and the groans of those
That served, and loved, and put in her their trust.
Frenchmen ! the dead accuse you from the dust?
Brows laurelled ?bosoms marked with many a scar
For France?that wore her Legion?s noblest star,
Cast dumb reproaches from the field of Death
On Gallic honour ; and this broken faith
Has robbed you more of Fame?the life of life
Than twenty battles lost in glorious strife !


And what of England?ls she steeped so low
In poverty, crestfallen, and palsied so,
That we must sit much wroth, but timorous more,
With murder knocking at our neighbour?s door ?
Not murder masked and cloaked with hidden knife,
Whose owner owes the gallows life for life ;
But Public Murder !?that with pomp and gaud,
And royal scorn of Justice walks abroad
To wring more tears and blood than e?er were wrung
By all the culprits Justice ever hung !
We read the diademed Assassin?s vaunt,
And wince, and wish we had not hearts to pant
With useless indignation?sigh, and frown,
But have not hearts to throw the gauntlet down.
If but a doubt hung o?er the grounds of fray,
Or trivial rapine stopped the world?s highway ;
Were this some common strife of States embroiled?
Britannia on the spoiler and the spoiled
Might calmly look, and, asking time to breathe,
Still honourably wear her olive wreath.
But this is Darkness combating with Light;
Earth?s adverse Principles for empire fight;
Oppression, that has belted half the globe,
Far as his knout could reach or dagger probe,
Holds reeking o?er our brother freemen slain
That dagger?shakes it at us in disdain ;
Talks big to Freedom?s states of Poland?s thrall,
And, trampling one, contemns them one and all.
My Country ! colours not thy once proud brow
At this effront ??Hast thou not fleets enow
With Glory?s streamer, lofty as the lark,
Gay fluttering e?er each thunder-bearing bark,


To warm th? Insulter?s seas with barb?rous blood,
And interdict his flag from Ocean?s flood ?
E?en now far off the sea-cliff, where I sing,
I see, my Country, and my Patriot King !
Your ensign glad the deep. Becalmed and slow
A war-ship rides : while Heaven?s prismatic bow
Uprisen behind her on th? horizon?s base,
Shines flushing through the tackle, shrouds, and stays,
And wraps her giant form in one majestic blaze.
My soul accepts the omen ; Fancy?s eye
Has sometimes a veracious augury ;
The Rainbow types Heaven?s promise to my sight;
The Ship, Britannia?s interposing Might!
But if there should be none to aid you, Poles,
Ye?ll but to prouder pitch wind up your souls,
Above example, pity, praise, or blame,
To sow and reap a boundless field of Fame.
Ask aid no more from Nations that forget
Your championship?old Europe?s mighty debt.
Though Poland (Lazarus-like) has burst the gloom,
She rises not a beggar from the tomb ;
In Fortune?s frown, on Danger?s giddiest brink,
Despair and Poland?s name must never link
All ills have bounds?-plague, whirlwind, fire, and flood
E?en power can spill but bounded sums of blood.
States caring not what freedom?s price may be,
May late or soon, but must at last be free ;
For body-killing tyrants cannot kill
The public soul?the hereditary will
That downward as from sire to son it goes,
By shifting bosoms more intensely glows :
Its heir-loom is the heart, and slaughtered men
Fight fiercer in their orphans o?er again.


Poland recasts?though rich in heroes old?
Her men in more and more heroic mould ;
Her Eagle-ensign best among mankind
Become, and types her eagle-strength of mind :
Her praise upon my faltering lips expires ;
Resume it, younger bards, and nobler lyres !
LINES
ON THE VIEW FROM ST. LEONARD?S.
HAIL to thy face and odours, glorious Sea !
?Twere thanklessness in me to bless thee not,
Great beauteous Being ! in whose breath and smile
My heart beats calmer, and my very mind
Inhales salubrious thoughts. How weloomer
Thy murmurs than the murmurs of the world !
Though like the world thou fluctuatest, thy din
To me is peace, thy restlessness repose.
E?en gladly I exchange yon spring-green lanes
With all the darling field-flowers in their prime,
And gardens haunted by the nightingales?
Long trills and gushing eestacies of song,
For these wild headlands and the sea-mew?s clang?
With thee beneath my windows, pleasant Sea,
I long not to o?erlook earth?s fairest glades
And green savannahs?Earth has not a plain
So boundless or so beautiful as thine ;
The eagle?s vision cannot take it in ;
The lightning?s wing, too weak to sweep its space,


Sinks half-way o?er it like a wearied bird :
It is the mirror of the stars, where all
Their hosts within the concave firmament,
Gay marching to the music of the spheres,
Can see themselves at once.
Nor on the stage
Of rural landscape are there lights and shades
Of more harmonious dance and play than thine.
How vividly this moment brightens forth,
Between grey parallel and leaden breadths,
A belt of hues that stripes thee many a league,
Flushed like the rainbow, or the ringdove?s neck,
And giving to the glancing sea-bird?s wing
The semblance of a meteor.
Mighty sea!
Chameleon-like thou changest, but there?s love
In all thy change, and constant sympathy
With yonder Sky?thy Mistress ; from her brow
Thou tak?st thy moods and wear?st her colours on
Thy faithful bosom ; morning?s milky white,
Noon?s sapphire, or the saffron glow of eve
And all thy balmier hours, fair Element,
Have such divine complexion?crisped smiles,
Luxuriant heavings, and sweet whisperings,
That little is the wonder Love?s own Queen
From thee of old was fabled to have sprung?
Creation?s common ! which no human power
Can parcel or enclose ; the lordliest floods
And cataracts that the tiny hands of man
Can tame, conduct, or hound, are drops of dew
To thee, that couldst subdue the Earth itself,


And brook?st commandment from the Heavens alone
For marshalling thy waves?
Yet, potent sea!
How placidly thy moist lips speak e?en now
Along yon sparkling shingles. Who can be
So fanciless as to feel no gratitude
That power and grandeur can be so serene,
Soothing the home-bound navy?s peaceful way,
And rocking e?en the fisher?s little bark
As gently as a mother rocks her child ?
The inhabitants of other worlds behold
Our orb more lucid for thy spacious share
On earth?s rotundity ; and is he not
A blind worm in the dust, gteat Deep, the man
Who sees not or who seeing has no joy
In thy magnificence ? What though thou art
Unconscious and material, thou canst reach
The inmost immaterial mind?s recess,
And with thy tints and motion stir its chords
To music, like the light on Memnon?s lyre !
The Spirit of the Universe in thee
Is visible ; thou hast in thee the life?
The eternal, graceful, and majestic life?
Of nature, and the natural human heart
Is therefore bound to thee with holy love.
Earth hasher gorgeous towns ; the earth-circling sea
Has spires and mansions more amusive still?
Men?s volant homes that measure liquid space
On wheel or wing. The chariot of the land
With pained and panting steeds and clouds of dust


Has no sight-gladdening motion like these fair
Careerers with the foam beneath their bows,
Whose streaming ensigns charm the waves by day,
Whose carols and whose watch-bells cheer the night,
Moored as they cast the shadows of their masts
In long array, or hither flit and yond _
Mysteriously with slow and crossing lights,
Like spirits on the darkness of the deep.
There is a magnet-like attraction in
These waters to the imaginative power
That links the viewless with the visible,
And pictures things unseen. To realms beyond
Yon highway of the world my fancy flies,
When by her tall and triple mast we know
Some noble voyager that has to woo
The trade-winds and to stem the ecliptic surge.
The coral groves ?the shores of conch and pearl,
Where she will cast her anchor and reflect
Her cabin-window lights on warmer waves,
And under planets brighter than our own ;
The nights of palmy isles, that she will see
Lit boundless by the fire-fly?all the smells
Of tropic fruits that will regale her?all
The pomp of nature, and the inspiriting
Varieties of life she has to greet,
Come swarming o?er the meditative mind
True, to the dream of Fancy, Ocean has
His darker tints ; but where?s the element
That chequers not its usefulness to man
With casual terror ? Scathes not earth sometimes
Her children with Tartarean fires, or shakes
Their shrieking cities, and, with one last clang


Of bells for their own ruin, strews them flat
As riddled ashes?silent as the grave ?
Walks not Contagion on the Air itself ?
I should old Ocean?s Saturnalian days
And roaring nights of revelry and sport
With wreck and human woe, be loth to sing ;
Por they are few and all their ills weigh light
Against his sacred usefulness, that bids
Our pensile globe revolve in purer air.
Here Morn and Eve with blushing thanks receive
Their fresh?ning dews, gay fluttering breezes cool
Their wings to fan the brow of fevered climes,
And here the Spring dips down her emerald urn
For showers to glad the earth.
Old Ocean was
Infinity of ages ere we breathed
Existence?and he will be beautiful
When all the living world that sees him now
Shall roll unconscious dust around the sun.
Quelling from age to age the vital throb
In human hearts, Death shall not subjugate
The pulse that swells in Ms stupendous breast,
Or interdict his minstrelsy to sound
In thund?ring concert with the quiring winds ;
But long as Man to parent Nature owns
Instinctive homage, and in times beyond
The power of thought to reach, bard after bard
Shall sing thy glory, Beatific Sea !


EMIMA, ROSE, AND ELEANORS;
THREE CELEBRATED SCOTTISH BEAUTIES.
ADIEU ! Romance?s heroines?
Give me the nymphs who this good hour
May charm me, not in Fiction?s scenes,
But teach me Beauty?s living power.
My harp that has been mute too long
Shall sleep at Beauty?s name no more ;
So but your smiles reward my song ??
Jemima, Rose, and Eleanors.
In whose benignant eyes are beaming
The rays of purity and truth ;
Such as we fancy woman?s seeming
In the creation?s golden youth.
The more I look upon thy grace,
Rosina, I could look the more ;
But for Jemima?s witching face,
And the sweet smile of Eleanore.
Had I been Lawrence, kings had wanted
Their portraits, till I painted yours ;
And these had future hearts enchanted,
When this poor verse no more endures.
I would have left the Congress faces,
A dull-eyed diplomatic corps,
Till I had grouped you as the Graces?
Jemima, Rose, and Eleanore.
The Catholic bids fair saints befriend him,
Your poet?s heart is Catholic too ;


His rosary shall be flowers ye send him,
His saints? days when he visits you.
And my sere laurels for my duty,
Miraculous at your touch would rise ;
Could I give verse one trait of beauty
Like that which glads me from your eyes.
Unsealed by you these lips have spoken,
Disused to song for many a day ;
Ye?ve tuned a harp whose strings were broken,
And warmed a heart of callous clay ;
So when my fancy next refuses
To twine for you a garland more,
Come back again and be my Muses?
Jemima, Bose, and Eleanore.
WITHDRAW not yet those lips and fingers,
Whose touch to mine is rapture?s spell;
Life?s joy for us a moment lingers,
And death seems in the word?farewell,
The hour that bids us part and go,
It sounds not yet?oh ! no, no, no !
Time, whilst I gaze upon thy sweetness,
Flies like a courser nigh the goal;
To-morrow where shall be his fleetness,
When thou art parted from my soul ?
Our hearts shall beat, our tears shall flow,
But not together?no, no, no 1


LINES TO JULIA M-
SENT WITH A COPY OF THE AHTHOIt?s POEMS.
SINCE there is magic in your look
And in your voice a witching charm,
As all our hearts consenting tell,
Enchantress, smile upon my book
And guard its lays from hate and harm,
By Beauty?s most resistless spell.
The sunny dew-drop of thy praise,
Young day-star of the rising time,
Shall with its odoriferous morn
Refresh my sere and withered bays :
Smile, and I will believe my rhyme
Shall please the beautiful unborn.
Go forth, my pictured thoughts, and rise
In traits and tints of sweeter tone,
When Julia?s glance is o?er ye flung ;
Glow, gladden, linger in her eyes,
And catch a magic not your own,
Read by the music of her tongue.


LINES
TO EDWARD LYTTON BTJLWER ON THE BIRTH OF HIS
MY heart is with you, Bulwer, and portrays
The blessings of your first paternal days ;
To clasp the pledge of purest, holiest faith,
To taste one?s own and love-born infant?s breath,
I know, nor would for worlds forget the bliss.
I?ve felt that to a father?s heart that kiss,
As o?er its little lips you smile and cling,
Has fragrance which Arabia could not bring.
Such are the joys, ill mocked in ribald song,
In thought, even freshening life our lifetime long,
That give our souls on earth a heaven-drawn bloom ;
Without them we are weeds upon a tomb.
Joy be to thee, and her whose lot with thine
Propitious stars saw Truth and Passion twine !
Joy be to her, who in your rising name
Feels Love?s bower brightened by the beams of Fame !
I lacked a father?s claim to her?but knew
Regard for her young years so pure and true,
That, when she at the altar stood your bride,
A sire could scarce have felt more sire-like pride.




m
'
