

EXTRACTS
FROM A
LETTER TO GOVERNOR HOBSON,
FROM
R. DAVIES HANSON, ESQ.
CROWN PROSECUTOR IN NEW ZEALAND.
1842.




Wellington,
April 22 th y 1842.
My dear Sir,
* # * « ♦
Some of the recent occurrences at Port Nicholson,
* * appear to me to require that you should be put in
full possession of the facts of the case, which it will be
impossible to gather from the press, and which may not reach
you from other sources.
» * * * *
Another and more exciting topic has however nearly driven
out of the public mind here all thought of the Municipal
Corporation Bill. I allude to the recent outrage, as it is
termed, of Ranghiaiata, a Kawia chief residing at Mana and
Porirua. It appears that he has uniformly refused to acknow-
ledge the right of the New Zealand Company, to any of the
land around the harbour of Porirua, and more than twelve
months since blocked up the road, or rather track, opened by
Colonel Wakefield through the forest. He had also on more
than one occasion stopped the progress of the surveys, and
though afterwards, upon representations being made to him,
he had allowed the surveyors to proceed, it was always under
protest, and with an unqualified declaration that he would not
allow a single person to settle in the Porirua district under
the alleged purchase by Colonel Wakefield. Ido not pretend
to judge whether the purchase made on behalf of the New
Zealand Company is valid, nor is it needful that I should
give any opinion, since that point will soon be decided in its
appropriate court. But it is admitted that it had been
uniformly disputed by the party in possession, and could not
therefore be legally acted upon until its validity had been
affirmed in a court of law.
A few weeks since, four persons of small capital, but
respectable and intelligent, agreed with Mr. Brandon and
Mr. Wicksteed, the two principal advisers of the Company’s
agent, for the lease of four sections on the Porirua road, near
the harbour. I mention the names of the parties by whom
the agreement was made to show that it is impossible to plead


ignorance of the claim of the natives to the undisturbed
possession of the ground. Under this agreement the lessees
were put in possession, and commenced to build their houses
and to make preparations for the erection of a saw mill.
Two of the houses were nearly finished, and the other two
had been commenced, when intelligence of their proceedings
reached Ranghiaiata, who gave notice that he intended to
pull down the houses. On the following day to that on
which the notice had been given, accompanied by a large
body of natives, armed with their usual weapons, he pulled
down the houses. No unnecessary violence however was
employed, and no wilful destruction of property was com-
mitted. To the parties however whose operations were thus
interrupted the consequences have been almost ruinous.
* » * * *
The first statements that were received of this occurrence
were of the most exaggerated description, and remedies of
proportionate violence were suggested. These remedies how-
ever gradually settled into two, the obtaining of a warrant
against Ranghiaiata and the calling of a public meeting.
The former object was sought by means of an affidavit laid
before me as Crown Prosecutor, on which I was required to
find an indictment. This I was compelled to do, but owing
to the mistake of the solicitor of the complainants this course
precluded him from accomplishing his object, and I have not
heard if he has adopted any other measures. The latter was
easily accomplished, and it was solely with a view to put your
Excellency in possession of some of the statements made on
occasion of that meeting that I originally commenced this
letter, which has now extended itself to such unreasonable
dimensions.
At that meeting Colonel Wakefield attended; certain
questions were put to him by Mr. Stokes to the effect —Had
he done his utmost to give the purchasers, under the New
Zealand Company, peaceable possession of their lands? and
these questions he answered. I cannot pretend to give the
words of his answer, but I can vouch for the substantial
accuracy, in every particular, of my version. He said that
on the occasion of Ranghiaiata having blocked up the road,
he had applied by letter to Mr. Murphy, and he read a copy
of the letter ; that when the Governor was in Port Nicholson
he had referred to the same subject, and had requested the
presence of troops, which had been refused on the ground of
the inadequacy of the force in the Colony; but that he had
not treated with the natives for the settlement of their claims.
He added that he had not been very strenuous in his appli


cations to the Government, for although his instructions from
the New Zealand Company directed him to yield all assistance
in his power to the Government, yet the Directors did not
wish him to take any pains to procure the removal of
inconveniences hy means of representations to the Governor,
they rather wished these inconveniences to he employed as
grounds of complaint against the Government, and as argu-
ments in aid of their efforts for the removal of the Governor.
With a noticeable inconsistency, he however attributed the
non-interference of your Excellency to a settled design to injure
this settlement, and concluded hy reading a letter which he
had addressed to the Directors in England, complaining of
the want of efficient protection in this and other particulars.
I have been thus minute in detailing the nature of the
speech of Col. Wakefield, because * * * *
here is an individual, to whom a public body in London has
thought fit to entrust, so far as they are able, the management
of affairs involving the property of hundreds whom they have
encouraged or induced to emigrate to this Colony, openly
proclaiming that he has consciously risked the destruction of
property, and has even hazarded the loss of life, by refusing
to take the measures within his power to settle the claims of
the natives, in order that the evils which he had encouraged
might be made a ground of complaint against a Governor.
* * * * *
I had written thus far, in the hope of being able to send off
my letter by the Government brig, but I was disappointed in
my hopes, and I fear that now the greater part of what I have
written may have been anticipated by the statements of others.
As, however, this business of Rangihaiata can scarcely fail to
be made the subject of comment in England, and will probably
be used as an engine of attack against your Excellency, I send
the letter by the earliest subsequent conveyance. In one
respect the delay is advantageous, since it enables me to render
the statement of the claim of the Company more complete
than I could have made it when I begun the letter.
It appears by the claim put in by Col. Wakefield, that the
alleged title of the New Zealand Company is founded upon a
conveyance signed by several of the principal chiefs of the
Kawia tribe, including Rauparaha, E. Hiko, and Rangihaiata,
by which they convey to Col. Wakefield, as agent of the Com-
pany, all their lands between certain degrees of latitude, ex-
tending from Mokao on the west coast of the North Island to
within a short distance of Banks’ Peninsula on the east coast
of the Middle Island. What the chiefs who signed this deed
imagined its import to be it is quite impossible to determine.


But any one who is acquainted with their customs must be
fully convinced that they could not have been aware in the
slightest degree of its real tendency, as understood and in-
tended by Col. Wakefield. And whatever might be the pur-
port of the Deed and the understanding of the parties, the
attempt so to construe a purchase of 20,000,000 of acres at
the rate of about 6d. per 1,000 acres, as to deprive those na-
tives who have not signed the conveyance, of their pahs and
potatoe grounds, is necessarily absurd and unjust. The very
magnitude of the purchase is a proof that it could not have
been intended to receive a literal construction; and no Court
of Law in the Colony, I feel assured, would feel justified in
enforcing a strict fulfilment of the terms of the Deed.
The intention of those who were the agents in putting
parties on a part of the land thus pretended to have been
purchased was probably twofold : Ist, if possible, to cure the
defects of the title of the New Zealand Company by means
of occupancy; or, 2nd, failing this, to avail themselves of some
illegality in the mode of asserting their rights on the part of
the natives, to call in the assistance of the Police Magistrate,
and thus to make it appear to the natives that the Government
would forcibly maintain any white man in his possession, how-
ever obtained. In both of these objects they have failed, and
they are now anxious to make the Government responsible for
the consequences of their failure.
There is however one result which can scarcely fail to be
produced * * * which is much to be deplored.
The difficulties of obtaining peaceable possession of land, ex-
cept within the Port Nicholson district, have been incalculably
increased. Twelve months ago, there would have been but
little difficulty in procuring from the natives of Porirua a
cession of all of their territory, excepting such as was occupied
by their pahs or had been reduced into possession by the em-
ployment of labor in clearing and cultivation. Now however
the natives have learned the value of land, and they have seen
that, in spite of all the promises made to them as regards re-
serves, they are to be turned out of the very spots which alone
they desire to retain; receiving in exchange a smaller quantity
of land, which to them is comparatively worthless. They will
not consequently accede to any proposals made for the pur-
chase of their land, except in small pieces, and at very high
prices. Such at least is their present feeling. I w r ill not assert
that by careful and judicious measures, steadily pursued, the
basis of which should be the maintenance of the native rights
to any land which they have occupied and improved, this diffi-
culty may not be overcome. But except by means of such


measures, or by the employment of force, I am quite con-
vinced that it cannot be. The settlers here have great reason,
on this ground, to complain of the policy of the New Zealand
Company and their Agent.
It does indeed appear probable that the Government will
be compelled to take the task of settling New Zealand into
their own hands, under the superintendence of some officer
specially appointed for the purpose, and in conformity with
rules framed expressly for this country. The matter is too
weighty and serious, and involves too much of advantage or
injury to the native population, to admit of its being safely
delegated to a body, having * * * the necessity
of declaring a high dividend. It does appear to me most im-
portant that the Government at home should be made fully
aware of the nature and magnitude of the interests dependent
upon the mode in which the Settlement of this Country is to
be carried on, and especially that they should learn how utterly
baseless is the pretence of the New Zealand Company to have
extinguished the native titles to the immense districts nomi-
nally included within their purchase.
In writing to your Excellency I may venture to refer to
the probable result of the enquiry now conducted before
Mr. Spain; though of course I can speak only as to the im-
pression which the testimony adduced before the Court has
had upon myself, without any attempt to anticipate the deci-
sion at which the Commissioner will arrive. Even with regard
to Port Nicholson, there appears every probability that the
case of the Company will entirely fail with regard to the
larger portion of the town, and no inconsiderable portion of
the country districts; and with regard to the purchase from
the Kawia tribe, in which Porirua is included, I imagine it
must fail altogether. I would therefore venture to suggest
that it might be expedient to prepare the Secretary of State
for thfs Colonies for a Report from the Commissioner adverse
to the claims of the Company, and at the same time to make
him aware of the feelings of the natives, and their claims to the
protection of Government. As between the Government and the
New Zealand Company, it may be that the Company is entitled
to grants from the Crown proportioned to their expenditure for
public purposes. This however cannot justify the Govern-
ment in giving away land which does not belong to it; land
which the natives have not sold and do not wish to sell, which
is theirs by as valid a title as that by which any English
gentleman holds his patrimonial estates, and which is absolutely
essential for their subsistence.
I have to apologize for troubling your Excellency at this


length. I do, however, feel that the importance of the topics
will plead my excuse. I have only to add, at present, that
the whole of this letter is at the disposal of your Excellency,
to make any use of it you may deem fit. There are certain
parts which you will perceive could not have been written
unless in confidence, hut, with the exception of these, there
is not a statement or opinion which I am not fully prepared,
at all times, and in any place, to avow and maintain.
Having once written, I shall probably take the liberty of
intruding upon your attention, from time to time, as events
occur here, which appear to justify me in troubling you. In
the mean time,
Believe me,
My dear Sir,
Your’s very sincerely,
R. DAVIES HANSON.
May 25, 1842.
His Excellency
Captain Hobson, R.N.
