

I There Is t-cny.rin tn WjeJss — r4 ~
HTifl |>
'*lJ VIXIXU
J[ I T*' * ■
i m 4 |
M"
7v T o. 5,779.
Price 6 J*o
MONDAY , MARCH 7, 1814.
0 s * RAND HARMONIC FESTIVAL.—For the
T BENEFIT of the WIDOW of the late JOHN COLSTON
DOYLE, late of the Theatres-Royal Covent Garden and Bath.—
A Dinner will take place at the Freemason’s Tavern, on Friday
Next. Dinner and Wine to be provided by the House, atlls.
each person ; the Residue is intended for the Widow.
Mr. MUNDEN, President.
Mr. CHAS. TAYLOR, Deputy.
Stewards.
JMr. Tncledon Mr, Elliot Mr. Lovegrove
Sinclair Clarke Webb
Broadhurst Hawes J. Smith
Emerv John Davey G. Smith
Blanchard Bellamy Gattie
Hill Dow; oq Bennett
Gibbons Dignum ' King
Terrail, + Pyne Field
Goss Knight ,
mi Tabic at half-past four o’clock precisely
Dinner on Table at half-past four o’clock precisely. Tickets,
each, to be had at the Bar of the Tavern.—N.B. An early ap-
p’iratior. ior Tickets is recommended, as none will be issued after
Wednesday next. _
Marine society office, Feb. 17, isiu
—The ANNIVERSARY DINNER of ti-iis Society will
be held at the London Tavern, Bishopsgate-street, on Thurs-
day, the 10th of March. Dinner to be on table at Five o’clock.
STEWARDS.
Moses Agar, Esq., Bury Hutchinson, Esq.
J ieut -Governor Brewell John Inglis, Esq.
"William Borradaile, Esq. Alexander Key, Esq.
Johll g W in. Buckle, Esq. Mr. She riff M a rsh
William Davis, Esq. John Nixon, Esq.
Edward-,Down, Esq. Capt. J. A.Ommanney, R. N.
Joseph Gough, Esq. Robert Pott, Esq.
Edward Harman, Esq. John Rae Reid, Esq.
Vice-Admiral Harvey John Anthony Rucker, Esq.
Thus. Hetherington, Esq. Edward Simeon, Esq.
N. B. No Servants will be admitted, except those whom the
President, Vice-Presidents, Treasurer, Stewards, and Nobility,
may think proper to bring with them. The Governors will meet
at the Society’s Office, at half-past Three o’Clock precisely, and
proceed from thence to the 'lavern.
The Committee beg leave to observe, that since the institution
the Society have clothed 59,221 men, and 51,009 boys, for the
sea-service. The great expense attending, has occasioned a dimi-
nution of their income, having been obliged in the last fifteen
months to sell fioOu. stock.
Governors not having received Tickets is owing to their resi-
dence not being known ; information 01 which being sent to this
Office, will be esteemed a favour.
TALBOT TAVERN, BRISTOL, Feb. 28, 1814.
AT a very numerous and respectable Meeting of the
Master Manufacturers and Tradesmen of this City, held
this day, to take into consideration the best means of supporting
Mr .'Serjeant Onslow’s Motion, for the Repeal of so much of the
Statute o r the sth Elizabeth, Chap. 4, as. .subject to Penalties,
Persons who carry on o: follow any Trades, without having
DEPTFORD VICTUALLING-YARD, Feb. 24, 1814.
r T T H.I2SE are to give Notice , that on THURS-
X DAY, the 10 Lh of March next, at Ten o'Clock in the Fore-
noon, will be exposed to PUBLIC SALE, at His Majesty's
\ iCrUALLING YAUDrtJ DEPTFORD, sundry Lots of the
allowing unserviceable PROVISIONS and STORES, now
tying in the said Yard , viz.
Bread, Bread Dust, Flour, Flour Sweepings, Raisins, Oat-
meal, Oatmeal Sweepings, Pease Screenings, Bakehouse Sweep-
ings, Callavances, Pot Barley, Butter, Cheese, Sugar, Beef,
Pork, Suet, Leager, Butt, Puncheon, Hogshead, Barrel, Half-
hogshead, and Rundlet Steves, Wine Pipe and Hogshead
Staves, Heading, tight and dry, a quantity of Boards Ends,
Fire-wood, &c.
A Deposit of 25/. per Cent, is to be made on the amount of each
Lot, at the time of Sale, and the remainder of the Purchase. Money
pnnl before the Stores are removea ; for which purpose a period oj
fourteen working days will be allowed from the day of Sale ; the Buyers
particularly obs rving, that not less than one half of Ihsf quantity is Id
be token away from the Premises within the first seven days, and the
remainder in the seven following days ; otherwise the Defwsi* Money
will be forfeited, and the Provisions or Stores rerhain the property ctf
the Crown, as no extension of time will on any account be granted.
OFFICE OF ORDNANCE, Feb. 25, 1814.
HP HE Principal Officers of His Majesty $ ORD -
X NANCE do hereby give Notice, that Proposals will be re-
ceived at their Office, in PALL MALL, on or before FRIDAY,
the lUk §/ March next, from such Persons as. maybe witling to
undertake the supply of WHEELBARROWS for service of the
Department for a period of three years, determinable after the
expiration of the first year, upon notice of three Months, at the
option of either Party.
Patterns of the Articles may be viewed upon application at the
principal Storekeeper’s Office.in the Tower; and farther Parti-
culars, together with the Terms and Conditions of*the Contract,
may be known at therSecretary’s Office, in Pall Mall
any day between the hours ®f Ten and Four o’Clock, where
the Proposals must be delivered, sealed up, and endorsed “ Pro-
posals lor Wheelbarrows;” but no Proposal can be admitted
after the said 11th of March, at Twelve o’Clock at Noon of
the same day, neither will any Tender be noticed unless the
Party making it, or an Agent in his behalf shall attend.
By Order of the Board,
R. H. CREW, Sec.
OFFICE OF ORDNANCE, Feb. 28, 1814.
r ! I H E Principal Officers of J Its Majesty's (Jr d~
X nance do hereby give Notice, that Proposals will be received
at their Office, in Pali Mall, on or be for if’ FRIDAY, the 1 8th day
of March next, from such Persons as may be nulling to under-
take the supply of Forage for the Ordnance Horses stationed in
the following Districts, to be delivered at the Expence of the
Contractor, viz.— < 1
North Britain.
JJRi
Northern.
Yorkshire.
Eastern —Exclusive of Warley.
.Southern —Exclusive of Chatham.
South-West—including Portsmouth, Isle of Wight, and
Christchurch.
Western.
Woolwich, with its Dependencies, Warley and Chatham.
W eedon, Northamptonshire.
Fora period of Six Months from the Ist of April next.
The Oats to be good, sweet, dry, and clean, without any mix-
ture of Foxy or Mowburqt Oats, and must not weigh less than
57 pounds per Winchester, bushel; the Hay to be sweet, dry, and
delivered in Trusses of Sfilba. weight. The Straw to be good,
clean, and dry Wheat or Rye Straw, and delivered in Trusses of
’Sfilbs. weight.
The Prices to be paid for the respective quantities of each arti-
cle which may be delivered, to be at the following rates, viz.
For the Oats at per hundred pounds, Avoirdupois weight.
For the Hay at per hundred and twelve pounds.
For the Straw at per hundred and twelve pounds. .
The Proposals may lx* delivered separately or jointly for two or
more of the said Districts, and it is expected that the Contractor
shall receive the Stable Dung, which, during the period of his
Contract may accumulate, making an allowance for the same
alter the rate of per Horse per week.
Further particulars may be known upon Application to the
Officers Commanding the Royal Artillery in each District, and
also at the Secretary's Office, in Pall Mall aforesaid, any day be-
tween the hours of Tern and Four o’Clock, where the Proposals
must be delivered, sealed up, and endorsed, “ Proposals for Fo-
rage but no Proposals ran be admit-.ed after the said 18th
of March, at twelve o’clock at noon of rhe same clay, neither
will any Tender be noticed unless the Party making it, or an
Agent in his behalf, .shall attend.
By Order of the Board,
R. II CREW, Sec.
IMRE at the CUSTOM-HOUSE.—The Friends
of a CLERGYMAN, whose Furniture and Library were
destroyed by the above calamity, solicit the assistance of those
who have dispositions and ability to alleviate the loss. The Cler-
gyman in question is Master of a Free School, at a Salary of 40/.
per anmrm, and has a Wife and Six Children.—Subscriptions are
receivedby Mr. llorncastle, Chhrch-row, IToundsditch ; and by
the ReV. Mr. F. 4, Thanet-place, Temple-bar, where the particu-
lars and extent of the loss may be known.
TWO PRIZES of =£20,000, &c. &c.&c. and only ONE DAY
to Draw.
“Vf EXT MONDAY, March 14, is the Last Day'of
TN Draviing, when the First Ticket Drawn a Prize above 17/.
will receive, in addition, TWENTY THOUSAND POUNDS.
THE .WHEEL CONTAINS
2 Prizes 0f.... ..=£20,000
t> 1,000
And the full proportion of other Prizes.
Tickets and Shares are selling, warranted undrawn, by RI-
CHARDSON, GOODLUCK, and Co. Stock Brokers, and
Contractors for the Lottery, at their Offices, Corner of Bank
Buildings, Cornhill, andifacing the King's Mews, Charing Cross.
This day is published, price 2s. 6d.
HHHE New OPERA of the FARMER’S WIFE.
JL Written by C. DXBDIN, jun. Now performing with
great applause at the Theatre Roy a]. Covent-Garden.
Printed for G. and ~S. Robinsons, 25, Paternoster-row.
OPERA HOUSE.—To be SOLD, pursuant to
an Order of the High Court of Chancery, made in a Cause
“ Davison v. Waters,” with the approbation of Edward Morris,
Esq. one of the Masters of the said Court, at the Public Sale
Room of the said Court, in Southampton-buildings, Ch.iyoery-
lane, To-morrow the Bth day oi March, 1814, between tlie hours
of one and two o’clock in the Afternoon, in One Lot, the ES-
TATE and INTEREST of the late FRANCIS G()OLD,Esq.
in the KING’S THEATRE or OPERA HOUSE, subject 10
the incumbrances thereon, and with the rights and appurtenances
thereunto belonging.
Particulars may now be had (gratis) at the said Master’s Cham-
bers, in Southampton -buildings; of Mr. William Leake, fcack-
ville-street; and of Messrs. Mills, Robinson, aad Young, Parlia-
ment-street, Westminster.
TpOR SALE by TENDER on March* Iritn, a va-
jL luable and highly desirable ESTATE, the property of the
late Mr. Cobbet, part Freehold, part Copyhold, of the Manor
of Frimley, and part Leasehold, situate at Frimldy,. county of
Surrey, consisting or a substantial built Brick Dwelling Mouse
and offices, coach-house and four-stall stable, with a fish pond,
and h* o hly productive garden, together with a close of very line
Meadow adjoining, containing with the house _a&:d garden sa. 2r.
57 p. Copyuold.
Also, 61a. Ir. 12p. of Freehold and Copyhold enclosed Land
on Frimley Common.
Also, Three very productive Meadows, containing9a„3r. 55p.
held on Lease for seven years from Michaelmas 1814.
Particulars may be had on the Premises; the Swan, Black-
water; the Lion and Lamb, Farnham; the White Hart, Bag-
shot; and the Auction Mart, Bartholomew-lane. Tenders (ex-
clusive of every expence of surrender and admission, which,
with the fine and heriots on alienation, and the assignment of the
present Lease,which are to be paid by the Purchaser) will be re-
ceived by R. H. Jago, Surveyor and Land Agent, 78, 'High
• iolborn, on and until March 40th, when the Parch: ser will-be
declared.—All letters po-t paid-
This day is published, price ss. 6d.
pONSIDERY ITONS on the IMPORTATION
of FOREIGN CO liN y arising out ..of the Proceedings'at an
a Meeting of the Heritors of Fife shire,' proposing to petition the E‘
Legislature for further Restriction ;as pubiisl ed"in tl> Coup.if.ji -, t
Newspaper, iOth December, 1815 : comprising ,a r-view of the " 1
usual arguments adopted by Agriculturists in support of this mea-
sure, unci she wing, that tb- pre high price of every thing has
been caused by ti e excessive Increase of the rent of /and, and a j
circulating taxation. That the proposed encouragement to Agri- ->
culture, in the legislative support of yet,higher prices, is delusive, fd
and will wrested to the further increase of run, iu the same de
manner as havl-been, the high prices to which" tine country lias FI
already submitted. Further, that the high prices of things are not
tjieresult of Paper Currency! Also exhibiting the tr«e cause of w
the rise in the price.of Gold and Silver in Britain, and thereby M
shewing, thatjt is indeprndent of the circulation of Bank-notes. &
Sold by Messrs. Onridge and Son, 154, Strand, London. G
DICTIONARY, Vo- 3!
X iumeXiV. edited by AI. EX. CHALMERS, F. S. A. is j.
published this day, price 12s. in boards. f
Printed for the Proprietors, and sold by George Wilkie, 57, *J
Pat; rnoster-row. Of whom may be had, j
The preceding 15 vols. price 12s. each.
Tiie publication will bexontinuedffiit the rate of a volume, con-
taining about 500 pages, every two months.
J his day is published, in three vols. ISrno. 1,55. boards,
CORASMIN ; or, the Minister, a Romance. Bv S
the AUTHOR of the SWISS EMIGRANTS.
Printed for Longman, Hurst, Rees, Orme, and Brown, Pa-
ternoster-row; and at the British Gallery, 54, New Bond-street, si
This day are published, in 4to. price ih Us. fid. boards, and on l ]
fine thick pape' - , price 21. 2s. bds.
PLEASURES of PITY, and other POEMS. By
1 F. F. WESTON, Esq.
Printed for Longman, Hurst, Rees, Orme, and Brown, Pater- r j
noster-row ; and at the British Galleey, 54, New Bond-street,
London ; and J. Upham, Bath.
This day is published, in one large sheet, accompanied with a
scriptidn, price 7s. Gd.
A SKETCH of the RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN;
il 1812, including a Plan of the Russian Positions at JJbcodiuo.
By the Hon. HOB 1". CLIFFORD.
Printed for John Cary, 481, Strand.
Of whom may be had,
A Plan of the Battle of Leipzig, with a description, price ss.
“ THEATRE OF WAR.
This day is published, price 9s. of on canvas, and in a case, 15$
ANEW MAP of the THEATRE of WAR, be-
tween the Allied Powers and France, comprehending the
whole of France and Germany, with part of Spain and Italy,
from the latest authorities.
Printed for C. Smith, Mapseller and Publisher, 172, Strand.
SLAT OF WAR |N FRANCE —Tills day is published, pries
7s. fid. in one large sheet, or JOs. fid.-in case for the pocket,
ANEW MAP of FRANCE, divided into Depart-
msnts and Provinces, comprehending the Netherlands,
Switzerland,, and part of Germany, on a Scale sufficient to shew
the present Military Operations.
London; Printed for John Cary, 181, Strand.
Of whom may be had,
A Sfnall Map, shewing the present Seat or War, East of Paris,
price 2s.
This day is published, price ss. fid. bound.
GiIfEC’OaUM EFIGRAMMATUM
nOEMATnN
DELECTUS, Cam Nova Versione et Notis.—Opera THOM7B
JOHNS )N, A. M. In Ustpr Scholar Etdnensis. Editio nova,
recoguita, et prioribhs multo emehdatior.
Etoiise: E-.Williams, apud quern veneunt: veneunt
etiam Londmi apud F. C. et J. Rivington, G. Wilkie et J. Ro-
binson, er C. Law.
Tiie Text and Notes of the present Edition, have been cor-
rected with the greatest cafe, and it is hoped will be found quit®
free from errata.
In a few days will be published, handsomely printed, in 5 vols.
Octavo;
TmLSMENTS" OF POLITICAL SCIENCE.
JLJ By JOHN CRAIG.
Printed for 'l'. Cadell and W. Davies, Strand, London ; and
W.Blackwood, at Edinburgh.
* m * This Treatise is divided into three Books—On the Consti-
tution of Government —the Duties of Government—and the Re-
venues of Government.—Under these heads, it is proposed to give
a connected and systematic View of Politics, and of that im-
portant branch of the Science usually denominated Political -
Economy. ,
SKETC?IING FROM NATURE.—Just published, in four
Parts, elegantly printed in imperial 4td. Parc the First, price
rpHE PRINCIPLES and PRACTICE of
I SKETCHING LANDSCAPE SCENERY from Nature,
systematically arranged, and illustrated by Sixteen Examples In
each part. By JOHN GEO RG E\VOOD,F. S. A. Lecturer on
Perspective at the Royal Institution.
In this work the fundamental rules df the art are so interwoven
with the practice, as to render the attainment of the principle an
unavoidable consequence of copying the examples. It cannot
therefore fail to prove eminently serviceable to those who are
d-sirous of Sketching Landscape Scenery with confidence and fa-
cility, and is strongly recommended to families residing in the
country, remote from a competent instructor, being carefully
adapted to the comprehensions of young persons.
Printed for, and »old by the Author, No. 7, Beaumont-street ;
and may be hud by application to the Booksellers and Priritsellers,
Either parr maybe purchased separately.
MR. WOODFALL’S JUNIUS. —This day is published, hand-
somely printed in three volumes Bvo. price' 2/. 2s. In a
New and Complete Edition (being the Second) of
r PHE LETTERS of JUNIUS; including Letters
X by the same Writer under various other Signatures, now
first Collected. To which are added, his confidential Correspon-
dence with Mr. Wilkes, and his private Letters, a idrcosed to
Mr. H. 8. Wdodfail, with a preliminary Essay and Notes, the
new Matter forming.at least two-thirds of the Work. Illustrated
with Fac-simijies of die Hind-writings of Junius, Mr. Burke,
Mi. Wilkes, Mr. Horne, Mr Dunning, Mr. W. G. Hamilton,
ike. from the Originals, now in the of bis son | Mr.
G. Woodfall A le\v| Copies may be had on royal pap*’*, price
3j. ss. in boards.
Printed for F. C. and J. Rivington; T. Payne; C. Wlkie;
Longman, Hurst, Rees, Orme, and Brown; Cadell and Davies;
J. Murray; J. M.wmau ; and R.-Baldwin.
Just published, the second edition, handsomely printed in 4to,
price 2/. 2s. and enlarged by very connsiderable additions,
A VOYAGE round the WORLD, exhibiting a
full and a comprehensive view of the present State of. Ma-
deira, the Brazils, Cape of Good Hope, and Botany Bay, the
V Society, Sandwich, and Friendly island , NeW Zealand, &c.
By JOHN TURNBULL.
3- tc This Voyage foryns a pleasing contrast to the pompous and
:t. suspicious narratives of the French travellers, who have almost
mom polised the manufacture of lying wonders. To such pro-
>n ductions we are glad to oppose the staple of Mr. Turnbull’ solid
, communications, and to give them the patronage of the British
*7 Review.”—British Review for October lBis.
“ We-consider this work one of the most interesting books of
r - Travti which hav*e appeared for many years.”—Edinburgh Rev.
A, Sold by all the Booksellers.
served an Apprenticeship of t-ven years thereto-
Mr. CHRISTOPHER GEORGE, in the Chair.
Resolved unanimously, That it is the opinion of this Meeting,
as well from long and attentive observation, as fro i actual expe-
rience, that the Penal parts of the Statute, sth Elizabeth, Chap.
4, (however proper or,necessary in the infancy of commerce and
manufactures, when they were subjected to - the shackles of mo-
nopoly in various branches) are now and long have been found to
present numerous obstacles to trade and manufactures, and there-
by to the national prosperity. \n;l tins Meeting is fully persuad-
ed that the Penal Provisions of the Statute are quite as inapplica-
ble to the present tunes as the monopolies before alluded to, am|
which an enlightened policy has long since annulled as destructive
to the best interests of this country.
Resolved unanimously, That this Meeting* though desirous by
all means in its power, to promote the free exerHse of trade and
manufacture,f by r unloving iu restraints and enlarging its facili-
ties, is by no means insen tible of the advantages derived from ap-
prentices!!];), and more especially as applicable to the due and
eariy instruction of youth, not only in the immediate branches to
which their tone is applied, but also in general habits of sobriety,
subordination and morality, so e ssential to their own well being-,
and to the welfare of the community.
Resolved Unanimously, That in the judgment of this Meeting,
persons devoting thffir.tiir.e and talent by apprenticeship to the
several branches of trade and manufacture, will be always secure
pf that advantage widen the early and progressive knowledge re-
sulting from.such a cause, will naturally give them over persons
less instructed.
Resolved unanimously* That a Petition be presented to the
Honourable the House of Commons on behalf of the Master
Maniiiv.cturp s and Tradesmen of this city, for the purpose of
giving effect to Mr. Serjeant Onslow’s views in bis intended mo-
tion,-and . licit the Members in Parliament for this City be re-
quested to present the same, and give their support thereto in
Resolved unanimously. That the Thanks of this Meeting be
presented to Mr. Serjeant Onslow, for his disinterested and
spirited exertions on behalf of the Trading and Manufacturing
Interest.
, Resolved unanimously, That a Committee be now appointed,
with authority to prepare a Petition upon the spirit of tlu -e Re-
solutions, and to take such other measures on behalf oft he Master
Manufacturers and Tradesmen of this city, as they may see fit
.and necessary; that any five or such Comutitee be a quorum, and
that the following persons do compose such- Committee, with
power to add. >ther Members to their number. -:,0
Mr, Christopl er George j . Mr. James Johnson
Mr. William Acraman j Sir. John Hare, jun.
Mr. T. S. Protheroe | Mr. Thomas Lewis
Mr. Preston Edgar , Mr. 'Thomas Prichard
Mr. George Jones Mr. Francis Baugh
Mr. 'Thomas Perry j Mr. VV'.ilrer W illiams
Mr. Robert Fripp -Mr. Richard tilopsc
Mr. Richard Robinson | Mr. Henry F>scn
Mr. Thomas Gough j Mr. James Thomas
Mr. Charles Gn sley . J hlr. JIE Pomuney
Resolved unanimously. That the foregoing Resolutions be ad-
vertised once in each Bristol Newspaper, and in the Courier
and Traveller, London Pa.v.-rs.
CHRISTOPHER GE(HIGE, Chairman.
The Chairman having left the Chair, the Thanks of the Meet-
ing were unanimously voted ,to hp.n, for his able and attentive
(conduct therein.
STIRLINGSHIRE.-At Stirling, the 2Srh day of Iffib 1814
AT a numerous and- respectable Meeting of the Gen-
tlemen of the County of Stirling, held here this day, called
together by the Convener, for considering the state of the
CGKN LAWS,
THOMAS GRAHAM STIRLING of Airth, Esq.
Convener of the County, in the Chair :
The Meeting having taken into consideration the existing state
#f the Corn Laws, and also the Report of the Select Committee
of the House of Commons on these Laws, are of opini -n, that it
is expedient to let the sentiments of this Count) be known upon
a subject so deeply affecting the welfare of the State.
After mature deliberation, tiie Meeting, 0:1 the motion of Mr.
Graham Stirling of Airth. seconded by Mr. Ogilvie oi Gairdoch,
unanimously adopted the following Resolutions ;
Ist, That it is the decided opinion of this Meeting, that some
legislative provision, is at present absolutely .necessary tor the
of the commerce of grain.
2d, That this Meeting perfectly approve of the general princi-
pk:. upon which the Select Committee of the House of Commons
Lav,- iounded their Resolutions and Report relating to this
Subject.
3d, That a legislative provision, proceeding on these principles,
•will not only be beneficial to the landed interest, by affording
pn encouragement do agriculture, bu: also to the commercial and
jnanufucruring classes of the community, by extending the culti-
•yatioir'of grain within the country, preventing the occasional re-
sWrnsffif scarcity, and insuring greater steadiness and regularity
*A' pn.v
i I,v: Meeting then resolved, That copies of these Resolutions
£>o t. r warded to the Lord lieutenant, the Member for the Coun-
ty, and others, Peers and Members of Parliament, connected
Stirlingshire, and that they be requested to support, in their
jpiaces in Parliament, such pleasures as may be brought forward
founded on these principles.
Resolved, That the thanks of this Meeting be given to Sir
Henry Parnell, the Chairman, and the other Members of the
Belect Committee of the House of Commons on the Corn Laws,
for the clear and luminous view of the subject given in their Re-
port to the House, and lor the great exertions they have made to
obtain an alteration of these laws.
Teat the Chairman be requested to communicate the above Re-
solution to Sir Henry Parnell.
Resolved, Thatia. se Resolutions be published in the usual
Edinburgh Newspapers, and also in the London Courier.
(Signed) T: j DMAS G RAMAM STIRL! NG, Presses.
Tiie Preses havin ’, left the Chair, the thanks df the Meeting
were unanimously voted to him for his conduct on this occasion.
Extracted from the Minutes of the Meeting, by
THUS. WXNGATE, Clerk.
T JpHE CASE of the WIDOW and FAMILY of the
JL Rev. WILLIAM JOHNSON, J 3., A. (formerly of St.
John’s College, Cambridge), late Vicar of Wjggvnhall St. Ger-
mans, near Lynn, in the county of Norfolk, who died suddenly,
on Thursday, the 10th February, aged 45 years.
•Mr. Johnson was a man of primitive simplicity, integrity, and
piety. He laboured faithfully and successfully in his ministry in
a situation much retired from the world, and with such inconsi-
derable means of support, as exposed hnn«eli v and family to priva-
tions hardly to be conceived by those who know the bleating of
competency. The income derived from Lis Vicarage did not ex-
ceed-Thirty Pounds a year; and he received, in addition, Forty
Pounds from the neighbouring Curacy of Wiggenhall hit. Mary
Magdalen ; so that he could never be said to possess more than
Seventy Pounds per annum.
With this scam / pittance, and the produce of his Vicarage Gar-
den, he maintained a Wife and family of Seven Children without
involving himself in debt, and without having ever been hetird,
by his most intimate friends, to utter a word of complaint; on the
contrary, he repeatedly expressed his entire satisfaction and con-
tentment with the lot winch Providence had assigned' him. (due
striking instance of this, and of his disinterested principle*, de-
serves to be mentioned. When a sum of money was, some years
since,.offen d to him by the Trustees of a public fund for rhe re-
lict of Ihe Clergy, he modestly declined it,with the observation
! hat there might be other Clergymen who wanted it more than
himself.
But, t£ though poor,” he was an instrument of “ making maw
rich;” and numbers we e seen to weep over his grave with the
deep-felt conviction that they had lost a faithful Pastor and a truly
valuable Friend. Surely the surviving family of such a man have
an irresistible claim to general compassion and liberal assistance.
They are left entirely destitute .of provision; except that the eld-
est son is on military service abroad, and the second (through the
assistance of friends) is bound apprentice to a Surgeon. The re-
maining five are now at home with the Widow, who is herself in
very indifferent health, and in a state .of pregnancy.
No further appeal can be necessary to the feelings of the hu-
mane, e specially* amongst those who take an interest in the situa-
tion of the poorer Clergy of the Church of England, and all who
respect the character of the useful labourers in the vineyard of
Christ.
We, whose names are undersigned, do most cordially attest the
truth of the above statement, and earnestly recommend the case
of this afflicted family to the benevolence of the Public:
Lynn, Feb. 16, >Bl4.
Rev. ti. Allen, Minister of Lynij St. Margaret.
Rev. J. R. Thackeray, Vicar of Wiggenhall St. Mary
Magdalen.
Rev. E. Edwards, Rector of Lynn St. Edmund.
Rev. K. H-ankixson, Vicar of Walpole St. Andrew.
Rev. W. Hardyman, Rectorof NorthLuffenham,Rutland.
Rev. A. Iveson, Rector of East Bradenham.
Rev. A. Serve Rector of Kelvedon, Essex.
Any further information, relative tp the Case, may be obtained
of Mr. Coates, 227, Oxford-street, London.
N.B. Subscriptions will be received by Messrs. Barclay, Trit-
ton,. Be van, and Co. Lombard-street; Messrs. Down, Thornton,
and Co. Bartholomew-lane; Messrs. Ilaiufnrrsleys. Greenwood,
and Co. Ball Mall; Messrs, iloare, Fleet-street; Messrs. Lub-
bock, Lubbock, and Co. Mansion-house-street; John Mortlock,
Esq. 250, Oxford-street; Mr. Hatchard, 190, Piccadilly; Messrs.
Rivington, 62, St. Paul’s Cnurch-yara; .Mr. Seeley, 169, Fleet-
street; Messrs. Gurney and Co. Lynn; and Messrs. Mortlock,
Cambridge.
The Money subscribed will be put into the hands of the Rev.
Mr. Thackeray, the Rev. Mr. Edwards, and the Rev. Mr. Han-
kin son, for the benefit of the family.
subscribers’ names.
The Right Rev. the Rev. J. R. Thackeray 5 5
Bishop of Durham 10 0 Rev. E. Edwards 10 0
. Right Hon. Lady Mary Rev. It. Mankinson 15 0
Fitzgerald - 10 Rev. W. Hardyman 10 0
Right Honourable Lady Rev. H. Hayes - 10 O
Frances Harpur 1 0 Rev. C. Simeon - 10 0
Right Honourable Lady Win* Jenney, Esq. 3 3
Robert Manners 2 0 Mrs. Jenney - 2 2
Wm. Wilberforce, Es* ( Briscoe, JEsq. 2 2
MP. - 10 0 Wm. Rowe, Esq. - 2 0
Rev. S. Alien - 111 Mrs. Coates. - fi 0
This day is published,"price ss. (id. in boards, embellished vvitli ;I
fins portrait by Canliiii, the Second Edition of
QOME DETAILS concerning GENERAL MO-
-55 REA U, and his last Moments. Followed by a short Bio-
graphical Memoir. By PAUL SVIN4NE, charged to accom-
pany the General on the Continent.
This Work contains-many facts hitherto unknown to the Pub-
lic, which are the more interesting, trom being narrated by an
Eye-withes-, who was honoured with the conlidence of General
Moreau, and who never quitted hie-, front the moment of his
embarking ‘ram America to his Death.
The same Work may be had in French,price ss. 6d. boards.
Printed for Longman, Hurst, Rees, Orme, and Brown, Pater-
noster-row and at the l!rftis.i Gallery,s4, New Bond-street,
Jn the Press, and speedily will lie - published, ~
I TIGHT KEN HUNDRED and THIRTEEN.—
Hi A POEM, in Two Parts.
The First containing a Retrospect of the'extraordinary Events
that have taken place on the Continent of Europe during chat
period; the Second, a rapid View of the present Slate of Bri-
tain, and the probable results of .the late Occurrences.
By Mrs. GRANT, of Loggan.
Printed for Longman, Hurst, Rees, Orme, and Brown, Pa-
tcruoftcr-row; and at the British Gallery, 54, New Bond-street.
Of whom may be had,by the same Author,
1 ■ Letters from the Mountains, being the real Correspondence
of a Lady, between the years 1373 and 1107. In 3 vols. J2m6.
the fifth edition, Iss. boards.
2. Memoirs of an Ameiican Lady, with Sketches of Manners-
and Scenery in America, in 11 vols. 12mo. price 12s. boards.
3. Essays on tiie Superstitions of the Highlanders of Scotland.
In 2 vols. 12mo. 1 as. boards.
4- The Highlanders, and other Poems, in foolscap Bvo. pr. 7s.
“■TuTOPEK’S EXAMINA ITONS; NEW EDITION.
Tiiis day. is published, in a neat Pocket Volume, price ss. 6d.
-EXAMINATIONS in ANATOMY, PHYSIO-
A..,A LO(jrY, Practice of Physic, Surgery, Materia MeJica,
Chemistry", and Pharmacy; for the Use of Students.
By ROBERT HOOPER, M. D.
Third Edition, greatly enlarged and improved.
Printed for Longman, Hurst, Rees, Orme, and Brown, John
Callow, Ihomas Underwood; T. Bryce and Co andD. Brown,
Edinburgh.
FAMILY BIBLE.—On-the Istof Marchwas published, No. I.
price fid. to be continued every .Saturday ; and Part I. price 45.;
or, on Superfine Royal -Paper, price Bs. (each Part containing
E’ght Numbers), to be continued every second Month,
npilE HOLY BIBLE and the APOCRYPHA :
JL with Notes explanatory and practical, and.with appropriate
Introductions, Tables, and Indexes: also with Maps, drawn for
this Work, by Arrowsmith ; and with Plans and Copper-plate
Engravings, by the best Artists : The whole to be completed in
Two Quarto Volumes, being arranged un 4er the sanction of the
Society.for Promoting Christian Knowledge, and dedicated, by
permission, to the Most ReVci rid the Lord Archbishop of Can-
terbury.—By the Rev. GEORGE D’OYLEY, B D. and the
Rev. RICHARD MANX, ALA. his Grace’s Domestic Chap-
lains.
Printed for the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge,
at the Clarendon Press, Oxford ; and sold by F. C. and J. Riving-
ton, Booksellers to the Society,St. Paul’s Church-yard, London;
and by all other Booksellers in the United Kingdom*
Kl RWAN’S SERMONS.
This day are published, in One Volufri:;, Octavo, with a Por-
trait of the-Author, 12s. boards,
'QERMONS. By the late Rev,WALTER BLAKE
O KIR WAN, Dean of Killala. With a-Sketch of his Life.
Printed for Longman, lluiot, Rees, Orme, and Brown, Pa-
teiMostqr-row.
« Ur. Kirwau preferred our country and our religion, and
brought to both, genius superior to what he found in either. He
called forth the latent virtues of the human heart, and taught men
to discover in themselves a mine of charity, of which the Proprie-
tors had been unconscious. He came to interrupt the repose of
the pulpit, and shakes one world with the thunder of the other.
The preacher’s desk becomes the throne-;>f light.”
Mr. Grattan’s Speech, June 19, 1792.
A few Copies are printed on Royal Paper, price One Guinea,
in boards.
This day is published, in royal folio, containing two highly
finished Caricatures, La Vignette Title (to be continued every
fortnight) price 2s. of - r
ROWLANDSON’S CARICATURE MAG A-
ZINE, for February. This Number will form the first of
a new series, and consist of Original Subjects only; designed
and engraved by THOMAS ROWLANDSON, Esq.
The object of this Work is to give a humourous Caricature
History of the Times.
Printed for Thomas Tegg, No.lll, Cheapside; Wm.Allasdn,
No. 31, Bond-street; J. Dick, Edinburgh; and all other Book-
sellers.
This day is published, in 3 vols. price2ls.'
.fVDONNEL, a National Tale, by LADY MOR-
GAN (late Miss Owensonj, Author of the Wild Irish Girl,
Novice of St, Dominick, &c. &c.
Printed for H. Colborn, 50, Conduit-street; and sold also by
G. Goldie, Edinburgh; and J. Gumming, Dublin. To - prevent
disappointment,’ it is requested that the public will transmit their
orders early to their respective Booksellers; of whom may-also
be had- just published,
Amabel, or Memoirs of a Woman of Fashion ; by Mrs. Her*
vey. Author of the Mourtray Family, 4 vols. 28s.
The Wife and the Lover, by Miss Hokroft, 5-vols, 18s. *
Traits of Nature; by Miss--Burney; 4 vols. 2Ss.
Geraldine Faucontxrg, by the Same, 5 vols. 21s.
Zulma, by Mud. de Stuel llolsiein, ‘J vols. 10s. -fid. ' *
This day is published, the'Kurd Number, p ice 2s. 60.
continued regularly on the Ist oi every-Mouth) of
rnHE REJECTED THEATRE ; or; a Collection
JL of DRAMAS which have been offered for Representation,
but declined by the Managers of the Playhouses,
Contents ;—Theodora, a Tragedy.—The Word of Honour, a
Comedy.—'l*he Bandit, an Opera.
Published by 11. Colburn, 50, Conduit-street ; and sold also by
G.and J. Robinson, 25, Paternoster-row, London; G.‘ Goldie,
Edinburgh; and J. Gumming, Dublin; of whom and all Book-
sellers may be had the First and Second Number? of this "Work,
containing, A View of the present State of the English Stage.
The Witness, a Tragedy.—lntrigues of li Day, a Comedy,-— •>
The Watch-House, a Farce.—The Prophetess, a Tragedy.—
The Masquerade, a Comedy. Each piece is accompanied with
critical remarks by the Editor, for whom Plays intended for in-
sertion are to be addressed (free of expense) to the Publisher.


Tn the PROPRIETORS of EAST-INDIA STOCK.
L.AFU.KS ANB'GeKTIEJTEN,
IjA b x.i- o -v 1, '■“ - - ‘ “ , 111 LUC Uk>lL
r ipHE present state .of Captain Millett s health hav-
X ing induced him to decline offering himself again to become
i Member kt'' tee Court of Direcrors, permit me to renew my
oliciuition tor the honour of your sup port at the General Election A List pi
n April next. 1 be; leave respectfully to submit to your consider tas in
•avion the present state of the DirectLoii, as connected with the lun. 1:
narithv.e branch of your affairs, there being at this time only Kill*
hree. Naval Members 'belonging to your Court; of whom one midshipr
a, iU be out in April by rotation ; whilst in the year I*os, when the gan, qua
uoportion was much greater,it was deemed expedient to increase Johnson
he number, on tiie unanimous recommendation of the Court of and Job
Directors. , ' Robert
Upon the death of your late worthy Director, Captain Kobert George
vViliiams, 1 first had the honour to declare my intention of offer- men; J
ng my service •, resting my pretensions to your favour, princi- Artis, y
rally on thexoperience I had acquired during more than twenty- 2d class,
ive years, passed in your regular naval service, and with a deter- Woy
ninadon to dev etc the whole of my time to the duties o the stoke, ir
rust to be reposed in me, should I succeed to this great object of verely;
ny ambition. Tim uniform flattering reception I have experienc- ordinar
;d on my canvass demands my grateful acknowledgment, and Robert
uicourages me to look With, confidence through your favour to seve
he day of election. . ■ seaman
I have the honour to be, with great respect, ward C
■ Ladies and Gentlemen, ly; Wr
Your most oh- liebt and very humble servant, seann.ni
>6, Georg e-street, Hanoycr- WJVI. STANLEY'CLARKE, slight y;
square, March 4, 1814. able s-<
From the LONDON GAZETTE of March 5.
Admiralty-Office •>. March 5.
Copy of a Letter from Admiral Lord Keith, K. 13. to John Mil- Joh
son Croker, Esq. dated on board his Majesty’s ship York, in dina
Cavvs-and Bay,the 2d lust.
Sir,— -I have the honour to inclose, for the informa-
fion of the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, a S ev
:opy ofa letter from Captain Phillimore, reporting the
tapture of La Cjorinde French frigate, after a most severe (
conflict, on the evening of the 25th ult. between her and
ihe Eurotas; an action which reflects the highest honour
upon the bravery and professional skill of Captain Philli-
more and his officers, and upon the valour and good con-
duct of his crew. Captain Phillimore has been severely ga ;
wounded on the occasion, but I entertain a flattering 0 f
hope that "bis Majesty’s service, and the country at large, ex
will not long be deprived of the services of so valuable an <j e .
FRENCH PAPERS.
MARSEILLES, FEB. 17.
A division of three sail of the line and three frigates
sailed from Toulon on the 12th lust, under the command
of Admiral Cosmao, to meet a ship of the line that was
Officer. I hate the honour, to bej &c. course for Toulon in defiance of all the manoeuvres of the
Keith, Admiral. enemy, who pursued them tinder a cloud ©f canvas. The
’ headmost vessels passed without being much molested,
His Majesty’s ship Eurotas, Plymouth Sound, k ut Romulus and the Adrienne frigate, which brought
March i, 1814. j-he rear, were hard pressed by all the ships of the line
My Lord, —l have the honour to inform your Lord- tilg enemy’s van. The Romulus had to sustain an ac-
ship, that his Majesty’s ship under my command, parted ,y. n two three-deckers, and defended herself valiant-
company from the Rippon on Monday night, the 21st keeping up a running fight as she stood before the
ult. in chp.se of a vessel which proved to be‘ a Swedish w ; nd- 1 i&er an action of three-quarters of an hour,' the
merchant ship, and on Friday the 25th, in endeavouring w [ u) j e S q Ua dron came to anchor in the Roads. The Ro-
to rejoin the Rippon, being then in latitude 47. 40. north, mu i us R-d only 70 men put hors de combat, and the
And longitude 9. 30. west, we perceived a sail upon the dl .; enne j|, The enemy’s loss- must have been consi-
ke beam, to which we gave chase. We soon discovered . derabie. The shin expected from Genoa left it on the
. . » ,* * 1.1.1 „ J . ',‘r. . 1 - J 1 ‘' . .I- - .1
iier to be an enemy’s frigate; and that she was endeavour- . i 3 th, and entered Toulon on the 14th in the mornings
ing to out-manoeuvre is th bringing her to'action ; but The-French squadron was, on the same day, under sail,
having rfmcli the advantage in sailing, (although the and (-j le enemy’s squadron was in signt.
-wind had unfortunately died away) wa were enabled at , milan, feb. 19. |
about five o’clock to pass under her stern, hail her, and The Prince Viceroy having directed the Royal Guard j
commence close action. . p - upon S, ilo, to 'which, place the enemy had pushed a co-
When receiving-her broadside and passing to her bow, iLm of 2000 men, took possession of that city on the,
our mizAi mast was shot away. I then ofdercd the helm j(j t h 5 ; n defiance of all resistance. 'J he young chas-
to be put down to -lay her aboard, but the wreck of’ cur 6eura of the guard, with the brave Colonel Peraldi at
mizen mast lying on our quarter, jirevented this desirable jj,eir head, carried, -’at • the point of the bayonet, the j
object from being accomplished. outer gate of the city, which the eneniy had entrenched, j
The enemy just passed clear ,of us, and both officers 'PLig exploit secures the left of the army, wnich the I
and men of the Eurotas renewed the action with the most encm y wa3 endeavouring to disturb on the side of the
determined bravery and resolution, while the enemy re- mountains. The enemy fled towards Toscolano in the j
turned our fire in a warm and gallant manner. V.-esuc- greatest disorder, and was pursued swqrd in hand ; we;
-x-eded in raking her-again, and then lay broadside to £oo kfrcm them one officer, and 80 sub officers and sol- j
broadside ; at 6. 20. our mam mast fell by the.board, the Vve have had 39 wounded, and 11- killed; among j
enemy’s mizen mast falling at the. same time ;at 6. 50. t j le i a££C r » ve have to regret three officers. Ihe flotilla j
our fore-mast fell, and the enemy s mainmast almost irn- on lake of Guarda, commanded by Captain Tem
mediately afterwards. At ten minutes alter seven she p; ei - ( contributed to our success, by cannonading the
slackened her fire, but having her foremast standing, she enemy’s columns on the roads skirting the lake, which
succeeded with her fore sail in getting out of range. f or c ed from 5 to 600 men to dispeise themselves in the
During the whole of the action we kept up a heavy and moun£a ; ns , after throwing away their arms. General
well directed fire ; nor do I know which most to admire, Theodore Lechi has communicated to the Royal Guards
the seamen at the great guns, or'the marines with their p r j nc g Viceroy’s satisfaction with the conduct of the
small arms, they vying .with each other who should most troo p 6 employed in this action.
annov the-enemy. j , February 21.
I was at this time so much exhausted by the io* of The accounts we receive from the Minc-io state, that
blood, from wounds I had received in the early part m p'; e ld- Marshal Bellpgarde has fixed his head-quarters at
the action from a grape shot, that I found it impossible Verona. Lieut.-General Couni, Neuperg has assumed,
for me to refnain any longer upon deck. I was therefore , w ; t fo n £ j lese two days, the command of the Austrian
under the painful necessity of 1 desiring Liutenant Smith | troops in the fiist line. The deserters agree that the
(First Lieutenant) to take command of the quarter deck, ?nem y su ff ers greatly for want of forage. One could
and to clear the wreck of the foremast and mainmast, ot f ind) at this time, twenty trusses of hay and a sack of
which then lay nearly fora and aft the deck, and to oats between the Adige and the Mincio. Since the-
make sail after the enemy ; but at same time, I had battle oh the Bth, the enemy has been reinforced by the
the satisfaction of, reflecting that I had left the command | re gi m ent of cavalry of Hohenzoiiem, and a regiment of
in the hands of a most active and zealous officer. | cuirassiers, said to be that of Bommariva. Ihe enemy
We kept sight of the enemy during the night by j jj ave lately required at Verona a thousand waggons
means of boat-sails and a jigger on the ensign staff; and 1 , !los t]y fo transport the soldiers wounded in the last
before twelve o’clock next day, Lieut. Smith reported to battle.
me, that by the. great exertions of every officer and man, nismes, feb. 19. ,
jury-courses, topsails, staysails, and spanker, were set in The 13th regiment of cuirassiers, halted here on tne
chase of the enemy, who had not even cleared away his ,-gb Instant, Several columns-of troops, travelling post,
wreck, and that we were coming up with her very fast, forming a corps of ten thousand infantry, passed through
going at the rate of six and a halt knots : that the decks t j, g department in the course of the week. Two regi-
wefe perfectly clear ; and that the officers and men were ment g 0 f fosileers followed, and proceeded to Lyons.
as eager to renew the'action' as thby were to commence perpignaN, feb. 21.
it; but, to the great mortification of every one on bpard, Tbe nine fortresses in this department are now cora-
we perceived two sail on the lee bow, which proved to purely furnished with provisions, and in the nest state of
be tlie Dryad id Achates, and they having - crossed thy defence.
enemy (we e - four or five miles distant) before wc PARIS, feb. 25.
could get up o. .d-w, deprived us of the gratification of .Wc have received news from a Chateau beyond Troyes.
having her colours hauled down to us. The enemy have exercised all manner or devastations
The,enemy’s frigate proved to be the Ciorinde, Capt. there. The country is become a desert, all the inhabit,
Dennis Legard, mounting 44 guns, tvitn four brass ants have fled ; for miles around not a head ot cattle is to
swivels in each top, and a complement ol 360 pictted found. There prevails a great animosity between the
men. Russian and Austrian officers, ihey refuse to lodge or
It is with sincere regret I have to state that our loss Pat together. Mjny bloody quarrels have taken place
is considerable, having twenty killed and forty wound- between them in the court-yard ot the Chateau. The
ed; and I most sincerely lament the loss of three fine Russfons treat the Austrians with the most insulting con-
young Midshipmen, two of whom had served the whole tempt. The inhabitants of the invaded countries make a
of their time with trie, and who all promised to be orna- o- rea t difference between the soldiers of the two nations;
ments to the service. Among the wounded is Lieu- the Austrians are indeed very exhorbitant in their de-
tenant Foord, of the Royal Marines,who received a niands, but they are not cruel; whereas the Russians
grape shot in his thigh, while gallantly heading nis b ave al i instinctive ferocity, which nothing can sotten.
party. One seeks in vain to distinguish the vassal from the man
I learn from Monsieur Gerard, one of the French Or- w ! 10 supposed to have received some education, the
fleers, that they calculated their loss on board the Cio- ] a ttcr has, indeed, some external appearance of urbanity,
rinde at 120 men. It is therefore unnecessary for .me to which excites some hopes, but one is soon undeceived,
particularize the exertions of every individual on board of an d tire natural disposition resumes its empire,
this ship, pr the promptness wifh which, every order was MILAN, feb. 14.
put into execution by so young a ship’s compare ; but I q‘b e Senate having deliberated on the Proclamation of
must beg leave to mention the able assistance which I re- t he Prince Viceroy to the people of Italy, has resolved to
ceived from Lieutenants Smith, Graves, Randolph, and ■ p rese nt his Imperial Highness the following address :
Beckham, Mr. Bcadnell, the Master,, and Lieutenants “Prince—You have spoken to the Italian people;
Foord and Connell, of the Royal Marines ; the very great and at your voice all those among us have rallied, who
skill and attention shewn by Mr, Thomas Cooke Jones, are faithful to their Sovereign, to their country, and to
Surgeon, in the dischargeof his important duties; the ac- their honour. During peace, you provided with pater-
tive seifoi'ces of Mr. J. Bryan, the Purser, and the whole na ] solicitude and wise foresight, for all the wants of the
of the warrant officers, with all the mates and midship- kingdom, and opened to it all the sources of public pros-
men, whom I beg leave most strongly to recommend perity. Now the din of a new war calls you again to arms
so your Lordship’s notice. . 1 for our defence. You hare found means, during three
t , 4 r. n r .u, VUM »--l wounded and have 1 months, to eppose to the enemy sttch a resistance, that tacreow the Dtdcc of Cartridge is expected here, to re-
I enclose a list of the killed ana wounded, and nave of our terr Jo ry, pro£ecvd by your view the corps of Walmodcn, which will immediate!*-
the honom to c. j. p H(LLIMC , RE , Capt. powerful arm, has remained.undisturbed amidst the con- march for the llhme.
trrlvioK flip I’psf of .Ifuiirone. 1 his tran- g-jient, FEE. Zd-
Will) lIH'I " -
ftagration which rages in the rest of Europe. 1 his tran- GHENT, fee.23.
quiliity would certainly not have been interrupted a Wp learn from Coutray, that the Allied troops, wr h
moment, but for an event which has no parallel in the took possession of that town, had advanced towaraa
history of nations. But you will triumph overall in- Ypresl The latter town, as well as Viewport and Os-
trigues and machinations. Providence abhors ingrati- ,tend, had been, summoned to surrender. The Allied
tude, and avenges violated hospitality. The star iff troops are in possession of Paperingen, Belle, and the aur-.
Napoleon still °shines with great. lustre ; and if you, rounding places. {I spy had been taken at Comtray,
Prince, remain at our head, who can fear that victory will who was on his way to Antwerp with dispatches,
abandon us. . . . February ~‘ 1 '" ,
u pdnee ! • The fate of this fine kingdom Ls in your We learn from the vicinity of Ostand, that the enemy »
hands ; the whole people will be docile, and will be ea- garrison in that town is 1200 strong. They had made
ger to answer to your call. Your voice, penetrating the several destructive sallies, collecting grain and levying
enemy’s lines, will inflame with new courage all the Ita- contributions. Last week 300 of them made atsally aa
lians who are surrounded by the foe, and who»a he seeks far as Slycker Sas, to pierce the dyke, by which the
to seduce by senseless promises. We all swear to unite whole environs of Ostend would have been laid under
with you ; we devote you our sentiments, our means, and water. Fortunately, they were prevented from effecting
pur persons, and our oath is sacred. Ah! who would their object by the peasants, who collected to the number
not be proud of following a guide whose invincible valour of between S and 4000, with weapons of all kinds, and
the enemy themselves praise; a Prince whose virtues drove them hack with some loss,
would suffice to make our age honoured by posterity; a dantzic, fee, 3.
hero who has chosen the only sublime, the onlv humor- The high Allied Powers having determined the fate
tal motto—honour and fidelity-! of our.city and fortress, in consequence of which they
“ Milan, in the Palace of the Senate,, Feb. 10, 1S14.” were this day delivered up by the, Russian to the Prussian
[The Municipality of the city of Paris assembled on troops, his Royal Highness Duke Alexanderpf W iitem-
the 26th in the Town Hall to receive the Deputies of berg, commander of the allied besieging army, has this
the towns of Montereau, Sezanne, Nogent-sur-Seine, day informed the government of this dry, that Dantzic,
Provins, and Chateau Thierry, sent to communicate the with its territory, is to return under 'the dominion of ,
details of what they have suffered from the enemy. These Prussia. The Proclamation made by his Excellency the,
details, which are given at length, with the ’signatures of Prussian Lieut.-General Von Massenbach, which has
all the deputies, in the Moniteur and’ other papers, are just been published, has certified this happy occurrence t»
too long and too revolting to be given entire. They the great joy of the inhabitants.
present a series of pictures, which may serve as com- ■ ■ , —■■=■
panions to those of the atrocities of the French them- BREMEN MAILS,
selves in those unhappy countries, which have witnessed ——
„ . . L w /* 1 - CIVTU HIT T PTTM
the retreat of their discomfited armies. SIX i H PUI.I.F. 1 1 N. *
The desolated environs, of Leipsic and Hemburgh, if Mnad-quarters of hi, LxcellenCj- the General m Ch.ef of the,
lilt uuupucuumiuu. 1 . . . B Army of Poland, Pinneberg, near Hamburgh,
we are to believe these accounts, find their counterpart on , ,
H u ,L and the Marne: and the scenes 17th February deserves to be accounted .among,
cxfictA ffiom S Genom Ahey felTin with the English | the tauks °f the Seine and the
fleet to the southward of Cape Side, but continued their t h e folloWuamffe. which iT nearly rep Ca- Russians on the'Kibe strove not to.be behind hand with.
their companions -n arms on the Seine.
The General in Chief, Count Benfiigsen, on this day
gave orders for a similar exjiedition to that of the 9th of
February against W’ilhelrhsburg to be undertaken, by-
causing the fortresses of Hamburg and Hamburg to be
threatened by the Generals Tschaplitz, Chepelef, and
Ahrendscheld, by making false attacks. The General
of Infantry, Von Doetroff, pushed forward with two.
columns under the command of the Generals Count
Tolstoy and Von Emme, towards Wilhelmsburgh, by
the way of the Bill and Ochsenwerder, for the purpose
of joining the column of General Von Markoff, on the
road of communication between Hamburgh and Haar-
burgh; which column was taking the same direction
from the side of Altona, by the way of the Rhelerstier.
Marshal Davoust knowing us to be the real masters
of Wilhelmsburgh, and nevertheless obliged to defend
this fortified island to preserve his communication with
Harburgh, although unable to. remain there, gave, wo
are sorry to say, as being too‘-early apprised of our attack,
on the approach of our Columns, several signals, by-
burning a house on Wilhelmsburg, and, firing of rockets,
on which the enemy’s posts on \\ ilhelmsburg qnd ad-
jacentislands endeavoured immediately to form a junction,
and by fighting their way, to receive assistance from the
fortresses. Our columns would not permit this junction to
take; place, but pushed directly forward towards the high
road, where they formed en Jror.ls against Hambro’ and
Haarburg, and drove the separated eilemy behind the
walls of that city ; Gen. Arentcheld supported this ope-
ration by a demonstration which lie made at the same
time against Haarburg, to the satisfaction ePthe,General
in Chief, and thereby rendered jt easier for' the troops,
pushing forward against Haarburg from Wilhelmsburg
to effect the burning of the bridge of Communicafion
near Haarburg, which was of the greatest conse-
quence; Haarburg was thereby become totally, sepa-
SPANISH PAPERS.
IMPERIAL ARMY OF ASUIAGON AND CATALONIA,
GOVERNMENT OF BARCELONA.
PUBLIC ORDER.
TO THE INHABITANTS OF THE CITV AND DISTRICT. TOaQ, WilCrC t.iey lOni.eU CH A1.m.0.0 .DU
“ I am ordered to defend the important fortress of Haarburg, and drove the separated eilemy behind tne
Barcelona and I will etnolov for its protection all the walls of that city; Gen. Arentcheld-supported this Ape-
zeal that honour and duty demand. ration by a demonstration which he made at the same
“ Ye talk of enjoying peace, but your intrigues delay .time against Haarburg, to the satisfaction cl'theAreneral
that blessing and the war must be continued. I announce in Chief, and thereby rendered it easier.for the troops,
to VOU, that it is my order to fight with spirit and con- pushing forward against Haarburg from Wilhelmsburg
stancy at this station, coveted by the English, and I will to effect the burning of the bridge of communication
fulfil the purpose of his Excellency the Duke of AWera. near Haarburg, which was of the greatest conse-
<« I know that there exist among ye dangerous per- quence ; Haarburg was thereby become totally, sepa-
sons who have often transmitted intelligence to the ene- rated from Hamburgh, had it been consistent with-the
Vio ilant means have been taken to detect them, and plans of phe General in Cniei to keep possession of
should tuev.be. discovered, exemplary punishment awaits Wisher,burg. As theintent of this expedition had by this
them. Leave to the Governors, and to the Military means beensounexpectedly soon fulfilled even before noon;
Chiefs who are their orvans, the task of discussing and the Prince of Eckmuhl with his army, which has
those interests by which your fate is to be determined, already decreased to about 20,000 men, was sheltering
Gbev die orders they give, keep away from all criminal himself in dread, behind bis wails; the General in Chief
ass»mbU-s, lest L employ the severest measures to avert Count Benningsen, gave orders for quitting again Wil-
the" mischievous consequences. helm«bcrg in the same manner as before, and for brmg-
“ The city of Barcelona is declared to be in a state of mg, the troops back to their former cantonments,
siege and ail authority rests with me, The ci' il func- | As trophies of this- day they brought with them se-
tionaries will participate with me in resorting to the vi ten officers and 393 privates as prisoners, and the soldiers
gorous expedients that pressing circumstances demand. drank to victory in the wine they had taken .rom the-
-6 (Signed) “ Baron Haßert. enemy.
“ Barcelona, Ist February.” , , The enemy, who fled too soon, lost on this day about
, (Here follows a Proclamation, declaring the city of 500 men killed and wounded, among whom there are
Barcelona in a state of siege.) ' said to be several officers of high, rank.- Our loss could
not be otherwise than trifling, as our brave soldiers w*uld
not jffive the enemy time to face about again. It never-
theless consists in 87 privates, and seven officers, a pro-
portion which is greatly to the honour of our Officers.-
Bremen Paper, Feb. 28.
DUTCH PAPERS.
. . LIICiULL CUMVIhIS 111 G| JJliVtUCftj rtm* aivui vti uv-v. 1 ,v, « |-u>’
Florence, Ftß. p ort fo n which is greatly to the honour of our Officers.-
On the 31st of January, the Neapolitan troops, under I °F e b. 28.
General Minutolo, entered this city. The Princess 1
Eliza set out next next day for Lucca. Ihe Neapo- . cnTTTTT OP PI? IWCF
litan troops are already on their march for‘Leghorn, BRITISH ARMY SOU 111 Cj. i RABLL.
which the French troops and authorities were preparing £ xtract 0 f a i, etter f rom the head-quarters of Lord
t 0 leave. COLOGNE, FEB. 19. Wellington’s Army, Feb. 15, 1814:
Pursuant to the orders of the Crown Prince of Swe- “ *>ery tiling has undergone a change since my last
d-n two flying bridges, and a bridge of boats, are to Bou.lt has . broken up fiom the line o, tne Adour, and
t j thrown over the Rhine, before our city, for the cross- marched for Pans with great part of h,s army. _ The po-
j r( , 0 f foom 16 to 20,000 Swedish troops, who are ex- smon at St. Jean Ilede I orf ..as been so lai abandoned
, i , . mj „ nr i oa t u as to leave no apprehensions from thence; and sueftet
five ‘squadrons of Swedish cavalry, has quitted Spain leaving garrisons in Barcelona and in
of very fine appearance. The Staff of the Crown Prince, other posts, and had h.s head- quarters on the 4th at
whi^ consist of arrived at must have arisen
is'suppostd that the Crown Prince will reach Aix- from some fresh successes ot the Allies, of which wc are
i /I. ii i. cm a in entire ignorance, whatever being known tKm
la-C apei eyie - • February 28. the front. Report (ever fertile,here) states, that the
The Hussar regiment of Bey passed through here on Cossacks are at Paris; hut it is useless mentioning these,
the 17th to proced to Bonn : it was destined for the things to you, to whom, of course, long ere tins, ad is
corns beriesrino- Mentz, but received counter-orders, and known. .
L now on its march to the interior of France, to join the “ A part of two British divisions have been pusheq
is now on its xiian, across the Adour, the 4th and 7th. All is preparation
a *"Yesterda-/about six thousand troops arrived here, part- for advance. Lord V\ eihngton s head-qn ‘. rs wHI bty
ly Swedish' and partly HMaseatic ; the greater part of transferred .orthwnh from wt. Jean de i-uz to 1 an (the
them have proceeded onwards, after being reviewed by the dace or nativity ot Bernadette). Lis supposed that
r pj . Sir John Hope will move with two or three divisions in
Durine hL Royal Hl-hness’s stay here, we had within the direction of Bourdeaux, while Lord Wellington,'
our wallsffie Russian enroy, Count Suchtclen ; the Aus- with the rest oi the army, marches on ihoulouse. _ Sir
1 ;>. jrnn Vim-ent- Mr Thornton, the British, John Dowme, with the Spaniards (ror that officer is cs-
GeLralTrusemavk the Prussian, and Mr. Von Bourke, pecially appointed by Lord Wellington to command the
Irenual re ■ Spanish army now here), occiipies our old positions in
the Danish envoy. Bremen, feb. 23. front of Bayonne. The Commissariat Department is
The Russo-German Legion, which belongs to the using every exertion to obtain supplies. Bullocks are
coil of Gen. Walmodcn, and is from 6to 8000 strong purchased from every part of Spain ; hay andl corn h,s-
is° now in this city; it consist chiefly of Germans and cut, salt, beef and rum, come from England, and .an
Dutch/who were formerly in the French service. To-[.dvaace wtU certamly take place, ’ -
A List of Killed and Wounded on board his Majesty’s ship Euro-
tas, in an action with the French frigate Cloriude, on the 25th
Feb. 1814.
Killed— Mr. Jeremiah Sparking and Mr. Charles Greenway,
midshipmen ; Mr. J. T. Vaughan, volunteer first class; >V Lo-
gan, ouarter-ma sfyir; Rudolph Jansenbus, able seaman; >V illia.ni
Johnson (l), landman; Robert Brown, Edward Meadows,
and John Bell, ordinary seamen ; John Neil, able seaman ;
Robert Crawford, ordinary seaman; John Hawse, landman ;
George Fox, able seaman ; John Robert Barber, land*
men; John Buxton',serjeant, Carle Haync, M m.Rodgers,Richard
Artis, private marines; Chapman.Hardick,supernumerary boy
2d class. . ' .
Wounded— -J. Phillimore, Esq.captain, severely; J. H. Bng-
stoke, midshipman, aligh ly; T. Hutchinson, quarter-master, se-
verely; Andrew White, captain of the fore-top, ditto; G. Ansell,
ordinary seaman, ditto ;'Martin Vanduplaus. able seaman, ditto;
Robert Coblev, captain of the main-top,. slightly ; John Hughes
(2) severely; Frs. Foley, able seaman, ditto; John Skitton, able
A-anuin, slightly ; Jeremiah Lee, ordinary seaman, severely ; Eu-
w arci Owens, slightly; Wm. Bromley, ordinary seaman, severe-
ly; Win. Evan--, able seaman, slightly; IVtnie, ordinary
seam-m, severely; Chisneil, Leonard Smith, able seamen,
sligh’ly; John Forster, ordinary sea man, severely-; Geo. Wright,
able s- aman, slightly; STm. Johnsion ordinary seaman, se-
ver-.-ly ; John Backhouse, ordinary seaman, ditto ; 1 bonus,
ordinary seaman, ditto; Thomas Johnston, ordinary stamaii,
ditto; John Egan, ordinary seaman ditto; M. Hayse, landman,
ditto; G. Dyson, ditto; J. Fremin.Tv.vi, ordinary seamen, dit-
to ; Sutherland, captain o i the forecastle,.ditto; ,/ohn
Glynn,ordinary eaman, ditto ; Jas. Shaw, able seaman,s.ightly ;
John Fowler, ordinary seaman, severely ; W i i. M’Namara, or-
dinary seaman, slightly.
Marines— Lieut. Foord, Jas. White, corporal, severely; Jas.
J'rayer, drummer, slightly; Js. Grundy, serjeant, severely ;
Phil. Prosser,private, slightly; J. liitchin, J. Cray, privates,
• severely. . „
(Signed) TMOS. COOKE JONES, Surgeon.
(For the remainder of the Gazette nee lust Pdgc.J
groi-HHU The following passage, wh.icn is neatly repeat- *■ j
eel iti L* the accounts, shews at least the impression the
which it is wished to give the citizens of .Paris, concern-
ing the views of the Allies: .
“To annihilate us was the;r principal and infamous e
desire; we are resolved, said they, to exterminate you, c -*'
and to take from you, for 50 years to come, the means t*'j
of fighting and defending yourselves. W e have not - 1
begun to plunder till we got to Chaumont, because we °f,
mean to fix your frontier there; but if, contrary to all
expectation, our immense army should experience re-
verses, the thunder will not be more terrible than our
vengeance.
u ln the intoxication of their ephemeral successes, the j oc
Russians publicly announced their near entrance into Pa- “ur
ns; and their design to carry oflF all the precious monu-
ments, the immortal trophies of our victories: to give up f -
Paris to pillage, to carry off the women to people their °j.
horrible deserts, to blow up the Thuilleries, and, in short, 11
to turn the scat of the fine arts into a heap of ruins.”
In another part, the Prince of Wurtembefg and the aR ‘
young Prince of Prussia, are accused of appropriating to
their own use whatever articles pleased them. j " 1
We have received news from a Chateaubeyono Troyes.


Pl' iCK OF STOCKS THIS DAY AT OJiE.
i per Ct. Cons. 70)£ I Bank Stock shut
; pe Ct. RecJ. shut Esc. Bills (Jr. ) 3 to 5 pm.
, per Cent, shut 1 Omnium 26J| pm
J per <lit Navy 977 h | Cons, for Acct. 71 1 4
THE COURIER.
MONDAY, MARCH 7.
For these two days there have been all sorts of reports,
to official intelligence or French papers having arrived.
The Armistice signed— the conferencesfor the Armistice
%oken off—a separate peace between Austria and France
—the removal under French escort of the effiatikon Pie*
,-tootentiaries to Paris—the advance of Btjlow to Meaux
-the consequent alarm at Paris—the. sudden return of
luonapaute frornpursuingSchwa rtzenberg—and
le immediate re-advance of the latter—Blucher cur-
founded—and Blucher in quick retreat upon Kheims or
Soissons. Such were the different and contradictory
nports of yesterday. T. he advance of Bulow to Meaux j j
was stated o* the authority of a letter said to have been ' wa
received from Paris, dated on the 28th Feb. at ten at the
right:—“We are in great alarm,” says that letter; “con-
siderable destruction has been occasioned by the light
troops of the enemy in our immediate neighbourhood,
Bulow has arrived at Meaux, distant 25 miles from this
city, with 25,000 men, and Gzernicheff with 6000
Cossacks.”
on
Upon the above intelligence, a morning Paper has he
observed, that Bulow could not have been at Meaux on w ;
tiie 28th, a Brussels article of the 25th mentioning that fre
fiis corps were only then preparing to march through die
Brussels. The Paris letter may have been mistaken
il the name of the General, but part of Wiszinge- q
Code’s army may still have been at Meaux On the 2/th. w ;
o' 28th u!t. The last French Bulletins informed us, soi
first, of Blucher, Yorck, and Sacken having been
attacked 'at Mery |on the Seine on the 22d, and se- .J
condly of the same- corps, -with the audition of Kle/st s , )0
and of reinforcements from Soissons (Winzinoe- e ni
Kobe’s division)' being on the 26th manoeuvring against Ca
Mar wont, who was at Ferte Gaucher.- Now, as the
bulletin mentioned, that Blucher, though attacked at
jjlery on the 22d, and driven out of the town, could not 1 ,)
k pursued, he might have continued his march upon Ti
troyes, from whence he was only 20 miles distant. As thi
le did not do this, we must suppose, that his takifig a pu
Afferent route-was from choice not compulsion : and that j
leaving of Winzingercde being cn his march from py
Joissons, followed by the rest ot the Crown Prince s i IT
amy, he determined to march and join him, and proba- un
jjy make a joint attempt upon Paris. This, it will be ob- j
aned, is in the nature of 'Blocker's military tactics.
iVhen Buonaparte made his excursions from Dresden f rc
ainst the Bohemian frontier, Blucher advanced
mi the Silesian, and Buonaparte was immediately
ced to give up his operations against the Prince of
'HWARTZENBERG, and hasten across the Elbe to op-
ose Blucher. Blucher finding that Buonaparte
ras pursuing Schwa rtzenberg to the Aube, might
rink it a favourable moment to re-adopt his Silesian
ictics, and make another movement towards Paris, espe-
dally as his army would be so strongly reinforced on its y r(
parch by Winzingerode’s division. th
«n the 25th or 26th, for the exact time is not mentioned, ot
j/e find him in front of Marmont’s position, at Ferte w
Gaucher. Marmont, who had no force strong enough £
to resist Blucher, might have fallen back, and it is
ly no means improbable, that by the' 28th the light “
toops of Blucuer’s advanced guard might have ('
ieen at Meauxi The effect of this movement of
Blucher’s, if the sickening negociation for an armis- p,
tice do not put a sudden stop to the operations here- as S p
vllas in other quarters, may be to enable him to advance th
tu Paris, or to oblige Buonaparte to measure back r ®
Ms steps with all possible speed, and give up his pursuit
of Schwartzenberg. If he direct his force against t p
Blucher, the Austrian General may re-advance to the tfi
vicinity of Paris, unless, which we cannot believe, Buo- aj
KAPAHTEhas a force capableofopposing BLUCHERinone
quarter,and Schwartzenberg in, another. And.it is j
to be considered, that all the corfritry .in the North
and North East of Blucher’s position, is open to ai
him, either to receive the reinforcements known
to be-on the,march to join him, or to fall back upon a*
them. If Buonaparte then pursue him, he must “
have Paris uncovered to the Austrians; if he proceed j
against the Austrians, he gives Blucher an oppor- J g
tunity of again advancing towards the capital. This view j si
of affairs differs somewhat from that which we were in- n
dined to take on the first perusal of the last Paris papers, j J"
■A few hours will determine whether we are correct or I t
The next arrival from France must bring us news of
great importance. We hope that one piece of that intel-
ligence will not be the arrangement of an armistice.
We Five made some further extracts from Dutch and
French Papers; one of which contains an account of a I
naval expedition from Toulon to convoy a ship of the
line from Genoa. However, they met with the English !
fleet on-their passage, and immediately made all sail back
tor Toulon. The French Paper mentions this as a most
praise worthy achievement. “ They fell in \Vith the
English fleet to the Southward of Cape Side, but con-
tinued their course for Toulon.in defiance of all the ma-
jxeuvres of the enemy, who pursued them with all sails
set,” We have no doubt the enemy ran back for port with
all possible speed, and that we pursued them as fast as we
could. Bat the enemy had no doubt a good deal the start
of us, and got back safe ; but two of their frigates, which
did not sail sowell as the rest, seem to have been severely
handled. The account says the Romulus had only 7t>
memkilied and wounded, and the Adriene IL
, There is reason to believe that Eugene Beauhar-
NOts has abandoned Milan.
nois nas ananaoneo. xviuan.
The Dutch Papers inform us that the Neapolitan
troops haVe already taken possession.of Florence,, and
were marching for Leghorn, of which they Would make
themselves masters with equal faciiit)'.
The Crown Prince was still at Cologne on the
22d. He was expected, however, to quit it in a day
or two.
It is said in private letters that a flag of truce has been
sent to Bayonne, requiring its surrender, which being
refused, a bombardment Was immediately begun by the
Spaniards, the British forces having advanced across the
Adour.
The Gazette of Saturday night contains-Capt. Phil-
-1.1 MO re’s account of the capture of La Clorinde
French frigate; to which we are enabled to add the fol-
lowing detail, some of the particulars of which have not
been noticed :—Though the Eurotas had had 20 men
killed, 40 wounded, her gallant Commander, Capt.PiiiL-
UIMORE, most dangerously wounded in the arm, and
'was lying upon the water wholly unmanageable, from
the loss of her masts, &c. yet did the remaining part
of her brave, crew, the instant that the ships separated,’
commence clearing the decks of the wreck, and rigged
up jury masts, to recommence the action as soon as day-
light should appear. This they most dexterously and
manfully performed. At the dawn of day the Eurotas
was perfectly under sail, and going down to her anta-
gonist, which was seen far to leeward, with his foremast
only standing, and a sail set upon it, endeavouringto make
her escape. A few. minutes had now only elapsed,
when the Dryad frigate, Captain Galwey, coming
from Newfoundland, appeared in sight. Yvhereupon
the Frenchman hoisted his colours,:;.lowered down a
boat, and putting a flag of truce in it, he sent an officer
to the Dryad. The French officer acquainted Cnptain
Galwey, that his ship had had a very severe action
with an English frigate, but that his Captain had re-
sources, and he was determined not to surrender his ship
unless Captain. Galwey would offer him terms !
Capt. Galway saw the Eurotas coming down under
jury-masts, and said to the French Officer, that he sup-
posed the frigate to the windward was the one he had
engaged: he said, he did not know—it might be so.
Captain G. told him he had no other terms to propose to
him, than to proceed immediately to his ship, and strike
the colours; if he did not, he should soon be alongside,
and then his Captain might, use' his resources. As the
Dryad approached th e.Clorinde, she lived a few shot at her.
TheFrenchraan hauleddown his colours.and went on board
the Dryad-to surrender his sword to Captain Galwey,
but he refused to receive it, saying, he had not struck
to the Dryad, but was the prize of, the frigate com-
ing down to him, meaning the -Eurotas. The crafty
Frenchman denied the fact, and returned to his ship.
The Dryad took- the Clorinde 'in tow, and being
under orders to proceed to Spithead, she brought her
to that port; they both arrived on Friday. We re-
gret to hear that Captain Pxiii.limore’s wound is
a very dangerous one—a grape-shot in the shoulder,
from which it is apprehended he will lose his arm : the
ball has not been extracted. He ’set a noble example
of heroism and,fortitude: although he was wounded
early in the action, he refused to quit the deck, or receive
any assistance from Mr. Joses, the surgeon—desiring
him to attend to the wounded men. Three times before
the action ceased, thptain Phillimore fainted upon
the deck, which he did not leave whilst a shot was fired ;
he landed on Thursday at Plymouth. The Achates
brig, Captain Morrison, was also in sight’when the
Clorinde struck. The Clorinde was returning to Brest,
from a four months’ cruise, during which she captured
the Townshend packet, from the Brazils, and eleven
other prizes. The Totunshcnd bad SOJXX)/. on board,
which, we understand, sunk in her:’ she burnt all her
prizes. The Sirius French friate, which sailed from
Brest with her, is still cruising.
An article from Brussels of the 14th of February says,
“ Hitherto no circumstantial account of the great battle,
(mentioned in several public prints) fought between Bar
sur Aube and Paris', has transpired here. Gen. von Win-
zingerode, who has already passed through the greater
part of Belgium, likewise, in a report published here,
speaks of that battle, but only in a few words : he confirms
the account of the enemy’s rear, which consisted of several
regiments of cavalry, being totally destroyed ; that a part
of the enemy’s cavalry endeavoured to take post at Cha-
lons, but had again been defeated by Blucher, who had
then taken possession of that place ; and finally, that
there remained only a small corps of reserve near Soissons,
and Napoleon’s weak corps in that neighbourhood.
The Prussian and Saxon troops, which had been here
for some days, are broke up for Mons.”— Bremen
i Paper, Feb. 26.
Two brigs were captured near Dover on the 4th inst.
and carried into Calais.
The following information was on Saturday received
at Lloyd’s:—“ On the 18th of January, at day-light,
in lat. 24. 2. N. long. 531 44. W. two enemy’s frigates
■fell in with the ships bound to Bermuda, uader convoy
of his Majesty’s ship Severn. Captain Nourse imme-
diately hauled out from the convoy, directing them to
steer to the'S. W. and stood towards the enemy. At
ninen.tK. being nearly within gun-shot, they were)
clearly made out to Se frigates of the largest force,
i having fourteen guns on a side on the main deck. The
Severn then wore, and soon after commenced firing her
stern-chasers, steering N. E. Captain Nourse having
the satisfaction of finding his object in standing within
gun-shot of them fully answered; their attention being
drawn from the convoy in expectation of immediately
bringing him to action. About noon the convoy was
out of sight. Captain Nourse was still ignorant' of
what nation the enemy were, when at four p. rn. the
j headmost ship coming up very close, commenced firing
and hoisted a broad pendant .with French colours.—
They continued partially engaged the whole day, the
French Commodore drawing up now and then very near,
j with the choice of bringing the Severn to close,action,
j but as often dropping astern for his second to close.
I The chase continued till the following morning, the ene-
j my’s ship very little out of gun shot at any one time, the
1 French Commodore having evidently the superiority in
I sailing, when at 9 a. m, they gave it up, after a run ot
I 160 miles. Capt. Nourse followed them, in the hope
I of falling in with some British cruiser, until dark, when
1 having split his main top-sai], the weather coming on
( thick, and being short of water, he gave up the pursuit,
j On his arrival at Bermuda, he had the satisfaction of
j finding the whole of his convoy safe, by whom he was
[ cheered. Captain Nourse sailed from Bermuda on the
j 4th ult. with the Surprise in company, in pursuit of the
J enemy.”
'y SVFFE..
A Sub-Committee having been commissioned to exa,
mine the documental papers and othei 1 scoyrces from am
which Mr. Ackermann’s Narrative of the most remark- p ai
able Events in and near Leipzig, &c. is compiled, as j
some insinuations have been thrown out, that much of
what is therein related is rather exaggerated, and Mr. ‘ rc
Ackerraann having furnished them with, the said papers, bn
they were-found to consist of- , . ■ tin
1. A .pamphlet, printed at Leipzig, entitled, “ Leip aR
z ig, wahrend der Schrechenstage der Schlachten, ion
Monat October, ISIS; ah Beytragzur Chronik dies&r
Stadt.” (“Leipzig', during the terrible Days of the H
Battles in the month of October, 18(3 ; being a .Supple- m;
ment to the History of this City. ”)■ . C
2. A printed advertisement of a large work, to be ac- .
compankd with nine plates ; the. advertisement itself 1 ,
giving a brief but comprehensive account of the battle of n h
Leipzig. -
3. A second advertisement, giving a similar descrip- /,•
tion of these battles, in German and French. w ;
4. A letter from Count Schoufrld to Mr. Ackerraann, p
describing the dreadful condition of the,villages in the .
neighbourhood of Leipsig, especially of those over which t ' a
the storm of the battle passed. - ■ It
5. An. official paper, signed by some of the .principal an
bankers and merchants .at Leipsig, containing an appeal Ti
to the benevolence of the British Public, in behalf oi the ‘
sufferers.
6. An official attestation of the truth of the statement
made in the said appeal, signed by the acting Burgomas-
ter of Leipsig, with the City seal affixed.
7. Several private letters, entering more er less into the
detail.
The'Sub-Comraittee, having read and considered the
chief parts of these several sources of information, were
unanimous in their, opinion, that far from any exagge-
ration of facts having been respited to, in presenting
this Na 'native to the British public, facts have been sup-
pressed under an idea that they might shock the feelings
of Englishmen, who, in general, by God’s mercy, have
so imperfect an idea of the horrors of a campaign, and
'die unspeakable sufferings occasioned by the presence of
contending armies,'that, to hear more of the detail con-
tained in the said papers, might destroy the effect of ex-
citing compassion by creating disgust, and doubts of the
possibility of the existence of such enormities.
> The Sub-Committee were likewise fully persuaded
that the accounts contained in these official and printed
papers could not have been published at Leipsig itself,
without being acknowledged by all as authentic, as they
would otherwise have been liable to the censure of every
reader and reviewer ; and therefore, comparing them also
with various similar accounts, received from other places,
they feel no hesitation in expressing their opinion, that
the Narrative'published by Mr.,Ackerraann is a true and
faithful representation of such facts as came within the
reporter’s own observation
Rev. W. Kurer, y Rev. C. F. Steinkopff,
Rev. Dr. Schwabs, Rev. 0. J. Latrobe.
Windsor, March 6. —-The Queen’s monthly
council met yesterday as usual, agreeably to the direc- h
tion of the Regency Act, to take into consideration the >
state of the King during the past month. P;
Yesterday the following Bulletin as to the state of the a ‘
King’s health during the last month, was exhibited at P 1
St. James’s :
“ Windsor Castle, March 5. v '
“ Ills Majesty continues under the full influence of P 1
his disorder, but his bodily health is good ; and his
Majesty has passed the month in an uniform state of f
tranquillity.” Vl
On Saturday a Cabinet Council was held at the Fo- P
reign Office.
The Prince Regent, the Duke of York, and a
select party, dined with the Earl of Uxbridge, cn
Friday. 1
The Princess Charlotte yesterday attended divine
service at the Chapel Royal, St. James’s.
It is said that the Napoleons with which the mysteri-
ous traveller, by the chaise and four, from Deal, paid his
expences, were purchased from Mr. Binss, by a draft
from a Noble Lord.
The Rev. George Murray having been appointed,
about the beginning of last year, to the Bishopric of
Sodor and Man, and presented to the Prince Regent
by the Duke of Athol, upon the occasion, it was dis-
covered, that, being only 31 years old, he had not at-
tained sufficient age to be a Bishop, 32 years being the
requisite age ; his consecration was in consequence post-
poned till yesterday, when it took place in Whitehall
Chapel. The Archbishop of York, as head of the Pro-
vince to which the Bishoprick belongs, presided on the
occasion, accompanied by the Bishops of Exeter and
Chester, and other Divines.
Extract of a letter from an Officer belonging to one of
the ships at Basque Roads :
“ basque roads, fee. 24.
“ The .Vengeur left the squadron on the 9th, to cruise
one month off L’Orient. The Warspite is on a week’s
cruise ; on her return the Dublin and Endanus will go
for a four months’ cruise off the Western Islands, so that
there'will remain the Royal Oak, Centaur, Egmont, and
Zealous, to watch the French squadron here, which con-
sists of a three-decked ship, and four ships of 74 guns
each. But from information received from the.
Master of a chasse maree, lately captured by the
squadron, it appears that all the young men have
been sent to the army, and that the French
ships are on the. eve of going up the Charante.
On the 16th instant, in consequence, it is sup-
posed, of the arrival at Aix of a French Senator
from Paris, the ships were finely decorated with
colours, and a salute of thirty guns, twice repeated,
was fired by the Ocean (flag-ship), accompanied by
afeu-deyoic at the island of Aix and along, the coast,
As all the ships did not join in the salute, we do not sup-
pose it was on account of any news of success on the part
of Buonaparte. The ships’eruising in the Bay have
NAVAL INTELLIGENCE'.
Faj. MOUTU.Marcii , a .rived y Us ;c rd 'hr Hindi
and vtoAe-revenae flutters, from a cruise ; WaUingharti,
packet, from Passages, last from Plymouth, where she
landed her mail. Arrived the Racer, Lieutenant Julian,
from Plymouth, and saiied again with the Clinker gun-
brig with a cdnvqy’ for the North coast of Spain. Sailed
tlje Reindeer sloop of war on a cruise; and the Ann,
and James and Henry, transports, for Cork.
Plymouth, March s —Arrived the Grammes and
Hazard troop ships from Portsmouth ; tire John Free-
man and Minerva from-Waterford; and the Hope from
Cork. Arrived the Nisus frigate, with, 15 sail of trans-
ports under cotvoy flora Portsmouth. Sailed the Mag-
nificent. and Clarence men. of war-on a cruise;
Harwich, March 6.—This morning arrived the
Lady Nepean packet, Captain Liveing, from Cuxhaven,
with mails, and 11 Hanoverian Officers for the King’s
German Legion. This packet took advantage of a par-
tial, breaking up of the ice, and came away last Thursday,
It does not appear that she brings apy news of import-
ance. Arrived, also the Diana, Capt. M'Donough ;
Lari:, Captain Sherlock; and Auckland packet, Captain
Bridge, having cn beard the outward Gdttenburgh mails,
with which they sailed from hence several weeks ago.
Too much praise cannot be- bestowed on the Com-
manders ot these packets, for their persevering conduct
on the occasion. After repeated but fruitless attempts
to find an inlet to the Swedish shore, and their provi-
sions being nearly expended, they put into a port of
Norway, in the hope of being received as friends, and of
forwarding their .respective mails to, their destination, but
no sooner had they entered the harbour than intimation
was given to them That unless they immediately departed,
their vessels aad themselves would in less . than an hour
be detained ; they consequently lost no time in getting to
sea again, and,there being no prospect of the ice giving
way, they determined on returning to this station. Sailed
the Rosario slpt.p of war, 4 for Sheerness; Reynard,
for Plymouth ; and the British Fair cutter, with dis-
patches for the Dutch coast. Remain the Aggressor and
Hasty several transports, and the Auckland
packet, Capt. Lyne, with the Dutch Mai! of the 4di
instant.
Portsmouth, March 6 Sailed yesterday the
Royal Sovereign, 110 guns, and the Iliudostan store-
ship, with the fleet under convoy for the Mediterranean,
with the wind at N.-E. Arrived to-day the Onyx and
Urgent, with a small convoy from the Downs. Sailed
the Hehrus, for off Cherburgh. The Intelligent gun-
brig is appointed convoy for Guernsey and Jersey. The
Bentiovi man of war, with the We'st India fleet," are ex-
pected to sail in the.morning.
The Providence, Hardy, Rom Tcneriffc for London,
a running ship, arrived here on Tuesday. The Master
states that he fell in with a cut down 74-gun ship, hav-
ing a frigate in tow, with her main yard gone. From
the length of time the frigate was repairing her top-sails
(two hours and a half), Mr. Hardy conceived her to be a
prize. He was hailed by the man of war, but before he
answered any questions, and when the man of war was
putting out a boat tor the purpose of boarding him, a
squall came on,, and lie pursued his voyage. The ships
were about five days’ sail from Gibraltar, whither he sup-
poses they were bound.
Deal, March 6. Sailed the Red-pole sloop of
war, with a convoy for Portsmouth. Arrived the Fa-
vourite sloop of war from that port, and sailed for the
River. Remain in the Downs the Monmouth, Griffon,
Si-can, Viper, and Badger,
The Mediterranean Convoy sailed from P ntsraouth
on Saturday about 60 sail, under the Roval
Sovereign, 100, Captain Caulfield, and HudcSan
store-ship; the Swinger, Capt.WAucHOPE, accompany-
ing them to a certain latitude.
The Imagine, Capt. Bamber, arrived at Portsmouth
cn Friday from Gibraltar, in 29 days. She had no com-
munication with the Mediterranean, and brought clean
bills of health from Gibraltar.
The next fleet for China and the East Indies will be
formed of the Dorsetshire, Captain Turner; Curtis,
Captain Boyce: Wexford,. Capt. Barnard ; Thames,
Capt. Riches; Henry Addington, Capt. Kirkpa-
trick, for China. Prince Regent, Captain Harris;
Surrey, Captain Beadle; Bengal, Capt. Nicholls,
for Madras and Bengal. The Phoenix and Lady Castle-
reagh, for Bengal, will accompany them, if ready ; with
the Lord Keith and Alexander, extra.ships, for Madras
and Bengal.
RAMILIES, OFF NEW LONDON.
My Dear Sir, 1 write you an hour or two before
I voluntarily proceed with a division of our chip’s crew*
to a noble trial of British pluck and skill. A challenge
having been sent by the American frigate Macedonian,
to the British frigate Statira, to dispute the honour of
their country’s flags, it has been necessary to complete
ours to the same complement as the enemy : I have there-
fore solicited to be one on so proud and glorious-an occa-
sion. I have long been in the shade of promotion, a;,i
not anticipating advancement on a coast where the enemy
will never dispute with a line of battle ship, induces me
to seek for a little eminence on board a. very fine and dis-
ciplined British frigate. Should I survive and cry “ vic-
tory ;” but, if not, all that is to be considered is, that it
is war time, and I have done ray duty.
The Authoress of the New Tragedy (which would,
otherwise have been immediately brought out at.Drury-
lane Theatre, and of which the report is so highly, fa-
vourable)-lias desired that the representation of her play
may be suspended, in order that public curiosity may ,be
gratified by seeing Mr. Kean in a succession of the cha-
racters of Shakespeare, without th'e possibility of in-
terruption.
of Buonaparte. The ships ’cruising in the. Bay have Corn-Exchange, March 7 There was a oodg
not been very fortunate lately, which we attribute to an supply of Wheat this morning, fo r which there was a
embargo being laid on the vessels in . America. The good demand, and that of fine quality sold from 2s. to
Royalist goes to Plymouth, having sprung her bow- Ss. per quarter higher than on this day week ; Barley
sprit.” sold freely at, an advance of •&., per quarter ; and fine
Covent-Garden Market. —The extreme seve- Malt is also 2s. per quarts ’carer; Beans are 2s. per
rity of the weather has rendered all the fruits and Ytege- quarter higher; Oats fully maintain last week’s prices ;
tables of the season scarce, and consequently dear beyond White Peas being scarce,, sold readily, and are 2s. per
all precedent. The following is a state of the prices on quarter dearer. In other nr ticks there is no alteration.
Saturday :—Asparagus 11. 4s. per hundred, cucumbers Wheat (English) '«S» 78s S 3 , 3 j small Beans - - tos to 44s
1 ■ aJ in , „ Ditto (Foreign) 60s 70s B' Ditto (new) - - 00 s to 00s
1/. 4s. per brace, best pines 2/. 12s. each, grapes 3/. 3s. Rye J . 38s to <42* Tick Beans - 58 s to 42s
per lb., endive Bs. per dozen, best brocoli 16 per bundle, Barley (old) - S6s to 445 New Ditto - - cot to 09-
second ditto 7s. per dittp, French beans Bs. per hundred, ®* tto C ne 'vi * • tr > 00s Oats (Pctatoe) - cos to sis
mushrooms ss. 6d. per pottle, best kale 12s. per basket, White Peas ’- ' 60s (Feed) - 24 s to S*
nonpareil apples Bs. per dozen, Colmar pears 11. 10s. per Ditto Boilers - - f® to 74s Fine Flour - - 6S< to 70s
dozen, coss lettuce 4s. per dozen, mint Is. 6d. per GfyFeas - - v IS to sos Seconds - costa 00s
bunch, greens 16s. per dozen bunches, Spanish onions „ Ked
12s. per dozen. Mutton is f 4 to 8s Od ( Pork./.. 7s Od to 8» ed.


•* J Y,['l - . : ■’ ' ; " ’
T - ■—— —~--J~ I SYDNEY MAY 8, IMS'. ARMY PROMOTIONS. sth West India Regiment, J&Dign J. Hylton, from the Bth Fat*,
I ******* ’-- ’ oVr , —T to be Lieutenant, without purchase.
LONDON GAZETTE—(Continued). The Governor Macquarie, Captain K. &. Wauer, Office.of Ordnance, March 2. Royal West India Rangers, Ensign J. Ernnedy to be Lieutensat,
i Jpir 1 1 ; —■ . ■ •- oiumil, mil* V, .......
LONDON GAZETTE — (Continued). The Governor Macquarie, Captain 11. S. Walker,
-*> | whose arrival from Otaheite we last week mentioned,
*oi r Cony of a letter from Captain Byron, of his Majesty’s ship Bel- | had been absent from hence since the 6th of last Sep-
n viilera, addressed to Admiral Sir John Warren,and transmit- | tember, from which she arrived at the above island in the
•id ted by the Admiral to John Wilson Croker, Esq- j s j lort Rpace 0 f 27 days, and from thence went to the pearl
h o H r iS , Maj f Sty ’ S Ship Brivid " a > Bernmda Jan 3 18,4 | procured about 60 tons of the pearl shell, of
* StR-1 beg leave to acquaint you, hts Ma es y a sh.p , with ‘ ei ht or ten tons ofpork obtained afterwards
under my command, or l Lhnstma. Dajv captu.ed the , consists. Captain Walker also
■S Umted b f tat£S ner Vtxpn,«ndeavounng to make her , p almerston - s \ s]md ; n the J o f discovering
. from Wl r l! "' n g to "> North Carolina, to Newcas- an(J hendi , or all of th , ,-uffians who about
tie, e awaie. ave tie onoui c ;n> 1 two years ago treacherously combined and murdered Mr.
y . ' > r John Barbeck, formerly master of the brig Cyclops, un-
ii ~ . , T 1 w 1, 1 „ der whose orders they had been left by Captain Fodger,
n r i Ad w‘? Sll p Jo in 'I h \ tt from ' iTentenaM of the Trial, for the purpose of procuring sharks’fins and
r John Wilson Croker, Esq. fromLeuenant Ja m£ and a ‘ Qt ‘ er En^lishraan) an account
■■ Pechell, acting commander of Majesty s sloop fie- . barbarous transaction we received and published
t suns z zzg&'msis ***> *««•« «!*
aground on Cape rJJL Shoal., .ho Inca American »». « •“
letter of marque schooner, of six guns, and 35 men., | their companions, among whom were « leve.al OtaheUim
The undermentioned letters have been transmitted by i and other «> join mtlve-rietes able pioject. A
. ™“ i eatssistsiS
‘®- er ’ VIZ I T • rl■at •, -u;_ ■F„ r val n , lof the delinquents could be found. Captain W. also
inc an account of his having run on shore in the bay, . , c 9 ~ * • , . • j 1 ;-u .Up--
0 where she b.lged on the rocks, the Baleine, French ce.vable degeneracy of inchnat.on bad '"•"g th h^e
store ship, of h guns and 120 men. bound from Tou- uncouth and savage islanders with the very basest of view
. F* . ° possible, as they were employed in constructing batteues
0 From Captain Coghlan, of his Majesty’s ship Alcmene, from the cannon taken out of the Port au stout
- ,f dated at sea" the 23d December, 1813, stating the cap- P™*** 30 S uns > wh f
x ture, between -Corsica and Cape Belle Molle, of the these batteries they doubtless haw a W!to the
:a French national schooner La Fleche, carrying 12 guns capture of shipping hat may acmdeAt yfal w ma the.
: u c and 99 men, with 21 soldiers, from Toulon, bound to *»ge ; and as a pledge of then ®
:h c•: . ail the mischief in their, powci, they nave planned
« Tro C m‘ Captain Dilkes, of his Majesty’s ship Castor, and ; headed expeditions against many undefen^d
? dated off Barcelona, the 15th January last, stating that elands, which they plundered and eft destitute. 11 e
her cutter, commanded by Lieutenant Loveless, had number of the Happym.we
w< boarded and captured the lleureux French privateer, car- certain ,t is they are capable of acco ph Jmg rac y
h 0 tying one 12-pounder and 25 men, ■ close under Monjui. Wf force, and that vessels caanot be too gua.ded
% Lieut. Loveless and one seathan were severely wounded. that chance to go that way. . • .
01 Another froni Captain Dilkes, dated off Bm'celona, “ Mr. Henry, Magistrate m Otaheite, arrived pas-
-23d January, stating that her boats, under Lieutenant senger «n the Governor Macquarie •
Stanhope, Ld captured another privateer, called Le CQ
Minuit carrvimr one g-un and small arms; her crew coiomai ung r-aay ->cisuii, - , T . ’
J u caiiynig one gui Pnrt n j n ,mn i. the Bth ult. havioff on board Lieut.
escaped on shore.
EXTRACTS FROH THE SYDNEY GAZETTES,
OR NSW SOUTH WALES ADVERTISERS.
r,!t SYDNEY, NEW SOUTH WALES, FEB. 20, 1813.
to The pleasant information was received here on the
im 10th of the safe arrival in Botany Bay of the Archduke tl
lee Charles, Capt. Jeffries, from England, or rather from g|
he Cork, which she left on the 16th May, with 147 male d
inj find s'i female prisoners. Of the men, two died on the
Ira passage, namely, Arthur Culmady, aged 67, from the v
v:: infirmities of age, and John Lenna, a young man, from a
abi extreme debility. All the others arrived in apparent j
co! health. The delay of this ship’s arrival was occasioned j
by the loss of her rudder, shortly after her departure from t j
on Rio Janeiro, which she left with the Minstrel and Inde-
to fatigabie in company, on the 11th of August. n
rni By the Archduke Charles have arrived Lieutenants j
ob Burbridge and Connor, of the Ist battalion, 73d regi-
ment, with a detachment of 30 non-commissioned offi- ~
an ccrs and privates, to join the battalion. „ (
de On the 15th tire ship King George, Capt. L. Jones,
tui arrived from the sperm whale fishery, having procured p
out from 30 to 35 tons of oil; out 14 months. She brings c
bn from Norfolk Island Mr. and Mrs. Mitchell. The 15th r.
err December, Captain Jones was in company, off Macau-
ou ley’s Island, with the Phoenix, Captain Parker, and
me Anne, Captain Gwynn : the former with 150 to 160
sla barrels, the latter only one fish.
siu Captain Jones gives an account of a subtle Otaheitan,
Di at present an inhabitant of New Zealand, f.gaibst whose
we artifices it would be no less humane than politic in masters
tht of vessels calling at-the Bay of Islands to guard. This
sm fellow, whom the seamen call Otaheite Jack, was left
am there by the Seringapatam, upwards of four years since,
and as he has a perfect knowledge of the New Zealand
bio dialect, with a tolerable share of English, he never fails
tbs to ingratiate himself with commanders by an offer of his ’ :
for good offices in procuring spars ; but finishes his services
urn by inveighing away the seamen, in order as much as pos- .
(•F sible to distress the vessel. Capt. Jones supposes" that
anc the people who suffer themselves to be deluded by the re
wh presentations of this villain, are afterwards murdered on
n>a account of their apparel, or to become food for the
the wretched cannibals who devoured nearly the whole of the
in Boyd’s crew.”
Arrived on the 3d Jan. the ship Spring Grove, Capt. i
me Douglas, from England in five months, by the way of |
bel Hobart Town. She brings Papers from England to the !
me middle of July.
jur ' SYDNEY, MARCH 13, 1813.
ch: The lately established annual fair at Paramatta, was
wn held pursuant to public orders, on the 11th instant. The
go. novelty of the occurrence, this being the first fair ever
we held in New South Wales, drew a vast concourse of
as ( persons of all ranks together—many of them out of cu-
it; riosity to view a scene which tended so strongly to re-
we mind them of their native country—while tiie still
be greater number assembled for the wiser purposes of buy-
ene ln g and selling. We are happy to say that all the ar-
et>. rangements for tbe accommodation of the buyers Shd sel- j
lers, and also fur the proper securing of the cattle, were |
' so complete that no accident occurred to damp the ge- |
,De ncral goed humour prevailing, and sales were made to a j
swi very considerable amount. Two individuals (Messrs, j
ra€ Wentworth and Lord, we believe), alone disposed of!
horned cattle to the value of upwards of 600}. and from ;
,; 6 , this a judgment may be formed of the extent of the j
ed general sales. Cows were sold so high as 271. per head, j
y Ol and some even went off at upwards of 301. These lat-
of ter were, however, of the English breed, which is found j
nse to answer much better than any other in this climate. '
t e r The shew of horses, sheep, and pigs, was also very gra- j
p- tifying, and the sales keep pace with those of the horned j
pa cattle.
The situation of Paramatha seems admirably calculated j
g c for an establishment of the present sort, being centrically !
r ; r .situated between the cultivated and pasture lands of
p a Windsor, Nepean, Richmond, Castlcreagh, Wilberforce, |
tb George’s River, Sec. on the one hand, and the great j
p U mart pf Sydney on the other, which furnishes the con- !
m , sumption for the redundant produce of all those farming
cc and grazing districts.
]j ( Ills Excellency the Gqvsrnor and Mrs. Macquarrie, |
p ( with his honour the-Lieut.-Governor and Mrs. O’Con-
sh cell, honoured Ihe fair with their presence, and returned'
to this settlement in the evening.
tn . We are extremely sorry to report the loss of the!
e f schooner Mercury, the property of Mrs. Reiber, and of 5
jy, the-schooner Endeavour, Mr. H. Kable, jun. master, at !
rich, and contains
2 Prizes of - - - =£20,000
1 - -- -- -- 2000
- 1000
Y ( with his honour the-^ieut.-Governor and Mrs. O’C’on- - w J t h £5OO, £3OO, £2OO, &c. &c. and only one day to
s b cell, honoured !he fair with their presence, and returned draw. In consequence of W. M.’s great success, and
Si to this settlement in the evening. j; n expectation of Selling the next two -Twenty Thousand
tit We are extremely sorry to report the loss of the | p unc j Prizes, haJ induced him to continue to present a
«f schooner Mercury, the property of Mrs. Reiber, and of | JH c / t Cake gratis, to every purchaser of a Ticket or Share
mi tl’.e schooner Endeavour, Mr. H. Kable, jun. master, at : unt jl the day of Drawing; in the late Lotteries, No.
Shoal Haven, on the 2d inst. both having cargoes of , 7731, a £20,000 and No. 512, £lOOO, were likewise
f «-d*r. The crews were saved. i gold in 23 Shares to the Public.
from Port Dairymple the Sth ult. liaving on board Lieut.
T. A. Crane, late Commandant of Norfolk Island ;
Lieut. Greenshields, and Ensign Pooke and Lady ; also,
the detachment of the 73d regiment landed from the
Indefatigable at Hobart Town.”
“ SYDNEY, JUNE 12, 1813.
“ Arrived on the Bth, from Flngland, the ship For-
tune, Capt. Walker, with 193 male prisoners, in a healthy
state. On the passage, John Birnie and Wra. Miles
died, and Thomas Simpson, and John Payne were un-
fortunately drowned. A soldier named Michael Dwyer,
who had accidentally received a ball wound in the leg,
also died, after suffering amputation of the limb. The
Fortune sailed from England die 13th Dec. went into
ilio Janeiro the 3d February, and sailed thence Match
the 22d.
By her have arrived Allen, L/sq. Deputy Com-
missary General ; Mrs. Allen and family ; Mr, and Mrs.
Hogan and family ; several Gentleiiien holding appoint-
ments in the Civil Service ; and the lot battalion of the
73d regiment, received an addition of an Ensign (Daw-
son ) and SO non-commissioned officers and privates.
The Racoon British armed vessel out of Rio, had fallen
in with and captured an American Incjiaman, with a
cargo of camphire from Java, supposed to be worth
from 70 to 80,000/. sterling.
THE STATE OF THE PRIVATE SHIP GUILDERS
YARDS IN’ THE RIVER THAMES, ON THE 26tlf
OF FEBRUARY, 181 R
Docks for repair
, Ships.
T . .. i Where
Bu,,uers - I situate ,
Slips for
building
Ships.
Single. Sr
Pitcher & Sons jNorthfleet
Wallis ! Riack wall
Wigtants&Green Ditto
Pitcher and Sons Ditto
Baniard& Roberts Deptford
Dud man and Co. Ditto
8. and D. Brent i Rotherhithe
Blackett Mill Wall
Hill and Sons jlimehouse
Curling and Co. Ditto
Tebbuttand Co. Ditto
Dowi>en and ('o. Ditto
Young and Co. j Rotherhithe
Thomson * 'Ditto
Ditto
luongbottom I RatcliffeCrcs
Fletcher and Son Shadwell
Luke and Co. jWapping
Beatson and Co. j Ilotlierhithe
Brent j Ditto
Rattenbury Ditto
Westlake (Ditto
ABSTRACT
And only 1 ship now building
And only 18 ships now under
slight repairs.
Slips for building Ships, 41
Repairing docks capable 1 _ shi s-
of receiving - J 1
fill off in the building of
In consequence of the great
ships in the port of London, t
on, thousands of industrious in
these establishments, are row
, and the few repairs going
individuals, connected with
pining in misery and dis-
tress from the want of employment.
The Bcllerophon, Capt. Hawker, in Portsmouth har-
bour, is fitting for the flag of A dm. Sir Richard Keats,
Commander in Chief at Newfoundland.
Rich Wheel. — There is only One Day to draw,
j and all the great Prizes, including Two of £‘20,000 are
; yet in the Wheel. On Monday next the Lottery ends,
i until which time Tickets and Shares may he had, war-
| ranted undrawn, at Swift and Go’s. Fortunate Offices,
! No. 11, Poultry, 12, Charing Cross, and 31, Aldgate.
High-street.
' All the floating Capital Prizes drawn on
1 Friday the First day of Drawing, were Sold in Shares
i by W. Martin, 8, Cornhill, viz. 5357, £5OO ; 2375,
i £5OO, See. where the fortunate holders may receive their
j Prize money on demand, or exchange for other Shares,
to be drawn 1-kh March. The Wheel is immensely
i.
2
2
J
1
1
I
1
1
1
Office of Ordnance, March 2, Royal \Vestindia Rangers, Ensign J. Kt nnedy to be Lieutenant,
Koval Regiment of Artillery, Second Lieutenant Francis J. vice Angelo, promoted; XJ. Lambert, Gent. to be Ensign,
Templer to be First Lieutenant, vice Kersteman, deceased 9 f lc f e . llue >•
Second Captain C. Wilkinson to be Captain, vice Reyneil, re- 6th Garrison Kattahon, .lon. W. St. I.awrence to be Ensign,
tired upon the Invalids ; First Lieutenant Allen Cameron to be ’Vice Bertles, promoted in the »Sth Foot. -
Second Captain, vice Wilkinson; Second Lieutenant Richard brunswicir Jencible Jn.a-,try Lieut IS. freer, from ttie
H. Drew to be First Lieutenant, vice Cameron; Major-Gene- Canadian 1-encin.e Inlantr, and E. F. Davis, from the Royal
ral T. Trotter to be Colonal-Coramandant, vice Huddleston, IVewtoundland heßcible Infantry, to oe Captains of Coinpa-
deceased,; Brevet Colonel P. U!o« to be Colonel, vice Trotter,; Serjeant mrday, from the 6th hoot, to be Quarter-
Major J. Carncross to be Lieutenant-Colonel, vice lliou ; lire- IdS * r * .
vet Major P. Fyers to be Major, vice Carncross ; Second Cap- Ai< jy. al Fencmle infantry, Ensign C. Davis to be
tain C. F. Sandham to be Captain, vice Fyers; First Lieme- lieutenant, vice Darden, killed maction. D. C. Napier, Geut.
nant J. Sinclair to be Second Captain, vice Sandham ; Second to be Ensign, vice Davis.
Lieutenant G. S. Maule to be First Lieutenant, vice Sinclair ; Canadian risible imantry, (.apt. G. Ferguson to have pernja-
Second Captain A. Hunt to be Captain, vice Truscott, deceased; nent tn the army. LnsignsJ.de Hen el, vice Johnson.
First Lieutenant T. Achison to be Second Captain, vice Huiit; superseded ;B.C. A. Gugy, vice i)e Ix-nnoore, killed hi
Second Lieutenant E. Bughurst to be First Lieutenant, vice ac ion ;E. VV. Antroniu», vice Freer, pn ; V. hi the- New
Achison. * Brunswick Fencihle infantry, to be Lieu f ;r„,ifs. Lieut. Vv :
Corps of Royal Engineers, First Lieutenant 11. D. Jones to be Davidson, from the sth Battalion of the Lowvr Cana.la
Second Captain, vice Robertson, deceased. v * ce . , Her tel; Ensign--- Dufresne, from theolh ikinal&id I
Corps of Royal Sappers and Miners, J. Galloway, Gent, to be ° t “ e Eower Canad?. Militia, vice Gugy; R. T. S* otr, vice .V--
Quarter-Master. trohus; Volunteer W. Taylor, from the 100th Foot, vice
Royal Artillery Drivers, J. Ilurhnance, Gent, to be Second Armstrong deceased, to he Ensigns.
Lieutenant, vice E. Griffiths, promoted; Second Lieutenant Glengary■Light Fencibles, A. Macdonald, Gent with
J. Kirsopp to be First Lieutenant, vice G. White, cashiered. tempoiary rank; i. Gugy, Gent, with temporary rank; A.
jrr n/r AT j - Macdonnell, vice Macdonald, appointed Ensign; R. Kerr, vice
War-Office, March 5. Gugy, appointed Ensign, to he Lieutenants! R. Ker Gvi.f
3d Regiment of Dragoons, Cornet T. Leech to be Lieutenant, Lieut. A. -Macdonald, vice Macdonald; Lieut, T. Gugy vice
without purchase, vice Shakespeare, promoted in the 18ih Kerr; Lieut. S. Fraser, to be Ensigns. * ° 7 ’
Light Dragoons; Hospital-Ass stantT. Backhouse to be Assist- Staff.— Major C? 5 Macdonnell, from the Glengarry Light )n-
-ant-Surgeon, vice Jones, promoted in the Ist Royal Veteran fantry Fviicibles, to be Inspecting Field Officer of ililitfa in
Battalion. Canada, (with the rank of Lieutenant Colonel in the Army),
Sth Regiment Light Dragoons, Brevet Lieut.-Col, H. Westenra, vice Cotton, deceased.
to be Lieutenant-Colonel, without purchase, vice VVade, ca- Hospital Staff. —Staff-Surgeon J. A. Knipe, from half-nay
shiered by the sentence of a General Court .'Martial. Cant. W. to be Surgaon to the Forces." Hospital-Assistant WH. Hume’
Martin, to be Major, vice Westenra. Lieuts. Y. .Johnson, vice to be Assistant-Surgeon to the Forces, vice White, appointed
Dickson, dec. andS. T. Edwards, vice IVTartin, to be Captains to the 84th Foot. D. Sihen, Gent, to De Hospital-Assistant to
of Troops, without purchase. Cornet E. E. Williams, vice the Forces.
Andrews,dec. Lieut. J. Fraser,from the 17th Light Dragoons, The King’s German Legion, Ist Regiment of Hussars, W. T.
vice Johnson, and Cornets Bygrave, vice Fortescue, pro- Gebser, Cent, to he Cornet, vice Gimboru, promoted.
moted in tbe 4th Garrison Battalion, and J. M ! Alpine, vice 3J Ditto, Lieut. W. von der Mellen to be Captain of a Troop,
Ed wards, to be Lieutenants without purchase. D. K. M‘Do- vice Both, dead of bis wounds. Cornet E. Gersclacher to lie
nald, vice Putjon, who resigns; ii. S. Hewitt, vice Williams; Lieutenant, vice von der Ellen. W. Deichmann, Gent, to be
G. j Cox, vice M‘Aipipe ; and'C. Wetherail, Gents, vice By- Cornet, vice Ger.stlaclwr.
grave, to he .Cornets without purchase. Ist Battalion of the Line, A. F. Kersting, Gent, to be Ensign,
loth Ditto, Lieut. W. il.iaisay, from the 4th Dragoon Guards, vice K. T, Meyer, who resigns,
to be Lieutenant, without pur,hast, vice Tranche, promoted. 2d Ditto, L. H. de Sichart, Gert. vice Paterson, promoted. C.
H. Buckley, Gent to be Cornet, by purchase, vice Barr-tt, L. de Sichart, Gent, vice Hamilton, promoted, to he Ensigns,
promoted. 3d Ditto, E. KoduVsklfGent. to be Ensign, vice Balchfr, pro-
18th Ditto, Cornet R Coote to be Lieut, without purchase, vice moted.
Pearson, who retire. Cornet and Adjt. H. Duperier to have 7th Ditto, Heindns, Gent, to be Ensign, vice Henderson
the rank of Lieutenant; and Cornet J. T. Machell to be appointed to the I at. Battalion ot Light Infantry.
Lieut, by purchase, vice Jones, promoted in the 3d Dragoons. Dillon’s Regt. C. de Jolivette, Gent, to be Ensign, vice Barnes
19th Ditto, Cornet W. V. Horton to be Lieutenant, without pur- whose appointment has not taken place.
chase, vice Floyd, promoted in the York Chasseurs. VVatG ville’s" Regiment, Ensigns R. de Watteville, vice Bovera,
22 d Ditto, Capt. C. Knatchbull, from the SOtli Foot, to be Cap- who resigns; C. May, vice Wrixon, removed from the service-
tain of a Troop; vice Maclean, who exchanges. Cornets Sir J. F. Hicken, vice Maiasbina, placed upon b .lf-pay, tobeLieu-
Gordon, Bart, by purchase, vice Cozens, who retires ; and J. tenants. C. Tscharner, Gent, vice De Watteville, to be En-
11. Bromwich, without purchase, vi«e Taunton, cashiered by sign.
sentence of a General Court Martial, to be F. Chasseurs Fritanniques, Ensign J. Julian to be Lieutenant, vice
Blundell, Gent, vice Bromwich, to be Cornet without purchase. JBroto, who resigns.
25th Ditto, Cornet W. Murphy to be Lieutenant, by purchase, Sicilian Regiment, T. Black, Gent, to be Ensign, vice Baanet,
vice Raven, who retires. promoted in the 62d Foot.
Coldstream Regiment of Foot Guards, J. Wilkinson, Gent, to Memorandum.— I The removal ot Assistant-Surgeon Hickson,
be Solicitor, vice Lovyten, deceased, from the 6th Dragoon Guards to the 16th Foot, as stated in
Ist Regiment of Foot, F. Crowiher, Gent, vice Conran, pro- 1 the Gazette of the Ist inst, has not taken place,
moted ; E. Crowther, Gent, vice Torrens, promoted; and. -• .
Gentleman Cadet C. B. Clarke, from tlic- Royal Military C cj~ BANK leu P 1 CiLS ENLARGED,
lege, vice Clark'e, promoted, to be Ensigns, by purchase. X, Blanchard, Lloyd's Coffee-house, Broker, from March 8,
sth Ditto, Lieut. H. J. Kaort, from the Sussex Militia, t.o be _ to April 26, at Guildhall.
Lieutenant, with temporary rank- J. Isaacs, Hackney Crescent, Hackney-road, jeweller, from the
6t.h Ditto, Hospital-Assistant F. G. Walbran to be Assistant- Ist instant, to April 12, at Guildlial!.
Surgeon. BANKRUPTCY SUPERSEDED.
Sth Ditto, Lieut. E. Brown ?o he Captain of a Company, with- Wharton, Oxford-street, tavern-keeper,
out purchase, vice Munday, promoted. Ensign j‘ o. Flana- BANKRUPiS.
gan, to be Lieutenant, vice Brown. Voluntvers R. Shaw, Cr ' ZGn » Kamscate, Kent, linen-draper, to surrender March
from the 49th Foot, vies Flanagun, and J. -VJathewson, vice and April 16, at tfuildha.il, London. Attorney, Mr,
Hylton, promoted in the sth West India Regiment, to be Butler, Ave Maria-Lne.
Ensigns. Quarter,Master-Serjeant J. I cvnam, vice Cooper, "Vv. Wescomb, Exeter, shopkeeper, March 17, 18, and April 16,
promoted in the New Brunswick FeiiCLmes, to be Adjutant, at the Hotel i avern, Exeter. Aftqcnies, Messrs. Lamb, Brut-
with the rank of Ensign. Quarter- G. Kice- tol E aiK ‘ IHwice, Ihince’s-street, near the Bank; and Mr,
man, vice Lewis, d ceased, to be Qu,art'.r-Master. Mortimer, Exeter.
15th Ditto, Ensign T. Baimister, frpi>i rhe Suwex Militia to be A - Satierrlnvaite, Birkenhead, Chester, dealer;, March 24, 25,’
XOnsi.?n. * ’ and April 16, at the Giob.c Tavern, Liverpool. Attorn-ies,
17th Ditto, Lieut. H. Woodd toY/ : Cap‘.din of a Company, vice * h \ Uiverpool; and Messrs. Chip chase and Norris, Puck-
Lee, deceased. Ensign P. J , Demoor, to be Lieutenant, vice Dn^or j*
Wood I. A. W. Gray, Gen*-, to be Ensign, vice D- moor. v> . jUge, Kentish I. own, builder. Mafch 12, 19, and April IS,
24th Ditto, Lieut. G. buiiboA, from the 56th Foot, vice A her- at Uuildiiali. Attorney, Mr. Wright, Hart-street, Bloom s-
crombv, who exchanges, and Ensign J. M‘ Gregor, without bury.
purd’.ase, vice M itched, appointed to .ti-e .-»t:i G ini.-ai Hat ca- •L. Boulanger, vine-street, Piccadilly, merchant, March 12,
lion, to be Lieutenants. Ensign F. Smith, Gent, vice jVPGre- 19, and April 16, at Guildhall. Attormes, Messrs. P. rnther
g .r, to be Ensign. * and Turner, London-strtet, I'Vnchu/ch-street.
29th Ditto, Lieut. C. Wright, from the Sussex Militia, to be s - Pearson, - roydon, Surrey, baker, March 3, 19, and April
Lieutenant, with temporary rank. \6, at Guildhall. Mr. James, Earl-street, Bl;uk-
-51st Ditto, W. Seward. Gent, to be Ensign, by purchase, vice , friars.■ .
L’Estrauge, promoted. J* LK-mpsey, Coleman-street, tai or, March 8, 15, and April 16,
34th Ditto, Captain G. Tjristovv, from the Tl Ceylon Regiment, at Gmid’Kill. Attorney, Mr. Hindman, Aldcrmanbury.
to be Captain of a Company, vice Burton, decea-ed. • Bridgevnaii, Binnirigluim,saddler, March 16, J 7, and April 16,
40th Ditto, Lieutenant James Johnston to be Captain of a Com- at f the Union Tavern, Attornies, Messrs. Swain, Stevens,
puny, without purchase, vice R. J\£. Browne,, promoted Map! s, and Pe 'arse, liederick s-place, Old Jewry; and Mr,
iu a Provisional Militia. Ensicn J. A. Wickniiam \rliateiey, lliiminghani.
to be Lieutenant, Vice Turton, killed in action. Serjeant C. J. Jones, Wolverhampton, hosier, April 11, 12, and 16, at the
K. Curetoa, from the 14th iJelu Dragoons, to be Ensign, vice Bradlord Arms, Stafford. Attornies, Mr. Biddle, Wolver-'
Wideriham. hampton; and Mr. i’hiiiipspNorfolk-street, Strand.
4! St Ditto, Lieutenants J. \V. Clemow, vice Shortt, killed in's c- J- Jon. late ot M .llwyd, Merioneth, tanner, March H, 15, and
tion, and ii. C. Cash, from the 12th Foot, vice Fuller, placed A J >r ‘ l the IW" 1 .fool, Montgomery. Attornies,
upon hait-p iy, to be Captain# of Companies, without pur- 1 ‘ A • Lincoln s Inn New-square, London ; and,
c l KlS e. Mr. B. Woosnam, Llanidloes.
43d Ditto, Ensigns C. Dobson, vice Angrove, dead of his C. Kallmeir, Southampton-row, Bloomsbury, tailor, March 12,
wounds; J. Miles, rice B.iiilie, killed in action; and K. R. a , nd Api-Hltf, at Guildhall. Attorney, Mr. R. Whiter, Ser-
I:ill, vice \V'. Murphy, deceased, to be Lieutfha # it.s, without jvsnt s Inn, lieet-street,
purchase. Considine, Gtnt. vice Dobson, and Wal- S - Gray, late 01 the White Mart, Folly-bridge, Dock-Head, Ber-
ton, Gent, .vice Miles, to he Ensigns. mondsey, victualler, March 8, 12, and April 16, at Guildhall.
14th Ditto, itTL. Haydon, Gent, to be Ensign, by purchase, vice Attorney, Mr. Pat ton, Walbrook.
W. Wombwell, who retires. DIVIDENDS.
49th Ditto, Lieut. W. J ones ro he Captain of a Company, vice March 26. W. Mearnden, late ot West Mailing, Kent, grocer,
Nairne, killed in action. Lieut. J. Sullivan, from the North at Guildhall, London.
York Militia, with temporary rank : and Ensign E. Glasgow, March E. Perry, Whitehaven, ironmonger, at the Black
vice Jones, to be Li urenants. Volunteer S. Brampton, from Lion, Whitehaven.
the 100th Foot, vice Glasgow, to be Ensign. March 26. D. B. Smith, Kidderminster, mercer, at the White
53d Ditto, Ensign G. Fitzgerald to be Lieutentant, without pur- Hart, Birmingham. %
chase, vice Bowyer, who resigns. A. Browne, Gent, to be March 30. It. VV. Clapham,Liverpool, grocer, at tne Globe Ta-
Ensigii, without purchase, vice Fitzgerald. Lieut. A. Daly vern, Liverpool.
to be Adjutant, vice Chipwell, promoted. IMarch 29. J. Gely, West Cowes, North wood, Isle of White,
55th Ditto, Lieut. P. Abercromby, from the 24th Foot, to be ship-builder, at the Bugle I mi, Newport.
Liehtenant, vice Sunbold, who exchanges. H. Leslie, Gent. March 2j. S. Griffiths, Old Bosweil-court, Carey-street,
to be En&* o n, vice Jamieson, deceased. llt Guildhall.
56th Ditto, Ensign H. Mackenzie, to be lieutenant, vice Myers, March 22. R. J. Austin, Great Saffron-hill, brass-founder, at
dead of Ms wounds. John Cameron, Gent, to be Ensign, vice Guildhall.
Mackenzie. Hospital Assistant, P Pope to be Assistant Sur- March 26. J. S. Swan, Friday-street, London, warehouseman,
geon, vice Brown, promoted in the Staff Corps of Cavalry. at Guildhall.
60th Ditto, Lieut. W. Rafter to be Captain of -i Company, by March 29. J. Hamper, High-street, Southwark, hosier, at
purchase, vice Stopford, promoted. Richard Jellicoe, |£sq. Guildhall.
to be Paymaster. Hospital-Assistant, C. Newcombe to be March s*9. R. Thresher, late of Cheapside, London, hosier, at
Assistant Surgeon, vice Berger, dec. Guildhall.
66th Ditto, Ensigns W. Hall, vice Macleod, deceased; and H. March 26. J. Bodenham, Cheam, Surrey, innkeeper, at Guild-
Rick, vice C. Young, dec. to be Lieutenants. W. Booth, Gent. hall, London.
vice Hall, and Hon. C. Tumour, vice Rich, to be Ensigns. March 26. J. Now!an, Keat-street, Whitechapel, soap-manu-
68th Ditto, Hospital-Assistant R. Williams, to be Assiscant-Sur- lacturer, at Guildhall.
geon,vice Barr, dec. March 28. W. Jackson, Beaumaris,Wales, draper, at the Globe
69th Ditto, C. Seward, Gent, to be Ensign, by purchase, vice 1 avern, Liverpool,
Stewart, promoted. ' April 4. J. Senior, late of Ossett-street, York, blanket-manu-
-72d Ditto, J. Elmore, Gent, to be Ensign, by purchase, vice Ten- tacturer, at the Man and Saddle Inn, Dewsbury.
nison, promoted. March 29. I. Thompson, Keeklc. Grove, Cumberland, merchant*
76tn Ditto, Capt. S. Bannister, from the Sussex Militia, with at the Globe Tavern, Liverpool.
temporary rank, and Lieut. R. IL Hamilton, vice Wakefield, April 6. B. Gooch, Portiand-road, Middlesex, victualler, at
dec. to be Captains of Companies. Ensign J. Paxton, vice Guildhall,
Hamilton, to be Lieutenant ;J. Kennedy, Gent, vice Paxton, March 29. T. Phillips, Milford, Pembrokeshire, J. Phillips, and
to be Ensign. . # J. Phillips, Old City Chambers, London, and C. A. Phillips,
7Btli Litto, J. M‘Crummin, Gent, vice Macleod, promoted ; and Milford, merchants, at Guildhall.
G. H. Douglas, Gent, vice Stewart, dec. to be Ensigns, without CLR 1 ill CA I ES— March 26,
purchase. Hospital-Assistant W. iVPLeod, vice Munro,pro- Clayton, Bcrkeley-street, Lambeth, saCidier,
moted, to be Assitant-Surgeon. W. Al ton, Cheltenham, builder.
80th Ditto, Capt. J. Maclean, from the 22d Light Dragoos, to be R* Palmer,- Worthing, plumber.
Captain of a Company, vice Knatchbull, who exchanges. A> - Havis, Bloombsbury-square, builder,
&2d Ditto, Nathaniel Greene, Gent, to be Ensign, without pur- U. Hurst, Broadstairs, Isis of Fhanet, taylor.
chase, vice.Pyne, whose appointment has not mken place. J. Spilling, Islington-road, carpenter.
84th Ditto, Ensign H. Jervis to be Lieutenant, vice Robinson,' T. Rudderforth, jun. Newington Cayseway, stay-maker.
deceased; Quarter-Master J. Crossley, to be Ensign, vice Jer- J-Gale, New London-street, Clutched Friars, merchant,
vis; Serjeant-Major Robert Whetham to be Quarter-Master,' J- Fletcher, W arlingham* Surrey, broker,
vice Crossley; Staft-Assistant-Surgeon W. R. White to be Sur- J- ReeJ, North Shields, master-mariner,
geon, vice Lloyd, deceased; Hospital-Assistant D, IVPCullock J* Wibberley and VV. Pepper, Nottingham, hosiers,
to be Assisttant-Surgeon, vice Inglis, deceased.
85th Ditto, Ensign J. Blake, to be Lieutenant, vice Johnson, T , c . ■
killed in.Lction On
86th Ditto. Cautaid the Honourable G. Fortescue. from .he 66th ov ? ar , ’ ° s .k >n .‘ ,
86tii Ditto, Cautaid the Tlonoutabiv G. Fortescue, from ■ lie 66th Til , °7 ar , ’° ■“ 7JV .... -
Foot, to be Captain of Company, vice Impey, deceased. Wedne9da y >“ t “> tra. Lady
89th Ditto, Lieut. A. Low to be Captain of a Company, vice of ™ m - Windham, L.q. ol a oaughte- ,
Annesley, deceased; Fnsijjn G. Berries, from the 6th Garrison MARRIED. ±
Battalion, to be Lieutenant, vice Low; Lieut. C. Cannon, to On Saturday, the 26th uir.’at Little Marlow, Bucks, by the
be Adjutant, vice Agnew, who resigns the Adjutancy only. Rev. George Green, Mr. John Kay, ot Aldersgate-street, to.
9lst Ditto, Volunteer Ducat to be Ensign, without purchase, Mrs.Poultou, daughter oi the late Win. Mellish, Esq. Barrister,,
vice O’Leary, promoted. of Gray’s Inn.
98th Ditto, Ensign L. J. Brown to be Lieutenant, without pur- On Tuesday, the Ist inst. at Nottingham, William Hurst, Esq.
chase, vice Gibbons, promoted in the New Brunswick Fend- to Sophia, daughter of Edward Swann, Esq, both of that f lace,
hies; J. Winniett, Gent, to be Ensign, vice Brown. ' DIED.
100th JJitto, Serjeant-Major E. Pilkington to be Quarter-Master, On Monday last, aged 58 years, John M.arcon, Esq. Swaffham*,
vice Ahearne, who resigns. Norfolk.
104th Ditto, Lieut. A. Rainsford to be Captain of a Company, Qn Friday last, in Portman-square, ‘Barnard Dickinson, Esq.
without purchase, vice Carmichael, appointed Pay-Master; of Bowden Park, Wilts.
without purchase, vice Carmichael, appointed Pay-Master.
Ensign J. A. M‘Lauchlan to be Lieutenant, vice Rainsford
G. Home, Gent, to be Fin sign, vice M‘Lauchlan; H. Carmi-
chad. Esq- late a Captain in the regiment, to be Pay-Master.
LONDON • Printed by JJ. iVFs*VYNY, No. 348, Str».nd ;and
published by J W. HA'yvVOOD, same pia««.
