

1809 TO 1886.




EXTRACTS from the
M.S. AUTOBIOGRAPHY of
JOHN BATHGATE,
Formerly of PEEBLES, SCOTLAND,
Latterly of The Glen, DUNEDIN, NEW ZEALAND.
The following notes are written for the information of
IRfKI my children. They will naturally be desirous to
know as much of the history of their parents as
possible; and although the life of their father
does not present many salient points of interest, it has
not altogether been devoid of incident, and as a whole
it may afford some lessons, both of warning and of en-
couragement. I may well say that I have been led in a
way that I knew not of, and that I have been the re-
cipient of numberless mercies from the hand of a long-
suffering and gracious God.
I was born on Thursday, the 10th day of August,
1809, at mid-day, in a house occupied by my father in
Fountainbridge, a suburb of Edinburgh. The beginning
of that year was memorable for the retreat of Sir John
Moore’s army on Corunna, and the battle which cost
that able soldier his life. The principal mass of the
new town of Edinburgh was then limited to the space be-
tween Princes and Queen streets. There were few shops,
excepting in the east half of Princes street. The open
space between the old and new towns was an open un-
fenced common, which formed an outlet to some of the
main drains. It was intersected by the Earthen Mound,


composed chiefly of rubbish, and then not half its
present breadth, and was used chiefly by foot passengers,
who walked on a pavement alongside a stone and lime
wall, which ran the whole length of the Mound. The
County Hall was not then built. The “ Heart of Mid-
lothian,” the old Tolbooth, reared its venerable head
at the west end of St. Giles; and clustering around the
Cathedral were numerous little booths and shops.
There were no police, no gas lamps ; the peace of the
city was preserved by a remnant of the old Town
Guard, and at night a few twinkling oil lamps helped to
make darkness visible. The belles of the day were
escorted in their chairs by link-boys, whose torches were
extinguished in the trumpet-like extinguishers which
adorned the iron railing in front of the new Town
houses.
My father, Alexander Bathgate,* married in 1805,
when only 21, my mother, Frances Hamilton Mac-
dowall, then scarcely 18. She was born in 1787 at
Edinburgh, and was the natural daughter of William
Macdowall; of Castle Temple, Renfrewshire, and was
brought up at the expense and under the care of Mr.
Macdowall’s sister, Mrs. Ferguson, of Hermand. My
mother’s father held a distinguished position in his day,
being Lord Lieutenant of Renfrewshire, and member of
Parliament for that county in several successive Parlia-
ments. A fine monument is erected in the Abbey
Church, Paisley, in his memory.
At this time Scotland was undergoing a religious
revival, which, through the efforts of the Methodists
and the Haldanes, was productive of good. Dissent in
those days was attended almost by proscription, and
this made the adherents of these bodies more warmly
attached to their cause, and more closely united in
friendship to one another.
* See Appendix,


Before my mother had completed her twentieth
year she had two children—the first still-born, and the
second a daughter, who was named Graham Ferguson,
after Mrs. Ferguson. She died when an infant. I
appeared next in order. Young and penniless my
parents must have beer. ; but my father had an inde-
pendent spirit, which prevented his hanging on to his
wife’s friends. Two old silver tea spoons marked with
the Macdowall crest —a hand holding a dagger with the
motto “ Vincere vel mori ” —which had formed part of the
marriage outfit, are now in the possesion of Mrs. Glad-
stone Robinson. My father tried a small school in
■jo-.,, Edinburgh, but met with indifferent success. On
22nd September, 1812, my sister Helen was born ;
and my mother died at the Water of Leith,
Edinburgh, and was buried in St. Cuthbert’s church-
yard at the end of 1813 or beginning of 1814. Two
mental photographs alone remain of her whom I long
mourned—one a visit with her to Hermand, and the
ISI , other seeing her ill in bed. Mrs. Ferguson con-
tinued to take an interest in me, and I retain
several agreeable recollections of her kindness. In
due time I went to school, and at five years of age was
able to read “ Barrie’s Collection.”
My father, on the 4th August, 1815, married at
Edinburgh Janet Campbell, daughter of Peter Campbell,
r a Highlander from Dull, Perthshire. The wed-
° 0 ding trip was taken to Dunfermline, when I
formed one of the party returning by Inverkeithing.
We had gone up the Firth in the “ Alloa Star,” the
first steamer in those waters, and we sailed from Inver-
keithing to Leith in an open pinnace. All the traffic
with Fife was carried on by these stout open boats, de-
pendent entirely upon wind and tide.
One day some of my school fellows observed an un-
usual commotion, and we ran up the Mound and past
Ramsay Gardens to the head of the High street, Wc


perched on a railing which then surrounded the city
reservoir, and saw the remnant of the 42nd Highlanders,
who had just landed from the campaign of Waterloo,
march into the Castle. The moment the leading man
entered a signal was given, and the Castle guns thun-
dered forth a salute. The whole esplanade was densely
crowded by an excited multitude, who were frantic with
enthusiasm, men and women cheering and shouting in
welcome to the tattered and toil-worn heroes. The 18th
June was long kept as a holiday in Edinburgh, and for
a year or two the High School boys, decorated with
blue rosettes, marched through the city.
Mrs. Bathgate’s first child, Elizabeth Fletcher, was
born on July r6tb. I was entered at the High School,
and although a private tutor was provided, I
made little or no progress, feeling ill fitted to
cope with the rough and rattling boys with whom
I was thrown. Fighting either single handed or in
mobs was of daily occurrence, and gunpowder a common
play thing. My chief companion was John Peregrine
Mackay. During this period my father’s family in-
creased, and there were born Alexander William, 2nd
July, 1818, and Catherine Campbell, 22nd July, 1820.
In 1821 I joined the rector’s class at the High School,
and found the atmosphere more to my taste. My father
now adopted teaching as a vocation, and was appointed
master of the Edinburgh Sessional School, having for
several years been head of the Sabbath School. It had
been originally started in consequence of the execution
of three boys in 1812 for the murder of a policeman,
who was killed in a riot. This sad event led to some
efforts for the education of the humbler classes, then
almost totally neglected. He introduced the system of
mental arithmetic then practised by Mr. Robert Scott;
and visitors to the school were surprised at the ease and
rapidity with which the sums were done. At
this time the English school of the Royal Burgh
of Peebles became vacant, and was offered to


my father, who accepted it. His leaving Edinburgh
called forth many expressions of regard; scholars
clubbed together their pence and presented, along with
an address, a pencil case and silver snuff box as a mark
of the respect and esteem they entertained for him as their
teacher for many years. This was no small present
from children of the humbler class, considering labourers
at that time earned only seven shillings a week. Among
other presents received was a handsome family bible,
given by Lady Carnegie, who took a great interest in
the Sabbath School. On May 12th my sister Helen
died, and was buried near her mother in St. Cuthbert’s.
A fortnight later we left Edinburgh for Peebles. I felt
somewhat at parting with my boyish companions, al-
though I could not say my childhood had been a happy
one. More had always been expected from me than I
was qualified to perform, and my spirit was broken and
cowed by too harsh a discipline; yet I must acknowledge
all was meant for my good, and was founded upon an
anxious desire for my progress. Stern, if not cruel,
discipline was the fashion of the day, both in families
and schools, and flogging was universal. Society
generally groaned under a severe tyranny at this time,
although vigorous efforts were made to effect an im-
provement. In the early days of the century, the
Edinburgh Review, under Jeffrey, Brougham, and other
leading Liberals prepared the way for reform; and the
starting of the Scotsman as an independent weekly news-
paper in 1816 marked the dawning of a better era. The
stamp duty was high, and the price more than the
humbler citizens could afford, but three or four clubbed
together and a single copy did duty in several families.
On 26th May I left Edinburgh in charge of the
carters engaged to drive our furniture to Peebles, and
enjoyed the day notwithstanding the state of the road.
Mr. Macadam’s plan for road making, which now bears
his name, and for which he received from
Parliament, had only been made known, and had not


reached the valley of Eddlestone. My father, Mrs.
Bathgate, and the children journeyed by the “fly,” an
old post chaise elevated to the dignity of a stage coach.
It held three inside passengers and one out; the fares
being 10/- inside and 6/- out; the journey occupying
five or six hours. Arriving at the ancient Burgh we
were received everywhere with kindness, and from our
neighbour I soon received my first lesson in trout
fishing.
In a month or two came the rumour that King
George the Fourth was to visit Edinburgh, and the
whole country was roused into a state of loyal excite-
ment. A King had not been seen in the ancient
kingdom for 150 years. Past depression was forgotten.
The clamours of Whigs and Radicals for reform were
ignored. Even the King’s treatment of Queen Caroline,
which had rendered him exceedingly unpopular in Scot-
land, vanished from the public mind, and thousands of
all ranks hastened to the metropolis to greet their
sovereign. “ Carle,” “ the Kings’ come! ” was in
everybody’s mouth, and blue coats with “ welcome ”
buttons adorned the backs of the multitude. White
duck or nankeen trousers were generally worn, and
bands of clansmen from Highland glens paraded the
streets in tartan array. My father took me to Edinburgh,
and on the day His Majesty landed (August 14th), we
obtained seats on a scaffolding erected on Leith Pier.
The royal yacht was anchored in the roads, accompanied
by a large flotilla. Bye-and-bye the harbour way was
cleared, and a signal gun intimated that the King had
left his yacht. Immediately the fleet thundered out a
salute, which was responded to by the batteries on
shore, and, amidst as much noise and smoke as if it had
been a regular naval engagement, His Majesty was
rowed into the harbour ; and as he stepped on the gang-
way ashore the cheers were tremendous. While the
ceremony and hubbub of landing and going up Leith
Walk in grand procession were going on, we walked up


the Eastern Road, and as we neared Edinburgh were
passed by a troop of horse artillery at full gallop, who
were going to fire the guns stationed on the brow of
Salisbury Crags. We reached the Calton Hill, and got
well placed on a rocky knoll overlooking the Regent
Road, where the new High School now stands. The
procession at last came in sight, and there at length the
monarch passed in his carriage, bowing affably to all,
and wondering where the poor were, as all were so well
dressed. The troops of cavalry (the Greys), the bat-
talions of infantry, the marshalled clans, the State
officers, the Royal Archers as body-guard, the bands of
music, all wending past to the ancient palace of Holy-
rood, formed an unprecedented and gorgeous pageant.
Much was due to Sir Walter Scott, who had a large
share in arranging the programme, and who succeeded
in diffusing through all concerned his own generous
enthusiasm and chivalric loyalty. The King took up
his abode at Dalkeith Palace, from which he came to
hold receptions, attend reviews, and show himself to the
people. A visit to the Castle was undertaken in state.
The trades lined the streets, and were gay with cockades
and sashes of blue silk and white rods in their hands.
The High School boys were to occupy a platform at
the head of the West Bow, I procured a ticket, and
had sash and cockade all prepared when my father re-
solved to take the opportunity of a return chaise to go
home. As the coach was at once tedious and expensive,
those who could afford it used to travel by post chaise,
and we did not resist the return of one that had brought
the Provost of the Burgh into Edinburgh.
In November I returned to Edinburgh, and mat-
riculated as a student in the University, working under
Professors Pillans, Dunbar, Wallace, and Dr. David
Ritchie. Of these four Professors Mr. Pillans gained
the greatest amount of my respect; but I was too timid,
boyish, and inexperienced to take up a position of ad-
vantage.


At this finite I paid my first visit to a theatre, the
occasion being Mrs. Siddon’s benefit, Mr. Charles
1826 Kemble, the principal actor. My High School
friend—John Mackay—and I had many pleasant
rambles round Edinburgh; and when the classes
broke up he accompanied me for five miles on my
pedestrian journey homeward. We left Edinburgh at
5 a.m., and I reached Peebles (22 miles) at 2 p.m.
My father’s assistant having obtained a better appoint-
ment, his duties devolved upon me.
On Candlemas Day I received, as the assistant, the
free-will offerings of the junior pupils, and thought my-
-1827 se K amazingly rich when I counted up the sum
of 8/4 as the total amount. I attended my first
ball, where several of the young beaux figured in
black silk knee breeches and silk stockings; and was
flattered by an invitation to a dinner usually given by
the magistrates on the occasion of the school examination.
I was in trepidation on being asked to carve a lamb’s
head, but got through with a blush. The yeomanry
were in quarters, and their mess coalesced with ours,
and a pleasant evening was spent. I thought myself
highly honoured when, according to the custom of the
day, the Provost and several others asked me to drink
wine with them. In August I went to Edinburgh to
visit John Mackay, and was present at the laying of the
foundation stone of George IV. Bridge. The chief
.domestic incidents during the year were the death of
Mrs. Bathgate’s mother, Mrs, C. Campbell, and the birth
of my cousin,: Mrs. McNicol’s daughter, who afterwards
married Mr. Palmer, parish schoolmaster, Dirleton.
My first pencil sketch was an outline of the ruined side
of Neidpath Castle; and in later years I carried off in
this way reminiscences of many pleasant scenes.
The new year commenced and developed very much
like its predecessor. I learned to skate, and afterwards
became fearless as a swimmer. The other incidents


1828 t^le y ear were the birth of my brother George,
my first glass of ale in an inn, my first com-
munion in the parish church, and having my health
drank for the first time in public at the examination
dinner. September was noted by the visit of the
Royal Archers, who came to the Burgh periodically to
shoot for the silver arrows. The winner usually ap-
pends a medal to commemorate his victory, the earliest
being dated 1628. The uniform of the Archers was a
single-breasted tunic of green tartan, with a velvet neck,
on which was embroidered a silver arrow, trousers of
white duck, and a Highland bonnet adorned with an
ostrich feather. The Archers dined afterwards in
the hotel, having the magistrates for their guests,
who, according to use and wont, after dinner pre-
sented their hosts with a riddle of claret, about two-
and-a-half dozen.
My first essay in land measuring was made this
year, when I surveyed my father’s garden, consisting of
an irregularly shaped quarter-of-an-acre. Miss Jessie
Spence, the sister of one of our boarders, a pretty and
pleasing woman, paid us a visit, and amused herself by
1820 rece i y i n g with favour my boyish attentions. Her
affability and frankness made a strong impression
upon me, and made me feel a greater amount
of self-respect than I had heretofore enjoyed. This
approach to the assumption of the toga virilis was also
heightened by the notice I received from some of the
county gentlemen. I was asked to survey parks, roads,
&c. in different parts of the county, and although I had
never before handled a theodolite, seemed to give satis-
faction. Biggar, one of the places visited for the first
time, was then a stirring market town, where a large
oatmeal market was held. It was also a stage for the
lead drivers from the Leadhill mines to Edinburgh.
I had a trip to Galashiels; and on that occasion had my
first glimpse of that romance in stone and lime—
Abbotsford.


On the 20th October my brother James was born.
This year witnessed my making a little further way in
1830 g races °f some of my patrons. Al-
though the chief portion of my time was spent
in teaching, I managed to do some rather im-
portant surveys. During the summer holidays I had a
delightful trip to Aberdeen, going up the Scotch coast
by steamer, and returning partly on foot and partly by
stage coach ; at the Bridge of Allan sleeping for the
first time in my life in an inn. I attended for the first
time a funeral, the coffin being carried by relays of
bearers from the house to the church-yard.
Fresh demands were made upon me for the exercise
of my surveying qualifications by my kind patrons—
-1881 J o * lll Hay
latter I surveyed several farms, and my labours
gave the worthy baronet much satisfaction, which
was expressed in a kindly way. I also did some
measurements in Lanarkshire for Mr. Charles Cuning-
ham, the introduction to whom proved a turning point
in my career, as when he heard I was desirous of
studying law he volunteered to find an opening for me.
For parts of this year and next I was engaged as tutor
to his children by Lieut.-Colonel Hugh Hay Rose, then
resident at Cardrona. The surrounding country was a
great delight. In the early spring I felt quite buoyant,
walking sometimes up Tweed side to Peebles; the wild
flowers were so beautiful, and the melody of the thrushes
so heart-stirring, that I overflowed with enthusiasm.
About this time the scourge of cholera made its
appearance in Great Britain, and created much excite-
-1 qqo ment > the deaths daily in Edinburgh amounting
to between 30 and 40. However, it bore a
blessing under its deadly wings, and led to the
formation of Boards of Health and other measures of
sanitary reform. Through the kindness of Mr. Cuning-
ham, of Newholm, it was arranged that I should proceed


to Edinburgh to enter into my apprenticeship as
solicitor in the office of Messrs. J. and W. Dymock.
Among my acquaintances was Mrs. Mann, whose husband
was master of the smack “ Venus,” and she suggested
that I should take a trip to London with them. This I
was nothing loth to do, and having obtained leave from
Mr, Dymock 1 agreed to accept the invitation. The
whole London traffic was at that time carried on in
smacks, and it took us a week going from Leith to
London. Our fellow passengers were two ladies and a
sheriffs officer from Edinburgh, who had nine female
convicts and one male under his charge for removal to
the transports in the Thames, ready to sail for Sydney,
The convicts had quarters in the forehold. The only
part of the voyage causing any anxiety was when we
were entering the Swim, a narrow channel through the
shoals of Yarmouth. Passing the Nore light I had
to pay the usual fine of a bottle of whisky to the men.
On the Saturday, at 6 a.m., we were abreast of Wool-
wich in time to see the convict gangs marched out to
their labour, dressed in dark grey; a number of them
having a chain from one ankle to one arm. They all
wore breeches and half boots. The “ Frances Char-
lotte,” convict ship, received our prisoners, some of
whom were much affected at leaving the last links with
their native country.
The Manns and I landed at Woolwich, and took
the stage on to Greenwich. The Hospital—an old
royal palace—was then tenanted by the pensioners, who
walked about in their ancient uniform—a cocked hat, a
blue square skirted coat with yellow lace, and knee
breeches. In the evening we went up to London in a
wherry, then the ordinary means of communication be-
tween the city and Greenwich. The following days
were occupied sight seeing. I had my first view of the
Horse Guards, St. James’ Park, the Houses of Parlia-
ment, scenes of much historical interest since destroyed
by fire, the British Gallery of Paintings, &c. On


Sunday I madfe the most of my time by hearing service
in St. Paul’s in the morning, and Westminster Abbey
in the afternoon. The colossal majesty of St. Paul’s,
the plainness outwardly of the houses in Grosvenor
Square, the meanness of the exterior of St. James’
Palace, and the magnificent sweep of Hyde Park, all
struck me, some with surprise, others with admiration.
Passing the residence of the Duke of Wellington—
Apsley House—l saw the windows still in their shattered
state, which had been broken by the mob in a frenzy of
political excitement on the subject of the Reform Bill.
Meantime, cholera was making sad havoc all around,
there being about 1,000 cases daily in London, and
many deaths. I was brought into somewhat close con-
tact with it on several occasions; and one evening on
arriving at the smack learned that the stoutest seaman
on board had been seized with the plague. I retired to
the state room I occupied with rather a heavy heart, and
after commending myself to God, tried to sleep. During
the night the second mate came aft, and reported that
one of the boys had been seized. The cries of the
sufferers resounded through the vessel, and made me
think of the possibility of never seeing home again.
Leaving London as soon as we could, after a week’s
voyage we were glad to find ourselves safe in the Firth
of Forth. Among my friends at this time were Messrs.
James, William, and Robert Chambers, through whose
enterprise was published the first popular journal for
the people. The price was three half-pence; and the
circulation at once bounded into thousands. The diffi-
culty was to supply the demand, and hand presses were
kept going in various parts of the city.
Early in 1833 I was offered an appointment by Mr.
Spiers, of Elderslie, at a salary of /80 a year certain,
1883 anc * £ IOO * S ave satisfaction. I accepted it,
and for two years did all I could to make myself
useful. The family (the Hon. Mrs. Spiers and her
daughters), were more than kind, and never for a moment


was I made to feel I was in a subordinate position. My
duties were on the whole light. During this time I had
several pleasant trips to Peebles, Glasgow, where I wit-
nessed the laying of the foundation stone of the Jamaica
Street Bridge, Abbotsford, Dryburgh, and a delightful
day at Loch Lomond. Among the leading families in
the neighbourhood of Renfrew and Paisley I was a
welcome guest, receiving much kindness from the Gib-
sons of Paisley, the Robertsons of Foxbar, and the
Hamiltons of Lounsdale.
The two latter carried on large bleachfields, for the
dressing of the manufactured cottons and muslins, then
1884 a S reat sta P^ e> The eldest son of the Robertson
family had to leave the country, at the expense
of the Government, several years before I knew
them. The operatives had risen and proceeded to the
neighbourhood of Paisley, demanding arms. A large
body had arrived at Foxbar. The house was barri-
caded. The eldest son came up from the works, and
seeing the crowd offering violence in front of the house,
he fired a gun he was carrying point-blank at the mob,
when the shot took effect and killed a man. The rest
of the crowd, thinking it was the military who had
arrived, instantly fled, and the whole intended rising
was checked. Vengeance was vowed afterwards against
young Robertson, and this led to the Government being
at the cost of his leaving home.
Early in 1835 Mr. John Wilson of Peebles wrote
urging the expediency of our going into partnership as
1835 wiaters an d land surveyors, in the old burgh of
Peebles. Accordingly I resigned my situation at
Elderslie, and before leaving Renfrew was entertained
at dinner in the “ Black Bull” by a large party of my
friends, Mr. Thomas Spiers being in the chair. Mr.
Spiers himself acted with great kindness, and advanced
me £lOO on loan to aid in providing the necessary
capital required in the new concern. Miss Mary Spiers


also presented me with a handsome sum to assist me in
my start in life. A week or two in Mr. Dymock’s office,
Edinburgh, enabled me to formally complete my ap-
prenticeship, when I followed the usual mode of applying
for admission to the roll of procurators before the
sheriff. Luckily for me, examinations in those days
were not very strict; the principal part of the ceremony
being to partake of a good supper at the applicant’s
expense. My examiners were very indulgent, and con-
trived to pass me. My certificate was signed, and the
usual admission granted. The first public office which
came in the way of the young firm was that of Heritor’s
Clerk. The salary was two guineas a year; but as
there were only two half-yearly meetings, it was
sufficient remuneration for the work done. At that
time the poor of the parish were supported by the
church door collections, supplemented by voluntary con-
tributions from the landed proprietors in proportion to
the valuation of their respective properties, fixed in the
old valuation roll, made up in the time of Cromwell.
The elders and kirk treasurer managed the funds, which
were so judiciously distributed that the call on the whole
heritors did not exceed in a year. After the new
poor law was passed, the expenditure bounded up to
1838 Finding my partner did not give that
attention to business which was necessary to
ensure success, we resolved to part, each remaining
in business on his own account. My personal
friends adhered to me; one of them, Mr. Andrew Buchan,
factor at Hayston, advanced to me £3O to start afresh,
which sufficed, with other sums available, to tide me
over my difficulties.
Things for a while went on very quietly. I was
making bread and butter, and my prospects were im-
looq proving. In ordinary matters I never grudged
any trouble in acting as clerk or secretary when
required. Our annual subscription ball used to be
held during the winter in the Tontine Hotel; and for


several years I acted as secretary and treasurer, making
all the necessary arrangements. The following is the
bill for January, 1839. There were 19 ladies and 34
gentlemen present, and the prevailing dances were reels,
quadrilles, and country dances.
Expenditure Tweeddale Subscription Ball.
£ s. d.
Music .. .. .. ~ .. 4 15 o
Supper, 53 at 1/6 .. .. .. 319 6
Ale .. .. .. .. ..008
Table Beer, 29 bottles at 3d. .. .. o 7 3
Porter, 7 bottles .. .. ..048
Negus (4 bottles wine) .. .. ..140
Whisky Toddy .. .. .. ..230
Sherry, half mutchkin .. .. ..026
Fruit .. .. .. .. ..076
Wax Candles, side board .. ..013
Light .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 o
Breakage .. .. .. ..006
Supper and Beer for Musicians .. ..062
jfi4 o
At this assembly I had for my partner chiefly a
young lady, Miss Anne Anderson. She was the
daughter of Dr. Andrew Anderson, a retired regimental
surgeon, who resided in Edinburgh. Miss Anderson’s
mother was the daughter of Mr. James Cairns, writer,
Peebles, whose widow, a fine specimen of the old Scotch
bourgeosie, acted as post-mistress. Her grand-daughter
paid her a yearly Christmas visit, and was then present
at most of the winter balls. Miss Anderson’s mother
died in Jamaica of yellow fever in 1819, a few weeks
after her birth, and the little girl was sent home to her
grandmother in Peebles to be cared for. When my
father went to Peebles Mrs. Cairns was our next
neighbour, and I had seen the sweet little girl grow up
from the time that she was three years old. On her
father retiring from the Army he settled at 40 Minto
street, Edinburgh, and Anne went to a boarding school
at Cairney Hill, near Dumfermline, for a year or two,


In 1839 she was an attractive young lady of 20; and
during her visit a pleasant hour in the evening was often
spent by me in her grandmother’s home.
In August I accepted an invitation given by Mr.
Robert Auld, solicitor, Edinburgh, to accompany him
and spend a few days with his father, Mr. David Auld,
in his charming cottage on the banks of the Doon.
While there I witnessed the grand spectacle of the
Eglinton tournament. The tournament at Eglinton
commenced on August 29th, 1839, and drew together
an enormous concourse of people. The collector at the
first toll-gate on the road leading out of Ayr received
as much in the shape of dues during three days as paid
his rent for the entire year. A small portion of the
Glasgow and South Western railway was then just
finished, that part between Ayr and Irvine, and our
party, along with hundreds more, went by the train.
It was expected that every person would dress as nearly
as he could, according to olden times. I flung round
my shoulders a shepherd’s plaid, and with a broad
Scottish blue bonnet on my head I formed a tolerable
embodiment of a border hillman. On reaching the
scaffold erected for the ordinary spectators I found
seated next me Mr. Wolfe Murray, of Cringletie,
Peeblesshire, who was dight in armour like a knight of
bygone days. To the left was the principal hustings,
where was enthroned the Countess of Seymour as the
queen of beauty. In front was the barrier, extending
lengthways, and at both sides the tents of several of the
knights and their retinue, all under proper guard. The
lists were placed in a beautiful green glade in Eglinton
Park, surrounded with magnificent trees, over which
were visible the dark towers of the Castle, where had
then assembled a distinguished company from all parts
of the kingdom. Prince Louis Napoleon, afterwards
the Emperor, was one of the guests, and took a leading
part in the martial exercises, he being then esteemed
unequalled as a sword player. The procession_was varied


and striking, the costumes brilliant, and the whole scene
interesting in a high When the jousting com-
menced the heralds gave forth the challenge; and when
1839 knight competitors appeared on horseback
fully accoutered, followed by their esquires ready
to charge—lance in hand, the illusion seemed a
beautiful reality. When the signal was given, and each
party went down one side of the barrier at full gallop
lance in rest, the excitement became intense. The
knights tried to strike one another, and the lances were
made of cross wood, so that the slightest shock shivered
them into fragments. On one occasion the Earl of
Eglinton struck his opponent right in the helmet with
such force as to almost unhorse him. The shaft of the
lance was shivered, and a piece of it, about a foot long,
sprang several yards up in the air from the violence of
the shock, while the spectators gave vent to their
feelings by a round of hearty applause. The only
drawback was the day being showery, which circum-
stance somewhat marred the magnificence of the
spectacle, although it did not damp the enthusiasm of
the multitude. The armour in use by the knights was
very varied in appearance, some being bright, some
black, and some richly inlaid with gold. Europe had
been ransacked for fitting suits ; and it is a remarkable
fact that in general the armour was found to be too
small for the stalwart frames of the modern represen-
tatives of knighthood, a proof that the race had not
been degenerating. A day or two after, a fancy fair was
held at Roselle, at which the Countess of Seymour did
her best to raise the wind by a lucky-bag. I was
standing close by when I saw N apoleon lose a sovereign
to her, I little thinking of the prominent position he
was soon to reach.
Business after this continued to prosper steadily.
During 1840 Mrs. Cairns died, and Miss Anderson paid
1840 a v * s * t t 0 P ee bl es > afterwards going to Selkirk,
where I met her at her uncle’s (Dr. Anderson)


house. On Sunday, 27th December (St. John’s Day),
1 called, and finding her alone told her the object of my
visit was to solicit her hand, when she gave me some
encouragement, but made some stipulations necessary
to be fulfilled before I could obtain an answer definitely
favorable. I was to give up my intimacy with the set
with whom I associated, of some of whom she did not
approve, be upon my trial for a short time, and finally
1841 w * n t^lo consent h gr father. The terms were
joyfully accepted; and in March, 1841, 1 received
permission to write to Dr. Anderson, duly receiving the
following reply : —“ Edinburgh, March 25th, iß4r.
“ Dear Sir—l received your letter yesterday, and have
“ to thank you for the favourable opinion you entertain
“ towards my daughter. It is, however, so serious and
“ important an affair for a parent to enter on the con-
“ sideration of, that I trust you will not deem me
“ presuming when I request some information regarding
“ your circumstances in life before giving a final answer.
“To commence married life involved in pecuniary
“ embarrassment or very limited means will be a great
“ bar to comfort; such difficulties afterwards not being
“ easily overcome, &c. (Signed) respectfully yours, A.
“ Anderson.” All obstacles were removed, and we
were definitely engaged. At this time Anne wrote—
“ My father thought an immense deal of your letter, and
“is quite prepared to like you. Oh, Ido wish I were
“ beside you to tell you how very happy I am, happy in
“ the thought of having done right, and happy in the
“ prospect which is opening up before us of spending a
“ lifetime blessed in each other’s love. I do not like
“ fuss ; but I am sure I am making fuss enough about
“ you, and one cannot help saying what they feel to the
“ person who is dearest to them on earth. Ido indeed
“ feel grateful to God for the favorable termination of
“ this matter ; but oh, my dear John, pray for me, that
“ while I give to you my whole heart and affections, you
“ may not usurp that place which should be given to
“ God only. Let me not make an idol of you, for I feel


“ that I would be only too prone to do so. Let us not
“ be hindrances but helps to each other in the straight
“ and narrow way which leadeth unto life.”
After this Anne went to Greenock to attend the
marriage of her cousin, Christina Anderson, to Mr.
Bilton ; and on her return I had the satisfaction of
making the personal acquaintance of Dr. and Mrs.
Anderson. We resolved not to hurry our marriage,
and agreed it should not take place till the following
year, thus giving Anne time to visit her friends in
Peebles, Selkirk, and elsewhere. Her letters during
this time were faithful and loving. In one she wrote
“ may you be able to say like my father that your wife
never spoke a cross word to you.”
On Wednesday, 6th April, we were married by the
Rev. James Robertson, at 40 Minto street, Edinburgh ;
and after luncheon started, amid the customary
shower of old shoes, in a carriage for Ratho, a
station on the Edinburgh and Glasgow railway. That
line had been opened very shortly before. The rails
were fastened to square blocks of granite, and the noise
in travelling was overpowering. The third-class
passengers were conveyed standing in open trucks.
Posting and train we arrived at Grimshaw’s Star Hotel,
George Square, Glasgow. As an instance of the
moderate charges in a first-class hotel at that time I
give the bill.
£ s- d.
No. 14. April 6.—Supper .. ..050
„ 6.—Port .. ..030
„ 6.—Ale .. ..010
„ 7. —Breakfast.. .. 050
„ 7. —Parlour .. ..050
„ 7.— Lodgings .. ..040
„ 7. —Maid .. ..010
~ 7. —Waiter .. ..020
„ 7. —Boots .. .. o 1 o
7. —Ginger Beer ..010
£' 8 0


We visited Largs, and found our way back to
Glasgow by steamer; spent a night in Hamilton,
enjoyed the scenery of the falls of Clyde, and then to
Peebles, where we were welcomed by my father and a
party of friends. We soon settled down to our daily
routine, beginning our married life in a simple way with
a single servant at the current rate of wages —£s for
the summer half-year, and £z 10s. for the winter.
Having made up our minds not to give expensive
dinners, we refused all dinner invitations, but were
always glad to see our friends who would fare as we did.
On Good Friday, April 14th, 1843, our eldest
daughter was born, and afterwards baptized by the
1040 parish minister and named Anne Isabella; the first
° ° name being after her mother and grandmother,
and the second after her great-grandmother, Mrs. Cairns.
This year I was appoined to the following offices:—
Clerk of Supply, Clerk to the Turnpike and Statute
. Labour Road Trustees and Procurator-Fiscal to
° the Justices of the Peace, which considerably
advanced my local standing and influence. A severe
illness followed the increase of work, and for some time
I hovered between life and death, suffering first from
congestion of the liver and bowels, and later from an
abcess on the lungs. After n weeks in the house I
was allowed out for a few minutes, and strength gradually
returned, till in three more weeks Anne and I went to
Dr. Anderson’s for change of air. Before returning to
Peebles we visited the West Highlands, and had a
delightful stay in Arran. During my nearly six months
absence friends had with much kindness rendered
valuable assistance in looking after the proper discharge
of my various official duties. I felt grateful to the
Almighty for all His mercies and for the marked
kindness and sympathy I had experienced. During the
whole of my illness and convalescence the devotion and
careful watchfulness of my dear wife were unremitting.


About this time an active effort was being made
to renovate the old Burgh. The old street was paved
with round boulders, very high in the centre, and the
side paths were paved with smaller stones gathered from
the river bed. It was resolved to level and macadamise
the main thoroughfare, to pave the sides, to remove
sundry outside stairs and outshots, and improve the
water supply.
Acting upon the advice of Mr. William Chambers,
it was resolved to start a small monthly periodical, to
be called The Peeblesshire Monthly Advertiser and Tweedside
Journal. I could not get anyone to share in the
pecuniary risk, so undertook it myself. In one of the
first numbers, a paragraph appeared suggesting a railway
up the valley of the Tweed, and preliminaries were all
arranged when a panic took place in the money market;
and as the Peebles line had not been heartily supported
by many of the land owners, it was resolved that the
concern should be wound up. This was accordingly
done.
Our second child, Alexander, was born on Monday,
4th August. In September I took lodgings in Aberdour,
where the children benefitted by salt water baths, and
Anne and I had some delightful excursions in the
neighbouring country.
This year Dr. and Mrs. Anderson paid us a visit in
our summer quarters at Southennan, and Anne and I
afterwards went for a week to the west High-
e lands. During our peregrinations we had seen
the three finest stone crosses still remaining in Scotland
—one at lona, another at Inverary, and the third at
._ Campbelltown. The chief event during 1847 was
H ' a delightful Highland tour with my dear wife.
Next year Mr, Monilaws persuaded me to enter the
kirk session, and I was accordingly ordained an elder.


My chief motive was not a persuasion of my own
suitability for such an office, as I rather shrank
from the cast-iron tenets of the Confession of Faith, but
from a desire to strengthen the hands of Mr. Monilaws,
who seemed anxious that the spiritual condition of the
parish should be improved and quickened. On Thurs-
day, 6th July, at a quarter past 8 p.m., my second
daughter Fanny (Frances Graham) was born, and after-
wards baptised in the parish church in the presence of
the congregation, Anne having the courage to bring in
the babe herself. Having carried on the Advertiser for four
years, I now got out of it with a loss of about £so. It
had been the means of aiding considerably in helping on
the ancient burgh in its progress of improvement, and I
never grudged either the time and trouble or the outlay
which it cost.
On Sunday, 3rd March, we were blessed by the
appearance of our second son John, who on the 21st
, April was baptised by Mr. Monilaws in presence
of the congregation. What followed, culminat-
ing in the loss of my beloved Anne, will be best
described in the words of a memorandum I penned after
her decease, and from which I now quote :
“ Believing that it may be interesting and instruc-
“ live to my dear children at some after period, when
they will cling with eagerness to every reminiscence
“ of their sainted mother, to preserve these notes of her
“ last illness and decease, I have reduced them to
“ writing with that view, and humbly trust and pray
“ that they may be enabled so to walk as to join her
“ when their trials are over amid the spirits of the just
“ made perfect. Although she recovered from her con-
“ finement apparently as usual, still she did not regain
“ her accustomed strength. During the spring she had
“ two severe attacks of pain in her bowels, but recovered
“ sufficiently to take a deep interest in proposed altera-
“ tions to our house, with which we decided to proceed


“at once. To escape the noise and confusion of the
“ operations, we took Milton cottage, Manor Water, for
“ the summer months, which my dear wife and children
“ thoroughly enjoyed. Early on a Sunday morning in
“ June, Anne was siezed with a recurrence of the pain
“ with which she had been formerly affected, so violent
“ that she could not remain in any one posture a few
“ seconds. Her agony was extreme and distressing to
“ witness. Everything was done to try and alleviate her
“ suffering, but it was not till Dr. Renton and the nurse
“ arrived, and leeeches had been applied, that it abated
“ anything. In the course of the summer my dear
“ patient had several attacks, but not so severe as
“before. She enjoyed her residence at Milton very
“much, and exercised a kindly hospitality to all her
“ friends who came to see her. Dr. and Mrs. Anderson
“ spent a few days with us, when it was resolved we
“ should go to Edinburgh in the autumn to consult
“ Professor Simpson, who saw her, along with Dr.
“ Alexander Peddie. They at once detected the
“ existence of an ovarian tumour, and recommended
“ that she should return home and go about as usual
“ and keep her mind as easy and cheerful as possible.
“We again spent a day or two in Edinburgh during
“November. On the evening of her return home on
“this latter occasion she was very much depressed,
“ saying she had felt a presentiment in bidding good-bye
“ to her father and Mrs, Anderson, that it was the last
“ time she would see them in Minto street, and she was
“ sure from their manner that they had felt the same.
“ She had another slight attack of her illness, but
“ recovered her usual cheerfulness and health in a day
“or two. The new year passed quietly, but in
February Anne became rapidly worse, and
“ suffered intense pain day and night. Her father and
“ Dr. Peddie came from Edinburgh, and her cousin,
“ Dr. Henry Anderson, from Selkirk, and everything
“ that medical skill could dictate was done to mitigate
“ her acute sufferings. Before leaving, the doctors


“ informed me that her chances of recovery were very
“remote. The cause of her illness was peritoneal
1 ‘ inflammation. On the gth February she was exceeding]y
“ ill, and thought herself dying. She bade a tender
“farewell to her dear children, and also spoke to me
“ seriously. ‘ Chasten your spirit, John, before the Lord,
“ ‘ and set a good example to your children,’ she said
“ most solemnly. I had never left her a moment all
“ that week. After that some slight symptoms of
“ improvement were exhibited, and she continued for
“ several days gradually to amend, until she was able to
“ get up out of bed for an hour or two. Thinking
“ herself so much better, my dear wife dismissed the
“ nurse, but before long bad symptoms appeared, and
“ she was again very ill. On April 27th a boy was
“ prematuirely born, who did not survive. During May
“ and the early part of June we had many touching
“ scenes. On one occasion she asked for her two Bibles
“ that she might write the names of Annie and Alec,
“to whom she wished them given. She wrote upon
“ one ‘ To Annie Isabella Bathgate, the dying gift of
“ * her affectionate,’ but was unable to write more. She
“ sent kind messages to all her friends, saying of her
“ father ‘ poor old man, he will mourn my loss very Sore.
“ ‘ Tell him I ever loved him very dearly.’ Her brothers
“ Tom and Graham she also mentioned, saying of the
“ latter ‘ warm-hearted Grahaniie, he too will miss me.’
“On another occasion she requested the nurse, her
“ aunt, and cousin to leave the room, and let her be
“ alone With her husband. After telling me some things
“ she wished to be given away, she made me kneel down
“by her bedside and offer up a prayer, which I
“endeavoured to do, half-choked with emotion. Al-
though at times she seemed to rally, she became
“ gradually weaker, till she was unable even to sit up
“in bed. The music of some hymns which a young
“ friend, Mary Robertson, used to sing with the children
“ when on a visit at Milton haunted her; and it afforded
“ her great gratification every afternoon for the bhildren


“ to come to her bedside and sing with my assistance
“ ‘ There is one above all others; Oh ! how he loves,’
“ and several others. Her father stayed with us for ten
“ days, and her two cousins, Tom Anderson from
“ Australia, and his brother Dr. Henry from Selkirk,
“ also came to see her. Although very weak from much
“ suffering she recognised them all. Her brother
“ Thomas arrived in Edinburgh from India, and at once
“ came out to see her. She knew him in a moment, her
“ eyes brightened up, and she said she would have
“ known him had they met on the top of Ben Lomond.
“ The Rev. Mr. Monilaws visited her occasionally, and
“ she always expressed great satisfaction when I once
“ every day at least took her hands in mine and prayed
“ the Father of Mercies to be with her in the time of
“her trial to alleviate her sufferings, to sanctify our
“ affliction, and to accept of us through the righteousness
“of Christ. On Thursday, the 19th June, her sufferings
“ appeared to be drawing to a close. She knew me,
“ and addressed to me several of her usual terms of
“ endearment. On the morning of the 20th her breathing
“became heavier, till at 20 minutes past nine she gave
“her last sigh, and her gentle spirit returned to God
“ who gave it. I need add no more ; but for the sake
“ of my children, who may peruse this, I will, however,
“imperfectly attempt to portray her excellent and
“ amiable character, that they may profit by her bright
“ example. One striking characteristic she possessed
“ was an intense love of truth, indeed she was truth-
“ fulness itself. She never concealed a thought from
“ her husband, nor made the slightest approach to
“ subterfuge. She possessed great firmness of purpose,
“ especially in what she considered to be the line of her
“ duty. Her manners were gentle, and she was full of
“ vivacity. As a mistress she was loved and respected.
“ She never scolded, but calmly found fault when
“necessary. As a mother she was most painstaking
“ and anxious, firm, and at the same time tender and
“ affectionate to her children. As a wife her whole soul


“ was in the faithful discharge of her duties. She had
“no thought beyond her husband and family. My
“ every wish was studied and forestalled, and I was
“ beloved with warmth and depth of feeling. Her high
“ and sterling principles and sound judgment rendered
“ her at all times a safe and judicious counsellor, and
“ she was fitted under Divine grace to strengthen my
“ character when otherwise it would have been wavering
“ and uncertain. In person she was remarkably well
“ proportioned, although under the average size. Her
“ hands and feet were exceedingly well formed and
“small; her forehead expansive, and displaying the
“ classical contour of her face, with the exquisitely cut
“ lips partially open. Very beautiful! A blessing rest
“ on her beloved memory, and may her dear children
“ endeavour to walk in her footsteps, believing.”
In December, 1851, Mr. Chambers, Mr. Walter
Thorburn, and I met to discuss the feasibility of renew-
18fi2 * n ß scheme of a railway to Peebles. A public
meeting was held, which was attended by all the
surrounding landed proprietors. A prospectus was
issued, and applications for shares came in from all
quarters.
On July 14th, 1853, at 42 George Square, Edin-
burgh, I married Miss Mary McLaren, eldest daughter
of Mr. James McLaren, Minto street. We had
a delightful tour to Carlisle, Chester, Dublin, &c.,
and returned home, where we were welcomed by friends.
I had now to make preparations for the cutting of the
first turf of the Peebles railway, which ceremony was
performed by Sir Graham Montgomery, and caused a
great stir in the neighbourhood. Having been elected
town clerk, my business increased wonderfully. I was
kept very busy, and the daily routine, owing to the
advantages arising from the domestic supervision of an
excellent and loving partner, flowed on equably and
pleasantly.


In September, my daughter Jane was born, and we
afterwards spent some weeks at Rosebank, a delightfully
situated cottage overhanging the Tweed at Glen-
ormiston, four miles below Peebles.
I was offered the charge of a branch of the Union
Bank of Scotland as an adjunct to my business. This
.ggg I accepted, and the office was soon open for
banking purposes. Shortly after this the railway
works were completed, and the line open for traffic on
July 4th. On Sunday, December and, I had not gone
to church as I was suffering from cold. I saw my father
come out of church before the rest of the congregation,
and five minutes later a messenger came for me, saying
he had fallen down in the street. I hurried out to the
doctor’s house where he had been carried, and found
him then dead. He was interred within the precincts
of the ancient St. Andrew’s Kirk, close to the granite
cross which I had erected to the memory of my dear
Anne.
This year was gladdened in its earlier part by the
advent of Mary Helen, who was born on February 13th.
jggg In March I started the Peeblesshire Savings
Investment Society, which was the first building
society established in Peebles, and proved successful.
The first term was closed after I had settled in New
Zealand, and at the wind up, the members showed their
kind appreciation of my services by sending me a
remittance of one-half of a small surplus left in hand.
In May, the railway completed its first full half-year,
when the proceeds enabled a dividend of 3 per cent, to
be paid to the shareholders.
A new access having been made to the railway
station, it was found necessary to widen the Cuddie
2gßridge; for which purpose 10 feet was taken
from my house, necessitating the re-modelling of
the interior. On August nth a grand Masonic display


took place, at first the keying of the new bridge, and
later at the laying of the foundation stone of the hall
in connection with the Chambers Institution. On the
2ist September, my daughter Rachael was born.
Being vice-president of the local branch of total
abstainers, I resolved on the experiment of having all
the members to tea, to prove that an enjoyable evening
could be spent without the use of intoxicants. In
August of this year a great step in the world’s progress
was achieved by the successful completion of the laying
of the Atlantic cable. The first message was the
angelic song “ In the plains of Bethlehem,” and it was
peculiarly fitting and appropriate.
February was a marked month in the family. On
the 6th we were glad to welcome our little daughter,
Katherine Alice; and the 18th we had to mourn
over the departure of her grandmother, Mrs.
McLaren. In the end of September, Mrs. Bathgate
and I proceeded to London with Annie, to place her at
school under the care of Miss Jane McLaren. There
had been considerable excitement in the public mind in
consequence of an alarm of invasion by a French army.
This had its origin in the vapouring of some French
colonels; and certainly the idea had been present in
their minds. The result was an enthusiastic and spon-
taneous offer of service on the part of the male
population to the government as volunteers. A company
was formed in Peeblesshire and speedily put into
training, giving every promise of efficiency.
In the early part of the year my good friend, Dr.
Anderson, had been showing signs of failing health.
1860 He finally succumbed and died on June 19th in
his 76th year, the last surviving son of Dr.
Thomas Anderson, of Selkirk. He was buried in the
Grange Cemetery, Edinburgh, where a neat granite


cross with the following inscription marks the resting
place of his mortal remains :
"In memory of Andrew Anderson, Esq., m.d., late surgeon
92nd Highlanders, who died at Edinburgh 19th June, i 860; aged
75. Born at Selkirk Ist October, 1784; entered the army 1805;
served 28 years in Italy, Sicily, Holland, the Peninsula, and West
Indies. He received the war medal with five clasps. ‘ For ever
with the Lord.’
Also,
“In memory of Georgina Graham, his widow, who died
at Edinburgh on 31st December, 1871."
Dr. Anderson had seen a good deal of service. He
was in the disastrous campaign in the Low countries,
where fever decimated our troops. He served in five
campaigns in Spain, for which he had the medal and
five clasps. At Fuentes d’Onoro, where he had laid out
his instruments for use, he narrowly escaped being
taken prisoner in a charge of French cavalry. At
Salamanca he felt somewhat shaky in the marching and
manoeuvring in range of 100 guns of the enemy playing
upon them. A ball went through the big drum which
was carried before him. He used to relate the fatigue
of the men in the long marches. On the word “ halt ”
being given, the men would sink down on the spot. On
the word being passed “ man of the mess for beef,” not
a soul would stir ; but when the word was “ man of the
mess for grog,” the men would be seen rising like ghosts
and departing for their refreshment. Many a time he
had been thankful for three stones under him to keep
him from the wet ground. After the peace he went with
the 92nd regiment to Jamaica; and there in a fatal
outbreak of yellow fever the regiment lost twice as
many men as they did at Waterloo. All the officers’
wives who were there died. On his return home he
married again; and after a short period of service in
Ireland he retired on a well-earned pension, and settled
in Edinburgh. His second wife was Miss Georgina
Graham, and she had two sons—Thomas, who entered


the army as an officer in the 78th Highlanders, and died
in 1876 at Westward Ho, and Graham, who went to
China as a cadet in the house of Dent and Co., and
afterwards realised a competency as a bill broker in
Hong Kong.
The volunteer movement had now taken shape, and
a review of the Scotch and Border corps was held by
the Queen and Prince Albert in Holyrood Park,
Edinburgh. There were 240,000 spectators present,
and 21,445 men. I took several of the children to
witness the spectacle, and a most impressive sight it
was. On September 22nd my daughter Edith made
her appearance.
On January 28th my father’s widow, Mrs. Janet
Campbell Bathgate, died at the house of her son George
1882 ’ n Edinburgh; and on the 17th of March my
eighth daughter, Dora Octavia, was born at
Peebles. In the following May the great exhibition in
London was open, and I took my eldest son (Alexander)
to see it, as he would not in his lifetime have such
another chance. In the beginning of September, with
the assistance of the Sabbath School teachers, I
organised an excursion of the Sabbath School children
to Hawthornden and Roslin by the Peebles railway.
Everything combined to make the outing a complete
success. In the following December a subscription had
been got up, chiefly I believe, at the instigation of Mr.
Tennant of the Glen, to present me with a testimonial
in acknowledgement of my services in connection with
the railway. I was invited to attend a public meeting,
where I was presented with a silver salver and
There was no public incident worth noting until
March 10th, when the marriage of the Prince of Wales
1863 *°°k P^ ace> The good folks of Peebles were not
behind any in the exuberance of their loyal
demonstrations. A public breakfast took place in the


morning, a novel entertainment, at which I was asked
to preside. My wife’s nervous system being slightly
out of order, we resolved to try a hydropathic establish-
ment, selecting Matlock Bank, Derbyshire, where a
course of the treatment did much good.
Shortly after this I was startled by a proposal
received from London that I should proceed to New
Zealand as colonial manager of the Bank of Otago,
about to open in Dunedin. The terms were favourable
—,£",1500 a year, with a free house and a five years’
engagement; so after consultation with some of my
friends I decided to accept the offer, and at once began
preparations. A public meeting was held on the nth
August at 2 o’clock p.m., at which I was presented with
a very handsome service of silver plate, comprising a
magnificent epergne, a complete coffee set, a tea urn, an
ink and paper stand, and a few smaller articles. In the
evening a farewell meeting was held, and the following
afternoon we all left by train for Edinburgh, three
ringing cheers being raised by the large crowd as the
train slowly left the station. Next morning we started
for London by rail; and after two days passed in making
final arrangements, we sailed in the good ship “ Star of
Tasmania,” Captain Culbert, arriving in Dunedin on the
23rd November, after a prosperous voyage of 95 days.
We spent the first fortnight in the Imperial Hotel,
Princes street, where we were very comfortable with
reasonable charges. I found, as regards business, that
Mr. Glennie, the accountant, had prepared the way, he
having attended the session of Parliament at Auckland,
and got the necessary private Act passed enabling the
bank to issue notes and carry on business. He had also
purchased a good site in Princes street, with a frontage
of 33 feet, for which he had to pay ,£"7,000. Houses
suitable for a large family were scarce; but at length we
got settled in a two-storeyed house in the suburb fronting
the Town Belt, called Montecillo, for which I bad to pay


a rent of £3OO per annum. A few years later, in a
period of depression, the owner had to sell, and all the
whole property of house and seven acres brought was
He had tried to persuade me to purchase it for
£3,000,
Business took me to Invercargill, where, after
spending a day or two, I took the coach to Kingstown.
lftß4 There was no regular road formed, and in many
places through the plains skirting the hill ranges
there was not even a track. The driver took a point
at a distance, and drove straight towards it, as if he
were navigating a ship. The day was fine, and the
atmosphere elastic and clear, which made the drive
through the natural solitude of the beautiful valley very
pleasant. The Oreti River, with its sparkling streams
and its alternate pools, reminded me much of the Tweed.
After a long day’s journey, we were finally landed at the
door of a calico hotel in Kingstown. Next day being
Sunday, the landlord got together as many of the
inhabitants as possible, and I gave a short address to
some 15 or 20 persons. The township was a mere
diggings hamlet, and it did not appear to have been at
any time a prosperous place. Mining in the neighbour-
hood had not been successful, and the township seemed
to be mainly dependent on its being the land terminus
of the traffic between Invercargill and Queenstown.
Next morning I started in the small steamer to go
up to Queenstown. The voyage was pleasant, and the
scenery striking and grand. We had a fine view in
passing of the Devil’s Staircase, being a steep ascent
in the track along the lake side, flanked by a precipice.
The year before, a mob of cattle was being driven along
this route for the supply of the diggers about the
Shotover, when one of them made a falsa step and
rolled over the cliff and killed on the spot. The
remainder followed their leader to an untimely end.
The buildings in Queenstown were in the first stage of


a diggings town —timber and calico. There was con-
siderable bustle, and an appearance of some business
doing. A shrewd Aberdonian had cultivated a piece of
the terrace above the town as a garden, and got fabulous
prices for his produce. A few days before, a miner had
given him 7/6 for a rosebud. In the hotel at which I
took up my abode there was a dance going on, which
meant no sleep for those who were so inclined. There
being no coach to suit my movements, I made interest
with the post-boy, and arranged to ride his horse, while
he mounted on top of the mail bags. This necessitated
starting at 6 a.m. We had a pleasant ride along the
shore of the lake to Frankton—then a township con-
sisting of a solitary hotel—on past Lake Hayes, through
a pastoral wilderness to the Arrow, then a row of canvas
tents and booths. We breakfasted here, where eggs at
the time were selling at 12/- a dozen. Starting
immediately after breakfast, we had a long dreary ride
along the valley of the Kawarau, where there was no
regular road formed, the track being in places very
dangerous. We had a change of horses by the way,
and kept steadily on till we reached Cromwell. It was
now dusk, and the remaining 13 miles to the Dunstan
seemed interminable. The darkness and the fatigue of
riding 50 miles on a hot day over rough country made
me weary for the end of the journey. At the Dunstan
I got housed in a wooden hotel, but there was no rest,
a noise from men drinking being kept up all night. I
drove across the country by the Serpentine Valley,
reaching the Taieri Plain by the Deep Stream, and
arriving at home pretty much done up, but very
thankful again to enjoy the comforts of civilization and
domestic peace. The result of the journey was that
branches of the bank were established both at Inver-
cargill and Queenstown.
Dunedin, at this time, was only a town in course of
formation. Many of the streets were unformed, and
even the main thoroughfares were only treated and


metalled like a turnpike road. A gas company had been
established; but there was no public supply of water,
the inhabitants depending chiefly on rain water from
their roofs, gathered into iron tanks. The municipal
government was that of a town board, with imperfect
means of administration. The question of an adequate
supply of water came up in January, and a public
meeting was held, at which I was requested to move the
second resolution. A vigorous effort was made to
establish a joint stock company, under the designation
of the Dunedin Waterworks Company, which was
successful. An Act of Parliament was obtained in the
ensuing session constituting the company, and granting
compulsory power of assessment. I acted as chairman
of the directors for five years, and presided at the
opening of the works at the reservoir after the contract
was completed.
On the 29th January, 1864, I attended a sale of the
estate of Carisbrook, consisting of a large dwelling
house and 60 acres of land. It was situated in the
Glen, behind Montecillo, where we were residing. It
had been part of the selection of Mr. James Macandrew,
who built the first house there, and it was his residence
when he was superintendent of the province. I attended
the sale, and after a very little competition the place was
knocked down to me at Having taken
possession, I had the house put into thorough repair,
and I also added a laundry and dairy, or pantry. When
the repairs were finished, we removed thither from
Montecillo, and re-named the place “ The Glen,” both
on account of its natural aptness, and as a reminiscence
of Mr. Tennant’s hospitable house on the banks of the
Quair in Peeblesshire.
A fire broke out in the Exchange Hotel, next door
to the premises of the Bank of Otago; and so rapidly
18R , did the flames extend, that the clerks and house-
-1 keeper had barely time to escape with their lives.


The bank was a stone building, but there was a stair
window in the side next the hotel, and through this the
fire was communicated to the interior of the bank, which
was speedily a blazing mass. On receiving intelligence
at my house, I was soon on the spot, but nothing could
be done to arrest the flames, which burned quietly out
after the first burst was over and the roof had fallen in.
My first thought was to secure temporary premises,
which I did by obtaining possession of an auctioneer’s
premises immediately opposite. I then hurried to the
Daily Times office, and got an advertisement inserted in
that morning’s paper intimating the change and that the
business would be continued as usual. When the ruins
cooled down, and we were able to get at the safe, which
had fallen into the cellar below, it was an anxious
moment before it could be known whether the contents
were untouched. To our great comfort, the large safe
door yielded to the key, and all within was found in
good order and useable, except that the leather binding
of the books was shrivelled by the steam and heat.
Parchment deeds were also shrivelled to one-fourth of
their size, but the engrossing was distinct and clear, and
could be easily read by means of a magnifying glass.
By ten o’clock next morning business was resumed as
usual, and it was truly wonderful the small amount of
inconvenience to which the bank was subjected by this
alarming incident. On this occasion the whole of the
block extending north from the bank building to
Dowling street was swept away, involving 12 properties,
and a loss of about £20,000. The old buildings were
soon cleared out, and substantial structures erected in
their place. It is a pleasing feature in colonial life how
instant the enterprise is in exertion to recover from such
calamities. There is no folding of the hands nor
waiting, but busy hands are immediately at work to
clear away the ruins, and not a day lost in the substitution
of new buildings. Not long after that, a fire took place
in the block of Princes street next the Octagon, in
which both sides of the street and buildings in the


Octagon were destroyed. The spectacle at one time
was terrific. The temporary wooden structures all
disappeared; and by these fires nearly the whole of
Princes street was purified and regenerated. Since the
introduction of water at high pressure, the fire brigade
is able, by means of the fire-plugs in the street, to pour
such a volume of water upon a burning building that
the fire is generally confined to the building in which it
breaks out. The intervening brick gables also render
efficient aid in limiting the spread of the flames.
On June 4th (Sunday), appeared our youngest son.
Five weeks afterwards he was baptized in the Congre-
gational Church, Moray place, and named James
Hawthorn Bathgate. His Christian name was in
memory of his maternal grandfather. His middle name
was bestowed as being euphonious, and as a reminder
of a happy day his dear mother and I spent on the 4th
June at the Botanic Gardens, Inverleith row, Edinburgh,
when a magnificent hawthorn tree was in full blossom.
This was a few weeks before our marriage in 1853,
In July I was invited to join a Dunedin company of
volunteers—No. 2 Scottish—as their captain. I
succeeded Mr. John Cargill, who had been appointed
major. I continued for several years, until on the
promotion of Major Cargill to be Lieut.-colonel, I
was -gazetted as major of the Ist Battalion of Otago
Rifle Volunteers. I remained in this position until my
appointment as District Judge and Resident Magistrate
in 1874. During my captaincy I was on the best of
terms with my company, and when I left them they
presented me with a handsome sword.
Our youngest child was born at The Glen this year
on Thursday, June 21st, and afterwards baptized by the
, Rev. Mr. Forsaith under the name of Eva Louisa
Bathgate. The first name, meaning in Maori
language “ nine,” was an appropriate name for my ninth


daughter. The middle name—Louisa—was given as a
reminiscence of Mrs. Bathgate’s friend, Mrs. Maclehose,
of Glasgow.
In October, 1867, my connection with the Bank of
Otago was severed. The previous year had been a
. very trying time. A financial panic had ensued
in London when the great discounting house—
Overend, Gurney and Co.—went to the wall. This
reacted on the colony, and a crisis followed here. The
Commercial Bank of New Zealand had to close its
doors, and was finally wound up. A run was made on
the Bank of Otago, but we were able to meet all
demands, and it scarcely lasted a day. Business,
however, was affected, and several of our customers
were not able to pull through. One of the directors
came out from London, and the result was that I
resigned on condition of being paid the sum of £SOO
and receiving a complete discharge. My terms were
accepted, and I was relieved of a position of great worry
and anxiety. My successor was Mr. J. W. M. Larnach,
of Melbourne. He was an able man and well supported;
but after four years’ experience his term came to a
close, and the bank transferred its business and property
to a new institution formed in London —The National
Bank of New Zealand.
On Ist January, 1868, 1 undertook the managership
of the Otago Daily Times Company, of which I had been
1 „ fi o a director. The paper was started in 1 85 ias a
daily by Julius Vogel, who had been imported
from Victoria as first editor by Mr. Cutten, the pro-
prietor of the weekly paper The Witness. The first
manager was Mr. Benjamin L. Farjeon, who resigned
to proceed to London to prosecute a literary career, in
which he has since been successful as a novelist, and I
was appointed in his stead at a salary of £6OO a year.
This was rather a downcome from the bank allowance
of £1,500, but I had compensation in freedom from


Care. 1 remained in my new position a year, and
succeeded in placing the books of the Company in
thorough order.
On 20th December, 1866, my eldest daughter,
Annie Isabel, was married at St. Paul’s Episcopal
Church, Dunedin, to Gibson Kirke Turton, barrister and
solicitor; and on 26th June, 1867, my second daughter,
Frances Graham, was married at The Glen by the
Rev. Dr. Stuart, Presbyterian minister, to William
Maitland, youngest son of the late Joseph Maitland, of
the Crescent, near Balclutha. Two of the brothers of
Mr. Maitland, senr. were judges of the Supreme Court
of Scotland—Lord Barcaple and Lord Dundrennan.
During 1869 I acted as Provisional Trustee in
Bankruptcy for the Otago and Southland district; to
i Qfio which office I was appointed on my application
by Mr. Stafford, then Premier.
On 6th April, 1870, I was admitted as barrister
and solicitor before the Supreme Court of New Zealand.
That year I was returned to the Provincial
' Council as one of the representatives for the
City of Dunedin, and shortly after joined the Provincial
Government as Provincial Solicitor. Having embarked
in local politics, the transition to colonial politics
' was easy, and I accordingly stood for Dunedin at
the general election in 1871, and was returned at the
head of the poll. I refused to have any committee or
to hire any canvassers, and my expenses were under
£35. I attended the session of the General Assembly
in 1871 at Wellington, and spoke on several occasions.
In August there was some stir at the celebration of
the centenary of Sir Walter Scott. A dinner, a public
meeting, and a ball took place. I was appointed to give
the toast of the evening at the dinner—“ The immortal
memory of Sir Walter Scott." The editor of the Daily


Times, in his leading article, referred to it as “the
pregnant, able, eloquent, and truly national oration
pronounced by Mr. Bathgate.”
In 1872 I returned to Wellington for my second
session. The Stafford ministry was defeated, and a new
1572 ministry formed, with Mr. Waterhouse as Premier.
I was asked by Mr. Vogel, the mainspring of the
party, to join the Cabinet, which I consented to do, and
was sworn in on nth October, and appointed Com-
missioner of Customs. Mr. W. H. Reynolds became a
member of the Government a few days later, when I
handed over the portfolio of the Customs to him, and I
undertook the duties of Minister of Justice and Com-
missioner of Stamps. Parliament was prorogued on
25th October. My duties kept me very much in
Wellington, and the year, until the re-assembling of
Parliament, was passed very much in routine work.
A domestic event of some importance took place in
the early part of the year—my eldest son having been
married to Miss Fanny Gibson Turton on 24th
' April. I came down from Wellington, and had
the pleasure of being present at the ceremony. In the
end of the year, Mr, Vogel offered me the appointment
of Resident Magistrate and District Judge in Dunedin.
With the approval of my colleagues, I accepted it at a
salary of £7OO per annum.
On February 21, the steamer “Mongol” arrived
from England with immigrants, after a voyage of 59
1 . days; this being the precursor of the direct
' steam communication, which was organised nine
years afterwards.
My magisterial duties occupied my time fully. In
every important case I took time to consider, and gave
a written judgment setting forth the reasons and decisions
which had led me to the conclusion at which I had


arrived. The trouble I took was duly appreciated, and
it prevented appeals.
On December 15, 1875, my daughter Jane was
united in wedlock to Mr. Noel Lee Buchanan, son of
jojg the Hon. Andrew Buchanan, m.d., a member of
the Legislative Council. Mr. Buchanan had
passed as a solicitor, and had entered into partnership
with my eldest son, under the name of Bathgate and
Buchanan. The young couple settled in Dunedin, and
eventually built a house at the Glen, called “ Pukenui,”
which they occupied till 1882, when failing health,
through confinement to the desk, induced Mr. Buchanan
to acquire a run in the Maniototo district, and devote
himself entirely to country pursuits. This led to the
complete restoration of his health.
Mrs. Bathgate’s brothers and sisters were now
desirous that she should pay them a visit, after their 13
187fi y ears ’ separation, and while the family circle was
still unbroken. She accordingly left Dunedin by
sailing ship in May, 1876, accompanied by our daughter
Katherine. They returned in February, 1877. When
, the vessel was telegraphed as being at the Heads,
my daughter Mary and I took a carriage to Port
Chalmers, and arrived in good time to see the voyagers
brought up to the jetty, on to which they stepped just
as if they had landed from an adjacent port, instead of
finishing a voyage from the other side of the world.
During her mother’s absence, Mary had become engaged
to Mr. John Edward Denniston, barrister (of Messrs.
Stewart and Denniston), and they were afterwards
married in the Congregational Church by the Rev. Dr.
Roseby, in November, 1877
In 1875, I started a weekly paper —The Saturday
Advertiser —with Mr. T. Bracken as editor. In 1881,
after six volumes had been published, it was sold to the
Morning Herald Company, and continued under the
charge of Mr. Bracken.


In the end of 1877 my son John, from China, paid
us a visit, and remained till March 4, 1878. I agreed
to sell him the lands of The Glen for which
relieved me of some anxiety in placing a specific value
on this asset.
I applied to the Government for a year’s leave,
which was granted on full salary on account of my
. n 7 q offering to lecture on the resources of the colony
when at Home. In order to strengthen my
hands, it was resolved by some of my friends in Dunedin
that I should be invited to a public entertainment. The
banquet came off in Watson’s Rooms on Friday, 27th
June, the Mayor in the chair. About 100 gentlemen
were present, including many leading professional and
mercantile men. Having got all my preparations com-
pleted, Mrs. Bathgate and I sailed in the “ Arawata ”
for Melbourne on Wednesday, July 2, in order to embark
in the Orient Company’s steamer “ Aconcagua,” for
London.
On our arrival, we received a very hearty welcome
from Mr. and Mrs. Renshaw at their pleasant dwelling
in Cedars road, Clapham Common, where we remained
a week. We started for Scotland on Thursday,
September 24, taking Manchester by the way for one
night. We had a pleasant greeting from Dr. and Mrs.
McLaren, at whose house we stayed. I had an inter-
view with Mr. Melland. Next day we were off by the
north train, and arrived at the Symington station, where
my brother James was waiting for us. We were speedily
transferred to the Peebles train, and in an hour’s time
were safely landed at the Caledonian station at Tweed
Bridge, Peebles. Provost Green and a few friends were
assembled to give us welcome, and in a few minutes
more we were comfortably installed in the old house in
the High street, which seemed to be very little changed
from what it was when we left it 16 years ago. My
brother’s family had grown up, and the younger ones


we saw for the first time. Next day, Saturday, we
made a trip to Edinburgh to see our good friends there,
and returned in the evening. On Sunday we attended
the Parish Church, and occupied the Magistrate’s
gallery. I sat in my old corner in the Town’s Clerk’s
chair, and handled his psalm book, on which I noticed
some of my old pencil markings. On Monday we called
at Glenormiston and King’s Meadows; and on the
Wednesday following I went to Edinburgh by appoint-
ment, and met Dr. Chambers at the High street. The
best presses working were one of Marinoni’s and one
from Otley—the “ Reliance ’’—turning out sheets by
thousands per hour ; a wonderful advance on the hand
presses I had seen throwing off the Journal (Chambers’)
47 years ago.
On Tuesday, September 23rd, I was entertained at
a banquet in the Tontine Assembly Room, Sir Graham
Montgomery in the chair. The room was quite filled,
and my health was proposed by my old friend Ex-
provost Stirling.
Mrs. Bathgate and I now took up our abode with
her sisters at Morningside place, and then we went into
lodgings for a few weeks, that I might devote myself
without interruption to the preparation of a volume on
New Zealand, to be published by the Messrs. Chambers.
On Tuesday, October 14th, I made a run out to Peebles
to give an address on New Zealand, on which occasion
there was a great turn-out; the Rev. Mr. Lorraine, the
Parish minister, in the chair. I also lectured in
Haddington, Dirleton, Dalkeith, Selkirk, and Inner-
leithen, and was well received everywhere.
It was arranged that I should deliver lectures in
Newcastle, Darlington, and Middlesborough, and each
IftSO proved an unqualified success. At
Newcastle the Mayor presided, and the room was
packed with a thousand people. I then went to visit


Mr. Joseph Tangye, a member of the celebrated firm of
Tangye Brothers, of Birmingham. He arranged for a
meeting at Kidderminster, which passed off well.
Altogether, as the result of my efforts, considerably over
■£ 100,000 of capital will flow into the colony with
intending settlers from various parts of Britain. I
received and answered above a thousand letters from all
parts of the world.
On May 27th we left London in the Orient steamer
“ Garonne,” glad to get away from the bewildering
whirl of the modern Babylon to a land of comparative
rest, where we could enjoy a pure atmosphere and the
simple pleasures of home. We arrived in Melbourne
on July 20th, and transhipped to the “ Rotomahana,”
reaching Port Chalmers six days afterwards.
The seventh Parliament of the colony closed 24th
September, 1881, and in the end of the year a general
.001 election came on. I was asked to stand for the
City of Dunedin, and at first declined owing to
the state of my health, but as the summer wore on my
health improved, and I began to think I might be able
for the duty. The electors of Roslyn, in which district
I resided, brought me a requisition. There were two
other candidates in the field—Captain Scott, r.n., who
had recently arrived in the colony, and Mr. Hodgkinson,
a resident of Maori Hill. I consented to stand, but
resolved to have no committee and not to canvass,
contenting myself with stating my sentiments at various
public meetings of the electors, and leaving the matter
in their hands to decide whether I was a fit and proper
person to be their representative. The meetings were
invariably successful, and without any pre-arrangement
I always obtained a favorable vote. The elections took
place in December, 1881, when I was returned at the
head of tbe poll by a majority of 14. The Assembly
met on May 18th, 1882. I joined on May 26th, Mrs.
Bathgate accompanying me to Wellington.


Rachael arrived in Dunedin on November 26th, and
came to The Glen December nth. Her movements
were somewhat interfered with on account of
scarlet fever, having attacked the two Denniston
boys. It was intended that she should be there some
time, but the visit was cut short. Mr. Pirn also came.
Their dear little girl, Edith Wakefield, a beautiful child,
in charge of a Chinese nurse, or amah, accompanied
them. They remained till Edith’s marriage with Mr.
hqoo Frederick Woodhouse, which took place on
February 28th. The day was lovely, and every-
thing passed off very well. Next day, Katherine and
her husband, Edward Melland, left for Europe on a
visit to his friends in Manchester, Mr. and Mrs. Pirn
and babe left on March 10th for Sydney, on their return
to Foochow. On April 24th, I addressed my constituents
in Roslyn Council Chambers, and received a unanimous
vote of thanks and confidence. On Wednesday, June
13th, Mrs. Bathgate, Dora, Eva, and I sailed in the
“ Tarawera ” for Wellington, where I had taken a
furnished house in Hill street for the session at a
month. We remained there till September.
December 12th.—A large steamer was seen off the
Ocean Beach at dusk yesterday. From this morning’s
papers it appeared the vessel was the “ Tongariro,” the
pioneer direct steamer of the New Zealand Shipping
Company, which had left London on October 27th and
Plymouth on October 29th. As we expected our son
James to be on board as a passenger, Mrs. Bathgate and
I went to the Port by the 10 o’clock train. Dora and
Eva had preceded us. On arriving, we found the
steamer had anchored at the Heads, and was not
expected till high water, about 10 o’clock. When she
arrived, we went on board and welcomed our dear lad
with much gladness.
In the month of January we had a visit from “ our
Jack” from Foochow. With his usual generosity, he


1884 S ave sisters Annie and Fanny, as well as Dora
and Eva, and his cousins, Christian Macmillan
and Georgie Bathgate, a trip to the Sounds, which they
all enjoyed very much. During their absence, Mrs.
Bathgate and I went by rail and coach to Maniototo, to
pay a visit to our daughter Jane and her husband, with
whom we spent 10 days very pleasantly. On March
13th, the s.s. “ lonic ” arrived in Wellington, after a
passage from Plymouth of 44 days. Our daughter
Katie and her husband, Edward Melland, were on board
with their babe, designated in the passenger list as “ Miss
Mary Melland.”
On June 9th, Mrs. Bathgate, Dora and I left for
Wellington for the session of Parliament. A vote of
no-confidence in the Atkinson Government was carried
by a majority of nine. The ministry obtained power to
dissolve, and after a short session of three weeks the
House was prorogued, and an appeal made to the
country. We left Wellington in the “Wakatipu” on
the 24th June, and arrived at The Glen, after a
pleasant voyage, on the 26th. On July 4th I addressed
the electors at Roslyn,and received a vote of confidence.
Mr. Ross, a resident in Roslyn, was my opponent, and
had an active committee, and made a keen personal
canvass. The consequence was that I was beaten by
77 votes. I cannot say that, beyond the dislike of being
beaten, I regretted the result. My attendance in
Parliament was becoming yearly more fatiguing and
uncomfortable ; and in the circumstances in which my
business relations were then placed, it would have been
difficult for me to have been absent from home for a
session at this special time. A more special reason
afterwards emerged, which clearly proved that what was
brought about by Providence was much better for me
than what I wished for myself.
August 10th.—By the mercy of God I have been
spared to see the completion of my 75th year, surrounded


by blessings manifold and undeserved. lam more than
ever anxious to receive Christ as my portion, and humbly
ask that the quickening influence of the Holy Spirit
may be bestowed upon me, that I may be renewed in
the spirit of my mind and “ born anew.” lam seeking
to live above the things of time, waiting day by day on
the will of God. Without divine grace, without the
love of Christ, life at the best is only vanity and vexation
of heart.
Last week my wife and I attended the annual
meeting of the Young Women’s Christian Association,
at which I spoke on the subject of “ The Mission
School,” taking up the necessity of Bible teaching, to
compensate for the shutting out of the Scriptures from
the public secular schools. I referred to Lord Meadow-
bank’s address at the trial of the three lads who were
convicted and hanged at Edinburgh for their share in a
riot on New Year’s morning in 1812, in which a police
watchman lost his life.
On our return home, it appeared to me that Mrs.
Bathgate was a little out of sorts. She had been com-
plaining for several months of a hardness in the right
breast, but as there was no acute pain, nothing was
thought of it. I went next day and requested Dr.
Batchelor to call and see her. His visit led to Dr.
Brown being called in, and as they both concurred that
a cancerous tumor had formed, which, if not taken away
in time, would work serious mischief, it was resolved
that it should be at once removed. They attended on
the 9th August, and, with the assistance of Dr. Davies,
the operation was successfully performed. Mrs. Bath-
gate, although somewhat tremulous in anticipation, went
through the ordeal bravely. Pain was stilled by the
administration of ether. She had a quiet night, and
calmly and cheerfully alluded to the trouble she had got
rid of so satisfactorily, saying “Is not this a happy
birthday for you?” We all recognised great cause for


thankfulness that this trouble had not overtaken us
when absent from home, as must have been the case
had I been returned as member for Roslyn.
In April I received a note from the Premier, Mr.
Stout, offering me a seat in the Legislative Council,
1885 I accepted. I received a formal summons
under the hand of the Governor, dated the 15th
May. Parliament assembled for the despatch of business
on June nth. I arrived in Wellington the following
day, and took up my abode in lodgings in Hill street.
When the Council met on June 12th, at 2.30 p.m., I
was duly sworn in, having been introduced by the Hon.
Mr. Buckley, Colonial Secretary, and the Hon. Mr.
Shephard. Mr. Buckley requested me to second the
address, which I did. On June 16th, I gave notice of
my intention to introduce the Bank of Issue Bill, the
second reading of which I moved on July 15th in a
speech of nearly an hour’s duration. It was well
received, and the facts stated made some impression.
I never had any hope of carrying the motion for the
second reading in so conservative a body as the Council
led by Sir F. Whitaker, solicitor for the Bank of New
Zealand; but a point was gained in getting the whole
case set forth in Hansard for the information of the
electors throughout the colony. After a tedious session,
the business came to a close on Monday evening, Sep-
tember 21st. I left at midnight, and reached Lyttelton
on Tuesday at 3.30 in the afternoon. A special express
left for the south from Christchurch at 5.30 p.m., by
which I travelled, and arrived safely at ten minutes past
four on Wednesday morning. The session may be
characterised as very unsatisfactory, although the
ministry succeeded in settling the question of aid to
hospitals and charitable institutions.
In October, 1884, our daughter Rachael, and her
engaging little daughter Edith (Birdie), came to The
Glen on a visit. On March sth, 1885, her second


daughter, Isobel, was born at The Glen. Mr. Pirn
visited us each of the two summers Rachael was here.
She left en route for Foochow, via Melbourne and
1886 C°l om b°> on March 12th, 1886, being the anni-
versary of the day in the previous year on which
our son James left us for China. On Tuesday, 2nd
March, my niece, Christian Macmillan, was married
to Dr. Colquhoun at Saint Matthew’s Church, Dunedin,
by the Rev. Mr. Powell. I acted in loco parentis, and
gave the bride away. The wedding party was after-
wards entertained at afternoon tea at the Glen. The
whole affair passed off very pleasantly. In February
my son John was wrecked on his voyage from Foochow
to Hong Kong. After being 55 hours on one end of the
wreck, which was jammed on to some rocks, a steamer
from Swatow brought two life-boats, which took them
off safely, though there was some loss of life.
On August 10th I completed my 77th year, and
felt thankful I had been so long and most mercifully
spared with a large measure of health and strength. I
have had a share of trouble and anxiety, but the mercies
have over-abounded, and I had grace given to sustain
me in adversities. I have had great comfort and solace
in a well-doing and affectionate family, all spared to this
day, and living together on amiable and friendly terms;
no strife or unseemly jars amongst them, so far as I
know, but rather each willing to assist the other. The
sons-in-law fully participate in these pleasant and kindly
feelings and relations. The day after my birthday,
there arrived in Wellington, where we then were, a box,
which on being opened was found to contain a beautiful
framed collection of photographs of my 26 grand-
children as a birthday present. The likenesses were
admirably arranged, and the whole formed a group
exquisitely pleasing. This spontaneous tribute of
affection, entitled “ Chips of the old block,” was
peculiarly gratifying to Mrs. Bathgate and myself, and
is greatly prized. We were very glad to find ourselves


located again at The Glen, although the weather was
somewhat severe. On August 26th a heavy snow
storm came on, and the snow lay on the ground for two
days, in some places for longer. It has been quite
unprecedented, and has followed the severe winter and
spring in Britain and North America, where a cold snap
has been specially felt. In Dunedin, trade has been
more than ever depressed, hundreds being unemployed.
As wool and grain have taken a turn upward, a feeling
of confidence is returning. It is to be hoped that better
times are at hand, and that the colony will see a renewal
of prosperity. Laus Deo !
NOTE BY MRS. TURTON.
A few days after writing the above words father
was taken ill, and had to go to bed, from which he never
Sent rose a S ain - Dr. Batchelor attended him, and
1 oo«‘ treated him for catarrh of the bladder, from which
he had suffered before. On Saturday the 19th
September he became partly unconscious, but rallied
again on Sunday morning, and knew those of his
relatives and children who were present. He passed
away quietly on Monday morning, September 21st,
aged 77, and was buried in the Northern Cemetery,
Dunedin, a few days later, followed by between 200 and
300 mourners, including most of our leading citizens.
The flag on the Town Hall was half-mast high, and the
Supreme and Resident Magistrate Courts were closed
out of respect to his memory. His work was well and
truly done, and he could say, like his Divine Master,
“ Father, I have finished the work which Thou gavest
me to do, and now I come to Thee.”
A simple monument was erected by his wife and
children to his memory, with the words from Acts 13
and 36th engraved on it—“ After he served his own
generation by the will of God, he fell on sleep.”


APPENDIX A.
John Bathgate, born in Haddington, Scotland ; married 10th
August, 1768, Helen Hay, also born in Haddington.
Their children were—
John .. .. Born 10th May, 1769.
James .. .. „ sth January, 1771.
Peter .. .. „ 26th December, 1773.
Charles .. „ 17th October, 1775.
William .. .. „ 4th August, 1777.
Margaret .. .. „ 4th April, 1779.
Mary .. .. ~ 2nd April, 1781.
Alexander.. .. ~ nth July, 1784.
Robert .. .. ~ 27th June, 1787.
APPENDIX B.
The following memo, compiled by Dr. Anderson, was received
from Mrs. Williamson, my wife’s aunt, after I was in New
Zealand;—
A. Anderson, m.d., 92nd Highland Regiment, born at Selkirk
Ist October, 1784, and Anne Cairns, born at Peebles 25th Decem-
ber, 1793, were married at Port Patrick, county of Wigton, by the
Rev. Dr. McKenzie on the 12th August, 1818. Our first child and
daughter was born at Up Park Camp Barracks, in the parish of
St. Andrew, county of Surrey, island of Jamaica, on the 15th day
of August, 1819, and baptized on the 22nd day of November by
the Rev. Mr. Campbell, rector of St. Andrew’s, by the name of
Anne C. Anderson, the name of her lamented mother, who died of
the yellow fever at Kingstown on the 18th September, 1819. after
an illness of four days. She sailed in the "Agnes of Aberdeen"
from Port Royal on the 14th of May, 1820, and arrived at Dundee
on the 15th July, at Edinburgh on the 20th, and at Peebles on the
25th July, 1820, in good health after a prosperous voyage.
Port Augustus,
Jamaica, October 20th, 1820.


Copies of Old Letters now in the possession
of Alexander Bathgate, Neidpath,
Dunedin, N.Z.
To Miss Cairns, Brggate, Peebles.
Castlebar, 6th November, 1818.
My dear Cath,
Your packet of the 2nd I received with great pleasure. I can
assure you the sketches you sent me are very acceptable to the
young ladies here. I was beginning to think you had forgot me
altogether amidst all your gaiety. I was very glad indeed to learn
that my mother was no worse, and all the rest in good condition.
They would enjoy their Edinburgh jaunt very much, I daresay, if
the weather was fine. It is now nearly a fortnight that we have
been at rest as to the reduction ; you would observe in the papers
how far it was to come down. We were saved only on account of
their being Highland regiments (those above 90). No other idea
was entertained but that we would remain here all winter. Various
are the changes that take place, and particularly in a military life.
We are now under orders for the West Indies. Jamaica is our
destination, but when is not yet known. It is, howerer,
thought that we will get orders to march on the arrival of some
of the troops from France to relieve this regiment. The Doctor
would have preferred remaining in Ireland if it had been so ordered;
but upon the whole is not much averse to it; he is fond of a warm
climate, and early in the spring is the best time to arrive in the
West Indies, so that one gets inured to the climate before the
warm weather sets in. Some of the officers rejoice at the idea of it.
Some, I suppose, will exchange, but in general they have no
objections. Our servant was in terror about the reduction, and
now he is as much so about going abroad. As to myself, I am
neither glad nor sorry. lam going, it is true, far, far from friends
and home, to sojourn in a foreign land; but wherever Igo the
remembrance of that home will cheer me and be the subject of
many a thought and conversation. My mother lam sure will be
sorry and uneasy at the thought of it. but that God who watches
over me here will protect me elsewhere, and will never forsake
those who trust sincerely in Him. I may be thankful to Him that
I have such a husband, who studies everything for my comfort and
happiness, and deserves, indeed, all my love and gratitude. He


regrets nothing sa much as losing his hospital surgeon, who is un-
willing to go out. He is a decent, sober, attentive man, and one
that he can place great dependence on—who looks as much to the
doctor's interests as to his own. He will be a very great loss to
him indeed. lam very sorry too, to lose Mrs Brewster. She is a
very nice woman, and very willing and anxious to serve one. They
intend going to reside at Galashiels. Most of her friends are
there. I suppose he will have a pension, having been more than
twenty years in the service. I suppose we shall sail from Cork ;
it will be twelve days’ march for the regiment. There will be only
two ladies besides myself. Mrs. Winchester and I will remain here
after they leave this for some days, so that we will have time to
reach Cork about the time they do. I don’t think we shall go by
Dublin ; we will take the coach as far as it runs, and post the rest
of the way. If it be such weather as it is now it will be very
pleasant. I don’t think anything of such a journey; no more than
going to Edinburgh. I think I shall have had a good view of Ireland
then from north to south and east to west. If we keep our health
it will be a great increase to our income, which will make us more
comfortable on our return. I don’t know whether five years or
seven is the limited time for regiments in the West Indies. It will
soon pass away, and I pray to God that in the end I may find you
all as I left you at home—not that I mean you young branches to
be in a single state. No, I hope by that time you will all be com-
fortably settled with the objects of your affections. Be of good
heart, I hope we shall all have a Christmas dinner in the old dining
room yet. I don’t know where I may be next Christmas, but I
shall have the consolation to know that on that day at least I will
be in your thoughts. Kenyon’s regiment is there. Perhaps it may
be removed on our arrival. Little did we think when we shook
hands in our little parlour that in so short a time we should both
be destined to such a distant quarter. If I was to meet him there
how astonished he would look. The Doctor’s old first is there too,
where he will have the pleasure of meeting all his old friends. You
must write me immediately on the receipt of this, as we may go in
less than a month, and we may not go for two or more, but in all
probability it will be soon. Be sure and write, and if you can send
me any more sketches you may. I intend, if I have time, painting
a pair of skreens for Mrs Bustead (who has been uncommonly kind
and attentive) as a small return. There is no good drawing paper
to be had, and no varnish. I was told to-day by a young lady that
varnish may be made with spirits of wine and gum arabic, which I
am going to try for my skreens. I intend sending to Dublin for
some white velvet to paint a ridicule if I can find out the secret of
it. I have finished the spencer I was making, which is very much
admired. The upper part is tucked pretty near together and
corded—you know, at equal distances, one time the tucks laid up
and the other down. A trimming put round in the middle and
pulled in below. I am tracing a pattern on net for a frill, but X


have so many things on hand I don't know when I will have it
finished. I intend making my pretty little tippet like yours you
know, the upper part of a spencer. I think it the best plan, as I
never can wear it. We will have a great many things to provide
for this intended voyage. I had some young ladies calling on me
to-day with Mrs Winchester, when we had it all discussed what we
should take. They were advising us not to give out the little
things to black women to nurse else they would imbibe all their
bad qualities, even their likeness—flat noses, thick lips, etc. They
would, I am sure, have no objections to accompany us, even with
an ensign, as many of the ladies in Castlebar would do. They live
in the country a little way, are five daughters, the eldest I have not
seen, being on a visit somewhere. They are very pleasant girls. I
think I mentioned them to you before; their name is White.
Their father is supervisor or something of that kind. We have not
visited there yet. I have called twice with Mrs W. The custom
here when you make a forenoon call is to produce a large tray (in
the country I mean) with bread, butter, wine, jam, apples, etc.;
when you get the jam handed to you on small plates with a spoon
to sup to your bread. The Misses White draw a little, and are
very fond of getting any patterns. They thought Belle’s pin-
cuusion very pretty, and one of them has copied it. I have been
learning a new way of purses from Mrs W. If I have time when
I write again I will enclose a little bit; you will perhaps be so in-
genious as to find it out. It is done on a block, such as I did my
father's button-hole one on, with gold thread or silver, and any
colored silk you choose. You may send me any patterns for work
you can spare or have time to copy, such as those Margaret Veitch
had; they will be useful to me. I have drawn several to these
ladies from recollection, but am now at a loss for more. You
would be astonished to see your poem of Hibernia in the Constitu-
tion. I gave it to Miss Drought, who got it put into the paper.
She is fond of these things and keeps a book where she pastes them
or cuts from newspapers. We spent Hallow-ee’n with Mrs.
Stricket (the last of October); we drank tea, eat apples, drank
toddy, nuts of course, supped on roast ducks, stewed apples, and
plum tart, and were regaled with a glass of wine. The old lady was
just like my mother, very kind and very much interested about us.
She is so sorry on the thoughts of us going so soon after she
thought she had her family fairly settled for the winter. The
Doctor has been doing what he could to procure a pension for her,
her husband having been a quarter-master in a dragoon regiment.
She has not yet had a final answer, but is in great hopes that the
Lord Lieutenant will grant it. If she succeeds she may bless the
day the Doctor came to Castlebar. There is a grand supper
promised on the happy occasion, which, it is hoped, will arrive
before we leave this. There is an order for all officers on to
be at headquarters on the ist of December, so we will not, it is
probable, go before that period.


You will recollect the Mr. Wallace, Miss Campbell, of Kailree,
was to have got. The Doctor has seen him, and Captain Ferrier, of
this regiment, is intimately acquainted with him. His mother and
sister live in Belfast, and his uncle has a property near Carrick-
fergus. From every circumstance, I think it must be the same
person. We spoke of it to Captain Ferrier, who said he under-
stood he was to have been married, and that he had met
with a disappointment, a fine get off, the disappointment
was, I presume, on the other side; it is said he is a
very fast young man. I suppose poor Caroline has returned
single. Mungo Campbell and she can’t do better than make a
match of it. What do you think ? I have no less than got a
Spanish grammar to-day to begin the study of that fashionable
language. I don’t think it will, by any means, be difficnlt. I have
the Doctor to instruct me, who is a proficient. It will be a good
amusement on board ship, and I hope to be mistress of it before I
get to Jamaica. Miss Drought is coming on very well with the
French; if X had remained I would very soon have had great
credit of my scholar. She is most anxious to learn, and when that
is the case, there is no fear of a person succeeding in anything. I
regret I did not bring my Italian book with me; had I known of
this move I would have brought a great many things I left. I trust
to you to take care of my shifts and coarse nightshirts that I did
not bring with me, and not allow Poll to finger them, as she was
threatening to do. Tell my mother, too, not to forget to set apart
a large chest and pop in anything she makes. I expect it will be
crammed before my return, so that I may have a fine providing to
take to Shawwood. After being in a warm climate we will require
an immense quantity of sheets and blankets to keep us warm. I'll
tell you a good plan : should you overcome all your scruples about
Father Phaidrick, and yet make him happy, you know he has a
well-furnished house, full of everything, just transfer your share to
poor me, and that will be acting a generous part. If he gets you
he will be blest, and wish for nothing more. I forgot to mention
to you in my former letter anything concerning Ker and Mrs
Fitzgerald. Shortly after the aflair took place he pretended to
take it so much to heart that he refused to live, and it was said that
he actually took no sustenance for a week, at the end of which
period he took poison and finished himself; this, however, all
ended in smoke. The case is to be tried at the Assises at Ballin-
rach very soon. It is not expected that the damages will be laid
high, as the gentlemen of the country rather favor him, from all
accounts. She was as much to blame as he, perhaps more. She
is going to England, and Captain Fitzgerald has sold all the furni-
ture of the house the other day. I don’t know where he goes. She
has left a fine family of five children, the youngest five months old.
I was at the auction with Mrs and Miss Bustead. It is as sweet a
little place as I ever saw; in summer I think it must be quite a
paradise. The house is in the cottage style, with windows to the


floors, very small but neat, and has been very nicely furnished. It
is three or four miles from Castlebar. We had a very pleasant
drive, the day being delightful. The Doctor dined yesterday at
the mess (the General being here inspecting some men who are to
be discharged); he drank rather too much wine, and I assure you
has suffered for it since—not to say he was tipsy, only a little gay.
He has no enjoyment in more than three glasses ; any more hurts
him. The Doctor made a will about four years ago; the marriage
contract could not of course be mentioned in it. He wishes to
know if it will be binding on the executors; if not, he intends
making another. You must ask my father, and be sure and let me
know when you write. The enclosed you must send to Selkirk.
The Doctor has got it written with a great exertion. He is so ill,
he was not out of bed the whole forenoon, and is now gone to it
again. I think it will prevent his exceeding his three glasses in
future. He has directed Thomas to send any letters to Peebles,
when you will be so good as forward them by Mr. Kerr. You will
not trouble him now much longer, as X suppose he can’t frank out
of Britain. Should you have written me before this letter comes,
you must send it immediately in case we should be off. X have
sent you a Dublin paper by this post —the last in all probability
you will receive of that kind. lam glad to hear you have such a
plentiful crop, and got in in such good condition. I have no
chance now of partaking of your flour scones. Tell Nancy not to
say anything against Williamson; perhaps he is destined for her.
I think it very probable, and should not be surprised to hear of it.
Bell would, I am sure, enjoy her jaunt to Alloa very much ; it was
very like the daft gawhies, you may tell them, to set off in such a
way. It was suspected, you know, that Mrs Robertson and family
would return to Peebles. lam sure she will be very glad, but
waes me Mary and Ann will have no chance of getting off in Peebles.
Janet is, I think, as daft as ever. Who is the young man she
comes looking after ? You will be very dashing in your new
pelisse. I don't think I shall trim mine; I shall have no use of it
where lam going. I cannot conceive why Mrs Anderson refused
the gloves; perhaps she thought she was neglected and the others
got theirs before. I saw Mr Smith’s marriage in the papers. He
has not laid his disappointment much to heart. You say nothing
of Mr Buchanan and Christie Burnett. I suppose there is no truth
in it; she would not, I think, suit him. I think I see Miss Betty
elbowing across the room to point out Peebles, with a long stick on
the map. I wonder her mother did not think it o'er costly. I per-
haps do the good girl injustice, but I am afraid it is a little above
her comprehension. Her father is an able hand to bring her on.
You recollect the dissertation he gave us about the whales or some-
thing of that kind; a perfect speaking trumpet. We got a most
magnificent present of apples the other day. The clergyman of the
English Church sent for the Doctor one day to draw a tooth for his
wife. Before hp got there, however, she was a good deal relieved,


and deferred the operation. The Doctor declined receiving any
compensation of course, but was repaid by 300 fine apples ; most
of them eating apples, and most delightful —half fears, half apples,
you would think. We are not acquainted, at least I never met with
them; their cottage is in the country about a mile from this. I
have learned just now that Kerr is in jail here. He was on bail,
but owing to some informality he is laid up—it is a sad business.
The Doctor is rather dull on the thoughts of the West Indies. He
was saying this morning that he would prefer Father Phadraich’s
situation, as minister of Innerleithen, to anything else. That would
be his highest ambition, or that of Manor. He seems to have a
great partiality for that bleak place. He is a perfect epicure in tea
drinking. I suppose we will be under the necessity of laying in a
chest for the West Indies; it seems there it is a guinea a pound.
That quantity scarcely serves us two or three weeks, once a day ;
you may judge how black it is. He endeavors to console himself
with the idea of returning to dear Shawwood and ending his days
in peace and quiet. I can’t say lam under any great apprehensions
as to the climate or anything else. lam resigned to any fate
wherever we go. " Will you go to the Indies, my Katie." that is
the Doctor’s favorite song now. He tells me that if the climate
does not agree with me he will dispatch me in a vessel to Greenock,
so you need not be surprised if I pop in on you some day, " meagre
and pale, the ghost of what I was." He hopes your Buira hand-
kerchief still holds out. and that you take particular care of it. He
is still wearing the sleeve of the same shirt as one, a great
favourite. He is so careful of it that he will not allow it to go to a
washing with the rest of the things, but must be washed in the
basin by my fair hand. He has given a hint in the Dublin paper to
you and Bell on a certain subject, which I hope sincerely will not
be lost on either of you. He promises you a most splendid dinner
at Shawwood on his return, which he will then be better enabled to
give, on condition that you have changed in certain opinions and
exerted yourself in my behalf, as to the grand providing. I hope
John Marshall may be so fortunate as get the pension; it
depends on the report of the Medical Board whether they
think they are entitled or not. I suppose only if they
have wounds at the time they are inspected equal to the loss
of a limb. Some have pensions for a while and then with-
drawn, as is the case with Lieutenant Cameron for the loss of
his little finger. This regiment as well as the 93rd may thank the
92nd for being kept up, the two latter being Highland they could
not reduce the one without the other. Had it not been for the
gallant 92nd the reduction would have gone down to the 90th.
The people here are only raising their potatoes; it is very different
fr.om Scotland, they have no fear of frost coming on early. We
have had four most delightful days, a little frosty—the best
weather we have had since I came to Castlebar. I got some of the
best tea to-day that this town affords, at no less than 10s. per lb.


The Doctor is even so plain as to tell people that he can’t take
their tea; they don't make it half strong, nor give it a good enough
heat. We will get coffee and rum in perfection where we are
going. The poor Doctor only broke his' fast this morning for two
nights and a day, owing to his debauch; he was indeed very ill last
night, but this morning is greatly better. He had not so much, I
am sure, as three-quarters of a bottle. He had dined at six and
was home about 10. so he had not time to drink much. We had one
of the greatest exquisites in the regiment the other night with a few
others at an oyster feast. He is quite a dandy, aMr Peat, X think
I mentioned him to you before. He is full of mirth and glee,
and in great spirits about going to the West Indies. I under-
stand Kingston is a large town, containing 36,000 inhabitants. A
very gay place lam told. We are rather at a loss what articles to
take out with us—what things will be cheap there and what dear.
We may perhaps send home for some things by-and-bye. Now I
beg you will write me whenever you receive this, giving me all the
information X wish to know. I will write you again from this
before we go, and then from Cork before we embark ; and before
the end of this year many changes will have taken place since the
last—my Uncle Anderson gone and that family all dispersed, and
I perhaps far, far distant. I may here say now :
“ Where e’er I go, whatever realms to see,
My heart untravelled fondly clings to thee.
Still to my sister clings with ceaseless pain,
And drags at each remove a lengthening chain.’
I don’t recollect whether it was Jamaica where Veitch was, if
so, he will give you some idea of it. Make ray compliments to
them both. This is a long letter, and lam sure not an unwelcome
one. I will write you the news from Jamaica. Remember me to
all the good folks at Firknow, and the Pillarians (nothing but
changes); also the Campbell family. Congratulate her from me
on her increasing family. It would be a sin to omit poor Miss
Somers, Mrs. Williamson—it would be endless to enumerate them
all—those who are interested in me. Don’t forget old Kate. I
don’t think I shall see her again in this world. I daresay many of
Mr. Sloan’s boys were from Jamaica; perhaps I might meet with
some of them. If Mr. Fullarton had been in Peebles, you might
have got an idea from him of what things it would be necessary to
take out. Remember me in the warmest manner to my father and
mother. Bell and Nancy, and accept, my dear Cath, the fervent
wishes for the welfare and happiness of you all. The Doctor joins
me in kind love; and believe me, my dear sister, yours affectionately,
ANNE ANDERSON.
Jamaica is 1,300 miles farther than Barbadoes or any other of
the Islands. Send the two enclosed letters by Post. If you are
sending anything to Stockbridge, you might send Mungo's with it,
but the other dispatch immediate; but I will send a Castlebar
paper to-morrow.


Fermoy, 26th January, 1819.
My dear Mrs. Park,
I am very much disappointed at not receiving a letter from you
or some of your good family. I please myself with the hope that
there is one on the way for me. I have written Bell Anderson
twice, and sorry am I to perceive that she is as little attached to
letter writing as ever. However, one of my letters might have
been lost, as I am not sure whether it was enclosed in one to
Peebles, which they never received. I intend sending this by Mrs.
Brewster, whom I mentioned to you before. You will receive also
a pinchusion, which I beg Elizabeth’s acceptance of. It was given
me by a lady in Castlebar. It is done in what they call rice paper,
cut out and pasted on. I must now give you a detail of my journey
to this place, where I arrived on Friday, the 22nd. The regiment
left Castlebar on the Bth and 9th of January. The Doctor did not
go for two days after, when he took the coach so far, which saved
him two days’ march. He only walked three or four days in all.
His feet blistered so much that he was not able to continue. They
got dreadfully stormy weather the whole way. I felt very lonely at
Castlebar. I was a week there after the Doctor left me. The first
three days I was confined to bed with, I daresay, a fever of cold.
I was much afraid of typhus fever, and that I would not be able to
follow at the time appointed. However, I got quite well before the
end of the week. I travelled in company with a young lady who
had been on a visit to Castlebar, and was going to Tralee round by
Cork. We jogged on very well together. We posted 90 miles
Irish, more than a hundred English. Posting is much cheaper
here than in Scotland. For one or two persons it is 1/1 a mile;
for three, 1/4. Drivers are paid at the rate of 2d. a mile. I don’t
think it cost us any more than if we had gone in the coach. We
performed a journey of 40 miles the first day. Slept at Galway, a
very large town ; but being almost dark when we got in, and setting
off before breakfast again, we saw very little of it. We got to
Ennis next day, about 33 miles from Galway. My travelling com-
panion had acquaintances there, who, as soon as they knew she
was arrived, came to the inn, and insisted on us going to their
house for tea, where we remained all night and next day and night.
They were a very pleasant family, and remarkably kind. Ennis is
a very nice little town; but the day did not at all prove favorable
for walking out much. We only had a parade through some of the
streets between showers. Next day brought us to Limerick, 22
miles farther, a very large town, a good deal resembling Edinburgh,
and I think as large, if I may judge from the streets we passed
through. We were quite in style I do assure you. We drove to
one of the first hotels, but it was in order to be in readiness in the
morning for the Cork coach, which starts from that place at 6
o’clock. Upon the whole, I think in these respectable houses you
have everything as moderate as in the inferior houses; everything


good, and served with the utmost dispatch. We drank tea at the
post-master’s. The young lady with me had some business to
transact with him. She had never seen him before. He was so
very pressing for us to stay to tea, that we could not withstand his
solicitations. Had we not been going off early in the morning, we
would have been obliged to stay to supper. We were even invited
to dinner next day, had we remained. There were his wife, a
young gentleman, and two young ladies ; I don't know whether his
son and daughters. It was a very splendid house, something like
those in Forth street. When I got to Limerick, I found a letter
lying for me from the Doctor, telling me the regiment had got a
route to Fermoy in place of Cork, there to wait the arrival of
transports. The mail from Limerick to Cork goes one day through
Fermoy and the other day a different road. However, it fortunately
happened that it went by this place the day for which I had taken
my seat. It is about 36 miles from Limerick to this. I got here
by one o’clock, where I found our servant waiting my arrival to
conduct me to my home. It is the neatest little town this that I
have seen in Ireland. The houses are all regularly built, and the
streets very well laid out. The country around is beautiful, and
there is a very fine river runs almost through the middle of the
town, over which there is a very handsome bridge. There is a
good deal of wood on the banks of the river, which in summer
must be enchanting, together with a great many gentlemen’s seats,
which adorn the surrounding county. The barracks are very
extensive, situated on the top of a bank overlooking the town.
The rooms are very comfortable. An officer is allowed a very good
sitting room, a bedroom adjoining, and a kitchen. I should have
liked very well to have been in barracks rather than lodgings; but
not having necessary furniture, it was not worth while, for the
short time we will be here, to make any arrangements for that
purpose. Only one of the ladies has taken up her quarters there —
Mrs. Winchester—who likes it very well. Mr. and Mrs. Thomas —
the assistant surgeon and his wife—arrived here the same day that
I did. She had only been confined a month, when she left home
in the north of Ireland, where she had gone for the purpose. It
was not expected that she would have been able to go out to
Jamaica at this time; but the regiment not sailing so soon as was
at first said, has left her time to get stout, so as to undertake the
voyage. I was told she was the prettiest woman in Ireland, but I
was very much disappointed. She is a sweet modest looking
woman, but no beauty. We will soon have married ladies enough
in the regiment. A Captain Donaldson arrived the other day, who
has got into the regiment. He is married to an English woman,
and has one child. She has not yet arrived. Captain Wilkie and
his lady are at Cork. They get into debt everywhere they go, and
are skulking now, not daring to show their faces here for fear of
being arrested. It will perhaps be a long time before you receive
this letter. If the Doctor has time, he will write Mungo before we


sail. We don’t know how long we may be here yet. Now, my
dear Mrs. Park, only think what a treat it will be to have a letter
from you in Jamaica. In pity, stir up Bell and Elizabeth to write
me You may write about a month after you see by the papers that
we have sailed. It may, perhaps, be there as soon as ourselves.
Write everything you can think of. Cross it and re-cross it if you
please. The smallest thing will be interesting to us. When Mungo
writes the Doctor, he does not give him any news. lam glad to
hear Barbara Laidlaw is something better. I have been enquiring
in two or three letters if Bess Smithson is in Selkirk yet. Tell me
all about her when you write. The officers have been arranging
matters to-day about laying in their stock for the voyage. It will
cost the Doctor £lB for himself and £5 for me. We have been
spending money here at a fine rate, many things we will require
being double the price in the West Indies, such as shoes, stockings,
muslins, and all these things. We have laid in what I think will
be sufficient for two or three years, when, if we live in Jamaica, we
will save the money, and bring home a fortune. What would you
think ? I have no great ambition for it. I look forward to the
time with pleasure when I hope to sit down at Shawwood to my
porridge and potatoes. I have not seen porridge since I left home.
When one is deprived of anything, how they value it. I would
like a tasting now. The Doctor bids me tell you he has no great
relish for going to Jamaica. If he had had /300, to build stable
and barn at Shawwood, he would rather have gone on half pay
than gone out. Should we be fortunate enough to return, I hope
we shall spend many happy days there at least. lam inclined to
look to the bright side of the picture. We don’t expect to be more
than three or four years there. I wish the voyage was over. lam
afraid of sea-sickness terribly. Tell Mungo, from his uncle, to get
as much money from his uncle Thomas as will purchase a feed of
nub and daerbtrosh, to those who have fulfilled the duties of their
diplomas. He is sorry to hear the account of the Broil having lost
the grand state umbrella; Thomas and the Stuncher to have a
piece extra for their good conduct. The book the Doctor intends
writing on “ Prognostication in Jamaica,” will be dedicated to his
disciples—Elizabeth, Bolingbroke, and Mungo. He hopes they are
improving, from the lessons they got from him at Stockbridge.
The almanack came safe. The Doctor requests to be remembered
to old Laidlaw’s family. He wrote to Selkirk about Mr. Oliphant's
business, so Mungo will have nothing further to do in the affair.
(Doctor Anderson now writes.) I hope the little antient shovel,
poker, and tongs are not knocking about the house, but hanging as
clear as a looking-glass, so that Mungo is able to put on his neck-
cloth before them. When I return, I will look over such articles
in the diplomas, to see that they are in good order. By the bje,
how are my blankets ? I hope the moths are not at them. Thomas
will pay you the £lO I owe you, also the eight shillings you paid


on my account for books, whenever he has as much money of mine
in his hands. This unexpected voyage has made me very low in
money at present. I wrote James Rodgers two letters since I heard
from him. I have now enclosed my will for Bell to keep. Mrs.
Brewster, who will bring this, was my nurse in hospital. She is a
very decent woman. Ask her to tea.
(His wife now resumes.) There is a very handsome house here,
beautifully situated on the bank of the river, quite close to the
town, which belongs to a Mr. Anderson. He came originally from
Dumfries; a pedlar, or something of that sort. After he settled
here, he began some speculation in herrings, and from one thing to
another acquired an immense fortune. He was the first that
established mail coaches in Ireland. A bank in Fermoy was also
set on foot by him. He has a son—Sir George Anderson—who
married a lady with a great fortune, and who possesses a magnificent
castle in this neighbourhood. The father, however, failed a few
years ago. I don’t know whether he had engaged too deeply in
speculation or not, and brought in a great many poor people, who
had money in the bank. He has now retrieved matters, and last
year paid £20,000 to these poor people who had suffered by him.
He keeps his carriage, and lives in great style. He has been very
fortunate; but I suppose he has been an enterprising persevering
man. You must excuse all my wanderings in this letter. I go
from one thing to another, as they come into my head. We will
have three transports out. I will be in headquarters’ ship ; the
only lady on board. We can be better accommodated separate
than together.
(Doctor A. writes.) How is my spreckled hen ?—the intended
population of Shawwood. I seldom see a large egg, but I think
of one of hers. I hear the inspector's cheeks are swelling out with
the delicious and savoury morsels eliminated from her corporal
system.
Up Park Camp, Jamaica, 21st June, 1819.
My dear Jane,
It is now more than a fortnight that we have been fairly settled
in Jamaica, which, as yet, none of us are very partial to. We
sailed from Cove on the 16th April, and landed here on the 2nd
June, which was considered a very good passage. We had most
beautiful weather, not a gale of wind to ruffle the surface of the
wide ocean, but a fine steady breeze, which carried us on at the
rate of 180 miles sometimes a day. I was very sick for a whole
fortnight, not able to leave my bed. The Doctor did not suffer so
much as he used to do. He was only ill two days. We had very
good accommodation gn board ship; a neat small cabin Jo our


selves, which contained our bed and all our baggage, and where I
could sit and work, which was more agreeable for me, being the
only female on board. Our party consisted of 12 officers, all very
agreeable and happy. The three transports kept always in sight of
each other, and sometimes came alongside of us in an evening to
have a tune, as we had the band with us. We were much dis-
appointed that we did not touch at Madeira. It was fully intended;
but somehow we passed it without knowing. We, however, went
on shore at one of the Canary Islands, belonging to Spain. The
inhabitants speak Spanish, and in their manners and customs are
altogether as much so as in the middle of Spain. I returned on
board highly delighted with my visit and with the civility of the
people, who showed us every attention. We passed a good many
of the West Indian Islands, but none of them very closely. The
peak of Teneriffe too presented itself to our view, the top of it
rising majestically above the clouds. It was certainly a very grand
object, and seldom seen at sea. I can’t say, I was much impressed
in favor of Jamaica from its first appearance. My spirits were not
very much elated the evening before we landed; sitting on deck
viewing the island. It was a melancholy reflection, to think how
many hundreds of us were about to go on shore, and how few
might ever leave it again, or ever see their native country more.
We disembarked very early in the morning, before the heat of the
day, and proceeded immediately up to the Camp here, about two
miles from Kingston.
Up Park Camp, Jamaica, 31st August, 1819.
My dear Bell,
You must allow that I am of a very forgiving disposition, to
address you once more after your seeming neglect. I will, however,
do you the justice to say that it proceeds more from your aversion
to letter writing than from any want ol friendship, I am confident.
I will, therefore, pronounce you incorrigible, and drop the subject
tor one more interesting, and that is to announce to you the birth
of a lovely little girl. The great event took place on Sunday, 15th
August. The Doctor was disappointed it was not a son born on
the birthday of the great Napoleon. He was sure in that case he
would have been a hero, but now he is very well satisfied with the
little Miss. I was not very ill; from 12 on the Saturday night I
was not very well, and did not sleep, but nothing so serious as to
prevent the Doctor from sleeping soundly. During the forenoon
of Saturday I got worse, and the child was born at 4 o’clock in the
afternoon. I was not very ill more than an hour and a-half. I
had nobody with me but the hospital surgeon’s wife and the
servant. The former came two or three times to dress the child,
She is a pretty little infant, thriving very well. She will be, I
think, very like Nancy—she has her eyes and nose exactly. If she


Is spared she will be the flower of the 'forest, her father says. He
is very fond of her. She is a darling infant when she does not cry;
but she has had a sore mouth, which has fretted her a good deal.
I have recovered very well myself; it is now sixteen days since,
and lam as stout as ever. Had I been at home I suppose X would
have been creeping from one room to another, muffled up in
blankets. Here I was up on the sth day and laid by a washing.
We can’t call a servant from the kitchen as at home. We have
only two rooms, and the servants only come at stated times. I
would have been afraid to have made so free at home, but I am
thankful I have not been the worse of anything yet. My little
lassie is not christened yet; I don’t know when it will take place.
I am told they charge about £7 English for performing that
ceremony here. She will be a namesake of yours. The Doctor
does not like it, but I think I ought to assert my right; unless
there was very good reasons for yielding—you will agree with me,
lam sure. I wish we were all home in a bundle; the prospect is
melancholy in the extreme here—nothing but death and desolation
amongst us. The mortality for about six weeks past has been
truly awful. You can have no idea of the state we are in. The
Doctor has a miserable life indeed, and God knows I have an
anxious one. We have already lost 130 men, 3 officers, 13 women,
and the same number of children. The officers are lieutenant
Colonel Blainey, who has left a widow with three or four children.
She did not come out with him; he had just got a year’s leave on
account of delicate health to go home when he was taken ill.
Lieutenant McDonald and Adjutant Mackie, the latter a most
excellent young man, and the Doctor’s most particular friend. He
is most universally lamented by the whole regiment. He was only
forty-eight hours ill. His friends live in Edinburgh ; his mother
is a widow, an old woman, and was very, very partial to this son.
He expressed great fears on his death-bed as to the effect the news
of his death would have upon her. The Doctor has just been
writing his mother communicating the melancholy Intelligence.
Mr. Thomas, the assistant-surgeon, is now dangerously ill. and his
child of eight months old is dying. A great many of our officers
have been ill, but have recovered, except these three. The 50th
regiment, which arrived here three months previous to the 92nd,
have suffered dreadfully. Had they not been moved from here
some weeks ago they would have been extirpated to a man—
whole families are swept away. In the 50th there was a Captain
and Mrs. Montgomery, their son, Major Montgomery, their
daughter and son-in-law, Dr. Brown, and his infant child have all
been swept away in the short space of one month. Mrs. Brown
and Miss Montgomery now alone remain. The adjutant lost a
daughter about seventeen and a little boy ; now he has gone him-
self. Mrs. North has lost her husband and one of her children ;
the quarter-master a daughter about eighteen. Colonel Hill died
yesterday. The 50th have lost in all about 10 officers, 200 men.


23 women, and as many children. A great part of this regiment is
now removed to different places, but we remain, of course, where
the hospital is. God knows how it will end, but the prospect is
dismal enough now. The first have only lost three officers in two
and a-half years, and not a single lady. I write my mother by this
packet. I have not drawn such a melancholy picture to her; lam
afraid, however, I have said more than will make her unhappy. If
'we escape this we may expect more healthy seasons in time to
come. There has not been such a fatal year in Jamaica since 1793.
In Kingston there has been great sickness, for the most part con-
fined to new comers ; few, if any of whom recovered. It has now
almost ceased there.
(Dr. Anderson now writes.) My dear Mungo,—The young
Anderson is a perfect beauty. I intend soon to introduce her to
the •* taws,” and to inculcate the doctrines of the divine Boston on
her youthful mind. I foretold its birth six months ago to take
place on the anniversary of that of the great Napoleon, another
hero to conquer, the which I persuaded myself into ; and when 12
o’clock of the evening of the 14th, your aunt began to bawl out
“ Vive L'Empereur," Napoleon troiseme veimqueur de VEurope ires fois.
But lo! in place of Napoleon a Josephine was born. Tell
Elizabeth that I wished to call her after her, but her mother will
not consent, so I think she will answer for a wife to you. The
mortality here has been awful; one week I believe out of 300 men
who were well on Sunday 53 were buried before the next. lam
terribly harassed. I wonder how I live ; but, sir, the appetite con-
tinues, which is a good sign. Tell Topas and Beatty that they
have a beautifnl little Creole Cousin in Jamaica. I wrote of her
last packet. Write me soon. The regiment is sent to another
quarter to see if the change will stop the sickness. I remain here
with the Hospital. Tell Bolingbroke that I expect Boston’s four-
fold state and questions from him for Josephine. I will give her
new motives and make her feel the taws soon.
September Ist, 1819.
(Mrs Anderson continues.) I have just been in to see poor Mrs.
Thomas. Her child is going to die, I mentioned him to you
before. He is the first dead I ever looked upon. I don’t know
when I will get him out of my head. It is a happy change for him,
poor lamb ; he has suffered a great deal for a month past. She is
a young, delicate creature, and is in terrible distress. It is doubt-
ful whether her husband will recover. If he goes lam afraid it
will kill her. If we survive this I expect soon to hear from you.
I wrote Mrs Park by the first packet from here. I expect soon to
have an answer with all the news from her. I would give some-
thing now to be at Stockbridge. All in good time, I hope we shall
yet meet and be happy together.


You must excuse this letter, written in a great hurry. Our
servant’s husband is taken ill, and moved from here. Of course she
has left ns, and it is only when Josephine is asleep that I have
managed to get this letter put together. We have a very useful
black boy, who can nurse her nicely, when he happens to be at
hand. I don’t know what we would have done without him, as,
owing to the sickness and death, the other ladies have been very ill
off for servants. Mrs. Captain Donaldson had a daughter three
weeks before me ; she has another boy, more than two years old.
Mrs. Winchester, who was married a month or two before me, has
no family or any appearance. Captain W.’s company has left this,
and she is gone to town to some of her acquaintances. Mrs.
Donaldson has met with a lady here with whom she was educated.
She has been like a mother to her. She is now in the country with
her. Only Mrs. Thomas and I are in these fatal barracks, and
Mrs. Major Wilkie, whom I don’t know. She has also lost a child
here. lam afraid to think what may be the fate of my little
darling were anything to be the matter with us. I will hope the
best, and indulge as little as possible in these melancholy reflec-
tions. I trust my next letter will not wear such a doleful aspect.
The happy days we hope to enjoy at home will make us forget all
this. Make my kind love to Mrs. Park, your mother, Mungo,
Eliza, and the boys, and accept for yourself, my dear Bell, the
unalterable esteem of your sincere friend,
ANNE ANDERSON.
(Continued by Dr. Anderson.) My dear Nieces, —You never
beheld such a pretty creature as your little Cousin here, though
not three weeks old. I fancy she will soon speak. She looks so
auld farrant. When she was born I thought I saw the dumpy Miss
Betsy’s nose, but I was disappointed : she promises to be as tall as
you. I hope you will not forget a question book for her. I
thought I would have a young Napoleon, but she proved a
Josephine. She never gets another name. I hope you will send
her a new frock. As yours is a favorite name of mine, I wished to
call her Elizabeth. Your loving Uncle,
A. ANDERSON.
Litter undated and with no address, evidently alluding to the death in
Jamaica of Mrs. Anderson ;
This being the first letter I ever wrote you, I am at a loss how
to commence it; indeed I find it no easy matter when I reflect on
what I have to communicate. Well, shall I tell you, or shall I
forbear. Come, let us mingle our tears and join in our lamenta-
tions. My beloved wife, your dear affectionate sister, is no more.
I have not words to express what I feel on the melancholy occasion.


She was, indeed, dear to my heart, The longer we were united
the stronger our affections and mutual attachment became, and
worthy was she of my fondest regards. It is needless for me,
when writing to you, who knew her amiable disposition, to dwell
upon her many virtues. Her constant study was to please; never
did hear a murmur from her lips, or behold a frown upon her
countenance. We were happy in ourselves, and the birth of our
darling babe was to us both a source of much joy. Often used we
to anticipate pleasure to come on our retiring to Shawwood, and in
imagination beheld our dear child running about the door. But
how soon are our fondest hopes and wishes blasted for ever! It is
the will of God, and it is our duty to submit. Oh, how my heart
bleeds when I think upon my dear Anne, and when I look at our
little innocent I burst into a flood of tears; the dear creature
insensible to its loss. Had you but seen what a fond mother my
beloved was, calling upon me often to look at the infant smiling.
This, however, is too much for me. I shall now give you some
account of her lamented illness. On the morning of the nth Sep-
tember I went early on board ship at Port Royal to visit Mrs.
Winchester, whom I found had died the night previous. When on
board I felt unwell, and immediately proceeded home. On entering
our bedroom I said to her. "Anne, I am afraid that at last I have got
the fever,” and requested her to cut off my hair and send for a
doctor. She was much affected and anxious about me, as every one
about us was dying. Mr. and Mrs. Thomas (my assistant), had died
the week before. I continued very ill until the morning of the 14th,
when I found myself out of danger. Oh, with what affection she
watched over me. I shall never forget it. About 9 o’clock on the
morning of the 14th, I said to her, “ I fear that you are not well.”
She replied that she did not feel quite well. I requested her to go to
bed and send for a doctor. On the morning of the 16th Major Ferier
advised me strongly to send her to Kingstown, where she could get
into larger rooms —lodgings. I asked her if she wished to go.
" I will do anything for the best,” my love replied, with inexpres-
sible mildness, for she was mildness itself. At the time I saw that
removing her would be of no use, as the cold hand of death was
upon her; yet I was ready to grasp at any chance of preserving
her. I came over the bed to see her once more, and could not
refrain weeping when I looked at her. “ Oh,” says she, “if you
behave like that you will make me believe that I will not get better;
but I hope I will get well, as I feel no pain, only a curious sensation
in my head.” I durst not ask her if she had anything to say to
you lest it might hurt her. She helped to dress herself, and when
carried out of the room to be placed in the coach, she said “ Be sure
and write me often and tell me how you and the child get on.” and
these were the last words I heard my beloved wife speak. She felt
no fatigue from the motion of the coach, and the woman who went
down with her told me that an hour after being in bed she felt
easier, and said that the people were very kind and attentive.


However, in the course of the afternoon of the 16th she became at
times insensible, but suffered not the least pain, inquiring sometimes
about me and the child, and expired without a groan between
twelve and one o’clock on the morning of the 18th September.
I was most anxious to be carried down to get another sight of my
dearest wife, but the Doctor would not allow me.
Letttr addressed to Andrew Anderson, Esq., M.D., Surgeon 92nd
Regiment, near Kingstown, Jamaica.
Stockbridge, 29th July, 1820.
My dear Uncle,
I daresay you are rather surprised at not hearing from me
before this, but, as your letter did not reach me till within a few
days of the time appointed for the sailing of the packet, I deferred
writing till the arrival of the little Grougy lass, which was last
week, when she made her appearance at Stockbridge in good health
and spirits. They were detained four or five days at Dundee from
their luggage being delayed in passing through the Custom House,
during which time they stayed in M. Park’s lodgings. She seemed
at first particularly pleased with her cousin (no doubt, Sir,
captivated with my engaging address), and most especially delighted
when I kissed her. Her sentiments, however, were rather changed
before she left us, but I attributed all this to a little coquetry,
which will soon disappear under the administration of that sovereign
monster of subordination and obedience, the Taws. If she ever
comes to be under my care, Sir, I’ll apply them with great precision
and effect, recollecting how we used to be scourged with the
catinfera. I did not vaccinate her when she was here as she was
teething, and rather fretful; I thought it would be as well to wait
a few days till they had weaned her, when it will be done at
Peebles. Miss Cairns took her there last Tuesday, and the Nurse
went with them to remain a few days till she is weaned. When
she returns I will give her the Five Pounds you promised her.
I daresay you are by this time acquainted with the death of my
Uncle Archd., which happened at Mull on tne 9th of May last.
Poor Bolingbroke fortunately happened to be there at the time.
They immediately sold all the furniture and left the island. Two
of his sisters are gone to Gravesend. My Uncle Adam intends
educating one of them (who is rather clever) for a governess, and
the other he has put Into a house of business in London, so that
they will not be all dependent on Mungo’s exertions. Both the
Laidlaws are still at Stockbridge. Old Mr. E. and his wife called
to see the little lassie, and she was also down returning the call.
1 forgot to mention, Sir, that she has got a little of the proboscis,


which she always pushed out whenever I came near her. Henry
Scott’s marriage with the eldest Miss Martin is to take place very'
soon; he has taken a house at Newington. Have you heard no
whisperings of the engagement between your quondam pupil
Elizabeth and a young Englishman of the name of Warier; it is
now nearly settled. She returned from England last March and
goes back again in the end of August, and the marriage is to be in
England shortly after. He is from Shropshire, but has resided in
Edinburgh three or four years. His father was a physician in
Chester, and he left a property about three or four hundred
a year, where he intends residing. He is very young—not twenty-
one till next November—but very quiet and of retired habits. lam
grieved, Sir, that you should be absent, and not able to give your
niece some of that sage advice for which you are so well qualified.
I will write you a more full and particular account of your in-
tended nephew-in-law in my next. I hope your own health is now
fully re-established. You will view the approach of the' sickly
season this year with less dread, as the regiment will be well
seasoned by this time; though from the terrible fatality of last
year, you cannot but be apprehensive. Can you discover no mode
of treatment by which the ravages of this disease, which has so
long baffled all the powers of medicine, can be most effectually
resisted ? lam confident, sir, that your experience, calamitous as
it has been, will not have been without its use; and if the extensive
opportunity which has been afforded you of observing the progress
of this disease and the effects of the different modes of treatment, if
it has not enabled you to find out a mode of treatment superior to
any which we are now acquainted, will have qualified you to decide
which of them is the best; and should you, sir, incline entering
the lists as an auctor, I have little doubt but your scientific and
judicious observation would not only entitle you to the gratitude,
but raise you to a high rank amongst the most esteemed of the
profession, and many might join in the " legi et perlegi sutnma voluptare
el cum maxima fructu ” of the worthy old professor; and then, sir,
if I should happen to write a Thesis, it would be nos auctores. This
season was at first very dry, which rendered it extremely detri-
mental to the ould does ; for the moths congregated in such masses
and made such furious attacks that, notwithstanding the zealous
and unremitting exertions of the inspectors, they have contrived to
render your garments rather more airy than you may perhaps think
agreeable; better suited indeed to your present climate than the
cold blasts at Shawwood. Indeed, lam a little alarmed lest their
audacious teeth should not even spare the far-famed buckskins.
The Sombreros are grown rather glazed with the assiduous
brushing employed to clear them from pulveritious particles. Be
sure to bring some old regimental ones to Shawwood with you, to
put on when you go to kill the Lollers, and they will serve ex-
cellently well to frighten the crows from your well cultivated
domain . It will be a famous time then, sir—fishing, threshing,


ploughing, shooting, &c.; the wine, sir, and the salt herring. The
Duke of Buccleugh will shrink into nothing compared with you.
James Rodgers went to London last autumn, expecting to get a
situation somewhere in the West Indies. I believe ; but his sisters
have not heard from him since his departure. Elizabeth met him
in London. He was not looking well. I hope, sir, you will not be
long in writing me again, though I have been rather dilatory in
answering yours. lam going to the country the end of this month,
and shall write you again on my return. I shall make an inspection
of Shawwood, and report to, and believe.
Ever yours truly,
MUNGO PARK.
Printed by Cherrie and Mclmdoe, Jetty street, Dunedin.
