

iiiii
:i* ‘ jHil l it--;*, •
i-i:i r:'-1-.-:;? f£;i i
, \ ’ j
■! ■ ■ i ' ’ll
■ V
inlUpU- ;Ui j-:-1:i
|iiipi||/
•A
I
sijHJsiSisHJiiftt:
slvi • ; : •-s 1 V&Vi H : i l«lll I :;
• ' • .
ir - .■;■
If
B
pQIIIIIII**
S' ii t
;
k '**•— -si*y■ | ' :
fi." •. * ..:. : J I;. ' - I
] • .
I
I iti" 1 ■‘ ,r 1
r- ~ «
|ji 1 - f
Sij&riKtfnr&i&mrs:3H<a|
mSm
. ' ;
riantPl
WiMa
UUi-.illi
srnmmmmmmsm
FtSSSfc • • in'! , || .* gf
■ ii ffi ii
i‘ •- * 1 . :0H
' I ~,j :
i» .
Is :||
a |n| 1 iipfc
■f" V
v 1 2 •
Ifilfj
iiiiiililiiiittfi
' * ’ ' 1 »
JJ
lili
* ll 1 . w ;
mm
iffi K iffiffi
i - i j ii
* If :7£Tf Jlllllr ?r i:f« - £. T i
j \ \
. n 1 f rt-
I
■ Ilfllli— • ■; ■ ••' ••'' •' In&Hiliflit


[PIUVAXE.J
EXTRACTS
FROM A
LETTER TO CAPTAIN FITZ-ROY, R.N.
R. DAVIES HANSON, ESQ.
LATELY COMMISSIONER OF REQUESTS IN NEW ZEALAND.


Adelaide, South Australia.
July 2ith, 184 G.
My dear Sir,
I took the liberty of writing to you from
Wellington, a few days before my departure for this place,
inclosing you copies of two Memorials which had been ad-
dressed to Captain Grey on the subject of one of the private
land claims in the New Zealand Company’s district.
* « *- * *
I have finally left New Zealand. The proceedings of
Captain Grey at Wellington have, to my apprehension, been
of such doubtful expediency, and so clearly unjust, that I
could neither look forward with satisfaction to my continued
connection with the Government, nor entertain any hope of the
immediate prosperity of the Settlement. Although at a con-
siderable sacrifice, I decided upon seeking my fortune else-
where, and I therefore visited this place, in which, from my
early connection with it, I have always felt interested; and
finding that there appeared a reasonable prospect of success,
have determined upon remaining here. I should state, how-
ever, that I was probably almost the only person in Wellington
who did not approve of Captain Grey’s policy, and believe
that he had taken the only proper measures for the settlement
of the Native Question. It will be for time to show which
was right.
I shall consequently be unable to give you any precise
information with regard to the future progress of affairs iu
New Zealand, but I wish to avail myself of this opportunity
to throw together a few hints which have occurred to me in
connection with the recent proceedings of the Government
there. Ido not apologise for troubling you, because I know
that you will continue to feel a deep interest in the fate of the
New Zealanders. And as it is not improbable that in conse-
quence of the late occurrences some new principles may be
proposed, with regard to that country, deeply affecting the
future fortunes of their Race, even such information as I can
convey may not be without its use.
I should, however, premise that I do not think Captain


Grey would intentionally adopt or recommend any policy
which would he injurious to the natives. I doubt even
whether he would have acted as he has done at Wellington,
had he not imagined that the matter there had been already
investigated and decided. Had ho enquired for himself, I
think he would have attempted to settle the matter by com-
promise, rather than by force. From all I can learn of him,
I believe that he would seek to advance what he imagines to
be the interests of the natives, but I fear that he may be
regardless of their rights. In many cases, a policy which
looks to the ends rather than to the means may be successful,
but I doubt if it would succeed with the New Zealanders.
Their attention has been directed to this subject, and they are
fully acquainted with the nature and extent of their rights.
Their forbearance is and has been hitherto secured by the
scrupulous good faith of the British Government, but they
can but look with doubt, at least, upon the progress of
measures, the scope and consequences of which they but
imperfectly apprehend. If once their confidence in the justice
of Government should be shaken, then I can see no security
for the existing settlements, and but faint hopes of the pre-
servation of the Native Race. In any measures that may be
adopted for the future government of New Zealand, this
should always be borne in mind. Any violation of the ex-
press or implied contracts, by which the Government is bound
in its dealings with the natives, could hardly fail to involve
most disastrous results. It is very probable that Captain Grey
may feel this; and in that case, when the present troubles are
appeased, New Zealand may yet become a peaceful and
thriving Colony.
I do not venture to speak of the proceedings in the Northern
part of the Island, because of them I know nothing, except-
ing from the statements in the newspapers, and from report.
You, from your local knowledge, will be better able than my-
self to judge of the character and probable result of the
policy pursued there. But the measures adopted in the
neighbourhood of Wellington do appear to me to involve
much injustice to the natives, and in their ultimate results to
be fraught with much injury to the settlers. And I can find
no such pressing necessity as in other cases has been held to
justify a vigour beyond the law. Much as I regretted the
proceedings at the Bay of Islands, I felt that there was no
alternative. The Government was forced into action by the
aggression of the natives, and could not remain quiescent
without confessing itself to be incompetent to the discharge
of its most important functions. In Wellington, on the con-


trary, the Government was the aggressor; forcibly dispos-
sessing the natives of land which they had occupied and
cultivated, for several years, under a title which those who
have most patiently investigated it believe to be well founded.
And tliis was done, although there was more land in the district
than the whole European population could cultivate; and the
natives were entitled, under the arrangements of the New
Zealand Company, sanctioned by the Government, to reserves
equalling, if not exceeding, in quantity, the land which they
occupied, but which reserves had never been made for them.
As the case of these natives, so far as I am aware, has not yet
been stated, —and as it involves considerations applicable to
the natives generally, —I propose to state, in some detail, the
circumstances of the case.
The original purchase of the district of Wellington on the
part of the New Zealand Company has been fully investigated
by the Commissioner appointed for that purpose, and his in-
quiries demonstrated the worthlessness of their title. The
evidence taken before him completely disproved those state-
ments of the universal assent of the natives, which were pub-
lished in Colonel Wakefield’s journal, and upon the faith of
which the claims of the Company were originally vested.
And as in the course of the enquiry Colonel Wakefield, on
the part of the Company, agreed to make a new purchase
from the majority of the natives who had dissented from the
former sale, it may he assumed that under the original deed,
the Company did not become possessed of any title which thfc
Government could recognise or defend. But whatever may
he asserted as to the validity of the original agreement for
the purchase of the Wellington district, it was made only
with the Ngatiawa natives residing on the shores of the har-
bour, and could only transfer such rights as they possessed.
At that time they only occupied the land in the immediate
vicinity of the harbour, their farthest cultivations not extend-
ing to more than a mile and a half from the beach.
It was, however, assumed, that they were entitled to the
whole valley, and the existence of other claims to any portion
of it, was not known till about a year and a half alter the
date of the first purchase, when a gentleman of the name oi
Mason, who had acquired a title by exchange to a section on
the Hutt, at a distance of about four miles from the beach, upon
proceeding to settle there found himself obstructed by a chief
of the name of Kaparatehau, who claimed under Raupcraha to
be entitled to the whole of the upper part of the valley.
In proof of this claim, he pointed to one or two places
where he had cultivated small patches of ground, and shewed


where lie had felled trees for canoes. From conversation at
the time, I may state that Mr. Mason was convinced that the
claim of this chief was well founded. Finding himself unahle
to obtain possession of the land, Mr. Mason applied to Colo-
nel Wakefield, as the Company’s Agent, and an arrangement
was made, under which, in consideration of some payment,
Mr. Mason was allowed to occupy his section. This arrange-
ment was, I helieve, adhered to hy the natives, but he was
confined strictly within the boundaries marked out, and on
more than one occasion was compelled to pay for liberty to
cut down trees beyond its limits. As the settlement pro-
ceeded, other individuals established themselves in the neigh-
bourhood, but always under protest from the natives. In the
majority of cases, the natives were induced to acquiesce in
the occupation by means of presents, made to them by the
settlers; and when this had not been done, the settlers were
exposed to interruption and annoyance. The natives also
occupied considerable portions of land, which they cultivated.
They were undoubtedly induced to settle themselves perma-
nently in this spot, instead of resorting to it at particular
periods of the year for the purpose of taking eels, and ‘ kakas,’
and pigeons, as had previously been their custom, in order
that they might avail themselves of the market for their pro-
duce, which was furnished by the settlement. (A somewhat
similar motive, by the bye, to that which is now creating new
towns near the principal railway stations in England.) In
fact, they showed themselves practically aware of the value of
the principle of concentration. And they were most useful
to the settlement, in increasing the supply of food at a cheap
rate, and in turning to account land which, but for them,
would still, for the most part, have remained unoccupied.
In the latter end of 1841, or the beginning of 1842, their
numbers were increased by the accession of Taringakuri and
his people, from Kaiwarawara, who having been driven from
that place by the repeated destruction of their crops, by the
cattle of the settlers, were invited by Kaparatehau to settle
upon his land. And, after the fatal affray at Wairau, their
numbers were again increased by some natives from an allied
tribe at Wanganui. By their combined efforts, several hun-
dred acres of land were cleared, and under crop, and the
labouring class in the town of Wellington were furnished with
a more abundant and cheaper supply of provisions than they
had been able before to command.
In this state affairs remained until the period of your visit
in 1844, when the alleged injury to the settlement, by the
occupation of this land hy the natives, was brought under


your notice, but, so far as I am aware, no statement of
the nature of their claim was laid before you. After your
departure an agreement was made with Rauparaha and Ran-
ghiaiata for the sale of their claims to the Hutt Valley for
the New Zealand Company for £4OO. The deed effecting
this sale was signed by Rauparaha, and by a relation of
Ranghiaiata on his behalf, but with the express stipulation,
on the part of Ranghiaiata, that a portion of the land thus
ceded should be set apart for Kaparatehau and his people.
This stipulation does not appear to have been communicated
to the government, at least in any formal shape, but in con-
firmation of the statement that it was made, I might refer
you to Mr. Edward Shortland, now, I believe, in England,
and to the Rev. Mr. Hadfield. No agreement, however, was
made with Kaparatehau as to his claim, and he refused to
recognize the right of Rauparaha and Ranghiaiata to sell the
land which he was actually occupying under a title, sub-
ordinate indeed to that which they possessed, but still valid
and indefeasible according to the established usages, or, what
might rather be termed, the prescriptive law of the country.
He therefore remained in the occupation of the land until the
arrival of Governor Grey. At this time the natives had, I
believe, nearly eight hundred acres under crop, and were
dwelling in an enclosed village, with numerous houses and
a chapel.
Almost immediately upon his landing at Wellington, Cap-
tain Grey informed the natives that they must yield possession
to the settlers of the lands which they were occupying, under
pain of forcible dispossession in the event of a refusal. They
did refuse, and after a short period spent in fruitless nego-
ciations he marched a body of troops to the spot. Upon this
Taringakuri and his people, with a portion of the Wanganui
natives, came over to Kaiwarawara, while Kaparatehau with
his tribe, the Nga-ti-Rangitahi, and the remainder of the
Wanganui natives took up a position on the hills at a short
distance. In their houses, which were fastened, they left
some blankets and other property, and they also left their
canoes, as they suppose, or assert, under the protection of the
military. Shortly after their departure, however, their houses
were entered, and the greater portion of their property, and
some of their canoes, were stolen by the settlers. This was in
the absence of the officer in command, and without the
knowledge of the soldiers, and was only discovered on the
return of the natives on the following day.
The houses and chapel were then burned by the troops,
and the fences destroyed in sight of the natives. This was in


the early part of the last week in February, 1846. On the
Thursday in that week a party of the natives plundered the
houses of several of the settlers, and, on the following Sunday,
the first of March, the same party visited almost every house
beyond the line,* and carried away by force the greater part
of the moveable property of the settlers.
They allege that they did this by way of payment for the
robbery of their goods, and burning of their houses. They
committed no act of wanton destruction, and although a show
of resistance was in some cases made, offered no actual
violence, I cannot however doubt that, had any serious
resistance been attempted, they were prepared, and probably
willing to have gone to any extremes. I can well believe that
their forcible ejection from land which they had occupied for
years, believing it to be their own property, and the crops
upon which would probably have been worth to them from
£ 1,500 to £2,000, added to the burning of their houses, and
the destruction of their property, had so exasperated them
that they would have been glad of an excuse to take some
effectual revenge. I confess therefore that I was struck with
the degree of moderation displayed, rather than surprised that
they should have taken some payment for the losses which
they had sustained. On the next day two natives were
apprehended on a charge of having been concerned in these
robberies, and on the following day, Tuesday the 3rd of
March, the settlers on the Waiwetu were plundered. On the
same morning there was a rumour in Wellington that the
troops had been attacked by the natives, and were then
engaged in actual conflict. Upon this Captain Grey pro-
claimed Martial Law, and ordered the Driver to the Hutt,
with an additional body of troops, to be landed in case of
necessity. By the evening, however, all was quiet, and it
was asserted by many that the whole affair was a mistake,
and that no attack had been made upon the troops. I could
obtain no precise information myself as to the reality of the
attack, and all that I could learn, with certainty, was, that
the troops had fired for upwards of an hour, that not one of
them received the slightest injury, and that no signs were
afterwards discovered of the presence of the natives. By the
end of the week, however, the Nga-ti-Rangitahi, under
Kaparatehau, and the Wanganui natives, who had joined
them, retreated to Porirua, to join Ranghiaiata. All appeared
quiet in the Hutt, and the settlers were satisfied that the
* Boundary cut by Kaparatchau.


vigorous policy for which they had so long been anxious had
proved completely successful.
There was, however, a source of discontent remaining, in
consequence of the detention of the two natives who had been
apprehended upon suspicion of having been concerned in the
robberies on the Hutt, One of these was related to E. Puni,
and the other to Taringakuri; and it was asserted by the
natives that it could be clearly proved that both of them had
spent the whole of the Sunday, on which the robberies had
been committed, at Kaiwara-wara. In order that their guilt
or innocence might be legally ascertained at the earliest
possible period, a special commission was issued by Captain
Grey. Under this they were tried, and one of them - was
found guilty upon what certainly appeared satisfactory testi-
mony, and was sentenced to ten years transportation. The
natives, however, still persisted that the witnesses for the
crown were under a mistake, and that the convicted native
was equally innocent with the one that was acquitted, and the
Rev. Mr. Hadfield, and others best acquainted with the
native character, while exerting themselves to procure a
remission of the sentence, foreboded that the sentence would
lead to some act of retaliation on the part of the natives.
Their fears were but too fatally verified. On the Thursday
following the sentence of transportation, two settlers, a father
and son, of the name of Gillespie, were savagely murdered.
The murder was committed by two of the Wanganui natives
from Kaparatehau’s party, who were related to the prisoner.
They immediately returned to Porirua, where they were
sheltered by Ranghiaiata.
Immediately upon receiving intelligence of the murder,
Rauperaha wrote over to Captain Grey disavowing all con-
nexion with Ranghiaiata, and advising that a party of troops
might be sent over for the apprehension of the murderers.
This was done, but as it was not found practicable to attack
Ranghiaiata at the time, they were posted there, in readiness,
as it is understood, to commence offensive operations so soon
as the weather would permit.
Shortly afterwards additional evidence was discovered, which
confirmed the statements of the natives as to the innocence of
the person who had been sentenced to transportation, and he
was accordingly liberated.
The result of a vigorous policy has consequently been, that
about two hundred natives have been driven from the occu-
pation of about eight hundred acres which they had cleared
and rendered productive: —that the out-settlers on the Hutt
have been driven in:—-their property plundered, and their


agricultural operations suspended;—that a large body of
troops are maintained in Port Nicholson at a great expense:
—and that a body of two or three hundred natives are in arms
to resist the authority of the British Government.
The whole matter in dispute was not worth even this, should
no worse consequences ensue:—but who can believe that we
have seen the worst?
The case of the dispossessed natives on the Hutt appears to
be this. Many years ago, Kaparatehau, in company with
Rauperaha and the other Nga-ti-toa chiefs drove the Ngati
Kahuhunu from the upper part of the Hutt Valley, and took
possession of the district. He continued to occupy it for
some time, paying to Rauperaha and Ranghiaiata, as the
principal Nga-ti-toa chiefs, a tribute of canoes and eels and
birds. Some years after the conquest of the district a ‘ tapu ’
was laid upon it by one of the principal Nga-ti-toa chiefs—
who considered himself injured by being excluded from any
share of the tribute.
This tapu was continued for upwards of two years, when in
consideration of large presents made by Kaparatehau it was
taken off, and he returned to the district. It was, I understand,
during this interval, that the original purchase was made by
Colonel Wakefield of the Port Nicholson district. But with
the exception of this period, Kaparatehau and his people, the
Nga-ti-Rangitahi, had continued in the uninterrupted enjoy-
ment of the land, till the attempted settlement by Mr. Mason,
They did not use it for the purposes of cultivation, because
it was at a distance from their usual residence, except in one
or two small patches to supply them with food when they
were on their periodical visits to the spot.
Since the formation of the settlement, however, a period of
nearly six years, they occupied it for the purposes of cultiva-
tion, and they have never even been treated with for the
cession of their rights, much less have they done anything to
recognise the title of the New Zealand Company. It is true
that the Commissioner for investigating titles in New Zealand
has reported against the claim of Kaparatehau—but that
individual was never brought before his court: nor was any
evidence taken excepting with regard to the claims of the
natives residing around the harbour. But even in the report,
of Mr. Spain, this land is expressly excluded from the land
awarded to the New Zealand Company. Even, however, had
that not been the case, his mere report could not operate to
divest the natives of any land, which they might possess. Nor,
had there been any sufficient evidence of the circumstances
which I have detailed, do I imagine that even a grant from


tlie Crown could have that effect. The grant actually issued
to the New Zealand Company reserved to the natives dll land
which they had cultivated between the period of the establish-
ment of the colony, and the date of the grant.
This reservation was made in the terms of an agreement
with the New Zealand Company’s agent, and although
Colonel Wakefield has not accepteil the grant, his neglect or
refusal to do this could not affect any rights which, under its
provisions, others might have acquired. The agreement with
Rauperaha and Ranghiaiata was made before the issuing of
the grant, and therefore could not affect any rights which it
conferred, nor affect Kaparatehau’s title by possession. This
chief and his people therefore had a claim by conquest,'and
by occupancy, and their claim had been, whether intentionally
or not, I am unable to say, recognised and confirmed by grant
from the Crown.
From this possession, thus guaranteed, they were driven, at
the point of the bayonet; their property was stolen; —their
houses and enclosures burned—and their crops seized.
Perhaps I may attach too much importance to the mere
legal rights of the natives under the grant: but I confess that
I have seldom known an act which appeared to me more arbi-
trary and illegal. There has been a great clamour in England,
on the part of the New Zealand Company and their advocates,
for the rigid and impartial application of English law in New
Zealand without distinction of person, or of race. Imagine
what would have been the sensation had Englishmen been the
sufferers in this instance, and you will be able to appreciate
the consistency of those who have advocated proceedings such
as those which, in this instance unhappily, Captain Grey has
adopted. Can any one doubt there would have been a cry for
the recal of a Governor who had thus violated the implied
trust reposed in him to administer impartial justice according
to the forms of law. And yet, should the natives succumb,
this measure will probably be praised as an act of politic vigor,
and contrasted favorably with the policy of those who allow
themselves to be trammelled by a regard to the principles of
justice, and the faith of treaties. Rut will the natives succumb ?
I can venture to express no opinion on this point—but I
doubt.
There is however yet another point to be borne in mind.
By the original contract of the New Zealand Company with
the natives, one-tenth of the land acquired was to be reserved
for the benefit of the natives. Of the laud claimed by Kapa-
ratchau not a twentieth has been reserved, and the only avail-
able reserves have been leased to Europeans. The question


has frequently been asked by the natives; “if we leave this
land where are we to go ? What land will you set apart for
our use?” And the reply has been that they must quit the
district. This they refuse to do, and I can discover no grounds
for charging them with wrong in so refusing. If the plan of
the New Zealand Company had been carried out in the spirit
in which it was conceived, and suitable and adequate reserves
had been made for the natives, with their consent, I cannot
hut believe from all that I have witnessed, (and I have' been a
careful observer) that no difficulties would have arisen in the
settlement of the country. But when on no principle of
reciprocal advantage; on no claim of superior right; hut by a
simple assertion of will, backed by mere power, the natives of
New Zealand are to he driven from their possessions,-
deprived of the fruits of their industry, and forbidden to share
in the benefits which it is assumed will flow from the coloniza-
tion of their country —what can we expect hut that force will
he repelled by force, —and that the natives, accustomed in
their own wars to inflict and endure every extremity, will risk
extermination rather than permit those by whom they have
been injured to reap in peace the fruits of their injustice.
But the die is cast, and we must abide the event.
August 9th, 1846.
I had written the above, at intervals, keeping the letter
open, and I have now received the intelligence, which you
will have received in England before this letter reaches you,
that the native force under Rangihaieta has attacked a party
of troops stationed in the Hutt, near the land from which the
natives were driven, and nearly succeeded in overpowering the
party. Although finally successful in repelling the attack,
the soldiers sustained a loss of six killed, and four wounded,
and a settler also was wounded. One of the soldiers, and the
settler, have since died of their wounds, so that the total loss
of the Europeans amounts to eight killed, and three wounded,
out of a party of about fifty. The natives, it appears, boast
that the attacking party consisted of only sixty men, and
that they sustained no loss. But, whether this be true or.
false, it now appears certain that the natives under Rangi-
haieta are determined to resist the Government—and that
they will not confine themselves to defensive measures. They
are not dismayed by the presence of a superior force, even of
military,—and consequently the safety of the settlement at
Wellington can only be secured by extensive military opera-


tions, at a groat expense of money, and of life, and after a
lengthened and perhaps doubtful struggle.
In the mean time all the peaceful pursuits, upon which the
prosperity of the colony depends, are suspended or impeded.
The settlers are drilling instead of ploughing, and the scat-
tered and isolated communities which have been formed in
the vallies in the vicinity of the town have been abandoned,
or must be on the point of abandonment. And all this has
been done, and risked, that a party of industrious natives
might be driven from land which they were cultivating, in
order that the holders of land-orders under the New Zealand
Company might have the benefit of their labour in clearing
and preparing the ground, and the Company bo spared some
paltry payment for the extinguishment of their right to the
remainder!
And to make the case stronger, the land thus taken pos-
session of for the Company, has been expressly excluded both
from the award of the Commissioner and the grant from the
Crown!
It is not very easy to speak in temperate language of the
systematic misrepresentation of the organs of the New Zealand
Company in England upon this subject. In a recent Wel-
lington paper, I observed an extract from the London
“ Spectator,” in which the writer speaks of “ amateur phi-
losophers who talk of the injustice of settling industrious
Europeans upon miles and miles of country which only half
a dozen savages visit when hunger or humour leads them.”
It is true that there is no direct reference to New Zealand in
this, but there can be no doubt that it was meant to refer to
that country, and to the policy of Government in reference to
it. But what is the fact? The first disputes in Wellington
arose out of a claim on the part of the New Zealand Company
of the right to deprive the natives of their pahs and cultivations.
The first affray in which blood was shed arose out of an
attempt on the part of the Company’s agent in Nelson to take
possession of a district to which the Company had no title,
and which could not have been needed for the settlement of
industrious Europeans since there was more available land in
the vicinity of Nelson, of which peaceable possession had been
yielded, than could be profitably occupied by five times the
number of the present settlers. The existing quarrel on the
Hutt has been the result of the forcible dispossession of the
natives of land which they were actually cultivating and had
been cultivating for years; although there is more land in the
Valley of the Hutt alone, exclusive of the other districts, than
could be cultivated by the whole agricultural part of the


community. But because the British Government has main-
tained the rights of the natives of New Zealand, against the
extravagant and baseless claims of the New Zealand Com-
pany,—and has thus disappointed alike their cupidity and
their ambition—no acts are spared to discredit its motives
and its policy.
It is much to be regretted that some one possessing the
requisite leisure and information should not now write the
history of New Zealand.
There is one circumstance connected with the recent move-
ments which at once vindicates your policy, and that of your
predecessors, at Wellington, and affords the strongest pre-
sumption that the measures recently adopted are not less
unwise than unjust. I refer to the assistance furnished to the
Government by nearly the whole of the natives of Port
Nicholson.
These natives, with the exception of E. Puni, were at one
time resolutely opposed to the claims of the Company, and
resisted the occupation of land by the settlers. You may
remember in the work on New Zealand published by Mr.
E. J. Wakefield, the terms in which he speaks of the claims
of the natives generally, and the contrast which he draws
between their conduct and that of E. Puni. This statement
must have been intended for those who were ignorant of the
circumstances, since any one acquainted with the case could
not fail to sec in this a condemnation of the policy of the
Company. E. Puni was satisfied, because his pah and culti-
vations had been reserved to him in conformity with the terms
of the agreement to which he had been a party. The others
resisted the claim of the Company because they had not been
a party to the sale, and their pahs and cultivations were
assigned to the settlers.
But when the Government interfered, procured their assent
to the sale, and secured to them the enjoyment of their pahs
and cultivations, they became peaceful and contented; and
they are willing to join, and in fact have joined, in the de-
fence of the settlement.
The very men who, in Mr, Wakefield’s book, are repre-
sented as false and dishonest, because they resisted an un-
principled attempt to deprive them of land which they had-
never sold, now come forward in aid of the Government, and
will form the most efficient security against any attack upon
the town. I will venture to assert, that had a similar policy
been pursued with regard to the natives on the Hutt, they
also would have proved peaceful and efficient members of the
community, and faithful and zealous allies in the event of


any quarrel with another tribe. It is true that this would
probably have cost 1000 acres of land, and some three or
four hundred pounds in money, hut even then it would have
been less costly than a vigorous policy has already proved.
There is another circumstance to which I wish to advert,
because it vindicates your policy in two points on which you
have been subjected to much obloquy. The success of the
Government at the Bay of Islands has been entirely owing to
the alliance of Nenc and his people, an alliance which was
purchased by your consenting to send back to Sydney the
first body of troops brought down to punish Hekc for cutting
down the flag-staff. And the very existence of the town of
Wellington to this period is attributable to your having as-
sured Rauperaha of pardon for his share in the disastrous
affray at Wairau. But for this, it is certain, that Rauperaha
would have joined Ranghiaiata, and their united influence
would have assembled a body of natives sufficiently numerous
to have destroyed the whole settlement.
I perceive that doubts are entertained with regard to the
future proceedings of Rauperaha, and it is impossible to say
whether the ties of relationship, cemented by forty years of
participation in common dangers and successes, may not ulti-
mately lead him to espouse the cause of Ranghiaiata. But,
at present, he is firm in his refusal to join in the present
quarrel, and this refusal has secured the neutrality of the
greater part of his own tribe, and of the natives of the
interior.
I need not point out the proof which these events have
furnished of the wisdom of the Government of New Zealand
in not attempting to bring Rauperaha to trial for his conduct
at Wairau. At that time there was not probably a single
native, from Porirua to Taupo, but would have taken up
arms in his behalf. But the measures adopted have converted
him into a friend, and have thus freed the Government, in its
present struggles, from the most subtle, active, and powerful
chief of the south.
I close this letter in order that I may avail myself of an
opportunity of sending it overland by way of Singapore. I,
however, propose again to recur to the subject, for the pur-
pose of throwing together my views on the whole claim of the
New Zealand Company. I need not say that I shall.be most
happy on any occasion when you may have leisure to hear
from you.
As you fully know, the question of British supremacy in
New Zealand is as far from being settled now as it was at
first. Our present successes (?) have been procured by al-


liances with a portion of the natives, and any act of injustice
or ill faith might convert our allies into enemies. It is neces-
sary, therefore, that the Government should lay down some
principles for its conduct in that country, which may com-
mand the acquiescence of the natives by their justice, and by
their obvious tendency to secure their rights, and promote
their interests. Should this not be done, we shall live to
witness a combined effort on the part of the natives, instead
of the isolated efforts of a few chiefs. The last year has
abundantly shown what would be the inevitable result of
such a combination.
*%* $ % ■
I need hardly mention that you are at liberty to use such
parts of this letter as relate to New Zealand in any way in
which you think they may be useful.
Believe me,
My dear Sir,
Very faithfully yours,
( Signed)
R. DAVIES HANSON.
