

EXTRACTS FROM OFFICIAL REPORTS OF NATIONAL CONFERENCE
(FOR THE INFORMATION OF LOCAL COMMITTEES).
7 8th, 19th, 24th, 29th April, and Bth May.
18th APRIL.
The Lord Mayor of Dublin presided at the Conference
of Irish Leaders yesterday in the Mansion House, those
also present being :
Irish Party —Mr. Dillon ; Mr. Devlin.
Sinn Fein —-Mr. De Valera ; Mr. Griffith.
Independent —Mr. Wm. O’Brien ; Mr. T. M. Healy.
Labour— Messrs. Wm. O’Brien (Dublin); T. Johnston
(Belfast) ; M. Egan, T.C. (Cork).
The Conference assembled at 10 a.m., and, after
deliberating for three hours, it was unanimously decided,
on the motion of Mr. Wm. O’Brien, M.P., seconded by
Mr. Griffith, to
“ Send a deputation, consisting of Messrs. Dillon,
De Valera, Healy, O’Brien (Labour), and the Lord
Mayor to Maynooth to wait on the Irish Hierarchy,
who were meeting there.”
The Conference decided to await the return of the
delegates, and to re-assemble at 7 o’clock.
On resuming at 7 p.m. the deputation reported the
result of the Conference with the Bishops. The report
was received with great satisfaction. The Conference
then adopted the following declaration ;
“ Taking our stand on Ireland’s separate and
.distinct nationhood, and affirming the, principle^of
liberty, that the Governments of nations derive their
just powers from the consent of the governed, we deny
the right of the British Government or any external
authority to impose compulsory military service on
Ireland against the clearly expressed will of the Irish
people.
“ The passing of the Conscription Bill by the British
House of Commons must be regarded as a declaration
of war on the Irish nation. The alternative to accept-
ing it, as such, is to surrender our liberties and to
acknowledge ourselves slaves. It is in direct violation
of the rights of small nationalities to self-determina-
tion, which, even the Prime Minister of England—
now prepared to employ naked militarism to enforce
his Act upon Ireland —himself officially announced
as an essential condition for peace at the Peace
Conference.
“ The attempt to enforce it will be unwarrantable
aggression, which we call upon all Irishmen to resist
by the most effective means at their disposal.”
The declaration was signed by all the members of the
Conference.
The Conference proceeded to discuss the methods to
be employed to give effect to the policy of the declaration.
Detailed instructions as to the most effective plans to
be pursued will be communicated in due course.
19th APRIL.
The following decisions were unanimously arrived
at:—
“ It was decided that the moneys collected for the
Irish National Defence Fund shall remain in the hands
of the priests of the parish, or such other persons as
may be locally selected, who will act as Treasurers
for the time being.
“ His Grace the Archbishop of Dublin has con-
sented to act as Trustee, with the Lord Mayor, of
Dublin, and a third to be subsequently named by
them.
" It was decided that representative Local Com-
mittees of Defence, selected by and from those who
sign the National Pledge against conscription, should
be formed immediately in each parish.
“It was decided that a detailed statement of
Ireland’s case with respect to the attempt of the
English Government to impose conscription on the
Irish people be prepared for presentation to the world,
and the Lord Mayor was requested to arrange to
proceed to Washington and present in person the
statement to the United States of America.
“ The question of the local conservation of food
supplies was under consideration in view of possible
developments.
“ The Conference advises the public to refuse to
assist in any proceedings facilitating the enforcement
of the Conscription Act.”
24th APRIL.
It is desirable that, where possible, a record be kept
by the local Treasurer of the names of subscribers, and
the amount of their subscriptions.
29th APRIL.
From information at the disposal of the Conference
the situation in regard to the menace of conscription
is unchanged, and for this reason the necessity of per-
fecting local organisation, representative of all the
people, is urgent, and should be proceeded with
immediately.
8th MAY.
"The Conference decided to ask the Local Com-
mittees to forward 10 (ten) per cent, of the
moneys already collected as a first call for central
purposes to the Standing Committee—-Messrs. Dillon,
De Valera, and Wm. O’Brien (of the Trades’ Con-
gress)—at the Mansion House, Dublin.
“ The Conference desires to intimate that except in so
far as calls are made for central purposes the Local
Committees are expected to devise arrangements
suitable for their own localities to safeguard and
administer the National Defence Fund.
“ Local Committees which have not already re-
ported to the Mansion House should do so at once,
giving the names and addresses of Secretaries, and
the amounts of their collections.
“ Where it is found that a more convenient unit
for administration will be a group of parishes, for
instance, in cities, the Local Committees may be
constituted from the larger area.
“ In view of certain public statements, the Con-
ference deems it necessary to emphasise that the
funds are under its control and will be administered
impartially, irrespective of party or religious belief.
" Regarding the constitution of Local Committees,
the ideal to be aimed at is to have representatives
of the different parties on these Committees, roughly
in proportion to the numerical strength of each party
in the district who have taken the pledge.”
C'cNfc<Qf Hd <ri- "V'i<vCU Le^eeG


18th APRIL, 1918.
The following report was issued by the Hierarchy :
“ A deputation from the Mansion House Conference, con-
sisting of the Lord Mayor, Mr. De Valera, Mr. Dillon, Mr.
Healy, and Mr. O’Brien, was received by the Archbishops
and Bishops of Ireland during their deliberations to-day at
Maynooth. After hearing the deputation and after a full
interchange of views, the Bishops came to the following
conclusions :
“ The Bishops direct the clergy to celebrate a public Mass
of intercession on next Sunday in every church in Ireland to
avert the scourge of Conscription with which Ireland is now
threatened.
“ They further direct that an announcement be made at
every public Mass on Sunday next of a public meeting to be
held on that day at an hour and place to be specified in the
announcement for the purpose of administering the following
pledge against compulsory Conscription in Ireland :
“THE PLEDGE.
“ * Denying the right of the British Government to enforce
compulsory service in this country, we pledge ourselves
solemnly to one another to resist Conscription by the most
effective means at our disposal.’
“ The clergy arc also requested by the Bishops to announce
on Sunday next that a collection will be held at an early suit-
able date outside the church gates for the purpose of supplying
means to resist the imposition of compulsory military service.
“ The Bishops also request the priests in their respective
dioceses to take the publication of these resolutions in the
Press as sufficient notification for them to act on.”
20th MAY.
Professor Eoin MacNcill and Alderman Thomas Kelly
were invited by the Lord Mayor to take the place of Messrs.
De Valera and Griffith, having been nominated by the
Executive of Sinn Fein.
The following statement was adopted :—^
“ The Conference, speaking on behalf of every section of
Irish Nationalists, condemns the deportation to England of
our colleagues, Messrs. De Valera and Griffith, and their
fellow-prisoners.
" We charge it as an attempt to discredit and disrupt
Ireland’s united resistance to Conscription, and this upon the
charge or allegation calculated to make a fair trial impossible
for them in England, and to prejudice the cause of the Irish
nation in friendly countries abroad.
“ We assert the ancient constitutional right of Irishmen
to be arraigned in their own country, and to be tried by their
own countrymen ; and we charge that the denial of that *
right is a violation of the first principles of justice and liberty,
for the defence of which England claims the alliance of demo-
cratic nations.
“ Political Poison.
“ We deplore the attempt in the proclamation of Field-Marshal
French to poison the English mind against the Irish prisoners
by the sensational allegation of ‘ a conspiracy in Ireland to
enter into treasonable communication with the German enemy.’
“When Field-Marshal French calls on the Irish people ‘to
assist the Government in every way to crush this conspiracy,’
all Nationalists must recall it is the habitual instrument of
British Government to blacken and assail Irish leaders in
order to effectuate their own objects, and that charges of
assassination were made against Charles Stewart Parnell
by means of a forged letter published on the day when a
perpetual Coercion Act for Ireland was passed through its
second reading in 1887, and that this forgery was availed of
by important members of the present Ministry to justify
such legislation to the world.
“ Confidence in the People.
“ The circumstances of the moment are trying, but we are
strong in the confidence that our countrymen will continue
to observe an imperturbable calmness, coupled with un-
shakable determination to be faithful at all hazards to the
sacred pledge of national resistance to Conscription, which
practically the entire Irish nation have now taken.
" While standing steadfastly on our good right, we shall not
cease to appeal to all friends of human freedom throughout
the civilised world to inquire for themselves whether the present
attempt to force civil war upon the Irish people on a trans-
parently false pretext of military expediency does not really
cover a wicked plot of English politicians to relieve them-
selves from their broken pledges to Ireland, in view of their
profession that they have entered into a world-war with the
object of securing the right of self-determination for every
other small nation in Europe.”
23rd MAY.
The Conference decided that inasmuch as the Irish prisoners
would be universally regarded as the victims of the national
struggle against Conscription, it is proposed to make provision
for the prisoners’dependents out of the National Defence Fund.
The Standing Committee is deputed to make the necessary
arrangements.
Alderman Thomas Kelly was appointed to the Standing
Committee in place of Mr. De Valera.
It was decided to publish the following correspondence:—
Mansion House,
Dublin, 15th May, 1918.
Sir, —On the 23rd April I wrote you asking fora passport to
proceed to America to place before the President of the United
States the case against Conscription being enforced in Ireland.
I received the passports on yesterday, for which I beg to
thank you. But I understand that no documents —either
written or printed—are allowed to be carried by passengers
going to the United States " unless such documents are
essential for the purpose of the voyage.” I would be glad
if you would kindly have authority issued to enable me to
convey the document which has been drawn up for presenta-
tion to President Wilson.—l am, Sir, yours faithfully.
L. O’NEILL, Lord Mayor.
The Right Hon. A. J. Balfour, P.C.,
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, Whitehall, London.
No. 86916/X/Mails. Foreign Office,
Immediate. May 18th, 1918.
My Lord Mayor,
With reference to your letter of May 15th last, I am directed
by Mr. Secretary Balfour to inform you that he is advised
by the competent authorities that the document which you
desire to convey to the President of the United States ought,
in the first instance, to be submitted to his Excellency the
Lord Lieutenant of Ireland.—I am, my Lord Mayor, your
most obedient and humble servant,
EYRE A. CROWE.
The Lord Mayor of Dublin.
Mansion House,
Dublin, 22nd May, 1918.
Sir, —In reply to yours of the 18th inst., my Conference have
decided that, as the “ Document ” is a direct communication
between the Conference and the .President of America, they
decline to have it submitted to the Lord Lieutenant.
Yours faithfully.
L. O’NEILL, Lord Mayor.
The Right Hon. A. J. Balfour, P.C.,
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, Whitehall, London.
In a single case the Conference received a representation as
to the exclusion of women from the Local Committees, and the
opinion of the Conference was requested thereon.
The opinion of the Conference on the question, unanimously
arrived at, was that the exclusion of women from Local Com-
mittees is highly undesirable.
The Secretaries of the Local Committees who have not yet
communicated their names and addresses to the Conference
are requested to do so immediately.
The Local Committees who have not yet forwarded ten per
cent, of the moneys already collected are requested to remit
the amount to the Standing Committee of the Conference —
Messrs. Dillon, Kelly and O’Brien (Trades Council), at the
Mansion House, Dublin.
2
