









EXTRACTS
FROM
LETTERS,
WRITTEN BY A GENTLEMAN
LATELY ESTABLISHED ON THE SWAN RIVER,
IN WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
DUBLIN:
PRINTED BY WILLIAM UNDERWOOD,
19, ST. ANDREW-STREET
1832.




MAP
of the
SWAN RIVES
Settlement
and
King Goerges
SOUND.
✓ •




INTRODUCTION.
The western side of Australia is traversed
for some hundred miles by a chain of moun-
tains, called the Darling*, running* from north
to south, nearly parallel to the coast.
A fine tract of country, ornamented by large
forest trees and flowering shrubs, extends
itself from their base to the sea, (a distance
varying from thirty to fifty miles,) and accom-
panies them to their termination at Cape
Chatham, the southern extremity of the con-
tinent.
From these mountains flow the Swan and
Canning Rivers, whose united waters dis-
charge themselves into an estuary nine miles


long, and three to four miles in breadth, called
Melville Water. The entrance to this estuary
is over a bar of rocks, with a depth of only
six feet at low water ; the bar extends about
three quarters of a mile, when the water
deepens four to six fathoms near the shore,
and upwards of eight fathoms towards the
centre, and thus continues for some miles.
The Swan River is navigable for boats, so
far as the tide flows, being more than forty
miles from the coast.
The average height of the mountains ranges
from 1200 to 1500 feet; some are consider-
ably higher ; and Mount William elevates its
rugged top three thousand feet above the level
of the sea.
The distance across the range is from twen-
ty-five to thirty miles, be} 7 ond which exten-
sive fertile plains open to the view, beautifully
wooded, and stretching tow ards the south-east
as far as the eye can reach. The progress
of further discovery towards the East was


prevented by the intervention of a rapid river,
called, after its discoverer, the “Dale its
course was found to be from south-east to
north-west; its source and termination are as
yet unknown.
The land to the south is more fertile than
that towards the north, the atmosphere cooler,
and the climate more agreeable.
About eighty miles to the south of the Swan,
the River Colley is met with, which, taking
its rise in the Darling* Mountains, flows (with
two other rivers,) into Port Leshenhault, an
estuary of sixteen or eighteen miles in length.
The banks of the Colley are said to be
beautiful, and the surrounding country to
bear much the appearance of many parts about
the Swan River, being that of a well wooded
park. There is a bar at the mouth of the
Colley which prevents the entrance of vessels
of any considerable burden ; the soil between
it and the Canning river, (nearest to the
mountains,) is of clay or red marl, occasion-


ally interspersed with sandy loam, like that of
Shropshire, and well adapted to agricultural
purposes ; towards the coast the soil is light
and sandy, but producing large timber: the
banks of the rivers abound in rich alluvial
flats; the mountains, (composed of granite,)
are generally rugged.
Of the country between the Colley and
Cape Lewin, but little is as yet known ; where
it has been penetrated, (as from the River
Yasse,) it has presented the same appearance
as in the neighbourhood of the Colley. Im-
mediately round Cape Lewin, to the east, a
town has been founded, called Augusta : the
situation selected for it, was at the mouth
of a river called the Blackwood, which de-
bouches into a commodious inlet of the sea ;
the river is navigable for boats for twenty-
five or thirty miles, and the banks well tim-
bered. Between Augusta and Ring George’s
Sound the coast had not been accurately
traced; it is supposed to contain some con


siderable inlets : towards Cape Chatham, one
is known to exist, which, (it is expected,) may-
be found to receive the waters falling from
the east side of the Darling- range, also those
having their source in the western declivity
of a parallel range, terminating near Pt. Hil-
lier. To the north of Pt. Hillier there is
a fine county, well wooded and watered ;
farther to the east lies King George’s Sound,
where there has formerly been a convict settle-
ment. Between this part of the Colony and
Swan River, is contained (according to the re-
port of those who have traversed it,) an ex-
tensive tract of beautiful country, well adapted
for either pasture or agriculture. The Gover-
nor is very active, and quite a favorite. He
has sent out several parties of discovery, and
has himself surveyed the coast, for four de-
grees to the north of Swan River, in hopes of
discovering the mouth of the Dale ; he has had
the entrance to the harbour buoyed off; has
taken soundings round the coast, and has been


TO.
DISTANCE.
WINDS;
TIME
Timor,
1500
S.E.
12 days
Java,
1700
13
Madras,
3400
30
Ceylon,
3100
28
Mauritius,
3400
21
Cape of Good Hope,
5003
31
England, the passage may be made
in
84
Van Diemen’s Land,
2200
S.W.
42
Port Jackson,
2600
50
unceasingly employed for the benefit of the
Colony. Emigrants will find much important
information in his reports, one of which con-
tains a table of the distances from Cockburn
Sound to different parts of the world, with
the average time occupied in the voyage by
a fast-sailing vessel. As the information it con-
tains appears to be essential to those about to
emigrate, it is here subjoined ;
From Cockburn Sound,


EXTRACTS.
TOWN OF PERTH, WESTERN AUSTRALIA,
Vlth, November, 1830.
I seize the opportunity of almost the first
leisure moment which I have had here, to give
you a hurried account of my proceedings and
prospects up to this time. We anchored in
Cockburn Sound, on this day fortnight, and on
the same evening landed on Garden Island, where
the first thing that struck us was the very un-
promising appearance of the soil, (which seemed
to be little else than white sand,) and the singu-
larity of tolerably good crops, or rather patches,
of peas, barley, turnips, radishes, &c. &c. produced
upon it. On Sunday came to the mainland, where
the embryo town of Freemantle is situated on the
beach. I was anxious to see the Governor with-
B


out loss of time, and therefore proceeded to Perth,
(about twelve miles up the river,) in the boat of Mr.
Brown, the Colonial Secretary, from whom I have
continued to receive the kindest and most hospi-
table attention. In consequence of some depreda-
tions committed by the natives on the upper part
of Swan River, Mr. Brown proceeded thither,
accompanied by a few soldiers : I took advantage
of seeing that part of the country, but have not
now time to give you a detail of our operations—
suffice to say, the natives were caught in the act
of plundering a house, and enjoying the spoil ;
seven were taken and brought prisoners to Perth,
where they were kindly treated, and dismissed
after being detained a few days. It is hoped
that the lesson taught them on this occasion, the
superiority they must have perceived in weapons,
strength, and co-operation, with their subsequent
kind treatment, may prevent any further annoy-
ance. They are rather active than strong, slender
in the limbs, but broad in the chest; and though
' to
generally far from being well-looking, yet not
deserving the epithet of hideous, which has been
applied to them; —they are quick of apprehension.
One poor fellow slept with his head on my knee,
in the boat, but not till he had asked my permis-
sion, which I gave him, first spreading some paper
on my trowsers to save them from the grease and


red earth with which his hair was ornamented, a
precaution they all seemed to understand. I next
went up the Canning River, my object being to
get a grant without loss of time, and take my
people to it; I find it difficult to get one. The
only land available for present purposes is on,
and near the banks of the rivers ; all this is
allotted on both sides of each river, almost to its
source ; but an offer is frequently made of giving
one half to a new settler, on condition of his per-
forming the location duties sufficient to secure the
whole. I have an offer of this kind, on the bank
of Swan River, and think of accepting it ; if I do
not I must look either over the mountains, where
a fine country is said to have been discovered, or
twenty-five miles to the south, where three rivers
fall into a lake, and thence into the sea, (this is
called Murray River,) or still farther to the south,
to Port Yasse, or Port Leschenhault ; or still
farther again to Cape Lewin, where the ground
is good, the climate moderate, and the harbour
excellent. These, of course, are only my fleeting
ideas on the subject, not grounded yet on any
firm foundation, for I have not been long enough
here to form any decided opinion as to soil, situa-
tion, or probabilities, I told you I would exagge-
rate no advantage, and conceal no defect : in
general, the further you go up the river, the


better is the soil, the Swan being rather an estuary,
or inlet of the sea, than a river, the quantity
of water actually discharged by it being very
small, if any during part of the summer, when
I should think it becomes a mere series of pools
and shallows, i.e. above the rise of the salt water,
which at that season reaches along way up, I
cannot yet say how far, but suppose about forty
miles. In winter it discharges an immense body
of water, overflowing its banks to a considerable
extent on the flat grounds, which become fine
pastures when this subsides. As to Mr. Fraser’s
account, 1 have no doubt it is true to the letter
respecting every part which he describes, but it
would not be safe to rely upon it, as general de-
scription of the ground of the Colony. There is
much disappointment felt by many here, who
thought they had nothing to do but scratch the
ground and sow, and forthwith have a crop ;
the proper seasons for sowing are scarcely yet
ascertained ; from this circumstance many have
failed altogether in their crops, which throws
them upon their capital for another year ; a few
only have been able to produce as much as is of
any service to them. I have seen two or three
good fields of wheat and some flourishing potatoes;
cabbages and peas, suffer greatly from insects.—
Pork has been selling at Is. id. per pound ; butter


(salt) at 2s. Gd. ; rum 12s. 6(£ per gallon ; shoes
155,t0 18s. per pair. These prices are unfavorable
to the settler, though advantageous to the mer-
chant. Some of this latter class have made almost
a fortune already. Persons sending out a venture
of provisions would make well. Irish pork is
most in demand ; we get no pork from the Cape ;
their beef does not keep well; that of Hobart
Town is not so fat as our English beef. American
flour would, I am sure, remunerate the importer.
The prices 1 have stated above, were those of a
time of scarcity. Our vessel was the first that
came during the season, and being just in time,
every thing sold enormously high. If this colony
be supported as it ought, during the trying period
of its infancy, I am convinced it will succeed well.
Cockburn Sound is an excellent harbour in win-
ter ; Gage’s Roads in summer. Its relative situ-
ation is good. From the nature of the coast, the
climate, and the interior, it is unlikely that another
harbour so good would be found in this quarter.
All the rivers in this neighbourhood seem to be
small, and to have bar harbours. A river has
lately been discovered, behind the range of hills
running to the north-west. Beyond these hills,
the interior, for forty or fifty miles back, has an
undulating appearance, and is then succeeded by
plains good for pasture. On this side, the only


good pasture is on flats on the banks of the rivers.
These are flooded in winter. Those who look to
keeping large flocks, speak of going over the hills
next summer; these hills are of trifling heig'ht,
and present no serious obstacle to carriage or the
formation of roads, when the colony is strong
enough to make or require them. The expense
and labour of getting goods up the river, at pre-
sent is very great; boats must, in summer, be un-
loaded, and dragged over the flats, but above
these, the water is deep, and the navigation only
occasionally impeded by fallen trees, which may
be removed hereafter. Every settler here should
have a boat, and learn how to manage it.
Friday , 19 th. 1 wrote the foregoing at the
quarters of Captain Irwin, from whom 1 have
received much kindness. I have since been up
the Canning River to look at some grants which
were undisposed of; they lie about a mile above
the navigable part. The country thereabout
looks beautiful, covered, or rather studded, with
magnificent trees; but the substratum is iron stone,
the clay strongly impregnated with it, hard and un-
manageable, and having very little pasture on
it, which is, (for immediate use,) the chief re-
quisite. Besides, the water of the river is salt
there in summer, and fresh water difficult to be
found. The Canning is located (with this ex


ception) up to the mountains. It is intended
that there should be a town near to its source,
where there is some fine ground. About Free-
mantle, where I am now sitting in my tent, it is
mere bare sand, but we must not judge of this by
similar looking places at home, for all vegetables
flourish on it, and all cattle thrive on the herbage,
scanty though it be. Until you have gone above
Perth, the ground is of the same nature; it changes
then to alluvial flats, and the higher grounds con-
sist of sandy loam of different qualities. Brick
and pottery clay is abundant: bricks are now
being made in many places. I saw a wooden
house burned down some nights ago, and have
therefore a dread of such—a mud house for me.
The great mistake committed by settlers has been
bringing too many articles of machinery and im-
plements, which are not necessary or suited to the
soil. If I were coming again, I should content
myself with grubbing hoes, spades, some kitchen
utensils, plenty of provisions, and a hammock ;
this would do to begin with. Those who brought
great apparatus and stock, were sadly burdened
with the first, and did not know what to do with
the second , till they got a place to put them in.
Some of their cattle ran into the bush, (as they
call it,) and were lost; some of the more delicate
died for want of care, or provisions on board ship,


or on landing. Pigs are likely to thrive here.
25th.—I have taken half of the grant of Mr. L.
It is nearly at the head of the navigable part of
the Swan River : how it may look after enduring
the heat of the summer, I know not, but it had a
tine appearance when I was there. It is singular
that it is just about the spot where we had the
skirmish with the natives. There are several very
respectable persons settled near to it, and there is
now a party of soldiers stationed beside it. The
heat here is very great for two or three hours in
the middle of the day during the summer, but
very pleasant in the morning and evening. lam
writing my sentences without much connexion,
because I have but little time to spare to reduce
them into order, and therefore give you my
thoughts as they occur. Since I wrote the first
part of this, two vessels have arrived from Van
Diemen’s Land, with provisions, &c. which has
caused a most beneficial effect on prices ;
Others are expected soon, so that we may have
plenty again ; but it is evident that, until the Co-
lony is able to produce something substantial for
its support, we must depend on contingencies and
have fluctuating markets. That it will succeed
ultimately I have not the least doubt, but we have
two or three years of hard struggling to contend
with. The servants I brought with me are all


happy, contented and healthy, and it must be
my care to keep them so. As to myself, with
the exception of several scrapes, cuts, and bruises
on my hands from dragging, carrying, and other
works, (for I have not spared myself,) I never
was in better health, thanks to the beneficent
giver of it. I have as yet suffered no difficulty
or privation, which I consider worth thinking of.
I hope to get all my luggage to Perth on Monday;
I am to pay £5 for taking one boat-load so far,
and must then push them over the flats, and
work up my way as best I can. I have in this
endeavoured to give you my candid impressions
and observations, neither disguising nor over-
stating any thing,—so far as it goes, good and
bad, you may depend upon it. When leisure and
time serve, I shall write more decisively.
r


Slh December, 1830.
This goes by the Cruiser to India, from which
there may be an early opportunity, so that, in all
probability, it may reach you before my last of
the 23d November, which was accompanied by
the continuation of rtiy Journal, and contained
my first impressions of this place. I should not
be sorry if it be so, for I can write now rather
more favorably with respect to several matters.
I have since agreed with Mr. to take the
half of his grant, on condition of expending so
much on my part as to secure the whole ; it is well
situated on the left bank of the Swan River. I
walked over all the frontage ground near the
river, some days since, and the land seems to be
good. It is generally considered a good grant,
and above the average of neighbouring ground,
but I cannot speak more particularly at present.
A vein of good land has been found on the banks
of a river called Avon, behind the hills—on this
ground settlers are choosing their grants. I have
got one upon that river towards the south—all
the lands up the Swan and Canning have been


long since granted, but persons claiming some of
these, have left the Colony, and after the expi-
ration of this year, these lands may be resumed by
Government, if not then occupied. I have spoken
to some practical farmers, who have not the
slightest doubt but that the Colony possesses every
capability, both for agriculture and grazing ; and
though the grazing grounds on this side of the
hills are not extensive, there is an unlimited tract
behind them and at no great distance. Two or
three vessels have come in since I formerly wrote,
and prices are now moderate ; but this is not yet a
place to come to without a good stock or capital:
the expenses and inconveniences of settling are
very great. Cattle are now very dear, though we
daily expect arrivals from Hobart Town. Rum is
allowed as a daily ration to servants, who have all
got into the habit of demanding it, and complain-
ing if refused. Good cows are as high as £25,
though some have been purchased for £l2. It is
not advisable to bring stock from England; freight
and casualties make them come too expensive. The
mistake with many has been in bringing too much
lumber and machinery ; some ploughs, cars, saws,
mill machinery, and such things, are lying even yet
on the beach. Vegetables, fruits, and crops of all
sorts, will thrive well here, with moderate care;
melons, cucumbers, pumpkins, cabbage, potatoes,


peas, French beans, turnips, radishes, lettuces, have
been produced very readily. I have seen very
good looking crops of maize, wheat, barley, oats
and rye. There is, therefore, no doubt of the ca-
pability of the ground, but the seasons for sowing
have scarcely been ascertained yet, and the seed
has been bad, so that many were disappointed.
It is very easy at home, to suppose, that as soon
as you arrive, you may get on a grant, sow imme-
diately, and reap shortly; but there are many dif-
ficulties to be surmounted.
A vessel is to sail for the Mauritius in about three
weeks, when I hope to write more fully, and in a
more settled way. At present, lam unwilling to
advise any one to come out, it is such a respon-
sibility ; but I have met with no difficulties for
" I was not prepared.


20th December t 1830.
I went out some days since to hunt kangaroos;
we saw five, but the dogs never got sight of
them. The mountains are about four miles off,
to which I lately went, but had not time to go
up, as the sun was fast sinking, and I went
astray in returning. Nothing is more perplexing
than walking in the bush ; you have no object to
steer by, save your shadow or a compass, the one
is always changing with the day, and the other
may mislead, unless you keep your eye constantly
on it. The country is most singular, but not pos-
sessing those features of great interest which I ex-
pected ; there is (as far as I have seen) great
sameness in the scenery. Several parties have been
beyond the mountains, (perhaps to the distance
of ICO miles,) and they report the scenery as of the
same description—undulating ground and exten-
sive plains, but no very striking object, no large
rivers, no lakes of any extent, and the plains sub-
ject to floods in winter. The river on which I
have got my grant from Government, has only
lately been discovered; and is not, I believe, navi-
gable, but runs strongly in winter, and forms a


series of pools and shallows in summer ; its course
is to the north-west, the more northerly part being
nearest theSwanßiver,butthe better ground lying
more to the south ; on this has been laid out the
site of three towns, (Northam) said to be about
twenty-eight miles from the head of the Swan, ten
miles from that to the second, York ; and 10 miles
from thence to the third, called Beverly, close to
which is my grant; this I know only from an un-
finished sketch of a map. It is singular that many
of the rivers seem to be larger near their source
than at a distance. We are to have a monthly
conveyance by boat, for our goods, up to the head
of the river ; a store has been established at Guilds
ford, about ten miles from this, on the river, where
we are sure of getting a temporary supply, when
not convenient to obtain it from Perth. Prices are
now moderate ; I have bought sugar at seven-
pence, rice at two-pence halfpenny, and coffee at
eight-pence per pound ; arrack at six shillings and
sixpence per gallon. The tools 1 brought, are not
as serviceable as others. Grubbing hoes, broad
and strong, like broad pick-axes, are the best; my
felling axes are too narrow and too long.


Cth March , 18.31.
It would be impossible to give you such a de-
scription of this country, as would apply to all
parts of it. The general character is that of
pretty landscape, rather than of sublime or grand
scenery. There is every variety of soil, from the
white sand, to the deep black vegetable alluvial
mould, each variety, generally speaking, having
something of peculiar production, either of tree,
shrub, herb or flower—on the white sand, the
Australian mahogany is found in great abun-
dance, and of excellent quality ; on the clay
grounds, the red and blue gum trees appear—
sandy soils produce the Banksia Protea. For the
first fifteen miles up the river, white sands pre-
sent themselves on either side, with some mixture
of vegetable mould. In this district, white lime-
stone is tolerably abundant. About three miles
above Perth, alluvial flats begin to appear; close
to the river, and as you ascend, these become
more frequent and extensive ; the rising grounds
change to a brown or red clay, and you lose sight
of the sand, which, however, still continues to run


parallel to the river, at some distance back, and
thus accompany it almost to its source ;on the
left bank, ascending the river behind the alluvial
flats, is a border of rising ground, generally com-
posed of a brown or red sandy loam, upon which
rests a plain or high table land of stiff clay,
stretching back to some distance. In many places,
however, the high land rises boldly up from the
river, so as to alternate with the flat on the oppo-
site side. The alluvial flats are covered with a
luxuriant crop of grasses. On the table lands,
the grass is not abundant, the principal vegeta-
tion having the appearance of tufts of rushes ;
lucerne, vetch, &c. all of which the cattle eat
freely, and thrive upon. There has now been a
years experience of the capability of the soil,
and there is no doubt that it can abundantly
produce any grain, fruit, vegetable, tree or shrub,
which belongs to its parallel of latitude. The
sandy loam is thought the best for present pur-
poses, the stiff clay lands being difficult to break
up, and requiring more time and labour than
many are willing to bestow. 1 have seen within
two miles of this, a fine crop of wheat, grown
without any manure, and with much less turning
up of the earth than would be required in Eng-
land. This was produced on an alluvial flat—-
the grain was ploughed in just before the rains


the ground was covered with the flood ; and in
spring, the vegetation was rapid and healthy.
All sorts of garden and field vegetables thrive well,
when put down in the proper season. Nothing
worthy of being called fruit has as yet been dis-
covered : the Zamia produces a nut, which the
natives eat, after considerable preparation by
steeping in water. There are growing wild, to-
bacco, hemp, flax, eringo, celery, parsley. Much
gum might be collected from the red gum tree.
To the eye, the country has the appearance of
being well wooded, but I should not say it is
thickly timbered. In some places there are open
plains, that resemble well ordered parks—no
where do you find impenetrable jungle, save in
the mere swamps and lagoons. The seemingly
conflicting accounts of two, ten, one hundred or
a thousand trees to the acre, may be all true of
different places, if you reckon every shrub as a
tree. Take for example, the ground where I
have built on. To avoid injuring the beauty of
the place, I have cut down but one large tree, and
not above a dozen shrubs and small trees, pre-
ferring to fell the timber, necessary for building,
at the distance of a quarter of a mile. Just be-
hind my house, (on the high level land) is a plain
of perhaps of two hundred acres, upon which, the
large trees are not numerous, or more than suffi-
i)


eient to ornament the place. There is one spot
looking like a cleared field of eight or nine acres,
not encumbered with a single tree or shrub. In
other places, a kind of tree resembling a larch
of four or five years growth* is thinly scattered.
This large plain is skirted by a thick border of red
gum trees, intermixed with banksias, black wat-
tles, green wattles, and other shrubs. The ground
of this border is a rich red sandy loam, very easily
turned up, and here my men are breaking ground
with the hoe, there being abundance of clear
ground between the large trees, when the light
brush is taken away. Trees here have not a very
ample foliage, so that you may walk in the
forest, and yet not enjoy much shade. The
red gum tree, resembles an old pear or cherry
tree, but of much greater dimensions : there
is a large red gum tree beside my house, which
will protect it in the winter from the fierce
north-west blast. The Zanthorrea hastile, or
grass tree, puts me in mind of a tall black native,
with a spear in his hand, and his lank hair hang-
ing down from a head, ornamented with a tuft of
rushes. These vary in size, from those peeping
over the ground, to those in swampy grounds,
eight or ten feet high, with a spear, equally long,
growing out of them, bearing at the top a beau-
tiful flower ; on the spear is found an excellent


clear transparent gum ; from the lower part oozes
a black gum, which makes a powerful cement,
used by the natives for fastening stone heads on
their hammers. The country presents an endless
variety or succession of flowering trees, shrubs
and flowers, but I have not met with any having
much perfume.
The kangaroo has supplied food to many who
were prudent or fortunate enough to provide
themselves with proper dogs, such as strong grey-
hounds, which are here expensive and difficult to
be procured —a good one costing more than £ls.
The only other animals you meet with usually
are the opossum, the kangaroo rat, lizards, com-
mon rats and mice; the rat not much larger than
the English mouse —they are abundant and mis-
chievous.
I have heard of emus, and have seen wild tur-«
keys, cockatoos, parrots, pigeons, quails, pies,
jays, hawks, black swans, pelicans, and a number
of others.
This day I shot a duck :—there are two kinds of
them, one, the wood duck, alights on trees. The
white cockatoos are very numerous, and now feed
upon the flower of the red gum tree, which lately
came into blossom. There are three or four
varieties of the cockatoo, white, black, grey, and
black with a red tail. The parrots are small and


gieen, the neck ornamented with a gold ring.
The pigeons are beautiful, with a bronze-colored
wing. Many birds have singular calls or cries,
and our crow makes a most dismal noise, termi-
nated by a long doleful cry. The white cockatoo
screams like a clocking hen disturbed from her
nest, the black one whines like a discontented pug
dog. There is a bird, called here the robin, like
our own in its habits of familiarity, but the
plumage is much more beautiful; a thrush re-
sembling the field-fare ; a small bird the size of
a wien, but of splendid color, like ultramarine ;
there are many other varieties, which I have not
time to enumerate.
There are many fish in the river, but without
a net of peculiar construction, (a trammel net,)
it is not easy to take them. I contrived to catch
a few like large roach, some perch, one small tur-
tle, and shell fish like the clam.
The climate in summer, in the middle of the
day, is very warm, most agreeable in the morning
and evening, cool and pleasant at night, sometimes
even cold as it approaches morning. In winter,
notwithstanding what has been said of it, I am
told the weather is delightful—a moderate warmth
during the day, and the nights so cold, as to make
you enjoy a fire—the rains only occasional, and
not ol long duration.


Insects are now wonderfully numerous. Ants
in great quantities, and of many varieties of size
and color, from the lion ant, an inch long, to
the small brown ant, which can insinuate itself
into the most minute crevice. These seize upon
whatever is eatable, and devour it in a short time.
The ground seems alive with white ants—trees
swarm with them inside and out—every thing
teems with life.
The principles of increase, and the agents
of destruction are so busily employed, that there
seems to be a hurried round of production and
decay, unknown to your more moderate climate.
Of snakes I have seen only two, both very small;
but my men have killed five or six, some of them
three feet long : we have not heard of any injury
being done by them, and in fact they do not appear
to be at all dreaded.
The natives are not so despicable a race of
people as was at first supposed. They are active,
bold, and shrewd, expert in thieving, as many
(and myself among the number,) have expe-
rienced ; they are courageous when attacked,
however, they are not very numerous, and we are
on good terms with them. I walk occasionally
to and from Perth, through the woods, alone and
unarmed; so you may perceive, from this cir-
cumstance, we are not in much dread of them.^
Note—Governor Stirling states in his official communications


Settlers are so scattered that I cannot form any
correct estimate as to their numbers; many more
were expected before the expiration of 1830, for
the purpose of obtaining the promised grant of
land, but as the good grounds in the vicinity
of the Swan and Canning Rivers were almost all
occupied by those who had previously arrived, it
is not to be regretted. I may say endless tracts
of fine country are now opened to new settlers,
though at a greater distance.
The inhabitants at the Cape, at Sidney, and
Hobart Town, have done every thing in their
power to decry this settlement, and deter the
emigrants from proceeding hither ; yet of the
success of the Colony there can be no doubt.
The jurisdiction of King George’s Sound has
been transferred to our Governor. This opens a
new district for colonization ; but there is not
much fertile land, it is said, in that quarter, until
you go back from the coast to the distance of
twenty or thirty miles. Captain Bannister, who
walked to it over land from Perth, mentions his
having passed over in his journey, about ninety
miles of luxuriant pasture ground, in one con-
that many of the Settlers had established themselves at once upon
their lands, regardless of any danger from the natives, who were
found to be so harmless, that single persons who had traversed
the country, never met with any interruption, or sustained any
injury or insult at their hands.


tinued tract, and he reports that water was not
difficult to be procured. Many of my friends
will be anxious to know whether 1 can recommend
this place for emigration. It is a very serious
responsibility to advise in such a case, particularly
as I have had as yet but five months experience
of the country ; but I have observed that expe-
rienced practical men, who have seen the ground
over the mountains, are writing home to their
friends in England to come out.
If persons cannot remain comfortably at home,
but are obliged to emigrate somewhere, I would
unhesitatingly recommend this place in preference
to Sidney , or Van Diemen’s Land.
Our market is at present, and has been ever
since the arrival of the Cleopatra , very well sup-
plied with all the necessaries, and many of the
luxuries, of life. We have flour now so low as
3 d. per pound, sugar from 3 d, to hd. coffee 7d,
tea 4s. 6d. rice 2d. per pound, rum 6s. per gallon
salt beef and pork about 6d. to B d. and fresh meat
Is. Qd. per pound. Prices are not likely to con-
tinue so moderate during the winter. I purchased
half a ton of flour some time since at £27 per ton,
and must soon purchase more. The difficulty of
getting these things over the flats in the river is
a great drawback, but there is a plan in progress
for deepening or avoiding them. The natives


stole 2 cwt. of my flour, as well as some belonging;
to others, on its passage over the flats; they also
took a bag of biscuits and some pork from my
house when I was last absent.
Our greatest want at present is stock ;we
have prepared a memorial to the Government
at home, calling for assistance in this particular,
and undertaking to guarantee the payment of the
prices. But our object may be obtained by the
Governor taking upon himself the responsibility
in consequence of the declaration of our wants
Stock thrives well here : English or Cape cows
are the best; the latter are excellent, and may be
had at the Cape very cheap: those of Van Diemen’s
Land are so wild they generally take to the bush
and are lost.
It is not advisable to bring any stock from
England, except perhaps a few sheep of choice
breeds for particular purposes ; but to a small ex-
tent sheep may be purchased here much cheaper
than they could be brought out.
The thermometer to-day did not reach above
80, we have had it often 110, some days as high
as 120, but I never found the heat insupportable,
even in the open air at mid-day. It is now, (nine
at night,) only 66. The seasons here differ from
those at Sidney, as far as I understand them.
If any person should think of coming out, he


ought not to burden himself with any superflu-
ities. Let him bring plenty of provisions of all
sorts, and a few common household utensils to
cook them. No cattle from England ; very little
furniture, and that of the strongest kind, and most
portable. No large packages ; every thing in
stout square boxes, not more than 2cwt. in each ;
(barrels and hogsheads fall to pieces in the sun,) a
few grubbing hoes and spades ; one plough and
extra irons. Emigrants should keep as much of
their property in cash, as possible. I wish I had
brought a large supply of Irish pork and Ameri-
can flour ; they generally bear great prices. One
cannot get a return from the ground for a long
time. Before coming here, we speculated upon
two crops in the year, which doubtless may be
produced of many things, but it must be after
the ground has been well prepared, and under a
more regular system of agriculture than we can
practise for some time. I dare say, many who
were thinking of coming have been deterred by
unfavourable accounts, some written perhaps with
sincerity, and with a good deal of truth ; but very
many, the result of prejudice and disappoint-
ment. In fact, many persons arrived, quit©
unqualified for such a life, knowing nothing of
agriculture ; the first settlers have all the dif-
ficulties to contend with. By the time other
£


emigrants arrive, the way will have been greatly
smoothed, and prices will be much lower.
I have nine young orange trees reared from
seed coming forward ; there are a few vines in
the Colony, and they have thriven well. There
is nothing very striking at first view, either in
the scenery or productions of this country—here-
abouts it is something like the scenery on the banks
©f the Thames, near Richmond. There is not
that endless variety of novel and unusual sights
which the fancy is apt to indulge itself in paint-
ing, as belonging to so distant a clime.
I know not what appearance the land beyond
the mountains may have, but here it looks not
unlike home, and might feel so too, if my friends
were with me.
I have built my house upon arising ground, which
first slopes rapidly, then gently down towards the
river, here about thirty yards wide ; smooth,
clear, and without any perceptible current, ex-
cept as driven by the alternate land and Seabreeze.
The ground is very picturesque ; on either side it
is broken at intervals into small rounded emi-
nences, rising a little way back from the river,
with a gradual ascent, reaching to an extensive
level plain behind.
When I came here there were only ten settlers
on the upper part of the river—there are now


ninety-seven. Being 1 so short a time in the Colony,
I shall not as yet speak particularly of its eligi-
bility, so as to recommend it decidedly as a place of
emigration, but feel (from what I have seen,) quite
borne out in my original idea of it, as a place where
(with even a small capital,) a settler may secure
an independence, having at least the substantial
comforts, if not the refined luxuries of life.
May 2d. Visit Perth ; meet with Captain
Mangles, author of Travels in Egypt—the native*
here are becoming useful in carrying wood and
water—dined with Mr. W—-rich treat of music ;
trios, a violoncello and two violins—mail about
to close, &c.


May 1 2th, 1831.
My former letter to you was broken off
abruptly. I resume this as a sort of journal.
Caught a turtle this evening weighing four pounds
and a half. 14th—PIant our potatoes. Weather
looks threatening, and distant thunder heard ;
though close and warm, it is pleasant. Fashioned
my garden into beds, and sowed turnips, cabbage,
radish, rape, &c.—lsth and 16th rain came on very
heavy and pretty constant ; put down four rows
of peas, each row thirteen yards long,and two rows
of calavanses and kidney beans. Men continue
fencing at intervals. Caught a larger turtle—shot
a duck—John shot one the evening before, so we
had a great mess of fresh meat. The garden con-
tains nearly half an acre—the ground is a little
hollowed in the centre, yet falling away to the
right and left, something like the shape of a sad-
dle. It still rains now at eight o’clock, but tem-
perature pleasant; thermometer 68. River begins
to swell. Read the newspapers to my people,
which gratified them very much, as they said it


told them all about home. You can have no idea
how we spell oar papers here. I have conned
over every advertisement, to see how trade thrives.
Wednesday—l fear lam wrong in the date of
the above, and have no way of rectifying it at
present —no matter. Four days have elapsed
since the foregoing was written. I have been
very busy at my garden, &c. have put down many
more seeds —radishes and turnips already shew-
ing well —got this day a quantity of peas, which
the Governor has distributed for seed, having
been injured for eating. This morning sowed a
few drills of wheat, before breakfast, in the gar-
den ; men afterwards went to harrow the far off
ground, for a crop of wheat : we have got an ox
and a cow to drag the harrow—rather tedious
work. The weather has been very delightful for
some days, thermometer now G 6. (one o’clock, )
in the house: no rain since Sunday. River quite
low again, and weather looking rather settled.
The spring of grass is amazing, every thing
green —beautiful little flowers have appealed,
covering the ground in great profusion, raising
their heads like snow-drops, and having very
much the fragrance of hawthorn blossom.
How often I wish that some of you were here !
This life, although it has its inconveniences, has
its pleasures also. I am sure you would enjoy


it, if once the roughing was a little over, I
have had great feasting upon fresh meat, fowls
every day for some time, for myself and people
’lo-day, I had at dinner a very large pigeon
yesterday, a brace of wild ducks—day before, a
brace of parrots, and so on. Enjoyed a treat to
day, of some greens and radishes. I feel very
lla PPy j us t now, in every respect, but my solitude.
Great rumours of ships having arrived—wonder
are they true ! any from England ? any letters ?
what news?— got my wheat sowed and harrowed
to-day. Saturday 28th, The numerous frogs
remind me, that the moist weather and approach-
ing winter have brought into active life an im-
mense quantity of these creatures, some of which
make a hard co-ax co-ax sort of noise, and others
a most mournful and horrible bellowing, which
might be mistaken for the high note of a bull;
perhaps this was what frightened the French na-
Planted yesterday two hundred cab-
bages in my garden ; we did not get them till
late, and put them in by full and beautiful moon-
light—also, a number of lettuces. Do you take
Alluding probably to,the alarm felt by M. Baillv and his
party m exploring the Swan river, on hearing a bellowing much
louder than that of an ox, among the reeds on the river side.
jfrtS tof ° mC hrg6q m P^~ B aidy quoted


an interest in the daily filling up of my garden ?
I hope you do, for it is to me a source of great
interest and amusement. This morning sent for
my cows —the men could not succeed in bringing
them- I went and brought the older one, and af-
terwards returned for the younger —I believe
James and I never had so hard a piece of work
in our lives ; she was wild beyond belief—
actually knocked him down once, dragged him
down twice, and ran at me : we got her home
through the river, put her into a pen, and there
she shall stay ’till she is tamed—sprained my foot.
Tuesday 31*/. Mr. L and Capt.
of the Nimrod , paid me a visit ; they had not
long gone when two others came, and shortly
after they had left me, a boat load hailed us in
passing. Yesterday, went to Mr. B by in-
vitation, to see Mr. Richard B and Mr.
D (Lieutenant of the Sulphur,) they were
not at home, having gone out walking : it seems
they went astray, and did not return until eight
o’clock at night ; they had wandered out of
their direction, ’till the stars shewed the seaman
that he was turning his back on home. I called
on Mrs. S in passing ; on my return, the fa-
mily were at dinner—sat down, and there staid
’till the moon rose—returned about nine o’clock ;
got from Mr. B ’s gardener some onion and


carrot seeds, which I sowed in the garden, now
pretty well filled. My peas are above ground.
All the seeds I brought with me have kept pretty
well. Most lovely weather ! when is this dread-
ed winter to come ? I feel like one who holds
in his breath, and collects his force to resist a
shock—making every preparation against the
winter; yet this is the last day of May, and
it has been as warm as your May, when you
have sun-shine. The mornings and evenings
are cool, yet here am I sitting, with doors and
windows open, feeling no cold, and never yet
having had a fire in my room. The thermometer
is now 63.—(eight o’clock in the evening). It
is a delightful climate ; would to God we were
all settled together ! but I always check myself
from saying much on this subject, till I shall
have been here a full year. Those who are fond
of the gaieties of a town life, would not be recon-
ciled to this place ; but I greatly like the quiet
and peace of mind which I enjoy. Frogs busy
again. Wednesday , June Is/. We have had
a most delightful day. This morning, soon after
breakfast, Mr. R. B and Mr. D came to
remain an hour or two ; after dinner two others
called, Mr. N and Mr. S ; got dinner
for them. Saturday . —l am told the Gover-
nor, Captain Irwin, Mr. Brown, and several


others are coming up the river. This morning,
I found my pigs and dog busily employed in de-
vouring a wild turkey, which had been wounded
was almost too late even to see it ; I had no
idea it was so large a bird —measured seven
feet, from tip to tip of extended wings—the
thighs were like legs of lamb. My men occu-
pied in the distant field, trenching the wheat
ground. Thursday night. Got wheat ground
finished, and prepared ground for peas, in gar-
den —some wheat coming up well.— Friday. A
boat with visitors stopped here, just before break-
fast, I was out shooting. Got my chimney
finished to-day, and this night have a fire for the
first time ; it burns well —my room looks snug
and cheerful—my shoes wear out very fast, two
pair within six weeks—leather cracks with the
heat Saturday night . Dined to day with
Mr. T , and have got some seeds for the gar-
den from him ; he gets half when they come up.
I have just been calculating, that since Sunday
morning last I have had no fewer than twenty-
one visitors. I expected the Governor, Mr.
Brown, Captain Mangles, and Captain Irwin, to-
day ; they did not come, but perhaps may to-mor-
row. Put down peas in garden; wheat in drills
up and looking well-—sky threatening—ther-
mometer 56.
F


Yesterday it rained the most part of the day,
but cleared up in the evening; heard that the
Governor and party had ridden up the river on
the opposite side, and returned shortly after, by
an intended new road, which is marked out by
notched trees, near half a mile beyond this place.
Monday . Mr. B called yesterday, took
tea, and slept here, being unwilling to walk
home, as the night was foggy. He wants me to
sketch a plan for employing prisoners, as a work-
ing gang, the Governor being anxious to do so,
if settlers will pay a superintendant.
This day, sowed many seeds—onion, cauli-
flower, brocoli, endive, French sorrel, brett,
(a Port Louis vegetable) spinach, parsley, and
three sorts of tobacco, for experiment. My gar-
den is nearly filled, and begins to look well.
Must now break up ground for maize. Caught
a beautiful snake, with a black head and yellow
body, in the garden, about eighteen inches long ;
put him into a bottle of rum, along with many
other such things—he vibrated his tongue most
rapidly and wickedly. Caught a centipede, nearly
four inches in length, when moving my trunks to-
day, it is in the bottle also.
Captain Mangles, R. N. Mr. Andrews and Mr.
Elliott stopped at my landing place, for a few


minutes, on their way up the river—they pro-
mised to call again, but returning, shouted out
they had not time. Those that one is most
anxious to see, are generally the most expe-
ditious in their movements. This evening took tea
sitting on my canteen, opposite a blazing fire,
placed on a brick hearth, a little above the level
of the floor ; no invidious fender to keep my feet
from getting the benefit of the fire—have placed
my guns in a rack, over the fire-place. I men-
tioned in a former letter, having made shades for
my windows, with grass tree sticks, like Ve-
netian blinds—neither sashes nor glass windows,
thanks to the erratic disposition of my carpen-
ter. Tuesday. Delightful day ; I was amusing
myself in the garden ; made a new bed, in which
were planted pumpkin, water melon, orange,
lemon, and cucumber seeds ; these I mean to
cover during the winter, from the heavy rain and
frost, (if there be any.) John busy to-night
mending his shoes ; I rummaged out bristles,
pincers, awls, thread, a ladle to make wax, and
cut the legs off a pair of boots for leather. It is
melancholy to see how fast our shoes disappear.
Captain Mangles told us yesterday that a ship
had come in, but when he left, it was not known
with certainty what ship it was ; hope it may be


the long expected Stirling .— Wednesday . Sat
up last night, sketching a plan for employing
prisoners as a working gang. Men fencing to-day.
I shot a duck before breakfast, and had very re-
luctantly to swim across the river for it; found the
water by no means so cold as I have often ex-
perienced in bathing at home in summer ; on
the surface it was cold, but quite agreeable at the
depth of two feet. A little rain to-day, but the
middle of the day as warm almost as your summer ;
—Certes, this is a fine climate, rather on the warm
side in summer. Shot two cockatoos (which are ex-
cellent eating,) put up the wall of my round tent,
like a verandah, round the house, to save the sun-
baked brick—rain commenced at one, p. m. and
has continued pretty constant, and sometimes
heavy—river swollen fourteen inches. Friday .
Rain all day—continued building—weather not
cold—like your wet summer.— Saturday. Rain
ceases —every thing looking well in the garden—»
all my cabbages strong and healthy —shot a brace
of ducks, one fell in the river—had to swim for
him —any thing for a fresh mess. In the evening
shot a bird, which some call a squeaker, some a
magpie. Tied my two cows out for an hour to
feed—they become tame. Tuesday. I forgot
myself and my journal for some nights past, but


nothing worth observing has occurred —still fenc-
ing the distant field—crows very persevering
and destructive, shot one, its stomach full of
wheat —hope to have the field finished to-morrow,
it looks well —much thunder and rain on Monday
night, but weather looks settled again : —we
have had nothing like winter yet ; the Stirling
has arrived, I must go down to buy a boat,
and some other things—weather pleasant,
Wednesday night , Was out kangaroo hunting
with young S ,we had three runs but got
only one brush kangaroo, about fifteen pounds
weight —I got half of it, (the usual terms of
hunting in company)—dined on part of it—
delicious eating!—— Friday , \7th June. Messrs.
T- and L came here yesterday even-
ing, slept and breakfasted, as did also young
S , who came to get me to go kangaroo
hunting, but there is a boat going to Guilford, so
far on my way to Perth, where I wish to make
some purchases, before winter sets in, and perhaps
there may be an opportunity of sending this to you.
Monday night, Here I am at Freemantle,
after having spent the evening at the house of
Mr. L— ,in company with Mr. and Mrs.
JVPD ; they have lately arrived, and
we had some airs sweetly played on the pian


by Mrs. M f D , most of the music of Don
Giovanni , which was a treat here. Dined yester-
day with the Governor. On looking over this,
I find it an odd jumble, part addressed to my
father, part to my sisters, and part to you. The
vessel sails to-morrow for java.
20 th June , 1831.








