

XVlll.' —Extracts from the Journal of a Voyage round the Globe
in the years 1833-36. By F. D. Bennett, Esq., Mem. R.
Coll. Surg., R.G.S., See. Read June 26, 1837.
The following pages contain the principal geographical and
statistical facts noticed during a whaling voyage round the globe
by the western route, in the years 1833-36. The highest S. lat.
attained was the highest N. lat. 50°, on the western side
of the continent of America. The chief places visited during the
voyage were Juan Fernandez; Pitcairn’s Island; Tahiti, Huaheine,
Ulitea or Raiatea, Taha, and Maurua, of the Society Islands;
Oahu and Maui or Mowee, of the Sandwich Islands; Cape
St. Lucas, in California; Sta. Christina, and Roapoa, of the
Marquesas group; Christmas Island; Caroline Island; Timor;
and St. Helena. Spermaceti whales were noticed eighty-nine
distinct times; and seventy-eight whales were secured, from which
the quantity of sperm oil and spermaceti obtained was about 245
tons. The voyage was happily completed without the loss of one
of the crew, either from disease or accident.
October 17, 1833, the ship Tuscan of 300 tons, T. Stavers,
Commander, sailed from the port of London, and on the 26th
sighted the island St. Antonio of the Cape de Verd group. In
lat. 8° N., long. 23° W. we lost the N.E. trade wind, and expe-
rienced calms and light and variable airs, during which we saw
the first spermaceti whales.
On the 4th December we crossed the equator in the long, of
23° W. In lat. 38° S., long. 51° W., the barometer fell during
twenty-four hours from 30* 10 to 29‘60, followed by a severe
gale from the westward of twenty-four hours’ duration, and being
within the limits of the “ Brazil bank ” the water presented the
green hue of soundings. The temperature of the sea at this
time was considerably higher than that of the surrounding atmos-
phere, and gave to the hands immersed in it a very agreeable
sensation of warmth. Numerous ocean birds of the high south lati-
tudes were visible around us, as petrels, pios, wandering alba-
tross, &c., and many were taken by hook and line baited with fat
meat. Some species were obtained new to the ornithological
collections of this country. We here, also, first noticed many
shoals of a species of porpoise almost peculiar to these regions.
Its chief peculiarity is the absence of a dorsal fin. The inferior
surface of the animal is of a pure white, whilst the back retains
the black hue so prevalent in cetacea. This porpoise has been
noticed by the French naturalist Peron, and has hence been
named Delphinus Pcronii. From the absence of a dorsal fin,
it is known amongst seamen as the “ righttwhale porpoise.”
VOL. VII. Q


January 4, 1834, in lat. 47° S., long. 57° 29' W., we passed a
floating iceberg, square, and about fifty feet high. Ships should
keep a careful look-out. Many penguins were also observed,
their home being either the iceberg, or, more probably, the
Falkland isles, from which we were distant little more than a
day’s sail. The albatrosses, which, with many other varieties of
ocean bird, attended our progress in great number, presented on
either side of the neck a vertical line of delicate rose-coloured
plumage, a peculiarity I had never observed in the many exam-
ples of this bird I had in former voyages procured off the Cape
of Good Hope.
January 14, we attained our highest S. lat., namely, 58° 33', in
long. 68° 53' W. Although the height of summer, we found the
temperature in this high S. lat. unpleasantly low, with showers
of hail and sleet; and the sky to the southward often presented
the white and luminous appearance termed “ ice-sky,” or "ice-
blink.” The barometer continued remarkably low, often falling
to 29*20, without any accession of foul weather.
February 11, sighted the island of Juan Fernandez from the
mast-head, bearing N.N.W., distant about sixty miles.
Juan Fernandez, on approaching the island,* presents a series
of elevated mountains of rugged and arid aspect; the central
mountains more level and continuous, but either extremity of the
land terminating by conical and gradually declining hills. “ Goat
Island,” situated to the S.W., and of moderate elevation, is sepa-
rated by a channel about three miles wide, and has its summit
surmounted by many conical eminences or hummocks. Its
western extremity is bluff, whilst the eastern descends gradually to
the water’s edge. Goat Island does not exceed four or five miles
in circumference; its greatest length being from east to west, and
its elevation from four to five hundred feet. Its shores are pre-
cipitous, and chiefly composed of a brown volcanic stone, pre-
senting on the faces of many of the cliffs tortuous columnar pro-
jections resembling the trunks and branches of trees half im-
bedded in its structure. This islet has a burnt and desolate
aspect, and affords no vegetation higher than a stunted shrub,
whilst the few verdant patches of soil tend rather to heighten by
contrast, than to relieve the general sterility of its appearance.
On the north side, and towards the western extremity, a run of
fresh water empties itself into the sea over the face of the cliffs.
With much impediment from a heavy surf, we effected a landing
on this island, and procured specimens of its natural productions.
Vast numbers of violet-coloured crabs abounded on the rocks of
the coast, and fish were so plentiful in the waters around as to
* Its height, determined by Captain King, R.N., in 1830, 3000 feet above the
sea, and the island of Masafu£ra estimated at 2300 feet.—Ed,


enable the boats in less than two hours to obtain an ample supply.
The ordinary amphibious birds were numerous on the coast,
many blue pigeons nestled in the cliffs, and some flights of small
birds, and a species of falcon, were noticed. Juan Fernandez
affords at its N. E. side the excellent harbour of Cumberland
Bay, and ample supplies for shipping.
Pitcairn Island. —Daylight, on the 7th March, disclosed the dark
and elevated form of “ Pitcairn’s Island,” directly ahead, bear-
ing W. J S. by compass, and presenting mountain land of limited
extent. The northern side, on which the settlement is placed, offers
a very picturesque appearance; rising from the sea as a steep
amphitheatre luxuriantly wooded to its summit/ and bounded
laterally by precipitous cliffs, and naked rocks of rugged and
fantastic forms. The simple habitations of the islanders are
scattered over this wooded declivity, and half concealed by the
abundant verdure. The coast is abrupt, rocky, beaten by a
heavy surf, and at most parts inaccessible; some coral debris are
found on the shores, and small coves, but no distinct reefs obtain.
At the period of our visit the population of this island consisted
of eighty persons,-}- the majority of whom were children, and the
proportion of females greater than that of males. With the ex-
ception of the offspring of three Englishmen resident on the
island, and married to native women, the entire race are the issue
of the mutineers of the Bounty, whose surnames they bear, and
from whom they have not as yet descended beyond the third
generation/ These islanders are a fine and robust people, but
are far from possessing handsome features. They are high-
spirited and intelligent, and speak both the Tahitian and English
languages fluently. In intellect and habits they form an inte-
resting link between the civilized European, and unsophisticated
Polynesian nations. Their food is chiefly vegetable. Yams,
which are abundantly produced, and of excellent quality, form
the principal support of the people, and next to these the moun-
tain taro roots (arum costatum), for the cultivation of which
the dry and elevated character of the land is so well adapted.
Cocoa-nuts, bananas, and pumpkins afford additional articles of
diet, but the breadfruit-tree yields a scanty crop of very indifferent
fruit. Swine, goats, domestic fowls, and the fish around the
coast, afford the natives an occasional indulgence in animal food.
Disease is rare amongst these islanders, and fefe, or elephantiasis,
so prevalent amongst the Polynesian islands, is here unknown.
* The peak reaches 1046 feet above the level of the sea (Beechey’s Voyage, vol.
ii. p. 675). — Ed,
fl n December, 1825, sixty-six inhabitants were found by Captain Beechey
thirty-seven of which were the grandchildren of the original settlers (p. 99). — Ed.
| The first settlers consisting of fifteen males and twelve females, landed here in
January, 1790.—Ed.


A comparative scarcity of water exists, since there are no natural
streams, and the volcanic structure of the island precludes the
formation of wells. Hence the inhabitants depend upon rain
water received into excavations or tanks. It is not, however,
until rain has been absent seven or eight months that any incon-
venience is experienced from deficiency of water.
The disastrous emigration of the Pitcairn islanders to Tahiti,
and their subsequent return to their native land, is well known.*
At the time of our visit, nearly two years had elapsed since their
return, and the people had in a great measure resumed their
systematic and simple habits, and the lands their cultivated state;
but the injurious effect of a more enlarged intercourse with the
world was yet evident in the restless and dissatisfied state of many
amongst them, and a licentiousness of discourse which I cannot
believe belonged to their former condition.
I lament to say we found them in a very unsettled and uncom-
fortable state, and divided into two factions opposed to each other
with a rancour little short of open warfare. The particulars of
this discord it would be tedious to recount, but its origin appeared
due to the recent arrival on the island of an elderly person named
Hill, who had appointed himself their teacher, governor, &c.,
and had formed a legislative body composed of some few of the
more powerful inhabitants, but to which the mass of the popula-
tion was much opposed. Their great wish was that a British ship
of war should arrive and settle their disputes.
Two only of the original settlers from the Bounty existed in
the island at our visit, and those were the aged Tahitian females,
Isabella Christian, the widow of the notorious Fletcher Christian,
and Susan Christian, his son’s widow. But we w’ere shown
various books and other articles which had belonged to the
Bounty.
There can be little doubt on the subject that Pitcairn’s
Island has had inhabitants previous to its occupation by the
people of the Bounty, since numerous remains of aborigines have
been found by the present inhabitants whilst cultivating the
ground \ indeed, the fact may be considered confirmed by the
recent discovery of two human skeletons inhumed on the soil,
resting side by side, and the head of each reposing on a pearl
shell. This last circumstance casts a yet greater mystery over
the history of these aborigines, since the pearl shell, although
found in the adjacent islands, has never been met with in the
waters around Pitcairn’s Island. To Hannah Young, the
youngest daughter of John Adams, I am indebted for the pos-
session of two stone adzes, supposed to have belonged to this
* See Royal Geographical Society Journal, vol. iii. p. 165.


nncient race, and which were found embedded in the earth.
They are rudely fashioned in the ordinary Polynesian form of
such utensils, are composed of a black basalt highly polished, and
bear an appearance of great antiquity. It is difficult to account
lor the apparent extinction of an original race upon a spot so
replete with every essential for the support of human existence,
and we are led to the hypothesis that either one of the epidemic
diseases that occasionally scourge the islands of the Pacific had
destroyed the inhabitants to the f last man,’ or that the original
occupants were merely a few male natives of other lands, cast
upon this when distressed, during one of the adventurous voyages
so usually undertaken in their open canoes.* The position of the
village on Pitcairn’s Island was fixed by Captain Beechey, R.N.,
who surveyed the island in 1826, in lat. 25° 3' 37" S., long. 130°
8' 23" W. of Greenwich.
After obtaining ample supplies of live stock and vegetables, in
return for some useful manufactures of Europe, we left the island
accompanied by three Englishmen who had resided on Pitcairn’s
Island many years since, but who had suffered so much persecu-
tion during the late discords which had unhappily prevailed, that
they were glad to avail themselves of a passage to Tahiti, until
they could return to their wives and families at Pitcairn’s Island
under competent protection.
Society Islands.— This group of islands, six of which were
discovered in his first voyage by our excellent circumnavigator.
Cook, is comprised between 16° and 18° S. lat. and 148° and
152° W. long.
During our various cruises in these seas, we at different times
visited the chief islands, which have been often described; yet I
may be permitted to add a few extracts from my journal with
respect to this highly interesting group.
Maitea. —March 21st, sighted the small but elevated f and
uninhabited island of Maitea and on the following morning
made the island of Tahiti, about sixty miles farther to the west.
Tahiti presents an elongated and high range of land, apparently
divided into two distinct islands, the low and narrow isthmus that
connects the two peninsulas, not being visible until closely ap-
proached. Its general aspect is exceedingly mountainous, some
level and highly fertile plains or valleys intervening, whilst a
broad belt of alluvial soil occupies the coast.
* This could hardly be consistently with the images and large piles of stones on
the summit of the hills found here. — Ed.
f Its peak 1432 feet above the sea (Becchey’s Voyage, vol. ii. p. 675). —Ed.
J Osnaburg Island of Wallis in 1767; Pic de la Boudeuse of Bougainville in 1768;
San Cristobal of Boerecha; and Dezena of [Quires, as being the tenth island discu-
'ered in the voyage of Mendara and Quiros in 1595.—Dairy mple’s Voyages, Vol. i.,
p. 42. Matilda or Osuaburg Island of the Charts is in 21° 50' S. 138® 45'. W.— Ed.


The loftiest mountain on this island is situated towards its
northern extremity, and may be estimated at between 6000 and
7000 feet elevation* It has never been ascended by an Euro-
pean, nor has any exact measurement of its height been given,
but the summit has been gained by some natives, who report the
existence of a lake of yellow water (probably an extinct crater),
and the presence of wild ducks differing in plumage from the
more common kind indigenous to the island. The aspect of the
lowlands of Tahiti has latterly undergone a considerable change,
from the extent to which the guava shrub flourishes on the soil.
Scarce twenty years have elapsed since this fruit tree was intro-
duced from Norfolk Island, and it now claims all the moist and
fertile land of Tahiti, in spite of every attempt to check its
increase. The woodlands and bush, for miles in extent, are
composed solely of this shrub, which bears a profusion of large
and delicious fruit. The people have advanced but little in civi-
lized habits; their dwellings are much as described by the earliest
European visitors, and European clothing is adopted to but a
scanty extent. Their principal improvements are in religious
observances, and in the acquirement, to a great degree, of the
elements of education.! The commerce of the island is confined
to the exportation of pearl-shell and pearls, sugar and cocoa-nut
oil, and arrow-root, which is altogether conducted by foreigners,
since the natives do not themselves possess any vessel larger than
a double canoe. The port dues, however, and trade for supplies
afforded by the numerous English and American whale ships
calling at the port, yield the natives much emolument, and trade
in kind has now given place to the circulation of specie. In com-
mercial importance and civilized improvements Tahiti, notwith-
standing its priority of intercourse with civilized nations, is at
least half a century behind Oahu, of the Sandwich group. A
consul from the United States of America has lately been ap-
pointed to this island, so much the resort of American shipping.
The British consul, whose charge includes all the principal
groups of the Pacifies, resides at Oahu, of the Sandwich group,
a distance of five weeks’ sail from Tahiti, and the communication
uncertain.J Saddle-horses imported from South America are now
in general use at Tahiti, both by natives and foreign residents;
oxen are also numerous, and shipping in the port are supplied
with beef, in quality little inferior to that of England, at about
2 d. per lb.
* Roughly estimated by Beechey at 7000 feet. Blossom’s Voyage, p. 195.— Ed.
f The population is estimated at from 18,000 to 20,000, chiefly Christians, under
the care of ei«ht missionaries of the India Missionary Society.—See Williams’s
« Missionary Enterprises ” — Ed.
t In February, 1837, Mr. Pritchard was appointed Her Majesty’s Consul for the
Society and Friendly Islands, to reside at Tahiti.—Eu.


A n opinion very generally prevails at Taliiti that the interior
and mountainous parts of the island are inhabited by a race of
people differing from those of the coast, and of timid and se-
cluded habits, but it seems scarcely probable.
During our stay here I made an excursion, in company with
Captain Henry, to the celebrated lake of Vaihiria, the road to
which commences from the coast at the district of Mairipehe, on
the S.E. side of Tahiti, and distant from the settlement of Pa-
peiti about thirty miles. The route lies along the coast, and
affords numerous highly picturesque scenes. On the S.W. side
of the island I noticed the numerous caverns which penetrate the
base of the precipitous cliffs that form this portion of the coast.
One of these caverns, which we inspected, was situated at the
base of a mural cliff of about two hundred feet in height, and its
face clothed with ferns and other elegant verdure. The mouth
of the cavern formed a large arch ; the bottom of the cavern was
occupied by a sheet of fresh water produced by infiltration through
the rock. I also noticed here a number of springs of fresh water
that rise from the midst of the sea at greater or less distances
from the shore. Their situation is marked by small eddies or
whirls on the smooth surface of the sea over the coral reef, and
upon some of these the natives have placed bamboos with aper-
tures in their sides, through which the fresh water flows as from
a pump; when fishing on the coast in their canoes, it is not
unusual for the natives to dive beneath the surface of the sea and
quench their thirst at these fresh-water springs. The cause of
their existence is of course simple, although the effect is some-
what extraordinary. Without departing greatly from our route
along the coast, we visited the “ Great Morai of Papara,”* which,
although much ruined and reduced in its height, yet retains a
great share of its original gigantic and not unornamental struc-
ture. This Morai is not, correctly speaking, in the district of
Papara, but in the district of Tevauta, on a spot named “ Ma-
hiatea.” Towards sunset we arrived at Atinua, where we passed
the night, and early on the following morning proceeded about
three miles to the coast of the district of Mairipehe, whence I
commenced an inland route towards the lake of Vaihiria on foot,
and accompanied by a native guide. The greatest portion of the
journey lay through level and well watered plains, abounding in
an over luxuriant vegetation, and winding round the bases of
steep and elevated mountains, A river rising inland traverses
these plains with a circuitous and impetuous course to empty
itself into the sea. The road to the lake follows closely the
course of the mountain stream, and only departs from it to evade
* Mentioned by Cook, Wilson, Ellis, Beechey. —E».


a circuitous bend, or to escape cascades and deep fords. We
had to cross this river (which, at the fords, ran with great force,
and was often both deep and broad), about one hundred and
eighteen times during the day’s tour to the lake and back. When
half way between the coast and the lake of Vaihiria, we lost the
cocoa-nut and other fruit trees, and the more usual vegetation of
the coast, and entered upon lands covered with bushy ferns, ele-
gant parasitic plants, and extensive thickets of a species of
amomum, rising as distinct reed-like leaves six or eight feet above
the soil, and emitting, when broken by pushing through them,
a powerful fragrance, not unlike that of pimento. Numerous
groves of the mountain plantain, loaded with their large clusters
of ripe fruit, were also visible on the heights around. The lofty
steeps, at the base of which we journeyed, presented constantly
the deceptive appearance of closing upon the level path we pur-
sued. We continued, however, along the torrent until nearly at
the lake, when we ascended a steep and rugged hill, from the
summit of which was visible the lake of Vaihiria, laid out in all
its placid and picturesque beauty in the vale at our feet, and to
which a short but steep descent conducted. The lake presents
a sheet of water of nearly circular form, situated in the midst of
a deep and circular valley surrounded by elevated precipitous
mountains covered with a short and bright verdure, whilst nume-
rous small cascades fall over their faces into the basin beneath.
The lake does not exceed a mile in circumference; its waters are
perfectly fresh, and of a dull green colour; for some distance
from the shore the depth is very trifling, and it is said that in no
part of the lake it has been found to exceed eighty feet. The
shores of the lake are formed by the bases of the mountains in
some parts, in others by a sandy beach, strewn with large boul-
ders of black volcanic stone, or by low ledges of breccia and
volcanic stone of a very friable character. Many wild ducks
were visible on the water, and the plaintive note of a bird, not un-
like the cooing of a dove, alone interrupted the tranquillity of
the spot. Eels are the only fish known to inhabit the waters of
the lake, which is rather an inland than a mountain lake, since,
although surrounded by mountains, its elevation above the sea
can be but inconsiderable, as no remarkable ascent is evident in
the route that conducts to it from the coast, except the steep
ascent in its immediate vicinity, which is merely that of its bound-
ing hills, and is almost compensated by a corresponding descent
to the lake on the opposite side.*
Returning by the same route I reached Mairipehe by six
o’clock in the evening. The coast here is well protected by an
* Estimated at 1500 feet above the sea in the Blossom’s voyage.—Vol. i.,
p. 420. —Eu.


extension of the barrier coral reef, and the tranquil water within
the reef affords good anchorage for shipping, off a native village
Avhere every essential supply can be obtained. A second natui’al
curiosity that I visited at Tahiti was the “Ofai marama” (moon
stone) of the natives, which affords a fair example of a basaltic
column, and is situated in a cavern at the foot of a lofty cliff at
the termination of the valley of Punaro, on the western side of
the island. The half-embedded column, which protrudes hori-
zontally, is seven feet in length, three and a half in height, and
six feet in breadth; dark and polished on its surface, which is
marked with regular vertical fissures. Its extremity, that presents
itself at the aperture of the cave, has a smooth surface, resem-
bling the half-risen moon in shape, whence the native name.
Although, from its geographical situation, Tahiti may be deemed
under the full influence of the S.E. trade winds, both N.W. and
S.W. winds are not unusual, especially during the months of Fe-
bruary and March, at which time the natives calculate upon those
winds to make voyages to the islands S.E. of their own. There
is reason to believe that the N.W. monsoon of the eastern hemi-
sphere, south of the equator, extends at times to the more eastern
of the Polynesian islands. Captain T. Stavers, of the Tuscan,
possesses on his charts a remarkable track made by that ship from
the Equator in 174° W. long, to the Society Islands, in an unin-
terrupted south easterly course of 2500 miles, the winds holding
chiefly from N.E. and N.W.*
Jiaiatea, the Ulitea of Cook, is situated about ISO miles to
the N.W. of Tahiti, this being the direction in which the islands
of the Polynesian groups usually lie, a direction that volcanic
action appears very generally to follow. It is about forty miles
in circumference, of mountainous character, covered with vegeta-
tion, and but too well watered, cascades, rivers, and swamps
abounding in all directions. At the distance of one and a half or
two miles from the shore the land is encircled by a coral reef,
that also includes the adjacent island of Taha. Here arc seven
excellent anchorages on the weather and lee sides of the island,
accessible at all times, and egress easy, except with a due south
wind. Raiatea has no commerce worthy of notice; cocoa-nut
oil and arrow-root are occasionally procured by small vessels
from New South Wales or South America; attempts have
been made to produce tobacco, and to make ships’ cordage
from the bark of the Hibiscus, for the Sydney market, and
beche de mer, with which the reefs abound, for that of
China; but although the island is capable of all these, and
many additional exports, opposing circumstances have caused
* See also Beechey’s Voyage and Williams’s “Missionary Enterprises in the
South Seas,” p. 507. —Eu.


every effort to establish a permanent commerce to be speedily
relinquished.
The soil is exceedingly fertile, exotic fruit trees thrive vigor-
ously, and particularly the fruit of the lime proves invaluable to
foreign shipping, and affords a striking example of the important
advantages that accrue from the dissemination of useful fruits and
vegetables. The population appeared to me to have suffered
dreadfully from disease. Accompanied by some natives, I as-
cended a lofty range of mountain occupying the centre of the
island, extending in a direction nearly N. and S., and about
2000 feet in elevation. The summit presented a level and
spacious plain of dark and bleak aspect, spread with numerous
swamps and streams of water, passing over exposed rocks
of a red colour, and entirely destitute of other vegetation
than short grass and moss, although but a few feet beneath,
on the less exposed spots, vegetation was lofty and abundant.
On the eastern declivity of the mountain, a short distance below
its summit, I was shown by my guides a natural excavation
about forty feet deep, resembling a large well about thirty-six feet
in circumference, the character of which led me to consider it as
a small volcanic crater, yet few of these have hitherto been ascer-
tained to exist in the Society Islands. It is remarkable that a
stream of water flowing over the declivity of this elevated moun-
tain abounds with eels and other fish, several varieties of which I
saw sporting in the water.
Maurua, or Maupiti, is a small and comparatively elevated
island about six miles in circumference, and its highest point
about 800 feet above the sea. It is situated about fifty miles to
the N.W, of Raiatea, and distinctly visible from the lower hills of
that island. It is surrounded by a barrier reef of coral, at a
distance of about three miles, which encloses numerous low islets
covered with cocoa-nut trees, but the lagoon is too shallow to
admit vessels exceeding one hundred and fifty tons burthen.
The island is composed of hills wooded to their summits and
occasionally crested by cocoa-nut trees, but presenting rugged
and mural cliffs to the sea coast, especially one rocky mass on the
S.W. side opposite the opening in the reef, which rises 700 feet
above the sea, resembling the ruins of a gigantic castle. Maurua
is said to possess primitive rocks, but such is certainly not its
general geological character; volcanic rocks, scoriae, and slag
abound; its smooth basaltic stones are much prized by the na-
tives of all the Society group, to make pestles to prepare their
food. The population of the island appeared small: * scattered
habitations were along the coast, but the principal settlement is
* According to the census made by the missionaries in 1828, it contained 1000
persons.— Ed.


on the S.E. or weather side of the island, which is also the resi-
dence of the chief Tairo : it contains a Christian church, in which
a native teacher officiates.
Swine, fowls, and especially yams, are abundant; water is
scarce. The natives were exorbitant in their charge for supplies
and rather disposed to theft. This island is little frequented by
foreign vessels; no ship before the Tuscan, in 1835, had visited
it for two years.
Tubai, or Motou-iti, appeared small, low, and uninhabited; it
is distant about thirty miles to the N.E. of Maurua, and is the
most northern island of the Society group : we here had a westerly
wind.
Huaheine, March 11, 1836.—This island is mountainous and
fertile, and nearly surrounded by a coral reef; next to Tahiti it
is the most frequented of the Society group; supplies are plen-
tiful, and the bay of Fare, where is the chief settlement, on the
N.W. side of the island, is safe and capacious, though not easily
entered through the reef with the prevailing trade wind. Near
Fare I noticed the venerable shaddock tree, covered with fruit,
which was planted by Cook when he visited the island to restore
Omai. It is the only tree of this species to be seen in the Society
Islands, and all attempts to propagate it have failed. Coffee
thrives in the gardens of the missionaries: population is said to
be 1900*
Tabuai-manu, or Saunder’s Island, has at a distance much the
appearance of a ship under sail; it is moderately elevated and
the hills are wooded to their summits. It extends in a N.E. and
S. W, direction, either extremity being low and covered with cocoa-
nut trees. The island was formerly celebrated for its yams; it
is now used as a penal settlement from Tahiti.
Sandwich Islands. —This archipelago of thirteen islands,
eleven of which were first made known to the world by our
own countryman. Cook, in 1778, is composed of eight moderate-
sized islands, and of five small islets; it lies chiefly between
19° and 22° N. lat. and 155° and l6o° W. lat.f
Woahoo or Oahu, May 16, 1834. —Anchored at the port of Ho-
nortiru, on the south-western side of this island, which has been
too often described to need much notice here. The character
of the country is mountainous, and its aspect naked and un-
inviting compared with Tahiti and the Society Islands. A
lofty range of mountain, extending N.W. and S.E. throughout
the island, separates the level land of the N.E. from that of the
* 2000, according to the census in 1828.— Ed.
f The population is estimated at 150,000—Christianity is the religion of the
state—and they are under the pastoral care of twenty-three American missionaries.
—See Williams's “ Missionary Enterprises.”— Ed.


S.W. coasts, which are again connected by elevated passes through
the mountains ; the most frequented, that of Pari, which stands
at the head of the picturesque valley of Anuanu, is 1800 feet
above the sea, and commands a beautiful and extensive view over
the vale of Kolau, ten miles in extent, to the ocean on the N.E.
side of the island. The structure of the island is volcanic, and
many extinct craters are visible.
The settlement at Honoruru presents many striking instances
of civilization. Supplies are abundant and reasonable : beef ex-
cellent. The Taro (arum esculentum) is plentiful, and forms the
chief food of the natives. Many European vegetables are now
commonly sold in the markets. As many as sixty vessels have
been anchored in this port at the same time. A few weeks pre-
vious to our arrival a Japanese junk had been driven to the island
in distress : the crew had suffered much from cold. They had
probably been driven off the coast of Japan by strong westerly
gales, carried to the N.E. till they met with northerly winds,
which drove the vessel to the Sandwich Islands.
I had the gratification while here of meeting Mr, Douglas,
whose subsequent melancholy death in Hawaii is well known,
and of making several excursions in the mountains with him.
Maui, or Mowee, Oct. 3, 1835. —This island, seen from a dis-
tance on the northern side, presents the appearance of two ele-
vated peninsulas connected by a low isthmus. It extends in a
N.W. and S.E. direction about forty miles, and is separated from
Hawaii to the S.E. by a channel twenty miles broad, and may be
seen at a distance of ninety miles.* The face of the island ex-
hibits the strong contrasts of luxuriant verdure and volcanic
sterility so prevalent in this group.
The settlement of Lahaina or Raheina is small, yet contains a
very neat Christian church, a market, reading-room, &c. The
population of the island is estimated at 20,000; the natives are
intelligent, orderly, healthy, and well under the control of the
American missionaries, who have great influence here.
Guadalupe, Nov. 20.—This island, bearing E.N.E., twenty
miles distant, presented high land with two elevated peaks at its
southern extremity. Its position, according to our observations,
is in lat. 28° 54'N., long. 118° 22' W.; several charts place it
thirty miles to the southward of this latitude, j It appeared about
fifteen miles in length and about 1000 feet in height.
In lat. 19° N., long, 107° W., about half way between the
group of Revilla-gigedo and the continent of America, a remark-
* This would imply an elevation of about C5OO feet.—En.
f Even in Admiral Kruseustern’s excellent chart of the Pacific Ocean, it lies in
28° 34' N.; it is corrected to its true position in his Supplement, yet given in his table
of doubtful positions, p. 164. In Arrowsrtrith’s Chart of the Pacific, it is in 28° 34'.
—Eu.


able milk-white and luminous appearance of the sea was noticed
at midnight all around as far as the eye could see from the mast-
head, which lasted till daylight; nothing could be detected in
the water to account for it, nor could any soundings be obtained.
In lat. 5° N., 103° W. long., the vicinity of land was suspected
from the presence of amphibious birds and sea-weed, and in
6° So’ N., 104° W., a pelican, about the size of a goose, and of a
dusky brown plumage, took refuge in the ship and was captured.
The nearest land was presumed to be Duncan’s Island, of doubt-
ful existence.* A female sperm whale, taken near this spot, con-
tained a mature foetus, which was anatomically examined : it was
fourteen feet long by six feet in girth.
Marquesas or Mendanaj group, Feb. 27, 1835. —The ele-
vated land of Hood’s Island, or Fetugu, was seen bearing S.W.
\ S., distant about fifty miles.J On the following morning saw
Koapoa, Santa Dominica, and shortly after Santa Christina and
San Pedro, and anchored in Resolution Bay of Cook, or Port
Madre de Dios of Mendaha.
Santa Christina, or Tahuata of the natives, extends in a N.N.E.
and S.S.W. direction about ten miles; an elevated rocky ridge
runs throughout the island, throwing off spurs to the east and
west towards the sea, and thus dividing the lowland into distinct
valleys, only accessible by land over the high hills which bound
them. I obtained the native names of twelve valleys from Reso-
lution Bay (Vaitahu) in order round the island. The soil is
exceedingly fertile and covered with luxuriant vegetation ; forests
of bread fruit, cocoa-nut, and other fruit trees. The natural pro-
ductions are much the same as in the Society Islands; the wild
cotton is superior to that cultivated in many islands; the sugar
cane abundant, large in growth, and of excellent quality: the
palmyra, or fan palm, also grows here, although unknown in the
Society or Sandwich Islands.
The population of Santa Christina is estimated at 1400 persons;
the appearance of the natives robust and healthy, with handsome
features. Each valley is under the dominion of a chief, who
maintains feudal independence. At the time of our visit the
island had been for some time in a state of profound peace; the
natives were generally honest and well behaved, and our officers
and crew associated and traded with them at the different valleys
* Duncan’s Island was so named in 1787 after the master of a merchant vessel,
Lat. 6° N., long. 106° W. of Greenwich. See Krusenstern’s Memoires Hydrogra-
phiques, vol. ii., p. 58. —Ed.
f Of this group of thirteen islands, extending 200 miles in a N.W. and S.E. di-
rection, four of the south-eastern portion were discovered by Mendana in 1596; one
by Cook in 1776; the rest by the Americans in 1797, and by them called the
Washington Islands. They were named Marquesas de Mendoza by Mendana, out
of compliment to Don Garcia de Mendoza, then Viceroy of Peru.— Ed,
J This would suppose a height of at least 2000 feet.—Ed.


without any unpleasantness occurring, and during my extended
excursions over the country, I experienced every assistance, hos-
pitality and kindness. Notwithstanding, however, the peaceful
aspect of the people, it is the duty of every commander of a
ship visiting them to be on his guard, since they are extremely
capricious, and capable of the greatest outrages when least
suspected.
Two missionaries we conveyed from England for this island
were settled at the valley opening upon Resolution Bay with as
much comfort as could reasonably be expected. They had found
but little encouragement, however, in the disposition of the na-
tives, who, though they had abolished open idolatry, retained the
greater part of the prejudices and customs of their heathen state.
The language of these people has some striking peculiarities,
but partakes largely of both the Tahitian and Hawaiian dialects.
Resolution Bay, described by Cook, corresponds to the valley
of Vaitahu. On the beach a stream of fresh water gushes from the
face of a rocky cliff, and affords shipping a convenient and good
supply of this essential. It is the same watering place indicated
by Cook, and the flow is supplied by a mountain stream not visible
in the vicinity of the coast. Eutiti, the principal chief of Vai-
tahu, is a shrewd and avaricious man, elderly and very corpulent.
He is eager to encourage the visits of shipping to his port, since,
through his traffic with them, and consequent acquirement of mus-
kets, &c., he contrives to maintain considerable influence over the
other chiefs of the island. This chief is the patron of our mis-
sionaries, and for the benefit of their cause it is to be wished he
were absolute. The coast of Santa Christina is rocky, abrupt,
and surf-beaten : no coral reef encircles and protects its shores,
nor those of any other island of this group. Nevertheless, the
detritus of coral is abundant on the beaches around the island.
In return for supplies of live stock and vegetables to shipping,
the natives alone require and value muskets and ammunition and
tobacco. Of the muskets thus obtained they retain the best, and
export the remainder to the neighbouring islands unfrequented
by foreign shipping
Koapoa. —Hove to off Port Jarvis, on the west side, with good
anchorage, to land three natives of the island who had accom-
panied us from Oahu, where they had been left by an American
ship. Several canoes came off to the ship, and the natives ex-
pressed much disappointment that we would not anchor and
trade with them. The principal native amongst them brought
with him a written list of the ships that had visited the island,
and a rough chart of the coast,* but who was the author of these
* Mr. Bennett has kindly presented a copy to the library of the Society. The
chart is certainly a rough sketch, hut it makes Port Jarvis on the N.W. side, with
good anchorage in eighteen fathoms —wood and water.—En. -


MSS. I could not ascertain. The island of Roapoa appears to
be nearly the same size as Sta. Christina, and equally mountainous,
rugged, and bold. The summits of many of its mountains pre-
sent conspicuous columns, spires or pinnacles of rocks. The
land extends in a direction nearly north and south, and presents
on the coast a succession of valleys of a highly fertile and pic-
turesque appearance. These most prevail on the western side
of the land, where several ports with convenient anchorage exist
which have been visited by some feAV South Sea men, though the
island is generally but little known or frequented. From Roa-
poa the island of Noukahiva is distinctly visible, thirty miles
distant, and the islands of Sta. Dominica and Sta. Christina, at sixty
miles distance, may be more faintly discerned. If it appears re-
markable that Mendaha, in his discovery of the Marquesas, should
leave Cook to discover Hood’s Island, which is so very visible
from the island of Sta. Dominica, it is yet more remarkable that
Cook should have failed to discover the island of Roapoa, which
on a serene day may be distinctly seen with the naked eye from
the beach at Resolution Bay, Sta. Christina.*
Caroline Island, April 23, 1835. —This is one of the low coral
islandsf of the South Pacific, and situated by our observations in
lat. 9° 58' S., long, (measured from the island of Raiatea) 150°
18' W. The entire island does not exceed four or five miles in
circumference; it is circular, and composed of several connected,
small circular peninsulas. A capacious and tranquil lagoon oc-
cupies the space within the land, and is bounded on a portion of
its eastern or weather side by a barrier reef of coral, against
which a heavy surf constantly breaks. The structure of the land
presented no material but coral in all its varied forms. The
greatest elevation of the soil did not exceed five or six feet, and
the coral rocks and shelving shores betrayed the progressive re-
ceding of the ocean from the land it had so materially assisted to
raise. Each compartment of the island was covered by dense
vegetation of a highly verdant aud pleasing character, some of the
loftiest trees attaining the height of twenty feet. No collection
of fresh water is visible on the island, though doubtless, as in many
other of the low coral islands, much of good quality may be
obtained from excavations in the sands.
The coast of Caroline Island is continuous, with a low and ex-
* The distance is fifty-eight miles, which proves the elevation of Roapoa to he
upwards of 2500 feet, and Santa Christina about 3000 feet above the sea. —Ed.
f Discovered by Broughton in 1795, in lat. 9° 57', long. 150° 25' W., and
doubtless the same as Thornton Island. See Krusenstern, Mem. Hyd. Sup., p. IG.
The island was also seen by Captain Willinck, in 1824, when in command of the
Dutch corvette the Lynx; and he gives its position 9° 54' S. 150° 9' W. of Green-
wich.—See Reize om de Wereld in de Jaren, 1823-4, van J. P. M. ’Willinck.
Breda, 1836,— Ed.


tensive reef of compact coral rock stretching into the sea for a
considerable distance, and thus extending greatly the actual com-
pass of the island. A large extent of the reef is left dry at low
water, whilst, when the tide is at its height, a boat may with care
be floated nearly to the verge of the wooded land. From the
single observation made during our stay, it would appear to be
low water at (J a.m. and high water at or 3 p.m.
Our landing from the boats was effected on the western side of
the island. The boat was then conveyed across the level tract of
fine coral sand, a distance of three or four hundred yards, and
launched upon the waters of the central lagoon, which we crossed
to the reef on its weather side, and discovered an aperture through
the reef, which allowed our passing into the open sea and again
returning to the lagoon without difficulty. The only quadrupeds
we noticed on this island were mice. Upon a former visit to this
spot (seven years previous to our visit) Captain Stavers had
landed some hogs, but no traces of the present existence of those
animals on the island were visible to us. Many boobies had
constructed their nests in the trees; and white terns, frigate
birds, curlews, a species of totanus, and small pigeons with
white heads and brown general plumage, were also numerous.
Fish were abundant in the waters around the island and also
in the lagoon, but not easily obtained on account of the voracity
of the sharks. Beche de mer abounded in the shoal water, and
some few pearl shells were noticed in the lagoon. The character
of the vegetation of Caroline Island accorded with that on the
shores of the Society Islands. The wood-land was chiefly formed
by the shrubs of Tournefortia , which were in full flower, and
emitted a fragrance perceptible at some distance from the lee side
of the island. We found but one tope of rather dwarfish cocoa-
nut trees, and that at its south extremity near the margin of the
lagoon. The quantity of fruit the trees produce is great, but
the nuts are small, and the fluid they contain often of brackish
taste. That some ship had latterly visited the island was evident
from many of the cocoa-nut trees having been cut down to obtain
more easily their fruit, a practice often dangerous, when these
trees afford important landmarks to navigators, and at all times
selfish and mischievous, and more peculiarly so here, where cocoa-
nut trees, although increasing in number, are as yet but few.
The only service Caroline Island can afford to shipping is the
supply of cocoa-nuts, fish, and fire-w r ood.
Christmas Island. —This is an extensive coral island, dangerous
of approach, and well knowm as the spot on which Cook, in his
third voyage in 1777, landed to observe an eclipse of the sun.
We coasted round about two-thirds of the island, and it appeared
to us to be more than sixty miles in circumference, which is the


extent given by Cook, and to be of a triangular form rather than
a crescent, with its base to the N.W. The western point of the
island projects some distance and is covered with cocoa-nut trees,
giving it a cheerful aspect. We landed and procured two boat-
loads of the fruit—no fresh water to be found; quails were numer-
ous, as also the peculiar boobies mentioned by Cook; lizards,
land and hermit crabs, abound. The Sida here grew abundantly,
which we had not noticed at Caroline Island. We found about
fifty fine cocoa-nut trees laid prostrate by fire and axe, the mis-
chievous work of some reckless sailors; yet the increase has been
great, as Cook records only thirty to have existed at the period of
his visit. The yams, melon, and cocoa-nuts planted by Cook
on the islet at the entrance of the lagoon have all disappeared.
The position of this islet, his place of observation, is 1° N.
lat,, 157° 30' W. long.
Bunker s, or Jervis Island, May 13, 1835. —Three days after
leaving Christmas Island, and by our calculations 228 miles S.W.
of it, in lat. 0° 20' S. long., l6o° 31' W., measured from Raiatea,
we fell in with a low and narrow island, extending east and west
from three to four miles in length, composed of sand and coral, and
destitute of vegetation; the centre of the land was slightly raised
by a confused assemblage of masses of blackened coral; the
beach of white sand was coasted by a heavy surf. It appears
doubtful if this is Bunker’s or Jervis Island; our position w'ould
agree best with the latter, but does not coincide with either as
laid down in our charts.* This is a dangerous shoal for ships,
and should be cautiously guarded against, as even by daylight it
only presents at a short distance an indistinct white line, and the
birds are not remarkable in number or character. Some years
since the Mary, English South-seaman, ran ashore on Jervis
Island, and was lost, her crew residing on the sterile land until
rescued by a passing ship.
It is much to be lamented that the positions of these various
islands scattered over the Pacific Ocean, which is traversed in
* Captain Browne, of the English ship Eliza Francis, discovered, on the 21st
August, 1821, a small island, five miles in circumference, and covered with hushes,
and determined its position to be 0° 23' S. lat., 159° 46' long. W. of Greenwich,
which is probably the same island called by the Americans Bunker. There is a dif-
ference of forty-five miles of longitude between the position of this seen by Mr.
Bennett and that of Mr. Browne: but as the latitude is nearly the same, there can
be little doubt they are the same island. But Jervis Island, although in nearly the
same latitude, lies 10° farther to the westward, according to Krusenstern’s Atlas of
the Pacific Ocean; yet this position is very doubtful; and any master of a South-
seaman, or other vessel frequenting these seas, will render an important service to
hydrography by fixing and making public the position of this or any of the numer-
ous islands whose situation is marked doubtful in our charts. Arrowsmith’s
Chart of the Pacific, 1832, gives Jervis Island in its correct position, as determined
by Captain Browne.— Ed.
VOL. VII. R


every direction by British shipping, should not be determined by
some competent authority: it is a point of much importance, and
in which many valuable lives and much property are deeply in-
terested.
Dec. 12,1835. —Saw land bearing N.N.E. fifteen miles, which
consisted of a group of three islands extending in an east and
west direction, of moderate size, rugged, elevated, and apparently
rocky and barren. By our observations this group lies in 24° Q'
N., long. 112° SQ' W., but no land is laid down in our modern
charts in this position. A chart of ancient date places three
Lohos Islands ninety miles to the northward of this spot, and an
ordinary map of North America of 1814 places islands in the
vicinity under the name of Celisos * Upon our arrival at Cape
St. Lucas we were informed that the existence of these islands
had been announced, and that some small vessels in quest of furs
had endeavoured to visit them but without success. It is remark-
able that, situated as they are in the direct route of shipping
making Cape St. Lucas, a route annually followed by numerous
South-Seamen, they should have remained so long unknown.
From the situation and character of the islands, it is probable the
fur seal abounds on their shores.
California, Dec. 15.—Hove to off the mouth of a bay between
Cape St. Lucas and Cape Palmo,'the southern extremities of the
isthmus of California, where is a small grazing settlement which
supplied us with excellent beef, poultry, and cheese. The land
about Cape St. Lucas, which forms the S.W. extreme, is bold,
rugged, and mountainous; the lowlands appear flat and sandy.
The settlement on the shores of the bay is a little to the N.E.
of the Cape, and the bay affords a fair roadstead with seventeen
fathoms water at half a mile from the beach, but open to the
S.E. gales, which are very severe. The tide here is regular, with
a rise and fall of five or six feet. The level plain which opens on
the bay is about thirty miles deep by ten in breadth; it is chiefly
covered with brushwood. The vegetation afforded some splendid
specimens of cactus, rising as a distinct and fluted column to the
height of from twelve to fifteen feet. Shipping may here procure
fuel, water, and provisions; a bullock costs from five to ten dol-
* In Krusenstern’s and in Arrowsmith’s Chart of the Pacific Ocean the Lohos
Islands are laid down in 25° 50' N., and 114° 30' W., or 150 miles N.N.W. of this
group. The Celisos, above mentioned, strange as it may appear, is most probably a
corruption of A lejos, signifying “in the offing” or “afar off,” and which is laid
down in Kmsensteru’s Tableau des lies Problematiques in lat. 24° 50' N., long.
115° 30' W. of Greenwich, as rocks having been seen in 1791. The group seen by
Mr. Bennett is only fifty miles S.W. of Cape San Lazaro, on the isthmus of Cali-
fornia, within thirty miles of Vancouver’s track in 1795, and within twenty miles
of Colnett’s in 1793.—E».
