

■ 'Mil / . -
g Cy Railways.
EXTRACTS FROM BYE-LAWS,
BEING A
RULE BOOK
THE G-XJZHD^XIISrCE
OF TUB
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
THE SERVICE OF THE VICTORIAN RAILWAYS
COMMISSIONERS.
AJPRIL, 1884.
AUTHORITY:
JOHN FERRES, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE.
1884.




yiCTORiAN Railways.
EXTRACTS FROM BYE-LAWS,
BEING A
RULE BOOK
TE3HE G-TJIID^XnsrCE
OF THE
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYES
THE SERVICE OF THE VICTORIAN RAILWAYS
COMMISSIONERS.
APRIL, 1884.
AUTHORITY:
JOHN FERRES, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE.
1884,
A. 238.-8,000.




At a meeting of the Victorian Railways Commis-
sioners, held at Melbourne on the 26th day of April,
1884—
It was resolved:
That the following Extracts from the Bye-
Laws of the Board of Land and Works be issued
as a Rule Book for the guidance and instruction
of the Officers and Employes in the service of
the Victorian Railways Commissioners.
R. SPEIGHT, Chairman.
ALFRED J. AGG, _
V Members.
R. FORD, J
Order,
P. P. LABERTOUCHE,
Secretary.




TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Instructions and Rules of General Application ... 7-14
Signals ... ... ... .... ... 14-29
Signalling in Foggy weather or during Snow-storms 29-32
Fixing and Repairing Signals, &c. ... ... 33, 34
Signalmen ... ... ... ... ... 34-43
Single Line working by Train Staff and Ticket ... 44-48
„ „ Pilot Guard ... ... 48,49
Regulations for working the Traffic of a Double
Line over a Single Line during repairs or ob-
struction ... ... ... .*. . ... 50-55
Single Line working by One Engine only at same
time ... ... .... ... ... 55,56
Block Telegraph Regulations .... ... ... 56-63
Goods and Ballast Trains working on steep inclines 63, 64
Station Routine, &c. ... ... ... ... 65-90
'* Guards, Shunters, &c. ... ... 90-111
Engine-drivers and Firemen 111-135
Piermasters ... ... ... ... ... 135, 136
Inspectors of Permanent way ... ... ... 136-146
Other .Permanent-way Men ... ... ... 146-158
Gatekeepers, Watchmen, &c. ... .... .« 158-162
Regulations for the guidance of Station-masters,
Operators, and others engaged in working the
Railway Electric Telegraphs... ... ... 162-174


Note. —The numbert of these Rules are not continuous, but are
consecutive, corresponding with the numbers in the Book of
General Bye-Laws of the 31sf January, 1884 , Jrom which
they are extracted,


VICTORIAN
RAILWAYS.
BYE-LAWS,
INCLUDING
EULES AND EEGULATIONS.
PART I.
INSTRUCTIONS AND RULES OF GENERAL
APPLICATION.
1. Every person employed by the Board must devote conditions of
himself exclusively to its service, residing at whatever service-
place may be appointed, attending at such hours as may
be required, and shall consider himself on duty when
on the line or at a Station, although it may not be his
regular time of attendance, paying prompt obedience to
all persons placed in authority over him, and conform-
ing to all Rules and Regulations of the Board. He safety
shall constantly bear in mind that the first and most Ber vant.
important duty is to provide for the safety of the
public.
2. Every Station-master, Inspector, Engine-driver, Reguiations'and
Fireman, Guard, Signalman, Policeman, Ganger, taWe to whom
Repairer, Foreman, Shunter, Yardman, and Gateman, supplied
and also every Clerk and Porter connected with the
working of the Railway, is to be supplied with, and
shall have with him when on duty, and produce when
required, a copy of the Rules and Regulations
affecting his duties; and the above employes, with the
exception of Repairers, are required to have a copy of
the Service Time-table for the current month.


Regulations, all 3. Although the Rules and Regulations for the
persons must , , , ,
know and com- several branches are made specially tor the observance
ply with. 0 f fi ie servants employed in each branch, yet every
such person must make himself thoroughly acquainted
with them, and will be held responsible for a knowledge
of and compliance with the whole of them.
Lost copies must 4. Any servant of the Department who may have
eiepace . i ogt his copy of the Rules and Regulations, or Time-
table, is required immediately to obtain another copy
from his superior officer.
Addresses of 5. The address of each person employed in the
working of the Railway must be registered at the
Station to which he is attached, or at which he is paid,
and must be posted in the Station-master’s Office, so
that, if required in cases of emergency, the men may be
readily found. Any change of address must be notified
to the Station-master, in order that the record may
be kept perfect.
Conduct of 6. All officers and servants must be prompt, civil,
and obliging. They must at all times afford every
proper facility for the business to be performed, be
careful to give correct information, and, when asked,
give their names without hesitation.
Travelling with- 8. No officer or servant of the Department is
bidden 8968 f ° r allowed to travel on the Engine or in the Brake Van,
Riding on Engine or in any vehicle in which luggage or parcels are con-
withoutaspecTain veyed, unless in the execution of his duty, without
authority written permission from a properly authorized officer
forbidden. Department.
Refreshment 9. No Guard, Engine-driver, Fireman, Signalman,
without special Porter, or other servant of the Department, while
forbfdden” on duty, * s a^ to enter a Station Refreshment
Room except by permission of the Station-master or
person in charge of the Station.
To apply for 10. Officers or servants of the Department are not
instruction in to take legal proceedings on behalf of the Board, nor


show any document or book to persons not connected ail doubtful
with the Department, nor deal with any communica- caseB,
tion on a subject for which they have no precedent,
or with doubtful questions, without first obtaining
instructions from the Board through their superior
officer.
11. On the change of duties between the Day and Mnnformation
Night Staff, all circumstances which may have occurred the person re°
out of the ordinary course must be communicated to lievins-
the man coming on duty as relief, and before he takes
charge ; and his attention must be drawn to the posi-
tion of the trains, especially if there be any overdue.
12. No person employed in any capacity shall give Sobriety of per-
up charge to any other person whose duty it may be sons rehevin »-
to relieve him unless the person being relieved shall
be satisfied of the perfect sobriety of the person whose
duty it may be to relieve him. And if any person
gives up his charge of signals, points, or other duty
to any one who may be in a state of intoxication, both
the persons relieved and relieving will be held re-
sponsible and punished accordingly.
13. Every person employed for any duty on the line Acquaintance
must have such a minute and perfect knowledge of
the Rules for the Signalling, Movement, and Protection of Trains,
of Trains, and the mode of carrying such duties into
operation, as will enable him to do what is necessary
at all times without reference to the Rules. He must
also always be provided with the appliances for giving
signals.
14. In every case where any person does not under- Men to be tested
stand his duty, or any subject on which information acquaintance
should be sought, he must immediately apply for in- with Rules,
structions to the Station-master or other superior
officer, and no excuse of want of knowledge will be
admitted as an extenuation in the event of any irregu-
larity or neglect. Every person is strictly enjoined •
to read the whole of the Rules over at least once a
month.


Officers to keep 15. Every officer is responsible for each person
andfaccounts. under his control keeping the proper records, books,
and accounts applicable to his duties. Any officer or
servant failing to report an occurrence or matter that
ought to be reported will incur the same responsibility
as if he had been the person in fault.
Alterations of 18. The Time Bills and public announcements
Time Bills. i ssue( j to Stations are held to be sufficient notices for
Station-masters, Booking Clerks, Ticket Collectors,
and all other servants of the Department as to the
changes in the Train Service, Special Trains, or any
other matter to which the notices refer. The Notice
Bills announcing alterations in time of trains are to be
posted up on the morning of the day on which they
come into operation, before the Station is open for
business, and all old Time Bills must be removed
and destroyed.
To keep the 19. Whenever any officer or servant has occasion
along’ 1 to walk on the line of railway, he must take that line
by which he would meet a coming engine, viz,, the
right-hand line of rails, and when a train approaches
he must go to the right, clear of both lines of rails.
Defaulters’ book 20. At every Station a book shall be kept by the
to be kept. Officer in charge, in which all minor faults or ix-regu-
larities of subordinate officers and servants shall be
inserted at the time the offence is discovered, and the
entry so made shall be read over or notified to the
offender; and general charges made against any
subordinate officer will not be entertained unless so
recorded.
21. Any officer or servant being unable through
sickness to attend to his duties must produce a certi-
ficate from a properly qualified medical man ; but if
the sickness be not of a sufficiently serious character
to need the services of a doctor, and the absence only
extends over one day, leave of absence for that period
may be granted by the applicant’s immediate superior
officer. Employes not observing this Rule will be
treated as absent without leave.
Sick leave.


22. Special Trains or Engines have frequently to Special trains
t' . , . °. P i • i run without
be run without previous notice ot any kind; it is no tice.
therefore necessary for the Staff along the line to be
at all times prepared for extra' trains or engines.
23. The slightest insobriety in any official when on Punishment for
V ~ i. " J . -n a i insobriety.
duty, or on the railway line or premises, will be fol-
lowed by immediate suspension and subsequent dis-
missal, in addition to such punishment as may be
incurred under section One hundred and fifty-six of
“ The Public Works Statute 1865,” to which clause
the attention of all servants is directed.
25. Any servant using improper language, or Causes,° f Re-
entering into an altercation with the public or his
fellow-servants, whatever provocation may be given,
absenting himself without leave, being guilty of dis-
obedience of orders, negligence, or other misconduct,
or being incompetent, will be liable to immediate
dismissal, in addition to any punishment he may
incur under “ The Public Works Statute 1865,” or of
any Act hereafter in operation.
26. Every servant is required to come to duty clean Dress and care
and neat in his person and dress. If provided with ofperson ’
uniform, to appear in it in a proper state of order, the
initial and number of badge perfect, and every portion
of it in conformity with the Regulations ; and no
servant, whether on duty or not, will be allowed to
smoke on the platforms.
27. The acceptance of any fee, gift, or gratuity is
strictly forbidden under any pretence whatever, under bidden.* 68 ° r
pain of fine or dismissal.
28. Any employe who is found to be a member of a No employ*? can
political association of any kind will be required to any poiitfcaf °
sever his connexion with the service. bod y'
29. No officer or servant will be allowed to leave p b e ™ i b s t s^ e ™ UBt
his office or work during the hours prescribed for duty,
before any ein-
except on official business or by permission of the
permanent head of his branch. during working
hours.


30. All officers will be required to attend at their
offices for such period beyond the ordinary working
hours as may from time to time be required for the
completion of arrears of work, or in consequence of
any departmental or public exigency.
Overtime.
Absence from 31. Except in cases of sudden illness or other
office or district, emergency, which shall be immediately reported to
the head of the branch, no officer or servant shall be
absent without leave from his office or place of business
or from the district to which he is appointed.
Public entering 41. No person is allowed to enter any of the Rail-
offices. way offices unless engaged on public business.
Reports of ir- 40. Each officer or servant is required to report to
regularities, &c, his superior officer (in the form provided to him for
the purpose, where a form is in use) every instance of
damage, derangement, or irregularity, or violation of
rules of any kind whatsoever that may come under his
notice.
issue of altered 47. Altered or new Time-tables must be in the
Time-tables. hands of every officer at least twenty-four hours
before they come into operation, but Time-tables
for the ensuing month must not be publicly exhibited
till the departure of the last train of the current
month.
officers and ser- 48. Station-masters, Guards, Enginemen, and Por-
vants not to ters are no t eu ter into any altercation, either between
wrangle in J .
hearing of pas- themselves or with strangers; and no reprimand is
sengers. to be given to any Guard, Porter, or other servant
within hearing of the passengers.
Re orts a-ainst Any officer Or servant who has cause to corn-
superior officers plain of or make a report against his superior, shall
within seven make the complaint through the officer at the head
days. of the branch to which he belongs within seven
days, if possible, after the occurrence of the matter


so reported by him, otherwise such report will be.
regarded as the result of malice, and not from a con-
scientious desire to advance the interests of the public
service.
61. Any officer or servant found travelling without Employes tra-
a ticket or pass is to be at once suspended by the passor
head of his branch, and the circumstance reported to
the Secretary, who will obtain the Minister's decision
as to whether the offender shall be allowed to resume
duty or be fined. Should his services be dispensed
with, prosecution may follow.
62. Any officer or servant seeing another officer or R o^° r t o"f^fo e n
servant intoxicated, must, in addition to reporting the
circumstance to the head of his branch, draw the
attention of some other person to it, so that corrobor-
ative evidence may be given.
66. Officers, in the event of any irregularity which Non-reporting of
may come under their notice not being reported to irre^ularities-
the proper authorities, will be dealt with as if they
were parties to the irregularity committed.
67. All officers and servants regularly engaged in Employes ex-
the Department are exempt from serving on juries, service™' 11 3Ur3
If summoned, they should inform the summoning
officer of the fact of their being so employed.
70. Goats belonging to employes, if found tin- Employes’ goats,
tethered within the railway fences, will be destroyed.
71. No officer or servant of the Department shall Live stock be-
keep or depasture any horses, cows, or other live
stock whatsoever, with the exception of goats, within
the railway fences, unless a substantial and sufficient
fence is erected to enclose the land upon which such
stock is kept.


nstructions 72. Heads of branches may issue such instructions
branches °* fr° m time to time as the exigencies of the service
demand, and any employe disobeying any such direc-
tion will be liable to punishment.
Employes to be 75. Employes travelling at any time and under any
suctfatan as circumstances are to be considered as servants of the
time when* Board, and should they transgress any of the rules
travelling. they are to be reported to the head of their branch.
interpretation. 76. The word Department in these Rules shall
mean the Victorian Railways Department.
PART 11.
SIGNALS BLOCK SYSTEM, STAFF RULES,
ETC., ETC.
„ ...... 77. The public safety, which must be the chief care
Responsibility „ * j ’
of sen ants with of every officer and servant or the Railway Uepart-
sfgnais. *° ment, being mainly dependent on the proper use and
observance of the signals, all persons employed,
whose duties are in any way connected with the
service of the line, are therefore particularly required
to make themselves familiar with all the codes and
instructions relating to signalling which are now or
may hereafter be issued from time to time.


78. All persons employed on any duty connected Precautions by
with the line must bear in mind that engines may bfadopted at St
pass any part of the line at all hours or at any moment all hours,
during the day or night, whether or not they may be
mentioned in the time-bills, or signalled in any way;
and the same 'precautions must always he taken in
signalling, whether engines are expected or not.
79. The first duty in every case must be that
relating to signals.
80. The following Code of Signals is to be strictly Method and Code
adhered to: — of Slgnals-
Red is a signal of “ Danger ’’—Stop.
Description.
Green is a signal of “Caution”—Go slowly.
White is a signal of “ All Right ”—Go on.
HAND SIGNALS.
81. These Signals will be made by hand or with Hand signal,
flags by day ; and with lamps by night, or in foggy
weather.
82. In the absence of flags,
both arms raised above the
head denotes “ Danger, ” thus:
Danger Signal.


Caution signal. 88. One arm raised above the head
denotes “ Caution/’ thus :
ah Right signal. 84. One arm held in a hori
zontal position across the line of
rails denotes “ All Right/’ thus :
Caution Signal 85. In the absence of a Green Light, a White Light
Wh e ite g Li<^ht by slowly from side to side denotes “ Caution ”
—Go slowly.
Any light moved 86. In the absence of a Red Light, any light
up and down or move d U p and down or waved violently denotes
waved violently
denotes Danger. ** Danger —otop.


87. Hand lamps and hand flags, when used as Hand Signals
signals, must always be held in the hand, and not [n U t hVhand. d
placed upon or stuck into the ground.
88. Officers in charge of Stations will be respon- Hand Signals
sible that all hand signals used by men under their good order. Pt U 1
control are in good order and kept clean, so. that
the colours be easily distinguished; and all servants
outside Stations using hand signals will bp responsible
that they are kept in good order and condition; and
when flags become faded or soiled, application must
be at once made to their superior officer for their
renewal.
FIXED SIGNALS.
89. Fixed Signals consist of Junction, Home, Fixed signals.
Distant, Advance, Siding, and Starting Signals.
SEMAPHORE SIGNALS.
90. Two signals only are shown on the Semaphore Signals shown
Posts of the Victorian Railways, viz., “Danger” £oste. maph ° re
and “ All Right.”
91. The “ Danger ” Signal is shown by the arm on Danger Signal,
the left-hand side of the Semaphore Post standing
out from the post, and the “ All Right ” is shown
by the arm hanging down to the side of the post, as
per Diagrams opposite Rules 114 and 115.
(a) Note. — The signal is invariably made by
the arm on the left-hand side of the post, as seen by
the Driver of an approaching engine.
92 “ Caution ” Signals are given by hand—a Green Caution Signal.
Flag being used by day, and a Green Light by night.
(b) Note. —Should a Green Flag not be ob-
tainable, the “ Caution ” Signal must be given by
hand in the usual manner.


Lights Signals. 93. At some large Stations, where there are lamps
showing White Lights for other purposes than
signalling, which come in the line of the signals,
a Green Light may be substituted for a White Light
on the Signal-post, but in all such cases trains are
to approach and pass through such Stations with
caution.
Certain em- 94. Officers connected with working of trains, in-
acquainted* 3 eluding Station-masters, Yardsmen, Porters, Guards,
with matters as Shunters, Signalmen, Drivers, Firemen, and men
to signalling. em pi o y ec i 0 n permanent way or works on existing
lines, are to make themselves acquainted with the
following Rules and Diagrams, their knowledge upon
which they are liable to be examined in periodically
by a Board appointed for that purpose.
JUNCTION SIGNALS.
where fixed and 95. Junction Signals are fixed clear of facing points
object of. i n( ji ca te the direction in which the points are set
and locked, and to inform the Driver of engine or
train which road the Signalman intends him to take ;
and it is very important that all Drivers should
satisfy themselves when a signal is lowered that this
is in accordance with the road they wish to proceed
on, and any signal not lowered in accordance with the
above should be treated as a Danger Signal.
96. Bracket Junction Signals have
arms branching to right and left, the
left-hand arm for engines or trains
to the left-hand road, and the right-
hand arm applies to the right-hand
road, thus :


97. Both arms in a Junction Signal
cannot be lowered at the same time,
so that if this should occur (as per
diagram in margin), it will show
there is something wrong, and should
be at once treated by Drivers as a
Danger Signal. This also applies to
the Junction Home Signals, and if they
are both off, the Driver should treat
them as both being at “ Danger,” and
come to a standstill until it is satisfac-
Danger, both
arms being
lowered
torily made clear by the Signalman
which signal was intended to be lowered. These cases
cannot occur in ordinary working, but would show
some disarrangement has taken place. A special
report of such occurrence taking place must be made
by the Driver to his superior officer.
98. In cases where there are
three or more roads, the arms
apply in rotation from right to
left, the outside arms applying
as before, and the centre one
being for the centre road, thus :
99. In places where Bracket
Semaphores are fixed with four
arms (as per diagram in margin),
for four roads, the arms are used
as follows : —The left-hand arm
for the extreme left-hand road;
the centre pole with two arms
apply to the two centre roads,
the top arm for the left, and the
bottom arm for the right ; the
extreme right-hand arm for the
extreme right-hand road.


100. In places where six-arm
Bracket Semaphores are fixed (as
per diagram) for six different
roads, the extreme left-hand pole
with two arms apply to the two
left-hand roads, the top arm for
the left and the bottom arm for
the next.
The centre pole with two arms
apply to the two centre roads, the
top arm in all cases for left, the
bottom arm for the right. The
extreme right-hand pole with
two arms apply to the two
extreme right-hand roads, the arms to be used
above.
Left-hand road. 101. In all Junction Signals where
the arms are one above another (as
Right-hand road. p er di a g ram in margin), the top arm
applies to the left-hand road, and
the lower one to the right. Junction
Signals should never be passed when at
“ Danger.”
102. There may be an exceptional case
where a Siding Signal is fixed on a Home
Signal; in that case it will be very low
down, with a very short arm, or some
distinguishing mark. The top arm will
always be for the Main Line, and the
lower one for Sidings, thus :
Main Line.
Siding.


HOME, DISTANT, AND STARTING SIGNALS.
103. When the Distant Signal arm
from any Signal-cabin is fixed on a Home
or Starting Signal, at the next place the
Distant Signal will be the lower arm, and
so controlled that it cannot be lowered
until the Home Signal is taken off.
Home or
Starting.
Distant.
104. Home Signals are fixed clear of
fouling points at Stations, Sidings, and
Junctions, and no engine must pass them
when standing at “ Danger,” except as
provided in Rule 179.
Home or
Starting.
106. Starting Signals must never be passed when starting signals
at “ Danger,” except for shunting purposes. wtoat nSS
except for
shan ting.
107. When any train or engine has gone forward Proceeding when
into the onward section, the Starting and Advanced h^gono^nto 18
Starting Signals (where such are provided) which gg® tl ° 0 I JIward 1 ward
control the entrance of trains and engines into such
sections must be put to and kept at “ Danger ” until
telegraph information has been received from the
Signal-cabin in advance that the preceding train or
engine has passed out of the section. So long as the
Starting Signals stand at “Danger” the Home and
Distant Signals must also be kept at “Danger/’ except
on the near approach of a train which has to stop at
the Station, when, after the speed of the train has


been reduced so as to admit of its stoppage at the plat-
form, the Home Signal may be taken off to admit the
train, but the Starting Signal must be kept at
“ Danger ” until the line is clear to the next Signal
Station ahead.
Distant.
108. Distant Signals are fixed at a consider-
able distance back from the Home to act as an
auxiliary to warn trains of danger, and also to
protect engines or trains standing at the Home
Signal. Drivers seeing Distant Signals at
“Danger,” should come to a standstill thereat,
and then draw cautiously as near to the Home
Signal as they can, and there await the “All
Right” Home Signal ; all Distant Signal arms
are fish-tailed to distinguish them from the
Home.
place of Home 109. The Home Signal lever in interlocking ap-
and'when”; P ara t us precedes the Distant, so that a Distant arm
Distant signals cannot be lowered until after the Home. Distant
at°“ Danger?” d Signals must be placed at “ Danger ” immediately they
are passed by a train or engine, and must not, where
the Block working is in operation, be again taken off,
except as prescribed by the Block Telegraph Regula-
tions. They must also be placed at “ Danger ” when-
ever any other obstruction or danger exists upon the
line they are intended to protect, and the “Danger”
Signal must remain exhibited until the obstruction
or danger is removed.
Drivers to stop HO. When locking bars are fixed to facing points
clear knocking Drivers of trains stopping at Stations should pull up
facing points twenty feet clear of them, so that they can be worked
and the points moved if necessary.
Duty of signal- 111. When a train is approaching facing points, the
is approaching* 11 Signalman must be specially careful to see that the
facing points, lever of the locking frame which governs the facing
points is close home to the frame and the catch firmly
down in the notch, and so kept until the whole of the
train has passed his facing points.


112. All facing points must be frequently tested Facing points to
by the Signalman, so that he may satisfy himself they betest€d-
work well and that no part is injured.
113. Facing points not worked from a locking frame Facing points not
must in all cases be securely fastened or held for the Peking frame 8
passage of trains. 1)6 beld > & ®*>
r ° .for passage of
I trains.
114. The “Danger” Signal to stop is
shown by the arm on the left-hand side
of the post being raised to the hori-
zontal position, thus:
Danger.
Note. —And at night by a Red light.
115. The “All Right” Signal is shown
by the arm hanging down by the side of
the post, thus:
But this should not be treated as an
“All Right” Signal until it has dropped
half-way, or an angle of forty-five degrees.
Any intermediate position to this should
be treated as a “ Danger ” Signal.
All Right.
Note. —At night the “All Right”
Signal is shown by a White light, but if
a mixed Red and White light or an im-
perfect light is visible , it must be treated
as a “ Danger ” Signal.
116. Arms obscured from view or
hanging straight with the Signal-post
should also be treated as a “Danger”
Signal, thus :
Danger.
Note. — The absence of a light at
night must be considered a “ Danger ”
Sigtial.


Rround Disc 117. When Ground Disc Signals are connected and
signals. work with points, these must not be taken by the
Driver or Shunter as a proper signal for the train to
come or go, but are only intended to indicate which
way the points lie.
junction points 120. When junction points and signals are inter-
iight before locked, the points must always be set right before the
signal is signal is lowered, and cannot be again changed until
the signal has been placed at “ Danger,” so that in no
case can a wrong signal be given and the points right.
Home Signals. 121. Home Signals are placed at Stations, Junc-
tions, Sidings, and Signal-boxes, and when at “ Dan-
ger ” no train or engine must pass there, or foul the
crossings or points to which they apply, except as
prescribed. Home Signals at Junctions are, as a rule,
so placed as to indicate by their positions the lines to
which they apply.
Home Signals at 122. Home Signals at Junctions must never be
be passed at ° passed when at “ Danger.” When a train has stopped
requiredtobe” 8 a Junction Home Signal, and it is necessary to bring
brought within the train within the Home Signal before the section
such signals. a h ea( j i s c i earj the Signalman may, where a Starting
Signal is provided, and that signal is at “ Danger,”
lower the Home Signal for the train to draw ahead.
The Engine-driver of any train which has been thus
stopped at a Junction Home Signal must, after that
signal has been lowered, go slowly forward, as far as
the line is clear, towards the Starting Signal, but must
not pass that signal until it is lowered.
Home signals 123. Home Signals at Stations, Sidings, and Signal-
junctionsnotto boxes (other than at Junctions) Avhere there are Start-
be passed at i n cr Signals, must never be passed when at “ Danger.”
Danger when & ° . , . 1 , , , , .
there are start- When a tram has been stopped, or brought nearly to
Train'^required a stand at the Horne Signals of a Station, Siding, or
to be brought Signal-box (other than at Junctions) where Starting
within such o-i V *ii , ~ . ' . , • _ 5
Home Signals. Signals are provided, and it is necessary to bring it
within the Home Signal before the section ahead is
clear, the Signalman may, if the Starting Signal is at


■** Danger,” lower the Home Signal for the train to draw
ahead. The Engine-driver of any train which has
been thus stopped or brought nearly to a stand at a
Home Signal, must, after that signal has been lowered,
go slowly forward, as far as the line is clear, towards
the Starting Signal, but must not pass that signal
until it is lowered.
124. The Engine-driver must only proceed so far short trains or
as is necessary to leave the last vehicle well clear of llght engines ‘
the points and crossings, and Avithin sight of the
Signalman.
127. Where it is found necessary to place the Home and dis-
Distant Signal arm from a box in advance on the B ° n
Home or Starting Signal-post of the box in the rear,
the Distant Signal must be the lower arm, and the
Home or Starting Signal the upper arm, of that post.
128. Distant Signals must be placed at “Danger” Use of Distant
immediately they are passed by a train or engine, and Slgnal ‘
must not, where the Block working is in operation,
be again taken off except as prescribed by the Block
Telegraph Regulations.
129, Distant Signals must be placed at “ Danger ” when Distant
Avhenever any obstruction or danger exists upon the pJacedV^ Dan-
line they are intended to protect, and the Danger ger.”
Signal must remain exhibited until the obstruction or
danger is removed.
130. Whenever the Distant Signal is at “Danger,” use of Home
the Danger Signal must also be exhibited by the Slgnals -
Home Signal, except in the case of an approaching
train, for which both the signals have been taken off,
that the Distant Signal must be placed at “ Danger ”
as soon as the engine of the train has passed it, and
the Home Signal be alloAved to remain at “All Right”
until the train has passed it, or has been brought to a
stand.
131. When a Home Signal has been lowered for Lowering Home
the passing of a train, it must not (except in case of Signal ‘


accident or obstruction) be again placed at “ Danger ”
until such train has been brought to a stand, or has
passed within the Horne Signal.
observance of 132. When an Engine-driver finds a Distant Signal
Distant signals. «Danger/’ he must immediately shut off steam,
and reduce the speed of his train, so as to be able to
stop at the Distant Signal Post; but if he sees that
the way in front of him is clear, he must proceed
slowly and cautiously within the Distant Signal, hav-
ing such control of his train as to be able to stop it
short of any obstruction that may exist between the
Distant Signal-post and the Home Signal, and must
bring his train to a stand as near the Home Signal as
the circumstances of the case will allow.
passing stations 133. On portions of the system where the Stations
with modern have not been equipped with signals on the modern
signals. system, when approaching a Station with only one
signal (in either direction), it must always be treated
as a Home Signal, and must never be passed when at
“ Danger.”
starting signals 134. Where Starting Signals are used, they are
atDanger!” 6 ** placed in advance of the Home Signals of the Station,
Junction, or other Post to which they apply, and are
intended to control the departure of trains into the
Station ahead. Starting Signals must never be
passed when at “ Danger,” except for shunting
purposes.
Home, Distant, 135. Home, Distant, and Starting Signals apply
only to trains or engines running in the proper
only to trains direction on the Main Line, and must not be used
running in the P ~ r,. . .
proper direction, for any other purpose, i rains or engines running in
Modeofsignaiiing the wrong direction on either line must be signalled
and to trains" 18 past the Home Signal by hand lamp or flag. Trains
or en S^ nes shunting from one Main Line to the other,
wrong irec- Qr shunting into or out of Sidings connected with
the Main Line, must, unless special signals are pro-
vided for the purpose of signalling such operations,
be signalled past the Home Signal, either verbally or


by hand lamp or flag, as occasion may require. It
being necessary in such cases that the “ Danger ”
Signal should be exhibited at the Home Signal, as
well as at the Distant Signal, for the protection of
the train or engine so employed.
136. Every Station-master, Signalman, Gateman, Defective signals,
or other person must, in the event of any Home, Jangemernsmi-
Distant, or Starting Signal under his charge becom- tu again in
ing defective, strictly carry out his Regulations, and
a competent man (or, if necessary, two or more com-
petent men) must be selected, provided with the
necessary hand signals and detonators, and appointed
to signal in lieu of such defective signal until it is
again in proper working order.
137. Where the circumstances of the case admit of Duty of station-
such an arrangement, the Station-master must select ™gn a ig become
proper men from his own staff for the purpose ; but defective,
where this cannot be done, he must apply to the
nearest Ganger for Platelayers.
138. The absence of a signal at a place where a signaisnotshown
signal is ordinarily shown, or a signal imperfectly 1 CCt 7
exhibited, must be considered a Danger Signal, and
treated accordingly, and the fact reported to the
Signalman or Station-master.
DETONATING SIGNALS.
139. Every Guard, Signalman, Engine - driver, Detonators, sup-
Gateman, Foreman of Works, and Ganger of Plate- plyof ’
layers will be provided with packets of detonators,
which they are always to have ready for use whilst
on duty ; and every person in charge of a Station
must keep a supply of these signals in a suitable place,
known by, and easy of access at all times to, every
person connected with the Station.
140. All the persons above-named will be held
responsible for keeping up the proper supply of de-
tonators, and should apply to their superior officer
before their stock is exhausted, so as to ensure
having sufficient in hand.


How to be placed 141. These signals must be placed on the rail (labe*
°n ran. upwards) by bending the clasp round the upper flange
of the rail to prevent them falling off. When an
engine passes over a detonator, it explodes with a
Train to be loud report, and the Engine-driver must instantly shut
piosinifoTdeto- °ff steam and bring his engine to a stand, and then
nator. proceed cautiously to the place of obstruction, or until
he receives the “ All Right ” Signal.
Detonator must 142. Detonators must be carefully handled, as they
bandied!* are liable to explode if roughly treated. It is necessary
to keep them well protected from damp. At intervals
of not more than two months, one from each person’s
stock must be tested, to ensure that they are in good
condition.
TRAIN SIGNALS.
Distinctive Head 143. For the information of Station-masters, Signal-
Lights. men, and all concerned, each engine must carry the
distinctive Head Lights or Discs prescribed by the
Department.
Tan, side, and 144. After sunset and during foggy weather every
after* 1 sunset! engine must carry the necessary Head Lights, and,
when running alone, a Red Tail Light also ; and every
train must carry a Red Tail Light, and, with the ex-
ception of a “ Light Engine,” two Red Side Lights in
the rear.
Tan Lamp to 145. Every train travelling on the line must have
vehicle! lMt a Tail Lamp attached to the last vehicle by day as
well as by night, except when assisted by an engine
in the rear, when the engine must carry the Tail
Lamp. The lamp need not be lighted in the daytime
except during foggy weather, but its presence in the
rear of each passing train will furnish evidence to
every Signalman along the line that no portion of the
train has become detached on the road.
Engine Tail 146. Engines when running on the Main Line
Lamp. without a train must carry a Tail Lamp in the rear,
both by day and by night. Engines assisting trains


in the rear must carry a Tail Lamp. Engines draw-
ing trains must not carry any Tail Lamp in the rear.
In the case of two or more engines running coupled
together without a train, the last engine only must
carry a Tail Lamp.
147. A Special Train to follow is indicated by the special Trains
preceding train carrying on the last vehicle a Red followin s-
Target or a Red Flag or the double Red Discs by
day, and an additional Red Tail Lamp or the double
Red Lamps by night; but as Special Trains or engines
have frequently to be run without previous notice of special Trains
any kind, it is necessary for the staff along the line u U C e. wlthoUt no “
to be at all times prepared for such extra trains or
engines.
148. Where trains run on parallel lines, special Paralleliines,spe-
regulations for Head, Side, and Tail Lamps will be
made, when necessary, to meet the circumstances of and Tail Lights.’
each case.
SIGNALLING IN FOGGY WEATHER OR
DURING SNOW-STORMS.
149. During foggy weather or snow-storms it is the station-masters
duty of the Station-master to take care that Fog- r esponBl . ble .
. * , ill G for employing
signalmen are employed, when necessary, at all the Fog-signaimen
places where their services are required, and, where necessity.
Platelayers are employed for the purpose, to arrange
beforehand with the Inspector of Permanent Way
for the district the Platelayers who are to act as Fog-
signalmen at the various .posts. In the event of a fog
or snow-storm occurring during the day, between six Fog in daytime,
a.m. and eight p.m., the men appointed for the pur-
pose must at once report themselves to the Station-
master and take his instructions ; those who have to
take duty at Junctions or intermediate Signal-boxes
away from a Station, must report themselves to the
Signalman on duty at the respective boxes.
150. When it is necessary to employ Fog-signalmen Employment of
during the night, between eight p.m. and six a.m., the uigil?. en


Station-master must arrange to have the men called
on sent to their respective posts. If the Fog-signal-
men become aware from their own observation, or
from information given to them, that their services
are required during the night, or at any other time
when off duty, they must at once report themselves to
the Station-master, or to the Signalman, at any
Junction or intermediate Signal-box away from a
Station, without waiting to be called ; but this will
not relieve the Station-master from the responsibility
of sending for the Fog-signalmen when necessary.
Addresses and 151. A list of the names and addresses of the Fog-
sfgnaimen° g * signalmen, showing the post to which each man is
appointed, must be kept exhibited in a conspicuous
position in the Station-master’s office, Signalman’s
box, or other convenient place.
Articles supplied 152. Each Fog-signalman must, before proceeding
s? nafmen P ost > supplied with detonators (not less than
24), a Hand-signal lamp trimmed and lighted, and a
Red and a Green Flag. If signalling for a Distant
Detail of duties. gjg na i s ] ie mus t place himself outside the signal in
connexion with which he works, and as far from it as
is consistent with his keeping it well in sight ; and
whenever a train or engine has passed him in the
direction of the box from which the signal is worked,
or whenever the signal is placed at “ Danger,he
must immediately fix two detonators, ten yards apart,
on one rail of the line for which he is signalling ;
and when he is satisfied that the train or engine has
gone forward, that the line is clear, and the Distant
Signal lowered, he must remove the detonators. If he
becomes aware of any obstruction existing on the line
in the immediate neighbourhood of the signal for which
he is signalling, either from a train or engine not
having gone forward, or from any other cause, he must
leave the detonators on the rail, and go back along the
line (showing a Red Light with his hand lamp) a
sufficient distance to protect such obstruction, and
must there place on one rail of the line for which he
is signalling two detonators, ten yards apart, and


return to within sight of the Distant Signal; and when
he is satisfied that the obstruction has been removed,
he must go and take up the more distant detonators
and return to his post.
153. When Fog-signalmen are employed in con- Fog-signaimen
nexion with Home Signals, they must place two deto- connexion with
nators on one rail of each line for which the signal is Home signals,
at “ Danger,” and carry out any instructions they may
receive from the Signalman on duty.
154. Guards must in all cases act strictly in accord- Guards not to
ance with Rules, and must not depend on Fog-signal- sfguaimen^or
men for the protection of their trains. the protection
of their trains.
155. A sufficient supply of detonators for the use Detonators to be
of the Fog-signalmen must he kept at the Stations an^signai" 8
and in the Signal-boxes in connexion with which the box es.
men are employed. If the number first supplied to
the men is likely to become soon exhausted, they
must communicate with the nearest Station or Signal-
box, and obtain a further supply.
156. The Station-master (when Porters are em- Relief men.
ployed), or Inspectors of Permanent Way or Gaugers
(when Platelayers are employed), must arrange for
Relief Men should the fog continue, and if the Fog-
signalmen are out more than six hours, arrangements Refreshments to
must be made by the Station-masters for furnishing F°s-stenaJmen-
them with needful refreshments.
157. The Station-master must, in all cases, satisfy station-master to
himself that the Fog-signalmen have duly proceeded thafrog-signai-
to their respective posts, when it is necessary for men are at their
them to do so ; and, where the Fog-signalmen are posts-
numerous, a competent man must be appointed to visit
them at their posts, and see that they are properly
performing their duties, and are supplied with the supply of signals,
necessary signals, furnishing them with a further
supply of detonators, if required.
158. At intermediate Telegraph posts the man in When “Danger”
charge of the Signal-box must, where practicable, exhibited at


intermediate when the Danger Signal is exhibited at his box, place
Telegraph posts. j. wo e t ona t o rs on the rails, sufficiently apart to give
two distinct separate reports, except in places where
Platelayers are appointed to repeat the Distant Signals
worked from the Signal-box. When these men are on
duty, the placing of detonators on the line will devolve
on them.
159. In foggy weather, when the Day Signals can-
not be seen plainly, the Signal Lamps must be lighted,
and kept burning.
Lamps to be
lighted.
160. Where the line is not worked under the Block
system, no Passenger Train must during foggy weather
follow a Goods Train, nor must a fast Goods Train
follbw a stopping Passenger Train from a Station nor
pass a Signal-box where trains are ordinarily signalled
within fifteen minutes, nor even then, until the Engine-’
driver has been properly warned of the time of the
departure of the preceding train, and where it will
next stop.
Trains following
each other.
161. Engine Signal-whistles. —The Engine Signal-
whistles to be given by Drivers when challenging the
Junction Signals, &c., are to be made in accordance
with those published in the Service Time-table.
Engine signal-
whistles.
162. The Signal Code for electric bells is to be
observed as published in the Service Time-table.
Electric bells.
168. The Service Time-table is to show the list of
Signal-boxes and the hours they are open.
Signal-boxes.
164. Such publication is also to show the number
and description of Head Lights to be used on engines
when running.
Head Lights on
trains.


REGULATIONS TO BE OBSERVED BY STATION-
MASTERS, SIGNALMEN, SIGNAL-FITTERS,
AND OTHERS,
Respecting the Fixing and Repairing of Signals,
and the Apparatus for Working Points and
Signals on Lines opened for Traffic.
IGS. During the erection or removal of signals, or New signals,
the prosecution of other work in connexion with removal off
points or signals which may interfere with the safe
working of the line, the Foreman Signal-fitter who
has charge of the work must communicate with the
District Superintendent or Station-master in charge,
who will make any special arrangements that may be
necessary in connexion with the working of the traffic
during the time such alterations or repairs are being
effected. Where there is no Station-master or Signal-
man, Signal-fitters must provide for the safety of the
line in accordance with the Rule on the subject.
IGG. When any points are about to be connected when points are
with a Signal-box or Frame, or when any connexion connected or
between the Signal-box or Frame and Points requires “YidHntfrferes
repairs, the execution of which will interfere with the with their
usual working of the points, the Signal-fitters must, worki «g.
before commencing, acquaint the Signalman in charge
of the points with the nature of the work, and agree
with him when it is to be done. After the work has
been commenced, the man in charge of the points at
which tbe Fitters are engaged must not allow any
train or engine to pass such points, without having
first communicated with the Fitters, and received
information from them that the points are in a fit state
for the train or engine to pass in the direction in which
it is required to run. When the work is completed,
the Fitters must inform the man in charge of the
points. When any repair or re-arrangement of the Bepairs which
Signal Apparatus is necessary, of such a character as forking 6 . wlth
to interfere with the working of the signals, the Rule
on the subject must be strictly carried out; and whether
a Signalman is present or not, the Signal-fitter before


commencing any work at points which may interfere
with the safe passing of trains, must fix a Red Hand
Flag at point of danger, and continue to exhibit it
there until everything is made safe.
Authority 167. No new signal must be brought into use, nor
ana*aUcred' ieW any alteration made in the position or use of any
signals, existing signal, without the authority of the Traffic-
manager or Superintendent of the line, and instructions
for working all new signals must be issued by the
Traffic Branch.
SIGNALMEN.
working of 168. The Signalman on duty must see that the
tested. 10 bG points and signals are kept in perfect working order,
and well oiled, and report to the Station-master under
whose supervision he acts, and to the Inspector of the
Permanent Way, or other person in charge of repairs,
any case in which the points, switches, or signals are
out of repair.
6 IG9. The Signalman must frequently examine and
examined. try the working of his Distant and other signals to see
that they work well, are kept clean, and that the
Care in putting signals sliow in the proper direction. Great care must
signal. he used in putting on a Distant Signal. It is not
sufficient merely to move the lever, but the Signalman
must at the same time watch the signal or its repeater,
so as to ascertain that it obeys the lever, and goes
fully on to “ Danger.”
wires to be 170. He must take care that the signal wires are
kept at the proper length by means of the regulating
screws or links, so as to compensate for the expansion
and contraction caused by variations of temperature.
when Distant 172. In the event of a Distant Signal becoming
defective. 660 ' 116 defective or not working efficiently, a competent
person must be stationed just outside the Distant
Signal, with hand signals and detonators, and act
under the instructions of the Signalman ; and when


such person is out of sight of the Home Signal, one or
more men must be stationed between that post and the
defective signal, for the purpose of repeating by hand
signals to the man stationed at the Distant Signal the
signals exhibited at the Home Signal post.
179. Home Signals at Stations, Sidings, and Signal- Home Signals
boxes (other than at Junctions), where Starting Signals junctions 1 a *
are not provided, must never be passed when at where there are
“ Danger,” except as follows :—When a train has signals,
been stopped or brought nearly to a stand at the Trains required
Home Signal, and it is necessary to draw it within within such t
such Signal before the line ahead is clear, the Engine- Home Signals,
driver must, on receiving verbal instructions from the
Signalman, draw past the Home Signal so as to bring
his train under its protection. If the Signalman is
too far from the Engine-driver to be able to com-
municate verbally with him, the Engine-driver must,
upon the receipt of the necessary signal by hand lamp
or flag from the Signalman, pass the Home Signal
and draw cautiously towards the Signal-box as far as
the line is clear, and there await the verbal instruc-
tions of the Signalman. The hand signals for this
purpose must be given only by a Green Light or
Green Flag.
182. The line must not be obstructed or occupied Obstruction of
by shunting or otherwise until the signals applicable w othenWse!' 1 ”
to the line or lines about to be obstructed have first
been placed at “ Danger.” Where the Block System Precautions to
is in operation, and it is necessary to foul or occupy be taken-
any portion of the line outside the Home Signal, the
line must first be blocked back by telegraph to the
Signal-box in the rear before such obstruction is per-
mitted; and during a fog or snow-storm, or where, in
consequence of the Station being approached upon a
falling gradient, special instructions for working are
issued, no obstruction must be allowed at the Station
inside the Home Signal until the line is so blocked
back to the Signal-box in the rear.
183. Should any impediment or obstruction exist Signals to be
upon the line within the sight or knowledge of the case of tCd m
Signalman, he must exhibit the “ Danger ” Signals, obstruction.
c 2


and prevent any train or engine passing his post in
that direction until such impediment or obstruction
has been removed, and the line made perfectly clear
and safe.
'junction 0 * 187. signals at Junctions must be kept at
Signals. “Danger,” except when lowered for a train to pass.
When a train approaches a Junction, the Signalman
must ascertain whether the line on which the train is
about to run is clear, and, if so, then exhibit the
signals for it to proceed.
when two trains 188. If, when tAvo or more trains approach a Junc-
Junctfonat tion at nearly the same time, the Signalman should
same time. have lowered the signals for a train which should
have been kept back for the passage of another, he
must not attempt to alter the order of the trains by
reversing the signals, but must put all the signals to
“ Danger/’ and keep them on until all the trains have
been brought to a stand, when precedence can be
given to the proper train.
Time intervals at 189. At places where the Block System is not in
Siam Junctions operation, when any train or engine has stopped at or
passed without stopping at a Station, or any place
System is not in other than a Junction where there are fixed signals,
operaton the “Danger” Signal must be immediately exhibited
at the Home and Distant Signals, and remain so until
the train or engine shall have passed or left at least
five minutes. The “ All Right ” Signals must then,
if the line is clear, be exhibited. * * * *
interval of time 190. Where the Block System is not in operation,
between trams. nQ tra j n or en gJ ne mil st be allowed to follow any
other train or engine on the same line within five
minutes.
Time intervals 191. Should a Passenger Train approach a Junc-
at Junctiona!" 8 tion 'within ten minutes after a Goods, Cattle, Mineral,
or Ballast Train, Avhich it has to follow on the same
line, the Signalman must stop it, and inform the


Engifte-driver of the time that has elapsed since the
previous train passed, and the Passenger Train must
proceed cautiously until the Engine-driver receives
an “ All Right ” Sigual indicating that the Goods,
Cattle, Mineral, or Ballast Train is shunted, or that
there is an interval of at least ten minutes between
such train and the Passenger Train. Should two
trains, which have to run forward on the same line,
approach a Junction within five minutes of each other,
the second train must be stopped, and the Engine-
driver informed of the train in advance. If the first
train has passed more than five minutes, but less than
ten minutes, the Signalman must exhibit the Caution
Signal by hand, hand lamp, or flag, as occasion may
require, to the Engine-driver of the second train.
Note. — This Rule does not apply where the Block Exception to
System is in operation, and trains are telegraphed as Ke ° ulatio,l ‘
clear of the post in advance before the time stated has
elapsed, nor to Signal-boxes at the entrance to Stations
at which two or more trains have to connect with
each other. In the latter case, unless special in-
structions for the working of the traffic are provided,
the Signalman, before lowering the Signal for a
train to enter the Station, must satisfy himself that
the line is clear to the point that the train has to run
to, and, if he is in doubt, he must stop the train
and caution the Engine-driver, both verbally and
by Hand Signal, before he allows it to enter the
Station.
192. Station-inasters and Signalmen are required to information as
ascertain how the Ordinary and Special Trains in their trains!" 111 ” of
respective districts are running, and to give informa-
tion to Guards. The Guard in charge of a train which
should shunt for another train to pass must instruct the
Engine-driver where to shunt, and, on arriving at a
Station, Junction, or Siding, where he should shunt for
another train to pass, must inquire whether the train
due to pass him there is late. The Guard must be
informed as to the whereabouts of the train, and, sub- Shuntingjor
ject to the order of the Station-master or person in pa ,a. r ramj


charge, must proceed or shunt as may he necessary.
If he goes forward, he must take care that there is
ample time to reach the place he intends to proceed to,
and get his train shunted off the Main Line, in accor-
dance with the Rule on the subject; and, where the
Block System is not in operation, the Station-master
or person in charge must himself inform the Engine-
driver of the following train the time that has elapsed
since the previous train left.
Passenger Trains 198. Passenger Trains must, as a rule, take prece-
dencePreee" dence of all other trains; and, where the Block Sys-
tem is not in operation, no Goods, Mineral, or Ballast
To be started” Trains must be started from any Station, Siding, or
mhmtesTof a Junction within ten minutes of a Passenger Train being
Passenger ‘ due to leave. If, however, the Station-master or Sig-
Tram. nalman has ascertained, by telegraph or otherwise, that
the Passenger Train which is due to leave is late, he
may despatch the Goods, Mineral, or Ballast Train,
with a sufficient margin to admit of its reaching the
next Shunting Station or Siding in time to avoid delay
to the Passenger Train, taking care specially to warn
the Engine-driver and Guard of the Passenger Train
when it arrives, and to inform them of the precise time
when the Goods or Mineral Train was despatched.
Shunting of 19T. Where the Block System is in operation,
t™ass°where rs Goods, Mineral, Cattle, and Ballast Trains must be
s^ out °f th 6 way of Passenger Trains ; and
Mineral, Slow Goods, and Ballast Trains must also be
shunted out of the way of Fast Goods, at Stations or
Sidings where there are fixed signals, in sufficient
time to prevent the Passenger or Fast Goods Train
being delayed by the signals either at the Station
whpre the train is being shunted or at the Block Sta-
tion in the rear.
Shunting trains 195. Where the Block System is not in operation,
where t>lock • 7
System is not
trains, as above, which have to be passed by any other
m operation, train must be shunted at Stations or Sidings where
there are fixed signals at least ten minutes before such
Passenger Train or Fast Goods is due, and kept there


till five minutes after it has passed. Wherever there
is sufficient Siding accommodation to contain the train,
it must not be shunted from one Main L4ne to the other,
hut always from the Main Line into the Siding.
196. When a train or engine has to be shunted from Shunting train
one Main Line to the other to allow a following train totheotherto°
to pass, such train or engine must be set well within {£ lo^ S g nother
the Home Signal, so as to be efficiently protected by
it from any other train or engine approaching from
the opposite direction.
197. No engine or vehicle must be shunted or moved shunting opera-
from one Main Line to the other, or from the Main tected.° be Pr °'
Line into a Siding, or from a Siding on to the Main
Line, until the proper signals have been exhibited in
one or both directions, as may be required ; and care
must be taken, when the Main Line is about to be
obstructed, after a Distant Signal has been placed
“ Danger ” for the purpose of protecting it, to allow
sufficient time to elapse for any approaching engine or
train (which may have been near to or within such
signal before it was so placed at “ Danger ”) to pass
before the obstruction is allowed.
198. When it is necessary to change or turn a rail, working of fixed
or in any manner to obstruct the line, or to do any pilteiaye^are
work to the permanent way between the Distant Sig- work within
, ~ A, > • -r . , i- , . Station limits or
nals of any Station, Junction, or any intermediate sig- nearinterme-
nalling place, of a character to make the exhibition of djateSignai-
a signal at all necessary, the permission of the Signal-
man in charge of the fixed signals must be first ob-
tained by the Foreman Platelayer, and the work must
not be commenced until the signals have been placed
at “ Danger ; ” and the signals must remain in that
position until the Signalman is informed by the same
Platelayer that the line is again clear and safe for the
passage of trains.
199. When a Flagman, in going back to stop a train, Flagman,
passes any Signal Station or Junction, he must request
the Signalman to keep at “ Danger ” the signals of that


Station or Junction to protect the line which is ob-
structed ; and the Signalman so instructed must not
take off his serials until the Flagman or Foreman
Platelayer in charge of the work has informed him
that the obstruction has been removed, and that the
line is clear, the object being that the Signalman and
Platelayers shall not show contrary signals to ap-
proaching Engine-drivers.
Points not to be 200. No person must move any points which lead to
signalm'an’a° Ut the Main Line, or from one Main Line to the other,
permission. without the permission of the Signalman in charge.
Engine* of p-i- 201. No engine, the property of a private owner,
vatcownero. under any circumstances, be allowed to enter
upon the Main Line, except by special permission of
the proper authorities.
S snai-box to be 202. Each Signalman must keep his Signal-box
kept private, strictly private, and not allow any other persons than
the authorized officers of the Department to enter it.
signalman to see 208, The Signalman must see that each train as it
that each train passes his box has a tail lamp attached to the last
has a tall lamp r , . , r
on the last vehicle, so that he may be satisfied the whole or the
vehicle. train has passed, and that none of the vehicles have
broken away.
S’gnaiman seeing 204. If a Signalman observes anything unusual in a
?n passing Wrong train during its passage, such as signals of alarm by a
train*. passenger, tail lamp missing or out, goods falling off,
a vehicle on fire, a hot axle-box, or other mishap, bo
must give the Station in advance the signal to “ Stop
and examine train,” and the Signalman at the Station
in advance must acknowledge such signal, and in-
stantly put on the Danger Signals to stop the approach-
ing train. Where practicable, the Signalman must also
telegraph the Station in advance the cause of sending
Train on op- the “Stop and examine train ” Signal. Should the
be Stopped* 0 Signalman receiving this signal have reason to suppose
that there is any danger to a train travelling in the
opposite direction, he must also stop that train, and


inform the Engine-driver of the circumstances, in-
structing him to proceed cautiously.
205. If a Signalman observes anything unusual in Precautions in
a train approaching his Signal-box, whether intending being anything
to stop or not, such as signals of alarm by passengers. j® u a pp" 0 a Ch-
goods falling off, vehicles on fire, hot axle-box, or other i n 'g.
mishap, he must endeavour to give a Stop Signal to the
driver. Should he not succeed in calling the Driver’s
attention, and stopping the train, he will act as the
preceding Rule prescribes.
206. Should any vehicle or portion of a train be Vehicle
running back in the wrong direction, the Signalman or/wrong line,
must call the attention of the Signalman at the next
Signal-box towards which the vehicle or portions of
the train may be running, by giving the prescribed
signal indicating that vehicles are running back on
wrong line. The Signalman who has received this
signal must stop any train about to proceed on the
same line, and take such protective measures as may
be necessary, such as turning the runaway train across
to the other line or into a Siding, as may be most ex-
pedient under the circumstances.
207. If any vehicles or portion of a train has escaped, Vehicle or train
and is running away in the proper direction on the
right line, the section in advance must be advised of
the fact by giving on the bell or gong the signal “ Ve-
hicles running away on proper line.” The Signalman
receiving this signal must, if necessary, send the sig-
nal forward, and take such other measures as he may
consider most expedient under the circumstances.
208. When a train has become divided, and is run- Train divided
ning away on a falling gradient, the front portion must on a gradient!
not, when the line is clear for it to proceed beyond the
signals, be stopped so as to risk its being overtaken by
the second portion; but when such train is running on
a rising gradient, or where the line is level, the first
portion must be stopped and shunted into a Siding as
expeditiously as circumstances will permit.


Vehicles de-
tached at
211. When vehicles are detached at Stations from
the rear of trains, and have to be shunted into Sidings,
the Signalman must be at once informed of the fact, in
order that he may keep the signals at “ Danger for
the protection of the line ; and at night, in addition,
a Red light must he shown at the rear of the vehicles
until they are safely placed in the Sidings.
Stations.
212. Goods and Mineral Trains must stop at the
places specified in the Service Time-table, unless, on
approaching a Station or Siding, a signal is given by
the Station-master or Signalman, by hand, lamp, or
flag, that it is not necessary for the train to stop. When
this is done, the train may run past the Station or
Siding without stopping, unless there are waggons or
goods to leave, when the Engine-driver will have in-
structions from the Guards to stop. In the case of a
train timed to stop at a Station or Siding “ when re-
quired,” the Engine-driver of such train must stop at
the Station or Siding, unless he receives a hand signal
to proceed without stopping.
Goods and Min-
eral Trains to
stop as marked
in working
Time-table.
Exceptions.
Trains timed to
stop “when re-
quired.”
Lighting Signal
Lamps.
213. The Signal Lamps must be lighted as soon as
it commences to be dusk ; and, during the interval
between daylight and dark, both day and night signals
must be used.
214. The Signal Lamps must be extinguished in
accordance with the following directions : —At places
where a person is on duty all night, and at level-
crossings where a Station-master or Gatekeeper is resi-
dent on the spot, and trains are running, the Signal
Lamps must not be put out until broad daylight. At
places where no person is on duty during the night,
the Signal Lamps must be put out before the person
last on duty leaves.
Extinguishing
Signal Lamps.
Ballast Train
discharging or
taking up mate'
rials on the
Main Line be-
tween two
215. Should a Ballast Train have to discharge or
take up materials on the Main Line between two Block
Signal-boxes, the Guard of such train must, before
entering the section, inform the Signalman in charge
of the Block Signal-box there of the facts, so that he
Block Signal-
boxes.


may be aware of the proposed occupation of the line,
and give any instructions that may be necessary as to
the shunting of the Ballast Trains for other trains.
21G. When it is necessary for a Signalman to leave Danger signal to
his box for the purpose of re-lighting or re-trimming ° U
his Distant Signal lamps, he must, before proceeding
to do so, place all his signals at “ Danger.”
217. At all Signal-boxes where both day and night Signalman leav-
Signalmen are employed, each Signalman before taking information To c
charge must, in addition to satisfying himself that
all the telegraph instruments, signal points, &c., are
in good working order, ascertain from the man he re-
lieves whether there are any special circumstances re-
quiring attention ; whether the trains which are due
to pass have done so, and, if not, what are the excep-
tions; also what trains, if any, are in the Station, or
arp signalled, and all other matters the knowledge of
which is necessary to enable him to properly discharge
his duty. The Signalman relieved must give full in-
formation on these points before leaving duty, so that
the duties of the post may be conducted in an efficient
manner, and any inconvenience arising from the change
of men avoided. Each Signalman must register in
the train-book the time of his arrival on duty and the
time of his leaving, and place his signature thereto.
218. Each Signalman, before commencing duty in Regulation of
the morning, must, when practicable, compare the clock signal-boxes,
in his box with the Station clock, and if any difference
exists he must correct his own by the Station clock,
so that the coiTect time may be shown. Where the
Signal-boxes arc some distance from a Station, the
Signalman must satisfy himself that his clock is going
well and keeping good time, by comparing it from
time to time with the nearest Station clock. If a
clock gets out of order and does not keep good time,
it must be reported to the Station-master who has the
supervision of the box, so that the clock may be re-
paired or replaced without delay.


REGULATIONS FOR WORKING SINGLE LINE OF
RAILWAY BY TRAIN STAFF AND TICKET.
Train staff or 219. A Train Staff or Train Staff Ticket must bo
«£rioi. t 0 C carried with each train or engine, and without this
Staff or Ticket no train or engine must be allowed to
travel on the line.
sto train to leave 220. No train or engine must be permitted to leave
a''the station an ,Y Staff Station unless the Staff for that portion of
the line over which it is to travel is then at the Station.
signals at cross- 221. At Stations where trains have to cross each
ias stations - other, all signals must be kept at “ Danger,” except
when required to be lowered to admit a train ; and
when trains which have to cross each other are ap-
proaching the Station in opposite directions, and the
signals have been lowered for one train, they must not
be lowered for the other train until the first train has
come to a dead stop, and the Signalman has seen that
the line on which the other train will arrive has been
left quite clear.
custody of stair. 222. The person in charge of the Station for the
time being is the sole person authorized to receive and
deliver the Staff or Ticket.
when staff is to 223. When ia train or engine is ready to start from
gfne-driver. En * ft Station, and no second train or engine is intended to
follow before the Staff will be required for a train in
the opposite direction, it is the duty of the person in
charge of the Station to give the Staff to the Engine-
driver.
When tickets are 224. If other trains or engines are intended to follow
Kngiije-driver succession before the Staff can be returned, a Ticket
indicating that the Staff is following must be given
by the person in charge of the Station to the Engine-
driver* of the first train or engine, the Staff for the
section being shown to him, and so on with any other
train or engine except the last, the Staff itself being
given to the Engine-driver of the last train or engine,


as directed in Regulation. After the Staff has been
sent away, no other train or engine must, under any
circumstances, leave the Station to follow in the same
direction until the Staff for that section has been
returned.
225. No Engine-driver with a train or light engine Engine-driver
must leave a Station until he has received the proper u° lt ii°he has re-
Staff or Ticket for that section of the line over which cel ved the staff
■»• iii iici /y» or TicKct.
he is about to travel, and he must not take the Stan
or Ticket from any other than the person in charge of
the Station for the time being. After receiving the signals.
Staff or Ticket, he must not start until the proper
signals have been exhibited, and, when with a train,
until a signal has also been given by the Guard. On staff or Ticket to
arriving at the Station to which the Staff or Ticket beglveßUl> -
extends, such Staff or Ticket must immediately be
given up to the person in charge of the Station, to
be dealt with as the latter may be instructed by the
Superintendent of the Line.
226. An Engine-driver will render himself liable to Penalty for
dismissal if, under any circumstances, he leaves a Staff leavlng'withont
Station without the Staff or Ticket for the section over staff or Ticket,
which he is about to run ; or, if he leaves with a Ticket,
without having also seen the proper Staff.
227. Each Staff has engraved or marked on it the stair, boxes,ana
name of the Staff Station at each end of the section to tlckets-
which only it applies.
228. The tickets must be kept in the proper Ticket- Tickets to be kept
box, fastened by an inside spring, the key to open the whlch’thc°suft
box being the Staff for the same section as the box, so is the key,
that if the Ticket-box is kept locked, for which the
person in charge of the Station will be held strictly
responsible, access to the tickets cannot be obtained
unless the proper Staff for the section is then at the
Station.
229. All spare tickets must be kept under lock and Sparc tickets to
key, and in the care of the person in charge of the be locked up ’
Station.


place for staff 230. The Staff, when at the Station, must not be
when at station. k e p t j n box, but ou t ] ie brackets outside of it.
Not to fake staff 231. Engine-drivers must be extremely careful not
proper staUon!* 1 to take the Staff or Ticket, beyond the Station at
which it ought to be left.
Special Trains, 232. When a Special Train or engine has to be run,
the usual Special Train Tail Signal must be attached
to the preceding train for the guidance of the Plate-
layers and others employed on the line.
Trains assisted by 233. When trains are assisted by a second engine
second engine. j n f rontj the leading engine must carry the Staff
or Ticket; but when the assistant engine is behind
pushing the train, the train engine must carry a Ticket,
and the assistant engine the Staff, except in cases where
the train and assistant engine are travelling over the
entire length of section, and have to be followed by
another train or engine, Avhen the train and assistant
engine must each have a Ticket. When the assistant
engine is intended to return to the Station from which
it started, Avithout running through the entire section,
1 it must always carry the Staff.
Engine carrying 234. In the eA r cnt of an engine AA r hich carries the
staff disabled. Staff breaking down between two Stations, the Fire-
man must take the Staff to the Staff Station in the
direction AAdience assistance can be obtained or is ex-
pected, in order that the Staff may be at the Station
Engine carrying on arrival of the engine. Should the engine that fails
Ticket disabled. be i n possession of a Ticket instead of a Staff, assist-
ance must only come from the Station at which the
Staff has been left; but if assistance can bo more
readily obtained at a Station other than that where the
Staff is, immediate steps must be taken to have the
Staff transferred to the other end of the section. The
Fireman must accompany the assistant engine to the
place where he has left his own engine.
when line is 235. Should the accident be of such a nature as to
blocked. block the road, and the traffic is likely to be stopped


for any considerable time, special arrangements must
be made for working the trains to and from the point
of obstruction on each side. The Train Staff Regu-
lations must be carried out on that side where the
Staff is at the moment of the accident, and, on the
other side, the traffic must be conducted by a Pilotman
to be appointed by an order in writing, and the person
in charge of each end of the section worked by the
Pilotman must have a copy of such order.
236. When the line is again clear, no train or engine when line is
must be allowed to pass the point of obstruction with- £iocked terbt:inB
out the Staff and the Pilotman. The Pilotman must
accompany the train or engine carrying the Staff to
the Staff terminal, when the traffic will be again con-
ducted according to the Train Staff Regulations.
237. When a Ballast Train has to work on the Ballast train at
line, the Staff must be given to the Engine-driver in nne' kontlie
charge of it. This will close the line whilst the
Ballast Train is at work. The Ballast Train must
proceed afterwards to one of the Staff Stations to open
the line before the ordinary traffic can be resumed.
238. The Service Time-tables with Appendices, staff stations
issued for the guidance of the servants, will contain lerviceThne-
the necessary information from time to time as to the tables with
places which are appointed Staff Stations. Appendices.
FORM OF TRAIN STAFF TICKET.
239.
Form of Train
Staff Ticket.
Where stick Ticket is in use.
■k°" Railway.
Train Staff Ticket.
Line of Branch.
Train No. (Down.)
To the Engine-driver,
You are authorized, after seeing Train Staff for the
Section, to proceed from to
and the Train Staff will follow.
Signature of person in charge—
Date
[Back of Ticket.]


Giving up Train 240. This Ticket must be given up by tbe Engine-
staff Ticket. driver, immediately on arrival, to tbe person in charge
of the Station to which he is authorized to proceed,
to be dealt with as the latter may be instructed by the
Superintendent of the Line,
REGULATIONS FOR WORKING SINGLE LINES
OF RAILWAY BY PILOT GUARD.
241. The Pilot Guard will be distinguished by a
special dress or badge ; and no train or engine must,
under any circumstance, be allowed to run on the line
unless it is either accompanied or personally started
by the Pilot Guard wearing such dress or badge.
Pilot Guard to
start all trains.
242. The Pilot Guard will, when practicable, accom-
pany every train ; but, when it is necessary to start
two or more trains from one end of the section under
his control before a train has to be started from the
other end, the Pilot Guard must furnish the Guard
in charge of each train not accompanied by himself
with one of the printed Pilot Guard’s Tickets, where
such are provided, properly filled up and signed, and
personally start such train, and must himself accom-
pany the last train. The Ticket granted in this case
will apply only to the single journey to the other end
of the section, where it must be immediately given up
to the person in charge of the Station, to be dealt
with as the latter may be instructed by the Super-
intendent of the Line. The Engine-driver must not
start his train without seeing the Pilot Guard, and,
in case the Pilot Guard does not accompany the train,
until he has received from the Guard of his train the
Pilot Guard’s Ticket authorizing him to proceed.
An Engine-driver working an engine unaccompanied
by a Guard must observe the same regulations as
herein laid down for a Guard with a train.
Pilot Guard,
when
practicable, to
accompany
every train.
Exception.
Engine-driver
working train
without Guard.
243. Previous to starting any train, the Pilot Guard
must ascertain from the Guard of the train that all is
right, and that he is ready to go on.
Starting of
trains.


244. In the event of a train accompanied by the Disabled trains.
Pilot Guard becoming disabled, the Pilot Guard must
make the best arrangements the circumstances of the
case allow for procuring assistance with the least
delay.
245. In the event of a train unaccompanied by a
Pilot Guard becoming disabled, the Guard in charge
must take the necessary steps for the protection of his
train, and communicate with the Pilot Guard as soon
as possible.
24G. No train or engine must be allowed to enter signalman to
upon any Single Line section without being stopped
by the Signalman, who must not allow it to pass until by authority of
he has made himself perfectly satisfied that the Pilot IllotGuaid -
Guard is accompanying it, or has given authority for
it to start.
FORM OF PILOT GUARD’S TICKET.
Form of Pilot
Guard’s Ticket.
247.
Where such Ticket is in use.
Ticket No.
Railway.
Line or Branch.
Train No. (Down.)
To the Guard and Engine-driver.
You are authorized to proceed from
to , Pilot Guard following.
Signature of Pilot Guard —
[Back of Ticket.]
248. This Ticket is to be given up by the Engine- Disposal of Pilot
driver, immediately on arrival, to the person in charge Guard ’ 3 Tluket-
of the Station to which he is authorized to proceed,
to be dealt with as the latter may be instructed by the
Superintendent of the Line.


REGULATIONS FOR WORKING THE TRAFFIC
OF A DOUBLE LINE OVER A SINGLE LINE OF
RAILS DURING REPAIRS OR OBSTRUCTION.
249. When an accident or obstruction of any kind
occurs on any part of the line, it must he immediately
reported by telegraph, or by the most expeditious
means, to the next Station or Signal-box on each side
of the place where the accident has occurred, so that
notice may be given to the Engine-drivers and Guards
of approaching trains ; also to the Heads of Branches,
to the Locomotive Station where the casualty vans
for the district are kept, to the District Traffic Super-
intendent, and to the Inspector of Permanent Way.
It must also be reported by telegraph to those Stations
where the starting of other trains is liable to be
affected by the delay caused by the obstruction.
Accidents to be
immediately
reported.
Appointment of
Pilotman.
251. A competent person must be appointed as
Pilotman, who must wear a distinctive badge, which,
until the regular badge can be obtained, must be a red
flag tied round his left arm ; and no engine must enter
upon any portion of the Single Line without the Pilot-
man being present and travelling upon the said engine,
unless two or more trains are required to follow in the
same direction, in which case the Pilotman must
order all trains to proceed, except the last, upon the
engine of which he must travel. If a special engine
is supplied for the use of the Pilotman, he must per-
sonally start the whole of the trains, and must follow
or accompany the last train on the engine provided
for his use. < '•
Limit of single 252. Single Line working should be confined to
Lme working, the points at wdiich there are fixed signals, with a
cross-over road, and at all times to the shortest length
1 wbere* oVer P oss^e ; but in the event of a cross-over road, not
there are no protected by Distant and Home Signals, being used
fixed signals is f or gi n gi e Li ne working, a competent man with the
necessary signals must be placed at least 1,200 yards
neyond the cross-over road to signal in lien of the


Distant Signal, and another man (similarly provided)
at the points to signal iu lien of the Horae Signal.
Should the distance of 1,200 yards fall within a When
tunnel, or close to the mouth of a tunnel nearest to ® cannot
the obstruction, or in any other position where, owing secn
to the formation of the line or some other circumstance, driver,
the Engine-driver of an approaching train or engine
would be unable to obtain a distinct and distant view
of the signal, then the signal must be exhibited at the
end of the tunnel farthest from the cross-over road, or
at such a distance over and above the prescribed dis-
tance of 1,200 yards as may be necessary to ensure the
250. Should the accident block one of the lines of when one line in
railway, so as to necessitate the passing of all up and blocked-
down trains upon a Single Line, immediate steps
must be taken to establish Single Line working, when
the following precautions must be adopted :
end of the Single Line. So soon as the person who has
made the arrangements for the Single Line working
is satisfied that they are understood, trains and engines
may be allowed to go on to the Single Line, under the
control, and by the permission, of the Pilotman.
Note. —It will generally be found most expeditious
for the Station-master in advance of the obstruction to
undertake the arrangements for Single Line working,
as he ivill have a clear road in the proper direction on
which the Pilotman can make his first journey. The
Pilotman can commence Single Line working so soon
as he is in possessio?i of the acknowledgments from
the men in charge of both ends of the Single Line.
254. When Single Line is to be worked for up and Suspension of
down traffic, the Block telegraph working must be ,vo° r c k l i ]] t g - legrJ1 ’ h
suspended, by an order in writing, from the person
who arranges the Single Line working, except on
d 2


REGULATIONS FOR WORKING THE TRAFFIi
OF A DOUBLE LINE OVER A SINGLE LINE Ol
RAILS DURING REPAIRS OR OBSTRUCTION.
Accidents to be 249. When an accident or obstruction of any kin<
reported* occurs on any part of the line, it must be immediately
reported by telegraph, or by the most expedition
means, to the next Station or Signal-box on each sid<
of the place where the accident has occurred, so tha
notice may be given to the Engine-drivers and Guard
ti'oi'no olcn tri tl»p TTpnrls nf T-irn.npbfia
man being present and travelling upon the said engine
unless two or more trains are required to follow in th(
same direction, in which case the Pilotman musl
order all trains to proceed, except the last, upon th<
engine of which he must travel. If a special engine
is supplied for the use of the Pilotman, he must per-
sonally start the whole of the trains, and must follow
or accompany the last train on the engine provided
for his use. \ ' ‘ <
Limit of single 252. Single Line working should be confined te
Line working, the points at which there are fixed signals, with f
cross-over road, and at all times to the shortest lengtl
When cross-over possible; but in the event of a cross-over road, noi
therc'nreno protected by Distant and Home Signals, being usee
used sls ‘ ials is for Single Line working, a competent man with th<
necessary signals must be placed at least 1,200 yards
oeyond the cross-over road to signal in lieu of th<


Distant Signal, and another man (similarly provided)
at the points to signal in lieu of the Home Signal.
Should the distance of 1,200 yards fall Avithin a When hand
tunnel, or close to the mouth of a tunnel nearest to yards cannot
the obstruction, or in any other position where, owing plainly seen
to the formation of the line or some other circumstance, driver,
the Engine-driver of an approaching train or engine
would he unable to obtain a distinct and distant view
of the signal, then the signal must be exhibited at the
end of the tunnel farthest from the cross-over road, or
at such a distance over and above the prescribed dis-
tance of 1,200 yards as may be necessary to ensure the
Engine-driver obtaining a good and distinct view of
such signals.
253. Three of the printed Forms provided for the Forms to be used
[ purpose of establishing Single Line working must be single Liue hinS
[ tilled up and signed by the Station-master or a person working.
lin charge of the Single Line arrangements. One of
these he must deliver to the Signalman in charge of
the cross-over road at which the Single Line working
commences; the second must be retained by the Pilot-
man ; and the third conveyed by the Pilotman or a
special messenger to the person in charge of the other
end of the Single Line. So soon as the person who has
made the arrangements for the Single Line working
is satisfied that they are understood, trains and engines
may he allowed to go on to the Single Line, under the
control, and by the permission, of the Pilotman.
Note. —lt will generally he found most expeditious
for the Station-master in advance of the obstruction to
undertake the arrangements jor Single Line working,
as he will have a clear road in the proper direction on
which the Pilotman can make his first journey. The
Pilotman can commence Single Line working so soon
as he is in possession of the acknowledgments from
the men in charge of both ends of the Single Line.
254. When Single Line is to be worked for up and Suspension of
down traffic, the Block telegraph working must be ® 1 0 0 r c k 1 j n t g e > leBraph
suspended, by an order in writing, from the person
who arranges the Single Line working, except on
d 2


Transfer of pas-
257. When Loth lines are blocked, and it becomes
sengers whore
both lines are
necessary to work trains np to the point of obstruction
blocked.
on both sides, for the transfer of passengers or any
purpose, Single Line working must be arranged on
both sides, between the nearest cross-over road and
the point of obstruction, a Piiotman being appointed
on each side, in accordance with these Rules.
Speed of trains.
258. Trains or engines, when working over the
Single Line, must be run cautiously and at reduced
speed.
Forwarding of
259. After making the necessary arrangements for
the safety of the passengers and trains, it will be the
duty of the Guards and Engine-drivers (if no superior
officers be present) to arrange for the passengers being
forwarded as soon as possible, acting in strict accord-
ance with these Regulations.
Points which
become facing
points to be
260. All points which become facing points to trains
running over the Single Line must be either held by a
held or secured.
competent man appointed to the duty, or so secured
as to enable the trains to pass safely over them.
Catch points.
261. Where there are catch points upon the line,
Station-masters, Signalmen, and others must take care,
inclines and through tunnels, where the Block tele-
graph working may not he suspended, in which case
special instructions will be given for Block signalling.
Engine-driver of 255. No train or engine must be allowed to enter
train about to U p oll the Single Line without the Engine-driver
enter upon x ® °
Single Line to having first been informed by the Bilotman that
sfngle°Limf is Single Line is being worked.
being worked.
signalman to 25G. The Signalman at each end of the Single Line
know I'iiotman. mus t know the man appointed as Bilotman, and must
countersign the notice for Single Line working held
by him. They must place their signals at “ Danger,”
and keep them so until both lines are clear, and the
ordinary working of the traffic is resumed.


before Single Line working is at any time put into
operation over such catch points, that a man, pro-
vided with proper signals, is placed at them, with
special orders to remain there, and to hold them pro-
perly closed for the safe passing of each Facing Train
until the order for Single Line working has been with-
drawn, and the Double Line working resumed.
2G2. Engine-drivers are warned that when working Engine-driver
Single Line, as above, they must not pass any catch gel?
points until they have assured themselves they are points are hew.
being held properly by a man at*the place.
263. Should the Pilot-man give up the working to change of
another, the name of the second Pilotman must be PUotman-
substituted on new Forms at both ends of the Single
Line; but this can only be done by the person who
arranged the Single Line working, and he on doing
so must collect and return the orders previously issued,
and on the resumption of the ordinary working all
orders which have been issued on Single Line work-
ing must be collected and sent to the General Traffic
Manager.
264. After one Pilotman has been relieved •by Relieved piiot-
another, he must not travel on any engine until he man travelling,
resumes duty as Pilotman.
265. Should a Signalman be changed during the signalman
time the Single Line working is in operation, the man clian s m g dutics-
coming on duty must be made acquainted by the man
going off duty with the arrangements in force and of
the person acting as Pilotman, and must countersign
the order held by the Pilotman.
266. The Pilotman must accompany the first train pilotman must
in each direction after the Double Line has been rSt
re-opened. _ direction after
Double Line lias
been re-opened.
267. Whenever it is necessary, in consequence of one line blocked
repairs to the road or relaying, lo block one of the
lines and work the traffic on the other, the arrange- traffic worked
ments for conducting the traffic must be made in the ot ier
same way as laid down in the foregoing Rules.


FORM TO BE FILLED UP IN CONNEXION
WITH SINGLE LINE WORKING DURING
OBSTRUCTION.
Form for Single 268.—•
Line working. Railway.
Station,
The Line being blocked between
and , all traffic will pass
between these two places on the Line.
will act as “ Pilotman,” and no engine
or train is to be allowed to pass on to the Single Line
unless he is present, and personally orders the engine
or train to start.
This order is to remain in force until withdrawn by
the Pilotman presenting my written authority.
Signed—
To
*Noted by at
*Noted by at
Noted by Pilotman.
* These signatures must be made on the copy held by the Pilotman.
Filling up Form. 269. The above Form must be filled up and used
whenever it is temporarily necessary to work the
traffic of a Double Line over a Single Line.
where Forms are 270. Six of these Forms must be kept in a con-
to be kept, &c. V euient place at each Station and at each intermediate
Signal-box, where there is a cross-over road, so as to
be available at any moment* night or day.
Disposal of 271. Before Single Line working is commenced, a
filled up Forms, copy of this Form must be signed by the person in
charge at each end, and be kept by the Pilotman, who
must see that each of the men signing the Form retains
a copy for himself.
station-master 2/2. In the event of a Station-master himself acting
Pilotman. as Pilotman, he must address and give the order to the
person he leaves in charge of his Station.


273. If an intermediate place (not a Station) is used Giving order at
for crossing the traffic from one line to the other, the (not!? 1 * 16
order must be addressed and given to the person in station) where
, , traffic crosses.
charge of that crossing.
274. Station-masters and other persons in charge responsibility of
receiving this order will he held responsible that the an^othera 816 ”
Inspectors, Foremen, Signalmen, and others at their receiving order.
Station are immediately made acquainted with the
circumstances, and are instructed in the necessary
duties.
REGULATIONS FOR WORKING SINGLE LINE BY
ONE ENGINE ONLY AT THE SAME TIME.
275. Only one engine in steam, or two or more One engine or
coupled together, which are then to be treated as one allowed on the
engine or train, must be alloAved to be on the line at line-
one and the same time, except in the case of an engine
or train becoming disabled and requiring assistance,
or an accident occurring which renders it impossible
for the engine to proceed, when the Guard in charge
must instruct the Engine-driver to keep the engine
stationary until his return, and then make the best of
his way to the Station whence assistance can be ob-
tained, and inform the person in charge there of the
circumstances, who will, on receipt of such informa-
tion, allow a second engine to enter the line. The
second engine must be accompanied by the Guard of
the disabled engine or train, who must explain to the
Engine-driver where, and under what circumstances,
the disabled engine or train is situated.
270, The Guard of the disabled engine or train will Disabled engiie
be held responsible for the safe and proper working of charge”!**
the line until both engines have left it, and it is again Guard,
clear.
277. Should an engine without a Guard become proceeding when
disabled, the Fireman must perform the duties pre- becomes
scribed for the Guard. disabled.


Locking points. 278. All points on the Single Line or giving com-
munication with it at intermediate stations and Sidings
must be kept securely locked, except when they are
actually being used for the purpose of shunting
vehicles with the engine working the line.
GENERAL REGULATIONS FOR WORKING THE
ABSOLUTE BLOCK TELEGRAPH ON A DOUBLE
LINE OF RAILWAY.
object of Electric 279. The object of the system of Electric Train-
systenf lgnaUlng s '£ n; dl' n g is to prevent more than one train or engine
being between any two block cabins or stations on
the same line at the same time. This is accomplished
by not allowing any train or engine to leave a block
cabin or station till the previous train or engine has
been signalled as having arrived at, or left, the block
cabin or station next in advance.
Every train to be 280. Every train or engine, without exception, must
carry a'tau nd therefore be signalled in its progress from block station
to block station. The last vehicle on every train must
carry a tail lamp by day as well as by night.
instruments, &c., 281. The block cabins or stations from which the
nsetun I Signal- signalling is done are furnished with instruments
boxes. which will signal the trains running in both directions,
and the system under which the instruments are to
be worked, and the mode of indicating the trains, are
laid down in the Code of Regulations supplied to
Signalmen, or exhibited in the Signal-boxes for the
guidance of the persons in charge.
Use of Block sig- 282. The Block Signal instruments are exclusively
nal instruments £ ~ . ... „ . . , , „ J
tor the signalling of trains, and must not be used for
any other purpose.
A second train or 283. On the lines worked on the Absolute Block
s y s f em ? a second train or engine must not be allowed
section, &c. to enter a section until the preceding train or engine
has been signalled as having passed out of the section,


excepting under circumstances specified in rules
to meet cases of train or telegraph failure. The
“Danger” signal must be exhibited at both the home
and distant semaphores, to protect trains or engines
standing at Stations or intermediate signal-cabins ;
and when any train or engine has gone forward into
the onward section, the semaphore signals which con-
trol the entrance of trains and engines into such sec-
tions must also be put to and kept at “ Danger ”
until telegraphic information has been received from
the block cabin in advance that the preceding train or
engine has passed out of that section.
284. In cases where advance starting semaphore Advance starting
signals are provided at the entrance to a block section, na” s apllore Sl °‘
trains coming off the preceding section, after stopping
at the home semaphore signal, may, on that being
lowered, proceed cautiously to the advance starting
semaphore, and there stay till that semaphore is
lowered.
285. When a Signalman has lowered the advance Signalling when
semaphore signal for a train which has drawn up to it into next"
to proceed into the next section, he must, after care- section fromad-
fully ascertaining that the train has cleared this signal, piiore.
raise it to “Danger” before lowering the home sema-
phore for another train to advance.
28G. Unless special instructions are given to the Line clear,
contrary, the line must be considered clear, and the
signal “Line clear” be given immediately the last
vehicle has passed the home signal post.
287. Should it become necessary to block a section, mocking
in consequence of a breakdown obstructing the line, sections-
or other circumstance causing it to be necessary to
stop any approaching train, the Signalman at the
Station where the obstruction takes place must use
the means authorized by his regulations for prevent-
ing any train leaving the block cabin in the rear.
288. Should there be reason to suppose that both Lines fouled,
lines are fouled, the Signalman must without any
delay block the lines in both directions.


shunting, &c., 289. No shunting or obstruction of any sort on
ie Main Line must be allowed to take place at a Sta-
are taken. tion until the Signalman has taken the proper steps to
prevent any train from leaving the next block cabin,
in either direction or both directions, as circumstances
may require.
Ballast trains 290. Ballast trains are not to stop to load or unload
stopping. between block cabins without first stopping to advise
the Signalman of the previous block cabin of the in-
tended stoppage, and its probable duration.
signals to be re- 291. All signals must be distinctly repeated until
peated, <tc. acknowledged. No signal must be acknowledged
until it is clearly understood. A signal is not com-
plete until it is acknowledged, and it may only be
recorded in the Train Signal-book when completed.
A proper acknowledgment must be clearly received
before a second signal is sent.
Entrvof signal in 292. Every signal sent and every one received must
be entered in the Train Signal-book immediately after
such signal has been sent and received.
“Clear”and “On 293. After a train has left a Station, and until it
line” Signals. j. iag arr i vet | a t the next Station in advance, and the
signal “ Clear” has been properly received, the Block
instrument needle will point to “ On line,” and the
out-door signals for the line to which that Block in-
strument signal applies must also be at danger.
clear” signal. 294. The “ Clear ” Signal is not to be given un-
less the line is actually clear, and no obstruction of
the line must be permitted after the “ Clear ” Signal
has been given.
Precaution before 295. Before giving the “ Clear*’ Signal, the Signal-
“clear” signal man mus t satisfy himself that the whole of the train
18 {jivcili *
has passed his cabin, and that no portion has become
■ detached on the road.
Train passing 290. Should a train pass a Block cabin without a
without'taii bm tail lamp on the last vehicle, the “ Stop and examine


train” Signal must bo sent to the Station in advance, lamponia*
and the Signalman must not give the “ Clear ” Signal vulliole ‘
to the Station in the rear, but must give the “ Train
passed without tail lamp” Signal. This signal being
acknowledged, the Signalman at rear Station must stop
any train following, and verbally instruct the Driver to
proceed cautiously, giving him the reason. As soon as
the train, the Driver of which has been cautioned, has
passed the block cabin or Station from whence the
“ Train passed without tail lamp ” Signal was received,
the Signalman then will re-commence signalling in the
ordinary manner.
297. On receiving a Train Departure Signal, a pre- Train Departure
paratory notice must at once be signalled to the next Slgnal,&t ‘
Station in advance, by giving tbe warning signal
which is to denote * * * train coming.
298. Should the Block instrument remain at “ Clear” <*ciear” ami
after the departure of a train has been signalled, the signals tl<>a "
Signalman must not understand by this that the line is
clear, but that the electric signal has been neglected.
In such a case he should at once give the “ Atten-
tion” Signal.
299. When the electric signal in a Signalman’s box Carefulness to be
remains at “ On line” for a longer period than usual
after a train has passed, the Signalman should remem- m»i'» at “ 0u
bor that then is just the time when he requires to be
most careful. He should not get impatient, but wait
a while before he does anything. Signalmen are some-
times over anxious to prevent the detention of a train ;
they should bear in mind that it is better to delay a
train than run the slightest risk of accident. If the
signal remain.at “On line ” a very unusual period,
the “ Attention Signal should be given, and an entry
made in Train Book.
300. When a Signalman has received a Departure Late arrival of
Signal, and has acknowledged it, and the train so trains ‘
signalled does not arrive at his cabin in the usual
time, then should he receive the “ Attention ” Signal


on the bell or gong, or any sign.il which he does
not understand, he should always in reply give the
Obstruction Signal; and any train proceeding in the
contrary direction must be stopped, and the Driver
and Guard specially informed and cautioned before
entering the section, as an accident fouling both lines
may have occurred.
Arrangements 301. Whenever it may become necessary to block
robloJkup S o a r ry ie U P or down line or both in consequence of the
downline. breakdown of any engine or train, or other unusual
cause of obstruction at a Station or on the line, the
Obstruction Signal is to bo given to the next Signal-
cabin from which trains or engines might approach,
and the electric block instrument as well as the out-
door signals are to be maintained at “ Danger ” until
the obstruction is cleared. The out-door signals at
the Station receiving the Obstruction Signal should be
placed at “Danger” before the Obstruction Signal is
acknowledged. The Obstruction Signal is also to be
given to the Stations on every side from which trains
or engines might approach, previous to the crossing
or shunting of any trains or vehicles.
Obstruction 302. The Obstruction Signal is to be received, in
Sl = naL all cases, in the fullest sense as an obstruction signal,
and no train is to be allowed to proceed on the road
so blocked until the “ Clear” Signal has been received.
incorrect signals, 303. Should an incorrect signal or acknowledgment
&c., sent. have been accidently sent, the error signal must be
given and repeated back, and then the correct signal.
incorrect signals, 304. Should an incorrect or unintelligible signal or
&c., received. ac ] aiow ledgment be received, the “ Attention ” Signal
must be given, and in reply the Signalman called will
carefully repeat the last signal intended to be sent by
him. The “ Attention ” Signal should also be given
and replied to by an exact repetition during storms or
lightning, or whenever the Signalman thinks it neces-
sary to assure himself of the correctness of the signals
shown on his instrument.


305. Should a signal or acknowledgment be n eg-Neglect of signal
lected, the “Attention” Signal must be given, and m e^ kn °* led °'-
iu reply the Signalman called will correct his omis-
sion. No reply is, in all cases, to be considered as
indicating that the line is blocked.
307. If from any cause the needle-pointers of the Disarrangement
Block telegraph instrument cannot be moved, the
signalling must be carried on by means of the Code of
Signals on the bell or gong until the indicating part
of the instrument is set right.
308. Should electric intercommunication be wholly when electric in-
stopped, the progress of trains and engines must be Kipped,
regulated in strict accordance Avith the general rules
for working the line by means of ordinary signals,
only with tins addition, that the Guard and Driver of
every train must be cautioned by the Station-master
or Signalman that the preceding train has not been
signalled “ Clear,” and that a good look out must be
kept.
309. In the event of any interruption occurring in interruption to
the working of the instruments, either thiough dis- instruments,
arrangement of the apparatus or from any other cause,
a report is to be immediately forwarded by the quickest
means to the Telegraph Engineer and General Traffic
Manager.
310, All signals must be given as distinctly as Signals to be
possible, free from haste and temper. Signals are given distinctly,
often made so fast that the instruments cannot render
them clearly and unmistakably. This should not be.
There is always ample time for all signalling purposes
between the trains, and it is always found that the
man who does his work in a steady methodical manner
will occupy less time in doing it than the one who
works his instrument in an intemperate manner, quite
regardless as to how the signals reach his comrade.
311. Every Signal-box must be provided with a Train Signal-
Train Signal-book, in which must be entered all up k° oks '
and down trains under their respective columns ;


giving the description of train, the time it is signalled,
the time the line is blocked, and the time it is again
cleared.
312. All entries must be made direct into the book,
and no erasures allowed. When a wrong entry is
made, the pen should be drawn through it in such a
manner as to show that it is crossed out, and yet not
so as to make it illegible.
Making entries
in book.
313. When Signalmen change duty, a line should
be drawn across the book immediately beneath the
last entry. The Signalman going off duty should
sign his name above this line, with the remark “Off
duty,” and the time. The Signalman Avho “takes
on ” should sign his name under the line, with the
remark “On duty,” and the time. Signal-boxes must
be visited by an inspecting officer at least once a week,
when Signal-books must be examined, as well as all
other arrangements of the box.
Signalman
changing duty.
Failure of instru
ments or bells.
318. In the event of any failure of the instruments
or bells, so that the necessary signals cannot be for-
warded and received, no train must, under any cir-
cumstances, be allowed to pass a Signal Station into
that section of the line where the failure exists without
having been previously brought to a stand, and the
Engine-driver and Guard advised of the circumstances.
When this has been done, the Engine-driver must
be instructed to proceed cautiously to the post in
advance, so as to be able to stop short of any obstruc-
tion there may be on the line. No train must be
.allowed to follow until the Signalman on duty can
satisfy himself that the line is clear.
Suspension of 819. Should any obstruction occur necessitating the
Block working, wor ki n g 0 f Single Line, the person in charge, who
gives the necessary instructions for so doing, must
at the same time give written instructions for sus-
pending the working of the line by Block telegraph,


except on inclines or through tunnels, where the
Block telegraph working may not be suspended, in
which case special instructions will be given for
Block signalling. On the working of the Double
Line being resumed, the order suspending the working
of the line by Block telegraph is to be cancelled by
written notice in the same manner and at the same
time as the order for working the Single Line is
cancelled.
320. It must be distinctly understood that the sig- Block system
nailing of trains on the Block system does not in any
way dispense with the use of home, distant, hand,
starting, or detonating signals, whenever and wher- signalling,
ever such signals may be requisite for the safety of
traffic. Indeed, those other and necessary precautions
should never be even relaxed. The safety of railway
traffic is only to be secured by overlaying one pre-
caution with another, and duly enforcing the principle
of each. Thus, when a train breaks down within a
Block section, the Guard of the train must not think
that he is perfectly secure, as the Block at the box in
his rear will be maintained till he arrives at that in
advance; but he must, as his rules prescribe, imme-
diately go back, and by means of his flags, lamp, or
fog signals, protect the rear of his train. It is by
these checks upon checks that any evil is to be
averted.
INSTRUCTIONS FOR WORKING GOODS AND
BALLAST TRAINS ON STEEP INCLINES.
321. If there should not be a sufficent number of To divide train
brakes to keep the train under command while de- 1 necessar J-
scending the next following incline, the train must be
divided at the Station, and a portion of the train taken
to the Station nearest the bottom, and there shunted,
under the protection of the signal, into a Siding.
The engine must then return on the proper line for the
remainder of the train, or so much of it as can be


taken down with safety, The Guard must accompany
the engine upon each trip, and be responsible that the
proper signals are made, if there should be no Station-
master or Signalman on the spot.
At top of incline. 322. If there be fixed Signal-posts at the top of an
incline, the train should he stopped there for the purpose
of putting down the brakes if necessary ; and if there
should be a Siding at the top of the incline off the line
on which the train is travelling, the train may be
divided under the protection of the semaphore on the
top of the incline, if it should be necessary to do so.
323. During the journey, the responsibility of
applying a sufficiency of brake power to the train will
rest with the Guard, who, however, should consult
the Driver; and particular attention must be paid in
each case to the gradients, state of the weather, and
condition of the rails, as well as the weight of
the train.
Responsibility
of Guard as'to
applying
brakes.
324. Guards in charge of ballast trains are par-
ticularly instructed to have the engine at all times
before the waggons when descending an incline, and
behind the waggons when ascending the incline.
There must be no deviation from this rule.
Position of
engine in bal-
last trains.
Vehicles ar-
ranged so as to
avoid shunting
unnecessarily.
325. Goods waggons should be so arranged that
more than one shunt may be avoided in leaving them
at each Station. The Goods Guards, in taking up
waggons on the road, should divide the train in the
particular part where there are other waggons for the
same destination.


PART 111.
STATION ROUTINE, ETC.
326. Every Station-master or person in charge of a Responsibility of
Station is answerable for the security and protection
of the office and buildings, and of the Department’s tion-
property there. He is also responsible for the faithful
and efficient discharge of the duties devolving upon all
the Department’s servants, either permanently or
temporarily employed at the Station or within its
limits, and such servants are subject to his authority
and direction in the working of the line. He is also
responsible for the general working of the Station
being carried out in strict accordance with the Depart-
ment’s Regulations, and must, as far as practicable,
give personal attention to the shunting of trains and
all other operations which in any way affect the safety
of the line.
32/. He must always appear in uniform when on Uniform of sta-
, , . P ... , " i• i x i • tion-master.
duty, it uniform be supplied to him.
328. He must see that all orders and instructions office duties,
are duly entered and executed, and that all books and
returns are regularly written up and neatly kept.
329. He must take care that all the servants at his Conduct to pas
Station behave respectfully and civilly to passengers bfin^ers-
of every class.
330. He must take care that all the servants come Cleanliness of
on duty clean in their persons and clothes, and in the form. 1
uniform supplied to them.
381. Every exertion must be made for the expedi- station duties,
tious despatch of the Station duties, and for ensuring
the safety of the public and punctuality of the trains.
333. He must satisfy himself that the Signalmen supervision of
at or attached to his Station perform their duties in °v nalnicn '


Stoppage of
trains.
Security of
facing points.
Cleaning, trim-
ming, and
lighting Signal
lamps.
Trimming of
oil burners.
a proper manner by night as well as by day; and, in
order to maintain a proper supervision over the men in
this respect, it will be necessary for him frequently
to visit the Signal-boxes. .
834. Station-masters are not to stop any train not
authorized to stop on the Time-table, unless ordered to
do so by an authorized officer, or in case of accident or
emergency.
335. At Stations where points are not interlocked,
the Station-master must satisfy himself that facing
points on the Main Line are in their proper position
and secured before the arrival of every train.
336. The greatest care must be exercised in the
cleaning, trimming, and lighting of Signal lamps, and
Station-masters will be held responsible for this work
being efficiently performed. The lamps must be
lighted and extinguished in accordance with the
Regulations.
337. The oil burners of all Distant and other fixed
signals must not be trimmed at the Signal-posts, but
must be brought to the Station lamp-room or Signal-
box, as the case may be, each morning, and cleaned and
trimmed there, and not replaced in the signal lamps
until required to be lighted.
on burners of 838. The oil burners of platform lamps must be
p a orm am . a^en th e ] am p. room ev ery morning, cleaned and
trimmed, and not replaced until required.
inspection of 339. Station-masters and others having signals
Signal lamps, un( j er their care, must frequently inspect the fixed
Signal lamps, and satisfy themselves that they are at
all times in good working order, and that the glasses
and reflectors are well cleaned.
Condition of 340. At Stations where roof lamps are supplied to
roof lamps. trains, Station-masters must see that the lamps are
properly cleaned and trimmed, and that no smoky,
defective, or badly-burning lamp is placed in the train.


341. At intermediate Stations, where roof lamps are Examining roof
provided, Station-masters must take care that the lampa "
lamps are examined on the arrival of the train, and
that any that may have gone out or be burning badly
are replaced by newly trimmed lamps.
342. The Station-master must see that all fixed Fixed scotches,
scotch blocks at his station are kept across the rail,
that all safety points are closed against the Main Line, Safety points,
when it is not necessary that they should be open for
the purpose of shunting; and that all vehicles be
placed within such scotch blocks or safety points.
344. All scotch blocks and facing points must be Locking scotch
kept locked, except facing points worked from points,
locking-gear boxes.
345. All vehicles shunted off at Stations as empties he
must be carefully searched. The windows of all
empty compartments must be closed when the carriages windows to be
are standing on Sidings at the Station, the ventilators J" 0 '
, . . ® 3 Ventilators open.
bemg'kept open.
34G. Station-masters, in addition to reporting any Disarrange-
disarrangement of signals to the General Traffic ment of signals.
Manager, should also telegraph at once to the
Inspectors of Works ■when ordinary signals are out
of order, and to the Signal Engineer when any inter-
locking signals require repair or readjustment.
347. No train must be started before the time stated starting of
in the Time-tables; and care must be taken that all rain ‘
carriage-doors are fastened. The signal to the Engine-
driver to start must be given by the Guard, upon re-
ceiving intimation from the person in charge of the
Station that all is right for the train to proceed.
348. The Station-master must take care that im- Name of station
mediately on the stopping of each passenger train t 0 be called out
the name of the Station is called out along the train
in a distinct and audible manner, and must pay im-
mediate attention to any indication shown by the
passengers of their desire to alight.
e 2


station-masters 352. Station-masters at intermediate Stations must
stattons^oex- 6 observe the state of the couplings on the arrival of the
amine couplings, trains, and cause any that require it to be adjusted.
inspection of 353. At Stations where Carriage-examiners are
kept, the Station-master or person in charge must,
examiners. before starting the train, satisfy himself that the ex-
amination of it has been completed, and that, so far as
the Carriage-examiner is concerned, the train is all
right and fit to proceed.
inspection of 354. At Stations where Examiners are not kept,
where there are ste P s must be taken to remedy any defect that may be
no Carriage- observed in the running of the vehicles, by supplying
examiners. o jj or g refise to the axleboxes of any that may require
it, or removing the defective vehicles from the train,
as may be found necessary.
Examination of 355. On a train stopping at a Station after sunset,
lamps d Slde or * n wea ther, the Station-master or person in
charge must see that the tail and side lamps are lighted
and in order.
shunting wag- 358. The Station-master or person in charge must
gons at Stations . , . »«««'.. A ~ . .
on inclines. take care that, while shunting waggons or other vehi-
cles, at Stations or other places situated on inclines, in
addition to screwing the van brakes tightly down, a
Te^ureJ 810 be su ffi c i ent number of waggon brakes are pinned down,
and sprags or hand-scotches used when necessary, to
prevent the possibility of the train or any of the ve-
Sprags and hides running dotvn the incline. At such Stations and
“t 8 other places a supply of sprags and hand-scotches
stations. must be kept for the purpose.
Shunting wag- 359. When waggons require to be shunted into in-
iidings!° incline c^ne Sidings, the trucks to be moved at one shunt
must be limited to such number as the engine can push
up without going at a violent or excessive speed.
Special Train 3GO. The Station-master, or person in charge at the
following. starting point of a Special Train, is responsible for the
tailboards or Red flags by day, and the extra lamp


by night, being affixed on the preceding train, and for
informing the Guard in charge of it of the description
and destination of the Special Train. The Guard of
a train preceding the Special Train is required to see
that the tailboard, flavor extra lamp is removed when
no longer required, and he must inform the person in
charge of each Station at which he stops of the de-
scription and destination of the train that is following.
301. Relief Trains, if run without previous written Relief Trains,
or printed notice, must be considered and treated as
Special Trains; and, in the case of those trains of
which no previous notice has been issued, the Station-
master or person in charge at the starting point must
see that telegraphic information is sent, when practi-
cable, to the necessary Stations and Junctions.
305. In the event of an accident obstructing one one line of rails
line of rails, so as to render it necessary to work the obstri,ctC(l ‘
traffic in both directions over a Single Line, the Regu-
lations for “Single Line Working” must be strictly
adhered to.
300. Before removing any travelling crane, the per- Travelling
son in charge of it must see that the jib is properly ££ ines ’ removal
lowered and secured, and so fixed that it will pass
under the gauge; and, when it has to be removed by
train, it must, when practicable, be so placed that the
jib will point towards the rear of the train.
307. Whenever a crane is in use whereby the jib or Use cf crane,
any other portion of it obstructs or fouls any line of
rails in use for traffic purposes, or whenever, by any
possibility, during the loading of round timber, long Round timber,
timber, angle iron, or other articles of great length, the
Main Line may be temporarily fouled, it is incumbent loading of.
on the person in charge of the loading to obtain the
sanction of both the Station-master and Signalman in
charge, and to see that the proper signals are exhibited
until the operation is completed.
370. Officers in charge of Stations will be held re- Maintenance of
sponsible that all locking bars at points and chock- 8
blocks on Sidings are painted and maintained a white blocks.


colour, and that the locks and keys of such appliances
are kept in proper order.
“Main Line” 871. Whenever the term “Main Line” is used, it
jTne" 8 running means the running line of any railway or branch.
“Train”includes 372. Whenever the word “Train” is used it must
Engine” he mi derstood to include “Light Engine,” i.e., engine
without a train.
“ Goods Train ” 373. Whenever the words “ Goods Trains ” are used,.
includes Goods, they must be understood to include “Goods, Mineral,
Mineral,Cattle, J , , „ r ™
and Ballast Cattle, Ballast, Plant, and Water i rains.
Trains.
use of fire-engine 37G. At Stations where there is a fire-engine, alii
or water-hose. the servants should be instructed in its use, and every
Watchman and other servant employed at any Station
must be made acquainted with the position of the fire-
buckets and fire-plugs, if there be any, and every man
should be instructed how to attach the hose, &c., in
case of fire taking place on the railway premises.
Employes are 379. Officers in charge of Stations will see that
hcabtto 40 ad officers and men placed under them are able to
exchange exchange duties one with the other, so that in case of
sickness or emergency each may be able to take any
duty.
Each person is to 380. Station-masters and officers will be held re-
dutyl S 0 sponsible for seeing that the person appointed per~
sonally carries out the duties of his office.
Assignment of 381. At every Station where there is no appointed
to Remade by Signalman, one of the Porters must be specially
station-masters assigned to working the signals, and be responsible
mayte Porters. f° r their correctness during the hours this duty is
assigned to him, or until he is relieved. He will also
be required to attend to his duties as a Porter, and
perform any other services that may be required of
him, so long as such work does not interfere with his-
attention to the signals.


382. Station-masters will be held responsible for Training of
the improvement of inexperienced officers and men ienCed
sent to them for instruction. They must be put to
each branch of duty in rotation, so that they may
become proficient in all. A monthly report as to
capacity is to be made.
385, All Porters at a Station, whether Passenger Ail Porters to be
or Goods Porters, must be placed in charge of signals
in rotation (unless the Station-master considers any t f™ enin
of them unfit for that particular duty), so that every
one may be thoroughly exercised with the Avorking of
signals. This rule does not apply where Signalmen
are specially appointed to Signal-boxes.
38G. If a Station-master should neglect to assign Responsibility of
the duties of Signalmen to proper persons, he will be regard to 3
held personally responsible. signals.
387. If the Officer in charge of an intermediate
Station should be without a Porter or other assistant,
he will be personally responsible for the correctness
of the signals at all times.
388. The Station-master shall ahvays communicate Station-masters
his instructions in clear and precise terms. He shall instructions! 80
keep himself thoroughly acquainted, by constant per-
sonal intercourse, with the character and conduct of
every man under his control, and maintain discipline
and order.
389. The Station-master has the power to suspend Power of
any servant of the Board under him, where the con- susPenslon-
duct of the servant is such as to require that course,
either Avith regard to the safety of the public or the
interests of the service.
390, In cases of emergency, where any of the men Temporary
are absent from suspension, sickness, or otherAvise, the vacancies!" 110
Station-master shall employ a temporary substitute, for
Avhose character and capacity he will be responsible.


Departmental 390. A copy of every notice connected with the
notices. working of the line, with a statement showing the
time each man is on or off duty, must he posted in
the rooms of the Porters, G uards, and Engine-drivers,
also in the signal-boxes, &c.
strangers not to 398. Station-masters are to see that Guards do not
travel in vans. a p ow p ersons to travel in the van, except those who
are authorized to do so. Any breach of this rule will
be severely dealt with.
Statiommastere 399, Station-masters are to take care that the
Guards obey Guards, while at the Stations, carry out all instruc-
rules - tions laid down for their guidance, and they are to
report any infringement of the Regulations to the
proper officer.
Communication 400. Whenever a Station-master, from any pressing
with Engineer’s •, , . , . ~ • 1 / c
staff, necessity, lias occasion to require the aid of any ot
the Engineer’s staffj he will at once communicate with
the Inspector of Permanent Way to whose district he
belongs ; but this direct communication is only to be
made on occasions which will not admit of delay. In
all other cases the ordinary notification by usual report
to the General Traffic Manager will be given.
No shunting 403. Whenever there is a siding of sufficient length
Line to'thc 1,1111 to contain the train, it shall not be shunted from one
other. Main Line to the other, but shall be placed on the
siding.
Penalty for 404. Any instance of carelessness in shunting,
carelessness in , , , • , .1 ~ n . ,
shunting. whereby vehicles are thrown oft the line, and damage
done to the rolling-stock and permanent way, will be
severely dealt with, by the person at fault being
dismissed the service.
k-b locks to 405. Before shunting commences the chock-blocks
be rem oved. , , , 0
must be removed.


400. Sidings should always be kept in readiness Sidings to be
for the immediate and safe entrance of any train that shunting! 1
may have to be passed by another train.
407. If there is not siding accommodation available,
the train or engine should stand clear of the Station, if there should
in a forward direction, a distance of at least 200 yards room to
from the Station semaphore, so as to be safe from any
following train running accidentally past the Station.
408. Station-masters must be in attendance on the Station-masters’
. . .— j , , ... t •11 o attendance, oic.
arrival of every tram to sign Guards Way-bills, <vc.,
&c., and to see that the duty of every officer at their
station is properly and promptly performed.
409. No Station-master can leave the Station of
which he is in charge without permission from the stations
General Traffic Manager’s Office. Severe punishment
will be recommended to those not reporting such irre-
gularities, as well as to the employe travelling without
leave or a pass.
413. Station-masters are particularly instructed to the
limit the number of vehicles placed in the train as far vehicles,
as practicable, having regard to the probable wants of
the journey, to prevent unnecessary haulage, and with
this view composite carriages are to be used when
possible.
414. Station masters at intermediate Stations must To usc despatch
use every exertion to make the time of stopping at
their Stations as short as possible.
415. Intermediate Station-masters, who have to Vehicles to be
attach carriages or waggons, should have them quite lca
ready by the time .the train arrives, and, if possible,
so arrange them as to avoid unnecessary shunting.
410. The entire coaching staff at Stations must be
on duty at each train as far as possible, and the Goods required.
Porters must assist when required. The Passenger
Porters must also assist in the Goods Department
when necessary they should do so.


Carriage-keys to 417. Station-masters, while on duty, are to have a
be kept ready. carr j a ge-key always on their person, and are required
to provide for every Guard, Under-guard, and Porter
being similarly supplied with one; and two additional
keys are to be kept at Junction Stations, for the Porters
attending the carriages there.
Doors to be 418. All passenger carriage doors must be kept
fastened. securely fastened during the journey.
Passengers not 419. Passengers must not be allowed to alight until
atrainin° m the train has stopped ; and to prevent accident from
motion. the neglect of this precaution on the part of the pas-
sengers themselves, the carriage doors must not he
opened until the train comes to a stand at the plat-
form.
Accident to 420. Should any casualty unfortunately occur to a
passengers. passenger, either from his own want of caution or
otherwise, the names and addresses of passengers or
other persons who may witness the occurrence are, if
possible, to he procured for after-reference if required.
Proceedings in 421. In case of accident to anyone travelling by
to jjassengers or train, whether passenger or employe, which makes it
employes. important to obtain professional assistance with the
least possible delay, and when time can be saved in
procuring this assistance, the engine and a carriage or
other vehicle may be despatched at once, either to
convey the person injured to the nearest assistance,
or to bring assistance to the spot where the accident
occurred, the necessary steps being taken to protect
the train either by putting it into a siding, or, where
standing on the line, by observing the precautions set
forth in the Rules on the subject.
Placing _ 422. No more passengers are to be allowed to
cMrfa”^ 31D enter a carriage than it is calculated to contain, and
passengers are not to be permitted to get into a higher
class than their tickets warrant.


423. In eases where passengers are carried out of Passengers
their way and to a wrong Station by mistake, the
wrong Station]
Station-master (after satisfying himself that they have
really been overcarried by mistake) will not charge
excess fare, but send them to their proper destination
by first train, endorsing the back of their tickets to
pass them on to the proper Station.
424. Tickets are to be issued to all persons applying Tickets issuing,
for conveyance on the railway, except persons in a
state of intoxication or unfit to travel.
486. Brake power is to be supplied for each train Brake power on
in accordance with the table framed by the Locomotive
Superintendent.
437. No vehicle of any description must be placed Brake to be last
. , * . j. .it ii vexucle in tram.
behind the rear brake in any train. *****
438. The carriages or waggons must be properly coupling of
coupled by the side-chains as well as the centre
coupling—no side-chains or couplings left hanging
down. The lamps must be lighted, or removed Avhen
not required.
439. When screw-couplings are used on live stock Screw-couplings
and goods trucks, the centre chain couplings must
be coupled to the side-chains and not to the centre
hook.
440. Officers in charge of roadside Stations, unless Screw-couplings
_ . -11 ij. .‘to be returned
where trains are made up, are not allowed to retain f ro m certain
screw-couplings. If any are left at a Station, they stations,
must be invoiced by next train to the nearest Up
station where trains are made up.
441. The screw-couplings with round ball are those Screw-codings,
made specially for the cattle trade, and must not be balls,
retained at any Station, but accompany “ M ” trucks.
Screw-couplings for Passenger Trains have a ball
with flattened sides. All trucks of cattle should be
screw-coupled.


Screw-couplings 442, Screw-couplings for cattle must be sent to
for cattle. Melbourne or to depot Stations. Depot Stations will
give particular attention to this order, and keep the
General Traffic Manager’s Office well informed of the
number on hand.
Spare couplings. 443. Station-masters are to see that all spare
couplings are sent to Melbourne.
in case of vein- 444. Should it be found that a tram, waggon, or
detached' I*’ 1 *’ engine has broken away, the person discovering it
must immediately take all steps to stop all following
trains, and to signal by telegraph (if possible) the
danger to the Station in advance ; but the first portion
of the train is not to be stopped there until it has been
signalled that the second portion has been brought to
a stand.
Buffers screwed 445. The buffers of the several carriages forming
U P* the train should be screwed up one against the other,
until each buffer recedes about one inch.
Trucks with 44G. Under no circumstances whatever must a truck
Trains” 6 " without buffer-springs be attached to a Passenger
Train, and no truck must be used for any other pur-
pose than that for which it is constructed. Any truck
attached to a Passenger Train must be put in front
of the carriages.
Position of pas- 447. Whenever passenger carriages are attached to
sengercarr a c es. Q oo( | g drains, they must be placed next the last
brake van. First-class carriages behind second-class
carriages.
Time to be taken 452. Every Station-master in charge of a Station
from Guard. -where there is no telegraphic communication is to
take the Melbourne time from the Guard of the first
Down Passenger Train, and no train is on any account
to be started from any Station before its appointed
time.


453. Whenever additional locomotive power is Requisition must
necessary for the special requirements of the Traffic locomotive 1
Branch, an officer of that branch, duly authorized,
must give, if possible, six (6) hours’ notice in the
usual form or in writing to the Locomotive Foreman
at the place where the additional power is required.
In cases of emergency, when there is engine power
ready and available, the engine can be supplied for
the requirements of the traffic immediately upon the
receipt by the Locomotive Foreman of the requisition.
The Clerk who makes out the engine requisitions will Engine requisi-
te responsible for their prompt delivery, and must see spedaT-train
that a signature is obtained for each. Notices of notices.
Special Trains are to be carefully read over and com-
pared with the original requisitions.
454. In addition to any circular memorandum that Notice of Special
may be issued, Special Trains are to be timed on to and lrains ‘
from all Telegraph Stations ; but Special Trains may
run at any time without any previous notice having
been given, and, if possible, a disc will be placed on
every preceding train.
Note. —In telegraphing Special Trains to Stations
in advance, the exact time that each such train is to
pass or leave every such Station is to be stated in the
telegram.
456. Before any Special Train is despatched on a special Trains on
single line, notice must be received and acknowledged B!Ugle liaeB,
by every Station-master on the single line ; and the
Guard, or if there be no Guard the Driver of such
Special Train or engine, must receive written instruc-
tions from the General Traffic Manager or terminal
Station-master who despatches the train, directing him
when to leave each Station, and where to shunt, if it
should be necessary for him to do so, in order to allow
trains to pass.
Note. The foregoing Rule is to be read in
connexion with the Staff Regulations , and the notice
in such Rule has reference to every Telegraph Station
on the line.


Special-train 457. Two notice-boards, for the purpose of indi-
notice-boards to ca ting the time of Special Trains, will be supplied to
statfonsV at each Station —one for the “ Up” and the other for the
“ Down ” line ; and the Station-master must exhibit
the proper notice on the morning of the day the Special
is to arrive at or to pass his Station, or so soon after
as he shall be advised that a Special Train is to arrive
at or to pass his Station; and the index on the board
must be arranged to show the proper time, if the
Station-master should be advised of it. And when
such Special Train passes, the notice relative to
it must be removed ; and if the Station-master shall
have no other advice of a Special Train than by a signal
attached to a preceding train, he shall exliibit the
notice from the time the preceding train arrives at or
passes until the Special Train arrives at or passes his
Station.
Proceedings 458. When business necessitates the running of
when Special a Special Train for which arrangements are not
lun made in the General Traffic Manager’s Office, all
arrangements commU nications in reference thereto must be sent
were not made v
in General Tiat-open in charge ot the Guard, who will require
Offlce? nagerS to give each Stationmaster between the points of
departure and arrival of Special an opportunity of
perusing same.
proceedings as to 459. When Special Trains have to be arranged for
notaiTaiwed'for independent of the General Traffic Manager’s Office,
in General the following rules are to be observed in addition to
all ordinary precautions : —The Inspectors of Per-
manent Way are at once to be communicated with.
The time of departure, arrival, and return is to
be telegraphed to all Stations on the section over
which the Special is to run. If on a single line,
and to a Station not having a staff, the staff shall
be taken from the nearest Staff Station to and
from the point of destination. Should the staff be
at the far end of the section, the Special will
have to wait its return, or, if started, the section
will have to be blocked between the Staff Stations


until the Special returns from the intermediate Sta-
tion. When a Special is arranged to run first over
a section, and when due notice has been given, it
will not be necessary to attach a signal to the
last train on the day preceding. When possible to
avoid it, Specials are not to follow close or shunt at
the same Station as the preceding train. Guards
of Specials are in all cases to have written instruc-
tions. Full information of all Specials arranged
for is to be sent to the General Traffic Manager’s
Office.
460. The Station-master being responsible for the &c ,
preservation of the buildings and offices of the Sta-
tion, he must keep the head of his branch constantly
advised of any indication of dilapidation.
461. He is strictly forbidden to put up any leaning Annexes
shed, or any other work, against or near the Station 1 ( in ° ’
buildings, unless authorized.
462. He must undertake the control of the public station-master’s
.. . , ... . 1 . jurisdiction.
level-crossing gates or junction signals assigned to
him, subject to such regulations as may from time to
time be issued. It will be his duty also to provide the
necessary stores required for each gate or junction
signal, and supervise such gate or sigual, as if it were
part of his Station.
463. Station-masters must see that all the outside To keep station
gates of their Stations are locked at night, and they " ,ltos ioLlvtd ‘
will be held responsible for the consequences of cattle
or horses trespassing through the gates under their
control, whether by day or night.
464. They shall enforce regularity, order, cleanli- order t 0 b ®
, J . , o i • • , preserved,
ness, and neatness throughout the Station, keeping it
clear of weeds, the ballast raked, and nothing left
lying on the surface which is not properly there.
Every article must be kept in the place appointed
for it.


467. The water-closets and urinals must be flushed
with a copious supply of water at least once a day,
and kept perfectly clean ; and they must be examined
daily in order that any obscene writings or sketchings
be removed from the walls or doors. All tanks must
be pumped full every morning.
Water-closets
and urinals.
468. The Station-master shall make at least one
inspection each day of the entire premises under his
charge, including all gates, signals, points, switches,
scotches, &c., &c. He must satisfy himself on each
inspection that the most vigilant attention is paid to
the switches and signals, and that they are properly
placed, used, and kept in working order, and that the
necessary hand signals are in readiness when required.
The constant adjusting of the wire of the Distance
Signal as the weather may require, so that the sema-
phore may not give an uncertain indication, should be
carefully seen to.
Daily Inspection
of Station.
469. Every vehicle not provided with a brake, when
standing in a siding opening on a Main Line, must be
rendered immovable by the application of a scotch to
one of the wheels. Every brake must be properly
pinned down.
Scotching
vehicles.
470, If any truck gets out on or foul of the Main
Line from a siding, in consequence of the entrance-
block being left open, the person through whose neg-
lect the vehicle gets away will bo dismissed, in
addition to any other punishment or penalty he may
incur under “ The Public Works Statute 18G5.”
Punishment for
neglect.
Mode of securing 471. All vehicles in sidings should be coupled to-
vehicics. gether, and so placed that the wheel of the outside
vehicle may touch the entrance scotch, so that it
cannot gain momentum to run over it.
Entrance scotch 472, The siding entrance scotch must always be
to be kept kept locked, except during the ingress or egress of
locked. v. ’ r ° , , ° . ° .
carnages or waggons, and the key is to remain in
possession of the person in charge.


473. Station-masters at Watering Stations must take Care of water
care that the water cranes are properly secured when cranes>
not in use, and especially at night, in order that the
jib of the crane may he clear of engines or vehicles
passing on the Main Line.
474. Whenever any vehicle has received injury, injury to
however slight in appearance, by getting off the line 'veluclLS-
or otherwise, it must not be allowed to continue in
traffic until it has been inspected and pronounced safe
by the Carriage-examiner at the nearest Station.
476. The oil holder at the top must always be filled Directions for
to the brim before lighting, no matter how short a “ampl* 6 ™ 86116
time the lamp has previously been burning, and the
screw at the filling hole must be tightened fully to
exclude air.
477. The light must be turned below the cone until Lighting,
the chimney is put on, after which it may be turned
half-an-inch above the cone for a couple of minutes,
then turned up to the proper height; great care must
be taken to put the chimney properly down to its seat,
otherwise, air will enter at the wrong place, and be
likely to cause serious damage.
478. All the air holes must be kept thoroughly Ventilation
clean. For Suburban trains, or those on other branch
lines, where carriages stand a long time at Stations,
the lights should not be turned so high as for long
journey trains, inasmuch as in the former cases the oil
gets heated and the light rises higher. The lamp-hole
cover must not be put down on the top of the lamp, as
such action would interfere with the ventilation, but
it must be laid back carefully on the roof of the
carriage when the lamp is in.
479. Should any chimney glass get broken, or any Defective
leak show in a lamp while running, such lamp must or
be removed from the carriage at the first Station


Filling and
cleaning lamps.
481. Due care must be given to the filling and
cleaning of the lamps at various Stations, and Station-
masters will see that the Lamp Inspector’s instructions
in reference to lamps are attended to by Porters and
Lampmen.
Use of grease.
495. Every grease axle-box shall be properly filled
with grease, and examined by pressing the grease
down with a grease knife. In warm weather the
greasing requires extra attention. No grease must be
left on the outside of the box, and the lid is to be
shut closely down.
Use of oil.
496. The oil journals are to be filled up from below
with a funnel at each greasing station, and the plug
replaced.
Hot axles.
497. Hot axle-boxes should be probed, and the
grease-hole and reservoirs well cleaned, washed, and
cleared of any grit, small stones, or other like sub-
stance, and replenished with clean grease or oil. The
Greasing Porter must immediately call the attention
of the officers on duty to any hot axle.
Care of grease-
box.
498. The grease-box must be kept clean, and free
from any impurity ; and the lids of the axle-box or
the station-boxes never left open.
where either of these defects may be discovered, and
Guards and Station-masters should give an eye in
passing to see that no such defects exist.
480. Station-masters at all Stations where lamps
are trimmed must be careful to keep a due supply of
kerosene, wicks, chimneys, and leather washers for
the filling hole screw ; these latter are to be renewed
from time to time, as they become hard from frequent
use. No trouble will arise in the use of the lamps if
these directions are adhered to.
Supply of
materials.
Special Trains 500. When short notice is sent by wire of a Special
arranged tor by m-, , .. .
wire. irain to run, or when it is not possible for written


special notices to be sent, every Telegraph Station
must send a copy of the message to Non-telegraph
Stations by the next train (on the Up or Down journey,
as the case may be), where it is possible to do so
before the arrival of the Special Train. This rule
applies to all short notices of Specials by wire on
single lines, and to short notice Passenger Specials on
double lines.
501. Station-masters must give full information to Fun information
and reply to all inquiries from any person connected be
with the line as to overdue or Special Trains. s iven -
502. Station-masters at terminal Stations will see Trains to “ run
that when Special Trains have to be run, those entered must^ave 4
on the time-table to “run as required ” are to be preference when
, r. , ... ... Specials have to
arranged lor m preference to putting on extra trains be run.
independent of the ordinary time-table, which in all
cases must be first exhausted.
508. In addition to the ordinary books of account, Books to be
there must be kept at every Station— kept ’
An Order Book, accessible to every person order Book,
employed there, in which shall be inserted
all general orders, circulars, and instruc-
tions of a general character for the govern-
ment of the Station and traffic.
A Train Signal Book, to be accessible to the signal Book,
whole staff at all times, in which shall be
registered all messages and signals in
respect to trains or special engines. This
book must be examined by every officer
before undertaking day or night duty, and
the Station-master must sign it daily.
508. “Arrival and Departure of Trains Book ” Copy of Arrival
must be carefully kept, and a copy forwarded by first
train each day to the General Traffic Manager’s Office t 0 be forwarded
on the proper form.
f 2


How to proceed §l3. If ordinary trains cannot clear Stations,
tratns'carmot Station-masters must communicate with the General
dear stations. Traffic Manager’s Office by wire, so that arrangements
may he made for Specials, as rolling-stock must not be
detained.
in 526. Clerks or Porters in charge of Stations are to
Stations to be b® addressed as Station-masters in official communica-
addrcssed as tions. This does not affect their grade, position, or
Station-masters. ....
privileges in any way.
water for 540. A copious supply of drinking water is to be
passengers. provided for passengers.
Medium trucks 556. Medium trucks must not be loaded with tele-
vldth* g ra pb poles. Officers in charge of Stations disregard-
poies. ing this rule will be severely punished.
Trucks with 558. Trucks fitted with pipes for patent brake must
pipes^ tobe 56 he shown on daily return of rolling-stock when at any
shown in return, other Station than Melbourne.
Ballast trains or 562. The rule as to ballast trains or engines being
off g tho S ]ine bC off the line fifteen minutes prior to passenger or goods
before 'ntsen-er ra^ns being due must be strictly adhered to. Every
or goods trains breach of and any departure from it must be reported,
arc due. Contractors and their men are to be informed of this
notification by Station-masters.
Disputes be- 579. Should any dispute arise between the Driver
and°Gmirds. erS and Guard of a train, it is most desirable that a third
party (other than the Fireman) should have his atten-
tion called to the dispute, so as to give evidence in case
of inquiry.
Arrangements as 586. At Stations where two or more Guards are
whereTnorc* 08 pl a ®ed, the Station-master will prepare, and post in
than one Guard Guards’ rooms every Saturday, a table showing the
)s plated. trains each Guard is required to run daily during the
ensuing week, and a copy of the table must be enclosed
to the General Traffic Manager by first Up train every


Monday. When subsequent specials are arranged,
and the order of running is altered, an amended copy
must be sent.
590. Whenever a passenger or mixed train arrives Late trains at
five minutes (or over) behind time at a terminal stations 1
Station, where there is a Locomotive Foreman, the
Station-master and Locomotive Foreman respectively
must at once call the Guard and Driver together, and
obtain their explanation vivd voce of the cause of
delay. The officers will decide there and then on
whom the blame (if any) rests, and furnish a joint
report to the General Traffic Manager, embodying
their recommendation.
(a) Guards must also forward at once a written Guards to report
report to the General Traffic Manager through their trams late ‘
superior officer, furnishing particulars of time lost,
as well as giving the information on the train way-bill.
(5) They must forward in addition to and with Guards to
the train way-bill, for every train, a train sheet, as s r . d train
per Form A, showing arrival and departure at each
Station on the section for which the sheet is made out.
591. Officers in charge of Stations must use their Trains to be
utmost endeavours to despatch trains in accordance tfmc-taWes. °
with the time-tables, and report at once, with par-
ticulars, any detention of five minutes or more to the
General Traffic Manager. In every case where it is
shown that delay has been caused through mismanage-
ment, or other cause on the part of officers in charge,
severe punishment will be visited upon the offender.
614. When semaphores or semaphore lamps get out Semaphores or
of order, the Signal Engineer is to be at once informed lamps o'u/of
by wire. The usual report is to be made to the order *
General Traffic Manager’s Office.
617. Sidings at a distance from a Station will be Sidings distant
worked by the officer in charge of the nearest Station, from a statlon ‘
who will be held responsible for the proper observance
•of Rules.


side lights on 621. Station-masters ami Guards are to see that
trains. llnrl-ifa orn nlono/1 nn +liq Incf volimla nf frftlllfi
side lights are placed on the last vehicle of trains.
Smoking only 624. A smoking compartment for first and second
class passengers is to be attached to every train, unless
tor the purpose, when otherwise ordered from the General Traffic
Manager’s Office. Station-masters and others in
attendance on trains will prevent smoking in any
carriage, either first or second class, other than that
set apart for the purpose. If any person persists in
smoking after remonstrance is made, his name and
address must be obtained with a view to such subse-
quent proceedings under the 142nd clause of “ The
Public JTorhs Statute ” as may be directed.
Penalty for 625. “By the Act 289, section 142, persons
forcgoTng S rui'c.° f smoking tobacco, opium, or any other substance in any
railway carriage except such as may be set apart for
the purpose, are liable to a penalty of Forty shillings ;
and such offenders whose names and residences are
unknown to the railway officials may be detained and
given in charge of a police constable to be taken before
a justice. Persons complained of for smoking should
be requested to desist by the Guard or Porter, and in
the event of their not doing so, he should ask their
names, and upon refusal to give them they may be
detained and given in charge of a policeman.”
REGULATIONS FOR CONVEYANCE OF GOODS,
ETC.
Loading and 830. The loading, securing, and sheeting of goods,
goods! ’" ° f timber, &c., should be done so as to prevent the
possibility of anything falling otf or extending beyond
the proper limit, and the goods should be sheeted so
as to prevent the possibility of fire. The greatest
care is necessary in this particular, as improper loading
is likely not only to cause serious damage to the
rolling-stock or the works of the line, but may occasion
accident to subsequent trains from articles falling off
and forming obstructions. Hound timber must be


specially secured. Goods must be loaded in sucli a
manner that they may not be damaged by concussion
or chafing. All casks of spirits or other liquids must
be blocked tightly.
831. Loads must not be made higher than
authorized gauges shown in the diagram, thus —
the Limit of load as
to size.
MOVEMENT OF ROLLING-STOCK, ETC.
903. The roofs of some carriages being higher than Certain carriages
the shed doors on the North-Eastern line, care must ”h U nted e into
be taken not to shunt them into the goods sheds, goods sheds.
Station-masters and all concerned are to be careful that
carriages do not sustain damage from this cause.
905. Employes are warned that any accident occur- Carelessness at
ring through points being held carelessly will ensure a I)01Ilts ’
severe penalty.
906. All trucks put on trains for passengers must screw-coupling
, it certain trucks.
be screw-coupled.
907. The vans with glazed side look-outs are intended New vans,
for passenger work only, and should not be shunted in
or out of the goods sheds.
909. “R” trucks are not to be kicked off trains trucks,
until the brakes are more effective.


Moving trucks 914. No truck is to be kicked from an engine on ti
passengers'. 1111 a train with passengers. In every case the truck o;
trucks must be eased on and attached to the engine.
Terminal 918. When composite carriages, numbered, &c.,from
ugiiuTncs 11 21 to 41AB, are in use on mixed trains running on light
securing certain lines, it will be necessary to have three trucks from
the front carriage secured with screw-couplings.
INSTRUCTIONS RELATIVE TO LOADING
VEHICLES, ETC.
Trucks to be 929. Trucks loaded with hay, straw, or other in-
swept out. flammable matter, when discharged, are to be swept
Gauge for load of 930. The gauge for the loading of trucks is:—
Height of load from rail, 13 feet in middle and 11 feet
at sides ; breadth of load, 8 feet 6 inches.
side-chains on 931. Side-chains on goods trucks are only to be
goods trucks. CoU pl e fi w hen they match ; and if too short, the truck
number must be reported to the General Traffic
Manager’s Office.
Trucks loaded 932. Trucks on which large boilers are loaded must
boiicrs? rgC be screw-coupled.
Guards measur- 933. Goods Guards must measure loads when they
mg loads. find it unsafe to run.
Loading posts 934. Post and rails must not be loaded in H trucks
when other trucks are available, unless in cases of
emergency.
Negligence in 935. Any employe through whose negligence trucks
are damaged by unequal loading of piles, timber, &c.,
will be severely dealt with, and held responsible for
the cost of repairs.


936. Officers in charge of Stations and Guards are riace of tracks
to have trucks of chaff, straw, or other inflammable Inflammable
loading placed as far as possible from the engine. material.
937. Carriage trucks on goods trains must be placed Place of carriage
, D trucks.
next the van.
940. All trucks placed on trains must be securely Trucks on train
fastened. to be fastened.
941. Bogie trucks are built primarily for the con- Loading bogie
veyance of very long timber, in the carrying of which ruc s ‘
the chief load is to rest upon the bolster over the
centre of each set of wheels, except when the timber
is crooked ; in such case care must be taken to place
a row of straight trees down as the first layer, on the
top of which the crooked ones may be put without
fear. When such trucks are used for carrying railroad
bars, the loading must be placed so that the ends
overhang the bolsters until they are flush with the
ends of the waggon, and in no case must an undue
burthen be placed in the middle, either for facility of
counting or any other reason.
942. Station-masters are not to have wooden or Loading wooden
iron medium trucks loaded with heavy loads of timber u ‘ c r ° a medium
or iron overhanging the ends.
943. Officers in charge of Stations are held per- Loading hay and
sonally responsible that all trucks of hay and straw straw '
are properly secured by lashings and covers before
such consignments are allowed to leave their Stations.
944. The bulk of all heavy dead-weight loads for Loading box or
box or “R” bogie trucks, such as grain, must be k bogie trucks,
stowed over the wheels.
946. Station-masters are to see that loading is Fastening
securely fastened. Guards are also to see that it does loadin »-
not shift during the journey.
950, The load of cattle and goods trains between Cattle and goods
Wodonga and Seymour is to be limited to 26 loaded 1
trucks and van. Seymour.


Loading Qtrucks. 951. Wheat or other produce in bags, when loaded
in Q trucks, must not project over the sides.
952. Trucks must he loaded in such a manner as
to distribute the weight of the load as equally as
possible between the four wheels. Any Station-
master Avho sends an over-loaded truck away from his
Station will be fined.
REGULATIONS FOR GUARDS.
971. Passenger Guards must be at the departure
Station half-an-hour and the Goods Guards one hotir
before the time appointed for starting, and sign the
Appearance Book in presence of the Station-master or
his representative, who will initial it at the time, and
see that each Guard is cleanly and pi’operly dressed in
the uniform of the railway, with the distinguishing
number on his cap, and in possession of carriage key
pouch, time-piece showing correct time, whistle, one
lied, one Green, and one White signal flag with case,
lamps in perfect order and properly trimmed, twelve
detonating signals, can of oil, grease box, knife, probe,
and two sets of spare couplings; and, in the case of a
Goods Guard, a tire bucket, spare rope, chain, at least
one dozen spare brake pins, and disc.
Attendance of
Guards.
To be supplied
with signals,
&c., &c.
972. All Guards must see that they have a set of
signals and a disc in their van prior to their taking
out their trains from any Stations. Any infringement
of this Rule will be severely dealt with.
Signals and disc
to be in vans.
975. Station-masters, Guards, and all employes
must at the commencement of each month make
themselves thoroughly acquainted with the hours of
the trains, and ascertain what changes there may be
in their running. Guards must be particular in noting
all alterations prior to their running their trains on the
Ist of each mouth. When any new Time-tables are
issued, Station-masters are to see that all Guards are
supplied with copies.
Acquaintance
with Time-
tables.


976. When there are two Guards with a train, the Under Guard
Under Guard must obey the orders of the Head Guard. Head Guard.
978. No train must be allowed to travel after sunset Tra j 1 n ® f j e ° r t s^ > ngefc
or in foggy weather unless there shall bo attached 0 r in foggy
thereto, and lighted, a Red Tail Lamp and two Red o\^llght«| th
Side Lamps; and the Guard, if there be only one, or Tail and Side
the Rear Guard, if there bo more than one, must see LampB '
that these lamps are kept properly burning throughout
the journey.
980. The Signal to the Engine-driver to start must starttngoUrains
he given by the Guard, upon receiving intimation from ,y ua
the person in charge of the Station that all is right for
the train to proceed.
981. When there are two or more Guards with a signalling when
train, the signal to the Engine-driver to start must with Strain.*
only be given by the Guard nearest the engine, and
not until after he has exchanged signals with the
Guard or Guards in the rear, and receiving intimation
from the person in charge of the Station that all is
right for the train to proceed. The signal for starting
the train must be given by the Guard blowing his
whistle and showing a hand signal; at night, when
a lamp is used as the hand signal, it must show a
Green light, and be raised above the head, and waved
gently from side to side.
982, The Guard must travel in his brake-van, and Must ride only
not upon the engine or in any other part of the train; m brake - van *
he is forbidden to pass over the tops of the carriages
Avheu in motion.
984. Should a Guard wish to attract the attention Means to be
of the Engine-driver, he must, in addition to using
the Communication, where such exists, apply bis I '^ o ( l ] l river ' 3
brake sharply, and release it suddenly. This opera-
tion repeated several times is almost certain, from the
check it occasions, to attract the notice of the Engine-
driver, to whom the necessary “ Caution ” or “Danger ”
Signal, as the case may require, must be exhibited.


Means to be 985. When the Engine-driver gives three or more
short, sharp whistles, or sounds the brake whistle
ouaiti’s Ct (when a special whistle is supplied for that purpose),
attention. or applies the Communication, where such exists, the
Guard, or Guards, must immediately apply the brakes.
Rear brake to be 986. j n travelling down steep inclines, Guards
applied when . ® 1 ’ . .
going down must, in order to steady the trams and assist the
inclines. Engine-drivers, apply the rear brake, care being
taken not to skid the wheels, if possible.
Guards to 987. When from any cause a train is unable to
proceed at a greater speed than four miles an hour, the
slowly. Guard, if there be only one, or the Rear Guard, if
there be more than one, must go back or send some
other competent person 1,000 yards. The person who
goes back must follow the train at that distance, and
use the proper Danger Signals, so as to stop any fol-
lowing train, until assistance arrives or the train is
shunted.
irregular stop- 988. When a train is stopped by an accident or
by*aceident or from any cause (except where it is efficiently protected
otherwise. by fixed signals), the Guard, if there be only one, or
the Rear Guard, if there be more than one, must imme-
diately go back 1,200 yards to stop any following train,
and must, in addition to his hand signals, take not
less than six detonators (which are to be used by day
as well as by night), and he must place upon the line
of rails on which the stoppage has happened, at a
distance of 400 yards from his train, one of the deton-
ators, at a distance of 800 yards another detonator, and
at a distance of 1,200 yards two detonators, ten yards
apart, and also conspicuously exhibit his hand Danger
Signal to stop any coming train. The Guard must
not return to his train until recalled by the Engine-
driver sounding the whistle of his engine, and when
recalled, he must leave the two most distant detona-
tors and return to his train, taking up the other
detonators on his way.
P cas e eoTreport of The report of a Detonating Signal in the dark
Detonating or fog is to be regarded as a Danger Signal. Engine-
signal. drivers are instructed and must pull up and bring their


trains to a stand, and afterwards proceed cautiously
until the reason of the signal being placed there is
ascertained. During daylight and clear weather, when
the driver can see a long distance ahead, the first
report of a Detonating Signal is to be regarded as a
Caution Signal, and the second to be taken as a
Danger Signal; then Drivers and Guards must make
every effort to bring their train to a stand, after which
they must proceed cautiously until the reason of the
signal being placed there has been ascertained.
990. Should the stoppage or failure occur to an wi.cn a stoppage
engine not attached to a train, the Fireman must imme- engine. 10 * light
diately go back and act in the way prescribed for the
Guards.
991. Should the failure occur on a portion of the
line worked on the Block System, the person who u n e is worked
goes back to protect the train must (after placing the
detonators on the rails as described in preceding Rule)
proceed as quickly as possible to the nearest Telegraph
Signalling Station in the rear, and inform the Signal-
man of the occurrence, and take such other steps as
may be necessary for securing the safety of the
line.
992. If a second train comes up before the obstruc- second irain
tion has been removed, the Guard of the second train before removal
must protect his train as directed in the Rule on the of obstruction '
subject. The Guard of the first train having assured
himself that the Guard of the second train has gone
back with the necessary signals for the protection of
the second train may then rejoin his own train. If
other trains come up, the same regulation must be
carried out, the Guard of the last train being the pro-
tection for the whole.
993. Should an accident to a train accompanied by B>th lines
only one Guard cause the obstruction of both lines, and
the Engine-driver run forward without being aware of driver
the accident, the Guard must, if he can obtain the fact,
services of a competent person, send him forward to


protect the opposite line to that on which the train
was running, and himself go back as directed by the
Regulations.
Detonatorst* fce (a) In the event of no competent person being at
oppositeUne. hand, the Guard must, if the Block System is in
operation on that portion of the railway, first go
forward exhibiting his hand “Danger” Signal, and
place three detonators on the opposite line to that on
which his train was running, at least 1,200 yards from
the obstruction, and then return and protect the rear
of his train, as provided by the Regulations.
where Block (i) Where the Block System is not in operation, the
operation. not Guard must use his discretion as to which line he
protects first, having regard to all the circumstances
of the case, but must use his best exertions to provide
for the protection of both lines with as little delay
as possible.
Portion of train 994. When a portion of the train is left upon the
from^ccmcnt mC Main Line from accident, or inability of the engine to
or failure of take the whole forward, the Engine-driver must not
return for it on the same line, except by written
instructions from the Guard, but must go on the
proper line and cross at the nearest points behind the
part left, which he must push before him until con-
venient to go in front again with the engine.
Engine-driver (a) If the Engine-driver finds it necessary to return
portion' of train* to the rear portion of his train on the same line, ho must,
before starting with the front portion, send his Fire-
man back to the Guard to obtain the necessary
written instructions, authorizing him to do so; and
if he gives such instructions, the Guard must continue
to protect his train in the rear, and prevent a follow-
ing train pushing it ahead, except on inclines worked
under special instructions.
Proceeding ( h ) When there is only one Guard with the train,
n one C Guird which is divided as above, it is the duty of the Fireman
wah train. to travel upon the last vehicle of the front portion of
the train until it is placed in a siding, and it is the
duty of the Guard, after putting down his brake and
carefully securing the last portion of the train so that


it will remain stationary, to go back and take the neces-
sary steps for protecting it by signals, in accordance
with the Rules on the subject.
(c) When two Guards are employed with the train, Duty of Under
the Under Guard must uncouple it and travel upon the UuartU
last vehicle of the front portion, in place of the
Fireman as directed above, the Head Guard taking
the necessary measures for protecting the last portion.
995. If, in case of accident, an engine or train is Engine passing
unavoidably obliged to run for a short distance in the dutanceon
wrong direction on either line, the Guard or Fireman wrong line in
° . . 7 . . case of accident,
must go or send some other competent person back to
the next Signalman, and obtain his permission in
writing for the engine or train to run upon the wrong
line to his post; and the Engine-driver must not, under
any circumstances, move in the wrong direction until
he has received such written permission.
996. No engine must be allowed to push a train of Engine not to
carriages or waggons on the Main Line, unless within pusU tiam-
station limits, but must in all cases draw it, except
under special regulations when assisting up inclines, or
when required to start a train from a Station. In case
of an engine being disabled on the road, the succeed-
ing engine may push the train slowly to the next
siding or crossover road, at which place the pushing Exceptions,
engine must take the lead.
997. When trains are stopped between the Home Trains stopped
and Distant Signals, Guards must not consider them and nisuwic™ 6
protected by the Distant Signal unless the engine is signal,
near to the Home Signal, but they must go back and
protect their trains as directed.
Note. — This Rule does not apply where , Giving to
another Signal-box being near, the Distant Signals
are fixed at less than the usual distance from the
Home Signals , and where the signals are controlled
from such other Signal-box.
998. When a train is stopped at a Block Telegraph Trains stopping
box under cover of Home and Distant Signals, waiting waitll £ “Line
“Line Clear,” Guards need not go back with signals Clear.”


Protection to to protect it; but, in case of a stoppage or failure
train stopping between two Block Signal-boxes, the Guard must go
between two ° . 7 . , °
Block boxes. back and protect the train, as required,
when failure Should the stoppage or failure occur to an engine
engine onh'! not attached to a train, the Fireman must immediately
go back and act in the way prescribed for the
Guard.
Portion of train 1001. Should any part of a train become detached
fnm C ution? h ° n when in motion, care must be taken not to stop the front
part of the train before the rear portion has either
been stopped or is running slowly, and the Rear Guard
must promptly apply his brake to prevent a collision
with the front portion.
Whether to stop 1002. There may be cases requiring the train to
whenactfdent be stopped owing to the failure of, or accident to,
to or failure of sonie part 0 f it, when the prompt exercise of iudgment
portion of tram , | . . r , . r . J& .
arises. and skill is necessary to decide whether to stop quickly
or otherwise.
Engine defective, («) If the engine be defective, the sooner the train
the 7aiis. Lkb ult can be stopped the better. If any of the vehicles be off
the rails, the brakes in the rear must be instantly
applied, in order that by keeping the couplings tight
the disabled vehicles may be supported and out of the
way of the vehicles behind, until the force of the latter
is exhausted, it being desirable in such eases that the
front portion of the train should be brought slowly to
a stand. The application of the front brake might in
such cases result in further damage, and they should
only be applied when the disabled vehicles are in the
rear of the train. In all cases the application of brakes
behind a disabled vehicle will be attended with advan-
tage.
V p e iaced S wnMn . 1003, Guards performing shunting operations at
safety points sidings must, in all cases, take care that the vehicles
blocks. 01 Ch ar ® c^ear °f the Main Line, and within the safety
points and scotch blocks, and that the points fall pro-
perly, and the scotch blocks are replaced across the
rails after the operation is completed.


1004. When a train is shunted for another train to Lamps of shunted
pass, the tail and side lamps must bo removed, or so trailis-
disposed of as not to exhibit the Red light to a fol-
lowing train.
1005. Double shunting is strictly prohibited, except Double shunting,
when done by engines specially used for the purpose,
and attended by experienced Shunters.
1006. Fly shunting of empty vehicles against loaded riy shunting.
Passenger Trains, and of vehicles containing passen-
gers or live stock, is strictly prohibited.
1007. Should a Guard find any signal exhibited irregularity in
which ought not to be, or observe any other irregu-
larity in the working of signals, or should he sec any reported,
cattle or other obstruction on the line, or any defect Cattle on line,
in the signals, works, permanent way, or telegraph, he Defective signals
must report the same at the first Station at which the t 0 bc rei,oiud-
train stops, and also on his journal.
1009. Guards and all other servants must exercise Getting between
proper care in getting between vehicles for the purpose coupler 0
of coupling or uncoupling them. uncouple tuem.
1010. At the end of the journey, the Guard in Train journals,
charge must deliver to the Station-master, or forward
direct to the Superintendent or Traffic Manager, as
may be ordered, a journal containing the time of the
running of his train, notiyg therein every circumstance
of an unusual kind, any detentions that have taken
place on the journey, and any error as to parcels,
luggage, or goods. In the event of any occurrence
having taken place which might have involved in any
respect the safety of the train or line, he must, in
addition to the notices on his journal, send in a special
report thereof.
1011. When a Guard is returning to the Station at Guard tmvei-
which he resides by a train other tnan that he is }J^ g , “ 0 * tra,n
appointed to work, he must render all the assistance appointed
in his power in the working of the train by which he wor *


travels, and obey any instructions received from the
Guard in charge of such train; and when there is a
brake-van, in which no Guard is riding, on the train,
he must travel in such van and act as Under Guard.
carriage doors to 1014. Guards must see that the doors of the car-
be dosed. riasres are properly closed, and in case of ant r unusual
Unusual stop- , & 1 J 3 J
page. stoppage on the road, must request the passengers to
keep their seats, except when necessary to alight.
when a Passen- 1015. Should a Passenger Train, in stopping at a
runs estops”" Station, over-run or stop short of the platform, the
short of a Engine-driver must not move the train back or draw
platform. . ® , . . .. r> ~
it forward until he receives instructions from the
Guard in charge to do so. Station-masters, Guards,
and others must at once take steps to prevent passen-
gers leaving the carriages that are not at the plat-
form; and as soon as the Guard in charge has satisfied
himself that all carriage doors are closed, and that no
passengers are entering or leaving the train, he must
instruct the Engine-driver to put back or draw up
to the platform, as may be required. The Engine-
driver must sound bis whistle before moving his train.
Passengers to 1016. Guards must take care that passengers enter
carriages. 1 * T the proper carriages for the places to which they
ue-becking by are booked, and that no passenger is allowed to leave
prohibited 1 the train for the purpose of re-booking by the same
train with a view to evade payment of the proper
Defective 1017. Should complaint be made of the defective
carnages. running of any carriage, the Guard must report it to
the Station-master or first Carriage-examiner, and
enter the particulars on his journal, giving the num-
ber and class of carriage; but if the Guard have
reason to apprehend danger from such carriage before
it can be inspected, he must have it detached from the
train.
liidie- travelling 1018. When ladies are travelling alone, the Guards
aionc. are to pay every attention to their comfort; and in


placing them in the train, they must, if requested,
endeavour to select a carriage for them (according to
the class of their tickets) in which other ladies are
travelling; and if they wish to change carriages
during the journey, the Guards must enable them to
do so.
1019. The Guard must not allow any passenger Passenger or
or parcel to be conveyed by the train unless properly
conveyed unless
booked. properly booked.
1020. The windows of all empty compartments windows of
must be closed, not only while the carriages are
standing at the Stations, but also when the trains are
ruuniug, immediately upon the compartment becoming open,
vacant. The ventilators must be kept open.
1021. The Guard must see that platelayers and Department’s
other workmen of the Department holding second-class
passes are kept as separate as possible from the pas- passenger?,
sengers. When a large number of workmen travel by
the same train, carriages must be specially provided
for their use, and they must ride in these carriages
only.
1022. Prisoners under the charge of police, and prisoners and
persons afflicted with insanity, must not be placed with insaue persoas-
other passengers, but in a separate compartment.
1028. In the event of any passenger being drunk
or disorderly, to the annoyance of others, the Guard is luSsLUgtK-
to use all gentle means to stop the nuisance; failing
which, he must, for the safety and convenience of all,
remove him from the train at the first Station.
1024. On the arrival of the Passenger Train at a not
terminus, the Guards must not leave until they have
until they have
delivered over all parcels and luggage to the persons
appointed to lake charge of them; and if any article luggage,
be missing, they must immediately report the case to
the person in charge of the Station and on their
journals.
g 2


1025. Every Head Goods Guard must have with
him his watch and whistle, a Red, a Green, and a
White flag, a box of detonators (not less than twelve),
a hand signal lamp, a full set of tail and side lamps,
two or more spare coupling chains, a brake stick,
two sprags, and two hand-scotches, and a leather
tire bucket.
Articles a Goods
Guard must
have with him.
1026. The Guard in charge of the train must satisfy
himself before starting, and during the journey, that
the train is properly loaded, marshalled, coupled,
lamped, greased, and sheeted ; that the brakes are
in good working order; and that the train is in a state
of efficiency for travelling, and has the proper signals
attached to it. He must also carefully examine the
loading of any vehicles he may attach on the way,
and if any vehicle become unsafe from the shifting or
derangement of the load, must at once have the load
re-adjustod or the vehicle removed from the train.
Duties of Guard
in charge.
1027. When from any cause a Goods Train has been
brought to a stand on the Main Line, where the line
is not level, and it is necessary for the engine to be
detached from the train for the purpose of attaching
or detaching waggons, the Guard must before the
engine is uncoupled, satisfy himself that the van-brakes
have been put on securely, and, as an additional pre-t
caution, must pin down a sufficient number of waggon-
brakes, and place one or more sprags in the wheels
of the waggons next to the rear brake in the case of
an ascending gradient, and of the foremost waggons
in the case of a descending gradient, so as to prevent
the possibility of the Avaggons moving away. The
number of sprags must be regulated by the steepness
of the gradient, the number of waggons, their loads,
and the state of the weather and rails.
Attaching and
detaching
vehicles where
line is not
1028. Before attaching any travelling crane to his
train, the Guard must see that the jib of the crane is
properly lowered and secured, and so fixed that it will
pass under the gauge, and it must, when practicable,
be so placed that the jib will point towards the rear
of the train.
Kemoviil of
travelling
cranes.


1029. The Guard must see that the chains on Chains of timber
timber trucks and ou boiler waggons are secured in ufner wlgßona
order to prevent their getting loose whilst travelling, to be secured.
Foremen, Guards, and Shunters must take care that
no timber truck or boiler waggon is allowed to leave
a Station or siding without the chains being first
carefully examined and made perfectly secure and
safe, and Guards will be held responsible for seeing
that they remain so during the journey.
1030. Waggons must not bo shunted into sidings shunting
nor to other waggons upon the Main Lines without I f® nsfrom
remaining attached to the engine, except the waggons
are attended by a Brakes-man, or other person pre-
pared to put down the waggon-brakes, or apply sprags,
as the case may be, so as to prevent their coming into
violent contact with other waggons or vehicles, or
fouling other lines.
1031. When waggons require to be shunted into shunting
incline sidings, the trucks to be moved at one shunt
must be limited to such a number as the engine can
push up without going at a violent or excessive speed.
1.032. Goods Guards must not leave their trains Delivery of
until they have been delivered over to the Foreman, endlVjourney.
Yardman, or Shunter.
1033. Guards of ordinary trains will be supplied Copy of Special -
with a copy of the time-table of any Special Train
arranged to run on the same line.
1034. Every person who goes in charge of a train To be .acquainted
as Guard must be well acquainted with the road over " lth thc road ‘
which he has to travel.
1035. Every Guard must each day, before going To read notices
on duty, visit the Guards’ room, and read such notices rooni .
and instructions as are there exhibited.
1036. If there should be a sand-box in his brake- Snnd-boses in
van, the Guard must see that it is fully supplied Avith VVikVloVoV* 1
dry sand, and that the delivery pipe is clear, and ready brake.


for immediate use. When the weather is damp and
the rails slippery, he must freely use his sand when
his brake is being applied. Sand will be useful at all
times in increasing the effect of the brake. Guards
should avoid as much as possible skidding the wheels
of their brakes. The greatest power in checking the
speed of the train is obtained by checking the rotation
of the wheels, without skidding them.
passenger 1037. Passenger Guards must attend to the loading
parcels B in the* of their vans, check all parcels with the way-bills,
vans. and see that every article is properly stowed ; they
will be held responsible for the correct delivery to the
Station-masters or other authorized officers at the
various Stations of all parcels, letters, luggage, horses,
carriages, dogs, &c.
Goods Guavas to 1038. Goods Guards must, before starting, see that
way-bill's. 11 the trucks in their train correspond with the way-
bills, and Guards will be held responsible for the correct
delivery of all trucks and van goods according to the
way-bills, and in case a disabled truck is left at any
Station short of its destination, full particulars must
be reported to the Station to which such truck
was consigned, as well as to the General Traffic
Manager.
Guards to have 1039. Guards of passenger and mixed trains are not
of screw-" nber t° start from terminal or roadside Stations where trains
couplings. are made up without having the proper number of
screw-couplings.
Punishment in 1040. If during the journey any vehicle gets de-
Cached from the train in consequence of the couplings
breaking, the Guard of such train will be dismissed,
unless he shall be able to show that the safety chains
as well as the centre couplings were in use, and in
addition to dismissal he will be liable to any punish-
ment he may incur under “ The Public Works Statute
1865.”


1041. Screw-couplings, spare chains, &c., are not Screw-coupiings,
to be hung on the tail lamp irons of brake-vans. Any & p c ® re chains ’
infringement of this rule will be severely dealt with.
1042. When carnage trucks arc hooked on to goods Hooking carriage
trucks, the centre-chain of the goods truck must be Clicks. t 0 g °° dB
hung on its side-chain.
1043. In the same way, the centre-chains of live Lacing of centre-
stock trucks must be laced on side-chains when screw- s [^trucks. 0
couplings are used.
1044. Great care is to be exercised in shunting at care in shunting,
all Stations, and any one found shunting or moving ®' hlclcs
vehicles by the side chains only will be fined. by side chains.
1045. Guards are to assist as much as possible in Shunting and
shunting, and unloading goods or parcels, and in
goods or
letting passsengers out of and into carriages, and they parcels-
will be held responsible for any extra delay that may
arise at Stations where such work is required to be
done.
1046. An engine must never be detached from or xo flying shunt
shunted in front of a train without the train being all,,wecl-
previously stopped ; and no carriages or waggons are
to be detached from a train while in motion, nor left
on the line when detached without the Guards’ brakes
and the brakes of several of the trucks being put
down, but always moved into a siding, and properly
secured.
1047. He must carefully examine, in the case of a Examination of
goods train, the loading and sheeting of the waggons loat,ms-
before starting from each Station, to ensure the pro-
tection of the goods from rain and sparks, going round
the train to satisfy himself that all is right. He must
also, at every Station where the train stops, ascertain
that the loading of the trucks has not moved, and
specially that it does not overhang the sides ; and
that the axles continue properly greased, and the load
neither too high nor too wide for bridges and tunnels.


To examine 1048. Should a Guard have reason to suppose that
certain oises. an J person is without a ticket, or not in the right
carriage, lie is to request the person to show him his
ticket, not with a view to receive it from him, but to
satisfy himself that every person has a proper one.
Should any passenger wish to change his place from
an inferior to a superior carriage, or proceed further
than the Station for which he has procured a ticket, it
can only be done by application to the officer in charge
of the next Station. Guards are not to put passengers
into carriages where there are Station-masters or
Porters'whose duty it may be to do so, and Guards
are ou no account to collect tickets except at roadside
Stations where there are no Porters or Station staff.
Examination of 1049. All packages containing: fish, fruit, game, &c.,
fish,fruit, game, P, , , p • i
&c., packages. put into the Guards vans must be carefully examined
before starting, and the attention of the Stowing
Porter or Station-master is to he called to any apparent
deficiency or damage, which is to be reported by the
Guards, who will be held responsible for condition
of the goods on arrival at final destination or at any
Stations where custody may be transferred to other
Guards. Station-masters on their part will see that
all packages are examined on arrival, and draw the
attention of consignees to the necessity of making
complaints before the articles are removed.
Examination of 1050. Guards are to examine the lashings of all
lashings. plant trucks at each Station as they go along.
Examination of 1051. Guards before starting from any Station are
trucks. to examine the doors of all goods trucks in their
train, and satisfy themselves that they are securely
fastened. They arc to see that open trucks are pro-
perly sheeted, so as to ensure protection from rain,
and that the loading does not overhang.
Brake power. 1052. Should any Goods Guard have doubts as to
the sufficiency of the power of his brake-van, he will,
before descending any incline, put down a sufficient
number of truck brakes, and instruct the Engine-driver
to keep the train well in hand.


1053. Guards and Drivers who accept staff tickets staff tickets,
will he held responsible for seeing that the staff is at
the Station from which they receive the ticket.
1054. From the moment that the train is in motion Responsibility
the Head Guard will he held personally responsible ofGuard-
for its regularity, punctuality, and safety, and that it
is provided with all requisites to ensure protection to
the passengers and their property, and promote their
comfort.
1055. The Head Guard will always travel in the Guard to travel
brake nearest the engine, if there be more than one 111 tach l,rake ‘
brake. He must keep a good look-out for all signals
in front, and closely observe them, and occasionally
look back along the train on either side alternately, in
order that he may observe any irregularity in the
running or oscillation, or any signal that may be
made by a passenger or by the Under Guard. In
stopping at a Station, the Guards should work their
brake so that any recoil may be avoided after the
train has come to a stand.
1056. Guards must not allow any other duty to Attention to
interfere with their attention to signals when ap- a ° na '
preaching Stations or junctions ; and Guards leaving
Melbourne for the Main or Geelong lines should not
commence to sort parcels until their trains are clear
of the junctions.
1057. The Guard is on no account to allow pas-Not to allow
. n • i•! ..I, passengers to
sengers to get into or out ot a carnage while the Ke t ; n or out
train is in motion ; nor, in case of accident or deten- is
tion, to leave their seats unnecessarily.
1058. It will be his duty to attend to the attaching To attend
and detaching of carriages at intermediate Stations,
of vehicles at
and, if necessary in that case, the shifting of the tail
and side lamps. He must use every exertion to make
the time of stopping at intermediate Stations as short
as possible.


1059. When reporting detention to trains, Guards
should give the name of the Driver, and the number
of engine, and load.
Detention of
trains.
1060. Guards in charge of trains must closely ob-
serve the time kept by platform clocks, and inform
Station-masters of any inaccuracy. A report must
be sent to the General Traffic Manager by the Guard
if any clock is found wrong.
Time to be kept
by platform
clocks.
1062. The Guard will be held responsible for the
duty of working the signals at road sidings where there
is no Signalman or Station staff, and he must take all
necessary precautions, as pointed out by the Rules for
Signals, with which every Guard must be acquainted.
Working signals
where there
may be no
Station staff.
1063. In case of accident, detention, or necessity,
the Guard may demand the assistance of any railway
servant either by day or night.
To demand as-
sistance where
necessary.
1064. No Guard shall, under any pretence, receive
money for his own use, or on account of the Railway
Department,
Not to receive
money.
1065. Every Guard must make a faithful and
minute report at the end of every journey, in the
forms which will be provided him for the purpose.
To make report
at end of
journey.
1066. Guards must not allow any intoxicated per-
son to enter a carriage, or any one else unless officers
of the Railway Department, under special orders, to
ride in his van, the inside of which must be kept
clean and neat. If a Guard takes any person in his
Tan who is not provided with a pass or ticket, he will
be dismissed; if he takes any one in his van without
being authorized, although such person may have a
ticket, he will be fined.
Not to allow
persons to
travel in his
van.
1067. He must see that the carriages are provided
with proper roof lamps ; and during the journey he
must from time to time look to the lamps, and see
that they continue lighted and are burning properly.
To see that roof
lamps are sup-
plied and
lighted.


1068. When a deficiency of room occurs in a train To obtain ad-
while on the journey, Guards should request the
riajres when
Station-master to telegraph to the next Station where required,
carriages are kept to have one in readiness to attach
on the arrival of the train.
1069. Upon the stoppage of a train at a Station, To allow passen-
, .11 . 7 r • n. .• i u ger to alight
and especially at a watering Station, should any pas-
in case of
senger require to alight for the purpose of nature, the necessity.
Guard must allow him to do so, urging the necessity
for his resuming his place quickly.
1070. On arrival at every intermediate Station, the To call the name
Guards must go to every carriage window, and call
loudly and clearly the name of the Station ; and at windows,
a junction with a branch line, the passengers for that
branch must be distinctly informed whether they are
required to change carriages or not. This must be
done by the Guards, independent of the notice of a
similar kind to be given by the Station staff.
1071. When trains stop at a Station, Guards are semaphore to be
to see that the semaphore is set at “ Danger ” before unloading 6 ’
proceeding to unload the van or to open carriage van or carriage
doors. 'This is to be more particularly attended to at doorsareo P euet •
Stations where only one official is employed.
1072. Guards must assist the Ticket-collectors, by To assist Ticket-
asking passengers to get their tickets ready, and by co!lectors-
shutting the carriage doors after the Collectors.
1073. Goods Guards must forward to the General Tickets collected 1
Traffic Manager’s Office, with the sheets, any tickets b ' Guaids ‘
they collect from passengers travelling in vans.
1074. They must note, for the securing of im- To note irregu-
mediate safety, and for the purpose of their report, ari IL *’
any indication of defect of road, vehicle getting off
road, receiving any strain or other injury, train started
suddenly with a jerk, or shunted violently against
carriages, trucks, or stops, See.; carriage observed to
oscillate, or run unsteadily ; all instances of over-


running at Stations ; any omission by Platelayers,
Signalmen, or other persons to give proper signals;
any defect in loading ; and any delay, neglect, or
irregularity occurring during the journey, or other
deviation from the requirements of these Rules, with
the time of each arrival and departure.
To note when 1070. They must note also, fora like purpose, the
nurtive assist- 0 " Stations between which they have had the assistance
ance is obtained. 0 f f] ie pilot engine, the name of the Engine-driver,
and number of the engine of the train.
To be responsible 1076. The G uard is responsible for the due placing
lights lire'pro- of the signal (side and tail) lamps and coach lamps
periy exhibited. on the train. Every Guard’s hand lamp, together
with the engine and tail lamps, must be lighted at
sunset or in foggy weather. The tail and side lamps
must be inspected at every Station, to ensure their
being kept properly trimmed and lit during the
journey.
Prompt delivery 1077. Great importance is attached to the prompt
of despatches, G f despatches consigned to the care of the
Guard, and any that are marked immediate must be
sent to their address by a Porter at once on the
arrival of the train.
To note any 1080. Guards arc to make a note of any carriages
dowst&c." or trucks in a dirty or defective condition, or with
torn lining, broken windows, deficiency of or defec-
tive roof lamps, side or tail lamps, and no statement
of such defect existing before the starting of the
train will bo received unless they shall have called
the attention of an officer of the Station thereto.
The Guards will bo held responsible for all defects
of the kind found on arrival of the train and not
reported.
To search car- 1081. The carriages are to be properly searched
by the Guards where there is no person specially
appointed for that purpose, and all property found
must be immediately brought to the officer on duty.


1082. Guards shall not exchange their trains or Not to exchange
duties with each other, except by the written instruc- j™nuiss/on° Ut
tion of the General Traffic Manager or of the Station-
master at the terminal Station from which they start.
1083. The Guard must prevent persons endanger- To take care of
ing themselves by imprudent exposure. In the event i >asse,l = ers
of any person being drunk or disorderly, to the an-
noyance of others, he shall use all gentle means to
stop the nuisance, failing which, for the safety and
convenience of all, he will exercise his authority, and
confine the passenger in a separate place until the
arrival at the next Station.
1084, Mail Guards are prohibited from carrying Mail Guards not
parcels for private purposes, and any breach of this j£“^ pnvate
rule is to be at once reported.
1085. On receiving parcels way-billed as valuable. Valuable way-
Guards must initial the entry on the way-bill, in pre- bl!led i iarcels *
sence of the Way-billing Clerk ; and on delivering
any such parcel at destination, must obtain the Re-
ceiving Clerk’s initials on the way-bill when handing
it over. When Guards change in the course of a
journey, the initials of the Relieving Guard must be
obtained on the way-bill by the first Guard.
1086. Guards, in addition to other reports, must Trucks left on
note on the slate hung up in their room any trucks l ourneJ '
thfct may have been left on the journey through hot
boxes or other mishap, stating at what Station they
were left.
1087. Guards will be held responsible for any Damagedtrucks.
trucks damaged on arrival at any Station, unless they
can prove that the damage occurred before the trucks
were put on their trains. Any instance of the kind
must be at once reported to the General Traffic Man-
ager’s Office.
1089. When a Special Train runs on a single line, special Trains oa
the Guard must exhibit his written instructions to


the officers in charge at staff Stations, special care
being taken that Station-masters at places where the
train has to shunt on the return journey thoroughly
understand them, so that the staff may be properly
arranged for.
stopping at 1090. Guards must stop at the mouth of the tunnel
between f castie- between Castlemaine and Sandhurst, to put down
hur"* andSand * sufficient brakes, and the block must be enforced be-
tween Elphinstone and the first-named Station.
Fastening truck
doors.
Guards late at
duty.
To report in-
fringement of
Byc-laws.
Examination of
loading.
To receive
Guard’s signals
by whistle.
To whistle if
ueceasaiy.
1107. Truck doors which will not fasten properly,
or admit of both pins being put in their places, must
be securely lashed before the vehicles are taken on the
train.
1108. Any Guard not being in time to take his
train out, and having omitted to send any reasonable
excuse for his absence at least thirty minutes before
the train should start, will forfeit two days* pay, viz.,
one day as a fine in addition to the day lost. Station-
masters are to report every such absence at once.
1113. Every Guard will see that the Bye-laws are
complied with, and whenever they are violated report
the fact at the next Station.
1122. On arrival at a terminal Station, the Guard
will, before going off duty, pass over all the trucks,
to examine the load and to test the tightness of every
lashing. Should the slate of the plant call for any
attention, the Guard will put it right, or verbally report
it to the Station-master or officer in charge. In a like
manner the Guard of the train by which the plant is
to travel will pass over every truck before starting.
1123. The Guard will give the Driver the signal to
start by blowing a whistle.
1125. Each of the engines is provided with a
whistle, to be used for the purpose of warning any
persons who may be on the line of the engine or train


approaching ; and it is the duty of the Guards to look
out to the Engineman on hearing this whistle, in order
to ascertain immediately the cause of its being used,
and to give any requisite assistance.
ENGINE-DRIVERS AND FIREMEN.
1126. The Engine-driver and Fireman must he with Time of attend-
their engine at such time previous to starting as the ancc ’
Locomotive Superintendent may require. And the Engine to be in
driver will be responsible for having his engine in proper order,
perfect order, the steam up, the tender regularly cleaned
inside, and full of fuel and water ; and his proper
supply of tools and signals (for which he will be held
responsible, and in the event of loss, shall get them
replaced immediately); and he must be ready to start at
least ten minutes before the hour appointed for starting.
1127. The Engine-driver must have Avith him at all Articles to be
times on his tender —tAvo short chains with hooks, a takcil ’
complete set of lamps, a croAvbar, a screAV-coupliug,
two large links, a screwjack, a fire-bucket, a box of
detonators (not less than tAvelve), a Red flag, a complete
set of fire-irons, and such other tools as may be ordered
by the Locomotive Superintendent from time to time.
1129. Great caution should be used in placing the Placing engine
engine against the train, which should be done Avith- aBiuu& ram ‘
out moA'iug a single carriage, in order to guard against
injury to any passenger who may be stepping into a
carriage at that time.
1130. Enginemen Avill be liable to immediate dis- Punishment for
missal for the slightest instance of insobriety, and to i “ Bobrkty ’
fine or dismissal for disobedience of orders, for neg-
ligence or other misconduct, as avcll as to punishment
under any Act applicable to the case; and they are
not to quit the service without giving a fortnight’s
previous notice in writing.
1131. Except on emergency, no engine must be Engine not to be
allowed to be in motion on the Main Line unless both AL!!n°Liuc° UlUe
the Engine-driver and Fireman are upon it. DriverLdFhe-
without both
Driver and Fire*
man being on it.


Net to start with- 1132. Any Driver shun ting a train without a Fire-
out Fireman. man, or some other person on the footplate acting as
such, or any Fireman shunting an engine or train in
the absence of his driver, will be either fined or
dismissed.
Examination of 1133. The Engine-driver, before commencing his
notices before , , , . . ~ ~ , , <. , •
starting. day s work, must examine the notices posted tor his
guidance, in order to ascertain if there is anything re-
quiring his special attention on those parts of the line
over which he has to work.
Not to leave 1134. When a passenger train is about to start from
platform^with-** a Station or ticket platform, the signal to start given
out proper by the Guard merely indicates that the station duty,
or the collection of tickets, is completed ; and previous
to starting the train the Engine-driver must satisfy
himself by observation that the line before him is clear,
and he must obtain, by means of his whistle, the ex-
hibition of the necessary signal as the circumstances
of the case may require.
Engine lamps 1135. The Engine-driver must, before starting, see
ami indicators. jjj s ] am p 3 are j n good order, and that his engine
carries the proper distinguishing lights, or other in-
dicators of the train. At and after dusk, and during
foggy weather, he must have the lamps lighted*
in foggy weather 1136. The Engine-driver and Fireman must care-
speed must be pit i 11* i i i o j* •/*/*
reduced if fixed Italy observe all signals, and when Irom tog, or if from
visible ar ° UOt an y causo > ie signals are not visible as soon as
usual, the speed must be reduced, and every possible
precaution must be used, especially in approaching
Stations and junctions, so that they may he able to stop
the train short of any obstruction, should the signals
bo against them.
To assist in form- 1138. The Engine-driver must afford such assist-
ing train, anC e with his engine as may be required for the for-
mation, arrangement, and despatch of his train.
Train under con- 1139. The movements of the train are under the
troi of ouard. direction of the Guard, to whose instructions as to


the stopping, starting, and general working of the
train the Engine-driver must pay implicit attention.
1 140. No engine must travel at a greater speed than To go steadily
eight miles an hour when going through facing points. facins
Engines coming off branch lines through curves on to
the Main Lines at junctions are not to exceed a speed
of twelve miles an hour.
1141. The Engine-driver and Fireman must pay Must observe and
immediate attention to and obey all signals, whether obey signals,
the cause of the signal being shown is known to them
or not. The Engine-driver must not, however, trust
entirely to signals, but on all occasions be vigilant and
cautious. He must also obey the instructions of the
officers in charge of Stations.
1143. All signals must be obeyed, and whenever or To obey an sig-
wherever a signal to stop is made by any person— nals-
namely, when the Red flag is hoisted or held out, or a
Red light or a common light is moved violently up and
down —whether the Engineman comprehends the rea-
son for the signal being made or not, he is to stop and
ascertain the cause of making such signal, unless he '
sees danger in doing so. It is to be understood that
any flag or lamp, of whatever colour, or anything else
violently waved up and down, is a signal to stop.
1144. When an engine passes a detonator it ex-Train to be
plodes with a loud report, and the Engine-driver otdeto-
must instantly shut oil steam, and bring his engine to nator *
a stand, and then proceed cautiously to the place of
obstruction, or until he receives the “ All Right”
signal.
1145. When from any cause an engine or train with- Engine or train
out a Guard is compelled to remain upon the Main Lino i e tt on Main Line
unprotected by fixed signals, the Engine-driver must jgjngg**'
send his Fireman, or some other competent person,
with Danger Signals to protect the engine or* train
during the time it is in such a position, in the manner
prescribed by the Rules ; and when an engine or train
H *


When stopped without a Guard is stopped outside the Home Signal,
slgnai C *mi° me an( l within the Distant Signal, the Fireman must be
within Distant sent back in like manner, unless the train is well
signals. covered by the Distant Signal.
Accident to en- 1146. Should an accident happen to an engine or
botiufneTto be train without a Guard, occasioning the obstruction of
obstructed. both lines of rail, the Engine-driver must, in addition
to sending the Fireman back, go himself or send some
other competent person 1,200 yards in advance of the
engine, to stop trains travelling on the opposite line
to that upon which his train was running, in like
manner as the Guard is directed to do by the Rules.
1147. Should an accident to a train occasion the
stoppage of, or be dangerously near to, any line of
rails used by trains running in the opposite direction,
the Engine-driver of the disabled train must immedi-
ately detach his engine (if it is able to run forward) and
proceed with it 1,200 yards from the scene of accident,
and leave his Fireman with detonators to act as laid
down in Rules 988-992 to protect the opposite line of
rails. The Engine-driver must then go forward to the
nearest Signal Station and inform the Signalman of
the obstruction, in order that any train or engine run-
ning on the opposite line may be stopped until the
obstruction has been removed. In the course of the
journey from the breakdown to the Signal Station, the
Engine-driver must stop any train that may be ap-
proaching on the opposite line, sounding the brake
whistle, exhibiting the necessary Hand Signals, and
in addition, showing a Red head light at night.
Both lines
obstructed.
Engine disabled,
1148. Should the engine be disabled, the Fireman
must at once go forward and place the detonators on
the opposite line of rails.
Portionoftrain 1152. When a portion of a train is left upon the
laftnn \faln Tiro -» r • -r • n • « • « •• • . . .
fromaeddent'or Main Line from accident or inability of the engine to
failure of engine, take me whole forward, the Engine-driver must not
return for it on the same line, except by written
instructions from the Guard, but must go on the
*


proper line and cross at the nearest points behind
the part left, which he must push before him till
convenient to go in front again with the engine. It
the Engine-driver finds it necessary to return to the
rear portion of his train on the same line, he must,
before starting with the front portion, send his Fire-
man back to the Guard to obtain the necessary written
instructions authorizing him to do so, and, if he give
such instructions, the Guard must continue to protect
his train in the rear, and prevent a following train
pushing it ahead. When there is only one Guard
with the train, it is the dut3 r of the hireman to ride oniymo Ouani
upon the last vehicle of the front portion of the train
until it is placed in a siding; and it is the duty of
the Guard, after putting down his brake, and carefully
securing the last portion of the train so that it will
remain stationary, to go back and take the necessary
steps for protecting it by signals, in accordance with
the Rules.
1154. When approaching a junction, the Engine-Properwhtstie on
driver must give the proper notice by whistle to ach °^ unc
warn the Signalman of his approach, and must not,
until he has seen the proper signals exhibited to pro-
ceed, run’ at a greater speed than will admit of his K t n l^nn?se C en" n
being able to stop his train before arriving at the
home signal or the points and crossings protected
thereby, or short of any obstruction that may exist;
and he must so stop his train if the signals are against Stop
him. The Engine-driver must, as far as practicable, a °‘* ms I “ n ‘
have his Fireman disengaged when appproaching or
passing a Station or junction, so that he also may keep sing Station or
a good look-out for signals. Should an Engine-driver,
on approaching a junction, find the proper signals it signals lowered,
lowered for him to proceed, he need not give the ) y'^ l ®" ottobe
junction whistles.
1155. The Engine-driver must protect his engine, To protected ine.
in accordance with the Regulations, without refer-
ence to any telegraphic communications that may
exist between Stations or signal-boxes, and he is not
h 2


in any way relieved from this duty by the existence
of Block or other telegraphic working.
Means to be 1156. When an Engine-driver requires the assist-
Se-driverand ance of the Guard’s brake, he must give two or more
Guard to at- short, sharp whistles, or sound the brake whistle
other’s'atten- (when a special whistle is supplied for that purpose)
tion - and apply the communication where such exists.
1157. Should the Guard wish to attract the atten-
tion of the Engine-driver, he will, in addition to using
the communication (where such exists), apply his
brake sharply and release it suddenly. This opera-
tion repeated several times is almost certain, from
the check it occasions, to attract the notice of the
Engine-driver, to whom the necessary Caution or
Danger Signal, as the case may require, will be exhi-
bited.
Assisting engine 1158. When one or more engines are employed to
not to leave tram ag j gt a trtiiii in the rear, they must not leave the
except where ’ J .
there are fixed train except at places where there are fixed signals
and a man on duty. When two or more engines are
employed to draw a train, they must not be uncoupled
except at places where there are fixed signals and a
man on duty, nor then until the engines have been
brought to a stand.
Light engine to be 1159. When two or more light engines have to pass
coupled. a t the same time through a Block section, they must
be coupled together before entering such section, and
must not be uncoupled except at a Block Signal-box
Avhere there are fixed signals and a man on duty.
Train drawn by 1160. When two engines are employed in drawing
two engmes. same train, the Engine-driver and Fireman of the
leading engine are responsible for the observance of
Duty of each En- signals ; the Engine-driver of the second engine must
signals? Vef 8810 watch for and take his signals from the Engine-driver
of the leading engine, but the Engine-driver of the


■second engine is not relieved from the due observance
of all signals regulating the safe working of the
line.
11G1. When two engines are attached in front of second engine not
~ , . i n • . , to give steam un-
a train, the assistant engine shall m no case give steam tu signalled to
until the train engine has commenced to pull, and do so-
has signalled to the assistant engine to that effect.
1162. Engines, when running on the Main Line EnginetaU-iampe.
without a train, must cany a tail-lamp in the rear,
both by day and by night.
1163. Engines assisting trains in the rear must carry
a tail-lamp.
1164. Engines drawing trains must not carry any
tail-lamp in the rear.
1165. In the case of two or more engines running
coupled together without a train, the last engine only
must carry a tail-lamp.
1166. Should an Engine-driver observe anything To signal train
wrong on the line of rails opposite to that on which when necessary,
his train is running, he must sound his whistle and
exhibit a “ Danger ” Signal to any train or engine he
may meet, and stop at the first signal-box or Station
and report to the person in charge what he has ob-
served. Should he meet an engine or train too closely
following any preceding engine or train, he must
sound his whistle and exhibit a Caution or Danger
Signal, as occasion may require, to the Engine-driver
of such following engine or train.
1167. The Engine-driver must start and stop his To start and stop
train carefully and without a jerk, and pass along the
proper line, which, in the case of an ordinary double proper line,
line, is the left-hand side of the permanent way in the
direction in which the engine is travelling.
1168. Should a train be approaching, stopping at, Use of whistle,
or leaving a Station on the opposite line, or should


Whistle on en-
tering tunnel.
Terminal
Stations to be
entered with
special care.
Rules for work-
ing steep in -
clines descend
ing.
Rules tor work-
ing steep in-
clines descend
ing.
Drivers bavirg
to st i p on lop
of inclines.
Rules for work-
ing steep in -
dines ascend-
ing.
shunting operations be going on, he must, on ap-
proaching and whilst passing, sound the engine whistle.
The whistle must also be sounded on entering a
tunnel.
11G9. Terminal Stations must be entered with special
care.
1170. On approaching the top of a heavy descending
incline, the driver must reduce his speed before the
incline commences, so as to insure his being able to
keep the train in command the whole way down the
incline.
1171. Drivers of Goods Trains must stop at the
nearest Station to or on the top of every steep
descending incline, as he may he directed by the
Guard, in order that the Guard may put down as
many brakes as may be required; and every Driver,
by himself or bis Fireman, must give every assistance
to the Guard in putting down the brakes, but Driver
and Fireman shall not both leave the engine at the
same time.
1173. Drivers who have to stop on the top of in-
clines for the purpose of having brakes put down must
be very careful in starting their trains, so as not to
break a coupling.
H 74. Xo Driver must attempt to ascend any heavy
incline unless he has engine power enough to take his
train to the top ; and, if he has any doubt of his engine
being able to take the whole of las train up the incline,
he must stop at the Station nearest to the bottom,
and inform the Guard, who will divide the train in the
manner laid down in the Knles for Guards, with which
Rules every Engineman must make himself fully
acquainted.
Drivertopro- H 75. In the event of his being obliged to stop his
directs. ‘ train when ascending an incline, and that it becomes


necessary to divide it there, the Driver must proceed
as Guard directs, and in the manner pointed out by
Rules 1176 and 1177.
1176. Before any portion of a train is uncoupled Securing portion
on an incline, every vehicle of the portion about to uncoupled.
1)0 detached from the engine must be properly secured
by its brake; and when the engine is required to
return on the wrong line for any portion of the train
that may have been left on the line, the Driver must
be particularly cautious in returning and in moving
his engine against the standing portion of the train,
in order that it may not be started back down the
incline.
1177. In the case of the train being divided for want Train divided for
of engine power as described above, and there should po^ ei ° en ° ine
be only one Guard with the train, the Fireman must
put down all the brakes immediately the train stops,
while the Guard goes back with the Danger Signal.
The brakes at the lower end of the train must be first
secured, and when the engine is taking up the first
portion of the train to the nearest siding off the line
on which the train is travelling, the Fireman (if
there be no second Guard) must travel on the last
vehicle, and attend to the brake ; and he must also
open the points into the siding as described above, to
admit the first portion of the train.
1178. If any train or engine be discovered-at aTo stop before
stand on the opposite line, not at a Station, the Driver
must sound his whistle and reduce his speed, so as to ° n opposite
IP 1 • j.l i.l line, “ no ‘ s a
be able to stop, it necessary, beiore reaching the other station,
train or engine. When approaching any Station or
Level Crossing, more than usual precaution must be
used ; and if the signals, from fog or any other cause,
be not clearly seen, the Driver must bring his train to
a stand before entering the Station, and afterwards
proceed with great caution until he knows the line
is clear.


in case of acw- 11/9. In the event of accident blocking up one line
dent to proceed » ~ . , ~
cautiously. or rails, and requiring all the trains to pass over the
To obey ail other line of rails, the utmost caution must be used ;
signals. and no f gh a n be permitted to proceed without a
memorandum, in writing, from the person in authority
on the spot where the accident has occurred. No
verbal message must, on any account, be attended to
in cases of accident; but a written memorandum must
be obtained before the train is allowed to move.
Defects in works, 1183. The Engine-driver must report at the first Sta-
s?gna\s!posts, or tion at which he stops any defect in the road or works,
wires. electric telegraph posts or wires, or signals which he
Deport to be ma y have observed, and at the end of his journey
made at end of J _ . 7 . _ ,
joumey. report to his Superintendent, fcoreman, or the Clerk in
irregular work- attendance the state of his engine and tender, any
ing of signals. j rre g U i ar working of signals, or other unusual circum-
stances that may have taken place on the journey.
Shunting of 1184. Waggons must not be shunted into sidings,
waggons from , . ■ T . ~, ° ’
trains. nor to other waggons upon the Main Lines, without
remaining attached to the engine, except the waggons
are attended by a Brakesman, or other person prepared
to put down the waggon brakes, or apply sprags,
as the case may be, so as to prevent their coming into
violent contact with other waggons or vehicles, or
fouling other lines.
Shunting wag- 1185. When waggons require to be shunted into
mdhigs. ° mC ine incline sidings, the trucks to be moved at one shunt
must be limited to such a number as the engine can
push up without going at a violent or excessive speed.
Engine-driver of 1186. When a light engine is running on the line
shunt^vhere 10 unaccompanied by a Guard, the Engine-driver will
necessary. be p, e Xd responsible for shunting where necessary for
trains to pass, and for carrying out the instructions
prescribed for the Guard in the Regulations.
sp ee ;i of Special 1188. Special Trains, whether passenger, cattle,
horse, goods, coal, or otherwise, must be run as nearly
as practicable at the same rate of speed as correspond-
ing trains shown on the Service Time-table, and of


which they may form n part; and the speed of Special
Trains must in no case exceed that of such corre-
sponding trains unless under specific instructions from
the General Traffic Manager.
1189. Should an Engine-driver observe a train or Train at stand on
. i ° . .. .. , ~ , opposite line
engine at a stand on tlie opposite line to that on obscured by
which he is travelling, obscured by steam or smoke, steam or smoke,
he must sound his whistle, and approach it very
cautiously, so as to be able to stop if necessary.
1190. A Green flag or a Green light exhibited by Platelayers’
__ _ . & \ signals to
Platelayers indicates that trains and engines must reduce speed,
reduce speed to fifteen miles an hour over the portion
of line protected by such Green signals.
1192. When any train or engine is shunting from shunting from
one lino to another, after sunset and in foggy weather, another after
the head and side lights of the engine must be reversed
so as to show Red against any other train or engine
travelling on the line of rails obstructed by train or
engine so shunting.
1193. Shunting engines employed exclusively in Lights on shunt-
Station yards and sidings must, after sunset and in in ° en ° ines '
foggy weather, carry both head and tail lamps showing
a Red light.
1194. Engine-drivers, after taking water from tanks nose of water
or water columns, must be careful to leave the hose
or water-crane clear of the Main Line, and properly
secured.
1195. Guards and Drivers are to be careful that speed of goods
the speed of goods trains inwards from Dudley-street
signal-box, Melbourne, to receiving sidings, goods street,
yard, Spencer-street, is not to exceed five miles an
hour.
1196. Drivers and Firemen are not to reside more Residence,
than half-a-mile from the running-shed in which they
are employed without the express permission of the
Locomotive Superintendent.


Addresses.
1197. All Enginemen are to leave their addresses
with the Locomotive Foreman Avith whom they
work.
To take orders
from Guard.
1198. Before the time of starting with any train,
the Driver must place his engine in front of the train.
After that time, and until the end of the journey, he
Avill receive his orders from the Guard only in all
matters affecting the starting, stopping, or the move-
ments of the train; and in case of any accident to the
train, he must, if required, disconnect his engine, and
proceed Avhere he may be ordered hy the Guard ;
and he must obey promptly all signals given to him,
whether by the officers in charge of Stations or the
Guard, so far as the safe and proper Avorking of his
engine Avill enable him to do so.
1199. While the engine is in steam, it must on
no account be left by both the Driver and Fireman
at the same time (for hoAvever short a time), except
when given in charge of the Day or Night Foreman ;
and Avlien it is standing the regulator is to be closed,
the slides are to be thrown out of gear, and the
tender-brake screwed up tight, until the signal is giA r en
for starting.
Not to leave
engine.
Not to jerk a 1200. Caution is to be used not to stop a goods or
train! 01 cattl ° cattle train too suddenly. Cattle arc much endangered
by the shock of too abrupt a stoppage. The engine
must not suddenly leave the train Avhen standing on
descending gradients, but should draw aAvay gradually,
so that it may be seen whether the trucks are secured
by their brakes.
To whistle before 1202. Before moving an engine, under any circum-
stances, the Driver shall sound his Avhistle to give
notice.
To 1203. If it is necessary for an engine to move on
moving- an r ° to the Main Line from a siding, or to cross from one
engine. Main Line to the other, the Engineman must first obtain


permission, challenge the Signalman by whistle, and
receive a signal from him that all is clear; and should
an Enginemau perceive that the proper signal is not
made to protect him, he should call attention of the
Signalman to the fact by sounding his whistle; but
this rule will in no way relieve the Station staff from
the responsibility of making proper signals for the
protection of the trains or engines.
1204. The Fireman must in all instances be under Fireman to be
the directions of the Driver. nrh e er° rders ° f
1205. The continued sound of the whistle will Not to whistle
signify the want of assistance. Euginemen must not unneoessanly '
whistle unnecessarily, especially when attached to or
near a passenger train, in order that the passengers
may not be alarmed.
1200. In the event of a Driver being unable to travel To advise Guard
with his train at the rate requisite to keep the keeptime.
advertised time, he must immediately make known the
circumstance to the Guard, who will report it at the
nearest Station or junction, for the guidance of follow-
ing trains.
1207. The exact time for performing each portion To keep time,
of the journey will be fixed by the time-table, and
the great object of the Driver must be to keep his
engine going regularly at the speed required, and from
wlifch speed he should vary as little as possible, never
exceeding the speed actually required for keeping the
time punctually, and therefore never arriving at any
of the Stations or at the end of the journey before time,
and he must arrive punctually at all intermediate
Stations.
1208. Drivers are not to make up time on the Down Must adhere to
journey to Sandhurst running down Porcupine and tlllle - table -
Big Hill banks, but must run between Stations to
time-table.


Late trains at 1209. Whenever a train arrives at a terminal Station
stations more than ten minutes late, the Station-master has
authority to question the Driver as to the cause of
detention, and Engiuemen will give the Station-master
every particular as to cause of delay, &c.
Delays to be 1210. Delays of over one (1) minute at any Station
reported. are re p or ted to the Locomotive Superintendent.
No person to 1211. The Driver and the Fireman only are to be
travel on upon the engine, and no other person whatever is to
engine. i o 7 *. i • i
he allowed to travel with them unless by a special
pass, which shall be issued only by the Locomo-
tive Superintendent, Secretary, Engineer-in-Chief,
Engineer for Existing Lines, and General Traffic
Manager.
Engine after 1212. When a train or engine approaches an
nu^t'draw Pl)e<l advanced signal set at “ Danger ” or any other
under protec- “Danger” signal, the Engineman must come steadily
tion of signal. gQ ag tQ gto p at « p) ail g er ” signal; and having first
ascertained that there is no obstruction, he is immedi-
ately to move his train cautiously within the protection
of the advanced semaphore or signal, so that no follow-
ing train may run into his.
Caution in 1213. When an engine or train approaches any
poaching Station when the semaphore is set at “Danger,” the
Driver must take care to keep his train in command, so
as to stop if necessary at the outside shunting points
of the Station; and he must not in any case come up
to the platform until he has ascertained that the line is
clear, whether there is a signal shown or not. The
Driver must in all cases approach cautiously any
Station where his view of the line throughout the
entire Station-ground is obstructed, in consequence of
the line being on a curve, gradient, or from any other
cause.
No flying shunts 1214. An engine must never be detached from or
to be made, shunted in front of a train without the train being
previously stopped ; neither may carriages or waggons


be detached from a train while it is in motion. Should
an engine or any portion of a train become detached
from the rest Avhen running, the Driver must not
pull up at once, but gradually reduce and so regulate
his speed as to prevent a collision between two
detached portions of a train.
1215. Enginemen must exercise great discretion in C*re in shunting,
shunting, so that breakages of drawbars when revers-
ing engines may be prevented.
121 G. In the event of a Driver finding any detached To take on
vehicles on the line upon which he is proceeding, he on h theline Ulld
must couple-to and push them on to the nearest detached.
Station, and shunt them into a siding; or, if he is not
in charge of a passenger train, and his engine be
powerful enough, ho must take them on to their
destination. If they are on the other line, he must
stop any engine he may meet, and also give notice of
the same at the next Station he comes to.
1217. All Enginemen shall stand up and keep a To keep a good
good look-out all the time the engine is in motion, look-°ut-
and more particularly for the signals at Stations,
junctions, and level crossings, and they must not
allow any other duty to take up their attention when
they are coming in sight of signals, nor until they have
passed them. They must also be prepared to act upon
any signals they may receive from the Platelayers ox-
others on the line; and if the Driver is engaged with
any part of the engine, he must take care that the
Fireman is looking out. In case of fog, or when from
any cause the fixed signals are not visible as soon as
usual, the speed must be immediately reduced, so that
the Driver shall be able to stop the train before
reaching the fixed signals.
1218. Shunting at roadside Stations is to be done as shunting at
far as practicable during daylight, and through loads ami
are to be sent by the night or very early morning through V'.ding
trains.


To look towards 1210. In the case of trains which stop at inter-
frequently." mediate Stations only for the purpose of taking up
or letting down passengers, goods, and parcels, the
Driver must look to the Guard’s van in sufficient time
before reaching the platform, so as to be able to stop
the train should the Guard signal him to do so.
Looking' out 1220. While trains are running with unlocked
along trains. doors, all Drivers and Firemen are to keep as con-
stant a look-out as possible along their trains while
running, to see that everything is safe.
Fireman to look 1221. The Fireman is to look back at starting from
back frequently. gf a ti oa f 0 see that a “Stop” signal is not subse-
quently given, and that all the train is attached ; and
frequently when on the journey, and more particularly
when passing all points where a Signalman is stationed,
to observe if he or the Guard continues the “All Right”
signal after the train has passed, or gives a “Stop”
signal to indicate that something is wrong.
To stop at 1222. The Driver, on receiving the distant
signal!’ 01 “ Danger” or any other “Danger” signal when ap-
proaching a Station or junction, must stop his train
outside of that signal; but immediately he has ascer-
tained that the line is clear beyond such signal, he
must, if possible, go on very slowly to the Station or
junction, so as to be perfectly secure from any follow-
ing engine or train. Should he be compelled to remain
outside, the Guard, or in his absence the Fireman, or
some other competent person, shall immediately go
back 800 yards with a Red signal to stop any coming
train ; and when a train is unable to proceed at a
greater speed than four miles an hour, the Guard or
Fireman shall go back GOO yards, and shall continue
walking at that distance from the train, exhibiting all
the time his “Danger” signal until the train is
shunted safely.
Not to go 1223. No Engineman shall move an engine through
poinfafunieM* 1 * an y points, unless some qualified person is there to hold
they are held, the switch lever. The Engineman must attend


strictly to instructions of Pointsmen or Yardsmen
when a train has been shunted into or before leaving
a siding.
1224. Drivers of all trains are to use great caution Passing cross-
at crossings used by the public. tags, junctions.
1225. Drivers are not to cross the Main Line at c^eat CaaUe
Castlemaine Station, unless the semaphores are set to maine.
protect them, and under the directions of the Station-
master.
1226. Drivers are to approach Stations carefully, To approach
and not to stop short or over-run the platforms where ons eare *
they have to stop; and shall use extreme caution in
passing Stations where they have not to stop ; and on
no account to make up time by increased speed
without special instructions so to do.
1227. Enginemen must challenge all Stations by To challenge
whistle, when approaching them, at 400 yards
distant, whether intending to stop or not.
1228, Drivers are not to challenge for another road Challenging for
until they have passed over the points on the road they another road-
are running.
1229. An interval of five minutes must elapse
between any two trains travelling in either direction tween trains,
on the same line of rails, except when shown in time-
table.
1230. Running shunts with passenger trains are on shunts
no account to be made.
1231. Enginemen are to prevent the nuisance of Not fallow-
smoke from their engines at Stations by turning on smoke at
the jet and easing their fire-box doors. stations.
1232. In approaching junctions, and before arriving steadil r
at Stations, and particularly at those where the lines stations,
cross into sidings, the Driver must reduce his speed in


proper time, so as to have the engine completely
under his command, and enable him to stop altogether,
if necessary, before arriving at a junction, or before
entering a Station, and he must at all times be careful
to stop exactly at the proper part of the platform ; and
to do this properly, Enginemen, in bringing up their
trains, are to pay particular attention to the gradients,
state of the weather, and condition of the rails, as well
as to the length of the train ; and these circumstances
must have due weight in determining when to shut
off steam. If necessary, he must use the signals
ordered for the Guard to apply his brake.
To examine 1233. The Engine-driver, before starting with a
sand boxeSL train, must examine his sand-b6xes, and take care
that they are fully supplied with dry sand, and that
the delivery-pipe is clear. He must freely use the
sand, if necessary, to increase the effect of the brake,
and when necessary to check the slipping of the
driving wheels.
Not to return on 1234. Whenever part of a train is left on the line
detached 16 f ° r f rom accident or from the inability of the engine to
waggon unless bring on the whole, the Driver shall not return for it
instructed. on the same line except by special instructions from
the Guard, but shall go on to the proper line, and
cross at the nearest point to the part left behind.
Engines ascend- 1235. Engines, when ascending inclines, are never
mg inclines. to i iave i ess t h an h a if g aU g e .glass of water, otherwise
there is danger of burning fire-boxes and tubes.
Descending long 1236. Drivers are to use every care in descending
inclines. the j on g i uc ]i ues a t a moderate low speed. Should
the Guard of the train be negligent in the proper iise
of the van brake , he is to be reported to the Locomo-
tive Superintendent by the Driver.
To place signal 1237. It is the duty of the Fireman to place the
tender "Strain signal lamps on the engine or tender, and, if there be
if required. no Guard, the tail lamp on the last carriage or
waggon; but the Driver is responsible for the duty
being properly carried out.


1238. In all cases when engines, carriages, trucks, Vehicles off line,
or other vehicles get off the line, or any other casualty, &c ‘
the Enginemen are to endeavour to ascertain, at the
time , the cause, and report accordingly.
To slacken speed
1239. In passing a Station where there is a train on a i t , ‘^™ ediate
the opposite line, the speed must be slackened and
the whistle sounded.
1240. Light engines, engines with waggons or Speed of engines
empty carriages, or with ballast trains, must never alone,&c. mn °
exceed a speed of twenty miles an hour, except when
specially ordered in writing.
1241. Under no pretence are Enginemen to fasten, Not to meddle
or weight, safety-valves, to obtain higher steam
pressure.
1242. Should fire be discovered in the train, the Fire in a train,
train must immediately be brought to a stand. The
signal of obstruction to the line must be made, and
the burning carriage or vehicle be detached with as
little delay as possible. No attempt must be made to
run on to a water column if it is more than 300
yards from the place at which the fire is discovered,
as such a -course is likely to increase the damage.
1243. Drivers seeing fire by the side of a line, or in Fire by side of
any adjoining field, must signal the fact to the nearest ’ u
Platelayer.
1244. Drivers can reverse their engines and put the Reversing
steam on against them when running. While the engmes *
reversing lever, as a means of stopping, is not to be
used regularly, in circumstances of danger from colli-
sion it must be pulled clear over, and the regulator
opened gradually, without fear. These steps must be
taken at once, without waiting to see if the brakes
will pull the train up.
1245. Enginemen are to understand that it is Putting steam in
essential that steam is to be put in the cylinders c^lmdei:s-
gradually at u any time, both at starting and whilst on
the road.


1248. All accidents to engines, rolling-stock, and
workmen must be reported to the Locomotive Super-
intendent before half-past nine on the morning
following such accidents. Should there not be suffi-
cient time to comply with this, a preliminary report
must be sent by telegraph.
Accidents to be
reported.
1249. Drivers must deliver up their running-sheets
for the day either on the same evening or following
morning, and must carefully fill in the exact amount
of coke, coal, wood, oil, tallow, and waste used each
day.
Running-sheets
of Driver.
Reporting inci-
dents which
occur in trips.
1250. Drivers are to report fully every incident that
occurs in their trips, viz. : —Hot journals to engines,
carriages, waggons, &c. ; detention of every kind, and
the cause ; times of starting from and arrival at all
Stations ; number of carriages on train. They are
also to report bad loading and stowing of goods, bad
coupling, &c., and bad road wherever observed ; and
immediately report in Avritiug (apart from the running-
sheet) to the Locomotive Foreman any loss of time
or any casualty whatever on their arrival at any end
of their journey.
1251. Running Foremen will forward Drivers’
reports to the Locomotive Superintendent’s Office
immediately on receipt of them.
Drivers’ reports.
Running-sheets.
1252. The actual and exact time of arriving at and
departing from Stations is in each case to be given on
the Drivers’ running-sheets.
Running-sheets
on Hawthorn
and Brighton
lines.
1253. On the Brighton and Hawthorn lines, the
time of arrival and departure at terminal Stations of
each journey must be entered on the daily running-
sheet.
1254. When a passenger train overshoots a Station,
the Driver is not to put back until he receives a signal
from (he Guard to do so.
Trains over-
shooting
Stations.


1255. All trains are to arrive and depart from Trains to and
Melbourne Stations with extreme caution. bournef 1 *
1256. Enginemen are not to use the steam brake Use of steam
for shunting purposes, except in cases of extreme brake ’
danger.
1257. Engine-drivers are to state, on their daily Reports, &c., as
running-sheets, whether the train they drive is worked contiguous' th
with a continuous brake. They are also to separately brakes,
report to their Foreman, in writing (addressed to the
Locomotive Superintendent), whether the brakes have
failed to act when required, under the following
heads :
Ist. Failure or partial failure to act when re-
quired in case of an accident to a train or
collision between trains.
2nd. Failure or partial failure to act under ordi-
nary circumstances to stop a train when
required.
3rd. Delay in the working of trains, in conse-
quence of defects in or improper action of the
brakes, distinguishing whether they arose from
neglect, or inexperience of servants, or failure
of machinery or material, giving the name of
trains and particulars of circumstances relating
to the cause of failure under the above three
headings.
In addition to the foregoing, Drivers must state
whether the brakes on their trains are hydraulic or air.
1258. Drivers of Williamstown goods trains are Goods trains
not to keep them standing between the workshops at waHwnstown
Williamstown for watering purposes, but when oppor-
tunity offers, they should take the water required at
the upper crane at Williamstown Station.
If it is impossible to prevent goods trains standing
for other purposes between the shops, it is advisable
to have the train pushed back, so as to enable the
workmen to cross the line, instead of crawling
underneath the trains.


Continuous 1260. The continuous brake is not to be applied
brakes. between Stations except in cases of emergency.
Trains stopping 1261. All passenger trains stopping at Footscray
at Footscray. station on the Up line must, previous to starting, get
both the Guard’s and the junction semaphore signals
that the line is all clear for the Driver to start.
Dead engines 1262. Any Driver drawing a dead engine behind
nemg rawn. gee £ 0 lubrication on the road.
Cattle and sheep 1263. Drivers are to use every care in starting,
trains. stopping, and shunting, when cattle or sheep are on
the trains.
Penalty for pas- 1264, Any Driver passing a “Danger” signal,
signais Danger ” exce P t w^en drawing his train inside a distant sema-
phore for protection, will be at once dismissed.
Dropping fires. 1267. Enginemen found cleaning or dropping fires
of engines at any place but the ash-pits will be
severely punished.
Priming prohi- 1268. Drivers must guard against their engines
Primiti< au.-d P r * m * n "- If priming is caused from dirty boilers, they
dirty'boilers, will report through their F oreman to that effect, other-
wise such an occurrence will be looked upon as bad
driving.
Going on to 1269. The driver is- in all cases to run cautiously up
to the turn-table, and to stop his engine before running
on. He is also to send his Fireman off the foot-plate
to ascertain that the table is right for going on to.
Examination Of 1270. Enginemen must frequently and carefully
brake screws, . , l v J , . . , ~ /
nuts, and examine the brake screws, nuts, and blocks, which,
blocks, if found in any way worn or defective, will be so re-
ported upon by them, so that such materials may be
replaced.
How fire-bars 1271. The utmost care must be taken during the
au to be kept, season to have the fire-bars as close as possible, te


prevent fire dropping out on the road. The admission
of air by the fire-door shoots must he practised to the
fullest extent practicable, so as to run with damper
nearly closed, in which way sparks will he prevented
from going up the chimney.
1272. During October, November, December, Jauu- Cleaning blast-
ary, February, and March, blast-pipes should be kept pipes ’ &c " &a
clean and to their full size ; and the smoke-boxes,
tubes, and ash-pans should he kept well cleaned.
1273. Enginemen are to test the level of the water Testing level of
in their boilers immediately upon getting on the foot- watermbollers-
plate, by opening the level cocks, and checking by
the lower gauge-glass cocks; this duty should be
repeated before the engine is put by in the shed.
1274. Drivers are to see that the smoke-box is Clearing smoke-
cleared of all ashes, and left clean and free from water, box ’
each day after running. They are to remove any
accumulation of ashes on the road, in order to prevent
the heating of the smoke-box door.
1275. All boilers are to be washed out by Drivers Cleaning boilers,
and Firemen. The Driver will he held personally
responsible for this work being properly done. All
boilers should, at least every three (3) months, have
a thin wire passed into the plug-holes and between
the stays of the fire-box, to feel for any accumulation
of scale or dirt.
The barrel of each boiler should have a long rod
passed through the plug-hole of the smoke-box, to
feel that no accumulation of scale or dirt exists. A
record is to be kept of each such examination.
127 G. Dunning Foremen, Drivers in charge, and care of screw-
Engine-drivers will be held responsible that the screw- eoupbngs S on C ''
jacks and screw-couplings on their engines are kept engines,
clean and in good working order.
1277. Drivers who neglect to return their time-cards Neglecting to re
of detentions on the road will be fined 2s. Gd. each time-cards,
vday.


Engine tools. 1278. No Driver is allowed to take tools, &c., oh
any other engine than his own. If short of tools, he
must report the matter to his Foreman.
Use of pumps 1271), Pumps and injectors are to be used alter-
ami injectors. na tely, and Drivers are to see daily that such apparatus
are in working order.
Use of coal and 1280. Economy is to be exercised in the use of coal
oll ‘ and oil.
Drivers signing 1281. Drivers are not to sign for coal for engines
for coal. they j iave not j r i ven .
Sand not to be 1282. Drivers are to use great care and abstain
vised. . .
trom using sand over the points and crossings.
Signing for coal. 1283. Drivers neglecting to sign for coal will be
subject to a fine of 2s. 6d. for the first offence, and ss.
for the second offence.
FUnders-street 1284. Enginemen are to refuse to proceed along
tramway. the Fliuders-street tramway with their engines or
trains unless two (2) men belonging to the Traffic
Branch are walking in-front.
Speed of sub- 1285. Suburban passenger trains are to approach
near stations. Stations at not more than Jive (5) miles an hour.
E in^hedwheii PUt A Driver, after receiving orders from the
day’s workis Running Foreman in charge that his engine will not
done. be ar) y more required, is to put it in the shed when
the day’s work is done.
Smoke when 1287. Pilot Enginemen are not to fire up or cause
flnngl unnecessary smoke when in the goods sheds.
Attendance at 1288. Drivers are to attend at the running-sheds on
running-shedi. ie j r Jays and look to their engines.
Presentations 1289. Presentations to Foremen and others when
transferred from one district to another will not be
allowed.


1290. Parchment certificates will be issued to Senior Certificates of
Firemen and Junior Drivers after they pass an exami- COlni>etency ‘
nation as to competency by the examining officers.
1291. No Junior Driver will he classified in the sth Classification of
and 4th classes until he obtains a certificate.
INSTRUCTIONS TO PIER-MASTERS.
1292. The Pier-master is responsible for the carrying Authority of
out of the laws, regulations, and bye-laws relating to Pier'master-
the pier of which he has charge, and is to have control
of all servants of the Department who maybe employed
on the pier.
1293. He will receive his instructions through the Responsible to
General Traffic Manager. Managen'™ 0
General Traffic
Manager.
1294. He will be responsible that proper lights are RcsponmWe for
exhibited and the proper signals made, and will slf ’" as *
exercise the same supervision with respect to the pier,
and the signals, switchings, crossings, trains, waggons,
engines, &c., while employed thereat, as if the pier
were a Station of which he was master; and the Pier-
master must make himself acquainted with all rules in
this book. He will be empowered to suspend any
officer or servant employed under him if in his opinion
the interests of the service render such a course
necessary, immediately reporting the circumstance.
1295. He shall give every assistance in his power T t ° on as ® ! | i t cer g US ‘
to the Customs authorities and officers who may be toniso cer3,
employed at his pier.
1296. While carrying out the provisions of “ The To assist masters
Public Works Statute 1865” and the Bye-laws of ° f ie ' r essels athls
the Board, he will afford every assistance to the mas-
ters, agents, and officers of the vessels which may be
alongside his pier, and grant them every facility and
accommodation that the interests of the Department
will permit.


To make himself 1297. The Pier-master must make himself thor-
o UghJy acquainted with the clauses of “ The Public
bye-fa ws. ’ Works Statute 1865,” as well as the Bye-laws of the
Board, Avhich in any way may relate to the management
of the pier and to the conduct of persons employed
thereat.
PART IV.
INSTRUCTIONS TO PERMANENT-WAY
INSPECTORS ON EXISTING LINES.
Nature of duties. 1298. Inspectors of Permanent Way in the service
of the Department will have charge of and be respon-
sible for the maintenance of the permanent way, level
crossings, approaches to Stations, and fencing on the
lines, of which they have control. For carrying out
this work, the Gangers, Repairers, and certain Gate-
keepers will be under the supervision of the Inspectors,
who will give all necessary instructions.
inspector to 1299. Every Inspector is to have a list of the names
workmen. 01 and abodes of every Platelayer or workman in his
district, that, in case of accident, he may be enabled
to summon them immediately to assist in any way he
may think necessary; and should any obstruction,
casualty, or accident take place, he is instantly to
collect the required number of men to repair the
damage.
inspection'of 1300. Inspectors will make frequent personal
hne - inspection of each Ganger’s length under their super-
vision either by trolly, velocipede, or on foot, and see
that the line is in safe and efficient condition, and that
each Ganger has a sufficient supply of stores. The
date of each inspection is to be entered by them in
their diaries for record and future reference.


1301. They are to se® that proper discipline is Discipline to
maintained, and that Gangers and others under their Gangers'and
charge are men of sober habits, capable and attentive others reported
r , , if not efficient.
to their duties. It any of them are considered de-
ficient in these necessary qualities, the Inspectors are,
in view of their responsibility, to report such to the
Engineer for Existing Lines without delay.
1502. Every Inspector is to see that each Ganger, Gangers, Re-
Repairer, and Gatekeeper under his charge is supplied Gatekeepers
with a copy of Rule Book ; and if through transfer or Rule
new appointment any employe joins his length, he will Books,
obtain his receipt for the Rule Book with which he
will supply him, and forward the receipt to the En-
gineer for Existing Lines. He must keep a sufficient
number of such books in stock.
1303. The maintenance of buildings, bridges, piers, Duty ° f f works'
viaducts, culverts, gates, and semaphores other than
interlocking, on lines under their supervision (with the
exception shown in next clause), will be under the
charge of the Inspector of Works for the district, to
whom the Inspectors of Permanent Way will give
every assistance, by reporting to him any repairs or
attention they consider such works require, and also
by seeing’ that the Gangers strictly carry out their
instructions with reference to reporting action of
floods, &c.
1304. All Inspectors are to co-operate and render Duty of signal
any assistance required by the Signal Engineer, who K "” meer '
has charge of the construction of all signals, the main-
tenance of interlocking signals, and the maintenance
of all signals on the North and South Suburban Lines.
1305. When Inspectors require a ballast, plant, or ordering plant,
water train, they are to make application for such to
the Engineer for Existing Lines a week before the
date required, to enable due notice to be given to the
Locomotive and Traffic branches and to provide trucks;
in cases of urgency, shorter notice will be sufficient.
The application, in every instance, should state the
portion of the line where the train is to be employed.


Ballast, plant, or 1306. All ballast, plant, or water trains employed on
beunderthe° l' nes under their supervision should be under the In-
immediate specters’ immediate charge, unless the safe working of
inspector. the line requires their presence elsewhere, when, in such
case, they will place an experienced and reliable Gan-
ger in charge of the train, to whom they will give all
necessary instructions. Station-masters, when practi-
cable, should be made acquainted by them of particulars
of running, and they should apply to the Station-mas-
ters for information as to the running of any special
trains that may be locally arranged for.
Ballast, plant,
and water
trains to be
worked under
staff system.
1307. Ballast, plant, and water trains are to be
worked strictly under staff regulations on single lines,
and under block regulations where the system is estab-
lished, in such a manner as not to interfere with the
traffic, and, whilst standing, are to be protected by
signals in the most efficient manner of which their
position will admit.
1308. Any material which an Inspector may require
for the efficient maintenance of the lines under his
charge he is to requisition for as ho requires it. The
estimate which is forwarded annually is for the guid-
ance of the Engineer for Existing Lines ; but noup of
the items included in it will be consigned unless requi-
sitioned for in the usual manner. Any unusual delay
in supply of such material is to be reported to head of
branch.
Ordering ma-
terial required
for line, &c.
inspectors to 1300. Inspectors are to keep an accurate register of
all renewals on lines under their charge, branding the
old material dates 011 new ra^s placed in road for future information;
an account is also to be kept of how the worn rails
taken out of road are disposed of. Old sleepers are to
be stacked, and when the number of them is sufficiently
large to warrant their being disposed of, such is to be
reported to the Engineer for Existing Lines, who will
cause instructions to be issued with reference to them.
HJJgJ-to be 1310. All materials, such as rails, fastenings,
stations,’sleepers, fencing, &c., are to be collected and stacked


close to Stations or to the residences of Gangers and
Repairers, and great care and watchfulness is to be
exercised that no obstruction is placed on the line.
Any neglect of such precaution is to be reported to
the Engineer for Existing Lines immediately.
1311. When any vacancy occurs by death, resigua- inspector to ra-
tion, or dismissal in the gangs under his supervision,
the Inspector is to report to such effect to the Engineer
for Existing Lines, and make any suggestion he con-
siders necessary as to the manner he recommends such
vacancy to be filled; and, if the circumstances of the
case require it, be will .appoint a person to temporarily
fill such opening until a permanent appointment is
made.
1312. Inspectors are to understand that Gangers Appointees to
and Repairers appointed to fill vacancies are only on probation °only,
probation, and if any employe is jound or becomes -
incompetent or incapacitated, a report to that effect be made.
must be made immediately.
1313. If at any time, through floods, increased Extra hands to
traffic, or any other cause, it may be necessary for the inspector IT
safety of the line, an Inspector can put on extra hands necessary,
temporarily, and report to the Engineer for Existing
Lines the necessity for so doing. Such extra hands
are to be entered and shown on the time-sheets as
Labourers.
1314. Inspectors are not to return any one employed No person to be
under their supervision at an additional rate of pay [ncreasel/pay
without first having obtained the necessary authority without autho-
for such increase, and are to quote the number of such n>-
authority on their time-sheets. Should they consider
any person has special claims for consideration, they
are to represent them to the head of their branch in
writing.
1315. All correspondence, time-sheets, requisitions, ah correspon-
. . , . , • • • t dence to be
accounts, invoices, and receipts in connexion with In- addressed to
specter’s duties, other than those conveying instructions Engineer for


Existing Lines to the employes acting under their supervision, are
sheets! paJ to be addressed to the Engineer for Existing Lines.
Pay-sheets received from the Pay Clerk are to be
returned to him direct.
inspector to 1316. Inspectors, when forwarding communications
telegraph to r 1 . _ - 0 _ . . _ •
Engineer for or an urgent nature to the .Engineer for Existing Lines,
undCT^rtain 8 are *° into consideration that such communication
circumstances, may arrive after his office is closed for the day, or
during holiday periods, and to guard against such
should telegraph.
Inspection of
lines before
busy season.
1317. Before the busy season commences, a special
close inspection of the lines is to be made, and a report
sent to the Engineer for Existing Lines as to any re-
newals considered necessary. Should any material be
required, it must be requisitioned for in the usual
manner.
1318. If a fire occurs, the Inspector is to make him-
self acquainted with its origin and extent, and report
full particulars to the head of his branch.
Burning off grass,
&c.
1319. Inspectors must take care that all grass and
rubbish lying between the fences on any part of the
railway property shall be burnt off whenever the
weather may render it safe and practicable to do so ;
and if the lands outside and adjoining the railway
fences should be the property of the Crown or the
Railway Department, the grass must also be burnt off
such lands for a distance of at least thirty feet from
the fences; but previous to any grass being so
destroyed, a notice must be served on the owners and
occupiers of the adjoining lands or premises, in accord-
ance with the provisions of the Act to Restrain the
Careless Use of Fire.
Works near
Stations.
1320. Works at or near Stations causing obstructions
to the line may be done under the protection of the
Station signal; but the Inspector will be held respon-
sible that a perfect arrangement is first made with the
Station-master or person in charge of signals.


1321. Scotch-blocks are. to be placed in all sidings scotch blocks ini
to prevent vehicles being accidentally moved on to the SldmgB ‘
main lines. The keys of such blocks to be handed
to the nearest Station-master, who will give a receipt station-master to
for the same, and such receipt is to be retained by leys. receipt for
Inspector for reference if required.
1322. Catch points must be put in at any sidings Catch points at
that are on or lead into sharp inclines where scotch- incimea° n sbarp
blocks would be insufficient to prevent trucks being
blown on to main lines.
1323. On single lines, or if facing-points leading to Locking-bar at
sidings occur on double lines, a locking-bar is to be pohit^ ir °
fixed at each pair of points leading on to main line, the
key of which is to be handed to the Station-master,
who will give a receipt for the same, which receipt is
to be retained by Inspector for future reference if
required.
1324. Inspectors are to have locking-bars painted Locking-bars to
, . r ax be painted white.
white.
1325. Inspectors in charge of lines or of any works Lmes at times of
, , ... ■ , . .i . • i , local storms,
in connexion therewith are strictly enjoined to use floods, &c.
extreme vigilance as to the safety of the way and works
during wet weather, and at times when local storms or
floods may be expected. At such times, and when-
ever necessary, every precaution is to be taken, and
special Watchmen and Signalmen provided at any spot special watch-
of which there may be doubt as to the sufficiency of Sen a to d be lgnal *
the water-way, or when Inspectors have reason to
believe that special measures are necessary.
1326, All distance-posts are to be placed in such Distance-posts,
positions as that they may be easily seen from trains
in motion, and if they indicate the down mileage they
are to be placed on the down side, and vice versd.
1327. Holes are to be sunk near all Gatekeepers 5 water storage,
cottages for the storage of water, so as to save the Material,
expense, inconvenience, and risk of running water-


trains. Material, such as bricks, slabs, and piping,
will be furnished by the Inspectors of Works on
application when necessary, and, if required, iron
-Supply of tanks, tanks will be supplied at places where the sinking of
water-holes is impracticable. Requisitions for such
tanks are to be sent to the Engineer for Existing
Lines.
1328. All time worked by Gangers, Repairers, and
Labourers over eight hours per day will be paid at the
rate of time and a half.
Overtime.
Trespassers. 1329. Every Ganger is to have a copy of the Gazette
notice authorizing him on behalf of the Board of Land
and Works to prosecute trespassers, which is to be
taken care of by him, so that he can produce it in court
as his authority if required.
signal con- 1330. Inspectors are to give instructions, and see
be^ntorfered ° that ballast, grass, &c., is kept clear of all connexions,
with. such as point-rods, cranks, and wires, so that the
working of points and signals be not interfered with.
Distance-posts to 1331. Inspectors are to have distance-posts elfec-
uange C rtienShs! tively placed to show the limit of each Ganger’s length.
.Notices oi special 1332. Notices of special trains will be forwarded
trains. direct from the Traffic Office, Melbourne, to the
Inspector of Permanent Way, who, by return train,
or as soon after as possible, is to forward receipt for
same to the General Traffic Manager. For this pur-
pose receipt forms and addressed envelopes will be
supplied to the Inspector on application to the Engi-
neer for Existing Lines. If auy train runs of which
the Inspector received no notice, he is at once to report
such to the head of his Branch.
Gangers ana 1333. Notices of the running of all special trains
are to be supplied to Gangers and Gatekeepers by the
special trains. Inspector, who is to keep a supply of Special Train
Notice Cards for this purpose.


1334. Inspectors will instruct nil employes con- special or un-
. n , , , expected trains.
cerned to be prepared for special or unexpected trains
at all times whether notified or not, and they will, if c £“ u^P*“ d
they consider that holiday or special traffic would be
interfered with, suspend any ballasting operations.
1335. Trollies should not at such times be put on Trollies,
the road unless in case of urgent necessity.
1330. Inspectors are to be particular, when recom- promotion of
mending Repairers for promotion, that the Repairers I{c i ,! * lrers .
they recommend are able to read and write with facility,
and have a thorough knowledge of their duties, in-
cluding laying of points and crossings.
1337. Relatives are not to be employed in the same Relatives not to
be employed in
gang. same gang.
1338. The clause in Rule Book with reference to inspection of
daily inspection of each length by the Ganger may be Gauged
so altered by Inspector as to have such inspection
made at such hours and in such manner as he considers
most effective; but it must be distinctly understood
that, each Ganger is to walk his length once each day,
and oftener when the probability of floods exists.
Written instructions to this effect are to be given
by the Inspector to each Ganger, and his receipt
obtained for it, which receipt is to be carefully filed
by Inspector.
1339. In cases of damage to rolling-stock, Inspectors Empioyds to pay
are to note, and make it known to employes under caused byTiieir
them, that in all such cases where carelessness is dis- carelessness,
tinctly shown the person in fault will be called on to
pay cost of repair, or may otherwise be dealt with as
the law provides.
1340. Inspectors are not to charge any work carried Expenditure not
out under them to construction account unless specially wnstimctfonul£
ordered to do so, and then the number of corre- less authorized,
spondence giving such authority should be shown on
time-sheet in Remark column.


Communications 1341. All communications conveying instructions
to be returned. cari y ou fc additions or alterations must be returned
to the Engineer for Existing Lines when such work
is completed; and if an unusual delay occur, the cause
of such delay must be at once reported.
Discharging 1342. Every effort is to be made to expedite the
trucks. discharge of trucks conveying mater ial for repairs to
the lines.
Monthly return of 1843. A return of ballast or water trucks employed
ballast trucks, Inspector or lying in sidings on lines under his
charge is to be forwarded by him to Engineer for
. Existing Lines on the Ist day of each month on
printed form supplied on application.
Mining on re- 1 344. No person is to be permitted by any Inspector
unde?super- to m i ne on the railway reserves in his district unless
vision. a proper permit to do so is produced, and then only
when the work is carried on by the person in such a
manner as will not endanger the stability of the line.
The issue'of 1345. Applications for passes are to be restricted
strictei during? as much as possible during holiday times, when the
holiday times, full strength of gangs should be kept up, and the
utmost vigilance on their part maintained, and also for
the purpose of avoiding the crowding of trains at such
times.
inspectors to 1346. Inspectors, in forwarding applications for
make provision n /d • i /~i . i
to have gates at- passes tor Clangers, Kepairers, and Gatekeepers, arc
on ty to s ‘£ u those they recommend be granted, and
keeper. when they have made provision to have the duties
performed hy the applicants efficiently attended to in
their absence. If the Inspectors disapprove of the
application, they are to forward tfce usual form,
unsigned, together with memo, attached, stating the
. reason they cannot recommend it. A record of the
dates of passes must be kept, and the date of previous
pass inserted on each application, as also the number
of children (if any) in the family for which the pass
is required. u


1347. No employe is to be allowed to travel without Employer passes
a ticket or pass ; and as Inspectors are held personally oll'service. USCd
responsible for proper use being made by the employes
in their charge of the Service passes issued for them,
the Inspectors will take care that such passes are used
only when the employe is in the actual discharge of
his duty, and at once report to the Engineer for
Existing Lines any attempt to infringe this regula-
tion. An employe returning to his home is not
considered to be on duty, and should not he provided
with a Service pass for such purpose , unless when the
work on which he was engaged at a distance from his *
home is completed.
1848. The children of Gangers, Repairers, and Gate- Facility for chii-
keepers, on application, will be allowed a pass to travel
free to the nearest State school, if considered necessary
by the Inspector, and as long as the privilege is not
abused. As it is desirable that employes having
children of school ages be stationed as near a State
school as possible, effect will be given to such intention
when it does not create an injustice or endanger the
efficient working of the lines.
1351. Inspectors of Permanent Way are to give Privileged gates,
written instructions to Gatekeepers in charge of
privileged gates as to hours and periods when such
gates are to be shut across the line and open to the
road, and obtain receipt for same. On such gates a red
lamp well trimmed is to be kept alight all night, and
where two Gatekeepers are employed to relieve one
another the hours of duty for each as arranged by
Inspector are to be distinctly shown on instructions to
that effect issued to them, and which are to be signed by
both and retained by Inspector, who will supply each
Gatekeeper Avith a copy. Inspectors are to report
immediately if any privileged gates in their district are
not shown on monthly Service Time-table. All gates Al , Kiiteg tobo
are to be locked before night by the gatekeeper in lock* <i at night,
charge. •


INSPECTORS OF WORKS ON EXISTING LINES.
inspection of 1853. Each Inspector of Works is to make personal
certain ■works. j nS p ec ti on 0 f bridge viaducts, piers, jetties, and
culverts on the lines in his district at least once in each
half-year, and more frequently if necessary, and take
all requisite steps to keep the same in safe and efficient
condition. The date of such inspection, together with
any repairs effected, are to be entered by him in a
diary, with which he will be supplied on application,
for record and future reference.
Precautions in 1354. In the event of floods occurring on any of the
case of floods. ][ nes j u his district, he must at once proceed to the
locality and take every precaution for the protection cf
the works under his charge.
Co-operation of 1355. The Signal Engineer has been placed in
S tors Wlth charge of the construction of all signals and the main-
Engineer. tenancc of all interlocking ones, with whom, and Avith
the Inspectors of Permanent Way of the district, the
Inspector cf Works will co-operate to ensure the safe
and efficient Avorking of the Existing Lines Branch.
INSPECTORS—ENGINEER-1 N-CHI EF’S BRANCH.
inspectors super- 1356. Inspectors of Works and Permanent Way of
oirneV?incs. CtS the Engineei’-in-Chief’s Branch employed supervising
contracts on new lines Avill conform to the alxwe Rules
as far as they may be applicable, and will communicate
with and receive instructions from their immediate
superior officers.
GANGERS, PLATELAYERS, AND OTHERS EM-
PLOYED ON THE PERMANENT WAY.
Lamps and 1357. Each gang of Platelayers or Labourers Avill be
supplied 0 bC supplied by the Inspector of Permanent Way for the
district with two sets of Day Signals, two Hand
Signal Lamps if Avorking after dark, and a proper
number of Detonators. Each Ganger will be held
responsible for having his signals constantly in proper
order and ready for use.


1358. The signals to he used by the men engaged in signals to be
repairing the permanent way are lied and Green Flags, uscd *
Hand Lamps, and Detonators. The Flags must he used
during daylight, the Lamps after sunset and in foggy
weather, and the Detonators at all times when
necessary.
1360. When it is necessary to change or turn a rail, working of fixed
or in any manner to obstruct the line, or to do any
work to the permanent way, between the Distant Sig- " ork , witklu
n , J ’. , ~ ° Station limits,
nals of any fetation, Junction, or any intermediate omeariuterme-
Signalling place, of a character to make the exhibition s Blfual '
of a signal at all necessary, the permission of the
Signalman in charge of the Fixed Signals must be first
obtained by the Foreman Platelayer, and the work
must not be commenced until the signals have been
placed at “ Danger/’ and the signals must remain in
that position until the Signalman is informed by the
same Platelayer that the line is again clear, and safe
for the passage of trains.
1361. The Platelayers must, in addition, protect Pinteiayers to
their operations by sending out a Flagman as ordered riagman,
by the Pule on the subject.
1362. When a Flagman, in going back to stop a Flagman,
train, passes any Signal Station or Junction, he must
request the Signalman to keep at “ Danger ” the
signals of that Station or Junction, to protect the line
which is obstructed, and the Signalman so instructed
must not take off his signals until the Flagman or
Foreman Platelayer in charge of the work has informed
him that the obstruction has been removed, and that the
line is clear; the object being that the Signalman and
Platelayers shall not show contrary signals to approach-
ing Engine-drivers.
1363. Platelayers and Labourers must not, except in tise
cases of emergency, or as provided in the Rules, avail
themselves of the fixed signals, but must, in all cases,
use their oavh special signals for their own purposes.
k 2


Passenger Train 13G4. Where the line is not worked under the Block
or other drains 8 Telegraph Regulations, if a Passenger Train approach
to be cautioned. w ithiu ten minutes of a Goods, Cattle, Mineral, or
Ballast Train, or Light Engine, the men repairing the
line must give the Engine-driver of such Passenger
Train a signal to go slowly.
Ballast Train 13G5. Should a Ballast Train have to discharge or
takta-Tupm*- hake up materials on the Main Line between two
teriais on Main Block Signal-boxes, the Guard of such train will,
two 6 Block 60 " 1 before entering the section, inform the Signalman in
signal-boxes, charge of the Block Signal-box there of the fact, so
that he may be aware of the proposed occupation of
the line, and give any instructions that may be neces-
sary as to the shunting of the Ballast Train for other
trains.
Protection of 13GG, Previous to any truck, lorry, waggon or other
impediment being placed upon the line, or in the
tlon * event of any Ballast Train or other train being obliged
to remain stationary on the Main Line, or to move
slowly, so as to be in danger of being overtaken ; or
in case of any slip or failure of the works, or if, from
any other cause, the line is not safe, the Danger Signal
must be plainly exhibited, and two detonators placed
upon the line, ten yards apart, at a distance of not
less than three-quarters of a mile from the point
where any impediment or danger exists, in the direc-
tion of any coming train or engine, even if no train or
engine is expected, by the Foreman or Ganger, or by
a competent man appointed by him to do the duty,
who must continue to exhibit the signal until a mes-
senger arrives with express orders from the Foreman
or Ganger to withdraw the signal, which order, how-
ever, must not be sent until the impediment or ob-
struction is completely removed.
Obstruction of a 13G7. If the impediment or obstruction renders both
bothlinesota nes unsa f e > or occurs on a single line of railway, the
double line. Ganger must send out “ Danger ” signals, and have
two detonators placed on the line, ten yards apart, not
less than three-quarters of a mile in both directions.


1308. Should the distance of not less than three- Obstruction near
quarters of a mile fall within a tunnel or close to the 11 tunnel ’
mouth of a tunnel, nearest to the obstruction, or in
any other position where, owing to the formation of
the line or some other circumstance, the Engine-driver
of an approaching train or engine would be unable to
obtain a good and distant view of the signal, then the
signal must be exhibited at the end of the tunnel far-
thest from the obstruction or unsafe portion of the line,
or at such a distance over and above the prescribed
distance of not less than three-quarters of a mile as
may be necessary to ensure the Engine-driver obtain-
ing a good and distant view of such signal.
13G9. Before a rail is taken out, during relaying signals during
operations, or when the line is not safe from any cause, rela y ln *f-
a “ Danger ” Signal must be exhibited, and two deto-
nators placed on the line, ten yards apart, at a point
at least one mile from the place of obstruction; and
in case of a single line, this must be done in both
directions.
1370. No rail is to be taken out, or repair commen- Kondtobekept
ced which will render the road for a time unsafe, during safB,
a fog or at night, unless by the direction of the
Engineer' or his assistants and the Inspector being
present, and in no case within Fifteen minutes of a
train being due. Where, however, a broken rail is
discovered, the Danger Signal must be made imme-
diately, and the rail replaced under protection of
signal.
1371. In all cases, before taking out a rail, the changing rails.
Platelayer must have at the spot a perfect rail in
readiness to replace it.
1372, When repairing, lifting the line, or performing signals when
any operations so as to make it necessary for a train Hue.
to proceed cautiously, the Foreman or Ganger must
send a man back at least half-a-mile, and as much
further as the circumstances of the case render neces-
sary, avlio must exhibit the “ Caution ” Signal so as


to be plainly visible to the Engine-driver of the
approaching train.
naiunot to be 1373. In no case, except in the most absolute
foggy or snowy necessity, is a rail to be displaced, or any other work
absoiutciy CXCCpt )G performed, by which an obstruction may be made
necessary. to the passage of the trains during a fog or snow-
storm ; and the times for effecting repairs which
involve the stopping of trains must, as far as practi-
cable, be so selected as to interfere as little as possible
with the passage of the traffic.
Platelayers’ 1374. A Green Flag or a Green Light, exhibited
speed. 8 tore ' UlCe by Platelayers, indicates that trains and engines must
reduce speed to fifteen miles an hour over the portion
of line protected by such Green Signal.
Distance at 1375. The “Caution” Signal must always be
Signal mast’be exhibited at a distance of at least half-a-raile from
exhibited. the point where it is required that the speed of trains
and engines should be reduced, and as much further
as the circumstances of the case render necessary.
To repeat signals Id/ 6. Should any Platelayer perceive the Guard of
from (inard to , . . • i • . , , ~ ~
Driver, an aproachmg tram making signals to the Lnginemen,
he must immediately repeat the signal, so that the
attention of the Driver may be directed to the Guard’s
van. If any Platelayer should perceive any of the
doors of the carriages or waggons open, or chains or
lashings hanging loose, in an approaching train, he
must endeavour to direct the attention of the Driver
to the fact by signal.
Protection of 1377. On no occasion, except in cases of emergency
on Main Lin? or °b accident, and never at night or in a fog, or when a
train is due, must a trolly be run in the wrong direction,
and in such cases the trolly must be preceded at a
distance of not less than a mile by a man with a Red
Flag and Detonators. In tunnels, a Red Light must
always be used.
Trolly not to be 1378. In the ease of a Single Line the trolly must
direction!™" 3 be so protected in both directions.


1379. No trolly must in any case be placed on the Trollies to be
line, except by the Platelayers, and with the know-
ledge of the Ganger, who is responsible for seeing it only,
properly protected and used.
1380. No trolly must, under any circumstances, be Trolly not to be
attached to a train, and all trollies when not in use anTto' l.6° felt' 11
must be taken off the rails, placed well clear of the clcar of Main
line, and the wheels secured with chain and padlock. ue ‘
1381. No Ballast Train, waggon, truck, trolly or Main Line to be
other impediment must be allowed to be on any part
of the line within ten minutes of a train being due; lsdue<
and excepting in cases of accident, or absolute neces-
sity, all repairs must be effected, and the line made
clear and safe for the passage of trains, not less than
ten minutes before a train is due.
1382. All persons in charge of Ballast Trains must persons in charge
obey the orders of the Station-masters, Inspectors, obey Orders of
and Signalmen, so far as relates to the time of their station-masters,
running on the line, and no Ballast Engine-driver si^uaUueu.’ and
must leave a Siding without the permission of the
person in charge of the signals.
1383. Ballast Guards are responsible for carrying naiiast Guards to
out all other Regulations prescribed for Guards for rcguiaUonrfor 1
the protection of trains. Guards.
1384. Ballast Trains must not work on the Main caiiast Trains
Line in a fog, except when authorized under special on
circumstances; and no Ballast Train, waggon, truck, or during fog.
trolly must be used, if possible to avoid it, except n
during daylight, and Avhen the weather is sufficiently t o be run or
clear for a signal to be distinctly seen at a distance of g^cept"during
half-a-mile. But when necessary to use Ballast Trains daylight',
at night, or during a fog, a lighted Red Tail Lamp
and two lighted Red Side Lamps must be attached to
the last vehicle of the train. By day the usual Tail weather.
Lamp must be attached to the last vehicle.


Accident to train • 1885. Any accident to ft train or engine, or failure
works"o' be any part of the works affecting the safety of the
reported. line, must be reported as soon as possible to the
nearest Inspector of Permanent Way and to the
Station-masters on both sides of the point at which
the accident or failure has occurred; and in the event
of a Signal Station intervening between the point of
accident or failure and the nearest Station in either
direction, the occurrence must also be reported to the
Signalman on duty.
Summoning 138 G. In conveying intelligence of or in summoning
assistance. assistance to any accident or failure, a Platelayer must
be sent as quickly as possible to the next gang in each
direction, from which a Platelayer must in like manner
be sent to the next more distant gang, until information
of the accident has by this means reached the nearest
Station in each direction, and the necessary assistance
has been obtained ; the Platelayers of each gang
proceeding without loss of time to the place at which
their services are required.
Foremanor 1387. Each Ganger must walk over his length of
line every morning and evening on week days, and
of line. where Passenger Trains are run, on Sundays, tighten
up all keys and other fastenings that may be loose;
and he must examine the line and the gauge of the
road, and the state of the joints, marking, and, if
necessary, repairing such as are defective.
Note. —This Rule is to he read with Rule No.
1338.
Points and cross- 1388. All points and crossings must be carefully
examined. examined, and, if necessary, adjusted.
Broken signal 1389. Broken signal wires must be temporarily
wires repaired. re p a | rec { until the regular Signal-repairer can attend
to them.
proper scotches 1391. The Ganger must take care to maintain proper
to be provided. gco t c hes on all Sidings requiring them.


1392. Each Ganger must report to the Inspector of Gangers to re-
Permancnt Way every case in which any signal is and
disregarded by an Engine-driver ; also when any defect of signal
. i . i • p i j wires And tele*
telegraph pole appears to be in an unsafe state, or any graph,
of the wires are broken, slack, entangled, or touching
each other or any building. He must also see that
all grass, boughs of trees, and rubbish are removed
from the electric telegraph and signal wires.
Note. —Each Ganger's attention is directed to Rule
No. 1471, having reference to the railway telegraph
line.
1394. In lifting the permanent way, no lift must be Lifting of per-
greater than three inches at once, and then it must be manent way '
effected in a length of at least twenty yards, in such a
manner as not to occasion any sudden change of
gradient. Both rails must be raised equally and at
the same time, and the ascent must be made in the
direction in which the trains run.
1395. No ballast must be thrown up to a higher Ballast not to be
level between the rails than three inches, and it must throWlluP-
be thrown as much as possible on the outside of each
line, and between the two lines, and be replaced as
soon as possible. The rails must be kept clear of Rails to be kept
gravel, ballast, or any other material. clean
139 G. No Avaggou or other vehicle employed in the AVaggona in
Permanent-Avay Department must be left in any Siding 0 be
without the wheels nearest to the entrance into the secured.
Main Line being properly scotched and secured.
1397. No blasting must be allowed on any slopes No blasting
or elsewhere on or near to the Raihvay without the Zltiwrity of
authority of the Inspector. inspector.
1398. Gaugers must close and fasten all gates they Crossing gates
find open, and report the circumstances, in order that fastened! 6 a °
the persons who are required to keep such gates closed
and fastened may be charged with the penalties.


Examination of 1899. Each Ganger isrequired,iathe event of storms
offloodT CaSe or fl°°ds, to examine carefully the action of the water
through the culverts and bridges on his length of line;
and should he see any cause to apprehend danger to
the works, he must immediately exhibit the proper
signals for the trains to proceed cautiously, or to stop,
as necessity may require, and inform the Inspector
thereof; and until the Inspector arrives, he must take
all the precautionary measures necessary for securing
the stability of the line.
Reporting as to 1400. Gangers must report to their Inspectors from
floods or time fj me the heights and levels of floods on their
damage to ° ,
culverts, &c. length, and at once report any damage to culverts,
bridges, &c., for the guidance of Inspector of Works.
Care of guard 1401. Every Ganger must see that the guard rails
rails, and f. p r i va t e gate crossings in his length, where there
ballasting* at r , o o , ,
level crossings, are no Gatekeepers, are kept tree from obstruction or
dirt. He will also be careful that the ballast is kept
level with the top of the rails throughout the whole
width of all level crossings, and no part of the cross-
ing, or line adjacent to it, is to be left stripped of
ballast at night. The crossings must be free of ob-
struction both to trains and the passage of cattle or
vehicle across the line.
Cleaning of 1403. Gangers must oil and keep clean the working
jß°nai S 3. and parts of points and signals, unless the duty is otherwise
specially provided for.
Line to be kept 1404. Each Gauger must keep his portion of the
dear and safe. p ne c ] ear an d safe, and the fences in perfect repair;
Fences to be an( j j u the event of any sheep, cattle, or other animals
Cattle'on "line, getting within the fences and gates, he must imme-
diately remove them, and report the circumstance to
the Inspector of Permanent Way.
Defects to be 1405. No temporary Siding shall under any circum-
immediateiy stances whatever bo laid down with the switches facing
lepane . the direction of the train, but they shall in all cases
be laid down in the direction of the train travelling.


No Sidings or switches shall be laid down without
the express permission of the Engineer. Whenever a
Siding is used, a man shall he appointed to attend to
the switch, who shall remain as long as such points
remain in.
Note. — The prohibition as to facing points in
foregoing Rule refers to double lines.
140 G. Gangers will he responsible that no waggon, vehicles in
truck, carriage, or other vehicle remains in a Siding joining a
which is not immediately adjoining a Station, and station. 0
under the control of a Station-master or Pointsman,
unless such truck or vehicle is properly scotched, and
the brakes, if there be any, pinned down; and every
Ganger will be responsible that the scotch-blocks of
every Siding in his district are in proper order, and
that they are kept closed when any vehicles are in a
Siding which is not under the special control ot a
Station-master.
1408. In cases of any bush or other tiro occurring Fires,
on the Railway property, or on the lands or premises
immediately adjoining the fences, whether such fire
shall have been originated by the locomotive engines
or not, every Repairer and workman within reach of
the fire must, as soon as he can leave the portion of
the line on which he is at work safe for the passage
of train, hasten to the spot, and endeavour to extin-
guish such fire, and, if possible, prevent it communi-
cating with the fences or property of the Board.
1409. All Gangers and Avorkmen employed upon To note origln
the Railway are to observe and note all circumstances of fire -
Avhich may come to their knowledge in connexion
with the origin or occasion of any fire which may occur
within or adjoining the Railway property, and Avhen
the fire is extinguished, or as soon as possible after-
wards, they are to report all particulars to the Engi-
neer’s Office.
1410. Gangers must see that all broken chairs, rails, Removal of
sleepers, or other defective materials, are removed
from the road Avith the least possible delay, and sound
materials substituted.


implement*and 1411. All tools, rails, sleepers, pieces of iron or
kept wood or other implement or material, must be care-
rai,s - fully placed so as to be quite clear of the line, and not
within four feet of the rails.
security of tools 1412. All tools and implements required for the
merit"! ple repair of the line must, when not in use, be kept locked
up in a building, or in boxes, for the security of which
each Foreman or Ganger on his own length of line is
responsible.
Platelayers to 1413. Platelayers and Labourers must desist from
trai2is^ eir ° f work upon a train approaching, and must not cross over
to the other lines, but move to the side of the road,
clear of all the lines, to secure themselves from the risk
of accident by trains running in opposite directions.
Working in 1414. Each Platelayer working in a tunnel, when
tunnels. trains are approaching in both directions, must, if he
be unable to reach any recess in the walls, lie down
either in the space between the two lines of rails or
betAveen the line and the side of the tunnel, until the
trains have passed. The width of the space depends
on the construction of the tunnel, Avith which e\ r ery
man must make himself acquainted, in order that ho
may select the place Avhich affords the greatest safety.
Materials found 1415. Each Ganger Avill be held responsible for
coUected! t 0 collecting any coupling-chains, hooks, pins, iron, or
other material which may be found on the line, and for
having them conveyed to the nearest Station Aveekly.
Luggage and 141 G. All luggage, goods, or articles found on the
fine'tobetaken line must immediately be taken to the nearest Station,
to nearest and a report made containing the best information that
can be obtained respecting the train from which they
may have fallen.
Articles a Ganger 1417. Each Ganger must, when going over his
examining 1 keys length of line to examine the keys and fastenings of
and fastenings. the ra ils, have Avith him a keying-hammer and span-
ners or nut keys, and be prepared promptly to supply
keys, nuts, packings, fastenings, or other parts of the
permanent way that may be required.


1418. When a horse is used on the Railway, a man Control of
must, in all cases, have hold of its head, whether the holsCS-
horse is drawing vehicles or otherwise.
1420. Gangers must order off the Railway all per- Trespassers,
sons trespassing within the fences, and must do their
best to obtain the trespasser’s name and address. If
any trespasser persists in remaining, they must take
him to the nearest Station and give him in charge of the
Station-master or police there; or (if any police con-
stable be nearer than the nearest Station) Gangers must
give the trespasser in charge of such constable, and at
once report having done so to the nearest Station.
1421. In case of any person wilfully damaging the Gare of gates.
Railway property, or leaving any Railway gate open
at a level crossing where there is no Gatekeeper, or
refusing to quit the Railway premises, then trespass-
ing, his name and address must be ascertained, if
possible, in order that he may be proceeded against
according to law. If the address of a trespasser can- Prevention of
o . . . , , A , . . trespass.
not otherwise be ascertained, he must be taken, with
as little force as may be necessary, to the nearest con-
stabte or police station, and given in charge ; but a
trespasser is only to be given in custody in extreme
cases, and, except in cases of danger , it will generally
be sufficient to obtain his name and correct address,
and, if possible, in all such cases the person arresting
should have a witness of the occurrence or offence
committed.
1422. Every Ganger or Platelayer is enjoined, on Arrest of persons
pain of dismissal, to take into custody, or assist in feiony. ttms
taking into custody, any persons he may see committing
any of the offences set forth in the “Public Worhs
Statute 1865” relating to Railways. And every
Ganger or Platelayer shall do his utmost to bring any
such offender to the nearest police constable or Station,
and he must immediately afterwards make a report of
the circumstances to his Inspector. He should be pre-
pared, if possible, with one or more witnesses of the
offence committed in such case.


N.B.—The attention of every Platelayer is also
directed to the Regulation as to Signalling in Foggy
Weather or during Snow-storms.
INSTRUCTIONS TO BE SPECIALLY OBSERVED
BY GATEKEEPERS AT LEVEL CROSSINGS,
WATCHMEN, AND OTHERS.
1423. Each Gatekeeper will be provided with day
and night hand signals, and, where necessary, detonating
signals, which, with fixed or advanced signals, where
there are any, must always be kept in proper order.
Signal lamps must be kept lighted as soon as it com-
mences to be dusk ; and between the dusk of the
evening and dark, and during a fog, both day and night
signals must be used. The signal lamps must be kept
lighted until after the last regular train, or special train
or engine of which notice is given, or which is announced
by signal, has passed; and Gatekeepers must always
signal each train in passing during daylight and until
their gates are locked across the road.
Signals.
Gates to be shut 1424, Unless specially ordered in writing to the
raihvay contrary (as in privileged gates), gates must always be
line- kept open for the Railway and shut across the road,
except when required to be opened for the traffic across
the line, and must then again be closed across the road
as]quickly as possible.
Gates to be kept 1427. Gates are never to be opened across the Rail-
teaiaisap- 11 way when a train can be seen or hoard approaching ;
preaching’. and in such cases the Gatekeeper must not allow any-
thing to cross the Railway until the train has passed.
The Danger Signal shall always be exhibited by the
Gatekeeper during the time that the gates are opened
for traffic across the Railway.
Protection of 1428. If an engine follow another within Five
trains. Minutes, the Danger Signal shall be shown. The
Danger Signal to be exhibited for a longer time when
the first train passes slowly, and makes the Gatekeeper


fear that it might he overtaken by a faster train follow-
ing, If there be any obstruction, or if from any cause
the line bo unsafe for the passage of an engine, the
Danger Signal shall be shown ; and if there be any
reason to make a reduced speed desirable, the Caution
Signal shall be exhibited.
1429. Gatekeepers when signalling are to stand, if Gatekeeper to
possible, on the opposite side of the Railway to that on t, e seen°when
which the train is passing, and in such a position that giving signals,
they may be conspicuous to the persons in charge of
the trains. Should any signal be given hy the Guard
of the train as it approaches, the Gatekeeper must be
prepared and repeat it instantly to the Eugineman, if
necessary.
1430. Should the Guard of an approaching train ex- Gatekeepers to
Dibit a Red flag with the object of calling the attention sfgna^whe^ 18
of the Enginemau, with the intention of stopping the trains are to
o? ' x i o hp stopDecL
train, the Gatekeeper must repeat the signal, and direct
the Engineman’s attention to the Guard’s van.
1431. On the approach of an engine, the hand lamp Method of show-
must be held steadily facing it, and moved round as it m ° hand lamps '
passes, so that the light will still he thrown on the
engine.
1432. Gatekeepers are instructed that the first point First duty is to
to be attended to in all accidents and casualties is the g|^ lais 1 ais. r ° per
showing the proper signals to warn a coming engine of
Danger.
1433. In the event of the road being from any cause Danger Signal in
obstructed, and if only one line is obstructed, the Gate- tion.° f obs " rut "
keeper is to hasten back to stop an engine approaching
on that line, and must remain at a proper distance until
the line is clear, or until some competent person arrives
to take charge of the signal, and who can be entrusted
with it. If both lines are obstructed, the Gatekeeper
must remain on the spot to give warning of Danger
both ways, until some experienced person is found,


who can be sent in one direction to give the signal of
Danger while the G atekeeper goes in the other direction
for the same purpose.
Position of gate 1434. The gate towards which cattle, carriages, or
when cattle,&c., h orses are approaching must not be opened until the
are approaching . V , ” . , r . „
opposite gate lias been hrst opened, so as to allow them
to cross over without stopping upon the line.
observance of 1435. Gatekeepers must take particular notice of
trains. each t ra | u as it p a sses, and if they see anything wrong
must show a “ Danger ” Signal to the Guard and
Engine-driver.
Signalling where 1437. Where the Block System is in operation, and
Bock system is the level crossing is not a Block Post, the signals must
in operation. OQ jy k e uge j j* o j. protection of the crossing.
Red light at level l^ 3B - The lam P s 0n level Cr . oSsin g g ates of . P ul ? lic
crossing gates, highways must show a Red light in each direction
along the line when the gates are closed across it, and
must ho kept lighted from dusk to daylight and during
foggy weather.
Fixed signals at 1439. At level crossings where fixed signals are
level crossings, provided, the Gatekeeper must test the working of his
signals both by day and by night, and report immediately
any defect to the Inspector of Permanent Way or other
person in charge of the repairs of signals, and to the
Station-master under whose supervision he acts.
TO give notice to 1440. Gatekeepers and others having charge of
inspector when g a t es> signals, and points, are required to give notice
required! e to the Inspector of Permanent Way in charge imme-
diately on any repairs being required thereto ; and in
ease any part becomes deranged or broken, or should
any gale hang so as not to shut properly, or the
fastenings be defective or become deranged so as not
to fasten the gate immediately on its being shut, they
must give notice of it to the nearest Platelayer, who
will get the same made perfectly safe.


1441. Gatekeepers or other persons in charge will To be responsible
be held responsible for the consequence of any accident
that may arise from the defective state of signals, 'le-
gates, or fastenings, unless the same shall have been
previously reported.
1442. The hand signals must always be in a proper Hand signals
state, and kept at hand ready for instant use. The ready! to be
lamps must be trimmed and cleaned not later than noon
each day.
1443. Gatekeepers are to prevent all persons from To prevent
walking on the line, or coming within the fences, ex- tresPassers-
cepting those engaged in connexion with the Railway
Department, who do so in the performance of their
duties; or unless such persons (who are not so engaged)
produce a sufficient written authority ; and the Gate-
keeper is to report all persons who persist in trespas-
sing or doing any damage to the line or works, so that
he or she may be brought to justice.
1444. Gatekeepers are to be supplied with a copy To be acquainted
of the Rule Book, with which they must make them- Time-^Wes. and
selves well acquainted ; and with the Train Time-bills.
Applications for any stores they may require are to be
sent through their immediate superior officer.
1445. Gatekeepers to level crossings at or near a statioiTGate-
Station must be particularly watchful when the Main kee P ers -
Line is occupied by the stoppage of a train, the
shunting of waggons, or otherwise obstructed, and must
exhibit the Red Signal to stop any engine or train which
may arrive on the line which is obstructed. Those who
are so situated are to attend to such special instructions
as may be issued for each Station by the Station-
master, and are to act under the orders of the Station-
masters for the security of the traffic. They must be
ready in an emergency in the performance of such
duties to leave the crossing, first locking the gates during
their temporary absence, as before directed. Those
who have charge of advanced or fixed signals or points
must satisfy themselves, by day and by night, that they


work properly, and must, immediately that they discover
any breakage or imperfection, report the same, failing
which, they will be held responsible for the conse-
quences of such inattention.
To forward all 1447. Gatekeepers are to forward immediately to
found articles, the Inspector of Permanent Way, or nearest Station-
master, any article which they may find on the line
which may have been dropped from the train or
carriages.
PART V.
REGULATIONS FOR THE GUIDANCE OF STA-
TION-MASTERS, OPERATORS, AND OTHERS
ENGAGED IN WORKING THE ELECTRIC
TELEGRAPHS USED BY THE DEPARTMENT.
1448. The Station-masters at all Railway Telegraph
responsible. Stations in Victoria, and all officers employed in the
Railway Telegraph service, will be held responsible
for the efficient performance of the telegraph duties of
their respective Stations, in conformity with the fol-
lowing rules and regulations :
Office hours. 1449. Every office must be open for telegraph busi-
ness daily, as soon as may be required for train tele-
graphing, and not later than at 8.30 a.m. In cases
where telegraph offices are required to be kept open
after the usual office hours, special instructions will be
forwarded by the Telegraph Engineer.
Night Operator, 1450. Operators are on duty at the Spencer-street
officT rBtreet Telegraph Office all day and night, on Sundays as
well as on week days.


1451. No office must be closed at night until the closing at nigh
“ checks ” have been sent, and the signal “ Good
night has been obtained from Spencer-street. Sta-
tions on branch lines must obtain the “ Good night ”
signal from the junction Station.
1452. All train reports must be sent as early as order of business,
required, and returns of rolling-stock must be sent to
Spcucer-street before 9 a.m. daily. Railway tele-
grams, * * » * and the reports of trains,
are to take precedence of other telegrams.
1453. The rule for “calling” or “signalling” a Eulefo^“call« ,
Station is to give the “call” three times, then the lDS ” stations.
“ sign ”or “ call ” signal of the office calling. When
a Station is called in this manner three times, and fails
to answer, it will be understood that he is not in
attendance. Any Operator calling, and unable to raise
a Station, is to ask some other Station, if possible,
beyond the office wanted, to try and get him, and the
fact is to be noted on the face of the message requiring
to be sent.
1454. Undue delays to telegrams, with the cause Delays to be re-
of delay, actual or presumed, must be reported by portecI '
train to the Telegraph Engineer.
1455. Contention or “fighting ” for circuit is strictly Contention for
forbidden. Operators must not “ break in ”or interrupt circult-
other Stations while working, unless for urgent rea-
sons, and not in any case during the progress of a
message. Circuit must always be given up, without
demur, on receiving the signal “8. >> If that signal be
improperly used, the fact must be reported to the Tele-
graph Engineer, and the Operator interrupting will
be held responsible if he have done so without suffi-
cient cause.
1456. Operators must not at anytime open their Kot to open key,
“ keys ” till they have first ascertained that the relay
is in proper adjustment.
L 2


signal “ wait.” 1457. When using the signal “1” or “ Wait/’ the
key must not be left open longer than one minute.
Care must be 1458. The circuit must not be interrupted by key
taken to keep being “ left open,” or through any other disconnexion
circuit closed ° r 7 o j
in an office. Special care must be taken to see that
the circuit is kept properly closed. When an office
is being “ cut out ” at night, particular attention must
be paid to ensure the buttons of the “ cut out ” switch
making a good and firm contact with the blocks on
which they rest.
Belays to be kept 1459, All relays must be kept incorrect adjust-
tn adjustment. ment, Special attention must be paid to this im-
portant duty in rainy, foggy, or stormy weather, when
the adjustment will be difficult and variable, and
require constant watching. In such weather the ad-
justing spring of the armature must be tightened up
( i.e ., the adjustment must be raised ) more than usual.
When relay is out 1460. A magnetised needle, hung by a thread over
of adjustment. ,■» •» .. •iix. j* i /*!• i
or near the relay coils, will be round useful in show-
ing whether the relay is out of adjustment.
intermediate 1461. Intermediate Stations should always be in
ment?” 8 adjust ' adjustment with both terminal offices, but when, owing
to defective working of the line, this is not possible,
they should keep in adjustment for the Station with
which they transact most business.
Lines working 1462. When the lines are working so badly that
Stations a great distance apart cannot work together as
usual, officers at intermediate Stations are expected to
assist, either by repeating the telegrams, or by assist-
ing the other Stations to “ break ” or to keep in ad-
justment for each other.
Registers.
1463. A clear and legible copy of each message
received must be recorded on the register tape. No
excuse will be accepted for any neglect of this
rule, nor are telegrams to be received by sound alone,
without being recorded on the tape, under any


circumstances. Should it happen that by accident
the register is out of order, the receiving Operator is
to inform the sending Station of the fact, and request
him to let his tape run. The sending Station will
then record the circumstance on the face of the mes-
sage sent.
1464. The register “ tape ” is to be dated and timed Eegister tape to
regularly every morning before commencing business. bedated > &c -
When finished, all tapes should be marked with the
time and date when they were commenced and finished,
and the line on which they were used; they should
then be packed up neatly and stowed away for reference.
1465. No tape is to be passed through the instru- Tape to be
ment more than three times. discarded.
1466. Every message received must be duly ac- Acknowledgment
knowledged by giving the signal “ 0.K.,” and by o£mefeSages-
signing the call of the receiving Station. No mes-
sage is to be considered as sent until this acknowledg-
ment has been obtained by the sending Station, and
recorded on his tape, together with the latter portion
of the message sent.
1467. If the circuit be interrupted for more than Testing for mter-
five minutes, the officer in charge will at once ascer- ru Ptlons-
tain the locality of the interruption, and carefully
examine and test his office connexions. If the fault
be on the Melbourne side of his Station, he will report
to the Telegraph Engineer by means of one of the
postal wires, or by the quickest possible way ; if not
on the Melbourne side, he will report direct to the
Telegraph Engineer, stating the nature, duration, and
supposed locality of the interruption.
1468. After carefully testing their offices, the Sta- Faults online—
tion-masters on each side of the fault will next inform formed! 0 be
the Gangers in charge of the permanent way that the
wire is interrupted, and direct them what to look for,
and how-to effect a temporary repair.


Guards to report 1469. Guards of trains should also be requested
faults on line. k ee p a i oo k o ut as their train passes over the faulty
section, and to report anything they may see to the
first telegraph station.
Reports of inter- 1470. Concise reports of interruptions are to be
ruption, telegraphed at once to the Telegraph Engineer, and
fuller details, giving all information, may then follow
by train.
1471. The following instructions are to he observed
by Gangers :
Instructions to
Gangers.
“ Each Ganger is directed to pay particular atten-
tion to the railway telegraph line when walking over
his section daily. If the wire he off poles and rest-
ing on the ground, it must be tied up so as to swing
clear. If the wire be broken, the ends are to he
fastened as near together as possible with a piece of
the wire supplied for the purpose, which the Ganger
must always have with him ; and, in all cases, these
or any other defects which may be seen in the wire
or poles are to he reported as soon as possible to the
nearest telegraph office. When the coil of wire sup-
plied has been used, another coil will be supplied if
asked for.”
1472. When one of two wires leading into a Station
is interrupted, the fact should be reported to Mel-
bourne by means of the other wire. Prompt attention
to this will assist greatly in restoring communication.
Double lines.
1473. When two wires are crossed, the ground wire
should be attached on both lines at the same time, and
if the cross disappears it will be seen that it is on the
side cut off. This is a simple test, and should be at
once applied in case of necessity.
“ Crosses.’
Lightningarres- 1474. Lightning arresters should be frequently ex-
que S nt°yexam- amined, and a special examination should be made
ined, ' a ft e r a thunderstorm. The points must be kept fixed
so that a piece of thin writing-paper will pass freely
between them and the centre plate. «


1475. All office connexions must be bright and office connex-
clean, and firmly joined together. ion 8"
1476. Should it be necessary for a Station to “cut “Cut out”'in
out” the instruments during a thunderstorm, the officer thunderstorm-
in charge must report the fact to the Spencer-street
Office, and on replacing his instruments in circuit
ascertain if there are any messages for him.
1477. Earth wires must not be used at intermediate Earth wires.
Stations, except for the purpose of testing, or to permit
of very important railway business being transacted,
and in such a case the time of putting ground wire on,
and the time when it is taken off, must be shown,
together with an explanatory note, on the face of the
message sent. The corresponding office must also be
informed, and the officer using the ground wire must
disconnect it directly he has finished the important
business for which he put it on.
1478. Officers must not in any way alter the ar- instruments, &c„
rangement of the wires, instruments, or fittings at not to be altered,
their Stations without special instructions first received
from the Telegraph Engineer, or, in cases of urgency,
from the Chief Operator, Spencer-street, who shall
at once report any alteration that has been authorized
by him and the reason thereof.
1479. Station-masters and Officers in charge are to station-masters
make themselves perfectly acquainted with the batteries,
electric signals, and apparatus of every kind used at rical apparatus,
and about their Station; they are to examine the same
frequently, and to see that they are always kept in
good working order. Should any serious defect be
found to exist in any of the apparatus, a full report is
to be sent to the Telegraph Engineer.
1480. All parts of the instruments must be kept instruments and
clean and in good order. They must be carefully 6
dusted at least once a day, and any defect or damage
must be immediately reported to the Telegraph
Engineer.


Suppiyofbattery 1481. The main and local batteries must also be
material kept in thorough working order, and a sufficient
supply of battery material must be kept on hand.
Attention is hereby directed to special memoranda on
the subject of batteries.
Daily reports as 1482. Daily reports as to the working of lines must
bnes° rking ° f ke telegraphed at 9 a.m. to the Telegraph Engineer
from the following Stations :—Geelong, Ballarat,
Castlemaine, Maryborough, Seymour, Warragul, and
Sale.
Monthly reports 1483. All junction Stations must send in a monthly
Stetions? Ctlon re P ort °f the working of branch lines, and must report
specially in case of any defective working.
Offices to be kept 1484. All telegraph offices must be kept strictly
private. private. No person, unless actually engaged in the
department, or who is specially authorized, is to be
admitted to the instrument or operating room under
any circumstances.
No one to prac- 1485. No one is to be allowed to practise at any of
permission of the telegraph instruments at a railway telegraph Station
Telegraph without authority in writing being first obtained from
Engineer. the Telegraph Engineer, nor may any one who has
not been certified by that officer to be competent be
permitted to send or receive telegrams, or use the tele-
graph instruments in any way.
Economy in use 1486. The electric telegraph wires should only be
of wires. used f or transmission of messages which cannot
be sent by train. Delay and confusion is caused by
unnecessarily crowding the wires with unimportant
business. Officers making an unnecessary use of the
telegraph will be held responsible for the cost of tele-
grams transmitted by them.
Abbreviations 1487. Abbreviations must not be used by Operators
forbidden. w fien sending railway or other messages, which must
be written in full, and all numbers therein transmitted
in words as well as figures, thus —“seventeen (17)


empty trucks by six (6) forty-five (45) train.” The
only exception from this rule is made in the case of
rolling-stock returns, in which figures alone may be
used, but special care must be taken to ensure
correctness.
1499. The exact time at which each telegram is Timing
sent and received is to be noted by the sending or messa & eB>
receiving Operator, together with his initial letter,
in his own handwriting. The time “ lodged ”at
every Station is also to be transmitted after the signa-
ture of a message, and to be written down by the
receiving Operator.
1500. The name of the receiving Station must be Name of receiv-
written on all messages received, whether the tele- {^written? 40
grams are of a private or an official nature.
1505. In case of an interruption to circuit, urgent interruption
messages must be forwarded by postal telegraph wire, clrcult •
by train, by hand, or by telephone, or in the quickest
way possible.
1506. Though messages are not delivered from Delivery of
railway Stations, it is the duty of the Station-master messa ° e 3,
and all other employes to endeavour to get any
messages received at their Station delivered promptly,
or to let the addressees of the messages know they
are at the Station.
1508. When a telegram is detained in consequence Delay to message
of an interruption to the wire, a note to that effect is t 0 be noted ‘
to be made on the message.
1509. Messages, which instead of being delivered Telephone mes-
by hand are transmitted by telephone, must be sent sases ‘
very slowly and distinctly, and a sufficient pause made
after each word to permit it to be written down.
1510. In all cases the message must be repeated Repeating tele-
back by the receiver from his written copy, and the I>hone mesBa “ e '
sender will be held responsible if the message is not


properly received from him. After hearing the repe-
tition, the sender will write upon the message the
word “Repeated back 0.K.,” with his initials and the
time.
1517. Telegraph inquiry notes are only to be issued
for goods or parcels in cases of extreme urgency, and
then the Station-master or Officer in charge must sign
the documents.
Telegraph in-
quiry notes.
Inquiry for
luggage.
1518. In the case of luggage, if the passenger is to
blame, he must bear the cost of inquiry by telegram.
1519. Operators must not decline to send or receive
a message because they may doubt whether it is “ On
Her Majesty’s Service.” The message must be
transmitted to its destination first, and afterwards
submitted to the Telegraph Engineer for his ruling.
O.H.M.S. mes-
sages not to be
refused.
1529. The monthly return of instruments is to be
made up by the Station-master or Senior Telegraph
Operator at each Station after carefully examining all
instruments, batteries, &c. A special note is then to
be made of any requirements, or any remarks as to the
condition of the lines.
Instrument
return.
(a) Junction Stations must always give a full and
accurate report of the working of branch lines.
Custody of 1534. Messages are to be carefully preserved, and
messages. made up in monthly parcels duly labelled. Once in
every two years, namely, in the first week of July,
1884, and each alternate year succeeding, the packages
of old messages and tapes must be forwarded by train
to the Telegraph Engineer, Melbourne, excepting
those for the last six months previous, which must be
retained for reference.
Destruction of (a) The packages forwarded to Melbourne will be
old messages, destroyed in the presence of the Telegraph Engineer,
or an officer appointed by him, and a certificate of
the destruction being completed shall be duly recorded.


1535. Melbourne time, which must always be kept Melbourne time
at Railway Stations in Victoria, will be sent by tele- 81gnal at 1 p,m *
graph to the principal Stations at 1 p.m. daUy.
(a) On receipt of the time signal, Station-masters Receipt of time
must see that the Station clocks are right. signal.
(5) Should the time signal be not received, the fact Non-receipt of
must be reported to the Telegraph Engineer, and the time Slgnal-
- time obtained from Spencer-street as soon as
possible after 1 p.m.
(c) The time signal will be sent from Melbourne sending time
to all Stations in direct communication with Spencer- 81gnal-
street Office.
(<f) On branch lines the junction Station must re- Branch lines,
peat the time signals as they arrive, carefully, by hand.
1536. In order to ensure uniform time being kept at Time at non-
all Stations to which the time signal is not telegraphed,
the following Rules must be closely observed ;
(a) Each Guard must, before starting on his jour- Guard to keep
ney, satisfy himself that his watch is correct correct time-
with the clock at the Station from which he
■ starts; and must again compare it, and set it
right, if necessary, by the clock at the Station
where his journey ends, before commencing
his return journey. In each case he must
show his watch to the Station-master, who
must see that it is right.
(5) The Guard in charge of the first passenger Guard to give
train stopping at all Stations must, on his stations! ertain
arrival at each Station, give the Station-
master or the person in charge the precise
time, in order that the Station clock may be
regulated accordingly. Station-masters will
be held responsible that this duty is carefully
and regularly attended to.
(c) Care must be taken to see that the clocks are Clocks to be
regularly wound up once a week, and if they nd rC '
gain or lose they must be regulated by turn-
ing the screw at the bottom of the pendulum


so as to raise the sliding weight if the clock
lose, and lower it if the clock gain. Half a
turn of the screw will make a difference of
about half a minute a day.
Defects in clocks 1537. Any serious defect which may occur in the
to be reported. wor ki n g 0 f an y dock must be at once reported to the
Telegraph Engineer, so that steps may be taken to
have the clock repaired.
1538. A Clock Repairer will visit each Station from
time to time, and will carry a memorandum hook in
which is to be entered the condition of the Station
clocks at the time of his visit. Each entry is to be
initialled by the Station-master, who will also note in
the book any remarks he may wish to make respecting
the clocks.
Clock repairer.
1539. Each Guard will be held responsible that the
watch supplied to him keeps correct time. Should it
not do so, the fact must he at once notified to the pro-
per officer, who will supply another watch while the
defective one is being repaired.
Guards respon
Bible.
1540. Station-masters at all Stations will he held
responsible for the correctness of the time shown by
their Station clocks, and no excuse will be taken to
exempt them from the performance of this most import-
ant duty.
Station-masters
responsible.
Special instructions concerning “ Train Messages”
1541. The first duty of Telbgraph Operators is the
prompt and accurate telegraphing of trains, and the
proper recording of all “ train messages.”
Importance of
duty.
1542. All “train messages” * * * * *
must be written out in full, on “ train message ”
forms, which will be supplied to every Station from
which trains require to be signalled. Each “ train
message ” must be signed by the Station-master, or
Officer in charge of the Station, and must be trans-
mitted by wire without alteration.
Train message
forms.


1548. No train message is to be considered complete Train messages
until it is acknowledged. Should an interruption ie d^df know *
occur to prevent an acknowledgment of a message
being obtained, the train message must be treated as
if it had not been sent.
1544. When an Operator is satisfied that he has
received a message correctly, and not until then , he is kdged.
to give the acknowledgment signal, which is the letters
0.K., and the signal call of the office. The acknow-
ledgment signal, together with the signature of the
message for which it is given, must be recorded on
the tape at both sending and receiving Stations. Mess-
ages must always be recorded at the receiving Station.
1545. “Train messages and telegrams reporting Train messages
accidents must take precedence over all other tele- d °nce. e prec °'
grams.
1546. In case of delay, or accident to trains, Opera- Accident to
tors must attend most carefully to the telegraph instru- trams ‘
ments, but must not on any account interrupt the
offices working, or cause delay by asking unnecessary
questions.
1547. To avoid mistakes, signals must be given Signals to be
plainly and distinctly, and Stations working must sign dlstmct-
their call at the end of every message.
1548. To avoid delays to trains, Stations must reply Reply instantly,
instantly to calls.
1549. Nothing must be allowed to interfere with Nothing to inter
the train signalling. No excuse will be accepted for
signalling.
its omission, or for delay in replying to a call.
1550. Conciseness and brevity must be observed Talking on line,
in all business communications between offices, and
gossip or idle conversation during business hours is
prohibited.


Train messages 1551. Train messages, when completed, must be
to be entered. (j u iy en tered in the message books, and kept in the
same way as other messages.
Railway mess- 1552. All train messages and other railway tele-
vmtten.h 6 grams must be written down, and not dictated to the
Operator verbally.
interruptions to 1554. In the event of an interruption to the wire,
master to be 11 ' which prevents the receipt and transmission of train
informed. messages, the Station-master must be at once informed,
so that he may take the necessary steps to prevent
delay to trains.
No railway duty 1555. It must always be borne in mind that prompt
thaif te?^aph- ) an( l ready attention to the telegraph instrument is
in £- part of the railway duty of every officer to whom
telegraph work is given, and that no other portion of
his railway duties is more important.


INDEX.
Rules
Absence without leave punishable, &c. ... ... ... 29,31
Accident blocking one line of rails ... ... ... 1179
Accilents causing both lines to be obstructed ... ... 1146
„ on lines used by trains running in opposite
direction ... ... ... ... ... 1147
„ to be reported ... ... ... ... 249
„ to passengers or employes, steps to be taken in
case of ... ... ... ... ... 420,421
„ to trains or engine not protected by fixed signals,
precautions in case of ... ... 988, 990-994, 1002
Accounts, responsibility as to keeping proper ... ... 15
Addresses of servants ... ... ... ... ... 5,1197
Altercations between servants forbidden ... ... 48
Announcements, receipt of, considered sufficient notice ... 18
Arresting persons committing felony ... ... ... 14£2
Assistance to be given at trains ... ... ... ... 416
„ to be obtained in case of accident, &c. ... 1063,1386
Assisting trains in rear ... ... ... ... ... 1158.
Attaching vehicles to goods train where line is not level... 1027
„ and detaching carriages ... ... ... 1058
Axles, hot, to be probed, &c. ... ... ... ... 497
B.
Ballast guards to carry out rules for protection of trains 1388
Ballasting, &c., at level crossings ... ... ... 1401
„ lines ... ... ... ... 1395
„ operations ... ... ... ... ... 1397
Ballast trains between two block signal-boxes ... ... 1365
„ „ control 0f... ... ... ... ... 1382
„ plant, and water trains, working of ... ... 1307
„ trains not to work on main line in foggy weather... 1384
„ „ on single lines worked by staff ... ... 237
„ „ to be off the line 15 minutes before other
trains are due ... ... ... ... 662
„ working on steep inclines ... ... ... 321-326
Blast-pipes, &c., of engines, cleaning of ... ... ... 1272
Blocked line, arrangements as to ... ... ... 236, 236
Block system does not dispense with other modes of sig-
nalling ... ... ... ... ... ... 320
„ telegraph, disarrangement of instruments, &c. 307-309, 318
, „ instruments to be used in signal-boxes ... 28*1
, „ „ to be used only for signalling
trains ... ... ... 282
„ „ ballast trains stopping between block cabins 290
„ „ regulations for working ... ... 279-320
„ „ working, suspension of absolute ... 254,319


Block telegraph system, object of ... ... ... 279
when shunting can take place ... ... 289
M „ system of signalling 280,284-288,291-305,310-313
„ „ system, restriction to second train or
engine entering a section ... ... 283
Boilers, engine, cleaning of ... ... ... ... 1275
Books not to be shown to the public ... ... ... 10
„ responsibility as to keeping proper ... ... 15
~, to be kept ... ... ... ... 20, 311, 503, 508
Brakes, continuous, reports to be made of ... ... 1257
„ „ not to be applied between stations ... 1260
„ power, insufficiency of ... ... ... ... 1052
„ „ regulation of ... ... ... ... 436
„ steam, use of ... ... ... ... ... 1256
„ to be last vehicle of train ... ... ... 437
Buffers, screwing up ... ... ... ... ... 445
Buildings, care of ... ... ... ... ... 460,461
Burning grass and rubbish . ... ... ... ... 1319
C.
Carriages, attached to goods train, position of ... ... 447
Cattle and sheep trains, care in working ... ... ... 1200, 1263
Certificates of competency for engine-drivers, issue of ... 1290,1291
Chains, side, on goods truck, use of ... ... ... 931
„ of timber trucks and boiler waggons to be secured 1029
Chock-blocks on sidings to be painted white ... ... 370
Clerks in charge of stations are to be addressed as station-
masters ... ... ... ... ••• __ 526
Clocks and watches, care of ... ... ... ... 1537-1540
„ in signal-boxes, regulation of ... ... ... 218
Closets, cleansing of ... ... ... ... 467
Collecting and stacking railway materials ... ... 1310
Conduct of servants ... ... ... ... ... 6
Couplings, spare, to be returned... ... ... ... 443
„ to be examined ... ... ... ... 352
Coupling vehicles, caution in ... ... ... ... 438,1009
Cranes, travelling, use and removal of ... ... 366, 367, 1028
D.
Damage to rolling-stock to be made good by employe at fault 1339
Damaged vehicles not to be continued in traffic, &c. ... 474
Defective carriages to be attended to ... ... ... 1017
Despatches, delivery of ... .... ••• ••• 1077
Detaching vehicles'from goods tram where line is not level 1027
Detonating signals to be regarded as a “ danger ” signal ... 989
Detonators, how to be placed on rail ... ... ... 141
„ must be carefully handled ... ... ... 142
„ responsibility for keeping up supply of ... 140
„ to whom supplied ... ... ... ... 139
„ where to be kept, &c. ... ... ... 155
Discharging trucks, despatch to be used in ... ... 1342
Dismissal, liability to, for certain offences ... ... 25
Disorderly passengers ... ... ... ... ... 1023
Disputes between drivers and guards, evidence of ... 579
Distance posts, place of ... ... ... ... 1326
„ „ to show gangers’ lengths... ... ... 1331


Rules
Documents not to be shown to the public ... ... 10
Doors of carriages to be fastened ... ... ... 418
Dress of servants to be neat and clean ... ... ... 26
Duties, exchange of ... ... ... ... ... 379
„ each person to do his own ... ... ... 380
E.
Employes travelling to be considered on duty ... ... 75
Employment of relatives in same gang not allowed ... 1337
Engine carrying staff or ticket being disabled, proceeding
in case of ... ... ... ... ... 234
„ disabled, fireman to place detonators ... ... 1148
„ drawing dead ones ... ... ... ... 1262
„ drawing train not to have tail-lamp ... ... 1164
„ in steam not to be left by both engine-driver and
fireman ... ... ... ... ... 1199
„ not to pass home signal at danger ... ... 104
„ moving from siding on to main line ... ... 1203
„ not to push train ... ... ... ... 996
„ no unauthorized person to travel on ... ... 1211
„ of private owner not to go on main line ... ... 201
„ passing for a short distance on wrong line in case
of accident ... ... # ... ... ... 995
„ or train unprotected by fixed signals ... ... . 1146
Engines, two or more passing through block section ... 1159
Engine-drivers and firemen must be on engine in motion
on main line ... ... ... ... 1131
„ approaching junctions ... ... ... 1154
„ articles supplied to ... ... ... 1127
„ ascending and descending inclines ... 1235, 1236
„ challenging for another road ... ... 1228
„ crossing main line at Castleraaine ... 1225
„ coming on duty ... ... ... ... 1126
„ dropping fires ... ... ... ... 1267
„ entering terminal stations ... ... 1169
„ going along Flinders-street tramway ... 1284
„ going on to turn-table ... ... ... 1269
„ going through facing points ... ... 1223
„ leaving without staff or ticket ... ... 226
„ liability to dismissal ... ... ... 1130, 1264
„ must obey signals ... ... 1136,1141, 1143
„ not to enter upon single lines, &c. ... 255
• „ not to shunt without fireman ... ... 1132
„ not to start without staff or signals 225, 242, 1134
„ not to take others’ tools ... ... ... 1278
, not to take staff or ticket beyond proper
station ... ... ... ... 231
„ not to weight safety valves ... ... 1241
M not to whistle unnecessarily ... ... 1205
„ not to use sand over points and crossing ... 1282
„ passing stations when another train is on
opposite line ... ... ... ... 1239
„ placing engine against train ... ... 1129
„ putting engines in sheds... ... ... 1286
putting steam in cylinders ... ... 1245
regulations for ... ... ... ...* 1126-1291
M


Rules
Engine-drivers reports to be sent to locomotive superin-
tendent ... ... ... ... 1251
„ responsibility as to tools, &c. ... ... 1126
„ returning for vehicles left on line ... 1234
„ reversing engines ... ... ... 1244
„ seeing anything wrong on opposite line of
rails ... ... ... ... ... 1166
„ signalling to guard or vice versa ... ... 1156, 1167
„ to approach stations carefully ... ...1226, 1232
„ to assist in arranging trains ... ... 1138
„ to attend at running sheds ... ... 1288
„ to be cautious at public crossings ... 1224
„ to challenge stations ... ' ... ... 1227
„ to clear trains of points and crossings but
• within sight of signalmen ... ... 124
„ to examine brake screws, &c. ... ... 1270
„ to examine notices ... ... ... 1133
„ to examine sand boxes ... ... ... 1233
„ to give fortnight’s notice before leaving
service ... ... ... ... 1130
„ to give up running sheets ... ... 1249
, to guard against engine priming... ... 1268
„ to keep a good look out... ... ... 1217
„ to look out along train ... ... ... 1220
„ to look towards guard’s van ... ... 1219
„ to protect their engines ... ... ... 1165
„ to report accidents, &c. ... ... ... 1238, 1248
„ to report defects in roads, signals, &c. ... 1183
„ to report every incident on journey ... 1250
„ to report not being able to keep time ... 1206, 1210
„ to return time cards of detentions ... 1277
„ to take on detached vehicles found on line 1216
„ to run to time-table ... ... ... 1207, 1208
„ to see that catch points are properly held 262
„ to see to lamp indicators, &c. ... ... 1136
„ to sign for coals... ... ... ... 1281, 1283
„ to start and stop with care ... ... 1167
„ to stop train on explosion of detonator ... 1144
„ to stop 20 feet clear of locking bar, &c. ... 110
„ to whistle before moving engine ... 1202
„ to use pumps and injectors alternately ... 1279
„ using coal and oil ... ... ... 1280
Entering offices, public prohibited ... ... ... 41
Entrance block being left open, punishment for ... ... • 470
Entrance scotch in siding to be kept locked ... ... 472
F.
Failure to report irregularities, responsibility for ... 66
Fire bars of engine boilers, mode of keeping ... ... 1271
Fire engine, servants to be instructed in the use of ... 376
Firemen must obey signals ... ... ... ... 1136,1141
„ to keep a good look out... ... ... ... 1217
„ to look out along train ... ... ... ... 1220
„ to look back at starting, &c. ... ... ... 1221
„ to be under engine-driver ... ... ... 1204
„ to place signal lamps on engine or tenders ... 1237


Rules
. Fires ... 1242,1243,1318,1408,1409
Flagmen to be sent out when permanent way is being
repaired ... ... ... ... ... ... 198
G.
Gangers, articles to be supplied to ... ... 1357
„ authority to prosecute trespassers ... ... 1329
„ regulations for ... ... ... ... 1357-1422
„ signals to be used by ... ... ... ... 1358
„ to collect and forward coupling-chains, hooks, &c. 1415
„ to examine lines, works, &c. ... ... 1387, 1388, 1399
„ to have certain tools when examining lines ... 1417
„ to inspect each length of line ... ... ... 1338
„ to keep lines safe and fences repaired ... ... 1404
„ to lock u]3 tools and implements ... ... 1412
„ to maintain proper scotches ... ... ... 1391
„ to remove defective materials ... ... ... 1410
„ to report damage by flood ... ... ... 1400
„ to report disregard for signals and defects in
signal and telegraph wires ... ... ... 1392
„ to temporarily repair broken signal wires ... 1389
Gatekeepers applying for stores... ... ... ... 1444
„ at stations, responsibility of ... ... 1446
„ giving signals ... ... 1429-1433, 1437-1442
„ regulations for ... ... ... ... 1423-1447
„ signals supplied t 0... ... ... ... 1423
„ to have red light at level crossing gates ... 1438
„ to observe each passing train ... ... 1435
„ to repeat guard’s signal to stop train ... 1430
„ to report when repairs are required ... 1440
„ to protect trains ... ... ... ... 1428
* „ to test signals ... ... ... ... 1439
Gates, care of 1351,1398, 1421, 1424, 1426, 1427, 1434
„ at stations to be locked ... ... ... ... 463
„ &c., defective ... ... ... ... ... 1441
Goats untethered to be destroyed ... ... ... 70
Goods and ballast trains working on steep inclines ... 321-325
Goods found on line to be sent to nearest station... ... 1416,1447
Goods guards, articles supplied to ... ... ... 1025
„ „ to check way-bills... ... ... ... 1038
„ ~ to forward collected tickets ... ... 1073
„ trains, delivery of, at end of journey ... ... 1032
■ „ „ definition of ... ... ... ... 373
„ „ not to be jerked ... ... ... ... 1200
Gratuities forbidden ... ... ... ... ... 27
Grease box, care of ... ... ... ... ... 498
„ „ use of ... ... ... ... ... 495
Guards, attendance of ... ... ... ... ... 971
„ articles and signals supplied to ... ... ... 971
„ attention to signals ... ... ... ... 1056
„ attracting engine-driver’s attention, and vice versd 984, 986
„ late at duty ... ... ... ... ... 1108
„ mail, not to carry parcels ... ... ... 1084
„ not to allow persons to travel in their vans ... 398, 1066
„ not to allow persons to get into or out of train in
motion ... ... ... ... ... 1057


Guards not to convey passengers or parcels unless booked 1019
„ not to exchange trains ... ... ... ... 1082
„ not to receive money ... ... ... ... 1064
„ not to travel in train they are not appointed to work 1011
„ not rely on fog signalmen ... ... ... 154
„ reporting infringement of bye-laws ... ... 1113
„ responsibility as to lamps ... ... ... _ 1076
„ regulations for ... ... ... ... ... 971-1125
„ receiving valuable way-hilled parcels ... ... 1085
„ responsibility for damaged trucks ... ... 1087
„ requiring additional carriages ... ... ... 1068
„ starting train ... ... ... ... ••• 080,981
„ working signals ... ... ... ... ... 1062
„ to assist in train work ... ... ... ... 1045
„ to assist ticket collectors ... ... ... 1072
~ to be acquainted with road ... ... ... 1034
„ to control train ... ... ... 1054, 1139, 1198
„ to couple vehicles properly ... ... ... 1040
„ to examine loading, tickets, &c. ... ... 1037, 1047-1051
„ to keep a good look out ... ... ... ... 1055
„ to give driver signal to start ... ... _ ... 1123
„ to give up all luggage, &c., before leaving station 1024
„ to forward train journals ... ... ... 1010
„ to have special train time-tables ... ... ... 1033
„ to have sufficient screw couplings ... ... 1039
„ to have supply of dry sand in brake van ... ... 1036
„ to have signals and disc in van ... ... ... 972
„ to note any trucks left on journey ... ... 1086
„ to note defects in vehicles ... ... ... 1080
„ to note when pilot-engine assists ... ... 1075
~ to observe time of platform clocks ... ... 1060
„ to read notices ... ... ... 1035
„ to report at the end of every journey ... ... 1065
„ to report detention of train ... ... ... 1059
„ to report irregularities ... ... ... ... 1007, 1074
„ to search carnages ... ... ... ... 1081
„ to see doors of carriages closed, &c. ... ... 1014
„ to see that passengers enter proper carriages ... 1016
„ to see roof lamps supplied ... ... _ ... . 1067
„ to see semaphore at “danger” before opening car-
riage doors, &c. ... ... ... . ... 1071
„ to see that train is in a proper state for travelling 1026
„ to sort parcels ... ... ... ... ••• 1057
„ to travel in brake van ... ... ... ... 982
H.
Hooking carriages and goods trucks ... ... ... 1042
Horses on railways, control of ... ... ••• ... 1418
I.
Inclines, working trains on ... ... ••• ... H7O, 1177
Insane persons travelling ... ... ••• ••• 1023
Insobriety, punishment for ... ... ••• ••• 23
Inspectors conducting correspondence ...
„ charging work ... _ ••• ••• 1340
„ forwarding urgent communications ... ... 1316


Inspectors not to return persons for increased pay without
authority ... ... ... ... ... 1814
„ ordering materials ... ... ... ... 1308
„ ordering trains ... ... ... ... 1305
„ responsibility as to passes ... ... ... 1345-1347
„ of permanent way, regulations for ... ...1298-1356
„ of works, regulations for ... ... ... 1353-1356
„ recommending repairers for promotion ... 1336
„ supervision of works and trains ... ...1298, 1306
„ to assist signal engineer ... ... ... 1304
„ to engage extra hands for safety of lines ... 1313
„ to forward return of ballast and water trucks... 1343
„ to keep register of renewals on lines ... ... 1309
„ to examine lines ... ... ... ••• 1300, 1317
„ to have list of workmen ... ... ... 1299
„ to maintain discipline ... ... ... 1301
„ „ works ... ... ... ... 1303
„ to return authority to carry out alterations, &c. 1341
„ to report servants found incompetent ... 1312
„ „ when vacancies occur ... ... 1311
„ to see men supplied with rule books ... ... 1302
Instructions from heads of branches to be observed ... 72
Interpretation of the word “ department ” ... ... 76
Intervals between trains... ... ... ... ... 190, 1229
Intoxicated persons not to have tickets issued to them ... 424
J.
Juries, servants exempt from serving on ... ... 67
K.
Keys of carriages to be kept ready ... ... ... 417
L.
Lacing centre chains of live-stock trucks ... ... 1043
Ladies travelling, facilities to be afforded to ... ... 1018
Lamps in vehicles to be removed when not required ... 438
„ kerosene, directions for use of ... ... ... 476-481
„ of trains shunted... ... ... ... ... 1004
„ roof, inspection and care of ... ... ... 340,341
~ signal, inspection and care of ... ... ... 339
„ „ lighting of, &c. ... ... ... 159, 213, 214, 336
„ tail and side, examination of ... ... ... 355
„ „ on trains, &c.... ... ... ... ... 1162-1165
Leave, sick ... ... ... ... _ .... ... 21
Legal proceedings, steps to be taken before instituting ... 10
Lever of home signals, place of ... ... 109
Lights, head, on trains ... ... ... ... ... 164
„ on shunting engines ... ... ... ... 1193
„ side, to be placed on trains ... ... ... 621
Limit to vehicles on trains ... ... ... ... 413
Lines to be kept clear ... ... ... ... ... 1411
Live stock of employes not to trespass ... ... ... 71
Loading, examination 0f... ... ... ... ••• 1122
Loads to be sent from roadside stations ... ... ... 1218
Loading and sheeting goods ... ... 830, 934, 941-944, 952


Load, limit to height of ... ... ... ... ... 831
Loading, negligence in ... ... ... ... ... 955
„ to be securely fastened... ... ... ... 946
Load, limit to, of goods and cattle trains... ... ... 950
Loading trucks, gauge for ... ... ... ... 930
„ „ with large boilers ... ... ... 932
Loading wheat in Q trucks ... ... ... ... 951
Locking bars to be fixed to points ... ... ... 1323
„ „ painted white ... ... ... 370, 1324
Locomotive power, requisitioning for ... ... ... 453
M.
Main line, definition of ... ... ... ... ... 371
„ obstructed, protection of ... ... ... 1366
„ to be clear ten minutes before train is due ... 1381
Measuring loads ... ... ... ... ... 933
Mining on railway reserves not to be allowed without proper
authority ... ... ... ... ... ... 1344
N.
Names of stations to be called out ... ... ... 348, 1070
Notices of special trains to be carefully prepared ... 453
„ „ to be issued ... ... ... 1332
„ ~ to whom issued ... ... 1333
„ posting of train ... ... ... 18,396,457
O.
fB2 182 365
Obstruction of line, precautions to be taken in case of | 1366-1368
Oil-burners, care of ... ... ... ••• ••• 337, 338
Oil, use of ... ... ... ... ... 496
Overshooting stations prohibited ... ... ••• 1254
Overtime work ... ... ... ... ••• 30, 1328
P.
Passengers alighting during journey ... ... ... 1069
„ care of ... ... ... ... 1083
„ carried to a wrong station ... ... ... 423
„ forwarding, both lines being blocked ... ... 257, 259
„ guards to check parcels ... ... ... 1038
„ placing of, in carriages ... ... ... 422
Passsenger trains following other trains... ... ... 1364
„ „ over-running or stopping short of
platform ... ... ... ... 1015
Passes to children of permanent-way men ... ... 1348
Passing stations not equipped, with modern signals ... 133
Permanent way, lifting of ... ... ... ... 1394
„ repairing of ... ... ... ... 1360
„ men to report accidents ... ... 1385
„ men, signals supplied to _ _ ... ... 1363
„ protection of, when repairing ... ... 1861, 1362
Piermasters, regulations for ... ... ... ... 1292-1297
Pilot guards accompanying trains ... ... ... 242
„ assisting disabled trains ... ... ... 244
„ dress of ... ... ••• ••• 241


Pilot guards starting trains ... ... ... ... 241,243
„ ticket ... ... ... ... ... 247, 248
Pilotmen, change of ... ... ... ... ... 263
„ duty of, in single line working ... ... 251
„ relieved not to travel on engine ... ... 264
„ to accompany train after double line is re-opened 266
Platelayers’ signals to reduce speed of train ... ... 1190, 1374
„ to keep clear of trains ... ... ... 1413
„ to repeat guard’s signals to driver ... ... 1876
„ working in tunnels... > ... ... ... 1414
Points, carelessness at ... ... ... ... 905
„ catch, care of, before single line working... ... 261
„ catch, where to be put in... ... ... ... 1322
„ facing, fastenings of ... ... ... ... 113
„ „ to he securely held ... ... ... 260
„ „ „ kept locked ... ... ... 344
„ „ „ tested ... ... ... ... 112
„ safety, to be closed against main line, &c. ... 342
„ not to be moved ... ... ... ... 200
„ repairing of ... ... ... ... ... 166
„ requiring to be connected with signal-box or frame 166
„ to be set right at junctions before signal is lowered 120
Political association, no to be member of a ... 28
Porters in charge to be addressed as station-masters ... 526
„ to be employed as signalmen ... ... ... 385
Presentations forbidden ... ... ... ... 1289
Prisoners travelling to be kept separate from passengers 1022
R.
Re-booking by same train not allowed ... ... ... 1016
Refreshment rooms, servants not to enter ... ... 9
Regulations, all persons must know ... ... ... 3, 14
„ lost copies of, must be replaced ... ... 4
„ to whom supplied ... ... ... ... 2
Relief trains ... ... ... ... ... ... 361
Relieving day or night staffs ... ... ... ... 11,12
Repairing line, precautions to be taken before ... ... 1370-1373
Reports against superior officers ... ... ... 54
„ of damage, &c., to be made ... ... ... 46
, of intoxication, cases to be made ... ... 62
Residence of engine-drivers and firemen ... ... 1196
Running-sheets, time to be entered on ... ... ... 1252
„ on Hawthorn and Brighton lines ... 1253
S,
Safety of public to be first care of servants ... ... 2, 77
Scotch-blocks at sidings, place of ... ... ... 1321
„ to be kept across rails, &c. .. ... 342
~ to be kept locked ... ... ... ... 344
Scotching vehicles in sidings ... ... ... ... 1406
„ „ not provided with brake ... ... 469
Screw coupling vehicles ... ... ... ... ... 906-918
„ couplings, use and care of ... ... 439-442,1041, 1276
„ jacks on engines, care 0f... ... ... ... 1276
Semaphore lamps to be kept in order ... ... ... 614
Service, conditions of ... ... ... ... ... 1


Shunting after sunset or in fogs ... ... ... ... 1192
at roadside stations ... ... ... ••• 1218
. „ at sidings ... ... ... ... 559, 406, 1003
„ chock-blocks to be removed before ... ... 405
„ certain carriages into goods shed prohibited ... 903
double, prohibited ... ... ... ••• 1005
~ for trains to pass ... ... ... ... 192, 1186
„ from main line ... ... ... ... 196, 403
„ operations to be protected ... ... ... 197
„ penalty for careless ... ... ... ... 404,1044
„ train to be drawn forward if there is no room for 407
’, trains where block system is in operation ... 194
„ trains where block system is not in operation ... 195
„ vans with glazed side look-outs ... ... 907
„ waggons at stations on inclines ... ... 358
„ waggons from trains ... ... ... ... 1030,1184
„ waggons into incline sidings ... ... ...1031,1185
Shunt, fireman not to, in absence of driver ... ... 1132
Shunts, flying, prohibited ... ... ... 1006, 1046, 1214
„ running, prohibited ... ... ... ... 1230
Sidings at a distance from stations, working of ... ... 617
Signalling, acquaintance with ... ... ... ... 13,94
„ in case of obstruction ... ... ... 183
„ in foggy weather or during snow-storms ... 149-160
„ in shunting, and when trains are running in
wrong direction ... ... ... ... 135
„ precautions in ... ... ... ... 78
Signal-boxes, where placed and privacy of ... ... 163, 202
Signal code for electric bells ... ... 162
Signalling when flagman is going back to stop a train ... 199
Signalmen changing duty ... ... ... ... 217,265
„ regulations for ... ... ... ... 168-218
„ seeing anything wrong in passing trains ... 204, 205
„ to keep points and signals in working order ... 168,169
„ to know pilotmen ... ... ... ... 256
„ temporarily leaving his post ... ... ... 216
„ to see to tail lamps on trains ... ... ... 203
„ to stop pilot guard’s train, &c. ...• ... 246
„ fog, addresses and posts of ... ... ... 151
~ „ articles supplied to ... ... ... 152
„ „ duties of ... ... ... ... 162
„ „ employed in connexion with home signals 153
„ „ employment of ... ... ... 149,150
„ „ refreshments to be supplied to ... ... 156
„ „ relieving duty ... ... .. ... 156
„ „ station-masters to see that they are at their
posts and signals supplied ... ... 157
Signals, all right ... ... ... ... ... 80,84,115
„ block telegraph 280, 284-288, 291-306, 310-313
caution ... ... ... ... 80,83,85,92, 1375
„ danger 80, 82, 86, 91, 114, 116, 221, 1154
„ detonating ... ... ... ... 139-142, 158
„ distant ... ... ... ... ... ... 103-138
„ engine whistle ... ... ... ... ... 161
” fixed 89
„ ground disc ... ... ... ... ••• 117
” hand 81-88,1374


Signals, home ... ... ... ... ... 103-138,179
„ junction ... ... ... ... 95-102, 187
„ lights ... ... ... ... ... ... 85, 86, 93
„ main line siding ... ... ... ... 102
„ semaphore ... ... ... ... ... 90
„ starting ... ... ... ... ... 103-138
„ starting, not to he passed at “ danger,” except
for shunting ... ... ... ... ... 106
„ train ... ... ... ... ... ... 143-148
„ alteration of ... ... ... ... ... 165, 166
„ care of ... ... ... ... ... 381, 386, 387, 1330
„ cleaning of ... ... ... ... ... 1403
„ defective ... ... ... 136, 138, 172, 346, 1441
„ fixing and repairing of ... ... ... ... 165-167
„ home and distant on same post ... ... ... 127
„ new or altered ... ... ... ... ... 167
~ of platelayers to reduce speed of train ... ... 1374
„ servants first duty is in relation to ... ... 79
„ regulations ... ... ... ... ... 77-164
„ to be shown during relaying work ... ... 1369
Single line working during repairs or obstruction ... 249-274
„ „ regulations for working by one engine only at
same time ... ... ... ... ... 275-278
„ „ regulations for working by pilot guard ... 241-248
„ „ „ „ by train staff or ticket 219-240
Single or double line obstructed, protection of ... ... 1367
Smoke boxes, clearing of ... ... ... ... 1274
Smoke from engines ... ... ... ... ... 1231, 1287
Smoking compartments to be set apart in carriages ... 624
„ prohibited ... ... ... ... ... 26,625
Special trains arranged for by wire ... ... ... 600
„ „ following ... ... ... ... 147, 232,360
„*■ „ on single Hues ... ... ... ... 456, 1089
„ „ or unexpected ones running ... ... 1334
„ „ running on parallel lines ... ... ... 148
„ „ run without arrangement with Melbourne
traffic officers ... ... ... ... 458,459
„ „ run without notice... ... ... ... 147
„ „ station-masters to answer inquiries as to ... 501
„ „ to be timed ... ... ... ... 454
Speed of engines and trains ... 987, 1140, 1188, 1195, 1240, 1285
Sprags and scotches, supply of, at stations ... ... 358
Staff, custody 0f... ... ... ... ... ... 222-224
~ stations ... ... ... ... ... ... 238 •
„ tickets, form and disposal of ... ... ... 239, 240
„ tickets, responsibility of accepting... ... ... 1053
Station-masters, attendance at trains ... ... _ ... 408
„ „ not to leave station without permission ... 409
„ „ not to stop certain trains... ... ... 334
. , , . „ ( 828-330,333,
„ „ supervision of books, servants, &c. < fay
„ „ responsibility 0f... ... ... ... 326
„ „ requiring aid from engineer’s staff ... 400
„ „ to appear in uniform ... ... ... 327
„ „ to have vehicles ready ... ... ... 415
„ „ to give precise instructions ... ... 388
N


Station-masters to report infringement of rule? ... ... 399
„ „ to use despatch ... ... ... 331, 414
Station premises, care of ... ... ... ... 464,468
„ routine, &c. ... ... ... ••• ... 326-625
Stopping trains between Castlemaine and Sandhurst ... 1090
Suspension, station-master’s power of ... ... ... 389
Switches at sidings ... ... ... ... ... 1405
T.
Telegraph working, regulations for ... ... ... 1445-1448
„ abbreviations forbidden .. ... ... 1487
adiustment at intermediate stations ... ... 1461
„ „ of relays ... ... ... 1459, 1460
„ calling stations ... ... ... ... 1453
„ circuit, contention for ... ... ... 1455
„ „ interruption to ... ... ... 1505
„ „ to be kept closed ... ... ... 1458
„ closing offices ... ... ... ... 1451
„ connexions of ... ... ... ... 1475
„ “ cut out ” in thunderstorm ... ... ... 1476
„ delays to be reported... ... ... ... 1454
„ faults on line ... ... ... ... 1468, 1469
„ gangers to examine line ... ... ... 1471
„ instruments and batteries, care of ... ... 1480
„ not to be altered... ... ... 1478
„ „ practising at ... ... ... 1485
„ „ return ... ... ... ... 1529
„ interruptions, testing for ... ... ... 1467
~ inquiry notes... ... ... ... ... 1517
„ „ ~ for luggage 1518
„ key not to be opened... ... ... ... 1456
~ lightning arresters to be examined ... ... 1474
„ lines working badly ... ... ... ... 1462
} , material, supply of battery ... ... ... 1481
„ messages, acknowledgment of ... ... 1466
custody 0f... ... ... ... 1534
„ delays to ... ... ... ... 1506
’ „ delivery 0f... ... ... ... 1508
” O.H.M.S 1519
„ timing of ... ... ... ... 1499
, „ train, accident to train ... ... 1546
„ calls to be instantly replied to 1548
„ forms for 1542
n „ importance of ... ... 1555
’’ „ „ interruptions to wires ... 1554
nothing should interfere with
” ” signalling 1549
„ signals to be distinct... ... 1547
talking on line prohibited ... 1550
~ „ to be acknowledged ... ... 1543,1544
’„ „ to be entered, &c. ... ... 1551, 1552
, f> „ to be promptly dealt with ... 1541
” name of receiving station to be written ... 1500
’ night operator at Spencer-street ... ... 1450
„ office hours ... ... ... ... ... 1449
„ office, privacy of ... ... ... ••• 1484
„ order of business ... ... ... ... 1452


Telegraph reports, daily, as to working of lines ... ... 1482
„ reports, monthly, from junction stations ... 1483
„ reports of interruptions to be made ... ... 1470
„ registers to be kept ... ... ... ... 1463
„ station-master’s responsibility ... ... 1448
' „ station-masters to have acquaintance with
electrical apparatus ... ... ... 1479
„ tape, use of ... ... ... ... ... 1464,1465
„ time keeping, &c. ... ... ... ... 1535-1540
„ “train” and “accident” messages to have pre-
ference ... ... ... ... ... 1545
„ “ wait ” signal ... ... ... ... 1457
„ wires crossed ... ... ... ... 1473
„ wires, earth ... ... ... ... ... 1477
„ wires, economy in use of ... ... ... 1486
„ wires, one of two interrupted... ... ... 1472
Telephone messages ... ... ... ... ... 1509,1510
Tickets, staff, care of ... ... ... ... ... 228,229
Time-tables, employes to be acquainted with ... .. 975
„ receipt of by employes considered sufficient
notice ... ... ... ... ... 18
„ posting of, where there is more than one guard 586
„ to be supplied before coming into operation ... 47
„ to whom supplied ... ... ... ... 2
Time to be taken from guard ... ... ... ... 452
Training inexperienced employes ... ... ... 382
Train approaching “danger ” signal, protection of ...1212,1222
„ approaching facing points ... ... ... 11l
„ assisted by second engine ... ... ... 233
„ ballast, between two block signal-boxes ... ... 215
„ definition of ... ... ... ... ... 372
„ detached in motion, protection of ... ... 1001
„ disabled, to be protected ... ... ... ... 245
„ divided when running on a gradient ... ... 208
„ drawn by two engines ... ... ... ... 1160
„ examination of ... ... ... ... ... 353, 354
„ going down steep inclines ... ... ... 986
„ gone into onward section ... ... ... 107
„ having two engines in front ... ... ... 1161
,’ information to be given as to running of ... ... 192
~ in motion, passengers not to alight from ... 419
„ intervals between ... ... ... 160, 189-191,193
„ late at terminal stations ... ... ... ... 590, 1209
„ lights on, after sunset or in foggy weather ... 978
„ not to leave unless staff is at station ... ... 220
„ not to travel without staff or ticket ... ... 219
„ ordinary, not clearing stations ... ... ... 513
„ passenger, to take precedence ... ... ... 193
or engine at a stand on opposite line to another
train, &c 1178,1189
„ portion of, left on main line through accident ... 1152
„ protection of ... ... ... ... ... 13
„ required to be brought within home signals ... 122
„ run without notice ... ‘ ... ... ... 22
„ running away on proper line ... ... ... 207
„ running back on wrong line ... ... ... 206


Train starting ... ... ... ... ... ... 347
„ starting from Footscray on “up” line ... ... 1261
„ stoppage of ... ... ... ... ... 212
„ stopped between home and distant signals ... 997
„ „ under cover of home and distant signals ... 998
„ to and from Melbourne ... ... ... ... 1255
„ to approach stations cautiously ... ... ... 1213
„ to be despatched to time-table ... ... ... 591
to be stopped on explosion of detonator ... ... 141
„ to run as required to have precedence ... ... 502
Trains, two or more approaching junctions ... ... 188 -4|
„ working over single line, speed of ... ... 24Sp^ r ”
Travelling without pass or ticket ... ... ... 8,61
Trespassers ... ... ... ... ... 1420, 1421, 1443
Trollies being used on lines ... ... ... 1335, 1377-1380
Trucks being attached to passenger trains ... ... 914
„ carriage, place of ... ... ... ... 937
„ cleaning of ... ... ... ... ... 929
„ fastening doors of ... ... ... ... 1107
„ medium not to be loaded with telegraph poles ... 556
„ must be securely fastened ... ... ... 940
„ “ii,” not to be kicked off trains ... ... ... 909
„ with inflammable material, place of on trains ... 936
„ without buffer springs not to be attached to pas-
senger trains ... ... ... ... 446
„ with patent brakes to be shown on rolling stock
return ... ... ... ... ... 558
U.
Under guard to obey head guard... ... ... ... 976
v.
Vacancies, temporary appointment to ... ... ... 390
Vehicles detached ... ... ... ... ... 211,444
„ in sidings, security of ... ... ... ... 471
„ shunted, to be searched, &c. ... ... ... 345
W.
Waggons in sidings, security of ... ... ... 1396
Walking along line ... ... # ... 19
Warning persons on line of approaching train ... ... 1125
Water cranes, care of ... ... ... ... ••• 473, 1194
„ for drinking purposes, to be supplied ... ... 540
Watering goods trains at Williamstown ... ... ... i 258
Water in engine boilers, testing level of ... ... ... 1273
Water supply for gatekeepers ... ... ... ... 1327
Whistle to be sounded ... ... ... ... ... 1168
Windows of carriages to be closed ... ... ... 1020
Workmen of department travelling ... ... ... 1021
Works being carried out near stations ... ... ... 1320
Works, care of lines and... ... ... ... ... 1325
By Authority: John Ferres, Government Printer, Melbourne.




