

[PRIVATE.]
EXTRACTS
FROM
THE FINAL REPORT
OF THE
CHIEF PROTECTOR OF ABORIGINES
IN
NEW ZEALAND.
March 1846.




Auckland, Protector's Office,
March 30th, 1846.
Sir,
I feel constrained by a sense of duty to my Sove-
reign,—to his Excellency the Lieutenant Governor, —to the
natives, —and to the colonists, —to offer, before leaving the
public service, a few remarks, in my official capacity, upon
the present state of the country: and to place upon record
some suggestions which I had the honour of laying before the
late Governor.
The observations I am about to make may be of use to his
Excellency, and, if acted upon, will, I think, materially tend
to the peace and prosperity of this country. I shall confine
myself entirely to matters affecting the interests of the natives,
but in so doing shall necessarily be led to make some obser-
vations upon the policy of the Government.
I trust that my intentions will not be misconstrued by any
one, and that these remarks, which are solely intended to pro-
mote the welfare of the community, will not be considered
personal; or be erroneously imputed to incorrect motives.
I disclaim any intention to offend, and I yield to no one in
earnest desire to further the true interests of the colony.
Where I differ in opinion from my superiors, and where I
deem it necessary to defend or explain the principles I hold,
I shall do so, only with a view to correct past evils, and to
expose the errors which have been committed, so that they
may be as beacons for the future guidance of those who may
hold the helm of affairs.
It was to be expected that in the wholly untried and un-
heard of relationship in which a civilised Power was placed
with a people like the New Zealanders, by the Treaty of
Waitangi, some misunderstanding might grow, either out of
the relationship itself, or out of the mode of carrying into
effect the principles upon which it was founded.
But the fact of such a misunderstanding having arisen can-
not be admitted as a valid reason for considering the obliga-
tions of a treaty less binding; and it would be utterly in-
compatible with the honor and integrity of the British Crown
to allow the Treaty of Waitangi to be evaded, or neutralised
by any subsequent enactment: or even to permit any modifi


cation of its understood and generally received interpretation,
simply because difficulties have arisen which were not foreseen
when it was solemnly ratified.
I assume, as a matter of course, that New Zealand was an
independent country previous to the year 1840, and that our
present relations with the New Zealanders were based upon
the Treaty of Waitangi concluded in the early part of that
year, and which now forms their Magna Charta.
Liberal as the provisions of the Treaty may appear to us
for securing to the natives their territorial rights, and the en-
joyment of their own customs, it never would have been signed
but for the assurances of her Majesty’s Representative, that
the object of the Queen of England in proposing to take the
Sovereignty and Government of this country, was to enable
her Majesty to protect the rights of the natives, and punish
refractory Europeans, of whose conduct they had complained;
and that the tendency of the measure would be to suppress
disorder, to increase commerce, and to promote the prosperity
and happiness of both natives and Europeans.
Upon the faith of these promises the natives signed the
Treaty; and when the British Government fulfils its own
part of the contract, the chiefs who assented to the measure
are equally bound to fulfil theirs, and are to all intents and
purposes British subjects. But when it is remembered that
* * * means have been resorted to, in order to get rid of, or
neutralise the treaty; and when it can be shown that many of
the Acts of the local Government have been directly opposed
to the spirit of that Treaty—l trust that His Excellency will
pause before he sanctions, by his voice, the unqualified con-
demnation so frequently bestowed upon those misguided and
ill-advised natives in the North, who have so recently attempted
to throw off the yoke of British authority.
I do not wish to extenuate the guilt of the leaders of the
late revolt; nor to insinuate that they were actuated by
patriotic motives; but Ido think, and I wish to be distinctly
understood, that we ourselves are morally responsible for much
that has occurred, and that the constituted Authorities have
contributed in no small degree to hasten, if not provoke the
catastrophe, by their neglect; and by the authenticity which
was given to the designing agitation of disaffected persons of
European origin, in consequence of impolitic measures. And
I fear there is still reasonable ground for apprehension, lest
that distrust and alienation of feeling which is now apparent
among the natives, should be perpetuated and increased by
those concessions which, if report speaks true, have been
granted by her Majesty’s Government to * * * *


a Company, whose existence and schemes have been inimical
to the real welfare and interests of the natives; and whose
specious, but deceptive promises of advantage have been the
ruin of many of the highly respectable colonists who relied
upon them.
Almost the first act of the Government, immediately after
the Treaty of Waitangi, tended to throw discredit on all titles
to land derived from the natives while they were an inde-
pendent people: and positively interdicted the future sale of
lands by the native chiefs to any but the Government.
The character and credit of her Majesty’s Government
received a blow in consequence of these proceedings from
which they never recovered: and the publication of these
measures as the principles on which the newly constituted
Government would act, at once identified the authorities, in
the eyes of the natives, with the land-traders of the day, and
placed them in the undignified position of ordinary speculators.
Notwithstanding the unfavourable impression made on the
minds of the natives by the first acts of the local Government,
if provision had been made for buying all the land which was
offered to them by the natives, and which ought to have been
done, in order to preserve the consistency of their own regula-
tions, all might have proceeded quietly; but when the natives
found that the Government would neither buy, nor allow
other persons to do so, they became very indignant, and un-
sparing in their remarks, and evinced at once that disaffection
and restlessness which are the sure precursors of mischief.
I took occasion, at an early period, to direct the attention
of the local authorities to this state of feeling, but no efficient
steps were taken to remedy the evil. The duty of purchasing
such lands as were considered desirable for the Government,
out of those offered by the natives, was imposed upon myself,
and it was not until I had repeatedly appealed to the Governor,
pointing out the incongruity of the duties of an agent for the
purchase of land, with those of Protector of Aborigines, that
his Excellency was pleased to relieve me from this anomalous
task.
But this act of justice came too late to prevent the evils
which resulted from the false position in which, as land-agent
for the Government, I had been placed. The adoption of
the principle of Sir George Gipps’s Land Claims Ordinance,
which restricted each claimant to a small portion of the lands
he purchased from the natives, previous to the formation of
the colony, was a measure which also had excited their
suspicion; and when explained fully to them by interested
Europeans, who took care to colour their representations ac


cording to their own feelings on the subject, the chiefs were
heard to reply —“ If your Government treat their own people
in this manner, what may we expect?”
It was only the respect which they entertained for their old
friends, the missionaries, and other respectable settlers, who
rather encouraged than controverted an opinion which was
current among the natives, that these proceedings of Govern-
ment were merely matters of form and theory, and that the
principles of spoliation which had been promulgated would
never be put into practice, that prevented the northern chiefs
from rising at this period to vindicate their independence.
The smothered feelings of disaffection were in consequence
manifested only in threats to oppose, even to death, every
attempt of the Government to interfere with their lands.
These threats were undoubtedly accompanied with much
harmless bombast, and as they were not followed by deeds of
violence, very little attention was paid to them; yet the
feelings that gave them birth were of a nature opposed to
permanent peace, and the mere expression of them augured
the existence of those embers of distrust and alienation which
might kindle into sedition and revolt, and clearly indicated
the necessity of promptly introducing some remedial measures
calculated to restore confidence, and avert the evils of rebel-
lion. Had measures of a liberal and conciliating character
been adopted at this juncture, the feelings of disaffection
might have been eradicated or confined to a few; but the evil
was allowed to grow and increase, until the certainty of those
consequences, hitherto only predicted by persons whose know-
ledge of the native character enabled them to foresee the
result, became apparent to every observer. The late Governor
no sooner became acquainted with the state and condition of
the country, than he took immediate measures to arrest the
evil, and restore the respect and good feeling of the chiefs
towards H.M. Government, and succeeded, by one act of
justice, in silencing in some measure the clamours of the dis-
affected, and thereby prevented that feeling which had already
become too general from gaining universal ascendency. By
restoring to the chiefs the unfettered right of disposing of
their own lands as they pleased, the late Governor rendered
nugatory many of the attempts which were made to augment
the number and strengthen the hands of those who were too
deeply imbued with the feelings of revolt, to be reassured by
any concessions, and who were determined to rebel; and by
thus demonstrating to the wavering chiefs the disinterested
intentions of H.M. Government, he secured not only the
allegiance, but the assistance of those, who if they had taken


part with the malcontents, would have rendered the insurrec-
tion still more formidable, but whose* aid has saved the
colony.
The Hokianga natives, owing to the failure of the timber
trade, were deeply involved in debt, and had no means of
extricating themselves but by selling some of their lands.
They stated their case to Governor Hobson, and to Acting-
Governor Shortland, but though these officers acknowledged
the justice of their demands, they did not venture to act upon,
the conviction. Mr. Shortland did, I believe, recommend to
Lord Stanley the allowing of purchases of land by private
individuals direct from the natives in certain cases, but he did
not feel at liberty to adopt practically the principles he recom-
mended, consequently the difficulties of the chiefs were not
removed. On the arrival of Captain Fitz-Roy they again
applied for relief: the loyal Thomas Walker Nene was among
the first who represented to his Excellency the hardship of
their condition. The Governor saw and felt the equity of
their arguments, and the justice of their claims, and took
immediate steps to remove their disabilities. The impression
made upon Walker Nene, and the other Hokianga chiefs, by
this act of prompt justice, has never been effaced, and their
conduct during the late troubles shows how they can appre-
ciate concessions like these, and how important it is to secure
by similar means the attachment and fidelity of such men.
The chief Parore of Kaipara had somewhat more than
eleven hundred pounds (£ 1100.) worth of property due to him
for land, which he had sold previous to the Treaty of Wai-
tangi; but in consequence of Sir George Gipps’s Act, the
parties were naturally disinclined to fulfil their agreements
with this chief, as that ordinance did not sanction their holding
sufficient land to warrant the outlay. There were many such
cases in the Thames, some of which I believe are not yet
settled; and the Europeans have told the natives, that the
reason why they do not complete their engagements is, because
the Government regulations deprive them of the benefit of
these purchases, by not allowing them to retain the land.
Under influences like these, and with such corroborating
circumstances continually before ,them, the natives could
hardly avoid the conclusion that they had been misled: that
in assenting to the establishment of British authority they
had made a false step, and that instead of their protection
and advancement being matters of solicitude, the object of
* Walker Nene, and others.


the Government was to obtain their lands, and to promote
objects foreign to their interests and welfare. This opinion
was still further strengthened, when it became known that
the surplus lands, withheld under the authority of the Land
Claims Ordinance, were to be appropriated and resold for the
benefit of the Government, and not restored to the natives,
the original proprietors, (as in the case of Mr. Fairburn).
Whether the spirit and meaning of the Treaty of Waitangi
was adhered to, or whether the natives in these cases have
been treated like British subjects, I leave for his Excellency’s
consideration. I am led to believe, and I submitted the
opinion to the late Governor, that not only the natives but
their advisers also very much misunderstood the Treaty of
Waitangi, if it gave power to the local Government to become
as it were confiscators, or to enact measures having a tendency
to weaken the natural sense of justice, which always inclined
the natives to maintain inviolate their engagements with Euro-
peans for the sale of land, when fairly and equitably made.
It is an undoubted fact, that the proceedings of Government
towards the land claimants tended to lower the tone of morals
among the natives, by giving (to say the least) to certain
objectionable principles of action the countenance and sanc-
tion of official authority.
The British Government unfortunately have imperfectly
discharged their obligations to the natives in other particulars
besides those I have named. The natives, as if to try what
the Goverment would do for them, in their new relationship
as British subjects, speedily brought forward their quarrels
and disputes with each other, respecting their landed posses-
sions, expecting assistance and protection; but they soon
found that these were questions about which the Government
took little or no interest; and that so long as their intestine
broils were confined to themselves, and were unattended by
injurious consequences to the persons and property of Euro-
peans, they were deemed too unimportant for interference,
although known to be the fruitful sources of strife and blood-
shed. To the present day there is neither a court to take
cognizance of disputes of mis nature between different tribes,
nor even the probability of the organisation and establishment
of tribunals, which could efficiently try and adjust such cases.
As so little interest was manifested by the Government con-
cerning these affairs, although considered by the natives to be
of the utmost importance, they naturally abandoned the idea
of appealing in any way to the authorities, and gradually
imbibed the notion that the jurisdiction of the Governor did
not extend to such cases, and as a matter of course fell back


upon their own resources; they had recourse to all their old
customs, and waged war against each other, with all the bit-
terness of former days, to the serious injury of themselves, to
the peril and annoyance of the settlers, and to the obstruction
of the progress of the colony.
For the reasons pointed out in my letter to the officer ad-
ministering the Government, dated 30th of July, 1843, and
on many other accounts, it appears to me that neither our
laws, nor the forms of our courts of justice, are at all adapted
to the necessities of the cases in which natives are concerned.
Even when the magistrate or presiding officer is willing to
give all the time and patience, so indispensably necessary to
the satisfactory investigation of native grievances, he is not
in a position to decide impartially. His ignorance of native
customs, and native mode of thought and action, and his de-
pendence upon the skill of a third person for a knowledge of
what is passing in his presence, are disadvantages under which,
in the existing state of things, a magistrate labors, rendering
it morally impossible for him to do the natives justice; and
until the laws are modified, and the forms of our courts made
more simple, in order to suit native cases, it cannot be other-
wise. Knowing well the wearisome nature of the task of
investigating native grievances, and the extraordinary patience
which this duty requires, I cannot wonder if the magistrate
sometimes feels such examinations to be extremely irksome
and unpleasant, and endeavours to get rid of them as speedily
as possible. The natives themselves are aware of the un-
suitableness of our courts to their cases, and they consequently
never think of bringing their quarrels between themselves to
our tribunals. How then can we expect them to relinquish
their ancient and accustomed mode of settling all disputes by
an appeal to arms, unless we provide a suitable alternative ?
The civil power, as at present constituted, is utterly inefficient
as far as the natives are concerned. A subpoena if served
upon a native is wholly unintelligible, and is of course dis-
regarded ; and a constable, except within the precincts of the
town, is incapable of doing his duty, lam persuaded that
such modification of the law, and of the forms of our courts,
might be introduced, as would remove many of the existing
difficulties; but it seems to me as if the prejudices of the
law authorities against all innovation on established forms and
technicalities, would present an almost insuperable barrier to
such alterations.
At the formation of the colony difficulties in the application
of the English law to the natives were evidently anticipated
by Lord John Russell, who urged this subject upon the con


sideration of the legislature. (See Parliamentary Papers for
1841, despatch, and instructions to Governor Hobson). It
was not until after the arrival of Governor Fitz-Roy that any
attempt was made to meet the difficulties of the case. The
enactment of the Native Exemption Ordinance may be fairly
considered as the first step towards remedying the evil of the
present system; but when that measure became law, it was so
ill-received by the settlers, and so opposed to the prejudices
of the unthinking European community, that even the ma-
gistrates in some instances wanted the moral courage to carry
it into effect. As I have before observed, the authoritative
interdiction by the Government of native customs, before a
suitable substitute in the shape of bye-laws, was supplied,
only tended to confirm the natives in their adherence to
ancient usages. The assumption of a power to govern, with-
out the necessary means, exposed the weakness of our position,
and when contrasted with the pretensions put forth, tended to
lessen the dignity and influence of the Government, in the
eyes of the natives, rather than to induce their assent and
obedience to its requirements.
The numerous fruitless applications for redress or assistance
made by the natives, forced them to the conclusion that the
Government was powerless, and although this opinion was
founded in ignorance, it is nevertheless a fact that the execu-
tive power was very inefficient, in consequence of the non-em-
ployment of suitable means, and this inefficiency has proved a
source of much inconvenience to the Europeans as well as to
the natives. There being no law to regulate the conduct of
the natives of the interior, or, to speak more properly, the
existing laws of the Government, extending nominally over
the whole island, being totally inefficient in distant districts,
the settlers are necessarily living in subjection to native cus-
tom, and are compelled to conform all their dealings with the
natives to that rule. Excepting those who reside in the im-
mediate vicinity of the towns, or rather within reach of our
guns, the settlers are at all times liable to the penalties at-
tached to a breach of native customs. In fact, the safety of
the out-settlers depends more upon personal influence, and the
degree of respect entertained for them by the chiefs, than
upon the protection they derive from the Government. And
with respect to the natives, those who are sufficiently ad-
vanced in knowledge and civilization, to appreciate the ad-
vantages to be derived from submitting to the requirements
of British law, are withheld from doing so, because they are
aware that this law, in its present state, cannot efficiently pro-
tect them, and that they would still be amenable to the ancient


customs of their tribes, which are neither defined, restrained,
nor modified by suitable enactments.
This anomalous state of things, renders the present position
of the settlers and natives much worse than it was before the
regular colonization of the country. Before the Government
established itself in this country, the settlers were in no danger
of being considered enemies to the public peace, by inculcating
in the minds of the natives any feelings of disaffection, nor the
natives of being considered and treated as rebels, for not placing
confidence in the assumption of an ineffective Government.
The settlers did not incur the risk of being injured from the
violence of the natives, while they continued to maintain the
respect and friendship of the chiefs of the district in which
they resided; for even in times of war, there existed a sort of
general compact, that whatever quarrels might arise among
themselves, the Europeans should be exposed to as little injury
as possible. In those days the British name was such as en-
sured the respect of the natives, and they held the power and
influence of the British nation in great veneration. But now,
lam sorry to say, the state of things is greatly altered. Con-
fidence has given place to distrust and disaffection, and respect
to undisguised contempt. In the present aspect of affairs, the
apparent prosperity of the colony must be considered as de-
pending upon the presence of a large military and naval force,
and the increased expenditure which their presence occasions,
rather than upon the real advancement of the country in the
healthy and legitimate enterprizes of agriculture and commerce.
The existing evils in the colony being so numerous, and
their origin being traceable in a great measure to an injudicious
policy, it may be asked what particular features of that policy
have occasioned the great difference between the present and
former feeling and conduct of the natives of this country to-
wards the Government; and what are the most likely means
of removing the evils deplored ?
The importance of the enquiry demands the most careful
consideration, and I must declare it to be my settled convic-
tion, that so far as the Government is concerned, the cause of
these evils is to be found in the impression made upon the
minds of the natives, by the acts of the Government, that
European interests were the sole objects of solicitude; and
that the rights and interests of the natives were matters of
nominal consideration. If the remedy for existing evils be
sought, I submit that the most obvious means of removing
them, would be by rescinding every restriction which imposes
retraint upon the chiefs, in the disposal and appropriation of
such lands as they can dispose of, without injury to themselves,


and by enacting bye-laws so framed, that the chiefs should
have the power of administering their own affairs, and by
carrying out a policy which should have for its object the
restoration of entire confidence in the intentions of the Govern-
ment, the augmentation of the power and influence of the
chiefs over their own people, and their gradual initiation into
the restraints and principles of British law. It is quite need-
less for me to enumerate the various ways in which the nature
of the policy hitherto pursued has been manifested to the
natives. I have on different occasions urged these matters
upon the attention of the authorities; but I am not aware
that any notice was taken of the growing discontent of the
natives, or any belief entertained of the consequences which
might be anticipated, and which those who knew the natives
had foretold, until after the arrival of Governor Fitz-Roy, who
addressed himself earnestly to the task of counteracting the
mischievous effects of former mistakes: —but his disinter-
ested and zealous efforts came too late to prevent the explosion
which every sensible person had long considered inevitable;
and it was his misfortune to be considered the author of
many evils which he was endeavouring to remedy, and which
I doubt not he would have eventually removed, but for his
untimely recall—just at the juncture (as may be seen from the
volume of native letters in my office) when every Chief in the
island was beginning to acknowledge that the Governor was
worthy of their entire confidence.
My sentiments respecting the best mode of governing a,
brave and independent spirited race of people, who are now
considered British subjects, have been so often made known
in the course of my official duties, that it is unnecessary to
repeat them. The principles of the system I would recom-
mend, however, may be briefly summed up and expressed in
one general maxim; and that is, that the natives should be
instituted as speedily as possible into the common rights and
privileges of British subjects, in all matters appertaining to
their own possessions, and that they should be led, not forced,
into the observance of British law. To effect this it is indis-
pensable that the Governor should possess their confidence,
in order that he may be enabled to exert a corresponding
influence. The influence maintained by the agents of the two
Missionary Societies over the minds of the natives, notwith-
standing the calumny and misrepresentation which has been
heaped upon them, is an indisputable proof of how much can
be done with the natives, if they are convinced of the disinter-
ested motives of those who wish to direct them. What occa-
sioned the marked respect which was paid to the persons and


property of the missionaries by the turbulent insurgents during
the whole course of the war, but the superior influence which
the missionaries possessed? This influence was partly ob-
tained by the practice of duties which unhappily the Govern-
ment neglected: by instructing and educating their children,
by attending and administering to the wants of their sick, by
supplying the destitute with food and clothes, and by endea-
vouring at all times to mediate between contending tribes,
thereby proving themselves the friends of peace, and of all
parties. In this way the missionaries increased an ascendancy
over the natives, which the thoughtless and profligate portion
of the community have in vain attempted to destroy. This
influence was employed on behalf of H. M. Government to
induce the natives to accede to the treaty of Waitangi, and
was not employed in vain; and although both the natives and
their advisers may have been disappointed in their expecta-
tions of what the Government would do for the former; and
though by exerting that influence it has given occasion to
those who are hostile to missions, and to agitators, to endea-
vour to poison their minds, by representing to them that the
missionaries cajoled them into an acquiescence in that mea-
sure—yet the natives generally retain confidence in their
pastors and teachers, as may be seen in the facts that every
missionary, and every mission station, has been considered
sacred, and remains now uninjured.
If the British Government had not only given missionary
labours the sanction of general approbation, but had based the
spirit and principles of the policy to be observed towards the
natives on similar foundations, the influence of the Governor
would have been far superior to that of the Missions. But as
this has not been the case, the natives regard the Government
with very distrustful feelings.
I should but imperfectly discharge the duty, which a con-
scientious desire to promote the prosperity of the colony in
sill its interests imposes upon me, if I were to conclude this
paper without referring in a more pointed way, and particular
manner, to the peculiar features of his Excellency’s present
position, and warning him of the possible consequences of the
continuation of such a policy N as that I have named in the
former part of this paper. For some months previous to the
recall of Governor Fitz-Roy being positively known, it was
circulated amongst the natives that his dismissal from office
was inevitable, and that Her Majesty would send a very
different kind of man to govern New Zealand—one who
would soon teach the natives to know their proper place. The
evidences of this unfavorable impression having taken root in


the minds of the natives became so strong, that I suggested to
Captain Fitz-Roy the propriety of sending an officer through
the adjacent districts, to contradict the rumours that were in
circulation (a practice I had always resorted to with success
to counteract false reports), to which he assented. Every
opportunity also was embraced by Captain Fitz-Roy, when the
chiefs visited him at Government House, to remove by his own
assurances those apprehensions which seemed to threaten an
unfavorable reception for his successor: and when it became
known that his Excellency Captain Grey was the officer selected
by Her Majesty, which happened at a time when a considerable
number of influential chiefs were in Auckland, (who came to
enquire from the Governor himself the truth of his reported
recall), Captain Fitz-Roy, when I was present, announced the
intelligence he had received, and, in order to revive the ex-
piring confidence of the chiefs, declared—that if he had been
permitted by Her Majesty to select a successor, whose adminis-
tration he thought would be just and equitable towards the
natives, and studiously attentive to their interests, his choice
would have fallen upon Captain Grey; than whom, judging
from what was publicly known of him, no one could be better
qualified for the government of New Zealand,
These endeavours to remove ill-impressions, and smooth
the way for the cordial reception of the new Governor, were
not altogether fruitless. Yet, notwithstanding all that was
said, it is an undoubted fact, that the natives were generally
inclined to receive his Excellency with distrust and suspicion.
I took the earliest opportunity of acquainting the Governor
with this fact, and my object in so doing was to put him in
Eossession of that which I considered it essential for him to
now, in order that his Excellency might not only refrain
from taking any steps calculated to confirm these impressions,
but that he might also by a positive intimation of his views
and intentions, cancel and remove them.
With this information and these facts before me, I should
have refrained from advising the speedy adoption of some of
his Excellency’s measures. The Arms and Ammunition Or-
dinance, for instance, I think might have been deferred for a
limited period without incurring any risk or danger. I fear
it has made an unfavourable impression upon the minds of
some of the loyal chiefs, and will have a tendency to confirm
their suspicions as to the policy to be adopted towards them.
For the same reasons I would have suggested to his Excel-
lency the organization of a department to represent the na-
tives, of a character more in accordance with the Governor’s
views than the Protectorate, before the dismissal from the


public service of those gentlemen whose moral influence had
been, and still might be of great service to the Government.
I regret also the necessity for his Excellency’s constant pre-
sence with the troops to superintend the military operations,
as tending to strengthen in the native mind their too prevalent
suspicions:—and I could have wished that his Excellency had
deputed some officer, in whom he could confide, to have gone
over to Waikato to have assisted the chiefs of that district in
settling their disputes, now become so serious. The attempt
itself, even had it proved a failure, would have been duly ap-
preciated by the native chiefs.
Having now, as I conceive, faithfully discharged my duty as
a public servant, and having the approbation of a good con-
science that in every public act I have performed, and in every
principle I have advocated, I have constantly aimed at pro-
moting the peace and prosperity of the colony, and the welfare
of both Europeans and natives, and that in my solicitude to
effect these objects I have never given way to considerations
of a private nature, nor to feelings of personal ease or advan-
tage —I will now take leave of his Excellency, and divest myself
with pleasure of the cares and responsibilities of a public station.
I must confess I am not without many forebodings respecting
the future, because I see that a spirit of disaffection and
distrust is spreading among the natives on every hand, indi-
cating a ripeness for more general revolt; and because I can,
at present, discover no signs of the employment of suitable
means to restore confidence and tranquillity to the country: —
but I earnestly hope that Divine Providence will so direct and
govern the counsels of his Excellency, that the evils I fear
may be averted, and that his administration may be eminently
successful.
In a private station I shall still be able, I trust, to render
some service to his Excellency, to my fellow countrymen, to
the natives, and to the colony at large.
I have the honor to be,
Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
(Signed) GEORGE CLARKE,
Chief Protector of Aborigines.
