

? I b> OC'C J S
EXTRA
Sl* siama
ATTEMPTED
ASSASSINATION
OF H. R. H. THE
DUKE OF EDINBURGH.
LATEST PARTICULARS.
{Abridged from Saturday’s Herald.)
An examination into' the charge against
O’Farrell was instituted' yesterday in the
large room of the Debtors’ Prison, at Dar-
linghurst gaol. Mr. “Voss, the Water Po-
lice Magistrate, Mr. J. Williams, Crown
Solicitor, conducted the examination on be-
half of the Crown. In the course of the
proceedings there were present his Excel-
lency the Eight Hon. the Earl of Belmore,
and Captain Beresford, Viscount Newry,
the Hon. the Atorney-General, the Hon.
the Colonial Treasurer, the Hon. Elliott
York, Mr. George, Mr. Wisdom, Mr.
Montgomery, and several other gentlemen.
The witnesses examined were Superin-
tendent Orridge, Air. Henry Clarke, Mr.
Simeon H. Pearce, Mr. John Harding,
(a bandsman of the Galatea), Mr.
Charles Pritchard (bandmaster of the
Galatea), Lieutenant Bradely (Galatea),
Mr. William Vial, Mr. Watson
(surgeon of H.M.B. Challenger), senior-
gtrgeaat Eawlinson, police-sergeant Mu*
grove, and constable Eobinson. At the
request of the authorities under whom the
examination is" conducted, the details'of the
examination will not be published until the
inquiry ia concluded. It was* adjourned
till Monday next 4 .
An examination of the pistols has set at
rest all doubt as to the number of shots
fired. After the first discharge, which in-
flicted the injury on his Eoyal Highness,
there was a second attempt, but the pistol’
missed fire, the bullet remaining iff the
chamber. At the third attempt the cart-
ridge exploded, and the bullet entered the
foot of Mr. Thorite. The pistol used was
not a Colt, but is supposed to be of French
manufacture. The barrel works on a hinge.
The following reward has been offered -
by the Government: —
“Notice is hereby given, that a reward
of £lOOO will be paid by the Government
for any information leading to the appre-
hension and conviction of each and every
accomplice of the abovenamed offender,
whether residing in this or any of the ad-
jacent colonies - ; and further, that, in addi-
tion to sUCh reward, his Excellency will be 4
advised to extend her Majesty’s frCe par-
don to any accomplice who shall first give
the required information.
“Henet Paekes.”
Indignation meetings have been and are
being held at Bathurst, Braidwood, Ber-
nina, Brisbane, Dubbo, Singleton, Tam
worth. Yass; Melbourne, and Adelaide. An*
address of sympathy, with four hundred
and two signatures, was forwarded from
Goulburn to Sydney on Friday night.
The following Parlimentary address was
adopted, and presented by the whole body
of the House ;
11 To his Eoyal Highness"Prince'Alfred
Ernest Albert, Duke of Edinburgh,
Earl of Ulster, Duke of Saxony,
Prince of Saxe Coburgh and Gotha.
“ May if please your Eoyal Highness,—
“ We, the. members of the Legislative
Assembly, take tile earliest opportunity to
express our horror and indignation at the
attempt which has been made on the life
of your Eoyal Highness during your visit
to this colony, and to assure you of the
feelings of profound grief and sympathy
which pervade the minds of all classes of
the community.-
“ renew the expression of oUr de-
voted attkohement toy our Gracious Queen
and the Eoyal Family, and we humbly
supplicate Almighty God, to Watch over
the life of your Eoyal Highness; and to
grant' that ‘ you may be speedily restored
tb perfect health."
Daring the meeting in the Pavilion yea-'
tCrday, between the moving and seconding
of ofte of the resolutions, that 'part of the
mighty crowd which stood in ti ‘compact
mas® between the platform attd the' great ■
northern entrance began, at' about fifteen
or twenty yards'from the reporters, to sway
to and fro with that hoarse angry murmur
Which is never heard except in a vkst crowd
of persons. Suddenly the pressure against
the side’s of the lower platform'relaxed,
and in the distance a forest Of heads swept
away towards-the entrance through the
densely packed multitude. Somebody said
the-plaCe-was - about to be' set fire to;-
but the more rational supposed it
to be’ only that which it proved to
be —a Fenian sympathiser being handed
out by the scruff of the neck, attended es-
ultingly by a numerous retinue. A mac '
named Alfred Shipton,-moved, it is believed,
more by drink than disloyalty, thought
proper to avow himself in favour of'Fenian
ism by sating that he “ did not believe in
the British throne.” Mr. Hixon, a young
gentleman belonging to the Volunteer Ar -
tillery, laid hold of him, and walked
him away out of the pavilion, nor did he
quit him until he had him consigned to
durance vile. Whilst the captured Fenian
was thus ingloriously hurried off to the
watchhouse, a man named Morgan came
behind Hixson (as he accompanied the
police in charge of Shipton) and made a
mow at him with his stick. This sympa-
thiser was also immediately laid hold of
and incarcerated according to his deserts.
[Per Electric Telegraph.]
Monday, 3 a.m.
The Duka experienced some return of
pain in the right leg, hut' Was -relieved by-
remedies adopted'.
Ho has since enjoyed refreshing sleep,
and is progressing most favourably.
Monday, % p.cs
The Prince is going on favourably. He
still suffers sympathetic pain in back and
leg. Nothing serious is anticipated,
Monday, 4.15 p.m.
The Government intends instituting a
criminal prosecution against the Freeman’s
Journal for publishing seditious matter.
Much excitement still prevails.
The Prince is going on well.
It is reported that the Government is in
possession of abundant evidence that the
act was the result of deliberate organisation
originating in Ireland.
Boat Accident on the Clarence River.
DROWNING OF THE BISHOP OF
GRAFTON AND AEMIDALE.
Bishop of Grafton and Armidale, his second
sbn, and servant drowned last night by the
upsetting of a boat on the Clarence Rjver.
Bishop conducted evening service at Graf-
ton, and was returning at .10 p clock, ac-
companied by his son, Mr. BroWn, ames
Creighton, two female servants. Aftergomg
a mile, wind fresh, sail set near upper end
of Elizabeth Island, a gust ofwmd . upe
the boat. Creighton, while attempting to
rescue the Bishop, was seized by the ser-
vant. when, to save himself, he had to
let go his hold of the Bishop, who
was never seen again. The survivor ,
pioW „p.
bodies are not yet reeovere fi
ber of boats are dragging. All business u
suspended. The sad occurrence has cast
gloom over the city and distnc .
