





F. W. NIVEN & CO.’S
GUIDE TO BALLARAT
THE “ GARDEN CITY OF VICTORIA.”
“A Garden City,” bright and fair to view,
From out primeval forests quickly grew ;
Founded on gold, her portals surely stand,
While troth and honor guide our favored land,;
Set like a gem, midst fields of waving grain,
In richest pastures, flocks of purest strain ;
With crystal lakes, and mines of sterling worth,
“The Golden Centre of the Sunny South.”
ALSO,
jPI jubilee skhitoh
(issued under the auspices op the city council).
WRITTEN BY
WILLIAM LITTLE, ESQ, J.P,
PRESENT MAYOR OF THE CITY,
ffiJHitlj numerous Illustrations bg tfje mb) “drtsp spijoto” process
(Messrs. F. W. Niven a. n Henry Crisp Photographic Artists).
BALLARAT:
F. W. Niven & Co., General Printers, 56 & 58 Lydiard Street.
MDCCCXC.


CITIZENS’
ITife |lssimmtc Compimir, Ximitci)
Registered under the Life Assurance Companies Act, 1873, as a Company
having Secured Assets in Victoria.
Empowered by the Victorian and New South Wales Railway Com
missioners to assure the lives of Railway Employees.
VICTORIAN OFFICE :
430 BODRKE ST. WEST, MELBOURNE.
THE Directors of the Citizens’ Life Assurance Company, Limited,
having recognised the fact that there are hundreds of wage
earners throughout the Colonies who cannot pay a yearly
premium, have had tables of rates oalculated for weekly, quarterly,
and half-yearly premiums, thus affording the opportunity to the
public of paying their saved pence direct to the Insurance Office
weekly. They believe that the objection “I can’t afford it,” will
very generally be proved to be baseless, when a man sits down to
consider what he can spare without discomfort, if he really is earnest
in his desire to assure. Their position is that a man may generally
assure for what he spends unnecessarily ; and it must always be a
source of reasonable satisfaction to anyone to know that he is
building up a useful sum of money, either for himself or those who
follow him, of the odds and ends, “ the unconsidered trifles,” of his
expenditure ; and much more is it so when the Assurance is paid for
by sums of money which would have otherwise been practically
wasted.
Daring 1889 the Citizens’ Life Assurance Company issued
57,322 Policies, assuring sums exceeding £1,300,000.
For fall information apply to the Local Office of the Company ,
<1156 STURT ST., BALLARAT. 0-






to Ballarat-f-
MpALLARAT, as it is now generally spelled, or
|lijl “ Ballaarat,” according to the quidnunc, a native
W name, originally pronounced Bal-la-a-rat—one of the
musical native words it will one day be the pride of
the Australian literati to dwell upon—means “ a resting-
place,” and those who saw this wonderfully-metamorphosed
valley as it was when it received its title, agree that the
name was singularly well chosen. A pleasant glade, split
by the silvery strand of the river Yarrowee, gemmed with
copses of gum and lightwood and honeysuckle, and car-
peted with springing sward—a picture of rustic sweetness,
a vision of nature in reposeful mood—Ballarat must have
been indeed a resting-place for the nomadic aborigine ; and,
in turn, for the gentle native animals now only seen in
parks and gardens, or found in forest fastnesses or in the
“ back blocks.”
In 1837, in the year in which Queen Victoria ascended
the throne, Ballarat was first seen by white men, and from
that time until early in the fifties was only viewed, occa-
sionally, by enterprising colonists and lonely shepherds. In
July, 1851, gold was found at Hiscocks, near Buninyong,
and a month later at Ballarat; and, as if by enchantment,
the place changed from a drowsy pastoral scene into one of
feverish activity, nervous energy, desperate toil. Stalwart
men from every clime came thronging in ; the Fellow of
Oxford and the navvy, the scion of nobility and the ex-
convict, notes from the whole gamut of the social scale
jostling each other in their haste to reach the new Ophir.
Mother earth’s green carpeting was turned wrong side out,
the copses vanished before the woodman’s axe, and dlte.


silvery Yarrowee became a muddy, ill-favored stream, and, as
if in high dudgeon at the treatment it received, has remained
an unwholesome-looking rivulet ever since. Tents suc-
ceeded bivouacs, huts replaced the tents, and they in turn
gave way to the edifices which now make up this city and
town, and illustrate nearly every phase of nineteenth-
century architecture. Although Ballarat was first reached
by the squatter-explorer in 1837, it was practically un-
altered until 1851, and all the marvellous changes that have
taken place in it date no farther back than ’sl. It is
difficult to realise that in so short a time primeval forest
has been replaced by a beautiful, populous, thriving city, in
which are practised nearly all the businesses of this active,
inventive age, and in which the arts and sciences have their
shrines and votaries. Indeed, it would be impossible to
realise the contrast were it not for the reflection that all
this marvellous transformation was wrought by the witchery
of that universal, unfaltering, undeniable talisman—gold.
Gold, not told in hundreds or in thousands of pounds, but
by millions—gold, not collected, rudely shaped and moulded,
from sanctuaries or palaces of a native race, but gold
measurable by the ton, and won by honest toil from the in-
exhaustible resources of Nature-—gold in dust, gold in
grains, gold in lumps, gold in ponderous masses, and not
stolen from the savage, but picked up from the ground,
garnered from the depths, drawn from mother earth, rent
from the flinty stone ; gold for the veteran, gold for the
novice at mining, gold for the illwninati, gold for the
ignorant, gold to be had for the taking, gold of the purest
quality known, wanting only to be taken up from the dross
surrounding it, and sent on its mission of gladdening the
world. The “ Golden Fleece ” was found by the first
argonauts to these shores when the produce from their
flocks placed them on the high road>to wealth, but the gold
itself was at the command of all who came and who had
any of that mystic, magic birthright called luck. Perhaps
there never came to the goldfields in the early days any one
individual, no matter how crass-hard his luck, but he had
his chance some time or other at the flood of gold which
poured forth from the mines.






The first auriferous indications were found by Hiscocks
in a gully near Buninyong ; this did not pay, but it led to
the real discovery at Golden Point on the 25th August,
1851, by two parties, “Connor’s” and “Merrick’s,” who
came up from Geelong; they found gold in profusion in the
surface soil, obtaining ounces in two hours, 30 ounces
being the result of their first day’s work. ' Merrick’s party
were not quite so successful, but before many days there
were hundreds of men on the ground, who estimated their
returns not by ounces, but by pounds weight of the precious
metal. A monolith has been erected to mark the locality of
the Golden Point discovery, at the intersection of Barkly
and Young Streets.
What are the objects of interest here 1 Everything !
But as one has not time to see everything, the principal
features of the place may be enumerated. To all and
sundry the traits of Ballarat’s infancy must be interesting.
The place is divided into a city and town by the river
Yarrowee, the town lying to the east, and the city to the
west. The town may be described as older, and the city as
younger Ballarat. In the town may be seen surface holes,
and the large areas pitted and mound-covered, illustrating
the shallow workings, while the very manner in which the
streets of Ballarat East run, indicates the main routes for
bullock-drays through that part, and the alignments of the
tents of the diggers when it was Canvastown. Then there
are the Eureka Stockade, of mournful memory; the sites of
the mines wherein were found the biggest nuggets gathered
here; the sites of the Montezuma and Charlie Napier theatres,
the scene of the fires which so nearly obliterated the town;
the site of the old woolshed on Messrs, Learmonth Bros.’
run. The more modern items of attraction in the town are
the Town Hall and its well-kept gardens, the Public
Library, Fire Brigade Station, Orphan Asylum, and the
Females’ Home. The city has a larger area and more
varied show-places. There are the Lake and Gardens, first
in attractiveness; the City Hall, Post Office Tower, City Fire
Brigade Station, the Phoenix and Union Foundries, the
principal quartz mines in the place (the Band and Albion
Consols and the Star of the East), the Hospital, the Bene-


volent Asylum, the Mechanics’ Institute (library), the Fine
Arts Gallery, the School of Mines, the Masonic Hall, the
Trades’ Hall, the Public Library, the Mining Exchange,
and the Miners’ Racecourse. Outlying are the famous
Kingston mines, Lake Learmonth, Lake Burrumbeet,
Dowling Forest, the Midas mine, Mount Cavern, the Lai
Lai Falls, Moorabool Falls, Buninyong, Mount Buninyong,
Mount Warrenheip, and the water-reserves.
Ballarat, from its well-planted streets, has been aptly
termed “ The City of Trees ” and “ The Garden City of
Victoria. ” It is the largest inland city in Australasia, and
has three main divisions, known as city, town, and borough,
which are called respectively the City of Ballarat, the Town
of Ballarat East, and the Borough of Sebastopol, Up to the
time of its being constituted a city—in 1870—the city was
known as the Borough, and then the Town, of Ballarat West
The city has an area of 4J square miles, a population
numbering 20,900 persons, and the assessed ratable value
of the property within its boundaries, in 1887, the year of
its Jubilee, was £146,105.
The Town of Ballarat East has an area of 6 square miles
480 acres, population numbering about 15,000, and pro-
perty ratably assessed at £62,900.
The Borough of Sebastopol has an area of 2 square miles
520 acres, population numbering 2,300, and property
ratably assessed at £5,095. It was named in 1855, when
the British army was engaged in its heroic fight on the
bleak Chersonese Heights, and was called after the goal of the
Anglo-French Army. It has also received the title of the
“ Model Borough, ” from an expression made by its mayor in
1868, Mr. John Whittaker. At that time the municipality
was flourishing, owning over 1,700 ratable properties, and
a loan of £6,000 had been raised to beautify the reserves
and provide for more footpaths. The annual death-rate was
only between five and six per thousand inhabitants. Since
then the properties have reduced to under 500—the others
being removed or burned—but the old title clings to the
borough. It is in part deserved, for the death-rate is still


MOOFABOOL FALLS




low, the borough has no debt, and its expenses do not ex-
ceed £7OO per annum.
Together, these three municipalities embrace an area of
14 square miles 40 acres, with a population numbering
38,200, and having properties with a ratable valuation of
£214,100.
Ballarat is about 70 miles W.N.W. of Melbourne and 55
miles from Geelong. The railway line from Melbourne via
Geelong to Ballarat (which was opened to Ballarat on 11th
April, 1862) is just 100| miles long, while that via Gordon
and Bacchus Marsh is about 75 miles. The city lies at an
altitude of 1437 feet above sea-level. Besides being the
main goldfield of the colony, it is the centre of a rich agri-
cultural district, and on every hand the miner and farmer
may be seen working side by side. In the Kingston dis-
trict, many a farmer who was jogging comfortably along has
been suddenly enriched by the miner following auriferous
deposits into his holding, and having to pay handsome
“ royalty ” for the right to work them.
MINING.
To the visitor, undoubtedly, the most interesting industry
is the one which has carried the name of this wonderful
place all over the world—mining.
The predominant geological formation of this district—
the bed rock—consists of clay, slates, and sandstone of the
lower Silurian age. In some places it is visible on the
surface, and in others it is buried under tertiary drifts or
overlaid with immense beds of lava. Associated with the
palseozoic rocks are veins and dykes of quartz and diorite,
and this quartz is more or less auriferous. The explorations
of the miner and super-ficial evidence show that the face of
the country underwent very considerable changes in the
later tertiary times, and it is confidently believed by miners
that most, if not all, of the gold in the alluvial deposits was
originally held by the quartz dykes and veins which have
been called its matrices. To put it briefly, the miners’
theory (which has been corroborated, in some degree, by
discoveries made in operative mining) is, that the gold was


originally held in the dykes and veins of quartz, and this
quartz, subjected to the action of running water —deluges,
perhaps—gradually fretted away, and, with the gold it had
held, was washed into the lowest level the water reached,
which would be the deepest depression in the palfeozoic rock
in the locality. This depression would be the river-bed of
ages ago, and is known now as the lead or gutter, and, like
surface rivers, has more or less numerous tributary streams,
characterised by similar auriferous qualities. The friction
caused by the pieces of fractured quartz rubbing together,
under the motion given them by the stream, reduced them
to a gravelly deposit, containing gold in greater or lesser
quantities, and this deposit is what miners term washdirt.
In places, these deposits are found on and close to the
surface, but as they are followed, they dip under the
basaltic rock—the hardened lava-flow spread over the
country by volcanic agency. Some of these leads, first
found on the surface, have been followed for miles,
gradually deepening, until they are found hundreds of feet
from the surface, and under two, three, or four distinct
layers of basalt. The palaeozoic rock, so far, has never been
found overlying wash, and as it is the Ultima Thule of the
alluvial miner, it is called the bed rock. The quartz
deposits are of a very different type. There the gold is
found in solid stone, or in pyrites lying with it. The
quartz is held to be the matrix of gold. Gold-bearing
quartz was found in the early days, but it cost so much
trouble to extract the gold from it with the primitive
appliances then in vogue, that it was generally neglected
for the sensationally rich alluvial deposits. The quartz
found on this goldfield is generally in dykes and floors,
varying from a few inches to several feet in thickness, and
yielding from a few grains to 2 and 3 ounces to the ton.
In Ballarat East floors are more frequent than in the West.
The makes of quartz are called lodes or reefs indiscrimi-
nately. By taking an ordinary book in one’s hand, and
holding it closed with the length running north and south,
and with the breadth at any angle from vertical to hori-
zontal, a good idea will be gained of the lay of quartz lodes
in this district ; held horizontal, or nearly so, the book will


31 H M RH
jffl m iro Jm




show the run of a “ floor ”of quartz ; held vertical, or at
an angle, it will give an idea of the dykes of quartz
generally called lodes. The lodes are seldom found quite
vertical, but inclined a little east or west. If a lode leans
to the east, the “ underlie ”is to the west; and if it leans
to the west, it underlies to the east. The make of stone
rarely runs level; it generally deepens as it is followed
north and south, and this deepening is called the dip. A
make of stone pitching downwards, going south, is said to
dip to the south. The lode being inclined, the lower side
of it is the “ foot wall,” and the upper side the “ hanging
wall,” and miners greatly favor what are known as well-
defined walls.
The annexed diagrams gives an idea of the general prin-
ciples of the two kinds of mining. Diagram I. gives the
salient features of alluvial mining. The poppet-heads (a)
stand over the shaft or pit (6) At the point c, what is
called the chamber is cut, and from there ( e e), the drive, a
lateral shaft, is put in. As the locality of the washdirt
{g q) is reached, rises (//) are put up to it. The wash-
dirt is sent down these rises into trucks, which are pushed
along to the chamber, placed on the cages, and drawn to
the surface, and their contents are then discharged into the
washing or puddling machines. By the simple plan of
putting the drive ( e e) under the washdirt, gutter, lead, old
river-be l, or whatever it may be termed, the inequalities of
the bed are avoided, and the road for the trucks kept level.
In the w r ashing, the simple fact that gold is heavier than
anything else is acted upon, and the lighter dirt, stones, and
debris are washed away with strong currents of water.
Diagram 11. is a sketch of the process of quartz mining.
The quartz lode is represented by the line e e, and the
shaft (6 b) has been sunk from time to time until it has
gone through the quartz lode. The chambers (c c) are
opened at intervals of 50 to 100 feet in the shaft, and cross-
cuts (</ d) are put in. At first, as the lode lies to the east,
they are put in to the east, but as the underlie brings it
westward of the shaft, they are put in to the west. These
crosscuts are also called main drives or levels. From the


drives (d d) rises (ff) are put up into the stone, and the
excavations made in taking out the stone are called
“stopings.” The quartz, as it is broken down, is taken
along the levels to the shaft, thence to the crushing
battery, where it is pounded to a fine powder. Quicksilver
is applied to the pulverised material, and by its affinity
with gold, retains the precious metal, while the fine sand
to which the stone is reduced is carried off by streams of
water. The mixture of gold and qucksilver is called
“ amalgam.” This is retorted, and the gold cast in bars of
various sizes. A quartz mine is an illustration of pro-
gression—while one level is discharging quartz to be crushed,
the shaft is being sunk further, and other levels are put in
to the stone. The gold does not run in the stone all alike.
Some portions of adode are poor, others rich, and where it
is rich the stone is said to be in the “ shoot ”of gold. The
cost of working varies in different mines, but as a general
thing any return of 5 dwts. to the ton will pay something
over expenses. The miner’s work is varied by circumstances,
and his vernacular is very idiomatic. The foregoing only
give pen and ink outlines of the principal features of alluvial
and quartz mining. Under favorable circumstances, as to the
cost of getting out and crushing, between 2 and 3 dwts. per
ton will pay, but anything like or over 10 dwts. is con-
sidered good.
Nearly the whole of Ballarat East, and the eastern por-
tion of the city, have been turned over by indefatigable
miners. The eastern end of Sturt Street stands upon
several feet of “ made ” ground—old mining debris —and
both in the city and town, when excavations are being
made for foundations of buildings, it is nothing uncommon
for the workmen to find washdirt with a little gold in it.
The site of Craig’s Hotel was surrounded one time with
primitive mining plants, and where the morning newspaper
offices now stand were busy mines in the early days. In
the halcyon days of surfacing, all a man wanted was a good
mate, a muscular pair of arms, some tools and a cradle, and
he could start mining ; but as the leads ran deeper, and the
mines got wet, powerful machinery became an essential,
and the party of two or four expanded into companies of






tens and twenties, with a little capital, and now shares are
issued in thousands, and companies’ capitals are assessed by
tens of thousands. In the surfacing days, however, the
poor man had his finest show, and mining was peculiarly
democratic in its principles. Some wonderful results were
attained during the jubilee period of shallow sinking.
Instances are recorded of men, immediately on their
arrival here in the early fifties, striking it rich, and going
home, with thousands of pounds’ worth of gold, in the same
vessel in which they came out. Many a young man,
however, who, in the full pride of his manhood, and elated
with hope, has come here to seek his fortune, has found only
bad luck, and, too proud to go back poor, remains here,
still hard up, no longer young, but ever hopeful. Found in
a lonely hut in the outskirts of the diggings, this sort of
person is known as a “hatter” (probably derived from
“ hutter ”).
This colony has produced about 55,000,000 ounces of
gold, valued, in round numbers, at £220,100,000, and of
this, about one-fourth was obtained in Ballarat. The
returns, however, are yearly decreasing, and nearly as much
gold was got in one decade, commencing in 1852, as in the
subsequent quarter of a century.
NOTABLE MINES.
The principal quartz mines in the city are the Band and
Albion Consols, which has been inspected by nearly every
distinguished visitor (including the Princes Albert Victor
and George of Wales) who has come here. This mine has
now four shafts working, one deeper than sea-level From
alluvial and quartz, it has given a yield of 652,682 ozs.,
worth £2,626,569, and it paid dividends to the total amount
of £1,160,625. Near this is the old Albion mine (alluvial),
down which the Duke of Edinburgh went when lie was in
Ballarat. The management had all the drives lit up with
gas on that occasion, and made of the workings a brilliant
spectacle. The Star of the East is a much younger mine.
One shaft here is also below sea-level, and another is being
pushed down. In this mine is one of the longest crosscuts


in the colony ; it extends over a quarter of a mile. The
late Lady Brassey descended this mine, and named a new
lode there discovered the “ Sunbeam,” after Lord Brassey’s
famous yacht. The nearest important alluvial mine
is the Midas, situate about seven miles north-west of
Ballarat. It is on Sir Wm. J. Clarke’s estate, and
in it one of the largest of nuggets was found in
Jubilee year. It weighed 6170 z., and was named the
“ Lady Loch,” after Lady Loch, wife of the then Governor
of this colony. Here the process of treating alluvial can be
seen in operation. This mine owes its existence to the
courage and enterprise of a lady, Miss Cornwell, and it has
the distinction of having never required a call up to this
date. The principal alluvial mine, that is to say the
richest in the district, is the Madame Berry, at Kingston,
about 16 miles from Ballarat, which is dealt with in this book
among the Creswick-Kingston mines. In Ballarat East can
be seen the vestiges of the surfacing days. Alongside the
Sebastopol Road may be seen numerous extensive mounds
of mining debris, the magnitude of which attest the energy
with which alluvial mining was prosecuted at the deeper
levels. It is estimated that the underground workings of
the Band and Albion Consols mine alone would, placed
end to end, extend 30 miles, and the shafts a mile and a
quarter. It is situated a little over a mile from the Post
Office. Permission to descend any mine can be obtained
from the directors or legal managers.
BALLARAT EAST MINES.
The Llanberris mine has been working for over 30 years,
and, as its name indicates, had a Welsh proprietary. The
owners have always done well out of it, though occasionally
there would be periods in which dividends would be rare.
The quartz has been worked from the surface down only
380 feet, so the mine may be said to be still in its infancy.
There are 2,000 shares in the original mine, which has paid
in dividends over £IO,OOO. Lately the old mine was divi-
ded into two, and shaft-sinking is now being carried on.
The Sulieman Pasha (named after the Turkish commander)
was started in 1878, and since then has paid £8,850 in


dividends. It is one of the very few mines which having
received Government aid, has repaid the loan. In the
Jubilee year rich stone was struck, and this strike gave
vitality to the whole group of mines in Ballarat East,
amongst which the Britannia United has erected a powerful
crushing plant, and joined the rather select list of monthly
dividend-payers. Its fortunes have since declined, owing to
the stone getting poor again.
THE EGERTON.
A famous mine is the Egerton, named after Grace Eger-
ton, a popular performer years ago. It was the property
of the brothers Learmonth, who sold it to Messrs. Martin
Loughlin, W. Bailey, J. 0. Williamson, and Owen E. Edwards,
for £13,500. Shortly after they purchased it, rich stone
was struck, and since then the mine has paid £283,854 in
dividends. Messrs. Learmonth, believing that they had been
misled into selling the mine for less than its value, brought
an action to recover it, but, after £BO,OOO had been expended
in law and lawyers, the mine remained in the hands of the
four purchasers.
CRESWICK-KINGSTON MINES.
Situated in some of the finest agricultural country in the
colony, and a pleasant drive of 16 miles distant from Bal-
larat, are the famous Kingston mines. They can be reached
by rail to Creswick (12 miles) and thence by road. Here
is the Madame Berry (18,000 shares), the richest alluvial
mine known, where, for some time, over £4,000 worth of gold
was obtained weekly. This mine was commenced on Ist Sep-
tember, 1879, and by Ist November, 1888, had paid in divi-
dends £507,600, and in royalty, £67,536. Of its capital of
£27,000, only £15,975 was called up, and £301,619 has
been expended on plant, material, labor, and other charges.
Many a farmer has been enriched by the dividends from
this famous mine, and more than one cosy villa residence in
Ballarat was paid for by the gold won from it. The mine
was named after the wife of Mr., now Sir Graham, Berry.
The Ristori, named after Madame Ristori, the famous
tragedienne, paid in dividends nearly £2O a share, produc-
ing nearly £500,000 worth of gold. The Loughlin, named


after Mr. Martin LoughHn, J.P.—one of the boldest and most
successful of mining speculators —also paid richly ; and the
Lone Hand, called so from a famous steeplechaser in Mr.
Loughlin’s stable, produced £522,162 worth of gold.
Amongst the successful mines may be classed the Berry
Consols, the Earl of Beaconsfield, and others.
Some of the mining plants in this district are v.orth
£50,000 ; the huge pumping machinery used to drain the
leads being very powerful, and correspondingly costly. This
field was started from shallow sinking in the Broomfield
Gully, and a band of eight mining investors in 1875 bought
6,000 acres of an estate in the locality for £36,000, and
called it the Seven Hills Estate, a name which has become
famous. The investment proved extremely profitable, a
return of £167,485 having been received by the investors,
£148,651 being percentage on the gold won by the
Companies who obtained the right to mine portions of the
Estate, and the remainder from rents for grazing. The
following table shows the richness of the field and the
profits of the Companies :
COMPANY.
DIVIDENDS
He Murska
Lone Hand
28,200
242,700
507,600
200,675
74,458
ROYALTY.
5,743
Madame Berry
Ristori
Ristori West .
39,163
67,536
32,153
QUARTZ AT CLUNES
12,707
The Port Phillip mine at Clunes has been working for a
generation nearly, and under the able management of Mr.
R. H. Bland, has produced from auriferous quartz about
£2,000,000 worth of gold. Another Company at Clunes—
the New North Clunes—has paid nearly £500,000 in
dividends.
NUGGETS.
The largest nugget ever found on Ballarat was the Wel-
come, which was got at Bakery Hill—just where Wills and


Humffray Streets now junction—at a depth of 180 feet, on
the 9th June, 1858. This mass of gold weighed 2,217 oz.
16 dwt., and was valued at about £9,000. The next to it
in size was one found in 1853 in the Canadian Gully, a
run famous for nuggets, no less than six being taken out of
it in one year. This one weighed 1,619 oz 11 dwt. The
“ Lady Hotham,” found on Dalton’s Flat, Canadian, in
1854, weighed 1,177 oz. 17 dwt. These were all found in
Ballarat East, but some good ones were also obtained in
the New Koh-i-noor, in Ballarat West. A nugget weighing
617 oz. was found on the 22nd August, 1887, in the Midas
Company’s mine, at Dowling Forest. The largest nugget
ever found, so far as records go, was discovered on the sur-
face at Mount Moliagul, near Dunolly, on the sth February,
1869. It weighed 2,2800 z.
THE MINING EXCHANGE.
On the site (in Lydiard Street, just north of the Post
Office) of the old Police Camp, and whence Captain Thomas
and his men issued on the morning of the memorable fight
at the Eureka Stockade, now stands the Mining Exchange
building. For years the extensive business of dealing in
mining scrip was carried on at the “ Corner,” as it was
termed, i.e., on the pavement and road on the south side of
Sturt Street, from Lydiard Street to the Mechanics’lnstitute
entrance. The brokers had their offices in Bones’ buildings
(now occupied by Hughes and Opie, drapers) and round the
Unicorn Passage. The Exchange, which numbers over 100
members, met in a large room in the Unicorn Hotel. In the
jubilee year a long talked of scheme took practical shape,
and the leading brokers secured from the City Council a
thirty-years’ lease of a market reserve site at the back of
the Post Office, and, making the concern into a company,
erected the present building. The frontage contains four
shops; there is a large room for the Exchange to meet in,
and the covered court, which is surrounded by offices, is 126
feet long by feet broad. The building, which was opened
early in 1888, cost £5,000. Some idea of the magnitude
of the transactions in mining stock carried on here may be
gained from the fact that one firm of brokers average an
annua,! turnover of over half a million worth of stock,




the diggings, demanding to see each digger’s license—de-
manding it as if it were a ticket-of-leave, and the possessor
a “lag” to be treated with contumely and suspicion. Every-
one who looked like a digger was expected to have a license,
and if he had not he was forthwith handcuffed and taken to
the lockup—the “ logs,” as it was called, because the
prisoners were secured to logs—and they were treated with
scant ceremony when they were taken before the Bench.
The police entered into their digger hunts with all the
gusto of Southern planters chasing runaway slaves, and
their behaviour became intolerable to the freeborn men on
the fields. When the police were seen coming, the cry
“ Jo, jo ” sent an electric thrill through the diggings, and
the unlicensed would resort to endless devices to elude the
gold commissioners and their myrmidons. Then, too, the
suspicion grew that some of those high in authority, and
whose duty it was to administer the law, were not impartial.
Towards the end of 1854 a digger named Scobie was
killed at the door of the Eureka Hotel, in Eureka Street,
in a scuffle, and evidence was forthcoming that Bentley,
the proprietor of the hotel, had a hand in his death. This
hotel was a large canvas one, and did a big business.
Bentley was arraigned before a police magistrate named
Dewes, who acquitted him, and it was generally believed
Dewes was pecuniarily indebted to Bentley. Among the
onlookers at the trial was Mr. J. Russell Thomson, the
same who, dying recently, bequeathed £4,000 for statuary
to be erected at the gardens. He urged so strongly that
Bentley should be sent before a jury that he came near
being committed for contempt of court. An indignation
meeting held on the spot where Scobie was killed, and
during the meeting some one set fire to the hotel, and it was
destroyed. Three men—and it is believed, three innocent
men—were arrested for the riot at the hotel, and were
sentenced to short terms of imprisonment. The diggers
believing they were innocent sent a deputation to Melbourne
on the 25th November, 1854, to “ demand ” their release
from the Governor, Sir Charles Hotham. The demand
was refused, but reforms were promised. The police force
was strengthened, and small detachments of the 12th and


40th Regiments of the line arrived in Ballarat on the 28th
November. Meanwhile the diggers had been drilling and
making requisitions for arms, ammunition, and horses, for
which they gave curious receipts. Peter Lalor, son of the
Mr. Lalor who was one time M.P. for Queen’s County,
Ireland, was elected commander-in-chief; Vern, a Swiss
and an ex-soldier, was another leader ; a fiery-spirited
Italian named Carboni Raffaello, a third ; Thomas Kennedy,
a chartist, a fourth ; and Ross, a Canadian, a fifth. John
Basson Humffray, the advocate for moral suasion, was at
this time little heeded. The more aggressive of the diggers
attacked the detachments of soldiers as they came into
Ballarat, expecting to take a prize in firearms, but were
disappointed. This attack was made a little distance east
of the stockade site.
The authorities, with an imbecile disregard of the temper
of the men they were trifling with, held, after all these
irritations, on the 30th November, the most exasperating
of all their digger hunts—and it was the last. The diggers
resolved to have no more of it. They burned their licenses,
hoisted their flag (not the red cap, as one or two wanted) —
a blue flag, with stars representing the Southern Cross on
it—collected arms and ammunition, and enclosed their
head-quarters with a rough stockade of mining slabs, ropes,
and overturned carts. There were thousands of diggers at
the meetings, but the stockade enclosed barely 300. The
requisitions made by the insurgent diggers were a grave
reflection upon the authorities, and Captain Thomas, of the
40th, the chief officer in command of the Government
forces, decided to attack the stockade before the number of
the malcontents should increase. The military station was
very close to where the Post Office now stands. Captain
Thomas, before daybreak on the 3rd December, 1854,
marshalled his forces, 276 men of all arms, including foot
and mounted police and cavalry, and stealthily approached
the stockade. The diggers’ sentry fired on the troops,
a few volleys were delivered on each side, and the troops,
charging up to the stockade, were soon over the trifling
barrier. Their grenades fired the tents, and in their assault
the diggers suffered severely. Captain Wise, of the 40th


Regiment, was mortally wounded, live soldiers were killed,
and Lieutenant Paul was wounded. The diggers were
taken by surprise, or the assault must have been more
deadly than it was. Thirty diggers were killed, and a large
number wounded, including Mr. P. Lalor (who lost his left
arm), and 125 were taken prisoners. It is said that the
diggers’ pass-word for the night was “ Vinegar Hill,” and
that numbers belonging to the stockaded foice were away
foraging at the moment Captain Thomas delivered his
attack. The most authentic accounts show the forces of
troops and diggers to have been about equal.
On the sth December, Major-General Sir Robert Nickle,
with 800 men, a large party of sailors from H.M.S. “Electra,”
and four field-pieces, arrived in Ballarat, and martial law
was proclaimed ; and in about three weeks things assumed
their normal condition. The prisoners taken in the
stockade were tried on a charge of “ high treason,” and ac-
quitted. Rewards were offered for the apprehension of
Lalor, Vern, and Black, but they were never claimed.
Lalor’s left arm was amputated, and he was surgically
treated without the authorities knowing of his whereabouts.
The excitement cooled, and no better illustration can be
given of its ephemeral character than the fact that Lalor
walked about, while the reward for his head was still offer-
ing, untouched and unmolested. He showed himself one
day at a Government auction sale, and a few days after a
Gazette notice was published withdrawing the proclaimed
rewards.
The obnoxious license was abolished, and representative
institutions started. Peter Lalor lived to be the honored
Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of Victoria. Scobie’s
brother erected a notable column over his grave, and a
memorial-stone at the Cemetery bears the names of the
soldiers and diggers who fell on that tragic Sunday.
Bentley got three years on the roads for his share in
Scobie’s death, and committed suicide in Melbourne in 1873.
Dewes, after embezzling moneys in British America, fied to
Paris, and committed suicide there. There are many men
now living here who remember the stirring events of a tragedy
which is fast fading into the history of a past generation.


EARLY BALLARAT.
The eastern part of Ballarat was the fashionable quarter
in the early days, when what is now the city was “ out in
the bush,” and all the revelries which high-spirited, thought-
less, or dissolute men flushed with easily-gotten wealth
could devise, were held in the town. The principal places
of amusement were the Montezuma and the Charlie Napier
theatres. Montezuma had a ring of the fabulously wealthy
Mexican capital about it, and the other place was titled
after the soldier whose name at the time was in everyone’s
mouth. All the brilliant performers who came to Ballarat
in the flood-time of gold-getting performed in one or other
of these places—G. Y, Brooke, Warner, Walter Mont-
gomery, Mathews, and a host of lesser lights. The notorious
Lola Montes fascinated her admirers from behind the dip
lights of the Montezuma stage. The Montezuma was
burned down, and the Charlie Napier became the Charlie
Napier Brewery, was afterwards sold for building material,
and the bricks, once laid on the altar of Thespia, now are
prosaically stationed in the walls of a terrace in Mair
Street, opposite the Western Railway Station. The site of
the old theatre is occupied by a mission chapel. Twice was
Ballarat East swept by fires which threatened to obliterate
every trace of human habitation, nearly every building
on either side of the Main Road for half a mile being
utterly destroyed. The loss of life on such occasions was
happily very small. To the north of Ballarat East, and
near the New Cemetery, is the site of the shepherd’s hut,
the occupant of which went mad from loneliness in the times
before the diggers’ advent. A little to the eastward of the
Sunny Corner Woollen Mills is the site of the Messrs.
Learmonths’ woolshed, where tallow was thrown away by the
hundred-weight, and diggers used to get it, for the carrying
away, to grease their windlasses. To the westward, and at
the south-west extremity of the Borough of Sebastopol, is
Murdering Gully, so called from its being the locality in
which the blacks murdered a hut-keeper on the Messrs.
Learmonths’ out station.
During the gold fever, living of even the roughest kind
was very expensive on Ballarat. Cartage from Melbourne


was at the rate of £IOO to £l5O per ton, and hotel charges
from £2 10s. to £l2 a week. Flour cost Is. 3d. a lb.; tea,
3s. 6d.; sugar, Is.; meat, 5d.; bread, 10|d.; bacon, 35.;
butter, 3s. 6d.; potatoes, Bd.; eggs, 12s. a dozen ; and
milk, 4s. a quart. Oats were 60s. a bushel, and tobacco
10s. per lb. Artisans got 255. to 30s. a day. Simple
drinks were 2s. a glass, and mixed, *.<?., cocktails, mint
julep, egg-nog, &c., 3s. a-piece. Meat has since risen
in price, but, as the lists of current prices show,
everything else has subsided to a fair valuation. The
storekeeper in canvastown had no handy paper bags to make
up his groceries in, and the purchaser had to “ bring his
own jug.” The inevitable “ billy-can ” was the popular
vehicle for carrying stores, but buckets, hats, and, it is said,
even stockings, were often called into requisition for this
purpose.
STATISTICS.
In the city and town together there are 8,000 dwellings,
41 churches, 200 hotels, 92| miles of roads formed and
metalled, 140 miles footpaths surveyed, 56 miles kerbed
and channelled, over 3,000 yards (lineal) of stone flagging,
22| miles (lineal) flagging or asphalt, 9 iron foundries, 4
agricultural implement factories, 3 aerated water factories,
4 breweries, 6 furniture factories, 11 printing offices, 3
flour mills, 2 woollen mills, 2 tanneries, 2 soap and candle
factories, a city hall and a town hall, 1 theatre, a mecha-
nics’ institute, 2 free libraries, an art gallery, a museum, a
gymnasium, 2 baths, 3 fire brigades, 2 post and telegraph
offices, a supreme court, 2 police courts, and 1 gaol. A
portion of Bridge and Main Streets was paved with wooden
planks in the early days, and was then known as Plank
Road. All the public offices, banks, and principal busi-
nesses are centrally situated near the City Post Office. All
the banks are in Lydiard Street, near its intersection with
Sturt Street, except the Commercial Bank, which is in
the western end of the City Hall, and the Mercantile,
which is on the south-east corner of the Dana-c?/m-Arm-
strong Street intersection. The Ballarat East branch of
the London Chartered Bank is in Main Street, near the
Ballarat East Post Office. In the City Post Office build-


ings are the Post and Telegraph Offices, the sub-treasury,
and the offices of the mining registrar, the registrar of
births and deaths, the secretary of the Mining Board, the
offices of the superintendent of police, the public works
officers, the officers of survey and lands department, and the
excise officer.
STREETS.
The streets are wide, and notable for their wealth of
trees. In the city they run almost true to the cardinal
points of the compass. The principal street, Sturt Street
(named after the explorer), runs almost due east and west;
it is three chains wide, is a very picturesque thoroughfare,
and is singular in having two roads and five footpaths
along it. At its eastern end it runs into Bridge Street, the
principal business thoroughfare of the town, and from
which branch Victoria Street—a fine well-planted avenue—
and Main Street, which leads to the ancient portion of the
town.
Lydiard Street runs north and south past the Western
Railway Station, and intersecting Sturt Street at the Post
Office. The tram roads radiate from the eastern end of
Sturt Street, westward to the lake and gardens, northward
to Soldiers’ Hill along Lydiard Street, and south towards
Sebastopol along Armstrong and Drummond Streets. A
glance at the accompanying plan will ascertain the names
and directions of the other streets.
HYGIENE.
Ballarat is one of the healthiest places in the world. It
is situated at a considerable altitude above the sea-level ;
the ground drains readily, while the labors of the city
fathers in planting the streets with wholesome trees have
done much to keep the atmosphere pure. Then, too, there
is no sewerage ] all the drains are on the surface, and dry
earth pans are, by direction of the local Board of Health,
used on all premises. The death-rate is among the lowest
recorded, averaging only 13 64 per 1000 inhabitants for
years past. The average rainfall for over a quarter of a
century was 26'06 inches per annum. The only drawbacks


are the exceptionally severe changes in temperature which
sometimes take place. The thermometer occasionally ranges
in summer up to 110 deg. in the shade, and in winter is
frequently below freezing-point. On one occasion Lake
Wendouree was frozen over, but the ice was not more than
about of an inch thick. The mean temperatures of the
different months are : —January, 65-3 deg. ; February, 64’4;
March, 6LB; April, 55T ; May, 49‘2 ; June, 45-5 ; July,
43J; August, 46.3 ; September, 48-7 ; October, 55-7;
November, 57 - 9 ; December, 61’6.
LAKE WENDOUREE.
Lake Wendouree lies about a mile and a quarter, almost
due west, from the Post Office. It is an ornamental sheet
of water, margined with gardens and lovely plantations,
and is the premier scenic attraction of Ballarat. When first
seen by white men it was a mere reed-bed, and continued
so until about 20 years ago, when a channel was cut
through the rushes from the eastern margin to the western,
and a few boats were put on it. From that time the
rushes were gradually cleared, until there was room for
sailing craft. In 1869-70 it dried up, and was then
used for some time as a training-ground for racehorses.
A bright idea struck one of the civic fathers, and that was
to construct an embankment along the middle of the lake,
and by pumping the water from the one side keep the other
side full. The embankment, which was constructed at
considerable cost, and never served the purpose for which
it was intended (for it was porous, and the water after being
pumped from the north side to the south soon found its old
level), has been an unmitigated nuisance ever since. Its
sinuous track can still be seen, and it forms shallows on
which many an amateur yachtsman has come to grief. The
lake now covers an area of about 600 acres, and furnishes a
beautiful place for the pastimes of the yachtsman, oarsman,
and angler, and a lovely scene for the holidaymaker. From
margin to margin longitudinally it measures a little over a
mile, and some good rowing contests are held on it every
summer. The yachting course is laid down in an oblong,
the corners of which are marked with buoys. Nowhere


in the colony can better fishing be got than here, for the
water is stocked with English perch and trout, carp and
tench. The walk round the lake, a route beautifully shaded
with willows and other ornamental trees, is a little over
three miles. The water is nowhere deeper than five feet at
winter level, except in places where excavations were made
for the embankment, for the forming of islands, and for
quarrying. This shallowness adds to the attractiveness of
the lake, for pleasure-seekers venture on its bosom in the
tiniest craft, satisfied that the worst harm they can ex-
perience is a wetting. Yachting and rowing boats are let
by the owners, whose houses are on the eastern shore, at
moderate rates ; and steamers ply to and from the gardens
every day in the summer, and every fine day the year
through. Occasionally moonlight fetes (subscription) are
held on the lake, and after a day during which the thermo-
meter has ranged to 108 deg. in the shade, such pleasurings
are peculiarly enjoyable. The boats on the lake number
altogether about 200, including 40 belonging to the rowing
clubs, 10 yachts and six steamers, and on the shore are about
25 boathouses, ornamental and otherwise.
BOTANICAL GARDENS.
The flower gardens cover an area of 83 acres on the
western end of Lake Wendouree,and are now an illustration
of what patient industry and skill can do towards converting
a wilderness into an oasis. The curator, Mr. Longley, has
done wonders. Near his present residence stands an old
gum tree, the veritable forest denizen, and not a handsome
one, under which he pitched his tent over a quarter of a
century ago, when he first stopped there. The beautiful
gardens how round him have grown steadily under his
fostering and judicious care. One of the loveliest spots in
this district is the willow grove at the lake edge; while the
shelter houses and ferneries are marvels of beauty. The
attractions of the gardens have been enhanced by the addition
of statues. Twelve marble statues, purchased at Carrara by
Mr. Thos. Stoddart, a wealthy speculator, were the first
works of art erected in the gardens. They cost over £2OOO.
Since their erection several other statues have been added






by means of a bequest left by Mr. J. Russell Thomson, one
of the pioneers of Ballarat, who left what remained of his
fortune (about £4000) to be invested in statuary for the
gardens. The one group, “ The Flight from Pompeii,”
perhaps the finest statuary of the character south of the
line, cost £ISOO. It has been pronounced by the highest
European critics to he a really first-class production, and
the sculptor, Benzoni, refused an offer of £4OOO for it.
A colossal statue of Sir William Wallace, executed in the
colony by Percival Ball, and the Claxton Memorial, are the
latest additions. The citizens are under obligations to
Messrs. J. N. Wilson and H. A. Nevett (Mr. Thomson’s
executors) for the admirable way in which they applied
his bequest. The City Council are now building a large
ornamental refreshment pavilion, fronting the carriage
drive and opposite the fernery gate, at a cost of £IOOO,
which will be much appreciated by citizens and visitors.
The gardens are full of floral attractions, shady walks,
and charming verdant nooks, and an especial item
is the maze, laid down on the plan of the Hampton
Court maze. The gardens altogether comprise an area of
about 300 acres, and are much resorted to by picnic parties.
PUBLIC PARKS.
The Victoria Park, Sturt Street, was made the scene of
an “Arbor Day ” tree-planting ceremony by Mayor Little
on the Queen’s birthday, 1890, when 1250 trees were
planted by citizens in less than an hour. The park con-
tains 326 acres, and occupies a fine elevated position
commanding extensive views. There are also park reserves
in Ballarat East called Mount Xavier and Vale’s Park,
after one of our pioneers and an ex-member of Parliament.
THE CITY HALL.
The City Hall, the principal municipal building, faces
Sturt Street. It contains the municipal offices, the council
chambers, and a large hall used for balls and festivals. The
tower contains the only peal of bells in the district, the
Alfred memorial bells, bought by public subscription, and
hung in the tower in memory of the escape of H.R.H.
Prince Alfred from the deadly intent of the would-be


assassin in Sydney, N.SW. From the top of the tower a
very fine view of Ballarat can be obtained. Permission to
ascend it can be easily got by applying to the Mayor of the
City, or to the Town Clerk, Mr. G. Perry. The City Hall
cost £25,980, and the peal of bells is valued at £llBO.
The city councillors are nine in number, three being
returned from each ward. The wards are known as the
central, north, and south. The councillors dress in true
aldermanic costume, the Mayor having beside rich robes
a valuable gold chain, which is a sort of heraldic history, in
miniature, of the mayoralty. By an agreement among
themselves, any councillor re-elected without a contest
contributes a fixed sum towards the extension of the chain,
each shield of which bears the name and date of some
chairman or mayor from the time the council came into
existence. The tower is 135 feet above the street level, the
top of the flag-pole 165 feet. The Post Office tower is 110
feet high, and the flag-pole 130 feet.
MONUMENTS AND STATUES.
These, at present, are few, but not so few for such a
young city. The central figure is a marble statue of Robert
Burns, .erected by admiring countrymen and others at a
cost of about £9OO. It was unveiled on the 21st April,
1887. Opposite this statue is a memorial, none too shapely,
to the memory of the ill-fated explorers—Burke, Wills,
Becker, and Grey, who died in 1861, on their return
journey from the Gulf of Carpentaria. At the intersection
of Sturt and Armstrong Streets is a fine statue of Tom Moore,
the Irish poet, executed by John Udny, Carrara, Italy, and
erected by public subscription at a cost of £l5OO. Steps
have been taken for the erection of marble statues of
Her Majesty the Queen, of the immortal Shakespeare, Adam
Lindsay Gordon, promised by the Hon. J. P. McPherson;
also a bronze statue of the late Hon, Peter Lalor, has
been promised by Mr. Jas. Oddie, which will further
beautify the street in the vicinity of the City Hall.
In the eastern part of Sturt Street, a monument
has been erected in memory of James Galloway, the
originator of the Eight Hours movement in Australia. In


l\ki
OJ K ; v;
> . •
r~ K; '
'
n Hp -
51%




the old cemetery will be found a broken obelisk over the
grave of the murdered Scobie, whose tragic end precipitated
the stockade troubles ; and also the monument over the
graves of the men who fell in the assault upon the stockade.
The monument at the stockade site is mentioned elsewhere.
BALLARAT BAST TOWN HALL.
The Ballarat East Town Hall is a neat brick building,
placed on an eminence and facing westward. The entrance to
to it is from Barkly Street, and adjoining it is the Town
Police Court and the public offices. The hall looks out
upon a very charmingly laid out garden, not extensive, but
exceedingly pretty and well worth seeing. On each side of
the broad entrance gate is a very pretty cedar tree, one of
which was planted by Prince Albert Victor of Wales and
the other by his brother George. The Public Library (free)
is but a short step from the Town Hall. It is stocked with
the newspapers and periodicals of the day, and the library
proper contains over 11,000 volumes. The Fire Brigade
Station, of brick, which is just opposite, and the tower of
which is 90 feet high, is an imposing landmark. It contains
the plant of a most efficient brigade, the town and city firemen
in generous rivalry trying which shall do most in the sacred
cause of protecting the lives and property of their fellow
townsmen. Among their plant this brigade has a highly
prized Shand and Mason steam fire engine.
MECHANICS’ INSTITUTE
The Mechanics’ Institute, practically a compendious
library for its subscribers, is in Sturt Street, nearly
opposite the Post Office, and has one of the finest, if not
the finest, fagade in Ballarat. The front elevation is four
stories high, and beside ample space for books and papers,
and numerous rooms for the convenience of the members,
it contains a large hall, used for lectures, concerts, and
other public entertainments. The newspaper, conversation,
and smoking rooms are on the ground floor, the library and
large hall on the second, while the top story in the front
elevation contains a splendid billiard room, furnished with


four tables and the most appropriate fittings, for the use of
the members. There are 1200 members on the roll, and
the library contains 14,000 volumes. The institute is
supported by the subscriptions of the members, the rent
from the use of the hall and the offices on the ground floor,
and has also an annual grant from the Government towards
the purchase of books. The present building was started
in 1860. Like all the institutions here, this one is managed
by a committee elected periodically by the subscribers. The
institution was originated in 1859, and the first reading
room was the engine-house of the Ballarat East Fire
Brigade. It is not a free library, and its benefits are
appropriated to the members only. Visitors from a distance
are permitted to participate in them for a term on their
being introduced by a member. The secretary for the
institute is Mr. W. H. Batten, who has filled the post for
over 20 years.
PINE ART GALLERY.
The Fine Art Gallery site is a very valuable one in
Lydiard Street, nearly opposite the George Hotel, and
here a suitable building has been erected, thanks to the
energetic liberality of the originator, Mr. James Oddie,
assisted by annual subscribers. Ballarat has the dis-
tinction of being the first provincial city to start an art
gallery. The pictures, among which are some valuable
works, at present at the command of the committee, were
exhibited in a room in the Academy of Music, the use of
which was given for the purpose, with his usual generosity,
by Sir W. J. Clarke. The whole of the pictures are well
worth seeing, the crux of the gallery being Solomon’s famous
work, “Ajax and Cassandra.” A good many of the
pictures have been presented by liberal-minded citizens,
amongst which are “ The Creation of Adam,” presented by
Bishop Moore; “Day’s Lock on the Thames,” by Vicat
Cole, R.A.; “Departing Day,” by Peter Graham, R.A.;
“The Village Inn,” by W. B. Leader, A.R.A.; these three
are the munificent gift of Mr. Martin Loughlin. The
gallery is open every day, from noon till 5 o’clock. The
secretary is Mr. J. A. Powell.


City Fire Brigade




THE CITY FREE LIBRARY.
The City Free Library has made a commencement in
the stone building in Sturt Street, adjoining the Post Office.
At present it is the day of small beginnings with it, but the
committee have the north-west corner allotment off the
Sturt and Camp Streets intersection for a site, and in time
there will doubtless be an imposing structure erected there.
Secretary, Mr. J. Vallins.
CITY FIRE BRIGADE.
The City Fire Brigade Station has a fine tower. This
brigade has earned an enviable reputation for. proficiency,
having secured a large proportion of the prizes given at the
annual competitions open to the fire brigades of the colony,
as the trophies stored at the station show. A wonderful
spirit animates the members of this brigade and the
Ballarat Fire Brigade, and they are justly esteemed very
highly by the citizens. The firemen receive no remuneration
for their services, finding their reward in the happiness of
doing good to others. The foundation-stone of the station
was laid by Sir Henry Barkly, then Governor of the colony.
The working members of the brigade number 40, and it is
esteemed a privilege to be in their ranks. The brigade
possesses among its valuable plant a Merryweather steam
fire engine, for use in districts outside the service of
the water commission. Soldiers’ Hill is the locale of an
efficient body known as the Soldiers’ Hill Fire Brigade.
THE HOSPITAL.
The charitable institutions in the city are the pride
of the residents. They are maintained partly by private
subscriptions and partly by Government subsidies ; these
subsidies bearing a proportion to the amounts subscribed
privately. The institutions are managed locally by com-
mittees, elected periodically by the subscribers, and are
subject to inspection by a Government officer, who takes
note of the distribution of the finances, and the character
of the work done in the institution. The Hospital is an
elegant building, with a fa§ade in classic style. It wag


started as one of the results of the engagement at the
Eureka Stockade. No place could be found for the
wounded men, and some of the buoyant, resolute spirits
who then gave impulse to the great heart of this wondrous
mining centre, started the project of erecting a hospital for
the reception of sick and injured men. The present ad-
mirable site, on the five-acre block now enclosed by Sturt,
Mair, Drummond, and Windermere Streets, was selected ;
it was then in the bush, and those who went out to it found
it wise to “ blaze” their route as they went, so that they
should not lose their way when returning. The foundation-
stone was laid on Christmas Day, ’55, and additions were
made in ’66 and ’69, making the present structure. The
Hospital contains 185 beds; and during the last year, 886
in and 3128 out-patients were treated at it. The buildings
altogether have cost £25,022, and the average cost per
annum per indoor patient was £sl Bs. Secretary, Mr.
Goldsmith ; collector, Mr. I. Burrows.
THE BENEVOLENT ASYLUM.
The most pretentious edifice in the place is the Benevo-
lent Asylum, which stands in the centre of a five-acre block,
bounded by Ascot, Eyre, Talbot, and Dana Streets. It is
built in the Elizabethian style, from designs furnished by
Mr. Christopher Porter, and carried out by Mr. A.
Downe, architect. The central original portion cost
£3765. The foundation-stone was laid on St. Patrick’s
Day, ’59, and additions were made in ’62, ’63, ’67, ’69,
and ’B7. The institution sprang from the warmly chari-
table feeling those who were successful in the great
struggle for wealth felt for the stricken ones who, wounded
and disabled, dropped from time to time out of the fray,
incapacitated from doing anything more for themselves in
the terrible Battle of Life. It has now accommodation for
over 250 inmates ; the Lying-in Hospital has beds for 35
patients. Out-door relief, averaging 413 rations for adults
and 266 for children per week, is given. To this retreat
has many a worsted warrior come, finding a pension for the
rest of his fragile life, provided by that divine flame of god-
like charity which has glowed and burned with all the


native ardour of this sunny clime. Here may be found men
who have served their country in the crucial times of war,
men from all climes, of all races and creeds, and, verily,
charity covereth them all. The religions of the civilized
world are all represented, and pagan, heathen, Confucian,
meet an equal welcome. Veterans of Trafalgar and
Waterloo have within these walls been sheltered until they
were finally enlisted by the Great Commander ; and not a
few who started life with everything in their favor, have
ended it peacefully under the towering dome of the Ballarat
Benevolent Asylum. Secretary, Mr. F. Coates.
ORPHAN ASYLUM.
This is another of the charitable institutions of Ballarat.
It is a fine brick building facing Victoria Street,
Ballarat East, and situated about two miles east of the
Post Office. It has accommodation and staff for 250
orphans, and is exceedingly well appointed, Mr. H. R. Caselli
being the architect. The institution, which cost £18,538, is
supported, as the other charities here are, by local sub-
scriptions, and a proportionate Government subsidy. Only
the orphan children of respectable parentage and ante-
cedents are admitted ; “ neglected ” and criminal chil-
dren being provided for in special Government insti-
tutions. The institution is always open to visitors, and on
the first Sunday in each month the mothers of the inmates
are permitted to be with them. This charity was mainly
originated by the Licensed Victuallers, and since its
inauguration has been contributed to by all classes of the
community. Secretary, Mr. R. Wreford.
THE CONVENT AND NAZARETH HOUSE.
The Catholics of Ballarat are always to the fore in works
of charity, as the above Institutions plainly testify ; but
besides these they voluntarily support several large schools
for the education of their children, and as a protest against
the provisions of the Education Act.
FEMALES’ HOME.
In this institution, which is entirely managed by ladies,
much is quietly done towards effecting the reform of fallen


women. The Magdalenes are admitted to the house, found
in food, clothing, and employment, and, when they show
a sincere intention to reform, situations are obtained for
them. The home is a two story brick building in Ballarat
East, standing about a quarter of a mile nearer the town
than the Orphanage.
REFORMATORY.
This is a brick building situated west of the Botanical
Gardens, and about three miles from the Post Office. It
was originally meant for and was used as an Industrial
School; then as a Lunatic Asylum. Latterly it has been
used as a place for incarcerating criminal boys. The in-
mates are subjected to a course of treatment which has
proved highly successful in reforming the young rascals, and
the Reformatory bears a high record for efficiency in
the work its name shows it was designed to carry out.
The good results achieved have mdae the institution, which
is a Government one, a subject of encomium for all who
have made themselves acquainted with the operations
carried on there. Superintendent, Mr. J. H. Connor.
TRADES’ HALL.
The Trades’ Hall is situated in Camp Street. It has a
fine front, and is easily distinguished. The front elevation
is three stories high, and the building contains a large hall
(60 x 30) for meetings, and committee, reading, and smoking
rooms, and also offices, lavatory, and cloak room. It is
entered from Camp Street via a spacious hall seven feet
wide, and is well lighted by a large lantern in the roof.
Every suitable provision has been made for ventilation,
lighting, and means of egress. The architects were Messrs,
James and Piper, and the building cost about £3OOO.
Secretary, Mr. J. Wilson.
OLD COLONISTS’ HALL.
This building is appropriated to the Old Colonists’ Asso-
ciation, an institution which, as its name indicates, belongs
to the survivors of the early settlers here. The object of


the institution is that of mutual benefit. The Government
gave the Association the valuable site in Lydiard Street,
where their hall now stands, and the rent from the shops in
the front more than pays the interest on the cost of build-
ing. The foundation-stone was laid in jubilee year by Mr.
John Murray, the president of the Association. Secretary,
Mr. J. W. Graham.
CHURCHES.
The finest ecclesiastical edifice in Ballarat is unquestion-
ably St. Patrick’s Cathedral, on the Sturt Street block en-
closed by Dawson, Dana, and Lyons Streets. St. Andrew’s,
Presbyterian (opposite), has the finest spire, and there are
several ornate buildings, such as the Lydiard Street
Wesleyan Church, the Congregational Church in Dawson
Street north, and the Baptist Church, Dawson Street south.
The following is a list of the churches in Ballarat: —
Anglican —Christ Church Pro-Cathedral (stone), Lydiard
Street south; St. John’s Church (brick), Armstrong Street,
Soldiers’ Hill; St. Peter’s Church (stone), Sturt Street
west; All Saints’ (wood), Drummond Street south ; St.
Paul’s (brick), Humfiray Street, Ballarat East; St. Stephen’s
(wood), Clayton Street, Ballarat East; St. James’ (brick),
Little Bendigo ; Holy Trinity (brick), Albert Street, Sebas-
topol.
Baptist —Dawson Street (stone), Dawson Street south.
Bible Christian —Armstrong Street (brick), Ballarat
North ; Skipton Street (stone), Ballarat South ; Grant Street
(brick), Ballarat East; Humfiray Street (brick), Ballarat
East.
Congregational —Dawson Street (brick), Dawson Street
north.
Catholic Apostolic —Catholic Apostolic (brick), Sturt
Street.
Disciples op Christ —Dawson Street (brick), Dawson
Street south; Peel Street (wood), Peel Street south.
Hebrew —Synagogue (brick), Princes Street, B.E,


Lutheran —Lutheran (brick), Doveton Street south.
Mission —Town Mission Hall (wood), Eureka Street.
Mission Chapel (wood), Main Street.
Presbyterian —St. Andrew’s (stone), Sturt Street;
Ebenezer (stone), Armstrong Street south ; Scots’ Church
(brick), Lydiard Street north ; St. John’s (wood), Peel Street
south, Ballarat.
Primitive Methodist —Humffray Street (brick), Bal-
larat East; Burnbank Street (brick), Ballarat North;
Eyre Street (stone), Ballarat South ; Darling Street (wood),
Redan; Sebastopol (brick), Beverin Street.
Quakers — Friends’ Meeting House (wood), Grant Street.
Roman Catholic— St. Patrick’s (stone), Sturt Street.
St Alipius’ (stone), Victoria Street, B.E.
Salvation Army —Barracks (wood), Little Bridge
Street, B.E.
United Methodist Free Church —Peel Street (brick),
Ballarat East; South Street (brick), Ballarat South.
Wesleyan —Lydiard Street (brick), Lydiard Street south;
Neil Street (brick), Soldiers’ Hill; Pleasant Street (brick)
Pleasant Street south ; Barkly Street (brick), Barkly Street,
Ballarat East; Little Bendigo (brick), Little Bendigo, Bal-
larat East; Mt. Pleasant (stone), Mt. Pleasant, Ballarat
East; Golden Point (brick), Golden Point, Ballarat East;
Brown Hill (brick), Brown Hill, Ballarat East; Macarthur
Street (brick), Macarthur Street west; Wendouree (wood),
north of Lake Wendouree; Sebastopol (stone), Cheshunt
Street, Sebastopol; Rubicon Street (wood), Rubicon Street;
Alfredton (wood), Alfredton.
Welsh Presbyterian —Welsh Presbyterian (stone), Al-
bert Street, Sebastopol; United Welsh Protestant Church
(brick), Armstrong Street south.
As in the case of every other class of edifice in Ballarat,
churches were first represented by tents, then by wooden
buildings, the more durable structures being comparatively
“modern.” St. Patrick’s was started in 1858 and it has
cost altogether £40,000, A tower and spire are yet to be


added to it. It contains some fine “ stations,” and inter-
esting particulars concerning its erection emblazoned on
brass tablets on the pillars. Christ Church was started in
1854, and on 30th November, 1888, His Excellency
the Governor laid the foundation stone of what is to be
an imposing cathedral, to cost £35,000. The building of St.
Andrew’s was interrupted by one of the unfinished walls being
razed by a gale, but this contretemps was soon remedied.
The spire is known as the Henderson’s Memorial Spire, the
black band round the pinnacles indicating the point the
work had reached when the first minister of the kirk, the
late Rev. W. Henderson, died. The Wesleyans spent
nearly £20,000 on the structures they erected on their
Lydiard Street site, the present church costing £IO,OOO.
The opening sermon in the discarded stone building was
preached by the Rev. D. J. Draper, who went down in the
ill-fated steamer “ London ” in the Bay of Biscay in 1866.
St. Paul’s Church, Ballarat East, in 1864, had to be taken
down and rebuilt, mining operations having rendered it
unsafe. There are comparatively few organs in the Ballarat
churches; St. Patrick’s Church, Christ Church, St. Paul’s, St.
Peter’s, Lydiard Street and Pleasant Street Wesleyan
Churches, St. Andrew’s, and Dawson Street Congregational
Church, only having them.
Ballarat is the see of two bishops—Anglican and Roman
Catholic. These were established in the same year (1873),
but the first bishop consecrated was Dr. M. O’Connor,
D.D., who was installed at St. Patrick’s on 20th December,
1874. Dr. S. Thornton, D.D., is the first Anglican bishop
of Ballarat; he was installed at the Church Pro-Cathedral
on the 10th August, 1875. Dr. O’Connor died on the 14th
February, 1882, aged 52 years, and his body was interred
in the north transept of the cathedral. He was succeeded
by Dr. Jas. Moore (Monsignor), who was dean and vicar-
general of this bishopric under Dr. O’Connor. Dr. Moore
was installed on the 27th April, 1884,
•SCHOOLS.
There are 20 State Schools, with accommodation of from
100 to 900 children each, the largest being the Dana Street,


about a quarter of a mile from the City Hall. The principal
private schools are the Ballarat College, Grenville College,
Mrs. Kennedy’s School for girls, Queen’s College (for girls),
Victoria College, and the High School. The educational
institutions belonging to the Roman Catholics include
the Loretto Convent, Mary’s Mount, near Botanical
Gardens; Loretto College; Little Sisters of Nazareth,
Mill Street; St. Joseph’s School; St. Aloysius’, Ballarat
South; Sisters of Mercy Convent Schools, Ballarat East;
the Christian Brothers’ Schools, Skipton Street; three
schools for boys, at Ballarat East, Palmer’s Gully, and
Redan, respectively; and a very well appointed College in
Sturt Street, opposite the Bishop’s Palace.
OBSERVATORY.
The Oddie Observatory is a very perfectly equipped one,
standing on a site reserved for the purpose by the Govern-
ment at Mount Pleasant. The funds for the erection and
equipment of the observatory were furnished by Mr. James
Oddie of this city, who has taken a deep interest in it from
its inception and a pride in rendering it complete. Captain
H. E. Baker, late of Goldsborough, who was first placed
in charge, died in 1890. The telescope was first turned
skyward on 13th January, 1886. The observatory is an
adjunct to the School of Mines.
SCHOOL OF MINES.
The Ballarat School of Mines is the most useful and
valuable institution for technical education in this district.
It was started in the old Supreme Court-House, which is
situate in Lydiard Street south, about a quarter of a mile
from the Post Office. The building was given by the
Government for the purpose when the Court-House now in
use was erected. The first building has been greatly added
to, the additions being very irregular in design and size, and
lately the old stone building which was for many years the
Lydiard Street Wesleyan Church, and which was rendered
superfluous by the erection of a new brick church, was
purchased by the School authorities and utilised as a
Museum. Not only are the technique of mining, geology,


and surveying taught, but a variety of other subjects, and
the School hasbeen affiliated with the Melbourne University.
The buildings and plant, including the site, are valued at
£15,000. The institution is supported by a vote of £2,000
per annum from the Government, the subscriptions from
supporters, and fees from students. A handsome new
building, occupying the whole frontage, is now being erected;
Messrs. Figgis and Molloy, architects. Among the curios
in the School is an exceedingly well contrived anatomical
model, of Japanese manufacture, used by the class in Materia
Medica. The assayers, mining managers, and engineers
trained in the School are in great request and find ready
employment all over the colonies. Am outpost from
the School is an Observatory on a reserve at Mount
Pleasant, distant a mile and a half from the Post Office.
The telescope is a inch Newtonian reflector, made by
Captain H. E. Baker. The School was greatly aided by the
late Sir Redmond Barry, and the Observatory was the
especial care of Mr. James Oddie, who himself expended
a very considerable sum upon it. Mr. A. Berry is the
registrar of the institution.
NEWSPAPERS.
There are three daily papers, two morning and one
evening. The Ballarat Star was started on the 22nd Sep-
tember, 1855, the first issue of the Ballarat Courier appeared
on 10th June, 1867, and the Evening Post started on the
25th May, 1863.
FOUNDRIES, &c.
Undoubtedly the principal manufacturing industry in the
place is the Phoenix Foundry. Originally it was a small
establishment for founding mining machinery, but under
the management of Mr. W. H. Shaw, it developed into a
manufactory for locomotive engines. Up to the jubilee
year the foundry had turned out over 200 locomotives of
different patterns under tender to the Victorian Govern-
ment, and for use on the Victorian Railways. The engines
have proved good and serviceable, and quite equal to those


imported. The foundry is in the hands of a small company
of resident gentlemen. The company has plant valued
at over £50,000, and employs nearly 400 hands. The
plant includes a specially powerful steam hammer and
powerful hydraulic rivetting machinery. The first engine was
delivered to the Government on the 4th March, 1873.
The Union Foundry, the property of Mr. John Hickman,
is the next largest in the place ; in it some very powerful
mining machinery—which, for quality, could not be beaten
—has been made. The plant is valued at about £20,000,
and 80 hands are employed. The proprietor is a well-known
member of the City Council.
There are other foundries, such as Lonie and Dingle’s,
Robinson’s, Cowley’s, and Laird’s Boiler Works; J. J.
Smith’s, Kelly and Preston’s, and Munro’s Agricultural
Implement Factories.
WOOLLEN FACTORIES.
Ballarat boasts two woollen mills with plant and appliances
sufficient to make all the blankets, tweeds, and worsteds
wanted in the district. The Sunny Corner mills, in Ballarat
South, are owned by a company. The plant is valued at
about £60,000, and includes 40 looms, and all the most
approved appliances, and lately a worsted making plant has
been added. So far the company has only paid per cent,
on capital. It was started in 1871. The other mill is in
Ballarat North, and is owned by three resident gentlemen.
THE GASWORKS.
The Gas Company is a private corporation with a capital
of £35,000. Their works, in Grenville Street, have been
in operation since 17th July, 1858. The company have
expended £98,626 on their works, and are now able to
make two million cubic feet of gas per week. Their revenue
in the jubilee year was nearly £28,000. At first the price
of gas was £2 per 1,000 feet, but now it is 7s. lid. The
company declares a 10 per cent, dividend annually.


~r
O
O
CP
c
>
s
s*
f
3
rr
n:
rr
X




WATER SUPPLY
Ballarat is supplied with water for domestic and quartz
crushing purposes from a system of four reservoirs, the
Gong Gong, Kirk’s, Pincott’s, and Beale’s. The Gong
Gong is the one nearest the city. It has a storage capacity
of 420,000,000 gallons, and the other three together hold
294,000,000 gallons. The Gong Gong cost £105,000
(including costs of a lawsuit), and altogether the system
cost £362,000. There is also a new dam further
up than the others in course of construction. The
catchment area comprises nearly 3,000 acres, and
extends right back to the Dividing Range, a distance
of nearly 30 miles. The water supply was formerly
managed by a joint commission of the City and
Town Councils, numbering 18 members, but they did not
work harmoniously, and now the Commission consists of
seven members—three appointed by the Government and two
by each Council, and Mr. J. Noble Wilson is the chairman.
The money for the works was lent by the Government, to
whom the Commission now pay £12,664 interest annually.
The Commission’s offices are in Grenville Street, near the
Gasworks.
MASONIC.
The Masonic Hall, Camp Street, is the joint property of
the Yarrowee and St. John’s Lodges. It is a pretty, com-
modious hall, and in it three lodges and one chapter meet.
The Yarrowee Lodge, E.C., 713, meets on the third Tues-
day in the month; St. John’s, 1.C., 427, on the second
Thursday; Orion, E.C., 1153, on the fourth Monday; and
the Yarrowee Royal Arch Chapter, on the first Tuesday
in every alternate month. The Ballarat Lodge,S.C., meets in
the Public Library, Ballarat East, on the fourth Wednes-
day ; and the Sebastopol Lodge meets at Sebastopol.
There are also lodges at Buninyong, Smythesdale, Creswick,
and Clunes. All the Masonic Lodges are now under the
Victorian Constitution.


ASSOCIATIONS.
Their name is legion, and the principal are the Australian
Natives’ Association, Young Men’s Christian Association,
South Street Young Men’s Debating Society, Amalgamated
Miners’ Association, Mine Owners’, Mine Managers’, and
Engined rivers’ Associations, Old Colonists’ Association,
Eight Hours and Half Holiday Associations, Hibernian
Society, endless Friendly Societies, and L.O. Lodges. The
A.N.A. is a friendly benefit society, the members being
born in the colonies, and is distinct from most such societies,
in that all meetings are open to the public. The members
of the Association meet fortnightly at the Mining Exchange,
Lydiard Street. The Young Men’s Christian Association
had rooms in Lydiard Street. The South Street Young
Men’s Debating Society have erected a hall of their own in
Skipton Street. The Amalgamated Miners’ Association in-
cludes all the miners working in Ballarat, and is at once a
benefit society and a union. The office is at the Trades’
Hall, Camp Street. The Mine Owners’ Association includes
the principal speculators in mining stock. The Mine
Managers’ and Enginedrivers’ Associations are limited to
their respective crafts. The Old Colonists’ Association is
a sort of club, reserved for those who have been 25 years
in the colonies, and they have a hall in Lydiard Street,
on a site granted them for the purpose by the Government.
The Hibernian is a benefit society restricted to Catholics,
and the members meet in the library at St. Patrick’s. The
Eight Hours Association is supported by the trades ; and
the Half Holiday Union, to maintain the Friday half holi-
day, is greatly valued by shopkeepers’ assistants. There
is also a newly-formed Ballarat Dramatic Society. The
Australian Natives’ Association project erecting a hall for
themselves on a site in Camp Street given them by the
Government.
MUSICAL ASSOCIATIONS.
Besides numerous bands and choirs and classes, Ballarat
boasts an effective association for promoting the study and
practice of singing. There are no active female members
of*the Liedertafel, for though any one may join on nomina-


tion and election, the musical performances are restricted to
men. The non-performing members are admitted to the
monthly concerts, at which the performing members and
some leading vocalists, secured for the occasion, sing. The
Liedertafel proper —that is to say, the singers—meet every
Wednesday night at Craig’s Hotel, where they are trained
under the despotic baton of Mr. John Robson. The
concerts, which are well worth attending, and always draw
large houses, are given in the Alfred Hall, which is tastefully
decorated for such occasions. Mr. W. D. Hill is the
society’s secretary. There are over 300 non- and 60 per-
forming members.
ATHLETICS.
A well-appointed Gymnasium—which is open all the
winter, and at which proper instruction is given by pro-
ficient masters, stands in Armstrong Street north ; it owes
its erection to the energy and liberality of Mr. Andrew
Anderson; immediately opposite are the City Baths (105 feet
by 60), which are open to the public (Mondays and Fridays
being reserved for ladies); hot, steam, and Turkish, as well as
swimming, baths can be had here. The largest baths inland
are at the corner of Peel and Eastwood Streets, Ballarat East.
They are 188 feet long by 80 feet 4 inches broad, with a
depth' ranging from 3 feet 8 inches to 7 feet 8 inches, and
they are well attended. There are two Cricket Grounds—
the Eastern Oval in Ballarat East, and the Western Oval
in city; the former is the better, and on it all the best
matches are played. Pedestrianism and other athletic
exercises are carried out on both. The Eastern Oval has
also an excellent wheel-track, quarter of a mile round. A
bowling ground is attached to each, and there is also a
bowling green—the Central—by itself in Mair Street.
The Eastern Oval is kept and managed by the Ballarat
Cricket Clubs. In the winter it is turned into a football
ground, and used by the South Ballarat and the Ballarat
Imperial Football Clubs. The Ballarat Football Club has a
ground of its own in Pleasant Street, near the lake, and has
recently erected on it a comfortable grand stand. There
are three Rowing Clubs—Ballarat, City, and Wendouree—
and each has a boat-house on the eastern margin of the


lake, and a stock of practice boats and outriggers. In all
these athletic clubs membership is attained on nomination
and election by members, and payment of entrance fee and
subscription.
ORDERLY ROOM.
This is one of the finest, if not the finest, drill-room south
of the line. It furnishes an area 189 feet long by 75 feet
broad under one span ; and along the sides of this spacious
room are arranged numerous offices, and quarters for the
drill instructors. The Ballarat battalion numbers all told
503 officers and men, and among the members are old
soldiers wearing medals for Crimea, New Zealand, Central
Asia, and Egypt. The commanding officer is Lieut.-Colonel
A. M. Greenfield.
PLACES OF AMUSEMENT.
The principal place of entertainment is the Academy of
Music, Lydiard Street. It was originally owned by a
company, but since became the property of Sir W. J. Clarke.
The foundation-stone was laid by Madame Arabella Goddard
on the 24th September, 1874, and the building was opened
on 7th June, 1875 ; La Fille de Madame Angot being the
first piece produced in it. The interior is roomy but not
well designed. It will accommodate 1450 persons, seated
as follows : —Circle, 350; stalls, 300; pit, 800. As many
as 2077 persons have been crammed into the building,
lima De Murska, Ristori, and other leading artistes, have
appeared there. The Alfred Hall, in Grenville Street, was
built in a few weeks, on the occasion of the visit of
Prince Alfred, by the two municipalities. It cost
£6OOO, and as the two Councils could not agree to
a site which placed it wholly in one or other munici-
pality, it was decided to erect it where it now stands
over the divisional line—the river Yarrowee—between the
City and Town, half in each municipality. It will accom-
modate now 3500 persons. The gifted Walter Montgomery
gave a series of his recitals in this hall. The Assembly
Room will seat 400. The large hall in the Mechanics’
Institute will accommodate 800 people. The other halls


used for entertainments and for balls and dances are—the
Ballarat City Hall; Trades’ Hall, Camp Street; Phcenix
Hall, Armstrong Street; Lyceum Hall, Lyons Street;
Societies’ Hall, Grenville Street; the Brigade Hall, Raglan
Street; Graham’s Hall, Windermere Street; South Street
(Debating), Skipton Street; Clyde Hall, Clyde Street;
Societies’Hall, Macarthur Street; Fire Brigade, BarklyStreet,
Ballarat East; Town Hall, Sebastopol. The old Theatre Royal
was the most com pact theatre ever built here, but it fell into dis-
use, and is now occupied as shops, in front by Messrs. Young
and Ince and others, while Messrs. Snow and Room have
an elegant show-room on the locale of the stage and green
room. The foundation-stone of this theatre was laid
by G. Y. Brooke, and in it appeared nearly all the
theatrical lights who came to the colonies between 1858
and 1876.
ROLLER SKATING.
Roller skating became a popular pastime in the jubilee
year, owing to a very commodious rink being opened in
Dawson Street north. Since then there have been
numerous small rinks started, and one of the finest in the
colony was for a time conducted in the Alfred Hall.
SHOWS.
The Ballarat Agricultural and Pastoral Society, the
committee of which meets at Craig’s Hotel on the morning
of the first Saturday in every month, was formed to
encourage agriculture, dairying, implement-making, and the
breeding of first class stock. Under its auspices two shows
are held every year, one of sheep only and the other of
every other description of stock and all kinds of manu-
factures and farm produce. The society yearly offers nearly
£2OOO in prizes, and the exhibitions are held in the
society’s yards at the north-east of Lake Wendouree. The
secretary of the society is Mr. S. Morrison.
The Ballarat Horticultural Society annually holds in the
Alfred Hall three exhibitions—the spring, autumn, and
bulbs shows respectively. This society has done much to


develop horticulture here, and its spring show is the “cup
day ” of Ballarat in its adoption by the ladies as a means
of displaying their spring costumes. The society’s secretary
is Mr. J. L. Harvey.
SPORTING.
No community would show itself characteristically British
if it had not a racecourse. Ballarat has two. The
Dowling Forest course, situate at the southern slope of
Mount Pisgah, on the Dowling Forest Estate, is the most
picturesque in the colony, and is, itself, worth seeing. It
is under the management of the Ballarat Turf Club, and on
it three meetings are held annually, including the annual
race meet of the Ballarat Hunt Club. The erections on
the course include a spacious grand stand and all the other
buildings requisite for carrying on the momentous past-
time of horse-racing. The course itself is a mile and a half
round, and the steeplechase course includes a log wall,
several stiff fences, a stone wall, and three hedges. The
honorary secretary for the club is Lieut.-Oolonel A. M.
Greenfield.
The Ballarat Miners’ Turf Club has a very conveniently
situated racecourse in Ballarat South, distant about a mile
and a half from the Post Office. The course is about a
mile round, and is singular as having a conical mound of
mining debris almost exactly in the centre of the ground.
An elegant grand stand and the necessary offices have
recently been erected on the ground, and now it is a very
complete little course. During the year four meetings are
held on it. The secretary for the club is Mr. T, Hager.
The Ballarat Hunt Club have a fine pack of hounds in their
kennel on the Learmonth Road, and they follow them, in
winter, at least once a week (either on a Friday or
Saturday) across country, which, but for its wire fence,
would delight any Britisher mounted on a hunter up to his
weight. At present the drag gives the scent, but foxes are
getting numerous and will soon be worth chasing. Mr.
R. Affleck is the master of the 8.H.0., and Mr. C. Walker
the honorary secretary.


The Ballarat Gun Club holds monthly pigeon shooting
matches at the Miners’ Racecourse, and periodically offers
valuable stakes, open to all comers. They have had over
90 entrants for such a stake, including all the best shots of
the colonies. The hon. secretary for the club is Mr. T. W.
Purdue, of Lydiard Street.
The Ballarat Coursing Club possesses an extensive and
exceedingly well contrived plumpton on Sir Samuel
Wilson’s Ercildoune station, about 13 miles from Ballarat.
At this plumpton several meetings in the year are held,
and there is never any lack of hares or of good trials.
Coursing is a dying sport in this district. The club’s sec-
retary is Mr. Simon Cadden.
The Ballarat Yacht Club hold their matches on Lake
Wendouree, and, during the summer, hardly a Saturday
afternoon passes without the lake being enlivened with one
of these events. The yachts are half-decked and range in
capacity from 3to 7 tons, and cost about £250. They are
built for flying, and as long as they can keep afloat they
travel at a rattling pace, and cannot be matched by the
craft on the bay or other lakes. The club’s secretary is
Mr. Ohas. Akins, and its rooms are at Mr. T. Gill’s Lake
View Hotel.
Bicycling and Tricycling have their full quota of votaries,
and there are two clubs in operation. The Ballarat
Bicycle and Tricycle Club (Mr. R. A. Thompson, secretary)
meets at Craig’s, and the Cyclists’ Touring Club (Mr. A. E.
Roberts, secretary) meets at Reid’s Coffee Palace.
PISHING AND SHOOTING.
Thanks to the public-spirited exertions of some enthusi-
astic anglers, notably Drs. Whitcombe and King, Messrs.
Seal Bros, and Mr. John Whitehouse, the lakes and the
running waters of this district are well stocked with good
fish. In Lake Wendouree, English trout, American brook
trout, English perch, carp, and tench are to be found.
Trout weighing lOlbs., perch weighing 81bs., and carp as
heavy, have been taken out of the lake, and the season’s


baskets of some anglers can be told in hundred-weights.
Minnows (live and artificial), flies, grasshoppers, the larvae
of the dragon-fly, young crayfish, and worms, all take in
turns, and a very deadly bait to the perch is the “flash” of
tin, silver, or copper. The supply of trout is kept up from
the breeding-ponds in the Botanical Gardens, the spawning
fish being stripped annually and the ova kept in proper beds.
Thousands of young trout are turned into the lake from
this pond every year. The same kinds of fish, and, in
addition, Murray cod, stock Lake Burrumbeet and Learmonth
A cod-fish, weighing 401b5., was caught in Burrumbeet, and
a brown trout, weighing 131b5., was taken from the creek
leading into Burrumbeet near the little hamlet called
80-Peep. The reservoirs of the water supply also contain
perch, trout, and carp. The Moorabool all down its course
contains lusty trout and well grown perch ; the river can be
reached by train to Millbrook, or by train to Lai Lai, or by
a pleasant drive down the Gordon Road, and there is
not a reach in it unfrequented by the speckled trout. The
river is, however, very snaggy, and abundance of hooks is
desirable. Perch can also be got in the reservoir at
Newlyn, and at Fisken’s dam at Yendon.
The best shooting is quail-shooting, the season for which
opens on the Ist March. All the farm lands in the
district, but especially those to the northward, are in their
turn visited by the quail. Snipe are found occasionally in
sedgy places, but their visits are very irregular. Wild
duck and black swan are often obtainable at Winter’s
swamp—about three miles west of Ballarat, —at Burrumbeet
and Learmonth, the Cockpit (on the Ercildoune Estate—a
permit to shoot is necessary), the water supply dams, and the
Moorabool. Wild turkeys and plover are frequently to be
met with in open country westward and northward from
Ballarat, and 15 to 30 miles out. The Korangamite Lake
district, south-west about 40 miles, teems with wildfowl.
Rabbits can always be got a few miles out, but a good ferret
is almost indispensable. The pothunter will find hares
everywhere,






PICNIC RENDEZVOUS.
Lake Learmonth is a sheet of fresh, or rather brackish,
water, covering an area of 1,000 acres, lying north-west of
Ballarat, and 13| miles from it by road. The drive to it
is through pretty, agricultural country, and the little town-
ship of Learmonth lies on the eastern margin. The lake
contains English perch, trout, and Murray cod, all of which
were placed in its waters by enthusiastic anglers resident
in this district. A few boats are on the lake for hire.
Occasionally a regatta has been held at Learmonth, but its
distance from Ballarat prevented a large attendance. As
its title shows, it was named after the pioneering squatters,
the Learmonth brothers. Trains run regularly now to
Learmonth.
Lake Burrumbeet (muddy water) lies almost due west of
Ballarat, 11 miles by road, and 13 by rail. The water is
brackish, but drinkable when boiled. It is stocked with
English perch, English and American brook trout, carp,
and Murray cod-fish, all of which grow to a large size, and
eels are plentiful in the creeks running into the lake.
Like the one mentioned above, this lake is a great resort
of picnic parties. Regattas have been held on Burrumbeet,
but the water is deep, and some sad cases of drowning
made such events upon it unpopular. There are a few
boats on Burrumbeet let out to hire. In 1838 the lake
was little better than a salt pan, and in the following
year was quite dry ; it remained dry for some years, and
then filled again, and has been as it is now for over 30
years. Not far from Burrumbeet, north-westerly, lies the
famous run of Ercildoune, first taken up by the Messrs.
Learmonth, and named by them after an old Scottish keep.
South-westerly from the lake, some distance away, is the
hardly less famous Carngham station, the property of the
Hon. Philip Russell. The lake is about 20 miles in cir-
cumference.
A curious cavern, which remains yet to be explored by
some adventurous person, exists in a hill known as Mount
Cavern, lying north-west of Ballarat, 12 miles away, and


near the little township of Ascot. The cavern has been
found to extend to a considerable depth and that is all
that is known of it.
At the Lai Lai Falls is one of the most picturesque spots
in the district. The Lai Lai station is on the Ballarat-
Geelong railway line, 12| miles from Ballarat; and the
falls are about two miles in a northerly direction from it.
A siding to the Lai -Lai racecourse (where a very popular
race meeting is held on New Year’s Day) carries picnic and
race excursions to within a quarter of a mile of the falls,
The waterfall itself is formed by a tributary of the
Moorabool, and it leaps down a chasm cleft in the basalt
for a distance of 110 feet, and then winds along in a
charmingly devious course to the Moorabool. A pathway
has been cut from the head of the chasm to the foot of the
falls, so that a good view of the waterfall from the greatest
vantage-point can be obtained for the expenditure of very
little exertion. About four miles to the eastward lie the Lai
Lai iron mines, which have not been hitherto a pronounced
success ; and near to the racecourse are the Moorabool Falls
(56 feet), not so striking a natural viise eri scene as the other,
but still very pretty. The route to the falls, by road, is
estimated to be 16 miles.
Mount Warrenheip (native name for emu feathers) is
another favorite place for picnickers. It can be reached by
road, six miles, or by rail to Dunnstown, on the Gordon line,
6| miles. The hill itself is 2,463 feet high, and the
Ballarat-Geelong railway is carried over one of its spurs at
an altitude of 1,725 feet above sea-level. From its crest a
magnificent view of the country can be obtained. A well
has been sunk near the reserve. It contains good water, and
has been frequently availed of by excursionists.
Mount Buninyong (bent knee), like Warrenheip, is believed
to be an extinct volcano, and both are surrounded by excep-
tionally rich volcanic soil (as much as £6O an acre being given
for a farm at Warrenheip). This mountain rises to a height
of 2,740 feet above sea-level. It is distant about miles
from Ballarat. Trains and cabs ply almost hourly during the
day between Ballarat and the township of Buninyong. Bunin-


yong is called the “ ancient village,” for it was a town,
possessed of a court-house, before Ballarat was thought of.
A very pretty drive leads to near the top of the hill, and in
the last pinch a zigzag path has been cut to the top for the
convenience of picnickers. From the top a magnificent
view can be obtained on a clear day. With a good field-
glass, Corio Bay, at Geelong, and the ships on it, can be
discerned, and a wonderful stretch of country for scores of
miles around.
The Water Reserves, situate about five miles eastward
from Ballarat, are extremely pretty, the natural beauties
of the locality having been heightened by the artificial lakes
the reservoirs form, and the copses and plantations of
English and other deciduous trees. The walk upwards from
the Gong Gong—the main reservoir—past Kirk’s and the
weir basin, is charming. The reservoirs are full of fish, and
anglers often get good baskets. Frequently, toward the
end of summer, the undergrowth in the reserves takes fire,
and, unless the flames are early checked, much damage is
done. An alarm-bell has been hung up near Kirk’s to
summon the employes in such cases. The keeper’s house
is connected by telephone with the water office in the city.
At Kirk’s, and also at Beale’s (12 miles from Post Office),
shelter houses have been erected for the accommodation of
picnic parties. A few boats are kept on the dams here ;
they are for the use of the employes of the Water Com-
mission, and not pro hono publico.
BLACK HILL.
The hill to the north-east of Ballarat, a glaringly white
eminence, was named in the early days Black Hill,owing to
the sombre looking crown of vegetation it had. The timber
has all been stripped from it, and the radical operations of
the Black Hill Mining Co. have riven the hill in twain and
turned it from black to white. At the foot of this hill was
erected the first crushing battery put up in Ballarat. From
the top of this hill a superb panoramic view of Ballarat and
the surrounding district rewards the excursionist who
climbs to it,


HOTEL ACCOMMODATION.
This is as varied as the wants of the public, some hotels
being as good as one could desire, and the others as cheap
as the man of slender means requires. Among the hotels
maybe mentioned Craig’s Royal Hotel, W. Bentley, Lydiard
Street, at which the Duke of Edinburgh, Princes Albert Vic-
tor and George of'Wales, and numerous distinguished visitors,
have quartered; Lester’s, generally considered to be the best
managed and most comfortable hotel in the colony, A. Lester,
Sturt Street; George, 0. Forster, Lydiard Street; Brophy’s,
M. Newton, Sturt Street ; Club, J. Dunn, Lydiard
Street; Union, J. Whitehouse, Sturt Street ; Buck’s
Head, Plouright and Hurst, Bridge Street; Royal George,
L. Steffanini, Lydiard Street; Unicorn, H. Pobjoy, Sturt
Street; Fern’s, D. Fern, Sturt Street; Ballarat, W.
Sandford, Lydiard Street; Provincial, W. Irwin, Western
Railway Station; Stork, Mrs. Gilbert, Armstrong Street;
Adelphi, Mrs. Zilles, Sturt Street; Town Hall, D. Wilson,
Armstrong Street; Southern Cross, A. Michelson, Sturt
Street; City Fire Brigade, L. Phillips, Sturt Street; Lake
View, T. Gill, Lake Wendouree; Edinburgh Castle, T.
Sayle, Armstrong Street; British Queen, S. Boanas, Bridge
Street; Earl of Zetland, E. Jonas, Bridge Street; Cos-
mopolitan, J. Michaels, Lydiard Street; Grand Hotel, S.
Cohen, Lydiard Street; Coffee Palace, J. Reid, Lydiard
Street. The ordinary tariffs range from 2s. 6d. per meal
and bed to 6d. per meal and Is. a bed.
RAILWAY ROUTES.
From here the traveller can go by rail to every part of
the colony, to Adelaide, and to Sydney. From Ballarat
radiate lines running to Scarsdale, to the Western District,
to Maryborough and the north-west, to Castlemaine and
Sandhurst northward ; to Daylesford, north-easterly, and
so on to Melbourne; to Gordon and Ballan, along a line
which runs direct to Melbourne; to Geelong and
Melbourne, and to Buninyong. The line between Ballarat
and Geelong is double and can carry very heavy traffic, It
was opened on the 11th April, 1862.


CONVEYANCES.
Horse trams run from the centre of the city to the Lake
and Cardens, Sebastopol, and Soldiers’ Hill, the fares being
collected on penny stages. Cabs, too, ply the same routes.
Omnibuses run to the outskirts of Ballarat East, and cabs
ply regularly to Sebastopol (6d.), Buninyong (Is.), and
Brown Hill (3d). The cabs are mostly four-wheelers (carry-
alls), but there are some hansoms. Ordinary cab fare is 3s.
per hour, or by mileage as per schedule, and double rates
are charged after 11 p.m. Omnibuses can be obtained for
picnic parties, and buggies and drags from the livery stables,
at moderate rates.








JUBILEE SKETCH.
BALLARAT’S BIRTH, 1837,
BALLARAT’S JUBILEE, 1887.




Jubilee Sketch.
ISSUED UNDER THE AUSPICES OF THE CITY COUNCIL.
Ballarat’s Bizet In, 18317,
Ballarat’s IJul 18817.
By WILLIAM LITTLE, Esq., J.P.,
PRESENT MAYOR OF THE CITY.
“ I do confess the imperfect performance.”— Congreve.
18 3 7.
rthe language of the yellowbacks and iambic prose of young
ladies’ journals, the gilded car of day is sinking in the west,
and eucalypti shadows lengthen on the grass. The budding
wattle and sheen top of Warrenheip arrest the glinting rays, and
all animated Nature is silent, save the jackass on the pliant bough,
and the yelping dingo chasing long-tailed marsupials over the
virgin bosom of Black Hill and down the fattening sides of unborn
Eureka.
Then as the Western Hills and the Peereck Range (Pyrenees) bar
the pencilled rays of the setting sun, cooling zephyrs send their
fragrant argosies through primal wood, sylvan dell, and o’er the
limpid Yarrowee, murmuring in its auriferous bed, awaking Apollo’s
accordant lyre and Nature’s subtle harmonies, inviting even the
drowsy bear to seek its lofty lair, the Eden-cursed snake its hole,
the pearl-headed toad its pool, the tired cub its dam, arid—and so
on, responsive
.... to the gentle lullaby
That through the trees is creeping !
Those sleepy trees, that nod their heads
Ere the moon as yet comes peeping,
Like a tender nurse, to see if all
Her little ones are sleeping.”


In the glade (White Flat) the curling smoke and smell of roast
wallaby ascend. Around the white fire-ash circles a group of
aborigines, mostly clad in primeval innocence, feathery coronets,
fat, and rouge, all garrulous and amaze over the coming change—the
reversal of their cherished tribal customs, cannibalistic and brutish
ways—to be effected by the colonising mission of the Anglo-Saxon,
whose exploring contingent from Geelong had reached the vicinity
of Ballarat (resting-place) that very day in August, and, strange to
say, in the accession year of our Gracious Majesty, and of grace
1837, in the persons of Thomas Livingstone Learmonth, Henry
Anderson, D’Arcy, Dr. Alex. Thomson, and others.
Then William, the lithe black king of the Ballarat tribe, addresses
the enterprising new chums—
“ Tradition, long- back ages dead, did say,
Across the big blue sea a pale-faced race,
Adventurous, impetuous, and free,
Would come in ships, with spreading sail and flag,
Allured by wealth, emprise, and fame,
New realms to add, unoonquered and unbought,
Except by blankets, guile, and tinselled gifts.”
The colonisers rejoin :—“ Billy, le Roi, that presage is to-day ful-
filled ; for, with a British psean, here we are, plus our Rose, Thistle,
and Shamrock virtues, cum national vices and the latest germs of
the newest disease. We’ve left the soft dalliances of cultured
society, safely passed the Scylla rocks and Charybdis whirlpools of
civilised shores, and crossed the briny sea, gaily singing with our
cousin-poet—
‘ ime erflote, ime erfiote
On the swift rollin tied,
and the rover is free.’
We bring with us the latest, more or less true, old-world histories—
prehistoric, ancient, modern. Poor ignorant black ! You know
nothing of Charon’s bark and Ireland’s wrongs ; neither have you
read the tales of Homer nor the wit of Hansard. Your young men
never wept over the troubles raised by the too-fair Helen, nor have
your children over the cuts caused by the much-cursed Bindley
Murray. Your profound Stygian darkness is seen in your dis-
graceful obliviousness of the fair unabashed sea-born Aphrodite on
the one hand, and of the more recently created great unwashed
throng on the other. Your thieving characteristics stand out in all
their black, base relief when put alongside the white man’s primal
fairness and the modern all-round game of grab-all. Your ignorance
of refined Greece is only equalled by the amount of emu fat you rub
upon your favorite gins. Your lubra annexees minister in miams to
sensual ease, and yet you know nothing of the European seraglio.
You batten on blood and roast neighbour, and are oblivious of
bygone human hecatombs offered to appease strange bloodthirsty
gods. Your Sabbathless lubra kills her new-born babe rather than
be bothered with many piccaninnies—a horrid practice, hardly ever
found out in Christian parts ! Your gin slavishly digs up starchy
roots with the muwrang-pole, and gathers the white snail for food,


rubs fire-sticks, and makes the dome-shaped wurley ; but our gin
rears strong palatial edifices, where some people, at others’ expense,
sooner end their days, freed from such domestic duties. You keep
the Ten Commandments—backwards—and practise polygamy, and
are in this regard in shameful contrast to the Latter-day Saints of
Salt Lake City. Your unpardonable ignorance of the Golden Fleece
is as pronounced as is the activity of the vermin which try to accom-
modate themselves in your scanty attire. You are great in fantasies,
weather forecasts, trails, carousals, and grunting corroborees. You
know nothing of the Babes in the Wood, but you do a lot about
those in the stone oven, thus practically illustrating the culinary
theory of the Yen. Dean Swift, ‘ that a young healthy child, well
nursed, is, at a year old, most delicious, nourishing, and wholesome
food, whether stewed, roasted, baked, or boiled, and will serve in a
ragoAt. A child will make two dishes at an entertainment for
friends, and when the family dines alone the fore or hind quarter
will make a reasonable dish.’ Having now, like Priam’s son, hec-
tored you, and contrasted your social nothingness to our ancient
and modern domestic and political ethics, we invite you to recipro-
cate, sketching your local topography, history, and other customs.”
Then following indissoluble fate, and ascending Bowdun’s Height
(Black Hill), the dark monarch,, “ with the future in his eyes,”
sadly surveys the surrounding landscape.—his fading kingdom—and
with his barbed hunting-spear points out the physical landmarks
and localities, and in soft non-sibilant verba (freely translated), and
with many signs, exclaims ; —“ Waugh! (behold) the upland Mount
Warreneip (so called from the feathery appearance of its lacey ferns
and leafy growths), verdant Bonanyong (thus named from the
representation of the knee of a man lying on his back), Mortello
(Blowhard), beautiful Portello (Mount Pleasant), Langi-willi (Mount
Emu), ferny Bereep-bereep (Mount Cole), and Boriga (Mount Bolton).
Among the shadowy trees of these hills we seek the lair of the bear
and the bird-catching iguanp, and spear the springy wallaby and
nocturnal meeam (wombat); while hiding in intervening dingles, by
hills enrapt, are many fish-supplied creeks and rush-fringed lakes,
including the Tombine (Lake Learmouth) and Bormbeet (Burrumbeet
—meaning muddy waters), all vocal with the swan, turkey, gigantic
crane, pelican, duck, platypus, and may-be the mysterious bunyip,
awaiting the unerring boomerang and the cunning snare. Besides
these, are the rich soils and wooded hills of Warra (Spring Hill)
and Micharola (Birch’s Hill), fit retreats for Pan, sylvan or med-
dling elves, the porcupine, curlew, the screaming cockatoo, red-
breast, rainbow-painted parrot, and gliding snake. Added to these
spots are Narmloclc (Yarrowee Creek), Uran-Uran (Sebastopol),
facing us, with their browsing kangaroo and fleety emu ; while
further away are Naringook (Smythes), Kurnum( Carngham), Ganing-
gering (Chepstowe), Galembeen (Creswiek), Drawell (Miners’ Rest),
Woran (Skipton), and Piggoreet—spots alive with the snarling
dingo, root-eating bandicoot, mallee-hen, flying-squirrel, mopoke,
and ‘ the sacred crow and bat. ’ Our origin is lost in darkness.


Most tribes have no idea of a Supreme Being, nor how anything
was first made. We are anti-spiritists, and therefore dread the
prowling demons, phantoms, and ghosts, which make us fear the
morknUa (night). The manes of our race,” continues the sable
king, “ fly towards the setting sun, and some are resurrectionised,
and ‘by-and-by jump up white man.’ Corpses, accompanied by
wailings of friends and their self-inflicted lacerations and burnings,
are by certain tribes hid away in hollow trees, in running streams,
cremated, and some of their ashes carried about by the tribe. Oc-
casionally the body is laid in a cave, or on branches of a tree on a
raised platform, or buried in the narrow trench for three moons or
so, and then unearthed to have some of its bones scraped and hung
up as a souvenir in the raiam of the deceased. Death is mostly
attributed to, and regarded as the effect of, witchcraft, exercised by
some keern (rascal) of some adjacent tribe, and ought to be, and
is where possible, revenged by taking a life for a life,
‘ And blood for blood—the simple golden rule
Taught by the elder gods,’
either by stratagem or in open fight, The whereabouts of the
sorcerer is discovered by a bending straw stuck loosely in a hole
near the dead body, or by noting the direction the first ant or maggot
takes, and the first man met is the culprit. There is a charm and
virtue in eating or lubricating oneself with the fat of emu or of a
dead man’s kidney, or by eating a part of his skin; while some,
in memoriam, hang round the neck a cut-off hand. The birth of a
piccaninny is a great and ko-ki (pleasing) event in our lubra’s leafy
and bark-made miam (as was Mrs. Artemus Ward’s twins). The
father dangles the little mottled darky, and our girls vie with each
other for that opportunity (after the manner, ’tis said, of fair
damsels of cultivated nations). If births are inconveniently frequent,
that inconvenience is sometimes removed by the mother simply
killing the new-born infant, and that, too, on principles recognised
by women and winked at by us men. Occasionally a female child,
soon after birth, is betrothed to some notable man of another tribe
(for the rule is against intermarrying in their own tribe), who in
after years, if the budding girl has not eloped or been stolen, claims
her as a matter of right. If one such has not thus been sealed to
him he may either exchange one of his unconsulted female relatives
for some other blackfellow’s child or sister in another tribe, or steal
a wife. If his Juliet should have eloped, then he may, by sending
the message-stick, and putting on the pipe-clay and ‘ armoury of
hate,’ get up an expedition into the territory of the adjacent tribe,
and take the probable and expected consequence of a hand to hand
fight with an aggrieved relative of the fur-clad frail one.
“Our food is mostly a choice between bulbous roots, insects’
larvae, white grubs, and wild dog ; param (white ant) and fish ;
pounded seeds and eggs ; yams, the fat emu and swan, conmoit
(snake) and turkey-bustard, water-rat, and frog ; porcupine ant-
eater, lizard, and kaima (kangaroo); wattle gum, fungi, and the


tree-grub, eaten alive or roasted. In our ignorance of cooking
utensils nothing can be boiled, but the stone oven is brought into
requisition in this way : heated stones are placed in a prepared
hole; the sometimes unskinned marsupial is laid on these, and
covered over with more hot stones ; and lastly, over all, earth is
spread to prevent the escape of steam and heat. More generally,
however, the roast is made before a burning log or on the fire-ash.
We aborigines are experts in the piscatorial art. Fish are caught
by diving, by torch and spear, basket drag-net, and other ways.
Water-fowl are noosed by the swimmer hiding his head in a bush,
or by gliding under the surface of the nallack (water), breathing
through a reed, till he arrives under the unsuspecting duck. We
spear the wallaby, dig out the wombat, climb the branchless tree,
and set the bird-catching boombermart (screen). In our inter-tribal
fights we are not unfair. The green branch is our emblem of peace.
Of the dead bodies of infants, and also of those of our own relatives
who die an unmangled and violent death, some tribes have eaten,
partly, perhaps, as a time-immemorial ceremony, and out of affec-
tion for the dead, but never as an article of food, like some tribes.
[ls this the origin of the mother’s affectionate saying, ‘‘ I could eat
you, I love you so ?”] It is lawful and common among some tribes
to strangle old and infirm people—a custom carried into effect by a
relative. The excuse is, to prevent the aged in times of attack
falling into the hands of the enemy and being tortured. Our
offensive and hunting weapons include the flint-pointed and spicule-
barbed spear, with the ivommera (throwing-stick), the fatal waddy,
canoe-shaped shield, leeangle (war club), the bur-reek (stone toma-
hawk), and the circling wonguine, which submissively returns to
the thrower’s feet. By incantations and magic the native sorcerer
dispels deadly native small-pox, and also eczematous diseases
common to the blackfellow, attributed to fish-eating and other
causes.”
As a brochure of this sort, prepared at short notice, must neces-
sarily be very limited in extent, I refer the reader for more extended
information to the excellent works on aboriginal affairs and history;
particularly to Brough Smythe’s Aborigines of Victoria, J. Bonwick’s
Port Phillip Settlement, James Dawson’s Australian Aborigines,
Richmond Henty’s Australasia, Fison and Howitt’s Kanularoi and
Kurnai, and to scarce works in the Public Library, Melbourne.
In conclusion let me add, King Billy might, years after, have
truthfully written, in the orthography of a A. Ward: “Before
your arrival the savaijis was virtoous and happy. They were
innocent of rum, draw-poker, and sinfulness gin’rally. They had
no faro-banks, delirium tremens, or Associated Press. Their habits
were consequently good. Late suppers, dyspepsia, gas companies,
thieves, ward politicians, pretty waiter-girls, and other metropolitan
refinements, were unknown among them. No savage in good
standing would take postage-stamps. The female aboorygine never
died of consumption, because she didn’t tie her waist up in whale-


bone things ; but in loose and flowin’ garments she bounded with
naked feet over hills and plains like the wild and frisky antelope.”
Artemus might have added that the blackfellow never any-
where frisks it long after the dominating white man’s advent, for
history shows that the annihilation of the savage black races
quickly follows the baleful appearance of the Anglo-Saxon and
Teutonic races. Hence the aborigine is fast becoming a sort of
extinct and archaeological curiosity. In those early days, when
white men were few in the land, they were lavish in soft words and
cheap and useless scissors, mirrors, and such-like gifts, to win their
way into the blackfellow’s heart and country, but succeeding ship-
loads and firearms increased their strength and cupidity, fully
justifying, I fear, Howitt’s native woman’s lament in 1841.
“ When he was weak and we were strong.
The white man’s soul was warmth and light;
With friendly smiles and gentle tongue,
He talked of reason and of right.
He asked of us, in language meek,
Where flocks and herds might well abide ;
We led to river and to creek,
Fair streams, and pastures green and wide.
“ He heard the river-bird, content,
Peel its sweet bells along the wave ;
He by the Yarra pitched his tent,
And to us wondrous food he gave.
“ But now they rise on every hand,
As clouds o’er heaven that move and spread ;
They thrust our living' from the land,
And build their domes upon our dead.
“ Now they are many—we are few,
Still brightly shine the sun and moon ;
The white man bears an altered hue—
His soul and face are dark at noon.
“ The white man tells us where to go,
He tells us where to turn and stand ;
Where our own creeks and rivers flow,
In their old freedom, through the land.
“ His flocks and herds our forest fill ;
A thousand woods we wander through,
And hunger ; yet we may not kill
The white man’s woolly kangaroo.
“ O sorrow ! weary little one !
O helpless and iil-fated child I
The food, the life, the land is gone—
And we must perish in the wild ! ”
Have we Christians aided in bringing about this result ? and will
it yet be said of us, “ Ye found him hungry, and ye gave him husks ;
thirsty, and ye gave him fire-water; naked, and ye clothed him
with the fatal robe of Nessus ?”
Cui bono ? Why all this aborigine reference ? It is, I reply, made
for the purpose of more distinctly marking the half-century contrast
which now follows.


Such was, then, virginal Ballarat. Reader, look on that picture,
as painted by Nature, in August, 1837, and then on the following
one, produced by Nature and Art, in August, 1887.
18 8 7.
I now drop the somewhat hyperbolic convenience, and proceed on
verities. “Edward Henty was the first abiding settler on Victorian
soil. ” This was at Portland in the year 1834. John Fawkner
entered the Heads with his little craft, the “ Enterprise, ” in 1835 ;
and, as I said before, T. L. Learmonth’s and H. Anderson’s parties
left Corio Bay to explore this part of the Colony in August, 1837,
and strangely enough, synchronously with the accession of Her
Majesty. Early in the following year, “ Anderson and Yuille
pitched their homestead at the Woolshed, overlooking the Ballarat
Flat; Henry Creswick selected Creswick Creek Run; Captain
Hepburn, the Smeaton Run ; and Andrew Scott, Mount Buninyong.
Mrs. Scott was the first resident lady. She drove across the dry
bed of Lake Burrumbeet in 1840. Waldie selected to the north of
Ballarat Flat, where his shepherd deserted his flock of sheep because
he could not endure the solitude.” By way of interlude, it must be
admitted, mem. con., that the local historian has no scope for
antiquarian perplexity. He cannot start at the Creation as Knicker-
bocker did when writing up New York ; he has only a bare half-
century of history behind him ; he has no old-world memories,
vestiges, traditional relics, or transcendental oeuvres d’ art, to cull
from ; no feudal keeps, nor crumbling monkish abbeys, “where once
the bells were rung and the mass was sung no ancestral halls, nor
lichen-covered walls of military ancients to dilate upon; no
Water loos or Trafalgars to versify ; no niches of the world’s dead
great—no, not even a Ballarat canonized saint to pray to, a gun-
powder plot to blow about, nor “ a street immortalised by the play
of Romeo and Juliet, nor by her tomb—admission, half franc.”
Albeit, within a period of fifty short years, a golden chrysalis has
been developed, and a grand transformation scene painted in this
inland capital, with its 85 miles of metalled streets—a town that
has sprung up from infancy with the rapidity of enchantment and
Aladdin’s lamp-rubbed palace., Here are no statue-crowned turrets,
minarets, and marble piles for a Byron to sing about; but he may
sing of our golden sunshines, sans London fogs ; of our political,
social, and religious liberty, sans terrorism, unsurpassed, if even
approached, in any of these respects in any other part of the globe.
Ballarat's population (whose death-rate is only 13'75 per 1000) is
now over 39,000—a thoroughly anti-Malthusian fact; for exactly
half-a-century back the population of the entire colony was only
1,264 !
The yeomen of early days, diggers and storekeepers, were men of
grit, allured mostly from the industrial and cultivated walks of


nations, enterprising and practical, and who, under “ Divine
Sophia,” wisely laid out the plans and limits of a great city, and
transmitted a legacy of wealth, nerj. and vigor to their offspring—
concordant circumstances conspiring to place this metropolis points
ahead in her race with inland cities. This energy found expression
at the Eureka Stockade, in sturdy anti-convict agitation, and ballot-
box surprises, and was coupled with civic capacity, loyalty to the
Throne, and adhesion to constitutional government. It was only a
corollary that the effects of the novel and risky toil, austere and
embryonic life of the early colonists, and the difficulties surrounding
and incident to a new and excited gold-seeking community,
attracted suddenly together from all quarters, should perpetuate
their impressions on the next generation ; just as, for psychological
reasons, the dauntless battalions of the First Napoleon were
supremely brave from the fact of having been born amid the
clang of seditious arms and nursed in the revolutionary days of
Louis XVI.
Here the citizen sinks shafts a quarter of a mile deep, prospects
and blasts miles of drives ere he sees the color of gold, ofttimes not
even that, suffering repeated failures with the pertinacity of Bruce’s
spider, and frequently without its luck. In times past, “many who
had engaged in gold-mining had never previously performed any
kind of labor ; but so great was the fascination of the pursuit that
tasks the most arduous were performed under difficulties the most
discouraging.” Hence, a genuine Ballaratarian settling down in any
part of the world quickly betrays his individuality and early train-
ing by his go-ahead and genial disposition—a disposition en rapport
with all mankind, and unwarped by the centuries-old jealousies and
hatred of nations ; and if Burns’ idea of a universal brotherhood is
not a fait acco'mpli, and the world one big lodge, then it certainly is
no fault of our townsman. Wherever he travels he gives his hearty
“ grip ” and pronounces distinctly his shibboleth, “ Ballarat,” a
word synonymous with “ open sesame ” and hearty welcome.
I now invite the reader to ascend the City Hall Tower and view
the vista of beauty, fruition, and proceeds of this aforesaid pioneer
energy, and summarise local surroundings of interest, and, as we
struggle up the tower, let me state, en passant, that although Luther
successfully climbed part of “the Holy Staircase of Pilate” it is
fo?er-dless to say, in ascending this corkscrew, he would have
stopped sconer, for as a designed artificial difficulty it is simply
unapproachable. It would be a fair question for the opinion of the
Council’s counsel, would a case of manslaughter lie against the
corporation (i.e., civic) if an obese ratepayer got stuck to death in
one of its spiral straits ? May I further add, par parentMse, that
tradition alleges that the design of a certain superb cathedral was
supplied by the devil in exchange for the artist’s soul ; but legends
are absolutely silent about Mephistopheles contracting for this
unnatural abortion. Around the tower’s crowning palisade, 135
feet above the street, lie more examples of nature and art than the


centum eyes of an Argus could take in at once, and most of which
are within view, viz.:—
The Surrounding Country ; Ballarat City and Town ; the Lake and Gar-
dens ; Public and Private Buildings, &c., viz.;—Alfred Hall, Colleges,
Grammar and State Schools, School of Mines and Museum, Water
Supply, Mining, Public Baths, Foundries, Fine Arts Gallery, Mining
Exchange, Old Colonists’ Association, Burke and Wills, Eight Hours,
and Eureka Stockade Monuments, Burns’ and Statues at Gardens,
Benevolent and Orphan Asylums, Hospital, Female Home, Mechanics’
Institute, Public Libraries, Gymnasium, Hotels, Woollen and Flour
Mills, Breweries, Distillery, Cordial Factories, Churches, Banks, Sup-
reme Court, Gaol, Newspapers, Street Tree-Planting, Clubs, Fire
Brigades, Masonic Hall, Warehouses and Manufactories, Militia Hall,
Academy of Music, Skating Rinks, Telephone Exchange, Show-yards,
Eastern and Western Ovals, Bowling Greens, Produce Market, Cattle
and Sale Yards, Reformatory, Sites for the Queen’s and Tom Moore’s
Statues, Mining Plants, the Observatory, &c. —all evidences of material
and social progress. Added to these are other signs of progress, not
visible, but their influence is felt, viz.:—The Liedertafel, Musical
Union, Maennerehor, Eisteddfod, M.I.A. Union, Y.M.C. Association,
A.N. Association, Horticultural, Hibernian, Caledonian, Orange,
Temperance, and Ladies’ Clothing Societies ; Turf and Hunt Clubs ;
also numerous Friendly and Benefit Societies and Unions.
Surrounding this golden et garden city lies a vast agricultural
grazing, and mining country, quartered into four great counties, of
which Ballarat is nearly the focus. This is an important factor, for
it has been well said, “ The cities would be no cities were it not for
the country.” The local fourth-form boy would be expected to state
in his topographical lesson that Ballarat is bounded, approximately,
as follows ; —On the north, by the county of Talbot, having 1645
square miles of upper volcanic territory, embracing arable land and
rich alluvial and quartz mines. On the west, by the county of
Ripon, containing 1777 square miles of luxuriant, undulating,
prolific soil of a basaltic and Silurian formation, adorned with
English-looking pastures and lakes. Among them is fresh-water
Burrumbeet, 20 miles in circumference, containing codfish weighing
up to 30 or 40 lbs. ; Lake Learmonth, Kingston, Spring Hill,
Creswick, and Dowling Forest. On the south is the county of
Grenville, 1477 square miles in extent, and includes as may be seen,
Mounts Hesse, Stewart, Bute, and Gellibrand, the deep and salt
Lake Corangamite, with its 72 superficial square miles of water
area. The near half of this county has been proved highly auriferous ;
the other half is rich in agriculture and grass land, and where the
highest price wool of the world is grown. On the east, by the
county of Grant, with its 1852 square miles of pastoral, agricultural,
and auriferous wealth, including Bungaree, Gordon, and Warren -
heip parishes, and the basaltic Mount, 2463 feet above the sea-level,
where the prolific soil has only “to be tickled with a hoe and it
laughs with a harvest.” Some of the land is worth £6O an acre, a
rather different valuation to what John Batman put on Victorian
soil in 1835, when he induced the three brothers Jagajaga, and other
chiefs (and, curiously enough, one of them with the patronymic
Bungaree) of the Dutigallar tribe, located at or near Port Phillip, to
sell, sign, seal, and deliver to him, on the 6th day of June, 1835,


a tract of land between Geelong and Indented Heads, containing
about 100,000 acres, for “20 pairs blankets, 30 knives, 12 tomahawks,
10 looking-glasses, 12 pairs scissors,” and an annual tribute of
similar goods. There was also another so-called contract of sale
entered into by the same commercial gentleman for about 500,000
acres, lying between the Yarra and Geelong, for the usual knives,
scissors, <&c., valued £45 ; but to the credit of the Colonial Office,
these one-sided bargains were cancelled.
It may here be well to inform the geographically ignorant in
foreign parts that Ballarat is not now a suburb of Botany Bay. On
the contrary, it is 676 miles distant per train ; and, to be exact,
the territorial position of our Post Office is 37° 33' 39" south
latitude, and 143° 61' .06" east longitude.
Ballarat (i.e., city and town) has a municipal area of 13 square
miles, and formed streets, mostly rectangular, long enough, put end
to end, to reach in a direct line from this to Melbourne (and yet
London had not a paved street until the fourteenth century); 55
miles of gas mains ; 8,814 buildings, of an annual ratable value of
£209,105, on which a rate of 2s. in the £1 is levied for maintenance,
&c., and Is. in the £1 for water. The municipal revenue is
£38,000. Ten miles of horse tramways are in course of construction,
133 cabs and hansoms ply for hire, and 51 licensed lorries, and
parcels express. The population, including Sebastopol, is about
39,250. The City Hall (1438 feet above the sea-level) is of Doric
and Corinthian orders, and was completed and furnished in 1871,
at a cost of nearly £30,000. Its facade has 153 feet to Sturt Street,
a street three chains wide and miles long, and is regarded as the
finest south of the equator. In the centre of it are a double row of
shady trees and a promenade. The Alfred Memorial bells, weighing
4J tons (in the City Hall Tower), cost £l3OO, and were rung for the
first time on Christmas Day, 1871. The illuminated clock has four
dials of 9 feet diameter. Ballarat West was constituted a muni-
cipality in December, 1855, under Captain Clarke’s Municipal Act of
the previous year, a borough in 1863, and a city in 1870. Ballarat
East first became a municipality sth May, 1857, a borough in 1863,
and a town in 1871. The dramatis personae of the City Council
are—T. H. Thompson (mayor), Lieut.-Col. the Hon. W. C. Smith,
M.P. (mayor-elect), F. M. Claxton, J. Hickman, C. Salter (all ex-
mayors), C. C. Shoppee, J. G. McDonald, D. Cooke, and W, Little,
with G. Perry (town clerk), and who on special occasions wear the
civic lace and buckles. The Town Councillors are—James Russell,
M.P. (mayor), Theo. Williams (mayor-elect), W. Scott, T. Walker
(ex-mayors), E. Murphy, M.P., J. R. Elsworth, W. Gale, J. N.
Dunn, and E. T. Whitten, with R. C. Young (town clerk).
The Lake, like Sydney Harbour, is called “beautiful,” has an
area of 600 acres, and varies from 3to 5 ft. deep. Its foreshore is
over 3 miles, and has a deep plantation fringe of Pinus insignis,
Cupresstis Lawsoniana, Macrocarpa, black and white Italian poplar,


Acacia, Juniperus, Wellingtonia gigantea, and such ornamental and
umbrageous trees. On its bosom
“The swan, with arched neck
Between her white wings mantling proudly, rows
Her state with oary feet
and also are the black swan, wild duck, water hen, and the
rapacious cormorant. On its margin are 25 public and private boat-
houses, with a total flotilla of some 135 sailing and rowing boats, 6
steamers, 10 yachts ; and three rowing clubs, with 40 boats.
Hydrocharids and other troublesome weeds in this Lake cost the
Council £7OO a year to keep down. Skirting the Lake are charming
villas, palaces of the Anglican and Roman Catholic bishops, a
nunnery, &c. We have no natural water-attraction like the Bays of
Naples, Lisbon, Rio Janeiro, or a Sydney Harbour; but we have this
artificial Lake of singular beauty, costing with the adjacent Gardens,
£3,000 a year to maintain ; and we have, moreover, a climate
similar in its mean temperature to that of the first two named places,
and superior to the last two.
The Botanical Gardens reserve of 83 acres was acquired in 1858.
Of this area, 33 acres are in flower and landscape gardening, the rest
in park. This “other Eden, demi-paradise ”is rich in botanical
wealth. Here is seen Flora, dressed in harlequin colors and roseate
hues. Every few yards introduces kaleidoscopic radiances, particularly
“When Spring unlocks the flowers to paint the laughing soil.”
Among the zigzag promenades are the mile acacia walk, the palm
walk, decked with petunias, phlox, verbenas, geraniums; the half-
acre of pegged-down roses, dispensing a fragrance rivalling “ Nard
and Cassia’s balmy smells.” Historian Fronde, after chewing the
cud of much travel, in ecstasies writes: “ Such variety, such
splendour of color, such sweetness, such grace in the distribution of
treasure collected there, I had never found combined before, and
never shall again.” Dotted around are beautiful Carrara statues,
the gift of a well-known citizen, while £4OOO more are in the course
of being similarly spent under the legacy of another noble-minded
man. The Fernery, 460 feet by 63, is the site of rapture-—the
Nirvana par excellence. There the ferns and lycopods, of Brazilian
density, include the native Diclcsonia squarrosa and antarctica ,
Cyathea dealbata, black and white Mexican ferns, intermixed with
camellias, azaleas, ericas, fuchsias, climbing plants, and shrubs, in
blazing effulgence. The place is fairly alive with song-birds,
transferred from the meadows of England. Here the early-rising
pedestrian verifies that
“ None but the lark so shrill and clear ! _
Now at Heaven’s gate she clasps her wings,
The morn not waking till she sings.”
In addition to the skylark, there are the thrush, blackbird, and
starling. On dit , see Naples and die ; I say, see the Lake and
Gardens, and you will want to live to enjoy their Elysian charms,
9,nd “ the rapture of repose that’s here,”


Another object of interest at the Gardens, and the first of the
kind started in the Colony, is the unpretending fish-hatching house,
where some 12,000 English and Californian brown trout are
annually hatched. The modus operandi (the French dry stripping)
is briefly this : the ova are in July taken from a few of the finest
fish caught in the prepared rill and placed on trays, over which
there is a constant and regulated flow of water. In 54 days the
tiny tribe break their shell. They reach one stage after another
until they arrive at three large ponds (one 70 feet long), and then
after twelve months’ infancy they are counted and turned into the
Lake to face the world and their natural enemies in the water and
out of it. Hence Izaak Walton’s advice (and did he base it on St.
Paul’s injunction, “ Study to be quiet,”) can here be followed—“ All
who are lovers of virtue, be quiet, and go a-angling. ” The Ballarat
Fish Acclimatization Society has placed piscators and the public for
ever under obligation by having stocked with English trout many
important lakes and streams in Victoria, and in some instances be-
yond it. The English perch was introduced into the Lake 10th
October, 1869, and have been caught up to 6 lbs., with the live or arti-
ficial minnow, 8 lb. carp, English trout up to 11 lbs. and 30 inches
long, 1J lb. tench, and large eels, all of which are varied and
numerous enough to make Pope’s lines applicable :
“ Our plenteous streams a various race supply ;
The bright-eyed perch, with fins of various dye ;
The yellow carp, in scales bedropt with gold ;
Swift trout, diversified with crimson stains.”
The arboreal road via the Gardens might be utilised as a sublime
Oriental-like Rotten-row, or Ladies’ Mile; or an enterprising Bar-
num might here profitably introduce, for the delectation of the
thousand picnicking youngsters from far and near, the domesticated
elephant of India’s jungles, or the dromedary from Arabia’s deserts.
The zoological specimens are few, and merely a nucleus.
The Alfred Hall was made memorable by the visit of H.R.H.
Duke of Edinburgh, in 1867, and for whose reception it was built
within an almost “ unthinkable” short space of time. This erection,
like a Colossus, bestrides the Yarrowee—the dividing Deva of Balla-
rat. Some of its timber was actually growing in the adjacent forest
of Warrenheip (where preying birds made their eyries and oppos-
sums frisked among the branches thereof) only six weeks before the
eucalypti were felled to make the gay and huge reception-hall, prrl-
sating with cheers and loyalty. The architectural order is Noah’s
ark. Perhaps it was a sagacious ark-itectural provision against the
repetition of the floods which had devastated that low-lying locality.
It accommodates an audience of 4,000.
Colleges, Grammar, and Private Schools number some 33
establishments, where the descendants of Dr. Syntax graft the birch
on to the rising olive branches, and, not to quote Dr. Watt, the
fruit thereof, like bread on the waters, is seen after many days in
brilliant University and commercial careers. Here our embryo


ratepayers are engaged “ scrutinising the dates of long-past human
things, the bounds of effaced states, and the lives of deceased
kings,” squaring the circle, and reading “ what a little foolery
governs the world.” Added to these monuments of scholastic pro-
gress, there is our great State system, under the free, secular, and
compulsory Act of 1873. Out of our local population, 10,338
scholars between the ages of six and fifteen years of age are on the
rolls of 17 superb scnool buildings. The education of 222,054
children costs the Colony of Victoria, yearly, £629,000. Altogether it
is a system affording quite a royal, cheap, and easy road to knowledge.
’Twas rather different in the early days of our ancestors. Josh
Billings is right. “ Schooling when I was a colt didn’t lie round
so loose as it diz now, and learning waz picked up ofcener by run-
ning yure head against a stun wall tnan by any other kind ov
mineralogy.”
The School of Mines, and its Museum, is where are taught, I
was going to say, all the wisdom of the Books of Solomon, and the
arts, sciences, and knowledges of the day—metallurgy, mining,
materia medica, pharmacy, natural philosophy, telegraphy,
chemistry, photography, mineralogy, engineering, surveying,
assaying, drawing, mathematics, electricity, languages, and I don’t
know what else. Examinations are about to be conducted and
diplomas granted on the affiliated conditions prescribed by the
Melbourne Alma, Mater. In this intellectual nursery the antiquarian
neophyte may delve into the treasures of the dead past; the young
Kepler, with the aid of the 26-inch speculum and Phoebe’s light,
may wander among the stars ; the alchemist dream of transmutations
and elixirs ; the physiologist see how fearfully and wonderfully we
are made; the grave Darwinian may postulate and dwell on the
bones of his ancestors ; a Faraday discuss laws of inertia, and make
discoveries among endless blowpipes, crucibles, acids, and alkalies ;
the microscopist estimate how many animalcules, with bulging eyes,
are swallowed in every drop of water ; a Hugh Miller may crack
stones ; a Watt get up steam for the 4£ h-p. engine ; a Yon Muller
subdivide tissues, &c., &c.—a concatenation of advantages conspiring
to produce Plato’s “perfect man,” a Pythagoras, and prove that we
live in the golden age of unshackled science, philosophy, and speed,
and are not breathing the stifling miasm of the dark ages. May we
never again descend into the gloom of Avernus. During the past
year 718 students attended 21 class lectures on different subjects.
The Museum contains 8000 interesting specimens.
Our Water Supply is obtained from the Gong Gong reservoir,
Kirk’s dam, Pincott’s, and Beale’s, and together contain 600,000,000
gallons of the purest aqua in the Colony. There are 30 miles of
mains, and 120 miles of reticulation pipes. The total cost was
£360,000. Only 32 years ago a barrel of water was worth 205.; now
we have not a coin small enough to pay for it.
Poppet-heads, debris, and other evidences of mining enterprise lie
all round. Infinitely more money has been spent under Ballarat


than upon its surface. Take the Band of Hope and Albion Consols
Company for instance. It has expended a million and a-half on its
underground and surface works. Its underground drives, put end
to end, would reach 30 miles. Its shafts together total a mile and
a-quarter. Its main shaft is over a quarter of a mile deep. It has
yielded 27f tons of “saint-seducing gold,” realising about £2,640,000,
and paid one million one hundred and fifty-two thousand pounds in
dividends. The geological formation of the locality is lower Silurian,
overlaid by basalt and newer tertiary. Mining is in quartz and
alluvial. Thirty-four years ago, “Jewellers’ shops” were opened
in holes 8 feet square and 8 feet deep. From these as much as
£IO,OOO or £12,000 worth of gold was obtained, and, occasionally,
famous nuggets like the Canadian, 132 lbs., in February, ’53 ;
Welcome, 2217 ozs., on 11th June, ’SB, found 180 feet from the
surface ; Lady Hotham, 1177 ozs.; Nil Desperandum, 540 ozs.; the
Lady Loch, 617 ozs., found this month in the Midas Claim, 120 feet
from surface, and about 50 feet from the spot where the Lady
Brassey nugget was just previously unearthed. Those were truly
the maelstrom days of excitement, the temps d’ emharras de richesses,
the cornucopia days, the days of picking “ the pockets of Midas,
the golden pools of the Pactolian (Yarrowee) River.” Since then
till now, Ballarat mines have won £53,500,000, out of a grand total
for Victoria of £216,000,000. The first discoverer of the precious
metal was a wheelwright, Hiscock, near Buninyong, who came
across the royal ore when grubbing a tree in August, ’sl, and thus he
became a modern apocalyptic revealer of wealth, like the Revelation
Angel who broke the seven seals, diffusing “ power, riches, wisdom,
strength, honor, glory, and blessing.” About the following month,
gold was found at Golden Point, and on the banks of the Yarrowee,
whose cradle and pan-disturbed water “was amber, and its gravel
gold.” Auriferous quartz is found in vertical and flat reefs, mixed
in varying proportions, and according to locality, with iron and
arsenical pyrites, copper, zinc, blende, hematite, galena, and
malachite.
Public Baths. —Those in the East are the largest in the Colony,
The basin is 187 feet long by 80 feet wide. Here is seen, when old
Sol is flaming in the sky, a crowd “suspended on the bosom of a
cooler world.” The Western Baths have also hydropathic adjuncts.
Foundries.— The Phcenix Company, Registered, has turned out
over 200 locomotive engines. Its one hundredth engine was reached
in April, 1883. The buildings cover some two acres of land, and
capital of £40,000 is invested. When in full work, 300 Tubal-cains
are employed, and 18 Vulcanian fires are kept going, from whose
ashes, Phoenix-like, new creations arise. The Union, another hive,
illumined by Promethean sparks, is where the finest beam and other
engines, heavy machinery, &c., are made. There are also several
other foundries.
Fine Arts Gallery, founded by me of our large-hearted
pioneers, exhibits an excellent variety of pictures. There are not


among them “ poems ” of Rubens, Raphael, or Correggio, but there
are, what to us is of infinitely more importance, the productions of
rising Colonial artists. Added to these are imported gems lent by
citizens. The gallery is a popular resort, “ where fancy may revel,
refreshed and delighted.” A £5,000 edifice is about to be erected
on a valuable site granted by a paternal Government.
The “ Corner ” is preparing to remove to the £5,000 new Mining
Exchange, now in course of erection. Here pulsates the great
mining heart of the Colony, and where success, hope and dis-
appointment often shake hands. Brokers go on ’Change twice daily.
The Old Colonists’ Association is about to build next to the
Mining Exchange. One of its objects is to preserve the memory of
those who laid our material foundations and raised our social and
political superstructure, and to hand down their imperishable pat-
ronymics to posterity, which is hardly likely to be entirely success-
ful, since “ the pyramids themselves, doating with age, have
forgotten the names of their founders.”
Burke and Wills Monument, of homely design, reminds one
of the ill-fated in 1861, and, as Gordon says,
“ Telling its story to great and small,
Of the dust reclaimed from sand-waste lone.”
Burns, “ breathing marble,” costing £lOOO, is the finest example
of him in the Colony. It serves to remind certain folk of the “ land
o’ cakes,” and of the “ language Adam spoke ” in the days of “ auld
langsyne.
The Eureka Stockade Monument was created in memoriam of
the brave who died, resisting wrong and official ignorance, on the
3rd December, 1854, thus endorsing the Bard’s conviction, that
“ strong reasons make strong actions.”
The Carrara Marble Statuary, in the Botanical Gardens,
includes the beautiful and appropriate Flora Farnese, the goddess of
blossoms and spring ; rustic Pomona ; Bacchante ; Leda, and her
disguised lover; youthful Hebe; and the four figures representing
Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter ; thieving Mercury ; and,
lastly, Hercules, with his raised club and Nemsean lion’s skin,
seemingly doing one of his twelve labors ; or, may be, he is looking
after fair Hebe, whom he married when they reached Olympian
groves. May the donator receive in the “by-and-by” “ a white
stone ” engraven.
The executors of another noble and generous-minded pioneer—
and Plato says, “If a man be endued with a generous mind, this is
the best kind of nobility ” —have purchased in Rome, a charming
group of marble statuary by Professor Benzoni. Its destination is
the Gardens. It comprises three figures, representing father,
mother, and infant, escaping from Pompeii. Four bass-reliefs
illustrate the eruption of Mount Vesuvius and the destruction of


the city, and seem to mark the very moment when “ the earth and
surging seas give signal ” of the warning.
“ Hark, the trump of thunder !
Lo, earth rent asunder !
And, forth, on his angel-throne,
He comes through the gloom.”
This great work of art is of the highest class, and thoroughly
educational. The best Continental judges value it at £4OOO ; but
it was purchased, owing to fortuitous circumstances, at considerably
less. There is also a fine statue of Sir William Wallace, chiselled
in the Colony, and costing £l2OO. The figure is 7 feet 2 inches, the
conjectured height of that Scottish hero, who is supposed to be
standing watching the English army straggling across the narrow
bridge at Stirling. About £l5OO more have yet to be spent in the
same direction under the same will. Handsome statues of the
Queen and Tom Moore are about to be erected on sites reserved in
Sturt Street, facing the City Hall.
The Benevolent Asylum is a fine Elizabethian pile of buildings,
housing 270 men and women, decrepit, and “between the lights,”
and where are seen
“ The failing ear and eye, the slower limbs,
Whose brief name is age.”
Relief is afforded weekly to 667 outside poor.
The Hospital, of Italian order, is a noble institution, containing
160 beds. Its foundation-stone was laid with masonic honors in
1856. Here the humanitarian may prove that “ selfishness is not
only the essence of all sin, but directly or indirectly the cause of
all disease, both acute and chronic.”
The Orphan Asylum, of Elizabethian design, is another triumph
of humanity, and stands in loco parentis to 160 children.
The Female Home is a substantial building, a place of refuge,
whose doors are ever open to receive the much-to-be-pitied sick
Magdalens.
The Mechanics’ Institute, with lecture-hall and suite of rooms,
affords mental pabulum for 800 subscribers, and is, I believe, the
finest example in the Colony. It is a bold Italian four-storied
building, containing 14,000 volumes. The Public Library,
Barkly Street, is a credit to all concerned. 10,000 books adorn its
shelves. The City Free Library is an open house. It is about to
be replaced by a costly edifice. The Gymnasium is a spacious
building, splendidly equipped, where the indispensable sanus corpus
is prepared for a sound mind. Some of the Hotels are unsurpassed
in point of excellence. The Woollen Mill at Sunny Corner, with
£40,000 invested capital, is in full work. So is the Doveton Street
Mill, and which, together, annually turn out 210,000 yards of cloth.
Three Breweries have a large annual output. The Distillery at
Warrenheip produces yearly 70,000 gallons of whisky, gin, and
spirits of wine. Time fails me to set out our agricultural machinery,
leather, boot, soap, and candle factories. There are about 40


churches and chapels, and a synagogue. The Town Mission Hall
and Salvation Army Barracks are creedless institutions, penetrating
the Gethsemanes of society. Nine banks of issue, two savings banks,
two cemeteries, a supreme court-house, and an adjacent gaol for
the falcons and vampires of society. The three daily newspapers
are the Star, Courier, and Evening Post. The Orderly Room is a
hall 180 feet by 76 feet, the largest of one span in the Colony.
There are numerous side rooms. Cost nearly £BOOO.
Street Tree-Planting is here an arboreal feature. Sturt Street
was first planted in 1860. There are now in the streets of city
and town 3000 flourishing trees. Victoria Street, in the town, is, for
its length, the finest planted street in the Colony; the varieties
comprise Oriental plane, elm, oak, gum, Wellingtonias, and Italian
poplars.
Anthony Trollope, after travelling the world over, and picking
up nuggets of information in the four corners of it, and to whom
no one can attach even the suspicion of “ blowing,” writes :
“ Ballarat struck me with more surprise than any other city in
Australia. In point of architectural excellence and general civilized
city comforts, it is certainly the metropolis of Australian goldfields.”
And such is the general verdict of distinguished visitors, from
Royalty downwards ; and it needs no St. Teresa or Seeress of
Prevorst to prophesy as to Ballarat’s possibilities, or that it—the
microcosm of Manchester—will continue the metropolis, growing
and ‘ ‘ spreading itself like a green bay tree. ” Is it then any wonder
that the distant Ballaratarian regards this spot as his Balia —his
“resting-place”—the esse of his being—and prays with his heart
towards it (with all the fervor of the proverbial hart, which
“ panteth after the water-brooks”), as did the worshipping Jews
towards Jerusalem ?
The spoken language of our citizens, in this as in other parts of
Australasia, is mostly healthy Anglo-Saxon, free from Americanisms,
vulgarisms, and the conflicting dialects of our Fatherland, and is
pure enough to suit a Trench or a Latham. Our youth, aided by
climatic influence, are in point of physique and comeliness unsur-
passed in the Sunny South. Our young men are well ordered ; and
our maidens, “ not stepping over the bounds of modesty,” are as
fair as Psyches, dispensing smiles as charming as November flowers.
The nomenclature of our streets perpetuates historical names, both
Colonial and English, and would make an interesting chapter, for
which, however, there is not available space.
I have, con amove, accepted the honor and complied with the
request of His Worship the Mayor of the City (T. H. Thompson)
and my fellow Councillors, and have written a short Jubilee Sketch
of Ballarat, contrasting its present progress with its native condition
and birth fifty years ago. This I have done “without prejudice,”
as Wig and Gown say, and with “ E. & 0.E.,” as Mr. Ledger foots
it; and thus (like Bunyan) “ I penned it down, until at last it came
to be for length and breadth the bigness which you see,”


3Aff
iifijo
' wi.
f)<u^ry
BALLARAT AGENT
GREAT WESTERN, VICTORIA, AUSTRALIA.
Prices of Dry Bottled \\HRes.
RED WINES.
CLARET— Per Doz.
No. o, extra quality, full f 36- qts,
bodied ... ... \ 18/- pts,
No. 1, superior quality, (26/- qts.
medium body ... iq/dpts.
No. 2, excellent quality, ,
light character (Din- £ 2l (’ S "
ner Wine) ... ...y I2 'P s '
CKABLIS—
BURGUNDY—
Pull bodied, very fine ... i6/6pts"
HERMITAGE—
SAUTERNE—
Full bodied, high class ...
’ & ( 16/ opts.
SWeet
( Quart
Bottles
only).
RED WINES.
Per Doz.
SHIRAZ— Quarts.
Full, fruity Wine, good body, 25/-
and 30/-
CONSTANTIA—
Very fine Wine, medium body, 25/-
and 30/-
VERDEILHO—
FRONTIGNAC—
Excellent Wine, light character, 25/-
and 30/-
PORT—
Superior Wine, fine flavor, 25/-, 30/-,
and 36/-
30/-, and 36/-
Hotel,
IRVINE’S GREAT WESTERN VINEYARD,
WHITE WINES.
HOCK— Per Dos
No. 1, very fine, delicate
: (14/6 pts.
No. 2, excellent quality, I 21/- qts.
good body ... ... ( 12/- pts,
Fine delicate quality ... | pts
Superior quality, high class | 2^|'
WHITE WINES.
Per Doz
REISLING—- Quarts
Extra quality, medium body, 25/
and 30/-
Rich, luscious, full body, 25/-and 30/
SHERRY—
Good flavor, matured, 25/- and 30/•
FRONTiGHAC—
Extra fine Wine, good body, 25/-


EXTRACT FROM REPORT OF WINE EXPERT.
1 hereby certify that I have inspected th.e Great Western Vineyard,
owned by Mr. Hans W. H. Irvine, and have examined and carefully tested
all Dry Wines in the cellar, and I can, through analysis and other measures,
highly and safely recommend them as pure Dry Wines of very superior quality,
.with good body, bouquet, and character —somewhat similar to the most
famous Continental Brands. They have been carefully and cleanly made
from grapes specially suitable, with the climate, to make Clarets, Hocks, and
other Dry Wines of the highest grade, and are free from coarseness, so
prevalent in many Wines. With the system adopted (thorough and careful
fermentation, constant and regular racking, and the valuable and judicious
method of allowing the Wines to mature thoroughly before placing on the
market), and with which I am much pleased, I consider such Wines as those
made at the Great Western Vineyard should meet with great favor amongst
connoisseurs, being pleasant to drink, and free from excess of alcohol, while
also containing naturally all the health-invigorating and imparting proper-
ties pure Dry Wines of the highest class should and do possess.
The Clarets and Hocks especially merit my highest approval and recom-
mendation, being magnificent Wines, with good keeping qualities, which all
the Wines possess in a marked degree.
(Signed; ROMEO BRAGATO, Professor of Viticulture,
Wine Expert, appointed by the Victorian Government Viticultural Board.
April 16th, 1889.
Orders taken for Great Western Champagne ( Dry),
Quarts and Pints , and Sparkling Burgundy.
OLD BOTTLED INVALID DRY WINES,
OF SPECIAL VINTAGES,
Are only obtainable from Irvine & Co., Melbourne, the Vineyard, or
William Bentley, Craig’s Royal Hotel, Ballarat.
TONIC WINE (Pints), Vintage 1873.
A limited quantity available, and ONLY at Craig's Royal Hotel.
Appended is a guarantee :
[Copy.]
Great Western,
18th December, iBgj.
I guarantee the pint Wine Bitters supplied to Mr. W. Bentley to be
1873 vintage Wine, and to have been in bottle for at least 18 years, which is
a sufficient guarantee that it is thoroughly matured.
(Signed) HANS W. H. IRVINE, Proprietor.


gß'a&g.s'si ■ »-
32 » ® o ■< ~ -z £5 s *»-
2.6 S o i i'* l >*B-f g- fj 0
ll|lsi|siliS _ s _ y -a x
alSltflliflS ft - i 5 > 5 / \\\ O
m p° i > ci :o A> w / / \ \ \ m
%C S?s 3 S c I \ \ \ H
is® jH | g g I 5 ( * 5
!lt;PKlsi> J(oh %§“ | " I // ; z
|Et|ja?|B|S ,“1 U'SxY 5
i||||i Si ||iS /W ify,,;.,.. 'f 4A^\\*
Sm ■“ —7>'- nil 111 ! . ; |p \ \ \
piiiifiiii: mi mm bßi
ss-!il r fc A !• /8 1 ;■'’ 4
Slti|Sl|S' £| Wkjp' t*Sß|k ■ O
gftllliitllf fT^
S’Hc“S' a ' . ! .** •jarViifelji i'A f/»
sB*|l£?">*<: ..Bje i? '■ *
Sg-s.s£j*®s i ?fP| ‘ «' 3*l -r-
S§ 2S« s*S 38 ffCo- TO \ V S 8 I %•; ÜBS !Hil Si.V;I ! S i!';l':i' ,: 31
g g g. : 2-g '*- a
o' ® o'2 sT t? 3
sEffltt
C-13 g ® *3
&§ § t*s kS'h!» si 80
- gSiiWjEVitSa
S.^<Po h:g B'-.fcls,
srs&s^P.?”
tlif|l||i|l|
S- m £Lm bS’ 4 ob h .
pjb'S & ®g"s« 2. a
£ l_J H> fyC P"" t>
s&ssZhziSo*
|l‘« a s S'l I &|-3
o| I 5 » f”
®&gßs-'»t?aS3S
3.s- B l i-i s-i
p£ , ?i°'P®p3 B
-g.”
®«o H'S.®'*"
Md ft&g'og'g' l
3 8 Pg-'ffS
r« H>»'
