





FAC NE FAC
AN APPEAL
TO THE
MOTHERS AND TEACHERS
OF AUSTRALASIA
By OUTIS
GEORGE ROBERTSON AND CO.
SYDNEY, MELBOURNE, AND ADELAIDE
1885




upon it.”
For “letting the bright sight full upon it,” page 17, read “ fall
For “muzzle loader,” page 18, read “ muzzle loaders.”
For “ keel plate,” page 31, read “ heel plate.”
For “spring-back locks,” page 30, read “ rebounding locks.”
For “deepness of shadow and indistinctness which renders,
page 38, read “render.”
-A. ID ID IE TsT H) _A_.
After the words “ cold water will suffice,” page 20, supply the
following :
It should be evident during the process of washing, that
the wash-rod acts as the sucker of a pump. This may be most
readily perceived when the rod, having been diawn upwards
and released from the hand, descends with a spring (the result
of suction) into the barrel. A little water, thrown into the
barrel by the side of the wash-rod, will bring this about more
speedily. When applying the suction test, care should be taken
to hold the gun so that the breech may receive no injury.




MRS. BARRY,
BISHOPSCOURT, SYDNEY,
THIS LITTLE BOOK
BY PERMISSION,
RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED


INDEX
Preface. —Title explained
Introduction. —Reasons for writing “Fac ne Fac”; Girls
should be taught how to shoot; Australian Girls
naturally courageous ....
Chapter I. —The advisability of teaching Boys to shoot ;
Advice about purchasing a gun ; How to load a
gun ; How to put a gun in half-cock
Chapter ll.—How a gun should be kept in a house ; How
to work a gun ; How to handle a gun when out
shooting ; How to cross a fence with a gun ; How
to carry a gun in a vehicle ; How to draw a charge
Chapter Hl.—How to handle a double-barrelled muzzle-
loader ; Something about breech-loaders ; How to
clean a gun-lock .
Chapter IV.—Some cautions about various kinds of shooting;
Stalking; Scouting; Scrub shooting; Night
shooting ....••
Concluding Remarks


PREFACE.
The title of this little book, “ Fac ne Fac,” calls
for a comment or two by way of preface. When
met in Latin authors these words mostly mean
“ suppose, do not suppose ” or “ assume, do not
assume.” “Fac” may then stand as a warning to the
mothers of boys to “ assume ” it as settled that their
sons, as a rule, will use fire-arms when they get the
chance. I know a man, now “in the sear and yellow
leaf,” who, in the days of his boyhood, when the
gun was put, as was thought out of his reach, in his
mother’s bedroom, used to let it down by the sheets
of her bed to a friend beneath the window, to be
restored to its place in like manner when the day’s
shooting was over. Again, I would warn them, as
“ ne fac ” suggests, “ not to assume ” that a youth of
seventeen, now his own master, as is so often the
case at that age in this country, without any previous
knowledge or training, is safer with a gun in his
hand than a boy of ten who has had rules impressed
upon him for his guidance. All experience proves
the opposite. But if a schoolboy were asked, as I
hope many will be, to translate “ Fac ne Fac,” he
would read “ do,” “ don’t.” It will be at once seen,
then, that “ Fac ne Fac ” is, as I suppose it ought to
be, a double-barrelled title, the first intended for
mothers and teachers, the second for boys and


youths, telling them what to do and what not to do
when handling a gun. lam greatly surprised, and
I have the fullest grounds for saying so, that gun
accidents are not tenfold more in number. We do
not know how soon we shall meet with our deserts
in this matter, for “care finds the careless out.”
That was an admirable piece of advice given by
Mahomet to the follower who said “ I will turn out
my camel and trust to Providence.” “ Tie up your
camel,” said the Prophet, “ and then trust to Pro-
vidence.” Nothing now remains for me to do but
to commend “an appeal to mothers and teachers,
with all its defects, to the perusal of a generous
public.
OUTIS.


INTRODUCTION.
The pages which follow are written only in the
interests of humanity. I hope by their means to
save some human lives, and to lessen the number
of mutilations which have become so common in
this fair land through gunshot wounds. If the
mothers of Australia will only read this little book
with some degree of care, and impress the rules laid
down upon their offspring, male and female, from
the age of seven to seventeen, I have no doubt the
result will be greater than anything I can reckon
on beforehand. Girls should learn the use of fire-
arms as well as boys. No girl knows at what time
in her life, in a country like this, such a knowledge
might be useful. Taking into account, too, the
smallness of our population, and the danger of
invasion by a very superior force, a regiment of
Australian girls, with their high courage, would give
a very good account of themselves. Whether this
be so or not, there cannot be any doubt that an
adept at shooting in the field proves by reason of
this a more efficient soldier, firing, as he needs must
do, with greater precision and accuracy. I have no
intention, however, of encroaching upon the duties
of the drill-sergeant, neither will I give rules by
which the youth of this Austral land may bag more
game. This, no doubt, I could do, were it necessary,


and had not the ground been fully occupied. The
Australians are naturally men of eye and hand, and
when able to get sufficient practice are almost
invariably good shots. My sole object is to teach,
and, as the number of gun accidents proclaim, it is
high time it should be taught, how a youth may go
out for a day’s shooting without inflicting upon
himself or his companion a gunshot wound. The
number of youthful sportsmen in this country is
very much greater in proportion to the population
than one meets with in England. Let anyone deny
this who has stood at the Redfern railway station
on the eve of a public holiday.


FAC NE FAC.
CHAPTER I.
It may be thought by some that it would be
enough to say that the first rule for the young
sportsman was caution, the second rule caution, and
the third rule caution ; but this is not the case ; a
great majority of gun accidents happen as the result
not of incautiousness but of ignorance. Let us hope
there are very few who would like to go through
the world conscious of having taken, out of the path
of duty, a fellow-creature’s life. Many a life has
been embittered for ever by the memory of having
shot a companion, and many a home is made
desolate by the fatal gun accidents which are of
such common occurrence. There is a very prevalent
idea abroad that boys are careless. This is not
really the case. “ Certain it is,” says Dr. Churchill
in his book on the “ Diseases of Children,” “ that
children left to themselves do display a wonderful
degree of care and judgment in taking care of
themselves.” When a boy is careless, in nine cases
out of ten it is because he has not been taught to
be careful. The writer, who has had long experience
in the matter, does not hesitate to say that the
safest person, old sportsmen out of the question,
with whom you can shoot is a boy of twelve who


has been taught from the age of seven to handle a
gun, whilst the most dangerous fellow-sportsman
one can have is your youth of seventeen who is
considered now by his parents old enough to manage
a gun with nothing but mother wit to guide him,
unless, indeed, it be a man of mature age, who late
in life, without any previous experience, goes out
for an occasional day’s shooting. I shall never
forget looking forward in the days of my youth,
during hard reading under an excellent classic, to
the first day of the partridge season for a day’s
shooting by way of respite, but being unable to hit
a single bird until I got away from the said classic,
as, in addition to shooting from his left shoulder, he
always persisted in carrying his gun so as to enable
you to look down its muzzle.
The cookery book says “ first catch your hare.”
Before a boy can learn to shoot he must have a gun
to learn with. As this little book is intended for
the masses, I will here give some advice on the best
method of procuring a gun suitable for a boy.
A second-hand gun,in a good stateof preservation,
of high finish, is preferable to a new inferior article ;
but as it is impossible, except very rarely, to come
across such guns, it is as well to state at once that
those 'who buy a gun should not do so without
asking the advice of some one who has had ex-
perience in such matters.
I have seen at the Sydney railway terminus a
homely woman, whose son was carrying a gun
which they had just purchased. Seeing at a glance
that it was such a weapon as no one should fire out
of, I learned that they had given a very fair price
for it to some ignorant or unprincipled vendor, which,
if laid out with judgment, would have procured
a perfectly safe weapon. Thus far I have found


Hollis the safest gunmaker when cheapness is a
consideration. For two pounds a perfectly safe
muzzle-loader of his make can be purchased in
almost any store in the country. I here would
solemnly warn all against buying new guns in this
country for less than the sum named above. Ido
not know how respectable men can have the heart
to sell them, nor can I tell how guns made out of
such base metal are even allowed to be manu-
factured. The number of mutilated human bodies
caused by the bursting of such weapons would
make quite a sad page of colonial history. It is
high time the Humane Society took the matter up.
I should advise that wherever there are young
people to be taught the use of fire-arms, that a light
single-barrelled gun be purchased, an inch less or
more, according to the length of arm of the learner,
cut off the stock. The local wheelwright can do this;
better, of course, that it should be done by a gun-
smith. lam led to give this advice, because I have
found that boys who learn to shoot with guns
intended for men are greatly inconvenienced in
after life by being unable to procure guns with
stocks of sufficient length. A straight stock should,
in my opinion, be avoided. I have never known
anyone who, after a long day’s shooting with
such a stock, did not suffer from a black or
cut cheek, which is most fatal to good shooting.
I differ very much from those who say that most
young sportsmen shoot under their game. Such
instances are the exception and not the rule.
Many young sportsmen shoot behind their game
in cross shots, but the straight stock would not
alter this. I think it would rather tend to make
matters worse. Had I the power I should cause
the military rifle to be made with a more bent


stock than at present is usual, as I believe more
bullets are rendered harmless by going over the
heads of the enemy than by any other defect.
While talking of alterations it may be well to say
that all the cheap single guns I have seen are
too strong in the main-spring. This should be
altered. The writer has done so effectually by
grinding the spring on a wet grindstone. A boy’s
hand is not as a rule sufficiently strong to cock and
uncock with safety a gun with an unduly strong
main-spring ; such a spring has also a tendency to
shatter the stock. The gun may now be put into
the boy’s hand on positive proof being had that
it is not loaded. “-The devil puts a charge in it”
is an old saying, and one that deserves universal
regard. Of all Irish sayings, I know none more
useful than this, “ loaded or unloaded, she’s dan-
gerous.” What a thrill of delight flutters the young
heart when for the first time its owner gets a gun
into his hand with a hope of being taken out in a
few days to shoot! Certain it is that a boy loves
the sound of exploding gunpowder. Mothers may
make up their minds to it, sooner or later their off-
spring will use fire-arms, and it is far better they
should do so openly than secretly, and with some
knowledge of what they are about.
The first thing a boy should be taughf is how to
cock and uncock a gun, and to put the hammer
from full to half-cock. More accidents occur from
this latter being done imperfectly than from any
other mistake known to the writer. Any boy when
asked to put a gun from full to half-cock will in-
variably do so by allowing the hammer to glide
gently under the pressure of his thumb, from the
nick of the full-cock to the nick of the half-cock.
This is always full of danger, but especially in the


case of cheap, badly finished guns._ It results very
often in turning your half-cock (instead of being
something which no pull on your trigger can affect)
into a hair trigger. Hence you hear of guns sup-
posed to be on half-cock going off by the stock
merely touching the ground. In fact, the least
jolt against the stock will cause a gun under such
circumstances to go off. He should allow it, in-
stead, to pass by the nick of the half-cock, pressing
the forefinger of the right hand upon the trigger in
the downward motion, and relaxing the pressure
in the upward motion, so that he may hear the
click of the half-cock in its full force ; during the
operation the hammer should not be allowed to
rest on the pillar.
A boy should allow, in cocking or uncocking a
gun, the part of the hammer intended for the
thumb to fall into the first joint of the thumb
sideways, as otherwise he will not have sufficient
strength to handle it safely ; in after life the top of
the thumb will be the proper part to use. The
bottom of the stock -should be allowed to rest
against the muscle of the right thigh, and the left
hand should grasp the gun midway between the
trigger guard and the top of the stock, while the
muzzle should be elevated above the line of any
one’s head ; at the same time the greatest care
should be taken, during this or any other operation,
to turn the muzzle out of the direction of your
companions. It will now be time to allow a cap
to be put on the pillar or nipple. To do this put
the gun in full-cock, press the cap well down with
the top of the thumb, next allow the hammer to
lie gently on the cap, and then press the back of
the hammer with the large muscle of the thumb,
so as to render certain that the cap is well home on


the pillar. Being quite certain that the gun is not
loaded, you may now snap the cap, holding the
muzzle of your gun so as to be opposite either a
long blade of grass or some dust. If there is no
stoppage, the blade of grass will be moved or the
dust will be disturbed. Having taken off the ex-
ploded cap, wiped the pillar and put the hammer
down, you now can proceed to put in your first
squib of powder. Hold the gun firmly in your
left hand by the upper part of the barrel, about
three or four inches from the muzzle, let the bottom
of the stock rest on the ground on the outside of
the left foot. In marshy places, and when the shooter
is tall enough, the end of the stock may rest on the
top of the left foot if the shooter is right-handed,
if left-handed on the right foot; and I may say
herq that shooting from the left shoulder should be
discouraged, except when the right eye is blind.
Even when this is the case shooting from the right
shoulder should be practised. I have, seen it done
effectively. Take your powder flask out of an
upper pocket on the left-hand side of your coat,
half fill the ordinary top containing drams.
This will be enough for your squib. Holding your
gun as perpendicularly as your height will allow,
pour the powder down the barrel (we are speaking
of a single-barrelled muzzle-loader, which every
youth should learn to handle before using a double-
gun or a breech-loader of any kind—more of this
anon) so as little as possible may adhere to the
side of the barrel. Now grasping firmly the back
of the barrel with the fingers of the left hand, the
trigger-guard being towards you, allowing the
thumb of the same hand to encircle the ramrod
loosely, next pull with the finger and thumb of
the right hand the ramrod a little out from the


barrel, holding it near the head, so as to get the
head free of the nick which retains it in its place.
In the case of boys, the motion which displaces
the ramrod should be more of a push than a pull
upwards, so that if the gun were to go off no
harm would be done to the hand of the loader.
The gun all this time is to be held in such a way
that it is never directed towards the person of the
loader, or that of anyone else. Hold your ramrod
between the forefinger and thumb of your left hand,
behind the barrel ; take a wad out of the right-hand
lower pocket, ram it home moderately hard. It is
always better to have a thicker wad over the
powder than over the shot, a cheap way of making
which I will suggest later on. Having put your
ramrod in its place, keeping your hand carefully
out of danger, you take a cap out of your right-
hand waistcoat pocket, or out of a pocket made for
the purpose on the right side of your coat. Attend
carefully to the directions given above on capping,
raise your gun from the ground by the left hand,
seize the middle of the barrel with your right hand,
pass your left hand to the portion in front of the
trigger-guard, allowing the second, third, and fourth
fingers of the right hand to encircle the round part,
or grip, of the stock, keeping the thumb disen-
gaged so as to raise the hammer, and allowing the
forefinger of the same hand to enter the trigger-
guard above the trigger, so as to press or relax
pressure on the trigger as required. A lesson on
this part of gun practice from an expert will be
found helpful.
This operation is more difficult and dangerous,
perhaps, than any other; and breech-loaders, svith
their clipped ear-like hammers and strong main-
springs, are, if anything, more difficult to manage


than muzzle-loaders. No boy should ever, in my
opinion, be allowed -the use of a gun until he gives
abundant proof that he has thoroughly mastered the
operation of cocking and uncocking it without allow-
ing the hammer to rest on the pillar, and putting it
from full-cock to half-cock in the manner prescribed
above, to which too much attention cannot be paid.
The learner having put his gun in half-cock can now
set out as if starting for a day’s shooting. He may
carry his gun under his right arm, with the muzzle
towards the ground, but out of line with his toes ;
or, holding it by the “grip” in his right hand, he
can allow the front part of the stock to rest m the
hollow of his left arm, the trigger-guard being
downwards. The gun can also be carried over
the right shoulder, the muzzle so elevated as
to be above the head of anyone walking behind,
the part of the stock in front of the trigger-
guard resting on the shoulder, and the right
hand firmly closed on the heel-plate at the bottom
of the stock ; but on no account is the gun to be
carried over the shoulder with the muzzle towards
the front and the stock protruding behind. This
latter is a most unsportsmanlike method.
Once more, do not carry your gun like a yoke at
the back of your neck, and never have game slung
to any part of it. When the shooter is not expect-
ing game, the ordinary gun should be carried on
half-cock. This also applies to the old-fashioned
breech-loaders, but not to those furnished with the
back-action movement, as these should be carried
with the hammer as nearly down as their back-
action admits. There is no more stupid or ignorant
practice than carrying a gun having a half-cock
with the hammer down, except in the case of
worn-out guns, which should never be used by


anyone, but least of all by the inexperienced. You
may now prepare to fire at some object, though
your gun is only loaded with powder. To do this
keep the fore arm resting on the top of the stock, the
elbow reaching as far as the heel-plate ; your left
hand may enfold the trigger-guard, held out of the
way as much as possible in the event of your gun
bursting; or it may, when using breech-loaders,
reach out on the stock. A very famous American
shot holds the barrel with his left hand near the
muzzle (he is a very large man) in pigeon shooting
a sport, if we can call it by that name, only fit
for lame legs or blacklegs. The first method I
have always found least fatiguing in a long day’s
snipe shooting; but since breech-loaders have
come so universally and so justly into use, when
the shooter can bear the expense, it may be
better to let the left hand extend as far as the
middle of the fore part of the stock, as, if breech-
loaders burst, they are most likely to do so at the
breech. You now, having put your gun in full
cock, arid fixing upon an object for a mark, bring
the gun to your shoulder, pressing it firmly against
it, letting the bright sight full upon it, and looking
close along the barrel with both eyes open if you
like, or with the left eye closed. You must deter-
mine never to shut your eyes when you fire ;
nothing is so fatal to good shooting. It is wonder-
ful what a little practice and resolution can do in
this, as in everything else. This same rule holds
good with double guns. Young sportsmen often
make the foolish mistake of aiming along the
right or left barrel as they may happen to be about
to discharge the one or the other.
You may fire several squibs of powder orr the
first day. The absence of recoil or kicking will


help you to keep your eyes open when you feel a
slight recoil, which you will do when your gun is
sufficiently loaded to kill birds and not to torture
them. And here I would say, always use good
powder—it is the cheapest in the end. I often
wonder the Society for Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals has not effected some change in this
direction. Slate-coloured powder is quite unfit for
use, and only tortures birds. I have always found,
for muzzle-loader,Curtis and Harvey’s fine diamond-
grain the best; coarse powder is better for breech-
loaders, as the fine kind is too severe upon the
dumps. There are no doubt many other excellent
makers, but all powder in this country, after the sea
voyage, is greatly improved by airing on a heated
dinner plate before using. This process, I need not
say, should be carried out with great caution, the
plate'being carefully wiped to get rid of any sparks,
and a small quantity of powder put upon the hand
and thrown upon the plate, so that if an explosion
takes place no harm would be done.


CHAPTER 11.
We suppose you have entered your house with youi
o-un unloaded —as a rule loaded guns should never be
kept in a house, although I have known shooters too
indolent even to take the cartridges out of a breech-
loader—but if it is kept loaded in the house, a
written notice, in large letters, should be attached
to it, and in such a way as not to fall off unless
taken off. If the young shooter has no gun-case,
which he might have made even for his cheap gun
by the village carpenter, or, better still, make it
himself, as it encourages tidiness and greatly helps to
preserve the gun, he should place it in a dry corner,
the end of the stock on the ground, out of the reach
of passers-by, with the top of the hammer towards
the corner, and distant from it about three inches.
A very effective gun-rack can be made by an old
harness turret for the barrel, and the round end of
a hat-rack hook in which the grip is to rest, both
firmly fastened to the wall on a wooden foundation,
and in a dry place, the gun enveloped in one of the
usual cloth covers. . .
It ought to be needless to say —but, alas, it is not
that the cap should not on any account be left on,
and that the top of the pillar should be caiefully
wiped when the cap is taken off. I may here
mention that I have seen a gun go off that had
been uncapped, but on which some of the detonating
powder had remained from a partially-exploded
cap. From this experience, although many will


not agree with me, I think it safe to wipe the pillars
after the airing cap has been exploded. No one
should ever cap a gun before loading. It is a safe
habit to wipe'the pillars after taking even metallic
caps off, and to snap the hammers —only in the case
of muzzle-loaders —two or three times by letting
them slip from the top of the thumb on to the
pillars, of course taking good care that no harm can
be done should the charge explode.
I will now give directions for washing a gun. It
is well for common use to have two wash-rods,
made out of soft wood—hard wood wears the
barrel—the one for washing, the other for drying.
An oblong hole, sufficiently large to carry the swab,
should be burnt through the rod, about half-aminch
from the thin end. Warm water, during the whole
of the operation of washing, is preferable; but to get
rid oT the greater portion of the burnt powder, cold
water will suffice. A strong rag —tow, a piece of
chamois leather, or a piece of sheepskin, with the
wool cut short attached, will do for washing
material, the great object being to select something
that will not fray, as many a terrible accident has
occurred by reason of a piece of the swab remaining
in the barrel being set fire to by the discharge, and
in its turn igniting the powder poured down upon
it, thus making a train to the powder in the flask,
which has been in this .way frequently exploded.
The reason of this is (and to learn anything well
one must know the reason of it) that the powder in
the first charge falling on the top of the rag drives
it lighted towards the breech, and not out at the
muzzle.
Having now washed the gun until the chapged
water has become clear, you put your ramrod into
the pipes and pour boiling water down the barrel,


keeping the latter in its place by holding the end
of the ramrod, so as not to scald your fingers, put
a thick cloth round the barrel, and hold it out of
the washing vessel so as to notice if the water
comes out freely and in the true direction ; if this
is not the case, some stoppage exists which must
be removed/ Churn the boiling water up and
down in the barrel, which you next, when, nearly
full, turn suddenly down and empty. You may,
when this is done, let the barrel drain by placing it
in a corner, muzzle down. Lose no time in setting
about drying while it is hot ; this must be persevered
in until it becomes apparent, by the cleanness of
the last drying fabric, that the barrel is quite dry ;
a live coal may be fanned at the nipple to ensure
dryness. Animal oil should now be used, a little
being applied to the inside of the barrel, especially
about the breech, so as to remove all rust spots ;
and the stock should be thoroughly cleaned, some
oil having been rubbed well in, and dried so
thoroughly on stock and barrels as not, to affect
the hand unpleasantly.
I will now suppose you are going out for your
first day’s shooting. If your gun be of small bore,
say fifteen or thirteen, and you are a boy of ten
(I went out shooting under guidance of a careful
man when seven years old), two drams and a
quarter of powder will be enough ; load as directed
above. Having snapped a cap, as before explained,
I advise the exploded cap, when only a cap is
snapped, to be taken off and the pillar wiped, the
hammer being put down before loading ; but the
broken cap should not be removed when the gun
has been discharged before loading. If a friend is
about to accompany you as a spectator, cause him,
while you are loading, to stand on your left hand if


you are right-handed, a little to the rear. In loading
a single gun there should be no danger, as the
capping should be the last thing done ; in the case
of double guns this caution will be useful. I know
an instance of a boy loading a single gun having
improperly put a cap on in the first place, his com-
panion standing at his RIGHT hand, when an internal
portion of the lock broke and the charge went off,
passing through the rim of his friend’s hat. Having
rammed the powder moderately hard, put into
your gun three-quarters of an ounce of shot. No. 8
is the best shot for boys to begin with. Whatever
style of shot-belt you use it should hang at the
left side, and you should be careful not to allow
the muzzle of your gun to be opposite any portion
of your body when putting in the shot. Ram a
wad lightly home, observing the method described
above for replacing the ramrod and capping, &c.
You may now start for your day’s shooting.
Direct your companion to walk upon your right
hand if you shoot from the right shoulder, a little
to the rear. On no account is he ever to go before
you. When about to fire at your first bird, which
I take for granted will be perched on a tree, let
your companion pass behind you, and stand behind
your left shoulder, as, if the pillar of your gun
were to blow out, as it sometimes does, and strike
him, it would probably inflict a mortal wound.
Should you shoot your bird, do not run or become
excited; and, above all things, if the bird is
fluttering, do not strike at it with your gun ; no
good can ever accrue to anyone for such a repre-
hensible act, except to the gunsmith. You should
reload your gun without moving, keeping your eye
as much as possible on the dead or wounded bird.
You then may pick it up, or send your friend to


do so, but it is unnecessary and dangerous for two
to engage in this part of the business. You now
probably require to cross a fence, and too much
care cannot be exercised in doing this safely. A
boy should never attempt, in my judgment, to
carry a gun over a rail or wire fence, or indeed
over any other except when absolutely necessary.
The gun should be invariably put in half-cock ;
the safest way is to place it on the ground, lying
nearly under the fence, and lengthwise, but in such
a manner that if a rail were to fall it would be
uninjured. To do this take the grip in your right
hand, holding the fore part of the stock and barrel
in front of the trigger-guard in your left; turn the
gun on its left side, with the top of the hammer
towards you ; lay it now gently on even ground ;
cross the fence at the stock end of your gun, but
not over the panel near which it is laid ; if two or
three away from it, in the case of old fences, so
much the better ; take up the gun as you laid it
down, and proceed with your shooting.
The foregoing method will answer for rail and
wire fences, but there are times when it may be
expedient to get your companion’s aid in crossing
a fence. Let me solemnly warn you to use every
known precaution should this method be adopted;
One of the finest young men I have ever seen was
shot dead by a companion handing him his gun
carelessly, and the number of deaths from this
careless handing of a gun from one to another is
truly appalling. If there is but one shooter —and
boys should not be allowed to go out together
with two guns—he had better lay his gun on the
ground, as explained above, never on any account
against a tree, near the fence and in the line of it.
Having crossed the fence, let his companion,


taking his position so as to place the gun between
himself and his friend, lift it in both hands, holding
it crosswise, the great object being, when the gun
is handed from one to the other, not to allow the
muzzle to fall upon the person of either. There
are times, if by yourself, when you will be obliged
to take a gun across a fence unaided, and, as in
the case of chock-and-log fences, when you will
not be able to pass it through. I am greatly
averse to placing a gun by a post in any fence, or
in the corner of a chock-and-log fence, or indeed
to placing it upright by any fence whatever. It
involves drawing or lifting the gun by the top part
of the barrel, which is always more or less perilous.
If you have to carry it across a fence, by no means
place the stock on the ground before you jump
down. I know one who has lost a forefinger by
doing this, his boot having caught as he jumped
in the hammer —which, according to the most
stupid but common practice, he carried DOWN
instead of at HALF-COCK. Had his gun been in
half-cock, notwithstanding his being guilty of the
grave impropriety of placing his hand over the
muzzle, no harm would have been done. A very
fertile source of accident is pushing through a rail
or wire fence with the hammer down. The top of
the hammer catches in the rail or wire, which
falling upon the cap, as it invariably does, causes it
to explode. An incalculable number of accidents
occur from this ignorant practice, to which the
great majority seem wedded, which is more
surprising when we reflect that such could not have
been the custom in the days of the old flint lock.
I have often wondered why this happens. The
only reasons I can give are that the majority do
not know the mechanism of the lock, or that


having put the gun improperly in half-cock, and
finding it goes off when this is the case, a prejudice
has got abroad which has been handed from one
to the other against carrying it so. It may indeed
arise on account of its appearing more unsafe
when so carried, as I admit it does to those
who are not sufficiently informed on the subject.
Never carry a capped gun with the hammers
down, unless when the lock needs repairs, as
it does when the nick of the half-cock is worn ;
you are then at the mercy of ten thousand
unseen little chances, any one of which may
cause the charge to explode. There are times
when you will at all risks carry your gun through
a fence ; if so, be careful to have no one in front
of you. ’ Never, on your peril, drag the gun behind
you this last should be observed at all times—
but, taking it in your right hand, just in front of
the’trigger-guard, put it well before you through
the opening by which you are about to pass,
holding it at an angle of about forty-five to your
body, with the muzzle raised and forward, and
opposite neither man nor brute.
You will now in all probability wish to rest for a
while, and if so be very careful how you place your
gun ; never put it against a tree or against a fence.
A gust of wind, a passing dog, a friend stepping
backwards, or hastily taking up his gun, may knock
down yours. Never leave a gun even fora moment
against a flat surface, such as the wall of a room, or
the edge of a table. I have known more than one
narrow escape from this practice. It should be
borne in mind that if a gun falls, from its shape it
is almost sure to fall on the hammers, and that, if
they are down upon the caps, it is almost certain to
go off; and even in half-cock there is a great likeli-


hood that this will take place. The neck of the
tumbler, to be sure, most commonly breaks, when,
generally speaking, no further harm is done ; but
sometimes the dog or the nick of the tumbler gives
out, which discharges the gun to a certainty. In
laying down a gun care and judgment should be
exercised, as the following curious accident proves :
—Three acquaintances of mine were out shooting,
when two of them descended to the brink of a
waterhole to slake their thirst. One of them laid his
gun on the ground with the hammer down, and
lying towards his companion, who was about twelve
yards from him upon the bank above. A stone of a
pound weight, loosened by the latter, rolled down,
struck the back of the hammer and discharged the
gun, giving all a great fright, and causing by the
recoil several splinters of rock to lodge in the young
man's face to whom it belonged. This accident
could hardly have taken place had the gun been in
half-cock, and would have been impossible if the
youthful sportsman, with a due regard to the
surroundings, had placed his gun upon the ground
with the trigger-guard up hill. One of the chief
advantages derived from shooting in the field is the
alertness, quickness of perception, and intuitive
power it imparts of taking in the position which
oftentimes proves useful in the ups and downs of
life. You are now a distance from home, and
possibly will return in a buggy. If so, I strongly
recommend you, having uncapped and wiped your
pillars, to draw your shot, return it to your shot
pouch, and squib off the powder, having recapped
your gun to do so. No doubt an experienced
sportsman can draw his charge safely with the
hammer in half-cock, but this can hardly be done
by the novice. I have had an axle-tree of a vehicle,


when travelling at a great speed, break while I
carried a loaded and capped double-barrelled gun
in half-cock. I could not have. answered for the
consequences were the hammer down, nor should I
like such an accident to happen again in any case.
The temptation to carry a loaded and capped gun
in a vehicle is very great in the hope of seeing
game on the roadside. If you run the great risk
of doing so, it must be at the half-cock, and the
gun must never be laid out of your hand, taking all
possible care that it is pointing perpendicularly
upwards, and opposite no part of your own or any-
one else’s body. Never put your hand at anytime
over the muzzle of your gun, except for the brief
moment of loading. Too much care cannot be
exercised in taking a gun out of any vehicle. No
one should ever hand a gun to another with
the muzzle towards himself or anyone else. This
little book would not be sufficiently large to
contain only the names of those who have perished
in this way. Remember that good sportsmen
never carry a loaded gun into a house. lam pain-
fully aware that it is, for all this, a very common
practice. If it is done at all, a label should be
attached as directed above, the cap removed, and
the pillars carefully wiped. The number of happy,
joyous lives that have been sacrificed to this
nothing short of cruel practice, of leaving loaded
guns in a house, is heart-sickening to reflect upon.
It is now most fitting that I should say to the
reader on no pretext whatsoever point a gun at
anyone. It is nothing short of a crime, and
deserves to be punished by the magistrates. If
young people knew the contempt in which sports-
men hold such conduct, I think it would deter them
from doing so. When a young man enters a room


where a gun is in sight, it very generally attracts
his attention, and he most commonly takes it up to
examine. He should first invariably ascertain if
it is loaded. This cannot be done without putting
the ramrod down the barrel: very many ramrods,
alas, are short, a most unwarrantable piece of
negligence when such suitable wood to make them
from abounds on all sides. This common fault
is easily obviated by laying the ramrod on the out-
side of the barrel after drawing it from the inside,
and measuring from the joinings of the breech. In
the case of the common-plug breech, a little in-
genuity must be exercised to prove that the gun is
not loaded. The ring of the ramrod’s head, as it
falls gently on the breech, ought to help in arriving
at a correct conclusion. It will often happen that
a muzzle-loader needs repairs, when it is sent to
the local blacksmith, or to a gunmaker. Before
it is sent care should be taken to ascertain that it
is not loaded. Seven such cases have come to my
knowledge wherein the charges were not drawn ;
but when they exploded, in one instance passing
between the smith’s legs, quite close to the body,
the owner in this, as in each other instance referred
to, assuring the operator that it was not loaded.
I know, also, a station in this country where a gun-
barrel had been used as a poker for nine years, and,
at the end of that time, the breech end having
been placed in the fire, the charge went off. These
instances should be enough to show the great
necessity of carefully proving that a gun is not
loaded before sending it for repairs.


CHAPTER 111.
It is now time that something should be said
of double-barrelled muzzle-loaders. The shooter
having become well accustomed to a single gun
may now be allowed to shoot out of a double one,
which is always attended with more risk. I may
here say that shooting out of a double-barrel too early
has a demoralizing effect upon young sportsmen,
leading them to depend too much upon the second
barrel, care and accuracy being as essential to
good shooting as to anything else. The rules, as
given above, will, except in a few items, answer
equally well for a double or single gun up to the
moment you may require to reload a discharged
barrel. When loading both barrels, make a practice
of putting the powder in one particular barrel first,
say the right and then the left. Use generally the
same number shot; and the same sized charge in each
barrel. Observe carefully whether your ramrod, when
both charges of powder and shot are rammed home,
protrudes the same distance from either barrel.
You may also, for the first charge, see if the powder
be up in the pillars ; the object in making these
observations being to ascertain whether you have
put a double charge in one barrel. In most double
guns the left barrel shoots the farthest; generally
speaking, therefore, it will be most fitting to fire the
right first, putting the forefinger only within the
trigger-guard, pressing it on either the right or
left trigger as required. The front trigger always


belongs to the right lock, the hinder one to the left.
Accustom yourself well to the feel of the triggers, so
that you may avoid the mistake, often so fatal,
of pulling the trigger of the right lock when you
are really wishing to effect some change in the
left. Having discharged one barrel, you should
proceed at once to reload. When game is expected
both barrels should be on full-cock ; therefore, on
firing a single shot, the greatest care should be
taken to put the loaded barrel on half-cock, as
there is hardly a more unpleasant experience than
to find you have loaded your gun with one barrel
in full-cock.
I will next say a few words upon breech-loaders,
which, in modern times, partly the result of more
scientific loading of cartridges, partly from the
invention of the choke-bore, have quite equalled, if
not outstripped, muzzle-loaders. The safest and
best kind, all other things being taken into account,
such as good material, &c., is the central-fire, with
a double grip below, and at the top of the barrel
a tadpole-like protuberance that lies imbedded in
the false breech as the joint of a dissected map,
when the barrel is locked. The snap-action fasten-
ing is for many reasons to be preferred, and the
spring-back locks are a most valuable addition.
Cheap breech-loaders are to be avoided. I have
seen a new double-barrel,' made by Hollis, with
all the modern improvements except the tadpole
proboscis, for £y.
It should be remembered that the strain upon a
sufficiently charged breech-loader is greater than
upon a muzzle-loader. Moreover, cartridges are
most frequently loaded for some time, and are
often loaded by others than the shooter, who over-
charge, overram, and overwad them. I have fired


such when it would have proved a serious matter
had the gun been a cheap, badly-finished article.
The shortest way to learn how to load a cartridge
is to unload one. I recommend Eley’s green
chilled shot cartridges as a pattern. If it is a pin-
fire, do not let it fall out of your hand in the
process, as it often explodes when this happens. I
think, for this reason, pin-fire breech-loaders should
be abolished. You can make a very good thick
wad as follows : —Get an ordinary bottle with the
inside of the neck about the size of the bore of your
gun ; cut it off half-way down the shoulder with a
hot ring ; get some soft paper, such as is used to
make milliner’s bags, cut it into squares, accord-
ing to the thickness of the wads you require, and,
if you please, apply a little animal oil to the paper.
Turn the mouth of the bottle downwards on a table,
thrust a square of your paper into the large end,,
ram as hard as you can with a ramrod, then drive
the wad out, when you will find that it will retain
its shape. Thick wads should only be used over
powder, and I have found, on experience, that a
muzzle-loader will shoot much better when so
loaded than when two thin wads only are used.
Before you attempt to put a cartridge into a breech-
loader, be sure you know how it is locked. Hold
the keel-plate against the muscle of your right thigh,
with the muzzle so elevated as to be out of a line
with anyone’s head and turned away from your
companion. Great care should be taken in the
case of locks which do not rebound to put the
gun in half-cock : you, in most cases, cannot load
it unless this is done ; but when the gun is worn
and, remember, breech-loaders do not stand the
wear and tear nearly as well as muzzle-loaders —
it has been locked with the hammer down, causing


the charge to explode. A breech-loader is more
easily cleaned than a muzzle-loader for one thing,
because most of the foulness remains in the empty
cartridge. No water is needed ; but, from the barrel
being open at both ends, many are very careless
about the cleaning rag getting loose from the rod,
when it often sticks in the barrel. Should this be
the case, do not put a cartridge in and fire it by way
of expelling the obstruction, as I have known done,
when the gun, as was to have been expected, burst.
A little snow stopping up the muzzle will be suffi-
cient to burst a gun, should it be fired without its
removal. It is not, therefore, to be wondered at
that a stoppage which no amount of ramming can
remove will have the same effect. The best course,
under such circumstances, to pursue is to pour a
little oil down the barrel. Get a gimlet welded to a
thin 'rod of iron. Bore a hole exactly through the
middle of the obstacle. This will loosen it; and
if not removable after the first hole is made, on a
repetition of the process it will become so. A thin
red-hot bar might be used if the gimlet method be
thought too expensive ; but I do not approve of
novices passing heated rods down barrels. A
turned clothes-peg, with less than a quarter of an
inch cut square from the forked end, will be found
—particularly if the prongs be widened with a
wedge at the top—a very useful appliance, when
enveloped with a rag or piece of chamois, for clean-
ing the cartridge chamber of a breech-loader.
Many who have never adopted this simple plan
will, on trial, thank me for the suggestion.
Every one who shoots ought to be able to take a
gun-lock to pieces for the purpose of cleaning. It
is an interesting amusement on a wet day when
one is weary of other pursuits, and gives an intelli-


gent insight into some of the dangers to be avoided,
and the risks which must be incurred, that could
scarcely be gained in any other way. Place the
lock to be dissected before you on a table, with the
internal works in view. Provide four small vessels
—small white saucers are the best—place them in
such a way that the position they occupy will answer
the screw-heads of the lock, so that you will be able
to replace each screw in its proper berth. Only
operate on one lock at a time. Put it in full-cock.
Now put on your cramp (no amateur should
attempt to take a lock to pieces without this instru-
ment and a turnscrew expressly for the purpose)
upon the main-spring, give the screw one very
gentle turn, next let the hammer down. This will
loosen the spring, when, with an upward motion of
the hand, or a little prising between the plate and
the elbow of the spring, it will become detached
from the plate. The cramp should be put on the
main-spring perfectly straight, and with the side of
the claws pressing against the back of the long
half of the spring, and lying up to, and evenly
along the lock-plate.' Be careful to guard against
the cramp grasping any part of the lock except
the main-spring. It should be borne in mind that
when a gun is in full-cock the spring is strained
quite enough. All that the cramp has to do is to
keep it sufficiently drawn together, which must
result when the hammer is let down. You can
now take out the dog or scear-screw, and the
scear-spring screw next the screws of the bridle.
This latter may be recognized by its having the
greatest number of screw-heads appearing upon it.
The little screw holding on the hammer may now
be taken out, when the hammer may be prised
off and the tumbler tapped through the lock-plate..


You can next unscrew the little shoulder against
which the short arm of the main-spring rests.
You then have the lock in such a condition
that you may clean each portion thoroughly. You
can now proceed to put it together, in the reverse
order to which you took it asunder. It may be
well to unscrew the cramp if you leave the spring
in it, holding the spring firmly in its place (so that
it may not fly out) by as much as you screwed it,
so that it may not have more than the strain of
full-cock upon it. If it cannot be thoroughly
cleaned, it must be taken out of the cramp. Some
advise this in any event. If you do not take it out
of the cramp, place it so that nothing may be
injured by its snapping or escaping, neither of
which should happen if the operation is properly
performed. The restoration of the scear-spring, if
the dog or scear is first put in its place, or of the dog
or scear if the dog or scear-spring is first restored, is
the most difficult operation for the tyro. First and
least proper method—Having put the dog loosely
screwed in its place, next put in the screw of the
scear-spring loosely. Press the spring, if it be a
double one, slightly together ; make a lever of its
lower end until the little shoulder drops into its
berth. You now screw everything home suffi-
ciently together. Second and proper method—
Having put in the scear-spring, you put the nose of
the scear or dog into the nick of the half-cock ;
pull the hammer well down and lever the scear by
the pressure of the thumb into position, when the
screw can be dropped into its place. I should re-
commend any young person who wishes to take his
gun-locks to pieces to apply to some experienced
friend, who will show him the best way to proceed.
Do not make your first essay upon the locks of an


expensive gun. Take them by all means to a gun-
smith. I must here add that lives are risked and
locks ruined by allowing them to become too foul
before any attempt is made to clean them. On the
other hand, I cannot say I approve of the custom
of boiling locks in a saucepan with washing-soda
added. Injury is done by taking locks asunder too
frequently.


CHAPTER IV.
And now it is high time that I brought this little
book to a close. Before Idoso I must add a few
words upon stalking, scouting, scrub-shooting, and
night-shooting. If you ever stalk ducks or any
other game, be most careful to have your gun in
half-cock, and never trail it after you ; also be very
sure to have no one in front of you, or no one
behind you. If two or more are engaged in this
exciting sport, they should be all abreast.
Scouting is the name applied to that kind of shoot-
ing when wallaby, kangaroo, hares, or, indeed, any
ground game—not to the exclusion of the opossum
—are pursued by a party of shooters, who walk first
in line and some distance apart, and then close in
towards each other. Many lives have been sacri-
ficed in this way, though it may not be so easy to
see what great resemblance there is between the
jacket of a friend and the skin of a wallaby. I look
upon this method of beating for game as sufficiently
dangerous to deserve to be discountenanced alto-
gether.
In scrub-shooting, if the scrub is high and ex-
tensive, carry your gun in half-cock. The grandson
of Joe Manton told me he had a gun go off in his
hand by the hammer, when down, catching in a
creeper. If for the most part the scrub allows you
to pass through it without coming into contact with
branches, and game are about, you may carry your
gun in full-cock ; and, even if you have to pass


through a dense and high portion, but small in
extent, you can carry your gun in full-cock, provided
you hold it with the grip in your right hand, with
the left shielding the trigger-guard, so as to prevent
any twigs entering it—the muzzle should be pointed
perpendicularly upwards ; this is the safest position.
When the scrub is extensive, and when you will, of
course, carry your gun at half-cock, the left hand
used for a trigger-guard shield is always a safe pre-
caution. In this last class of shooting the greatest
care should be taken not to cross each other’s beat.
If ground game are seen stealing away, the tempta-
tion will be to leave your beat and follow them
silently to the right or left, as occasion may require.
This should never be done, neither should a fur cap
be worn by anyone when out shooting. Some very
shocking deaths have occurred from neglect of this
simple piece of advice. The fur cap, whether made
out of hare, opossum, native bear, or wallaby skin,
appears through a thicket, or above a rock, and is
mistaken for game, when the head of the wearer—
as has happened very often—receives the leaden
shower intended for very different quarry.
It is well when shooting in company to wear
something on the person bearing a marked contrast
with the surroundings. The dark green of the
foliage of Australasia makes this desirable for those
of full height, but it is doubly necessary for boys,
who, from their being of low stature, are less likely
to be seen.
SHOOTING BY NIGHT.
Shooting by night is always, for obvious reasons,
more dangerous than shooting by day.
At full moon, in this favoured land, when a blue
silvery light is shed abroad on all sides, the lambent


softness and glory of which I have never seen
equalled elswhere, there is nevertheless a deep-
ness of shadow and an indistinctness which renders
it next to impossible to recognize objects with any
degree of certainty. Under these conditions the
greatest caution is requisite, and at no such
time, if at any, should youths indulge in that
hazardous sport known as scouting, full of danger
by day, but infinitely more so by night. When a
party of young fellows are out shooting after sun-
down, the safest way perhaps is to walk together,
unless indeed they keep entirely out of each other’s
range, which is far preferable.
I can tell by experience that a single grain, and
that only of snipe shot, striking one at eighty yards
distance, when discharged from a good gun, is not
a pleasant sensation.


CONCLUDING REMARKS.
Boys should not be allowed to use pistols or
revolvers, neither should toy brass cannons be given
them. A revolver is a particularly dangerous weapon,
on account of the likelihood of a charge remaining
in a chamber unnoticed. The shortness of the
barrel, too, makes it, in common with all other
pistols, a very unsuitable weapon for a learner.
When you go into a friend’s house and see a revolver
on a mantelpiece or shelf, never play with the
hammer, or snap it out of a window. Just as you
have done so some ofie may pass. I have known a
most distressing death occur in this way. We
should remember “ the thing that hath been it is
that which shall be,” “ and that which is done is
that which shall be done.” Strange as it may seem,
shooting with a catapult will be found the best
preliminary training for a gun. I venture to affirm
that a boy of ten, who is a good shot with a
catapult, on merely being taught how to put a gun
to his shoulder, will shoot well on the first attempt.
The benefit of catapult shooting arises for the
most part because proficiency in it depends so much
on a sympathetic action between arm and eye. Fire-
arms should always be handled with reverence.
This will be clearer when we reflect that it is
chiefly by the use of missile weapons in general,
but by the gun in particular, that man, while
physically so weak, has gained his ascendency over
the lower animals. By the skilled use of a pistol a
boy is more than a match for an elephant, that most


- DEC
40 FAC NE FAC. V O /.
*
formidable, when angry, of all the brute
Some of my readers may remember, when a huge
tame elephant went mad, how, on being pronounced
incurable, and ordered to be shot, a number of
soldiers fired a volley at it, with little or no effect;
on hearing which the great hunter and explorer of
the time killed the huge beast instantaneously
with a single bullet from a revolver. I will add
little more, as I feel convinced that enough has been
said, if observed, to produce habits of carefulness,
sufficient to enable the veriest tyro to progress in
the active habit of caution, until the risk in using
a gun becomes minimized. It must be admitted
that the most careful in the use of fire-arms are
liable to accident. Chance or accident, as we
speak, seems a necessity of our lives here below.
A man may tread upon an orange peel as he walks
the pavement, and thereby cause his death ; but he
could not do so if some careless person had not
thrown it there. He might have fallen upon the
pavement with the same result from a thousand
other causes, against which there was no guarding.
My only contention is that gun accidents might, by
attention being given to what appears in the pre-
ceding pages as to what one is to do, and not to do,
when handling a gun, bo»lessened by at least seventy-
five per cent. As long, however, as the present system
is pursued of allowing youths, without any previous
instruction, the use of fire-arms, we must expect to
read almost daily in the public prints distressing
accounts of wounding and death. What I have
written, if read and acted upon by those whom it
concerns, ‘which is equivalent to saying by all, will,
I sincerely believe, greatly lessen the mortality and
mutilations from the ignorant use of fire-arms so
common in this fair southern land.


p( li&b (


■
'ijfl ■ :
if;;:'
