

Facing
PERCY GRAINGER


Contributors to this volume are Brian Allison,
Malcolm Gillies, Barry Peter Ould, David Pear,
Michael Piggott and Eleanor Tan.


Facing
PERCY GRAINGER
Compiled and edited by
David Pear
National Library of Australia in association with the
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne
Canberra 2006


© National Library of Australia 2006
Every reasonable endeavour has been made to contact the copyright holders.
Where this has not been pososible, the copyright holders are invited to contact the publisher.
National Library of Australia Cataloguing-in-Publication entry
Facing Percy Grainger.
ISBN-13: 978-0-642-27639-0.
ISBN-10: 0-642-27639-0.
1. Grainger, Percy, 1882-1961. 2. Composers —Australia —Biography. I. Pear, David.
780.92
The exhibition, Facing Percy Grainger, was curated for the National Library of Australia by
Brian Allison, David Pear and Martin Terry in association with the
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne.
Assistant curators: Astrid Krautschneider, Irene Turpie
Publisher’s editor: Irma Gold
Designer: Kathy Jakupec
Printer: Inprint Pty Ltd
Front cover: Unknown photographer
Percy Grainger c. 1935
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne
Back cover: Percy Aldridge Grainger (1882-1961)
‘Blind Eye Score (Hill-Song II)’ undated
Large format music score used by Grainger as a
visual aid whilst conducting
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne


Contents
Foreword iii
Jan Fullerton and Glyn Davis
Grainger; The Formative Years 1
David Pear
Grainger the Composer 9
Malcolm Gillies
Grainger the Performer 15
Eleanor Tan
Grainger the Music Arranger 23
Barry Peter Quid
Grainger the Social Commentator 31
David Pear
Grainger the Autoarchivist 39
Michael Piggott
Grainger the Visual Gourmet 47
Brian Allison
Further Reading 55
List of Works 57
Notes on Contributors 58
Exhibition Checklist 61


Foreword
Jan Fullerton
Director-General, National Library of Australia
Facing Percy Grainger explores the many facets of the life,
persona, artistic world and musical achievement of a
unique Australian musician. Percy Aldridge Grainger
(1882—1961) is celebrated across his astonishing and
diverse range of endeavour: foremost as pianist and
composer, but also as a pioneering folklore collector,
musical arranger, ‘free musician’ and musical inventor,
sometime visual artist, social commentator and archivist.
The National Library of Australia is pleased to present
this exhibition and accompanying essays in collaboration
with the University of Melbourne where Grainger
established his own museum in 1938. The temporary
closure of the historic museum building for
refurbishment has provided the opportunity for its rich
collections of documents, music and artefacts to travel
and be interpreted in a wider national context, alongside
the rich music, folklore, pictorial and manuscript
collections of the National Library.
It is rare to find anywhere a personal archive in a
public institution such as the Grainger Museum, that
both exclusively memorialises and is founded by the
person himself. Grainger, with a clear eye to future
audiences and scholarship, thus played a pivotal role in
the documentary heritage of Australian music. Such a
value radiates through the National Library’s ongoing
commitment to collecting and disseminating Australian
music. The Library, the University and other institutions
are working together to make Australian music
accessible worldwide through the national online
service Music Australia (www.musicaustralia.org).
Grainger’s driving instinct was to communicate every
feature of his complex personal and aesthetic life and his
creative achievement as played out across Australia,
Europe and the United States. Through the exhibition
and this associated book, the curators (David Pear and
Brian Allison) and essayists provide a timely Australian
retrospective of Grainger’s artistic achievement. This
complements the international recording series of his
oeuvre currently taking place in Europe, and his
memorialisation in America that, ironically, honours him
as a celebrated ‘American’ musician. The exhibition and
essays redress this bias, acknowledging the extraordinary
and uncompromising expatriate artist who maintained a
deep dedication to Australian artistic life.
Grainger challenges us to reflect not only on the inner
life of the artist, often expressed in flamboyant, idiosyncratic
and experimental forms, but also on the wider role of the
artist in society. His desire, arguably one in which he
succeeded, was to influence, educate and mould public
taste, to create appreciation of the history of music and
music-making in its universal and cross-cultural dimensions,
and to unflinchingly expose his personal aesthetic.


Foreword
Glyn Davis
Vice-Chancellor, the University of Melbourne
For the past three years, curators, authors, conservators,
photographers, cataloguers, designers and many others
have been applying their creativity and skill to bring
Facing Percy Grainger to life.
In a larger though related journey, the University of
Melbourne has been rethinking its strategic direction.
Our aspiration remains, however, to be a public-spirited
institution that is highly esteemed nationally and
internationally for making distinctive contributions to
society. Our focus will continue to be research, learning
and teaching, and what we are now calling ‘knowledge
transfer’. Indeed these three strands are so intertwined
and interdependent, like strands of a triple helix, that our
future success will depend on pursuing them as a single
integrated vision.
Melbourne has also reaffirmed the unique virtues of
its campus locale, where face-to-face teaching remains
the norm, where scholars gather from across the globe,
and where learning communities embrace evolving
technologies. The University has always enjoyed a strong
sense of place, its centre bounded by Carlton and
Parkville, the city and its general cemetery.
One of the many features which has made the campus
distinctive has been the Grainger Museum. The Grainger
supports each of the three strands of the triple helix.
Set beside the Faculty of Music’s Conservatorium and
opposite the Centre for Studies in Australian Music, the
museum supports learning and research including
composition, performance and musicology. It also has
strong relevance to programs across many of our other
disciplines including art curatorship, design, education,
history and museology.
By their very nature, universities are about much
more than discovering and imparting knowledge.
They naturally lend themselves to a two-way transfer of
knowledge through their external engagement with
government, industry and the community. As such, the
Grainger Museum and Facing Percy Grainger are perfect
examples of how to pursue public and community
purposes. The exhibition represents a genuine
partnership between professional and academic
colleagues; it involves two renowned institutions; and it
adds value through this wonderful publication and
through additions to the Library’s national web-based
gateway, Music Australia.
At the opening of the Sydney Olympic Games, a
Grainger composition accompanied Cathy Freeman as
she lit the Olympic cauldron. My hope is that this
exhibition and its complements will be just as
inspirational.


Baron Adolf Edward Sigismund de Meyer (1868—1949)
Percy Grainger c. 1903
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne


Grainger: The Formative Years
David Pear
‘Country Gardens’ is the work above all by which
Grainger is known.To his chagrin. He set it to music in
1918 when he was serving as a bandsman in the 15th
band, Coast Artillery Corps, at Fort Hamilton, South
Brooklyn. Often playing for Liberty Loan Drives to raise
money for the war effort, Grainger was frequently called
upon to improvise up to four or five times an evening as
they moved from one fundraiser to another. He finally
put the work on paper at Governor’s Island, New York
City, far away from the hollyhocks and daises often
associated with its whimsical melody. Selling at the rate
of some 27 000 copies per year at its height in the 19205,
it broke Schirmer’s sales record for 75 years. Grainger set
it initially because of a perceived appeal to every class of
listener, and because of its ‘tunefulness and rhythmic
pregnance’. ‘Country Gardens’ became both the key to
Grainger’s financial freedom and the bane of his career.
For an artist consumed with an interest in gliding tones,
atonalism and polytonality, that such a work should
become his flagship was, certainly in his later years,
embarrassing. But despite the simplicity of its melodic
line, it is not an easy piece to play, particularly the
professional version. Over 40 years after the composer’s
death, ‘Country Gardens’ continues to be a significant
distraction to those attempting to understand this
unusual man’s life, for its simplicity —banality almost —
belies the complexity which characterised Grainger’s
mind, his life and his output.
Percy Aldridge Grainger (1882—1961)
‘Country Gardens’: English morris dance setting
National Library of Australia


Grainger was born in Brighton, Melbourne in 1882 to
an Australian mother and a British father. Initially taught
piano by his mother, Rose, and educated at home, at the
age of 12 he moved to Frankfurt to study at the Hoch
Conservatorium. His mother continued to support
them by teaching English to German students. It is
questionable whether or not Grainger’s time in
Frankfurt, educationally speaking, was a success.
Grainger did not complete all his formal examinations,
yet on the other hand he met a diversity of British,
Danish and American students who were to be of
influence or help to him throughout his life. Most
notable was the Frankfurt Group, as they are known, of
Balfour Gardiner, Cyril Scott and Roger Quilter —all
students of the Conservatorium.
It is also significant that in 1901, when Grainger came
to live in London —with a residency which almost
exactly paralleled the Edwardian period —he was an
Australian of part-British stock who spoke German and
Danish fluently. But he and his mother were, in effect,
refugees. The atmosphere in Germany had not been
comfortable for English residents since the Boer War.
For the Graingers, too, events in South Africa led to
tensions which peaked when one of Rose Graingers
German students expressed to her the hope that ‘as
many of your men as possible get killed'. This student’s
wish was fulfilled. When war came, British casualties in
South Africa were among the worst the nation had ever
experienced. This was an embarrassment to the
patriotically-minded Graingers, and it is hardly startling
that Percy Grainger clung to Kipling’s poetry in his last
years in Germany, as the most accessible poet of the
nation’s sentiments. Kipling provided a mental life raft to
Knud Larsen (1865-1922)
Rose Grainger 1907
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne
the colonial Grainger, who was no doubt a Briton to the
Germans (even though until 1900 he had never visited
Britain). He was, however, an Australian —indeed,
a ‘colonial’ —to the British, while the Australians were
not —some are still not —quite sure what to make
of him.
Graingers personal solution appears to have been the
adoption of an enthusiasm akin to that of a religious
convert: he sought to become more British than the


British, and his departure for London seemed an
inevitable step in a process of national self-assertion that
began in Frankfurt. Grainger and his mother came to
England to avoid the tensions of Germany due to the
invitation of Lilian Devlin, an Australian Grainger had
known both in Melbourne and in Frankfurt. He later
described Devlin as: ‘lovely as an angel from heaven —
tall, fleshy, blond & with the loveliest loving look in her
face & the sweetest soft-hearted Australian ways ...
What low-born swine people must be to applaud
smart-alecky ugly-looking musicians of the lower races
& at the same time cold-shoulder a vision of Australian
beauty like Miss Devlin’.
Grainger’s first recital with Devlin was a great
success, no less for the presence in the audience of
Australian contralto Ada Crossley. It was not long
before he was in demand throughout Belgravia,
Kensington and Chelsea as a player for the ‘musical
evenings’, known as ‘at homes’, which took place in
homes of the ‘well-to-do’. Artists, too, including the
much-respected Mortimer Menpes, invited Grainger to
play in their studios. Over the years, and certainly by
1910, Grainger had firmly established himself as a
respected concert pianist, and had no need to
supplement his employment through ‘at home’
performances. By this time, many significant individuals
invited Grainger to their homes entirely in his own
right as an extraordinarily interesting person. Moreover,
as most writers contemporary to Grainger stated
upfront, this pianist was significant ‘eye candy’ and
graced the drawing room with more than just
appropriate music. Indeed, throughout his life Grainger’s
looks played a substantial part in his selection for a
variety of professional and social activities, and he made
every effort to use them to his full advantage.
Grainger was soon to meet Ernest Thesiger, who
himself had studied to become a musician but
abandoned it in favour of acting. He was later to star in
a number of major films. Thesiger undertook to guide
Grainger through the quagmire of London high society,
Francis Derwent Wood (1871—1926)
Cyril Scott c. 1903
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne


Jane Erin Emmet de Glehn (1873—1961)
Percy Grainger 1905
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne
and began by introducing the charming young colonial
boy to the immensely influential John Singer Sargent.
Sargent had a statelessness about him, not unlike
Grainger. His father was an American and a doctor with
a streak of wanderlust. When he took his family on the
‘Grand Tour’, a European tradition of travelling Europe
before settling down, his son John was born. Subsequent
years saw the continuation of the ‘Tour’, providing the
Sargents with a wonderful perspective on the world but
little sense of community. John Sargent seems to have
reacted to this in his later years, becoming firmly
ensconced in his studio at 31 Tite Street, and remaining
there most of his life. This home appears to have
become a veritable ‘waiting room’ for the rich and
famous, as much as for the penurious and famous.
Anybody who was anybody wanted to be seen with, or
painted by, Sargent. While Grainger was mercurial in his
later autobiographical writings when evaluating his
friends from this time, about Sargent he was
consistently generous, reiterating that the artist was
‘always great-heartedly wanting to put well-paid jobs in
my way’. Grainger dedicated his composition ‘Father
and Daughter’ to Sargent.
Sargent introduced the young Grainger to interesting
people who could help him, or to whom he could be
useful. In 1908, it was Sargent who arranged for
Grainger to play for Faure and later invited him to dine
in the company of Grainger’s idol, Rudyard Kipling,
whose poems he was avidly setting to music.
Not only did Sargent make an interesting sketch of
Grainger, as a famous portraiture artist he spent so much
of his time sketching those who were to figure in
Grainger’s life during the foundation of his career.
This group of social and artistic high-flyers were
intensely close-knit, and as a result some of the most
important figures in Grainger’s life at this time were
introduced to him by Sargent. Mrs Charles Hunter —
Mary or ‘Mrs Tally-ho’ as she was referred to by many
of the Chelsea set —was one. She was described by
Sargent’s biographer, Stanley Olson, as ‘a well-tuned


steam launch, capable of fifteen knots, from which
immense nets were cast, hauling in a heterogeneous
crowd ... Sargent was her principal catch’. Sister to
composer Ethel Smythe, Mary once declared that she
saw it as her ‘sacred duty ... to spend every penny’ of her
husband’s money. An ambitious woman, she achieved
her goal, despite her husband’s substantial holdings.
Much of it was spent nurturing young artists such as the
alluring Grainger.
Grainger hated intensely the way some members ot
this circle ‘used’ each other —and used him. What
particularly irritated him was when he received
invitations to an ‘at home’ or dinner party, only because
the host or hostess wished him to play for free. The last
thing a professional musician wanted to do in his leisure
time was to play for the public. Grainger put a stop to
this quite decisively at the London house of Lady Elcho.
Artists Wilfrid and Jane von Glehn (later de Glehn)
were there, and Grainger had been introduced to them
by Sargent. They asked him to play and he refused.
They asked again, and again he refused:
So they enlisted Mrs Patrick Campbell to play her
wiles on me. In the sight of a crowded room-ful of
people Mrs Campbell threw herself down on her
knees before me, saying ‘Dear Percy Grainger, please
play for us’. But I remained stubborn (tho unpleasant
it was) & Mrs PC. had to get up off the floor.
The Mrs Patrick Campbell in this account is no less than
the then very famous actress for whom Shaw specifically
wrote the role of Eliza Doolittle in Pygmalion.
Accustomed to getting her own way, this was one
Jacques-Emile Blanche (1861-1942)
Percy Grainger 1906
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne
instance in which she did not. For a young man in his
early twenties, this demonstrates considerable strength of
character on Graingers part.
Grainger nevertheless demonstrated the same traits as
those he criticised, making free use of the advantages
knowing such people could avail him. One in particular
stands out. Mrs Lilith Lowrey, a socialite twice Grainger’s
age, lived in splendour in Queen’s House, one of the
most exclusive homes on London’s Cheyne Walk.
She ‘took up’ young men like Grainger, as he explained:


One evening, driving home to Queen’s House in
a taxi from some party, she told me that if I didn’t
become her lover she would do nothing more for
me. I had no such inclination; on the other hand,
I had nothing against [playing] the role of a male
whore. But I feared the riskiness of the matter and
her husband’s attitude to it. [ln English] A scandal
wouldn’t help my job-life either! Mrs L. told me
that her husband took no stock in her sex-life;
didn’t care what she did. [ln Danish] So I went to
bed with her the same night. I had never before
slept with a woman, nor had I ever reached a
sexual climax while awake ... Imagine my surprise
when, [with] ... Mrs L., I sensed within me
overpowering landslide, which seemed to start in
my toes and reached its completion in my head!
I thought I was about to die. If I remember
correctly, I only experienced fear of death. I don’t
think that any joy entered into it.
This ‘love-serve-job’, as Grainger called it, went on for
some years, with his mother’s encouragement. She knew
what was good for her son. Lowrey certainly introduced
him to a wide circle of artists, musicians and society leaders.
On a clandestine trip to Dieppe in 1902, she introduced
her lover to the painter Jacques-Emile Blanche. Grainger
took to him immediately. He was to Grainger ‘not a
common-or-garden Frenchman. He had been at school in
England & spoke English with learned mastery & subtle
wit. What a spell-binding man & how I grew to love him!’
Perhaps the greatest test of Grainger’s affection and
respect for Blanche was contained in his ability to
sustain criticism from him. When Grainger’s ‘Colonial
Song’ was played in London in 1913, Blanche wrote the
following to his friend:
The only, the one danger in your disposition, might
be as to your indulging into some a trifle too facile
effects in the way of big ensemble, just a little too
!a[c]king. I think you are at your best whenever you
seem to dive in a vort [sic] of turmoil of superforced
and intricate currents —Do give us a lot more!
Arnold Henry Mason (1885-1963)
Ella Strom 1919
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne


But by now the door was closing on the sparkling
Edwardian years. War loomed. In 1914, against a
background of jeers at Grainger’s cowardice, he left with
his mother for the United States. He was soon hailed as
one of the country’s top concert pianists, but things were
never the same again. While the United States provided
Grainger with many opportunities, he was rarely happy
there. His mother’s health, which seemed to have
stablised during the English years, deteriorated as the
syphilis given to her by her husband ate its way both into
her body and her spirit. In 1922, she took her own life.
Devastated, Grainger wrote the wistful ‘The
Nightingale and the Two Sisters’ from folk songs
gathered only a month after she died. His mother’s death
marked the end of Grainger’s youth, and of an idealism
and enthusiasm with which he had infected everyone he
met. Subsequent years saw him continually rearranging
compositional materials, values and philosophy gleaned
in these formative London years. As he later noted:
‘in London, I became deeply swayed by Japanese
thoughts, by French tone-art, by Spanish tone-art, & by
anything passed on to me by beloved friends like
Menpes, Jacques Blanche, Sargent & others’. Grainger
was a lucky man: not only to have been under the
tutelage of such eminent figures, but to have been
counted as their friend.


Axel Poignant (1906—1986)
Portrait of Percy Grainger 1935
National Library of Australia


Grainger the Composer
Malcolm Gillies
Percy Grainger was a composer first and a pianist
second. Or so he said. The evidence of his life suggests
otherwise: that Grainger spent most of his heyday at the
keyboard, and getting to and from the 3000 concerts he
took part in between 1890 and 1960. In later life he
lamented that his compositions had gained too little
attention, and even that came too late in life.
Yet Grainger had mapped out his life plan as a composer
before he was 20, and he held true to that plan over the
next six decades as best he could. We now know him
best by his highly distinctive arrangements of folk
music—‘Country Gardens’, ‘Folk Song from County
Derry’ and ‘Lincolnshire Posy’ —but that was not what
Grainger meant by composing. That was arranging.
When he talked of serious composition he meant works
such as his Kipling‘Jungle Book Cycle’,‘ln a Nutshell’
suite,‘The Warriors’ and, above all, his quest for‘free music’.
Grainger’s folk-music arrangements are by their very
nature miniature works. The tunes are set in a few
imaginative guises—skilfully varying the rhythms, pitches
and instrumental timbres —and then, in between two and six
minutes, the piece is over. In his original compositions
Grainger tried to break out of the miniaturist mould, to grow
from the ‘bijou’ country-garden Englishness of his best-known
arrangements into a ‘continental’ Australian conception
which was, as he wrote to a longstanding English friend in
1957, ‘monotonous, uneventful and unbroken-up’.
That desire for musical continentalism paralleled his quest
for ‘all-roundedness’ (rather than specialisation) in personal
development. Common to both was Graingers desire to
achieve seamless development over a wide expanse, rather
than varied repetition of something self-contained.
‘The Warriors: Music to an Imaginary Ballet’, written
between 1913 and 1916, was Grainger’s longest and
most extravagant work. Scored for a huge orchestra,
with a veritable battery of percussion instruments and
three piano parts, the work was an aural parade of
Grainger’s key racial influences —ancient Greek heroes,
Nordic warriors, Zulus and Polynesians. These combined,
in Grainger’s words, in ‘an orgy of war-like dances,
processions and merry-makings broken, or accompanied,
by amorous interludes’. Yet this orgy was ultimately a
string of eight miniature sections. And unlike
Stravinsky’s ballets, which had inspired Grainger to
write his ‘imaginary ballet’ in the first place, the whole
of‘The Warriors’was no more than the sum of its parts.
Similarly, in his ‘ln a Nutshell’ suite, Grainger did not
manage to break out of the miniature mould, except in the
suite’s third movement, ‘Pastoral’, which is a glorious
10-minute ramble of rhythmic and harmonic flexibility.
Here Grainger succeeds with large-scale development
rather than just skilful variation of detail.


Percy Aldridge Grainger (1882-1961)
‘The Warriors’, full score 1916
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne
That flexibility with pitches and rhythm is seen, in more
experimental fashion, in a series of little-known works that
Grainger created from boyhood to old age. In Graingers
telling, the origin of these experimental works lay in late
1880 s Melbourne where he observed the freedom of the
movement of water (he mentioned the Albert Park Lake,
in particular), and asked himself why music did not move
as freely as water. Over 60 years later, in a 1952 lecture,
he clarified what he was searching for:
1. Melody freed from the tyranny of harmony;
2. Harmony freed from the narrow conceptions of
concordance; 3. Intervallic freedom unrestrained by the
hampering confines of scale & key; 4. Rhythm freed
from the constant in-step-ness-with-Jim (coincidence
between the rhythms of the various voices);
5. Musical form freed from unsuitable ‘architectural’
conceptions. In other words: FREE MUSIC.
What irritated Grainger most was that Western music
seemed to be suffering from arrested development because
of its allegiance to the fixed steps of yesterday’s music and,
in particular, the simplistic conformities of classical and
romantic music. He likened its condition to that of Egyptian
bas-reliefs with their conventionalised forms, against the
liberated and lifelike flow of Greek sculptures. He believed
musical liberation would only occur when music could be
conceived outside the traditional restraints of pitch, rhythm
and form.
He first challenged conventional rhythm when, in
1899, his analyses of Old Testament speech rhythms led
to the irregular rhythms of his ‘Love Verses from the
Song of Solomon’, and his Scottish-influenced
‘Hill-Song’ no. 1. Meanwhile, the lurching of an Italian
train had inspired his minute-long experimental ‘Train
Music’. Later, in 1907, he attempted an early essay in
‘beatless music’ with ‘Sea-Song’. From around 1905, as
he set about transcribing British folk songs, Grainger
became increasingly frustrated by the limitations of all
kinds of written notation. In his ‘Random Round’


he turned the inspiration of South Sea Islander music-
making into his first experiment in ‘concerted partial
improvisation’, an attempt to blend Western notions of
harmony with Rarotongan practices of polyphony.
While the public lapped up his jaunty folk-music
settings, Grainger was privately planning a comprehensive
assault on formalised music. A further move towards his ‘free
music’ aims came during the 1920 s as he established his
principles of‘elastic scoring’. Against the classical-romantic
orchestra, with its inflexible instrumental formula, Grainger
posed a way in which all available instruments could be used
in ensemble playing. In more baroque fashion, what
mattered was that players were assigned their parts according
to a few simple rules of instrumental combination. Using
elastic scoring it was possible to expand and contract to fit
the available players. So often there were too many good
wind players but too few good string players to fit the
standard formulas of the symphony orchestra.
Wurlitzer, Knoxville, United States
Butterfly Piano 1940 s
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne


Percy Aldridge Grainger (1882-1961)
Kangaroo Pouch Method of Synchronising and Playing 8 Oscillators (‘free music’ illustration) April 1952
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne
But Grainger wanted to go further. Much further.
The fixed steps found on the pianos black and white
keys, and on most wind and brass instruments, irritated
him beyond measure. These instruments were
aesthetically stillborn through their inflexibility of pitch.
They could not ‘glide’. But the music Grainger claimed
he wanted to express to the world was a gliding, sliding,
infinitely malleable music, akin to William Hogarth’s
‘curves of beauty’.
In early 1935, on ABC radio, he unveiled his ‘Free Music’
no. 1, first scored for string quartet, but later rescored for
early electronic instruments called theremins. ‘Free Music’
no. 2 followed in 1937, scored more ambitiously for six
theremins. This music, with its seamless gradations of pitch,
sounds like a distant precursor of the Dr Who theme.
ABC listeners must have wondered as much at Grainger’s
broadcast lecture on ‘The Goal of Musical Progress’ as at his
weird ‘free music’ example, for he explained:


‘Free music’ ... will be the full musical expression of
the scientific nature-worship begun by the Greeks and
carried forward by the Nordic races. It will be the
musical counterpart of Nordic pioneering, athleticism,
nudism. In all these respects it will be cosmic and
impersonal, and thus fundamentally differentiated
from the strongly personal and ‘dramatic’ music of
non-Nordic Europe with its emphasis upon sex,
possession, ambition, jealousy and strife.
A sextet of theremins, however, still relied on six
individual lines performed by humans. Grainger wanted
multi-voice, gliding music that machines could play
without the unreliability of human interpretation. Only
then, when music was truly impersonal, could it finally
be free.
World War II interrupted Grainger’s ‘free music’
experiments. During the war he relocated from New York
to Springfield, Missouri which he used as a base for
re-intensifying his concert career, often playing to troops
at military camps. But in 1945, when the war was over
he returned to his home in White Plains, New York, and
soon teamed up with a local physicist, Burnett Cross, to
start making impersonal ‘free music’ machines.
One early machine involved three melanettes (electronic
keyboard instruments) and experimented with microtones
of one-sixth of a tone. Another, from 1950, involved a
swanee whistle and two recorders controlled by a paper roll.
These led to the more substantial Estey Reed Tone-Tool
machine which operated like a pianola. A huge metre-wide
roll of perforated paper passed over a ‘kind of giant
harmonica’ at a regular speed, resulting in a four-part glide
realised over steps of one-eighth of a tone.
In 1952, Cross and Grainger created a Kangaroo Pouch
Tone-Tool which gave greater flexibility in pitch
and volume for eight independent parts. For months
the Graingers’ lounge room in White Plains was
dominated by a huge paper roll nearly two metres
high, onto which 16 graphs were sewn at various
heights. Without getting too technical, Grainger
achieved smoother ‘hills and dales’ of sound than ever
before, as eight oscillators negotiated their pitch and
volume graphs.
A further machine, the Electric Eye Tone-Tool, was
developed from 1953. It used photocells and electronic
oscillators, based on newly available transistor
technology, to realise the contours of Grainger’s ‘hills
and dales’ graphs. Soon, Grainger was working on
graphs of his own music, and of others such as Wagner,
Grieg, Skryabin, Cyril Scott and Arthur Fickenscher,
to be performed by his new instrument.
However, technology was racing ahead of Grainger.
By the mid-1950s the electronic synthesiser, developed
at the Radio Corporation of America’s Princeton
laboratories, was able to achieve most of Grainger’s aims
with much greater subtlety and infinitely greater
budgets. The rest is history, and electronic music rapidly
became an integral part of our sonic landscape. Despite
his view in old age that the development of ‘free music’
was his only work of real musical importance, Grainger
never composed a major piece of ‘free music’.
His lifelong quest ‘to tally the irregularities and
complexity of nature’ was realised only in experimental
terms. He remains best known for his consummate folk
music arrangements, for which even Benjamin Britten
would claim him as his master.


Frederick Morse
Grainger: Pianist Composer 1920 s
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne


Grainger the Performer
Eleanor Tan
At the height of his performing career in the United
States from 1920—22, Percy Grainger was playing up to
120 concerts per year. These concerts featured him in a
variety of roles as solo pianist, chamber musician,
concerto soloist and conductor. As solo pianist his
concert programs were wide-ranging and included
original compositions as well as arrangements from the
medieval to modern periods, with the exception of
classical works as Grainger was known to dislike Haydn,
Mozart and Beethoven. Moreover, he frequently
championed works by lesser-known composers, and
those of his composer friends Edvard Grieg, Cyril Scott,
Balfour Gardiner and Henry Cowell.
Proclaimed as a virtuoso in concert reviews,
Grainger’s pianism was synonymous with the romantic
virtuoso tradition and, more specifically, with that of the
composer—pianist Franz Liszt. Though Grainger never
met Liszt, his indirect link to the virtuoso tradition was
through his teacher in Melbourne, Louis Pabst, who, in
turn, was a student of Anton Rubinstein, the famous
Russian who was inspired by Liszt’s pianism and
promoted his principles and teaching methods.
Grainger’s enthralment with Liszt student Eugen
d’Albert’s slapdash style further reveals the values that
informed his own playing: ‘When I saw d’Albert swash
around over the piano, with the wrong notes flying to
right & left, & the whole thing a welter of recklessness,
I said to myself: “That’s the way I must play.” I am afraid
I learnt his propensity for wrong notes all too
thoroughly!’
The heavier action of the late nineteenth-century
piano ushered in a new kind of pianism which
necessitated the use of weight technique in order to
achieve greater sound projection. An aspect of pianism
that was common to both Liszt and Grainger was their
use of the fist. Noteworthy eulogies such as, ‘young
Siegfried Percy Grainger is a muscular artist, who
crashes chords with the energy of a sun god’
Unknown maker
Cast of Percy Grainger’s hands undated
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne


undoubtedly confirmed Grainger’s physical relationship
with the instrument as that requiring to be struck. It is
no surprise that his critics portrayed him as ‘a shining
apparition with golden locks, [who] smites the keyboard
like the harmonious blacksmith ... his fingers are like
steel mallets’. Thus, by bunching his fingers into a fist
and stiffening his entire arm and wrist, Grainger would
strike the keys as if with a mallet. His physical approach
to the piano, more that of an athlete than an aesthete,
translated into a form of muscular pianism which, in his
opinion, ideally complemented the ‘double percussion’
action of the piano. Similarly, the Russian composer
Glinka recalled in his Memoirs that Liszt’s ‘performance
of Beethoven’s sonatas and classical music in general was
not what it should be; he struck the keys as though he
were chopping meat’. It is perhaps such histrionics that
led critics to variously proclaim both Liszt and Grainger
as ‘genius’ and ‘charlatan’.
Another feature of Grainger’s muscular pianism was
his idiosyncratic use of bunched and alternating
fingerings to convey greater virtuosity. This is evidenced
in his piano composition ‘ln Dahomey’ (‘Cakewalk
Smasher’) which features alternating and bunched
fingerings, and glissandos to connote virtuosity.
However, Grainger sustained an injury to his right-hand
second finger as a youth, and so his prescription of such
fingerings could be ascribed to his need to avoid undue
pain. In time, this developed into a personal idiosyncrasy
and forged a pianism that was based on personal
strengths and weaknesses, and hinged on less safety and
sensitivity. Indeed, Grainger’s awareness of his technical
limitations, particularly in the areas of velocity and
speed, forced him to foster methods to enhance what
one critic called the ‘effect of virtuosity’, of which a
spirited sense of rhythm inevitably played a part. But
more pertinently for Grainger, the gestural and imitative
qualities of music should serve to articulate the
‘twittering, pattering and coughing sounds’ of folk
singers, rather than connoting a deeper aesthetic.
This principle became intrinsically linked to his unique
interpretation of rhythm and articulation.
True to the virtuoso tradition, Grainger was not
averse to rearranging the score to enhance the effect of
virtuosity. By playing a simple trill with alternating
hands or dividing a passage between two hands, he
sought to convey greater velocity, volume and variety of
articulation. Conversely, Grainger would simplify a
passage by redistributing the difficulty between both
hands or even omit the difficult passage altogether in
performance, as Liszt himself would have recommended.
As a Steinway artist, Grainger actively promoted the use
of the middle pedal, which was a new feature in the
American Steinway Grand. In a show of virtuosity, he
would frequently combine the use of all three pedals in
performance to achieve the effect of an organ.
For Grainger, virtuosity was not restricted to the hands,
but also extended to the feet.
Paradoxically, while Grainger’s muscular pianism
distinguished him in the early twentieth century when
personal style was the essence, it also later shackled him to
the past and thwarted his musical and technical
development in adulthood. As late as the 1940 s Grainger
was still propounding the stiff arm and stiff fingers approach
to his students at Interlochen, when Tobias Matthay and
Rudolf Breithaupt had, four decades earlier, revolutionised
piano technique by proposing the relaxation method and


Champeau Studios, New York
Publicity photograph for Duo-Art reproducing pianos c. 1925
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne
weight transfer technique respectively. Graingers frequent
complaint of lethargy after each performance —which he
considered a ‘rack of a platform’ —was probably due to
extreme psychological and physical tension during
performance. Yet, despite this shortcoming, Grainger had
an insatiable need to learn new and difficult repertoire
which exposed him to various pianistic challenges and
offered him insights into current compositional trends.
The virtuoso tradition of the nineteenth century was
not only restricted to the platform of the stage, but also


L. Coring, Leipzig
Fob watch and chain originally belonging to Edvard Grieg, given
to Percy Grainger by Nina Grieg in 1907 undated
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne
extended to exhibitions of athletic prowess offstage.
While Liszt was noted for his antic of leaping onto the
platform of the stage instead of taking the steps,
Grainger too enjoyed flaunting his athleticism on and
offstage. His critics noted his brisk stride onto the stage
as if he were starting on a 20-mile walk, and also
commented on his agility in leaping onto the stage or,
once, making a dash to the end of the hall and back
during an orchestral tutti in a piano concerto. In this
regard, it is difficult to imagine that Liszt did not
contribute to the model for Grainger’s athleticism
as a virtuoso.
London provided the impetus for Grainger’s early
performing experiences from 1901 to 1914. The‘at home’
concerts provided many opportunities for Grainger to
cultivate a virtuoso image. It was during such a concert
in May 1906 that Grainger met Edvard Grieg while
turning pages for him, leading to a brief but significant
friendship which lasted until Grieg’s death in 1907.
Perhaps it was Grieg’s provocative interview with the
Danish newspapers that established Grainger as
the Grieg interpreter: ‘What is nationality? I have
written Norwegian Peasant dances that none of my
countrymen can play and here comes this Australian
who plays them as they ought to be played!’ But though
Grieg saw in Grainger a champion of his music, his diary
entry, written soon after his meeting with Grainger,
revealed this: ‘But I missed ... the splendid Percy
Grainger who turned the pages for me at a concert and
whom I love almost as if he were a young woman.’
Grainger’s self-preserving decision to leave for the
United States when World War I broke out was also an
astute career move. Grainger’s schedule was soon packed
with performing engagements throughout the United
States, and in a letter to his mother he disclosed that his
music would ‘bring more honor to Australia than any
soldier-work I could have done in British armies’.
In a review of Grainger’s New York recital debut on
11 February 1915, critic Richard Aldrich of the New York
Times commented on his ‘distinctive personality that marks
him out even in this season crowded with pianists of great
and distinguished powers [Gabrilowitsch, Bauer and
Busoni], He has the technical equipment that is


Sergei Vasilyevich Rachmaninoff (1873—1943)
‘Morceaux dc fantasie pour piano’ 1890 s
Prelude in C Minor, Op. 3
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne


indispensable for the modern player and opulent tone, a
vivid sense of rhythm, a feeling for tonal color and variety
of touch’. Evidently, Grainger’s debut program was
calculated for virtuosic effect and variety: the works
performed included Bach-Busoni’s ‘Organ Prelude and
Fugue in D’, Brahms’ ‘Handel Variations’, selections from
Grieg’s op. 66 and op. 72, Grainger’s ‘Colonial Song’ and
‘Mock Morris’, Chopin’s ‘Posthumous Study in Ab’,
Ravel’s ‘Ondine’, and Albeniz’s Triana’.The success of this
performance led to many others throughout the country.
Percy Aldridge Grainger (1882-1961)
Percy Grainger conducting the student orchestra in the Bowl at the National Music Camp, Interlochen c. 1942
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne


prompting Grainger to write that he had ‘never been
more successful anywhere than here, both as a composer
and pianist, maybe nowhere as successful as here.
Next winter is already fully booked with the very best
concert engagements ... America is a good country for
a popular artist!’
Apart from his gruelling recital commitments,
Grainger signed up with the Duo-Art Company, Decca
Records, and Columbia Graphophone Company to make
piano rolls and records. This resulted in approximately 250
original recordings and piano rolls of solo and chamber
performances. Particularly noteworthy was Grainger’s
1921 piano roll recording of Grieg’s ‘Piano Concerto’,
with Grainger assuming both roles of accompanist and
soloist. The years of Grainger’s transition from English to
American residence, though fraught with personal
uncertainties, witnessed a smooth career progression.
Grainger’s willingness to explore music in different
contexts and through various mediums was a crucial
element of his commercial success during his early years
in the United States.
While this period marked Grainger’s most successful
phase as pianist and composer, his career came to a
grinding halt when his mother committed suicide in
April 1922. This personal tragedy sapped Grainger’s will
to succeed, and he took a long hiatus away from his
performing commitments to re-evaluate his life.
When he returned to performing in the late 19205, his
career never attained the heights of his early New York
success, though it was somewhat revitalised during
World War 11. Grainger continued to perform in smaller
venues until 1960. Such concerts recall a more intimate
setting where he would program his own compositions,
featuring himself as pianist, conductor and guitarist.
Indeed, life was a revolving stage for Percy Grainger,
whose multi-faceted personality and idiosyncrasies were
documented and frequently recounted, more so than his
professional contributions to music. Such eccentricities
were probably developed in response to his mother’s
advice to ‘practice personality’, which he consequently
did in order to distinguish himself and project a
larger-than-life personality.
Throughout his 60-year career, Grainger wore the
many hats of composer, conductor, teacher, recording
artist, inventor, writer and pianist as it was his belief that
‘geniuses are those who proudly refuse to specialize, those
who retain an all-rounded, balanced, manly approach to
life’. While he felt bitter that due credit was not accorded
to him for his many contributions to music, this did not
deter him from involvement with live music-making right
up until 29 April 1960. As his wife Ella later wrote on
the program of this day’s event, ‘Here was Percy’s last
concert. 1960, Oh so nice at morning Recital, then a
‘fiasco’ with Band in the afternoon —also nice.’


Percy Aldridge Grainger (1882-1961)
An annotated copy of ‘British Folk-Music Settings no. 6. Irish Tune from County London Derry'
London: Schott & Co., c. 1912
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne


Grainger the Music Arranger
Barry Peter Ould
In the impressive rollcall of music arrangers throughout
twentieth-century music, no musician looms as large in
this field as the composer—pianist Percy Aldridge
Grainger. His numerous arrangements of works by other
composers, as well as arrangements of his original and
folk music settings, present a body of work which is
perhaps unique in music history. Grainger’s musical
interests covered a wide spectrum from medieval
polyphony to the twentieth century, which culminated
in his own early experiments in producing electronic
music on ‘free music’ machines.
Grainger’s development as an arranger can be
roughly divided into three periods. His earliest work as
an arranger of traditional music can be dated to 1898
when he took the song ‘Willow Willow’ from William
Chappell’s ‘Old English Music’ and wrote a new
accompaniment to the existing melody. This was soon
followed by 25 traditional melodies from Augener’s
‘Minstrelsy of England’, all with new accompaniments
by the 16-year-old Grainger. In 1900, during a visit to
West Argyllshire in Scotland, the young Grainger
was heavily influenced by what he saw and heard, and
this was to have a profound effect on the music he
produced thereafter.
His next set of arrangements was 12 songs from the
Scottish collection ‘Songs of the North’, for which he
wrote new piano accompaniments. Another two pieces
from the same collection were arranged for a cappella
voices, and it is in these settings that the beginnings of
Grainger’s unique harmonic style can be heard. Grainger
continued to make new settings of existing source
material more or less up until he embarked on
collecting traditional folk songs. The years leading up to
this important phase of his life were filled with an
insatiable appetite for work.
His first public recital as a pianist took place in 1901,
but he was also very busy playing at private functions.
These early years in London saw the composition of his
paraphrase transcription of Tchaikovsky’s ‘Flower Waltz’,
his first venture into that particular form, and piano
transcriptions of ‘Four Irish Dances’ by his friend and
mentor, Charles Villiers Stanford. This would in turn
lead to a series of piano transcriptions of pieces he
particularly admired, thus securing him a position
amongst the ranks of composer—pianists who were
attracted to this genre.
It was also during this period that Grainger first met
his musical hero Edvard Grieg. He had long been a
fervent admirer of the Norwegian’s music. While still
a boy in Australia, he had come under the spell of
Grieg’s piano music, taught to him by his mother, Rose.
His earliest orchestral arrangements were of three of


Edison Company, United States
Edison Standard Phonograph undated (after 1903)
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne
Grieg’s ‘Lyric Pieces’ from op. 12, scored in July 1898,
which predated his first song arrangement of ‘Willow,
Willow’ by some four months. In 1902, during his stay at
Waddesdon Manor, near Aylesbury in Buckinghamshire,
Grainger penned perhaps his most famous arrangement.
It was his choral setting of ‘lrish Tune from County
Derry’ which has in latter years been wrongly attributed
the title ‘Danny Boy’.This sumptuous melody was to be
arranged in many different ways during Grainger’s
lifetime, but the first published edition of his elastic
scoring concept was a highly chromatic version
of the tune.


In 1904, a meeting with Lucy Broadwood inspired
Grainger to start collecting folk songs in the field.
The material he collected between 1905 and 1909 would
become his new source of inspiration, leading to the
creation of one of his major musical achievements: the
composition of the series ‘British Folk Music Settings’,
which forms the largest collection of pieces among the
generic headings he gave to his compositions. The folk
songs he collected were mainly from Lincolnshire and
Gloucestershire, but he also notated a number of sea
shanties from John Perring and Charles Rosher, a deep
sea fisherman and retired sailor respectively. It was from
Rosher that he collected ‘What Shall We Do with the
Drunken Sailor’, used to great effect in his ‘Scotch
Strathspey and Reef. Peering provided ‘Shallow
Brown’, perhaps one of Grainger’s greatest settings.
Grainger also visited Denmark where he undertook
several expeditions to collect material, the last being in
1922. Again, the songs he collected in Denmark would
be used in a series of compositions entitled ‘Danish Folk
Music Settings’ of which his ‘Danish Folk Music Suite’
for orchestra is the crowning achievement.
Edison Company, United States
Wax cylinders
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne


A series of eight concerts between 1912—13, organised
and sponsored by Henry Balfour Gardiner, a fellow
student at Hoch’s Conservatory in Frankfurt, presented
Grainger with an opportunity to present some of his
choral and orchestra! arrangements for the first time.
At the first of these concerts, his setting of a Faeroese dance
folk song with guitar ensemble, ‘Father and Daughter’,
was a huge success. It brought Cecil Forsyth’s attention
to Grainger’s unique scoring for guitars which he later
used in his book on orchestration. The fifth concert
included one of Grainger’s earliest orchestral settings
from folk music sources, Passacaglia on ‘Green Bushes’.
A publishing deal with Schott and Co. was secured
in 1911 and, after the success of a handful of popular
pieces including ‘Shepherd’s Hey’, Grainger was
encouraged to make piano arrangements of them to
widen their popularity. Thus the process of transcribing
his own pieces began. While Grainger’s original piano
works are almost without exception transcriptions
(the majority of his piano versions were made after their
original instrumental or orchestral scores were
composed), it is in the 30 or so transcriptions of other
composers’ music that his originality as a composer for
the piano shines forth.
After this period Grainger and his mother departed
for the United States. This third phase was to be the
most extended. As his ideas for new works were drying
up, especially after his mother’s death in 1922, Grainger
undertook the constant rearranging of previous
compositions. A brief period in the United States Army
as bandsman gave him the opportunity of writing for
the military band. It was during this time that he
arranged a number of his popular pieces for band.
During his London years he had acquired a thorough
knowledge of wind instruments, augmented by his time
as bandsman, and this proved invaluable when he came
to write such masterpieces as ‘Lincolnshire Posy’.
However, the anonymity of army life did not last long
and it was soon discovered that his true talents lay as a
concert pianist. In 1918, he was coaxed into giving a
piano recital in aid of War Bonds. For this recital he
dished up the piece to which his name would be
inextricably linked for the remainder of his life.
The tune had been given to him 10 years earlier by
Cecil Sharp who had collected it from traditional
sources and his arrangement of ‘Country Gardens’
would provide Grainger with an income for life.
After his time in the United States Army he resumed
work as a concert pianist and his vigorous nature never
allowed him to rest. Grainger’s remaining years in the
United States were oriented towards education, and a
series of teaching posts were made available to him.
This provided him with the opportunity to make
arrangements of pieces for multiple pianos so that his
piano students would be able to play alongside him and
thus accustom themselves to playing in an ensemble.
For the more gifted pupils, he made special two-piano
arrangements of some of his original works and folk
music settings.
It was at the Chicago Music College, beginning in
the summer of 1919, that the two first numbers of his
‘Free Settings of Favourite Melodies’ were written out.
The ‘Hornpipe’ from Handel’s ‘Water Music’, however,
appears to have been thought out earlier than this. It is
a straightforward treatment of the original melody,
though technically more demanding than it sounds.


Fox Photos Agency, London
Dolmetsch Family and Assistants 24 November 1932
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne
The second, Brahms’‘Wiegenlied’ (‘Cradle Song’) op. 49
no. 4, is a contemplative study characterised by much
arpeggiation.
The third piece in the ‘Free Settings of Favourite
Melodies’ series is a transcription of the song ‘Nell’
op. 18 no. 1 by Faure. Grainger’s filigree treatment of the
melody was made in February of the same year in which
Faure died. The transcription of one of Faure’s most
poignant love songs, ‘Apres une reve’ op. 7 no. 1,
followed in 1939. In the twilight years of Grainger’s life,
although frail, he could often be heard playing these two
Faure melodies.


Before 1920, work commenced on ‘Ramble on Love’,
with the full title ‘Ramble on the Love-duet in the
Opera ‘The Rose-Bearer’ no. 4. But it was his mother’s
suicide in 1922 that drove Grainger to complete this
most elaborate of all his piano paraphrases, with her
name obliquely enshrined in the title.
For the Chicago Music College’s summer school in
1928, Grainger made the first of his impressive
transcriptions for a percussion ensemble of Debussy’s
‘Pagodes’ (‘Estampes’). In 1932, Grainger was appointed
associate professor and chairman of the music
department at New York University and, through the
auspices of Gustave Reese, Grainger was introduced to
a recording of medieval music by the English
musicologist, Dom Anselm Hughes. This experience was
to bring Grainger’s attention to a body of music which
would preoccupy him for the remainder of his life.
His work on arranging and trying to popularise this
music led to the publication of a series of pieces entitled
‘English Gothic Music’.
In the following years while visiting his homeland,
Grainger made a series of transcriptions from recordings
of ethnic music from the Pacific regions, and the
harmonisation of a Chinese tune, ‘Beautiful Fresh
Flower’, which he had read about in A Theory of Evolving
Tonality by the American musicologist, composer,
organist and conductor, Joseph Yasser. The melody of
‘Beautiful Fresh Flower’ was also used by Puccini in his
opera Turandot.
From 1930 onwards, Grainger began lecturing and
teaching at the National Music Camp at Interlochen,
Michigan, and for these annual events he turned his
attention to making many arrangements of works by
Unknown photographer
Percy Grainger with small child at the National Music Camf
Interlochen c. 1942
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne
different composers, among whom J.S. Bach took a
central role. At the same time he began a series of
masterly arrangements under the heading ‘Chosen Gems
for Winds’, including works by Josquin, Cabezon, William
Lawes and Eugene Goossens, as well as pieces made
available to him from his collaboration with Hughes.
A similar set of arrangements for strings was also
undertaken, and many of these works were performed
during the concerts Grainger organised at the Interlochen


summer music schools. For his final concert in the
summer of 1944, he made a transcription of Ravel’s
‘LaVallee des Cloches’ for tuneful percussion and strings.
This was his second transcription of a Ravel piano work.
In 1934, he had transcribed ‘Le Gibet’ for piano and
marimbas, but the score has never come to light.
Such is Grainger’s breadth and vision that if all music
apart from Grainger’s arrangements were to disappear,
we would be left with a body of work which would give
us a fundamental understanding of the development of
music from different cultures throughout the ages.
It is unfortunate that Grainger’s reputation as a
composer is largely based on a handful of popular piano
arrangements, while the bulk of his inventive and highly
individual settings of folk music, together with his
arrangements of a wide gamut of music from all periods,
and his own original compositions, for the most part go
unperformed and unheard. The multifaceted genius of
Grainger the music arranger has yet to be fully
appreciated.


Percy Aldridge Grainger (1882-1961)
‘British Folk-Music Settings no. 6. Irish Tune from County Derry’
New York: G. Schirmer, 1917
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne
(MUM stands for Melborune University Museum)


Grainger the Social Commentator
David Pear
Roses red and roses white
Plucked I for my love’s delight.
She would none of all my posies,—
Bade me gather her blue roses.
Half the world I wandered through,
Seeking where such flowers grew;
Half the world unto my quest
Answered but with laugh and jest.
It may be beyond the grave
She shall find what she would have.
Oh, ‘twas but an idle quest, —
Roses white and red are best!
Rudyard Kipling
Everything Percy Grainger articulated about society
must be understood in the light of his views of both race
(by self-admittance his ‘religion’) and sex. It is, for some,
a bitter pill to swallow. A cleaner, less querulous, less
inconsistent individual is more to their taste. But for a
man who sincerely believed that, for instance, there
would be fewer wars if nudity were more widely
practiced, to sterilise his image is to risk losing all that is
important about him; more so than with other
composers. Of course, all such individuals are surrounded
by legend and myth. Everything about them is subject to
scrutiny, interpretation and misinterpretation. Percy
Grainger, however, decried such mythology. Anything
less than the absolute truth, he claimed, amounted to
‘lovelessness’. In consequence, few figures in history have
furnished posterity with such a range of primary sources
in an attempt to ensure that an accurate record be left in
their wake as Grainger has. Living with an eye to the
future, and with the establishment of his museum in
mind from as early as his late twenties (it was realised
during his early fifties), he kept virtually every notebook,
receipt book, diary, address book and most letters both
written and received. The letters alone number many
thousands. Despite the discomfort it causes some
Grainger acolytes even today, he would not brook any
compromise. Either tell the entire truth, or remain silent.
Under normal circumstances the content of personal
literature, such as that provided by Grainger, would be
affected by certain rules of propriety. We rarely put into
print exactly what we think. Historian Michele Perrot
rightly notes that such ‘subtle stratagems of camouflage
and display [nevertheless] bring us at least to the gateway
of the fortress’. But Grainger had little regard for such
propriety. Indeed, if anything, his mildly exhibitionistic
nature had greater sway in determining what he wrote


Burnett Cross (1914—1996)
Close-up photograph of Percy Graingers eyes 1950
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne
and how he expressed himself than any concern for
public sentiment. He was ruthless in acknowledging
failings as well as virtues. As a result, Grainger does allow
his inquirer to go beyond the gateway of Perrot’s fortress,
even if he does inevitably nudge the visitor towards some
battlements and away from others.
The basis of much of Grainger’s brutal honesty was
his belief in the educational function of the artist in
society. He was unyielding about this —the artist was to
create public taste and public opinion, not pander to it.
Entertainment was self-indulgence and not part of a
true artist’s work. He saw that his own role as a
composer was to ‘play my part in the creation of music
that should reflect ... a forward-striding host of
comradely affectionate athletic humanity might be heard
chanting the great pride of man in himself’. His inability,
however, to sustain public interest in anything other than
his lighter, folk-song-based works was an enduring
disappointment to him. He wished to excite the public
to consider his more complicated, experimental writing
which he believed more accurately representative of his
style and true personality.


Despite his disappointment with his public, Grainger
maintained his dedication to the cause of Australian artistry,
claiming, in 1942 in a letter to his Aunt Clara, that he
wished to leave his music in such a state as to do honour to
Australia. Above all, he wished to shun artistic compromise,
which he saw manifested primarily in all things middle class.
The art of the villa, or ‘suburban art’, was, for Grainger,
art for the modest. He took a much more aggressive view of
his responsibility for the propagation of true ait, and
expected the same of his friends. It was a muscular, virile,
almost aggressive response. Indeed, as he warned his close
friend, composer Cyril Scott, ‘you don't see the world in
terms of fighting. Very well; the world will overlook you in
favor of the men who do see life in terms of fighting’.
Grainger’s artistic battle was racially based. His duty as
a composer was clear to him: to turn back the tide of the
Battle of Hastings and its Norman corruption by
constantly promoting any music which he considered
Nordic or Anglo-Saxon, and by ignoring Latin traits and
those influences derived, as far as he could identify,‘from
the civilization of the Roman Empire’. It was an
artistic—racial educational activity.‘Nice to all, but best to
my own,’ was his personal motto.
In his mature writings he frequently transgresses the line
between racism and racialism, between the superiority of
one race over another and the less strident belief of‘equal
but different’. His private writings reveal a more insidious
racism than his mellowed words for public consumption.
His 1933 radio broadcast in New York,‘Can Music Become
a Universal Language?’, serves as a good example.
It attempted to promote an understanding of the music of
a wide variety of racial and ethnic groups. In so doing,
Grainger maintained that a ‘universal language’, and thereby
a common ground in music, could be constructed upon
which all peoples —regardless of age, race or culture —might
meet. It would be naive, however, to assume that this
represents Grainger speaking in support of the equality of
Mickey Spillane (b. 1918)
One Lonely Night
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne


races and ethnic music. Rather, it is his contention that by
understanding such music, the culture of that race would be
revealed. He does not advocate interracial music. Much as
Kipling espoused racial segregation in his tale Beyond the
Pale, so did Grainger: ‘A man should, whatever happens,
keep to his own caste, race, and breed. Let the White go to
theWLdte and the Black to the Black.’A realistic approach
to Grainger’s racial interpretation of music returns the
reader to his saying,‘nice to all, but best to my own’.
Barely six months after having written the text to this
broadcast, in his private autobiographical ‘saga’ Grainger
was writing an invective against Frederick Cowen,
‘a lousy Jew’ who had been the conductor of a long
series of orchestral concerts at the Centennial Exhibition
in Melbourne, some of which Grainger had attended.
Grainger attacked Cowen at length. He considered it a
tragedy that some of the earliest orchestral music had
been brought to Australia by an individual unfit for such
a momentous task: a mere Jew. He wrote;
We know that Jews are very unlucky in being
ungifted in toneart —we know that altho the Jews
are the most numberful of all the mindtilthed
((educated)) races in Europe (races lacking in
mindtilth may birth lovelier toneart than
mindtilled ones, yet it is only the mindtilled races
who are able to write down their toneart so that it
reaches the big world).
He continued in this tone, noting that lands well
populated with Jews and ‘roundskulls’ had never
produced as good a music as lands containing few Jews.
Predictably enough he cited the Nordic lands as
possessing a low Semitic population.
Grainger’s interest in ethnic music arose likewise from
a conviction that it was untainted by Semitic
influences, rather than from a genuine dedication to
interracial enquiry—whatever he might have said in
public. He upheld that he was able to combine a love of
the Western tradition with the exotic music of the
South Seas, Africa and Asia without ‘going native’
‘to the disadvantage of [my] Europeanism’. Indeed,
behind all his proposals for artistic interracial dialogue
lay Grainger’s constant determination to promote
Nordic music.
Percy Aldridge Grainger (1882-1961)
Two whips fashioned by Percy Grainger from a variety of materials undated
Unknown maker
Whip belonging to Percy Grainger undated
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne


Percy Aldridge Grainger (1882-1961)
Photo-Skills Guide 1942
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne


While he publicly asserted the equality of all music,
he sought never to promote anything written by a Jew,
or anyone suspected of even being Jewish, Delius
excepted. In 1947, writing to composer Daniel Gregory
Mason —a fellow Nordic and in Graingers eyes a
‘genius’ —he noted:
We have earnt good money performing the music
of foreign countries & writing books & lecturing
about the music of foreign countries. Now let us
apply our money to propaganda on behalf of our
own music & the music of our own racial group.
Grainger’s sexual interests, and the photographs he left in
the Grainger Museum as a record of them, are also
startling, especially for their time. He wrote:
Love, sex-life, friendship, reaction, influence, support:
they are the things that life’s beauty and art’s strength
live from, and these things I want to glorify in my
books and in my museum to a degree and in a way
that they have not been cultivated before.
Grainger’s pornographic collection was part of his
attempt to provide evidence to succeeding generations
that he too was once as sexually active as they might
now be. It was also proof that he enjoyed sexual activity
into his senior years. His variety of day books,
annotations in works on sexology, and photographs and
pornography collections demonstrate the development
of a perceptive and self-analytical mind. Combined with
Grainger’s considerable ability to articulate his ideas in
letters, together they form a full account of one man’s
journey through creativity and how he perceived the
various aspects of his life to impinge on that creativity.
It was not just sex: diet, languages, exercise, art and
furnishings, as well as the music with which many of us
are so familiar, are all fully accounted for in his museum
as dimensions of his total creative profile.
Grainger’s interest in the phenomenon of sex, as well
as its practice, was precipitated out of need as much as
inherent appeal. His father’s infection with syphilis, and
then his mother’s, coupled with the tension that these
then incurable afflictions predictably created, brought
to the foreground issues which even today tend not to
be confronted within families. In addition, his own
interest in flagellation intrigued him. He felt no shame,
just curiosity concerning the genesis of this interest.
He once wrote that it was possibly as a result of
witnessing his mother’s attempts to head off his father’s
drunken sexual advances with a horse whip, in order
that she not beget syphilitic children by him:
I have seen her drive him out of the room with a
riding-whip when he was drunk and unwilling to
follow her wishes in this matter. She kept house for
him until I was about B—9 years old, as she hoped
to be able to get the better of his drunkenness.
But when she realised that it was no good, then
they separated (about 1891?) —in all friendship.
And he was subjected to the same punishment for
misdemeanours himself. Later in life he discussed these
issues openly with his mother who, in reference to
Kipling’s poem The Light That Failed, referred to his
sado-masochism as ‘blue roses’: he wanted what he


could not have. She could offer no help to her son, nor
could any of the many subsequent friends to whom he
presented not always welcome details of his erotic
pursuits. The issue was made all the more complex by
Grainger’s close relationship with his mother and the
ensuing innuendo of incest. This coloured much of the
public knowledge of Grainger for many years, providing
a dramatic element for playwrights and journalists
which distracts too readily from a deeper consideration
of the issues. Today, however, through the documents he
surrendered to his museum, and through a society much
more prepared to confront such dimensions of
character, Grainger may indeed reach a much larger and
more receptive audience.
Unknown photographer
The Grainger Museum under construction 2 November 1938
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne


Frederick Morse
Rose and Percy Grainger, aged 60 and 39, on the Porch of their White Plains Home 17 July 1921
National Library of Australia


Grainger the Autoarchivist
Michael Piggott
Thinking for this essay began in August last year while on
holiday in France. There were five of us, and at least as
many cameras. We collected the predictable tourist items
and one of us kept a diary. We were typical, in other words,
of most people who in their private lives retain tax returns
and other domestic records, and who more generally
create and retain family photos, letters with some personal
meaning and so on; items which were once significant,
and which continue to be kept despite house moves and
periodic spring-cleaning. But I would call none of us an
‘autoarchivist’; Percy Grainger, I would.
Travel reflections also provided another contrast.
Like a number of European countries, France has
numerous biographically-focused museums —sites
where a renowned historical figure was born or lived or
died. Without deliberately looking, we came upon
museums relating to Leonardo da Vinci (Amboise),
Vincent van Gogh (Arles) and Joe Bousquet
(Carcassonne), and we noted references to numerous
others relating to those such as Marshal Foch and
Marcel Proust. However, it is rare to find such
institutions, in Europe or elsewhere, which were started
by their subject. In Australia, one struggles to identify
anyone who arranged for a public institution to host an
operation exclusively devoted to one individual.
The few obvious candidates, such as Bob Hawke’s Prime
Percy Aldridge Grainger (1882-1961)
Frankfurt diary 1898
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne
Ministerial Library in Adelaide and the Arthur Boyd Centre
at Bundanon, New South Wales, simply have no parallel in
motive, initiative and timing to the Grainger Museum.


Unknown maker
Childs writing box belonging to Percy Grainger late 19th century
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne
Conventional wisdom has it that victors write history.
Identifying how history guarantees an individual’s
memory is more difficult to simplify. However, the
survival of physical and mental traces of the past is part
of the explanation, and it is possible to enumerate some
classic factors relevant to their transmission across time.
To one degree or another, the creation and preservation
of personal cultural heritage material requires a strong
sense of purpose, the right circumstances and personality
to generate good material, a conducive logistical and


bureaucratic environment and, finally, a nominated
successor to take over beyond the grave. Grainger had
the lot.
But what was Grainger’s motive for collecting?
Novelists, psychologists, sociologists and philosophers
among many others have been struck by the fact that
since we humans learnt to talk and write, we make and
transmit ‘memory texts’ to tell stories. According to
novelist Graeme Swift, we are by nature a storytelling
animal; our identity is constructed via a narrative of self.
We can only speculate as to whether Grainger’s
obsessive need to record his story stemmed from anal
retentiveness and papyromania (the compulsive
accumulation of papers), or whether the objects he
collected acted as symbolic substitutes linked to a
childhood need for compensation. But if Swift is right
and we are fundamentally a storytelling animal, there is
little doubt that Grainger had a story to tell; a story
essentially of two chapters.
Firstly, he wanted to memorialise his mother. Their
mutual attachment and dependence on each other was
deep, and remained strong up to her death in 1922 when
Grainger was 39. The only son ol a mother separated
from her husband when he was 10, Grainger’s general
and musical education and training, his career, even his
choice of friends and lovers were shaped by Rose during
his formative years and into middle age. They were
utterly devoted to each other and were rarely apart for
more than a few weeks at a time, writing constantly to
each other when they were. They performed and were
recorded together, and shared similar interests in reading,
crafts and certain kinds of music. Grainger dedicated
compositions to her, shared the same accommodation,
nursed her when sick, and used the stage name Percy
Aldridge Grainger over his legal name, George Percy
Grainger, in honour of her family name, Aldridge.
Grainger’s ideas about how to formally document
this devotion varied from an Aldridge museum in
Adelaide to a ‘Grainger-Aldridge-Strom’ museum at his
home in White Plains, New York. What he actually
Percy Aldridge Grainger (1882-1961)
Photos of Rose Grainger and of 3 Short Accounts of Her Life by Herself,
in Her Own Handwriting: Reproduced for her Kin and Friends by
her Adoring Son Percy Grainger 1923
National Library of Australia


achieved was vast and remarkable. While on tour he
donated named collections of music to local libraries in
Rose’s memory. After she died he started carrying her
last (unsent) letter to him round his neck in a tiny
container, and wrapped her brass bedhead in newspaper
cuttings containing stories about death or disaster.
Within a year of her death he created his first memorial,
a personally designed and funded volume entitled,
‘Photos of Rose Grainger and of 3 Short Accounts of
Her Life by Herself, in Her Own Handwriting:
Reproduced for Her Kin and Friends by Her Adoring
Son Percy Grainger’. Not surprisingly, Grainger’s parents
and their families, particularly the Aldridges, featured
prominently in his ideas for the museum galleries.
They were strongly represented too, particularly Rose,
in the collection, including thousands of letters between
mother and son, and her personal effects such as clothes,
accessories, shoes, hats and undergarments which were
in their house at White Plains at the time of her death.
Secondly, in the Grainger Museum at the University
of Melbourne Grainger’s private and public motives
converge, the latter similar to those of a university
archives or public library. He was endlessly curious—
about himself, his family, his circle of friends and music,
and believed everything should be honestly
documented and the documentation preserved for
research and display.
Grainger came to believe he was especially talented,
to such a degree that he felt he himself should be the
object of study. He photographed himself and his wife
following flagellation, and noted such activities, from the
equally private to daily trivia, in his diary. As for his
circle of friends, he believed his theories about the
source of their compositional imagination should be
documented in the broadest fashion. He collected not
only letters received, but sought the return of his own
originals. Truly catholic in his view of cultural heritage,
he also collected clothes, portraits, musical manuscripts
and instruments and even sought photos of other
composers’ eyes, believing those with blue eyes were
special. In his many explanations on the purpose of the
museum he wrote: ‘I have tried in this Museum ... to
trace ... the aesthetic indebtedness of composers to each
other ... and to the culturising influence of parents,
relatives, wives, husbands and friends.’
However, the aim was not only to focus on his life
and times. Grainger felt music in general, and Australian
music in particular, should also be recorded through the
full range of documentary forms, for example spending
his own funds to secure a collection of Marshall-Hall
material. His interest in folk song and folk culture is also
relevant here. He was an early user and champion of the
phonograph for folk song collecting, particularly in the
British Isles. Whether in remote counties of England, in
Denmark or New Zealand, he championed an approach
emphasising scientific methods, the authentic voice, and
moral rights much against the prevailing orthodoxy of
transcription and improvement.
The purpose of all this collecting was ultimately for
the use of future scholarship. In Grainger’s essay on his
interest in flagellantism, which he directed be closed
until 10 years after his death, he urged the documents be
‘lodged with some medical or historic or scientific
society or library that may wish to investigate the nature
& habits of creative Australians’. When an exasperated
Cyril Scott, having been pestered for clothes and letters,


Mde. May Hammond, couturier, Belgravia
Evening gown belonging to Rose Grainger 1906
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne
asked, ‘do you imagine for a moment ... that anybody
will want to wade through this sea of letters’, Grainger
replied, ‘They will be there for reference, and so at the
disposal of any musicologist or biographer who may
want to prove a given point’.
To adopt the recordkeeping categorisation of the
National Library’s Manuscript Librarian, Graeme
Powell, Grainger was simultaneously an accumulator,
communicator and recorder. His output of letters, diaries,
essays and reminiscences, from what Gillies and Pear call
his ‘ever-scribbling pen’, was vast. This, combined with
the sheer business needs of his concert pianist career,
made office support essential. Rose put aside souvenirs
from his infancy and filed notices of his concerts,
conducted most of his business and directed much of his
social correspondence. In effect acting as his agent, she
would conduct correspondence almost daily and advised
Grainger to do the same, including to her during their
absences. Though many copies of their outgoing
correspondence have not survived, most between Rose
and her son were carefully retained. In Naomi Cass’
words, she ‘curated a space for her son’s genius’.
Once the University of Melbourne had accepted
Graingers proposal to establish the museum, there was a
more deliberate and less emotional form of delegated
documentation. Between 1938, when the museum was
officially opened, and 1955-56, when Grainger made his
final visit to Melbourne, Richard and Dorothy Fowler
were its part-time curators. They worked under numerous
constraints originating from university indifference,
inadequacies of the building, wartime contingencies,
import and customs exigencies, and the constant flow of
parcels, boxes and crates from Grainger which required


Percy Aldridge Grainger (1882-1961)
Photo-Skills Guide 1942
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne
unpacking, sorting and storing. Despite all this, they were
totally supportive of their absentee archivist.
Several times during his life Percy Grainger made
arrangements in anticipation of possible threats to his
collection and its continued management. He had a great
fear of fire and insisted that his museum not have
electricity connected. He also moved key documents away
from New York during World War 11, prepared formal and
informal instructions about his estate, and distributed
multiple copies of some items in his collection.


Grainger was grappling, as have many others individually
and collectively, with an ancient tension between
mortality and posterity. In oral and non-literate societies
particularly, storytelling, song and dance are practised to
pass on beliefs and traditions to the next generation.
In literate societies the modes of transmission are more
varied. However, even with the rise of collecting
institutions, historical societies and so on, the survival of
Grainger’s personal documentary material, such as
correspondence, manuscripts, diaries and legal documents,
was not guaranteed.
Against this background, Grainger’s 1932 museum
proposal to the university was unprecedented, even
compared with literary estates. As Paul Brunton has
noted regarding the writer Miles Franklin, in Australia in
1954 it was still unheard-of for a writer to bequeath an
entire personal and literary archive to a library. Grainger
didn’t rely on a will or wait to be approached by a library.
It took a couple of letters (and, admittedly, a favourably
disposed chancellor and a considerable amount of
Grainger’s own money) for him to gain his own
university-based museum. Through a process variously
termed pluralisation or de-privatisation, he single-
handedly achieved what was to became a core function
of librarians and archivists. Scholarship and the public are
the beneficiaries of this gifted amateur archivist.


Unknown maker (Native American)
Round beaded handbag collected by Percy Grainger c. 1915-17
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne


Grainger the Visual Gourmet
Brian Allison
During the 14 years Percy Grainger lived in London
(1901-14), he developed a strong network of friends and
associates within the visual art world. He learned quickly
of the cachet gained from being immortalised on canvas
or paper by a fashionable portrait painter, and also
recognised the unique social status successful portraitists
enjoyed in the heady world of London’s upper classes, or
‘the smart set’, as Grainger referred to them.
A year after his arrival in London, Grainger was
befriended by French society painter Jacques-Emile
Blanche who, as well as executing an arresting portrait
of the pianist, introduced him to some of his influential
subjects, including the composer Claude Debussy.
It is also probable that Blanche introduced Grainger to
Baron Adolph de Meyer, ‘court’ photographer to
London’s social elite, who was to produce Grainger’s
first publicity photographs.
Quite apart from the needs of self promotion, Grainger
sought the company of these artists because he also spoke
a common language with them and enjoyed their
company. He was visually literate and was familiar with
the history of Western art. As a child he appeared destined
to be a painter or illustrator. Numerous juvenile sketches
and watercolours held in the Grainger Museum, stand
testament to his extraordinary natural talent as a visual
communicator. At age six he was producing caricature-
Unknown photographer
Diamond-patterned towelling outfit worn by Percy Grainger (detail)
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne


Percy Aldridge Grainger (1882-1961)
The Large Hof (Court) in Romer, Frankfurt 1896
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne
like drawings a talented teenager would have been
satisfied with. Though music became Grainger’s central
preoccupation, he called upon his natural acuity and skills
as a draftsman numerous times throughout his adult life.
Grainger was a home-educated only child, who used
drawing as a means of entertainment. His father John
Grainger, a prominent Melbourne architect, was
undoubtedly his first teacher. As part of his architectural
training, Grainger senior developed strong illustrative
skills and was a competent watercolour painter. He also
exposed his son to the landscape painting of the
Heidelberg School and introduced him to painters
Charles Conder and Arthur Streeton. In 1890, Grainger
spent time in Streeton’s studio watching him work.
Grainger stated in ‘The Adridge-Grainger-Strom
Saga’, an unpublished autobiographical manuscript held
in the Grainger Museum:
Father was just as fond of paint-art as lie was of
tone-art [music]. He was always thinking and
speaking of Greek shape-art (sculpture), old
Italian, old Dutch and other painters (Turner,
Millais, Millet, Burne-Jones, Murillo).
In 1890, John Grainger wrote to his father of his eight-
year-old son’s fascination with drawing:
At present he draws well, immensely well, and it is
a frightful thing to keep him from being always at
it, and his mother is most anxious he should be an
artist. I’m afraid if he becomes one that he will be
dangerous, and his mothers ambition is to take
him to London or Paris where some old duchess
or young with influence, may ‘take him up’: that is
to introduce him to a lot of people who buy
pictures not on account of the picture, but for
the artist.


In the same year John Grainger put an end to his
marriage by going to England. Percy’s mother, Rose,
took in boarders to meet rental payments. The boarder
who made the greatest impression on the young Percy
was English botanical artist and landscape painter Albert
Edward Aldis. Aldis became Grainger’s second art
teacher.
Grainger displayed a precocious talent at the piano and,
with his father absent, his mother changed the direction
of her son’s artistic endeavours, introducing music tuition
and rigorous piano practice. At 12, he performed his
first formal public concert and the following year
departed for Germany to study piano and composition
at the Hoch Conservatorium in Frankfurt. Although
music was his principal concern, in 1896 Grainger also
attended the art classes of Frankfurt painter Georg Franz
Widmann.
To this date, Grainger had only experienced the
urban landscapes of Melbourne and Adelaide where
building and landscape design echoed the high Victorian
preoccupation with classical revival, with the occasional
Gothic church adding variation to a narrow similitude.
John Harry Grainger (1855-1917)
Orient S.S. ‘Oruba’ Leaving Plymouth for Australia, Nov 12, 1890 1891
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne


His reaction to the landscape and cityscape of Frankfurt
was one of ebullient enthusiasm. In his spare time he
made numerous sketches and watercolours. Some of the
images are finished but many show brevity of execution
akin to note-making, as if he was learning to read the
structure of this new visual world. The many hasty and
half-finished drawings he filled his sketchbooks with as a
child suggests that a visual understanding of his world
was an intuitive priority. Throughout his life he used
drawing to reinforce his written texts. In this sense he
could be compared to the eighteenth-century dilettante
who used drawing and painting as a way of documenting
journeys of discovery through multiple fields of study.
Grainger’s need to understand the world visually did
not always have an aesthetic goal as an end result. Often
his gaze took on the mantel of the detached voyeur.
Later in life he was a consumer of pornography —very
soft by today’s standards —and as a young man while on
tour with the Australian contralto Ada Crossley’s 1908
concert party, he openly wrote in a letter to his lover,
Karen Holten, of paying native women to ‘dance the
Can-Can without clothes on’. He continued:
There is no doubt that having Vz a painter’s nature
makes me wish to see naked bodies maybe in a
slightly different way to folk who have no painting
inclination. It works on my pictorial senses like
hearing the tuning up of a big orchestra does on
my compositional senses.
In 1909, during a concert tour of New Zealand and
Australia with Ada Crossley, Grainger developed a
fascination for Polynesian and Melanesian decorative
arts and design. He wrote to his mother of cycling to a
Maori pa:
It looked modernly made, the roof of galvanised iron,
& European paint used everywhere instead of stains,
but the carving of the front & the crisscross wall
screen decorations inside appealed to my ignorant
enthusiasm like anything. Lovely colour effects &
seemingly never repeated variety of pattern.
His enthusiasm for the crafts of Oceania became a
preoccupation which culminated in a desire to master
the techniques of woven beadwork. Visiting the
Wellington and Christchurch museums, he produced
sketches of artefacts and documented designs
schematically. Both he and his mother experimented
with the intricate process of knotting and building
pattern with glass beads. In May of the same year in
Lithgow, New South Wales he completed a substantial
bead necklace and chest piece, later claiming that he
worked on the piece for 160 days.
The freedom of expression Percy Grainger
experienced in the arts of the Oceania also influenced
his attitude to clothing design. During his performing
career he conformed to protocols that demanded a
performer wore specific formal attire, yet in his private
life he experimented with the colour, form and material
of his garments.
Around 1910 (after we had been fired by the
beauty of Maori and South Sea Island clothes and
fabrics seen in museums in New Zealand and
Australia) my mother mooted the idea of clothes


made from TURKISH towels —cool in summer,
warm in winter and washable at all times. I leaped
at the idea, seeing therein a chance to return to
something comparable with the garish brilliance
of the sky blue and scarlet garments of our Saxon
and Scandinavian forefathers ... Between 1910
and 1914 I wore these clothes while giving many
of my lessons in London and continually during
my composing holidays in Denmark.
Many of Grainger’s more experimental clothing designs
express a playfulness and self-conscious daring. Although
there is no evidence in his writings of a desire for dress
reform, he was obviously reacting to the often
inconvenient dress conventions of the Edwardian middle
class. He created garments that allowed him greater
flexibility of movement and it is believed that he jogged
in his innovative clothing through London’s parks.
Robyn Healy, formerly curator of fashion and
textiles at the National Gallery of Victoria, speculated
that some of Grainger’s earlier designs, which are cut
from single colours with simple edge designs,
display similarities to Egyptian dynastic clothing and
the later clothing of the Copts, influences he would
Percy Aldridge Grainger (1882-1961)
Oscillator-Playing Tone-Tool Ist Experiment (‘free music’illustration) 23 November 1951
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne


have been exposed to through visiting the Victoria and
Albert Museum.
Grainger’s clothing designs produced in the mid-1930s
display a more experimental use of colour and form than
his prewar designs. After settling in New York, he and his
wife Ella created garments that show an awareness of the
effect of abstract painting on costume design. The couple’s
designs boldly unified sharp rhythmic shapes with
pulsating primary colour combinations.
Though a celebrated performer on the international
concert circuit, Grainger is renowned today as a
composer and arranger. While he was in England prior
to World War I, he began to design the covers of his
published editions, preparing the finished artwork to a
camera-ready stage, including the typography. Grainger
approached two-dimensional design in much the same
way that he composed and arranged music: drawing
freely from different sources. He mixed and adapted
Unknown maker (Native American)
Moccasins collected by Percy Grainger
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne


styles until he intuitively created a certain melange he
considered appropriate for a particular piece of music.
He experimented with calligraphy and colour
relationships, and simple decorative devices. For the
cover of his ‘Lullaby from Tribute to Foster’, he chose a
simple decorative floral design he copied directly from a
pair of North American Indian moccasins.
He refined an Australiana motif of freely interlacing
gum leaves which he introduced to several published
editions as a frieze surrounding the cover text. Ironically
his most popularly known arrangement, ‘Country
Gardens’, often erroneously referred to as ‘ln an English
Country Garden’, was published as a work for piano by
G. Schirmer Inc. with a cover design sporting this frieze
of delicately interlinked eucalyptus leaves.
The composer prepared most of his cover designs
freehand with a brush, using ink and watercolour or
gouache, having first drawn the basic design in pencil.
Generally his lettering has an edge-softness quite foreign to
machine-cut type. He would often prepare numerous loose
sketches a quarter of the size of the finished artwork until
he established the desired proportions and layout.
In the last decade of his life, Percy Grainger strove to
invent ‘free music’ machines. These simple mechanisms
were groundbreaking experiments designed to make
the musician and the conductor redundant. In the spirit
of illustrator Heath Robinson, his inventions were
‘cobbled together’ out of cast-off parts of butchered
radios, harmoniums, wheels from rollerskates, acetate
records, twist drills, sewing machines and many metres
of string.
The very evanescent nature of these structures meant
that few complete machines still exist. And except for a
couple of acetate recordings, they are now mute. But
true to his nature, Grainger documented these sound-
uttering devices in sketches, watercolours and gouaches.
However, they are not the clinical sketches of an
engineer. Often highly coloured and radiating energy,
the images appear playful, as if Grainger enjoyed the
novelty of rendering his bizarre subject matter.
Grainger’s last great musical experiment was also the
last time he was to engage his ‘painter’s nature’ and play
with the talents he never fully realised. Conceivably, if
his father had not retreated from a dysfunctional
marriage, Percy Aldridge Grainger may today be
remembered as one of Australia’s leading painters and
designers who just happened to have latent talent as a
pianist and composer.


Unknown photographer
Percy Grainger, Fort Hamilton, New York 1917
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne


Further Reading
John Bird, Percy Grainger. Sydney: Currency Press, 1998.
Jacques-Emile Blanche, Portraits of a Fifetime: The Late Victorian Era,
the Edwardian Pageant, trans. and ed. Walter Clement. London:
J.M. Dent & Sons Ltd., 1937.
Paul Brunton,‘Miles Franklin: A Brilliant Career?’, National Library
of Australia News, May 2005, pp. 18—21.
Naomi Cass,‘Making a Museum of Oneself: The Grainger Museum’,
Meanjin, vol. 59 no. 2, 2000, pp. 140—151.
Naomi Cass, Male Order, exhibition catalogue, lan Potter Museum of
Art, 1999.
Kay Dreyfus (ed.). The Farthest North of Humanness: Letters of Percy
Grainger, 1901—14. South Melbourne: Macmillan, 1985.
Malcolm Gillies and David Pear (eds), Portrait of Percy Grainger.
New York: University of Rochester Press, 2002.
Malcolm Gillies and David Pear (eds), The All-Round Man: Selected Letters
of Percy Grainger, 1914—1961. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1994.
Thomas P Lewis (ed.), A Source Guide to the Music of Percy Grainger.
White Plains, N.Y.: Pro/Am Music Resources, 1991.
Chris McAuliffe and Peter Yule (eds), Treasures: Highlights of the
Cultural Collections of the University of Melbourne. Carlton,Vic.:
Melbourne University Publishing, 2003.
Alan McCulloch and Susan McCulloch, The Encyclopaedia of
Australian Art. St Leonards, NSW: Allen & Unwin, 1994.
Werner L. Muensterberger, Collecting: An Unruly Passion: Psychological
Perspectives. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1994.
David Owen,‘The Sultan of Stuff’, The New Yorker,
19 July 1999, pp. 52-63.
Graeme Powell,‘Prime Ministers as Recordkeepers: British Models
and Australia Practice’ in Sue McKemmish and Michael Piggott
(eds), The Records Continuum: lan Maclean and Australian Archives
First Fifty Years. Clayton,Vic.: Ancora Press, 1994.
Helen Reeves,‘The Past-Hoard-House: A Study of the Grainger
Museum’, Graduate Diploma in Material Culture thesis,James Cook
University, 1984.
Alexander Theroux,‘Odd Collections’, The Yale Review, January
1998, pp. 1-12.
Elinor Wrobel, Percy Grainger:The Passionate Folklorist and
Ethnomusicologist, exhibition catalogue. Parkville,Vic.: Grainger Museum,
the University of Melbourne, 1999.
Elinor Wrobel, Percy Grainger (1882-1961): Artist and Art Collector.
Parkville,Vic.: Grainger Museum, the University of Melbourne, 1997.


Rupert Bunny (1864-1947)
Percy Grainger c. 1902
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne


List of Works
The following is not a comprehensive list of compositions and
arrangements by Percy Grainger, but a chronological list of those
works cited in this publication.
Compositions
‘Jungle Book Cycle’, 1898-1947
‘Love Verses from the Song of Solomon’, 1899—1901
‘Train Music’, 1900—1
‘Hill-Song’ no. 1, 1901—2
‘ln Dahomey’ (‘Cakewalk Smasher’), 1903-9
‘Colonial Song’, 1905-12
‘Sea-Song’, 1907, 1921-2
‘Free Music’ no. 1, 1907, 1935-7
‘ln a Nutshell: Suite for Orchestra’, 1907—16
‘Father and Daughter’, 1908-9
‘Mock Morris’, 1910
‘Random Round’, 1912—14
‘The Warriors: Music to an Imaginary Ballet’, 1913—16
‘Lullaby from Tribute to Foster’, 1915
‘Free Music’ no. 2, 1935—7
Folk Song Settings: Collections
‘Songs of the North', Scottish folk songs, 1900
‘The Nightingale and the Two Sisters’, 1922
‘Danish Folk Music Suite’, variable scorings, 1928—41
‘Lincolnshire Posy', 1937
Individual Folk Song Settings
‘Green Bushes’, 1905-6
‘Father and Daughter’, 1908—9
‘Shepherd’s Hey’, 1908-13
‘Country Gardens’, 1908—18
Editions and Arrangements
Edvard Grieg, ‘Lyric Pieces’ op. 12, 1898
William Chappell,‘Willow Willow’, 1898
Augener,‘Minstrelsy of England’, c. 1900
‘British Folk Music Settings’, a collection of over 500 folk songs,
1901-10
‘Scotch Strathspey and Reel’, 1901-1 1
‘Folk Song from County Derry’or‘lrish Tune from County Derry
traditional song, 1902
Peter Ilich Tchaikovsky,‘Flower Wiltz’, 1905
CharlesVilliers Stanford,‘Four Irish Dances’, 1907
John Perring,‘Shallow Brown’, 1910
‘Free Settings of Favourite Melodies’, 1919, 1922—43
‘Ramble on Love’, traditional song, 1920—27
‘Danish Folk Music Settings’, a collection of over 200 folk songs,
1922—27
Johannes Brahms, ‘Wiegenlied’ (‘Cradle Song’) op. 49 no. 4, 1923
Geoprge Frideric Handel,‘Hornpipe’, 1923
Gabriel Faure,‘Nell’ op. 18 no. 1, 1925
Claude Debussy,‘Pagodes’, 1928
‘English Gothic Music’, 1933-50 s
Maurice Ravel,‘Le Gibet’, 1934
‘Beautiful Fresh Flower’, traditional Chinese song, 1935
‘Chosen Gems for Winds’, 1937—53
Gabriel Faure, ‘Apres une reve’ op. 7 no. 1, 1939
Maurice Ravel, ‘La Vallee des Cloches’, 1944


Notes on Contributors
BRIAN ALLISON was introduced to the cultural
heritage sector through working as a museum
photographer. After completing Museum Studies he
took the position of Director of Horsham Regional Art
Gallery (Victoria). He has since worked in curatorial
positions with the Port Arthur Historic Site in Tasmania
and with Museum Victoria’s Immigration Museum.
At the University of Melbourne he was manager of the
Grainger Museum and Curator of the Grainger
Collection for six years. He is presently the University’s
Curator of Exhibitions and Partnerships within
the Cultural Collections Department. He has research
interests in nineteenth-century decorative arts and design.
MALCOLM GILLIES is a Deputy Vice-Chancellor at the
Australian National University. A musician and linguist by
training, he has written extensively on twentieth-century
music, including important studies of Percy Grainger and
the Hungarian composer, Bela Bartok. He holds doctorates
from the universities of London and Melbourne. Gillies is
President of the Council for the Humanities, Arts and
Social Sciences, and a former president of the Australian
Academy of the Humanities. He also chairs the board of
the Australian Youth Orchestra and the Elision
contemporary-music ensemble.
BARRY PETER OULD co-founded the Percy
Grainger Society (UK) with David Tall in 1978 and, in
1984, became editor of the Grainger Society Journal.
In 1993, he was awarded an International Grainger
Medallion. Activities over the intervening years have
included the establishment of a central archive of
Grainger’s music and the forming of his Bardic Edition
music publishing house in 1987. He is a member of the
Board of the International Grainger Society (New York)
as well as music consultant for both the ongoing
Chandos Grainger Edition and Schott & Co. He is
administrator and representative for the Grainger Estate.
DAVID PEAR holds a PhD from the University of
Queensland which focuses on Percy Grainger’s
educational views. He has co-authored or edited a
number of works about Grainger including, with
Malcolm Gillies, The All-Round Man: Selected Letters of
Percy Grainger, 1914—1961 and Portrait of Percy Grainger.
Currently he is an Adjunct Associate Professor and
Visiting Fellow at the Humanities Research Centre,
Australian National University, and part-time Senior
Lecturer at the Music School-Conservatorium, Monash
University. His next book, written with Mark Carroll and
Malcolm Gillies, is entitled Self-Portrait of Percy Grainger.


MICHAEL PIGGOTT has been at the University of
Melbourne since 1998, and is currently Manager of
Cultural Collections and University Archivist. For the
previous 27 years he was with the National Library of
Australia, the Australian War Memorial and the National
Archives of Australia. He has postgraduate qualifications
in librarianship, history and archives administration, and a
long association with the Australian Society of Archivists.
He is an Honorary Research Fellow of Monash
University’s School of Information Management and
Systems, and was recently appointed to the Public Records
Advisory Council (Victoria). Last year he co-edited and
wrote for Archives: Recordkeeping in Society.
ELEANOR TAN is an accomplished practical and
theoretical musician. As a pianist she has many years of
professional practice, both in Singapore and the United
States, where she undertook undergraduate and
graduate studies at Indiana University, Bloomington,
and the Eastman School of Music, University of
Rochester. She completed her PhD in Musicology on a
University of Queensland scholarship. Eleanor is
currently Head of Studies in Music (Academic) at the
Nanyang Academy of Fine Arts, Singapore. She also
serves as music consultant to the National Arts Council,
and is on the board of the National Piano and
Violin Competition.


Unknown photographer
Percy Grainger ‘ln the Round’ 1933
Grainger Collection, the University of Melbourne


Exhibition Checklist
Unless otherwise indicated, all works are
from the Grainger Collection, the University
of Melbourne.
Aeolian Company, New York
Advertising leaflet for the Duo-Art
reproducing piano c. 1925
printer’s ink on paper; 34.3 x 17.1 cm
1932 Duo-Art Piano, with 1940 s
modifications by Percy Grainger to
facilitate a ‘free music’ experiment
wood, iron, ivory, brass;
100.0 x 147.0 x 166.0 cm
Albert Edward Aldis (1870-1921)
Cootarnundra Wattle (Acacia baileyana) c. 1916
oil on canvas; 60.0 x 44.7 cm
The Painter’s Room at ‘Killala’ c. 1891
oil on canvas; 34.5 x 24.5 cm
American Social Hygiene Association
Inc., New York
Health for Men: ‘Keep Well’ Beats ‘Get Well’
New York; American Social Hygiene
Association Inc., 1920
printer’s ink on paper; 18.5 x 9.6 cm
The Battle Creek Sanatorium
Percy Grainger’s dental x-ray 1930
b&w negative film, printer’s ink and
manuscript on card; 10.9 x 25.4 cm
Vegetarian supper menu 28 December 1928
typescript on paper; 23.0 x 15.8 cm
Jacques-Emile Blanche (1861-1942)
Claude Debussy 1902
graphite on paper; 17.5 x 16.0 cm
Percy Grainger 1906
oil on canvas; 91.4 x 73.7 cm
Bower Studio, Durban
Percy Grainger and Ada Crossley in Durban 1904
silver gelatin print; 24.0 x 29.0 cm
Lucy Broadwood (1858-1929)
Letter from Lucy Broadwood to Percy
Grainger 21 March 1925
manuscript on paper; 25.4 x 20.0 cm
E.T. Brown Ltd., Melbourne
Receipt for Grainger Museum building
works 24 September 1938
printers ink, typescript and longhand on
paper; 21.5 x 21.2 cm
Gordon Furlee Brown
Percy Grainger 1926
silver gelatin print; 38.0 x 29.0 cm
Buffet Crampon, Paris
Soprano saxophone early 20th century
brass, ebony mouthpiece; 70.5 x 9.0 x 9.0 cm
Rupert Bunny (1864-1947)
Percy Grainger c. 1902
oil on canvas; 99.2 x 83.6 cm
Sir Edward Burne-Jones (1833—1898)
Diptych design for stained glass window,
St Peter’s Church,Vere Street 1885
photolithograph after original cartoon;
35.0 x 14.0 cm each
Champeau Studios, New York
Publicity photograph for Duo-Art
reproducing pianos c. 1925
silver gelatin print; 25.0 x 32.2 cm
Noel Counihan (1913—1986)
Percy Grainger undated
ink on paper; 52.0 x 36.0 cm
Burnett Cross (1914-96)
Close-up photograph of Ella Grainger’s eyes
1950
chromogenic print; 13.5 x 18.3 cm
Close-up photograph of Percy Grainger’s eyes
1950
chromogenic print; 20.4 x 25.5 cm


W. & G. Dean Pty. Ltd., Melbourne
Receipt for Grainger Museum building
works c. 1956
printer’s ink and longhand on paper;
14.5 x 10.0 cm
Jane Erin Emmet de Glehn
(1873-1961)
Percy Grainger 1905
graphite and chalk on paper;
41.2 x 28.4 cm
Baron Adolf Edward Sigismund
de Meyer (1868-1949)
Herman Sandby 1903 or 1904
platinum print, note to Grainger inscribed
on mount; 43.4 x 33.4 cm
Invitation to Percy Grainger with
accompanying envelope c. 1906
ink on rice paper; invitation 60.5 x 18.5 cm
envelope 7.3 x 22.0 cm
Percy Grainger c. 1903
platinum print mounted on paper,
decoration drawn in graphite
on mount by de Meyer;
photograph 25.5 x 14.0 cm, paper mount
43.0 x 31.3 cm
Percy Grainger c. 1906
platinum print mounted on paper, stylised
signature drawn in graphite on mount by
de Meyer; photograph 23.0 x 16.0 cm
paper mount 52.3 x 32.0 cm
Count Jean de Strelecki
Rose and Percy Grainger 1919
silver gelatin print; 24.2 x 19.5 cm
Jelka Delius (1868-1935)
Frederick Delius c. 1925
oil on canvas; 91.8 x 79.0 cm
L. Doring, Leipzig
Fob watch and chain originally belonging
to Edvard Grieg, given to Percy Grainger
by Nina Grieg in 1907 undated
rose gold, steel, glass; 7.5 x 5.5 cm
Aime Dupont
Antonia Morse, nee Sawyer 1917
sepia-toned silver gelatin print on card,
inscribed to Grainger in ink and dated
10 April 1917; 24.5 x 17.1 cm
Edison Company, United States
Edison Standard Phonograph undated
Used by Percy Grainger after 1903 to
record folk songs by various artists on
wax cylinders
wooden housing, with painted Edison logo
and large (slightly dented) black painted
bell; housing 26.5 x 37.0 x 23.0 cm, bell
36.5 x 17.0 cm diameter; wax cylinders;
approx 12.0 x 7.5 cm diameter each
The English Folk Dance and Song Society
Membership card 1943
printer’s ink and manuscript on card;
5.0 x 7.5 cm
with compliments slip: printer’s ink on
paper; 10.0 x 13.0 cm
envelope: printer’s ink and manuscript on
paper; 12.0 x 14.6 cm
Fox Photos Agency, London
Dolmetsch Family and Assistants
24 November 1932
reproduction of original silver gelatin print,
mounted on board; 100.0 x 140.0 cm
Edward Gersett, shoemaker, London
Shoes belonging to Rose Grainger c. 1908
glace kid leather; length 26.0 cm
Ella Viola Grainger (1889-1979)
G.M. Extensions in the Making
8 November 1938
silver gelatin print; 9.0 x 14.0 cm
John Harry Grainger (1855—1917)
A Running Fight 1894
watercolour on paper; 23.2 x 44.7 cm
Fisher Boats Returning to Banff, Scotland,
Early Morning 1892
watercolour on paper, 20.2 x 35.5 cm
Letter from John Grainger to his father
14 January 1890
ink on paper; 20.5 x 25.5 cm (double sheet)
Orient S.S. ‘Oruha ’ Leaving Plymouth for
Australia, Nov 12, 1890 1891
watercolour on paper; 16.0 x 28.0 cm
Princes Bridge, Melbourne, Victoria: Foundation
Stone Laid, September 7th 1886,
by Mrs JC. Stewart, Mayoress 1886
heliotype; 33.0 x 42.5 cm
Percy Aldridge Grainger (1882-1961)
Analysis of Bead Design undated
graphite on paper; 21.5 x 41.0 cm
Arnold Dolmetsch: Musical Confucius
Grainger Museum display legend c. 1955


10 photographs, typescript, glass, wood;
91.5 x 116.5 cm
Bicycle Belonging to Artist July 1897
watercolour on paper; 19.6 x 26.2 cm
‘Blind Eye Score (Hill-Song II)’ undated
Large format music score used by Grainger
as a visual aid whilst conducting
watercolour and crayon on paper;
39.3 x 61.2 cm
Blue exercise book containing the words to
folk songs collected by Percy Grainger
1905-6
manuscript in commercial exercise book;
23.0 x 19.0 x 2.0 cm
‘British Folk-Music Settings no. 6. Irish
Tune from County Derry’
New York: G. Schirmer, 1917
Published music cover design
printers ink on paper with annotations by
Grainger in ink and graphite; 30.5 x 23.5 cm
Burg Koenigstein, Taunus June 1896
watercolour on paper; 9.2 x 11.1 cm
‘Colonial Song’: piano solo
Melbourne: Allan & Co., c. 1921
MUS NL mba 786.2 G 743
National Library of Australia
Colour Analysis of Bead Design 1909
watercolour and graphite on paper;
18.0 x 37.0 cm
‘Country Gardens’: English morris dance
tune collected by Cecil J. Sharp and set for
piano by Percy Aldridge Grainger
(original version)
London: Schott, c. 1919
MUS N mba 786.4054 G 743
National Library of Australia
‘Country Gardens’: English morris dance
tune collected by Cecil J. Sharp and set for
piano by Percy Aldridge Grainger
(simplified version)
Melbourne: Allan & Co., c. 1930
MUS N mba 786.20994 C 855
National Library of Australia
Decorative beadwork chest-piece made by
Percy Grainger during his 1909 Australian
and English tours
white, red, blue, black and yellow beads,
cotton; collar 6.0 cm; tassels 34.0 cm
Deemths 1942—44
Contains Grainger’s writings on racial issues
manuscript, typescript and newspaper
clippings in commercially printed
spiral-bound notebook; 26.5 x 20.5 cm
Frankfurt diary 1898
manuscript in commercially produced
excercise book; 21.6 x 17.2 cm
‘Harvest Hymn’: For Elastic Scoring
Melbourne: Allan & Co., c. 1940
MUS N mbb 786.4956 G 743
National Library of Australia
‘Hill-Songs I & ll’ undated
Cover design for publication
watercolour and graphite on paper;
30.1 x 23.0 cm
‘Hill-Songs I & IP undated
New York: G. Schirmer Inc.
Published music cover design
printer’s ink on card with amendments by
Grainger in blue crayon; 30.7 x 23.5 cm
‘How I Became a Meat-Shunner '
December 1946
Article written for The American Vegetarian
newsprint; 51.0 x 36.0 cm
‘ln a Nutshell’: Suite for Orchestra
(conductor’s score)
Florida: Edwin F. Kalmus & Co., [l9 |
MUS N m 784.21858 G 743
National Library of Australia
‘lrish Tune from County Derry’
Melbourne, Sydney, Adelaide, Bendigo:
Allan & Co., 1921
Published music cover design
printer’s ink on paper with annotations by
Grainger in ink and graphite; 31.0 x 24.5 cm
‘Kaffir Belt’, S. Africa (beadwork design)
16 February 1909
ink and graphite on paper; 26.0 x 20.5 cm
Kangaroo Pouch Method of Synchronising and
Playing 8 Oscillators (‘free music’ illustration)
April 1952
ink and watercolour on paper; 28.0 x 43.5 cm
‘Klavier Concerto’ 1896
manuscript; 35.6 x 27.0 cm
Kurhaus at Bad Bruckenau, Oherfranken
c. 1898
watercolour on paper; 23.8 x 31.0 cm


Letter from Percy Grainger to Cyril Scott
discussing his thoughts on sexuality
2 December 1947
typescript on paper; 28.0 x 21.1 cm
Letter to Mrs Rodgers at Arch Hill
Studios, New York, discussing mannequins
commissioned for the Grainger Museum
5 October 1951
typescript on paper; 28.0 x 22.0 cm
Letter to Mrs Rodgers at Arch Hill
Studios, New York, discussing mannequins
commissioned for the Grainger Museum
27 November 1951
typescript on paper; 28.0 x 22.0 cm
Letter to Virginia Morley and Livingston
Gearhart, 21 May 1949
Manuscript Collection MS 9066
National Library of Australia
Looking Over Karldcr Grosse Bridge Towards
Sachsenhausen,from Frankfurt June 1896
watercolour on paper; 21.3 x 24.1 cm
Love letter from Percy Grainger to Ella
Grainger, with envelope 17 November 1931
manuscript on paper; letter 17.0 x 27.5
envelope 9.1 x 14.2 cm
Museum outlays 1938
Handwritten list of expenditure on setting
up the museum
manuscript on paper; page one: 23.0 x 17.9 cm
pages two and three: 25.5 x 20.1 cm each
‘No. 5. Irish Tune from County
Londonderry’ undated
two pages, printer’s ink on paper with
editorial annotations by Grainger in ink
and graphite; page one 33.0 x 18.0 cm
page two 28.5 x 18.0 cm
Oscillator-Playing Tone-Tool Ist Experiment
(‘free music’illustration) 23 November 1951
ink and watercolour on paper; 14.2 x 25.7 cm
Oscillator-Playing Tone-Tool 3rd Experiment
(‘free music’ illustration)
24 November 1951
ink and watercolour on paper; 14.2 x 27.9 cm
Outlook from Room Where Selfbeating Took Place
10 February 1933
silver gelatin print; 12.6 x 9.0 cm
Percy Grainger 11 January 1942
silver gelatin print with technical photographic
details annotated by Grainger; 16.2 x 9.0 cm
Photo-Skills Guide 1942
Handmade photograph album containing
photographs of Percy and Ella Grainger,
many of which are annotated by Grainger
with dates and technical photographic details
silver gelatin prints adhered to card;
30.0 x 19.8 cm
Photographs of John H. Grainger
Grainger Museum display legend c. 1955
six photographs, typescript, wood, glass;
96.5 x 68.5 cm
Photos of Rose Grainger and of 3 Short Accounts
of Her Life by Herself in Her Own Handwriting:
Reproduced for her Kin and Friends by her
Adoring Son Percy Grainger 1923
White Plains, NY: Grainger, 1923
National Library of Australia
NLq 920 G 743
Roller desk device 1950 s
Invented by Grainger to dispense with the
need for a person turning the pages of a
pianist’s musical score during performances
wood, card, wire, metal; 36.0 x 54.0 x 20.0 cm
Roman sandal design undated
ink and graphite on paper (Union
Steamship Company of New Zealand
letterhead); 20.2 x 12.5 cm
Rose Grainger c. 1897
watercolour on paper; 17.8 x 24.0 cm
Rose Grainger undated
graphite on paper; 34.3 x 31.0 cm
Rose Grainger’s funeral bouquet, framed as
keepsake by Percy Grainger c. 1922
dried flowers, manuscript on paper, glass,
wood; 24.0 x 15.3 cm
Sliding Pipe Free Music Invention June—July
1946
masonite, wire, string, tape; 68.0 x 78.0 cm
Still Life —Pot Plant January 1897
watercolour on paper; 24.0 x 17.9 cm
The Aims of the Grainger Museum
Grainger Museum display legend 1955
typescript, glass, wood; 106.5 x 33.0 cm
The Large Hof (Court) in Romer, Frankfurt 1896
watercolour on paper; 26.6 x 15.8 cm


‘The Warriors’ December 1916
Full orchestral score with program notes
pasted into front pages
manuscript and printed typescript on
paper, bound with cloth-covered card;
55.0 x 36.0 cm
‘Tiger,Tiger’: for unaccompanied men’s
chorus or man’s high voice single (tenor solo)
and men’s chorus
London: Schott, c. 1912
MUS N mba 782.842 G 743
National Library of Australia
‘To a Nordic Princess (Bridal Song)’ 1929
Published music cover design
printer’s ink on blue card; 26.0 x 19.5 cm
‘Tribute to Foster’
New York: G. Schirmer, 1932
published music score with cover design
inspired by moccasins; 30.5 x 23.5 cm
‘Two musical relics of my mother’:
for two pianos; played by Rose Grainger
and Percy Grainger
New York: G. Schirmer, c. 1924
MUS N mba 786.4957 G 743
National Library of Australia
Whip fashioned by Percy Grainger from a
variety of materials c. 1940
leather plaited whip, cord, plaited catgut,
newspaper, string; length 83.0 cm
Whip fashioned by Percy Grainger from a
variety of materials undated
commercial drumstick, small leather whip,
cord, linen thread; length 70.5 cm
R. Vaughan Williams (Greatness in Simplicity)
Grainger Museum display legend c. 1955
photograph, typescript, glass, wood;
94.5 x 66.5 cm
Percy Aldridge Grainger (1882—1961)
and Ella Viola Grainger (1889-1979)
Diamond-patterned towelling leggings worn
by Percy Grainger. Machine and handsewn
using manufactured bath towel c. 1934
cotton, plastic; 38.0 x 37.0 cm each
Diamond-patterned towelling waistcoat
worn by Percy Grainger. Machine and
handsewn using manufactured bath mat
c. 1934
cotton, wood, metal; 50.0 x 54.0 cm
Striped towelling shirt worn by Percy
Grainger. Machine and handsewn using
manufactured bath towel c. 1934
cotton, plastic, metal; 48.0 x 72.0 cm
Striped towelling shorts worn by Percy
Grainger. Machine and handsewn using
manufactured Dri-Glo towel c. 1934
cotton, metal; 53.0 x 69.0 cm
Rose Grainger (1861—1922)
Letter from Rose Grainger to Percy
Grainger 29 April 1922
Rose Grainger’s last letter to her son, torn
into very small pieces and later
reconstructed by Percy Grainger
graphite on paper, ink notations, adhesive
tape; 26.0 x 20.9 cm
Plaited lock of Rose Grainger’s hair;
approximately 40.0 x 5.5 x 1.5 cm
Greyhound, United States
Bus ticket 1953
printer’s ink on paper, annotations by Percy
Grainger in graphite; 8.8 x 16.0 cm
Edvard Grieg (1843-1907)
‘Konzert fur Klavier’ Opus 16 in A Minor
[lB-]
published sheet music, heavily annotated by
Percy Grainger; 33.5 x 26.5 cm
Mde. May Hammond, couturier, Belgravia
Evening gown belonging to Rose Grainger
1906
silk, tulle, velvet, beads, metal fastenings;
165.0 x 48.0 cm
Fritz Bennicke Hart (1874-1949)
Papers 1898-1951
Letter written to Fritz Hart by Percy
Grainger on 3 August 1943 from the
National Music Camp, Interlochen,
Michigan
Manuscript Collection MS 2809/237
National Library of Australia
Hawaiian Bible
Ka Baihala hemolele: o ke Kauoha kahiko a me
kc Kauoha hou: i unuhiia mailoko mat o na
olelo kahiko: a hooponopono hou ia
NuYoka: Ua paiia no ko Amerika poe
hoolaha Baibala, 1929
Inscribed:‘Bought, Hawaiian Mission Soc.,
Honolulu,July 16, 1938’
Fred High
The Value of a Rational Diet
Chicago: F. High, c. 1927
leaflet, printers ink on paper; 22.5 x 16.0 cm


M. Hirsch
Percy Grainger 1898
oil on board; 50.0 x 39.8 cm
E.O. Hoppe (1878-1972)
Ella Strom 1927
silver gelatin print; 26.0 x 19.5 cm
T. Humphrey & Co., Melbourne
Rose Grainger 1903
silver gelatin print; 48.5 x 35.0 cm
John Jenkins (1592-1678)
‘Fantasy for 5 viols, no.l in D major’,
arranged by Percy Grainger
Roneod 11934?]
MUS N mbb 785.7195 G 743
National Library of Australia
Augustus John (1878-1961)
Portrait of Ella Grainger undated
continuous line drawing in graphite on
paper; 25.0 x 20.5 cm
David Jones Ltd., Sydney
Receipt for Grainger Museum building
works 20 September 1934
printers ink, typescript and longhand on
paper; 21.5 x 13.3 cm
Gertrude Kasebier (1852-1934)
Baron Adolf de Meyer c. 1903
silver gelatin print inscribed in ink by
de Meyer; 27.5 x 19.3 cm
William Louis Koehne
Rose Grainger (age 59) Wearing Indian Necklace
Bought at Albuquerque, N.M., early May 1920
photogravure print; 22.0 x 30.0 cm
Knud Larsen (1865-1922)
Percy Grainger 1909
graphite and watercolour on paper;
28.5 x 20.5 cm
Preparatory sketch for portrait of Percy
Grainger 1906
graphite on paper; 37.4 x 26.6 cm
Rose Grainger 1907
graphite on paper; 37.1 x 26.6 cm
Lebolt, Chicago
Tea caddy and set of four spoons
early 20th century
hand-wrought silver; caddy 11.0 x 9.0 cm
diameter, spoons each 15.0 x 3.0 cm
Norman Lindsay (1879-1969)
She Arrives 1924
etching, engraving and stipple on paper;
sheet 42.8 x 36.4 cm, plate 23.6 x 22.5 cm
Eirikr Magnusson (1833-1913) and
William Morris (1834-1896)
The Story of Grettir the Strong,
translated from the Icelandic
London, New York: Longmans,
Green & Co., 1900
Arnold Henry Mason (1885-1963)
Ella Strom 1919
oil on canvas; 89.9 x 69.4 cm
Rowland H. Mayland and Son,
New York
Metallophone c. 1930
wood, steel, aluminium, nylon string;
83.0 x 174.0 x 110.5 cm
Margaret Mead (1901—1978)
From the South Seas: Studies of Adolescence
and Sex in Primitive Societies
New York: Morrow, 1939
Meissen, Germany
Monkey Orchestra 18th century
Set of 11 figurines collected by Rose Grainger
porcelain; each approx. 15.0 cm high
Mortimer Menpes (1855-1938)
Heavy Laden (Japanese Girl with Child) undated
colour drypoint etching; 39.8 x 25.5 cm
Portrait of the Artist undated
drypoint etching on India-laid paper;
34.6 x 16.2 cm
Frederick Morse
Grainger: Pianist Composer 1920 s
lithograph; 200.5 x 105.0 cm
Percy Grainger and Ella Viola Strom on their
Wedding Day 9 August 1928
silver gelatin print; 25.2 x 19.8 cm
Percy Grainger ‘The Genius of the Piano’ 1920
promotional poster: silver gelatin print on
linen-backed paper; 100.0 x 75.0 cm
Portrait of Composer, Percy Grainger
(1882-1961) in 1925
gelatin silver photograph; 24.0 x 19.3 cm
Pictures Collection, PIC P 1358
National Library of Australia
Rose and Percy Grainger, aged 60 and 39,
on the Porch of their White Plains Home
17 July 1921


photogravure print; 22.0 x 30.0 cm
Pictures Collection, nla.pic-an 10571976-2
National Library of Australia
National Music Camp, Interlochen,
Michigan
The Weekly Scherzo 15 August 1937
magazine; 23.0 x 15.5 cm
Hugh Neville-Smith
Letters and photographs from Percy and
Ella Grainger 1901-1948
bound volume
Manuscript Collection MS 9044
National Library of Australia
Attributed to Alice E. Norton
(1865-1958)
Rossetti House 1902
watercolour on paper; 28.0 x 19.5 cm
Dr Kaare K. Nygaard (1903—1989)
Death Mask of Percy Grainger 1961
plaster painted to resemble bronze,
wooden base; head: 28.0 x 16.5 x 16.5 cm,
base: 14.0 x 14.0 x 6.0 cm
Percy Grainger c. 1955
bronze; 79.0 x 32.0 x 29.0 cm
Percy Grainger’s Autopsy report
20 February 1961
typescript on paper; 28.0 x 21.8 cm
Paul and Hewitt, printers, Melbourne
Program for concert for the benefit of
Percy Grainger, held at the Melbourne
Town Hall on Tuesday 14 May 1895
printer’s ink on paper; 21.0 x 40.5 cm
Axel Poignant (1906-1986)
Portrait of Percy Grainger 1935
sepia toned photograph; 10.4 x 14.3 cm
Pictures Collection, PIC P1376/E
National Library of Australia
Sergei Vasilyevich Rachmaninoff
(1873-1943)
‘Morceaux de fantasie pour piano’ c. 1895
published sheet music with annotations
by Edith Meadows, Clara Schumann,
Ella Grainger and Percy Grainger;
35.4 x 27.0 cm
Mrs Riggs
Papers, 1915-1916
Three letters from Percy Grainger to
Mrs Riggs
Manuscript Collection MS 6901
National Library of Australia
William and Kathleen Rogers,
Arch Studio, New York
Letter to Percy Grainger regarding
mannequins commissioned for the
Grainger Museum 28 April 1953
manuscript on paper; 21.7 x 13.8 cm
Life-size mannequin of Percy Grainger 1952
straw, synthetic mesh, papier-mache;
170.0 x 60.0 cm
Invoice for mannequins 13 July 1952
typescript on paper; 26.5 x 19.5 cm
Bertrand Russell (1872—1970)
Why Men Fight: A Method of Abolishing the
International Duel
New York: The Century Co., 1917
John Singer Sargent (1856—1925)
Percy Grainger c. 1905
charcoal; 53.1 x 45.2 cm
National Gallery of Victoria, Melbourne
Gift of Percy Grainger, 1956
3319-4
Cecil Sharp (1859-1924)
Letter from Cecil Sharp to Percy Grainger
1924
manuscript on paper; 25.3 x 20.2 cm
Lady Leonora Speyer (1872—1956)
Printed invitation to meet Edvard &
Nina Grieg 21 May 1906
invitation: printer’s ink and manuscript on
paper; 10.0 x 13.1 cm
letter: manuscript on paper; 15.2 x 12.0 cm
Mickey Spillane (b. 1918)
One Timely Night
New York: New American Library, 1951
Margaret Sutherland (1897—1984)
Papers, 1920-1950
The Strange Story of Percy Grainger
Manuscript Collection MS 2967 Box 1
National Library of Australia
Algernon Charles Swinburne
(1837-1909)
Ballads of the English Border
London: Heinemann, 1925
Tiffany & Co., New York
Visiting card case belonging to
Percy Grainger undated
nickel silver;
4.0 x 8.6 x 0.7 cm


Edward Tregear (1846-1931)
The Maori Race
Wanganui: A.D. Willis, 1904
True Thrills Vol.l, No. 4, 1942
USA: Country Press Inc.
pulp fiction magazine; 28.5 x 21.7 cm
Unknown maker
Brown plaited leather belt worn by Percy
Grainger with his towelling outfit 1930 s
leather, metal; 109.0 x approx 4.0 cm
Cape Verd
Model yacht bought for Percy Grainger at
the boat-house, Albert Park Lagoon,
Melbourne in 1894 or 1895
wood, paint; 16.8 x 58.0 x 12.5 cm
Cast of Percy Graingers hands undated
plaster, gold paint; left hand 6.0 x 15.5 x 20.5
right hand 6.5 x 10.0 x 21.0 cm
Child’s writing box belonging to Percy
Grainger late 19th century
wood, slate; 9.0 x 29.0 x 22.0 cm
Coffer 17th century
with late 19th century additions
oak; 98.2 x 97.0 x 47.0 cm
Display cabinet bought by Percy Grainger
for the Grainger Museum 1930 s
glass, copper, wood;
180.0 x 100.0 x 50.0 cm
Fob watch and chain given to Percy
Grainger by Baron de Meyer undated
gold, steel, glass; 7.3 x 4.4 x 0.6 cm
Guitar c.lBOO
wooden guitar, featuring substantial
1830s—40s modifications by the Panormo
workshop, London; 91.0 x 28.0 x 8.0 cm
Percy Graingers christening cup undated
gold plate, silver; 7.8 x 6.7 cm diameter
Private Matters: Do Not Open Until 10 (ten)
Years After My Death 1955 and 1956
Contained material relating to
Percy Graingers sexuality
ink on paper envelope, tape; 25.1 x 32.0 cm
Tan loafers worn by Percy Grainger with
his towelling outfit 1930 s
leather, metal; 9.0 x 28.0 x 9.5 cm
Whip belonging to Percy Grainger undated
plaited rawhide, leather, metal; length 84.0 cm
Unknown maker (English)
Box stretcher chair 1630—60
fumed oak; 95.0 x 46.0 x 35.0 cm
Wellington chest c. 1850
inlaid wood, brass drawer handles;
122.0 x 57.0 x 39.0 cm
Unknown maker (Japanese)
Tsuba undated
Japanese sword hilt used as a brooch by
Rose Grainger. Given to her by
Lotta Hough
iron, gold, applied pin;
approx. 7.0 cm diameter
Tsuba undated
Japanese sword hilt used as a brooch by
Rose Grainger. Given to her by
Lotta Hough
iron; approx 7.0 cm diameter
Unknown maker (Melanesian)
Beadwork armband collected by Percy
Grainger c. 1909
blue and white beads, fibre; 8.0 x 30.5 cm
Beadwork armband collected by Percy
Grainger c. 1909
red and white beads, fibre; 6.0 x 27.0 cm
Unknown maker (Native American)
Gauntlets collected by Percy Grainger
c. 1915-17
red, blue, white, yellow, pink, green
and orange beads, animal skin, cotton,
velvet, white beads;
length 39.0 cm, fringe 9.0 cm
Moccasins collected by Percy Grainger
(his original museum label read: ‘Originals
from which cover design of Tribute to Foster
was copied by P.G.’) c. 1915-17
animal skin, cotton, red, pink, mauve and
blue quill-work; 8.0 x 23.5 cm each
Round beaded handbag collected by Percy
Grainger c. 1915—17
red, blue, white and yellow beads, animal
skin; diameter 11.5 cm, handle 25.0 cm,
loops approx. 7.0 cm
Two beadwork panels collected by
Percy Grainger c. 1915-17
white, red, blue, green and yellow beads,
silk, wool, paper backing;
14.0 x 11.0 cm each


Unknown maker
(Navaho, United States)
Necklace belonging to Rose Grainger
early 20th century
silver alloy; 15.0 cm diameter
Unknown maker
(Norwegian, possibly Bjorn Vik)
Hardanger fiddle 19th century
wood, four melody strings, five sympathetic
strings, traditional dragon head fmial and
designs; 61.0 x 21.0 x 10.0 cm
Unknown maker (Pueblo Indian,
Arizona/New Mexico region)
Pot c. 1900
earthenware, painted geometric design;
27.0 x 32.0 cm diameter
Unknown photographer
Edvard Grieg c. 1905
silver gelatin print; 28.5 x 19.0 cm
Female Nude c. 1925
Purchased by Percy Grainger in April 1927
at Levende Billeuggervaeker Pictures,
Fagfotos, San Francisco
silver gelatin print, slight sepia-tone;
25.5 x 17.9 cm
Female Nude c. 1925
Purchased by Percy Grainger in April 1927
at Levende Billeuggervaeker Pictures,
Fagfotos, San Francisco
silver gelatin print, slight sepia-tone;
25.5 x 17.7 cm
Grainger Museum undated
silver gelatin print; 11.3 x 15.2 cm
Grainger Museum Interior c. 1938
sepia-toned silver gelatin print;
12.0 x 16.2 cm
Great Musical Composers undated
albumen prints; 83.0 x 95.0 cm
Interior of Percy Grainger’s house at
7 Cromwell Place, White Plains undated
silver gelatin print; 19.7 x 24.5 cm
Interior of Percy Grainger’s house at
7 Cromwell Place, White Plains undated
silver gelatin print; 20.1 x 23.9 cm
Lilith Lowrey undated
silver gelatin print mounted on dark grey
board; 28.3 x 22.5 cm
Percy and Ella Grainger 1936
silver gelatin print; 34.8 x 25.5 cm
Percy and Ella Grainger inside the Grainger
Museum 13 December 1938
silver gelatin print; 9.6 x 7.5 cm
Percy Grainger 1886
silver gelatin print; 34.0 x 26.0 cm
Percy Grainger c. 1886
two silver gelatin prints in wooden frame;
33.5 x 50.0 cm
Percy Grainger 1909
two sepia-toned silver gelatin prints;
17.3 x 25.3 cm
Percy Grainger 1936
silver gelatin print; 34.8 x 27.3 cm
Percy Grainger 1936
silver gelatin print; 34.8 x 24.5 cm
Percy Grainger conducting the student
orchestra in the Bowl at the National
Music Camp, Interlochen c. 1942
silver gelatin print; 20.5 x 25.5 cm
Percy Grainger, Fort Hamilton, New York
1917
silver gelatin print; 25.4 x 20.0 cm
Percy Grainger with one of his students at
the National Music Camp, Interlochen
c. 1942
silver gelatin print; 20.5 x 25.5 cm
Percy Grainger with small child at the
National Music Camp, Interlochen c. 1942
silver gelatin print; 25.3 x 20.2 cm
The Grainger Museum under construction
2 November 1938
sepia-toned silver gelatin print;
8.5 x 14.5 cm
Unknown printer
Visiting card printed with Percy Grainger’s
address in King’s Road, Sloane Square; and
the message:‘Mr Percy Grainger will be
returning to London’
[between 1908 and 1914]
printer’s ink on card; 9.0 x 14.0 cm
Unknown tailor
Evening concert suit belonging to
Percy Grainger c. 1910
wool, silk, cotton; tailcoat 101.0 x 43.0 cm
trousers 116.0 x 35.0 cm


Vail & Co., London
Publicity poster for a Percy Grainger recital
at the Aeolian Hall, London 13 June 1907
printers ink on paper; 75.0 x 49.0 cm
Walt Whitman (1819-1892)
Leaves of Grass
New York; M. Kennerley, c. 1897
Inscribed: ‘Transferred to the dear Graingers,
in deep appreciation, from their friend
Edith Simonds, April 1915, New York’
Francis Derwent Wood (1871—1926)
Cyril Scott c. 1903
bronze; 67.3 x 44.0 x 22.8 cm
Wurlitzer, Knoxville, United States
Butterfly Piano 1940 s
Small semi-circular piano adjusted by
Grainger and tuned to sixth tones for use
in his ‘free music’ experiments
wood, ivory, paint, steel/iron frame, nails,
screws; 77.0 x 76.0 x 72.0 cm
Label for the Butterfly Piano,
handwritten by Percy Grainger in 1952
ink on cardboard; 6.5 x 18.5 cm
E.L.Yencken & Co., Melbourne
Receipt for Grainger Museum
building works 22 November 1938
printers ink and longhand on paper;
22.0 x 17.0 cm




Percy Aldridge Grainger (1882-1961) was a celebrated pianist and
compoer of over 1200 works and arrangements, a pioneering
folklore collector, musical inventor, conductor,
