

I QS




FACTS FOR THE PROTECTIONISTS.
To the Editor of the “Empire.”
Sir —Under this head, a letter by the Rev. Dr.
Lang appears in your issue of the 13th instant. It
is one of several papers the object of which is to
expose the
with Mr.
delusions of those who think,
|n, that the prosperity of this
A*"r <
protection afforded to
to the talents,
the character, and the experience of the writer may
lead to a surrender of the judgment to his views, I
will endeavour to point out the fallacies on which his
arguments are based.
Very little consideration ought to have satisfied
Dr. Lang that no duty imposed by the colony for the
protection of its manufactures could lead to the
position, by the British Government, of a duty
the importation into England of its raw produce, nor
1| ;


that, while the operation of such a duty would be
most injurious to England, it could in the slightest
degree affect the interest of New South Wales. It
will not be denied by any one that the prosperity of
England has in a great measure resulted from her
manufactures, and it will hardly be doubted, that
other countries are rapidly following in her steps and
becoming her rivals in this great source of national
wealth. How much soever England may be opposed
to the efforts of her Colonies to manufacture articles,
for their own use, it is not conceivable that she can
be so insane as, by imposing restraints on her impor-
tation of their raw produce, essential to her own
existence, to throw that produce intq .the hands of
foreign competitors, nor can any one doubt that
countries which are now making great efforts to
obtain the wool of this colony would be ready to
avail themselves of any advantage such folly on the
part of the British Government might afford them.
The Doctor has adopted the hackneyed expression
of “ sickly growth ” as applied to manufactures that
require the aid of protection. The expression is not
applicable to the manufactures of a young country,
«nor to those of any country making an effort to
Ripply itself with manufactured articles, and will be
found to exist only in the shameless defective manu-


factures of old countries which have been too often
made to meet the demand of foreign, and inex-
perienced purchasers ; fraud that has always resulted
in the ruin of the manufacturer. The care and
support required for the establishment of manufac-
tures in young and new countries, like the culture
and raising of exotics, always leads to the sturdiest
growth—sturdy because cultivated with care and
supported by those for whose benefit they are raised.
The Doctor tells us that we require that protection
only which a long sea voyage always affords! Has
the Doctor failed to observe that the expense of this
voyage applies with infinitely greater force to the
export by the colony of her raw produce, and that
the less costly the article the more weighty the
imposition—that that which but slighty affects the
price of expensive manufactured articles becomes a
heavy charge on wool and other raw produce. The
Doctor with too triumphant an air for one deeply
concerned in the welfare of the colony tells us there
is another requisite indispensable to our future manu-
factures—“ a numerous and redundant population.”
Is it proposed that the employment of the people in
the business of the factory should be postponed until
such population becomes clamorous for bread ? ifjß
some magic wand then to convert the wandering
tgC •


stockman and his neglected family into manufactu-
rers ? This is as unreasonable as it would be to
propose that education should be postponed until the
population becomes sufficiently dense for the intro-
duction of approved schools. And what is to create
this dense population, how many generations are to
starve until the introduction of manufactures? Let
Turkey answer the question, and re-assure us that
the employment of the people creates the population,
and not the population the employment.
That Dr. Lang, who has so deeply and so well
considered the condition of America, who has given
to the world an invaluable work upon her religion
and education, should have overlooked the history of
her manufactures and their triumphant establishment
at a time when the want of population was, from the
nature of the occupation of her people, infinitely
greater than it can be in a pastoral country, is un-
accountable. But it is still less to be accounted for
that he should not have contemplated the manufac-
tures of the colony under an aspect of infinite impor-
tance to its moral and national character. 1 will
endeavour to do so.
Five hundred miles from Sydney, boundless sheep-
walks are maintained. Too remote to send the


'oU
y. ~m
produce to a market, the carcasses are very com-
monly boiled down for their fat, and fat and wool
are sent on a journey often of some months’ duration
to a shipping port for exportation to a foreign mar-
ket. From that port, in return, the manufactures
of England and other countries are conveyed to the
sheep-walks; even the coarse blankets and clothing
for the shepherds. Who are employed in these
sheep-walks?—men; who to convey the produce to
market and carry back the supplies ?—men. But
surely there are women and there are children at
these remote stations ? Yes, but how employed,
how taught, how visited by the ministers of the
Gospel ? Answer these questions and then say how
long such a condition is to continue before the popu-
lation becomes sufficiently dense for the introduction
of manufactories. It is obvious that, it will never
become so, but that the race will degenerate into
barbarians, few in number, untaught, unpitied, and
unknown. A population that must pass away like
the aboriginal savage.
Turn to “the star of W. B. Allen and Co, that
has appeared above this dark horizon.”
In a remote district, in New England if you please,
a very humble manufactory of blankets will be es-


tablished—the wool used, that which is of the most
inferior description, and not worth the costly journey
to a shipping port. Blankets and coarse clothing
will there be made for those who are employed on
the sheep-w r alks, and two journeys of 500 miles each
will be saved. And who will be employed in this
simple manufacture ? Very few of the men who
would otherwise have been bullock drivers, but
generally women and children, who are now “ in-
cumbrances,” and regarded as expensive and un-
manageable appendages to a grazing establishment.
A village will spring up round this manufactory,
and shoes and many other articles, now’ imported at
a heavy expense to the country, will be made on
the spot, and the tallow, now sent to the end of the
world, will be converted into soap and candles. Pop-
ulation will then increase and all that can be made
on the spot will be gladly received by those who
reside at a distance of fifty, or even a hundred miles,
and who would then save a journey of four hundred
miles, and have their servants less frequently out of
their control. But this is not education ? This will
become the hotbed of female and infant slavery.
The late cloth factory of Dr. Mitchell gives the lie
to this assertion. Children employed, hardly beyond
their amusement, w'ere there well fed and well
clothed. A very large part of their time was


devoted to their education, and their mothers made
domestic and contended. And now the gentle dew
of Heaven falls on this “sickly growth,” and the
minister of religion, the schoolmaster, and the surgeon
complete the good work, and convert the uncivilized
inhabitants of the wilderness into a Christian com-
munity. It is still objected that the operation must
be limited to particular spots. Be it so. Is it nothing
to lay in favoured spots so sacred a foundation ? But
the charge is not true. Children of sufficient age
would be sent for miles from their homes to be em-
ployed, and taught, and cared for in the manufac-
turing village, and the poor widow and her helpless
family would there find employment and a home.
Population would be found in, instead of out of the
colony, and a foundation would be laid for whatever of
national character this country may eventually attain.
It is admitted by Dr. Lang that the colony must
at some period become a manufacturing country. It,
is my object to shew that this is the time to com-
mence, and that small matters are not to be despised.
That the formation of the habits of people, like the
education of children, must begin early.
I will close this letter with a flat denial that we
have not the population with which to begin manu-


Sydney,
■
I/6UO
1857.
r Of??
factures, which might he managed most advanta-
geously for the colony. Look at the children in
Sydney what is to become of them ? No reflecting
person can walk through the streets and alleys of the
city, without trembling for the thousands he feels—
he knows must perish. Untaught, they too com-
monly are, or trained only to infamy. Is it nothing
to rescue them ? They have, it is said, an objection
to leave the city, and well they may. What employ-
ment can a helpless widow find for herself and her
children at Armidale or Gundagai ? Establish man-
ufactories in these places and they would gladly
escape to them from the misery they endure in the
capital. T heir friends and the charitable would aid
them to remove, and thousands of interesting children
would escape from the ruin that now awaits them.
To those who are not too wise to learn, I commend
the reading of a small but deeply interesting book,
by Mr. J. B. Byles, called “ Sophisms of Free
Trade.” In this book I found a confirmation of
views I entertained many years ago, and which
I have too deeply considered to be deluded by the
clap-trap of free-trade.
J. NORTON.
f-
o - W
L,.




