

FACTS
FOR
MR. PARNELL’S BILL:
A Speech
Delivered in the House of Commons, on 21 st September , 1886,
BY
JOHN DILLON, M.P.
LONDON:
THE IRISH PRESS AGENCY, 25 PARLIAMENT-STREET.
1886
Price One Penny.


R. D. Webb and Son, Printers, Abbey-street, Dublin.


FACTS FOR MR. PARNELL’S BILL.
I think it is hardly fair or generous of the right hon. gentleman,
the Chief Secretary for Ireland, to charge the Irish party with
taking no interest in this bill, because they have not addressed
the House to-night. I myself, representing the party, was
anxious to take part in the debate during the course of the even-
ing ; but, availing myself of the ordinary channels of information,
I understood the right hon. gentleman intended to speak at 9.30
o’clock, and was accordingly prevented from rising to address the
House at that hour, as I intended to do. The Government might
easily know, if they had any true information from Ireland, we
do take an interest in this bill, and we could not fail to take an
interest in it, dealing as it does with the great cause of the Irish
tenantry, whom we represent in this House (Irish cheers),
have listened to the tone of menace and defiance which character-
izes the speech of the Chief Secretary for Ireland with a great
deal of regret, but without the least alarm (cheers)— with a great
deal of regret, because in introducing this bill, as the Govern-
ment might at least do us the justice to believe, our hope was to
procure an interval of peace in Ireland during which we might
lay before the people of England the cause, in the justice of which
we believe-it is not because I fear the landlord party of Ireland
if this bill is defeated, but I look forward with the greatest
sorrow to the struggle which must inevitably ensue (cheers).
That is the reason I listened to the speech of the Chief Secretary
for Ireland with the deepest possible regret. No one believes
that the Irish landlords will profit by this new act of folly on
their part. Knowing how they suffered for the rejection of the
A


Disturbance Bill, I have the most perfect confidence that they
will suffer in like manner for the rejection of this bill (cheers).
In the speeches of the many hon. members who'dealt with this
subject there was, as it seemed to me, a sad want of appreciation
of the gravity of the situation in Ireland (cheers). We were met
with quibbling arguments, with figures which I can hardly think
that the men who quoted them believed to be correct; but all
through this debate—and I call the attention of hon, members to
this fact—of the members representing constituencies in the north
of Ireland—members representing the landlord and Conservative
party in Ireland—not a single one has spoken (cheers).
It is a strange thing—an anomalous thing—that when this
motion was brought forward for the rejection of a bill affecting
the tenant-farmers of Ireland, and affecting directly no other
class, that that motion was made by a member who represents
the borough of Cambridge, and seconded by a member who re-
presents the city of Londonderry (cheers), and that the hon.
members—and there is a fair number of them in this House—
who are landlords themselves, and who represent Irish consti-
tuencies, have not opened their mouths against this bill (cheers).
That is, I say, an anomalous and important fact, and I believe
that the true reason that underlies this is that, while they would
go into the lobby against this bill, they know, because they live
in Ireland and have estates there, that the results in Ireland
which will follow from the rejection of this bill, will be results of
enormous interest and enormous danger to all who have landed
estates in Ireland (cheers), and they know whatever mock heroics
may be indulged in by English Catholic snobs (loud cheers), or by
London solicitors, who have no real connection with Ireland,
that the circumstances in which we are placed are circumstances
of the utmost gravity; and they prefer to give a silent vote (cheers).
I listened to the speech of the hon. member for South Tyrone
(laughter), a gentleman who seems on this occasion to have added
one more to the many wreaths of laurel which he has already
won in the House, for performing the feat of standing on


two stools (cheers). That hon. member represents the Tory
landlords of South Tyrone, who sent him into this House, and
he serves his masters well; but I beg leave to state that the tune
which we hear him sing here is a very different one from
that which he sings on platforms before the tenant-farmers of
South Tyrone (cheers) ; for I have it from a gentleman in whose
veracity I have the most perfect confidence, that he listened to
the hon. member addressing meetings of his constituents at the
last election, and that speaking to the tenant-farmers whom he
was then trying to wheedle into voting for him, he used these
words:—
“ The judicial rents cannot be paid ; and what is more they ought not
to be paid.”
(Home Rule cheers). That is the language which does for the
County Tyrone farmer. And the language we have heard
to-night is the language which suits the House of Commons
(Home Rule cheers).
I wish to say a word or two in answer to criticisms as
to the way in which this bill would work. It has been stated
that it would probably take months and years to work this
act; and when I hear that it makes me strongly suspect that
hon. members have not studied this bill, or the working
of similar acts. One argument was this—while it was ad-
mitted that 135,000 cases were settled within eight or nine
mouths under the Arrears Act, it was said that these were cases
in which the landlord and the tenant had made joint applications,
and, therefore, there was no need to investigate whether the
tenant could or could not pay. If that were so, then the land-
lord, and the tenant, and the Court, entered into a combination to
defraud the British Treasury; for the Act said that the court
“ shall inquire ” whether the tenant is able to pay, and if it is
assumed that the court made no inquiry, then it is suggested that
there was a tripartite confederacy to defraud the public revenue.
If that be so, all I can say is that the Solicitor-General for Ire-
land has a very low opinion of the morality of Irish lawyers.


Mr. Gibson. — I made no such imputation.
Mr. Dillon. —I never said he did (hear, hear, and cheers). I
said the imputation was implied in his argument, and if he
denies the imputation then he asserts that the courts did honest-
ly investigate the cases—that this very court to which we pro-
pose to refer the working of the bill, did in six months deal with
135.000 cases, and finished them all (hear and cheers). Is there
I would ask, any likelihood of anything like so many cases com-
ing under the operation of this bill ? (hear, hear). I will later
on draw attention to the figures which have been used by hon.
members opposite ; but I now express my belief that the vast
majority of the Irish landlords, seeing what is before them if this
bill were passed, would make settlements with their tenants
without going into court at all, and that out of the 200,000 or
300.000 tenants who would come under the operation of the bill,
three-fourths or four-fifths would come to a settlement of that
sort. My estimate is that if this bill were passed, not 20,000
cases would come before the Irish Land Court, and with the ex-
perience of the present staff of the court, I have perfect confidence
that it would dispose of every single case in six months.
I want to say a word about the number of tenants to whom
this bill would apply, and the number who would be left out.
We tried to make the bill as moderate as we thought was con-
sistent with the interests of the public peace; and now it is made
a charge against us that we have not included the tenants whose
rents were fixed in 1885. I don’t think it was fair to stop at
December 31st, 1884. But why did we do it? Because we
wanted to bring forward a bill as slightly subject to hostile
criticism in the House of Commons as possible. It would have
been argued, if we had gone to December 31st, 1885, that we
were including in our bill the very tenants whose rents had been
settled after the fall in prices. The Solicitor-General stated that
the bill would exclude 70,000 tenants, whose rents were fixed in
1885. Now the tenants whose rents were fixed up to December
31st, 1884, number 153,465. The tenants whose rents were fixed


during the year 1885 number 21,900; and the tenants whose rents
have been fixed during the present year are 19,500. These we
don’t claim. But hon. members are quite welcome to put the
1885 tenants in the bill if they like (cheers). I believe that of
these 153,000 to which the bill would bring relief, not 20,000 would
come before the court. I believe that as soon as 'the Irish land-
lords saw how things were going in the court a general settle-
ment would then take place all over Ireland. There is no earthly
reason why the Laud Courts should not dispose of these cases
with the utmost celerity. The operation of going over the land
and valuing it has been done. There is no occasion to repeat it;
and the records are in the possession of the court and can easily
be got at.
The two main arguments on which we have rested our case
for the necessity of this bill are these:—First of all the totally
unlooked for and unexpected fall in agricultural prices which
has taken place this year—coming on the top of another de-
pression, through which every one in Ireland supposed that we
had nearly passed—and the calamitous character of the season
for the last month in Ireland over the south and west which is
more serious than has been supposed. The second strong point
in our argument is what we consider to be the probable action of
the landlords during the coming winter.
The question of the fall in prices has been so fully dealt with,
that I do not propose to take up the time of the House any further
with this subject. But there are two or three points connected
with it—and even at this late hour I must ask the indulgence of
the House while I direct attention to them, for they are exceed-
ingly important. First, I wish to refer to the stale old argument,
which has done so much service against us, and injured us so much
in England—that Griffith’s Valuation of Ireland was made at
a time of great depression and of low prices, and that in order
to appreciate on what basis that valuation was made, we must
go back to the schedule of prices contained in the Valuation Act,
and to the conditions which prevailed in Irish agriculture in
B


1852. Now, once for all, I utterly deny this proposition. And
to make good my denial I must read to the House a few extracts
from the evidence taken by an important Committee of this
House, which was appointed in 1869 to enquire into the question
of the valuation of Ireland. Before that Committee were ex-
amined Sir Eichard Griffith, and most of the officers who had
worked under him on the valuation of Ireland, besides other
important witnesses. And these extracts I shall read, with a
view of proving three propositions, each of them of the utmost
importance.
jq rs t That in the opinion of Sir Eichard Griffith himself, his
valuation of Ulster was up to the full letting value in that pro-
vince in 1869, the time when this evidence was given. I think
every hon, member will admit the importance of that statement,
when I say that it takes into account all the tenant’s improve-
ments, which in Ulster in 1869, I believe, were more than
one-half of the entire value of the property.
Secondly—That from 15 to 20 per cent, added to the valua-
tion of three southern provinces would bring them up to the
same standard as Ulster : and
Thirdly That in this valuation all the tenant’s improvements
—building, and draining, and fencing—were fully included. The
valuers on the farms valued as they found them, and made no
allowance whatever for the improvements made by the tenants.
In Question 1574, Sir E. Griffith was asked :
“ Do you think that if the three southern provinces are valued on the
scale of agricultural prices during the five years preceding 1866, it would
be a uniform valuation with the valuation of Ulster—that is made on a
different scale ? ”
Sir E. Griffith answers :
“ The fact is, the improvement in agriculture was so great that the
valuators took a very high view of it. It has been shown by a member
of the Committee that our valuation was perhaps on a scale too high, for
it is equal to the rents. I know that in an estate of my own in the
County of Londonderry my valuation was higher than the rents.”


And again
Question 1676 : —“lt [The valuation of Ulster] must have been either
upon the scale or not ?” Answer “We did attend to the scale ;it
was a certain guide j but I think the full value of the improvements
was taken into consideration, and in consequence of that we came
up to the letting rents of the principal landlords.”
And ton. members must recollect that this valuation of Ulster
was made after the enormous rise in prices caused by the
Crimean war.
Now I come to the evidence of Mr, John E. Yernon, who
ought to be an authority with Conservative gentlemen in this
House, as he has been one of the largest land agents in Ireland—
a Conservative himself—and was appointed as the Conservative
member of the Irish Land Commission. Mr. Vernon was
asked:—
Question 3032 “Is it the fact that the higher valuation of Ulster
arises from the new valuation having just been completed in that prov-
ince ? ” Answer“ I believe that to be the fact.”
Question 3033 : —“ And that will account for the difference of the
valuation in Ulster and in other provinces in Ireland ? ” Answer:
“ Quite so.”
Thus showing unmistakeably, that in the opinion of Mr. Vernon
the valuation was not carried out on the basis of prices in schedule
to the Act, but in accordance with the conditions of agriculture at
time of valuation, which time was subsequent to the Crimean war.
Now with reference to the southern provinces. Mr. John
Ball Greene was asked :
Question 2415 You say there is a difference between the North
and South, of 15 per cent. ? ” Answer “I am sure there is,”
Question 2416 : —“ Is not the difference still larger ? ” Answer; “In
some cases it may be as high as 20 per cent.”
Now, Sir, with regard to the question of the improvements of
the tenants, I must ask permission to read a few more extracts.
Mr, Green, who was second in command at the Valuation
Office under Sir E. Griffith, was asked


Question 425 : “In making these deductions (in respect of taxes) from
the valuation, did you ever take into account the existence of tenant-
right in the north of Ireland ? ” Answer “ No.”
Question 426 :—“ That is not an element in your calculation at all 1 ”
Answer :—“ None.”
Now Mr. Yernon on the same subject: —
Question 3029 “As far as you know, they value on what may be
called the intrinsic value of the land, without reference to the various
interests which may have grown up by the use or letting of the land ?
Answer :—“ I believe that to be the case.”
Question 3030 “ Therefore, they have no occasion to consider the
question of what is called tenant-right ? n Answer “I do not believe
that they consider it. I believe that they value the land as they see it
and find it.”
I assert, and every Irish tenant in Ulster will bear me out,
and I defy even the hon. member for North Tyrone to deny it,
that in Ulster in 1869, and when the valuation was completed,
the value of the province was more than half made up of the
unrewarded labour of the tenantry (cheers). The improvements,
the drains, the fences, and the buildings, were all made by them;
and thousands, aye, hundreds of thousands, of acres of worthless
bog and waste mountain were brought into cultivation by their
untiring industry. And all this was done almost universally,
without the slightest assistance from the landlord.
And when this valuation of Ulster was made, what a state of
things did it bring to light ? That the whole of this vast pro-
perty —the creation of the tenant farmers of Ulster, had by
a gradual process of rent raising, been confiscated by their
landlords. Tor we are told that the valuers valued the lands as
they found them; and the result came out about equal to the
rents. And this, too—although, as I have proved, the valuation
was made at a time of great agricultural prosperity. We of
the National party have often been denounced as robbers by
Irish landlords. But here is a case of wholesale confiscation by
Irish landlords, which for injustice and cruelty it would be


hard to parallel in history. So much for Griffith’s valuation.
But the whole subject is one which would repay careful study.
Now, Sir, I think it has been clearly proved in the course of
this debate, that the fall in prices during the last year is on an
average, nearly, if not quite, 20 per cent. But are we to believe
that the Land Commissioners in fixing rents, looked only to the
value of the bad years, 1881, 1882, and 1883 ? I have it on the
authority of more than one of the Commissioners themselves, that
they were guided by an average—going back to the year 1877
believing, as they did, that the depression existing at the time
was only temporary, and that in order to do justice they should
consider the high prices of 1877 to 1879, as well as the low
prices of succeeding years. Suppose, then, for the sake of
illustration, that we admit that present prices show a fall of 25
per cent., as compared with those which the Commissioners had
in view when fixing rents previous to last Autumn. What re-
duction in his rent would a tenant be entitled to, in view of a
25 per cent, fall in prices ? This is a question which has not
been sufficiently brought before the House.
Sir Richard Griffith, who was no friend to the Irish tenants,
in his instructions to his valuators, said—“ One hundred acres of
tillage produces .£592, and the cost of production is £359.”
Therefore, the amount to be divided between landlord and ten-
ant is £235, and that is considerably less than 50 per cent, of the
total produce. But will anybody deny that in Ireland there has
been absolutely no fall in the cost of production— not one shilling
to the unfortunate tenant —therefore, the whole loss falls on the
net profit. Now, according to the calculation of Sir Richard
Griffith, the net profit is considerably under 50 per cent, of the
gross produce on a tillage farm. Therefore, in view of a fall in
prices of 25 per cent. —if we accept the principle of dividing
the loss equally between landlord and tenant—the tenant would
be entitled to a reduction of considerably over 25 per cent.. And
when the system of rack-renting prevails, as it largely does in
Ireland—it would be manifestly unjust to divide this loss
equally between landlord and tenant.


Now, in support of our contention, that a strong case exists
for at least a temporary reduction of rents fixed in 1881-’B2-’83 —
let me quote a most remarkable case reported at page 13, Return
of Judicial Rents for May and June last.
In 1881 the tenant got his rent reduced, presumably by private
agreement with his landlord, from ,£lBO to £‘lso, and having
applied to the Land Court in this year his rent was further reduced
to £ll2—that is, a reduction of 24 per cent, on the rent fixed in
1881.
I wish to direct attention to a few evidences of depression,
which have not been noticed in this debate. In the month of
November last, the Central Antrim Tenants’ Defence Association
—a purely Protestant association, which worked against us at
the general election—passed a resolution to the effect that 50 per
cent, won’t meet the depression of prices ; that the depression is
so great that if it continues it will be quite impossible for the
tenants in Ulster to pay rent and live (hear, hear). Further,
this association says that the tenant-right of Ulster farms is un-
saleable, except in choice and exceptional farms (hear, hear).
We have heard a volley of assertions from the hon, member for
Derry (Mr. Lewis) as to the enormous prices given for Ulster
tenant rights. All I can say is, that I am perfectly content to
place against the authority of that gentleman, the authority of
the Central Antrim Tenants’ Defence Association (cheers). That
is not all. I turn to still more remarkable testimony of the
present depression, and of the deplorable state in which
farmers are. At a recent meeting of the Kildare Board of
Guardians, the clerk brought forward a letter from another
Board of Guardians, calling attention to the sufferings of the
farmers ; and a resolution was proposed, setting forth that the
interests of the landlords, as well as the tenants, would be best
promoted by the making of substantial abatements, and that
50 per cent, off the Government valuation is the least that
can do any good. The Baron de Robeck, both a landlord and a
tenant-farmer, said: —


t( J agree with everything Mr. Fenton has said, except regarding the
per-centage of reduction. I would agree to that too in a certain way ;
but I agree with Mr. Fenton as to the depreciation in prices. I am
sorry to say that the bad weather for this season has altogether spoiled
the crop. I would agree to everything he said, except to draw a hard
and fast line at fifty per cent., as what one man might-want might be too
much for another. It may be necessary in some cases, but it is not
necessary in all.”
Here is a well known Conservative landlord, who stood in the
Conservative interest for the County of Kildare at the last
election, and his declaration at the Kildare Board of Guardians
is, that this reduction may be necessary in some cases, but not in
all. He agreed finally in the resolution, the proposer having
agreed to omit the figure, 60 per cent. Other landlords followed.
Major Burrowes, deputy-lieutenant of the county, and a large
land owner, supported the resolution. Mr. Mansfield, an ex-ojjicio
guardian, a large land owner in the county, supported the reso-
lution. And what was the resolution? It was a resolution
calling on the Government to put a stop to capricious evic-
tions (cheers); and this resolution was passed at a meeting
of the Board of Guardians, with a tenant farmer in the chair,
and it was supported by the late Conservative candidate, and
other Conservative land owners supported him. Not a single
voice, except the voices of two individuals in the whole meeting,
was raised against it; and these gentlemen did not object to the
resolution, but they said it was not proper business of the board.
I want to know, Mr. Speaker, if this is not evidence to impress
on the House the necessity of something being done. Where are
we to go for evidence ? If you won’t believe Irish Nationalists,
if you won’t believe Presbyterian farmers, will you believe
Conservative landlords in the County of Kildare ? (cheers).
It is utterly impossible to answer or contradict any of these
facts.
There was only one point in the speech of the hon. member for
the borough of Derry which I deemed to be the least worthy of
consideration. It is perfectly true, as pointed out by the late


Chancellor of the Exchequer, the right hon. gentleman the mem-
ber for Derby (Sir W. Harcourt), that all the speeches from the
Ministerial side were addressed to showing that there was no
urgent case for the reduction of rent in Ireland. The only strong
point in the speech of the hon. member for Derry, had relation to
what he made out to be the increasing wealth of the Irish farmers
in live stock and cattle. I have noticed in this debate a most ex-
traordinary perversion of figures. Ido not say it was a deliberate
perversion, but I believe the figures were supplied by agencies,
and hon. members who made use of them did not look into them
for themselves. What did the hon member for Derry say ? He
said there was an increase of all kinds of stock in Ireland, with
the solitary exception of pigs. Will hon. members listen to the
true facts of the case ? From 1885 to 1886 these are the figures.
In horses there is an increase of 2,013; and this entirely took place
in two-year-olds ; and we attribute this to the fact, that farmers
having found the rearing of cattle entirely unprofitable, turned
to try their hand at horses. There was a decrease of 912 in one-
year-olds, which showed that the experiment did not answer their
expectations. Another item which created some laughter was
that of asses. The small farmers do their carting with asses, and
there is a decrease of 912. The hon. member quoted the figures
in cattle, and he led the House to believe that there was an
increase of wealth in Ireland in cattle. This year the net decrease
in cattle is 44,824 ; and that only very slightly brings before the
House the real facts, which are alarming and appalling in the
extremest degree. There was an increase of milch cows of 1,300,
a slight increase of three-year-olds—3,so2—and why 1 Because
the Irish farmers could not sell them, and they took them home
because they could get no price for them (cheers). This is a
thing to which I would beg the attention of the hon, members.
In two-year-olds there was a decrease of 48,936, and why ? Be-
cause the Irish farmers killed their calves because they found
they could not pay for their rearing. The reason of that appalling
decrease is the reason I tell you—the farmers were so dispirited


and broken-hearted by the prices they were offered for store
cattle that they killed the calves (cheers).
Now, these figures utterly contradict the statements of the
hon. member for Derry, and reveal a condition of things, which
to those who are acquainted with the real life of the Irish far-
mers, about which the member for Derry knows nothing, is
simply appalling. The hon. member for Derry pointed out that
the people of Ireland had increased the amount of land in cultiva-
tion. He pointed to the fact that there was an increase in the
land under tillage of 76,000 acres ; of this, 59,000, I find, is
meadow and clover. The increase in real tillage is only 17,000
acres ; and of that 15,000 is in flax in Ulster, and 2,000 in
potatoes. In oats, which we are told by the hon. members
opposite is the really paying crop, there has been a decrease of
5,664 acres. That looks, does it not, as if the wealth of the
Irish farmers was increasing? I allude to the figures of the hon.
member for Derry, because they certainly surprised myself. I
did not know how to account for them, and I had these figures
made out to-day and carefully checked.
It has been said that the Land Commissioners who settled
the rents were friends of the tenants. That was a most audacious
assertion (cheers). Why, Sir, hundreds and thousands of tenants
1 know in Ireland have refused to go into the Land Courts,
because the Land Commissioners were mainly and largely in the
landlords’ interest. I have a return which answers this asser-
tion completely. Out of thirty-three lay Commissioners appointed
under the Land Act, seventeen were landlords or agents —50 per
cent, of the members of the Land Court were landlords or agents.
I do not know that anyone will venture after that to say that
they were in the tenants’ interest ? (cheers).
What is it we ask that you should do by this bill in this
House? Simply make Irish landlords do what English land-
lords do—nay, to make Irish landlords do a great deal less than
what English landlords always have done, or generally have
done. If Irish landlords had acted reasonably in the past, there


would have been no necessity for any of the acts dealing with the
Irish land question, that have been passed in this House. It is
useless for anyone to come forward and talk of Irish landlords
having been tried and found not guilty. If they were found not
guilty, then why did this House spend weeks and months passing
the Compensation for Disturbance Bill and the various Irish Land
Bills 1 The second branch of our argument relates to the con-
duct of the Irish landlords. I admit that if it could be shown
that they could be expected to act as reasonable men in the face
of this crisis, there would be no necessity for this bill. But what
is the fact 1 Past experience has shown that they cannot be
trusted (Irish cheers). It is impossible for me to go into the
whole of our cases ; but I must ask the House to have patience
while I refer to the recent actions of some leading landlords, in
showing that they cannot be expected to act reasonably, and that
if you refuse us this bill you will drive the Executive Govern-
ment in Ireland into courses which the moral sense of England
will condemn (hear, hear). We have heard a good deal of Lord
Clanricarde. He never goes near his estate, and his tenants
never see him. His tenants came into court in the month of
May this year. If you ask me why they did not come there
before, I will answer that they were afraid to do so; because, as
in the’ case of so many other estates, the tenant has hanging
gales, and the threat of costs of appeals held over his head, and
is warned that every penny will be taken out of him by writs
from the Superior Courts in Dublin, if he dares to go into the
Land Court. Well; his tenants at last came into court, and
numbers got their rents fixed last May and June, and here are
some of the reductions :
Old Rent. Judicial Rent.
£3O 0 0 ... £ls 0 0
10 0 0 ... 7 0 0
11 0 0 ... 7 15 0
18 16 0 ... 11 10 0
30 0 0 ... I 4 15 0
6 10 0 ... 3 15 0
15 0 0 9 10 0


These, I admit, are picked cases. But the reductions averaged
over 25 per cent. And now, Sir, let us consider for a moment
what Clanricarde’s action has been in the past, and what he is
doing at this moment. And remember, this is a man who has,
I suppose, two or three thousand tenants in the County Galway.
After the election at which my hon. and gallant friend, the
member for North Galway, was elected in 1872, Lord Clanricarde
raised his rents, to punish his tenants for voting against his
nominee. So far as I can learn, Lord Clanricarde has never
spent anything on his estate, nor in any way shown an interest
in the welfare of his tenants. And his estate in Galway is now
a centre of disturbance.
Let me quote a few cases from a statement I have received, of
what has recently taken place at Woodford, on this property.
The tenants having asked a reduction of 25 per cent., Lord
Clanricarde refused any concession. A number of tenants were
picked out and proceeded against by writs from the Superior
Court in Dublin, instead of the ordinary county court civil bill.
This was done, of course, with a view to increase the cost enor-
mously, and to terrify the rest of the tenantry. I now proceed
to quote some cases from the statement: —
“ 1. Pat Conroy, aged 76, wife aged 75, four children, owed one and
a-half year’s rent, £36; but on 7th June last paid a half year’s rent, for
which he has acknowledgment written on the back of his last receipt,
and was then assured no further proceedings would be taken. Costs,
£l7 10s.
“ 2. Pat Fahy, wife and child, three brothers and sister, owed two
years’ rent, £25. Costs, £lB.
“ 3. James Bruder, aged 70, wife and three children, owed one and
a-half years’ rent, £lB. Costs, £l7 10s.
“ 4. Thomas Saunders, wife, old mother, and seven children, owed two
years’ rent, £lB. Costs, £l7 10s.
In amounts stated to be due in these cases is included the
hanging gale ; and the injustice of adding this is especially great
on the Clanricarde property, as on that estate it has always
been the custom to pay annually in October the rent which fell


due the November previous. Conroy, Fahy, and Bruder, and
their ancestors for generations (and this applies generally on the
estate), worked on their holdings, built houses, made drains,
walls, fences, etc., in fact brought their holdings to their present
state, without the slightest assistance in money or materials from
the landlord. And though the rents are lower than on Mr.
Lewis’ property in this parish, were the tenants’ rights to their
improvements respected, the rents should be enormously cut
down. Even as the Land Act is worked, at the late Portumna
Land Sessions, the reductions on the Clanricarde estate ranged
from 30 to 50 per cent. Saunders—the fourth case mentioned
above—came into possession on payment of £lOO fine about
seventeen years ago. He had just come from Australia, where
by farming he had made over £6OO ; he built a house and offices
at an expense of about £2OO ; and although strictly sober, hard-
working, and industrious, he is now not worth a shilling. To
evict these four men, the bailiff came with 700 police and a gang
of Orange emergency men from Ulster. All the tenants on this
property were and are willing (so far as they are able, for some
of them are too poor) to pay their rents on a reduction of ss. in
the pound. And whilst Lord Clanricarde is said to have granted
7s. 6d. in the pound to his English tenants, he refuses a farthing
to his tenants here ! And this is one of the men on whose for-
bearance the government wish us to rely. And to support this
mean, cruel, and stupid tyranny, the Irish government will be com-
pelled, during the coming winter, to use the forces of the crown.
It is plainly impossible for me to go into the details of many
other cases. I must content myself with giving some samples
of reductions which have been made on the estates of some of
these gentlemen in whose moderation and forbearance we are
asked to trust. Take the estate of Martin McDonnell of County
Galway:—
Old Rent. Judicial Rent.
£2 3 9 ... £0 17 6
2 6 5 ... 1 2 6
2 0 0 ... 0 17 0
And so on. The reductions averaged over 60 per cent.


These are all cases in which in my opinion there ought to be
no rent at all, for the tenants are men who were evicted from
their former holdings and left naked and bare on the mountain
side, and rent is put upon the land which they reclaimed, and
the mud huts which they built (Parnellite cheers).
Let us come to Mr. Loftus Tottenham (hear hear). His
tenants entered the Land Court, having at last mustered up
courage, in the month of April last, and the general reductions
average very close upon 50 per cent. This is one of the gentle-
men who would get up in this House and defend the Irish
landlords. Rents of £5 15s. have been reduced to £3; of £2, to
£1 55.; of £ll, to £6; of £7, to £4 55.; of £7 6s. 4d., to £3 125.;
of £5, to £2 10s.; and of £5 10s., to £3. This gentleman would,
no doubt, in this House support the idea that we might rely on
the reasonableness of the landlords (hear, hear, and Irish cheers).
I come to another noble lord, whose estate has been referred to,
Lord Annaly, whose agent boasts that he can bully any tenant
in Ireland into submission, and that he trampled on the Land
League. So he did, lam sorry to say, and he used to go strutting
about Dublin stating that he had broken down the Land League,
and had tolerated no dictation from them. At last Lord
Annaly’s tenants summoned up courage to go into the Land
Court, and here are some of the reductions: —£20 145,, to £ll 75,;
£8 145., to £4 155.; £l3, to £6 65.; £2O, to £l2; £4, to £1 155.;
£24, to £l3 10s. (loud Home Rule cheers). I was denounced
because I recommended the tenants to combine and ask for
25 per cent, reduction.
I will leave the House now to judge of the conduct of the
agent, who boasted and bragged in Dublin that he had beaten
down the tenants and compelled them to pay the last penny.
Now we come to Lord Kenmare (loud cheers). We have been
told that we have been unjust to Lord Kenmare ; and this is a
case to which I invite the attention of the Chief Secretary)
because I warn him that in the case of Lord Kenmare’s estate he
will have great trouble this winter. It was stated in a letter the


other day that there have been very few evictions on this estate.
I tell the House that I do not believe the statement in that let-
ter was true, and even if it were true the sting was in the tail of
it, for the agent said that if the rents were not paid he would
proceed to evict every tenant who would not pay. What is the
case with regard to the Kenmare estates ? Here are some of the
reductions made by the Court: —.£27, to £l7; £27, to £l7; £6,
to £3 10s. ; £6, to £4 ; £35, to £22 ; £25, to £lB ; £SO, to £3O
(loud Home Rule cheers). I admit all the time that I am
picking out the worst cases ; but, I say, is this House prepared
to support by the force and authority of the law in Ireland, men
who are capable of dishonesty, such as this man, who can be
declared in the face of England to be guilty of this gross
injustice to our countrymen —men who have been proved to have
extracted 100 per cent, more than what is a just rent, and who I
venture to say, instead of returning some of this money to their
tenants, will endeavour to compel them to pay all they owe at the
rate of the old rent. This noble lord, who, no doubt, is shocked
at the dishonesty of the Land League, was applied to the other
day for the poor-rate and county cess, in respect of farms from
which his tenants had been evicted ; he refused to pay, and the
magistrates refused to decree him for it. There is the honesty of
the Irish landlords.
I come now to another, Lord Middleton, whose sou is a
member of the present government. Lord Middleton’s tenants
applied for a reduction the other day, and a deputation was sent
representing some judicial tenants and some who were not judi-
cial tenants. Lord Middleton refused to see the deputation, or
to discuss with them the propriety of a reduction. And in a few
days word was sent round from the agent’s office, that no reduc-
tion would be granted on any judicial rents, and that the other
cases would be considered separately. When the rents were not
immediately paid, Lord Middleton proceeded against eight of the
judicial tenants, by the most expensive process the law afforded,
had their farms sold in Cork Courthouse; and the tenants being


terrified at the prospect of eviction and the loss of all their pro-
perty in the improvements and buildings on their farms, bought
in their farms ; and the law costs which these tenants had to pay
amounted to .£BS. In order to buy in their farms and pay the
costs, these men had to borrow from their friends, to raise money
in the bank, and a public subscription was also raised to help
them. And in the case of seven out of the eight, there was only
a half year’s rent due.
Now what was the crime for which these men were so ruth-
lessly punished. They had not refused to pay rent. On the
contrary, is is notorious that they had always paid their lent
regularly and punctually. But they had asked for a ieduction,
and hesitated to pay when any reduction was rudely and brutally
refused. There are in Ireland at this moment, landlords who
boast and brag that they would not take a penny under the
judicial rent, and who look upon the judicial rents as sacred.
I don’t want to weary the House, but I am entitled to make as
strong a case as I can in respect to the question, which is all-
important at the present moment. What right have the Govern-
ment to anticipate that the Irish landlords will act justly by
their tenants. I think I have made a pretty strong case (loud
opposition cheers), and I will wind up with a reference to the
hon. member who moved the rejection of this bill. That gentle-
man and his brother are not popular landholders in the south of
Ireland; I will go further, and say they were harsh and cruel
landlords (cheers), I have got some facts here, which I think
will make hon. members believe that I speak nothing more than
the absolute truth. There is a circular dated March 15th, 1873,
signed Penrose Fitzgerald, and issued to his tenants. This, I
may say, was at the very acme of prosperity and high prices.
The circular says :
“ He was informed that some of his tenants held at a fair rent, and
others much under the real value, and that his desire was to act fairly
and justly to every tenant already in occupation —to leave him such a
margin of profit as will enable him to live in comfort and respectability.


Mr. Penrose Fitzgerald. —Will the hon. member read the
whole of the circular ?
Mr, Dillon—lt is too long to read wholly (oh !oh !). I have
said that I don’t object to the terms of the circular for itself.
I merely wished to quote the circular to show the estate was
valued in 1873, Then I have a statement in reference to some
recent occurrences on his estate. First, there is the case of
William Wall, rent fixed in 1873 at £ 6l, reduced about three
years ago to £56, which is the present rate (hear, hear). The
poor-law valuation is ,£43. No abatement off the March gale of
1885 was offered; an abatement of 20 per cent, off the Sep-
tember gale was offered. The tenant hesitated to accept it, and
was served with a writ, and had to pay full rent and costs.
Luke Shea; rent £26, valuation £2O ss. Rent was fixed by tenant’s
acceptance of landlord’s offer about three years ago. Tenant accepted
because he had no confidence in Land Court.
“ Edmund Shea ; rent £2B 2s. 6d., valuation £22 10s. No abatement
since this rent was fixed three years ago. During three years previous
to fixing of present rent, was allowed 15 per cent, off the old rent.
When present rent was fixed by landlord, tenant objected to sign agree-
ment, until agent’s clerk said to him ‘Unless you consent to sign this
agreement, you will be compelled to refund the allowance you have been
receiving during the last three years.’
“John Shea; rent £l4, valuation £l2 10s. Judicial lease. No
abatement.
. “ Mrs * McCarthy; rent £62, valuation £4B ss. No abatement at any
time previous to this year; but 20 per cent, was offered last July if
March rent of 1886, were paid; tenant was unable to pay.”
Now I come to a case which seems to be one of peculiar
hardship :
“Cornelius McDonnell; judicial tenant, rent £32, valuation £26.
Last September, tenant owed a year’s rent, and in common with other
tenants asked for abatement, and offered to pay a year’s rent, less 25
per cent. ; asked for an interview with the agent, which was refused ;
agent s clerk told him that no abatement would be given; was served
with writ on Ist January, 1886, and the interest in his farm sold by
sheriff on 17th March.”


That is to say, he was proceeded against by the most expen-
sive and deadly process the law admits of, and one which robbed
him of his rights of redemption, and all rights sought to be
conferred on Irish tenants by various acts passed in this House.
Shortly after this, by the advice of friends who offered to lend
him money, McDonnell went to the landlord’s solicitor and
offered the full rent and costs. Solicitor consulted agent, and
then wrote to the tenant, as follows '“ Mr. Penrose Fitzgerald
cannot accept your offer as matters have proceeded so far.”
McDonnell was evicted on 23rd August, and although he made
an effort to settle on the day of eviction, the landlord’s bailiff
would not listen to him.
This is an example of the forbearance of the landlords. I
appeal to the Englishmen opposite, to the English landlords who
sit upon those benches, and ask them would they not be ashamed
to sit silent when such charges as these were made against them
(loud cheers). Is there one single English landlord who when
his tenant had offered to pay 75 per cent, of the rent, and after
the wretched tenant had been put to enormous cost, his interest
sold out, and robbed of his rights by this cruel process of law
(cheers), is there an English landlord I ask, who, if this tenant
should then offer the full amount of the pound of flesh, the gift
of his relatives and friends (cheers), the full rent with the double
costs, those of the judgment of decree, and of the eviction on
title, would refuse that offer and turn the wretched man and his
family adrift on the world? (loud cheers). Ido not believe that
there is a landlord in England or Scotland who, if he had done
such a deed, would not be ashamed to sit amongst his fellows in
this House, and the hon. member who stood forward in this
House, speaking as the representative of the landlords of Ire-
land, does not deny it (loud cheers). Is it to men whose forbear-
ance is like this that you are going to trust for the peace of
Ireland ? (loud cheers), I appeal to you ; do you look forward
with satisfaction to have your forces placed at the command of
the Lord Kenmares and the Lord Annalys, and to having the


lively of England’s soldiers disgraced in carrying out their work,
and the Irish constabulary moving in enormous masses to inflict
on a wretched people as cruel an injustice as ever was done in
the name of law ? (loud cheers). There is not a man in this
House who does not know if the landlords of Ireland try to
extract to the uttermost the full measure of their legal rights
in the coming winter, wrong—cruel, intolerable wrong—will be
done, and the Irish tenants in the hour of their misery and of
their despair will remember that this House turned a deaf ear
to their appeal for justice, and treated the story of their suffer-
ings with jeers and with contempt (enthusiastic cheers).
The hon. member the Solicitor-General for Ireland, in one of
his flights of stormy eloquence (laughter), declared that only
1,300 families had been put out of their homes during the quar-
ter ending 30th June last, and on this he consoled himself by the
reflection that it was the normal number. The figures of the
Chief Secretary have shown that at least 2,000 families will be
turned out in the coming winter. I ask whether this House is
content to accept this as the normal condition of Ireland ?
I wish to draw the attention of the House to this question of
Irish evictions, and more particularly with reference to one
county, and that is the county where troubles have arisen.
Where you have evictions there will you have trouble (cheers).
I only point to this particular county, because I want to bring
to the minds of English members two or three facts which must
be realised before it is possible to understand the cause of agra-
rian disturbance in Ireland. I allude to the County of Kerry.
Every Irishman knows that tip to a few years ago Kerry was
one of the most peaceable counties in Ireland, Any landlord
(and I might even refer to the notorious Mr, Hussey himself),
might wander through the most lonely parts of that county, and
would be welcome in the humblest cabin (cheers). Seven or
eight years ago there was not a landlord in Kerry who would
not be as safe and as welcome in the house of his poorest tenant
as he would be in his own. Now many a landlord in Kerry


cannot venture from his home without a guard (Ministerial
cheers and counter cheers). One would suppose that they were
in one of the most disturbed spots of a far Eastern land. How
was the change brought about ? (cheers). I ask the attention
of the House to these figures. In 1877 the total number of
evictions in the County of Kerry was 18 families; in 1878 it was 26,
in 1879 it was 70, in 1880 it was 191, in 1881 it was 192, in 1882
it was 293, in 1883 it was 403, in 1884 it was 410, in 1885 it
was 358—making a total for these six disturbed and fatal
years, of 11,304 human beings driven from their homes in that
county alone (sensation). Is not that explanation enough for any
reasonable man ? (cheers). And when we look at the last
returns, we find that that state of things, so far from improving,
is going on steadily from bad to worse. During the three
months ending on the 30th of June last, we find that in the
County of Kerry there were 187 families driven from their
homes. Of these, 73 were restored—giving a total of 114 families
driven absolutely in three months from their houses out on the
roadside (cheers). In the face of this, are we to be told that this
House is to rely upon the toleration and forbearance of the Irish
landlords ? I appeal to hon. members, is it reasonable to expect
that we should be content with assurances like these ? We do
not rely upon the forbearance of the Irish landlords, because we
who have read the history of Ireland know it is a rotten reed to
lean upon (cheers). I have never denied that there have been
landlords in Ireland who have acted the part of just and reason-
able men. You never hear of them, because they do not dispute
with their tenants, but there is always a large residuum suffi-
cient to keep the country almost in a state of civil war—men who
have had no bowels of compassion, who boast and brag, and
their tenantry fear them (cheers). It is against this class of men
we demand protection from this House. If this House refuses
the protection—if this House comes to the conclusion that the
tenantry of Ireland must be left as they were left six years ago,
without any relief except what they can win by their own exer


tions, all I can say is that in my opinion this House, and more
especially the Unionists in this House, will have made a deep and
weighty mistake (cheers).
There is one argument which has been urged upon me privately
by hon, members on that side of the House, and by Unionists on
this side, against our demand for the National Self-government
of Ireland, and it is this r that this House is never deaf to an
appeal from the Irish members; and they have often told me that
if we brought forward our grievances they would be remedied
(Ministerial cheers). Now this bill is declared to be urgent by
the whole of the National party, and even the leaders of
the Irish Conservatives have not said one word against it.
And yet it would seem that the Government have made
up their minds not to give us this bill. That is a mistake
for the Unionists of England. It is a deeper mistake for the
landlords of Ireland. It has been said that we introduced this
bill in bad faith. I deny it. We introduced it as the most
moderate measure that we could lay before this House, and at
the same time say that it would secure peace through this winter
in Ireland. I know there are tenants whom this bill would not
save; but what Ido say is that it would do away with all danger
of widespread disturbance, and that the trouble which would
come if the bill were passed would be local and trifling. If this
bill passed, we should be in a position honestly and loyally to ex-
ercise our influence to keep the country quiet, and to induce the
people to endure patiently whatever sufferings they might have
to bear.
I remember the same class of arguments were used against
the Compensation for Disturbance Bill in 1880 (hear, hear). I
remember as well as yesterday leaving the House of Lords after
that bill had been rejected—greatly rejoiced, because I believed
that act was the knell of Irish landlordism. But lam six years
an older man than I was then ; many things have happened in
that interval and I know better now what a struggle between
landlord and tenant in Ireland means; and while I am prepared


to go into that struggle, and while I am confident of the resu
(loud cheers), I was anxious sincerely and honestly that the truce
of God, to use the words of the member for West Birmingham,
should be prolonged in Ireland; until we could lay before the
people of England our arguments for the cause for which we have
so long striven, in the justice of which we firmly believe, and
which we are confident of commending to their reason and t eir
conscience (hear, hear).
I look forward with dislike and dread to the tumult of passion
which will be let loose in Ireland by the rejection of this bill;
and while I say I fear not the ultimate consequences, I am sorry
that the Government has sent us back to our country with a
message of hatred and defiance (cheers)-to tell the people that
this House will do them no justice; to tell them that they have
crot nothing to trust to but the combination which saved them in
1880 and which has won for them every single right they have
gained (cheers). Our course is perfectly clear. We have to-
night brought forward this bill with a sincere desire to have
peace this winter in Ireland. This House has denied the tenant
justice. Igo back to Ireland to tell the tenant that if he wishes
to live he must trust to his own exertions (prolonged Irish
cheers); and so long as I have life and liberty, so long shall I
tell the people of Ireland to continue in that course of persisten
and determined agitation, by which in the past they have won
every single liberty which they possess, and every concession
which has been granted them, and by which in the future, i
they will only show perseverance and bravery, they will win
spite of Irish landlords and in spite of this House—the right to
live as freemen in their native land (cheers).
The Division.
The House then divided —
For the second reading, ••• 202
Against, ... ••• •••
Majority against, 95


The Irish Question.
The Following Publications are supplied by the
Irish Press Agency.
Facts for Mr. Parnell’s Bill. By John Dillon, M.P.
Ulster. By J. J. Clancy, M.P.
The Elections of 1885. By. J. J. Clancy, M.P.
Coercion. By J. J. Clancy, M.P.
The Treatment of Minorities in Ireland.
By Charles Dawson, Ex-M.P.
The Orange Bogey. By J. J. Clancy, M.P.
The Opinions of Some Protestants regarding Home Rule.
By Alfred Webb.
Price One Penny each.
The foregoing will be sent gratis to Clubs and Associations
in England, Wales, and Scotland, on application to the Irish
Press Agency, 25 Parliament-street, Westminster, London.
HSiT Other Tracts in preparation.
