

FACTS ABOUT THE BALLOT.
Annexed is a representation of the mode of voting by the
Ballot, in use in the Colonies of Victoria, Tasmania and
South Australia, for the Election of Members of the Colonial
Legislatures.
In 1853, the Colony of Victoria obtained the sanction of the
Queen and the English Parliament to a constitution establish-
ing a responsible Ministry and two Houses of Legislature, both
-elected by the people, instead of the then-existing "Legislative
■Council," partly nominated by the Queen and partly elected.
The Ministry introduced into the Council a Bill to regulate
the elections under the new Constitution, in which they
proposed to preserve the system of open voting used at
elections for the Council. Mr. WILLIAM NICHOLSON, a native
of Cumberland, an opulent merchant in Melbourne (of which
city he was the first Mayor), and the leader of the independent
or opposition party in the Legislature, moved a resolution,
" That any Electoral Act should provide that the votes at
elections be taken by Ballot." The Ministry opposed this
motion, but it was carried by a majority of eight. They
therefore resigned, and Mr. Nicholson was charged with the
formation of a Government. This task he was obliged, for
private reasons, to abandon, and the old Ministry resumed
office. They announced they should treat the resolution in
favour of the Ballot as if it had never been passed. Mr.
Nicholson drew up Ballot clauses, and in the Committee on
the Electoral Act carried them against the Government, who
-opposed every clause. The Electoral Act, with the Ballot
clauses in it, became law, the Legislative Council ceased to
exist, and the new Legislature was elected in September, 1856,
when the Ballot was tested for the first time in the Colony,
and operated, said the Melbourne Herald, "in a manner which
" not only satisfied the expectations of its most sanguine
advocates, but actually won over as converts some of those
t: who were previously its most determined opponents, both
" in and out of the Legislature."
The plan of voting in force in Victoria and, with some vari-
ation in details, in Tasmania and South Australia also, is this :
If a poll is demanded, as many polling-booths are erected by
the Returning Officer as the size of the constituency requires.
By law, each of these booths is required to be divided into two
sections. This division is effected (as is shewn in the picture)
by a partition. The left-hand division of the room is public,
and open to any person ; and the right-hand division, called
" the ballot-room;' is private, and no persons except those
actually engaged in voting are allowed to be in that division.
It will be seen that in the right-hand or private division
of the room are screened recesses, each containing a table and
pen and ink. Each recess accommodates one voter, and there
may be as many of these recesses as the size of the consti-
tuency requires.
The Returning Officer provides a ballot-box with lock and
key, for each booth. These boxes are of uniform size, about
two and a half feet deep, and ten inches wide, with a hole
at the top to admit of the voting-papers passing through.
The box is shewn in the picture, standing on the right of the
table, guarded by a policeman. As many voting-papers as
there are voters on the Register of Electors are printed. These
papers are of uniform size and in the following form prescribed
by the Electoral Act. The form printed below is a fac-simile
of those used at the election for the district of Castlemaine.
COLONY OF VICTORIA.
District of Castlemaine. —Election of Two Members.
~ GEORGE ANDREW BROWN.
HEN-RE—J-<E>*ES.
JAMES—ROBINSON-.
JOHN THOMAS.
DIRECTIONS.
The voter is to strike out the name or names of the candidate or candidates for
whom he does not intend to vote by drawing a line through the same with a pen.
He must be careful not to leave uncancelled more names than are capable of
being returned for the province or district in which he votes, namely, two names,
otherwise his ballot-paper will be invalid.
If he cannot read he may require the returning officer or deputy returning officer
to strike out for him such name or names as he may designate.
The ballot-paper so marked by or for the voter is to t dropped by him into
the ballot-box.
The voter is not to be permitted to take his ballot-paper out of the ballot-room
or polling-booth.
It will be seen that an elector wishing to vote for the two Candidates, " George Andrew
.Brown "and "John Thomas," would draw hispen through theotherthree names as shewn above.
At the opening of the poll the Returning Officer or his deputy takes his seat at the table
in the polling-booth, accompanied by his Poll-clerk and the Scrutineers appointed by each
Candidate on his behalf, to see fair play on the part of the Returning Officer, the Poll-clerk,
and the Scrutineers of the other candidates. All these officials are sworn not to attempt
to discover how any elector votes. These officials are shewn in the picture seated at the
table. At the door in the left-hand, at the top corner of the picture, is represented a voter
entering the booth, to whom the attendant policeman points out where he is to go. In the
left-hand or public division are shewn various groups of persons engaged in conversation;
the voter, passing through these groups, comes to the table and publicly claims his right
to vote. The Poll-clerk refers to the list for his name, and if that be found and his
identity undisputed, the Returning Officer delivers to the voter one of the printed voting-
papers before described, at the back of which the Returning Officer has signed his own
name, to prevent the possibility of unauthorised papers being used. The picture shews
a voter in the act of receiving his paper from the Returning Officer, and the policeman
lifting the barrier to admit the voter to the ballot-room. The voter having received the
paper, takes it into one of the recesses in the ballot-room, where he strikes out the names
•of those candidates he does not vote for, leaving uneffaced the names of those for whom
he votes. It will be seen, on reference to the voting-paper, that if the voter cannot read,
he may ask the Returning Officer to strike out the names for him, and the Returning
Officer is sworn to keep secret any vote which he may in this way know. In the picture
the recesses are shewn occupied by voters. It will be seen that the screen on each side
protects the occupant of each recess from his neighbour seeing how he votes, while he is
prevented prying into his neighbour's vote ; and all are protected from the
inspection of the groups assembled in the public room, though such groups may contain
the landlords, the employers, the creditors, or the customers of the voters in the ballot-
room. The voter having struck out what names he pleases, folds up the paper so as to
conceal the vote given, while it shews the signature of the Returning Officer on the
back ; he then returns to the table and is shewn in the picture placing his folded paper
in the ballot-box. This done, he goes out at the door shewn in the right-hand corner of
the picture, where he is represented making his exit. The poll being closed, the ballot-
boxes are instantly opened by the Returning Officer or his deputy, in the presence of the
Scrutineers ; the votes for each candidate are counted, and the majority ascertained. The
Returning Officer then makes out an account of the papers originally printed, the number
delivered to voters, and the number not delivered to voters ; the papers are divided and
sealed up in separate parcels, marked respectively " ballot-papers used," and " ballot-
papers unused," and are delivered to the Clerk of the House of Legislature to which the
election relates, to be kept by him for two years and then to be burnt.*
In large constituencies, where there are several places for taking the poll, a Deputy
Returning Officer is appointed for each booth, who presides, ascertains the votes given
and the majority for his district, makes out the account of the voting-papers for his
district, and transmits them to the Returning Officer, who ascertains the majority of
* In South Australia the ballot-papers are destroyed immediately after the declaration of the poll. Iu
Tasmania they are kept for five years.
votes for the whole constituency, and forwards to the proper officer the accounts of all
the voting-papers relating to the election. The final state of the gross poll being thus
ascertained, it is declared either the evening of the same day or in the course of the
following day. The votes are counted in each district immediately after the poll is closed,
iu the presence of the Scrutineers, who are a check on the Returning Officer and on each
ither. Fraud on the part of the authorities engaged is thus rendered impossible. The
Victoria Ballot system therefore removes one of the usual objections to the Ballot, viz.,
t iat the Returning Officer may alter the votes aftei they are placed in the ballot-box.
Bach candidate is empowered to nominate a Scrutineer, who has the opportunity of
seeing that the ballot-box, when it is locked up and placed for the reception of the votes,
is empty, and he is present during the whole proceedings, until the close of the poll
He therefore has an opportunity of preventing unqualified and unregistered persons voting, '
and sees the votes placed in the box, and at the close of the poll sees the box opened, and
checks the counting of the votes. The voter is thus secured that his vote is not tampered
with by the Returning Officer, and he is shielded from the pressure of undue influence,
while fraudulent conduct on his part is equally prevented, for under no circumstances
can the voter obtain a second voting-paper, or leave the ballot-room with his paper.
The result of the election, for the Colony of Victoria, is thus summed up in the
Melbourne Argus of the 27th September, 1856: "In fact there is no use mincing matters ;
" the Ballot here is a perfectly successful mode of securing the sense of a constituency,
" in accordance with the spirit of free institutions ; and our English readers may rest
" pretty well assured that any one v:ho objects to the Ballot is beset with a desire to tamper
" with the voles of those who may be in his power. It is all very well to surround the sub-
" ject with a great deal of mystery and false argument which have nothing to do with it.
" But the real question resolves itself into what we have stated, and the friends of the
" Ballot in England should make their arrangments accordingly. The Ballot here is a
" brilliant success."
To the same effect is the universal testimony of the Victorian press. Private testimony
corroborates it. Mr. James McFall, in a letter to The Manchester Examiner and Times,
says, " the Ballot is a true reflex of public opinion ; for nothing but the Ballot could have
" thrown out the three unsuccessful candidates for the Central Province. In the next
" place, it effectually prevents bribery, corruption, intimidation, treating, and all un-
" necessary excitement and excess, and it saves a candidate from those ruinous expenses
"to which he is subjected under the old system. Allow me to tell all my old friends of
" the working classes, it is my firm belief that the Ballot is of more importance to them i
" than the remaining five points of the People's Charter."
A private letter says, " I hope, before another general election in England, you will have
" followed our example and introduced the Ballot. I was one of those who advocated it,
" but without any great expectation from it. I must say, however, that its advantages are
" far greater than I had looked for. It has led to the abandonment of canvassing, the
" abolition of cabs, &c., for bringing up voters, and all the touting by lawyers, agents, and
" subordinates on the day of election. The business of the polling-booth goes on as
" quietly as business ought to go on, and the only excitement is in the evening, when
" the result of the poll is looked for at the committee-rooms, for the Returning Officer
" and Scrutineers make up their numbers at once, and as each candidate has a Scrutineer,
" he, of course, furnished his committee with the numbers at once. 'Tis a first-rate
" invention, I assure you."
The Ballot has worked equally well in the other Australian Colonies. Tasmanian elections
have been contests, not of influence, but of principles. This is illustrated by an address of
Mr. R. Strahan, in reply to a requisition from the electors of Clarence District, taken from
the Colonial Times , 16th September, 1856 : "I consider election by Ballot as tending
"to ' put the right man in the right place.' With every acknowledgment, therefore, for
" the promise of your votes, I beg to release you individually from your pledge, and will
" trust to your discrimination at the Ballot to vote for him who, you conscientiously
" believe, will best promote the welfare of Tasmania and the interest of our district."
A private letter from Hobart Town, the capital of Tasmania, says, " The Ballot system
" has been adopted here, and succeeds admirably, much to the disappointment of certain
" classes who benefited by the old style of electioneering."
Finally, in South Australia the Ballot is equally successful. A letter published in the
Bristol Gazette says, " In your last letter, you ask my opinion of the working of the Ballot
"in this colony. lam happy to say it proved completely successful: so well were all
" parties satisfied with it, that I do not think there are a hundred persons who would wish
" the old system of open voting restored. The whole of the elections passed off in peace
" and quietness. Ido not think it cost the whole of the candidates as much as it did one
"on the previous system. I am satisfied that if the people of England could have seen
" the orderly and respectable way in which our elections were conducted, they would hail
" the Ballot as one of the greatest blessings."
Reformers, the Ballot has been, with the sanction of the Queen, on the advice of
her Ministers, established in our Australian Colonies ; yet we are told that it would be
un-English, immoral, and unconstitutional to adopt the Ballot at home : but the Ballot
cannot be un-English, immoral, and unconstiiutional at home, and English, moral, and
constitutional in other parts of the empire. Let us therefore unite and use every exertion
to obtain for those whose votes are to them a mockery, a delusion, and a snare, the
invaluable safeguard and protection of the Ballot.
Jssued by the Society for Promoting the Adoption of the Vote by Ballot, 5, Guildhall Chambers, Basinghall Street, London, E.C., and 12, Ne wall's Buildings, Manchester.
