

AUSTRALASIAN ASSOCIATION FOR THE
ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCE.
SYDNEY SESSION, 1898.
FACT AND IDEA,
C. J. BRENNAN, M.A.
Read before the Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science ,
January, 1898.
33665 (4,1)




FACT AND IDEA.
By C. J. Brennan, M.A.
(Bead before the Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science,
Tuesday, January 11, 1898.)
§ Cogitatur is the most comprehensive statement of the
Universe.
The ordinary view of the world, which every man daily makes
use of and assumes, may be shortly expressed thus : space-occupying
bodies whereof one is mine, on theonehand • on theother, awareness
of these bodies and various feelings in relation to them, this
awareness and these feelings forming a unity of consciousness,
mine. The last concept of this phase of consciousness, the final
statement of this view, is the separation of the whole into two
divisibilia, two disparates—Matter and Mind ; whereupon, the old
metaphysical scruple—How came this world here ?—insinuates
itself under this form ; How then can one disparate know the
other ?
From the point of view just analysed, no answer can be given ;
the question can merely be stated. Deeper analysis removes the
scruple altogether, seeing that the view of the world from which
it arises is not final, secondly that it is a division; for not
merely does it make a crude distinction between phenomena
merely according to the category of space, but it sets asunder
what it found united. How shall they be again united, unless
we first abandon our arbitrary division 1 For a knowing subject,
the final view of things must be based on knowledge. However
true it may be that, taking space as basis of our analysis, knower
is here and known is there, distinct and divisible ; from the stand-
point of knowledge, knower and known are united, distinct hut
indivisible, mutually necessary and inseparable. Everything
objective has its subjective aspect; every thing is also a feeling •
otherwise, for knowledge, it would not exist. And it is for
knowledge, for consciousness, that we analyse.
The phase of consciousness which yields us subject and object
as inseparable aspects of the one phenomenon is technically known
as Reflection. Cogitatur—it is known, it thinks —we have no
impersonal verb of the kind—is its expression ; and observe,
nothing more is necessary, For cogito , I think , merely expresses
336 65 (41)


the unity and continuity in time of the subjective aspect, which,
along with its objective aspect, becomes object in Reflection, and,
at the same time, its separation from the object. This mode of
consciousness—direct, as it is called —must justify itself by reflec-
tive. In reflection there is no self-consciousness; hut reflection is the
basis of self-consciousness. Preceding reflection there is a mode
of consciousness—primary, as we observe it in the child—wherein
the subjective aspect has not yet become object; but reflection
has not to justify itself by this mode, seeing that it alone makes
explicit what was implicit in the latter—makes real its poten-
tiality ; whereas the division and separation performed by direct
consciousness presupposes and assumes the distinction performed
by reflection.
Reflection is the decisive mode of all consciousness.
§ The world in primary consciousness is one, and everything
given therein is real. Reflection shows the ground of this reality,
in that the real is given, hut given in consciousness.
There is, however, another kind of question as to reality, which
arises in direct consciousness—another form of the old metaphy-
sical scruple, Cartesian doubt. It begins and ends in direct
consciousness : its last word is cogito, las object to myself cannot
be other than real; but these other things. . . 1
But these other things are given in consciousness ! Even a
sense-hallucination is a reality, as such ; reflection cannot shake
it. Its rejection is the result of a judgment, delivered according
to the evidence of full consciousness directed by attention; its
persistence or non-persistence for full consciousness determines its
secondary reality or unreality.
Here we reach the question—-How certain things can be more
real to consciousness, apart fro?n their reality to mere awareness, or
reflection, in answer to what demands they are more real? Simply,
the human procedure with regard to reality. Why do we choose
and reject—on what authority ?
Is it not plain that the authority must lie in consciousness, be
other than mere awareness (Wahrnehmung) 1
Consider a moment our judgment with regard to error—hallu-
cination. Reality—on what else does it depend except on our
awareness, on its presence in our consciousness ? Not on its
duration in our consciousness; for how many fleeting things do we
hold for real 1 and how indeed can five minutes more or less
affect reality where duration is infinite ? We simply reverse the
verdict of plain consciousness.
Have we not here an indication that man shapes his reality for
himself out of some indifferent brutum ? Do we not find reason
to suspect that he is led thereto by his longing for stability ?


The existence of error in the world is indeed a suggestive
question. Why error ? Is it that reality depends on man and
his search for it ? Or is it that the unreal, the misleading, the
erroneous, which we gradually set aside, are the only actual
world ; that man never comes into touch with the true reality ;
that he must seek another real—or another error—which will
better suit him—his interests ?
§ Yes, the human procedure is a modification of reality—say,
rather, a substitution of humanity for reality.
The Fact is not the object alone—to make the mere object the
fact is already a human process—and contains not merely feeling
as awareness, but feeling as emotion ; for an emotion is the
subjective aspect of the object, and there is no object in the
universe which does not excite, invariably, some emotion. The
fact is one : we break it up.
The first action of direct consciousness is to separate conscious-
ness, and more particularly emotion, from its object; and our every-
day habit is to look upon this latter residue as the fact, whilst
ignoring the subjective side, and, above all, never dreaming that
the emotions form an indispensable aspect of the phenomenon.
Perhaps, in this, we are belying the motive which led to the
separation of Mind and Matter as empirical objects; which separa-
tion, following the discovery of Feeling in reflection, was surely
no homage to the solidity of the outer world—rather, say, the pulling
of itself together by consciousness in face of the object: whereupon
follows the ordinary world-view, since consciousness finds itself
united to a body which is to it a matter of great interest.
Otherwise, why this division of the world into Matter and Mind 1
Was there not many another possible line of section ?
Or otherwise : since all things are in the primary sense real, and
since consciousness is the test of this reality, why, in establishing
this secondary distinction of real and unreal, of which conscious-
ness is the sole arbiter, ignore a certain part of consciousness,
because of its apparent disconnection with the material objects
which occupy space 1 Are we not, in making this conception our
basis of reality, granting everything to a set of interests, pressing,
in regard to this body which belongs to us 1 Logical reason for
such standpoint there is none : interest is the key of the
situation.
Standpoints—from many such do we deal with the world after
our separation of its subjective and objective aspects. Each point
of view is arbitrary : it is the strategic position of a certain
interest—is not Occam’s famous razor merely the expression of a
mental need for clearness I —directing the attention towards its


object. Attention directed by interest—that is, the force which
sets in motion the whole machinery of human thought and
endeavour.
As has been said, we break up the fact. We abstract the
subjective aspect; the objective remains poorer. We further break
up our abstracter, according to each varying interest. Do we not
thereby limit the range of our possible conclusions ? Whereupon
I ask ; Is this not merely the necessary -npoSpo/xos to some further
reunion, determined by the unity of interests'? Is it not the search
after another, fuller Fact ? That we must so proceed with the
world as we do, shows—that it does not recognise our interests :
the objective world is fixed and firm; they not. Are we not aiming
at a transformation of it, wherein their importance shall be as
absolute a fact as the existence of this sheet of paper 1
The question brings to light a certain human doubt, —Am 1... ?
We shall recur to it later on.
§The procedure of the abstract intellect, by its very simplicity,
is a good example of the way in which man remoulds reality in
answer to his interests.
The starting-point of the intellect is the concept. The form of
the intellect is the same as that of perception : the concept is
formed out of reality, but rejects all phases of the latter which
are not required for the satisfaction of the interest in question.
Thus, for several phases of reality, meeting in various ways in
different objects, we have a set of concepts, formed by the atten-
tion singling out each phase from all the objects in which it occurs.
The unity of the object, already detached from the unity of Fact,
is broken up according to the variety of interests, whose unity is
that of consciousness. And it is this unity of consciousness, whose
form is infinite duration, that gives the final unity and justification
to all our voluntary modification of the world—intellectual, moral,
aesthetic.
The modification is equivalent to a recreation.
One procedure—that of the intellect ‘with regard to spatial
perception, otherwise material bodies—demands, at the present
moment, attention.
The bodies are regarded as apart from all human feeling ; and
their properties are measured by certain standards of space and
time—standards absolute only in so far as they are purely
arbitrary.
They being converted into concepts, the concepts of their inter-
action (otherwise laws) are sought, with this aim—to reduce them
to a unity : an ideal, is it not ?
Observing certain interactions of complete empirical bodies,
the intellect extends these laws into the infinite, transforming,


ideally, those aspects of bodies which are the objects of the visual,
auditory, olfactory, caloric senses into results of the object of our
crudest sense—that which contains for us the most interest from
the point of view of ourselves as space-occupying bodies—Touch.
Time was, when this transformation was attempted from another
standpoint; but the strongest interest in this domain of space-
occupying bodies has, as was only right, gained the day.
What stronger proof, from another side, of the intellectual
need to obtain a conceptual unity in this matter selected and re-
arranged according to a physical need, than the reduction of the
object of Touch, Resistance, to a minimum, an Atom, colourless,
odourless, tasteless, without light, and without heat, perfectly hard
and perfectly elastic, unfelt, unloved, unhated, not regarded as a
reality, yet used as a concept explanatory of all this full and rich
world of colour, sound, taste and odour, light and heat, which we
love and hate, fear and live in, with whose skies and tempers our
feelings seem inwoven ; —what other is it than the Ideal, set in the
void and formless infinite, to represent an Idea—that of material
nature reduced to concept, and spied out by thought in all her
forms ? If we endowed an atom with all attributes, still it would
in the last resort only satisfy the intellect, conceiving even this
possible, being used as an intellectual explanation of these attri-
butes existing phenomenally. Further, it would frustrate the
spirit of ideal progress, which here would be barred by a rigid
absolute, devoid of mystery and wonder.
One thing is plain—that this induction of sensory phenomena
to the effects of various interactions, measured by arbitrary stan-
dards, of arbitrary minima of resistance-offering matter, is per-
formed by the intellect (since this cannot choose its points of
view) in response to two interests : one, the instinct of physical
self-preservation, here voicing its crude concept of all action as
absolute spatial contact; the other, a need of intellectual unity in
the world—its conformance to our thought.
Truth itself, so much worshipped by this century—what is it but
an Ideal 1 For it is not the declaration of such and such a phase
of reality, but the perfect accord of our concepts, that constitutes
it; and just the nature of the universe, the nature of the subject,
that their form is infinite duration, makes it an ideal. While the
test of primary Reality is the one moment of consciousness, with-
out appeal, that of all secondary Reality, consequently of Truth,
is for ever eluding us. The congruity of our concepts is at every
fresh moment a matter for re-examination, since the perceptual
order continually offers fresh matter for fresh phases of thought.
Thus it is that the first concept is the beginning of a journey in
infinitum.
Here we might cast a short glance at the fundamental canon of
this procedure, that of causation : in which, setting aside the


notion of Force—a notion, it may be remarked, rather derived
from the fictive power of the mind, thus a metaphor for all our
treatment of reality, than from our sense of muscular exertion—
setting this aside, we find two necessary notions, Necessity and
Uniformity.
Necessity arises from our consciousness of the formal element,
Time ; every phenomenon must have an antecedent.
Uniformity—absolutely necessary for science, thus showing
that this latter aims at being something more than mere registra-
tion of objective sequences—must, as a concept, be justified by the
material element. Flame and water do not mingle —Natura non
facit saltum. Yes; but who will guarantee the non faciet?
The only answer that one can give is that the concepts of an
established sequence—flame and heat—are mutually inclusive ; or,
of the opposite—flame and water —mutually exclusive. But . . .
The concepts have been drawn from experience !
Or, I may be told that all phenomena arc manifestations of one
law, one reality—phases of atomic grouping ; but the atom does
not explain its particular appearances ; even if it be endowed
with all the qualities manifested therein, it does not explain (ah !
note what we require) why this rather than that—is, in fact,
wily a mark of your and my need for an Absolute.
And finally, that our assumptions work well, are justified by
practice ; to conclude therefrom as to their truth, what is it but
a further assumption as to a harmony existing between our daily
practice and the nature of Truth (eternal, as we must think her) ?
—the last ineradicable assumption, presumption, or delusion of
humanity.
We are all following the Chinuera.
§ Here we might arbitrarily end our survey of the human
procedure; the moral and aesthetic processes testify more clearly
as to its nature. We have seen man everywhere at work
modifying—what? we cannot say—since the human procedure
reaches down into perception and sensation. It would be too
much presumption even to say that he works on an indifferent.
Something is given, something is brute fact; but does not that
very word “ brute” denote its distance from us 1 (Is not brute
fact, perhaps, another of our myths ?) Fact first exists for us
when our interests lead us to set a value on something; and when
does this valuation fii’st begin 1 None can say ; it is involved in
the simplest act of consciousness.
What, then, does it signify to be true to fact 1 To be true to
one’s own most lasting interests. The man who is at all costs
true to brute hard fact, as he says, what else is he doing than
allowing his rigid honesty to dominate all other instincts ?


We have further seen—important fact—how consciousness has
broken up its own unity, that it might become more fully aware
of its different interests, each by each, and use them in turn as
means to remodel the world. We have seen also how unsatis-
factory were the results of each isolated process; and, in truth,
were it not futile to remain in this divided state ?
Surely, all has been just so much preparation to some greater
synthesis—the complete humanisation of the Universe, when man
shall have attained complete knowledge of himself—how many
assumptions are here involved ? (is man, then, something stable 1 ?)
§ Man’s task is to spiritualise, idealise, humanise—the terms
are all equivalent: is not human pride here evident ?—to humanise
the world ; and the challenge proceeds from the Infinite.
Our negative consciousness of the infinite, the void, inane
profiundum has for emotional aspect the aspiration, or more than
aspiration; I, the Human, ought to he there —to fill that void ;
or, since in the Infinite we can only live Here and How, to feel
that we stand in some satisfactory natural relation with Eternity,
our most certain environment; to feel that we are indeed here
and now in the place where we should be : and as reverse side of
this—for all aspiration has its reverse side—the old doubt, Ought I?
am I fit ?
This existent objective universe in all its solidity—and yet this
solidity is, perhaps, to a great extent our work—infinite by one
at least of the cognitive forms, belongs to us—or rather we belong
to it by a certain side of our nature ; by another we seek to
establish ourselves above it, as we, by the other and more abstract
cognitive form, belong to infinity.
What is the emptiness that terrifies us in the infinite 1 We
cannot be more swallowed up, more lost in boundless Time and
Space, than we are this very Here and Now. What we fear
is that the Idea of the Infinite may be found incompatible with
the Idea of the Human.
Yet we aspire.
It is the moment of thought that redresses the wavering balance.
To see ourselves sub specie aeternitatis, all human interests
being united and the whole Human set over against the world,
to take the last values and decide what it is that accords with
Eternity—what it is that deserves to last; such is the reconciliation,
such is our deliverance ; the moment of Thought, no trimming of
fear-bred tales.
We cannot always content ourselves with fragments. When
we broke up the old unity and framed the first concept, we began
that journey towards the last Unity of World and Human, the
great Fact and Idea in one, made up of all those countless rapports


between ourselves and Nature, which we now separately follow out.
Such separate maimed human processes are only justifiable as
Vorsiufen to this synthesis.
Whatever image we make to ourselves of this Idea is called by
a name soiled by all ignoble usage—the Ideal. Every human
attempt at humanisation of the Universe Las hitherto shaped its
Ideal, and by the satisfaction which this afforded—not necessarily
to the mass—has justified itself ; but all have hitherto been found
imperfect, sometimes perverse. To offer me the atom as a satis-
factory ideal, as the trophy of a real human victory—how perverse!
For what trouble does it cost to find the link between us and outer
things, the interest we feel towards them, by refining on which
this spectre is conjured up 1
If not time and space, at least power is lacking to adumbrate
that Idea. Yet we are not left without some indication of that
state in which it would be given in direct intuition, where thought
would be like quivering flame, inseparable from sense, emotion, and
imagination. Of such perfect Life all beautiful things by their
perfection—limited, ’tis true —are the fitting symbols, and the
creators of Beauty in all its shapes the fitting prophets. The Eden-
thought, the dream of a Golden Age, strangely offered to an
unimaginative century in the shape of a philosophy which denied
reason, civilisation, progress, is never absent.
To say, with that prophet and others, that our present imperfect
life is a disease, were, perhaps, too glaring a substitution of Idea
for Fact, an exaggeration, a reductio ad absurdum of the Human
Procedure—the Human Fallacy, as we might cheerfully agree to
call it.
Sydney : William Applegate Qullick, Government Printer. —1899.
8
SECTION J.


■■■■. - viv. ■;v ■
■
,


