

FACTORY
PLANNING
PART I
SOME ASPECTS AFFECTING
WORKING CONDITIONS
Commonwealth of Austratia
DEPARTMENT OF LABOUR AND NATIONAL SERVICE




FACTORY
PLANNING
PART 1
SOME ASPECTS AFFECTING WORKING CONDITIONS
BULLETIN NO. 8
Industrial Welfare Division
DEPARTMENT OF LABOUR AND NATIONAL SERVICE
Commonwealth of Australia
1945


PUBLICATIONS
Industrial Welfare Division
DEPARTMENT OF LABOUR AND NATIONAL SERVICE
BULLETINS
1. Industrial Lighting
3. The Australian Foundry, Working Conditions and How to Improve Them
4. Planning Hours of Work
5. Amenities in Wartime Factories
6. Atmospheric Conditions in Australian Textile Mills
7. Australian Textile Mills, A Guide to Good Working Conditions
8. Factory Planning, Part I, Some Aspects Affecting Working Conditions
MANUALS
1. Planning Cafeterias for Australian Industry, Part I (Price 3s. 6d.)
2. Standard Recipes for Industrial Cafeterias (Price 10s.)
3. Operating Cafeterias in Australian Industry*
TECHNICAL REPORTS
1. Dust Hazards in Australian Foundries
2. Tetryl Dermatitis, Its Incidence and Control
3. Some Observations, on Natural Ventilation, Air Movement, and Factory Design *
BOOKLETS
1. How to Reduce Absenteeism and Increase Production (Price 25.)
2. A.B.C. of Factory Ventilation *
3. Industrial Accident Records, Their Compilation and Use*
LEAFLETS
2. Oil Dermatitis: Cause, Prevention and Treatment
5. The Clothing Trades, How to Provide Good Conditions
6. Casualty Treatment in Wartime Industry
7. Personnel and Welfare Officers in Industry: What They Do
8. Working Conditions and Welfare in Food Processing Factories
10. Course of Training as Personnel and Welfare Officer in Industry
12. Industrial Cafeteria Advisory Committees, Model Constitution
Publications may be secured on application to the Department of Labour and National Service,
Nicholas Building, 37 Swanston Street, Melbourne; Prudential Building, 39 Martin Place, Sydney;
Bank of New South Wales Chambers, 2 King William Street, Adelaide; Alliance Assurance
Building, 70 Eagle Street, Brisbane; Foy’s Building, 765 Hay Street, Perth; and Bank of Australasia
Building, 29 Elizabeth Street, Hobart.
*In preparation


CONTENTS
Introduction
I. Lighting Page
A. Daylight ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... - 6
1. Windows and Roof-Lights ... ... ... ... ... 6
2. Avoidance of Glare ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6
3. Standards of Illumination 7
4. Maintenance 8
B. Artificial Lighting .. ... ... ... ... ... ... 8
1. Quantity of Light 8
2. Quality of Light 8
3- Fluorescent Lighting 10
4. Maintenance 11
5. Planning Lighting Installations 11
C. Colour ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... - 11
1. General ... 11
2. Typical Recommended Colours ... ... ... ... ... 11
11. Ventilation, Cooling and Heating
A. General Basis ... 13
1. Air Temperature, Relative Humidity and Air-Movement ... 14
B. Ventilation ... „ - 14
1. Natural Ventilation 14
2. Mechanical Ventilation ... 16
C. Cooling and Heating 18
■ i 1. Evaporative Cooling ... ... ... ... ... ... 18
2. Air Conditioning 19
3- Heating 19
D. Effects of Climate 22
E. Removal of Dust and Fumes ... ... ... ... ... ... 23
111. Lay-Out, Construction, and Equipment
A. Lay-Out and Construction - 23
1. Position of Amenities 25
2. Traffic and Access ... ... ... ... - - 27
3. Isolation of Processes 29
4. Floors 29
5. Walls and Roofs - 32
6. Reduction of Noise ... ... - 32
7. Accident Prevention 33
8. Factory Grounds ... - - - - 34
B. Items of Equipment 35
1. Seating, Work-Benches, and Posture 35
2. Drinking-Water 38




PLANNING FOR ECONOMY AND EFFICIENCY
IN POSE-WAR FACTORIES
THE twenty-six million pounds spent in Australia on industrial buildings
during the war years may yet prove to be one of the country’s best invest-
ments. Far above the value to industry of much-needed modernisation of
many of its factories, is the accumulation of knowledge and development of
technical skill that can contribute much to post-war efficiency.
The design of industrial buildings was not among the things to which
competent technical attention had previously been given on a wide scale in
this country. It had not, for instance, received anything like the attention that
had been given to the development of industrial processes. In any case, the
urgent demand of wartime production in five years afforded more oppor-
tunities for experience than had occurred in the previous twenty years or more.
There are few who would suggest that all features of the hundreds of
wartime factory buildings were good; least of all perhaps the men who
designed them and since have been able to observe them in operation. Time
may show that some of the buildings were too costly for the industries they
were to house, and that others were too cheap. There are also buildings which
demonstrate all too clearly the fact that examples of industrial design which
have gained approval in the United States or Great Britain do not necessarily
prove satisfactory in the entirely different conditions found in Australia.
The realisation of the climatic differences of the various parts of this
country may alone mean enormous savings for Australian industry, both in
capital outlay and operating costs. For the natural advantages of our climate
afford excellent opportunities for developing to a much greater extent the use
of natural light and natural ventilation, as well as contributing in other ways
to the health and efficiency of factory workers.
We are learning from our experience that factories can be designed to
suit the needs not only of the process but also of the operative. It is in this
direction that the greatest advance may be expected in the immediate post-war
period, as architects and engineers join with production men to design factories
with due regard to the fact that it is the men and women who work in them
who will, in the long run, mean the difference between failure and success.
This bulletin records Australian experience in some aspects of factory
design affecting working conditions. It is based on technical investigation
carried out in all States. Acknowledgment is made to the large number of
manufacturers and others throughout Australia who, in a number of ways,
have assisted in its preparation.
R. G. BAXTER,
Director.
INDUSTRIAL WELFARE DIVISION,
Department of Labour and National Service,
Melbourne, October, 194 b.


I. LIGHTING
A. Daylight
THERE are at present no simple for-
mulas that can be used in designing
industrial buildings to ensure satis-
factory natural lighting, but considerable
work is now being undertaken on this sub-
ject. Pending investigations by the Stand-
ards Association of Australia, and pub-
lication of the results, some provisional
standards can be recommended for adop-
tion.
1. Windows and Roof-Lights
Most of the State Factories Acts require
that every work-room should have win-
dows or roof-lights opening to the external
air. It is preferable that sufficient of these
should be openable to comply with the
requirements for controllable ventilation
as referred to in Section II of this bulletin.
In the interests of good natural ventila-
tion, openable windows in walls are desir-
able, even in factories where sawtooth or
monitor roofs provide sufficient light.
In the majority of modern factories with
sawtooth lighting, it is common to find the
glass area in the roof equal to 20 or 25
per cent of the floor-area.
In calculating glass areas, sill level
should be assumed to be not lower than
that of the working plane (usually at
about 3 ft. 3 in. from the floor), and any
glass below that level should be dis-
regarded. The glass area should receive as
much unobstructed light from the sky as
possible; if any external object of appreci-
able width extends above a line projected
from sill level to 15 degrees above the
horizontal, it should be considered an ob-
struction, and the window area should be
increased above the minimum to compen-
sate for it. Where work-rooms are lit by
windows in the walls (as distinct from
overhead lighting from sawtooth and roof-
lights), the window heads should be as
near the ceiling as possible to ensure the
maximum penetration of daylight into the
rooms. It can generally be assumed that
daylight will be inadequate at any place
where the sky is not visible from the work-
ing plane, or where the distance from the
nearest window is greater than twice the
height from floor-level to the head of the
window.
Messrooms, change-rooms, wash-rooms,
water-closet and urinal compartments (or
rooms containing water closets or urinals),
casualty rooms and rest-rooms should have
windows or roof-lights with a glass area of
not less than one-tenth of the floor-area,
but no window should be less than two
square feet in area.
2. Avoidance of Glare
Direct sunlight inside buildings is warm
and cheerful, but as workers usually can-
not change their positions, it results in eye
fatigue due to the high brightness of sunlit
objects and the strong contrast between
them and other objects in shadow. Win-
dows in sawtooth roofs should, therefore,
preferably be planned to face south.
To take full advantage of natural ven-
tilation, factory buildings in most parts of
Australia should have openable windows
on all sides, although narrow buildings
having windows on two opposite sides
have been found satisfactory when pro-
perly orientated with regard to prevailing
winds. Steps should be taken, however, to
control and diffuse direct sunlight by the


Fig. 1. The sawtooth roof in this machine-shop gives an area of glass equal to 22½ per cent of the floor-area.
The clear height between floor and box gutter is 18 feet, and the height of the glass is 9 feet; each bay is
40 feet wide. One-quarter of the total window area is openable. Windows in the walls increase the natural
lighting of the outer areas, a space of 80 feet being maintained between all buildings on the site. Unit heaters
are used to maintain a satisfactory working temperature in winter.
Photo: General Motors-Holden’s Ltd., Fishermen’s Bend, Vic.
screening of all windows exposed to the
sun, particularly those facing north or
west. This may be done by adjustable
louvres, fixed slatted shades, external
Venetian blinds, etc. Light-coloured trans-
lucent blinds that pull up from the bottom
will screen work-tasks near the windows
from direct sunlight, without seriously re-
ducing the penetration of daylight to the
far side of the room from the tops of the
windows.
However, where windows are exposed
to strong sunlight in hot weather the blinds
should be outside, in order to shade the
glass. This is an important factor in keep-
ing down the air temperature inside a
building. Care should be taken that the
blinds do not obstruct the ventilation.
It is desirable for work to be so arranged
in relation to windows that workers will
face neither the light nor sunlit external
surfaces. Diffusion of sunlight by means
of figured glass is not the solution to the
glare problem, as the glass itself becomes
dazzling.
3. Standards of Illumination
If, during fairly dull winter afternoons,
the natural illumination at any place where
work is done is lower than the minima set
out in the Standards Association of Aus-
tralia Code for the Interior Illumination
of Buildings, 1 then artificial lighting
should be installed in accordance with
these requirements.
2 As incorporated during wartime in the National
Security (Standards of Lighting) Regulations.


Fig. 2. Bands of direct sunlight from the roof would constitute a serious visual hazard, if exacting visual work
were required, because of the strong contrast between sunlit objects and their surroundings. Buildings can be
designed to avoid this.
4. Maintenance
It is important that structural arrange-
ments are provided for cleaning windows,
and give safe access to both sides of saw-
tooth and monitor glazing. Ventilation
systems can be planned so that fumes and
smoke do not pass over the glass of'
windows.
B. Artificial Lighting
Where artificial light is needed to sup-
plement daylight or where night work is
done, the following points should be
observed:
1. Quantity of Light
Sufficient light must be provided for
the work-task. This will vary from 5-10
foot-candles for rough work up to 25-50
foot-candles for fine and exacting work,
according to a detailed schedule in the
S.A.A. Code No. (E) CA 501—1942.
Measurements can be made with a light
meter, a small appliance used by most
electrical contractors or merchants.
Sufficient light must be provided on the
surroundings as well as on the work-task.
It has been found that the continual ad-
justments of the eyes as they range be-
tween brightly lighted work-tasks and
gloomy surroundings result in eye fatigue.
The S.A.A. Code, therefore, calls for il-
lumination of surroundings to be not less
than one-fifth of the illumination of the
task itself, and in no case less than 5 foot-
candles.
2. Quality of Light
Direct glare should be avoided from ex-
posed lamps in working-areas and reflected


Figs. 3 and 4. A comparison of these two photographs illustrates the effectiveness of light-coloured Venetian
blinds in controlling and diffusing direct sunlight. Compare the strong, eye-fatiguing contrasts between the sunlit
objects and those sections of the work-room in shadow in the top photograph with the evenly-diffused, comfort-
able light in the photograph below. (The fluorescent fittings shown are not alight.) Pastel-coloured walls and
ceiling are good reflectors. Low-temperature, electrical tubular heaters are arranged continuously under all benches.
Photos: Vicks Pty. Ltd., Melbourne.


Fig. 5. Production increased and accidents declined in
this machine-shop following the installation of a well-
designed system of lighting. 200-watt inside-frosted
lamps give 12 foot-candles on the task. Light-coloured
floors, walls and ceiling are a feature of this plant.
Photo: Litchfield Engineering Co. Ltd., Adelaide.
Fig. 6. Where continuous production depends on
speedy, accurate seeing, eye-strain must be reduced to
a minimum with good, comfortable lighting. In this
spinning-room, fluorescent lighting gives 12 foot-
candles of light without glare on the work-task.
Photo: Bond’s Industries Ltd., Sydney.
glare from smooth or polished surfaces.
It is important that in working-areas all
lamps should be fitted with properly de-
signed reflectors or diffusing fittings, or
otherwise shaded from view. Reflectors
must screen lamps down to an angle of
at least 20 degrees below the horizontal,
and for lamps of 300 watts and over,
mounted below 20 feet from the floor, not
less than 30 degrees. Large lamps of 500
watts or equivalent must not be used in
open-type reflectors if mounted less than
14 feet from the floor. Local lights that
can be adjusted to different positions on
machines should have a specially deep re-
flector to screen the lamp from the view
both of the operator and of those in the
vicinity.
Where diffusing fittings are used, direct
glare will result if the area of diffusing
glass is insufficient, or if the lamp is too
close to the glass.
Reflected glare is almost as fatiguing as
direct glare, and can easily be avoided by
the use of diffused lighting in place of
open-type reflectors, when tasks on ma-
terial of a shiny or glossy nature are being
carried out.
3. Fluorescent Lighting
Special steps have been taken during the
war to make fluorescent lighting equip-
ment available to essential establishments.
Equipment may be obtained from distri-
butors for exacting visual tasks in work-
ing-areas.
The value of fluorescent lighting in pro-
viding first-class seeing conditions has
sometimes been reduced by the practice
of installing the lighting fittings over
machines, benches, etc., with no upward
light to dispel the darkness of upper areas.
This effect of gloom above should be
guarded against, and if necessary auxiliary


lighting installed to light the general
surroundings.
4. Maintenance
Lighting systems should be maintained
in an efficient condition. Illumination can
easily be reduced to a small fraction of
the original value if the lighting fittings
and lamps are allowed to become dirty, if
walls and ceilings become darkened, if
burnt-out lamps are not replaced, or over-
aged lamps are kept in use. Routine atten-
tion can be given to these things, especi-
ally to regular cleaning, which should be
done at least every three months.
5. Planning Lighting Installations
In all factories where it is necessary
to work in artificial light, the standards
of the S.A.A. Code are recommended as a
minimum.' Further information is set out
in the Department’s bulletin "Industrial
Lighting,” and technical advice regarding
the planning of lighting installations is
obtainable from electrical supply under-
takings, architectural and engineering con-
sultants, electrical contractors and supply
merchants.
C. Colour
1. General
The colour of walls, ceilings, machines,
furniture, and work-surfaces is of great
importance to effective lighting. Light-
coloured surfaces reflect far more light
than dark ones and so help materially in
lighting the interior. Dark-coloured sur-
roundings are not only depressing and
gloomy, but also absorb much of the light
which is paid for in the electricity ac-
count. Dark-coloured surfaces contrast
strongly in brightness with well-lighted
work tasks and tend to cause visual dis-
comfort and eye-strain.
Ceilings are above the normal line of
vision and should be painted white to get
all possible benefit from reflected light.
For walls, however, white is too glaring.
They should be light in colour, and if
darker dadoes are considered essential for
maintenance, they should be kept as low
as possible and reasonably light in tone.
Large areas of strong colour, such as
bright red, yellow, or green, should always
be avoided. Floors are important reflectors
of light, and should be kept reasonably
light in colour. Near-white floors are some-
times provided in factories where work
has to be done on large underside hori-
zontal surfaces, but should be avoided for
most visual tasks.
2. Typical Recommended Colours
The principal paint manufacturers have
adopted a range of ten typical recom-
mended colours for interior industrial use. 2
For easy identification they are known to
the paint trade as C.I. ("Commonwealth
Industrial”) Colours.
There are six light colours (reflection
factor 60 to 75 per cent), light grey, light
green, light blue, buff, warm buff, and
sunshine cream, and four medium colours
(reflection factor 25 to 40 per cent),
medium grey, medium green, medium
blue, and medium tan. The light colours
are used for walls and light-duty machines,
the medium colours for dadoes, heavy-
duty machines, and other surfaces subject
to wear.
Machines used in industry are generally
painted black or dark grey with shining
metal parts reflecting uncomfortable high-
lights. Wherever practicable, it will be
found an advantage to paint the main body
of the machines C.I. medium grey, or C.I.
medium green. Small machines, or ma-
-2 These colours are reproduced in the Department’s
bulletin "Industrial Lighting.”


Fig. 7. Light colours help to provide a high level of illumination throughout the working-area. Compare the
light-coloured machines on the right with the drab and light-absorbing effect of the machines on the left which
are shown before being painted in the standard light grey. The wooden floor and clearly-marked passage-ways are
a feature of this plant.
Photo: General Potors-Holden's Ltd., Fisbermen's Beand, Vic.
chines used on light-coloured goods may
be very effectively painted in C.I. sun-
shine cream, C.I. buff, or C.I. light green.
Colour can also be used for identifying
pipe lines and conduits, etc. [S.A.A. Code
No. (E) CA 503] and for drawing atten-
tion to fire-fighting appliances and other
emergency equipment. For these purposes
strong colours can be used but they should
not be applied continuously, nor should
they be so close to the work-task.as to be
distracting.
Paints with a semi-gloss finish are pre-
ferable to full-gloss paints which are apt
to reflect dazzling highlights. The latter,
which are easier to keep clean, should be
limited to areas where rough use makes
them specially desirable.
Most people recognise that light, clean
surroundings have a better effect on the
spirits than drabness and gloom. The use
of C.I. sunshine cream or C.I. warm buff
on the walls of a cold, sunless room can
impart a sense of warmth; in an area
where there are hot processes, C.I. light
blue, grey, or green will suggest coolness
and space and help to reduce the feeling
of discomfort.


II. VENTILATION, COOLING AND HEATING
A. General Basis
THE atmospheric conditions in a fac-
tory have a marked bearing on the
well-being of operatives and on the
efficiency of production.
The human body requires air to breathe
that is sufficiently pure to prevent respir-
atory health hazards and discomfort, and
atmospheric conditions that will readily
maintain normal temperature. Otherwise,
loss of working efficiency, and greater
liability to accidents will be experienced.
An adequate supply of fresh air is essen-
tial to prevent the accumulation of stale
human odours and tobacco smoke, and
also, by dilution, to minimise the transfer-
ence of air-borne infection from person to
person. Generally, these requirements are
met when the average fresh-air supply is
30 cubic feet per person per minute. In no
position in a factory should the fresh-air
supply be less than 20 cubic feet per per-
son per minute.
In naturally ventilated factories in Aus-
tralia, an adequate fresh-air supply is
usually obtained by compliance with the
State Factories Act, which stipulates a cer-
tain air-space per person, and the area of
ventilators to be installed in the walls and
roofs.
The special measures which must be
taken to avoid the contamination of the
air by dust, fumes, or gases, are outlined
later.
Under normal conditions the human
body maintains itself at a relatively con-
stant temperature. It takes in fuel in the
form of food and transforms it into heat
and energy. The amount of heat produced
is increased by die performance of mus-
cular work; the more strenuous the work,
the greater the production of heat. Con-
stant body temperature is maintained by
the dissipation of excess heat from the
surface of the body.
At low external temperatures the body
loses heat from the skin and the clothing
by direct contact or conduction and con-
vection to the air, and by radiation to
neighbouring objects. Heat can be lost by
these routes only as long as the temper-
ature of the air and of the surroundings
remains substantially below that of the
skin. As air temperatures rise, less heat can
be lost by this means, until ultimately a
state of equilibrium is reached at a tem-
perature between 90°F. and 96°F. An
increase in air temperature above this point
results in the surface of the body gaining
heat from the air. Evaporation of sweat
from the skin almost entirely regulates the
dissipation of heat from the body under
such conditions, and maintains body tem-
perature within normal limits. Loss of
heat by means of the evaporation of sweat
commences at air temperatures of about
70°F. in the case of persons at rest or per-
forming light work, and increases as tem-
perature rises. It commences at a lower
temperature in the case of strenuous exer-
cise or heavy work.
A danger point is reached when the
body can’ no longer prevent a rise in its
own temperature. Heat collapse and per-
manent damage to the body may occur
with high air-temperatures and humidities.
Even before these conditions are reached,
considerable discomfort is felt and human
efficiency falls to a low value. Similarly,
if the body is unable to generate sufficient


heat to prevent its temperature falling
below normal, discomfort and loss of effici-
ency are experienced and serious physi-
ological damage may be sustained.
1. Air Temperature, Relative Humidity
and Air-Movement
The three factors affecting the rate of
body-heat loss are air temperature, relative
humidity and air-movement.
The air temperature most suitable for
operatives naturally varies with the kind
of work being done. Higher temperatures
should be provided for sedentary workers
and lower temperatures where active phy-
sical work is undertaken. The range of
65°F. to 75°F. is most suitable for sedent-
ary workers, the lower figure being appro-
priate to winter and the higher figure to
summer. For active work, 60°F., or even
55°F. for heavy manual work, is recom-
mended as the minimum temperature for
winter conditions.
Relative humidity is of little practical
importance in winter, but in summer it
influences the readiness with which heat
may be lost through the evaporation of
perspiration. Air that is very humid will
not assist the transfer of heat from the
body as readily as air of low relative
humidity which has greater capacity for
absorption of moisture.
Air-movement has a great influence on
the transfer of body heat, and thus on com-
fort. Atmospheric conditions of high tem-
perature and relative humidity may be
offset by a high rate of air-movement.
This rate should never be less than 20 feet
per minute during cold weather, rising to
a practical maximum of 200 feet per min-
ute as the temperature and humidity in-
crease, or even more in tropical climates.
Air-movement does not necessarily imply
a steady stream in one direction but is
preferably an eddying or wafting motion
which surrounds the body in moving air
and so carries away the warm humid air
from the skin.
There are steps that can be taken to
minimise the entry and accumulation of
heat and moisture in the working-area
during hot weather and to conserve heat
during cold weather. The lining of walls
and particularly roofs with heat-insulating
material assists in modifying both summer
and winter temperatures by reducing the
rate of heat-flow in or out of the building.
The heating effect of windows exposed to
direct sunshine for many hours per day is
decreased by provision of awnings, shades,
solid-blade louvres, or blinds. These are
more effective when placed outside than
inside windows.
The working-areas of many factories are
made uncomfortable by the large quanti-
ties of heat and moisture liberated by pro-
cesses. In most cases the use of correctly-
designed exhaust systems or heat-radiation
shields will obviate this trouble.
B. Ventilation
1. Natural Ventilation
During hot weather, advantage can us-
ually be taken of the outside breezes to
provide good ventilationv inside a building.
This can be attained by opening doors,
windows, louvres, roof vents, and other
ventilators to permit the air to move right
through the working-area.
The effectiveness of this provision de-
pends largely upon the width of the build-
ing. In a wide building, or one with win-
dows on one side only, outside breezes will
be unable to penetrate the full width of
the room and "stuffiness” may then be felt
in inner areas, even when there are com-
plaints of "draughts” from people close to
the windows.


Fig. 8. Adjustable glass louvres of this type were first used in Queensland and are now being widely adopted
in other States. They make it possible to "open up the wall” to obtain full benefit of summer breezes, but can
be adjusted to suit cooler conditions or closed tight in winter. Where openings are in one wall only, satisfactory
ventilation and air-movement cannot be expected to penetrate more than about 30 feet into the work-room.
Whenever natural ventilation is depended upon, special care needs to be taken to avoid internal walls and
partitions that obstruct air-movement at the working-level.
Photo: Maxam Cheese Products Pty. Ltd., Brisbane
In general, it can be assumed that where
any factory with windows on one wall, or
on two contiguous walls only, is more than
30 feet wide or with windows on both
sides is more than 60 feet wide, the natural
ventilation will require some mechanical
assistance to provide sufficient air-move-
ment in warm weather. This may be pro-
vided by fans, punkahs, or other mechani-
cal devices.
A point often overlooked is that the pro-
vision of internal partitions to offices, etc.,
even when only to door-head height, will
prevent the effective movement of air from
open windows. A common mistake in plan-
rung is to place a range of offices or lav-
atories along the greater part of the out-
side walls, thereby preventing windows
from being used for ventilation of the
working-area.
In many industrial buildings in Australia
the ventilation openings provided in ac-
cordance with State Factories Acts are
sufficient to maintain air purity, but are
quite inadequate to provide good working
conditions during hot or humid weather.
Large areas of glass in walls are made
fixed instead of openable, and ventilation
openings are often located high in walls
instead of low down. High-level openings,


Fig. 9. Windows at bench height that open to permit a refreshing movement of air to circulate at the working-
level of the operatives contribute to both comfort and efficiency in warm weather. Two-thirds of the area of the
windows in this machine-shop may be opened or closed at will; the centre section of each window is designed
to provide hopper ventilation in cold weather. A proportion of the windows in the sawtooth roof can also be
opened when required.
Photo: Stokes & Sons Pty. Ltd., Melbourne.
such as those in sawtooth roofs, will not
by themselves create sufficient movement
of air to give comfort at the workers’ level
in warm weather. Outlet ventilators in
roofs are of little value unless adequate
inlet ventilators are provided at a low
level to permit circulation of air through
the working-area.
The provision of controllable ventilation
openings at low levels in the walls allows
the air to pass through the building and
provide suitable air-movement round the
workers. Half the area of these airways
should be between floor-level and a height
of 7 ft. 6 in. from the floor, and so ar-
ranged that there will be a passage of air
across all parts of the building. The areas
required vary with climatic conditions and
are discussed later.
The glass areas needed in walls and
roofs, as set out under heading, "Day-
light,” are in excess of the openable areas
recommended for ventilation. However,
the replacement of some fixed glass by
openable windows would materially im-
prove the ventilation of many factories.
During winter the ventilation openings,
except those required for the maintenance
of air purity, may be closed to minimise
heat loss and to reduce the air-movement
in the working-area. Special attention
should also be paid to the prevention of
draughts.
2. Mechanical Ventilation
Where satisfactory natural ventilation
cannot be obtained, or where better con-
ditions are required than are obtainable by
this means, consideration will be given to


the installation of mechanical ventilation
equipment.
A mechanical ventilation system implies
the use of various types of fans and associ-
ated equipment to produce the exchange
of air between the outside and inside of
a building and the distribution of air
within the building. Wnh such an instal-
lation a definite quantity of air is delivered
to or exhausted from selected points in
the building, under complete control and
independent of outside breezes or other
variable factors.
With the plenum system, air is drawn
from outside the building and delivered by
fan mechanism through ductwork to out-
lets or registers in selected positions in
the factory. The type and size of outlets
are calculated to give suitable distribution
of the air and rate of air-movement. By
this means, the necessary volume of air
is delivered where and how it is required.
The air thus brought into the building
finds escape through wall and roof open-
ings. The system is most applicable for
general ventilation of buildings for which
natural ventilation is inadequate to pro-
vide sufficient fresh air or air-movement.
By the addition of air filters, comparatively
dust-free air can be delivered into a
building.
An exhaust system is designed to with-
draw a known volume of air from the ap-
propriate points and to discharge this out-
side the building in a suitable place. It
may be installed to provide general work-
room ventilation by inducing the volume
of air exhausted to enter the building
through doors, windows, and other open-
ings and move across the working zone to
the inlets of the exhaust system. In design-
ing an exhaust system for general ventila-
tion, great care must be taken to prevent
the air from passing from the inlets direct
to the outlets without moving through
Fig. 10. Ideas about steel-framed windows have under-
gone considerable change in the last few years. Fixed
panes are now avoided except in air-conditioned build-
ings. Modern windows for other industrial buildings
provide a large proportion of openable sections, par-
ticularly at low levels, to permit the circulation of air
round the workers. Another lesson has been to avoid
as far as possible the obstruction of light and air that
results from placing amenity buildings, offices, and
stores on the outer walls of working-areas.
Photo: John Heine & Son Pty. Ltd., Sydney.
Fig. 11. Refreshing air from the ventilating unit cools
these operatives who are subject to radiant heat from
the presser. The dampers and louvres give control
of the volume and direction of the air delivery.
Photo: Hilton Hosiery Co. Pty. Ltd., Melbourne.


Fig. 12. Mechanical ventilation ensures comfortable air-movement in this building which is too wide for satis-
factory natural ventilation. A plenum system operated by a centrifugal fan in the basement delivers filtered air,
heated in winter, through a system of ductwork. The outlets are designed to distribute the air throughout the
working-area. The roof lining used here assists not only in maintaining satisfactory temperatures, but also in the
reflection of light from the sawtooth roof.
Photo: Commonwealth Aircraft Corporation Pty. Ltd., Lidcombe, N.S.W.
the working-area. Local exhaust systems
are particularly applicable to the positive
removal of fumes, odours, smoke, dust,
heat, and steam from processing plant and
restricted areas.
Plenum &nd exhaust systems can be
installed to operate together for the mech-
anical supply and removal of the air so
that the volume of air and its movement
through the building are both under entire
control.
C. Cooling and Heating
1. Evaporative Cooling
The principle of lowering the temper-
ature of air by evaporation of water is fre-
quently applied in conjunction with a
plenum mechanical ventilation system to
obtain a cooling effect in a building.
The applicability of evaporative cooling
to a particular locality depends upon the
summer temperature and relative humid-
ity. In hot, dry areas many buildings are
being cooled to the . extent of 15°F. to
20°F. with comfortable relative humidity,
desirable air-movement, and freedom from
dust, by evaporative-cooling installations
which do not involve heavy capital or run-
ning costs. The effectiveness of this equip-
ment decreases with increasing relative
humidity.


Fig. 13 Air conditioning to provide controlled atmosphere for high precision work in this tool room also
maintains the comfort and efficiency of operatives in all seasons. Other modern features include a wooden floor
well-spaced machinery and tool racks, and lined sawtooth roof. Machines, walls and ceiling are all painted
in light colours, and diffused artificial light is provided by glass-steel reflectors. The good housekeeping appar-
ent here is coming to be regarded as one of the signs of efficient management.
Photo: Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd., Newcastle, N.S.W.
2. Air Conditioning
Complete control of the atmospheric
condition involving temperature, humidity,
air-movement, and purity can be attained
by means of air conditioning. The extent
to which complete control is necessary
depends on the purpose for which the con-
ditioned zone is used. In some installations
the temperature never varies more than
plus or minus I°F. in summer or winter.
An air-conditioning installation is fun-
damentally a plenum ventilation system to
which has been added a refrigeration plant
to cool the air stream and reduce its
humidity before delivery into the working-
area. A heating plant is also usually incor-
porated. The design of such an installation
involves many technical and financial com
siderations and should be undertaken only
by an engineer experienced in this type
of work.
3. Heating
During the years of war, when industry
has been called upon for increased output,
the need for more adequate factory heating
has clearly emerged. In the past, many fac-
tories have been inadequately heated by
haphazard methods which result in dis-
comfort, inefficient work, and high fuel
costs.


Fig. 14. The atmosphere and air-movement in the mule-spinning room of this Sydney textile mill are kept at a
level satisfactory for both operative and process by air conditioning. The outlets in the ductwork are closely
spaced and arranged so as to ensure a satisfactory distribution and rate of air-movement.
As a winter measure, it may often be
necessary to close controllable ventilation
openings and other openings, apart from
the fixed ventilators necessary for air pur-
ity, in order to prevent draughts and the
leakage of warmed air from the building.
This will reduce the rate of air-movement
and consequent rate of body heat loss.
Care should be taken, however, that the
air-movement does not fall below 20 feet
per minute or a sense of stuffiness will
result.
Examination of factories in Australia
has shown that many heating units are of
unsuitable type and are incorrectly placed.
This means that there is heavy and un-
necessary wastage of heat and fuel, while
the heating of the working-area remains
unsatisfactory. The design of heating in-
stallations for industrial buildings is for-
tunately now receiving the attention of a
number of Australian engineers skilled in
this subject.
As each installation requires consider-
ation on its own merits, it is not practical
to list the uses or methods of application
of various heating systems. Where any of
several systems can be employed to obtain
satisfactory heating for a particular fac-
tory, or section of a factory, the economic
factor becomes the main consideration.
The capital and running costs of each ap-
plicable system should, therefore, be cal-
culated so that the final design embodies
the most economical means of obtaining
successful results.
The first step towards providing an
effective heating installation is to design
or perhaps adapt the building so that the
heat losses by various routes are reduced


Fig. 15. Unit heaters are used in this work-room to maintain temperatures at a level suitable for both process
and workers. Lining the roof with insulating material reduces the cost of heating in winter months and reduces
heat from radiation in summer. Loud speakers provide music at intervals throughout the day.
Photo: Bradford Cotton Spinning Mills (Vic.) Pty. Ltd., Melbourne.
to a minimum. This may involve lining
roofs and frame-construction walls, pos-
sibly with the use of heat insulating ma-
terial, particularly for the roof. It may
also involve steps to prevent the leakage
of warm air and heat loss through un-
insulated floors.
The question of the lining and insula-
tion of roofs and walls of industrial build-
ings is one which may be expected to re-
ceive increasing attention from Australian
engineers and architects. From the point
of view of winter conditions alone, some
contend that in many parts of the country
the days on which heating is necessary are
few enough to offset the higher cost of
heating uninsulated buildings.
The economics of the question, however,
involve consideration of summer condi-
tions also. Properly designed insulation
that cuts heating costs in winter can also
play a part in reducing the cost of keep-
ing temperatures down to an efficient
working level in hot weather.
In some overseas countries where sum-
mer temperatures are not so high as in
Australia, buildings housing hot processes
are often purposely designed to assist heat
loss through large areas of glass and un-
insulated walls and roofs. While in cer-
tain industries in Australia such buildings
might prove satisfactory in winter, serious
trouble might be experienced in summer
due to radiant heat from the sun entering
through unprotected walls and roofs.
Naturally, the control of solar heat is a
factor that has to be considered in relation
to all industrial buildings in this country.


D. Effects of Climate
Great differences in climate between
various parts of Australia make it impos-
sible to set down recommendations equally
applicable in, say, Ballarat, Kalgoorlie,
and Brisbane.
In Queensland, the industrial areas are
largely confined to coastal towns where air
temperatures do not reach great extremes
either in summer or winter, but where the
main problem is to offset the summer con-
ditions of fairly high temperatures com-
bined with high humidity. This condition
can be relieved by providing adequate ven-
tilation in summer with as many openings
as possible in the factory. Fortunately, in
these localities of high humidity there are
usually cool breezes which help to transfer
body heat to the atmosphere. When these
breezes are allowed to blow through fac-
tories, by providing adequate openings on
opposite sides of buildings, they help to
make conditions more comfortable. Con-
trollable openings in walls should be not
less than 15 per cent of the floor-area.
Factories in these areas seldom require
heating during the daytime.
In New South Wales, the coastal areas
below 2000' elevation have a problem
somewhat similar to that of the main
Queensland industrial areas, though in
winter there is generally need for some
heating during the daytime. Factories in
these coastal areas should be constructed
so that in summer the wall openings are
not less than 10 per cent of the floor-area.
In the upland parts of New South
Wales, such as Lithgow, Bathurst, Tenter-
field, Goulburn, and Orange, where tem-
peratures remain low for several months,
heating is essential for maintenance of
satisfactory working conditions in winter.
In summer, however, wall openings to
provide good air-movement should be at
least 10 per cent of the floor-area.
In inland parts of New South Wales
and Northern Victoria and on the gold
fields of Western Australia, great extremes
of temperature occur during the year. For
instance, in many Riverina towns the aver-
age temperature in the hottest month is
over 90°F. and in the coldest month is
below 40°F. Facilities for adequate heating
in winter are essential and ventilation
openings for use in summer should have
an area at least equal to 10 per cent of
the floor-area. Owing to the low relative
humidities associated with high tempera-
tures, evaporative cooling can be used with
outstanding success. Insulation of build-
ings assumes great importance in these
districts where it is effective in both sum-
mer and winter.
In Victoria and Tasmania, daytime heat-
ing is essential in winter, particularly in
such cities as Melbourne, Launceston, Bal-
larat, and Hobart, where there are long
periods with low temperatures. In those
areas, the openings in walls for summer
ventilation should total not less than 5
per cent of the floor-area.
Factories in South Australia and the
metropolitan areas of Western Australia
generally have less need for daytime heat-
ing in winter than those in Victoria and
inland New South Wales, although in
some inland towns in South Australia,
such as Berri or Mt. Gambier, factories
have similar heating problems to those of
Melbourne and Geelong. Because of high
summer temperatures, controllable ven-
tilation openings should total not less than
10 per cent of the floor-area.
The percentages of controllable wall
openings in relation to floor-areas recom-
mended throughout this section are sug-
gested as a tentative guide only. Climatic
conditions are so variable that no hard
and fast rule is possible. In all cases, how-
ever, it is essential that the wall openings


provided for natural ventilation, as ex-
plained in an earlier section, should be so
placed as to permit circulation of air
throughout the factory at the level of the
worker.
In those areas where hot, dry winds
blow freely into factories, they often have
a .heating rather than a cooling effect. On
some days it is better to shut a factory up
as much as possible to prevent the heating
effect of such winds, and use mechanical
means to create air-movement. The fre-
quency with which such conditions nor-
mally occur in each locality will affect the
necessity for this provision.
E. Removal of Dust and Fumes
The considerable expansion of Aus-
tralian industry during wartime has
brought into use a wide range of chemical
substances whose toxicity is not well
known. Moreover, special processes associ-
ated with new manufactures have created
health problems which did not exist in
Australia before the war. For instance, cer-
tain solvents, non-ferrous metals, and dusts
from abrasive processes are a few causes
of industrial health problems.
Fig. 16. These well-designed hoods prevent the escape
of steam and vapour from the paper-making machine
into the atmosphere. Natural draught has been used
in the hoods nearest to the camera while fans have
been introduced to create a forced-draught exhaust
in the three hoods at the end of the line. Photo:
Australian Paper Manufacturers Ltd., Melbourne.
Fig. 17. An individual exhaust system extracts dust
from this pounder which could not be connected with
the general plant system. Photo:
Wonder-Welt Shoes Ply. Ltd., Sydney.
Fig. 18. In this smith’s shop smoke and fumes are
prevented from escaping by a well-designed hood
which completely encloses the forge. The absence of
smoke has also resulted in better natural light through
clean windows and white walls. The shadow boards
are an important feature of the good housekeeping.
Photo:
Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd., Newcastle, N.S.W.


Fig. 19. Linings to walls and roofs in frame structures help to control fluctuations of temperatures in winter
and summer and their attendant troubles. The monitor type or double sawtooth roof in this building is
lined with sheets of insulating material. The light coloured surfaces also help in good lighting.
Photo: Cable Makers Australia Pty. Ltd., Liverpool, N.S.W.
The protection of workers from indus-
trial health hazards requires that precau-
tions be taken to prevent dusts, gases,
vapours, smokes, or other injurious im-
purities from being inhaled in dangerous
concentrations. Even if they do not con-
stitute a health hazard, some of these sub-
stances may be present in a form that is
unpleasant or creates a nuisance and there-
fore should be removed.
The best method of doing this is by
the maximum possible enclosure of the
source of liberation of objectionable sub-
stances by hoods or casings connected to
properly designed mechanical-exhaust sys-
tems. By this means they are collected and
removed before they are able to disperse
through the working-area.
The design of efficient exhaust systems
for particular applications involves skill
and experience, for their types and ar-
rangements cover an extremely wide
ran g e . Many existing installations are in-
effective through faulty design. Use should
p e mac j e 0 f the services of an engineer
with a specialised knowledge of this work,
The Industrial Hygiene Sections of State
Health Departments can supply extensive
, f. . , •, , ; , ,
data regarding industrial hazards and have
.■ & 6 . . . ..
a w^e ran g e 0 testing equipment ava i
able. Whenever there is t es lg itest ou t
about the effect on operatives of processes
generating dusts, vapours, smokes, or
fumes, scientific tests and information
should be requested.


III. LAY-OUT, CONSTRUCTION, AND EQUIPMENT
A. Lay-Out and Construction
AN efficient lay-out of a factory is of
great importance in providing
good working conditions. The
planning of new factories or of alterations
to existing ones is the special concern of
architects and engineers who study the re-
quirements of each project, and this sec-
tion does no more than indicate some of
the general principles involved.
In the early stages of planning, produc-
tion managers and plant engineers need to
be in close contact with the architect and
his consultants. This will ensure that the
building plan is properly related to the
production plan, that the building struc-
ture is appropriate at every point for the
processes it houses, and that the various
services—electrical power and lighting,
mechanical ventilation, compressed air,
steam, water, wastes, etc., and also con-
veyor systems are incorporated into the
structural design.
In modern factory planning the working
out of the production-flow charts deals
with the problems of a particular factory,
but there are certain elements related to
employee welfare that have a universal
application. These include not only the
major aspects of lighting and ventilation
referred to in the foregoing sections, but
also such matters as traffic ways, location
of amenities, floor treatment, accident pre-
vention, reduction of noise, etc.
1. Position of Amenities
Change- and locker-rooms are most con-
veniently placed close to the direct route
between the employees’ entrance and the
working-area, with wash-rooms and toilet
adjacent. Inconvenient location means that
employees will not use them to their best
advantage. Rooms of this sort, or offices,
should not be ranged along the outside
walls of a factory in such a way as to block
off ventilation openings from the work-
room.
Very large works often have several
amenities blocks in different parts of the
factory, with some additional toilet facili-
ties close to the work-place. Dining-rooms,
too, require to be reasonably accessible, as
well as properly lit and ventilated. It can
be assumed that workers will not make
full use of a dining-room that is more than
300 yards from their work-place. Where
there are several dining-rooms in a factory,
they can be served efficiently by a central
Fig. 20. When change-rooms. and locker-rooms are
conveniently situated, they are used to greater advan-
tage by the workers. Doors to men’s and women’s
amenities blocks, which are beside the groups of
workers, are situated between the entrance to the
factory and the entrance to the work-room.
Photo: Kraft Walker Cheese Pty. Ltd., Melbourne.


Figs. 21 and 22. Increased production requirements have resulted in close collaboration between foremost pro-
duction executives, engineers, and designers in applying experience gained here and abroad to the design of new
Australian factories. Early consultation ensures that building and production plans are properly related, and
that the building is adequate at every point for both the process and the workers who are to carry it out.
In addition to lay-out plans, showing the flow of work and position of every machine, "three-dimensional
plans” (scale models) are now being used to help solve problems in advance. In Fig. 21 the Director of the
Beaufort Division (centre) discusses the lay-out of a factory extension with his Assistant Directors and Plant
Manager. In Fig. 22 the plant engineer, senior lay-out draughtsman, and architect discuss the arrangement of
machines in the plans for a new section.
Photos: Beaufort Divn., Dept, of Aircraft Production, Fishermen’s Bend, Vic.


Fig. 23. Wide, clear passageways, well defined by painted lines, warm wooden floors, light-painted machinery,
good natural and artificial light, and unit heaters are features of this Victorian machine-shop. The low walls
on the tool store (extreme left) and the wire-mesh partitions (extreme right) do not prevent cross ventilation.
Recent investigations in a number of factories, however, indicate that buildings of this construction and these
dimensions are too wide for effective ventilation in the Australian climate. One solution may be to assist air-move-
ment at the level of the workers in those sections which are too far from windows and other low-level openings.
kitchen that handles the major part of the
food preparation. All these questions are
dealt with in more detail in other publica-
tions of the Department of Labour and
National Service.
2. Traffic and Access
The development of a logical produc-
tion-flow will ensure that cross traffic is
reduced to a minimum, and that ample
space is left for storage-areas so that these
do not encroach upon traffic ways or work-
ing-areas.
Traffic ways need to be of adequate
width for their purpose, properly defined,
and kept clear of obstructions. A minimum
suggested by a requirement of one of the
State Factories Acts is four feet wide for
main traffic ways and two feet wide for
access passages to machines; but these will
need to be considerably increased in many
cases. Lines painted on the floor help to
prevent encroachment on traffic lanes. If
adequate space is always allowed for stor-
age, passages that give access to fire-escape
exits and stairways need never be used for
this purpose, and can always be kept clear.
(The width of aisles, fire-escapes, and exit
doors should, of course, comply with the
requirements of State Factories Acts.)


Fig. 24. Wartime necessity has been responsible for considerable advances in the planning of Australian factories
to permit the more efficient flow of production. The conveyor trolleys shown here have platforms and seats that
are adjusted to suit the work carried out at each of the stations through which they pass on this fuselage line.
The completed fuselage is transferred by electric hoist to the final assembly line (at left). Knowledge and
experience gained in production planning, the design of ingenious jigs and fixtures, and ways of arranging work
to reduce waste effort and fatigue may be expected to play an important part also in the maintenance of industrial
activity in the post-war period.
Photo: Commonwealth Aircraft Corporation Pty. Ltd., Fishermen’s Bend, Vic.
Workers require sufficient space to per-
form their various tasks without being
cramped by their neighbours, or by the
placement of equipment. Machines should
be placed so that there is easy and safe
access around and between them. Most of
the State Factories Acts require 400 cubic
feet of air space per person, which allows
for each worker at least 28 square feet of
floor-area with a ceiling height of 14 feet
(which is the maximum allowed in most
States for computation), and more if the
ceiling is lower. Congestion, however, is
less often caused by too many persons in
one room than by the inconvenient placing
of machinery and other equipment. The
amount of elbow-room required by each
worker varies with the type of work; for
instance, while conveyor-belt workers may
p e seate d as closely as at 2 ft. 6 in. to 3 ft.
d i n . centres, most types of bench and
machine workers require at least several
f eet c | ear on either side of them for stack-
- faw matefial and comp i et ed articles.
I n factories where each work-task has been
, , , . c ,, . „ ~, ,
made the sub ect of motion study the
. \ ... , . J .
space required will have been exactly
r .... A 1
The development of modern conveyor
systems, as well as the use of gravity-flow
lay-outs, simplifies inter-factory traffic, and,


Fig. 25. The arrangement of work so that everything required is within easy reach avoids waste effort and
unnecessary fatigue. In this assembly task all the parts are arranged in a semi-circle within arm’s length. The
ratchet screw driver is suspended on a spring directly above the assembly point. Fatigue-saving arrangements
like those shown at this Sydney electrical engineering establishment are now being adopted in a number of
Australian industries.
by reducing unnecessary handling and lift-
ing, leaves the operative with more time
and energy to devote to productive tasks.
3. Isolation of Processes
Processes that give rise to dust, heat, or
noise, should be considered in the early
stages of planning, so that means for deal-
ing with them can be incorporated in the
building design, e.g., duct-work and
special ventilation, insulating materials,
etc. The emission of dust may be avoided
in some cases by completely enclosing a
process; or the emission of heat by sur-
rounding the source of heat with insulating
material. In other cases the source of dust,
heat, or noise can be partitioned off, so as
to limit the nuisance to as small a portion
of the factory as possible. Elsewhere, it
can be adequately dealt with by mechanical
means, e.g., local exhaust ventilation. Each
case must be dealt with on its merits; but
it should be considered when the factory
building is being planned.
Electric welding and similar processes
injurious to the eyes should be effectively
screened from the sight of all operatives
other than those immediately engaged on
the work, who will be equipped with pro-
tective shields or goggles.
4. Floors
The main requirements of factory floors
are that they should have an even surface


Fig. 26. Many difficult problems of lay-out peculiar to the industry have been overcome in this work-room by
the good arrangement of mobile racks and by good housekeeping. Individual power to each machine, eliminating
overhead belting, warm wooden floors, and fluorescent lighting are other good features.
Photo: Wonder-Welt Shoes Pty. Ltd., Sydney.
Fig. 27. The walls of this engine-testing room have
been lined with sound-absorbent material that prevents
the loud and sustained noise from reaching the adjoin-
ing work-rooms. In this extreme case the operator
has also been provided with a sound-proof com-
partment. Photo:
General Motors-Holden’s Ltd, Fishermen’s Bend, Vic.
Fig. 28. The impervious floor in this Sydney food-
packing plant is kept free of water by good drainage,
The surface is even, but not so smooth as to be
dangerous. Walls are tiled to head height and there
is a cove at junction of floor and walls. Where work
is done standing, it is the practice to provide properly
designed duckboards or other insulation on the floor.


Fig. 29. Strips of a special wood composition inkid in the concrete floor in front of these machines save the
operators from fatigue and from standing on a cold, hard surface. They are recessed flush with the concrete and
so cannot cause accidents through tripping the worker.
Photo: H. B. Dickie Ltd., Melbourne.
■without irregularities or changes of level,
that they should be dry and easy to keep
clean and do not become slippery under-
foot, and that they should stand up to the
traffic to which they are subjected.
It is not possible to refer here in detail
to different types of floors, particularly as
some have been unobtainable during the
war years, while others are still in the ex-
perimental stage of development. But since
experience has shown that the importance
of suitable flooring has often been over-
looked in the past, attention is drawn to
the necessity of giving it consideration in
the early stages of planning, especially
where graded surfaces and drainage may
be involved.
For some factories, wood floor surfaces
are most satisfactory; for others, and par-
ticularly those in which there are wet pro-
cesses, some form of impervious floor-
finish with a non-slip surface is essential.
Where any liquid is spilt from processes,
or where water is used for cleaning, the
floor should be graded to fall to floor
wastes and gutters adequate to carry off
all surface drainage. A gradient of 1 inch
in 10 feet (1 in 120) has been found
satisfactory in comparatively dry factories.
Where floors are constantly wet, a steeper
gradient and a harder surface may be re-
quired, and the use of non-slip compounds
in trowelled finishes, or of special non-
slip floor tiles.
With any type of impervious floor it is
desirable to carry the floor finish up the
walls to form a skirting with a cove of
approximately l\ in. radius, so that clean-
ing may be easy and efficient.


Unnecessary fatigue is experienced by
workers who have to stand on hard or cold
surfaces, such as brick, stone, concrete, or
steel. This can be avoided by providing at
work-places floor surfaces of wood, mag-
nesite, thick linoleum, asphalt, or similar
material laid either as a part of the floor,
or in the form of movable mats. To reduce
the danger of tripping and stumbling,
mats, duckboards, etc., should, where pos-
sible, be recessed flush with the general
floor-level. In any case they should be
designed to stay in position at the work-
place without shifting about, and should
not project into traffic ways.
5. Walls and Roofs
In dealing with heating and ventila-
tion, reference was made to the value of
using materials with high insulating pro-
perties in the construction of walls and
roofs in order to protect the interior of the
building from extremes of heat and cold.
In winter, the internal wall and roof sur-
faces of lightly constructed buildings may
be several degrees cooler than the general
air inside the factory. As heat is lost
through these surfaces, the maintenance of
working comfort requires greater heat
input than would be otherwise necessary.
Good insulation .means a reduction of
heat loss in winter, with a corresponding
reduction in the co.st of work-room heat-
ing. It reduces down-draughts caused by
cold surfaces, and in summer assists in the
maintenance of efficient working condi-
tions when outside temperatures are high.
The use of frame construction without
internal linings can seldom be regarded as
wholly satisfactory. Unlined roofs transmit
heat in summer, and in cold weather are
a source not only of down-draughts, but
also, in some cases, of condensation, which
forms on the underside of the roof and
drips on to the work below.
Walls and partitions that are solidly
constructed, or that incorporate good in-
sulating materials, are also important in
the reduction of noise, vibration, and the
entry of dust.
Flush internal surfaces, and the reduc-
tion to a minimum of ledges, crevices, and
exposed structural members, will simplify
the maintenance of cleanliness. In factories
where food is handled, the wall surface to
at least six feet from the floor should be
faced with impervious material that can
be washed down.
6. Reduction of Noise
Extremes of noise and vibration can
cause physical damage to persons subjected
to them, and in a few industries disorders
of this type have been recorded. There are,
however, many industries wherein the
noise produced may not result in physical
damage, but is nevertheless responsible for
much fatigue, inefficiency, and irritation.
The amount of noise produced in certain
areas has been measured in other countries,
and figures have been compared on pro-
duction, spoilt work, and absenteeism
under conditions of uncomfortable noise
and of comparative quiet. In some cases
the improvement noted under quiet condi-
tions was considerable. Generally, it ap-
pears that the majority of manual workers
become accustomed to continuous, regular
noise even when it is very loud, but spas-
modic noises cause a marked increase in
irritation and distraction. Workers on
mental tasks are more affected by noise
than manual workers.
It is desirable to reduce noise in fac-
tories wherever possible, and to limit it
to a small area. In doing this it is necessary
to ensure that vibration is not transferred
to the main building structure. As floors
are usually the principal source of trans-
mission, early consideration should be
given to the mounting of machines, which
may be on independent foundations with
mastic jointings, on pads of material


that will absorb vibration, or on
bases with spring or rubber mountings.
Air-borne noise can be reduced by the use
of sound-absorbent material on walls and
ceilings and by confining noisy processes
as far as possible within sound-absorbent
walls or baffles.
The maintenance in smooth running
order of all machinery used in production
and also of trucks and trolleys will do
much to reduce unnecessary noise nuis-
ance. Rough and broken floors can also
contribute to avoidable clatter, and to wear
on wheeled equipment.
7. Accident Prevention
Good factory lay-out is an effective
means of preventing accidents to em-
ployees and damage to plant.
In addition to conforming to the re-
quirements of Factories Acts, allowance
must be made for the proper handling of
material and control of traffic within the
factory. Analysis of industrial accidents
shows that many take place when hand-
ling and transporting material, and that
falls are a major source of injury. Con-
sequently the lay-out of aisles and traffic
ways and care in the design of stairs,
ramps, and floors generally are important.
Doorways opening directly on to traffic
ways are to be avoided as are blind cor-
ners and intersections. It must be remem-
bered that any condition that subjects a
worker to discomfort or constraint during
the working period is a breeder of acci-
dents, most of which are caused by small
lapses of care or attention which become
dangerous in industrial surroundings. The
employee who must work in a constrained
posture or face a glaring light, or who is
subjected to noise, heat, cold, or to irrit-
ant vapour or dust is predisposed toward
accidents both physically and mentally.
Fig. 30. Where it is impracticable to isolate noisy
processes much can be done by mounting machines
on bases that absorb the vibration. The bench sup-
porting these stocking seamers rests on rubber pads,
which localise vibration and so retard transmission of
noise. Photo:
Hilton Hosiery Co. Pty. Ltd., Melbourne.
Fig. 31. Many accidents occur while attention is dis-
tracted from some easily recognised source of danger.
The best method of prevention in such cases is to
render the danger spot proof against inattention. The
rails around this slag pit protect passers-by and nearby
workers. Photo:
Australian Consolidated Industries Ltd., Sydney.


Fig. 32. Safe working practices can be made doubly
effective by enlisting the interest of employees in
accident prevention. The score board in the illustration
is as important in itself as is the small group bonus
it refers to. Displayed near the factory entrance it
keeps alive a sporting interest in production without
lost-time accidents. Photo:
Rylands (Bros.) Pty. Ltd., Newcastle, N.S. W.
Fig. 33. The white-kerbed lawns between these railway
tracks are used by the mill workers during meal-
breaks. The tracks and the path in the foreground are
spread with crushed clinkers. What might have been
an unsightly, dangerous, and dusty area has been
made safe, pleasant, and habitable, and an aid to
efficient operation. Photo:
Lysaght’s Newcastle Works, Pty. Ltd., Newcastle,
N.S.W.
Strong contrasts in illumination are to
be avoided between work-tasks and their
surroundings, particularly where there are
moving parts, and also at doorways and
stair-landings.
If hand-rails are provided on stairs they
should be on both sides, otherwise traffic
tends to keep to the one side. Proper per-
manent gangways and ladders must be
provided to give safe access to cranes, and
the space at the foot of such ladders should
be protected against traffic.
Drinking fountains and notice boards
should not be placed in traffic ways or
where suspended loads are carried over
them.
There should be space to allow the load-
ing and unloading of material and its
handling in and out of machines without
interference with adjacent employees.
Proper facilities for the removal of
waste products from machines are often
even more important to the avoidance of
accidents than the handling of the finished
material. This is particularly so in the case
of turnings, chips, and dusty, wet, or oily
wastes.
8. Factory Grounds
There are still many factories where bet-
ter use could be made of the unoccupied
land within the factory boundaries. Road-
ways are not always adequately planned,
while free open spaces have been allowed
to become junk-heaps. Roadways, cart-
docks, and car-parks need to be properly
graded and drained, and constructed for
the type of traffic they are to carry. Sur-
faces that do not produce dust, and are
easy to hose down, such as concrete, brick,
and asphalt, are particularly desirable out-
side factories where cleanliness is import-
ant to the process. It is in the interests of
accident prevention that pathways should


be kept in good repair, free from puddles
and from cracked or broken surfaces, and
that the grounds should be adequately lit
after dark. Where a factory is built well
back from the street and employees have
to wait about for transport, some sort of
shelter against bad weather may be needed.
Racks or sheds for bicycles may also be
required outside the factory at some con-
venient point between the gate and the
work-place.
Wherever space permits, the preserva-
tion of attractive natural features and the
planting of grass, shrubs, and trees will not
only do much to prevent dust nuisance but
will also greatly improve the appearance
of the factory and encourage a general
appreciation of order and tidiness. How-
ever small in area, gardens contribute to
the workers’ health by attracting them into
the open air and sunshine during meal-
breaks. Garden seats and rubbish bins are
essential items of equipment. Tennis courts
and sports grounds will be used to capacity
in large factories and wherever the social
clubs are particularly active.
B. Items of Equipment
1. Seating, Work-Benches, and Posture
Fatigue, which is one of the principal
causes of accidents and spoilt work, is
greatly affected by the posture of the
worker, and work can be so arranged that
strained or unhealthy posture and un-
necessarily awkward movements are
avoided. Wherever work can be done
seated, there should be chairs, with backs,
at the correct height for comfortable
working. '
For greatest comfort and efficiency a
worker’s hands on machine operations
should be a little above the level of the
elbow; on bench operations at, or slightly
below, the level of the elbows. Surveys
Fig. 34. A few minutes spent in the fresh air and
sunshine after the mid-day meal is good for health
and efficiency. Grounds need not be large to be attrac-
tive. This small, well-kept garden with comfortable
seats with backs is appreciated and used to advantage.
Photo: Eyelets Ltd., Melbourne.
Fig. 35. Where employees cycle to work it will be
necessary to provide some place where the bicycles will
be protected from theft, damage and from the weather.
Photo:
Cable Makers Australia Pty. Ltd., Liverpool, N.S. W.


Fig. 36. Fatigue is reduced on this pin-setting job by adjustable chairs with backs, and foot-stools, designed
to Suit the various heights required for comfortable and efficient work.
Photo: Yarra Falls Ltd., Melbourne.
carried out in England and America have
shown that the elbow height of the average
woman worker is at 40 in. from the floor
(for men 2 in. to 3 in. higher) and that
70 per cent of workers fall within 1.5 in.
of this measurement. From this it appears
that when work is to be done standing the
height of the bench should be 37 in. to 38
in. for women, and 39 in. to 40 in. for
men.
Special adjustments may have to be
made for those who vary from the normal
to any extent. For short people it is easy to
provide extra height in a standing plat-
form. As it is important that the shoulders
should not be raised when working, but
should assume a natural relaxed position,
special attention should be given to this
point. Especially tall people may require
the bench or machine set higher.
Work that can be done alternately sit-
ting or standing is least fatiguing and
high chairs or stools with backs can be
provided to suit the bench heights men-
tioned above. There are many jobs now
done standing at which the provision of
seats would add to the workers’ energy
and efficiency.
Where workers can be seated at their
work the seat should be of such a height
that the relationship of hands to elbows is
the same as when standing (l in. to 3 in.
below the elbow level), and for this, seats
will generally need to be 10 in. to 12 in.
below the bench level. To allow room for
the knees and feet, so that correct posture
can be maintained, the edge of the bench
should be no deeper than 3 in., and the
space under it should extend back at least


-9 in., preferably more. Care in providing
a seat of correct height will be wasted,
however, if it is not also made comfort-
able, as the workers will themselves bring
cushions or other padding. The seat itself,
therefore, should be well curved, padded,
or rounded at the edges, and not more
than 14 in. from front to back and 14 in.
to 16 in. wide. When it is more than
18 in. from the floor, a foot-rest will
be needed under the bench, and a foot-rail
on the chair. The foot-rest should be wide
enough’ to take the whole foot, and be
tilted up at a slight angle. All seats should
have backs (there are only a few. jobs
where this is not possible), which should
be curved to support the small of the back,
and should be not more than about 10 in.
wide so that the elbows can move freely.
The ideal chairs are those on which the
height of the seat and the height and posi-
tion of the back are adjustable; but the
important point to observe is that each
worker’s chair should actually be set cor-
rectly for the work. Very often inadequate
seating can be adapted by the addition or
alteration of backrests, by blocking up or
cutting down the legs, and by the pro-
vision of foot-rests.
Good posture is an essential part of
efficient operation, and workers should sit
well back in the chair, erectly but not
stiffly, with arms moving freely from the
shoulders. Slumping in a chair will in-
crease fatigue instead of relieving it.
Although there are some jobs that can
only be done standing or moving about,
at many of them (such as in weaving and
spinning mills, in packing, and on several
types of machines) there are opportunities
for sitting down while the work proceeds.
In these cases at least one seat should be
provided to every three employees, and so
designed and placed that workers can
Fig. 37. Accidents and spoilt work are kept to a
minimum on this machine press by the provision of
a comfortable, adjustable seat with back rest which
reduces fatigue, and by the good guard which com-
pletely encloses the task when the press comes into
operation.
Photo: Stokes & Sons Pty , Ltd., Melbourne.
Fig. 38. Cold, thirst-quenching water is essential dur-
ing hot summer months, especially in dusty processes.
Where the normal water supply is not cold enough
to be palatable, an ice-box cooler as illustrated here,
or a refrigerated water fountain should be installed.
Photo: Bedggood & Co., Pty. Ltd., Melbourne.


readily make use of them. A chair with a
back is desirable for this purpose, but the
special points of design described above
are not essential.
2. Drinking-Water
Clean, cool, and wholesome drinking-
water should be accessible to all employees
at all times. To avoid the infections that
are very easily spread when a number of
persons use the same cup or glass the in-
stallation of water bubblers is recom-
mended. It will usually be found a time-
saver to have one in each shop or work-
room, and, except in small factories, in
each wash-room as well. Convenience of
situation is usually the deciding factor, but
as a general guide it is suggested that the
minimum provision should be not less than
1 to every 100 employees, and for hot
industries, such as foundries, not less than
1 to every 50 employees.
The common type of bubbler, which
throws, out a jet of water and is controlled
by a spring tap, is usually supplied in a
small bowl with a waste. Some authorities
recommend that it should be fitted with
a mouth guard, or fixed in a wall niche
of such a shape that the mouth is pre-
vented from coming into contact with the
orifice. Mouth guards, however, are sel-
dom satisfactory, and the possibility of
infection lurking in the well-flushed rim
of the orifice is fairly remote.
Preferably, the temperature of drinking-
water should be between 55°F. and 70°F.
Where it rises above this temperature it
is not palatable and workers tend to drink
less than is desirable. Water temperature
may often be prevented from rising by
protecting pipes from exposure to the sun
and other sources of heat. Where, in spite
of this, it rises above 75°F., some means
of reducing the temperature should be
adopted.
This may be done by means of a simple
ice-box water-cooler in which the water is
passed through a pipe coil under a rack
in an insulated container supplied with
block ice; or else by a drinking-water re-
frigerator, gas or electrically operated,
which is a little more elaborate. An evap-
orative cooling device, of which the water
bag is the best known and most primitive
example, may prove successful in reduc-
ing water temperatures, particularly in
dry, windy areas.
In hot or heavy industries where workers
sweat freely, salt tablets are necessary and
are preferably supplied by means of a
dispenser fixed near the drinking-water
supply.


EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION
and
Technical Data Sheets
THIS bulletin contains the pooled ideas and experience of a considerable
number of Australian manufacturers, engineers, and architects, many of
whom have collaborated in the working out of problems affecting working
conditions and efficiency in Australian factories, and have offered freely to share
their experience with others.
It is likely to be a considerable time before the last word is said on any of
the aspects of industrial building design referred to in these pages. Each of
them is now, or in the near future will be, the subject of investigation by
technical officers of the Department of Labour and National Service.
Other aspects barely touched upon in this bulletin, like the arrangement of
processes in such a way as to employ buildings of a type and shape that take
fuller advantage of Australian climatic conditions, are now receiving the skilled
and imaginative attention of production men in a number of industries. These
men may be expected to have interesting things to report from time to time.
The move to exchange, information may be expected to gain impetus in the
post-war period as it is realised that all who are interested in maintaining
industrial activity in Australia stand to gain much from anything contributing
to the increased efficiency of each industry.
Already large firms with considerable technical resources have undertaken
to make blue prints and technical data freely available and in turn have displayed
a readiness to accept and try out new ideas.
In addition to Departmental bulletins and reports on various aspects of the
welfare of industrial workers, it is proposed that technical Data Sheets will be
be issued at frequent intervals dealing with details of industrial building design
related to the improvement of working conditions and efficiency.
Appropriate acknowledgment will be made of the source of any infor-
mation supplied to this Department for publication and distribution in this way.


NOTES
G. W. GREEN & SONS PTY. LTD.. MELBOURNE




