

r.a.ç
'•'«‘ffCo
FACTS, FIGURES & LESSONS FROM
A Plea for Absolute
Freetrader
The following paper was read by Mr. 1 of its reward.
Yoa Hagen at the Meeting ©f the I Firstly, then, let me show by faot* and
Newtown Labor Electoral League on J ®« ur « B fro / n that fcbe by
1. ! tS P reeent . mode , of ™ B PS
tie* of wealth may be gained from the i the 66,000 females, many of whom
statement thai ef every 100 adult males [ toil and drudge to the verge of sheer
41 have preverty to the value of prostration, and the absentee capitalist
£100.” who toils not neither does he spin, earns
Of coarse everyone of these fellow* 1 T ' eo f WB " J he
should, according to Mr, W. E. Abbott " ord > £3,500.000, and yon do not tax
and others of tl at school, be written down h, . m . *° be , 9xte,lt of one half-penny. In
as idlers or at all events, as men who rai«ng the luxury cry as as additional
mast be Uugh- the virtne of thrift ; do Bet '°? rich pleaea d ° **
yen wonder tha- the men, who, more than fol .« et that _ th * rs 18 , on thls £3,600,000
any others, hate all their lives been neither a tax on luxuries ner on the
oomp.lled to exercise thrift, are begin- necessaries of life and that this item
ning to realise that the more thrift they al ? n f T wdl S° » lo “* way to expla.n
exercise the »< re of it goes to swell the what ,. l h . ave , already .said, -that the
pockets of the aen who lives not on his f* mdle P layed on ns m wlth
own boasted tk ift, but on the thrift of the wd luxn 7 f n " ofc affect «7
the mea he aflfiats to despise as wanting «PP«*“«« extent, the estimated pre-
in thrift portion of tavation as I have worked it
loan money, but it is not so ; the benefit
to the landowner is a permanent and
increasing one. To the landless it is
an additional curse. Let ns assume
ifriday, the 16th September, 1892; taxes men in exact proportion to their
In days when men were suable to ability not to bear it. The corollary,
read and write, when the Press was °f course, being, that the State leaves
taxed and mnazled, when an interested alone the other fellow in exact pro-
aristocracy joined the priest and the portion to his ability to bear it. The
ruler in preventing economic and all largest item of our revenue is that in-
truth relating to social subjects reaching eluded under the head of the Services,
the ears of the people,—in days not sc which in the year 1890 (aad this is the
long since departed, days when men 7 ear to which all my figures refer ex-
were unable to study facts and figures, oe P‘ when otherwise stated), was
when they did occasionally happen to 174,198 and amounted to 44 psr cent
leak ont, the people were content to °f the total revenue raised. The
that yon are going to build five miles of
railway and for this purpose yon either
borrow money from abroad or
yon raise it through the customs
at a cost of 25 per cent. Yoa
bsrrew a million for the purpose
and some ass or rogue who thinks
yea are an ass will exclaim “ Look at
the labor we make for yon.” Well, let
us look at it. Something like this is
taking place on the line now being
made from Marrickville to Burwood
believe the atheistical lie that poverty Government of New South Wales
and its attendant evils were ordained of (subject of course to the mortgage
God, aud that equal political and social held by the British investor) awns
rights formed no part of the cosmogony the railways, the telegranhie and
of God. Whilst so ignorant tney telephonic systems of the colony as well
believed that the course and concourse fts the pest office, and that amount was
of nature held within itself no provision derive ! from those sources, and a few
to meet the wants and necessities of °ther small items. I am surprised to
road. You are a laborer and yon start
to look for work. From the day yon
start to the day when the line is finished
you will not average five work days or
40s per week. The extent of the benefit
you will receive is that you will be al-
lowed in return for your work to sup-
port yourself and family, and when tho
the line is finished, in return for the
lit buillb. - ,
out.
I draw vonr attention to the state- ,» „ , . , ,
ment of Coghlai that out of a popula- We . are all ready to ho f at * . redac *
tion of a little over 1,100,000, nearlv tion of wages ; we are ready to object to
1,000,000 were abselatelv property-less; abôa labor aad tbe gauge of the inten-
tât the wealth had drifted into the , B,ty of . our Ejection to alien
hands of .ne-ni-ith of the population. It abor ’ s f xa ? tly , ,n f proportion
follows that eig it ninths of the taxation , . ® , s^an ,? lv . m £
of the colony is borne by the larger por- t0 th - 6 ° b J e °‘ loaable a ™ Tal >° r
tion of the community who have no arrival is acc stomed The
property and or v one ninth bv those who effec ' , of taxat l on ra >s« d under our
are U the property. I may P resen j metbod 18 ® xactly the Bame as
be told that .. sis not strictly true, , tbe fission of Chinese or Kanaka
because the we tlthy consume and nse for the Chinese or Kanaka is a
more dutiable goads than the poor and da “B e . r to . u8 > , only 80 far a * bis standard
eotueqienily piv more. Well l am of living ,s below ours The Chinaman
doling with a year when these wonderful ! makeB ( ur f t . ure and the chief evil in-
duties on luxuries, such as clocks, bed- * oW f “ dom S 80 1 168 m the , fact ‘ hat
slsads, floorcloths, carpets, chinaware, be does not use the furniture he makes,
glassware, cutlery, formed no part in our t The reason the employer does not go
list of dutiable reticles ; but even if I to the islands and to China and there
. ' _ ûiYin mw fn n rv* to kn/tnner> 4hi» rtn ndn wrl
those born into it, and were content that none of our legislators have in
with the crumbs that fell from the rieh their wis lorn chosen to treat this class
privilege of having been allowed to exist,
yon will be furthtr taxed by Govern-
ment to pay the additional interest.
Ton may possibly be allowed to live
until the British investor comes along
for some of the principal due ; if so you
must either be furtner taxed to pay
that or a premium in return for his kind-
ness in allowing you to remain in his
debt. Of coarse there is always the
not remote possibility that before he
does come along you may be already
taxed into Abraham’s bosom to pay in-
terest on unearned values which your
labor and year capital and your
wretched unnatural desire for food and
shelter has created.
man’s table. of revenue as a form of taxation ; but,
A measure of education has enabled 1 strictly s--oilcing, I contend that at
the people to do as we are doing to- j bottom it is a very severe form of taxa-
night,—to study facts and figures, which ■ l-'on, insomuch that the producer on the
prove incontestably that involuntary , jue baud and the consumer of the pro-
poverty, which is not the result of 1 ducts carried on our railways not only
voluntary idleness, exists not because bas to pay the working expenses but
of the niggardliness of Nature, but a^so the. interest on loans out ef which
because some one all along the line is they were built. “ Well, to he ought;
reaping the fruit of other men’s labor; that is only fair,” someone will remark ;
and what forms a still more disastrous but I contend that our railways aad
feature of the question, the minority, tramways and the whole of oar putdic
namely, the landowners, have the power works should never have been mortgaged
to prevent the majority—the landless— as they in fact are, to any foreign raoney-
frotn tapping nature’s storehouse, except lender; and that they set enly should
war« dealing wit) this year’» figures lam fmploy them is because the standard of
c«nvin«ed that ti.e taxes raised on what l lvm S tbe^ e aff « rdB n ° outlet for h.s pro-
ar. called luxnrie » are too small to affect dacts • wages and
the main questio i as to the incidence of e » ,ela,lT , e interference with trade
o«r present mode of taxation; the fact whlcb lesse , ns the purchasing power and
that yoa ret nothing whatever out of the o°n«eqnently reduces the standard of
iee»m« of the absentee will more than bring is harmful, and our system of
c»tnpeH»ate for the little difference the !ff tlon 18 harmful just in so much as
question of luxuries may make. What ll greases the power to consume and
this methed of taxation then means is en J°J- cnm / ,al er--
tkat!eith«r the verv small savings, if any, by an intense selfishness and
hav« been swallowed up, or that they *f oranc f of “'timate recuits prevents
have been and *re being deprived of J the employer and the legislator from
something they ought to have had and r /! l I llsln g the ev f! that , muBt necessarily
which it would have been for the good f O,1 ° w ever y, actlon , of either having a
of the wWe comm unity that they should tendea «y to lessen the mm total of hu-
liav# had mBn happiness involved m the réduction
of the standard of living. The standard
Under the heading of taxation we 0 f living is reduced as yon
levied through the customs, excise, stamp rc duoa the purchasing power and
aud licenses, a total of £2,748,339 the purchasing power is reduced as
equal to £2 9s lOd per head of pop- effectually under our method of raising
ulation. Ibis foi m of taxation is in- the revenue as though it had b«en
creased or decreased in amount conse- i modelled on the lines most calcalated to
quent on the reduction or increase in e ff ect that very object,
th« amount of du liable articles. Mr. „ , , T , , , , .
Cotton, in his able Freetrade speech in Froni Coghlan I learn that during
the House, proved that the raising of thehalf year ending June 30,1891 the total
money by mean« of customs duties earaln K s ? ‘ 2 '5 45 T> m ! n m . co< *-
means that snob aouey is raised at a nect.on with the Broken Hill _ proprietary
cost of at least ? oer cent to the conn- “ ,n ® , £160,861, includmg salaries
try. If you ra.se £2,000,000 through L half y ear ’ giving an average of
thejeustoms it will cost £500.000 to rake x1 .? 6 8 ? man Incidentally it is as
it. In 1890 the taxation per head was £2 well to know this because it will enable
9» lOd, add to th 525 per cent and it yoU to f ° r l m a ldoa as tbo corrp,ct-
amomitg to £1 2s 3,1. Now, f OB3 or otherwise of the reported fabn-
if there is -ne wage !<"« bums Kid to have been paid to the
earner in a fvmilv of four you tax him ul u. uuu m<*afug
c i.- n o o o < „ ,*i . ( due allowance for the higher salarie « you
fo«rtim«s £3 2s3i. or at the rate of ... , J .
vr nil will be forced to the conclusion
£l2 Os per annum. Now as Coghlan , ~
... ■ . 1 ~ • ° i that the average wages paid
estimât «s the average earnings per male , . tr ’,, 1
at £BO 13s 2d it follows that you tax f er man , f rtal “ Iy cou!d . not
him to the extent c: 15 per cent of his h , ave exoe,,dacl fl oos P'T week n la f
• o o [, I v , place waere profits are abnormally lug’ll
earnings if there am 6 others aependent r &
~ ° Tr i Pion * .. aad the cost or living qane as atwior-
on him. If he earns £l2O you tax him ~ ~ , , ° 1 , ,
10 per cent on hk earnings; if he F” 1 y bl S b and ( the em P loymsnt un-
reoeives £l2OO you tax him 1 per cent ; K a tiy 111 nü ex reme-
£24oo a year Jpe r ceut. and so on. Most of the shareholders of these
If no is dependent c n him you tax him mines live out of the colony and I can-
i per cent. Thci Hon. John See not say how many individuals sharing in,
informed his audier.ee at Newcastle that or dependent on those dividends, contri-
the rate of taxation this year was some- bute to the revenue under the system of
thiog like £2 16s 10d p°r head. lam taxation ; but I assume it is safe to
trusting to my memory k.t I know it say not more than 400 individuals do so
was between £2 Iris and £2 17s. If contribute. I think it is generally ituder-
you add 25 per cend and multiply it by stood that the poorer people have larger
4 you will have a ta ■ r ation of £l4 4s per families on the principle taught by natural
family of 4 under Dibbs,’tariff, and £l2 9s history, viz., that the more hunted the
under Parkes’, an appreciable difference, animal th-> faster it breeds. 400 at £1
£2 9s lOd per head equals 4.36 per 11s gives the sum of £622 10s, taken
cent, on the average income of the from the mine owners, whose dividends
mean population, 25 per cent, for that half-year amounted to
added gives us 3.45 on the average £625,945. Now if you assume
income of £57. The reason men are that each wage earner at Broken
satisfied to be taxed in this way is that Hill has three others dependent on him
they do not realise that they are so you have 10,180 individuals paying into
taxed. If I put it in another way you thetreasury an average taxation of£l 11s
will see that the thing is really as bad l-|d per half year which amounts to
as it is represented to be. In 1890 the £15.842 taken out of the £160,861
total taxation, with 25 per cent, added wages, and equals more than 10 per
was £3,435,424. Would you be sur- cent of the average earnina-s.
prised to know that, this is more than _ , , . .
half, more than £0 per cent, of the T , ho "gb the evils arising from such
amount which is paid for houses and methods of raising revenue are great
land other than that, used for agricultural they are m no way to be compared in
pastoral and mining purposes, which in magnitude with the evils which anse
the same year amounted to £6,120,000. fr f °” tbe fallu J e of rals,n S revamle . ou
When you make your payment for ° f tb ? land valu f;. As , a reBnlt ° f ” ot
. - i4 ', . hm Him» nni* r\ n n 1 1 \w<irlrc! «wrt nnr. no_
on terms which the landowners dictate, have been, but could have been oo*
Education is enabling men around us siructed entirely out of the vaine» whi«h
Be as thrifty as you like, deny your-
self every comfort, slave for your chil-
dren as you will, work a lifetime to
make a good business, hand it down to
your children ; and know that, as sure-
ly as you can know anything
in life that sooner or later
your thrift, your indutry, and
all the results of yonr self-denial,
will, if your son be landless, go to tho
man who is possessed of the land.
All savings, all property, ultimately
comes to him, and to him only
who is possesssd of the most powerful
of all weapons, the most irresistible
power in our modern civilisation—un-
earned values. Count the number of
the land value owners in any given
country aad you count the slaveholders.
Count the landless and you count the
slaves, or the fathers of future slaves.
In the power of the private landowner to
deny you the right to toil, in his power
to strike against employing you which he
does every hour of bis life, in the power
which is the cause of every strike of
modern times, in the power which you
increase with every hour’s toil, in the
power which yo i strengthen every
day you fail to attack it,
in that power even more than in K'is
power to rob you o c the fruits- of .your
ijcio iic-u t JOii v/i* ù\o liickbtOl
The land question is so little understood
that you will hear nen say it may be
an important question in new countries
but it is of little importance
in the old ones. Gentlemen,
whatever the evils of private ownership
are the least discernable aad most
difficult to realise, there they are most
intense. I find on reference to Muihall
that in England the power of the
private landowner is as great as here,
that in that country he not only always
can, but always does, annually by means
of an increased rental take to himself an
amount equal to the total accu-
mulated savings of the working
classes to any given date. Mr. John
Hee, in the House, deplored the
alleged fall that had taken place in
the value of land in England, but I may
state, on the authority of Muihall, that
in sixty years ths rental per house had
risen from £8 8s per annum to
whilst the rent paid had risen from 24s
to 78s per individual. New South
Wales, in conjunction with Victoria, is
said to be suffering from the effects of
booms. Now we never hear of a boom that
is not at first-hand related to the land. A
land boom, whether it be a surface
land boom, a gold, silver, or copper
boom is simply an attempt prematurely
to create unearned value, or tribute-
levying power, and though it fails often
because it is premature, ultimately it
never fails. The land boom is always
with us, but it is only when an ex-
traordinary attempt is made to hasten
what is taking place all the time that
we call it a land boom. Notwith-
standing all that may be said about the
fall in price of land at any time or
at any particular place, this
rule will always hold good —
that as the copulation of any country
increases, and with it an in-
creased need for shelter and food, so
also will the value of land increase.
Those who realise this, who count on
the needs of the present generation and
those to come after—those who use
this knowledge are the authors of the
unemployed question. I have no hesita-
tion in saying that the benefits derivable
from a system, of land-value taxation,
destroying, as such a system would,
land monopoly, would be greater even
than the evils produced by our present
system of taxation. X cannot believe
that the Broken Hill st -ike would have
been possible had the mines been taxed;
as the fictitious prices could not have
been maintained, consequently no excuse
would have existed for lowering wages in
order to earn interest on, if not fictitious
certainly unearned values. I would that
the lesson ùerivable from a study of
Coghlan’s or any other official statisti-
cian’s figures, could be taught the bread
earners of the 994,3000 who have no
property. If they but understood
their meaning, all the canning
all the fighting power which every hour’s
toil places in the hands of the privileged
few, would avail them nought in a
struggle with a people once in the pos-
session of the machinery to make known
their wants and truest interest. Such
to understand than the enactment of their very erection created,
laws that are not in harmony with Perhaps one of the most bopefal, one
Nature (one of the first laws of Nature °f the most cheering indications that
is that he who work« shall eat and this opinion is gaining ground in these
be fille«) do not only fail in effecting colonies is fhe recognition of what is
any good, bat positively cause an in- cslled the betterment principle. Not
calculable amount of evil. Perhaps it that I expect much good from it,
would be safe to say that every evil because I feel it will simply be used
existent in our social system to-day a red herring to lead us
is the result of an insane sttempt to °H the trail ; still, though crude and
embody in onr written and onr common unsatisfactory, and partial in it* present
law, laws which are not embodied in form, it is nevertheless a reeog*itioa of
Nature. The laws issued by Moses the principle that the State has the
down to our own law-givers never had, right to take State-made, State-earned,
and never can have, any good or bind- values. We have therefore no lenger
ing effect, either on the people to whom to fight for the recognition of
they were issued or on posterity except principle ; but for the practical enforee-
so far as they ere true and correct nient and the practical extension of a
interpretations of Nature. principle already admitted to b« jn«t,
According to Coghlan, education, or and already, imperfectly though it may
the acquirement of so mach education be, embodied in our legislative *aact-
as will enable an individus! to read or meots. I have said that onr public
write, has made rapid progress. In works could have been built out ef State
1857 out of every 100 persons married made values ; and now for figures to
iu this colony 28 were «nable to prove it
sign the marriage register ;in 1890 less The total area of land in this colony
than 3in every 100 had to resort to the is 105,000,000 acres, the total under
expedient of making a mark; and leas'ior sold is 192,000,000, leaving
without troubling yon with any 3,000,000 which bo one ha« found it
more figures, it is satisfactory to worth while'to use. 151,000,000 acr*s g (
know that the proportion of children are i till unalienated. Nearly 45,000,000 at
able to read and write either acres have either been sold or are in one
Wfnvo nr 'V- r n- ' «/ ».V> u«Ji‘»u. oo
hetnvo nr Z"Z Ll p uit.u.
15, is greater every ye<r. I refer to f.ir as I can gather from Coghlan,
these figures because I beheve that in tbe total amount paid into the national
that one word education is to bo found treasury for the sale'of these lands from
the alpha and the omega of the solution the formation of the colony to the d<ue
of the social question.' - I amj dealing with was £32,714,268; but
Education, the prima factor in pro- a s t : e conditional purchasers still owe
during discontent, must also be the on land conditionally purchased some-
principal factor in removing the causes thing over £13.000,000 the totnl amount
Or that discontent. As a result of edu- realised to the end of 1889 was
cation men are asking why, with in- £44,000,000. It would be interesting to
creased methods of production, there is know now much has been paid out of tne
no proportionate increase in the supply Treasury for resumption of portions re-
of leisure and comfort. ' Why no division fibred for public purposes and I am in-
of results ? The mason, the bricklayer, elmed to think that the figures would be
the carpenter, and the painter, who all his of a very surprising nature. The now
life, and whose father, all his life before private owned lands for which the State
Mm, has been building houses, begins received certainly not more than
to wonder whv it is that, after building £30,000,000, after deducting same
so many, he has not one to call his own, P a 'd for resumption, arv valued ac-
and why he, like the Son of Man. is cording to Coghlan at £173,000,000,
everlastingly brought face to face with which means that, without taking into
the prospect of not knowing where to consideration the value of mining lands,
lay his head. All around the question without taking into consideration what
is asked individually and collectively really forms a very important part of the
whv is it that labor fails to receive question viz.—that the houses and im-
whnt labor earns ; and the still more provements effected on the land which
important question—why is it that Coghlan estimated at a value of
labor is not allowed to work in £129,000,000, is raally the property of
order to live? These questions form the fbe land owner, because he is the land-
alpha of the social question, as the ad- owner. It means, I s*y, that those who
mission and the knowledge of an evil are now i n possession of those lands
carries with it the hope of its re- valve them at_ £143,000,000 more than
moval. Now my attempt to-night is to the State received for them. This is
showthatwhatlabor,dimly aadaathrough surely a sufficient answer to anyone who
a glass, realises to be truth, viz.—that would assert that our public works, and
labor is robbed of its earnings and its even ail the public of the
right to live, is, in very truth, the case, colony could not have been paid out of
The propositions I have to put before unearned values ; and it also proves
you are 'two, and all my figures much else which your own thoughts will
shall be marshalled in proof.—lst. That suggest if you ponder over it, but which
rent in solid hard-earned cash, in one building our public, works asd not de-
payment, don’t ferget that you are Wing the cost of our public roads in
ust as surely, i bough you fail to the way we propose they should oe in
realise it, paying a.i equivalent of more f ,ltu . re > and asBf f they sh ™ ld ba ™ beea
than half that amo-mt to carry on the m the past, we have a public debt and
misgovernment of die colony. I con- hav J n S a pnbhc debt, national bank-
sider our present metho i of raising r [‘P tc y stares us rn the face every time
revenue where it should not be raised tbe P a .V'? ent , a . ar S e P ort, f ,°, f
and failing to raise it where it should be that l’! ,bho . d / alls due - sll0u!d
raised forms so important a feature in we * all eltuo J *i 0 P ay U P S®
producing the deplorable extremes of a ' B “ ewal - Ifc . lS not f E ° . dlfficalt
poverty and wealth, that I do m the light of passing events to imagine
not think I shall be- wasting your time such a time arriving. No matter how
in giving you two more illustrations great the assets of an individual, a com-
as to our me- hod of taxation P* 11 ?- a bank . or a ool ?“y> , lf from any
and its incidence, the effect «anse whatever a period of panic arises
of which is to make the poor poorer by tbero 18 d^® ln r !?f ein B atld . t,dm f
taking from them the little they get. I over the difficulty Che ye-y kindest
call every one of the 994,300 Coghlan service the British investor cou d do
refers to, poor. Every man who de- woula be to refuse us any farther loans.
pends“ or a landlord for shelter and 1 sball not wflary yo “ wltb any , fi « ure ?
consequently occupies! his premises on relating to our pnbhc debt beyond
snffrance only, poor everyone who has no sa W tb at a t fhe close of 1890 it stood
tenement he can ' call his own, poor, at £48,000 000 ; that in H ye.ro it had
everyone who, if his work ceased for a gJ OWQ so altogether out of proportion to
short time, would be brought face to the grow hof population that whereas
f -4. U , ™ ° at the close ot tke year 1879, it was
race with hanger ar a want, poor. , j . , u A e
£2l hs 6d per head, at the end of
Coghlan estimates the income ot non- 1890 it was £43 3s 4d per head of the
residents of ths colonv at £3,500,000 ; population and is still higher at the
he estimates the total income of tho present moment. I say it is monstrous
66,000 females, who in this city work tb ht nearly 1,000,000 people of this
for wages to be £2,800,000. If you as- oolon y> wb o have received from the
same that no one was dependent for sup- country no benefit except the permission
port on any one of these 66,000 females bve in return for their labor, should
yen take from their earnings £204,600. be hardened with the payment of interest
That view of the case is bad enough, ( and *be load of such a debt as this. Thei
bat if you take it for granted that burden as I have shown has been m-
every female worke ■ supports out of her curred for the benefit of the landownei
earnings which average £42 one and he, and he only, should pay for th.î
other individual, you take £405,200 benefit he has received. I know it w
or nearly 14 per cent of those Ba ‘ d ‘bat the whole community
. * ». . . . * .. knnndln Annul w Kff (Via Ovnuml I til VO V
the present system of deriving 1 revenue time forbids me to deal with. Let it
is a system that takes from the earnings n ot be forgotten that not more than
of labor an amount altogether dispropor- seven out of every 100 individuals in
tionate to the seivices and benefits ren- the community have any rignt of
dored by the State to labor. Now, be- ownership in ffie private lands of this
fore you accuse me of being afflicted with colony that those who own ths
fiscal mania, note carefully the second lands of this colony, they, and they only,
proposition, which, though inseparably are possessed ol the private property of
connected with the first, is of still the colony.
greater importance.—That the amount While on the question of the wealth
which is taken out of the earnings of of the colony let me refer you to pag«
labor under a revenue tariff, or under 630 of this volume. There Coghlan
the present really higher revenue tariff, estimates the total wealth of the colony
because it certainly is not, in any way, private end public at £586,000,000
protective, though large and though equal to £523 per head of the popula-
generally termed an indirect form of tax- tion. The private wealth he estimates
atiou, is really small and aat £407,000,000, equal to £363 per
direct form of taxation when head of the population. You will find
compared with the amount which on turning to page 639 that the income
is taken from the earnings of per head of mean population amounted
labor to pay interest on unearned to £57. Yon will find that the income
fictitious and state-made value?. It is of wage earners was considerably lass
possible to estimate and to rednee to ac- than half of the total income of the colony,
tual figures, the amount taken out of the Tho average wages earned per male
earnings of labor by the state under the was £BO 13s 2d and the average wage
heading of taxation ; bat it is utterly per female £42 14s 7d per annum. The
impossible to estimate what labor loses wealth oi New South Wales is. at pre-
in being denied the right to work, and sent as well distributed as in any part of
the difference between what labor gets the British empire ; but that we are
and what labor earns is involved in the rapidly travelling the road whither all
whole of the second proposition. The land monopoly leads is only too appa-
whole of that difference nltimately goes rent to the most superficial observer,
to the private land owner, the holder of From page 638 I gather that there were
unearned vaines. I recognise that in this colony 161,100 adult males wh»
every £lOO of unearned capital repre- possessed no property ; that there were
sents £lOO worth of tribute levying in this colony 994,300 people who were
power and when you remember that even possessed of no effects, other than a
the rules of compound interest are little personal property, mostly fnrni-
langbed to scorn by the holders of nn- ture. To use the words of Coghlan
a power we can only gain through a
recognition of equal political rights
embodied as they nave never yet been in
our electoral laws. —Suburban Indepen,-
earned values, then and not till then “ though the property ef the colony may
can you form any ide i of the ultimate be said to have sccumnlated in the
and true answer to the question as to hands of abont one ninth of the popula-
dent, September 24, 1892,
benefits equally by the expenditure of
tion, a more correct idea of the distribo- earnings. That is the way we treat
why labor fails to receive the recompense
*'■ ■
4
