

Jaery Stories.
By CHARLES L. MARSON.
[All rights reserved.
[1891]
E. A. PETHERICK & CO.,
ADELAIDE, MELBOURNE, AND SYDNEY.




Ad Chloen




CONTENTS.
Goblin Glue 10
The Blinding op Yewli 14
Wirra’s Scholar 27
The Mukka and Dwarf Treblekin - - 36
The Monks 50
Tutivaly, the Black Dwarf King - - 57
Through the Prickly Pear Hedge - - 70
The Land op Cockain 78
Red-brick Brownik 8§


Hussn L GW-UNQHMt, GtNtRM. PSUmtRS,
WIOIUOUIH STM.VS,


Goblin Glue.
STORY I.
THERE was once on a time a wicked Sea Troll
named Yewli, who was one of the rulers of
the Great Bight. Ages ago, he was born in a
little cave, no one knows quite where, and indeed no
one cares; but he grew uglier and uglier every day,
and shiftier and shiftier every week, and stronger and
stronger every year, until he became chief of the
wicked water things in this part of the sea. He hunted
with a pack of sharks, who obeyed no one else ;
hunted the poor fat schnappers, and even the very
whales themselves. He would send stinging things,
like policemen, to order one off from his dominions;
and when he could do nothing else, he told his
wickeder brothers what time the ships were coming,
and got them to untie the winds. He had a great
palace under the sea—a hideous black palace, all slimy
B


and hidden in masses of seaweed, and three parts
buried in the sand. There were no windows there,
for, as you well know, if the sun ever shines on a Troll
he bursts in pieces. Yewli sat in his dark palace all
day, eating sea-apples and sleeping, and at night he
came out to hunt and kill things by starlight and
moonlight.
But one night it was blowing great guns, and
game was scarce, and the sky was as black as ink.
Yewli had crawled half out of the sea, and was sitting
on the sandhills, with the foam crusting his yellow
skin. His great tawny feet, with their black nails,
were still in the breakers, when he heard his two
neighbours—the Hill Trolls —talking. Compared to
Yewli they were quite little fellows, those Hill Trolls:
reddish-brown hairy people, no taller than a good-
sized gum, with long arms and hands that could tear
down the largest branches from the trees, and teeth
that could grind stones into mud. They were dis-
cussing how they might best do a mischief to the sons
of men. Wirra, the elder one, was all for tearing up
their houses and tossing the people into the sea; but


Mukka, the younger, thought that plan too simple for
the Hill Trolls; “ and besides,” he added, “it does
not much hurt folk to die. That is a small mischief to
do them—only to kill them.” So the wind boomed,
and the Trolls plotted, and the lights were few and
faint in the town; and Yewli, seeing that it was not
nearly morning, called to the Hill Trolls to come over
and plot with him. And there they sat on the sand-
hills near the creek, and talked until a grey streak in
ihe sky frightened them back to their places before
the sun rose on the world.
I do not know whether they invented it then, or
fetched it from over the sea; but I am sure it was
Yewli’s Idea—the Goblin Glue—for that began it
hereabouts. Night after night the neighbours met, and
the sea smoked, and the hills smoked, and the children
said one to another—“ The Trolls must be brewing to-
day,” as they watched the steam and smoke roll away
in great, twisted, grey masses. The school teachers,
when they heard this, used to get angry, and say—
“ There are no Trolls, no Trolls anywhere.” But we
knew better.
b 2


At last the grey sky grew blue, and the soft sun
shone out again as usual, and a young blue moon and
a blaze of stars at night shone in a clear heaven, and
nothing seemed wrong at all. But Yewli, Wirra, and
Mukka had brewed a great cauldron full of Goblin
Glue, and the grey dwarfs were spreading it about
everywhere. You cannot see Goblin Glue, but it is
terrible stuff for all that. It gets into your hair, and
you cannot take your hat off, not even when you meet
your own sister in the road. It gets into your ears,
and then, when the sour-sorbs and the dandelions and
the orchids all whisper to you, you never hear them.
The grey dwarfs drop a handful into one man’s pocket,
and when he puts his hand in, there it sticks ; and they
flip bits into people’s eyes, and then they can only see
about a dozen things in the whole world. It gets into
people’s heads, and they get stupider and stupider every
day. The grey dwarfs smear it on fences in the
paddocks, and on workmen’s tools, and on buggies and
horses’ harness, and even on flowers; and 0! the misery
it brings ! Still, I must say that it keeps the nap on
hats and coats, and makes shirts white. They tell me


also that it keeps houses and fences from going to
decay, but lam not sure of this. In a few years
every one in the colony got some of this horrid glue on
him somewhere, and when the grey dwarfs reported to
the Trolls, Wirra was forced to confess that Mukka’s
plan was far better than his, and that Yewli was the
best of the three.
But somewhere, probably up in the bush, some
children will be bom who will be able to see this
dreadful glue, and to keep away from it, and then they
will tell us how to escape from the curse of the Trolls;
and that is what lam waiting for. I asked a white
dwarf about the matter, but he only wrung his little
hands and cried, and said the cauldron was not a
quarter empty yet; and he did not know what we
could do, for the remedies were terrible—made out of
boiling blood mostly, and the juices of white men’s
eyes.


The Blinding of Yewli.
STORY II.
4 ITTLE Roland’s house was near the sea and
was almost hidden in a nest of tall hamboos.
The Bamboos were always looking over the
wooden fence for the Wind, who was their great
friend. When he came they whispered together,
and told him messages and nodded to him, and
he told them secrets, which no one else understood,
not even Roland’s father and mother, for they
were too busy to notice such friends. The Bamboos
loved best to hear the Wind when he came from
the sea, and as Roland lay in bed he could hear
them talking together, and sometimes the Bamboos
shuddered, even the tallest of them shuddered, until
Roland wondered what things the Wind had seen out
over the sea to make people shudder, because the sun,
and the ships, and the white birds, and the sparkling
salt water, and the beautiful colored evening sky all


seemed .pleasant enough to talk about. Yet every
night he heard them talking and shuddering until he
knew there must be something terrible out over the sea,
which the Wind had seen and the Bamboos heard of.
Roland’s mother had often told him about his
great namesake in olden times, rough Roland the
Paladin, and how brave and pitiful he was, and how
ready to listen to any poor thing who cried for help,
and little Roland had made up his mind that he would
be a soldier too, like old Roland the Peerless, and go
and find out the truth of what the Wind told the
Bamboos, and search out the unhappy ones and do
them right. So he used, when he played on the shore
and found poor things, fishes and such like, dying on
the hot sands, to throw them back into the water and
say, as the priest had taught him, “ Pray God for me,
brother, in my hour of need! ” and they knew and
understood, and swam away gratefully. But one day
he found a large fish, a leathern jacket, golden and blue,
and he lay groaning on the sands in the warm morning
sun, and little Roland longed to keep him for the sake
of his beautiful skin, but the poor fish sighed and


sighed, until Roland pitied him, and dragged him to
the waves and got him afloat, and when the fish got
better he spoke and thanked little Roland in a queer
humming voice, and they had a long talk together.
The leathern jacket told him about the wonderful
ways of the sea things, and all the strange life they
lead, and how the sea caves are lighted with silver
stars. At last he had to swim away to get some food,
as he had not breakfasted that day, but he promised
to come again for a ehat, and so he did. Every day
little Roland thought of nothing else than his strange
friend, and he forgot to play and almost forgot to eat,
thinking about the sea things. But one night the
Bamboos and the Wind told stories louder than ever
and shuddered worse than usual, and little Roland
made up his mind to ask his friend the fish what it
was all about, and so he did. Then the fish told him
that it must be about Yewli, the King of the Sea
Trolls, and about his palace of black rocks, and his
pack of sharks, and about the evil he was ever planning,
and the mischief he did to men and even to fishes.
“Indeed, my dear, it was in alarm of him that I rushed


into the foam and got left by the waves, and it was a
false alarm too,” said the poor fish, a little ashamed of
himself. “Do you know where his sea palace is 1 ”
asked Koland, “ for some one ought to go and kill
him.” “0, dear ! do not talk to me about it,” said
the fish testily; “I am the father of a family,
but a flabby little thin-skinned thing like you would
have no chance against any of them, besides I do not
know how the grey dwarfs manage to get down to him
from Air World ; but Air World is a queer place, Ido
not understand it myself.” And with these words he
whisked his tail and disappeared in the blue water,
leaving a little ring of cream where he dived in.
“ Some one ought to do it,” said little Roland,
“ and if I only knew how ”
So he went back home and talked to the family
magpie about it. Magpies, as you perhaps know, have
studied all such matters, and can tell a great deal if
they only choose, and this magpie chose to help, being
tired of studying wickedness and needing a little holi-
day from such studies. “Say nothing about it, but
leave it to me,” she said, “and I will talk to the dwarfs.”


The very next morning it luckily came to pass that
the magpie met one of the grey dwarfs in the mist.
The grey dwarf was big with importance and pride,
for was he not to go down to Yewli’s palace that very
night with a message from the Hill Trolls ? “ Could
men and women anyhow get in there alive ? ” asked
the magpie carelessly, cracking an insect in her beak
as she spoke. The grey dwarf laughed. “ The charm
is easy enough,” he said, kicking a white arum lily.
“ This miserable thing is so bad for all of us, that the
fools could do anything they liked if they knew how
to use it, but then they happily do not know that,” and,
with a grin, he ran away in a wreath of curling mist.
The magpie looked up at the white flower and gently
pulled the tip of one of its wonderful leaves, and then
ruffled up her feathers and stood on one leg, and
thought and thought until the sun was well up and
breakfast had begun.
Little Roland came into the garden after breakfast,
and they sat on an old kerosene tin together, and he
heard the grey dwarf’s story. It was a funny tale
the magpie had to tell. “You must say nothing to


anyone, but just go out in the little boat to-night, ’ she
f
said, “and row towards the setting sun, and get the
fish to guide you, and then lie down in the boat and
wait, and you want nothing with you but the arum
flower, and when the grey dwarf comes jump out
after him, and you will find the way in to Yewli’s
palace, and as for the rest I cannot tell you; but I
think you had better stay at home and be quiet after
all, for no good comes of such doings.’’
But little Roland thought of old Roland, the
bravest knight of Charlemagne’s court, and how he
never cared what he endured so that he might slay
the wicked, and set the people free from tyrants, and
he resolved to try at any rate. So he went into the
house and looked at it all over, and said good-bye to
the tables and chairs, and the picture of “Evening
Shadows,” and to the Iron Duke, and to the piano
where his mother played every evening, and to the
flowers in the verandah, and to the cat, and he looked
at his stamp album and took his father’s revolver out,
but put it back again because it could not be fired in
the sea: and then he went to his mother and found


she was going out shopping, so he walked with her
and carried her parcels, and clung to her all day and
helped her in the housework, and blacked his father’s
boots until they sparkled with the polish. He thought
of the boys he played with, and the cattle, and the old
horse, and the peas in the garden, and everything
seemed far nicer than he had ever known it to be
before, as he saw it—for the last time perhaps. Then
his father and sister came to tea, and Koland did not
talk a word and looked troubled, so that they laughed
at him, and after tea he slipped out, having kissed
them all, and he picked the white arum and put it in
his bosom, and then he ran over the sandhills.
The sun was setting, and the tide was high, and
the whole air was full of quiet light, but he never
stopped for a moment, but dragged the little boat into
the water, and rowed out along the golden path as
quickly as he could pull. The little waves against
the keel sang as he rowed, and the world seemed
glorious and as if there could be no Trolls; and Eoland
shook his shock of golden hair and seemed in a dream.
But the sun went down, and a little grey mist was


rising, when a humming voice spoke to him out of the
water— “So you have come out here to look for Yewli.
Row quickly, or I shall be too late.” It was the
leathern jacket, and Roland rowed and rowed, and the
fish swam on before, until the sky grew so dark he
could not see the fish’s track; and then he said his
prayers in the boat. “Wait here,” said the fish, “and
when the grey dwarf comes, follow him. And now,
good-bye. Do not speak a word to any one, and they
will never see you.”
Roland lay quite still, and waited in the bottom of
the boat, and the mist grew thicker; but no one came.
At last he heard some one step into the boat from the
sea, but it was too dark to see; and the oars were
seized and dipped in the water. And how the boat
went along ! It was the grey dwarf who was rowing,
rowing until the waves against the keel yelled and sent
up a tall spout of sea water into the air. He did not
seem to see Roland, because, I suppose, of the magic
lily; but, by-and-by, the boat stopped, and he made a
cry like the curlew’s note, and then the boat swung
round and round until she seemed to be standing half


upright, with her nose in the air. And then the grey
dwarf leaped into the sea, and Roland after him. The
water was whirling round and round, and they had
leapt into a great round passage ; and down they went
—down to the bottom of the sea, and the little boat
floated away in the mist. There was a faint blue light
at the bottom of the sea, which came from little
creatures on the weeds, and just showed the rush of
dark waters and the black things moving in them.
The dwarf ran quickly along a passage, and Roland
after him, until they came to an enormous square black
rock, and this was opened as if a huge trap-door spider
had opened his house, and they passed in quickly, and
the rock shut tight again, and they were in Yewli’s
palace. The floor sloped down with firm sand, and
the jagged walls were lit by little tongues of greenish
pale flame; but the grey dwarf took no notice of any-
thing. He hurried down the passage, and seemed
uneasy, and looked round often; but Roland noticed
that the dwarf’s eyes never seemed to see him, and
that was because of the magic lily. It was cold and
silent there, as cold as ice, and so silent that they


could hear the sharks if one swam against the rock
outside to rub himself, and the crunch of the sand
under the dwarf’s little feet seemed to make a crackle
as he walked. Down went the path —down and down,
until they came to a huge dim cavern, and there lay
Yewli. His body was lost in the darkness, but Roland
could see huge yellow arms and black hands, every nail
of which was as broad as his own head. Yewli was
lying on his belly on the sand, resting on his elbows,
and his nails rested upon his coarse yellow cheeks.
His hair was like seaweed, and his eyes were a glassy
sea-green, shot with red gleams, and he had huge white
tusks, each one as big as the grey dwarf. Roland
seemed to be only in a dream, and he stood by, quite
curious, but not in the least frightened. The dwarf
gave his message to the monster, who smiled sleepily,
and promised to meet the Hill Trolls, and then he
sniffed and moved a little, and asked if all was right.
“I feel a smarting in my eyes,” he said, “almost as
though there were lily pollen in the air,” and with
that he winked his great fishy eyes many times.
Roland wondered how lily pollen could hurt either of


them ; but no one seemed to see him, and he took the
flower out of his bosom. Its golden tongue was there,
covered with yellow pollen ; and a quick thought came
to him to blow some into the Troll’s green eyes. No
sooner had he done so than he heard a roar like the
roar of a hundred cannon, and a shrill scream, and all
the lights went out and the sea rushed in. Yewli
had opened the door, and the cavern was filled with the
plunge of the charging sea. Roland felt himself
whirled along by the blinding water, he knew not
whither, until at last he saw a star, and felt and
heard that the waves were beating him against a rock;
and he breathed the fresh salt wind again. Then he
clung to the rock for dear life, and dragged himself
out of the sea upon a far-off coast.
And Yewli was blinded—blinded for ever, and
can never plot more. And some day he will crawl
out of his cavern by accident when the sun is up,
and then he will burst—as Trolls always do and must
when the sun shines on them.
And it all seemed to be done in a few minutes
by one child and a flower.


But there is a sad bit still to tell you, after all.
Roland was found and saved, and he got home again;
but he was not a child any more. He was an old,
grey-haired, and wrinkled man, and lame, too; and he
crawled and limped home one morning as the sun
rose. The Bamboos were gone ; his father and mother
and sister were gone; and the cattle, and the horse,
and the garden, and the lilies were gone; and the
house was all altered, and on it a board —“ To Let.”
Thirty years had gone by in the world of men since
they picked up the little boat, and thought the boy
must have been drowned, and cried about him.
But the magpie was sitting on a sheaoak, and
she knew the lame old man—knew him at once.
“I am glad you have got back,” she said. “I
knew you would; but they are all gone away, and
I am the oldest magpie about here.”
Roland found out his parents. They were not
dead, nor his sister; but they refused to know him,
and thought him an old mad tramp. So he went
back to the magpie and told her. “Well,” she said,
“what could you expect? You gave them all up,
c


and yourself, too, to go after Sea Trolls. You must
pay the fiddler, if you will dauce. That is but fair.”
“But Yewli is blind, and they have made their
last cauldron of Goblin Glue,” said old Roland.
“Yes,” said the magpie, “but you won’t see the
end of it; and no one will believe your story except
poor old me.”
Roland’s eyes shone, and he looked at the sea,
and then at the beautiful hills, in silence, and at last
said again—“ But Yewli is blind ; Yewli is blind.”
“0, yes!” said the magpie, angrily. Then she
ate an earwig, and whistled. And so they parted.
But Yewli is blind now, and that is the great
thing.


Wirra's Scholar.
STORY III.
TIM TOMKINS was a grubby and greedy school
boy, who never played football, or cricket,
or hockey, or any game but marbles, and
he cheated at marbles. He never bathed, either
under the shower or in the sea unless he was forced,
and he never took off his hat, even when he met
with a lady he knew. He lived chiefly to eat,
and to hunt cats, and throw stones at weak and old
people; and his parents were at their wits’ end to
know what they could do with him when he should
grow up. One day Tim’s father caught him pulling out
the tail of a beautiful Port Lincoln parrot that belonged
to his little sister Nell, and Tim caught it, that day, as
he well deserved. He was thrashed with a malacca
cane until his dirty body tingled, and, in his anger and
tears, he resolved to run away. So he did, and that
c 2


very day he ran towards the hills and got there about
night-time, and hid himself in the scrub and ate sweets
and cakes he had bought on the way with one and nine-
pence, which he had stolen from off the kitchen dresser.
The day had been hot, but the night was cold, and Tim
began to wish he were safe back again, for his anger
was cooled, and he felt tired and generally uneasy; but
he noticed near him a hole in the hill side, such as
folks make when they are “ prospecting for minerals,”
and, as it was growing dark, he crept in and huddled
himself together to sleep.
The stones hurt him, although he had gathered
some ferns and heath, and he was afraid of centipedes
or scorpions, or lest a snake should find his way there,
so he could not sleep.
At last he heard the sound of little feet, and he
saw a small man looking into the hole. He was grey
all over, face and clothes, and cap and hair, as grey as a
piece of granite rock, and he had long eyes like a
Chinaman and a large mouth, and in his hand he
carried a candle shaped like a cricket ball. He looked
in, and seeing Tim’s white face he went into peals and


peals of laughter that sounded unearthly and mocking.
Tim was frightened and vexed, but said nothing. At
last the little man took off his grey cap and made a
most low bow, and said, “ I am delighted to see you,
Sir ! You have come just in the nick of time when we
wanted one more boarder in our school.” Then Tim got
up and bolted for the mouth of the cave, but the grey
dwarf simply stretched out his arm, and Tim, after one
attempt, felt he might as well have rushed against a
feather-edged rail as against that little grey arm, so he
kept quiet, and trembled from head to foot and began
to blubber. But the dwarf took no notice. He gave a
long whistle, and the back of the cave began to move,
and a heavy door of stone opened and showed a large
passage straight into the hill. The dwarf pushed Tim
before him and shut the door and locked it, and
grinned again. “Go on please, most distinguished
Sir,” said the dwarf, and gave Tim a pinch and a
twitch that made him jump and hurry on in front.
The dwarf ran, and Tim ran down the long round
passage, and at last they came to a hall, in the middle
of which was a huge black table.


Round that table sat a queer company, grey dwarfs
and men, and two black dwarfs more hideous than the
grey ones, and towering above them was a huge red
Troll, with white gleaming eyes, whose large arms lay
along the table and clutched an immense wooden
drinking cup cut out of a hollow tree trunk. The Troll
looked as though he had been carved out of red cedar
wood with all the knots and twists left in, and his
coarse hanks of hair hung in a tangled mane down his
back. An old worn fur robe covered his chest, and his
bare arms and hands were mottled with brown stains.
When Tim and his companion entered, the company
stopped talking and all looked at them. The dwarfs,
whose faces could just look over the black table,
grinned maliciously. The men looked sodden and like
bewildered blinkards, and Wirra just moved one long
knotted finger and pointed to a vacant place. In another
minute the dwarf had pushed Tim thither, and the
talking and laughing and drinking began again. Wirra’s
school always begins like that.
All round the cavern upon jets of rocks stood
round balls, which burnt fizzingly, like damp candles,


and in a dark corner there was a something quivering
like a rush of shadows. It was the fire, hut the flames
were black instead of yellow, so that they did not look
like flames at all.
Everybody talked at once, and they all looked at
Tim in turn, and called him a “ distinguished visitor ”
and one of the “ most remarkable men in the colony.”
Then he was given a wooden pannikin, and it was filled
with dirty-looking water and he was made to drink. It
tasted like very coarse syrup at first, and then gave
him a burning feeling in the stomach and made him
swimmy about the head, and he felt as if his eyes were
lumps of gum; but everybody was so agreeable that he
began to be quite agreeable too (for him) and to scowl
as freely as if he were at his father’s tea-table. He felt
that his importance was recognised at last, and as he
was praised more and more lustily, he grew less and less
timid, until at last he got up from his chair and said he
was glad to come to that school, and thought the master
and other fellows were just his sort, and then he said
“ er-er-er ” several times and sat down, wishing he had
not drunk so much syrup.


Bursts of applause followed this speech and loud
whispers of “able and eloquent,” “a Demosthenes,”
“a Cicero,” “grand,” “an Australian Burke,” <kc., &c.,
and though Tim did not know what they meant, he felt
quite proud of himself.
He was astonished at the way in which Wirra
moved about. Now he seemed as still as a statue, and
now he would suddenly appear the other side of the
table, or far away in the cavern; now he would be
lying in front of the black fire, and now he would
disappear altogether.
After a long time the company broke up, and
Tim’s dwarf told him to follow into the second school-
room. He did; and in a moment he heard a door open,
and was in a stuffy, hot, little rock chamber. On
every side were looking-glasses, which made it seem
enormously big, for they reflected one another. Tim
saw himself on every side, from every point of view.
He turned round, and a hundred images turned, too;
and he ceased to scowl, for he had only himself to
scowl at; and he grinned at himself in the way the
dwarfs grin. Such habits are easily learnt. He


grinned for about an hour, when the door opened, and
the dwarf told him that he had done well, that school
was over, and that he should be given a new suit of
clothes and be sent home for the holidays. It was a
large check suit, and a large white band of linen which
went round his throat, and all was smeared with goblin
glue within and without. After he had put on these
clothes the dwarf gave him a cup of stuff and told him
to drink it. So he drank it, and it was like salt water
and treacle, and in a moment he was back in the outer
cave, and the morning was getting grey.
Tim rose and yawned, and slowly he began to
forget all that he had seen in the mountain. It was
the effect of the draught which made him forget nearly
everything, except how important he was. Folk who
have been to Wirra’s school remember nothing else
about it but that.
He sauntered home in a leisurely way, and
swaggered into his father’s house. Everyone looked at
him in his new clothes with astonishment, but Tim could
not remember where he got them, or anything except
that he was the most remarkable man in the colony,


In vain his father laughed at him, his schoolmates
kicked him, the masters snubbed him. He insisted on
making his ugly voice heard on every possible occasion;
and now at last he writes books and articles in news-
papers to say how very very important he is, and that
is, I believe, the way in which he earns his living. He
washes now more often than he used to do, I am glad
to say.
But every year, when the day comes round, he
cannot help going up to the hills, and always by
accident he rests in the little shaft, and the grey dwarf
takes him into Wirra’s school, and they dose him again
with their dreadful drinks, and call him Demosthenes
and Cicero. Then they pinch him and kick him a
little, and give him a horseshoe pin, or some bad cigars
well smeared with goblin glue, and they give him
another dose of forgetful medicine and send him
back.
But one day, unless we can stop him, he will go
there once too often, and Wirra will quietly seize on
him at supper, and will wring his neck and roast him at
the black fire, and they will then tear him and each


will have one of his bones to suck; that is the usual
fate of the scholars at this school.
No one may call him Tim now : even his
mother has to call him Mr. Timothy; and he is uglier
than ever. But all the same we ought to stop him
from getting his neck wrung.


Troll MukKa and Dwarf
Treblekin.
STORY IV.
AJf UKKA is the youngest of the Hill Trolls—
J r he is only a few hundred years old. He
never kept a school, and roves about a
good deal. He likes to hear the chink chink of the
miner’s pick near his cave, and then to flood him
out with dirty water, or to bury him in loose earth.
He always goes afoot, not like Wirra; Wirra rides
a big black horse, at full gallop on the moonless
nights, and the winds shriek when he rides over
them and hits them with his stirrup; but Mukka
has got an air raft and can sail on a black cloud if he
gets one thick enough. He might sail on a thick white
one, but then the sun would touch him and he would
burst in pieces. He can drink up all the water in
the creeks and waterholes and wells, and when the


sheep come to water they find only grey mud, and
then Mukka laughs. He likes to drink the tanks
dry while the station hands are asleep on hot nights.
Once on a time there was a girl named Elsie, who
lived on a station. Her father was a shepherd, and
Elsie never went to school—partly because there was not
a school there. She never wore shoes, or hardly ever,
but she could ride the wildest horse through the scrub,
and she could track like any blackfellow. Once when
she was quite little she had seen a white dwarf; she
found him asleep under a native cherry, and she
thought he must be a small boy, who had got bushed.
She got off her horse and woke him up, and when he
uncurled his face from his arms she saw that he had a
golden beard and quick blue eyes. She asked him if he
were bushed : but he laughed, and said he lived there,
and that his name was Treblekin. She gave him some
bread and cheese which she had, and he ate it and thanked
her, and then ran quickly over the next hillock and she
thought he was gone; but he came back and called out
that he would remember her and help her once, when
she was in danger, and then he ran away. Elsie caught


her horse and went after him, hut she could not find
him, or see any traces of him. A few weeks after that
Elsie was thrown from her horse and broke her leg badly,
and she was lame from thenceforth, but Treblekin
never came to help her. Then she had another mis-
fortune. Her horse broke his leg in a rabbit-hole, and
she was miles away from home and her leg was too
lame to walk back. They found her next day, half
dead with thirst, but Treblekin never helped her then.
Elsie was very beautiful, though she was lame.
She had a holy, kind face, and everybody liked her.
When she was confirmed, and hopped up to the
Bishop on her crutch, people said she looked like
one of the saints, and they all said, “ What a pity such
a fine lass should be lame ! ”
One day her father told her that she was going to
be sent to town : and so she had to say good-bye to the
horses and dogs and all the old wild life without shoes,
and to travel miles and miles, with not a soul to talk
to, in coach and rail. At last she got to the town,
and her aunt met her and took her to her own house.
At first she liked it: the streets interested her and the


shops, and the Italians playing at the edge of the pave-
ment, and the music in church, and all the houses, and
the gardens: and then she liked her little cousins, and
could tell them all about the station, and the horses,
and the wallaby hunts, and at last she told them
about Treblekin. They did not believe about Treblekin,
and only laughed at her and told their aunt, who told
poor Elsie not to “ fill the children’s heads with such
nonsense.” She cried a good deal at that, and then
her cousins laughed more. They went to a Model
school, and learnt geography and geology and many
other things, and how to be larrikins, but
Elsie could hardly read and knew nothing by heart
except the church Catechism and some of the old
ballads her grandfather taught her. They told her
that it was waste of time to go to church, and called
her a saint in mockery. Every day she had to go to
school—to a private school—and the mistress and girls
laughed at her because she could never remember seven
times, though she was so big, and strong too in spite of
her lame leg, and so she longed to get home again.
At last it was summer and she went home; and


there they all were, and the horses and dogs and grand-
father and the cats, and she was glad to see them; but
the place looked small and poor, and the tea tasted
nasty, and she was tired, and it was fearfully hot, and
the flies were awful.
Next day Elsie went for a ride with her brother
Tom, and they rode to the salt lake and got there about
sunset. They saw to their astonishment a huge black
raft lying on the sand, and as they came over the hills
to it, the brown sail moved in the wind and the cords
creaked. The horses saw it too, and got mad with
fright and bolted. Elsie was brushed off in the scrub
and her horse ran away, and Tom’s horse carried him
far away before he could stop it. Elsie got up and
looked, and was curious and limped towards the raft,
and thought she would look at it while Tom caught her
horse.
So she found a stick and helped herself along, and
came right up to the raft, and clambered right on to it.
It was far too big to sail on the lake, and yet it seemed
well used and very old, and the ropes were worn.
There was nothing on it but a few large coils of thick


rope and some extra planks, and all was as still as
death, so Elsie sat quiet and simply waited. Now the
darkness came on quickly, and as it grew dark she saw
a black cloud, darker than the dark air, rising from the
edge of the lake, and it moved and grew bigger,
swelling like a bladder when one blows it. Then she
heard a rustle in the sand and a tumbling of sand and
stones, and at last she felt sure that something must be
coming out of the ground, and she trembled very much.
But the black cloud covered the raft, and she crouched
behind a huge coil of rope and hid her face.
The raft shook with a heavy foot, and the ropes
creaked, and the wind lifted the sail, and there was
a rocking, and Elsie felt they were moving and she
sprang up, and was going to scream, but she was
too astonished. A tall giant sat in the raft and
steered it. He had a thin face, with hollow cheeks
and a sad look, and was looking up to the masthead.
From the top of the mast floated a white flag, like
a stream of white cloud touched by the moon, and
it lit up the raft, and they were floating on what
looked like black water and sailing swiftly along.
n


When Elsie moved the giant’s eyes fell sadly down
and rested upon her. “ Who are you 1 ” he said at
last in a noiseless sort of voice,” “and why do you
sail in Mukka’s ship and over the black air 1 ” He
did not seem angry, and Elsie rather liked him
though he was a Troll, so she told him simply how
it happened, and asked him to put her back
at the lake, but he shook his head and said she must
first come for a voyage with him. Then he tightened a
rope and the boat heeled over a little, and without any
noise or splash they seemed to be going at a frightful
pace. “ Hold tight,” said the Troll, and the boat
swung round a hill top and they went faster than
ever. Soon Elsie’s nose and one ear began to bleed,
(they went so fast you know !), and the Troll handed her
a shining hard sort of tiny pebble to put in her ear, and
that stopped the bleeding. Then the boat stopped at a
high mountain top, and the Troll went out and told
Elsie to sit still and he would take her home then, and
he soon came back.
He kissed Elsie on her cheek with his thin lips,
and off went the boat, and the black cloud-water rolled


behind them in silent waves, and soon the raft
jolted on the land again and the jolt flung Elsie
out. She hurt herself and lay insensible upon the
ground.
When she came to, she seemed to hear a voice
saying— “ When all the rest fail you will meet
Treblekin at the salt lake.” But she saw no one,
and presently she heard a coo-ee, and a gun went off,
and she knew her people had come to look for her,
and it was daybreak. She coo-ee-ed back, and they
soon found her and took her back. “ That was a
nasty fall she got,” her brother was saying. “ The
horses took fright at a huge shadow like a sail, and
threw Elsie off. What a mark on her cheek ! And
how queer she looks ! ” “No wonder ! ” answered
her father; “she has been lying insensible in the
scrub all night.” Elsie said nothing, for it all seemed
a kind of dream.
When she got home she looked in the glass, and
saw a white face, with a long whiter scar on one cheek,
just where Mukka had kissed her; and the rocking
of the air-raft still made her eyes heavy-looking.
D 2


She came downstairs, and something got in her
right eye, and she closed it—when, lo! she seemed to
be in a room mostly of black charcoal, and as damp
as a vault. She got the speck out of her eye, and
opened that, and all looked as usual. Then she shut
one eye again, and all was hideous. It was the side
of her face, which she had touched with Mukka’s
pebble, which saw so queerly. Then her grandfather
came into the room, and she looked at him with her
queer left eye. He first seemed to be a mass of
raw, red flesh, smoking with white smoke; and as
she looked at him steadily he seemed to flow away,
until only a toothless skeleton stood there, and then
even that became a heap of black smoking ash, with
white and yellow powder sprinkled upon it. And
then she opened her eye, and there was the old man
in his chair, reading his large print prayer-book.
At first Elsie was horrified at herself, but after a
little she rather liked looking out of the queer eye,
and liked seeing the flowers curl up and turn black and
become steam, and fall into charcoal and iron rust; and
the books look black and drip with water, and


everybody get raw and become barebones, and at
last smoke. She used to describe these horrible
things, and then she was praised by her parents for
being clever; and at school she got put at the top
of all the classes.
But sometimes grandfather shook his head over
her, and the priest sighed, when he thought of her
holy young face at the confirmation; and sometimes
the scar on her face twitched, as lips do when they
kiss, and that was uncomfortable. For all that, she
got on splendidly at school.
But whenever she looked at babies with her
queer eye, or at little children, they screamed; and
the dogs would not follow her; and the magpie alone
used to peer into her face with apparent pleasure.
Then Elsie went to church, and shut her right eye,
and the walls fell to mud, and the great stained
window looked like a heap of sand, and the holy altar
turned black, and the priest became a skeleton, and
the chalice alone remained silver, but lost its shape ;
and there appeared to be nothing but sand and mud
and water salt with people’s tears, a little silver and


some bones, and the spinning of dead worms. And
Elsie opened her eye again and shuddered.
Then she felt cold, and went home, and she
longed to tell some one about it, but could not think
whom to tell. She thought over all the folk she knew,
but no one seemed near enough to tell. She thought
one was an old frump, and another was an old fool,
and one gossipped, and another had pimples, and they
were all really skeletons and ashes; and she hated
them all! Yes, all! Then the magpie peered at her
and warbled, and he seemed to be laughing,
and said something like “It’s all tit for tat,” with
his beak in the air. What could he mean 1 ! Did
they all hate her 1 Yes! they evidently did; Elsie
could see it all now. And she remembered how the
boys did not care to ride with her, and how the
girls at school whispered about her, and how the
babies screamed. So she hated them all the more,
and felt cold and 0! so miserable and lonely and
clever !
About this time Elsie became a teacher, and she
was called the best teacher in the colony, because she


chiefly taught what she saw with her one eye. But
that made her all the more miserable, and the scar
in her face twitched more and more, and she hated
everybody, even the horses; and no one liked her, for,
as you may imagine, she was utterly disagreeable.
At last she went home again for a bit, and rode
out to the salt lake, and remembered how she had
sailed in the Troll’s raft, and she thought how stupid she
used to be before then. The sky was just the old colour,
and the lake was just the old size, and Elsie for once did
not look at them with her left eye; so the sky did
not become black and get emptied of its pink clouds
and its sunset lights. Instead, Elsie sat on the ground,
and she put her face on her knees and sobbed until
her head ached. And then she cried out —“Treblekin !
cannot you help me ? ” She was only half in earnest
when she said that; but she heard a patter—a real
patter —of feet, and there was a little white dwarf
just up to her knees, and he had golden hair and a
golden beard, and brave blue eyes. And he looked
at her, and said —“ Well! So you’ve come at last 1 I
know what you want.” He laid his two little elbows


on her knees, and took her blubbery, scarred face in
his hands, and examined the scar where Mukka had
kissed her ; and then he quite slowly kissed the other
cheek, and said—“ That will grow right now.” Then
he said to her—“ Mukka’s pebble is still in your left
ear, and no one can ever get it out. But I will tell
you what to do. There is a little English weed
called Fumitory. Do you know it 1 No ? Well, ask
the'priest; it grows in his garden. You must distil
that, and mix it with a little honey of roses, and
drop that in the right ear.”
Elsie looked up to thank him; but he was gone,
and her scar seemed to be all on fire, and it hurt.
But next day it was smaller, and next day smaller,
and at last it faded away, almost quite. The priest
gave her some Fumitory and honey of roses, too, and
she used them—and what do you think happened 1
When she opened her left eye by itself, her old
grandfather looked still only a dreadful heap of ashes;
but when she opened her right eye by itself, he was
a tall, bold young man, with a beautiful brave face
and bright golden hair. But when she opened both


eyes, he was her dear old granddad, who so often
told her tales. Then she went about and opened the
right eye, and saw such glorious things, as even the
priest had never before dreamt of, in all his life.
When she opened both eyes she saw what ordinary
folk saw ; and that is what she does mostly. All
the babies and cats and dogs and everybody like her
now; and though she is still a little lame, and has
a little scar on her face, she has almost forgotten
Mukka and his bitter kiss, and the jewel to stop
bleeding; but Treblekin sometimes talks to her still
at the salt lake.


The Monks.
STORY V.
ONCE on a time there was a great town named
Highlea, where the people were very wicked.
They only cared about quarrelling and fighting
and hurting one another; but they were such cowards
that they hardly ever fought face to face, but when
a man had passed his enemy, the enemy would hit
him with a club on the head, and then run away.
When they were not watching to hit their enemies,
they used to have baths of warm mud, for there were
hot mud-springs near there. They did not do much
work, but other people fed them well, and gave them
clothes for nothing. Ido not know why these other
people did so, but they did. The people of Highlea
were, some of them, tired of living in that town,
and of doing nothing but eat and hit other people’s
heads, and take mud baths, and get their own heads


hit. So, when a little old man talked to them, they
were inclined to do what he told them. That was,
to build a large house near Highlea and become
monks. Lots of the people became monks, and the
little old man was the Prior, or head man among
them.
The Prior was a strict little old man, and the
monks were not very accustomed to obey, or to pray.
They grumbled at all the things he made them do.
They all had to get up at midnight, and the youngest
carried a lantern, and they went to church for a service
called “ matins ” every night. Then, at six o’clock in
the morning, another service called “ prime ” was said.
Another called “ terce ” was said at nine o’clock;
another called “ sext ” at noon ; another called “ nones ”
at three o’clock ; and another called “ compline ” at six
in the evening. Besides all these they had other
services, masses, in the church, and lots of scrubbing,
cooking, and washing to do, and gardening besides, for
flowers grew everywhere, within and without. The
little old Prior was a short man, with a long nose and
a keen eye. He walked with his shoulders up to his


ears, and he had rather long feet. He used to waddle
somewhat, but whenever he came to look over the
monks at work they trembled. If any one left any
crumbs, or did not make clean the saucepans, or left
any dust in the rooms called Dorter, Frater, and
Farmery, the Prior would be sure to see it; and
then he would say—“ Dust is the serpent’s meat,
and we want not the old serpent fed here.” After
this he would punish them, and make them chop
wood for a long time, or kneel on the cold stones.
If any one slept too long, or talked too much,
or said anything unseemly, or sang the Psalms care-
lessly, the Prior would be sure to know it and
punish him.
One day the Prior had to leave the monastery
and go on a long journey, and the Sub-Prior ruled
in his place. He loved sleep and meat. So,
little by little, the prayers grew fewer, and the
dinners grew larger; the flowers and mint and
fennel in the jars were not changed so often, and
the scrubbing was not done so well. Then some of
the monks sighed for the strict old Prior; but others


made fun of him, and wanted him by no means
to return.
Now, one day there came a lad to the monastery,
and begged to be allowed to come in as a monk,
and the Sub-Prior had him in on trial. He was a
dark, lean lad, and clever. He could sing merry
songs, and he always seemed to be awake and active,
and he made jests for the brothers. They called
him Brother Swart, and the monks used to love to
hear his tales, even in the holy church itself, and,
alas! even at mass time. Brother Swart made great
fun of the little old Prior and his strict ways, and
stirred up the monks against him.
Now, after a long time, the little Prior returned,
and he said very little, but looked round and saw
how things went; and he looked at Brother Swart,
who hid behind a fat brother as best he could. But
that same night, at matins, half the monks did not
get up; and at the other services they slept or
chatted, some in the church, and some anywhere else.
The old Prior was sorely troubled, and he called them
together and told them how grieved he was; and he


very sternly rebuked them, and forbade them to talk
at all for several days. All the monks grumbled,
and Brother Swart made greater fun of the Prior
than ever, and broke the silence at every hour of
the day; and at the services he sang ribald lampoons
upon the Prior instead of singing the holy words.
At last there came a great feast day, when all
the monks were to go out of the monastery into the
green fields, singing psalms and carrying the great
cross and the banner of our Lord and of his saints.
The Prior walked at the head, and was to preach to
the people, and tell them how they might live better
in this world and dress their souls for better company
still. But on that very morning many of the monks
had been sleepy, and did not come to the prime, and
so he had bidden the drowsy ones to fast until the
evensong. They were filled with angry thoughts
against him, and Brother Swart had stirred them up
all he could.
So, when the procession filed out of the great
gate, and the holy psalm was raised, the Prior heard
the people laughing, and he could not understand


why. But all the way along the people laughed at
the procession, until the Prior stood still and bade the
cross-bearer stand also, and he looked behind him.
The wicked monks had all got at the back, and they all
had long feet and long noses, and all their shoulders
were up to their ears, and they were waddling along
in masquerade to make fun of the Prior. Now, when
the old man saw this, he was not angry, but he was
sorely afraid lest such foolish monks should be
chastened of God, and he flung himself before the
great cross and lay on the ground in tears, and, with
deep prayers for them, he cried for mercy.
Now while he lay there, a bright-faced young
man, clothed in scarlet, came from among the people
and prepared to smite the wicked monks with a long,
steel sword, and they all fled from him, but the
Prior rose from the ground and ran quickly and
beseeched him not to slay them. Then in an instant
those wicked monks were changed into queer birds,
which flew far away. As they flew, one of them
bore in his beak a hissing, wriggling, black snake,
and that was Brother Swart. Then the young man


said to the Prior—“ These wicked men are changed
into birds, and they are banished to a far-off land
to repent. When they can say the six services
every day for a hundred years without missing one,
they will become men again; but Brother Swart
will be a black snake for all a thousand years.”
Then the Prior went home with the rest of the
monks, and there was peace in the monastery from
that time onwards.
But the people call those monk-birds the laughing-
jackasses, and the black snake they still call Brother
Swart.


Tutivaly, the Black Dwarf
King.
STORY VI.
THERE was once a boy named Mat, who
invited his three friends to a birthday picnic.
Their names were Jock, Sim, and Gavin,
and each one had a kangaroo-dog of his own. These
all set out together, and Mat had a large wallet,
to be carried in turns, well filled with provisions.
It was a glorious September morning when they set
out i the grass was long and green and the air
was full of fresh scent from the wattles. They
wandered away among the hills until they found a
new hollow, which lay concealed by thick, scratchy,
kangaroo-bush, and they got into it because they saw
some bronze-winged pigeons flying there, and they
hoped to find some nests. Everything was so still
E


that you could not hear so much as an insect buzz,
and the flies had not begun to bother.
Have you ever seen a hollow in the hills shaped
like a giant’s flower-saucer ? This one was such, but
the rock walls were twenty feet high, and the floor was
a mass of ferns, and rushes, and heath, and tea-tree.
Sim was the youngest of the boys, and they used
to think very little of his advice, and even to pull his
ears and hair and to hammer his arm if he displeased
them, so he was the quietest; but this time he said
—“ Ido not like the look of this place: I vote
we go back.” “ Why, little silly 1 ” said black-haired
Gavin, throwing a fir-cone at the speaker. “I don’t
know,” said Sim; “ but look at the dogs. Ido not
like the place.” The dogs certainly did not like it.
They had come through the bush, but were shivering,
with their tails curled hard between their legs. The
elder boys looked at them and at Sim, and felt
uneasy, but none of them dared show it. “ Hi! Tyke!
s-s-s-s-cats! ” said Jock to his dog to make him run,
but the poor animal only a little slackened his tail,
as if he longed for a wag, and came closer. The


boys ran, shouting, but the dogs only hopped gently
by them, and refused even to chase a hare which
appeared in the distance.
“ Let’s have dinner,” said Mat at last; and they
sat upon a great silver log, charred on one side by
some bush fire.
The boys looked round, and everywhere they
could see the grey line of level rock going round the
place, just quivering in the warm air. “By Jove!
this is a queer place ! ” they said one to another,
“ and it’s warm here.” And so it was, for there was
not a breath of wind to stir the wild clematis. No
one knew of the place, or had seen it before, and
they lost their first uncomfortable sense in their
curiosity. All except Sim, and he kept remembering
the stories an old black woman had told him about
the dwarfs, black and white, and how queer it was
to meet them —especially to meet Tutivaly, the Black
Dwarf King.
In the valley there was a watercourse, much
overhung with bush and creepers, and half-choked
with logs and old sticks, and nearly dry. While they
e 2


were eating, the dogs looked up at this and pricked
up their ears, and snuffed, and listened. Sim noticed
them, but the others did not; and by-and-hye they
were all startled by hearing a whistle—a pretty, clear,
coaxing whistle—and the dogs ran towards the sound
evidently pleased, and that was strange, because none
of them liked strangers; but soon the boys saw,
coming along the bank of the watercourse, a little
fellow with a golden beard and a white face, who
was whistling on a kind of flute. The dogs jumped
about him as if he had been their own master, and
he seemed quite at home with them. When he got
to where the boys were he stopped, and said, “Do
you boys like music 1 ”
Now these boys generally would answer politely,
but, as the dwarf was small and they were taken by
surprise, they sniggered and whispered to one another,
and no one spoke. At last the dwarf smiled rather
sadly, and he took up his flute and began to blow.
At first the notes came slow and clear, like a sorrowful
hymn; and then they came quicklier and more
cheerfully; and then the music broke into a dance;


and then the very flute seemed changed, and the
sound rolled out, and the ring of rocks echoed it as
rocks echo the sea when the waves charge against
them; and then the sad hymn came again, but
sadlier this time; and then there came a soft cry
and a soothing; and again the hymn came, and at
last the dance, but softlier blown, and then the hymn,
loud and clearly blown, ended the piping. The boys
sat still and watched, but the dwarf said nothing.
He sighed and walked on, after a little pause.
“ I think we ought to have thanked him,” said
Jock; “I wish I could play like that.” But the
dwarf was gone, and they had not spoken to him.
But now they went on to explore the valley, or
“circus,” as they called it, and they found a good
many birds’ eggs and a Jew lizard, and tired themselves
until the sun dipped behind the walls; but they saw
no white dwarf again that day.
Then, in the twilight, they again felt uneasy.
Sim especially urged them to go home, and they
turned to do so—when a heavy rustle and a loud
hiss seemed to show that a large snake was near them.


They ran away a few steps, and were getting over
the ground pretty quickly, when they ran into a
fine, silken net, which fell upon them and covered
them, and held them struggling upon the ground.
This was no accident, for they heard the sound of
■laughter and hurrying feet, and soon they could see
a number of little black fellows about the height of
the white dwarf they had met, and these quickly
killed the poor dogs with long spears, and then seized
the boys and bound a little cord round each one’s
wrists, and then quietly rolled up the net.
“ Surely you can break that thing,” said Gavin
to Mat, and each tried, but it was quite useless, and
when anyone tried to break it, the dwarf on either
side twitched it maliciously, and it hurt and cut.
Then everyone grew faint-hearted, and each boy in turn
began to weep—first softly, and then with blubbering
and loud sobs; but, before they had finished, the
dwarfs dragged them along and led them to a deeper
hollow, and there were some picks and shovels lying
on the ground. The leader of the dwarfs came
to Mat and told him, “You will have to dig all


night for us, and we will sit round and watch you.”
So saying, he slipped the cords off Mat’s wrists, and
Master Mat, finding his fists free, immediately aimed
a hard blow at the dwarf’s face, which the dwarf
avoided, and Mat then bolted. Not a dwarf seemed
to stir, but one of them, by a turn of the wrist, had
thrown a noose over the boy, which caught him
round the stomach and jerked him cruelly. Poor
Mat, rather crestfallen, was again set free, and this
time stood still for a minute and again tried to run.
The same thing happened—a noose tightened round
him and he fell heavily, and his nose bled; hut the
dwarfs only laughed. Then the hoys were each given
a pick or shovel, and Mat was beaten with a heavy
hone rod, which he endured sullenly; and they all
began to dig in terror.
The dwarfs sat round in a ring, resting their
chins on their knees and grinning with white eyes
and teeth as the hoys tossed the sand up and tore at
the rushes and heath. “ When I say, ‘ Now !’ ”
muttered Mat, whose nose was still bleeding, “rush
and hit them with the tools, and then follow me.”


But the king of the dwarfs seemed to know what he
meant, and carelessly picked up an extra pick, and,
with a great effort, drove its point against the head
of one of the other dwarfs. The dwarf grinned, and
took no harm, but the king showed Mat the pick.
Its very point was turned !
Little by little the boys understood that they
were helpless in the hands of these small and
smiling slavemasters, and they ceased to whisper,
and dug in silence, with blistered hands and aching
backs. At last little Sim grew so tired he could
not lift the shovel—not even when they flicked him
with a whip, which was made of fine, dark hair.
Then the dwarf king gave them leave to lie down
for a moment. It was a clear, brilliant night, and
they lay on their backs and looked up at the
Southern Cross, but they ached all over and could
not think; but, before they were rested, the dwarfs
roused them up to work again. Now they had got
to soft, white quartz, and the gold-dust could be seen,
but the dwarfs never noticed that, and the boys had
to dig on.


Little Sim, after a bit, fainted again, and a
dwarf dragged him by the heels a little way out
and let him lie. So the night passed on slowly in
agony for the captives. Just when the morning was
nearly coming, the dwarfs called the boys away and
took them to a cave, where, in almost utter darkness,
they were fed with dogs’ flesh, burnt a little in the
fire, and a drink of brackish water in a bone cup was
served to each one, after which, they slept on the
ground, while the blessed sun was pouring his golden
light on all the valley outside, and drying up the
very tears they had shed.
Sim did not sleep much, but he found a bit
of hollow bone on the floor, and he blew into it and
made a faint note of music, and then, with his knife,
he cleaned the bone and began to make a fife out of
it, and the dwarfs came round and watched, much
interested. So next night, when Mat, Jock, and
Gavin were put to work, Sim was allowed to work
away at his fife, and to make it fit to play upon, and
whenever he blew the dwarfs laughed and stroked
his hair heavily, and that usually pulled some out;


but they meant it for kindness, and spared him
the whip.
Every day the boy miners slept, and every night
they dug with sore hands and were beaten, until they
felt all stupid and careless about everything. They
got to like the half-raw flesh and the brackish water
and their sleep on the floor of the cave; and every
day the hole they dug grew a little bigger.
Sim soon finished his fife, and on it he squeaked
all the tunes he could remember—“ Bonnie Dundee,”
and “ The Irish Washerwoman,” and “ Polly Oliver,”
and “Yankee Doodle,” and a lot more—and Mat,
Jock, and Gavin would look up and nod and remember
the old sun, and dream of getting free again, when
they recognized a tune, but they were not musical,
and, to tell the truth, Sim’s tunes were not exactly
accurate. Then he played the hymns they sing in
church, and the chants, but Jock had not been much
to church and the other boys only knew a very few
of these ; and then one night he struck upon a queer,
sad melody. It came to him by accident, and he did
not know where he had heard it; but Jock nodded


and nodded to him, and he tried it again, and got it
nearer right. But the dwarfs did not notice the tune
or come near, and one even flicked Sim with the
hair-whip as he played it. At last it flashed across
Sim that this was the tune the white dwarf had
played to them on their last day in the sun, and
he could not sleep when they got back to the cave
for thinking of it.
So, while the others slept, he sat up and blew
the notes on his scrannel rough fife, and this time
he got them better —when, lo! far off there came an
echo, yet not an echo, for it was far more beautiful
even than the memory of the tune—the sound of the
old music itself which came sweetly down through
the cave roof from the bright air, and the coloured
world, and the sunshine, and it answered Sim’s feeble
notes. It was the white dwarf who played, and the
black dwarfs tossed in their sleep and moaned, and one
of them woke up and angrily snatched Sim’s pipe
away and flung it against the wall, but Mat and
Jock smiled in their sleep, and Gavin woke up and
whispered—“l’ll get the fife, and then play again,


dear Sim! Play one of the tunes the dwarfs like,
and not that just yet.”
So Sim played very softly, “ Pop Goes the
Weasel,” and the dwarf king raised himself up and
listened and nodded, and then lay down to sleep
again. All the dwarfs lay quiet, and the last one just
flicked all the boys with the whip and he then lay
down and closed his eyes ; but they sat up with little
Sim. Then when Sim saw them asleep he breathed
clearly the notes of the dwarf’s hymn, and again the
echo that was more than an echo, came in a grander
piping, and little Sim suddenly remembered how the
piece went on, and he quickened his pace and played
it on louder and faster, and the other piping swelled,
too, until the cave was filled with the sound, and
the black dwarfs all got up and shook themselves
and seized their weapons, and the elder boys begged
little Sim to stop because they had no hope that
they could ever break their bonds, and they even
laid their poor, dirty, blistered hands upon him to stop
him; but he shook his head and went on.
Then the dwarfs put on their cords over the


lads, but the beautiful, solemn melody seemed to
get into the limbs of the boys, and they found the
cords snap quite easily, and they pushed past the
dwarfs and upset them. The dwarfs seemed weak
—so stupid and weak ! —and were easily pushed away,
and that is because the blessed sun was shining above,
and then the black dwarfs are always weak, if the
boys could only have known it. Nothing stopped them
now, and with their blistered and bleeding hands
they flung down the brushwood and logs from the
mouth of the cave, and once more they saw the old
blue sky, and got into the warm air, and saw the
old, green world of the day, and all the rocks rang
with the echoes of the beautiful hymn—even when
little Sim stopped his feeble music; and they heard
the same melody even after they had escaped from
the round valley and felt the breeze on the wild
hill-side blow upon them as they hastened home.


Through the Prickly Pear
Heilge.
STORY VII.
THE almond trees were just throwing down a
soft snow of white flowers in the back yard,
as the children came out from the house
in the morning. They stood under the tree and
tried to catch the falling, silky, white things in their
red mouths before they could float on to the ground.
The two elder ones caught a few, but the three little
ones could not catch any. “I shall certainly ask
father why almond trees have white flowers,” said
Mary to brother Jack. Father came by on his horse
pretty soon, and the children ran up to him and
got close to the horse’s legs, and they put the question
to him. Father sat still on his horse and looked at
the almond trees for a bit, and then said—“ I think it


is to show the bees where they are wanted. The bees
bring the pollen and the pollen makes almonds, and
the tree pays the bees their wages in honey drops.”
“But why are not almond trees all pink?” Jack
asked. “ Yes, father,” chimed in Mary; “ and we
want to ask you why the grass is green, and why
yellow-bells are yellow ? ” Father looked down at the
children and said, smiling—“ I don’t know, my dears.
I am a busy and stupid old fellow! but some day
you will read about such matters; but, even then,
I fancy you won’t understand them—this side of the
prickly pear hedge.” With that he shook his bridle-
rein, and the horse went off at a canter.
“Why does he always tell us about the prickly
pear hedge ? ” the children asked one another. “ Why
should we all be so ignorant on this side of it, and
where is the prickly pear hedge ? ” The children
had to ask for stories about all the things, and father
told them when he had time. When the almond
trees blossomed, father told them that the little fairies
were doing their washing and bleaching before the
dancing season began, but when they hung their


clothes out to dry the brown fairies mischievously
stole the pegs, and so the clothes got blown away.
The brown fairies rode on bees, but the “ good people ”
flew on their own wings. Then he told them how
the purple ants were the ground-dogs of the brown
fairies, but mosquitos were their air-dogs; but he
always ended his stories by saying, ‘‘ You can learn
all you want to know the other side of the prickly
pear hedge.”
One day Mary and Jack went to stay with old
Aunt Patience, an old, old lady who had come out
from England (I should think in the ship Buffalo),
and who had also done and learnt a great deal more
both before that happy event and since. Aunt Patience
was a white witch, and when her old hands bewitched
people she cured them of the toothache and other
aches besides; but when folk cried for the moon
even Aunt Patience could never get more than a
little bit of the moon for them, but that little bit
was often enough to show them that it looked and
tasted quite different from what they thought.
“ Well, dears ! ” said Aunt Patience, “ you shall


go through the prickly pear hedge if you want to go,
and then you can see for yourselves; but I think
you will be glad we live on this side of it, after all.”
Then Aunt Patience called her wild turkeys, six
of them; and they came at once, and she harnessed
the huge birds to a little moon chaise without wheels,
and they all set off together. Whir-r-r! how the
great wings flapped, until one could hardly see or
breathe ! Jack felt giddy, but he dared not scream,
and poor Mary was very sick before they had gone
a mile ; but at last Aunt Patience pulled the birds up,
and the chaise-and-six floated quietly to the ground.
It was the end of the world, some say, but Aunt
Patience never told them that. She simply pointed
to a great, tall hedge of prickly pears which stretched
from sky to sky. It was covered with green and
yellow pears, and yellow flowers and red buds, and
it threw up its great, fleshy leaves high into the air,
and its little sprouts studded the ground with spiny
shoots. “ There you are ! ” said Aunt Patience, “walk
along until you see a peg is in the ground with your
name on it—then push through, if you like.”
p


They had walked on a few steps when Mary
cried “ There’s my peg! ” and, sure enough, there it
was, and the hedge looked thin there. Jack wanted
to go through the same hole, but Aunt Patience said—
-41 My dear, everyone has a hole marked out for him
in this hedge, and no one can get through except
at his own place.” So Jack had to walk nearly a
mile further, which he did without grumbling.
Mary made a bold push, but the thorns ran into
her a good bit and she could not help crying out
loud, and her dress was torn, and her hair caught
in the fleshy leaves on the thorns and came out—
lots of it—and she got one foot at last through the
hedge, and then her head, and she could see her
brother almost a mile away. He had wrinkled up his
face into puckers and was trying not to cry, but the
fine needles were in his eye-lids, and his lips, and his
nostrils, and in his boots and his finger-tips and his ears
were furred with them. But they both got through
at last.
Now, just through the prickly pear hedge was a
piece of ordinary country, as it looked at first, but


on every leaf of every tree and bush you could see,
■when you looked close, an immense lot of hand-writing.
Not only the Latin name was there—as clearly as
it is written in the labels of the Botanical Gardens—
but also a long description of why it was blue-green,
scythe-shaped, sticky, flat, or whatever else it was;
and when you looked more and more at it you would
see, between the lines, still smaller print, and that
told you what medicine could be made of it, and what
insects lived on it, and why it smelt as it did. When
the wind stirred the leaves they all lectured at once,
like very learned professors, and every grass-blade which
the children came near cleared its throat and began
in a little, squeaky voice, and the rushes quickly
drowned them. “My name is Juncus Squarrosws,
and my panicle is terminal,” began one rush, but,
before he could out with his speech, the words
“foeniculum” —“like many others, a Mediterranean
Inula ” —“Gape of Good Hope”—“now a cosmopolitan
Sonchus”—“called by Shakespeare ‘The Shepherd’s
Purse ’ ” —“ you will observe the stripes which lead
to the nectaries ” —all these and a thousand more voices
*2


joined in the tangled and interminable chorus. You
could not shut your ears to it, for it grew louder and
louder, and birds came flying, and beasts, and insects,
and chirped, buzzed, hummed, grunted, squeaked all
their history, and structure, and evolution, and native
names—until the children’s heads swam ; and when
at last the thunder began roaring out a terrific lecture
on electricity, they turned back to the prickly pear
hedge and dashed at it more eagerly than ever.
If to get through was pain and grief, to return
was torture, and they left red stains on the great
thorns as they pressed back, and, blinded and smarting,
they got back at last and felt Aunt Patience’s fingers
nimbly picking the thorns out of their hands, and
feet, and faces, and she took them home again safely.
But for all that, they were not quite free from the
needles for almost a year. Then they stood again,
one August day, under the almond blossoms and
watched the white petals fall, and tried to snap them
as before; but they are not quite so anxious for
another dive through the prickly pear hedge. “I
think I like best these quiet plants and things,” says


Jack; “one can think about them in peace, but when
they all lectured like professors I could not learn a
single thing.”
But old Aunt Patience is still willing to take
any of the children in her turkey-chaise up to the
hedge. “If you go through, my dears, you will pass
all your standards, and all be top of the school, but
it hurts a good lot, and, as far as I am concerned, I
like best the quiet, beautiful things on this side of
the Prickly Pear Hedge.”


The band of Cockain.
STORY VIII.
QEORGE was a handy fellow who could do the
house-work, or the garden-work, or the milking,
as well as anyone, and his mother even
allowed him to cook the dinner when she went up
to Adelaide to buy a new gown for herself. It was
a hot day, and a North wind was blowing the dust
into clouds a hundred feet high, and George felt warm
over the saucepans. He had put the lamb into the
oven and was just peeling the last potato when he
felt a rush of heat come over him that made the
kitchen intolerable. The very blowflies were too sickly
to do more than crawl along the dresser. George
rushed out into the garden and sat near a big orange-
tree, and flapped the flies with his potato-knife.
“ How I wish dinners would get themselves ready! ”
he sighed, half aloud. “So they do in some countries! ”


said a voice from the orange-tree, and when George
looked round he saw a little brown-legged fellow
sitting upon the orange branches. He was black-eyed,
and bare-armed, and bare-legged, with a dark-green
cap and a dark-green blouse, and he had a sprig of
orange-blossom in his cap. “So they do in some
countries, I assure you,” he said again. “ Who can
he be ? ” thought George to himself—“ in our orange-
tree, too ! It makes one cool to look at him, though.”
The fairy—for he was a fairy—swung his brown legs
in time and sang a song to himself in a clear treble
voice, with no effort at all—
Heigh-ho ! when the North winds blow
All we wish is the Land o’ Cockain,
Where they whistle the wind from the Southern Sea,
And the cool just fans us to life again.
Heigh-ho 1 when the East winds blow
My heart goes out to the Land o’ Cockain,
Where they whistle the wind from the balmy West,
And the nipt blood tingles with life again.
Heigh-ho ! when the sky’s of steel
And the cattle are dying for want of rain ;
When the sun licks everything dry as dust—
Then I sigh deep for my sweet Cockain.


Heigh-ho ! when the flood comes down,
And to save the houses they struggle in vain
In the mud, and the damp, and the ugly rush—
I pant and sigh for my own Cockain.
Heigh-ho ! when the scrub’s ablaze,
And we heat
“ But you won’t get the dinner done, George, my lad,”
he said, looking sharply at George, with his black
eyes.
“No more I shall, sir! ” said George, respect-
fully, for he liked singers; “hut I’ll be out again
as soon as I’ve put on the potatoes.” In he rushed
into the sweltering kitchen and bent over the tin
and finished the last potato, and washed them, and
set the saucepan on the fire, with “cold” water and
a pinch of salt in it, and popped out again into the
garden, with a glance, as he passed, at the American
clock on the mantel-shelf. The fairy was still there,
and was still swinging his legs to the same time,
and apparently musing upon Cockain.
“Do the winds really come when you whistle
for them 1 ” said the perspiring cook.
“Undoubtedly—in Cockain,” said the fairy.


“ 0 how I wish I was there for half-an-hour! ”
said George.
The fairy broke two twigs off the tree and held
out one to the boy.
“ Catch hold of this,” said he, and while George
held it he waved the other twig in the air and sang
—something like this he sang —
Poor little soul in the tortured skin,
One step up—let the old world spin !
Lift your legs and just let it roll,
And you’re far away, you poor little soul!
He seemed to lift up George as he sang, and the
ground spun and slipped away, and then he let him
down—and there was no orange-tree, no house, and
no garden visible !
They were standing in a queer brown-and-yellow
country all in stripes, like ploughed land; but, oh,
what queer things they saw ! The trees sparkled with
pink branches. They were made of sweetmeat, and
the flowers on them were creams and caramels, and
the leaves were biscuits, and they bore all kinds of
fruits —all quite ripe, and some of them candied.


What looked like sunflowers were really tarts; and
the very pebbles were bulls’-eyes and dough-nuts. A
fallen log lay near them—it was fresh jam roll. As for
buns, they grew in bushes—the little ones at the top
and the big ones near the ground. Cheese straws
sprouted under the hedges of cake-tree, and when
you saw a bare patch on the ground it was where
some delicious bird, or joint, or pie lay, smoking hot,
ready to be eaten. George stared, and felt cooler,
for the air was delicious, and he hardly believed his
eyes.
Could he eat something 1 he asked the fairy.
“Anything you like,” said the King of Cockain
—for that was the fairy’s title—and George picked up
a large apple dumpling from the ground and began to
eat it as he stood. The King watched him and,
while he ate, chatted on pleasantly.
“ Everything in this country is delicious,” he
said; “ the streams are of milk, and ginger-beer, and
wine. What looks like soil is chocolate and brown
bread; and every flower, and leaf, and pebble, and
blade, and every bit of bark is good for food. There


are no snakes, or mosquitos, or North winds; there
is nothing poisonous, and no darkness, and, indeed,
nothing to annoy you.”
“ Surely this must he heaven,” said George; but
he secretly thought that it did not look quite so nice
as the green world, with its orange-trees, its moon,
and its winds.
“ Well,” said the little King of Cockain, “ I do
not know what you people mean by heaven ; but
when I have listened to preachers in your world they
seemed to me to be meaning to describe Cockain.”
“ Can one sit down ? ” said George.
“ Certainly; but as you have to sit on pastry, or
chocolate, or something, I advise you to taka off your
clothes—everyone does here.” That seemed sensible,
and George was soon out of his few garments, which
he hung over a dry shrub of black liquorice-sticks.
He sat on the ground and ate, and ate, and ate,
and the little King walked about and watched him.
“I wonder I do not get a stomach-ache,” said
George.
“ Impossible, my dear ! ” replied His Majesty;


“no one does here.” So George ate till his jaws were
stiff, and then dozed on the ground.
He woke up feeling rather sticky, and the King
said, “If you want a bath, whistle; and if you want
it warmer, whistle a higher note.” So said, so done.
The boy whistled, and a little breeze brought him a
little cloud, which hung over him for a minute and
sent a shower of tepid water all over him.
“ Well! this is a nice country,” said George;
and he began on a new flower again, which proved
to be a strawberry-ice.
“ Are there any other people here ? ” he asked.
The King took him by the hand and they moved
lazily over the banquet-ground, smelling fresh dainties
at every step, and they came to a thicket of jelly-
leaves, where a thin stream of soup flowed along the
ground, and the King looked in and said, “There’s
one! ” A whistle sounded from the thicket, and
they stood aside while the little cloud washed the
thicket, and then they looked in together. A huge,
fat, white, smooth maggot lay half-buried in the ground.
It looked like a very enormous cheese-mite, and George


loathed the sight of it. They looked at the maggot
as it slowly moved and' began to gnaw the ground,
and the King watched George but said nothing.
Presently the King kicked the maggot with one of
his brown toes, and, with an uneasy wallow, the thing
wriggled one end out of the ground.
“ Good heavens ! it looks a little like a man,”
said George.
The face was like that of a repulsive idiot, but
very white. The eyes were tiny, and almost closed;
the flat nose and mouth nearly joined ; and four white
teeth showed, like fishes’ teeth, between the flexible
lips.
“ He’s been here a hundred years and more,”
said the King. “I brought him because he was a
fine young fellow, and wanted to come here very
badly; but they all get like this in time.”
George saw with horror that two sets of little
withered strings at the maggot’s sides and end were
shrivelled arms and legs.
“However did he get like this?” he asked the
King of Cockain.


“ They begin just as you did, you know. They
eat and eat a lot, and then they take off their clothes
for a bath. Then they eat, and sleep, and eat, and
have showers all day long, and they get drowsier
and lazier every day. At last they lie down to eat
—it is too much trouble to pick things up. Then
they get half-blind, and then their arms and legs
shrivel, and they get so stupid they never talk. But
they can whistle—that is the curious thing —though
they are nearly deaf.” So saying he stooped down
to the uneasy maggot and whistled very loudly a few
notes at his bald head, where the shrivelled ear was
just visible. A gleam of light seemed to pass over
the dull face and the lips went together, and a shrill-
toned whistle followed. It was an air out of the old
“Beggars’ Opera,” but George did not know that,
and, after a few bars, it ended in a grunt, and
the maggot wriggled into its hole again and set to
eating.
George began to cry. “ Please, King, I want to
go home,” he said, and the black-eyed fairy laughed
and held out the same bit of orange twig to him,


and, waving the other arm, sang a little charm—like
this—
Out of Cockain, to the land of buffets,
Back to the scorching heat and pain,
To the land of frost, of toil, of poison—
Anywhere, only—out of Cockain.
In a minute they were back under the old orange-trees,
and the brown legs were swinging in time to the last
notes.
“The potatoes are just done, George, and your
mother is puffing and blowing along the road with
her new gown. Good morning! ”
“ Good morning, sir! ” and George ran to the
gate to help his mother carry the parcel.
And 0 ! what a dreadfully hot day it was!


Red-brick Brownie.
STORY IX.
Y 3 ED-BRICK BROWNIE is the kindest of all
\ the Brownies. He got his name from his
brick-red mantle, which he always wore, and
a little cap of the same colour with it. The other
Brownies are, some of them, mischievous enough; but
Red-brick Brownie never mislays things nor charms
the cream, so that he may laugh at the woman, who
churns what will never become butter. Neither
does he throw the soot into the saucepan, nor lame
the horses, nor tell the hawks and native cats where
the chickens are to be easiest found. All these things,
and a hundred more, the other Brownies do; but
Red-brick Brownie has never done anything very bad.
His worst doings have been that he has sometimes
shewn the white ants a few posts or rafters, which
served them very well; but it did not please the


builders to find them there. Red-brick Brownie, too,
warns the mice against traps and the sparrows against
poisoned wheat. He is a lazy little fellow, the other
Brownies think; but do not you believe it, my dears !
Over-busy is under-good, and a long way under, too ;
and thinking time is not time lost.
Red-brick Brownie is about as tall as a good-
sized baby. He has soft brown arms and legs, and a
round face, with dark brown eyes and long black
lashes. His toes are very small and round. Of course
he can make himself invisible when he likes, and can
curl away into the tiniest little hole; but when he
stretches himself out he is as big as a good-sized
baby.
One lovely warm evening Red-brick Brownie was
playing bo-peep with a willy-wagtail near a grove of
loquat trees. He was twisting cobwebs while he
played, and the bird tried to snatch them from
his hands, to line her nest with them. Red-brick
Brownie lost the game, for he played carelessly and
for fun, while the bird was very much in earnest.
The sun began to go down, the western sky became
a


green-yellow, and the air turned suddenly cool. It
was just that time of day when the gum trees lose
all their colour, and you can see their shapes most
clearly—their infinitely varied and beautiful shapes.
Red-brick Brownie said good-night to the bird, and
was walking softly towards a large hollow tree,
meaning to romp with the opossums till moon-set, just
to keep himself warm. Suddenly he heard sounds of
distress from the vineyard—voices he did not recognise;
and he ran, as only Brownies can run, to find out
what was the matter.
He peeped through the black vine wood, and
under a thick bough he saw a sight, which astonished
him indeed. Five little faeries, not so large as himself,
sat shivering on the ground. They had the loveliest
clear white faces, just touched with pink. The chief
one wore a soft, blue robe, like a clear Morning sky in
hue, and she had great gnat-like wings, which matched
her robe. The others wore Musk-green, Opal, Pea-red,
and Pomegranate. Brownie saw all that, and named
them in his own mind at the first glance, for Opal
carried a glow-worm torch, which she had filched from


her cousin, a Will o’ the Wisp, and that lit up the
bower, where they sat, weeping and dismayed. The
fact was that these five had stolen away from the faery
court for a frolic without telling Queen Mab and the
Faery King. They had floated away in nautilus boats
and on the backs of swallows until they had lost their
way. The sun had set, and the blue wings of Morning-
sky had been frayed, and now they were shivering with
cold and despair, for the cold dew would drench them
if it fell upon them.
Red-brick Brownie was rather shy at first, but he
soon plucked up heart, and, holding his little red hat
in his hand, he showed himself, bowing politely. The
five faeries looked at him, and then all together rushed
up to him and took hold of his brown arms, and danced
around him with joy. 11 You are one of the country
faeries, I suppose,” said Morning-sky to him; “ were
you sent by Queen Mab to tell us the way home, or
did you find us out by accident 1 ” Poor Red-brick
Brownie was not a faery properly speaking, as he had
no wings, and he had only heard of Queen Mab from
the wind elves, and he felt particularly shy at being
o 2


danced round by five strange faeries. He felt par-
ticularly wingless and brown and dusky in their
company, and half sorry he ever introduced himself
into their society. “Ho! if you please,” he said
simply, “ I do not know Queen Mab, and lam only a
Brownie.” Then the faeries laughed at him and made
game of him in the most heartless manner, because he
did not know Queen Mab, who was, according to them,
the one and only person worth knowing of all the
living sprites in faery land. Then they told him the
wonders of her court, and of the moonlight dances
which left rings on the grass, and of the magic rings
they threw on tables and on white table-cloths, which
brought “good luck,” and of the feasts and junkets
they have at Queen Mab’s court, and how they pinch
the maids who are lazy, and how they ride on sea-mews
and swallows, and a thousand other things. Eed-brick
Brownie, however, had much to tell on his side. He
told them of the enchanted island which no boat can
reach, for the bitter lake boils, and the boat is upset,
and the rowers scalded to death. “On this island is a
huge gum tree, the largest in the world, and wrapped


round and round this is the King Serpent himself. His
huge coils have worn the tree until it is like polished
glass, and it groans with his weight. He has a large
cavern, which leads to the bottom of the sea, and goes
far beneath the bitter lake and beneath the earth itself.
When the King Serpent goes to the sea he makes the
earth shake. Once a ship fired its guns at him and he
was stung by the iron balls as they bounded from his
iron scalps. Then he rose from the whirling water far
above the mast, and dashing down again caught the
great ship by the keel, and shook it as a dog shakes a
rat, and it sank, crushed into a shapeless mass.” The
faeries listened, but they hinted that stories which were
told by folk who never saw Queen Mab could not
interest them very much. “Queen Mab ! Queen Mab !”
said Eed-brick Brownie at last. “If her court is the
only enchanting spot, why are you here under a
southern vine with the Southern Cross peeping through
the tendrils at you ? ”
Red-brick Brownie, however, was too kind-hearted
to be angry. He saw that the poor faaries would not
fare well when the night dews began to fall, and he


began to think of where he could put them until the
sun and the swallows woke up, and they could get
back to their Queen Mab again.
The only place of shelter he could suggest was a
rather undignified one. You know those kakas, as
the children call them, which learned men call
cicadas 1 You know how, when they are getting to
the winged stage, the great insect climbs up a post
or a tree and cracks open. Out flies the winged thing,
and leaves its old brown skin, with staring sightless
eyes and cleft head looking upwards.
“Now,” said Eed-brick Brownie, “if you do not
mind curling yourselves up and getting into these, you
will find them comfortable enough, I can assure you;
and I will carry the torch and guard you until the
sun gets up.”
Musk-green, Opal, Pea-red, and Pomegranate were
indignant. They fluttered their wings and sailed up
in the air to let off their bad tempers. But poor
Morning-sky had frayed wings, and when one’s wings
get frayed one’s pride cools. She asked Red-brick
Brownie to excuse the others for their rudeness.


Indeed, the cool air soon brought them to reason, and
they were only too glad to hear that Morning-sky
had resolved to accept the lodgings.
The four were soon disposed of, and Red-brick
Brownie saw them sink into tiny little things and
drop snugly into the kakas’ jackets. But poor Morning-
sky, she could not fly until her blue wings grew
again, and that would not be for a day at least. So
Ked-hrick Brownie had to take her tenderly in his
brown arms and climb up a tree with her to put her
to sleep.
She rested her pretty cheek against his shoulder,
and her golden hair wove a soft silk mesh over his
arm. He swung himself up the tree with the other
arm, and before he dropped her into the kaka’s skin
he kissed her dainty lips.
“I do not know anything about Queen Mab,”
he said, “but I wish you would stay here with me
and make me glad.”
He was such a handsome Brownie, and so tender
in his ways, that the poor sick little fairy quite longed
to stay with him, and half-promised that she would.


Good Brownies. are such an immense comfort when
one is sick, that even faeries fall in love with them
a little.
Eed-brick Brownie ran for his spear, and he was
on guard all night, and walked the rounds from
sleeping faery to sleeping faery ; and he visited
Morning-sky’s sleeping-place twice for every visit to
the others. The excuse he gave to himself was that
she could not fly if anything disturbed her, but the
others could. He had slung his spear on his back,
and he carried the torch all night long. He sang to
himself as he watched, not that the faeries should
hear, but because he felt proud, and wanted to keep
awake.
ON GUARD.
Stand off, scorpions !
Venom, keep away !
Here sleeps the daintiest of faery dears,
Clad with the colour of the morning sky ;
Stand off, black bad things, till the day appears
And bright blue wings unfurl again to fly.
Stand off, scorpions!
Venom, keep away !


Faster ! Faster !
Lazy stars, run round !
Run ! run ! until your faces all look white
For with the sun she’ll rouse herself anew,
Fairer than all you faeries of the night.
Run faster, stars I we’ve watched enough with you.
Faster ! Faster !
Lazy stars, run round 1
At last it was morning, and the Sun called the
faeries up. If they looked exquisite by torch-light,
words could not picture them by day. Poor little
Brownie lowered his spear and knelt on one little
brown knee to kiss their hands in turn, but when he
got to Morning-sky he kissed her hand and then her
pink foot in devoutest homage. “You stupid fellow !”
she said, drawing it back, “you tickle my foot. ’ But
whatever she said he fancied it was altogether perfect
and generous, even when she laughed at him for his
sentinel song, and never said a word of thanks for all
the hours he had watched for them. Perhaps Queen
Mab had not taught her faeries how to behave to
Brownies.
With the sunlight came the swallows, and with


the swallows each faery had a horse, and—then —
away they went, waving their hands to Red-brick
Brownie, and laughing at his mouth, which quivered
as the swallows sailed at full speed out of sight. If
ever a Brownie could have wept real tears he would
have done so then, but they cannot you know.
So he washed his little brown legs in the creek
and let the crayfish walk over his toes, and then he
went back to the old life, just as if nothing had
happened. The only change in him is that he some-
times cries strange cries, in the vineyard at night, and
he keeps the kaka skin in his hole, and is always
asking about Queen Mab and her court, but, unfor-
tunately, no one can tell him about her.


