

<&airy
I ' $
MKS. I!i:.\riili'K WILCKKN. • .-'%^
M l IIMrl< iucmkkvkii.


4
i fa fe


PREFACE.
n «)q
|g HAVE wiled away some happy leisure hours in writing these little
stories. They were not originally intended for publication, but I
have been strongly urged by many kind friends to have them
printed. It seemed ungracious to refuse such a request, and this
must be my excuse for sending forth this little memento of my visit to
Hobart and its beautiful surroundings.
MRS. BEATRICE WILCKEN.
Hobart, November, 1890.


■^pppf.
I WM ' • ■ .
A ' . •• •


the ; :-i’t
FORGET-ME-NOT
EEP in a forest where beech, and elm and fir trees grow, there is the
fl&L source of a little brooklet, and at the side of that brooklet was once
a bower of ivy in which lived the loveliest and prettiest of fairies.
Her life was one dream of happiness. She danced in the sunbeams,
jj|H bathed her small feet in the little brook and splashed the old stone
with water until his old mossgrown head looked as if it were crowned
IISIBaS§i with diamonds. r I he old stone looked pleased though it could not
I smile very much you know. Then she threw kiss-hands up to vhe trees,
and they bowed in return and rustled their leaves from head to foot in
acknowledgement of hei sweet winning ways. She chased the butter-
flies, and when fairy and butterflies were tired they rested —she leaning
against her old friend the mossgrown stone and the butterflies resting on
(her head—a picture as lovely as a dream !
One day when she was tired of her play and resting,
I there came along a human being with book and pencil in
his hand. He threw himself on the moss and in a
rapturous voice read aloud what he had written. He was a
poet, and his heart was filled with the beauty of Nature
J .ike music the words fell from his lips and the fairy listened
'breathlessly. Then he went; but the next day he
'■ again, and then again, and the little fairy grew silent. All
I \ her playing was over. One intense wish seized her heart — asaa
/ \ the wish, the longing that she also were a human being that msm
I \ the Poet might see her and to read her those beautiful words.
Time went on, and it became mid-summer. Now
everybody knows that in the mid-summer’s night —in full jkjp
moon shine —the Queen of the fairies holds her court to hear
complaints of all her subjects and to judge rightly,
s


And so it was also
this mid-summer’s night.
In an opening i{ the
forest, where the ground
is covered with moss, the
trees grow in a circle,
and the moonbeams
have full play, the fairy court was to be held.
All the little flowers stretched their heads up
as far as they could to have a look at the
Queen —to dream ever after of her. The
glowworms lit their lamps, hanging about in
garlands and festoons, and then the court
came. In front the whole orchestra —the
gnats as harp players, the bees as violioncello
players, the frog as the big drum, and every
insect that could hum or sing doing its very
best.
Then the Fairy Queen came lying in a lily drawn by golden
beetles. When the procession arrived at the open space the orchestra
stopped playing, and silence fell on all assembled. Suddenly, first
low, then louder and louder, the wonderful song of the nightingale
was heard bursting forth with intense enthusiasm, as if all the beauty
of the summer’s night was concentrated in that glorious song.
Then silence again
The Fairy Queen spoke: —“ Let all who want to complain
come to me that I may help them.”
One little fairy came and told a tale how a most malicious bee
would persecute her, and insist upon telling how much he was in love with her.
Another complained that the nightingale sung the whole night through at her window,
and she never could get a good night’s rest. At last our dear little fairy came and
threw herself at the feet of the Queen. “ And what ails thee, my sweet little thing,”
the Queen kindly asked, “you, the happiest in all my empire.? ”
“Oh gracious Queen,” the little fairy answered “grant me one wish—the
only wish of my heart —let me be as human beings are, that I may speak to them
and they speak to me.”
Seriously the Queen looked down upon the fairy, and seriously she said :
“ You ask a dangerous thing. I will grant your wish, but only under one condition.
You shall be a human being as long as no man ever says to you ‘ I love you, and no
man ever kisses your cheek. Menlare a false race. They rush at the moment’s pleasure
and break the hearts of those who trust them. If ever a man speaks to you of love,
you will have to die ! Go, and be a human being, but never forget my words.”
And, dancing, the little fairy went home.
The next day dreamingly the Poet came along and looking up he saw a
beauteous vision. He thought for a moment that his fancy had created it; but the
vision had life and came blushing and smiling with her sweet blue eyes towards him.
They sat down together.
The Poet talked to her and read to her.


I
. -
And he went and came, and came and went, and that deadly poison, which
contains the greatest misery and the greatest happiness, that poison which human
beings call love, entered and filled their hearts.
One night when the moonlight bathed the whole of Nature in a silver glory—
when silence reigned supreme—the youth gently put his arm around the maiden’s
shoulder, drew her towards him, kissed her cheek, and whispered “ I love you.”
One moment of intense happiness, and then all Nature seemed in an immense
uproar. Thunder roared, the lightning flashed, and before them stood the Fairy
Queen ! The poor girl sank trembling on her knees, and the Fairy Queen cried
“ Vou know your doom. You have brought it upon yourself. You trusted a man.
He spoke to you of love. You die.”
But the Poet stepped forward and cried “ No ! she shall not die. She trusted
a man’s heart; she shall live for ever in that man’s heart, and shall never die
there, or ever be forgotten ! ”
A smile passed over the Fairy Queen’s face. She laid her hand on the girl’s
head, and gently she said “ No ! she shall not die ; but as a human being she
cannot live,” and under her gentle hand the body and limbs of the girl formed
themselves into leaves, the neck into a stem, the lovely head into a flower, and the
blue eyes looked up into the Poet’s face.
“ You shall not be forgotten ” said the Fairy Queen “ and ‘ Forget-me-not ’
be thy name.”
And since that time the little blue “forget-me-not” has been the emblem of
true friendship and true love.
Aozz 767*
l Cf i


gods’s fiery kisses had awakened her, and
blushingly she had unfolded leaf after leaf until she
stood in all her queenly beauty. And Nature rejoiced!
The birds sang rapturously, “ The Rose is born, the '
Rose is born ! ” The butterflies whisper to each other,
“ The Rose is born; she is so very beautiful!” The bees /
carried the news to the fields —to every little flower.
“ Rejoice,” they said, “ tlie Rose is born, the Queen
of flowers. We have no time to day to chat with you,
we must carry the news' far and wide and then we W f m)
must go and worship her.” And the little flowers '
begged and prayed—“ O dearest bees do stop and
tell us how the rose looks ? Is she really so very
beautiful?” But the bees had no time to answer. m'
They flew away and the little flowers grew so sad that IP!
they cried all night. We often see tears in the eyes ' vN Al' 1 '.
of the flowers ; human beings call them dew, but the ,
Sun-god, who is so good, knows better and when he -
rises in the morning and sees all the little flowers in
tears he paints them so that they sparkle; and instead
of tears even the tiniest flower carries a crown of
diamonds and gold. And, as the Queen of the
flowers had been born, all that could fly and move
Ij iriHjii mm )|
AND
THE NIGHTINGALE.
fN a beautiful summer’s morning the Queen
of the flowers, the Rose, opened her eyes
to the light of the day. She had slept
in her green mossy leaves until the Sun-


m 11 | Ur^ ie^
arm they walked along, and stood before the rose. He said,
T? “ To-morrow is our wedding day ; let me give you the loveliest
gift on the last day of your sweet maidenhood ; ” and he broke the
rose and fastened it in her hair. Alone and lonely the nightingale
sang his song, and with his last note fell dead. The intensity of
Many, many years later, when it was a summer’s night again, and
once more a young Rose Queen was born, and a young nightin-
imm gale sang of love, a woman stood at the seat; her hair shone
like silver in the moonlight. She had a book in her hand. She
fi7 opened it and her eyes fell on a withered rose. Slowly she
pressed her lips to it, and raised her eyes to the stars. The moonlight kissed the
stars on her cheek and wove a silver glory around her head. But the nightingale
sings of undying beauty and of undying love.
tk
I


I OE «^5
G in the South is a mountain —a mountain of ice.
~O..||P3G! On the top of the mountain is a palace of ice and in that palace
0 reigns supreme the Ice Queen. Her eyes are like stars, brilliant and
g>S>% clear, her face snowy white. She is beautiful, but the poor Queen has
Jj|L no heart she has a lump of ice in her breast and that never melts.
She travels sometimes, then she puts on her head a silver crown and a
$ long flowing silver veil trimmed with fiery red. Human beings call it the
Aurora Australis, but it is only the ice queen in all her beauty and glory who travels
up to the sky to her only friend the polar star. Ihe polar star once upon a time
made love to the Ice Queen, but he soon found out she had no heart, so they got
to be friends only, and every year she goes and visits him.
Once upon a time she was on her way to her friend, more beautiful looking
than ever, when her eyes fell on the sea below. There, heaving up and down with
the waves was a ship and tied to the mast a beautiful youth, the last survivor of the
ship’s crew. Never had the Ice Queen seen so much beauty as in that upturned face.
She met his eyes and the youth opened his arms towards her.
Then she folded her silver veil around him and carried him to her home.
She was so beautiful that the youth could do nothing else but look at her and
wish he could love her, but you know she had no heart and as human beings cannot
exist without love the youth began to pine away and grew more sad every day.
The Ice Queen thought he wanted amusement, and she made him run over the
ice with her, slide down the mountain, and play at snowball, but it was of no use,
he grew more and more silent and more and more sad. fl hen she thought she
would allow him to roam about sometimes, and she ordered her servant, the south
wind to take him on his wings when he went on her errands. But before the youth
left on one of these excursions she told him he was bound to her for ever, unless he
could find, when he was flying on the wings of her servant, some kind soul who
would open the house door wide and let him in to step up to the homely fireside.


And the south wind sailed forth with him and blew over land and sea, shook
the roof of the houses, rattled at the windows and doors, and every time the youth
saw the fire of the hearth he called Let me in, let me in and save me,” but to
all the people it only sounded like the sighing and wailing of the wind.
But there was one little cottage on the heath, lonely and solitary, where lived a
mother and daughter.
Every time the wind came dancing around the cottage and the sighing and
iling grew louder, the girl’s eyes turned wistfully to the door, she rose from
her seat to open it, but then the south wind carried the youth away, away back to
the ice palace on the ice mountain, back to the beautiful Ice Queen.
And so time went on. The south wind carried the youth over land and sea
and back again many a time, and every time he saw the lonely cottage and the
maiden with her wistful eyes, and every time his sighing grew louder, and one night
when the southwind played around the cottage his cry was so loud that the girl
rushed to the door and cried out “ Come in, come in, whoever you are,” and in
rushed the youth to the fireside. The south wind grew wild, shook the cottage to
its foundation, knocked the chimney down, rattled mercilessly at the window, but
the youth and the maiden heard him not, they stood gazing at each other and all
the world was forgotten.
The south wind had to go back to his Queen and tell the story of the rescued
youth.
How wild with anger the Queen was. Down into the deepest cellar she
ordered her servant, there to stop for years, and poor humanity rejoiced.
“ The winters had been so mild ” they said.
The next evening the Queen bethought herself of her old friend the Polar Star.
She put on her beauteous head her silver crown, wrapped herself in her magnificent
silver veil with the fiery border, and rose high in the heavens.
And in the cottage door on the heath the youth and the maiden stood hand in
hand gazing up at the wonderful —the glorious—beauty of the Ice Queen,


\ I FLOWER |
d-i—s-~e—
q the North of Germany there are mountains called the Harz Mountains,
*£-S|S a rugged and wild range with deep gorges, wild mountain streams, and
6 [igjllj) partly impenetrable forests. In one of the hidden little valleys, in a
f&jpf small cottage, was living a charcoal burner with his wife and only son.
Ik Generation after generation of charcoal burners have lived and died
Wf there, content with small earnings and a simple and hard-worked life.
$ This only son of the last charcoal burner was of a different mould —he
was a dreamy lad. He passed his time in running about the mountains, deep into
the forest —lying day after day under trees, to listen to the song of the birds, to the
rustling of the wind, and to the wild rush of the mountain stream. The few books
which his parents possessed he had soon learnt by heart, and his soul longed for
more. One day he was standing amongst old things in the lumber room, when his
eyes suddenly fell on a book he had never seen before, and the presence of which
was a mystery to him. He took it up, rushed out with it, and threw himself on the
grass. Hour after hour passed and he did not stir, but read until the sun had set
and it grew dark. The book contained the most wonderful story.
“ Thousands of years ago,” said the book, “ there had lived in that same
valley a wonderful man, so wise that he understood the language of the birds, of the
animals, the insects, and even the mountains opened to show their treasures to him.
He could even hear the grass grow.”
“ One day he made a large fire, put a cauldron on that fire, went into the
mountains, took lumps of gold and silver and other metals, and put them into the
cauldron, then he gathered precious stones and put them also in; then he took of
each species parts of a bird, an insect, an animal, and put them in ; of every herb
and grass he took a leaf, a root of every tree, flowers of all kind, and then he boiled
them together for nights and days and days and nights.”
“ Then he took the cauldron and carried it where the mountains are steepest
and most rugged, where the trees close together—where utmost silence reigns. He


|pK
dug a deep hole, poured the contents of the cauldron into the hole, covered it up
again and spoke, ‘ Here shall the Flower of Knowledge grow—beautiful to sight,
but only those will see and find it who do not mind labour and work, who will seek
tor it far and wide, whose eyes are open for the beauty of nature.’ And slowly rose
from the earth a magnificent golden flower, the Flower of Knowledge. And the
man disappeared and was never seen again.”
When the lad had finished the story he jumped up, his heart beat with delight.
“ I will find that flower.” he cried, “ if it should cost me my life.”
And he set out and wandered night and day where the mountains were rugged
and where the trees grew close.
But wherever he looked and searched he could not find the flower.
Tired and weary, disappointed and sad, he sank one evening into the moss.
Tears ran down his cheeks, and he cried, “ It is of no use, I have searched from
morning until night, from night until morning, to find the Flower of Knowledge.
I cannot find it, and I must now die.”
And suddenly it seemed as if the sweetest music filled the air, and it seemed
to sing—“ Do not despair, look up and be happy.”
And he looked up, and before him rose slowly and magnificently a golden
flower. Intense light seemed to stream out of every leaf, illuminating the scene
around and dazzling the lad’s eyes, while the voice sang, “ I am the Flower of
Knowledge ; thou hast faithfully searched for me, behold me in all my beauty.”
But the lad could not look at her, the light was so intense.
He fell on his knees and cried, “ You are so beautiful, if I look at you I shall
go blind.”
And the voice sang again, “ Human eyes are not created to look into the
Flower of Perfect Knowledge. I will give you one leaf; study and love that and
you will be happy,” and overcome by his emotion the boy fell senseless to the
ground.
When the sun coloured rosy red the tops of the mountains the next morning,
the boy opened his eyes. At his feet lay a golden leaf.
“ I have seen the Flower of Knowledge,” he cried, *• it was not a dream, a
thousand times be she blessed, I am intensely happy.”
He pressed the golden leaf to his breast, carried it home, read and re-read the
words written on it.
Every day he found new words, and every day saw his knowledge grow.
And he went forth into the world and proclaimed aloud to the wondering and
delighted mind of humanity what the Leaf of the Flower of Knowledge had taught
him.


HHERE is a dell hidden away in the very heart of the forest Almost
impenetrable is the way to it. Hardly ever a foot enters it. Very
few know of it, but whoever has seen it can never forget it. High
crags and rocks rise in a circle. A brook forms a pool beneath them.
One solitary rock stands out in the middle. In this dell grows the
most precious of flowers. Only every hundred years the sunbeams
touch a certain spot on that solitary centre rock, and every hundred
years the full moon reaches the same spot. And when that happens
in the same midsummer’s day and midsummer’s night, then there springs to life a
flower, blue as the sky, with the silvery sheen, as of the moonbeams, and a light as
from the sun.
That flower is called the Flower of Poetry, and whoever finds that flower is the
greatest poet of his time, and blessed beyond everything.
On the border of the forest stood a castle. The baron thereof was a mighty hunter.
From far and wide his friends had come to attend the hunt. The horses
neighed, the hounds yelped and the horns sounded, and away they went into the
deep forest.
The last of the men, a youth, lingered behind for a moment.
He raised his hat to the young daughter of the baron. She stood on the
terrace and waved her white veil, then she took a rose from her hair and dropped
it at the youth’s feet. He alighted from his horse, picked up the rose, pressed it
to his lips and dashed away.
On he rode, and on, forgetting the hunt and everything.
Deep into the forest he rode, and as he rode, narrow and narrower grew the
path; the branches of the trees touched his cheek ; but on and on he urged his horse.
At last the forest grew impenetrable. Then he dismounted from his horse
and tried to lead it on.
12


The voices of the forest began to sound weird and strange to him.
He listened.
What did the birds sing ?
“His heart is touched, ha, ha; his heart is touched, ha, ha.”
And the old trees seemed to shake their heads, and their rustling sounded as
if they sang, “He goes to meet his fate. Don’t laugh at him. Dont laugh at him.”
It grew darker and darker.
Then suddenly the trees opened, and he stood in the dell.
“ It is late,” he thought, “ but we have full moon, a night in the open air won’t
do me any harm.”
He tied his horse to a tree, and threw himselt at the loot of the solitary rock.
He tried to keep awake, but his eyelids dropped, and calmly he fell asleep.
Slowly and majestically the full moon rose over the dell, higher and higher she
sailed in the sky, and then her beams touched the spot on the solitary rock which
had been kissed in the day by the beams of the sun.
And it was as if the moonbeams slowly raised out of the ground a flower, blue
as the sky, with the sheen of the moonbeams, and a light as from the sun. i
The flower rose at the head of the sleeping youth.
The moon passed on and kissed his eyelids. He opened his eyes, raised him-
self, turned round and beheld the wonderful flower.
“ Oh, how glorious he cried,” and he sank on his knees before the flower,
looked deep into its heart, and then pressed his lips to it.
And slowly the rocks seemed to pass away, soft green moss covered the ground,
flowers sprang up, and out of each flower a tiny fairy peeped and smiled at the youth.
And the pool was a dancing brook, and the nixie of the brook rose out of it,
shook her long hair so that the drops of water glittered like diamonds, took off her
silvery veil and held it out to the youth.
On the top of the crag there rose a castle. The gates were thrown open, and
over the drawbridge passed a procession of knights clad in steel armour, with
helmets and waving plumes.
And over all the blue flower shed her beaming light. And the youth looked
around him then at the flower, and his heart and his eyes drank in the wonderful
beauty of the Blue Flower of Poetry.
Once more he sank on his knees, once more he kissed the flower, then his
eyes grew heavy. He sank to the ground and fell asleep.
His horse neighed and he awoke.
How long he had slept he knew not. He sprang up and looked round.
Where was the flower ?
“ I saw it,” he cried. “It cannot have been a dream.”
He covered his eyes with his hand, and in his mind rose once more the blue flower.
His thoughts formed themselves into words, and verse after verse poured from
his lips.
And the beauty of nature, which only poets can express, filled his heart.
r i hat is the story of the blue flower, the Flower of Poetry. Once in a hundred
years a poet is born a true poet, who has kissed the blue flower, with the sheen of
the moonbeams and the light as from the sun, and only such a poet can move the
hearts of human beings—can understand their grief and their troubles—and only
he can find words of consolation and of hope.


e Garde
neVer W6nt 0Ut
OR THE
FIRST O SONG
the Garden of Eden burnt a Holy
flame.
When the Sun.god rose in the morning, he gave his first kiss to the
flame, and it rose nigh to heaven
The Sun-god loved the flame —it was a child of his. “ Burn pure
and bright,” he said, (i that whoever nears you may feel purified and
happy.”
And the fire gave out light and warmth.
One day the Gods of Nature held great council. “We have created the earth
they said. It looks beautiful. Animals, birds and insects, they all seem happy.
Only human beings go about listlessly. They look up to us with beseeching eyes,
what can they want with so much beauty about them.”
“ They can speak,” said the God of the Winds, “ I hear them when they are
sweeping past.”
“ They can paint,” said the sky, “ I saw them looking up at me and then their
brush copied me.”
“ I saw them raise temples in stone, and copy the leaves and trees of the forest
in stone,” said the sun, “ What could they want more.”
“ I know what they want,” said the God of Love,” “ 1 looked into their hearts.
To speak or to paint is not enough for them, to build temples of stone does not
satisfy them, let us give the greatest gift of heaven, let us give them music. Let
music carry their hearts up to the sky. Let them forget in music their troubles.
Let them feel in music that purest delight which not all their words can express.”
“We have to create music,” the Gods cried, “ where can we find something
pure out of which to give it birth ? ”
“ I know,” cried the Sun-god, “ I know where it is to be found. It is my child
the holy flame that burns in Eden.


A child was born—a boy. “He has not opened bis eyes yet, said the young
mother. “ Unfasten the shutter and let the light in.”
They opened the shutters and a sunbeam fell into the room.
At that moment the boy opened his eyes, which caught the sunbeam and then
he closed them again.
The boy grew up a dreamy lad.
“ He is no good ” said the parents, “ He will never work, he only loves the sun
as if the sun could feed him.”
“ But the sun fed his heart.”
The sunbeam which his eyes caught when he opened them for the first time
in the world, was the holy flame of Eden. It lived in his brain. It sang and sang
to him, but the boy did not understand what it sang.
One day the storm gathered. The heavens seemed on fire. The mighty
thunder roared, and the boy stood bare-headed looking up at the sky.
Then nature grew quiet. ,
The clouds grew lighter and lighter and once more a sunbeam shone in his
eyes.
Then the boy opened his lips, and first low, then louder and louder the sound
came forth and then he sang with all his heart and soul.
And so the first song was born.
Pure and bright, lovely and consoling is music, the holy flame from Eden.


pti n «)Q
Q fj5W£ N the clouds there stands a castle. The roof is of silver, the walls of
*9''te|S gold. It has battlements, pinnacles, and embrasures. A beautiful
0 queen lives in it. In one room of the castle sit her maids at a frame
working a large veil. Trees, castles, houses, stars, sun and moon are
raised under their hands.
When the veil is finished they throw it over their queen, she is
covered from head to foot in its soft folds.
Every day the maids finish a new veil.
The castle is called Cloudlands—the veil covers Queen Imagination.
Sometimes the queen descends to earth, walks over a bridge which glitters like
silver, and shines in all colours, red and blue, and yellow and green.
Human beings call it the rainbow, but it is only the bridge of Queen Imagina-
tion, and disappears when she has stepped to earth.
For a long time she had lived in her Castle Cloudlands without descending to
earth. Life there had been dreary and dismal, and very matter of fact —eating,
drinking, and dressing the main topics of conversation. Yawning and sighing for
something not understood.
One day Queen Imagination stepped on her rainbow bridge, and descended
to earth,
“It is a long time since I have been here,” she thought, “let me watch and
see how humanity has fared.”
She listened here, she listened there. She heard commonplace talk commonly
expressed everywhere.
“ The people have degenerated since I saw them last,” she thought. “ I am
sorry; let me try to raise their thoughts if possible.
She walked slowly on. Two men were talking together. The one said,
“ What a delightful dinner our friend gave last night, the wine was so good. It
must have cost a mint of money.”
16


'O' IGT
The Queen softly touched him with her veil.
The man put his hand to his head, as if something long forgotten occurred ot
his mind. “Ah,” he said, and looked up into the sky, “ how beautifully that
swallow moves through the air; how gracefully it skims the air. I wish I could
sail along like that little bird.”
The Queen passed on and saw a young couple sitting on a seat. She heard
the man saying, “ Yes, life is very tedious and very stupid. I wish it were not so.
I wish, for instance, I could say something very nice to you, but I don’t know any-
thing.”
The queen opened her veil and put one fold around him.
“ I know now,” he cried, lifting his head. “Do you hear the nightingale sing ?
It sings of love to you ! Do you see the blushing rose ? She blushes because she
loves! Do you hear the whispering wind ? It whispers Love ; and I, I love
you.”
The queen passed on smilingly.
“ Humanity is not lost, she thought, it only sleeps now and then.”
In a room o' a small cottage stood a boy. He put his hands out and groped
his way into the garden. There he stood still. He had been born blind. He
turned his lifeless eyes towards the sun. “They say the sun is beautiful,” he mur-
mured, “so shall be the sky. How can I describe how they look.”
The queen saw the boy with his lifeless eyes turned towards the sun.
She walked up to him, unfolded her veil, and covered the boy with it.
“ Yes,” he cried, “ I can describe the sun, the clouds, the sky, the flowers, the
birds. How beautiful is the world.”
And there he stood enveloped in the veil of imagination, blind to the outside
world ; bnt seeing and living in the world of beauty.
The queen went back to Castle Cloudlands, her maids wove other and different
veils. She comes down to earth with them.
Here and there she touches a grieved soul, but when she finds a human being
who has been tried hard in life, and who is longing for something lovely and pure,
she unfolds her veil, throws it around him, and carries him up to Cloudlands, that
he may forget his sorrow and be happy.


mi
L "*'•'*/ • .V stz. xh s£z. ii I
in the
deep down in the sea there stands a Palace rof Chrystal—
transparent throughout—ornamented with garlands of coral,
pearls, and seaweed. At night, illuminated by thousands of those
numerous insects, which, in warm summer nights are to he seen
'i i v moving up and down on the waves.
II There lives the king of the seas, Neptune.
His is a mighty empire and he governs it with care and justice.
He has many sons and daughters who roam about far and wide, and
report to their father the knowledge they gain.
But there was one little daughter, the youngest, the pet, the favourite.
She was marvellously beautiful, with golden hair which covers her like a
mantle, with eyes like the sunlight, with a mouth like living coral, and a voice
which moved the hardest heart. With all that she was a vain little thing,
this lovely mermaid. She did nothing all day long but decorate herself,
crown her head with corals, plait pearls in her hair, and on moonlight nights
she sailed along, lying in a large shell and sang.
The poor sailor who heard her song and saw the beauteous vision, forgot
everything else, and an intense longing seized him, he pined and died.
But when the storm raised the waters to mountainous waves she could be
seen dancing on the top of the waves, from one to another, rising and disappear-
ing in the foam, and her singing would be heard far above storm and sea.
The sailor forgot his duty. He had no ears, no eyes but for her. He let
the rudder go, and ship and men were lost. This went on for a long time, but at
last all the numerous shipwrecks came to the ear of her father Neptune. It
made him very angry, because he was a kind man, fond of human beings, and
proud that they should sail and steam over his wide domain, and proud to lead
them safely from shore to shore. He ordered his daughter before him.


— - : w
She came singing along, not dreaming what fate awaited her.
But Neptune was very cross.
He took the pearls out of her hair, the coral crown from her head and said.
“You have been gifted with rare beauty, with high talents and you could use
them only to destroy instead of bringing happiness. Go from my sight, and
only when you have repented venture to come back.
Far inland there is a cave where a tiny spring sees the light of
day. That little spring rushes over stones and rocks till it looses itself in the
wide ocean. Travel up that little stream till you reach the cave and live there
until you are forgiven.
« Sadly turned the little sprite away, sadly it travelled up that stream until
it reached the cave.
It was a dismal spot—rocks, and nothing but bare rocks wherever she
turned.
What a difference after the blue ocean and the dancing waves.
But the little sprite was such a lovely creature, that wherever she turned
her sunny eyes young ferns and mosses began to grow, and ivy to cover the
walls. . .
And where bare wilderness had been, one vision of beauty created a
paradise.
There the little sprite lived and sang her wonderful songs, breathless
listened the tiees, breathless the little birds peeped out of their nests, and the
wind carried away the melody, travelled with it over the wide sea until it reached
a great composer, whispered the magic song into his ears, and the world was
delighted with a grand and new composition.
So lived the little sprite many a year, harmless, and spreading beauty far
and wide.
At last Father Neptune took pity upon his child and called her back to hit
palace. The cave has never been the same since she left, but whoever enters is
feels an inexpressible delight, because the charm of beauty rests on it for
ever.
yg 1
i»


WSY 41E THE
. WHE sky looked down upon earth in her deepest blue, she smiled at
the water, she saw her lovely image reflected in it as in a mirror;
she saw } ier likeness in the upturned eyes of children, clear and
G'U-'VmO'U-O C 1
bright; she heard human beings praise her in her perfect beauty.
'TT ' Her father the Sun-god drove his fiery horses across the heavens,
LJ and heard the praise of the people, and he smiled.
“ Poor humanity,” he said, “ with so much trouble, so much
care, and yet so easily delighted with the beautiful. You are so far away from
them, my daughter, I will bring some of your beauty within their reach. I
know a range of mountains wild and grand ; take a piece of your veil, my
daughter, colour it in all shades of blue, from the darkest purple to the lightest
azure, and cover those mountains with it. I will put the finishing touch to the
picture in rose colour and gold.”
And the Sun-god looked down and peeped into every corner of the moun-
tains. He touched the little brook so that it splashed up and threw itself
headlong over the rocks in sheer delight. He made the leaves transparent, as
if liquid^gold dropped through them. He kissed the flowers, and wonderfully
they biushed from the lightest rose pink to deepest red. He painted a little
bit of gold here, and a little bit of silver there, and then he said, “ Put your
veil over the mountains now, my daughter, and cover them well.”
And the sky covered the mountains with her blue veil. That is_ why the
blue mountains are so very blue. And whoever stands on Mount Piddington
when the Sun-god goes to rest, will never forget the wonderful colour and
beauty of the sky, when he gives his daughter his last embrace.


the God of Love, was lying on a white fleecy cloud.
1|K Spring, the young God, in all his radiant beauty stood beside him.
He had knocked at doors and windows and had called “ Come out, come
out, you sad and troubled people, my brother the Winter is gone, bright
shines the sun and mine it is now to reign.
He looked into the nests of birds. “Fly out,” he cried, “spread your
wings wide, light is the air, soar up and sing your sweetest song.”
He softly caressed the earth and the little flowers peeped out. He smiled
at them. ‘‘ Venture out my lovely children, venture out, sunshine and song fills
the air.”
He waved his hand over the trees and young buds and blossoms broke
forth, and happy and blooming looked all the world.
One morning the young God looked down upon the earth. No bird was
singing, no human being smiled, the flowers drooped and hung their heads.
“ What is the matter,” cried the God, “why is my lovely world so sad?”
“ I know what it is,” cried a voice, “ Let me reign instead of you for a
short time, and happiness will be restored.” And Cupid, the God of Love lifted
his arrow.
“ May I ” he cried, pointing his arrow to earth, “ Yes you may, cried the
God of Spring, make all the world happy.”
And Cupid sent his arrow and another one followed.
A young maiden sat under a blossoming orange tree. Listless were her
eyes as she looked up into the sky. The arrow shot by Cupid touched her
heart, a slight blush rose to her cheek, a deep sigh escaped her lips and an
expression of delight overspread her features.
21


A youth was lying on the grass watching the girl. The second arrow went
into his heart. He jumped up, bright shone his eyes, and with elastic steps he
went towards the maiden. Here and there he stopped to pick a flower or grass,
and then he laid the bouquet at the maiden’s feet.
Cupid sent one arrow after another to earth.
He touched the heart of the bird and it sang its sweetest song. The flowers
lifted their little heads, the trees blossomed and all the world was happy.
“ I have only one arrow left,” said Cupid, “ what shall I do with it.
“ Let us combine and form something that is lovely, beautiful, and rare,
said the young God of Spring. “ I will raise a flower and paint it with the deep
red colour of the evening sky. Send your arrow into its heart that it may open
its beauty to the admiring world, that it may grow and spread and be the delight
of mankind.”
And the God laid his hand softly on the earth. A stem rose, higher and
higher, leaves spread out and a beautiful dark red flower sprang into life.
“ Now shoot thine arrow Cupid,” said the God.
And the arrow went into the heart of the flower and slowly she opened her
dark red leaves.
That is the origin of the Waratah —the red flower.
Spring and Love combined to form her, and forever she will be loved by
her native people.


N9H^
\Jr HIE MQU1T1IIS.
AR in the south, nearly at the end of the world, many many years
ago, there was a large Empire, and that Empire belonged to a
mighty sorcerer. He had everything his heart could wish for.
9 Gdcl and silver, precious stones, flowers rare and beautiful; and
all the living world obeyed his command. One day he sat on a
rock before his castle contemplating his wide domain, when he
heard a soft breeze whispering, “You are very mighty, and have
everything you can wish and desire, but the most beautiful thing in creation
you have not. You have never seen the three beautiful princesses. Far
away from your empire is an island where the sunbeams are living birds, where
golden fruit grow on the trees, and the air is laden with perfume, there the
princesses live.”
And quietly the soft breeze passed on.
The sorcerer jumped up, and cried, “ Have I lived so long, and did not
know that such beauty existed. The princesses must be mine, I will sail to
the island and bring them to my castle.”
Slowly he raised his staff, made a few passes and transformed himself into
a golden bird, with a golden crown on its head, then he beckoned to a rosy
cloud, stepped on to it and sailed over the wide ocean far away.
One morning he saw lying on the blue sea, the island where the sunbeams
are living birds, where golden fruit grow on the trees, and the air is laden with
perfume.
Slowly he descended, and beheld a lovely sight.
In an opening of the woods were assembled numerous girls, winding rose
garlands, hanging them from tree to tree, chasing each other and throwing roses
at each other.
33


T
v
JfihL 4r- ■ ■ -s,- ■
It was the festival of roses.
In the middle stood the three beautiful princesses.
Two of them holding a rose wreath to crown their sister.
In that moment the sorcerer descended on a tree.
He began a magic song.
The princesses looked up, and catching his eye, slowly their white robes
folded round their limbs in white wings, their rosewreath into a rosy feathery
crown.
The cloud took them up, and the sorcerer sailed away with them far over
the sea to his own domain.
When they arrived he waved his staff' over them, and their white wings
unfolded again, and once more the feathery crown became a rosewreath.
He brought them to his castle, and laid all his treasures at their feet —
gold and silver, precious stones, and wonderful flowers.
But the poor princesses, carried away from all they loved, were deeply un-
happy, and nothing would console them.
One day the sorcerer bethought himself that deep in his mountains was
lying a stone, which, when touched, enabled one to understand the language
of animals, birds and insects, the whispering of the wind, and the language of
the waters, which made one wiser than anybody else. It was called the
philosopher’s stone, or the stone of wisdom.
The sorcerer thought, “ Surely if I bring them this stone of wisdom they
must feel happy.”
As soon as he was gone the princesses said, ■“ Let us fly away as far as
we can. we might find some one to take us back over the sea to our own dear
island.”
And they walked away as fast as they could.
When the sorcerer came back with his precious stone, he found the castle
empty, the princesses gone. He grew wild with anger, and rushed after them.
He found them standing at the edge of a precipice.
In his rage he cursed them and spoke a dreadful vow. “ Grow into stone ”
he cried, “ you shall not be human beings any longer, and stone you shall
remain until hundreds of years hence, one of your own people from your own
own island comes and finds this stone of wisdom and lays it at your feet.
He threw the stone to the ground and it disappeared, and the three
princesses turned into stone.
You see them standing at the edge of the precipice.
But their tears had formed into a little brook, which dashes over the
precipice, and when you are very wise you will underst andwhat the little brook
ells you of the sad fate of the three beautiful princesses.
62 7
Calder, Bowden & Co., Printers, Hobart.


A
>V\
.
I
■
. •


• • * 1 «,
4
4o^6
