



vivLiB... ,yj|
■
'V-*






(J FAIRY TALES
FROM THE LAND OF THE WATTLE.


\


Fairy Tale
FROM THE
AND OF THE WATTLE
OLGA D. A. ERNST.
With Illustrations by DOROTHY ASHLEY.
/
MELBOURNE:
McCarron, Bird $ Co., 479 Collins Street.


7 CST.ISQ4 *
Of THE


PUBLISHERS’ NOTE.
The following short Stories are the work of a young
Australian girl, whose childhood was passed in quiet
country places favourable to the contemplative mood and
the observation of Nature. They are offered here simply
zs Tales told by a Child to younger Children, in the hope
that they will not only amuse the young, but also win
the approval of those to whom a loving study of tree and
flower, bird and insect, and the association of familiar
elements of old-world fairy lore with Australian surround-
ings, commend themselves.
The original illustrations by Miss Dorothy Ashley
may likewise indicate an Australian talent of promise.




45
49
55
61
67
73
81
CONTENTS.
The Origin of the Wattle ... ... ... 9
The Fire Elves ... ... ... ... ... 15
The Fairy of the Vase ... ... ... ... 21
Sunridia : I. The Wounded Butterfly ... ... 29
11. The Goblins of the Earth and Water 33
» 111. Cloudland ... ... ... ... 37
IY. The Guest of the Ant Queen ... 41
The Unselfish Mermaid ... ... ... ... 45
The Opossums’ Jealousy ... ... ... ... 49
What the Jackass Said ... ... ... ... 55
Where do the Pins go to ? ... ... ... 61
How Cats got Whiskers ... ... ... ... 67
The Bunyip and the Wizard ... ... ... 73
Adiantlna and the Giants ... ... ... ... 81
The Fairy Fortune and the Old Year ... ... 89




iC T I : bc Origin of fife TUatilc, S
® cr—


liiu
1/T^ *' " "L r . ~ Sv \t}?
1 4^i>-i3fe?H 1 ! i h -■
y- __ x ,


NCE on a time, so scientists tell us, the
country around Lake Evre in the State
«/ «/
of South Australia was fruitful and
productive. The plains around the lake were co-
vered with beautiful grass, ■on which kangaroos and
o o
wallabies crazed in hundreds. Ferns and gum-trees
skirted its shores, while in their branches by day birds
of all sizes and colours chirped and twittered, and
by night numbers of opossums and flying squirrels
sported. In the shallow inlets of the Lake great
crocodiles wallowed in the soft mud.
Then great changes came over the Lake Eyre
country. Gradually the waters of the Lake receded,
and slowly, very slowlv, the once fertile and beautiful
rJ ' «/ «/ '
plains grew barren and desolate as we now know them.
As all the plants and animals in the surrounding
country either migrated or starved, a certain race of
fairies, called “The Children of the Lake, were doomed
to perish also.


These little fairies’ only chance of escape from
destruction was that Oberon, supreme king of all the
fairy tribes, should take pity on them in their dire
distress and change their form.
When the fairies heard that they must either die
or be changed, they wept very much, but their little
queen arose and said: “Sisters, we will not die I We
will ask to be changed into plants or animals. Which
shall it be ?”
“ Let us be plants I Oh, could we but retain some
of our present beauty, at least our golden hair!” sobbed
the other fairies.
Now I must tell you that these fairies were
beautiful little creatures, with pretty slender bodies
and lovely golden hair, which, as they floated about
among the trees, gave them the appearance of lovely
golden balls.
ext day the queen and her subjects sent a
message to Oberon to grant them an interview.
TV hen he was come, they asked him to change them
into plants, of a form in which thev might still retain
d o
their beauty, especially their golden hair, of which
they were justly very proud.
“Then you shall be trees—of such a kind as
man has never seen before. Be trees!” said Oberon
kindly to them, for he was touched by their grief.
*/ O


THE ORIGIN OF THE WATTLE.
“Yes! ves!” cried the fairies, “but remember our
«/ 7
request!”
“Be it as you wish,” said he, waving his wand;
and immediately, where the fairies—alas! no longer
fairies—had stood, lav little black hard oval seeds.
«/
Oberon smiled and returned to his kingdom, but
the seeds lav where he had left them.
o
They lay there a long, long time; the sun dried
them, but did not shrivel them up, for they were too
hard.
After a time Oberon remembered that he had
only half fulfilled his promise. So, one day, a large
Hock of big birds were seen to Hv over the Lake
o «/
country, swoop down on the seeds and each take one
in his bill, and then they Hew on again, far, far to
the south-east, where Victoria now is.
But on their way a great bush Hre broke out!
o
The flames blazed, the trees crackled, and fell; but
the birds Hew on till one by one, overcome bv the
heat, they dropped in various parts of the country—
and the seeds seemed lost. The Hre swept over them,
scorched them, and buried them under the hot ashes
and soil; and then the rain fell.
Glorious rain! All Nature revived again. After
a while, a great change came over the seeds—the
hard skins cracked, and tiny white shoots sprang up.


These then unfolded two pale green leaves, and soon
more leaves came on, then more and more till the plants
were a foot high. After that they grew quickly,
and soon full-grown trees stood there with slender,
O
pliable branches, clothed with dark grey-green feathery
foliage.
O
Soon buds came, which grew larger and larger
O O O
and at last burst into flower, covering the trees with
a wealth of golden blossoms, which diffused a sweet
perfume around.
When white people came to this island continent,
they admired these trees exceedingly, but beino-
pioneers of a new countrv, they had to study utility
-L %J ' fJ fj tJ
more than beauty, and found that the slender, pliable
branches would be useful for plaiting and “wattling”
together to form the rude walls and enclosures of
their early habitations.
«/
Hence thev gave the tree the name of “wattle,”
rj O
under which name it is dearly beloved and familiar
to all Australians. But a learned professor gave to
it the more appropriate and beautiful Greek name
“Callicoma,” which means “beautiful hair.” So, you
7 «/
see, the fairies had their wish concerning their lovely
CD e/
hair.


f
i
i
(9fie Jlre- Elves.


Vu 1 )
N l '^\\-' . ”"' I ' ■ r~*
1 »"j^V -/
■' ,.V ■✓ ■■-; <r '-» % d'l- 'hii/
*** f ‘ ■ \£> " , F


jpiE
*«BBSiKSMONG
mm-
the dry grass and leaves on the
grey mountains there lurked three
O e/
little red elves.
Tiny little fellows they were; all
glowing red. They had been born in a man’s pipe, and
being desirous of seeing the world they had jumped
out of the pipe and fallen among the dry grass and
leaves on a hill in the Australian Alps.
‘‘Ah!” cried they, “this is the place for us!” and
each caught up an armful of withered leaves and kissed
and hugged them until they too became red and glowing
as themselves.
A light gust of wind came and tossed both elves
and leaves into a patch of dry grass.
Oh! how the grass welcomed them; it blazed and
fizzed till the little elves shouted and shrieked for joy.
“Listen!” said the birds, “how the burning twigs
crackle. They did not see the elves, so how should
t/ '
they know !
fj


On and on leapt the fire, soon bushes and great
trees were in a blaze ; and didn’t those wicked, wicked
elves enjoy themselves!
The great trees bent their heads in meek sub-
mission as the little elves ran up their grey trunks
and scorched their green foliage.
O o
“Look! what a pretty pattern the bush tire makes
on the hills!” the children in the valley cried, but
their parents sighed and shook their heads as the fire
crawled steadily down the mountain.
There stood a small cottage on the side of the
hill, and the fire came nearer and nearer.
“Quick, father,” cried one of the children, “look
how near the fire has come!”
Yes! there it was only half-a-mile away. Even as
the child spoke, a hot gust of wind rushed by which
scattered bits of burnt leaves and papers on the
ground.
The sky was of a murky yellow-brown colour,
and the sun showed like a red ball through the
O
smoke; the strong smell of burning eucalyptus was
everywhere. Soon men gathered from all parts armed
with wet bags, and sallied forth to meet their common
enemy and beat it back.
Oh! how they worked! With all the energy of
despair they flung themselves against their terrible


foe, but as soon as one part was conquered, another
portion of the fire would, with the rapidity of lightning,
run into a grassy hollow or a belt of dead bushes and
bracken, and blaze forth afresh. At last, just as they
were about to give up their fight as useless, a tiny
drop of rain fell on a man’s forehead, then another and
another, and as the welcome rain came down, the fire
was easily kept at bay. Sobbing like children, the
men cried in husky voices, “Thank God I it is the rain!”
Down the rain poured in torrents, and soon only a few
sparks were left.
Among the ashes, three miserable little elves
were creeping away; when plash! down came another
drop, and they vanished altogether!




Tlfe Jwiirv of life Vase.? Jj




“j|||pT
siohed the fairy of the
O *J
Japanese Vase on the mantelpiece of
the nursery, “I wonder where I shall
o-o to next?”
o
She looked very pretty dressed as a little Japanese
woman.
“You haven’t come to see me yet!” said the
great Clock on the mantelpiece, “I can tell you very
much about my native place—Strasburg! Will you
come f
“’Yes! gladly!” said the little fay, and Hew straight
to the clock and nestled down beside the spirit of the
Clock; he was a queer little man dressed in a brass
coat of mail. “You must know,” he said, “that Stras-
burg is a very old city; it is enclosed with walls
which have now been turned into beautiful avenues of
trees. It—”
“May I also come?” cried the fairy of the Vase
on the other side of the clock.


“And I would also like to cornel” said the elf of
the Candle. “And I! “and 11” cried two little
Baskets from China.
“Yes! Yes! come all!” and the spirit of the
Clock went on telling about his native city, where the
beautiful cathedral with its lovely tower stands, and
about the famous clock within the cathedral; and so
much more that it was midnight before he had
finished his garrulous tale.
Then the elf of the Candle requested, with a
greasy smile, permission to tell them the history of
his life, which, he affirmed, was a very interesting and
highly instructive one. But the company declined
this kind offer with thanks, for all he could talk
about was tallow, wax, and cotton wicks.
“I wish we had someone here whom we have
never seen before, to tell us a new storv!” exclaimed
7 «/
the two fairies of the Vases. “I would not ask the
Fender or the Fireirons, they are such common things,
so far below us!” said one.
“Nor the flowers either; all they can talk about is
sunshine, dew and earth!” added one of the Baskets
from China.
“Suppose you all go to bed!” said the Clock, and
they all returned to their respective homes and slept
till mornino-.


<S£
THE FAIRY OF
THE VASE.
All slept except the Clock, who, being properly
wound up, went on all the night through, talking to
himself about the Hying of the minutes and the sands
of time.
Next day the fairies of the Vases received visitors,
for a spray of lovely golden Wattle was put in each
vase by the daughter of the house. Soon the whole
O
room was filled with their fragrance, but the rude
Candle wished that the extinguisher was on his head,
for he loved no smell but the candle smoke. After a
while one of the fairies asked the Wattle blossom, “I
have heard that you can only talk of sunshine, dew
and earth. Is it true?”
“Yes, we do talk of those three things; for are they
not meat, drink, and life to us? If you fly through
this window and right across the next paddock you
will see a lovely wattle tree. Go to it and ask it its
thoughts!” So the fairy stepped out of her vase and
told her sister to come with her, and joining hands
they flew away.
It was a lovely day in October, the grass was a
light green, the sky was blue and cloudless, and the
darker hue of the gums and wattles gave a softening
o »“ O
touch to the brilliant landscape. The fairies stopped
to admire the scene, and then flew on again and had
soon reached the wattle tree.


r^|
|2?
S?*
FAIRY
TALES.
Curtseying before it, the one said: ‘‘Sweet Wattle
Tree, we wish to know what are your thoughts to-dav.
t/ O ♦ -
as you stand here blooming in the spring sunshine?”
“What can I think of but the sunshine? It flies
down from the great sun and warms and brightens all.
The seeds spring up at its gentle touch and the
flowers blush more rosily than before. It sends a
thrill of life up my great roots and I break out into
blossom, I waft my fragrance as incense up to the
Great All-Father, as praise and thanks for His bountiful
care, and I feel happy. The earth feeds me, the
sunshine warms me, and I blossom, and all unite in
giving praise to God. All praise is due to Him.”
And the fairies returned wiser and happier than
before, having learnt the lesson of the sunshine—
happy contentment!


jjf
In Qjjapf ers


1 '


ff T
%
I?
SUNRIDIA.
Chapter 1.
The Wounded Butterfly.
was a lovely morning! The sun was shining-
over the river Goulburn, where a soft south
, wind was wafting the scent of blooming
wattles. The little birds chirped and sang,
a jackass laughed from the branch of a tree, and four
magpies carolled below.
It filled one with the joy of life!
So thought the fairy Sunridia, as she rose from
her eucalyptus blossom couch, and shook out her
lovely wings, and combed her golden hair.
When she had finished her toilet, she took from
the bark a small eucalyptus berry filed with magic
ointment. But even this tiny weight was too heavy
for her, for she was no larger than an ant, so she
called a friendly swallow, and said to him, ‘‘Dear
Swallow, will you kindly take me and this little berry-
over to vender lovelv wattle?”
«/ «/


This the swallow gladly consented to do. and the
O %/
fairy soon found herself next to a wounded butterfly,
who was reposing on a bed of soft wattle leaves.
Sunridia opened her tiny jar, and bandaged up her
patient with its healing ointment, and the butterfly
soon fell asleep under its soothing power.
After a half-hour or so it awoke, and said to
the tiny fairy, “Thank you, charming Sunridia, for
your tender care; I am quite better now. Oh! what
can I do to repay you?”
The fairy softly stroked his feelers with her wee
hand, and then said, “Oh, it does not matter about
repaying me, dear Butterfly, I only did what I could."
“Oh! I have thought of something,” replied the
butterfly; “do you know the Goblins of the Earth and
Water?”
“No,” answered Sunridia, “I have only heard of
their wonderful dwellings in the earth.”
“I will take you to them, dear Sunridia, if you
will seat yourself on my back.”
Swiftly they were borne through the sun-lit ah-
«/■ «/
above the river, and when they had flown a mile or
so, the butterfly stopped before a cave-like hollow, on
the banks of the Goulburn. and pulled a piece of
o'rass.






f.,
\Ajjbrary,
|2?
s?
SUNRIDIA.
Chapter 11.
The Goblins of the Earth and Water,
Instantly there opened on the side of the rock a
little door about a foot high, and a strange little
O 7 o
figure appeared in it.
He was certainly not a beauty by any means;
his little body was short and fat, with two thin little
legs and a pair of arms like sticks; while his head was
large, and appeared like a big nose grown on to a
body, and his eyes glowed like a pair of coals.
Sunridia trembled before this apparition, for al-
though he was no higher than a foot, yet he seemed
like a giant to the little fay.
“Come with me, dear Butterfly,” whispered Sun-
ridia, and the butterfly nodded his head.
“Will you come inside, fair elf?” said the goblin
in a high squeaky voice, as he led the way down a
narrow passage, lit with phosphorescent mushrooms, by
whose gleams Sunridia could see the walls covered


with various rainbow colours, which shimmered and
flickered beautifully.
At last they entered a large underground cavern,
brilliantly lit up with glowworms and softly shining
mushrooms. Raised on a sort of dais was a long
table, with a great feast spread on it. Round this
were seated nearly a hundred goblins, with their king
at the head. As Sunridia entered, all the goblins
rose and bowed, saying, as if with one voice, “Hail,
Sunridia; hail to the fair guest of the King of the
Goblins.” The king stepped from his seat, took the
fairy by the hand, and led her to a seat beside his
own, and placed the butterfly on his left hand.
Suddenly Sunridia felt a gentle tap upon her shoulder,
and, turning round, saw a dear little opossum, with
o-olden wattle wreathed round his neck and tail, who
O 7
seemed to be the waiter, and who said to her, “Fair
madam, what will you take? wattle gum jelly or
stewed eucalyptus leaves?”
The fairy chose the jelly, and after the feast was
done, the king took her by the hand, and led her
through a number of beautiful passages, and at last
they came to an opening, where the river was flowing
past. It was not far from the widely-famed Goulburn
Weir.
If I touch you with my sceptre, you will be


able to walk on the river. Would you like to?”
asked the king, with a wicked twinkle in his eye. The
fairy nodded her head, and then the king touched her
with his sceptre, and hand in hand they walked on
the river.
Soon they heard the roaring of the weir, and
they returned to the land.
e/
Then, walking slowly along the bank, they came
in sight of the weir.
“Oh, how lovely!” exclaimed Sunridia, and the
sight indeed merited the praise. Over the water went,
roaring, rushing, and falling in a sheet of feathery
foam, and if one listened, one heard the elfin voices
of the river, shrieking and calling, as the water leapt
and roared.




jS=
‘cf
*%•
SUNRIDIA.
Chapter 111.
Cloudland.
The goblin-king having taken Sunridia to this spot,
now turned to her, and said, with such a wicked grin
that she shrank back in fear, “Now go and strike the
weir wall with my sceptre, and see what will happen!”
and he led her to the top of the water above the weir.
“But what will happen?” asked Sunridia.
“Oh, you will see!” he said roughly, and he looked
so wicked that she trembled as she lifted the sceptre to
do his bidding, when, suddenly, she heard a piercing
cry of warning above the roar of the water, and saw
a lovely river nymph swim towards her, who, with
tears in her eyes, cried in a voice musical as the
water, “Beautiful fay, beware of that wicked goblin
kino-; he knows that only the good and beautiful, such
as you, have the power, when touching the weir with
his magic sceptre, to make it fall into ruins, and then
all the people living along the river banks below the
weir would get drowned. Oh! wouldn’t it be awful?”
“111 make you do it,” shouted the king, but


just as lie lifted his hand to seize her, the fairy felt
herself slowly drawn out of the water by soft hands,
and voices more soft than the sighing of breezes
whispered, “Welcome, welcome to Cloudland, where
no sorrow or wickedness reigns. She looked, and
saw herself surrounded by beautiful shadowy forms.
On and on she was borne, ever upwards, till even the
roar of the weir grew indistinct. The motion was so
soft and soothing, that, worn out by the fright she
had undergone, she fell fast asleep.
She was awakened by the soft fluttering of velvet
wings about her face, and opening her eyes, saw the
butterfly hovering about her. She looked around, and
found she was lying on a soft bank of fleecy clouds,
with two or three of the same shadowy forms near
to her, so raising herself on her elbow, she inquired,
“Who are you?”
And soft and sweet came the answer, “We are the
Sisters of the Air, the Daughters of Sun and Water.”
Sunridia smiled, and looking over the edge of
the cloud saw the fruitful Goulburn A alley beneath
her. Away far in the west stormclouds piled them-
selves one upon another, and now and then a transient
flash of lightning shot across their dark depths. “There
will be a heavy thunderstorm soon,” whispered the but-
terfly anxiously to the fairy. “Had we not better go?”


“No! no! stay with us,” begged the Sisters of the
Air, “stay with us, we do not often have visitors. We
will show you the treasures of our aerial home.”
They took Sunridia by the hand, and showed her
the beautiful country of the clouds, or Cloudland, its
caverns and mountains, its cities and castles, lakes
and rivers, which we poor mortals only see from the
earth, and of which we can form only a faint con-
ception as we gaze upwards at the clouds.
Sunridia played with the little raindrops, that
were hurrying down to the earth, while the soft
breezes caressed her hands and feet.
“Look,” said the butterfly, “look at the sky, it is
quite overcast.”
Suddenly there rushed by Sunridia a glorious
form in the shape of a woman, one radiant flash of fire
which blinded her. And immediately behind, uttering
a deafening roar, followed a burly black giant.
“Oh! what is that?” gasped Sunridia in alarm.
“It is the Lightning and Thunder,” whispered a drop of
rain. “Thunder always chases the Lieditninof.” And
O O
before Sunridia had recovered from her frisrht, she
suddenly felt herself falling, falling, in company with
thousands of raindrops, oh! how swiftly, until she
lightly touched the ground. “0-o-o-h!” she gasped,
“that was awful!”




Chapter IV.
The Guest of the Ant Queen, and the Good-bye.
Looking around her, Sunridia noticed that she had
alighted on an ant hill, and that a multitude of
©
ants were staring at her; and being still too shaken
and flurried to speak, she overheard the following
conversation. “Pooh!” said a soldier ant, “the best
thing is to settle her with a pinch of my sting.”
“No! no!” responded a worker, “that would be a
waste of good food; it would be far better to store
her in our great granaries.” “Oh, leave her alone!”
said a lazy drone.
By this time Sunridia had quite recovered, and
said smilingly, “My friends, I am the fairy Sunridia,
and will do no harm to you, but help in any way in
my power.
“Bring her to the queen,” said a soldier ant, “she
shall decide.” Then he and a brother soldier took
her between them and marched her down the ant-hole.


But what of the butterfly? When he saw Sun-
ridia falling with the drops of rain, he followed as
quickly as he could, and was just in time to see her
escorted by the two ants down the ant-hole. He
begged the ants to let him follow the fairy, but was
told rudely that the queen did not want to see a
butterfly, they were common enough; so he waited
patiently outside. Meanwhile, Sunridia was walking-
down the long passages of the ants’ abode. At
last they came into a large open space, and in the
centre of this stood the ant queen. Sunridia bowed
low, while the queen said sternly, “Who is this?”
“I am Sunridia,” replied the fairy, “the guardian
of birds and flowers and insects,”
The queen’s tone softened when she heard this.
She bade the fairy welcome to her kingdom; then
turning to the soldiers, who stood like two statues
there, she said, “Doubtless our noble guest would like
to see the different parts of my kingdom."
“Yes, I would indeed; but would you tell me
first in what part of the Goulburn Valley I am?”
“Why, did you not know that you were at the foot of
the tree where I am told that you reside ? I have
often seen you flitting about; but when you came in
your wings were so wet and draggled, that I did not
recognise you.”


The soldiers then conducted her to granaries
where they had little heaps of grains of sugar, wheat,
and grass ready stored for the winter.
“I suppose you didn’t know we keep cows as
well as store grain?” said one of the soldiers, with a
grin.
“Keep cows!” ejaculated Sunridia in surprise.
“Yes, keep cows,” repeated the ant; “perhaps
you have seen the little green insects, that live on
rosebushes, cabbages, and other leaves. Well, they
have two little tubes, out of which sweet juice drips,
and these we suck or milk.”
“How wonderful!” said Sunridia; “and pray,
where do you keep these cows of yours?” “Oh,”
replied the ant, “we keep them in little stables
of ours, and feed them with leaves.”
“We have pets too,” went on her conductor,
turning into another passage, and pointing to some
caterpillars and beetles.
“Of course you know how strong we ants are?”
“Yes! I have heard reports about your great
strength. You can, I am told, lift things six times
heavier than yourselves!”
“Yes,” replied the ant; “there, you can see for
yourself. Look at that ant; he is carrying a grain
ot wheat which is nearly four times as heavy as he
is himself.”


Presently they heard a peculiar hissing sound,
d «/ 1
and the soldier hurried Sunridia oh as last as he
could, for he told her that someone must be dis-
turbing the ant-hole.
When they gained the entrance, they saw the
gallant butterhy struggling in the midst of the sol-
diers, after a vain attempt to force an entrance.
“My friends,” said Sunridia, “let him go, and I will
send you to-morrow a pot of honey, from my friends
the bees!”
Thus bribed, the ants let him go, and Sunridia
mounting on the butterhy’s back, waved a farewell
to the ants, and was soon in her eucalyptus blossom
fast asleep, just as the sun went down.






H dear,” sighed a lovely mermaid, who
was swimming about in Hobsons
Bay, near the mouth of the Yarra,
long ago,—“Oh dear, I’m so sick
of doing nothing!”
O O
“I will tell you something to do,” whistled the
Wind as he flew past. “Near the mouth of the Yarra,
among the bushes, lies a poor blackfellow; he is
under the spell of the old witch, who lives near
by. You only can save him, for only when some-
thing beautiful unselfishly give its life for the
black, can he grow well!”
“I will go!” said the mermaid resolutely. “At
last I shall be of some use in God’s great world!”
So she swam up the river, and soon espied the poor
black writhing in pain and shrieking loudly for help.
“I will help you,” sang the mermaid, and
swimming close to the bank, she stretched out her
arms to him.
“Who says that she will help one who is under
a spell of mine?” roared the witch, rushing out from
among the scrub along the shore. Before the mer-


maid could escape she was caught by her hair and
dragged out of the water.
“You’ll suffer for this!” shrieked the enraged
witch; and she looked so horrible, that the mermaid
shivered with terror.
Then suddenly the witch changed her tone, and,
solemnly chanting a rune, she waved her broomstick,
and instead of the lovely mermaid, there stood a
tree; with branches covered with long needles, and
whose seed-capsules looked like tiny oysters, just
like the little shells which ornamented the mermaid’s
tail and hair. When the wind blows through the
slender needles and branches, it makes a soft melan-
choly sound like the cooing sound of the mer-
maid’s song, which once floated over the waters of
Hobson’s Bav, but now never more.
</ '
As soon as the mermaid was changed, the black-
fellow leaped up well and cured, but as he had
been too sick before to notice what had happened
around him, so he had seen nothing of the kind
mermaid who had perished to make him well again.
So he took up his spear and boomerang, and went
on his way, and the tree sighed again as the wind
flew past, for her sacrifice was not honoured.
Doubtless you have guessed the name of the
t/ o
tree, namely the She-oak; and now you know why
it sighs.


K Tbe 0po3sun\s' ]ealousv. /}


'


S3,
P 3 '
THE OPOSSUMS’ JEALOUSY.
UR Opossums lived in a grand old
eucalyptus tree on the banks of the
Yarra. They were all four brothers of
one family, and were very comfortably off, so at
«/ * e/ «/
least the other opossums said, for their nest was
right down in the hollow of the tree, and made soft
and snug with dry leaves.
One cold day when a heavy windstorm was
raging, a little white thing about one foot high
knocked at the bark covering of their nest, and a
thin piping voice begged shelter for the night; for
although it was only five o’clock, the night was
closing in.
O
The opossums gladly gave the shelter, and into
the nest stepped the little fairy, but she was wet
and draggled, and her wings were bruised and torn.


The opossums made her comfortable on a bed
of soft moss, and so she stayed and kept house for
them, while they were swinging by their tails, and
frisking about in the moonlight. But one day she
O O v
was missing; they searched high and low, and at
last the youngest brother found her seated among
the fragrant boughs of a golden wattle, with the
C"} o o
kino- of the wattle elyes seated by her side.
The opossum went back to his brothers, and told
them what he had seen, but scarce had he finished
his report, when the fairy made her appearance again.
“The fairy is to be married to the elf king on
New Year’s Eye,—the king told me himself!” whis-
pered the soft South Wind to the opossums.
After the wind had passed out of hearing, the
eldest opossum said, “She shall not marry the king;
we will hide her on her marriage day, so that the
o «/ 7
king cannot find her I You know, elves can only
marry on the last evening of the } T ear. Why should
she leave us? we have fed and sheltered her!”
“Yes! yes!” assented the other three, “it isn’t
«/
fair at all 1”
At last Xew Year’s Eve came. At dusk the
little fairy crept out, but on either side of the
opening the opossums stood on guard, and as soon
as she came out, they chased her back again, so
that she could not get away.
O «/


The stars came out one by one, and blinked down
cheerily at the little imprisoned fairy, but the Wind
moaned and sighed through the leaves; he was to
have sung the wedding anthem, and now he couldn’t.
He flew back to the elves and told them all about
the sad plight of the fairy bride.
A few minutes before the clocks had begun
to strike twelve all over the world, the elf king and
his followers arrived at the opossums’ tree; and
the fairy, hearing the tramp of their tiny feet, glided
up from out of the hollow, and by the help of a
moonbeam, which stretched its silver ladder towards
her, she was soon in the elf king’s arms, and both
were swiftly carried to the bridal hall, embowered in
a lovely fern gully; and, just as the moon rose
high above the gully, flooding it with a glory of
soft light, the Wind breathed his wedding anthem
among the trees. And so the plans of the selfish
opossums were frustrated by a little moonbeam.




/
>
|c| 06cii f6e jackass .Said. S
s——S)




ha! ha! 5 ' laughed father Jackass
one sunny morning, “what do you
think the Sun told me this morning'
o
about the fantail-fly catcher ? His family weren’t
always birds, he savs.”
o 7 «/
“No! I suppose not,” said his wife, “they were
eggs once. Ha! ha! ha!”
She always finished up with a ha! ha! ha! It
is a way that family has.
4 ‘Oh, you are very witty to-day, my dear!”
said her spouse, and he laughed till the tears came
into his eyes, and even the young jackasses, who
thought that they could laugh as well as their
parents, enjoyed the joke, and said, “kic, kic, kaw,
kaw, kaw!”
ell, as I was saying,” resumed the father
jackass, “the fantail-flycatcher wasn’t always a bird,
and I will tell you the story in the Sun’s own


words. He said: ‘Long, long ao'o, in the beautiful
O 7 O O
gullies of the Australian Alps, there lived a race of
lovelv white fairies, and near them in the caves and
t j '
crevices of the great mountains, lived a family of
little black gnomes. The fairies were very good
O «/ O
friends with the gnomes, and always invited them to
Ca 7 */
tlieir balls among the ferns, all except the lovely
little princess, the only child of the fairy queen.
She never passed a gnome but she made some
rude remark about their black skins, in comparison
with her own white one.
“She should have been dropped from a tree, and
that would have made her more respectful! ” said
the mother jackass in a shocked, moral tone.
“It is a pity you weren’t there to do it; but
then the Sun wouldn’t have been able to tell me
this story. The crisis was reached one day when
the fairies gave a midsummer night ball, and all the
O O
gnomes were invited.
O
“It was a lovely night! The moon shone
brightly, and the wind sighed softly through a gol-
den wattle tree in full bloom, which scented the
whole gully with its lovely perfume. The little
princess was swinging in a spider’s web hammock,
when the gnomes arrived. As soon as she espied
them coming, she called out, ‘Oh, ugly blackfaces,


WHAT THE JACKASS SAID.
don’t come near me, for I’m a sweet, pretty little
creature! ’
‘‘This was too much for the gnomes; their
kino- lifted his wand, and waved it three times,
O 7
and said solemnly, ‘Be a bird!’ and immediately,
t/ ' e/ 7
instead of the lovely little princess, there hopped a
little black and white bird with a little fan tail,
which it shook from side to side, and cried with
a saucy air,—‘Sweet, pretty little creature!”’
“But as for the rest of the gnomes, they were
o 7 «/
in such fear of the consequences, that they tied to
their caves, and have stayed there since; but the
fairies, none of whom were present at the transfor-
mation of the little Princess, looked for her an-
xiously, and now you see their tears on the grass
«/ 7 «/ O
every morning as dew. That is the story the
Sun told me!”
“And a very pretty story too. Ha! ha! ha!”
v i «/ e/
said mother jackass.




>> Ctfbere do fhe £ins q,o Jo? <{


j jyj* 4 i,. 1 :■ If ll
,}. mm% % "-XI 1
|i|!|p I f ; -
i; : | a' t' :
! ' ,^': ' , < v


i?'
WHERE DO THE PINS GO
where all the pins go to?” said
boy of eight years. “I will tell you
where!” whispered the great Genius of
Thought, who is always present, and ready to tell us
anything. In an instant the boy was in the spirit’s soft
encircling arms, the Genius spread his broad pinions,
and they were flying southward at lightning speed.
The child’s home was at Heidelberg, in Victoria,
and when he next peeped out from the spirit’s arms,
he beheld Melbourne, the “Queen City of the South,”
under their feet, but onward they sped, and the roaring
ocean boomed and bellowed in Bass Strait, and they
«/
felt the storm-spray on their cheeks. On and on they
flew, across verdant Tasmania, and then it grew
colder and colder as they went further south, but
the child felt neither heat nor cold, for the spirit held
him close to his great heart.
An iceberg drifted by, another and another, with
great seals and whales sporting in the water, and
then only great deserts of ice and snow. At last,


they reached the great ice barrier, round the South
Pole! At a beautiful ice portal stood a lovely maiden,
clad in soft snow garments, ornamented with hoar
O 7
frost, and a crown of icicles in her raven tresses.
“All hail, great spirit! what brings thee here to-
day?” she said in a voice, musical as the lap of the
waves upon the shore.
‘‘l have brought a visitor, fair queen! who wished
to know where pins disappeared to!” replied the Genius,
“Oh, indeed!” said the queen, smiling; “Well, stand
here bv me and vou will soon know.” The child and
«/ %j
the spirit stood next to her, the child all expectation,
while the Genius talked with the queen. All at once
the boy heard tiny voices addressing the queen, saying,
“Fair Queen of Forgotten Things! We bid vou hail!
O C e
Can we now enter to rest in your fair land?” “Xav,
«/ 7
not yet,” replied the queen; “first give an account of
yourselves and what vou have done!”
«/
When the bov heard the tiny voices he looked
nJ
down, and there were nearly a hundred pins talking to
the queen; but now the pins were replying, and he
listened, for this is what the}' said, “O queen! this
morning a lady bought us in a shop and then took
us to her home. We lay quietly on the toilet
table for about an hour, when a little girl came in,
O *
and taking us up began to play with us. After a
while she went over to the fireplace, and seeing a


WHERE DO THE PINS GO
small crack in the floor emptied us all into it, and
when we were gone she danced about with glee. But
we were far from dancing about, for we were lying on
the earth beneath the house, we—”
“Oh! I’m sure that’s my sister Maisie,” said the
boy eagerly; “she lost a whole packet of pins to-day,
and so I wondered where they \vent to,”
“If this young person will allow us to proceed
we will go on,” said the largest of the pins in a very
dignified voice, and seeing that no one interrupted him,
he went on —“We were lying on the fioor of the house,
«/ O 7
and as we thought no one could ever find us, we
O 7
resolved to come here, so we spoke the magic rune; —
Now on earth our work is done !
Now we’re useless every one !
Now from earth well quickly fly.
To the realms of Bye-and-bye!
and we immediately found ourselves transported here!
And now, dear queen, may we enter into your
kingdom?”
“No, you may not! you have done nothing to
gain rest,” said the queen to the disappointed pins.
“This little boy can take you home to his mother,
with my compliments;” and touching the pins with
her wand, they all fell together in a heap, and the
queen gathered them up, and placed them together in
a paper, and gave them to the child.


“Ah! here comes one more worthy of rest than
you,” said the queen, as a bent and blackened pin
approached her. “Good friend, you seem in great
distress, and are surely ready to come to my kingdom!”
“Yea, I am weak and tired, and long for rest!”
“Come in!” cried the queen, and entering, took
the pin in her hand and it became a lovely fairy;
and then the portal closed.
“Oh, can’t I go in too, great spirit?” pleaded
the child. “Nay, thou canst never enter; but, when
thou diest, thy good deeds may rest in the Land of
Forgotten Things; and now we will go!” replied the
spirit, and taking the child in his arms, he Hew
north again, “How long have we been?” queried the
child of the spirit. “Just as long as a thought takes
to pass through your mind!”
At last they were at home again, and the spirit
kissed the child and vanished, and the child looked
out of the window. His mother came into the room;
the child turned and gave the pins to his mother,
saying: “With the compliments of the Queen of
Forgotten Things!” “Where did you get these pins
from?” asked the mother. “From the queen,” was
the answer, “You must be sick, child! come to bed,
your head is wandering,” said the mother, and she
put him to bed; but little did she dream of what
he had seen!


g 370W Gals qof S^isltcrs;


■- 4/'" A
< " ' fib V
' J f%*


§2?
HOW CATS GOT WHISKERS,
OW this isn’t an Australian fairy tale;
but none the less it may interest you
3 to know how cats got whiskers, all
through the pranks of a very naughty cat.
Many centuries ago, there lived in Persia, in a
beautiful palace, a very powerful witch, who owned a
large black cat, but without whiskers, for cats had
none at that time.
This cat, who in other respects was all that a
cat should be, had a very naughty kitten, so different
from his well-behaved mother, that the witch called
him Steal-all. As the little fellow grew up, he stole
everything that was left unguarded by his mistress,
so that she was often tempted to give him away, but
refrained out of regard for his mother.
But when he stole and ate a whole jar of her
magic ointment, the climax of his bad conduct was
reached. When the witch made this discovery she
soundly whipped him and locked him up.


Master Steal-all considered himself very much ill-
used, and plotted a means of escape with the witch’s
dog, who also had a grudge against her, the dog
promising to give him a ride if he would share his
dinner with him.
So when night fell they set off.
O </
Next morning, while the dog was taking a nap,
Steal-all caught a bird, and was just finishing it,
when the dog awoke.
O
The dog became so enraged at Steal-all’s greed,
that he chased him up a tree, and then went on his
way alone.
Next day, Steal-all made friends with an ele-
phant, who gave him a ride for a few days, but at
the end of that time he got into disgrace with his
new friend too, through scratching his big trunk.
This so vexed the elephant, that he resolved to rid
himself of him on the first opportunity.
They were just passing a house wherein dwelt
another witch, a cousin of Steal-all’s former mistress,
and noted far and wide for her bad temper.
Near the house was a pool of dirty water, and
into this the elephant plunged Steal-all and left him.
He scrambled out as best he could, and crawling
up on the roof, he came too near the chimney, and
fell right down it, striking against the side of a


HOW CATS GOT WHISKERS.
cauldron in which the witch was brewing the Elixir
of Youth and Beauty, which after years of experi-
ment and labour she had just discovered.
The cauldron overturned, scalding her feet severely,
and in her fright and anger she dropped the recipe
in the fire, and so, through Steal-all, the precious
Elixir was for ever lost.
The witch just managed to grab him up before
he could make his escape, and snatching up a needle
and thread of white cotton, she carried him outside
to the verandah post, and putting the threaded
needle through one side of his upper lip, she passed
it round the post, and then back through the other
side. This was repeated several times, until he was
firmly fixed. Then she left him to his own devices.
Steal-all struggled, till a few of the smaller
stitches broke away, leaving only the needle marks
on his lips, but he could break no more.
That evening the witch, relenting, took pity on
him, and cut the remaining threads across the middle,
meanwhile chanting the charm:—
All your race shall now have whiskers,
Fathers, mothers, brothers, sisters,
That all in future clays shall see,
How naughty cats must punished be!
And Steal-all departed a sadder and a wiser cat.


If any of you doubt me, just look at your
pussy, and you will see the needle marks, where the
stitches broke, and also the remaining’ threads namely
the whiskers.


: l r l)C ;6unvip diid the Xtfeard. \{




HE Wizard of the Roper River loved the
Mermaid of the Gulf of Carpentaria.
He was a wrinkled old man, his long
7 O
white beard reached to his knees, and he knew that
the mermaid would never love him if he looked as
old as he now did.
So he determined to go to an old witch that lived
at the source of the river.
He sailed up the river on an alligator, and at
last he came to the place.
The witch came out of her little hut—oh, she
vas frightfully ugly I—but when she saw the wizard
she was so delighted with his appearance that she
thought he would make a splendid mate for her.
The wizard did not at all reciprocate that feeling,
for his thoughts were fall of the lovely mermaid, and
so he said, rather shortly: “Can you give me the


|2>
~<c%
FAIRY TALES.
Elixir of Youth and Beauty? for I wish to wed the
Mermaid of the Gulf of Carpentaria I”
The witch heard and said nothing, but only nodded
her head two or three times, and instead of brewing
the Elixir of Youth and Beauty, she made another
elixir, which made anyone who drank it love the
person who was standing next to him.
When the wily witch had finished, she brought
it to the wizard and told him he need only take a
mouthful and the charm would do its work.
The wizard did as he was bid, and no sooner
had he drunk a mouthful when—-hey, presto! he seized
the witch around the waist, and embracing her heartily
he asked her to become his wife.
This the witch consented to do, and they both
went back to the river and sailed down on the
alligator, for the wizard had quite forgotten the
mermaid through the witch’s charm.
O
But what about the mermaid? She was sitting-
on a rock in the Gulf and combing her glittering
O O o
tresses.
The morning was fair and bright. A thunderstorm
the night before had cleared the atmosphere, and the
rising sun shone on the seamaid’s golden hair.
O O
Soon she heard a low soft splashing of water far
away. She turned and looked, but could only see a


THE BUNYIP AND THE WIZARD.
burning star on the top of the water. As this drew
nearer and nearer she made out the form of the
Bunyip—the far-famed Bunyip, the Bunyip of legend
and story. He was a huge black animal, with the
appearance of a seal or a walrus, only from the
middle of his forehead projected a huge horn, on the
top of which rested a brilliant star.
Strange as it may seem, the mermaid loved this
wonderful creature, who also loved her in return,
for, although in appearance a beast, he had the
affections of a human being. The mermaid seated
herself on his back, and he slowly swam to the shore
with his lovely burden, while she chanted a lovely
song. ‘‘Lovely maiden, will you be my wife?” said
the Bunyip.
The mermaid smiled and nodded, and then she
asked suddenly, “But how can we get to the centre
of Australia to be married?”
“I know!” replied the Bunyip. “You remember
the old witch at the source of the river? We’ll ask
\
her.” And he told her the story of the witch and
the wizard. As they were speaking they saw the
witch riding overhead on a broomstick. The Bunyip
hailed her, and when he had asked for her advice she said.
—“Pooh, pooh! that’s nothing; I can easily manage
that. When do you wish to be married?” “To-morrow,


at mid-day,” said the Bunyip. “Very well, there is
not a minute to lose, for my ship travels slowly,”
and, chanting a charm, she waved her wand, and the
Bunyip and the mermaid were surrounded with fleecy
clouds, which held water. It was like a cloud basin with
water in it, for the Bunyip could not live without
water.
Slowly they drifted south, and next day the
great central plains of Australia were seen. The
happy pair, not being acquainted with this part of the
world, went past further south than they had intended
to do, and only pronounced the magic word “lacigam”
when they reached that part were Lake Eyre now
stands. But there was no lake there at that time.
Immediately the cloud began to sink rapidly, and
when it touched the ground the cloud disappeared, and
the water spread itself out wider and wider, and so
the lake was formed. The mermaid and the Bunyip
swam to the shore, where they were married by a
beautiful fairy. After the marriage the little Elves of
of the Dust danced before the company, for I must
tell you that there were distinguished visitors there
all the el\ es, lays, wizards and witches, and, of course,
our two friends from the Roper River.
These little elves were queer little fellows, for
their bodies were quite transparent, and when they


danced quickly a cloud of dust issued from their feet
and surrounded them.
The wizard of the Roper River said to his wife,
as the elves were dancing: “What little dears those
elves look when they are dancing; they are pretty!”
“Pooh! not as good-looking as you!” said his
spouse admiringly.
When the King of the Dust Elves heard this he
turned to the witch, and smiling sarcastically, said :
“Xo! we certainly haven’t goggle-eyes and eagle-noses
like your husband!”
The witch jumped up, waving her wand, and
screamed the following charm:
Dancing, dancing ever on,
You shall never rest!
Ever you shall turning go,
High and low from east to west!
Poor little elves! On and on they danced, and
the dust-cloud around them grew thicker and thicker,
but still they danced on quite out of sight.
And so was formed the dust-storm, or willy-
nilly, of the Australian summer.
The other guests were so surprised, that they first
stood rooted to the spot, and then, fearing another
outbreak of the witch’s wrath, tied with one consent as
fast as they could.


The Bunyip and the mermaid dived to the bottom
of the Lake, and never came to the surface again.
Down there, the Bunyip made deep and cosy
caverns for his bride and himself, and that is why
some parts of Lake Eyre cannot be fathomed.
Even the flowers and trees sank into the ground
with terror, and so the surrounding country became
a desert as it is to-day.
When the witch, after this terrible occurrence,
found herself left alone with the wizard, she said to
him, with an amiable grin, “My dear, I think well
go home now!” and so, home they went, quite pleased
with themselves and the mischief done.


and l!?c Miauls' V)
Cg3


w .'-t =3= r-1 mV
|


|ONG, long ago, a race of mighty giants
lived in the caves and recesses of the
mountains of Victoria.
Their headquarters were in the North-East, in
the Australian Alps, where the mountains were most
rugged.
oO
The giants were very big—indeed, they were as
tall as the largest trees in Australia.
Near the home of the giants, in one of the most
beautiful gullies, deeply embowered in moss and tree-
terns, was a cave, at whose entrance fell a silvery
little waterfall, tilling the air with its musical tinkle.
This was the home of the beautiful water-nixie,
Adiantina, who had had, just then, the misfortune to
fall under the displeasure of a powerful magician, who
cast a spell over her.
Through this spell she became so ill that she
could no longer sport in the crystal stream which
was life to her.


As she felt so ill, and not likely to get better,
d O '
she sent a frog with a message to her friends the
giants, that they should come to see her, and if
possible help her.
But before the frog reached them, the magician,
who also was very friendly with the giants, told
them that the spell which had fallen on the nixie
was only to be broken if she could rest her head on
a golden pillow and her feet on a silver footstool.
As the giants were the keepers of all the gold,
silver and precious stones in Australia, the magician,
not knowing that the giants were friends with Adian-
tina, considered his secret quite safe with them.
He little thought that the powerful monsters would
at once resolve to unlock their treasures for the
benefit of their dainty little friend.
As soon as the magician had left them, they
hurried to their mountain stronghold, from where
they had access to their precious stores, which no
one besides them had ever seen or touched.
Some melted the gold and made a beautiful
golden pillow, and others made a lovely silver foot-
stool.
When they had finished this, they hastened to
the abode of the suffering nixie, and on their way
t/
met the frog, who delivered his message.
O


ADIANTINA
AND THE GIANTS.
This only made them run the faster. At last they
came to the nixie. V ery beautiful she looked lying
on a bed of dark green moss, clad in a dress of
lace woven by Mistress Spider, trimmed with pale
green feathery tern and sprays of sarsaparilla, and
a diadem of shimmering dewdrops in her glossy
black hair.
The giants admired her more than ever, al-
though her face was pale and her eyes full of pain.
‘‘We have brought you a cure, lovely nixie!”
they whispered, but their whisper was like a mighty
wind rushing through the forest.
They put the golden pillow under her head, and
the silver footstool beneath her feet, but scarce had she
rested there, when she sprang up well and healthy.
This so delighted the giants, that they danced,
laughed and hurrahed for joy at the speedy and
successful cure, the earth and sky shook with their
noisy glee.
Suddenly, with a clap of thunder, the magician
7 o
stood in their midst. His face was white with anger,
and his eyes flashed fire, as he shrieked in an awful
voice, “You rascals! you wicked rascals! you have
betrayed my trust! you shall suffer for this! you
have used the gold and silver cure! your whole
race shall suffer for this— Be Trees !


And, iimnediatelv, where the giants had stood
/d 7 O
were mighty trees, and wheresoever a giant had
O «/ 7
happened to stand in Australia, there a mighty tree
took root and grew.
I suppose all you who read this story have seen
these transformed giants,—namely, the eucalyptus trees.
The birds and winds soon carried the seed to
all parts of the Australian Continent, but the fore-
o-oino' storv accounts for their being highest and
thickest in the ranges.
O
The trees’ long grey trunks are like the gar-
ZD Cr o O
meuts that the giants wore at that time, the leaves
are the caps, and the Huffy flowers are the feathers
in them.
The oil made from the leaves relieves pain and
illness, just as the giants’ gold and silver did of
old, and thus they still bear suffering in order to help
others.
Eucalyptus means “ well-covered/' and the seed-
boxes of the tree are well-covered, like the giants’
gold and silver.
O
You may in fancy see the gold when the rising
sun shines on the dewy leaves, and the silver, when
the moon shines on them at night; but the gold and
silver metal is still where the giants left it, and people
have to dig for it now.
O


But what about the beautiful nixie?
Well! after the magician had transformed the
giants, she fell at his feet and besought him to
O 7 O
change them back again, but as he would not, she
asked him to change her into a plant too, for
they were changed for her sake.
The magician touched her, and she turned into
the graceful little fern, which always grows near
springs and rivers,—namely, the graceful Maidenhair
or Adiantum.




$ ’I r be jp'airv fortune aqd I be
(t. ©Id Qeai> J|




•£= THE FAIRY
FORTUNE AND THE OLD YEAR.
ga 3
HE fairy Fortune dwelt in a large cave,
at the end of a beautiful gully, in the
Blue Mountains of New South Wales.
It was Old Years Eve, and all the sprites,
goblins, fairies, and elves were at her bidding
assembled in the cave, to say good-bye to the Old
Year.
The cave was a huge hollow, lighted by glow-
worms, phosphorescent mushrooms, and also by the
moonlight, which came through various chinks in the
root, and the whole effect was mysterious, weird, and
beautiful.
-A-t the entrance of the cave stood two or three
she-oaks and gums, through which the night wind
sighed with a melancholy sound.


The Old Year 19 — sat on a kind of mossy
throne, ornamented with sparkling dewdrops. He
looked old and wan; his long golden robe hung
loosely over his bent and shrunken form, but his
«/
face had a kindly look and his black eyes were very
bright and quick.
His head was crowned with a wreath of withered
grass and dry earless cornstalks.
The lovely fairy Fortune sat next to him, holding
his withered hand. She looked a great contrast to
the poor Old Year, as she said brightly to him:
‘'Only one hour more and you must go; so let us be
merry once more. Come forward, friends, and have a
joyous dance."
The elves and fairies and the rest of the quests
O
ranged themselves in two lines, then the musical
O 7
locusts, crickets, tree frogs, mosquitos and the wind
began the music, for they were the band, and around
the assembly went—one lovely kaleidoscopic maze of
whirling colours; nothing was distinguishable but the
goblins’ red caps among the fairies’ wings and filmy
dresses.
After the dance was over the Old Year said to
his companion: “How was it that you treated me so
badly all through my life, except during the last two


'•>= THE FAIRY FORTUNE AND THE OLD YEAR. =<•
£©} „ fv
or three weeks, when you gave me a few refreshing
showers? Look at my wreath! instead of being green
and beautiful, it is dry and sere through the drought.
Oh! why did you do it? I was not allowed to ask
you before.”
“Ah! my friend,” replied the wise fairy, “every
few years a drought must come, and you had to take
it, but you have one consolation, for in your lifetime
ended the war in South Africa!”
“Yes! yes!” responded the Old Year; “but just
think ol the poor farmers; they will never have a kindly
thought for me.”
“Never mind; perhaps you may be of use to
them yet, for at twelve o’clock you must change into
something else. Now think! What is your wish?” she
said, smiling at him.
o
His face brightened as he said: “I would like to
be changed into a large, large cloud, so that I could
give rain at the proper seasons through the next
year’s reign.”
At this moment the curlews gave a wild mourn
ful cry.
It was twelve o’clock.
ihe Old Year kissed his hands to the assembly,
and then the fairy touched him and he became a


<si
it- L
§2,
FAIRY TALES.
little cloud, and as it floated out of the cave it
became bigger and bigger, and soon floated out of
Ou OO
sight.
Then all eyes turned to look at the vacant
throne, but it was vacant no longer; on it sat a
beautiful child, with dark brown hair, dressed in a
golden gown, and crowned with wild clematis and
sarsaparilla, and on the soft night wind was borne the
cry of “Hail, all hail! to the happy New Year!


Melbourne:
McCarron, }!ird and Co., Printers,
4“9 Collins Street.


-
-






A 823
ERN
II I I
01755371
1508


-
I' ■ J
>
- H ? i > , 7** i •
* '
x / %
; - .. ■
V- - •**
sir
~ r f
" /
k. ~'Vt> » I
» -* - V
; -:-«*/• * ” tv
I « 1 v ;1- ■• at
> < *v »
" ' V. • V
\ > *
j 4
f •;■ V J '
' . .. ■
r '•■•' I j
N*
/
y*. 4 \
.. ' tk
’v s
