

: • * ~-~ --'■ \~ i ZZ...=±— ; .
;■— —- —■ — — r f-*» ■ , _ __ t- j-H j- j
£ K
r


GEORGE GREENWOOD


FAIRY TALES OF THE
SOUTH SEAS
OTHER STORIES
fcpAFORTH LANDING LIBRARY




ft \
J
FAIRY TALES OF THE
SOUTH SEAS
OTHER STORIES
ANNETTE KELLERMAN
ILLUSTRATIONS BY
MARCELLE WOOSTER
SEAFORTH LENDING LIBRARY
LONDON
SAMPSON LOW, MARSTON & CO., LTD.


MADE AND PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY PURNELL AND SONS
PAULTON (SOMERSET) AND LONDON


DEDICATED
TO MY
Fairy Godmother
ILDA MATHEY




FI041 7?
CONTENTS
A True Story n
The Beachcomber and the Princess
A Fairy Tale 18
The Twin Brothers 45
The Sirens of the Southern Seas
A Fairy Tale 55
The Monster of the Deep .... 70
The Moonstone Palace .... 89
Christine the Courageous . . . .100
Tim the Shark Killer . . . .108
The Fantastic Waterfall . A Fairy Tale 126
The Pirate Ship . . . . .139
The Gnomes of the Coral Seas
A Fairy Tale 143
The Phantom Lighthouse . A Fairy Tale 152
Wild Bird 160
Inquisitive Misna . . A Fairy Tale 182
Young Australia 189
The Vampire of the Coral Seas
A Fairy Tale 195
The Giant Clam’s Revenge . . . 211


Contents
Under the Southern Cross . . . 219
The Enchanted Pearls . A Fairy Tale 243
Shipwreck Island . . A Fairy Tale 250
The Fisherwoman’s Magic Cure . . . 263
How Neptune Rules the Sea A Fairy Tale 273
The Greenstone Hatchet . A Fairy Tale 284


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
Annette Diving from the Sultans’ Tower . 12
Annette Tries to Escape from the Tower on the
Fairy Wire but is Foiled —So Dives into
the Sea and Escapes 16
Princess Danie looked very Beautiful Standing
on the Enchanted Rock . . . .22
Just as Gunta Thought it would be the Finish
for Himself and His Friends —an Unex-
pected Thing Happened .... 40
Map of the South Sea Islands ... 46
Underwater Films from Annette’s Fairy Tale
Pictures 60
The Cannibal Chieftain had Captured the Castle
of a Rich Merchant from Java . . .100
Chief Babu’s Head-Hunters .... 104
The Little Men Shouted at Their Steeds . 146
Vessels that Sail the Seas . . . .174
The Lovely Lady was Flying through the
Water and Misna with Her . . .184
Every Spike was Spearlike and Glittered in the
Sun ........ 206
Kuta Whammed His Spear into the Poor
Clam’s Body 214
The Robber Tree Crabs . . . . .258
The Maori Chief saw Standing before Him on a
Maiden Fern—a Small Elfin Fairy . . 292
Te Po Tao at the Witches’ Cauldron , . 312




FAIRY TALES OF THE
SOUTH SEAS
OTHER STORIES




A TRUE STORY
Dear Little Chums,
Before you commence reading the
Fairy Stories do read my wee letter to you
all. I think you will enjoy the book ever so
much more if you know how I came to write
it, and why it is that I have always adored
Fairies. I want you to see the glorious South
Seas that I have known for years, through
my eyes.
When I was a little Tot about six years
old, Dad took me to Cavill’s Baths, in Sydney,
Australia, to learn to swim. Each day we
walked with my brother and sister through
the beautiful Botanical Gardens, with its won-
drous view of the most famous harbour in
the world, to our swimming lesson. I was
awfully scared of the water and did not learn
quickly, but Mr. Percy Cavill, who was my
teacher, never frightened me, so I soon lost
all fear. Nearly every child in Sydney learns
to swim when they are quite young. There
are so many beaches around the lovely harbour,


with the finest white sands, and to enjoy them
one must be able to swim.
Before I was thirteen years old I was like
a fish in the water. I will never forget my
first high dive as long as I live. A boy called
Snowey, who was a wonderful diver, dared
me to go off the high platform, so up I went.
I suppose it was about thirty feet high, but
when I arrived on the top of the diving stand
it looked a hundred. It’s funny how distance
always seems greater looking down than looking
up. Anyhow my knees were quivering, but
I made up my mind that I would not come
down the ladder and be laughed at, so I swal-
lowed hard and took the plunge. They told
me afterwards that it was not bad for the first
effort, only I had allowed my head to drop
forward and that’s fatal. It spoils a perfect
entry into the water.
Later, in Melbourne, I was the first girl to
swim— two, five and ten miles.
After these long swims I left sunny Australia
with my Dad and went to England. It was
my first trip, and I’ll never enjoy another voy-
age quite as much as that one. We visited
Ceylon, and Bombay, in India, then came
through the Suez Canal, which was a great
thrill. In spots it was so narrow you could throw
pennies to the Arabs on the desert sands.


”jjl iL -^SmbSw
-V&iflBp ./Jf 5 ]#’-t ,'**!
■
Annette Diving from the Sultan’s Tower
A scene from Annette’s Fairy Tale Picture, “A Daughter of the
ods Fox Films. Photographed in Jamaica, West Indies.
[Face page 12




Goodness, I can’t remember all the long
distance swims I made in England. There
were so many. But the best, I think, were
from Dover to Ramsgate, which is about twenty
miles; Putney to Blackwall, on the Thames,
also about twenty miles. I hated that swim
though, the water was so dirty. After that
Dad took me to France to swim in the thril-
lingest race I was ever in. There were seven-
teen men in it and I was the only girl. I was
so proud because I came third, and only four
of us finished the race. It took place in the
river Seine, in Paris, and was about twelve
kilometres (nine miles). The bridges and the
banks of the river were just teeming with
thousands of people, and I remember they
threw flowers at me as I swam along and kept
shouting excitedly “Allez Mees! Allez Mees!”
because I was the only girl and so many men
were dropping out of the contest. When I
arrived at the finishing line the French people
went wild, and later a crowd of boys took the
horse away from the fiacre (carriage) and
pulled it, with Dad and me in it, to our little
hotel. It WAS fun! Another great swim I
had was from Tuln to Vienna, in Austria.
Thirty-six kilometres (about twenty-seven
miles). Imagine swimming down the beautiful
Blue Danube. Not many people have had


that honour. I must say, though, that it was
the coldest water I ever swam in. I was racing
against the Champion Austrian swimmer and
I was lucky enough to win. Dad and I then
trotted off to America. When I first saw the
skyscrapers and the overhead trams I gasped
with amazement, and the hustle and bustle
of New York was all so new and exciting.
Now I must tell you the most thrilling
experience of all. It was when I appeared in
Fairy Tale Films. How I did love acting and
swimming in those beautiful pictures. I have
done six films and five of them were Fairy
Tale Films. Neptune's Daughter , produced by
Mr. Carl Laemmle’s Universal Films, was the
first. It was made in the Islands of Bermuda.
I played the part of a Mermaid who later
becomes a mortal. In one scene I was thrown
over a cliff with my hands and feet tied. I
had to release myself under the water. The cliff
was about fifty feet high, but I had done so much
high diving all my life it did not seem difficult.
My next Fairy Tale Film was A Daughter
of the Gods , produced by Mr. William Fox’s
Film Company. It was taken on a really
tropical Island in the West Indies (Jamaica).
I had three great thrills in this picture. In
one scene I dived from a tower, you will see
the picture of it in the book. I was dressed


in a long flowing robe of white silk, and as
I came through the air I looked like some
huge white bird. In another scene I was thrown
into a pool containing six large alligators, and
that is “true as true”. These alligators had
been gathered in the river swamps some dis-
tance from Kingston, Jamaica, and they were
really savage, and fought one another all the
time, chewing each other to pieces. I must
have been guarded by my good Fairy because,
though these horrible monsters attacked each
other, yet when I was thrown in amongst
them they were so taken by surprise, and I
was so quick getting out of the water, they
did not even try to grab me. I must say,
though, that I had seen to it that they were
well fed before the scene was photographed.
What I loved best of all in A Daughter of the
Gods was when I dived off a swing high up,
seventy feet over the water. As I swung back-
wards and forwards over a gorgeous mirror-
like lagoon, hundreds of little gnomes watched
me from below.
Back and forth I swung until the swing
arrived at its highest peak, then I dived from
it into the crystal clear water.
In another Fairy Tale Film, Queen of the
Sea, my best dive was from a high wire, sus-
pended between two towers, sixty feet in the


air. This picture is also in the book. I had
learned to dance on a tight wire six or seven
feet off the ground, but later, when I had to
walk on it, in the film, it had been placed high
up —sixty feet —stretching from the tower
window across the water. I was simply petrified
with fear. It had appeared so easy when I
had practised on it near the ground. How-
ever, everything went off all right, but I was
glad when it was over.
Would you like to know how I came to write
these Fairy Tales and other stories? I had
always wanted to see the South Seas, so I
took a long holiday visiting some of the Islands
I had read so much about. I was so thrilled
by what I saw it seemed to me I was living
in Fairy Land. I wished all my little friends
could know more about the South Seas. One
day I made up my mind to write a book so
that boys and girls could enjoy all the won-
drous Islands I had seen. As you are reading
these stories I w T ant you to remember that the
trees fish fruits foods huts natives
and modes of living mentioned in the Fairy
Tales are all to be found in the South Sea
Islands, with one exception, the “ Monster of
the Deep.” This is, of course, a Faity Tale
Monster. The pretty illustrations will help
you to recognize the fish, huts and boats.


SSBS
Annette Tries to Escape from the Tower on the Fairy Wire
BUT IS FOILED, SO DIVES INTO THE SEA AND ESCAPES
A scene from Annette’s Fairy Tale Picture, “Queen of the Sea”
Fox Films.
[Face page 16




Now if you are ready “let’s go”. Come with
me to the South Seas. . . . Annette.
P.S. —Don’t forget to peep at the little map
of the South Seas. You will know then exactly
where the stories all take place.


THE BEACHCOMBER AND THE
PRINCESS
(a fairy tale)
About five hundred miles east of Fiji, in
the South Seas, lies the Tongan group of
islands. Sometimes people call them the
Friendly Islands. Among this group, once
upon a time, was an island called Lanoa. It
was owned by a King whose name was Svenska.
Many years before this story opens, he had
sailed into the lagoon of Lanoa with his Queen,
and little daughter, the Princess Danie. His
ships, laden with gold, rich cloths, and ivories,
weathered many storms on the long voyage
from Scandinavia, which lies in the Northern
Seas. The little Princess had been delicate as
a child, and the doctors had wagged their
heads, saying that she must away to sunny
climes, or she would fade away and die. The
King and Queen, who loved their daughter
above wealth and kingdom, decided to migrate
like the birds, and travel the world over in


Beachcomber and Princess 19
search of warmer countries. After many moons
had passed, the ship, Kristian , sighted the
Southern Cross, twinkling merrily in the
skies, and the little Princess was so enthralled
on seeing it for the first time, that her father,
the King, said. “We will seek a home in sight
of the Southern Cross.” Finally, they came
upon a gem of an island. It was laden down
with nature’s gifts. Bananas, Paw Paw (a
delicious tropical fruit), Taro (a root which
tastes like bread), Fei (something like a banana
and from which ever so many dishes are made),
Bread Fruit, Sugar Cane, and Coconuts grew
in abundance. The fragrant Frangipanis,
Syringa, and Hybiscus, lovely tropical blooms,
gave a splurge of colour, here, there and every-
where. As the Kristian dropped her anchor,
the Princess Danie could not contain her joy
on seeing the merry native people smiling so
kindly at her, as they waved the tropical flowers
from their “dug out” canoes. A “dug out”
is a canoe hewn out of a solid tree. The natives
chop down a large tree, then from the trunk
they hollow out the shape of the canoe all in
one piece. Some “dug outs” have a little
outrigger” which is a kind of balance placed
on the side of the canoe, and is a great help
in rough weather. It is a piece of floating
wood, pointed at both ends, and held together


2 0 Beachcomber and Princess
by two bamboo poles at right angles to the
wood.
The natives were awed when they saw so
much splendour. Their curiosity was like that
of a small child, simple, and beguiling. The
Polynesian tribes of the South Seas are a cour-
teous and a kindly race of people. The men
are extremely handsome, with fine physiques;
generally they are very tall, with classical
features. Their teeth just gleam when they
smile so cheerfully. The men natives of Lanoa
wore a Lava Lava costume, which is a kind
of grass skirt, and many of them had their
bodies much tattooed. The pretty girls had
beautiful languorous dark eyes, classical noses,
and the sweetest voices you ever heard. Their
hair was like black spun silk, and the colour
of their skin was not dark like the Fijians,
or Solomon Island natives, but the colour of
a cup of coffee with a little milk in it, “ Cafe
au lait”, as the French say.
The Ali (Chief) of Lanoa came forward in
his canoe to greet the King, and with great
dignity the fine old man said. “Ua maliu mai
Tupu Sinasina” (which means, “Welcome,
Oh White King”, in Polynesian language).
King Svenska then made the Chief under-
stand, even though he could not speak the
language, that he wished to live on the Island.


Beachcomber and Princess 21
He would pay them well with beautiful cloths,
beads, and ivories in return for their land,
and if they so wished it, they could all be-
come his subjects, and by doing so they would
never have cause to regret it.
At the end of his speech, the King presented
the Chieftain with a “Whale’s Tooth” which
to a native is the most prized of all possessions.
The Chieftain of the Tribe, a fine, stately
old man, beamed on receiving this great gift,
and again bade them welcome to Lanoa. King
Svenska, then anchored his ships in the lagoon,
and decided, to the great joy of his small daughter,
to make his future home on this Island so
blessed by nature.
For many years, the King and Queen, with
their little daughter, Princess Danie, lived very
happily on Lanoa. The once delicate child
grew into a beautiful young girl with sun-
coloured skin. Her golden hair, which was
wondrous to behold, fell almost to her knees.
The lovely blue eyes, with their dark lashes,
would glow with pleasure when she saw the
natives swimming or diving for her amuse-
ment; then they had taught her, too, to become
so proficient in the water, that she could dive
from the palm trees overhanging the edges of
the deep lagoon. When Danie had first arrived
in Lanoa, she had been very frail, and greatly


22 Beachcomber and Princess
feared the water. It had taken many weeks
for her to learn to swim, but the good native
Vanu, had been patient, never frightening her.
Patience and kindness, he knew, would over-
come any childish fear of the sea.
When she had learned to dive, Vanu had
asked Danie’s nurse to sew a tiny bead or
shell on the chest of her mistress’s little bathing
suit, then he instructed the child to keep
her eyes on the shell while she “fell in” head
first.
Keeping her eye on that little object, kept
her head down, and that is what always troubles
beginners. Up pops the head, just as they
are about to dive in, and of course they go
“a tummie whacker.” Just “falling in” head
first is the quickest way to lose fear of
going flat. As soon as Danie was able to
“fall in” with her head down, Vanu, by de-
grees, showed her how to raise up on her
toes, and spring out, keeping her head up,
and her back curved, so that she cleaved the
water like a knife.
When the Princess was about sixteen years
old, she was known far and wide for her beauty,
goodness, and adventurous spirit. She knew
no fear, and often embarked on a little trip
of adventure, going off in her beautiful “dug
out ” canoe, which had been made for her


? \
1}
ml
);/i] H
w
' f~ - '
.. '
Princess Danie Looked very Beautiful Standing on the
Enchanted Rock
[Face page 22




Beachcomber and Princess 23
by the natives as a birthday gift. It was in-
laid with mother-of-pearl and Cauri shells.
The carved markings gave it a Royal appear-
ance. The King and Queen were not worried,
when Danie started out alone, because they
knew she was beloved of everybody, and she
never wandered away too far.
One day, however, while she was exploring
one of the lagoons, Danie paddled her canoe
far up into a creek, where she had never ven-
tured before. The over-hanging vines, which
reached from the trees down into the water,
were reflected so clearly she felt as though
she were looking into a mirror. The sky was
the bluest of blues, peeping through the trees,
and the great white cockatoos, with their yellow
crests, looked like fluffy clouds.
Danie loved the tropical birds with their
vivid colourings. Parakeets with green, blue,
and red wings; the Macaw of yellow and blue,
were all playmates of the little Princess. She
sang to them, and imitated their calls.
As Danie was looking up into the thick,
overhanging foliage, her heart almost stopped
dead. Sitting in a tree bough just above her
was the most beautiful lady she had ever seen.
“Oh!” she whispered, “it must be a fairy.”
Then the lovely lady spoke to her. “Little
Princess come ashore, and I will show you


24 Beachcomber and Princess
another rare bird; one that you have not seen.”
Danie was so thrilled with her new friend,
that she forgot all caution, and brought her
canoe to the side of the bank, then, light as
a feather, she jumped ashore.
The lady came down from the tree, and
took her hand, but the moment she touched
Danie’s fingers, the Princess was as though
turned to stone, and she could not move or
speak. Then the beauteous creature changed
suddenly into a horrible, haggling old Witch
with a nasty, cackling laugh. “Ha, my beauty,”
she cackled. “At last, I have captured you.
I have tried for years, but a good spirit always
hovered about you. I am Evil, my little dear,
and I shall put you on the Enchanted Rock,
fifty miles from any land, and there you will
stay until someone swims out to you, and breaks
the spell.” Then she laughed again, and con-
tinued. “It will have to be the greatest swimmer
in the world, because I shall make the seas
mountainous, the tides contrary, and there is
no man alive who can battle those waves or
fight my monster.”
With that, Danie seemed to sink into uncon-
sciousness, and when she woke up again she
was on a rock surrounded by reefs of coral,
and chained to her fate. “Oh!” she cried.
“My poor mother and father, I have brought


Beachcomber and Princess 2 5
so much unhappiness to them.” Princess Danie
looked very beautiful standing on the rock.
She was clothed only in her hair, but it entirely
covered her like a golden mantle.
When the Princess Danie did not return
as usual, the King and Queen grew alarmed.
Svenska despatched hundreds of his natives
in search of her, but after seeking every-
where, they returned in great sorrow to throw
themselves prostrate before their King, and
tell him that his daughter was not to be
found.
The King and Queen were by this time
nearly frantic with grief. They sent out heralds,
and couriers all through the Southern Seas,
and one day, many weeks after the Princess
had disappeared, a courier came back on one
of the King’s ships, saying he had heard that
a beautiful young girl had been chained to
a rock far out to sea by the wicked Queen
Atrosse. “Who is this Queen Atrosse?”
demanded the King. The courier shivered as
he answered. “ Sire, she is the most dreadful
Witch Queen in the South Seas. Every twenty
years, she finds a beautiful girl, and enslaves
her by her power. No one has been able to
break the witch’s spell, because only a super-
swimmer could reach the Enchanted Rock,
which lies fifty miles from any land.” “Will


2 6 Beachcomber and Princess
she keep my daughter for ever chained to
the rock?” asked the Queen, wringing her
hands. “Your Majesty,” answered the courier,
“ the Witch Atrosse must keep a beautiful
girl on that Rock of Enchantment, else she
will lose her power. After twenty years she
throws the maid to the sharks, then she goes
in search of another victim. The day a man
swims out and releases the captive, the spell
of the witch will be broken for ever, and she,
in her turn, will be transformed into a horrible
reptile.” “Well,” stormed the King, “I will
give half my wealth and ships to the man who
releases my daughter from the spell of the
wicked Queen Atrosse.”
The King then sent his ships around the
world to give the news of a great prize to who-
ever would swim out to the Enchanted Rock
in the South Seas, and release the beautiful
Princess Danie. The prize was to be half of
the wealth of King Svenska, the Princess for
wife, and a full rigged ship to whoever was
successful, be he Prince or Pauper. From the
Baltic, Mediterranean, Adriatic and South Seas,
came ship after ship to the island of King
Svenska. Hundreds of men, princes, sailors,
tinkers, tailors, and merchants tried to swim
to the Enchanted Rock, but all in vain. Many
were drowned in the attempt, some were eaten


Beachcomber and Princess 27
by sharks, and hundreds gave up after the
first few miles. It did not seem that there
was a man in the whole world who could swim
the fifty miles to the Enchanted Rock. The
King was in despair as the months ran into
years, and still his beloved daughter remained
under the Witch’s spell, looking sadder, but
more beautiful, as time went on.
Now it happened that on a little island,
some miles away from King Svenska’s kingdom,
there lived a Beachcomber. He was perfectly
happy to let the days go by without ever doing
much work. He loved the sun, the stars, the
birds, who were his friends, and the fish, many
of which he had trained to come to him in
the water. He had captured a number of
Swordfish, Sawfish and Spearfish, when they
were very small, then he had built a rock pool
for them, and each day as they grew larger,
he would feed, train and talk with them until
the fish knew his voice, and he became their
master.
Even when some had attained the length
of eighteen or twenty feet, with snouts of six
or eight feet long, the huge fish never thought
of hurting him. He allowed them to go free
when they were full grown, but they came
daily to visit and swim with him. The Spear-
fish and the Swordfish are somewhat similar,


2 8 Beachcomber and Princess
both having a spearlike sword extending from
the snout. The length of this horrible weapon
varies from about four to six feet. The heads,
tails and fins of both these fish are differently
shaped. The strength of the spear or sword
is terrific, for it can make a hole in the bottom
of a sailing boat.
The Sawfish, which has a long saw that
measures more than six feet attached to its
snout, is a horrible looking animal, and is
very dangerous. The teeth of the saw
are triangled and saw-edged, and when
the fish meets an enemy, it just hacks back
and forth, until its victim is torn clean
through.
The Beachcomber could not understand why
people wished for finery and wealth. Nature,
with all its bounty, was all that he loved. The
natives on the island of Yenta, where he had
lived for years, were so friendly; then he had
his chums of the sea to add to his happiness.
Gunta, which was the name the natives had
given the Beachcomber, was a wonderful
swimmer. Two or three days each week, he
swam completely round the island, which was
seven miles. He never showed the slightest
signs of fatigue, and he was a source of con-
tinual wonder to the kind-hearted natives, who
when he was on one of his long swims, worried


Beachcomber and Princess 29
about the sharks. Gunta had absolutely no
fear of the monsters, because his band of
Swordfish, Sawfish and Spearfish always in-
sisted on accompanying him, so he was well
guarded from all danger.
The natives admired this white man above
all men. He was splendid looking, with a
magnificent physique, which he owed to his
long distance swimming. There is no sport
in the world that can compare with swimming
to make one healthy and strong, and it develops
such perfectly smooth muscles. Gunta had
hair like burnished copper, and a set of perfect
teeth, which were quite dazzling when he
smiled. He had a nice, grinning kind of smile
that appeared on any provocation.
One day, when he was swimming in the
lagoon with his friendly sea monsters, a native
sitting nearby in a “dug out” looked at him
in amazement. The huge Swordfish would
play around with the Beachcomber wrestling
with him, and still never once did the almost
terrifying animal so much as touch him with
his snouty sword. Later, when Gunta was
sun basking the native came to him and asked
him why he did not swim for the great prize
offered by King Svenska.
“Sole e! (Friend.) Imagine great wealth
and a Telie’ (beautiful) bride. It is worth


having,” the native said. “ I care not for wealth
at all, I wish for no prize, and I would not
like a bride; besides there must be finer swim-
mers than I, trying to rescue the Princess,”
Gunta answered. “No,” replied the native.
“I have seen many of these tagata sinasina
(white men) from other lands, and they are
not such good swimmers as you, and certainly
not one of them is so handsome or ‘malosi’
(courageous).” Gunta laughed good-naturedly
when he heard this. He was not at all con-
ceited, and thought that his native friend only
wanted to encourage him. “ I think I will
paddle over to King Svenska’s island, and
interview the King. The wealth or the Princess
I do not seek, but I would like to release the
poor maiden from the wicked Atrosse’s spell,”
he mused. He had never seen the lovely
Princess Danie, so he must be forgiven for
saying he did not want the bride.
When he arrived at the Svenska Island, he
found the whole palace in an uproar. Another
Prince had lost his life trying to swim to the
Enchanted Rock. The King was in despair,
and the Queen was prostrate with grief. So
many men had lost their lives endeavouring
to rescue the Princess Danie. When Gunta
asked if he might interview the King Svenska,
he was told that His Majesty would speak


Beachcomber and Princess 3 1
to him, but that both the royal father and
mother had given up hope of ever seeing their
beloved daughter again. When Gunta was
ushered into the throne room he was filled
with sympathy and pain for the King and
Queen who looked so bowed down in their
sorrow. “Sire, I have come to ask if I might
also attempt to rescue the Princess Danie,”
Gunta said in his deep, kind voice. “Young
sir,” answered the King sorrowfully, “I must
warn you that many hundreds have given
their lives trying to swim that fifty miles to
the Enchanted Rock. It seems a hopeless
task. I will give to any man who rescues my
daughter, wealth and ships, and he can take
my Danie as bride.” “Your Majesty, I want
neither your wealth nor ships, nor do I wish
to marry your daughter,” replied Gunta.
‘What!” cried the King, too astonished for
words. “You refuse the wealth, and scorn
my beautiful daughter. Explain yourself, sir.”
Your pardon, oh King,” apologised the young
Beachcomber. “Wealth does not bring happi-
ness. You have much gold and fine ships,
but your head is bowed down with sorrow.
I have nothing but the skies, the sun, the
flowers, and my friends the fish, but I am
wealthier than you, for I have health and
happiness.”


The King could not understand this young
man, who looked like a Viking, but who refused
wealth, and the Princess as bride. All the other
contestants had thought only of the gold and
the ships. “Why, then,” the King asked, “do
you refuse to wed my daughter ? ” “ Sire, I
have never set eyes on a maiden yet that I
wish to take as bride, and I will not marry
any girl if I love her not. How can I tell whether
I will love your daughter if I have never seen
her?” answered Gunta. For the first time in
many moons, the King Svenska laughed.
“Young sir, give me your hand, you are honest
and lack not of brains. I have only one wish,
may you succeed in this great task you have
set yourself. Had I a son, I would not have
wished him different from you. When do you
wish to commence the swim, to-day?” asked
the King kindly. “Oh, no, sire, I will return
in thirty days from now, and hope to be able
to succeed where so many have failed,” an-
swered Gunta. “Thirty days!” stormed the
King. “Thirty days! Is this a joke that you
are playing, young sir?” “Oh! Your Majesty,
from your own lips have I heard that this task
is w’ellnigh impossible. Many men have died
before me. Am I so conceited a fool that I
must think myself so great a swimmer that I
can do better than they. These men who have


Beachcomber and Princess 33
tried have not been wise. So great a test must
need great practice. I will return to my island,
and for thirty days I will swim many miles
daily, so as to strengthen my muscles and
lungs.” Thus spoke Gunta, and the King under-
stood that here was a youth who had brains
and sense. He remembered how all the other
swimmers had set off on this long journey as
if it were child’s play, and with no forethought
at all. The Queen rushed to the young man’s
side, and gave both her hands to Gunta, and
with tears in her eyes, she said. “Oh! young
sir, I feel that at last my beloved daughter
is to be saved, and I will see her again.
Do as you wish, I will be praying for your
safety.”
So it was that Gunta returned to his Island,
and set himself to practise every day for the
greatest swim that any man could accomplish.
His first trial was three times around Yenta
Island accompanied by his sea friends. They
seemed to understand that the kindly mortal
had a great adventure ahead of him. The natives
would watch the Beachcomber from the hills.
They were greatly excited seeing Gunta pre-
paring for his coming swim.
About fourteen days after he had interviewed
the King, Gunta started out to swim round
the Island eight times. As it was seven miles


34 Beachcomber and Princess
once around, eight times would make it fifty-
six miles, a fine test. The King Svenska sent
his couriers in canoes to watch the progress of
the swimmer, and when they returned they
said the Beachcomber had circled the island
seven times and was still going strong, showing
no signs of fatigue. They told the King and
Queen, in awed voices, that many large, terrible
fish swam with him all the way. “Sire,” said
one of the couriers, “he talked to them as
he would to us, and they understood all he
said.” The Queen smiled and put her hand
on the King’s arm saying: “He is a fine,
handsome youth. I think he will save our
Danie.”
On the thirtieth day, Gunta paddled to the
King’s Island, and following his “dug out,” was
the queerest array of fish you ever saw, Sword-
fish, Spearfish and Sawfish. From the castle
window, the King wondered what it all meant.
He was soon to know, for when Gunta tied
his canoe up to the pier, the fish all waited
quietly while the Beachcomber went to take
God speed from the King and Queen. “My
son,” said the King. “I call you my son,
because you have taken the place of one in
our hearts. We will be watching and praying
from the tower window, and there we will stay
until we see you disappear from sight.”


The Queen took the young man in her arms,
and wished him a safe return with her daughter.
Gunta returned to the pier below, and with a
wave of his arm to the royal pair standing at
the tower window above, he dived in and
started off on his great swim. Hundreds of
natives lined the beaches, hilltops and rocks
to watch the progress of the swimmer until he
was out of sight. The royal pair went to the
high tower that King Svenska had built especi-
ally to follow those who tried to reach the
Enchanted Rock. With his glass he could just
see his beloved daughter standing so forlorn
and forsaken with her chains dragging behind
her.
For twenty miles Gunta did not have much
difficulty. His friends the fish cheered him
on his way. When night came on, the moon
was at its fullest and the silver moonbeams
shone down on the swimmer and his little
band. The stars twinkled, and the Southern
Cross put new courage into the Beachcomber’s
soul. He swam with a strong, steady stroke,
and never changed it. He knew that to keep
changing from one stroke to another was a
mistake when swimming a long distance. One
tires more easily. As the night progressed, he
could feel the under-tow was getting stronger.
The Witch Atrosse was trying to bring about


36 Beachcomber and Princess
his downfall. When morning dawned the waves
became higher and higher. Gunta called to the
fish, and they came close by. “ I will need
you before the day is done,” he told them.
The day wore on, then the storm broke loose.
Lightning flashed, thunder crashed across the
skies, the seas were mountainous; still Gunta
swam on. Tired he was, but not yet exhausted,
and once in a while two or three huge fish would
come to his side, and act as a breakwind when
the elements were at their worst. Gunta won-
dered, as night came again, if he would ever
last till morning. The friendly moon was not
to be seen, nor were the stars. Rain came
down in torrents, as it does in the tropical
South Seas. Once Gunta thought it was all
over. A wave, the like of which he had never
dreamed, spun him over and over like a top,
and he would have drowned had it not been
for his friendly fish who pushed him to the
surface.
Towards dawn, the Beachcomber knew he
could not last many hours longer. The seas
had calmed down, but he did not like the
blackness of the water, which in the South Seas
is always so blue. He feared that the Witch
was about to strike at him again. Suddenly
he saw a huge fin on the surface of the sea.
Gunta saw it coming towards him, but then


Beachcomber and Princess 37
it veered around. He knew it was a Shark,
and he thanked his lucky stars that his friends
were with him. He knew those cowardly
monsters would never attack him with several
Saw and Swordfish nearby. The Sharks feared
the horrible snout-like weapons. For the first
time, Gunta felt himself getting a little nervous.
A cold, chilly feeling ran the length of his
spine. He looked around for his little band of
helpers. He noticed that most of them were
swimming more than thirty yards ahead of
him; he wondered why. He wished they were
all close by. However, he saw on each side a
Spearfish, so he felt a little less lonely. He
looked at the sky over his head. How black
it was, the sea was almost purple. It was so
uncannily dark. What did it mean? He found
great difficulty in making any headway. The
tide, too, seemed to be fighting him. Gunta
knew that something dreadful was about to
happen. Then he looked about fifty yards
ahead of him. He shuddered. A quivering
mass like an immense grey cloud rose out of
the water. Its movements were so slow and
undulating that Gunta thought at first he was
dreaming. Higher and higher it rose, then
slowly it disappeared again into the sea. Terri-
fied, Gunta kept his eyes glued to the spot.
Again the great bulk appeared on the surface


38 Beachcomber and Princess
of the water, but this time he saw writhing,
snakelike arms lift themselves higher and higher
out of the sea until the poor Beachcomber
felt the dreadful monster towering above
him.
Horrified he then saw the oncoming menace
disappear from sight. Once again the writhing
mass with its tentacles sixty feet long rose
above the sea’s surface. Two huge, malignant
eyes glared with unholy light. Then Gunta
knew that his enemy was a Giant Octopus of
unbelievable size. He was well aware that the
dreadful monster had one hundred and twenty
pairs of vicious suckers on each of those snake-
like arms. He had not lived in the South Seas
for years without learning that if any of those
eight tentacles ever whipped themselves round
a man, they never let go. It is easier to drag
the arms off the monstrous animal than it is
to pull the victim away from those suckers
made like the strongest vacuum cups. It was
a million to one chances of a man coming out
alive from the clutches of an Octopus, the size
of the one which faced him, unless he were
lucky enough to drive a dagger into the balloon-
like body of the monster. What made this
almost impossible though, was that its girth
was not very much larger than an oversized
football. As these thoughts rushed through


Beachcomber and Princess 39
Gimta’s mind, an unexpected thing happened.
He saw with horror two of his favourite Sawfish
lifted bodily out of the sea. The Octopus held
them in the air as though they were pieces of
paper. Only then did Gunta understand why
his fish had remained so far ahead of him.
They wished to be prepared to meet any on-
coming foe, and to put themselves between
the enemy and their master. As he watched
his friends in those writhing arms, he was
thunderstruck to see two more of his Sawfish
hacking away at the tentacles of the Octopus.
The monster then brought his two captives
down on to the water w r ith a ferocity that
must have almost killed them. Then up shot
two other fish high in the air. Gunta won-
dered when his kind deliverers would all be
demolished, and it would then be his turn.
Three of his Swordfish flew out of the water
several yards, descending with their sword
beaks into the feelers of the Octopus. Never
had such a fight been waged in the Southern
Seas. The flight of the Swordfish was amazing.
Gunta knew that they had been known to fly
thirty or forty feet out of the water, but until
now he had never seen it done. At times it
was hard to see because the Octopus changed
its shades like a Chameleon, and the water
had become a horrible sepia colour for yards


40 Beachcomber and Princess
around, where the monster had ejected its
blackish fluid. He could still see the Sawfish
hacking backwards and forwards endeavouring
to release its fish-mates, then just as Gunta
thought it would be the finish for himself and
his friends, he saw his largest Swordfish, which
was about eighteen feet long, dive out of the
sea in a perfect arc, its body flying at least
thirty feet through the air, and with an aim
as straight as a die it plunged its spear-
like sword with unswerving accuracy deep
into the balloonlike body of the Giant
Octopus.
The sea became a seething mass of purplish
blue fluid. The malevolent eyes looked with
anguish at Gunta, then with a great trembling
contraction, it threw its feelers into the air and
sank conquered into the depths below. Never
would Gunta forget the sight of that fight
between the hated monster of the sea, and
his faithful little bank of fish, whom he
had known since they were as small as river
trout.
In spite of his great joy at being delivered
from the Witch’s dreaded Octopus, Gunta felt
very sad. Some of his favourites were missing.
Several of his sea friends had given their lives
in their fight for him. He then looked around
him but could see no further enemy. All was


Face page 40




Beachcomber and Princess 41
calm and still. When Gunta saw this, he re-
gained much of his strength. “ I must swim
to the Enchanted Rock,” he thought. “The
fish have been brave, I must also have courage.”
So on he swam. He wondered how much
further he had to go, when suddenly the sky
cleared as if by magic. The sea became a
sapphire blue, the sun shone, and about a mile
away he saw a rock, and on it stood a maiden.
The distance was too great to make the figure
out clearly, but he was happy. “I am nearly
there, perhaps I will be able to break the spell,”
he thought joyfully. As he swam nearer, the
Swordfish kept very close to him, but he had
no fear, he knew that courage had won over
cowardice. He felt he was swimming quite
easily and fast, and as he arrived to within a
few hundred yards of the reefs, he almost sank
with surprise. Standing on a rock, with her
golden hair almost covering her, was the most
beautiful maiden he had ever seen. “Oh! How
lovely she is,” Gunta thought. He swam with
all haste to her, and, though tired, his heart
sang with joy. When the Princess Danie saw
the handsome young man, she smiled for the
first time since she had been enchanted. “Oh!”
she cried in her joy, “you have come to save
me. How can I thank you ? ” Gunta had by
this time reached the rock, and climbed up to


42 Beachcomber and Princess
where the Princess was standing. “Be careful,”
Danie cried. “Take the big conch shell from
my hand, and dash it into the sea.” Gunta
took the shell she held and with all his might
he threw it into the water. There was a crash,
and a spout of flamelike water shot up from
the reefs around him, then all was quiet. In
place of the rocks, was a magnificent canoe,
and harnessed to it were Gunta’s sea friends
all swishing their tails for joy. The Beach-
comber, standing in the canoe, was dressed in
fine silken robes, and the little Princess Danie
beside him was looking lovelier than ever in
her frock of silver cloth and pearls. Danie took
her rescuer’s hand and said. “Oh, you have
saved me from worse than death. You
will restore my mother’s and father’s hap-
piness. Let us go to them, and I am sure
my father will grant you anything you ask
him.”
When they arrived in the lagoon of Lanoa
the natives were all decked in their finest lava
lavas. Strings of shells were around their necks,
garlands in their hair; in fact they were well
preened. They had come out to greet the
joyous pair in their “dug outs.” They threw
flowers, chanted their war songs, and beat their
Lahlis (drums). The King and Queen were
waiting at the royal pier to welcome the happy


Beachcomber and Princess 43
young people. They received them with open
arms. Gunta was the beloved hero of the day,
and his friends, the fish, swished their tails
for happiness.
When the Beachcomber and the Princess
arrived in the throne room, the King and
Queen took their beautiful daughter in their
arms, and the King said smilingly with a twinkle
in his eyes. “ Since you have refused half of
my wealth, oh, Gunta, and do not wish to
take my daughter as bride, what can I do
for you?”
The Princess gave a little cry. “Oh!” she
murmured. “Then how can I thank you, sir,
for saving my life.” Poor Gunta; he threw
himself at the King’s feet saying. “Oh, sire,
forgive me, I had not seen the lovely Princess
Danie. It is wrong to marry one you do not
love. As soon as I set eyes on her, I loved
her with my whole heart and soul.” “Ah!”
laughed the King. “My son, I knew that
you would lose your heart when you saw
her. And you, Danie?” he said, turning
to his daughter, “What have you to say?”
“ I also do not care for wealth, father, I
will live with my Beachcomber wherever
he wills it.”
And so it came about that Danie the Princess,
and Gunta the Beachcomber, were wed with


44 Beachcomber and Princess
great festivities, but after the wedding they
went to Gunta’s little Island, where he built
his bride a pretty home, and there they lived
in great simplicity, happily for the rest of their
lives.


THE TWIN BROTHERS
There once lived a very rich pearl merchant
in the Great Barrier Coral Reefs. These reefs
are in the South Pacific Ocean, off the north-
east coast of Australia. This merchant had
become so wealthy, that he was known from
one end of the South Seas to the other as
Valeur the Pearl Dealer.
His beautiful home was worth going miles
to see. On one of the coral reefs he had built
an immense bungalow, high on stilts, so that
at high tide the water came almost to the foot
of the tremendous verandah which ran com-
pletely around the house. The stilts, which
would have looked ugly at low tide, he had
camouflaged with rocks, shells, and seaweed.
However, what made Valeur’s home look almost
indescribably lovely were the coral gardens,
vhich, when the tide was low, made a picture
of rare beauty.
Imagine bunches of coral, flower-shaped, of
every tint and shade. Some were vivid scarlet
or orange, others were the palest pink, blue,
and mauve. It would have been impossible to


The Twin Brothers
count the many different forms of coral Blooms.
Large coral rings called “Atolls” were clus-
tered here and there giving the gardens won-
drous patterns, making them appear as flower
beds, but much more beautiful. Then the lovely
“Animal Flowers” called anemones peeped out
between branches of coral ferns. These flowers,
half fish, and half blooms, fed on any tiny fish
that came their way. At low tide there were
hundreds of small crystal pools all over the
reefs, and fish, the like of which are never seen
in Northern Seas, swam hither and thither,
while the sun’s golden rays shone and played
a game of sunbeams with these multi-coloured
fish. The Wrasses, funny fish, heads tattoed
like a man, but with gorgeous bodies of yellow
and blue, gambolled with the Rainbow Fish,
who were so proud of their scales of many
colours. Then the Serpent Eel, which is just
like a snake, only its body is bright yellow with
circular black stripes, added still more colour
to the reefs, as it glided in and out of the
crevices. It is sad to relate but the sea-anemone
seemed quite jealous of all the beautiful fish,
because, as they came within reach, she clutched
at them and held them tight, and they could
not get away, but the fish were wary, as they
gambolled happily about, keeping out of harm’s
way.


, A, I
. • 5 . NSV *
v # j \vX
>'- 'v 1
■ y'-'.'- s' . -
- •, i §
3 • , s
a t \.J ° y. r -7
“ , s-»
Jj f L» ,tI ' r-“ "3
/ 4> \ - ,- —' = <
/<■ 1 « /£H2>
- " 2 a?/ -
4*/s z_A f l
S/ . r <* tf
; t - = A-* j
n ~ Z CL f -
:L o t cd { -
An a= r . _ J -i: -
»' > 1— \ 2 -t
<» C ~ \ ?
\ j CO \1 D '
\ ; J\
\ < \
\* < >-0
*/*)>%
•i
%a 9 4
•
- *ST < 5
/•*V .
V ?&!
[Fare />ag? 46




From the bungalow above, it was a magnifi-
cent sight to look down on the wondrous coral
gardens, and watch the fish of every colour
playing about in the pools below.
Now, the rich pearl merchant, Valeur, had
a fleet of pearl diving canoes, and dozens of
fine native divers. He had brought them from
the various South Sea Islands. They were all
a beautiful brown colour, had black hair, fine
white teeth, and they were the finest under-
water swimmers in all the South Seas. Valeur
owned an island just a few hundred feet away
from his reef home, and here the natives all
lived with their families very happily. There
was a sandy white beach, and, back of that,
nestling in the thick foliage, they had built
their palm-thatched huts. All around them
grew fine-looking staghorns. These tremendous
ferns grow on the side of trees, and resemble
a stag’s head. Here and there were orchids,
white, purple, pink, growing wild. These
exotic flowers peeping out from between
the maidenhair fern, turned the small island
into a paradise.
Each day, when the tide was low, Valeur’s
diving fleet would set out in the “dug out”
canoes and go beyond the reefs to dive for
pearls. The head natives would look after the
canoes, while the divers would seek the shell.


Some of the natives took down a heavy rock
to enable them to sink quickly, and also so as
to remain longer submerged. It is very diffi-
cult without a heavy weight to stay under water,
because when the lungs are filled with air, the
body becomes like an inflated football, and it
is impossible to sink a football, isn’t it. Of
course, some of the very best divers are so
clever they do not need the rocks, but it takes
a long time to become as expert as that. You
see, they must learn to control their breath
perfectly. Do you know that some pearl divers
stay under the water almost four minutes, and
that is a long time for a mortal. Only fairy
people, like mermaids, mermen, and fish can
live for ever underneath the sea. I must not
forget to tell you that all native pearl divers
strap a wire basket around their waist, so that
they may bring up a fair number of shells at
one time. After they have filled the baskets,
the divers return to the surface and put the
shells in the “dug outs” and the head natives
look after them. I suppose you know that
pearls are found in an oyster shell! These
oysters are not like those we eat, but about
five times as large. If the natives do not find
a pearl in the oyster, the shell is not thrown
away. From the inside wall of the shell, which
is called a valve, they make pretty mother-of-


pearl knives, baskets, combs, and brushes, be-
sides all sorts of pearly things.
After Valeur’s divers had spent many hours
seeking pearl shells and the tide was high, the
head natives would order the fleet back to the
beach, and on arriving there, they opened all the
oyster shells, and laid them in the sun to dry.
It is much easier to find pearls when the
oyster is all dried up, and there is less chance
of damaging what might be a valuable pearl.
Now Valeur had two sons who were twins,
and alike as two peas. No one could tell them
apart, except when they spoke, Val had a quiet,
soft voice, but Tal spoke harshly, and often
cruelly. Unfortunately, one twin was a fine,
upstanding boy, that was Val, but the other
was cruel and mean, poor Tal. Val tried all
he could to change his twin brother, because,
even though Tal was such a bully, he loved
him as he was his twin. Both the boys were
wonderful divers and swimmers. They had
learnt when they were tiny tots of five years
old, and of course the pearl divers had taught
them all kinds of tricks. Often they would go
with the fleet, and just for fun try and bring
up pearl shells. Val, the good boy, was a little
more expert under the water than Tal, and
because of this the bad boy was jealous. Often
when they were at the bottom of the sea looking


for pearl shells, Tal would see his brother with
his hands filled with the oysters, and would
swim to him under the water, then kick and
strangle him until Val would drop them. Tal
would then come to the surface, and hand the
shells to the head diver saying, “I am much
better than my brother Val.” But the head
native would look into the bad boy’s eyes, and
see that he was telling a story. Tal always
dropped those eyes of his. He could not look
anybody straight in the face, because of his
untruths. The divers all loved Val, because
they knew he never told tales on his brother,
and his voice was so kind; they called them
Val-the-good, and Tal-the-bad. The rich mer-
chant Valeur had told his sons that they could
go with the divers to seek pearls, but they must
always stay together, so that one could help
the other in case of accidents or sharks.
Several times, Val had pulled Tal out of
danger when they were under the water. Tal
would boast of what he could do, but when
he got caught in the long sea kelp, or if he
ventured too close to the reefs below, Val would
go to the rescue. The bad boy was never grate-
ful, nor did he thank his twin brother for saving
him.
One day, when the boys went out with the
diving fleet, Tal-the-bad, dived off without his


The Twin Brothers 5
twin, and down he went all alone. Val, who
was standing on one of the canoes, chatting
with the natives, heard a cry from one of the
little “dug out” boats. He looked over, and
he heard a native diver shouting, “ Malie!
Malie! (Sharks, Sharks.) Val looked where
the man was pointing, and sure enough a great
Blue shark called a “man eater” was making
his way towards the boats. Val looked around
for his brother Tal, but could see him nowhere.
On, on, came the horrible fin of the shark,
skimming the water, then it disappeared sud-
denly below the surface, and at that same
moment Val clutched a large pearl-shell knife,
and went overboard, and swam down, down,
down. He could see Tal on the bottom, and
to his horror saw the dark shadow swimming
round his brother, like a cat playing with a
mouse. Tal tried to “push up” but was so
paralysed with fear, that he sank unconscious,
to the sea bed. Val, never once thinking of
himself, swam straight at the shark, who was
so taken by surprise that for one instant he
swerved away from his prey, lying on the
floor of the sea. Then infuriated, he swished
on Val, who was coming towards Tal, and
slid over on his back, ready for the moment
when he would tear his opponent apart. But
Val, with a quickness of a flash, ripped his


knife along the stomach of the man eater. The
shark, though dying, made one final attempt
to kill the game little fighter, and with a last
effort, lashed out with tail and fins, and unfortu-
nately the fins cut deeply into Val’s arms, and
he, too, sank to the sea bed.
Meanwhile —quicker than it takes to tell, the
natives on the surface had been watching every-
thing from above. The water is so clear in the
South Seas, that it is often easy to see a shell
in fifty feet of water. As soon as Hadi, the
head native saw the water dyed red from the
blood of the shark, he dived overboard with
two other natives, and while they rescued the
unconscious Tal, Hadi himself went after his
beloved little master, and brought him to the
surface. It was a sad and sorrowful sight to
see both Valeur’s twin boys lying insensible in
the “dug outs.” Val’s arm was bleeding pro-
fusely, and he lay white and weak from the
loss of blood, and the tremendous effort, while
Tal was so filled with water that the natives
thought that he was drowned. For nearly two
hours, they worked trying to pump air into
Tal’s lungs, and finally he gave a gurgling little
Poor Val, he lay as though dead in the
arms of Hadi, and when they arrived at the
Valeur home, the merchant, who had been
watching from above as they paddled towards


shore, could see that something disastrous had
happened. He rushed to the pier, where the
boats were landing, and there he found both
his sons lying in the “dug outs” apparently
lifeless. “What has happened?” he cried in
agony. “Are they dead?” “No, master, but
one has nearly been drowned, and the other,
Val, whom we all love, is near to death, after
fighting with a shark,” said Hadi, as he lifted
Val in his arms, and carried him up the shell
steps to the bungalow.
The merchant’s wife, when she saw her sons,
was beside herself with grief, but she had not
been brought up by the sea in vain. She knew
at once what to do with the boys, and gave
them the best of care. In a few days, Tal was
able to be around, but Val was still very ill
from loss of blood, besides he was only a lad
of ten years, and that is far too young to have
to fight a shark, which is a man-sized job.
Poor Tal-the-bad was very much changed.
He would not leave his twin brother’s side,
and for the first time he spoke in softened
tones to his father and mother. “Oh, Mother,”
he said, “if only God would bring Val back
to health, I would be so different. He saved
my life, and never once thought of himself.
If he dies, it will be all my fault.”
But Val did not die. In the South Seas,


where Nature is a perfect doctor, his wounded
arm healed up in the sun; the salt water and
sea air quickly brought him back to health
again. He had done a heroic deed, but many
other little boys would do the same for their
brothers or sisters, so he did not think any
more about it. He was glad that Tal was so
changed, and now when they go pearl diving,
they are both very happy, and the natives learnt
to love Tal-the-bad-one, as they once called
“The Naughty Twin.”


IV
THE SIRENS OF THE SOUTHERN SEAS
(a fairy tale)
Once upon a time there lived a sea king,
who was known from one end of the under-
seas, to the other as Wague, the Wicked. The
God of the Waves, Neptune, had tried for
many years to wipe out this sinister despot of
the Deep. Under-sea battles had been waged,
by all the good Denizens of the Southern Seas,
but to no purpose. Wague, the Wicked, and
his army of Sharks, Octopi, and Sawfish seemed
to outnumber the Mermen, Swordfish, Spear-
fish of other deep-sea monarchs. It was said
that Wague was befriended by the Witch of
the Crystal Caves, and through her aid, he
had been able to defeat many of his enemies.
Now Wague had twelve beautiful siren
daughters; each one was more lovely than the
other. Sirens are not to be confused with
Mermaids, because the former have legs, and
the latter fish tails. Like all Sirens, Wague’s
daughters, sang divinely, and each played the


56 Sirens of the Southern Seas
lute supremely well. As for their dancing, they
were like wraiths, as they flitted about in King
Wague’s under-sea palace. The King had built
a wondrous Blue Grotto for them to dance
their time away. The Grotto was hung with
blue Giant Coral Fans, and Coral Ferns. The
Giant Coral Fans are indescribably lovely, and
I never saw a real fan yet with so graceful a
sweep. Wondrous vases of coloured sponges,
standing seven and eight feet high, were in
the corners of the grotto, whilst tables, and
stools made of the palest pink coral, stood in
the back of the caves. The couches were of
coral, too, but over them lay the softest sponges
of pale blue. Huge mirrors of the finest mother
of pearl were scattered here and there, and
the green, cobwebby moss was draped across
the couches where the twelve siren princesses
slept.
Now you would have thought that living in
such perfect surroundings, they would have
been sweet and good Princesses, but I am sorry
to say that such was not the case. It is very
sad to have to state that Wague’s daughters
were known as the “Evil Ones.” Unfortu-
nately, they used their lovely voices, sweet
music, and wraith-like dancing to lure men on
ships to disaster.
King Wague had a great army of deep-sea


Sirens of the Southern Seas 57
fish, and each month, when the moon was
full, he sent some of them to spy on the ships
above, and when the Southern Cross danced
merrily in the sky, welcoming the mariners to
the South Seas, and the moon threw its silver
beams over the sea, changing it into an irides-
cent jewel so like an opal, then would the fish
dive below, and in all haste swim to Wague’s
palace, with the tidings that many ships were
sailing the seas above.
On hearing the glad news Wague sent for
his twelve beautiful daughters, who came
dancing into his presence, and he said, gleefully
rubbing his hand together, “My most beautiful
daughters, to-night you will bedeck yourselves
in all your glory, and rise to the surface. Wait
until the moon is at its highest, then you will
sight a ship. When it comes close by, sing
your sweetest, look your loveliest, and play
your lutes divinely, so you may charm these
mortals that they forget all else but your beauty.
As you sing, remember, oh my daughters, the
reefs not far distant, and swim slowly towards
them, so that the ship will be lost with all on
board. Do your work well and you will receive
your share of the spoils.” As he spoke, the
wicked King Wague laughed gleefully, as though
it were a great joke that so many brave men
should die.


When the Princesses heard these orders from
their father’s lips, they danced with glee, and
said. “Oh Joy! Oh Joy! we will have more
rare necklaces and jewels.”
They were filled with happiness, and did
not think once of the doomed sailors. How-
ever, there was one Princess among them who
did not dance happily, or show great pleasure.
That was Ila, the most beautiful of all the
daughters of the wicked King Wague. She
seemed downhearted, and as the others danced
away from the throne of Wague the Wicked,
one of her sisters pulled her along and said,
“Come along, Ila, what’s the matter? You
look so sad, and you should be the happiest
of us all. This is your first swim to the surface,
and you will gaze on the face of man, and lure
him to his death, or, if the King Father wishes
it, he will be imprisoned in the cave of the
Monster of a Thousand Feet.” But Ila could
only reply. “I don’t want to gaze on the face
of man, I can’t stand the thought of that beauti-
ful ship foundering down, and down, until it
reaches the bottom of the sea, and then watch
all of father’s monsters tearing it apart, seeking
the treasures. Oh! It’s more than I can bear.”
The Princesses hearing this could not under-
stand their younger sister, who was so much
more beautiful than they, and who would surely


be able to lure many men to their doom, but
Evil can never understand Good, and Ila was
Good, and they were Evil.
There was great rejoicing in the Blue Grotto,
as the sistersj made ready for the rise to the
surface. They laughed and sang as they be-
decked themselves with wondrous jewels, all of
which were pirated from sunken ships. Ila,
the loveliest of them all, however, would not
wear any of the gems.
I will go as I am,” she said, but when she
saw the look of hate the others gave her, she
added. It is the first time that I undertake
so high a swim; I must be perfectly free.”
She sadly hung her little lute round her neck,
wishing she could stay behind.
When the Sirens danced into Wague’s pres-
ence again to take farewell, he saw at once
that Ila had not adorned herself like her sisters,
so he said. “Why have you not made yourself
more beautiful, my daughter?” “Oh, my
Father,” answered Ila, softly, “allow me, on
my first swim to the seas above, to go without
any adornment; I am not as my sisters are,
I am a little nervous, and do not wish to be
weighted down with many jewels.” As the
wicked King Wague loved his youngest daughter
most of all, he told her that, after all, she was
beautiful enough, so this time she might go as


6o Sirens of the Southern Seas
she was. Then he ordered one hundred fish
from his deep-sea army to escort the Princesses
to the seas above.
It was a strange sight to see the twelve beauti-
ful Sirens surrounded by immense deep-sea
fish, and stranger still, to notice that the mon-
sters did not attack them, nor did the Princesses
show any fear. As they rose leisurely, millions
and millions of silver bubbles floated from their
mouths, leaving a long trail of luminous phos-
phorous, adding light to the depths and darkness
of the sea.
Ila, whose first visit to the surface it was,
looked in wonderment at the different fish they
met on their way up. The trip took quite a
long while, because the domain of King \\ ague
was nearly a mile deep (over one thousand
fathoms) and the nearer to the surface Ila came,
the more difficult she found it to breathe. One
of her sisters had told her to rest occasionally,
because the pressure of the water was so different
from the really deep sea, and she must accustom
herself to it. The strange and beautiful fish of
shallower waters amazed her. The Flying
Gunnard, with its tremendous wings, almost as
large as its body, the Parrot Fish, of green and
red, the Butterfly Fish, which was almost per-
fectly flat and had fantastic markings of vivid
hues, thrilled her.


H V- ” -- _C —
■yQPBL. 4 si~n
K £ £
aj .4Pfe3L. |-z
r* cr
f— r-
r, ~
M« >
[Facf pri"e 60


*


Never had she seen anything so funny as the
little Angler Fish, which had its own hook and
rod attached to its nose, so that it did its own
fishing, just like a mortal. Had she been in a
happier frame of mind, Ila would have liked
to have stayed for hours among these fish, so
quaint and beautifully’ coloured. They looked
at her curiously too, because most of them had
never swum to any great depths. One hundred
to two hundred fathoms was as far as they ever
ventured, because their bodies would not stand
the great pressure of the deeper water, and
they would collapse in the deep deep seas.
Then, too, many of the denizens of the deep
never swim in shallow waters, because they,
too, have bodies only fitted to withstand the
strong pressure of the greater depths, so even
though they all swim in the seas, a great many
fish never, never meet one another.
The eleven Evil sisters swam with great joy
onward and upward, for their minds were on
the spoils they were to receive, but little Ila,
despite the novelty of the trip, was desolate.
Finally, they arrived at the surface, and Ha’s
little blonde head popped out of the sea. She
saw for the first time in her life, the Moon,
Stars, and the twinkling Southern Cross. She
gasped for breath. Not only was she not used
to the air, which was so strange, but the beauty


6 2 Sirens of the Southern Seas
of what she saw also took her breath away.
“Oh!” she murmured, “how beautiful! How
can my father be so wicked as to wish harm on
mortals living above the seas.” She was so
occupied that she did not heed her sisters when
they cried. “There is a ship! Away off! coming
out of the sky.” They meant, of course, that
it was to be seen on the horizon, but to the
Sirens who did not know what that meant,
the ship, with its wonderful scarlet sails, all
filled with wind, did look as though it was
sailing right through the heavens. Frolicking
with glee, they at once commenced playing and
singing, as though the vessel were quite close.
Ila did not join in the songs, nor did she try
to play her lute. “Oh, why must they be so
cruel,” she thought, “as to wish harm on those
poor mortals ? ” As time sped on, the ship
came nearer and nearer. Ila could see it quite
plainly now. “How wonderful!” she cried
aloud. “The red sails, the mast of silver, and
the figure-head of gold.” It was indeed a
figure-head carved completely of gold, repre-
senting a beautiful lady with long hair. “Why,
it looks like me,” thought the little Siren to
herself. Even her sisters noticed it. “How
strange,” they said, forgetting their song for
the moment. ' “The figure-head resembles Ila.”
The sailors by this time were trying to locate


Sirens of the Southern Seas 63
where the voices were coming from. They
were as yet too far away to hear clearly, but
they rushed to the side of the Stella Maris
(which means Star of the Sea). The men be-
came so fascinated with the singing that they
forgot their tasks, leaving only the man at the
wheel. “They hear us!” cried the Sirens,
waving their arms in glee. The sailors were
entranced. Like figures of stone, they stood,
never heeding the warning voice of their be-
loved master, the Prince Dorando, who tried
in vain to command them back to their work.
The man at the wheel steered towards the
voices, and the Sirens continued singing as
they swam, closer to the Reefs. The Prince
was in despair. “Come away,” he cried in an
agonised voice. “Have you not heard of the
Sirens of the Southern Seas? They will drag
us to our deaths.” As he was about to con-
tinue pleading with them, he saw Ila gazing
sadly at him, but from her lips came no song
°f joy, nor did she play her lute. He feasted
on her loveliness, until Ila became alarmed for
him. “Go away!” she cried. “Gaze not on
me again, or I will lure you to your doom.
I beseech you, turn away!” One of her wicked
sisters nearby, heard her pleading words, and
she said angrily, “Are you mad, Ila? Our
father, King Wague, will punish you for this.”


64 Sirens of the Southern Seas
“ I cannot help it,” sobbed the little sister. “It
is impossible for me to lure these harmless
mortals to their deaths.” The Prince made one
final effort to save his men. He rushed to take
the wheel from the man, but alas, too late. On,
on, steered the poor soul towards the beautiful,
but evil daughters of King Wague, as they
swam merrily towards disaster. Just as Prince
Dorando arrived at the wheel, his beautiful ship
the Stella Maris , was dashed up against the
Reefs, and there foundered with all on board.
The Sirens now sang a song of Hate; still the
sailors tried to follow their voices, only to be
dragged to the bottom of the sea. Ila, when
she saw the ship crash against the Reefs, hid
her face in her hands horrified, then she remem-
bered that she must try and save the Prince.
In and out of the wreckage, she glided, looking
in vain for the handsome mortal. Sobbing,
she asked her fairy godmother to help her.
Suddenly she came upon a mass of silver. It
was the once beautiful mast of the Stella Maris
broken in two, and nearby, on another piece
of wreckage, she saw her Prince; he was lying
unconscious, after being struck, as the ship
foundered.
Tenderly, and lovingly, she swam with the
wounded Dorando to a beach nearby. Weeping
continuously, she prayed that he might not be


Sirens of the Southern Seas 65
dead. After dragging him on to the sands, she
tried to revive him. In her sorrow, she never
once thought of her sisters, and the terrible
wrath of her wicked father when he discovered
that she had not only saved a mortal, but failed
to return with the other Sirens.
When Prince Dorando opened his eyes for
the first time, his head was pillowed on the
lap of the lovely Princess Ila. At first, he thought
he must be dreaming, that the figure-head
of the Stella Maris had come to life. “Oh!”
he murmured. “The Lady of the ship!”
“No,” replied Ila sorrowfully. “I am one of
the daughters of the under-sea King, called
Wague.”
“ It is not possible, you cannot be this wicked
King’s daughter, for you are Good, and he is
Evil. Everyone has heard of this sea monarch,
who preys on the seas above,” answered
Dorando. Weeping, the little Princess told him
that her mother, an enchanted mortal, had
died when she, Ila, was born, of a broken
heart, because the King, her husband, had
enslaved so many mortals. “Then you, too,
will suffer through your kindness in saving a
human life,” said the Prince sadly. “Perhaps,”
answered Ila bravely. “ But my mother would
have wished me to rescue you. I will meet my
father without fear.” “Stay with me, little


Princess, I love you so, you are so sweet,”
begged the Prince. “I have seen you in my
dreams for years. Why, I had the figure-head
on the bow of my ship built from the face of
a maiden I had seen in my dreams, and it must
have been you, for how else could it have
resembled you so.” Ila pushed the Prince
away, and cried, “It is impossible —I cannot
remain with you, I am from the sea, and an
immortal. You are a mortal. Now that I have
saved you, I must return to my father.” She
began to weep, and the Prince tried to comfort
her. The Princess then took a small charm
from around her lovely throat, and handed it
to the Prince. “Take this charm,” she said.
“ My mother put it around my neck before she
died. I do not know if it will bring you luck,
but it will remind you of me when I will have
returned to the sea.” The Prince took the
little shell charm from her, and as he did so,
a voice came out of the air nearby saying,
“Oh, Mortal Prince, you have brought great
ill luck to both the Siren Princess, and your-
self. Wague, the Wicked, has sworn to drag
you to his Cave of the Monster, and the Princess
Ila, by saving a human life, is to have full vent
of her royal father’s wrath.” Ila threw herself
on her knees crying. “Oh, Voice of the Wind,
is there no way in which I can save my Prince.”


Dorando, who had been listening as though
dazed to the Voice, said. “Nay, Nay, oh Spirit,
I must be the one to suffer, not the little siren
princess. I will face my doom, but she must
be rescued.” “There is only one way in which
the Princess Ila may save the mortal.” The
Voice replied. “Take the dagger from the air,
as I hand it to you, Oh Maiden, and plunge
it deep into your heart. Only thus can the
Prince Dorando be rescued.” When the Voice
died out, both Ila and the Prince saw a dagger
in the air in front of the little Siren. The Prince
snatched at the weapon, so as to prevent Ila
taking it, but as he tried to grasp it the dagger
disappeared, only to be seen again closer to the
Princess. Ila reached for it, and as she took
it the Prince was transformed, as though to
stone, and could not move. The Siren took
the weapon in her hand, and, raising it in the
air, cried, “ I am happy to give my soul for
the mortal I have saved, Farewell, beloved!
farewell!” Then she plunged the dagger deep
into her heart, and sank into a little heap on
to the sands.
No sooner had she done so, than the Prince
came to life again, and dropped to his knees
before the brave little maid who had given her
soul for his. He snatched her in his arms, and,
kissing her, said. “Oh, Princess, I would give


68 Sirens of the Southern Seas
ten lives to see you open your beautiful eyes.”
He had hardly spoken the words, when the
Voice of the Wind was heard again. “Oh,
Prince, look out to sea, look out to sea! ” Dorando
did as he was told, and he saw a perfect replica
of his doomed ship coming towards the shore.
“What does this mean? Oh Voice,” he cried
beside himself with excitement. “It means, by
her great sacrifice and unselfishness, Princess
Ha has saved both of you from the furies of
King Wague. In giving her soul for yours, she
has brought your freedom and hers. Take
your Princess in your arms, and trust the Voice
of the Wind.”
Prince Dorando took the unconscious Ila in
his arms, and as he did so he felt himself being
carried through space, and before he could even
wonder what had come over him, he was stand-
ing on his ship, the Stella Maris , with all his
crew and officers around him.
They, too, through the sacrifice of the Princess,
had won their freedom from the Wicked King
Wague. The Prince looked at the lovely maid
in his arms, and as he did so, she opened her
glorious eyes, and wonderingly murmured:
“This must be fairyland.” When she saw
where she was, she was speechless with joy,
and there is little more to tell, except that the
Princess Ila, after she had been gowned in


Sirens of the Southern Seas 69
wonderful raiments of satins and pearls, was
married to the Prince Dorando, and they sailed
the happy seas of matrimony forever and for-
ever, never losing sight of the merry Southern
Cross.


THE MONSTER OF THE DEEP
Just off the coast of Thursday Island, which
lies at the tip-top of North Eastern Australia,
a ship, laden with gold and rich treasures,
foundered after a hurricane, and sank to the
bottom of the sea. The many schooners, brigs,
and barquentines, who with their finest divers
had tried to recover the treasures for salvage,
had made every attempt in vain. Divers per-
ished, and the ships returned to port without
achieving the faintest success. No man had
ever lived to tell the tale of what happened
beneath the seas, where the good ship llda M.
had gone to the bottom with all aboard. For
several years, ship after ship would sail from
all parts of the world to try their luck at recover-
ing the gold and treasures from the ill-fated
vessel.
Now sailors are very superstitious, and little
by little, they began to think the llda M .,
lying on the bed of the ocean, was haunted,
and gradually fewer and fewer ships visited the
spot where she went down. It seemed as though


The Monster of the Deep 71
everybody had given up the idea of finding the
sunken treasure, and in time, people forgot all
about it.
One day, three young brothers who lived
in Cooktown, North Queensland, were listening
to their father, a retired sea captain, talking to
an “Old Salt.” “Old Salt” is the name given
to seamen who sail before the masts year after
year. The captain was telling him all about
the Ilda M ., which had been sunk years before
with thousands of pounds’ worth of gold, and
many rich treasures aboard. “Hundreds of
divers lost their lives trying to salvage the
ship,” he said, “And not one ever came up
again to tell the tale of what happened at the
bottom of the sea. It’s been a mystery ever
since.” The three young boys, who were
listening interestedly, looked at one another,
and after their Dad and the “Old Salt” had left
they commenced talking excitedly about the
treasure ship. Lee, who was the eldest, and
about fourteen years old, asked his brothers
what they thought of it all. “ Can the ship be
haunted, or is there a Monster who watches
over the treasure?” he asked. Neither of the
other two boys could think of an answer, but
Mike, the youngest, said. “ Listen, Chaps, I’ve
got an idea. Father asked us the other day
what we wanted to do when we were older.


72 The Monster of the Deep
Supposing we tell him we would like to be
divers. Dad knows ever so many ships where
we could start.” “Why, that’s a great idea,
Mike,” answered Con, the second eldest brother.
“And when we are old enough, we could have
a ‘shot’ at finding the treasure. What do you
think, Lee?” “It’s not a bad idea, but it has
its drawbacks,” Lee grumbled. “I am five
years older than Mike, and by the time he
would be ready I would be about twenty-two
years old.” “You may be older,” said Con
scornfully, “ but you have not got his brains.
He thought of the idea, you didn’t.”
“ Perhaps Lee is right, Con, I am a lot younger.
Supposing we each try alone, and when Lee
is eighteen he can go first,” said little Mike
with a crestfallen look. The brothers agreed
that that would be all right, and from that day
on they pestered their Dad to let them become
deep-sea divers. “ It’s a hard life, lads,” the
father told them. “ Only the strongest can
stand it, but if you have made up your minds,
I’ll get you aboard a ‘Lugger,’ as soon as
you are old enough, and you can learn all about
it from the ground up.”
When Lee was fifteen, he was taken aboard
the Georgina S., a lugger that worked off the
North Coast of Queensland, picking up pearl
shells, and Beche de Mer, which is a sea slug


The Monster of the Deep 73
as long as a cucumber, and almost the same
colour. It is considered quite a delicacy, especi-
ally by the Chinese, who pay big prices for it.
Of course the divers sought for pearls, too, but
there was a big trade done in selling pearl
shells for making all sorts of brushes, collar
studs, buttons, and hundreds of knick-knacks.
For this kind of pearl trade the diving is quite
unlike the native method on all the smaller
South Sea Islands. The luggers go out to sea,
and the divers are sent down in water from
four to twenty fathoms deep (a fathom is six
feet), in a heavy rubberized cloth suit with
copper helmet and lead-weighted boots of im-
mense size. Of course Lee did not do any
actual diving until he was seventeen years old,
because it requires great strength and lung
power to be a deep-sea diver. The greater the
depth, the greater the strain on the lungs.
When Lee was nineteen, he told the Skipper
of the Georgina S. that if he would take the
lugger to where the Ilda M. had foundered
many years ago, he, Lee, would make an at-
tempt to locate the lost treasure, and that the
Captain could share in the gold, or whatever
was found. The Skipper of the Georgina S.
thought the lad must be a little queer in the
head, but the idea of perhaps becoming a rich
man so enticed him that he agreed to take the


74 The Monster of the Deep
lugger to the spot where the Ilda M. had sunk.
When they started out, Con, the second brother,
was aboard too. Being three years younger
than Lee, he was as yet only doing odd jobs
while learning the ropes. He was still too
young to do any deep-sea diving. Mike, the
youngest brother, was at home with his Dad,
as he was only fourteen.
The two older boys were very excited at
the thought of at last one of them getting a
chance to try for the treasure after waiting so
many years. “ Lee, of course if you are suc-
cessful you must give half the treasure to Mike.
He thought of the idea,” said Con. “Not on
your life, me lad,” answered Lee. “He is only
a kid, and besides he has never been as strong
as you or I, and won’t ever get a chance of
diving for the gold, even if I fail.” “Well,
that’s the wrong spirit, Lee. The adventure
ought to be first, and the reward second. You
are only thinking of yourself, and though I
don’t want any harm to come to you, I only
hope you’ll get a fair share of the spoils,”
remarked Con crossly.
When the lugger, the Georgina S. arrived
at the spot where the ill-fated Ilda M. had
foundered, Lee was all for getting started. He
seemed to have so much confidence in himself,
and he never once thought of failure. Con


The Monster of the Deep 75
was like a cat on hot bricks, worrying about
his brother. “Are you sure you feel fit, and
all right?” he asked anxiously. “Rather!” said
Lee, as he pulled on his diving suit. “I’ll be
a rich man, when I come up, Con,” he said.
“I wish he would not think of the gold all
the time. After all, it is a great adventure to
be the first to recover the treasure from a sunken
ship,” thought Con, as he watched the men
screwing on the diving helmet.
When Lee was being helped down the iron
ladder, Con was standing by the pumps, so he
could listen to everything that transpired. In
a few moments, Lee was at the bottom of the
ladder, and he tied his “lead line” to the last
rung before he descended into the depths below.
The pump which gave Lee his air in the helmet
and suit was the only sound for a few minutes.
The Skipper and crew were all thinking what
had happened to the other divers who had gone
before him. Minute after minute went by until
finally one of the men at the pumps said. “ He’s
on the sea bed.” Con wondered what his
brother was seeing down there away from every
human person. He became more and more
anxious, as the men continued pumping air to
the diver. “He must be walking around now;
I wonder what he’s found?” they said. Sud-
denly there were no more line signals. The


76 The Monster of the Deep
men wondered if anything had happened. The
Captain signalled, but received no response.
Con became panic-stricken, and begged the
Skipper to hoist him up. “He’s all right,” said
the Master of the ship, “give him a chance”;
but he looked anxious as he spoke. As time
went on, the Captain gave the order to “Hoist
away.” The men commenced working the
winches. “It feels very strange,” said one man
at the wheel. They continued turning, but
with each revolution they became more troubled.
There were no signals from Lee’s line, and
the whole gear seemed too light. Slowly, very
slowly, they pulled upwards, but the men at
the winches knew that disaster had overtaken
the diver; however, they said no word of their
discovery because Con, the brother, was standing
by. Finally the men did not have to work the
wheel or the pump any longer, because the air
tube and the life line floated up to the surface
alone. Con gave a horrified cry. “ Lee is not
on the line,” he shouted. “Both lines have
been cut.” True enough, only the rope and
the air tube had come to the surface to tell
the tale of what had happened to Lee in his
search for the sunken treasure.
When the Georgina S. pulled into port, Con
went home to break the sad news to his Dad
and brother. When the father heard of the


The Monster of the Deep 77
death of his eldest son he was bowled over by
the shock. Mike was in a great state of grief.
“It’s all my fault,” he said. “I thought of it,
I am the cause of his death.” “Why, that’s
silly, Mike. Didn’t we make a pact when we
were all little boys, and didn’t Lee insist upon
being the first to go?” consolingly said Con.
“Con,” begged Mike, “promise me you won’t
try when it comes to your turn. It’s foolish!
Promise me.” Con could see his brother was
wrought up, so he said. “Oh, well, we’ll see.”
But Mike was persistent. “No, Con, promise
me; don’t you see, if you die I’ll never forgive
myself all through life. Give me your word of
honour, now, that you’ll forget about it.” “Oh,
all right,” Con said. “I promise,” and walked
away.
The two boys never spoke of it again, but
when Mike was fifteen he said to his father,
“Dad, I want to go to work.” “What do you
want to do, lad?” asked his Dad, who loved
his younger son better than life. “I’m going
to be a deep-sea diver,” he answered seriously.
“ No, no, my son, I have lost one boy, I do
not want to lose another.” “Oh, Dad, can’t
you see I can’t be a coward. I must stick to
my pact with Lee. It was I who first spoke
about diving for the treasure. I must stand by
my word,” Mike said firmly. “What about


78 The Monster of the Deep
Con?” asked the father. “He’s sensible, he’s
given up all idea of going.” “Only because I
made him promise he would not go, but it’s
different with me. I sent Lee to his doom, I
must also take a chance like he did.” So spoke
the gallant little Mike. The father saw that
nothing would ever shake his son’s idea of
honour, so the saddened parent saw the boy
leave to become a deep-sea diver.
Four years later Mike had developed into the
most fearless diver in the South Seas. He took
his job very seriously, studied the currents,
tides, and when he was deep-sea diving he
noticed everything. He learnt how to fight
Sharks, had once eluded an Octopus; in fact,
he was giving himself a thorough preparation
for the big task ahead. “Never have I known
the like of him,” said the Captain of the Jackie C.
“He is fearless.” Mike also practised deep
breathing every day. He developed his lungs,
until he could expand them seven inches, which
is a wonderful chest expansion. Once he had
been the weakest of the three brothers, but
through his hard work had become as strong
as an ox. One day Mike said to his Captain
when they were eating dinner below deck.
“Sir, I would like to make an attempt to bring
up the treasure from the sunken Ilda M”
“Oh, lad, leave it alone,” said Captain Bundy.


The Monster of the Deep 79
“We do not want to lose our best deep-sea
diver; forget about such nonsense.” “I am
sorry, sir,” answered Mike, “but if you won’t
accompany me to the spot, I will have to leave.”
The Captain, a dyed-in-the-wool seaman,
who had learnt to love this straight, upstanding
lad, knew that he meant what he said, so he
asked him when he wished to go. “ Right
away. The tides are light just now, sir, and
the currents easy,” answered Mike.
Captain Bundy gave orders to start the fol-
lowing day at dawn. Mike came to his cabin
as they were leaving the port. “Captain,” said
he, “ I would like to talk things over wdth you
before we arrive.” “ Come in, and sit down,
lad,” answered the Skipper gruffly, to hide his
feelings of sorrow. Mike came to the Captain’s
desk with a little chart in his hand. “ Captain,
I have been studying the lay of the Ilda M.
for years now. You can see by this chart that
it is quite a simple matter to locate the wreck,
because the ship went down a few hundred
yards off the isolated Danger Reef. Any deep-
sea diver could find it with his eyes closed.
Con, my brother, told me that when Lee made
his attempt the lugger must have thrown its
anchor just above the Ilda M. y for no sooner
had Lee arrived on the sea-bed than his signal
stopped. As you know that is very rare. It


8o The Monster of the Deep
often takes hours, and sometimes days for the
diver to locate a wreck. That proves the chart
must be very well laid out.”
“That may be so,” replied the Skipper.
“ But don’t forget lad, the many men who have
died seeking the gold.”
“Yes, sir! That’s just it. I believe they all
went about this thing from a wrong angle.”
As he spoke, Mike laid the chart on the desk,
and continued. “Their one idea was going
after the treasure as soon as they touched the
sea bed. They gave no thought to the great
danger that might be below. All we know is
that not one diver ever returned to the surface
again to tell what happened on the Ilda M.
In each case the air tube and the ropes were cut
clean through, when the gear floated up from
the wreck. Now this time, I am going down
to find out what the dreadful ‘something’ is,
which has taken toll of so many lives. If I can
locate that first, then perhaps I will try and
recover the treasure later, but my great aim is
to avenge my brother, who was killed four
years ago.”
The Captain looked at the brave lad who
thought only of the brother who died trying
to recover the treasure. “Well, laddie, what
do you expect to find ? ” he asked Mike. “ Captain
I don’t know, but it must be something that


The Monster of the Deep 81
no one has ever seen before, because divers are
afraid of nothing under the sea. They are used
to every kind of danger. We have all fought
Sharks, Giant Octopi, and Devil Fish. Some
have died in their fights, but some clue was
always left behind. In this wreck, the divers
must have been taken so by surprise that they
lost their heads completely, and by the time
they had recovered themselves the air tube had
been cut. I will take down two large knives
that I have had specially made. One is semi-
circular, and the other is like a three-pointed
dagger with the edges like a shark’s tooth, all
jagged. I plan to descend some distance from
the wreck, and move towards it, so I won’t be
the one to be taken by surprise. If there is
some hidden menace below, I will give it the
shock instead. You see, Skipper, ‘ the Thing,’
whatever it is, could always see the diver being
lowered, because the ships anchored just above
the wreck, and it was prepared.”
When the Captain heard all these plans, he
understood that the young man had given much
thought to the adventure. “What can we do
now, lad, to give you a hand in this fight, if
there is going to be one,” asked the Captain.
“That’s just it, Skipper,” answered Mike
eagerly, “we’ll arrange some special signals, if
I am in great danger, but I must be given


82 The Monster of the Deep
plenty of time to see my enemy.” The Skipper
and Mike put their heads together, and thought
out a plan. Then Mike went up on deck to
prepare for the adventure he had been seeking
ever since he was a child. His brother, Con,
was waiting for him anxiously, and he begged
Mike to think twice before he started for the
unknown dangers below. “ Con, I have made
up my mind about this. I will avenge my
brother’s death, even if it costs me my life.
Lee did not use his brains. He gave no thought
to the perils. Poor Lee, his one idea was the
gold,” said Mike.
On arriving at the spot where the Ilda M.
had sunk, the Skipper gave orders to push a
little farther north. “We’ll work towards the
wreck, as we get the signals from Mike,” an-
nounced the Captain. When everything was set,
and just before they screwed on the diver’s
helmet, Mike turned to Con, and said with a
grin on his fine looking face, “ Con, tell Dad
if I don’t come back not to worry. It is better
to have two dead sons than one live coward,
and I would have been the real thing if I backed
out of this. Look after him if I stay behind.”
Poor Con, manly chap though he was, could
not keep the tears from his eyes as he clasped
his brother’s hand. One of the crew tapped
Mike’s helmet twice, which is the signal always


The Monster of the Deep 83
that everything is ready, and for the diver to
descend the ladder. As he disappeared out of
sight, there was not a dry eye on the lugger.
Everyone had loved the lad, and none thought
they would ever see him again. Soon he was
out of sight, but certainly not out of mind.
When Mike finally arrived on the floor of
the ocean, he at once took his bearings. He was
very cautious. He knew that something dreadful
was invading the depths. Slowly he went a step
or so forward with the peculiar floating motion
caused by the water, looking about him at every
move. The bottom where he was, was fairly
soft, there was not much coral just at that spot,
but a great deal of kelp which he cut down.
He advanced a few more feet, always looking
completely around him. He felt he was nearing
the wreck. He was on the coral now, and there
was a large shadow far in front of him, which
was thrown from the sunken ship. More
cautiously than ever he advanced, when sud-
denly he saw at some distance from him some-
thing moving towards him. Mike was surprised
that, at that spot, all the kelp and sea grass had
been mowed away, as though by a human hand.
No skeletons or diving gear were to be seen.
He held his ground, not wishing to make the
first move. He could see the wreck quite plainly
now. “Heavens! What was that?” Something


84 The Monster of the Deep
was coming towards him. It was not a Shark
or an Octopus. What could it be? It seemed
to have legs; closer and closer it came. Mike
did not move, but grasped his knives and waited.
The thing came on with a lurching walk, not
at all like anything he had ever seen under the
sea. Then Mike saw it plainly. It had legs
like a large orang-outang, and arms like a giant
sea crab, huge, huge, claws that seemed razor
edged. Suddenly its head came into sight;
never had he seen anything so dreadful. No
wonder those divers had all been taken by
surprise, and frightened to death. It had a
queer-shaped head like a kite, flat, but with a
tremendous mouth that turned up at the cor-
ners and looked as though it were grinning,
and three green eyes. They reminded Mike of
greed, hatred, and jealousy. He did not know
which eye to look at, and it waved its head
from side to side with a queer, fanlike motion.
The body was for all the world like an ape,
only it was marked to resemble a striped fish.
The monstrous “Thing” appeared so strong
that Mike wondered how he would ever kill it.
“ I must keep my air line out of the way,” he
thought. On, on, came the dreadful monster.
Its three green eyes almost turned the diver’s
heart to stone, but Mike knew he must not
lose his head. Then it attacked. The diver


The Monster of the Deep 8
was prepared though. He pushed up off the
bottom, so that his line was out of reach, as
the monster tried to grab it, and just missed.
As Mike came to the seabed again, he gave a
lunge at his enemy with all his might. The
resistance of the water, which is so tremendous,
makes it almost impossible to use a knife to
attack. Blood, or something like it, dyed the
water, but that thrust made the monster more
furious than ever. With his giant claw he
grabbed Mike’s arm, just above the wrist. The
monster’s strength was terrible; even with his
heavy rubber cloth band, Mike knew that his
wrist was broken. Staggering with pain, he
dropped one of the knives, but with the other
arm he drove the second knife into the mon-
ster’s neck; this time Mike must have hit home,
because the fiend released the arm, and sank
to its knees, then with one final effort, it jumped
at the diver, and tried to grab the air-tube.
But, though fainting from pain, Mike thrust
his dagger-sword into the gruesome animal’s
chest, and it sank down, spitting a sort of green
froth from its big mouth. The last effort had
been too much for the brave diver, and, before
he could give the signal to be hauled up, Mike
fainted.
Meanwhile, aboard the lugger, there was
great excitement. The men could tell some-


thing was happening below. The signals that
the Captain and Mike had arranged had not
been forgotten. The diver to let them
know if anything out of the ordinary was taking
place. There were set signals if conditions were
good. Everything had gone splendidly, until
Mike fainted, and when there was no further
response to his signals, Captain Bundy yelled,
“ Hoist away, lads, something has happened.”
Slowly they hauled the diver up. It took almost
thirty minutes to bring Mike to the surface.
As he was at a depth of more than one hundred
and fifty feet, it was necessary to haul very
slowly, so that his body could become accus-
tomed to the upper pressure. He was pulled
up for eight minutes, and then they rested him
four minutes, and continued this process, until
he reached the surface. Bringing a diver up
is the most dangerous part of deep-sea diving.
That thirty minutes seemed like an eternity to
the waiting brother, and when Mike’s helmet
came into sight, they thought he was dead; he
gave no sign of life whatever. Con was in a
dreadful state. “My second brother gone,” he
cried. “Oh, Father, what will you say?”
The Captain, though anxious, kept his head;
he ordered the men to take off Mike’s helmet,
and the skipper tested his heart, and he saw
to his great joy that his favourite and best diver


The Monster of the Deep 87
still lived. After they had revived Mike enough
for him to speak, he told them that his wrist
was broken. Gently they took off his diving
suit, and the Captain put the damaged arm in
a splint. Con was beside himself with joy, but
he would allow no one to question Mike as to
what had happened, because he feared that the
horror that was below might still be alive.
When he was quite himself again, and com-
fortably settled in the Captain’s cabin, Mike
told them what he had seen below, and the
terror of it. “It must be the only monster of
its kind,” said the Captain. “ I have never
heard of another.” “Well,” said Mike. “It’s
the last of its species too, because it’s dead.”
When the crew and the Skipper heard this
they were too astounded to speak. Later, how-
ever, the Captain turned to the men, and said.
“Now, fellows, who will volunteer to go down
and look for the treasure, and don’t forget that
whatever lies below in the wreck of the Ilda M.
belongs to the brave lad who killed the ‘ Monster
of the Deep ’.” The Skipper had no trouble
in finding volunteers, and the men all gave a
great cheer to the hero of the hour.
It is pleasant to relate that when the good
ship Jackie C. sailed into port, she brought
with her the treasure of the luckless Ilda M.
Mike, with his usual generosity, shared with


88 The Monster of the Deep
all the crew aboard the wealth that had been
recovered from the seas. “ I have avenged all
those men who died trying to find the treasure,”
he said. “And that’s what I wanted most to
do. The seas are now rid of the horrible * Monster
of the Deep’.”


THE MOONSTONE PALACE
This is a really and truly fairy tale. Once
upon a time there was an orphanage home in
London with ever so many tiny tots all dressed
alike. Their hair was screwed back tight, and
they wore heavy shoes and thick stockings.
Now in London, the sun does not shine as it
does in the South Seas. The sky is not so
blue, the flowers not so vivid, and there are
no wonderful Casuarina trees. Then one must
go to the aquarium to see pretty coloured fish
swimming about. Of course the little orphans
rarely saw the sun in the big building in which
they lived, and most of them had never seen
the real sea, or any tropical fish.
They were a bright little lot though, because
the people in London have the happiest natures
in the world. It rains, snows, fogs; then it is
damp, and often cold, yet they always say:
“Well, it might be worse.” Now that kind of
disposition should be rewarded, and in the little
orphanage it was, and I will tell you how.
There was a little girl called Bumpsie, she
was as smart as a whip, and she always seemed
89


so happy. When a lady or gentleman came to
the orphanage to take one of the other little
girls away to a nice home all she said was:
“Well, her Fairy has come along.” Now
Bumpsie had been given a book of South Sea
Fairy Tales for Christmas. Another orphan
girl called Wiggles, who had been chosen by
some very rich people and taken away to live
with them, had sent Bumpsie a book of fairy
tales, because she knew that that was what she
would have liked best.
From that day, Bumpsie was the most cheer-
ful child in the orphanage. She did her scrub-
bing, and sewing with a bright smile, and she
never grumbled. Whenever a tired, sad little
orphan said. “ Oh, Bumpsie, how can you
laugh all the time with that face of the Matron’s
looking at you.” Bumpsie giggled. “I pretend
I am a fairy queen, and every time she does
something mean, I change her into one of those
dreadful Monsters of the Deep like in my fairy
book. That’s why I laugh so after her back
is turned. The other day I changed her into
a large crab, and in my mind I put the crab on
its back, because I read in my South Sea book
that if you turn a crab on its back it can’t turn
over on its front again. Can you imagine the
Matron lying on her back, and not being able
to turn over?” laughed Bumpsie.


Her little mate, whose name was Tippy,
laughed out loud. “Oh, Bumpsie, you are a
one. Let me play too; always tell me what
you change her into.” “Well,” answered
Bumpsie, “when she was so mean the other
day to poor little Syd, who hadn’t done a thing,
and she looked with those ferocious eyes as
she set the punishment, I turned her into an
Octopus, because when she is in her tantrums,
her long, snaky arms never let go.”
In the days that followed there was an air
of mystery about the orphanage. The Matron
could not understand what had come over her
charges. They were very good, but would
glance at her with a funny look in their eyes,
as though she were something queer. Bumpsie
would take the orphans into her confidence,
and after looking at a story in her beloved book,
she would say. “If she is nasty to-day to any
of us, I’ll change her into a Giant ‘ squid ’ fish,
but be careful to keep away from her, because
they are very dangerous.”
The game would have gone on indefinitely
had not something happened. Some visitors
one day were making an inspection of the
orphanage. Among them was a very pretty
young lady, who came into the dining-hall, and
as she passed Bumpsie’s stool she dropped her
pendant. She did not notice it, as it fell, but


Bumpsie saw it, and picked it up calling, “ Please,
Miss, you have dropped this pretty brooch.”
“Thank you, dear,” said the lady. After
looking at the little girl, she added. “My, what
big eyes you’ve got.” Quick as a flash, Bumpsie,
who knew her fairy tales, answered brightly,
“The better to see you with, my dear.” As
soon as she had said it, she knew she had done
an unwise thing. All the children screamed
with laughter, and the Matron called for order.
“Oh, I beg your pardon, Miss,” said the abashed
Bumpsie. “ I forgot where I was, and you look
so like the beautiful Red Riding Hood.” “What
a funny child you are,” said the lovely lady.
“How would you like this pendant. It is called
a Moonstone, and it has a fairy legend. There
was once a Princess who, every time she rubbed
the Moonstone, was transplanted to the beautiful
Moonstone Palace in the Coral Seas where the
sun always shines, and the sea is even bluer
than your eyes.”
Bumpsie was simply carried away. “Oh,”
she cried, “that would be the most wonderful
present in the world. May I really have it?”
The Matron, who had come forward, looked
very grim, but she smiled sourly because the
young lady was so rich, and gave great gifts
to the institution. “Please allow the little girl
to keep the pendant, Matron,” said the visitor


turning to the hard-faced woman. The Matron
tried hard to smile as she answered that it was
against the rules to have trinkets, but that if
Agatha (that was Bumpsie’s real name) would
put it out of sight, she could keep it. Bumpsie
thanked the kind lady with her heart in her
eyes, but after the Matron and the visitor turned
their backs, and as they went towards the door,
Bumpsie whispered loudly, “ The Princess and
the Shark!” The little girls all tittered, and
the Matron turned quickly saying, “What did
you say, Agatha ? ” The lady, who had heard what
the child had said, hurriedly replied, “She said:
‘lsn’t it a lark?’ ” But the pretty visitor had a
merry twinkle in her eyes as if she herself really
thought it was a great lark.
After the lady and the Matron had left the
room, the children rushed around Bumpsie to
see the wonderful Moonstone. “Oh, Bumpsie,”
cried Tippy, “you really must have a fairy,
because you’re so lucky.” “Oh, I don’t believe
in fairies,” said Estelle, a tall and ungainly girl
who was known to carry tales. “That’s too
bad,” said Bumpsie good naturedly, “because,
when I take all the orphanage to Moonstone
Palace, they won’t let you in if you don’t believe
in fairies.” “Ha! Ha!” laughed Estelle, “You
are dippy, Bumpsie.” “She’s not,” spoke up
Syd, standing nearby. “Bumpsie has more fun


than anyone in the orphanage, because she lives
among her fairies all the time.”
That night, when all the others were asleep,
Bumpsie took out her Moonstone, and, shiver-
ing with excitement, rubbed the stone. “Please
fairy of the Moonstone, w r aft me through the
air to the Moonstone Castle in the Coral Seas,”
she pleaded. No sooner had Bumpsie finished
the sentence, than she found herself being
snatched off the bed, and the next thing she
knew she was riding on the back of a most
wonderful flying bird. It was silvery white,
and quite hollow, with all its inside out so that
Bumpsie could sit comfortably in it, like in a
real flying ship with soft cushions. On, on, it
flew, the sun was shining brightly, not a cloud
was to be seen, and from above Bumpsie could
see the bottom of the ocean, and thousands of
coloured fish. She knew she must have come
into the Indian Ocean, because she recognised
the beautiful island of Java with its queer looking
turrets. She could see the tiny Javanese people.
She had seen pictures of them in her geography
book. Then she passed over New Guinea.
Here she noticed the huts all built high on
stilts. Bumpsie screamed with pleasure when
she saw the Birds of Paradise, there were some
with gold tails, others silver, and again a beauti-
ful one all beige colour. There must have been


over twenty kinds of different Paradise Birds,
“I never knew that,” thought Bumpsie. “I
only heard of a golden and silver Paradise Bird.”
On, on, the bird carriage flew. Bumpsie was
just wild when she saw the many South Sea
Islands. There seemed to be thousands. The
white sands, palms, fragrant trees, birds of
every hue that she had read about in her fairy
tales were just too wonderful. But the best
was yet to come. When she first saw the Great
Barrier Reef, the largest Coral Reef in the
world, she knew she was in fairyland. Hundreds
and hundreds of small islands she saw, and
inside the reefs there was not a ripple of water,
because the Great Barrier makes a break-water
from the ocean. “ Oh! Oh! ” said the bewildered
Bumpsie, who had never seen anything in her
life outside her own imagination. “ I am lucky
and happy!” Just as she spoke, the flying bird
swooped gracefully down and the little girl
nearly swooned with joy. Just below her was
the most extraordinary Moonstone palace that
had ever been known.
Its moonstone turrets of pastel shades, gleamed
in the sunlight like opals, and the reefs below
blended their dazzling colours with the sapphire
sea and blue skies, until Bumpsie thought there
could not be a colour left in the world.
Down, down, swept the silver bird, never


swerving, then all of a sudden, the child found
herself right in front of the palace doors. To
make matters more thrilling, just as Bumpsie
was wondering what she would do, the door
opened and the loveliest lady she had ever seen
came to the Bird’s side, and said softly, “You
are Bumpsie, the little girl who has always
lived with the fairies in your heart, aren’t you ? ”
“Yes,” gasped Bumpsie. “I live for my fairy
tale hours. I forget all about the horrible
orphanage when I am with the fairies. I never
feel cross when the other girls are taken away
to somebody’s home, because there is no place
in the world like the dream palace I hold right
in my head.” Bumpsie was thunderstruck when
she saw she was talking everyday talk to the
Fairy Queen. She wondered how many pearls
and diamonds there were in the Queen’s crown,
and the silver dress she wore which trailed on
the ground, must have been so heavy, because
it was not pretend silver, but real silver lace,
still it was so fine that it weaved in the breeze
ever so slightly. “ Come in, Bumpsie; little
girls like you are very rare nowadays. So few
people love the fairies any more.” She took
the child by the hand and led her into a dream
castle, such as Bumpsie even with her imagina-
tion had never thought could exist. “Oh! Oh!
Oh!” was all she could say.


They went through room after room filled
with rare jewels, and there were dolls dressed
in satins and velvets. Everything that a person
could wish for was to be found, and so many
people all looking so happy. “Bumpsie, now
that you have seen all these rare gifts, I will
grant you one favour. You have only to ask
it. Would you like great riches?” asked the
Fairy Queen, with her eyes steadily on the little
girl.
“Oh, Fairy Queen, if you will grant me one
request. It is not wealth I would wish for,
but if only I could have my little playmates
from the asylum to live here. Some of them
will never be taken away by nice people. You
see only the very pretty little children are
chosen, and many of us are not a bit good
looking,” said Bumpsie, oh, so seriously. “Little
girl, unselfishness is one of the greatest of virtues,
and should always be rewarded. I will trans-
plant all your playmates to the Moonstone
Palace,” said the Queen. The Fairy clapped
her hands three times, then she led Bumpsie
to the window. “Look up there, Child,” she
said. To her amazement when Bumpsie looked
up into the sky she saw dozens of silver birds
coming towards the castle, each carrying a
child, then she saw them swoop down, and
one by one they stopped at the palace door,


and out trotted the orphans. “Go and meet
them,” said the Queen. Bumpsie rushed down
the mother-of-pearl stairway, and stood at the
door. “Welcome to Moonstone Palace all of
you,” said Bumpsie royally. “Oh, Bumpsie,
you are a one; you said you’d ask the Fairy
Queen to bring us here, and you have. Thank
you ever so,” said Tippy. Just then the chil-
dren heard a cry, and looking away down on
the reefs below, they saw a silver bird, and
when the kiddies looked again, they could see
Estelle, and the Albatross would not bring her
to the palace door. “Oh, poor Estelle, I told
her that would happen,” cried Bumpsie, all
worried about the girl who had never been too
kind. “ Wait a minute, I’ll see the Fairy Queen.”
She rushed up the stairs, and flew to the Queen.
“Oh, please forgive Estelle, and let her in,”
begged Bumpsie. “It’s not her fault she’s like
she is. She told us once that someone had
allowed her to fall on her head when she was
a baby, and I’m sure that is why she is a little
different from us all.” The Fairy Queen looked
at the pleading face beneath her and she said,
“Bumpsie, you are a funny morsel. I’ll allow
Estelle to come in, but you must promise to
teach her to love fairies.” Bumpsie again flew
down the stairs, and rushed out of the castle
to where the silver bird was stubbornly standing


with poor Estelle. When Estelle saw who had
come for her the poor child cried: “Oh, please
Bumpsie, I always wanted to believe in Fairies.
But I am not pretty or graceful like you, and
I did not think Fairies liked ugly people.” “Oh,
Estelle, don’t you know that whoever the fairies
love are always beautiful, because they see them
through fairy eyes. Come on, we will go and
see the Fairy Queen, and ask her if we must
help her polish up the moonstones,” replied
Bumpsie. When the children arrived in the
presence of the fairy, the Queen said. “Now,
children, you will be given all the pretty clothes
you desire, and your duties will be to be a good
fairy to some poor children in the everyday
world.” With that the orphans were all dressed
in a flash in beautiful gold and silver frocks;
their hair was long and curly, and they had
silk stockings, and darling golden shoes, and
they all lived happily ever after.
Nobody ever told me what happened at the
Orphanage Asylum when the Matron found
every one of her charges had disappeared, never
to return.


VII
CHRISTINE THE COURAGEOUS
Many, many years ago on one of the Islands
off British New Guinea, lived a powerful
Cannibal Chieftain. He was almost seven feet
tall, and his black, frizzy hair stood on his
head like a huge mop. Through his flat nose
and in his ears he wore large rings. His face
was one mass of queer scrolls; it had been so
marked and tattoed it resembled a map more
than a face. He was covered with fantastic
shells, beads, and fibre bracelets, and his thick
lips were dyed a bright red.
He ruled his tribe of head-hunters with a
rod of iron. Head-hunters are black men who
eat white people. Whenever the Chieftain’s
slaves disobeyed him he threw them to the
crocodiles, which he had brought from the
swamps of North Queensland. Chief Babu and
his tribes were feared and hated. Years before
he had captured the castle of a rich merchant,
who had come from Java to settle in the South
Seas. Java lies in the Indian Ocean. The mer-
chant and his retinue had been taken prisoners


fcP {V
The Cannibal Chieftain had Captured the Castle of a Rich
Merchant from Java
[Face page 100




and after a great orgy of tribal festivities, which
lasted many days, the Javanese merchant, with
all his people, were put into the Golden Urn,
and hung over a fire to make a dainty morsel
for the Chieftain and his savage warriors. The
beautiful Castle, in Javanese style, was used
by the Chieftain as a prison for white captives,
Through the cliffs was a stairway, which led
to the Castle above.
Chief Babu, who had always lived in thatched
huts with his tribes around him, could not
accustom himself to living in the beautiful
Javanese palace, so he remained with his people
in the cannibal village. Now, there were very
few Islands in the South Seas where head-
hunters were to be found. The island of Babu
was one of the exceptions; the Polynesian race
of natives looked with horror on cannibalism.
It was only in the Solomon, Fiji, or New Guinea
Islands, where head-hunters existed.
The ferocious Chief and his mighty warriors
would set out in their war canoes whenever a
ship was sighted. These war canoes were large,
and a dozen or more natives would ply the
oars. Chief Babu, himself, always led his head-
hunters, and they would storm some becalmed
sailing ship, and capture the white men on
board, some of whom died fighting for their
freedom. It was very rare that a white woman


was taken prisoner, because in those days few
women sailed the seas.
Now every year the Chieftain held a conse-
cration festivity. He offered sacrifice to his
“War Gods,” in gratitude for the many white
men that had been captured by his tribes. Each
year a young maiden was sacrificed to their
Gods. The Chief would send his head-hunters
scouring the South Seas in search of a beautiful
white girl. The warriors had to wander far
afield, because in New Guinea there were very
few whites. The warriors would be gone many
moons as they travelled hundreds of miles
towards the Polynesian Groups. (Polynesian
means —Many Islands.) In these Islands of the
South Seas, a number of white families, many
of which were missionaries, lived happily in
their tropical surroundings. (The natives of
Samoa, and all Polynesian tribes, are unlike the
savages of New Guinea, Fiji or Solomon Islands.
They are lighter in colour, have beautiful
features, and sleek or wavy curly hair, so different
from the frizzy mops, flat noses, thick lips of
the savage tribes. The Polynesians look with
scorn on these black people of the Melanasian
tribes, which is what they call the natives of
New Guinea, Fiji, and Solomon Islands.)
After paddling some days from Babu Island,
the warriors sighted a brig. She was making


little headway; the breezes were so light as to
barely fill the sails. The savages in their canoes
were able to overhaul her, and you can imagine
their surprise, on overtaking the schooner, to
find at the wheel, steering the ship, a beautiful
young white girl. She looked like a Viking’s
daughter, with her healthy sun tan, and her
fair hair waving gently in the breezes. She
had seen them from a distance but had not
called her father, who was resting below deck,
because she did not realise there was any danger.
Christine had sailed the South Seas since she
was a tiny child, and had never experienced
one single dangerous element outside of moun-
tainous seas, and tropical storms, which she
thought was all in the day’s fun. However,
when she saw the head-hunters coming along-
side, and then, when one of them with the
quickness of a cat scaled the side of the ship,
she started to scream, but too late. The cannibal
had clasped his black hand over her mouth,
and with his other arm picked her up as though
she were a kitten. Christine was a strong,
healthy girl, but in the arms of this savage she
was as weak as a small bird. The warriors made
off with the beautiful white captive before any
of her father’s crew, who were below deck,
noticed that anything was amiss. The warriors
chanted war songs all the way to Babu. The


Chieftain would be pleased with them. Never
had they had so lovely a prize for the War
Gods. They tied Christine’s hands and feet,
but were not cruel to her, they knew she must
be well and beautiful when they handed her
over to their great War Chief.
The cannibals of Babu were beating their
Lahlis (native drums) in monotonous regularity
when the canoe paddled into the lagoon. The
Chieftain came out to meet them in great
splendour. He wore a magnificent head-dress
made from gorgeous paradise plumes of many
colours. When he saw the lovely Christine he
smacked his lips, and rolled his eyes. Never
had he seen so wonderful a sacrifice.
As it was some days before the festivities,
the Chieftain ordered that Christine be taken
to his Castle prison on the cliffs. Poor Christine,
she could see from her turret, the crocodile
below, and the savages dancing round a huge
bonfire in great festive joy. She was a brave
lassie, the sea had taught her to be fearless,
and no maiden in the South Seas could swim
better than she; her diving was so expert that
she had often plunged from the shrouds high
up on her father’s ship. Christine watched the
warriors preparing for the feast. Hour after
hour they continued to beat their Lahlis. Daily,
the Chieftain Babu came with great pomp and


ft*
[ Face page 104




ceremony to visit his captive. “How beautiful
she is!” he thought, “and how courageous.”
Christine greeted him as though she were a
Queen, and he just a slave. Not for one moment
would she allow this black man to think that
a white girl was frightened. As the day drew
nearer when she was to be sacrificed, Christine
thought of her father’s loneliness. Her mother
had died when she was a baby, and since that
time, her Daddy had been everything to her.
He was so proud of her swimming prowess and
of the way she sailed his ship. He called her
“His little skipper.” Christine wondered if he
would ever hear how she had died. She hoped
not.
On the last day before the sacrifice was to
take place, when the savage Chief came to visit
his beautiful captive, he asked her if she would
like to make one request before she went to
die. “Oh, Chief,” begged the little maid in a
pidgin native language, “if you would allow
me a few minutes on the parapet to say my
prayers to my God. I cannot pray if I do not
see the sun.” The Chieftain was amazed at
this young girl’s spirit. He admired courage
above all else, so he said she could have a few
moments beneath the sun to say her prayers.
Later, Christine was led out on to the parapet
by two head-hunters. The Chieftain never for


one moment thought that any prisoner could
possibly escape from the Castle. It was more
than one hundred feet high. As Christine smelt
the sea air, and she saw the sun above her
shining so brightly, she gained courage. Quietly
she knelt down, and putting her arms towards
heaven said: “Please God, forgive me for what
I am about to do, and look after my Daddy.”
The two savages looked away as she prayed.
They, too, had learnt to admire the brave
Christine. No sooner had she spoken her short
prayer, than she jumped to her feet and before
the head-hunters could grasp her, she flew to
the parapet, which was on the very edge of the
cliffs and with just enough time to poise her-
self for the spring, she dived like a beautiful
swallow into the sea below, while the hundreds
of head-hunters watched her flying through the
air. The Chieftain Babu, who had also kept
his eye on the Castle above, could not believe
his eyes. Never had he seen anything so beauti-
ful as the white maiden’s dive. “Just like a
bird,” he thought.
As soon as Christine struck the water, she
started swimming away from the shore. The
Chieftain sent out some of his men in a canoe
to catch her. He gave orders that she was not
to be harmed. Poor little Christine, all be-
draggled like a wet dove: the big men dragged


her back to the Chieftain. She stood proudly
before him, and then the biggest surprise of all
happened. The Chieftain Babu came over to
Christine, and, with a royal bow, he told her
that his warriors would take her in his canoe
to safety, and that they would not return to
Babu until they had found her ship. “ Such
courage and beauty, Oh Daughter of the Southern
Seas, belongs only to the Gods, and I cannot
sacrifice a Goddess, you are free.” With those
words, he took her to his own royal canoe. He
ordered the head-hunters to pack the “ dug
out ” with many rare gifts, then he sent Christine
on her way with a festive wave of his hand.
Many days later, Christine found herself in
the arms of her beloved Daddy, none the worse
for her adventure. When she told of her won-
derful escape from death, he said, “Christine,
my little girl, courage and bravery in adversity
is much to be admired.” “Oh, Father,” an-
swered Christine, “how glad I am that I learnt
to swim and dive. Had it not been for that
I would not be alive to day.”


VIII
TIM THE SHARK KILLER
You can travel any island from New Guinea
to Australia or New Zealand, and never see
any wild animals. In the north of Australia,
and some of the island swamps, there are
Crocodiles, but Tigers, Lions, Panthers, Jaguars,
and Cheetahs are not to be found in the South
Seas. On some of the islands, there are wild
Boars, but it is rare that a human life is lost
through them. The only living thing natives
really have to fear are Sharks. Each year a
number of lives are sacrificed to these dreadful
denizens of the deep, or the monsters make off
with some poor unfortunate native’s leg or
arm. The most feared Sharks are the great
White Shark, the Blue Shark, the Sand Shark,
and Tiger Shark. The Great White Shark, and
the Blue Shark, nicknamed “man eaters,” are
the worst of all. They have as many as six
rows of teeth. Large, three-cornered teeth with
saw-like edges. Ugh! These two species of
Sharks are sometimes fifteen or eighteen feet
long, and when their mouths are open, they


measure two and a half feet. Ugh! No wonder
the natives of the Southern Seas are frightened
of these horrible enemies of mankind. There
is one specimen, however, that is absolutely
harmless. It is called the Basking Shark; it
has a flat head, large mouth, and has never
been known to harm anybody. Some of them
are almost twenty feet long.
Now on one of the islands in the Cook group
lived a small boy with his parents. His father
was a Copra and Banana Trader, and had many
coconut and banana trees on his plantation.
The little boy’s name was Tim Clark, and as
he was as yet too small to work, he basked in
the sun most of the day, or fished and swam
off the beach in a lagoon, not far from his home.
Tim did a few hours’ lessons daily with his
mother, but I am sorry to say his eyes were
mostly out to sea, instead of on his books.
Tim was a wonderful little fisherman. He
speared his fish with great agility, and he knew
the names of most of those that swam around
the reefs and lagoons.
One day his father came back after inspecting
one of his plantations at the other end of the
island, and as he sat down to eat his dinner
he said gravely, “Mother, I’m afraid I can’t
eat much lunch to-day, Tve had such bad news.”
“What is it, dear?” asked Mrs. Clark, full of


concern. “There has been another child taken
by a Shark. These waters must be infested
with them. That makes the fourth native lost
in a year,” he answered. “Daddy, why doesn’t
someone try to kill them?” asked Tim, who
was all ears, listening to his father’s tale of
horror. “ They have, Tim, but with no success,”
said the father wearily. He did not like these
things to happen to the natives who worked
for him. They were a fine lot of people, and
always so cheerful.
It so happened one day that Tim was in his
“dug out” when he saw a big shadow swim-
ming towards him. He grew sick with fear for
a moment, but he kept quite still, and the large
Shark circled his canoe, and swam out of the
lagoon. Tim hurried home and told his father
what he had seen. The following day Mr.
Clark called for some of the natives, and went
in a “dug out” to see if the Shark came back.
The lagoon was somewhat distant from the
house, but they did not have long to wait after
they arrived. A fish, about sixteen feet long,
circled their canoe. The natives, who were all
prepared with their spears, took one look at
it, as it came to the surface, and saw that it
was a tremendous Basking Shark, which is
harmless. “Tim, that’s a Basking Shark; notice
his funny square-shaped head. Some people


call it a ‘Hammer Head’ because it is so flat.
It does no harm at all,” said the boy’s father
disappointedly. He had hoped to catch one of
the man eaters, that had caused so much dis-
aster. He returned to the house with Tim and
the natives, and told his wife, who was anxiously
awaiting them, what they had seen. “We let
it go, why kill anything harmless,” he said.
Tim could not get out quickly enough the
following afternoon to see if the Shark was
there again. He had taken a bit of bully beef
off his plate at luncheon, and hidden it in a
piece of paper. He jumped into his “dug out”
and quickly made for the lagoon. Sure enough,
after paddling for a short time, he saw the big,
black fish coming towards the canoe. When it
was close by, Tim dropped his piece of meat
overboard. The Shark nabbed it up, and
swished around the boat asking for more. Next
day, without saying anything to his mother,
Tim, I am sorry to have to tell you, took a
whole tin of beef out of the larder, and made
off with it. He hoped his mother would not
miss it, but how could he tell her that he was
going to teach that fish to come to him. Off
he went to the lagoon, and waited anxiously
to see what would happen. To his great joy,
the Shark appeared for the fourth time. He
circled the “ dug out ” looking for his tasty


bit. After Tim had opened the tin, he took
out a handful only, and threw it to the Shark.
Around and around went the fish, asking for
more. This time Tim gave him another hand-
ful. The Shark certainly seemed to find it to
his liking. When the fish had taken the meat,
he commenced his little promenade, circling
the boat again, but Tim cautiously paddled to
shore, and the Shark after him. The boy “shot”
a small breaker, that carried him right up on
the beach, and he left the fish gazing at the
canoe, wondering what it was all about.
Now this little performance went on day
after day. Tim managed to forage some kind
of food for the now friendly Shark. In a short
while the fish brazenly put his head over the
side of the “ dug out ” as if to ask for his tit-bit.
Tim, as time went by, spoke to him, and called
him “Basky,” and then made the animal follow
him all over the lagoon for his tasty morsel.
Meanwhile, the boy never said a word to his
father or mother. They wondered why he was
quieter than formerly, and why he was so eager
to go up the lagoon each day.
After Tim had been following this little
routine with the Shark for a few weeks, he
decided to try the “trick” that he had had in
the back of his head for some time. He fed
“Basky” once, and spoke to him, then, as the


Shark came right alongside the “dug out,”
Tim slid on his back. The fish was so taken
by surprise that he dived down so as to escape
from the boy clinging with his legs. Tim rolled
off, and climbed back into the boat, and when
the Shark came to the “dug out” again he
gave him another piece of meat. He did not
try again that day, but on the following morning
Tim attempted exactly the same thing. This
time, however, the Shark was not frightened,
but he rolled over, and Tim tried to cling on
for dear life. When the boy let go his hold,
the Shark swished around, thinking it was a
great game, and Tim climbed back into the
“ dug out ” and gave the fish his reward. This
little game went on for days, until the Shark
had become so used to Tim’s playing with
him that they rolled around together for minutes
at a time. Tim practised diligently clinging on
the Shark’s back with his legs, until his mother
and father wondered how the boy had so many
scratches on them. Tim then thought of an
idea. It would be much easier to cling on if
he had a pair of Dad’s dungarees. Dungarees
are pants, something like overalls. The next
time he saw the native servant putting out the
washing Tim waited his chance, and away went
one of Dad s perfectly good pairs of dungarees.
Tim scooted away with them, then he cut off


the legs, short enough to fit him, and tied the
pants round his waist with a piece of rope.
When he tried his trick with the Shark, he
found it twice as easy to grip with his legs.
As the months went by, Tim became simply
marvellous “timing” his jump on to Basky’s
back. He became so adept, that when the fish
swished around Tim just stayed “put.”
He hid his father’s dungarees each day, and
arrived home as though nothing had happened.
The mystery of the pants was never solved.
Father declared that mother dreamt she had
hung them on the line, because the natives
had never taken a single thing that did not
belong to them. Daily on the beach Tim prac-
tised another little trick with a wooden pointed
dagger he had made. He would sit for hours
just jabbing that wooden dagger into the sand.
His father said one day in surprise, “Why,
Tim, you’ve developed a wonderful muscle on
your right arm. What have you been doing?”
“Oh, just playing around,” answered Tim
cautiously.
Some time later, his Dad came home from
the plantation, and said, “ Lillian, this has got
to stop. One of my boys had his leg taken off
by a man eater to-day; the natives have tried
to catch the terror, but though one man saw
him, he got away.” Tim’s eyes flashed, but he


Tim the Shark Killer 11
held his peace. He did not wish to awaken
suspicion, but some minutes later he asked
casually. “Where have they seen this Shark,
Dad ? ” “ Oh, at the other end of the island,
son. It must be the same fish that is doing
all the damage, because it happens so regularly.
Not one of the natives want to do any pearl
diving. The children who never before feared
the water now shun it,” replied Dad.
Coming home from the beach one day, Tim
entered the house just as his father was telling
mother that he’d be gone a few days on his next
trip to the plantation. “ There is much to do, we
have a great load of copra to send off, and the
bananas have to be sorted and packed,” Dad
said. “Oh, Mother, please allow me to go with
Dad this trip; it’s ages since I went to the
plantation, I love watching the natives gathering,
and packing the stuff; besides the bread fruit
trees at night are so lovely to watch,” pleaded
Tim. Dad was rather pleased that his son
wished to accompany him. It would be nice
to take him along. What a big boy he had
grown. He was very tall, and strong for his
twelve years. “All right, son, if mother says
you can go, I think I can manage to take you
with me,” said his father with a fond smile.
Tim’s joy was wonderful to behold. He gathered
together his dungarees, put them in a bundle,


wrapped in palms, so they could not be seen.
As Mr. Clark was loading the large “ dug
out” he saw Tim stuffing a bundle surrepti-
tiously in the stern. “What’s that, son?” asked
Dad. “Oh, it’s a little parcel; just a little sur-
prise,” hurriedly answered Tim, quaking with
fear that perhaps his Dad would want to see it.
But Mr. Clark had lots to attend to, so let it
pass. Mother came down to the beach to see
them off, and Tim looked so happy and strong
sitting at one of the paddles. “Mother,” said
Tim, “I’ll have a great secret to tell you when
I come back.” “All right, Boy,” called Mrs.
Clark laughingly as she waved her hand to the
pair she so fondly loved in the canoe.
After they had gone she returned to the
house, and decided she would prepare her
weekly baking, so that when her small family
returned home, in two or three days, she would
have the larder filled with good things. Looking
over her stores, she noticed that a number of
bully beef tins were missing. “Good gracious!”
she said aloud. “Why, my fine English bacon
that mother sent out from England has dis-
appeared; I wonder who the thief is, so many
things have been missing lately. Dad must see
into it when he comes back. It’s most unusual.”
When Tim and his father arrived at the other
end of the island, the natives welcomed the boy


among them. They were fond of their master’s
son. How he had grown. Tim’s father, having
a heap of work to do, allowed his boy a free
rein. Tim wandered down to the beach. He
greeted the fisherman who was drying out
pearl shell. “Talofa, Atu, pee te malolo”
which meant “Good day, Atu, how do you
do.” Nearby he spied one of their diving spears.
“Atu, your tao silisili ’ese” (your spear is
wonderful). “The finest I’ve seen,” flattered
Tim. He then begged Atu to give him one.
“Oh, Master Tim, I give it to you with pleasure;
I make another for myself,” said Atu, pleased
that his master’s son had paid him so high a
compliment. “ Atu, would you cut it down
for me to the size of a big dagger?” begged
Tim, “and make it very ‘ma’ai’ (sharp) like
a ‘naifi’ (knife).” The native, wishing to
please the boy, did as he was asked, and when
Tim received the spear, the head of which
was made of whalebone, it was razor
blade edged. “Be careful, Master Tim, it
is dangerous,” said the native, as he handed
it to him. “ Thank you, thank you, Atu,
Soifua! (goodbye),” said Tim, making off
with it.
The following morning, at early dawn, Tim
sneaked out of the hut where he and his father
were sleeping. With him he took a fairly


8 Tim the Shark Killer
large bundle, and from under his mat he grasped
a dangerous-looking dagger spear. Stepping
as noiselessly as possible, he left the hut, and
went down to the beach, where the “ dug
outs ” were lying high up on the sands. Pushing
one down to the water’s edge, he shoved off,
and started for the end of the island. On
arriving there, Tim opened his bundle, and
first of all he unwrapped his dungarees, then
took out another parcel that he had placed
inside the pants. And lo and behold, it was
the bacon that his mother had received from
England. He also opened a couple of tins of
bully beef. “Poor Mother, I suppose she will
think there is a terrible thief on the island,”
he laughed. “I’ll tell her all about it, when
I get back.” Showing no signs of fear, Tim
pulled out from under the stern a heavy piece
of wire. This, he tied strongly to the bacon.
Then he attached the wire to the stern of the
canoe, after which he did a queer thing. He
paddled the canoe in a large circle around
and around, gradually getting the ring smaller.
He must have circled a dozen times before
he stopped. He then took the pork from the
stern, and put it inside the boat. He scanned
the water about him, but of fish of any kind
there was not a sign. He stood up and waited.
It seemed to him he must have been waiting


hours, when suddenly, off at a distance of
about a couple of hundred yards, Tim saw
a movement on the surface of the water. He
looked again. “There he is! there he is!” he
yelled in his excitement. Tim could see him
clearly now. The fish must have been sixteen
feet long. He was much thinner than Tim’s
Basky Shark, and the back fin was well down
to the middle of his body. Around and around
the “dug out” he circled, swimming the exact
route Tim had taken with the piece of bacon.
“He must be a Blue Shark,” said Tim to him-
self. “Dad said they had five or six rows of
teeth. Goodness, I’m glad the side fins aren’t
too near the neck,” he thought. As the mon-
ster continued circling, Tim threw a piece of
bully beef over the side. The Shark, who was
close by now, dived for it, but was disappointed.
It was the bacon he was after, for Sharks love
pork. Around he circled again. Tim had
watched him grab the meat. “ I must be care-
ful,” thought the boy. “He’s a terror. I’m
glad he’s not as fat as Basky, I’d never grab
him, he’s so quick.” Tim took the bacon that
was on the wire and attached it to the side
of the canoe, but just above the water
line, then he prepared himself for the
combat.
The Shark, smelling the pork, circled first


below the “dug out,” while Tim stood ready
for him. As the fish came alongside right on
the surface, quicker than a flash of an eyelash
Tim “timed” his jump, so perfectly that he
was astride of the Shark’s back, clinging for
dear life with his legs round the gills of the
Shark. His left hand he slipped into one of
the gills, his right arm he brought down with
all his might, just below the neck, with his
dagger spear. The pain-crazed fish swished over
and over, trying to throw his enemy, but Tim
had been practising too many months on
“ Basky ” to be fooled. He rolled around with
the Shark, waiting for his chance to plunge
his spear into the animal once more. Just as
he felt that the fish was about to dive below,
Tim brought his arm down like a rocket into
the Blue Shark’s neck. This time Tim felt
the fish sag under him, and saw they were
sinking together. The boy let the animal sink,
and came to the top exhausted, but happy.
He righted his “dug out,” which had turned
over. This is quite difficult, but in the South
Seas they do it easily, as it is just a knack.
Tim climbed into the canoe and started
back to the hut, where he had left his
father.
On arriving near the beach, he saw crowds
of natives on the shore with his Dad. They


had missed him, and the native who had given
Tim the spear, told Mr. Clark about the
dagger he had made for the lad. The father
was filled with trepidation. As they were
looking out to sea, they saw a canoe coming
around the corner of the reefs, and as it came
nearer they knew it was Tim in the “ dug
out.” When he shot up on to the beach, his
father rushed to him crying, “Tim, where have
you been? You have frightened us all out of
our senses.” Then he noticed T m’s dun-
garee costume all spattered with blood. “ Son,
what has happened ? Are you hurt ? ” asked
the father anxiously. “No, Dad, I’m all right,”
answered Tim with a happy grin on his face.
“ I’m sorry about your nice dungarees, but I
have been out killing the Blue Shark this morn-
ing,” continued Tim as though he had been
picking up sea shells. “Killing a Shark!”
cried everybody at once. “Yes, Dad, the big
Blue Shark that killed and maimed all the
natives is at the bottom of the sea, just around
the end of the island,” answered Tim quietly.
It was then that bedlam let loose. The natives
could not believe their eyes or ears. The father
was almost too stunned to speak. Then every-
body spoke at once. Finally Tim made himself
heard. “ Dad, could one of the divers help
me bring the Shark up. I’d have tried my-


self, but I had no rope, besides the water is
very deep,” That morning a holiday was called
on the plantation. The canoes all paddled out
to the spot around the end of the island where
the Shark had sunk. The natives wanted to
see the animal brought up. One of the best
divers went down with a strong fibre rope
with a lasso knot at one end. From the sur-
face the merrymakers could see the native slip
the lasso over the Shark’s tail, then he carried
the other end of the rope towards the canoe.
Unfortunately it was about fifteen feet short,
so a native from one of the other “dug outs”
dived over with another length. Just as easily
as though he were on top of the water, he
tied the two ends together, then swam to the
surface, and handed the rope to Mr. Clark
sitting in the “ dug out.” The Shark must
have weighed four or five hundred pounds.
While two of the natives paddled for dear
life, two others hauled the monster towards
the stern of the boat, until it was close enough
to tow it into shore. The natives, in their
excitement, sang all the way back to the beach.
They had not yet understood how it had been
done. Tim had said very little. It was only
that evening in the hut, alone with his Dad,
that he told the whole story; how he had trained
the “Basky” Shark, and what he had been


practising for months. His father could not
believe his ears. “Why, son, that was a great
thing to do, and very brave. You have avenged
all the children who have lost their lives. To-
morrow we must go home and tell Mother
all about it,” said the father. “Yes, and I
must get back to Basky,” said Tim. “ He’ll
be hungry and lonely. Had it not been for
him I would never have thought of the idea.”
So the following day the father hurried through
his work, and the natives, who had been told
the story, worked like trojans, so that Mr.
Clark and his son could leave at once. The
islanders almost worshipped young Tim after
they had heard of his heroic deed, and as they
all came down to the beach to wave good-bye
to the lad, one of the natives stepped out and
cried. “Much cheer for Tim-the-Shark-Killer.”
And from that day to this any boy in the South
Seas will tell you about the famous exploit of
the boy called Tim.
When father and son arrived home, Tim
rushed to his mother’s arms. “Oh, Mother,
I have a confession to make, I stole the pork,
the dungarees, and the bully beef.” “Mother,”
said Dad, “before Tim says any more, I want
you to come down to the beach, we have some-
thing to show you.” Wondering what it could
be, Mrs. Clark followed her family to where


the canoe was lying. When she saw the car-
cass of the Shark on the beach she recoiled
with horror. “ How horrible it is, who killed
it?” she asked her husband. “ Tim-the-Shark-
Killer, Mother,” answered Dad proudly.
“Tim!” gasped mother, looking from one to
the other. Then Dad told her the story from
beginning to end. “Why, Darling,” cried
mother with tears in her eyes, taking the boy
in her arms. “How wonderful; you must
promise me, though, that you will never do
it again. Mother might have lost her boy!”
“Well,” said Tim, “I might as well promise,
because I don’t suppose there will be any
more man eaters around these parts for years
and years.”
After kissing her again, Tim added. “Oh,
Mother, give me something to give Basky, he
must be starving by this time, and he’s such
a good old friend.”
Tim went off with another tin of beef, and
both his mother and father promised that
Basky would always get a meal somehow.
When he arrived on the beach, Tim jumped
in his “dug out” and paddled round the lagoon.
Sure enough, there was Basky disconsolately
swimming slowly back and forth. When he
saw the “dug out,” he swam towards it for
dear life, and snapped at his bully beef. Tim


towed him around the lagoon again, and gave
him an extra big piece for his second tit-bit.
“Thanks, Basky,” Tim said. “I never could
have done it without you, and I feel awfully
tickled about it,” said Tim-the-Shark-Killer.


THE FANTASTIC WATERFALL
(a fairy tale)
Once there was a small native child whose
name was “Hina.” She lived on an island
called Tenaro. Hina was a lonely little maid,
because, poor wee mite, she was dumb, and
had never spoken a word in her life. Her
native mother and father could not understand
why anybody should not be able to talk, so
rather neglected her, although they had never
been cruel. Tenaro was not one of the prettiest
islands in the South Seas by any means. It
was small, and strange to say it lacked the
beautiful “something” that is generally found
in tropical islands. Hina, who was always up
at dawn for her swim in the lagoon, came out
one morning from her hut, and she chanced
to glance at the dense foliage behind the house.
She thought she was dreaming; she looked
again, then she gasped for breath. From the
centre of the island at a height of one thousand
feet, had appeared a mysterious waterfall, the


beauty of which beggared description, and it
had appeared from whence no one, later, could
tell. The colouration of the spray and mist,
caught by the tropical sunlight, transformed
it into a million rainbows. Then, too, as if
guarding the glorious moving kaleidoscope, on
either side were foliage of multi-coloured shades
of green, and as the spray flung upwards and
outwards, the sun’s rays on the irridescent
water threw eerie green shadows, here and
there, while the hibiscus blooms, of vivid reds
and orange, grew in profusion everywhere,
making the picture strange and fantastic. The
water fell on to the beach below, and flowed
into the sea. Hina feasted her eyes on the
wondrous sight. Her lonely little heart was
able to grasp the great beauty of what she
saw. Minute after rflinute passed by before
she came back to earth. She hated to have
to share the mysterious waterfall with anybody.
She had seen it first, and felt as though it
belonged to her alone. She decided she must
awaken her mother and father, and show it
to them. Slowly she returned to the hut, and
beckoned them both to come and see the water-
fall, which had appeared so mysteriously out of
nowhere. When the parents saw the fantastic
sight they threw themselves on the ground
grovelling in prayer. They called the villagers,


shouting, “Afu! Afu!” (Waterfall, Waterfall.)
Now all natives are superstitious, so they, too,
fell to their knees in supplication and prayer.
It does not take long for news to travel in
the South Seas, and very soon hundreds of
canoes of every size and shape, found their
way to the island to view the fantastic water-
fall. The natives of Tenaro came to love the
“Afu Ah” (which means Fire Waterfall), and
each day, before sunset, when King Sol was
one ball of fire, they left whatever they were
doing and came and sat reverently on the
beach gazing up at the falls. They knew that
at sunset they would see something that no
mortal could explain. Afu Afi appeared like
a scintillating fire, as the sun threw its dying
rays upon it, and just as the last beams sunk
into the horizon a beautiful maiden appeared
on the crest of the falls, and an immense
Albatross, —which must have measured sixteen
feet from the tip of one wing to the other —
circled the apparition three times, then vanished
into thin air. As time passed, the natives
hoped the vision would remain longer, but she
always disappeared as suddenly as she had
come, and the waterfall continued to flow its
usual iridescent course.
At dawn, Hina came to the foot of the Afu
Afi, and she would sit in the water beneath


the spray. Strangely enough, the sea, which
is always warm in the tropics, contrasted with
the cool fresh water that came from the falls.
Even in the hottest weather it remained very
cold.
As the weeks went into months, and the
months ran into years, Hina became quieter
than ever. She never felt lonely now, because
she lived for her beloved Afu. Almost daily,
she would make a pilgrimage to the top of the
falls, taking a small bunch of blooms. It
seemed, as the years passed by, that voices
began whispering to her from the spray. Not
being able to speak, Hina remained always
neglected. She grew up with the other native
children, but rarely joined in the merrymaking.
When she arrived at the age of sixteen, Hina
saw the girls of Tenaro choosing their sweet-
hearts, or getting married. Native girls marry
very young in the South Seas. The boys on
the island all passed Hina by. She could not
speak, nor was she pretty, so had it not been
for the “Aitu,” (Vision) which appeared every
day on the falls, and her little pilgrimages to
the crest, she would have been a very lonely
lass.
Hina never minded not having a sweetheart,
until Tunda came to Tenaro to live with his
parents. He was about seventeen years old,


and like a young God to look at. His swimming
and diving was superb; no one on the island
could spear fish as he did. His strong right
arm would descend with perfect accuracy, as
he threw the weapon. Tunda could also kill
fish with a bow and arrow with the same skill.
He would stand in his “dug out” and shoot
the arrow with unfailing results. He paid little
attention to the young maids, because he
always seemed too busy, but many of the
beautiful girls on Tenaro would have been
pleased had he noticed them.
One day, Funda had seen Hinda, at dawn,
splashing about in the falls, as it flowed into the
sea. He could not remember seeing her before.
He asked his mother who she was, and why
he had never seen her with the other young
people. “ Oh, she is ‘ leteine Gugu ’ (dumb
daughter) of one of the Tenaro families. As
she cannot speak, she keeps much to herself,”
answered his mother. “How sad, Tina”
(Mother), answered the boy sympathetically.
“ She must be very lonely.”
The following day, when he was on his way
to his early morning swim, he paused at the
falls, and spoke to Hina, as she splashed around.
“Talofa, Hina” (Good day), he said. She
was dumbfounded that this handsome young
man should notice her.


The Fantastic Waterfall 13
She shrugged her shoulders, putting her
fingers to her mouth, and shook her head
to show she could not speak, then smiled
sweetly. Tunda did not find her pretty, but
he thought she had such true eyes, and a
warm smile. “Like crystal water,” he thought
to himself. “ I am going for a swim,” he
said to her. “ I like to have the sea to my-
self, so I swim at dawn. I see you like
to have the Afu to your self, too, so we are
both happy, eh?” She laughed shyly, and
nodded her head.
“Tofaina” (farewell), he said, and off he
went, first to swim, and then to spear some
fish. Each morning, he came over to Hina,
as she sat at the foot of her beloved waterfall,
and he always made some funny little remark
to make her laugh, then away he would go
for his swim. Sometimes Hina would watch
for him at sundown when the apparition on
the falls appeared. One day he actually came
and sat next to her on the beach and said,
“Hina, I have watched you when the ‘Aim’
(spirit) of the falls appears, and you seem so
far away as though you were up there with
the vision. Poor Hina, all she could do was
to nod and smile sweetly.
Now at early dawn, one fine morning, just
<dter Tunda had had his one-sided chat with


Hina, he was about to say good-bye, and go
for his swim, when he noticed her looking with
rapt attention at the head of the waterfall, as
though it were a living thing. He, too, was
arrested by a strangeness around him; he felt
something uncanny was pleading, a murmur,
like the sigh of the wind, as it swayed the
Pandanus trees. Boylike, he shrugged his
shoulders, and put the thought from him.
“Tofaina, I will swim now, Hina,” he said.
As he spoke, he was struck by a look of horror
on Hina’s face. She had seen something dread-
ful in the falls. Tunda asked her what was
the matter. She rushed out from under the
spray, and clutched his arm. She was pulling
him away from the sea. He could not under-
stand. “What is the matter, Hina?” cried he,
forgetting she could not talk. Hina looked
out to sea, then horror struck, she pointed to
a speck swimming into the channel, which
led into the inner reefs. Tunda followed her
eyes, and he saw a tremendous Tiger Shark
swimming towards the shallow waters. He
jumped into his canoe and paddled out to
where the fish leisurely snooped about for
prey. With perfect timing of great practice,
he threw his spear at the animal, striking it
fairly in the neck, and though it swam around,
it could not rid itself of the weapon, which


stuck fast. By this time, natives came rushing
from the huts, brought out by Tunda’s shouts.
“Malie! Malie!” (Sharks! Sharks!) and they
pushed their canoes into the water, and joined
in the chase. It took three spears to kill the
monstrous animal, before it sank to the bottom.
When the natives came ashore they asked
Tunda how he had happened to see it. “Hina
saw it,” answered Tunda, and he was about
to relate what she had seen in the falls,
but Hina clutched his arm, and nodded her
head, as though she would say: “Don’t
tell”
Hina was glad she could not speak. She did
not wish to explain to them that she had seen
the vision of the Shark so plainly in the falls
a minute or so before Tunda was to enter the
water. They would all think she was a little
crazy.
From that day on, Hina never missed her
swim at the foot of Afu Afi. She never saw
another apparition. However, the murmuring
voices seemed to become more insistent. She
often thought she could hear somebody calling
her name out of the spray. Since she had
saved his life, Tunda brought a little bunch
of hybiscus each day to her at the falls. Hina,
in her turn, carried them up to the crest each
afternoon, when she made her pilgrimage. She


loved the roar and surge of the water above,
as it beat its way over the falls. The noise was
like music to her ears, and, through it all,
she could always hear a voice saying softly,
“Save me! Hina, Save me!” Try as she
might, she could never understand what it
meant. Hina wondered in what way she could
help the beautiful lady of Afu Afi. She had
saved Tunda, whom she had learned to love;
now she wished she could help her Goddess,
whom she adored.
Tunda never missed coming to the foot of
the falls to see Hina. He wondered why he
looked forward all day to his meeting with
the little dumb girl. She was not nearly as
pretty as the other maids on the island, and
she could not speak, yet he loved to be with
her, and he made up all kinds of funny little
jokes, just to see her smile.
One glorious dawn, Hina was sitting as
usual in the spray of the falls when she saw
the vision of a handsome young man standing
not three feet away from her. He seemed to
have appeared from out of the spray, and had
both his arms towards her, as though pleading.
Then she heard a faint rustling whisper, like
the sighing wind. “ Sacrifice! Sacrifice! ” and
then the apparition vanished. “What could
it all mean?” thought Hina. What was she


to sacrifice ? Suddenly, it seemed as though
her brain became quite clear. She knew that
she must make the supreme sacrifice for the
Goddess of Afu Afi.
Hina hoped she could see Tunda before
she made her pilgrimage to the crest. All
through the day she watched for him, but he
did not appear. She wanted to cry, because
she could not say good-bye. He had been the
only one who had ever been really kind to
her on Tenaro. She took the blooms he had
given her that morning, and when it was time
for her to walk to the top she left without
even a glimpse of Tunda.
That afternoon, it seemed to the islanders
that the Afu Afi was more alive than ever.
The sunset blazed as though it were molten
fire. . . . The waterfall, catching the fiery
rays, was one mass of flames.
As the sun slowly sank, and the natives
waited for the vision to appear, they noticed
that, for the first time since the waterfall
had made its appearance in Tenaro, Hina was
missing from her place.
“Where is Hina?” asked Tunda of one of
the girls. “She goes daily to visit the crest,
but always returns in time to see the ‘Aitu’”
(spirit) answered the girl. Tunda was worried.
He felt sad, he could not understand why; the


little dumb girl seemed to him the brightest
thing in Tenaro.
Suddenly, as the sun commenced to sink
on the horizon, the Goddess appeared; they
could see her far more plainly to-day; she
was alive. The huge bird flew out of the spray-
ing mist, and began circling the dazzling vision,
when, like a sunbeam, a figure flashed out,
and stood at the side of the spirit. “It’s Hina!”
everyone cried. “Oh, Hina! Hina!” cried the
horror-stricken Tunda. She carried the little
bouquet he had given her, in her hands, and
looked like a beautiful wraith, standing beside
the vision. Hina may have been a plain little
girl, but as she stood ready to make the supreme
sacrifice for her adored lady, she looked divinely
lovely. Just as the last golden rays of the sun
touched the Goddess of Afu Afi, Hina threw
her hands towards heaven, and then she plunged
into the seething mass below. The natives,
spellbound, hid their faces, not knowing what
to expect, when above them they heard a
cawing of a bird, and on looking up to the
crest of the falls, they saw the Albatross sweep-
ing gracefully down towards them, and as
they followed him with their eyes, he stopped
at the foot of the falls, and was transformed
into a handsome young man, then to their
great amazement, they saw the beautiful Goddess


no longer a spirit, but alive standing before
them, and at her feet lay Hina. Tunda rushed
madly, arriving first at the spot. “Oh, Hina!
Hina!” cried the boy in anguish, “I love you,
come back.” He fell on his knees beside her,
when suddenly he heard a sweet voice beside
him saying: “Fear not, Tunda, Hina is not
dead. She has, by her unselfishness, released
both Prince Waldo and myself from the spell
of a wicked Witch Doctor. We were doomed
to enchantment until a mortal would blindly
make the supreme sacrifice to the Waterfall.
Hina was willing to give her life for me. Now
the spell is broken, and she will not die.” As
she spoke, Hina opened her lovely eyes, and
looked up at Tunda. “It must have been a
dream,” she said. Then, seeing the beautiful
Princess, “Oh, it is true, I did save you!”
The natives all held their breaths in astonish-
ment. For the first time in her life Hina had
been able to speak. They could not believe
their ears and eyes. Hina could talk, and she
had become the most beautiful native girl in
Tenaro. “Oh, Tunda, I can speak at last,”
she said softly. “Yes,” said the Prince, “and
the Princess would like to grant you any favour
you might ask.” “Oh!” said Hina, “I wish
that the Afu Afi might always remain in Tenaro,
and that when I am married I wjll have six


beautiful children, three boys and three girls,”
said Hina charmingly.
And isn’t it splendid to know that, in time,
Hina got all her wishes. She married Tunda,
and lived happily for ever and ever, beneath
the Fantastic Waterfall.


THE PIRATE SHIP
Once upon a time there was a Pirate Ship
that sailed the Southern Seas forever in search
of gold and treasures. The Pirate Chief was
a fiendish man, who took great delight in
throwing all those who annoyed him to the
sharks. He was hated and feared by his crew.
Several times they had tried to kill him, and
take the ship for themselves, but he had always
been too quick for them. Among his men the
Chief had spies who warned him if trouble
was brewing. When he heard of a forthcoming
mutiny, he would call for those who had con-
spired against him; he always knew who the
culprits were. He would then take the guilty
men and tie them to some of the rigging, after
which he ordered a large piece of bacon, or pork,
to be hung on a line at the stern of the ship.
In no time, the sharks were following the trail
of the meat, then the Chief called all hands
on deck. With a grim laugh, as the unfortunate
men were thrown overboard, he made ribald
jokes, while he watched them being torn asunder.


“ See here, me hearties! ” he shouted, “ a nice
tasty morsel for the sharks, now who wants
to be the next one ? ” The crew would shudder,
but after that horrible sight they obeyed orders,
and did the dirty work for their hated Pirate
Chief.
The Pirate Ship hid in coves ready to pounce
on some unsuspecting vessel, and should the
prize look worth while they would open fire
and wage war on the unprepared ship. On
one occasion, they had captured a magnificent
barquentine, on its way to Australia. After
taking all those aboard her prisoners, the Chief
looted the ship then he ordered his murderous
crew to set fire to her. The Captain of the
barquentine saw his ship burst into flames.
Horror-struck he stood with his passengers
on the deck of the Pirate Ship, watching his
once beautiful vessel being turned into a heap-
ing mass of charred wood.
As the Chief gave orders to “ Get under
way,” the flames rose higher and higher, the
roar and crackle of the masts as the ship com-
menced to burn, turned poor Captain Hard-
wick’s heart to stone. The Chief then ordered
the prisoners to be brought before him, and
he grimly looked them over. Suddenly his dark
vicious face, with its cruel mouth, broke into
satisfied smile. To his great delight and


surprise, standing beside the Captain of the
barquentine was a beautiful young girl. “ Heigh
Ho!” he exulted. “This time I have a prize
worthy of my ship. For years I have been
seeking a lovely bride, and she walks right
into my arms.” Captain Hardwick grew pale
with anger, but said quietly, “Sir, she is my
daughter, and becomes the bride of no man
unless she so wills it.” “Hah! Hah!” roared
the great Pirate Chief. “ Tie him to the rigging,
and hang the pork.” Four Pirates surrounded
the Captain, dragging his daughter away from
his side. Three others held the girl, as she
fought to go with her father. “ The Maid must
remain,” said the Chief. “She will then learn
not to disobey me.” The lovely Dianne watched
the meat being hung astern, and then, to her
horror, she saw the huge man eaters snatching
at the food.
She screamed as her father was dragged to
the stern, and fought like a tiger when he was
thrown over to the sharks. “Oh, King of the
Seas,” she implored, “if there is a King of
the Sea, punish these monsters, who have
killed and tortured my darling father.” As
she pleaded her last words, the sky was shot
with flames, lightning flashed, and a sheet of
fire swept the deck of the Pirate Ship,
then all was still as the grave. When the


sky cleared, there was not a soul to be
seen on the vessel.
From that day to this, every seaman sailing
the Southern Seas, when passing the spot
where the Pirate Ship had met her doom, saw
the ghost of a full-rigged ship with orange
sails, filled with wind, but not a soul on board
to steer her fate.


THE GNOMES OF THE CORAL SEAS
(a fairy tale)
Somewhere in the Coral Seas, north-east
of Australia, was an island, that no mortal had
ever set eyes on. It was peopled by the smallest
Gnomes one could imagine. Their little round
huts were like any you see in the South Seas,
with thatched roofs of Pandanus trees, and
plaited leaf blinds instead of walls, which
were rolled up in the daytime. The only differ-
ence, of course, was that their huts were very
small.
The island was called “Afi” (Fire) Island
because of the scarlet flowers, which grew
in such profusion that at times it appeared
to be one mass of flames. The little Gnomes
were no drones. They looked much like busy
ants, hurrying and scurrying on their way to
their various duties. They fished daily, and
looked for pearl shells, so as to beautify their
huts with mother of pearl ornaments; planted
the coconut trees, and gathered small shells to


144 Gnomes of the Coral Seas
make pretty necklaces for their wives and
daughters. Above all, they searched for pearl
Nautilus. This shell fish is quite different
from the brittle Nautilus. The Blubbery little
“ Squid ’’-like looking fish which carried the
shell in the same way as does a snail, lives in
both kinds of Nautilus, and has ninety legs,
but the Pearl Nautilus is the loveliest, and most
delicate mother of pearl to be found. The
shell is so fine, it is almost as thin as a piece
of paper. The Gnomes made all kinds of
pretty knick-knacks for their houses from it,
besides brooches and ear-rings shaped into
patterns of fish and mermaids. The Alii (Chief)
of this Gnome village was an old man with
a beard that touched the ground. His costume
consisted of a kind of skirt called a Rami,
made of red fibre, which reached from the
waist to the knees. He wore many shells and
beads made of berries. All the Gnomes were
a fine brown colour, not as black as the natives
from Solomon Islands, and though the men
all had long white beards, their faces were
pleasant to look upon, and very kindly. The
tiny women wore skirts of grass too, pretty
wreaths in their hair, and pearl shell orna-
ments, besides rings made of tortoiseshell.
They had the smallest feet, and their teeth
were just like the pearls they wore.


It was so cute to see these little women
cooking their food. They dug a hole in the
ground outside their huts. Then they filled
the bottom and around the sides with stones
about the size of an orange, after which they
lit a fire of wood over the stones. When the
bricks inside were red hot, they took the wood
out, and laid the food on the hot stones, and
covered it with bread fruit and banana leaves.
When everything was cooked to their liking,
they would take out the food, and the Gnomes
would squat down to eat. The tablecloth was
made of fresh banana leaves laid on the floor,
and away they would go for dear life, sitting
on their haunches, each one digging into the
one large pot.
One day some of the Gnomes were on the
white sandy beach fishing or carving pearl
shells. They looked so happy, these little
people, working busily, squatting under the
coconut trees, which bent over so gracefully
into the water, while some of the palm leaves
were swept back and forth by the gentle move-
ment of the surf. One of the Gnomes, who
was a few yards out from shore, and sitting
in his little “dug out,” thought he saw some-
thing on the sea bed dragging itself slowly
towards the beach. From where he was, it
looked like a big fish. He dived over, and what


146 Gnomes of the Coral Seas
he saw almost took his breath away. Only
a few feet from him was a Mermaid, trying
to pull herself up on the sands. He swam
over, and could see that something had hap-
pened to her, so he pushed her forward until
she rested on the beach with her head out
of the water. The Gnomes who had been
watching from a little farther up, rushed down
to the spot where she lay, and gathered round
like a swarm of bees. “It’s a Mermaid,” they
cried, “and isn’t she beautiful.” The Mermaid
lay white and still, with her long fair hair
lying in a fine mass around her. “Something
is the matter with her,” spoke up one of the
Gnomes’ wives. “Let us lift her a little far-
ther out of the water, then we can find out
just what is wrong.” The Mermaid opened
her eyes, and she said, “It’s my arm and back,
they are hurt.” Of course the Gnomes under-
stood what she said, because in fairyland every-
body speaks the same language, and they don’t
have to learn dozens, like we poor mortals
do.” I tried to go home to my father’s cave,”
sighed the little Mermaid, “but I could not
go any further for pain.” “How did it hap-
pen?” asked the little old Chief who thought
he had never seen anything like this delightful
Lady Fish. “ I was swimming around an
island,” she answered, “not far from here,


y
[Face page 146




when one of the natives who was fishing, mis-
took me for a large fish, and dived overboard
with his spear. The only thing that saved
me from being speared through was because
the diver was so surprised at seeing a Mermaid
instead of a fish, his spear glanced sideways
and the wood struck me on the shoulder. I
swam away, but my home is far distant,
and I could not get any farther than this
island.”
While the Mermaid was telling her story,
the Gnomes listened enthralled at her adven-
ture. The old Chief then said cheerfully.
“The Mermaid must remain as our guest
until she is well. Hurry olf now, all of you,
and find some sea sponges to make her a
couch.” “Oh, thank you,” said the Mermaid
gratefully, “I will be happy to stay, but will
you make the couch on the reefs, where the
waves always wash over it. I cannot live alto-
gether out of the water, kind friends,” she
said. Then the busy little Gnomes sought for
the sponges, and they picked a tiny cove where
there was just enough water at all times to
cover the Mermaid, and still allow her head
and arms to stay out if she so wished it. The
little Gnome women brought her Beche de
Mer (the cucumber looking slug) which is a
great delicacy. Then she tasted their mangoes,


drank pineapple water, ate taro (which is a
root of a tree and often takes the place of bread)
and the Gnomes wished she would stay for
ever, she was so sweet. In a few days, the
Mermaid was almost w r ell again, and she told
the small natives that she must soon leave
them. “My Father, King Neptune, will be
quite anxious about me. He has many daughters,
but he watches over us all,” she said laughingly.
The old Chief gathered all his tribe about
him and said, “My people, our little guest
has been with us some days, and we have not
shown her any festivities because she was not
well. Before she leaves to return to the deep,
we must give her a “Poi” (party).
The next day the inhabitants of Afi island
turned out to do honour to Neptune’s daughter,
Anita, as she was called. They brought Frangi-
pani and Syringa blooms and strewed them
before the delighted Mermaid. Then they
lined up on the beaches, and danced for her.
“How funny they look,” thought Anita, “with
their beards waving about in the breezes; but
they are such kind people.” When they had
finished their gyrations, the Chieftain, who was
seated near the Mermaid, stood up and said
with great pomp, “Now, Mermaid Anita, you
will see for the first time a Turtle Race.” With
that, he clapped his hands, and fourteen little


Gnomes of the Coral Seas 149
Gnomes appeared at the other end of the
beach leading turtles, at least six or seven feet
long. They lined up as in a real race. There
were reins, too, in the Turtles’ mouths, and
at a given signal the Gnome jockeys stood up
on their backs, and the spectators cried, “ They’re
off!” And then Anita saw the funniest sight
she had ever seen. The finish was to be a
few feet away from where she sat half in the
water. The little men shouted at their steeds,
the spectators yelled their heads off, and the
Turtles watched each other with beady eyes.
The beards were waving in the breezes, and
in some cases getting into the eyes and mouths
of the riders. They roared in their fury, grab-
bing the whiskers, and tucking them into their
grass belts at the waist, and as they neared
the patch of water where the finish was to
be, they pulled a little at the reins so as to
be prepared when they slid down astride on
the Turtle’s back, and they yelled at the Turtles
to keep their heads up. It w r as only a few yards
of water to where the Mermaid sat, but it
dipped suddenly at the spot where they were
to race, and Turtles are very hard to ride in
the water. If the head is allowed to get under
the surface, down swim the Turtle, and down
goes the rider. As they entered the water, it
was a strange sight to see the animals trying


150 Gnomes of the Coral Seas
to throw their gallant riders, but it was stranger
still to watch the little Gnomes hanging on
for dear life, and trying to keep the heads
of the Turtles up. Those few yards were
like miles to the jockeys. Some of the
Gnomes “turned Turtle,” and all that
could be seen of them as they went to
the bottom with their steeds, was feet and
bits of whiskers.
The little Mermaid nearly died laughing,
but when the victor who had managed to
remain above water crossed the line first, she
clapped her hands for joy. The proud winner
received a fine mother of pearl ornament cut
out to represent the little Mermaid visitor.
The Alii asked Anita to present the prize,
which she did with great ceremony, and then
the festivities continued until after dark. Huge
bonfires were lit. The Gnomes played their
weird instruments, and sang Gnome community
songs, and when the moon came up, Anita
took leave of her little friends with tears in
her eyes. “I’ll never forget your kindness,”
she told them all in a pretty speech. “I will
tell my father, King Neptune, and perhaps
some day we can repay you for all you have
done for me.”
The Gnomes crowded round her, and the
Chief wished her, “Tofaina,” from them all,


Gnomes of the Coral Seas 15
and as she swam off from her little sheltered
reef into the deeper water, she waved and
took one last look at Afi Island, where the
kindest little native Gnomes lived so happily
and contentedly.


XII
THE PHANTOM LIGHTHOUSE
(a fairy tale)
Many, many years ago, and not long after
Captain Cook discovered Australia, in 1776,
there were no passenger ships steaming up
the glorious Sydney Harbour. Only sailing
ships, weary and toil worn, entered the Sydney
Heads, looking much the worse for the buffet-
ing and perils they had undergone. In those
days it took many months to travel from
England to Australia.
The Old Salts could tell hair-raising tales
of their battles with the elements. Most of
them had, in one trip to Australia, encountered
typhoons and hurricanes. They had fought
plague and sickness aboard, such as scurvy
and small-pox, brought on by the food and
water they were compelled to eat and drink,
on the long voyage out. Very often, the last
lap of the trip was the worst. There are few
waters to compare, for viciousness, with the
great Australian Bight, when the weather is
stormy. Many ships foundered at sea with all


those on board, and others were dashed up on
the rocks.
On its way to Sydney during those pioneering
days was a ship called the Leonard Ash , carrying
a full cargo and many immigrants. It had
encountered dreadful seas and bad weather.
After more than four months trying to fight
the elements, the Leonard Ash , in an almost
unseaworthy condition, came around the Cape
Llewin, on the south-west coast of Australia,
and started on her last two thousand miles
when she ran into another storm. Captain Hays
in his heart and soul, knew that his ship was
doomed. The Australian Bight was no place
in dirty weather for a ship on its last legs. So
he prepared the passengers for what might
happen.
Now on the vessel was a small boy and his
sister, accompanied by their father and mother.
They were bound for Sydney. The little family,
called Luescher, clung together during those
last dreadful hours before the ship, which was
now miles out of her course, struck a reef
about a hundred yards off shore. The Leonard
Ash lurched, and then lay on her side. Owing
to the heavy seas, and the fact that it was a
stormy night, nothing could or had been done
for the doomed passengers, and as the surf
swept over the now derelict ship, many were


washed overboard, some were killed by the
wreckage, and others were drowned instantly.
When dawn came a number of bodies were
washed up on shore, and among them were
the two Luescher children, who, though still
unconscious, were both alive. The parents
were nowhere to be seen. As the day wore
on, the boy was the first to recover conscious-
ness. Little by little, he was able to under-
stand the dreadful thing that had happened
to him. Crying and calling for his family, the
child ran up the beach, and accidentally stumbled
on his sister. His joy was too wonderful to
behold. He pulled her farther up on the sand,
and rubbed her hands, calling her name.
“Patsy, Patsy, wake up!” Gradually the little
girl opened her eyes, and, as the memory of
the night of horror came upon her, she cried,
“Mark, Mark, where is Mummy?” Poor chil-
dren, neither Mummy nor Daddy were to be
found. Both had perished. The sole other
survivor, strangely enough, was an Old Sea
Salt, who had been washed up without so
much as a scar. “You can’t kill the Irish so
easy,” he said to himself, as he rubbed his
legs, and worked his arms back and forth to
take the stiffness out of them. As he looked
up the beach, he saw two small children clinging
together, coming towards him. “For the love


of Mike,” he said aloud, “it’s the two Luescher
kiddies,” and he moved swiftly towards them.
When the poor mites saw the old seaman,
they ran to him in their joy. “Oh, Jerry, it’s
you, it’s you!” They kept crying over and
over again. Now Jerry was old, but he knew
the ropes, and it did not take him long to get
the lay of the land. He knew that in a few
days the sea would settle, and that there would
be much cargo from the wreckage washed
ashore.
“With all that stuff aboard, we ought to
be able to get food to last us months,” he told
the children, and he was right. In time, they
were able to go out to the wreck, and bring
in sacks of potatoes, barrels of flour, and
blankets, besides many other things they could
use. The boy Mark became a real help to the
old man. He learnt to fish and forage for food.
The girl was timid, and frail, but very cour-
ageous. At night, Jerry, to keep her mind off
the horrors that she had undergone, would tell
the children legends of the South Seas, and
one story he told in particular Patsy loved.
It was all about a Phantom Lighthouse, and
every time there was a storm, a fairy would
make a lighthouse appear so as to warn the
ships. “Oh, Jerry, if only she had done it
for us.” “Well,” said Jerry, “you keep asking


her to, and perhaps the fairy will come along
and put one up in these parts. They sure do
need it, Missie.”
Each night, Patsy would lie in her blanket,
listening to the surf beating up against the
reefs, and she could see ship after ship in her
mind being dashed to pieces in the storms.
Jerry was very worried about the child. One
day she came to him and asked him if they
could not light a large bonfire when the weather
looked dirty. “Sure we can,” answered Jerry,
wishing to please her. Mark, too, liked the
idea, so whenever the nights were stormy,
Jerry would light the bonfire, just so Patsy
would be happier. He knew that the flames
would never be seen three hundred yards off
shore. When the fire was lit, Patsy stood by
it, and said. “Please, Good Fairy, will you
turn this into a Lighthouse.”
Now a strange thing happened. One night
there was a dreadful storm, and Patsy could
not wait for Jerry and Mark to light the bonfire.
“Oh, hurry,” she said, “I know it will save
a ship to-night, Jerry, I know it.” When it
was lit, she said her little piece: “Please, Good
Fairy, turn this into a Lighthouse, and save
a ship.”
Some weeks later, a battered barquentine
came into Sydney harbour and the first thing


The Phantom Lighthouse 157
the Captain did after he came alongside was
to ask who had put up the fine Lighthouse some
eighteen hundred miles along the coast of the
Australian Bight. “Why there is no Lighthouse
at all on that coast,” answered Kell, the landing
officer. “Of course there is,” argued the
Captain. “ It’s the finest I’ve ever seen, and
saved us from going on the rocks.” The man
he had asked was mystified, but he was still
more surprised when another ship came in
weeks later, and the skipper said. “Of all the
lighthouses I’ve ever seen, that one in the
Bight is the finest. It sure beamed out!”
By degrees, everyone in Australia heard of
the Phantom Lighthouse, and the Governor of
Australia ordered a vessel to scour the Bight,
and report if anything strange might be seen.
He sent a ship to investigate, but no light-
house was sighted. However, the Captain of
the Winfield S. was greatly surprised to find
a girl and a boy with an old man living like
Robinson Crusoe eighteen hundred miles from
Sydney. He went ashore, and after greeting
them, the Captain asked the old seaman what
they were doing there. “Oh,” Jerry answered,
“sure, and we were washed ashore, it must
have been over a year ago, from the wreck
of the Leonard Ash .” “Well,” said the Captain,
“can you tell me anything about the Phantom


Lighthouse that all the ships are reporting
when they arrive in port.” “Phantom Light-
house!” said the old man. “Why we only
burn a small bonfire to please the little girl
here. You could not see it two hundred yards
out from shore.” “Oh, Jerry, it’s my fairy.
She must have heard my little prayer. Every
time we light the bonfire I ask the fairies to
turn it into a Lighthouse, and she has,” said
Patsy, filled with awe. “For the love of Mike!
what do you think of that now,” said old Jerry.
The Captain did not know what to say. “Well,”
he said, “I suppose I’ll have to report what
you have got to say to the Governor. Now
get your things together, and I’ll take you all
back to Sydney.” “Oh, no, no,” cried Patsy.
“ I cannot leave the bonfires, otherwise more
ships will be wrecked. I must stay here to
see them lit.” Nothing that the Captain could
say would move the child. Jerry, who loved
the easy life he had led the last year, w r as in-
wardly pleased, so he spoke up and said: “I’ll
tell you, Captain, I’ll stay along with Patsy,
and help her light her bonfire. How about
you, Mark?” “Well,” said Mark, “I’ll stay
too, until I get big enough to work on a
ship.” “All right,” said the Captain, “I’ll
report that you are here, and see that a
vessel comes in every so often, so you won’t


The Phantom Lighthouse 159
want for anything, and in case you change
your mind.”
But Patsy never changed her mind. She
became the heroine of Australian seamen who
sailed the mighty seas, and was known the
world over as “THE KEEPER OF THE
PHANTOM LIGHTHOUSE,” because the
light never failed to shine.


XIII
WILD BIRD
Barnotie’s Circus was on its way from
India to Australia. In Bombay they were to
embark for Sydney. The little troupe, who
had been trying to make both ends meet for
months, working in the torrid humidity of
India, was more dead than alive when they
reached the Alexandria Docks. The clown, who
was supposed to be so funny in the ring, was
a most pathetic sight, sitting on his little trunk
at the wharf, watching the few remaining
animals being taken aboard. Standing close by
him was a small child of about ten years old.
“Margot Fairy on the Web” they advertised
her on the placards, because she danced like
a thistledown on the tight wire. “ Clowny,
isn’t it heavenly to leave India,” she said. “To
see it like tourists, it is wonderful, or to live
in the hills; but in a small circus, and stopping
only at those horrible little towns, it is awful.
I hated the food worse than all, what there
was of it I mean.” “Yes, imagine, Margot,
we won’t have to work until we reach Perth,
West Australia,” sighed the clown.


Whilst they were loading the paraphernalia,
Margot wandered about the wharves. The
many boats lying at anchor, the Catamarans
(Indian sailing boats), Sampans (Chinese boats),
and Chinese Junks fascinated Margot. She
stood gazing at a fine schooner, busily loading up
too. Margot loved a sailing vessel, they looked
as though on adventure bent; how different it
was, she thought, from the steerage of a third
rate steamer, where she always travelled.
Once, when she was a small girl, she had
worked, and been so happy, with Wirth’s
famous Circus in Australia. It was there she
had learned to dance on the tight rope, like
a fairy, but after her mother, who was a widow,
had married one of the flying Barnoties, they
had left Wirth’s “ Big-Topbecause her step-
father, Barry Barnotie, had wished to own a
circus of his own.
Life had been a nightmare to the poor child
ever since. They had wandered over the face
of the globe, at any rate a good part of it, but
always playing in small towns. When her
mother died poor little Margot prayed to go
too. Her stepfather became a cruel tyrant,
and the circus was not well patronised. It
w r ould have been too awful to bear had it not
been for the clown, who tried to help her in
his clumsy way.


As Margot watched the schooner she noticed
its name, Wild Bird. How pretty, she thought,
and how clean. She wondered where it was
bound for. Just for fun, she asked the white
man, standing by the gang plank, where they
were going. “The South Sea Islands, Sissy,
is where we are bound for. We picks up Copra,
and the like,” answered the Mate. “The South
Seas!” echoed Margot, with wide open eyes.
“Yes, we’ll be gone quite a while, but where
are you bound for, may I ask?” questioned
the Mate. “Sydney,” answered Margot, “on
that boat over there,” pointing to a steamer.
“On that old tramp? Poor kid! you with the
circus, I suppose ? I heard they wanted to
get back to Australia, and were willing to go
on anything,” tactlessly said the Mate, who
was a kind-hearted old soul, and would not
have willingly hurt the child’s feelings. Poor
Margot’s eyes filled with tears, but she said
bravely. “Oh, it won’t be so bad, but when
do you leave.” “In an hour or so, I guess,”
answered the Mate. Margot then said good-
bye, and walked back to where they were still
loading the vessel, on which she was to sail.
She heard her stepfather in his cruel voice,
swearing at the men. “I hate him!” said
Margot to herself passionately. Just then she
received a shock, because out of a clear sky,


a thought had come to her. Why not hide
on the schooner Wild Bird , and go to the South
Seas as a stowaway. No one would miss her
for ages; no one ever did, until they happened
to want her. She was sorry to leave Clowny,
but he’d understand. How often he had said:
“Margot, if I were a Fairy Queen, Fd waft
you away from here in a jiffy.” “Well, I’ll
waft myself away,” she thought.
Hurriedly, she sped back to the schooner,
and luckily the Mate had left the gang plank.
She bided her time, and before she knew it,
Margot had hidden herself among the rigging,
waiting for a chance to climb into a lifeboat.
It seemed hours before she got an opportunity
but after she had installed herself, she prayed,
as she had never prayed before, that she would
not be found before the Wild Bird left the
docks. Finally, she heard a lot of noise, shouts,
and the anchor being weighed. In a short
while the schooner was on her merry way to
the South Sea Islands.
Margot was so tired and worn out, poor
dear, that before she realised it, the motion
of the boat, and the cool sea air, after the heat
on the wharves of Bombay rocked her to sleep.
Many hours later, when the Wild Bird was
some miles out to sea, a tropical shower came
up. In the tropics rain falls suddenly without


warning, and then stops just as quickly. Some-
times, it freshens the air, but more often, in
the Indian Ocean, it leaves a humid kind of
heat that is not at all pleasant. The Captain
of the Wild Bird , whose name was Walker,
was at mess when the rain fell in torrents.
He sent one of the crew above to see that
everything had been stowed away in the hatches,
on leaving Bombay, and that nothing had been
left lying about. The Bo’sun made a complete
circuit of the deck, and happened to glance
at the lifeboat on the port side. It was pouring
cats and dogs, but he could just make out in
the darkness a moving figure. What could it
be? He hurried over to the boat, and found
himself looking straight into two of the largest
eyes he had ever seen. Straggly wet hair streamed
down the face, and when he put his hand on
the object, he felt a sopping arm. “ For the
love of Mike!” said the Bo’sun, “whatever
are you?” “I’m-m-m Margot,” stuttered the
voice. “ I stowed away before the Wild Bird
left Bombay; I’m so hungry, Mister,” replied
the pathetic little voice. “Well, you’d better
come down and see the Master,” said the man,
lifting her out of the boat, and thinking at the
same time what a poor, skinny little thing she
was. He took her by the hand, and when they
entered the cabin below the Skipper nearly


jumped out of his seat. “ I found her in one
of the boats, sir,” said the Bo’sun. “She ain’t
had a bite, I guess.” The Captain was the
first to recover his speech. “Where do you
come from, stowaway?” he asked gruffly, but
not unkindly. “ I belong to Barnotie’s Circus,
and we were to have left by a steamer that
was loading up on the same wharf where you
were, but I hated to go with my stepfather
again, and I don’t know how it happened, but
I hid on this lovely Wild Bird.” “Well,”
laughed the Captain, “ that’s a fine name for
the ship, but if I might say so, it suits you
much better, Missie. Whatever are we going
to do with you ? We have no trained monkeys
aboard, other than what you see here,” added
the Captain looking at the men around him.
“Please, sir, I can help in the kitchen, sweep
the decks, I’m very strong. All circus people
are,” said Margot proudly. “Poor kid. Well,
I’ll have to think it over. You must be hungry,
hurry up and take off that wet dress, and put
this on,” said the good-hearted Captain, handing
her a sou’wester. Then turning to the Bo’sun,
he added smilingly: “Tell Cookie to bring in
some grub for the cabin passenger.” Poor
little mite, the food that these sailors ate looked
like a banquet to her. The men glanced at
one another as she went after the beans as


though she had not had a square meal for
days, which was fairly true. They bunked her
in the mess room, on the long seat by the
portholes.
Margot slept like a log, and woke bright
and early, next morning, when she heard
“four bells,” which meant it was six o’clock.
She found her way to the galley, and asked
the Cookey for some water to wash. She
chatted away to him, just as though she had
been on board all her life. That is the way
of circus people. They knock about the world
so much, that nothing ever feels strange to
them. In a few days, Margot had become
part and parcel of the schooner, Wild Bird.
She mothered everybody, sewing for this one,
and doing odd jobs for that one; in fact she
was a very busy little body. Circus life is
probably the hardest in the world, but it
generally makes fine characters out of its little
band of people. The girls learn to sew, cook,
mind babies, even while they have to practise
hours every day at their acrobatics, besides
appearing at night under the big tent. Margot
was no exception. She was the handiest little
soul, and always so merry and bright. On fine
days, when the winds were fair, she would
give a performance to the Captain and crew.
She could do almost anything in the way of


acrobatics, turn handsprings, back flips, and
she did not have a bone in her little body, it
seemed; the manner in which she could twist
herself into all kinds of knots. Circus children
are taught everything from the ground up.
Margot was just as good at turning back somer-
saults as she had been in her little turn on
the tight wire. One day, the Skipper, who
was making a round of the decks, heard a
voice calling; “Hullo, Captain Alf.” He looked
around everywhere, but the voice seemed to
come from above. On looking up, he saw,
right at the top of the shrouds (the ropeladder
that runs to the height of the mast), a little
imp laughing and waving to him. “ Come on
down, you young rapscallion,” he said, fearing
that she might fall. “Oh, Captain, it’s lovely
up here. I can see so far out to sea. Don’t
you worry, I’ll not fall.” He knew it was no
use saying anything, the child had been brought
up to fear nothing, so he smilingly went on
his way. Climbing the shrouds became Margot’s
favourite pastime as they kept getting farther
south towards New Guinea. She loved watch-
ing the brilliant sunsets from above.
Months and months passed by. Margot had
become a fine, healthy little miss. She had
also become a first-class seaman. “You could
get your papers any time now, Wild Bird ,”


said the Skipper. She had learned to tie all
kinds of sailor’s knots, that never came undone,
and never forgot anything about the schooner,
after she had been told once. How she loved
the free life aboard the Wild Bird. The thought
of ever going back to the circus was too awful.
When they went ashore at the islands Margot
just thrilled through and through. She watched
them loading the Copra, and learned all there
was to know about it and its uses. She saw
the natives cutting up coconuts, and laying
them in strips, to dry in the sun. These strips
of dried coconut are called Copra. They are
then shipped away, and taken to factories,
where the oil is extracted, and coconut oil,
margarine, tallow, candles, and other articles
are made from the oil. From the fibre of the
outside of the coconuts, rope is made. “Just
imagine all that coming out of coconuts hanging
high on trees,” exclaimed Margot, when she
had learned all about the things that could be
made from coconuts. When they put in to
the islands, Margot would live in the water.
She learned to dive so expertly that she’d pop
in one side of the schooner and swim all the
way under the vessel, coming up on the other
side. The first time Margot did this trick she
almost scared the Captain to death. He saw
her disappear, and then completely lost sight


of her, and while she was on the other side
of the ship, playing around, he was still waiting
for her to come up where she had gone down,
frantic with fear that something had happened.
Now it so happened that nearly a year after
Margot had become the little Wild Bird of
the schooner, the Captain put in to Fortune’s
Island. Whilst the vessel was unloading, Margot
went ashore, to look things over. She was
carried away by the beauty of the place. There
were some lovely bungalow huts, and one in
particular that looked so cosy. “It must belong
to some rich white people,” she thought.
Comfy hammocks, books, and chairs with
pillows covered with the brightest coloured
cretonnes were scattered around the tremendous
verandah, that forms a great part of the South
Sea Islander’s home. As she gazed with rapt
attention, a lady came on to the porch with
a small baby in her arms. She happened to
see Margot, and for a moment she could not
believe her eyes. The child was dressed in a
pair of short pants, that had been made from
sailor’s trousers. Her hair was cut, almost
like a boy’s, and curled all round her head,
framing the dear, brown face, taking away
all the boyish appearance. The lady thought
she looked too sweet for words. Margot, in
her turn, saw a lovely white person, with the


darkest grey eyes and the prettiest red mouth
she had ever seen. The two looked at one
another; finally the lady broke the silence.
“ Where on earth do you come from, Wild
Bird,” she said. “Come up here, and tell me
all about yourself, nymph.” “Oh, how funny,
that’s where I come from, the Wild Bird, and
that’s my nickname too. How did you ever
guess it?” answered Margot. “Well, the name
certainly fits its wearer,” laughed the lady.
Margot ran up the steps on to the verandah,
looking about her admiringly as she went. It
all looked so comfy. “Tell me all about your-
self, child,” asked Mrs. Bruce, as she took the
little girl by the hand and led her to a chair.
Margot looked at her new friend searchingly,
then, as if finding the face opposite her trust-
worthy, she told her whole story simply, right
from the beginning of all the things she could
remember.
When she had finished, Mrs. Bruce said:
“Why, child, it sounds like a fairy tale; imagine
you going through all those experiences since
you were a tiny tot.” As she spoke, she looked
at her own baby in her arms, thinking how
different it would be for her little daughter,
bred in the lap of comfort. “Now, Wild Bird,
can you read or write?” she asked. “Oh, yes,
I have read every book on the schooner. I


know everything about the South Seas, and I
never make mistakes about ships, like so many
people do. Then I help Uncle Alf out with
the ‘ Log ’ —you know, that’s the book where
they write everything that happens during the
day on a ship, and then you see, I can tie a
sailor’s knot as well as any of the crew,” said
Margot with great pride. Mrs. Bruce laughed,
on hearing of these accomplishments. Then
she said: “Wild Bird, suppose you came and
stayed with my little family for a few months,
to see if you liked it.” “Oh, it’s nice of you
to invite me,” answered Margot, not knowing
if she would like it or not, “but I can’t leave
Captain Alf. They need me on the schooner.”
“Well, we will go and see Captain Alf, and
I think he will understand,” said Mrs. Bruce
seriously. She called one of her native ser-
vants, and told her to watch the baby while
she went to the schooner with Margot.
When they arrived on the Wild Bird , the
Captain, who had been very busy, and had
not missed the child, was surprised to see her
come aboard with a stranger. “ Captain Walker,
I would like to talk to you for a few minutes,”
said Mrs. Bruce, holding her hand out. After
shaking hands with the stranger, the Captain
showed her below, and she came to the point
without any further talk. “Captain Walker, I


am Mrs. Bruce, my husband is the manager
of the Copra plantation on Fortune Island. I
met your little protegee, and she told me all
you have done for her. Don’t you think it
would be for her good if she stayed with me
for a little while. Happy though she is, she
needs a woman’s care just now, and I could
give her every comfort.” The poor Captain,
who had learned to love Wild Bird as though
she were his own, swallowed hard before he
replied. “I understand, Mrs. Bruce; she is
almost eleven years, and needs a motherly
hand. We’re a rough lot, but she has been
well cared for. The crew have been mighty
careful about their language, and the like,
when she was around. WVll miss the little
rascal, but I know it’s for her good.” “Oh,
Captain Alf, I don’t want to leave you, dear
Captain Alf,” cried poor Margot, clutching the
Skipper’s hand. “Margot, dear, listen,” said
Mrs. Bruce. “In six months Captain Alf will
be back and you can have a nice visit with
him again. I know you will be happy here,
dear, and it will be just a holiday for you.
Think of it like that.” “She’s right, Wild Bird,
you are a bit of a handful for a lot of men,
and, besides, we are on our way to Australia,
and if you are caught aboard the schooner when
we reach Sydney you would never be allowed


to stay. It’s against the law,” spoke up the
Captain kindly. “ I don’t want to go back
to my stepfather. Oh no, then I would never
see you again, Captain Alf,” cried Margot.
Turning to Mrs. Bruce, she said sweetly, “you
are so kind to invite me, and I am very grateful;
you see I did not want Captain Alf to be lonely.
“ Why, child, we’ll be very busy from now
on, and the time will pass quickly,” answered
Skipper, taking the child in his arms, and
holding her tightly.
When the schooner Wild Bird left Fortune
Island, Margot, the other Wild Bird, stayed
behind, sobbing her heart out, until the last
speck of sails passed out of sight.
In a few weeks’ time, Margot fitted herself
right into the Island life, just as she had done
on the schooner. Mrs. Bruce loved her dearly;
she was so practical, and still so carefree. She
looked after the baby like a real little mother,
and altogether became the bright vision on
the island. She visited the native huts, gossip-
ing and bringing sunshine to all around. Mrs.
Bruce had had some little frocks made for
her, from the same cloths that the natives’
Pareus were made of. In all these bright colours,
Margot looked more like a wild bird than ever.
Of course her acrobatics became the talk of
Fortune Island. When she had seen the little


native boys climbing right to the top of the
coconut trees, some of which were fifty or
sixty feet high, Margot thought what fun it
would be to try that too. One day, coming
home from visiting, Mrs. Bruce nearly fainted
with fright when she heard Margot’s voice,
from above: “If you want me, Aunt Jess, I’m
up the coconut tree.” “Oh, child, come down,
come down,” said the poor lady petrified.
But the Wild Bird said reassuringly, “Don’t
be a bit scared, Auntie darlingest. This is no
height for me. I’m not a bit frightened, and
I’m used to the shrouds of the schooner; I
did miss them so. It’s such a beautiful view
from here. I can see completely around Fortune
Island.” What was poor Mrs. Bruce to do?
It was silly of her to instil fear into that brave
little soul, so she said as calmly as possible:
“All right, dear, only just be a little careful,
for my sake.”
One day, Mrs. Bruce came down on to the
beach, which was not far from her bungalow,
and to her amazement she saw Margot teaching
the native children to do “back bends,” as
she called them. She was holding a little boy,
as he went over backwards, until his hands
reached the sands. “Now turn your toes out
a little more, Redo, bring your heels down,
or you’ll never get a balance,” said the small


~
■ ; j I
[fcl<* /XJ?«’ 174




teacher. Poor Redo, his little brown face was
purple, but he valiantly tried his utmost to
do as he was told, while the other kiddies
laughed with glee. When Mrs. Bruce returned
home she said to her husband: “Oh, Fred
dear, that child Margot will be the death of
me. She gives me a surprise every minute.”
“What’s the minx up to now?” answered her
husband fondly. “Well, she’s doing her best
to turn Fortune Island into a circus,” answered
his wife laughingly, telling him about Margot’s
escapades.
A few days later, Mr. Bruce announced the
fact that they were leaving for a short trip
to Papeete, the principal town of Tahiti, as
he had some business to do for his company.
He said, of course, that Margot was to go,
too, and look after Baby Wyn. “ Oh, how
wonderful, Uncle Fred; how like a fairy tale.
I’ll be the best nurse in the world,” said Margot,
full of joy.
The following week a trading ship put into
Fortune Island, and picked the little family
up. Margot was in the seventh heaven being
at sea again. She wished it was Captain Alf’s
schooner, but she consoled herself, knowing
she would see him again in a couple of months.
The trip from Fortune Island was only a few
days, but it was bliss to the little Wild Bird,


and she amused the crew so with her antics
that they called her Clowny for fun; so she
told them all about the real Clowny.
When the Bruces arrived at Papeete they
went to a nice little hotel; it was one of the
few r two storied buildings in the town, as, of
course, most South Sea homes are bungalows
or huts. Margot thought it all such fun. She
rushed down to the quay, later, to see a big
American liner on its way home to the U.S.A.
Hundreds of natives, Chinese, and a few white
people lined up to see the steamer Tahiti come
in. Margot loved all the bright colours that
the natives wore, and it was all so exciting to
see the eager faces on the deck of the ship,
as they watched the picturesque Tahitians wel-
coming them.
Mrs. Bruce visited quite a lot, while she
was in Papeete. She had a number of friends,
and Margot looked after Baby Wyn, as care-
fully as though the wee mite had been her own.
One evening, a couple of days before they
were to return to Fortune Island, Mrs. Bruce
came to her, and said: “Margot, there is going
to be a dance at Government House, to-night,
and uncle and myself have been invited. Now,
darling, I want you to go to bed early, and
be careful of baby Wyn. You can sleep in
my room with her, and Uncle Fred will go to


your room, when we come home. We don’t
expect to be back until three or four.” “That’ll
be lovely, Auntie Jess; I’ll have Wyn all to
myself.” Margot loved her auntie’s room. It
looked out over the side of the building on to a
pretty garden. Her own room was at the back
of the hotel. Margot helped her aunt into her
frock to go to the ball, and told her she looked
just like a Fairy Princess. After they were
gone, she undressed Wyn, and put her to bed,
then she popped into her little nightie, and,
after saying her prayers, was off to sleep in
a jiffy.
Suddenly Margot woke with a start. She
seemed to be choking; she could hardly breathe,
jumping out of bed she found the room was
full of smoke. Cries of Fire! reached her ears.
Margot, horror struck, realized that the hotel
was in flames, and that she and Baby Wyn
were on the second floor. She rushed to the
door, but the smoke rose in clouds. She could
see nothing. Running to the window the child
screamed for help. There was a garden just
outside, with a huge palm tree, about thirty
feet away. Margot could see that the front of
the hotel was one mass of flames. People came
running to the side of the building. Somebody
screamed—“A ladder! A ladder!” While she
waited for the ladder to be brought, Margot


rushed to the baby. It was choking, stifling,
so was she. She poured all the water out of
the jug on the washstand over a sheet, then
wrapped the baby in it. Quick as a flash, the
brave little lass tore the mosquito netting, and
strapped the gasping baby to her back. Then
she returned to the window to look for the
ladder. Suddenly Margot heard a terrific
crash. The corner of the hotel on her side of
the building had fallen in, making it impossible
to put the ladder up against her window. It
looked as though the two poor children would
be burned alive. What could be done?
Coming from a circus, and used to danger,
Margot was quick-witted. “Throw me a rope! ”
she cried. “A heavy one!” A man came from
below, and hurled a rope to her, but he knew
she could not let herself down on it, because
the flames were climbing the woodwork just
underneath the window. When Margot saw
this, she shouted, “Wait a minute.” She dis-
appeared into the room, and tied the rope to
the bedstead with one of those wonderful
sailor knots she had learnt on the Wild Bird.
She had not much more time. Fierce waves
of flames were lapping under the door. She
ran back to the window, and throwing the
rope to the man below, cried: “Quickly—get
a native to climb with it on to that palm tree.”


Quicker than it takes to tell, the native was
up the tree, to about the height of her window,
and had fastened the rope around the trunk.
“Tighter! much tighter!” shouted Margot,
“It must be taut!”
Then something happened that no one on
the island of Tahiti will ever forget. Margot,
without a balance of any kind, and with the
baby on her back, walked foot by foot across
the garden, on the rope, while the flames leaped
behind her into the room she had left, and
the agonized crowd below watched her, expect-
ing the child to be dashed to the ground. At
each step, Margot took time to balance on one
leg, then slid her tiny bare foot cautiously
along the rope, while the thrilled mass below
held their breaths. Mr. and Mrs. Bruce, who,
like every one at Government house, had rushed
to the burning hotel, stood below among the
people, afraid to move, lest one sound might
put the child off her balance. Step by step,
Margot made her way with sheer pluck. All
the way across she kept murmuring: “Please
God, help me; please God, help me,” until
she was a foot away from the palm tree. As
she took her last step, she clutched the native,
who was sitting with his legs around the trunk,
the way natives do when they wish to rest
while climbing a coconut tree. Excitedly the


people below rushed up with the ladder and
put it against the tree for the brave girl to
descend, but the strain had been too much
for Margot —The Fairy of the Web. Once she
had her foot on the ladder, and sure that all
was well, poor darling, she crumpled up like
a leaf, and would have fallen, had it not been
for the helping hands scrambling up the ladder.
On seeing her baby and the little heroine
safe and sound, Mrs. Bruce wept and laughed
at the same time. After untying the baby from
Margot’s back, they found that though the
infant was a little choky, she was in no danger.
Poor little Margot, strong and healthy as she
was, became very ill for some weeks, from
shock and strain. The good people of Papeete,
who had learnt to idolize the little heroine,
waited hours daily before the house where she
had been taken, until they heard that she was
out of danger. Mrs. Bruce and her husband
nursed her night and day, until the doctor
said she was well enough to be taken home,
and that the sea trip would soon bring her
around. When Margot left Papeete, on the
schooner Anne C., that was to take her back
to Fortune Island, all Tahiti came down to
the Quay, to say good-bye. She was a happy
little girl, and Mrs. Bruce looked at her lovingly,
saying to herself that if it were possible she


would adopt her. Had Margot been her own
daughter she could not have loved the little
Wild Bird more.
When Captain Alf returned to Fortune
Island, two months later, they told him all
about Margot’s great adventure, and Mrs.
Bruce asked him what he thought her chances
were of adopting the child. “You’ll have no
trouble now, Mrs. Bruce,” said the Captain.
“ Her stepfather was killed while doing his
‘turn,’ and missed the net in one of his flying
dives.” “Well —we won’t tell Margot that.
We’ll just say he is dead, and then Mr. Bruce
will see about legally adopting her,” said Mrs.
Bruce.
It did not take many months before Margot
found herself with a loving mother in Aunt
Jess, and a nice Daddy in Uncle Fred, and
she adopted Captain Alf for her own uncle,
and he never misses spending some of his time
with his little niece, Wild Bird, on Fortune
Island, where she lives so happily with her
adopted family.


XIV
INQUISITIVE MISNA
(a fairy tale)
There was once a little girl who was so
inquisitive that she had earned for herself the
name of Inquisitive Misna.
Now Misna was the dearest wee mite in the
world, but she always had her little nose into
everything. Her mother would often say to
her. “Misna, one of these days, your curiosity
will get you into trouble.” The child lived
with her father and mother on an island among
the “Friendly Islands.” Her Daddy was a
trader. A trader is a man who buys and sells
everything from pretty beads to pearls. Misna’s
father owmed a schooner, and he sailed the
South Seas visiting all the islands, buying
Copra, (which is dried coconut and is used
for making oil), Pearls and Bananas from the
natives. He did not pay them with money
like we use, but gave them Whales’ Teeth,
Cloths, Bangles, and often, Spearheads, in
return for their wares.


Before the trader left home to visit the sur-
rounding islands, he took his child into his
arms and said. “Misna, be a good little girl,
and keep your nose out of mischief.” She
would answer him sweetly. “Yes, Daddy,”
but as soon as he was out of sight, Misna was
peeping into everything that did not concern
her.
One day she climbed a tree overhanging the
deep lagoon. From where she sat she could
see clear to the bottom of the sea and the water
must have been thirty or forty feet deep. She
wondered what was down there. “ What wouldn’t
I give,” said she to herself, “to know what
was going on underneath the sea.” She leaned
over farther and farther, trying to watch one
of her favourite fish, called “ The Old Wife,”
scurrying about. This pretty fish had brown
stripes running all the way round its body, a
red and brown tail, and fins, the colour of
a ripe tomato, which were shaped like little
sails. Misna could never understand why they
called it “Old Wife.” “It’s so young and
beautiful,” she had said to her mother. “Now,
I wonder where ‘Old Wife’ is going,” she
thought. The child was so occupied watching
the fish that she overbalanced, and fell from
the tree into the water, and it’s dreadful to
relate, but Misna could not swim. Imagine,


eight years old, and not being able to swim.
Isn’t that dreadful? Down, down she went,
and the little fish scuttled out of her way.
Misna wondered if she were drowning, but
her Good Fairy was watching over her, for
she found herself lying on the bottom of the
sea, while the crabs and lobsters quizzed at
her as much as to say. “ Whatever are you
doing down here ? ” Misna looked all around
her, and like the inquisitive little girl she was,
she at once began to take notice. She was
delighted when she saw a crab she had heard
so much about but had never seen. It was
absolutely bright yellow, with large red dots
on its back, as large as a shilling piece. “Now
that I know I am not dead,” she thought, “I
really must go and investigate everything.”
So she stood up and walked along the floor
of the sea. She just loved the long Sea Kelp
and the sponges were so soft to tread on; never
had she thought they could be so beautiful.
The shades of pink, purple, and blue looked
so vivid beneath the sea. Everything seemed
a hundred times more beautiful than they did
above the surface. The butterfly fish really
did look like a butterfly. It appeared to be
flying, and its body was so flat, Misna wondered
if it had been ironed out. Suddenly she saw
a “Fire Fish.” “Oh, how wonderful with the


ww . w ~~ 7m
ISmll' '7'M* . ' 5
C£Sr%£/. . v /j{ w-lt*'\ ■ z
<J2'i S J \=l i s
1 ■ I " I I
H\'~v I $
//' r ■) n
// \. • vi |p >
'7/ iSi <
/' A Ik- "“‘(i ~
■J flw it i
»t% f- =
• S.
- - -
[Face page 184




sun shining through the water; “ it’s all in
flames,” she cried. The large fin on the back
was so like an angry porcupine, and not a bit
like a fish’s fin; then it also had four flying
fins, as Misna called them, because they re-
sembled wings. “ It’s great fun under the sea,
I’d love to live here,” thought she. All of a
sudden, she saw two giant clams coming towards
her. They must have been three feet long, and
much heavier than she was. “Don’t hurt me,”
she cried. The giant Clams stopped and with
their two large valves wide open, looked at
her, but did not move out of her way, then
Misna knew the reason why. They were guard-
ing a pearl door. Never had she seen anything
so sweet. The door was all made of mother
of pearl oyster shell, and quite high, taller
than she was, and there was a cute little pearl
knocker. “Please, Mr. Clam, I have come to
visit,” said Misna. “Is the Lady-Fish home?”
The Clams moved aside, and she knocked at
the door, but received no answer. Misna,
always inquisitive, pushed it —and, Oh goody;
it opened, so she cautiously walked inside.
What she saw there she would never forget.
Asleep on a couch made out of shells and
coloured sponges was a lovely Mermaid. “I
must be dreaming,” thought Misna. She tip-
toed over to the couch, but the mermaid did


not move. “ Oh, I suppose she’s tired out
swimming so much,” murmured the little girl.
She walked cautiously to the centre of the
pearl-shelled room and looked around. The
walls were one mass of mother of pearl, covered
with beautiful under-sea flowers, and kelp.
Misna had not known there were so many
different greens in all her life, as in those sea
ferns. Suddenly she spied a small table and
mirror. The large glass was surrounded by
bright red coral, and on the table was a comb
made from very fine coral ferns, and Misna
just clasped her hands with joy when she saw
the jewels lying there. Such pearls, and such
beads made from seashells. Just then she
turned around and saw the Mermaid sitting
up on her couch. “Oh please, Miss Mermaid,
forgive me for being so inquisitive. I did
knock, though, before I entered,” said Misna,
all flustered at talking to a real live Mermaid.
The Mermaid laughed, and the bubbles came
flying out of her pretty mouth. She was so
beautiful, and her hair floated around her like
a gossamer of gold, then she stretched her
arms over her head like we do after we wake
up. She swished her tail, and, as easily as any
goldfish, swam to her little dressing table; sat
down on the stool, and began combing her hair;
then she clasped on her pearls. She took one


lovely string of tiny sea shells, and put it around
Misna’s neck. The Mermaid motioned her
head, then she took Misna’s hand, and before
the child could utter a word, the lovely lady
fish was flying through the water and Misna
with her.
They swam through crystal caves and coral
gardens. When Misna saw a school of fish
called Moorish Idols, she wondered how any-
one could wish to live above the sea. Once
she spied a nasty “squid,” but it sneaked off
into the kelp as though put to shame by the
pretty Mermaid and her guest. A Squid is a
horrible fish with eight tentacles, like an Octopus,
but its body resembles a submarine, and it
has tremendous eyes that gleam malevolently.
Two of the feelers, which are ever so much
longer than the others, shoot out in front of
the head; they are like horrible whips, and if
they ever fasten on to a person, they never let
go. “Ugh.”
Just as Misna was thinking how wonderful
it all was, she fainted away, and the next thing
she knew, she heard her mother’s voice saying,
“Oh, thank God, she is saved, my little girl.”
Misna opened her eyes, and she was in Mummie’s
arms, being hugged and kissed. “Why, Mother
darling,” she said, “you mustn’t cry. I’ve had
a wonderful adventure with a real Mermaid.”


“ Misna, dear, I think you have been dreaming,”
said Mother, hugging her again. “ But, Mumsie,
she gave me a pretty shell necklace, look at
it,” begged the little girl. And sure enough,
there was a beautiful shell necklace around
Misna’s neck.


YOUNG AUSTRALIA
Armand Kelly, a small lad about ten years
old, was considered the finest all round swimmer
and yachtsman for his age in Sydney. He had
had the great advantage of living right on the
Harbour front, all his young life. His father
had built a splendid looking home, high up on
the edge of Point Piper. Armand never got
tired of watching the kaleidoscope of boats that
wended their way in and out of Australia’s
magnificent harbour. No finer sight could be
seen in any part of the world. Battle Cruisers,
large Travel Steamers, Full Rigged Ships,
Schooners, Brigs, Yachts, Ferry Boats, Colliers,
either at anchor or making their way to their
destinations, was a thrill that never faded for
the small boy.
Then at night, when the “Ghost Ships”
glided into the Sydney Heads, showing only
their Green and Red Port and Starboard lights,
when the dimly lit ferries put into Mossmans
Bay or North Sydney, and the “Fairy” Dance-
hall boat, with its hundreds of twinkling lights


on masts and riggings, anchored in a cove,
Armand wondered if Sydney wasn’t the real
fairyland he had read so much about.
Saturday afternoon was his great delight
though. He could see from the terrace the
full racing course up and down the harbour
where the dozens of sailing boats were all
fighting for dear life to pass over the winning
line first. Some days the excitement was
intense. The breezes blew strongly and the
seas were heavy. The boats laid over so far
that one expected any minute to see the sail
dip in the water, but they rarely did, because
the sailors hung far out over the other side
to keep the keel submerged. However, when
there was a “Southerly Buster,” which was
the name given to windy storms that came up
suddenly over the harbour, Armand had seen
as many as three large sailing boats capsized
and laid over on their sides, and all the crew
sitting like sparrows, in the centre of the large
sail as it lay in the water, waiting to be picked
up.
Armand was a sympathetic lad, and he felt
sorry for boys and girls who did not live on
Sydney’s glorious harbour, so on week-ends
the pretty swimming pool, which lay at the
foot of his home, was always packed with happy
children. The house “ Coo-ee-land,” had been


built on a high terrace about sixty feet above
sea level, and Mr. Kelly had planted grass,
and many lovely flame trees which gave the
terrace a picturesque appearance, then when
the swimming pool and boathouse had been
added later, his gardeners had made the pret-
tiest rocky steps leading from the lawn above
to the bathhouses sixty feet below. It was an
enchanting sight from the house to see the
kiddies gambolling about in the pool. After
their swim, Armand’s father would pile them
all into his launch, and run them in and out
of the many lovely coves. He often said to
his wife. “Australian children should be the
happiest in the world. God has been very
good to them in his gift of Nature and Climate.”
Now one day, Armand and some of his little
playmates went for a picnic to Bondi Beach.
The children loved going there. It was on
the ocean side of Sydney, and the breakers
were simply made by heaven for people who
loved “Shooting them.” Kiddies from the
age of five or six learn to “time” a breaker,
as well as a native from the South Seas.
As the Australian beaches can be exceed-
ingly rough, a certain part of the beach is
roped off for bathers, and splendid looking
life-savers keep their eye on the swimmers so
carefully that few deaths from drowning ever


occur, then, too, there is a large stand in the
centre of the beach with a bell hung on it,
and if ever that bell rings, the bathers scurry
out of the water in double quick time because
they know it is a “ Shark Warning.” When
Mr. and Mrs. Kelly arrived with their batch
of happy kiddies, happiness broke loose. Quicker
than it takes to tell almost, the youngsters
were in their “bathers,” as they call their
swimming suits in Australia, and shooting the
breakers for dear life. There is no doubt that
this form of swimming is the most invigorating
of all. The children just tingled from head to
foot as they were battered around by immense
waves, always to come up shrieking with joy
and laughter. Armand, who was such a little
expert, was the centre of an admiring throng.
Because he had been well coached, some-
thing that is so necessary to really good swim-
ming, his strokes were the perfection of ease.
He was exactly like a porpoise, as he dived
in and out of the tremendous breakers. Being
a week day, there were far fewer picnickers
than on week-ends. The children had some
parts of the beach to themselves, and they
raced on the sand while the father acted as
judge, and gave the winners, “Bulls’ eyes,”
which are huge peppermint lollies. (A lollie
is a sweet or candy.)


Armand and his special chum, Ock (short
for Octavius), made a little wager between
themselves. They would swim out as far as
the ropes, and race into the beach. As they
swam out, Ock who was not by any means
so strong a swimmer as Armand, was swept
by the current off a straight course. Armand
wondered what he was trying to do. He could
see Ock some little distance from him, and
decided to swim towards him. Suddenly out
of a clear sky, the ever-dreaded bell on the
sands started tolling. “Sharks, Sharks!” yelled
everybody, and there was a scamper for shore.
Armand and Ock were some distance out by
now, and not far from the ropes. “Come on
in,” yelled Armand. “Sharks!” Just as he
said it, he could see something grey swooping
down towards Ock. Without thinking of him-
self, he swam with tremendous speed, and as
he saw the oncoming shark, he got in front
of Ock, and started beating his feet up and
down, raising a tremendous splash Whether
it surprised the “Grey Nurse,” as these mon-
sters are often called in Australia, I don’t know,
but the shark veered around, and disappeared
out to sea. Ock, who was terribly shocked
from fright, sank suddenly. Armand quick as
lightning, dived beneath him, and brought him
to the surface again, then turning the insensible


Ock on his back, and holding him under the
arms he swam, using his legs only, towards
shore. By this time, the life-savers, who are
the best drilled and finest in the world, had
already pushed the boat off shore, and in no
time they had arrived to the rescue of the
gallant boy. It must be understood that the
water is generally so rough that it takes a tre-
mendously powerful swimmer to save any-
body’s life off the Australian Beaches when the
breakers are high. The lifeboat soon hauled
the two children ashore, and Armand became
the hero of the day. Poor Ock, who loved his
friend like a brother, looked at him shyly, and
said. “Armand, that was a ‘Bonzer’ thing to
do. Crikey, I wish I could swim like you.”
Armand flushed with pleasure at these words.
The fact that Ock thought him a great swimmer
was far greater praise than that he had done
something brave. “ That’s all right, Ock. You’d
have done the same for me,” answered Armand
brightly.


XVI
THE VAMPIRE OF THE CORAL SEAS
(a fairy tale)
Once upon a time, long before Australia
was discovered, the Great Barrier Coral Reef
was inhabited only by immortals. As the Coral
Reef is a stretch of over twelve hundred miles,
you can understand that Fairyland was quite
a large place. No lovelier spot could the fairies
have chosen, because in no other corner of
the world is there such a wealth of coral gar-
dens, beautiful fish, and small islands covered
with every kind of tropical foliage. The islands
inside the reefs were too innumerable to count,
but on each one stood a Fairy Castle of great
beauty. Now in one of these castles lived the
Fairy of Unselfishness. Every time she heard
of a little boy or girl who had been very unselfish
to their mother, father, well, to anyone at all,
she would bring them to her Enchanted Palace
when they died. If they were little boys, they
were taught how to sail a ship, or fly one of
the Albatross Birds, and if they were little


girls, they were given wings of their own, and
off they were in a jiffy to a far away land to
keep an eye on some other little lass.
Now among the children on the Island of
Unselfishness was a little boy called Emile.
Once he had lived in the slums of London,
sleeping at night in a tiny attic, with his dying
mother; during the day he sold matches. Poor
little kiddie, the closest he had ever got to
seeing a ship or boat was on the hoardings.
One day he had been on his way home to tell
his mother, who lay ill and starving, that he
had sold sixteen boxes instead of the usual
ten. He had been so pleased that he told the
flower-seller of his good luck. She sat near
the lamp post, where he always stood ready
to dodge the trams and buses trying to sell
his wares. The poor woman had kept an eye
open for little Emile, who was only nine years
old, and when he came rushing to her crying
gleefully, “Wot d’ye think, Mrs. ’Opkins? I
sold sixteen boxes te dye. I’ll be able to tyke
me muwer a extra bun ’ome.” Mrs. Hopkins
looked at the little lad sadly, but, like all the
fine cockney women, she never showed any-
thing but the bright side to those around her,
so she answered: “A blessed millionaire, ain’t
ye, me lad? Well, seeing as ’ow you’re going
to give yer Ma a beano ’ow abaout takin’ ’ome


a bokette of flowers.” So saying the dear soul
gave Emile a lovely sweet smelling bunch of
violets, something she could ill afford to do.
She was rewarded, though, when she saw the
wee face. “S’elp me! Vilits! Muwer’ll go
balmy when she sees them,” said the laddy.
“I’ll never forget it, Mrs. ’Opkins, never,” he
added seriously.
With that, he sped off to buy his mother
the little extra bun. He could not climb the
steps fast enough to get to the attic room. He
burst in out of breath. “ Look, Muwer, wot
I brought for ye!” He rushed to the bed to
show the violets and bun to his mother, but
he saw that she was asleep. He bent over to
see if perhaps she was resting, like she often
did, with her eyes closed, and he touched her
hand lying loosely on the bed. It felt cold,
then he looked closer, and the poor little mite
saw that something had happened. He flew
down the steps to rush across the street to the
chemist s shop to tell the clerk, who had always
been so kind to him. He thought not of trams,
trucks or cars. He heard yelling, horns blowing,
and a scrape of brakes, then he knew nothing
more. Emile had been run over by a truck,
and in his hand was the little bunch of violets.
As he lay in the middle of the street, Emile
heard a voice in his ear. Even with all the


noise and din about him, he could distinctly
hear someone saying, “Come with me, child,
to the Palace of Unselfishness. It is beautiful
there, and you’ll be very happy.” The next
thing he knew, he was on a wonderful ship
which was run by a lot of boys in fine uniforms.
The lads knew everything about the managing
of the vessel, and the Captain was a fine young
Prince. Naturally, Emile looked curiously
around him, and then he saw a wonderful
Fairy Queen, standing at his side. “Why, it’s
Mother!” cried he joyfully. “Yes, dear, I am
the Mother of every little boy and girl on
Unselfish Island,” said the Fairy Queen. Now
here is a strange thing. Every child could see
his own mother’s face in the Fairy Queen’s.
Of course their mother had never had such
gorgeous clothes, nor long fair hair, but to
them all, the fairy had “mother’s look” about
the eyes, so they were all happy, because
they had a mother. Isn’t that a nice fairy to
have?
When they arrived at the Isle of Enchant-
ment, Emile could not help saying, “Doesn’t
it smell beautiful,” and “ Oh, look at the wonder-
ful gardens in the water.” Of course as soon
as he arrived in fairyland, he spoke correctly,
because there, everything is perfect, even speech.
The fairy called all the children together, and


introduced the newcomer. Then she turned to
Emile, and said, “Now, child, everything in
fairyland is for your good and pleasure. I
must warn you, however, of the wicked Witch
Menteuse. She has a realm at the bottom of
the sea, and she has enchanted hundreds of
people from all the fairy islands of the Coral
Seas. You must be careful, and not to be
inveigled on to her ship that never stops. Boys
and girls, on seeing the beautiful spun glass
vessel with its glitter, have been tempted by
the wicked Menteuse, and have disappeared
forever from fairyland. If once any one puts
a foot on that ship, he is doomed to enchant-
ment.”
“But how can anyone get on the ship if
it never stops, oh Queen ? ” asked Emile full
of curiosity. “The Witch has many ways of
enchanting the children, but on the Island of
Unselfishness she lures them off the Coral
Reefs, and carries them herself to the glass
spun ship,” explained the Queen.
One day, Emile was sailing the Coral Seas
in the Silver Fee, which was the Fairy ship
to which he was assigned. He saw in the dis-
tance, coming towards him, the most beautiful
vessel he had ever seen. It was so transparent
that it looked as though it were made of spun
glass. You could almost see through it, and


as the sun threw its burnished rays upon it,
and the waves rolled slowly across the bow,
Emile was spellbound before the wonder of
the spectacle. “Look at that ship!” he cried
in ecstasy. “It looks like millions of dazzling
rainbows, as the sun plays around it. Why
doesn’t it break in two? It looks so fragile.”
The Prince, Commander of the Silver Fee }
who was standing by, said sadly, “ Laddie,
that is the Witch’s ship Dolorosa , and she lures
many to their doom through its great beauty.
My beautiful Princess is enchanted on it, and
though I have tried to rescue her, it has been
in vain.” As the Prince spoke, the vessel passed
the Silver Fee , and Emile could see hundreds
of poor creatures putting their arms out in
supplication, asking to be saved, and then he
heard a most horrible laugh. It just sent a
cold shiver down the boy’s back. “Oh, how
dreadful,” he said. “Is there no way to save
those poor people?” “Only by killing the
Vampire of the Coral Seas,” answered the
Prince. “Many have lost their lives trying it.”
“Vampire of the Coral Seas?” asked the boy.
“Whatever is that, Prince Cherine?” “Emile,
it is a horrible monster; it is about twenty
feet long, and under the water it looks just
like a bat. It has ears like a bat, and a spine-
tail that measures thirty feet in length, and


is edged like a thin saw. One whip of the tail,
and it’s the end of the victim. However, the
Vampire kills its prey mostly with the batlike
arms. The Sea Bat, as the seamen call it, is
the most feared of all fish, more so than the
Octopus. Once a man gets caught in those
dreadful arms, the Vampire squeezes and
squeezes until the victim is one mass of pulp.”
“Ugh, how awful,” whispered Emile, whose
hair was almost standing on end. “ Many
have tried to save their loved ones, and been
dragged to the depths below,” continued Prince
Cherine sadly.
One day, Emile was fishing off the Reef,
thinking how wonderful it was to be among
the fairies in the Coral Seas, and glad that
he had been unselfish when he was on Earth.
“What is that?” he said to himself. He listened
again, and then he heard the sweetest song
from the depths below. Through the water,
he could just catch a glimpse of a beautiful
girl with long hair of reddish gold, dressed in
strings of pearls about three feet in length,
which swayed back and forth with the motion
of the water. She played a lute, and sang so
sweetly. “ I did not know that there were
fairies down there, too,” he thought. “I’d love
to see what is under the sea.” “Oh, my nice
young lad, the fish are ever so much prettier


down here. I can show you some beauties,”
said the exquisite voice. Emile suddenly re-
membered the Fairy Queen’s warning. “ She
has lured many children from the Reef,” she
had said. Emile grew very courageous, and
said sternly, “ Get away from Fairyland, you
horrible Vampire of the Seas.” As he spoke
the words, the beautiful girl turned into a
tremendous Eagle Ray Fish, or as the fisher-
men call it a Sea Bat. No sooner had the trans-
formation taken place, than the animal, which
looked exactly like a huge Bat, swam into the
depths below, but the water through which it
had gone turned for a few minutes red, like
blood. “ Ugh, it makes me creep,” said Emile,
who had no further desire to fish. After he
returned to the Palace, he told all his playmates
what he had seen, and what he had said to the
Vampire. “She’ll hate you for that,” said
Hoops, his little pal. “I don’t care, Hoops;
from now on I am going to watch the Reefs
every day, and try to save some of the others
from being dragged down,” answered the boy.
Sure enough the next afternoon, Emile arrived
on the Reefs in time to see Bertina, a pretty
little mite, walking towards the edge. “Bertina,
Bertina!” shouted Emile, rushing wildly to the
little girl’s side. She looked around, as he
came towards her. “Oh, Emile, look at the


lovely lady down there,” cried the mite. “Oh,
Bertina, try to understand that it is a Witch.
She turns herself at will into a beautiful Lady
so she can lure little girls and boys into her
arms, then she takes them on the ship that
never stops,” explained Emile seriously. Look-
ing into the water, he repeated the words he
had said previously. “Go away from the Reefs,
you Vampire.” The Siren again changed into
the horrible Bat, but before she dived down,
a voice came out of the sea crying, “Emile,
beware! That is twice you have defied me,
Beware! ” Emile shuddered, and returned to
the Palace, holding Bertina’s hand.
From that day on, he spent most of his time
on the Reefs, watching over the children, so
they would not be tempted by the lovely voice
of the Siren. Each time, he heard the same
warning, “Beware, Emile, beware!”
When he sailed on the Silver Fee , Emile
watched ceaselessly for the Vampire’s Dolorosa.
He wished it belonged to the fairies, and that
he was Captain of it; he loved it. It fascinated
him beyond anything, so much so that Prince
Cherine became worried. “Oh, Emile, Emile,”
he said, Take your mind off the Dolorosa ,
you will be yet tempted to do something silly.
You have saved so many souls on the Reefs—
we need you.”


“Prince Cherine, I would like that spun
glass ship, but I want to free it from the Witch’s
clutches first,” replied Emile. “Why, lad, big
men have not been successful, and have been
enchanted by the scores; you are only a lad,
what can you expect to do?” asked the Prince.
“Well. Did you ever hear of Tom Thumb,
who was no larger than my finger? Mother
used to call me her little Tom Thumb, because
I watched over her, and guarded her from the
man who came for the rent. That was one of
the few fairy stories I ever heard; just think
what Tom Thumb did. He saved dozens of
lives,” answered Emile.
One fine day, Emile scurried off to see his
beloved Fairy Queen. He had a great favour
to ask her, and when he came towards her,
the Queen, who loved the boy for his gallantry,
smiled fondly. “Now, Emile, what is it you
wish to ask?” “Oh, Fairy Queen, could one
of your giant guards make something special
for me ? ” asked the boy excitedly. “Of course,
child, they will make you anything you wish,”
answered the Queen. “Is that all you came
for?” she added. “No, oh Queen,” blustered
the boy blushing, “ I would like to ask you if
it’s possible, now that I live in fairyland, to
breathe under water like a fish.” “Why, of
course, Emile, there is only one creature that


could squeeze the breath out of you, and that’s
the Vampire of the Coral Seas,” exclaimed the
Queen. “ But if I were weighted down with
iron, wouldn’t I sink to the bottom?” asked
Emile anxiously. “ Child, only the Vampire
could drag you to the seabed. If we could rid
the South Seas of this Monster Witch, any
child on the Fairy Coral Reefs could swim at
will in the depths below. You would have
only to ‘wish’ to rise to the surface, and up
you’d come. Remember the Sea Bat alone has
made the seas inaccessible,” answered the
Queen sadly.
After hearing what the Fairy Queen had to
say, Emile went in search of the guards. Finding
one of the kindly giant men, who did all in
their power to make the children of Unselfish
Island happy, Emile asked him if he would
make him a suit of armour, out of copper,
which would cover him from top to toe. “It
must have spikes at least ten inches long all
over it, and the spikes should be saw-edged.
Then, too, there should be a spiked pole over
the head, at least six or seven feet high,” said
Emile seriously. “Of course we can make you
such an armour,” answered the guard. “May
I ask what it is for, Emile?” “I am sorry,
I cannot tell you now, but you’ll know later,”
answered the boy bashfully.


The following day, Emile arrived on the
Reefs at the critical moment when his friend
Hoops was walking into the water where the
Siren sang. Emile yelled loudly, but too late.
He saw a hand come out of the sea, clutch
at the lad, and drag him down. He rushed to
the edge, and he heard the same awful laugh,
and a voice cry, “Ha, Ha! Not this time, Emile,
young lad, not this time!” Horrified, Emile
stood transfixed, and he saw the Vampire fold
her arms together, until they completely covered
the child, then he turned away. He could not
look longer. “How dreadful that such things
should be in Fairyland,” said the poor boy
aloud. There and then, he made up his mind
to rid the seas of this dreadful Witch that was
turning this paradise into a horrible night-
mare. Each day, waiting for the armour to
be finished, Emile took his place on the Reefs,
always ready to warn the children as they
came to fish or play. One afternoon the giant
guard came to him and said that the armour
was ready. Emile tried it on. It fitted like a
glove. It was difficult to move in, but not
unmanageable. He asked the giant to carry it
to the little lagoon. Then he practised for
some time in it. He went under the water
with great ease, and he could see perfectly
through the glass in the helmet.


11 I J I ' : i
; r i | i "
‘ f || i 1
1 .JtMtfjmk i
[Face page




Two days later, Emile went to the Queen,
and said, “Give me your blessing, oh Queen.
I am about to try to rid the seas of the Vampire
Bat.” “Emile, I do not forbid you to go, be-
cause I know it is an unselfish act, and I can
only wish you well, and should you succeed
in this more than difficult task, you may
ask for anything you wish, and it will be
granted.”
It seemed as though all Fairyland was out
to see the great attempt. Not one of them
believed that a little boy like Emile could over-
come the dreadful Vampire of the Coral Seas.
Emile asked one of the boys to stand near the
spot where the Siren always sang, and then,
after she had sung, he himself would dive in.
The children held their breath, and waited.
Soon the voice commenced singing; it was
really a sweet, crooning sound, more than a
song. She sang about the wonderful ship of
spun glass, and just as the small boy was being
tempted to jump in, Emile flopped into the
water in his heavy spiked armour.
It looked a gruesome costume. Every spike
was saw-like, and glittered in the sun, as he
dived in. As soon as he struck the water, the
Siren changed into the Vampire, and enfolded
poor Emile in her Bat-like arms. Tighter and
tighter she squeezed, until the boy thought


the armour would be flattened out like a sheet,
but the giants had made it well. The tighter
the Vampire squeezed, the more the spikes
dug into her flesh. Finally, when she tried to
let go, the spikes had entered her body right
up to the hilt. Emile felt himself being released,
but could not get away from the horrible fish.
The Bat stuck to the spikes, then a voice came
out of the deep, crying. “You have torn me
apart, I am finished, let me go.” Poor Emile
tried to push the now shapeless mass from his
armour, but it was too big, and the upper part
of it was stuck to the spike pole above his head.
He could not see because the Bat was so large
that his head only came to the middle of its
body. He remembered what the Queen had
said, that he could easily rise to the surface
if he so “wished” it, even in the heavy armour,
so he said to himself “ I ‘ wish ’to rise to the
surface.” He found himself coming up at once,
and as soon as he came above water, four
gigantic hands raised him out of the sea. It
was the giant guards, who had been watching
everything that had happened. They quickly
removed the ugly mass of flesh from the armour,
and then they helped Emile to take off the
heavy spiked suit.
The Fairy appeared as though by magic.
All the children stood around, too thrilled even


to speak, but the Fairy Queen said, “Emile,
you have rid the Coral Seas of its only enemy.
Fairyland is once again the Paradise it should
be. In gratitude, I will grant you any request
you would like to make.”
“Oh, Fairy Queen, is the spun glass ship
free,” excitedly asked the small hero. “ Cast
your eyes on the sea, child,” smiled the Queen.
Emile looked out towards the horizon, and he
saw coming at full speed the wonderful ship
that was ever in his mind. “Oh, Fairy Queen,
if I might be allowed to learn to run the spun
glass ship, I would be happy beyond words,”
Emile said bashfully. “ Child, I am going to
make you Captain of the Vampire Ship, and
from now on, it will be called the Gratitude.
Emile’s joy was something to behold. His
playmates gave him a rousing cheer, and they
were all happier still when they saw the once
doomed ship throwing its anchor in the lagoon
below the castle. When they saw the faces of
all those who had been enchanted on the ship
that never stopped, they realised what a great
deed Emile had done, for each one looked
happiness personified.
When Captain Emile took over the Gratitude
for its first merry trip around the South Seas,
it was filled with happy and excited little travel-
lers, who visited many islands hitherto unknown


to them. The small skipper, when his spun
glass ship “hove to” in the lagoon of Unselfish
Island, many weeks later, thought how perfect
a place Fairyland had become since it had been
rid of the dreadful Vampire of the Coral Seas.


XVII
THE GIANT CLAM’S REVENGE
Have you ever seen a Giant Clam? Well,
at the North of Queensland, in Australia, these
Shell Fish are to be found in great numbers.
Just off the coast of Cape York Peninsula, was
a small island called Warawara. A number of
Aborigines, which are Australian natives, have
lived there for years. Now the Australian
Aborigines are different from any other native
in the South Seas. They are neither so intel-
ligent or good looking as the Polynesian Races,
nor have they the lovely caje-au-lait colouring.
In fact, the Australian natives are a far inferior
tribe of people. It must be said for them,
though, that they are for the most part harmless
and simple-minded folk. On Warawara Island,
lived a small Aborigine family, who spent most
of their lives fishing for Dugong. There are
two ways of catching this large fish, some of
which are nine or ten feet. Spearing the fish
by throwing the weapon or from a Dugong
Stand. The natives build a Stand about fifty
yards off shore; of course they build it at low


tide, then they have a spear about fifteen feet
long, with a sort of barbed arrow head. They
tie one end of the rope around the spear, and
the other end they fasten to the Stand. When
they see a Dugong, they throw the weapon,
rarely failing to hit the fish, and when they
have captured it, they tie another rope to the
tail, then they hold the head under water until
it is suffocated. I must tell you that a Dugong
is a Mammal fish, which means that it has
to come to the surface for air, so if it is held under
water for any length of time, the fish drowns.
Isn’t that strange? The little Aborigine Kuta
was only twelve years old, but he was a fine
shot with a spear. It takes more knack than
strength to spear fish. This small boy fisher-
man had lived every minute of his young life
right on the beach of Warawara. He knew
every living thing by its name.
There was one sport above all that Kuta
loved. He had a passion for collecting Giant
Clams. He spent half his life seeking these
wonderful Shell Fish, many of which weighed
about 150 to 200 pounds. That’s almost as
heavy as a large man. These tremendous Clams,
which look like two shells stuck together, have
to open and close the shells (valves) quickly
to swim. Kuta would wait on the beach for
hours, hoping to see one near the edge of the


water; then, as it came within distance of him,
he would ram his spear into the clam, when
he had his two valves open. The boy had
practiced this trick for so long that he had
become very dexterous. After Kuta had speared
the Shell Fish, the valves would jam together,
but it was too late. Alas! the barbed spear
had entered into the Clam’s body. After the
Shell Fish died, Kuta would drag it himself,
or if it were too heavy, he would call his father,
and they would take it to his special “ Clam
House,” and add it to his already large collec-
tion. He had built himself a small hut out of
Shells, Clams, and Palms. It was really quite
a pretty sight, but Kuta never once thought
of the poor Clams, who had done him no harm.
For months he had been trying to catch two
wonders he had seen just off the Dugong Stand.
They always eluded him, and they must have
been Mr. and Mrs. Giant Clam, because they
always swam together. Never had Kuta seen
such beauties. They must have been three
feet wide. “If I ever catch those, I will have
to ask two natives to help me carry them,”
he thought. One day, when he was catching
small fish with a tiny net, just off the edge of
the beach, Kuta saw the two Clams swimming
towards the sands. He rushed out of the water
and quick as a flash, found his spear, then flew


back to the water’s edge again. One of the
Clams seemed to be resting, but the other,
who was curious, swam towards Kuta, and
with great dexterity, the boy whammed his
spear home into the poor Clam’s body. The
Shell Fish tried to get away. He clutched the
spear stick, and his strength was so great, he
broke the spear in two, but the weapon had
done its work. The poor Clam died and sank
in the shallow water. Kuta saw the other Clam
coming towards him at a terrific speed. The
native lad knew the Shell Fish wanted to see
what had happened to his Mate, so Kuta rushed
out of harm’s way. From the upper beach, he
saw the lonely Clam swim several times around
his Mate, then disappear. The boy called his
father, and between them they carried the
Clam to the Shell Hut. The father and mother
were very proud of their son for bringing home
such a prize. Then Kuta told them that he
was going to try and get the Mate too.
Day after day, Kuta watched anxiously from
the Dugong Stand, or the Beach, but all in
vain, the Giant Clam never returned. He gave
up all thought of ever seeing it again.
Often after the tide had gone out, Kuta
would seek in the rocks for large Crabs, and
Beche de Mer. He was always cautious as he
looked in the crevices. There are many treacher-


11 1 111 fl / B If
| 1
/ | || f| |
[Face /jagf 214




ous, but harmless-looking sea animals around
the Australian beaches. The “Portuguese Man-
o’-War a little blubbery fish, and the “ Sea
Eggs” aren’t a bit comfy to step on in bare
feet, then the Crabs and the large Clams, if
they nip your big toe, can make you yell like
billy-oh. Kuta knew all the tricks of these
annoying “Rock-livers.” The small Octopus
and Squids hid in corners, and they changed
their colour to match the rock of kelp so quickly
that they could only be seen when it was often
too late. Two or three times, Kuta had had
his leg grabbed by a small Octopus, and though
he had managed to kill it with his knife, it
had taken a long time before his father had
been able to drag away the tentacles which
clung to his leg, even after death. Kuta nearly
always went to the same rocks, on the end of
the beach, because they were so cluttered to-
gether, and the Crabs seemed to have a prefer-
ence for the thick sea kelp, and the massed
together rocks. The native boy had worn a
little rock path to his chosen spot.
Now a really strange thing happened. One
day, as the tide was going out, a Giant Clam
could be seen placing a large bunch of kelp
on the little rocky path that Kuta travelled
over each day. Then the Shell Fish cleverly
crept under the kelp, and there lay hidden.


Hour after hour he waited, showing no move-
ment at all. Little by little, the tide came in,
until it completely covered the Clam. The
large Shell Fish, when the water rose above
him, came from behind his hiding place, and
slunk into the sea. The following day, the
Clam came back, as the tide receded, and
gathered the kelp about him again, and there
he stayed until the high water chased him into
the depth. Day after day, the Clam persisted
in this little performance. Now, one afternoon,
at low tide, Kuta went for his Crab hunt. As
the boy approached the rocky path, he saw
the bunch of kelp. Cautiously he went towards
it, and with his spear, tested it. He hoped that
perhaps there were some fine, luscious Crabs
hidden in it. When he saw no movement under
the sea-weed, he stepped closer. As he did,
there was a convulsive motion, and before Kuta
knew what it was all about, the Giant Clam
had snapped at his leg, and held it as in a vice,
while the boy shrieked with fear and pain.
The harder Kuta pulled his leg, the tighter the
two valves of the Clam jammed together. His
screams brought his father and some of the
natives from their huts. When they arrived at
the spot, they saw the native boy sitting on
the rock with his leg held in a vice-like grip
of a Giant Clam, that must have weighed at


least three hundred pounds. “It’s the Mate
of the Clam I caught some time ago,” cried
Kuta in agony. The father did not know what
to do. The valve was so heavy and large, that
the weight alone was causing agony to the
boy. When the men tried to get near to pry
the valves open, the Clam just clamped tighter,
and Kuta screamed with pain. Finally, one of
the natives thought of an idea. If a small bon-
fire were lit at the back of the Shell Fish, the
heat would cause the valves to open, and the
boy would be freed. It took a long time to
carry out the plan, because the rocks were still
wet from the outgoing tide. The natives brought
dry stones, and placed them at the back of
the Clam, then they built a little fire of small
twigs, after which they set a light to it. As
the heat became more intense the Shell Fish
relaxed a little. The fire had to be kept alive
at the back of the Clam only, otherwise Kuta
would have been burned. Gradually, the warmth
pervaded to the inside of the shell, and one
native waited, watching the valves slowly open,
then suddenly he pried a rock into the opening,
so that the Clam could not close down again.
When finally they extricated Kuta from
the grip of the Giant Clam, he was carried
almost fainting to the hut. The natives dug
the spear into the flesh of the Clam, and


killed it. Later, they carried it to Kuta’s
Shell Fish Hut.
It was many days before the native boy could
walk again. He never looked at the two tre-
mendous Giant Clam shells outside his hut
without shuddering. Although he remained a
wonderful fisherman, and still visited the rocks
for Crabs, Kuta never again tried to catch a
Giant Clam. Never as long as he lived would
he forget “The Giant Clam’s Revenge.”


XVIII
UNDER THE SOUTHERN CROSS
On one of the smallest and prettiest islands
in the South Seas, lived a white man, his wife,
and their one small boy. They had a number
of native servants, but beyond that there were
no other inhabitants. Once in every six months
a trading vessel put into Toahotu. The little
family, whose name was Thurling, lacked for
nothing. Bread fruit, coconuts, plantains,
bananas, yams, and taro, besides fei, which is
something like a banana, grew like weeds on
this island. Naturally the natives, though cheer-
ful, were rather lazy, because when they were
hungry, they could find so much food growing
on the trees, they had no incentive to work.
The island itself was beautiful beyond words.
It was smothered in tropical foliage. The Cape
Jasmine, and Hybiscus, burst through the ferns,
so that their pretty faces should not be hidden.
The Hybiscus in the South Seas is almost
every colour, and the sweet smelling Amarenthes,
Frangipani, and Syringa grew in such pro-
fusion that Toahotu was in full bloom all the


220 Under the Southern Cross
year round. The miniature beach, with its
reef, about fifty yards from shore, was pure
white coral sand, and when the surf rose like
a huge cloud before breaking over the reefs
into the bluest of blue lagoon to escape up on
to the sand, nothing could have looked more
like Fairyland, so thought little Tommy Thurling,
a dear wee lad of four years old. His native
nurse, sitting with him on the beach, told him
all sorts of fairy legends, about the birds and
the sea shells.
Have you ever seen real South Sea shells?
They are no more like those found in Northern
beaches, than chalk is like cheese. Tommy had
a collection that anyone might envy. Some were
like chrysanthemums with curly petals, others
resembled pansies with their velvet faces of
purple colouring. Then there were the little
dancing shells, which looked like ballet skirts,
of row upon row of ruffles. The colouring of
the South Sea shells defy description, orange,
pink, mauve, some were marked with stripes
of yellow and blue, and the prettiest of all was
a perfect sun bonnet that looked as though it
had been starched. Tommy played with the
shells by the hour, making them into soldiers,
or sailors, tinkers, or tailors. At four, he could
swim like a fish, and being so much with the
natives, he spoke their tongue better than his


Under the Southern Cross 221
own. Mr. Thurling had brought his small
family to Toahotu, because of his wife’s health.
The doctor had ordered complete rest and
quiet. They had learned to love the island so
dearly they decided to remain. Mr. Thurling
was a wealthy merchant from Melbourne,
Australia. Tommy had never worn any clothes,
since coming to the South Seas, so naturally
he was almost as dark in colour as the good-
looking natives of the island. Had it not been
for his fair hair, which was almost silver gold,
he could easily have passed for a real native.
His parents used to laugh about it. “ Claribel,
it’s a good thing we are here with him, other-
wise he would forget how to talk English,”
laughingly said Mr. Thurling. The native
nurse idolized the boy, and watched him like
a hawk. The family lived in a bungalow-hut,
thatched with leaves of the Pandanus trees, and
it had a tremendous verandah running all the
way round it. The rooms inside were used
only to sleep and dress.
Now a dreadful catastrophe happened to
this Paradise Island. It is not often that a
hurricane blows up to such an extent as to
absolutely destroy all before it, but such a one
came along, and brought great disaster to
Toahotu. One night the natives, who are very
superstitious, knew by the very stillness, which


-222 Under the Southern Cross
was almost suffocating, that it was the calm
before the storm. They rushed to their huts,
and commenced tying them down with fibre
rope, just as the first blast swept across the
island. Higher and higher rose the wind, the
skies were streaked with lightning, fork light-
ning, illuminating Toahotu, almost like day for
a few seconds, then all was black again. Thunder
rolled, and the wind whistled through the
swaying trees. Faster and faster the hurricane
gathered speed, until it reached a hundred
miles an hour. The coconut palms w r ere mowed
down like grass. Banana trees were washed
away, and the seas rolled up on the beach,
crashing over the reefs, like the roar of a cannon.
The native huts were swept into the air, leaving
the poor souls grovelling on the ground, pray-
ing to God. The little white family was huddled
together in their bungalow, wondering when
their last hour would come. Natu, the native
nurse, completely covered Tommy with her
body, in case of falling timber. The dreadful
part of it all was that no one could do anything.
They had to wait for the hurricane to wear
itself out. On, on, through the night, the
thunder roared, the wind shrieked, then the
awful thing happened. An immense tree, at
the back of the bungalow-hut was struck by
lightning, and it crashed across the house, where


the poor white family were praying to God
for help.
Dawn came, and the tropical storm died out
as suddenly as it had appeared. The seas
swelled slowly, as they always do in the wake
of a hurricane. The sun shone, and the surf
broke over the reefs, but oh! the pretty island
of Toahotu was completely demolished. Few
palm trees were left standing, the blooms had
disappeared, the huts were scattered from one
end of the island to the other, and the poor,
homeless natives were trying to find the little
family of Thurlings under the debris. They
finally extricated the father, and mother; both
had gone to heaven. They could see nothing
of the boy, until one of them spied the nurse
Natu, in the corner of the hut, half buried
under some of the thatched roof wreckage, and
on lifting her up, they found little Tommy.
The nurse was unconscious, but the boy, who had
cried for so many hours through the night, had
fallen asleep, worn out from the dreadful ordeal.
Poor little lad, it was a sad sight to the kind-
hearted natives. Both mother and father taken from
him in one fell swoop. Later, they found that Natu
was not badly hurt, but had been knocked un-
conscious by the falling roof. Her only thought on
regaining her senses was Tommy. She tried to
comfort him, watching him night and day.


Not long after the catastrophe had taken
place, Natu wondered how soon the trading
vessel would pay its six-monthly visit to
Toahotu. She knew the white Captain would
take Tommy away from her; back to his own
race of people. She could not bear the thought
of losing him. He was fast becoming like her
own little son; except for his fair hair, no one
could tell he was not a native child. He never
heard English spoken, and was now talking
only the native language. The thought of being
parted from him was causing great grief to the
nurse, until she suddenly thought of an idea.
She waited until the moon was full, and one
night she loaded a “dug out” with water, bread
fruit, fei (which is so good for children as
food) bananas, and a few fresh coconuts, so
that Tommy could drink the cocoa milk, which
even in the hottest weather is cool when taken
from the nut. She then waited until all the
natives had retired for the night, and quietly
wrapping him in a Pareuv (native cloth), she
stole out of the hut, down to the beach, where
the “dug out” was standing all ready loaded.
She laid the sleeping child on the floor of the
canoe, and covered him with a piece of Tainamu
(mosquito netting) she had brought with her.
Natu paddled on until the sun was well up
in the sky. When Tommy awoke he did not


grasp what was happening. He thought it was
a great lark. Poor Natu did not know where
she was going. She hoped to strike another
island, where she could say that Tommy was
her son, and that they could live untroubled
by white people seeking the child she
loved.
After a couple of days at sea, Tommy
wanted to know when they were going to land.
The poor nurse was by this time thoroughly
frightened. She feared a storm might blow
up, and had no idea where she was. She was
also terrified lest the child became ill. Luckily,
they had food and water to last some days,
but the heat of the day made Tommy feverish
and cross, poor little mite. He called for his
Mummy constantly. As the fifth day dawned,
Natu was in despair. She paddled on, and on,
with little hope. As the sun rose higher, she
wondered if they would ever sight land. The
sea had been deadly calm for the period of
five days, but in the tropics, anything might
happen, and she feared a storm above all things.
Tommy, who was always seeking Nu’u (land)
suddenly criedNatu, Nu’u motu” (which
means, Natu, an island). Natu looked where
the child was pointing, and sure enough, she
made out a speck rising from the sea. All
day she paddled towards it, exhausted, but


226 Under the Southern Cross
courageous. Poor woman, she did not realise
she was harming the child she adored by taking
him away from the white people. As the stars
came into the heavens, Natu was within a few
hundred yards of a palm-laden island, and as
she heard the surf beating on the sands, she
broke down and wept for joy. Exhausted
though she was, she managed to beach the
canoe, then she told Tommy to sleep in the
“dug out” till morning, and she covered him
with the mosquito netting, and there the little
lad slept like a top, until long after dawn.
Poor Natu, lying on the sands nearby, she,
too, slept the sleep of the tired and exhausted.
Natu was awakened by a noise around her,
and she sprang up to find a number of natives
surrounding them. They plied her with ques-
tions. She told them that she and the boy
had gone out fishing, and she had fallen asleep
in the “dug out,” and that they had drifted
away from shore. I don’t know whether they
believed her story, but they did not question
her further. They were too interested in the
little son with the “Tulufula Auro” (golden
hair). They thought he was a child of the
Gods, with his head of spun gold. It never
occurred to them that he was a white child,
so brown he was. They told Natu, she could
stay if she wished, and when they heard


Under the Southern Cross 227
Tommy’s sweet voice chirping, they welcomed
him almost royally.
The Island of Papara was quite off the beaten
track of ships of any kind, and also very primi-
tive. In a short while, Tommy was almost
worshipped by the kindly natives. They treated
him like the “O’le Alo Ititi” (Little Chief).
Then, too, they gave great respect to Natu,
because they thought she was the mother of
this child with golden hair. They had never
known such a thing, these simple people.
In no part of the world do mortals believe
in legends, or fairy tales, as they do in the
South Seas. The natives of Papara imagined
that Tommy was blessed by some fairy god.
They called him Tomu, as that is what they
heard Natu say. As the child grew older, all
memories of the past vanished. He forgot his
own tongue, and the white parents passed out
of his mind completely. In time, he came to
look upon Natu as his mother. He called her
Tina Natu (Mother Natu) and he never for a
moment thought himself other than a native
child.
He played with the children, always leading
them in the games. His fertile British brain
saw ahead of the simple native children. They
played a great game called “ Spinning the
coconut.” A child would spin the coconut like


228 Under the Southern Cross
a top almost, and if the little black eyes, which
are at one end of the coconut pointed towards
himself, he won the chance to spin it again,
otherwise whoever the eyes looked at, took his
turn of spinning, and whoever spun it six times
received a little prize. Tommy always out-
smarted the others. His favourite game was
Spear throwing. The boys used a light stick,
shaped like a spear. They threw it slant-wise,
then it hit the ground, and bounced towards
the target. To hit a bull’s eye, this way is
very difficult, but Tommy used his brain as
well as his muscles, and he was champion of
champions at this game. One of his playmates
was the Chief’s small daughter, Luna. She
was a pretty child, and very intelligent, like
most Polynesian children.
The Island of Paparo was, as I said before,
never visited by South Sea traders. It was
small, and the natives just lived their
lives away among all that nature had given
them.
When Tommy was about fifteen, old Natu
passed away. Before she died she did not
confess that her little son was in reality a white
man’s child. She thought that it would be
better if Tommy never knew. There were
times when he felt very lonely, and he could
not tell why, in the back of his brain, some-


Under the Southern Cross 2
thing stirred in him, telling him that he was
a little different from these other natives. He
was a fine lad, and was loved by all on the
island of Paparo.
Another year went by, and the old Chief
who was getting along in years, called him into
his hut, and said, “ Alo ititi’e ” (Oh little Chief)
“ I will need a young man to take my place
as Chief. I am getting old, and would like to
see someone else rule my people.” “Oh!”
answered Tommy, “I don’t want to be Chief,
Alo’e” (Oh Chief). Then seeing the old man
was hurt, and angry, he said quickly: “I mean,
I am not fitted for it.” “Tomu, I have watched
you through all these years, and you are as
different from my people as the sky from the
sea. You led the children always in the games.
Then, too, when you are Chief, you will take
a wife, and my pretty daughter Luna would
make a lovely bride.” “Oh Alii! ” cried Tommy,
horrified, “ I am young, I do not wish to wed.”
“ What’s that you say ? ” cried the Chief. “At
your age, I had had two wives already. You
have plenty of time to prepare yourself for the
great honour of taking my place.”
Poor Tommy, when he left the Chief, he
was very downhearted. He had no desire to
marry the Chief’s daughter, and he did not
wish to be Chief. He had been happy among


230 Under the Southern Cross
these natives, but for months past had thought
of taking a canoe to explore the seas. Each
Masina Atoa (full moon), he wanted to be up
and going. Suddenly he made up his mind;
when the natives had all gone to rest he would
take off in one of the “ dug outs.” It was strange
that, twelve years after arriving on the Island
of Paparo, Tommy should leave it exactly the
same way as he came, in a canoe. He did not
forget to load it up with things he might need.
He had no idea what might be on beyond the
horizon, but he was going to find out. Stealthily,
that same night, he crept down to the water’s
edge, and shoved off with a feeling of joy.
Although he had been happy, something had
told him that other things lay out there on
the sea. He was days paddling before he sighted
anything at all. The fourth night was filled with
horror. A heavy sea rolled over him, and he
had all he could do to keep the “dug out”
right side up. Some of his food was washed
overboard. He lay flat on the bottom of the
canoe part of the time, trusting to the seaworthy
little craft to pull through. When day dawned
he hoped that he would sight a ship. Surely
there must be other islands somewhere. Another
day passed, Tommy was parched with thirst;
all his water gone, and he had nothing to eat;
he was about to give up the ghost, when he


saw a dot of white on the horizon. “O’la!”
(A sail) he cried. He wondered if the speck
would ever come nearer. Hour after hour he
waited, the spot gradually became larger and
larger. He stood up in the canoe, waved his
hand, yelled, but to no purpose. Tommy
almost despaired of the ship sighting him.
He was almost at the end of his tether. His
tongue was swollen, his eyes bulging, and his
head spun. Still he tried once more. He waved,
and yelled, knowing that his cries would never
be heard, but from sheer excitement. Finally,
he was rewarded. Closer and closer came the
vessel; it was a magnificent, palatial yacht.
They had seen him, and would pick him up.
As it came quite close, Tommy thought he
had never seen anything so beautiful. “ Like
a great bird, with its white wings,” he thought.
When the canoe came alongside, the crew of
the Silver Pheasant let down a ladder, and
Tommy, more dead than alive, managed to
climb over the side, only to collapse on the
deck. The owner of the yacht, Prince Ellwood,
was travelling the South Seas, with his wife,
Princess Helen, and his lovely young daughter
Emmie. When the Prince saw the handsome
young native, as he thought, he wondered if
he was colour-blind. Never had he seen a
native with silver gold hair, and the wonderful


physical development of the lad was splendid
beyond words. He ordered that Tommy be
carried below deck, and looked after. Then,
perhaps, when he was sufficiently recovered, he
would tell them how he happened to be alone
at sea in a small dugout canoe. Some hours
later, Prince Ellwood, hearing that Tommy
was feeling more like himself, went below to
speak to him. He first spoke English, but the
lad could not understand a word, so the Prince
called one of the natives in his crew to inter-
pret for him. “Ask him who he is, and where
he comes from,” said the Prince. The native
asked the question, and Tommy smiled charm-
ingly, as he replied, “My name is Tomu, and
I belong to one of the small islands. I wished
to see what lay beyond the setting of the sun,
so left my people. I have been many nights
at sea.” “Ask him what he wishes to do,”
said the Prince, on hearing what the inter-
preter said. Tommy laughed when the native
asked him his intention. “Tell the Alii Sinasina
(White Chief) I would like to be one of his
tribe, on this beautiful ship. I am strong, and
can spear fish, swim, dive for shells, and I
have also learnt to cook many good things.”
The Prince laughed heartily, on being told this.
He liked the lad, but was puzzled with his
blue eyes, golden hair, and his smile, that


Under the Southern Cross 233
somehow reminded him of someone he knew.
“ All right, tell him we will find something
for him to do on the yacht,” answered the
Prince. Tommy was delighted beyond words.
The Princess Emmie was greatly interested in
the young native and one day she spoke a
few words of pretty “pidgin” native to him.
Tommy blushed under his dark skin, and
remained speechless, before this beautiful vision.
“ Tomu, my father says that you are a wonderful
swimmer. You must show us what you can
do later.” “Oh, Tafamaiata (Blush of Dawn)
whose beauty but makes the jasmine appear as
a wisp of Nonu grass, you have but to com-
mand and Tomu will obey,” answered Tommy
with native gallantry. Princess Emmie, who
had never heard such flowery language in
English, could not help laughing a little at
this young native, who paid her compliments
like a Prince.
Each day she would pass by and chat a little
with him. Tommy looked forward all day to
her coming. He loved her voice, and listened
whenever he could as the family chatted English
together on the deck. He seemed to have
heard some of the words before, and when he
heard her say: “Oh, Mother darling,” he
instinctively knew exactly what she meant. He
learnt English words so quickly that he amazed


23 4 Under the Southern Cross
everyone. Tommy asked the Prince, one day,
if he could not have a book to pick out the
letters. The Prince was astounded at this
request. Very few natives wished to really
learn the English language. They were mostly
satisfied to pick up a word here and there,
and mix it with a little native patois.
When they arrived at Tahiti, Tommy was
like a child for glee. Everything was new to
him, the pretty native girls in their Pareus,
the young men, swirling their lava lavas, as
they walked, the French officers from the
ships, the bustle, and the hustle of the lively
little French island were all something he
had, in his wildest dreams, never thought
of. He was disappointed, though, to find that
the beach in Papeete (the principal town of
Tahiti) was grey, and not a snow white coral
beach.
The Prince allowed him to carry the parcels
ashore, so he accompanied them everywhere,
much to his joy. Tommy created quite a sensa-
tion in Papeete. Never had the inhabitants seen
a native boy with golden locks, and his extra-
ordinary physique, through so much swimming
and exercise, made him stand out like a young
god among all the other natives.
When the family returned to the yacht, the
Princess Emmie’s mother could not help remark-


Under the Southern Cross 235
ing to her husband, that Tomu seemed a very
extraordinary native.
A few days later, the Silver Pheasant encoun-
tered a severe storm. The little Princess, who
loved to watch the sea, when there were moun-
tains of froth and foam, remained on deck,
much against her mother’s will. “ Something
will happen one day,” the mother said anxiously,
when the girl insisted that it was quite safe
to stay by the wheel with the Captain. Princess
Emmie had no fear, because she always had
her “sea legs.” However, as the weather be-
came dirtier, and the rain fell in torrents, the
Captain told her she ought to go below. She
started towards the companion-way, when,
without any warning, the yacht gave a sudden
lurch, and an immense wave swept over the
deck, and before Emmie had even time to
scream for help, she had been carried over-
board, in the wake of the heavy seas. Now
Tommy had for some time kept his eye on
the Princess, and whenever she did anything
reckless he stood ready in case of danger. He,
also, feared something might occur on rough
days. As he saw his young mistress washed
overboard, he dived over the side, without a
second thought, and swam to the Princess.
The fairies must have been watching the two
brave young people, because Tommy was


236 Under the Southern Cross
thrown by the wash of the wave, almost on
top of Emmie, and as he saw her head bobbing,
he swam to her. She saw him, and he shouted
to her, “ Don’t grab me, or we will both be
drowned. Take it easy, and I will steady you;
we must try to keep in the wake of the yacht.
They are sure to send someone after us.” It
took time to say all this in the rough sea, but
he managed between waves, in his funny
English, as they bobbed about like corks.
There was great consternation on the yacht.
The Captain turned the boat around, and
slowly came towards the two in the water.
When the Silver Pheasant sighted the heads
the Bos’n threw a long rope, with a lifebelt
attached to it, to Tommy. The Captain thought
it was safer than putting a lifeboat over; then
he stopped the yacht, and the two young people
were hauled towards the Silver Pheasant. The
little Princess was taken aboard, without any
mishap, but unfortunately, as Tommy was
being pulled up, a gigantic wave smashed him
against the side of the yacht, and he knew
instantly that his foot had been broken. Poor
Tommy, in great agony he managed to help
them pull him on to the deck, but he had to
be carried below to the cabin. The Captain,
who was also the Ship’s Doctor, as is usually
the case, looked at the foot, and said seriously


Under the Southern Cross 237
that he had indeed broken the ankle, and that
it would take many weeks before Tommy
could be around again. The lad was kept for
days below deck, as the weather had been so
bad, but the Prince and his family visited him
daily. The Princess’s mother never stopped
praising Tommy for his bravery in saving her
darling child. She brought books for him to
read, and Emmie often read them to him. It
was amazing how well he spoke English. After
he had been in his cabin for two or three weeks,
the Princess’s mother came up to her husband
on deck, one day, and said, “There is some-
thing strange about that lad, he seems lighter
in colour; it’s very difficult to believe that he
is a native.” “I have noticed that, too, but
feared saying anything, as it seemed too ridicu-
lous,” replied the Prince smiling. “Let’s ask
Captain Scharff to take a good look at him,”
laughed the Prince. When the Captain visited
Tommy, the next day, he examined his eyes,
his hands, feet, nails, and hair, but he said
nothing to the astonished boy. Afterwards, he
rushed on deck in great excitement to the
Prince, and exclaimed: “That boy is as white
as you or I. He has lived all his life among
the natives, with no clothes on, and naturally
has become quite dark. However, there is no
mistake about it.” “Well,” said Emmie, “I,


238 Under the Southern Cross
for one, am not surprised, I always felt he was
white. I can’t tell why, but, Daddy, I really
did.” “I wonder who he is,” the Captain
asked. The Prince sprang out of his seat.
“Do you know I believe he is Tom Thurling’s
son; don’t you remember, Helen? the parents
were killed in a hurricane, on the island of
Toahotu, and the Nurse disappeared with the
child? Why didn’t I think of it before; I knew
Tom Thurling well.” “Oh, how wonderful,”
said Emmie, happy as a lark. “Won’t he be
pleased to hear about it. Let’s go and tell
him right away, Mother.” The family all w r ent
below to break the news to Tommy, who was
diligently studying his lessons. “Tommy, are
you brave enough to stand a shock,” asked the
Prince. “Well,” answered the lad smiling, “if
it’s a good shock, great White Chief, yes; if
it’s a bad one, perhaps I am not so brave.”
“Tommy, what would you say if you heard
that you were a rich young white man,” said
the Prince. “Oh, please don’t joke with me,
White Chief. It cannot be true, I have lived
among natives all my life. I remember nothing
else. Just one word stays in my memory, and
that is ‘Muwer’,” answered Tommy seriously.
“Tommy, don’t you see, even your name is
English; Tomu is just a contraction. However,
we will go at once to Toahotu, and see if you


Under the Southern Cross 239
remember anything, or if the natives recognise
you,” said the Prince, well pleased with the
way things were turning out.
During the next few weeks Tommy was like
cat on hot bricks. He thought he would
never get to Toahotu. He was limping about
with a stick by the time they sighted the island.
He had been lying on the deck, day after day,
while Emmie read him all sorts of adventure
tales. He was now dressed in white dungarees,
and a shirt. Tommy loved the little Princess’s
voice, and sweet ways, and the two young
people were as happy as the day was long. If
it were only true that he was this Tommy
Thurling, as the Prince insisted.
When the Silver Pheasant sighted the island
of Taohotu both the young folks were too
excited to speak. The yacht dropped anchor
inside the lagoon. Some of the natives from
the shore, who had seen her from a distance,
paddled out to meet them, and when Tommy
stepped into the dinghy, to go ashore, the
natives came close up to look at the dark-
skinned young man with the golden hair.
Suddenly, one of them yelled, “Why, it’s the
young Tama Sinasina (which means the white
boy) who was spirited away by Natu.” When
the Prince heard this he asked Tommy to
row ashore. The enthusiasm of the natives


knew no bounds, they surrounded the dinghy,
chattering away like a lot of birds on an early
spring morning. As Tommy beached the boat
they, too, rode up on to the sands, greeting
the young man like a long lost friend. Tommy
spoke to them, and asked if they would tell
him what had happened w r hen he was a child,
“Oh, Tomu,” one native said, “Natu, she stole
you from Toahotu, one night, when we were
all asleep. I think she feared the White Captain
would soon come and take you from her. We
seeked everywhere for you, and later, when
the trading vessel visited the island, we had
to tell the Captain that Natu had taken you
away. They searched for you in vain; once
every year the trader comes to ask if there is
news of you.” “How extraordinary it all is,”
said the Prince. “You see, Tommy, your
father was very rich, but he loved the South
Sea Islands, because your mother regained her
health there. We will make some gifts to these
kindly natives, before we leave. I will send
the boy for some beads and Pareus for the
women, and for the men I have some nice
ivory ornaments.” When Tommy handed the
presents to the natives they were all delighted.
“We are so happy to know that you are alive,”
they said. He thanked them gratefully for what
they had done for him and his parents. He


was almost too happy to talk, as he returned
to the Silver Pheasant. Never in his wildest
dreams had he thought he was a white man’s
son. When the yacht took leave of Toahotu,
the natives paddled out some miles, to wish
them “Bon Voyage.”
The Prince decided that Tommy should go
to Melbourne, where his father had had his
estate, and make it known that he was alive.
Princess Emmie was heartbroken that she was
to lose her playmate. She had taught him to
read, and he had commenced to learn to write,
then his English was coming along at a great
rate. As it took some weeks for the Silver
Pheasant to get to Sydney, the two young
people enjoyed every minute of their time
together.
On the way back the Silver Pheasant dropped
anchor at a number of pretty islands, and
Tommy showed Emmie how to improve her
diving and swimming. He taught her how to
bring up objects from the bottom. The Prince
Ellwood and his wife, Helen, were delighted
to see them so merry and happy together,
for they had come to love Tommy like a
son. The day before they landed in Sydney,
the lad came to the Prince, and said very
charmingly, “ Prince Ellwood, I hope you will
allow me to ask for your daughter’s hand


242 Under the Southern Cross
in marriage. She has promised, with your
permission, to wait until I have had three
years’ private study, for I am, as yet, very
ignorant.” “Tommy,” answered the Prince,
“there is no one I would rather give my dear
daughter in marriage than to you. You have
proved yourself a brave lad, and through all
your strange life have always remained a straight,
upstanding boy. As soon as you have com-
pleted your studies I am sure Emmie will be
waiting for you.”
Three years later, the Silver Pheasant was
making a return trip to the South Sea Islands,
but this time it was a happy honeymoon couple,
who were on board. Tommy and Emmie were
sublimely happy, as they watched the friendly
Southern Cross beaming down on them.
“Emmie, the Stars and the Moon, to-night,
are shining brighter than ever. They, too, are
delighted that we are to live happily ever after,”
said Tommy grinning happily.


XIX
THE ENCHANTED PEARLS
(a fairy tale)
Once upon a time, there was an old Witch
whose name was Pasmal. She lived about
eighty fathoms below the surface, and inhabited
a crystal cave. All day long she measured out
potions made from sea herbs and the hearts of
dead men. The hearts of the mortals were
difficult to procure, but the old Witch had
among her subjects a number of giant squids,
and she would send them scouring the depths
for signs of wrecks. These monsters would then
bring dead sailors back to the Witch, and she
would cut out their hearts, and ply her witch-
craft.
In her cave Old Pasmal had many mortals
under her spell. Now this Witch was different
from all others, for she did not transform
people into fish or animals. She thought only
of beautifying her cave. Once it had been just
an ordinary one, like any you might see at
the seaside, but the old Witch had turned the


mortals into beautiful stalactites, and stalag-
mites, and it was said that with the exception
of the great Sea King, Neptune, Pasmal had
the finest crystal caves in all the under-sea
realms. The old sea Witch would transform
herself at will, and would appear before some
unsuspecting mortal on land, perhaps as an
old fisherwoman, or a beautiful native girl,
trying to sell “Opola Ula” (a necklet).
As soon as she tried one of the bead neck-
laces round the mortal’s neck, they were changed
instantly into a stalactite in her cave beneath
the seas. The prettier the native girl, the more
beautiful the stalactite, and the handsomer the
man, the finer the stalagmite. When old Witch
Pasmal met very young girls of thirteen or
fourteen, she would transform them into large
pearls, and there they would lay for years and
years in a tremendous shell. One day, when
the Old Wfitch was visiting the island of Tahiti,
disguised as a native woman, selling beautiful
shell necklaces, and mats, she met three very
pretty white daughters of one of the rich mer-
chants on the island. Tahiti is one of the most
charming islands in all the South Seas, and
as it is owned by France, almost every white
person speaks French, or at least a patois,
which means a kind of pidgin French. Pasmal
approached the girls, and said: “Bonjour, mes


petites demoiselles. Voulez vous voir mes
perles?” The maids, like all young girls, were
a little curious, and Juliette, the youngest and
prettiest, answered excitedly, “ Mais oui, mais
oui!” The Witch handed them each a pretty
string of shells, but no sooner had they put
the beads around their necks, than they found
themselves transformed into pearls as large as
water melons, and they w r ere lying in gigantic
oyster shells under the sea in Pasmal’s cave.
Poor little maids, when they saw what had
befallen them their souls cried, because the old
Witch could not take those away. When Pasmal
was absent from the cave the enchanted mortals
talked to one another, and it was weird to hear
the stalactites talking to the stalagmites,
and the pearls wailing to each other in their
despair.
Strange as it may seem, though many fathoms
deep, only two feet of water flowed into
Pasmal’s cave. It stopped at the foot of the
stalagmites.
Now it so happened that a large schooner,
called the Mousie Jane , was sailing the Southern
Seas above the crystal cave. It was said that
very fine pearls were to be found in that section.
The Captain aboard the ship ordered one of
the divers to go down and investigate the possi-
bilities of pearl diving. A Diver prepared


for the descent, and after having his helmet
screwed on, he descended the iron ladder,
and went on into the depths to explore. As
he walked along the sea bed, he saw, a
few yards ahead of him, a wonderful cave.
Being of an adventurous turn of mind,
he entered the great opening. To his amaze-
ment, only two feet of perfectly blue water
was in the cave. The stalagmites and the
stalactites almost took his breath away. They
were of every colour of the rainbow. Never
had he seen so much beauty. Then his
eyes wandered to the gigantic pearls, and he
thought if he could only take the three largest
up to the Mousie Jane it would be a great
feather in his cap. He tried to pick them up,
but found them very heavy. “I can only carry
two,” he thought. “I will have to leave one
behind, and come back for it later.” He took
two in his arms, and left the cave, and gave
the signal to be hauled up. When he arrived
at the surface, the crew saw he was carrying
something heavy. They helped the Diver up
the ladder, and a man took one of the large
shells from him. Unfortunately he misjudged
the weight, and dropped it on the deck. There
was a terrific explosion, and in the place of
the pearl stood a beautiful young girl. “What’s
this?” said the Captain, too astonished for


words. “Oh, sir, my sisters and I were en-
chanted by the Witch Pasmal, and transformed
into pearls. Monsieur, this diver has saved
us,” cried Marthe gratefully. “Oh, sir, please
throw the other pearl on the deck, and save
also my sister,” she begged tearfully. The
Captain took the other shell, and let it fall.
The same thing occurred again. The second
sister appeared in place of the pearl. “What
does this all mean?” asked the Captain. It
was Juliette who answered. “Monsieur,” she
said in broken English, “this Monsieur, he
come to the cave when the Witch she is away,
my petite soeur, she is still underneath ‘chez
la Sorciere’” (which in French means “with
the Witch”). The Captain asked the Diver if
he would go down again, and try and rescue
the third sister. “ Righto, sir,” answered the
man, who by this time had his helmet off, and
had been listening to the little drama. They
screwed him up and down he went into the
deep. On arriving on the seabed, he could
see that something had happened. Fish were
hurrying past him outside Pasmal’s domain.
He entered the cave and walked forward as
quickly as his heavy suit would allow. As he
arrived at the spot where the pearl lay, he
saw to his dismay that Pasmal was entering
the cave at the other end. He knew then that


the theft had been discovered. She came to-
wards him waving her arms frantically, and
behind her were two horrible giant Octopi with
red eyes. The Diver thought quickly. He
remembered the girls had asked the Captain
to throw the pearls on the deck. As quick as
lightning, he raised the big pearl shell over
his head, and threw it on the rock with all
his might and main. There was a roar, and
then everything went black. When the Diver
opened his eyes he was standing on deck of
the Mousie Jane , with the third sister next to
him, and the whole deck was crowded with
people. “Great Heavens, am I dreaming?”
yelled the Captain. “No, sir,” spoke one of
the men standing by. “By throwing the shell
on the ground, the Diver broke the spell of
the old Witch Pasmal, and we were all trans-
formed back into mortals again. No human
being has ever crossed the threshold of that
cave before, and it is written in under-sea
witchcraft that should a human being enter
the portals of an Enchanted Cave, and if he
break one of the Witch’s shells, her spell is
forever ended.”
The good Captain of the Mousie Jane , spent
the rest of his trip visiting the islands in the
South Seas where the mortals had been lured
to their doom by the Witch Pasmal, who, I


must tell you, has in her turn been transformed
into a giant Octopus, and in her hatred of
all mankind she wanders beneath the seas
seeking for prey to take to the bottom of
the sea.


SHIPWRECK ISLAND
(a fairy tale)
Here is the story of Shipwreck Island. The
most desolate place in the Southern Seas.
There was not a flower or blade of grass to
be found anywhere. The inhabitants were
poor souls, who had been shipwrecked at sea
and rescued by the Evil One, called Blageuese,
who threw them on Shipwreck Island.
Some tried to swim away from the dreadful
place and were eaten alive by sharks. Other
unhappy captives had made an effort to grow
fruit, but the trees withered. When they fished
in the lagoon, so they would not starve, the
Evil One would allow them to catch a beautiful
fish, only to find, when they tried to cook it,
that it was a phantom and disappeared into
thin air. However, the old Witch threw them
enough scraps of food to keep them alive.
Once some of the men had built a canoe, to
make their escape, but as they were about to
launch the boat in the water, it broke into
smithereens.


Many wished that they had gone down with
their ships. Several vessels who had heard
tell of the Evil One had tried to rescue the
poor creatures held prisoners by the cruel
Blageuese, but no sooner did a ship of any
kind come within a radius of two or three
miles, a hurricane would blow up in an instant,
either wrecking the rescuers, or driving them
farther and farther away from the island.
Now, on an island called “Kiwi,” not far
from where the unhappy people prayed for
death, lived a Hermit. He was a kindly man,
and except for his Birds, Tree Crabs, Turtle,
he existed absolutely alone.
Kiwi was known from one end of the South
Seas to the other, because when the ships
sailed by, they saw flocks and flocks of gor-
geous tropical birds hovering over the island.
Hundreds of small huts had been built on the
tree tops, so that the Hermit’s feathery friends
could have pretty homes. Cockatoos, Paroquets,
the green Magpie with scarlet beak and legs,
then the gorgeous Blue Egrettes which are the
rarest of the Egrette tribe, and which had
migrated from South America, were among
the beautiful birds living on Kiwi Island.
The Hermit loved his pets beyond all words.
He also had the queerest array of Robber Tree
Crabs. These Crabs live in the Mangrove


trees, and are altogether different from those
found on rocks, and in crevices by the water.
Not only are they very large, some of them
more than a foot long, but they climb trees,
and steal the coconuts right at the top of the
palm trees. Strange as it may seem, the Hermit’s
Tree Crabs never troubled the birds at all,
and they all lived happily together like one
big family. Among the feathered tribes on
Kiwi, were forty immense Albatrosses, the
largest of tropical sea birds. Each one must
have measured sixteen feet across the wings,
and they came each day to be fed by their
friend the Hermit.
For years, Herbert Ponter, which was the
Hermit’s name, had been able to hear the wail
of the poor lost souls on Shipwreck Island,
when the wind blew towards Kiwi. The sound
travelled quite plainly across the water, and
he would feel sad for days. He often wondered
how he could ever save them. One day an
idea came to the Hermit. If it took him the
rest of his life, he would find some way of
rescuing the unhappy seamen off that island.
He called his Albatrosses together, telling them
he wished to try a new game with them. Then
he cut a large piece of fishing net, and fastened
one end like a harness round one of the birds,
leaving the wings free. Taking a second bird,


he fastened the other end of the net in exactly
the same manner, but the Hermit left enough
of the netting between the two birds to make
a kind of hammock seat, almost like a swing.
He then tested the strength of the two birds
together by laying heavy pieces of rock in the
hammock. At first the Albatrosses could only
carry a few pounds, but little by little the
Hermit increased the weight of the rocks, and
in a short time he was able to seat himself
in the improvised hammock seat. He then
trained all the other Albatrosses in the same
way, until the forty birds were able in pairs
to carry him around the island. The birds
thought it was great fun, and each day they
could not get into their net harnesses quickly
enough. Herbert, the Hermit, was very care-
ful not to hurt them, because his birds were
his best friends. He improved the harnesses
until they were strong, but comfortable. He
would talk to his feathery friends, and just
like dogs who understand anything their master
said, the Albatrosses grasped every word that
was said to them.
One night Herbert told his two leaders that
he wished them to carry him to Shipwreck
Island, a few miles across the water. “You
must be very careful,” he said. “If we fall
into the sea the Sharks will make a meal of


us. Do you think you are strong enough to
try it?” The Birds cawcawed in their pleasure,
it was all a great game to them. The Hermit
waited for darkness to set in, then he harnessed
the two Albatrosses with the fish net, and
after seeing that everything was quite snug
and safe, he sat himself in the hammock seat,
which hung between the two birds, and away
they flew. The Hermit thought how comfy it
was, and he patted the birds as they went in
a direct line towards Shipwreck Island. All
went well, and the Hermit was elated. How-
ever, he did not wish to spoil his chances of
landing, so he told the birds to hover above
a little while, while he scanned the land below.
He could see a number of poor unfortunate
men lying stretched on the rocks, trying to
sleep. He picked a spot on which to land,
then he ordered the Albatrosses to descend
to earth. As soon as he put his foot to the
ground he quickly woke one of the men at
his feet, and whispered something in his ear.
A few seconds later he had hopped into his
bird aeroplane, and was well on his way back
to Kiwi Island.
The following night, all the forty Albatrosses
were called together. Herbert the Hermit took
two at a time, and harnessed them up until
all were ready to make the trip. He thought


how splendid they looked waiting for his instruc-
tions. He told the two leaders to go at the
head to show the way, then he ordered the
others to follow up in close formation. “For
goodness’ sake, don’t speak,” he admonished
them. “Not a sound, do you hear?” They
cawcawed, promising to be very quiet. “You
will descend to the earth together, and as soon
as one of the men on Shipwreck Island sits in
the hammock, leave the island for dear life,”
he instructed them.
He watched his fleet of bird ships set off
on their great adventure with pride in his
eyes. “Man never had better friends,” he
thought, as he saw them vanish into the night.
Anxiously he waited for them to return, hoping
nothing would happen to upset his plans.
Soon he was rewarded for his patience. Coming
towards the island, he could make out the
Albatrosses flying in perfect formation towards
him. They circled around Kiwi, so as to allow
each pair to make a safe landing. The Hermit
was too pleased almost to speak, when he saw
the delighted, happy faces of the unfortunate
creatures from Shipwreck Island. As soon as
the men left the hammock seats, he asked the
birds if they could return for more people, but
if too tired they were to wait until the next day.
No sooner had he spoken, than the Albatrosses


formed up again, and flew off for the second
batch of passengers. While they were gone,
the Hermit welcomed the visitors to his island.
He asked them if everything had gone with-
out a hitch. “Yes, sir,” answered the man
to whom he had spoken the night before.
“ Last night, after you whispered in my ear
that you were sending the birds for us, I gave
the message to all my fellow prisoners on
Shipwreck Island. The words went round like
wildfire, but almost silently. Seamen are very
cautious. We arranged between us that we
were to go in squads of twenty men. When
the birds arrived to-night, those of us that
you see here slipped into the hammock seats
and were wafted away from that island of terror
to this happy place in a few short minutes, so
it seemed to us.”
The Hermit, who had arranged a great
spread of Bread Fruit, Mangoes, Bananas, Taro,
Fei, all of which grew on Kiwi, told the men
to sit around, and help themselves. When the
poor creatures saw the food before them they
almost wept. They had not seen such a banquet
for years. The Hermit could not watch them
eat. It made his heart ache to see the half-
starved men clawing at the simple food he
gave them. They had not long to wait before
the Albatrosses returned with the next twenty


men. No sooner had the birds got rid of their
passengers, than without waiting for further
orders, they flew off once more to bring back
another lot of poor unfortunates from Ship-
wreck Island. This same procedure continued
the whole night through, and by dawn the
last twenty men had been rescued from the
Witch’s clutches. It was a very tired, worn-
out fleet of bird-ships that brought the last
passengers to Kiwi. The Hermit almost wept
with gratitude as he unharnessed his beloved
birds before they took a much-earned rest.
“You have been the most loyal and faithful
of friends,” he told them. “I will never forget
it.” They were almost too tired to cawcaw,
and their poor wings drooped as though they
would never lift them again, but, worn out
as they were, the Albatrosses looked very
happy.
The next day the Hermit called all the men
together, and asked them what they thought
the Witch would do to revenge herself. “It
is impossible to say,” said one man. “She will
think of some diabolical trick, unless something
were to befall to her.” “That, my friend, is
just what I wish to talk about,” said the Hermit.
“Has the Witch any enemies, or do you know
of any way by which we could break this dread-
ful spell of hers.” “For years now, we have


all been trying to find out some manner in
which she could be overthrown, but the only
thing we ever knew her to fear was a Robber-
Tree Crab,” answered a man, who had once
been the Captain of a ship. “A Tree Crab,”
cried the astonished Hermit. “What do you
mean by that?” “Well, sir, once just as she
was about to do something horrible to one of
the men, a Robber Crab ran past her, and she
threw up her hands in horror crying: ‘Get
away from me, I fear you,’ explained the
Captain. After that, we tried to find a Tree
Crab all over the island, but never could. She
had no swamps or mangroves on Shipwreck
Island, so they could not live, I don’t know
how the one she saw ever came to be there.”
The Hermit, who had been listening inter-
estedly to what the Captain had to say, jumped
up saying, “Why I have dozens of Tree Crabs
in my mangrove swamps. The little rascals,
they steal the coconuts, but as I have plenty
and I live alone, I do not punish them. Suppose
you come and look at them to see if they are
like the one the Witch saw.”
In great excitement, the men followed the
Hermit to where the immense mangrove trees
were. With their gnarled roots growing out
of the sea swamps, they looked for all the
world like dozens of snakes intertwined, adding


[Face page 258




a weird appearance to the shrubs and foliage,
growing at their base. Dozens of gigantic Tree
Crabs were half way up the trunks of the trees,
then some were lying on the gnarled roots,
sipping the milk out of the coconut, and using
their large claws, just like a monkey. The
Hermit called to them, and they scurried about
the swamps, crawling to his feet, but never
clawing at him. Then they went off again
about their business. “ Was it a Crab like
these that frightened the Witch,” asked the
Hermit. “Exactly, only not so large,” replied
the Captain. “W T ell, these are Giant Tree
Crabs, they are so well looked after, so are
naturally larger than the ordinary ones,”
explained the Hermit. “Well, that settles it,
I have an idea that we will be able to surprise
the Witch before she can do us any harm.”
That same night, after dark, the Hermit
harnessed a number of his Albatrosses, but
he laid large palm leaves over the hammock
seats. When he had made all his preparations,
he took a basket filled with scraps of fish, bread
fruit, mangoes; he called the birds to follow
him, and went to the mangrove swamps. When
the Tree Crabs saw him arrive with the basket,
they swarmed around him. After they had
been well fed, the Hermit stooped down, and
without any fear picked them up two at a time,


and placed them on the hammock seats covered
with palm leaves.
When all the birds had their share of Crab
passengers, the Hermit told the Albatrosses
they were to follow him to Shipwreck Island.
He seated himself in one of his bird ships,
as he called his flying fleet, and, taking the
lead, he set out once more to defy the Evil
One Blageuese, across the water.
On arriving at his destination, he flew his
fleet around the Island. As his eyes became
accustomed to the dim light, he could make
out the horrible Witch standing on one of the
rocks, rocking back and forth in her dreadful
wrath at being thwarted. He could hear her
plainly vowing vengeance on those who had
robbed her of her captives. The Hermit thought
it time to descend on the island. He swooped
down with his fleet of birds. Quickly, he took
the Crabs out of the hammock seats, and spread
them on the ground. Then he himself returned
to his bird ship, and he ordered all the birds
to go aloft again, and hover over the island.
The old Witch, who was some distance away,
could not see exactly what was taking place.
She rushed in haste towards the Hermit just
as the birds were leaving the ground. Her
fury knew no bounds, but when she saw the
Crabs all coming towards her, she screamed,


and tried to rush away, but the Hermit had
placed them well. They entirely surrounded
her. On, on, they came, clawing the ground
in their haste to get at her. The Witch yelled
and moaned. “I am undone! I am undone!
King Neptune vowed that Tree Crabs would
break my spell! I hate him! a curse on the
King of the Waves!” As she screamed, the
Crabs squirmed at her feet, clawing at her
ragged clothes. The Hermit from above turned
his eyes away, he could not look at the wicked
wretch being scratched and clawed to death.
Some time later, when he looked again, he
could see only a bunch of rags lying on the
ground, but of the once evil Witch there was
not a sign to be seen.
The Crabs had done their work well. Then
a strange thing happened. When Herbert the
Hermit prepared to descend on Shipwreck
Island, it was not to be seen. It had mysteri-
ously disappeared into the sea. He wondered
what had become of his Crabs, who had brought
the downfall of the wicked Witch Blageuese.
He felt sad at losing them. He ordered his
fleet of birds to return to Kiwi Island, and
on his arrival there, to his surprise and pleasure
he found that all the Crabs had mysteriously
returned and were scurrying for dear life to
get back to their beloved mangrove swamps.


There is little more to tell, except that the
Hermit sent his pet Seagull, which he had
trained to carry messages, with a letter in its
beak to one of the islands, saying that the
rescued men from Shipwreck Island were on
Kiwi waiting to return to civilization.
Some weeks later, a full rigged ship put in
to Kiwi Island, and took off the men who had
been so long captive of the Evil One Blageuese.
After the grateful men had all left, the Hermit
returned to his happy and solitary life among
his pets he loved so well.


XXI
THE FISHERWOMAN’S MAGIC CURE
One of the loveliest islands in the Polynesian
group was Widgee. Though quite small, it
was very captivating. Its peaks with the purple
clouds rolling by, and sometimes obliterating
them, were weird and fantastic. Then, after
a tropical downpour, the rainbow with its
prismatic colours made an almost an unbeliev-
ably beautiful picture. In this heaven-sent
spot, King Ffloyd and his Queen Dorothy
came to settle. After they had lived some time
on the Island of Widgee, a little baby girl was
born to the Queen. She was so small when
she arrived that she fitted into a fancy sewing
basket. Unfortunately, the mite was so
sickly and puny that her life was despaired
of.
The castle of King Ffloyd was built high on
a hill, and across the tops of the Palm and
Casuarina Trees, the view of the surf pounding
up on to the rocks and reefs below was indeed
an eye-filling feast.


Every day the Queen would watch the natives
passing to and fro in the gully, which ran below
the garden. She noticed, in particular, a small
boy of three or four who looked the picture
of health, and he seemed as sturdy as a little
tree. As he wended his way alongside his
mother, who led a small donkey with a cart,
the poor Queen wondered why God had been
so good to that fisherwoman, giving her a fine,
healthy young boy, while her baby girl lay
always sickly in a cot. She was a Queen with
wealth, yet she envied the fisherwoman who
lived in a thatched hut down there on the
beach.
When the Princess was four years old the
Queen decided that something must be done
to cure her child of the mysterious illness from
which she suffered. She sat so still all day,
never wailing, or complaining, but she could
scarcely toddle about, and took no interest in
anything.
Finally, the King offered much gold and
wealth to any doctor who would cure his
daughter. From Australia, India, New Zealand
came doctors and healers. Some recommended
that she be put in a room with no draughts,
others gave her herbs, but all to no purpose.
The Princess Mipsie became just a little in-
valid. After the child had passed her fifth


Fisherwoman’s Magic Cure 265
birthday, the Queen said to her Heralds, “ Go,
take one of the royal canoes, visit all the sur-
rounding islands, and announce these tidings.
To whoever cures my little daughter, the
Princess Mipsie, I will give bangles of gold,
cloth of rare texture, and priceless beads.”
The Heralds sped forth, and from that day
on, many queer native Witch-doctors arrived
at the castle. They brought with them herbs,
and strange teas for the Princess to take, but
most of it was thrown down the royal sink.
The Queen could see that many of these Healers
were fakers.
Each day, Queen Dorothy would carry
her little daughter Mipsie to the verandah
to see the fisher boy, who was now a fine
lad, passing with the donkey. He always
looked up at the Princess on the hill, and
waved his hand. Sometimes, he would leave
a bunch of Oleanders or Jasmine at the
gates below, and Mipsie always sent down
for them.
One day, the fisher boy, whose name was
Valia, came home to his hut by the beach and
told his mother he had heard that the Queen
was very sorrowful because many people had
come to the castle to cure the Princess, but
as yet no one had helped her at all. “Tina,
(Mother), why don’t you try and give her


266 Fisherwoman’s Magic Cure
health. See what a Malolo (strong) boy I am.
Never sick, and always so Fiafia (happy).”
Suddenly a thought came to the fisherwoman.
“You are right, Valia, I have an idea. I
will try and speak to the Queen to-day,”
said the native woman with her cheery
smile.
She set off to the castle on the hill, and when
she arrived at the gates, the native sentry, who
knew the fisherwoman, told her that the Queen
would never see her. Queen Dorothy happened
to be on the verandah, and saw the fisherwoman
below. She could see that something strange
was taking place, because in all the past years
never once had the native woman ever done
more than look up at the castle windows. She
sent a messenger down to the gates to enquire
what the fisherwoman desired, and the mother
of Valia answered respectfully, “I would speak
with Her Majesty. I wish to help the Princess
Mipsie.” The messenger took the answer back
to the Queen, and she at once asked that the
fisherwoman be brought before her. “You are
the mother of the fine, healthy lad, is that not
so?” said the Queen kindly. “Yes, your
Majesty,” answered the native woman. “ I
think I could help your little daughter.” “Oh!
if you only could,” sighed the Queen. “But
I have tried all the finest doctors and healers,


Fisherwoman’s Magic Cure 267
and still the little Princess lies there silently,
and with no joy of life.”
The fisherwoman then made a queer request.
“Your Majesty, I will undertake to cure your
little girl on one condition. She must come
with me for one masina (month), and during
that time she dare not see anyone from the
castle.” “You must be mad,” said the Queen
angrily. “My daughter, used to every luxury,
living in a fisherwoman’s hut.” “Then I can
do nothing for your little girl, your Majesty,”
spoke the fisherwoman bravely. The child, who
had been listening to all that was said, called
to her mother, and in a weak voice, begged:
“Oh, Mother dear, please let me go with the
fisherwoman. I have done everything you asked
me to do; taken medicines, teas, hot baths,
until I hate it all so. Each day I see the fisher
boy, and my heart goes out there with him.
Please, darling Mother, let her try to make
me well.” The Queen was so astonished that
she could not believe her ears. She sent for
the King, who loved his daughter very dearly,
so that he might be told of the fisherwoman’s
offer. When the King heard what the Queen
had to say, he turned to Mipsie, and for the
first time he saw a spark of light in her sweet
eyes. “Oh, Daddy, Daddy,” she said, “let
me go, I am sure the fisherwoman will help


268 Fisherwoman’s Magic Cure
me.” “Sire,” said the native woman, “I will
watch over her with my life. In one month
you may come and see your daughter. I promise
that she will be much improved.” The King
looked at his wife the Queen, and, turning to
his child, told her that she could be made
ready to go with the fisherwoman. “ I will
send for the conveyance for you and the
Princess,” he added. “Oh no, your Majesty,
I will come for her in the little cart with the
Asini (donkey).” “Oh!” screamed the Queen,
“my daughter in a fisherwoman’s cart.” “Oh,
Mother, please do what she says,” pleaded
Mipsie. “How wonderful to go in a cart with
a donkey.” Finally the Queen gave in to her
daughter’s plea. After all, the child would not
be far away, and the woman was very trust-
worthy. If, by any chance, she did cure her
Mipsie, she would be the happiest woman in
the South Seas.
So it happened that the following day the
Princess Mipsie was driven away wrapped in
the royal coverings, but lying happily in a native
fisherwoman’s cart, drawn by a donkey, and led
by a proud little native lad.
One month later the King and Queen came
with great pomp to the fisherwoman’s hut to
visit their royal daughter. You can imagine
their amazement, when they asked at the little


Fisherwoman’s Magic Cure 269
home where the Princess was resting, and the
native woman answered with a smile, “Your
Majesties, the Princess Mipsie is playing on
the beach with Valia. They are seeking
shells.” “What!” cried the King; “she can
walk about, and gather sea shells.” “See
for yourselves,” answered the native, and
they looked on the beach, and there they
saw their daughter playing on the white
sands with the native boy Valia. She was
as brown as a berry, and the Princess’s only
garment was a tiny Lava Lava (loin cloth),
otherwise she was as naked as the day she was
born. “Is that my daughter,” asked the aston-
ished Queen. The fisherwoman called to the
Princess, and the child, when she saw her
darling mother and father ran with glee and
clasped her mother around the knees. “Oh,
Mother,” she gasped happily, “isn’t it wonder-
ful; I do love everything! the shells, and the
birds, then the fish, they are all my friends,”
and she laughed with sheer joy of being alive.
The King and Queen both had tears in their
eyes, as they turned to the fisherwoman. “ What
can we do to repay you,” they cried. “Your
Majesties, I beg you to leave her another masina
(month) for her own good. It has been an
uphill fight, and only in the last ten days has
she really shown great improvement,” begged


27 0 Fisherwoman’s Magic Cure
the native woman earnestly. The Princess
added her plea also, and the royal pair decided
their daughter should remain a little longer at
the fisherwoman’s hut.
When the King and Queen came again to
take their little girl home, the native woman
greeted them at the door of the hut, and begged
them to come a few steps down the beach
where the lagoon was overhung by coconut
palms. They followed her to the beach, and
what they saw left them almost breathless.
Standing on a tree trunk that stood high out
of the water was the Princess. She was listening
earnestly to what Valia was telling her, then
they saw her dive into the lagoon. It was not
a wonderful dive, because it takes time to be
a good diver, but for a beginner it was splendid.
And she came up elated at her success. “ There
is your daughter, Sire,” said the fisherwoman.
“ She is the picture of health, and will be a
fine swimmer in no time with Valia’s instruc-
tions,” said the fisherwoman, proudly and fondly.
“How did you bring about this wonderful
change,” asked the King. “What medicine did
you give her, and what is your magic cure.”
“Nature is the magic cure, your Majesty. It
is Valia who put the idea into my head; he
told me of the Witch-doctors who had visited
the Princess Mipsie, and of the Fakirs, then


Fisherwoman’s Magic Cure 271
he added that I ought to be able to help her.
Had I not made him into the healthiest boy
in the South Seas? I realised that the poor
Princess was fighting nature’s laws. Children
should have fresh air, healthy exercise, they
should all run in the sun with little clothing
on whenever possible. The little Princess lay
coddled from one month to another, until she
became weaker and weaker for lack of muscular
movement, so I brought her down here, and
the first few days she lay in the sun for just
several minutes at a time. The sun’s rays
are strong, and she was as yet not used to
it. Then I held her in my arms in the sea
water each day, later Valia carried her in.
He is strong, and, day by day, she, too, gained
strength. He showed her how to run a little,
holding her hand, and how to do some move-
ments he had seen the sailors doing on the
schooners, when they wished to become
stronger. You see, your Majesty, how simple
it was. Nature is the greatest magic cure of
all.” The King and Queen almost cried for
gratitude. “What can we do for you in return,”
they asked. “Allow your daughter to come
each day and swim with Valia. It will make
him happy, and keep the Princess well,” begged
the fisherwoman. “I wish for nothing else,”
she added.


And that is the story of how Princess Mipsie
became healthy and happy, and any little
boy or girl who wishes to be strong, must
do their exercises daily, and learn to swim
and dive.


XXII
HOW NEPTUNE RULES THE SEA
(a fairy tale)
Exactly in the middle of the South Pacific
Ocean the water is about three thousand feet
deep. Imagine diving down under the sea
over three miles. Of course no mortals have
ever dived to any such depth as that. Eighty
fathoms is about the limit that a man can
reach. In the greater depths, and in tremen-
dous caverns, running for miles under the
sea bed, lived King Neptune, and his subjects.
If a diver had been able to descend into those
realms, he would have found at one point
a rock of great height with a huge opening,
descending into the floor of the ocean. There
were wondrous steps, of rare luminous minerals,
gleaming like jew r els, which led deeper still,
until they reached a portal at least a hundred
feet high. At this gate stood two gigantic
Mermen, dressed in gleaming fish scale armour,
and high helmets, fashioned from rare and
large sea shells, shaped like Giant Nautilus,


274 How Neptune Rules the Seas
with long quills of red, taken from the “ Fire
Fish.” In one hand, they held a long staff,
reaching nearly twenty feet high, and the
point was spearlike, and opalescent, as it gleamed
in the unearthly green light, that came from
nowhere.
There was something eerie about the bright-
ness of the caverns, because, of course, there
was no sun, but stranger still was the water
beneath the sea bed, it was crystal clear, and
a sapphire blue. Now all this light and mirror-
like water was extraordinary, because at that
great depth, the sea is so black no mortal
would be able to see half an inch in front of
his face. Inside the great portals, a cave,
which resembled nothing more than a high
Cathedral, ran for over a hundred feet like a
hall; it led to another door made from Star
Fish, and guarded by two more Mermen.
And here was where Neptune ruled the waves.
There were hundreds and hundreds of cave-
like rooms, separated from one another by
gardens of deep sea-flora, which seemed to
be able to thrive under the sea. Neptune’s
own palatial cave was of quite different for-
mation from the rest. The interior of the
dome was studded with rare jewels. Emeralds
of huge dimensions threw weirdly green rays,
and the magnificent sapphires gave forth a


How Neptune Rules the Seas 275
bluish shaft, which intermingled with the
brighter light of the strange “ Luminous Lamps ”
which were placed in the crevices of the
gigantic cave. Mirrors of the finest mother-
of-pearl, were framed by diamonds, as large
as egg shells, while the strangely fashioned
couches and stools were clustered with
turquoises.
Neptune’s kingdom was wealthier than any
monarch’s above the sea. He ruled his fish,
and the Mer-people with a kind, but firm,
hand. He waged wars upon lesser sea monarchs,
whose only idea was to destroy the mortals
above. Neptune’s army of fish was sent to
the five oceans. The Arctic, and Antarctic
Ocean were guarded by Seals, Sealions, Walrus,
and many other Amphibians. To the warmer
Oceans, Porpoise, Sword Fish, Saw Fish,
Tunny, and Dolphins, were among the largest
of his sea army. The horrible White Shark,
Blue Shark, and Tiger Shark were the “wild”
fish of the seas, just as lions and tigers are the
wild animals of the realms above. When
Neptune was angry with his subjects, he would
storm and rage, and it affected the seas all
round, and very often that is what caused
a hurricane. Sometimes, he was at war with
the lesser sea monarchs, who had always
been jealous of him, and had tried time


276 How Neptune Rules the Seas
after time to dethrone the greatest of
Sea Kings.
Then again, Neptune was a very just im-
mortal. Many a mortal’s ship was sent to
its doom because the men aboard were law-
less, and godless creatures. He would cause
a Typhoon to wipe out the “Sea Vermin”
as he called them. On one occasion, one of
his most beautiful daughters had been trapped
in a fishing net with her tiny sister, and though
the eldest daughter escaped, the baby was
carried up in the net with the seaweed, and
she died from want of airwater. Neptune
had never forgotten that, and when, some-
times, he saw her baby face in his mind, lying
on the beach, gasping for the sea, it turned
him into a madman for a little while, and
he caused terrific storms upon the mortals
above.
Neptune had many daughters, and several
wives. He was a good father, and quite a
decent husband. Strange as it may seem
though, you might have thought that, having
such a large family, he would have been rather
casual to so many girls, but that was not so;
he loved them dearly, made rare gifts to each,
married them off to fine mermen, so that they
never had any desire to explore the three
miles of sea overhead. They were quite happy,


How Neptune Rules the Seas 277
and satisfied to stay in the deep. That explains
the reason why mortals so rarely see a mer-
maid. Now among his daughters was one
whose name was Anita. Neptune loved her
more than all the others, and though he never
showed any favouritism, Anita knew that her
father had a soft spot for her. Naturally, she
was grateful at being chosen as favourite, so
she idolised her sea king Daddy. Then, too,
she was different from the others. She had
an adventurous disposition, and had rendered
Neptune many services, while scouting around
in the depths of the seas. It was she who had
warned him when the wicked Wague was
about to launch another attack.
Anita had wandered into the Witch of the
Crystal’s Cave, and she overheard King Wague
asking the old hag if it were yet time to wage
war on the greatest of all sea kings, Neptune.
“ At the next high tide, when the sea has
reached its greatest depth, perhaps you will
find the king in a lax moment,” answered
the Sea Witch, looking into her large urn,
which spewed forth flames of green. Anita
swam back to her father’s palace with all haste,
rushed to his private cave, and asked for an
interview. On being admitted, she swam to
his feet, and said: “Oh Beloved Father, the
wicked King Wague is to make another attack


278 How Neptune Rules the Seas
on your realm at the next tide, when the water
is at its highest.” “Ho!” cried Neptune,
“that son of a Shark? I would that the deep
could be rid of him. He has wrought des-
truction from one end of the seas to the other.”
The King then thanked his favourite daughter,
Anita, and she was happy and content, as she
swam away.
When the high waters came around, Neptune
had made his plans to meet the wicked King
Wague in an under-sea battle. He hated war,
above all things, and only on great provoca-
tion did he call his army out. The great sea
king, who had from a distance watched many
sea battles, fought above, between mortals, had
thought how useless they had been. It was
hard for him to understand why humans should
fight on the seas, when they were so helpless.
With one wave of his Trident Wand, he,
Neptune, could rid the seas of them all, and
he had rendered many of these puny warrior
ships helpless, in order to show all mortals
that though they might make war on
each other, they could never conquer the
elements.
It had been a whim of Neptune’s to have
a fleet of “ Fish Ships.” His under-sea magicians
had, with great skill, contrived ships made
from some of the largest fish of the deep, and


How Neptune Rules the Seas 279
through their magic, only the shell of the fish
remained. And it was possible for the Mer-
men to sit inside, and see through the eyes
of the queer fish-ship. From the Electric Ray,
and Electric Eel, (fish which generate elec-
tricity), the magicians had been able to invent
a strange kind of power, so that the Mermen
steering the fish could make great speed, and
attack an enemy fearlessly. From the scales
of many luminous fish, which are only found
at very great depths, the magicians made lights
which were so intense that even in the darkest
waters they threw a ray many feet ahead, when
they shone through the eyes. Then from the
mouth of these fish-ships, a greenish fluid
belched forth, which would for the time being
blind the enemy, compelling them to retreat.
Neptune intended trying the Submarine War
Fish on the unsuspecting King Wague. He
called his Pacific Ocean forces together, among
which were his “luminous” fish squadron, and
it was a most thrilling sight to see fish of im-
mense size swimming in large schools, like
a perfect army. In the great depths, the sea
is so black that, without the luminous squad-
ron, the “battle seas” would be impenetrable,
so Neptune named them his “ Searchlight
Convoy.” Now Neptune had a “Soldier Fish”
which as a rule is only found in the shallow


280 How Neptune Rules the Seas
waters, but the great Sea King had a brigade
of them, each fish being the size of a shark.
The soldier fish are really the funniest sight
in the seas. They swim as though drilled like
an army. When the leader turns, they all
follow in perfect unison.
Neptune’s fish scouts swam back to the
King of the Seas in all haste, to give the
information that King Wague was on his
way, and that he had been able, through
the Witch’s power, to gather the largest
forces any lesser sea king had ever been
able to assemble.
The battle was on! Neptune’s great army
went out to meet King Wague’s oncoming
rush of Sharks, Octopi, Squids, Swordfish,
and the most despised of all deep-sea fish,
the Eagle Ray, nicknamed the Sea Bat, because
it looked like a tremendous bat under the
water. Neptune’s fish were more schooled
than Wague’s; then too, he had his large army
of Mermen, who swam like fish, and who
had been drilled by the great Sea Monarch
himself. As the enemies clashed, the ocean
swelled with the impact of the coming together
of the under-sea forces. The Swordfish and
Sharks battled it out, the Octopi concentrated
on the Mermen, who fought bravely to keep
out of the toils of the snake-like arms, and


How Neptune Rules the Seas 281
parrot jaws that crunched all it grasped. It
was difficult to know who was really getting
the better of it, because each side fought so
ferociously, but when Neptune, from his “Eye
of the Sea,” saw that his Mermen were getting
badly dealt with, he gave orders to spring the
surprise. He commanded the fish-ships out
in full force. I should tell you that the Eye
of the Sea” was a crystal glass, whereby
Neptune could observe all that transpired
in the five oceans.
The fish-ships, manned by Mermen, shot
out of the caverns, at lightning speed. When
the army of Wague the Wicked saw these
curious new fish coming towards them, they
retreated, but still kept on fighting, as they
lost ground. The fish-ships forged ahead, and
as they came closer, Neptune’s army opened
up as they had been commanded to do, so as
not to be in the line of the green blinding
fluid, when the Mermen pressed the shell in-
side the fish. The Wague army was demoralized,
but before they could turn and swim away,
the fish-ship belched forth the green fluid, and
they fell to the sea-bed in schools. That about
finished the battle between the wicked King
Wague, and the great Sea King Neptune.
Neptune’s army returned to their Monarch,
scarred and war battered, but victorious that


282 How Neptune Rules the Seas
their just King had again won his right to be
the ruler of the seas.
After life had become once more normal in
Neptune’s domain, he sent for his daughter
Anita, and thanked her for her forethought,
in warning him. “It has taught me something,
daughter,” he said. “I must keep my eye
more on the ‘ Eye of the Sea ’ crystal. I some-
times get a little careless. I have reigned so
many thousand of years that at times I grow
a little weary of watching all that transpires
in the five oceans. I no sooner finish with
one battle down here in the depths, when I
hear that these puny monarchs above the seas
are about to start another war, and then our
domain becomes one mass of scrap iron; it
is becoming difficult to know what to do with
all these steel wrecks. Anita, the longer I live,
the more I realise that war is useless. Perhaps
in another ten thousand years I will see the
last of these battles above and below the sea.”
“Yes, Father,” answered the lovely Anita.
“ But as that is quite a long time off, supposing
you have a little snooze, you must be very
weary.”
Heaving a sigh, Neptune allowed his favourite
daughter to take his Trident, Crown, and
Conch Shell, from him, and the dear old
man, who had ruled the seas for so many


How Neptune Rules the Seas 283
thousands of years, lay down on one of the
curious couches, and closed the tired eyes
that had watched the five oceans so justly,
and wisely, for more centuries than you or
I could count.


XXIII
THE GREENSTONE HATCHET
(a fairy tale)
There are probably no more beautiful islands
in the whole world than New Zealand, which
belong to the British Empire. They consist
of the North and South Islands and together
they are larger than Great Britain. In New
Zealand, there are Fjords, and Sounds, not
to be equalled in any part of the World; Canyons,
and Mountains, many of which are snow-
capped; Lakes of azure blue, or emerald green,
teaming wdth fish; Waterfalls by the hundreds,
falling in cascades over the mountain sides,
and Caves deep in the earth, one of which
has a mysterious river running through it.
Then, to cap everything, the most beautiful
glacier in the world, Franz Joseph, glistens in
the sunlight, as it lies snugly surrounded by
evergreen forests. Imagine all this on a South
Sea Island.
Now, I am going to tell you how this wonder-
land was discovered, and why the natives of


New Zealand, who are called Maories, have
always believed in Fairies and Legends.
About seven hundred years before any white
man set foot on these islands, a fleet of war
canoes, headed by a Chieftain, called Turi,
landed on the North Island. The canoes were
manned by great Warriors, and these “dug-
outs” were said to carry fifty or more natives.
No one has ever been able to say exactly where
the Maories migrated from. They themselves
tell of a mythical land called Haiwaiki, which
is supposed to be somewhere among the Poly-
nesian Groups, near the Society Islands.
Strangely enough —but no island of this name
has ever been located. The Maories must have
been great navigators, because they tell of
being many days at sea, of facing storms,
hunger and sickness, then, too, they had no
compass, like we have to-day, to show the
way, and yet they lost very few canoes crossing
the seas.
The warriors were the finest type of natives.
Their faces were tattooed completely, but these
markings were not revolting. Some of the
women were very pretty, but funnily enough,
they, too, had tattooed scrolls, but only from
the mouth to the chin. After the Maories
landed in New Zealand, the tribes separated,
and chose different routes. Some wandered


north, some south. Now one of the Chieftains,
whom we will call Te Po Tao, encountered
a river on the west coast of the North Island,
and he told his tribe that they would follow
the stream to its end, and there build their
Pah (village). Te Po Tao was anxious to explore
the interior of the island, so he led his canoes
leisurely down the river, which is now called
the Waikato River. The tribe camped each
night on the mossy banks, under feathery ferns,
or often in sight of snowy mountain peaks.
It was many days later before Te Po Tao an-
nounced to his natives that they had come
to their destination. He knew that they had
at last arrived at the end of the river, for it
was churning and swirling, showing that Rapids
and Falls were ahead. On investigating, the
Maories gasped with surprise. The river they
had navigated for more than a hundred miles,
ended its almost peaceful life by thundering
roars of churning waters, as it soared like white
clouds over tremendous falls, only to die away
in a lake of azure blue, guarded by three snow-
tipped volcanoes, standing majestically some
miles distant. Te Po Tao decided to settle
at this spot. However, like all tried warriors,
he sent his native scouts far and wide to report
on what might lie in the surrounding lands.
The natives had gone in twos to scour the


country, so what was the surprise of the
Chieftain when, some days later, a Tao (tried
warrior) came back alone. “ What has hap-
pened Horo?” asked the Chief. “Oh, Chief,”
answered the Scout, “twenty miles from here
lives a Witch Dragon. Never have I seen
such witchcraft. On her domain are things
that must be seen to be believed. Clouds of
steam rise high into the air from the earth;
eerie noises come from the ground, boiling
geysers shoot from large crevices in the rocks,
many hundreds of feet in the air, as though
they would meet the skies. In some spots,
the weird waters look black and forbidding,
but in others the boiling spray juts forth from
among the pale green moss and ferns. The
earth rocks beneath the feet, and enough water
to fill many lakes escapes into the bowels of
the earth, never to be seen again.”
“ What is this you say? Are you mad
Horo!” asked the astounded Chieftain. “Nay,
nay, oh Chief, I have more to tell. After watch-
ing in horror, Hamo and I ventured towards
a Cauldron, of gigantic size. There we saw
veils of misty steam rising to great heights,
and swaying and writhing in the centre of
the cauldron were many small Witches. We
hurried on, wishing to escape from the dreadful
sight, when Hamo pointed to a rock cavity


out of which boiling vapour rose hundreds
of feet, and standing on a ledge in the midst
of the seething steam was a horrifying Witch
Dragon. The upper part of the body was
like an old Hag, the lower was a Dragon’s tail.
A dreadful cackle was heard, and then a voice,
which made my blood run cold, cried: ‘For
many centuries the Witches and Goblins have
held this land for their own. We’ll have no
mortals in our Paradise. I will take one of
you to feed the baby Witches, and the other
shall return to the mortal Chief with greetings
from the Dragon Witch. He and his tribe
must leave these shores, and return from
whence he came, else in my wrath I will wipe
out all his people.’ With these words, an
immense Dragon Claw stretched across the
mist and spray, and lifted Hamo into the air,
as though he were an ant, then threw him
into the boiling cauldron, where the little
Witches swayed, and I saw them, to my horror,
clutch at their prey, and drag him down into
the limpid pool of steaming water. I rushed
madly away from the sinister and terrifying
domain, to bring the dreaded tidings to you,
oh Chief.” This was the tale that the warrior
told of the Dragon Witches’ Home, which has
since been called Wairakei by the natives of
New Zealand.


Chief Te Po Tao called a number of his
best warriors to a War Council, but after
talking things over it was decided to move
some fifty miles away from the Lake (Taupo),
where they had commenced building their
Pah (village). “At a distance we can find out
how strong the enemy is, perhaps Horo has
overstretched the facts. However, it would
not be wise to remain under the very nose
of the Dragon Witch,” the Chief told his
people. The warriors were fearless when it
came to fighting mortals, but they knew that
to make war on immortals it was necessary
to seek the protection of a good spirit. Chief
Te Po Tao had made up his mind not to do
anything hasty, but to bide his time. The
following day the Maoris pushed off in their
“dug outs,” returning about twenty miles on
the Waikato River, then Chief Te Po Tao
commanded his people to leave the stream,
and they would continue eastward on foot;
the canoes, he said, would be transported.
Some days later, they arrived at a peaceful
little lake, at the foot of a high Volcano. The
water was crystal clear; baby ferns, and moss
of the palest shades of green, swayed on the
banks, and at the end of the lake the Maoris
saw something they would never forget. Rising
up on the slopes of this valley of enchantment


were wondrous Pink and White terraces. They
shimmered in the sunlight, as though studded
with crystals, and dancing as though their
very lives depended on it w r ere hundreds of
tiny Elves, no bigger than large dolls. Their
wings resembled Dragon Flies, and as they
hopped from one spot to another fountains of
misty spray shot into the air, dropping silvery
dewdrops on the fairylike terraces. When the
Chief saw this wondrous vision he decided
to venture closer. He ordered that one of the
“dug outs” be put in the lake, saying he would
go himself to seek speech with the Elves. “If
they are good spirits,” he said, “they would
perhaps help us in our War against the Dragon
Witch.” Now a strange thing happened. No
sooner did the canoe float on the water than
it disappeared out of sight, as though it had
never been. “What then is this?” cried the
Maoris. The Maori Chief was a brave war-
rior, so remained undaunted by this happening.
He announced that he would walk to the Pink
terrace, and converse with the Elves, if pos-
sible. He spied a small track, overhung with
creeping vines, and weeping willows. “ I will
go alone, my people, to show these fairies
we mean no harm. Remain here, until I return,”
announced the Chief. As he disappeared,
the tribe watched anxiously across the


water, to where the Elves danced on the
Pink terraces.
Chief Te Po Tao walked hurriedly towards
the patch of colour, but he was surprised to
find that he came no nearer to his goal. He
appeared to be walking in the same spot. After
one hour he realised that something eerie was
being enacted. He had not moved more than
one hundred yards since leaving his tribe.
“ Oh Spirit, if you are a Spirit, hear my voice
in supplication. We wish no harm, but would
ask the aid of an immortal to combat the
Dragon Witch,” supplicated Chief Te Po Tao
to the empty air. As he ended his speech,
he saw standing before him on a maidenhair
fern a small Elf, no larger than his hand. “ Oh,
Mortal, although we are good fairies, we can-
not interfere with the Dragon Witch. She is
powerful and evil,, and it is only through the
mercy of the Fairy of the Glow-Worm Grotto
that she has done us no harm. The Witch
has sworn one day to wipe out these Pink
and White terraces,” answered the sweet little
voice of the Elfin Fairy. “Oh, lovely mite,
where is this Queen of the Glow-Worm Grotto
to be found?” asked the Chief Te Po Tao.
“That I cannot tell you, Mortal Chief. She
lives in an underground cave of rare beauty.
To reach the Queen, you must find the sub-


terranean river that flows beneath the Earth,
and which leads to her miraculous Grotto.
No mortal has ever set eyes on the Glow-
Worm Grotto, but should you find it I am
sure the Fairy Queen will advise you, as she
is supremely kind and good.” With those
words, the tiny Elf disappeared from view.
Chief Te Po Tao returned to his tribe, who
were anxiously waiting for him, discouraged,
but not beaten. He would somehow find the
underground river, which led to the Glow-
Worm Grotto.
The Chief ordered his tribe to move on,
saying that they would never encroach on
the realm of the Elves, but would find a home
farther East. Day after day the Maories camped
in valleys, or by the side of a glassy lake,
fringed with evergreen trees, and full-bloomed
Pohutukawa, a scarlet flower of great beauty.
They paddled the length of the lakes, always
on the look out for a place to call home. Finally,
they came to a little spot on one of the shores.
It looked at first so peaceful, lying snugly in
fern-clad vegetation. It did not take long for
the natives to see that they had at last come
upon a place fit for the gods. The lake was
bright green to its very edge; it teemed with
fish; large rainbow trout, and from the banks
close by, steam rose from the earth, fountain-


.* E j7
5 *.v
■
Jl# 1
,\ />v | /'i% i
J! ~i£l - '. V^6w, / X**. . > *t • 7
„ | - /H | 7 '• ' I
/jtms&rz ■ k. ■ ; V- i
. nf/ / - r . : v • ;..; v •
; V- {f: : #3i$t& i
1 %sgp s
f#:M j;
V o ■. ;* "2 *1
'■■y* |
~~>w \ v> v _> -T
[Fart’ page 292




like springs bubbled and gurgled among ferns
as light as gossamer; crystal clear, blue pools,
some hot some cold, lay side by side, near
the edge of a small beach. Cray Fish and
Eels, which natives so love, were to be seen
in abundance. Te Po Tao decided that they
would build the Maori Pah (village) in this
spot. The natives commenced work on their
Whares (huts), building on the edge of the
steaming pools, so that they could use the
steam for cooking. The Maori women soon
realised they would not have to light fires
or boil water for cooking. They built a number
of “Hangi” (steam oven). Water was thrown
on the hot stones, and the steam cooked the
food perfectly. The Maoris needed no run-
ning hot and cold water or bath-rooms, for
they used the pools of warm water. The Chief
was so happy to have found this land for his
tribe that he ordered his warriors to build a
tremendous Whare as a sort of community
house, where they could meet, and where the
Tohunga (priest) could give praise to their
God Maru. The Maori huts are altogether
different from the other South Sea Island
Homes. New Zealand is much farther south,
and the huts cannot be left open. Then again,
the Maoris do, and have always done, fine
wood carving, so the Whares have caused


great admiration to all who have seen them.
The natives had been very wise people, for
when they had migrated from Haiwaiki they
had brought with them seeds of every kind
to transplant, besides a few pigs for breeding.
The Maori women always carried their babies
on their backs, and it was quite a usual sight
to see the women cooking at their steam ovens
with the wee mites strapped by flaxen shawls
to their mothers’ backs, happily cooing.
One day, Te Po Tao, after the Pah had
been built, and his Community House was
finished, gathered his tribe around him for
a big festivity. He made an eloquent speech,
telling them they should be happy indeed to
call this valley of plenty (which is now known
as Ohinumutu) home. To finish up the cele-
bration, the warriors danced a Haka, which
is a Maori War or Festive Dance. The natives
slapped their thighs, stamped their feet, and
made the most awful faces you ever saw. They
stuck out their tongues, and distorted their
mouths and eyes, until they resembled nothing
more than a rubber mask, being pulled every
way. After the warriors had finished, the Maori
women danced the most graceful “Poi” dance.
They did rhythmic motions, while they twirled
little flaxen balls suspended on a string. It
is the prettiest native dance in the world.


While the women twirled the funny little
“do-dads,” they sang a Maori song. The balls
appeared to make all kinds of circles, but they
never once got mixed up in the string. When
the celebrations were over, and the Tohunga
(priest) gave them a blessing, the natives re-
turned to their “Whares” (huts). What was
their amazement to find that every hut had
been demolished, and that there was not a
stick left standing. The Chief, on hearing
what had happened, was too astounded to
speak. He was cold with fury, at the thought
of the enemy not coming boldly out to fight,
but sneaking like a thief in the night to bring
havoc among his tribe. “ Something will have
to be done,” he said. “It is the Dragon Witch
who has done this deed; we must find a way
to bring her into the open. My brave people,
you must sleep beneath the stars until we
can find some way of making our home per-
manent.” With those words, Te Po Tao sent
his tribe to rest, while he called the Tohunga
for Council. “ There lies a mysterious river
within fifty miles of this spot,” said the Chief,
“ but how to find it is the question. First of
all, I will send a scout to see if the Witch has
a Domain or subjects in these parts.”
Two tried Warriors were dispersed the fol-
lowing day to track some evidence that the


Dragon Witch herself had wrought devastation
to the Maori native village.
The Chief did not remain long in suspense.
The Scouts, who had been very cautious while
making their investigation, came back with
a fearsome tale to tell of their adventure.
“Chief,” said Horo, “only two or three miles
from here there is a valley of unearthly sights.
Awesome geysers, belching forth spray hun-
dreds of feet into the air; boiling pools, mud
volcanoes rising from the ground, and all
making turbulent or hissing sounds, are dread-
ful, but wonderful to behold, and diving
into these repellent mud puddles, which give
forth a weird ‘plop plop’ n °ise, continuously,
are Goblins, like very small men. These Gnome-
like spirits, pop in and out without getting
burnt or wet. Without doubt, oh Chief, they
are in league with the Dragon Witch. After
seeing the spectacle, oh Chief, we did not
wait further, except to notice that there were
pools, hot and cold, of yellow, blue, and green,
all within a few yards of one another. Then
there is a lake of great beauty, only two miles
distant from this valley of horrors, which is
almost beyond description, so perfect it is,
and it teems with fish.” “Horo, you have
done well; we must now find the underground
river which leads to the Glow-Worm Grotto.


Only through this Fairy Queen can we hope
to remain in this strange, but wonderful land,”
answered the Chieftain.
After hearing what the Scouts had to say,
Te Po Tao knew it was of no use rebuilding
the Pah (village) until they had rid the land
of the Dragon Witch, so the Maories camped
beneath the stars, ever on the elert for the
evil one to strike another blow. Daily they
found some calamity had happened. The seed
they planted would be dug up in the night,
a “dug out” disappeared as though by magic
and two of the natives vanished leaving no
trace behind them. Meanwhile, Te Po Tao
sent his Scouts looking for openings of creeks
and rivulets, hoping to find the entrance to
the underground river which led to the Glow-
Worm Grotto. One day the Chief announced
to his tribe that he was about to go on a sur-
vey trip himself. “ I must find some way of
arriving at this Grotto. Without the help of
the Fairy Queen, the Dragon Witch will drive
our tribe into the sea,” he said.
Te Po Tao then set out on his expedition
in search of the Fairy of the Glow-Worm
Grotto. Day after day, he tramped, ever on
the look-out for some clue that might lead
to the entrance of the underground river that
the Elf had spoken of. He swam the lakes


and searched the springs, but with no success.
Finally, he arrived at the most beautiful lake
he had yet seen. Sapphire blue water, with
a rainbow mountain guarding it, fan-shaped
terrace of pinkish hue surrounded by green
ferns, high terraces of white, earthy rocks,
which looked like marble, glowed in the sun-
light, but there was no sign of Elves, Goblins,
or Fairies. “I must look thoroughly into this
magic Domain,” thought the Chief. He cau-
tiously peeped into every nook and cranny.
A hurtling roaring fall beat its way into one
corner of the lake, the water of which appeared
cold, but a little further on was a spring of
hot water, which seethed and bubbled, like
Champagne, and Te Po Tao could see perfectly
to the very bottom of the pool from which
it sprang. The pool must have been many
fathoms deep, and the rocks were of green,
and bright yellow. As he continued gazing
into the depths, he noticed an opening like
an arch. “I wonder,” he mused aloud, “if
that could be the entrance to the underground
river. No, it cannot be, for the water is
steaming, and no mortal could live diving
into those boiling depths.” He stood fascinated
gazing his fill, never taking his eyes from the
eerie fantastic spectacle. The entrance into
the earth seemed to grow larger as he watched,


and Te Po Tao realised that he had at last
accidentally found the entrance to the under-
ground river, which led to the Glow-Worm
Grotto. Longingly he gazed into the water,
wondering if it were possible for a human
being to reach the Fairy Queen’s Domain.
Finally, Te Po Tao made up his mind. “If
I die, it will be for my tribe, I have brought
my people many miles from Haiwaiki, I must
find some way in which to make this beautiful
land safe from the evil spirits.” So, undaunted
by the steaming and seething water, the great
Warrior Maori Chief plunged into the boiling
sapphire blue pool. Like a rock, he went to
the bottom, but what was his amazement to
find that he shot through an arch, leading
into the earth, without even feeling the heat
of the water, and to his mystification, he was
gliding along a subterranean river at a great
speed. As he sped along Te Po Tao did not
have to swim, the eddy swept him at will,
and so easy was it to float that he was able
to gaze in wonder at the silver and gold stalac-
tites over his head. The waterfall he had seen
roaring into the pool, must have caused a
swift current. The underground passage glowed
with a bluish light, and hanging vines dropped
gracefully into the water. The creepers were
gossamer, cobwebby veils of orchid colour. He


must have been carried along at a terrific speed,
for after being in the water about three hours,
he calculated that he had gone at least fifty
miles. The Chief knew it was no use trying to
pilot his own course. His destiny was in the
hands of some unearthly guide, and come
what may, he would follow it to the bitter
end. Suddenly, Te Po Tao saw, some hun-
dred yards ahead of him, the most fantastic
sight he had seen since coming to the new
Wonderland. Through a tremendous rock open-
ing, he caught a glimpse of the Grotto he was
seeking. He looked with astonishment; at last
he understood why the cave had been called
the “ Glow-Worm Grotto.” From the roof,
millions and millions of tiny blue lights, brighter
than any stars, gleamed and shimmered in-
cessantly. Allowing his gaze to wander to the
walls, he saw that they, too, were one scintil-
lating mass of glowing Glow-Worms. The
Maori Warrior Chief looked his fill at the
fairy wonders, and as his eyes grew accustomed
to the Grotto, he noticed that from the roof,
thousands of silken threads, which hung down
many yards, had been woven by the Glow-
Worms to catch unwary insects who tried to
enter the crystal crevices, where they had built
their home. Te Po Tao found himself gliding
slowly towards the centre of the Grotto. As


he looked around, he saw emerging from the
water a crystal dais, almost like a throne, and
on it stood a Fairy Queen of superb beauty.
Her garments of many pastel shades were of
such cobwebby texture that they must have
been woven by fairy spiders. The dais upon
which the beauteous Queen stood, continued
rising, until Te Po Tao felt himself standing
on firm rock. Then he realised what had taken
place. The whole floor of the cave had risen
above the surface. There were rocky mush-
rooms of great size, and on them stood diminu-
tive elfin fairies, fluttering hither and thither.
They did not appear to be wet, except on
the wings, where silvery dewdrops seemed to
hang in mid-air.
The Warrior Chief of many battles felt
abashed at viewing such charm and sweetness.
He sank on one knee before the Queen of the
Glow-Worm Grotto at a loss what to say.
“ Oh, Great Maori Chief,” spoke a bell-like
voice, “ I have been waiting to speak with
you; I would help your tribe in their unequal
war against the Dragon Witch. The good
spirits of this great and glorious land are happy
that at last a race of mortals are come to these
shores.” “I thank you, most gracious Queen,
for your welcome to my people. We wish only
good to this land of beauty and plenty. The


Dragon Witch has already brought much dis-
aster to my tribe. How can we combat this
Evil Spirit ? ” answered the Maori Chieftain.
“ I have a plan, oh Chief, that may be the
undoing of the Dragon Witch. It is written
in witchcraft that a good spirit cannot wreak
vengeance on an evil one, the spirit of purity
must not wage war, but it has not been said
that a mortal may not bring about the down-
fall of a Witch. Therefore, I can only tell
you how you may help your tribe. Now, Chief,
I am about to tell you a secret that I only know.
The Dragon Witch cannot exist where the
fumes of Sulphur are present; there are many
small sulphur springs in these parts, but the
Dragon Witch, through her power, has been
able to keep them beneath the ground. On
her domain, at the foot of the Witch’s Cauldron,
is the Principal Sulphur Geyser, which controls
all the other smaller ones at the edges of the
lakes surrounding your present camp, and the
home of the Goblins. The Witch has stopped
up the outlet with a Petrified Cauri Log, but
should this geyser be released it would at once
set every sulphur spring in the entire Lake
District working, and the Evil Spirits would
be overthrown.” “How is this Geyser to be
released, oh Queen?” asked the interested Chief.
“There is only one way in which the Petrified


Log which stops up the geyser, can be split
in two, and that is by a ‘Greenstone Hatchet.’ ”
“A Greenstone Hatchet? I do not understand,”
said the mystified Chief. “ That is where the
difficulty will arise, great Warrior. If I told
a mortal where this Greenstone is hidden, it
would at once lose its power. Suffice it to
say that somewhere in these parts there is
Greenstone of superb beauty. However, there
is one small hill that contains the rarest speci-
mens of this Jade Stone, and so the mortal
who discovers it will be given the power to
split the Petrified Log.” “Will it not be
impossible to approach the Dragon Witches’
Realm, should we discover the Greenstone
Hill?” asked the Chief. “You will order your
Warriors to build a new Pah (village) at once,”
continued the Fairy Queen. “When the Dragon
Witch hears of this, she will at once tear her
hair with rage, for she will come to the con-
clusion that you are defying her, and intend
to remain on this island, in spite of her warn-
ings. Do not allow the Whares to be left alone
for one minute until the time is ripe to strike.
As long as she sees your tribe building, she
will not attack. Her idea will be to wait until
the new village is complete so as to demolish
the whole place at once. While the building
is going apace your most valiant and tried


Warriors must seek for the Greenstone. When
you have completed your Pah, and the Hatchets
are in readiness, call your entire tribe together,
and tell them that in honour of the new village
there is to be a great celebration to be held
in the Community Whare. There they must
stay until they receive orders from you, telling
them to return to their huts. While the cele-
brations are taking place, the Dragon Witch
will assuredly come with her evil spirits to
demolish the Pah. As soon as she has left her
realm by the Dragon’s Cauldron to go to your
Pah, at Ohinumutu, you must split the Petrified
Log with the Greenstone Hatchet. Now, oh
Chief, do you think the task impossible?”
“Oh, Fairy Queen, no task is too difficult
for the Maori Tribe to attempt, and with the
great assistance you have given us I have only
one thought, victory,” answered the Chieftain
Te Po Tao. “I must warn you, oh Chief,
that much danger lies before you, and yours,”
said the Queen of the Glow-Worm Grotto.
“My tribe has much courage, oh gracious
Queen. I thank you for this great kindness
you have shown me and mine, and it will be
repaid in full. The Maori Tribes will endeavour
to make their race an honoured one in all
lands. Word will now go forth that the Good
Spirit of the Blue Grotto has befriended our


race of mighty Warriors.” Hardly had Te Po
Tao spoke these words, than he found himself
standing in the midst of his people in Ohinu-
mutu. The Maoris gathered round their Chief,
babbling a million questions, but though he
smiled, he waved them aside, called his Tohunga
(priest), and demanded that the sacrifice of a
pig to the Great God Maru take place at once.
The Priest knew that something extraordinary
must have taken place, because they had only
brought a few pigs with them from Haiwaiki,
and could not afford to sacrifice the animals,
unless it was for some great reason.
After the ceremony, the Maori Chief called
a Council of War. One of the Warriors blew
his mightiest on the long wooden Trumpet
called a “Pu-Kaea,” which was always used
for cursing an enemy, or calling a tribe. On
hearing the long blast, the tribe hurried to
the Hut of the Chief. They knew they were
to be told something of their great Chieftain’s
adventure to the Glow-Worm Grotto. Te Po
Tao did not waste time coming to the point.
“My people, I wish you to place implicit faith
in what I am about to say. I cannot take you
fully into my confidence at present, it is im-
perative that our plans should not reach the
Dragon Witch, or the Goblins of the Valley
of Horrors, so I will reveal to no man the Fairy


Queen’s instructions. Bear in mind, however,
that if we obey her command implicitly we
will defeat the Witch of the Steaming Cauldron.”
The Chief then ordered his warriors to com-
mence building a new Pah at once.
His next step was to call his strongest and
mightiest Warriors before him, and this is
what he told them: “Oh Warriors of the Great
Maori Tribes, I have a task that requires great
courage, and super strength. You will go in
twos to seek for a magic stone called the Green-
stone. Somewhere in these parts is a small
hill which contains much of this Jade. Until
one of you discovers and brings me enough
of this stone to make a mighty hatchet we
can never hope to bring about the downfall
of the Witch Queen.” With those words, the
Warriors, without more ado, went in search
of the Greenstone which was to be the salva-
tion of Te Po Toa’s tribe.
The building of the new Pah at Ohinumutu
went apace. The Maoris put their shoulder
to the wheel to get it completed as quickly
as possible. Day after day went by, with no
word from the Scouts who had gone to seek
the Greenstone Hill. Te Po Tao was in des-
pair, because, as time passed, new catastrophies
occurred among his people. One of the Maori
babies had mysteriously disappeared, and its


mother was in an agony of grief. She came
and threw herself before the Chief, begging
him to find the Child “Rangi.” “We shall
do all in our power to bring the baby back
to you,” said the Chief consolingly.
Some days later, two of his trusted Warrior
Scouts returned torn and bleeding. They had
discovered a small cave on the side of which
was a little incline. Thinking that perhaps
they had located the Greenstone Hill, they
commenced digging. No sooner had they
started than three small Goblins appeared and
attacked them. They were almost powerless,
as these Evil Imps clutched at them. “ Luckily,
Horo fell to the ground, mighty Warrior though
he is, and as he did so his hand struck a piece
of stone, and no sooner had he touched it
than the Goblins vanished into thin air,”
related the Warrior. “I looked down at what
lay in my hand, Mighty Chief, and I saw a
small piece of stone, the colour of a fern,”
said the thrilled Horo. “You have done well,
my Warriors. Did you bring back some of
this Jade,” asked the elated Chief. “ Indeed
we did, oh Chief. We brought a large block
of Greenstone,” answered the Warrior. “Good!
You will now hew a hatchet head, oh mighty
Horo,” ordered the delighted Chief. He had
no sooner spoken, when rushing into his pres-


ence came two more Maoris. “Oh, mighty
Te Po Tao, Huka and I have brought you a
massive piece of the Greenstone,” gasped an
elated Warrior. “What is this I hear? Another
piece of Greenstone! This cannot be! ” thun-
dered the Chief. He went in all haste to inspect
the Jade Stones, and sure enough, there were
two large blocks of it. Te Po Tao did not
know what to make of it, but he ordered a
hatchet hewn from each block.
The Whares were now completed, and the
natives were only waiting for a command from
their Chief. Te Po Tao was in a great quandary.
As the Warriors returned from seeking the
Greenstone Hill, each pair carried a huge piece
of Green Jade. He was at his wits’ end. Finally
Huakatoa, his greatest Warrior, arrived in
camp carrying a gigantic block of Greenstone
on his shoulder. “What can all this mean?”
cried the shaken Te Po Tao. “Where did you
find this, Huakatoa ? ” “Oh Chief, twenty
miles from here is a Great Geyser, which
spouts water two thousand feet into the air.
Turi and I had almost given up hope of ever
finding the Greenstone as we came to within
a few hundred yards of the Great Geyser.
Suddenly, we heard an ear-piercing roar, and
the water flew without further warning many
hundreds of feet into the air. Long we watched


it, then I thought it might be wise to venture
closer; perhaps we might find the Greenstone
Hill. We went as near to the Spouting water
as we dared, then, as suddenly as it had burst
forth, the Geyser ceased. On arriving close
by, I spied an incline that might have passed
for a hill, but was about to dismiss the thought
when the Earth rumbled beneath our feet.
I felt it a warning from the Dragon Witch.
The Earth shook to such an extent that some
of the soil from the elevated ground rolled
downward, and I could see plainly that the
rock beneath it was of greenish colour. I knew
that to get at it I would have to take the chance
of the Great Geyser spouting forth once more,
and perhaps killing me, but I remembered
that the whole tribe would be wiped out if
I did not try. So I rubbed my Tiki (charm)
that always hangs around my neck, then rushed
to the small hill at the foot of the great Geyser.
I had just managed to dislodge a large piece
of the stone, when we heard a churning noise,
and Kuri rushed to where I was trying to
extricate it from the earth, and together we
were able to carry the stone to safety, just as
the Mighty Geyser burst forth once again.”
(The Great Geyser, which the Warriors had
seen, was the Waimangu Geyser, which alas!
centuries later, suddenly stopped spouting,


never to flow again.) When the great Chief
heard his Scouts’ story, he was at a loss what
to do. “What can this all mean,” he asked
himself. He could not tell his Warriors that
everything appeared to have gone wrong with
his plans, so he ordered them each to make
a hatchet. The Maori Chief then called his
Tohunga (priest) and said to him: “Only one
of these Hatchets will bring about the Down-
fall of the Dragon Witch, but how are we to
know which it is to be.” “Oh Chief, allow
each warrior to heave a mighty swipe, and
whoever has the magic hatchet will release
the sulphur geyser,” said the wise Priest, who
had been taken into Te Po Tao’s confidence.
“You are right, oh Priest. We will set off,
to-morrow, at dawn for the Witch’s Domain.
It is fifty miles, as the birds fly, so with swift
paces we should arrive in one full day,”
answered the Chief.
Te Po Tao called his tribe together, and
told them how elated he was at the way every-
thing had progressed. “ The Warriors who
went in search of the Greenstone will make
ready their hatchets. To-morrow, we depart
for the Witch’s Cauldron, fifty miles from
here. Those of the tribe that remain behind
will stand guard by the Whares, and when
the Tohunga gives the order to go to the


Community Whare, you will do so, remaining
there until my return. It is absolutely impera-
tive to the success of our plans that the new
Village remain as though deserted, while you
are making merry in the Community Whare.
Have you understood, oh my People?” said
the Chief. “Yes, oh Great Warrior,” the
tribe answered in a chorus.
The following day, the Scouts stood waiting
at dawn for their Chief, with their hatchets
well hidden in palm tree ferns. Te Po Tao
feared that some word might get to the Witch’s
ears, so he gave a loud blast on the “Pu-Kaea,”
calling his tribe before him. He announced
loudly that he was about to go on a hunting
trip, so that should any of the Goblins be
spying on them, they would not know the
real destination of the Chief, and his Warriors.
All through the day, and far into the night,
the Maori tribe marched towards the Witches’
Cauldron. On arriving at about five hundred
paces from the Domain of the Dragon Witch,
Te Po Tao halted his Scouts, and then he
himself climbed a high tree, where he could
get a good view of the Witches’ Cauldron.
What he saw turned his blood to ice. The
Witches were fighting among themselves, as
they writhed in the boiling pool. They tore
at one another like vixens. Of the Dragon


Queen, there was no sign. “Warriors, we will
stay quietly at this spot until the Witches
leave the Cauldron. Then we will know that
the Dragon Witch has gone to our Pah to
demolish it.” Hour after hour the Warriors
waited. Te Po Tao knew that the Priest would
not send the tribe at the Pah to the Community
Whare until he was sure that the Maori Chief
had arrived at the Witches’ Domain. The
Tohunga was allowing the Chief plenty of time
in case of accidents. Suddenly, Te Po Tao
heard a horrifying laugh. He could hear quite
plainly a dreadful voice cry: “ Come, oh my
Witches, we will away to the new Maori Pah,
and tear it apart. We will first go to the Goblins’
Domain, and tell them that the Warriors are
all away, and to join us in our little fun.” Then
a frightful unearthly laugh w r as heard.
No sooner did Te Po Tao see that the Witch
had left than he ordered his Warriors in double
quick time to rush to the Witches’ home.
“We must hurry. It will take her no time
with her witchcraft to arrive at the Goblins’
Domain, and from there, it’s only a few minutes
to our Pah,” said the Chief anxiously. They
had no difficulty in finding the Petrified Log,
at the Witches’ Cauldron, which was covering
the Sulphur Geyser. As soon as they had
located it, Te Po Tao said: “My Warriors,


[Face 312


*


you will wield your hatchets one at a time,
and endeavour to cleave the Petrified Log
in two.”
One by one, the Great Warriors attempted
to cleave the trunk in half. Te Po Tao was
becoming more and more anxious as time
passed. He feared the return of the evil ones,
then perhaps not one of the hatchets would
enter into the Petrified Log. There were only
two more Warriors left. After more than a
dozen natives had brought their hatchet down
with all their force, not even a dent had been
made in the Log. Only one more hatchet
remained, it was Huakatoa’s, the mightiest
Warrior in his tribe. “Oh mighty Huakatoa,
you who have come all the way from Haiwaiki,
and with your strong arms have paddled night
and day the great War Canoe, it now remains
for you to save the tribe of Te Po Tao,” said
the anxious Chieftain. Huakatoa expanded his
mighty chest, set his feet apart, and with all
the power in his gigantic frame, brought the
Greenstone Hatchet down with his might and
main on the Petrified Caurie Log. An ear-
piercing noise rent the air, and the Warriors
had only just enough time to move quickly
out of the way, when a steaming Geyser belched
forth, and the Fumes of Sulphur pervaded
the whole Domain. “If I could only see the


Downfall of the Goblins, and the Dragon
Witch,” said the Maori Chief. “I would that
I had a steed with wings.” Before Te Po Tao
could bat an eyelash, he saw standing before
him a queer little donkey with small wings,
attached to his hoof. “Ho! Ho!” said the
pleased Chief. “Take me where I can see the
Dragon Witch and her Evil Spirits.” The
words were not out of his mouth, when Te
Po Tao found himself flying through space,
and the next thing he knew he was gazing
down from a hill, on to his new Pah. He saw
grovelling in the dust hundreds of small Gnomes.
The Sulphur rose from the pools and crevices
around the Whares. As he looked again, the
Chief saw for the first time the horrifying
Dragon Witch. The upper half was terrifying
enough, but the Dragon’s tail, and the dreadful
claws were horrible to behold. The Witch
cursed and flayed the Goblins, who writhed
and gasped like mortals do. The small Witches
tried to clutch at the Dragon, and together
they disappeared into the ground. Te Po Tao
did not wait to see anything further, but ordered
his queer little steed to return to where he
could see the Witches’ Cauldron. Away went
the brave and noble animal, and Te Po Tao
had hardly time to wonder if he’d arrive there
before the Witches, when he found himself


sitting on his steed high up on a rock with
an uninterrupted view of the Witches’ Domain,
which to-day is known as Wairakei. When
he saw the marvellous, but terrifying sight,
he was both awestruck, and horror struck.
The Fumes of Sulphur were almost more
than he could stand, but he was not going to
miss seeing the victory of Good over Evil.
Suddenly unearthly shrieks and yells almost
pierced his ear-drums, and he saw a number
of small Witches struggling out of the Boiling
Cauldron. They were gasping, swaying, writh-
ing, and shrieking. Never had Te Po Tao
witnessed anything so dreadful. He was
about to turn away, when he looked towards
the Dragon Witch’s throne, and what he
saw made his blood run cold. The horrible
monster was tearing her lanky hair with her
Dragon Claws, then the upper part of her
body separated from the lower half, and the
Dragon’s tail slunk away into the boiling mud
pool, and disappeared from sight. For a mo-
ment Te Po Tao could not see the upper part
of the Witch, but what was his amazement,
a few seconds later, to find standing on the
rock close by the steaming throne, a beautiful
lady with streaming blonde hair. The Chief
was wondering what it all meant, when sud-
denly the ground opened near him, and to


his surprise the beauteous creature stood before
him. She looked exactly like the Fairy Queen
of the Glow-Worm Grotto, so the Chief saluted
in the Maori fashion. “Oh Queen, how can
we thank you ? ” he asked her gratefully. “ Rise,
oh Chief, I am not the Queen of the Glow-
Worm Grotto, I am the Dragon Witch,” replied
the apparition. “What is this you say? You
look exactly the same as the kind Queen, who
saved my tribe,” said the astonished Te Po
Tao. “Oh Chief, I am a Fairy twin of the
Queen of the Glow-Worm Grotto. Twins in
Fairyland have never before been known, and
an old Dragon Monster, who was half man
and half Dragon, heard of the two fairies,
who were exactly alike, and he swore that
he would take one for his bride. I was stolen
from the Glow-Worm Grotto, and brought to
the Monster’s underground realm. I loathed
and detested the Dragon, and for vengeance,
he transformed me into a Dragon Witch, and
I had to obey everything he said. My sister
has tried for many years to release me, but
was powerless to do so. Only through a mortal
can an enchanted soul be released, and you
were brave enough to face every danger to
help your people, so the Queen of the Glow-
Worm Grotto knew that you were to be trusted
to carry out her instructions. I shall return


to my sister’s Domain. Whenever the Maori
People wish for help, they have but to call
on the Fairy Queens of the Glow-Worm Grotto.
You will find that you are free from the clutches
of the Dragon Monster. He and his subjects
will have disappeared from these parts. I
promise that these Sulphur Springs will never
die down. Return to your Domain, oh Chief,
and there you will find your lost natives, all
restored, and the Pah in perfect condition.”
“I thank you, oh Fairy Twin,” said the
enthralled Maori Chief. “We are proud to
be the first mortals to land in this great and
glorious land. I promise that we will make
the name of our people respected all over the
earth.”
There is little more to tell, except that
Te Po Tao and his Warriors returned in tri-
umph to Ohinumutu, and there they found
their tribe jubilant. The great Maori Chief
kept his word to the Fairy Twin of the Glow-
Worm Grotto. The Maori Race is known all
over the Universe for their intelligence and
kindness. Many doctors, lawyers, singers, and
preachers, are to be found among this race
of natives, and although, like the Indians of
America, they had many wars fighting for the
country they discovered, they have become


fine and staunch friends of the white people,
and Great Britain has no more loyal subjects
than the New Zealand Maoris. I must tell
you that all these wonderful Geysers, Lakes,
Volcanoes, Mud Pools, are still to be seen on
the Islands. The New Zealand Greenstone is
famous for the beautiful knick-knacks that
have been made from it, and any little boy
or girl who wants to see where the Fairy of
the Glow-Worm Grotto lived, or the Great
Geysers and the Steaming Cauldrons where
the Witches danced, should ask Daddy or
Mummy to take them to the North Island of
New Zealand, where these wonderful show
places still exist.
THE END


♦


*l O c? I fc. tf
V< 3
1508
00142427


k


’ rr - r- —rt- ;——
m - j:-
; ttt i; ■' —H —- —. —
