

tf I i J
S*2\ *jL J
\" ‘Vrtl 1
r> ✓ jj3 jpS. fW| *w wJ I Fy i \ * m JB
>Vhk£CT T> \ fvV wf\% VTsl'i I J\ fi Vk iM
v \- 1 L ~y v, vm
y/A^i\
[ /j l]/||
t ■ r^f^vf\vv\
11?
:. :.'5:£;‘-f' ’ : ';. r • 7 ;Vf .* • - • - li ; r «* • ‘ *»•"< ’- • : • "*•< ■ 1 :* ‘It i" r?f l-f *’ -•’■** ' '!*'.■
■ i**■-’v j '<-^m-•*&".•'* . ,’: ' L’C--;-,: .- '.flsiii s :'. .. -.\ '■ ‘.•■*< <t *
: ;s£|;2 ';fVjj*SSSj


A*
V Jw
y


FAIRY TALES TOLD IN
THE BUSH
V -7} - xV
' ! n'-j
;vkuoßAßy,..X^


“ EACH WALL WAS COVERED WITH SHELVES, AND EACH SHELF WAS
FULL OF BOOKS.”


FAIRY TALES
TOLD IN THE BUSH
SISTER AGNES
LONDON : ELLIOT STOCK
62, PATERNOSTER ROW, E.C


v t |j| C • ‘ v


cr hi n
Zio i /
PREFACE
|F these Fairy Tales told to children in the
I Australian bush , “The Magic Gun”
and “ The Underground River,” are
original, but the others have been
brought from the old country, not in book form,
but in the memory of a lover of fairies and
children.
“The Origin of the Yarra Yarra” was told
to the writer by old King Barak, the last King
of the Yarra tribe, a few days before his death.
These tales, as told here, charmed the writer
in the “ Sixties ” when Melbourne was a place
of bush and swamp. They now charm little
slum children in the so-called “ slum parts ”
of the city of Melbourne, “ The Palace of
Truth ” and “ The Magic Gun ” being always
asked for when stories are to be told.


r


CONTENTS
The Little Man in Brown, or the Boy who Lied 3
The Magic Gun 21
The Underground River 31
The Origin of the YarraYarra (Ever-flowing) . 51
Forget-me-not 61
The Palace of Truth 75


ILLUSTRATIONS
Each wall was covered with shelves, and each shelf
was full of books .... Frontispiece
The boy grew bold and began to read ... 2
The sale of the bull . . . . . . n
Barak telling the story of the Magic Gun . . 20
Eating the berries . . . . . *3°
The fish gave a flap, a jump, and reached the water 45
Barak snatched the honeycomb away, and put it in
his mouth ....... 50
Finding the footprint of the " Shining One ” . . 56
The Man in the Moon . . . . . .60
Marie finding the man . . . . . -67
Marie going to the Moon . . . . .69
They came in sight of an enormous tree, upon which
grew golden apples . . . . . -74
The toys running away . . . . .82


THE LITTLE MAN IN BROWN,
OR THE BOY WHO LIED.


' fT
I ■
“ THE BOY GREW BOLD
AND
BEGAN TO READ,


LITTLE
in brown,
THE B6Y WHS LI*EP. p*
ONG, long ago in the days when
there were no schools, there lived a
man and his wife and their only
child. He was a bright, clever boy,
and his parents were very ambitious for their
dear boy, and wished him to become a great
and renowned man. They saw that the children
who could not read or write, but who just
played all day long, had to go to work while
still very young, and were generally so stupid
that they could never earn much money; so they
determined to let their boy have an education,
and be able, later on, to have an easier life
than they themselves had ever enjoyed. They
worked early and late and saved every penny,
even when their boy was still a baby, and by
the time he was old enough to learn, they had
saved enough money to pay a learned man who
lived in the town to teach the boy. Boy he


was always called, and I am very glad there is
no other name for him, because of his bad
ending.
When Boy was fourteen years old, he knew
so much about books that there was not a single
book in the learned man’s library that he had
not read. Oh, he was very clever and knowing,
and he told his mother and father that he now
knew enough to go and earn a good living.
“ In the morning,” said he, “I shall set out
to make a fortune.’ 1 ’
Long before daybreak, the boy set out on his
journey, carrying a bundle done up in a big
red handkerchief. It contained a clean shirt,
a pair of socks, a loaf of new bread, and a bottle
of milk. His parents were very sad when he
went away, but they knew he would never
have any chance to become great and famous
in the town where every one knew him as “ the
boy.”
Away trudged the boy, up hill and down
dale, until at last, just before sunrise, he came
to a hill where, as he imagined, cock had never
crowed and man had never walked before.
Tired and hungry, he sat down to eat his loaf
and drink his milk, and, just as he had finished,
a little old man dressed all in brown suddenly
appeared before him. The boy rubbed his
eyes to make sure he was not dreaming, for a


minute before he had been alone ; now, here
was this funny little man looking at him. The
little man wore knee-breeches and silk stockings,
a cut-away coat, and a cocked hat, all of brown,
and the funny thing was that the colour of
his clothes matched the colour of his eyes and
hair.
“ Well, my boy,” said the old man, “ you
look surprised to see me.”
“Yes, sir, I am; I thought no one lived
here.”
“ Can’t people be in a place without living
there ? You yourself are here at present, but
I suppose you don’t live here.”
“ No, sir; lam going out into the world to
make my fortune.”
“ Just the boy I want. lam looking for a
boy who will promise to do a little work for me
for six months, and for that little work he is
to get £5O. Will you come and do it ? ”
“ That I will,” cried the boy, jumping up
gladly.
“ Stay, though, there is one question I must
ask first,” said the little old man. “ Can
you read or write ? ”
“Yes,” answered the boy proudly, “ I can
read anything in my tutor’s library.”
“ Ah ! then you won’t do for me, and I must
go on my way in search of a boy capable of


doing what I want, but unable to read or
write.”
“ Why do you want ” began the boy;
but he was speaking to space, the little old
man in brown had disappeared. Suddenly
the boy formed a resolution. He would go
home again, make himself look quite different,
and come to-morrow morning to this same
place, and then, if the little old man came
Well, the boy had been taught to read and
write, but he had not been taught to be truthful
or honest. His parents thought that did not
help people to get rich or famous.
Back he went to his home, and when he told
his mother what he intended to do, she was
quite pleased. “ See,” she said to her husband,
“ how clever the boy is ; this is what book-
learning has done. No one else would think
of such a clever trick.”
Next morning, at sunrise, there was a boy
again sitting on the top of that distant hill,
where the boy had breakfasted the day before.
Indeed it was “ the Boy,” although he looked
quite different. He had dyed his fair hair and
his eyebrows, making them look almost black,
and he had rubbed the juice of a certain bark
on his skin to make him seem dark. There he
sat, a dark foreign-looking boy, eating his break-
fast and impatiently waiting for the little old


man to come again. He had not long to wait.
How he came the boy never knew, but he
suddenly knew he was not alone, and looking
up saw the old man looking at him.
“ Ah, a fair boy yesterday, and a dark one
to-day. I hope there is more luck for me with
the dark than there was with the fair. What
are you doing here, boy ? ”
“I’m looking for work, sir,” answered the
boy, trying not to show how delighted he felt.
“ Good,” said the old man, “ and I’m looking
for a boy who wants work.”
“ Will you engage me, sir ? ”
“ Softly, softly, there are one or two things
to speak about first. Can you read and write ? ”
“ No, sir,” answered the boy, not even turning
a shade paler under his dye, for you see he had
never been taught to be truthful or honourable.
“ Good again ; then if £5O a year will suit
you, you can come at once.”
Of course the boy said “ Yes ” to that, and
the old man led him to a house just over the
next hill, a pretty house standing in a big natural
garden.
“ Come in,” said the old man, unlocking the
door, “ come in and I’ll show you what you
must do to earn your money.”
The boy was astonished to find that the
house was really only one big room; each wall


was covered with shelves from the ceiling to the
floor, and each shelf was full of books. The
boy was then told that he would be quite alone
in the house, as his master meant to travel for
six months. Usually he lived there by himself,
but he had studied so much that his brain was
tired, and he knew that if he wished to get really
well and strong again, he must travel away,
and not look at a book for six months. So he
had hired the boy just to dust his beloved books
in his lonely house, and, as it was so far away
from people, he had to give a big sum of money,
as wages, to get any one to stay there alone.
The boy stood looking around in astonish-
ment. “ Where am Ito sleep ?” he asked.
“ Why, on that couch, of course,” said the
old man ; “ you’ll find plenty of blankets under
it.”
“ And what am I to eat ? ”
“ Ah ! ah ! ah ! ” laughed the old man, “ trust
a boy to make provision for that. There is,
my boy, a wonderful secret connected with this
house. When a certain magic word is pro-
nounced, a table is lowered by invisible hands,
and on the table you will find everything you
wish to eat and drink. Now say it after me,
‘ Corremurreplatyemurrepleuemurretimemurre -
jcherymurrepljeskuskiski.’ ”
Slowly the boy repeated the strange word


after the old man, and, as he finished, there
descended a table even as he had been told.
On the table was a baked fowl, a duck, vege-
tables, puddings, tarts, cakes, sweets, and two
or three kinds of drinks. Oh, these things
were good! The boy soon knew that, and
when he had eaten and drunk as much as he
could, the man said he must get away as soon
as possible, as he felt his brain could not stand
the strain of even the backs of the books much
longer.
“ I know you can't read and write, boy,”
said the old man, “ and yet I want you to pro-
mise me you won't read a single word in these
books, nor even open them.”
The boy promised readily enough, and then
the old man went off. At first the boy worked
at the dusting, never daring to open one of the
books in case the old man should suddenly
appear as he had done on the hill-top ; but, as day
after day passed, and there was no sign of him,
he grew bold and began to read. What he read
was very, very strange, stranger than anything
he had ever heard of. Soon indeed he knew
that his master must be the cleverest man in
the world, for he learned from his books how to
turn himself into any animal, and then to change
back again into himself. How he longed to
try it, but he dare not, because one condition


was, that a person turning into an animal found
a leather halter round his neck, and only a
human being could undo it, so that he might
turn back again to what he had been before.
Long before the six months were over, the
boy was longing to go and try this wonderful
unheard-of thing, but he dared not go until the
old man came back, or he not only would have
had to go penniless, but the old man might
suspect him, and watch him and his actions.
At last, however, the little old man returned.
“ Have you kept your promise ? ” were his
first words. “You have not read the books ? ”
and the boy vowed and protested that he had
not even opened the books. The old man
examined his precious volumes, and, finding
them in good order, paid the £s°, and the boy
then set out for his home. His father and
mother could hardly believe he had earned so
much money in such a short time.
“ Easy come, easy go,” is a homely saying,
and certainly “ Boy’s ” £5O went very easily
indeed, and soon it was all spent. “You
must go and earn some more money,” said his
mother.”
“Ah! ah!” laughed Boy, “not I; I’ve
learned how to get money without working, no
more working for me. I’ve learned how to turn
myself into any animal I like. The worst of it


“ THE SALE OF THE BULL.”


is, though, if I change into an animal used by
man, like the horse, cows and dogs, a halter
will be around my neck, and I can’t change
back again until the halter is taken off. Now,
to-morrow is market day, and all the farmers will
be in the town, so I’ll change myself into a
bull, and you can take me to market and sell
me, but remember to take the halter off my
neck.”
“Never fear,” said his father, “ I’ll re-
member.”
Early next morning, when Boy’s father went
into the yard, there stood a beautiful black bull
which he at once led off to the market. Quite
a commotion was made by the fine bull.
“Come here,” cried the farmer who first
saw it, “ come here, and look at this prize bull.”
A crowd gathered around, and soon the
farmers had made up their minds to buy it be-
tween them, as no one was rich enough to buy
such a costly bull for himself alone. £l,OOO,
and well worth it, they all declared. So five
of them clubbed together and bought it. One
farmer, who had a big strong stable, was to
take care of the fine beast. Together they
took the bull to the stable, saw it safely locked
up, and the key put in the farmer’s pocket.
Next day the five owners brought some friends
to see their prize, but, 10, the bull had dis-


appeared. They looked at the fastenings of
the door —nothing wrong—and there was no
other way by which the bull could have escaped,
so they all declared that the farmer had hidden
the bull and meant to sell it secretly. Poor
man, he was at once hurried off to prison.
Where was the bull ? Why, no sooner had the
farmers locked the door, than the bull changed
himself into a fly, and flew through the keyhole.
When the boy’s father reached home, there
was his son sitting by the side of the fire enjoying
a meal, while his mother rocked herself from
side to side, laughing at the trick he had played
the farmer.
“ A thousand pounds ! now, if we had another
thousand, we would never need to work again.
Change yourself into another animal next market
day, and I’ll sell you again.”
“ No,” said the son, “ we must wait awhile,
there will be a great noise about the bull that
has disappeared.”
And indeed there was a noise about it.
Everybody’s tongue clattered so loudly that
even the little old man in brown heard a whisper
about it. “ Ah,” thought he, “ that boy has
played me false. A bull could not disappear
unless some one knew my magic secret. I must
keep a watch on that town, and see if any other
valuable animal comes to the market.”


After some time people forgot all about the
strange disappearance of the bull, and, as the
boy’s father continuously worried him to work
the magic trick again, he at last consented.
This time it was a beautiful prancing horse
that was seen and admired by the market
people. £l,OOO was asked for it. The little
old man, disguised in a great cloak and turned-
down hat, began to bargain for it, and soon
the father had sold it, and had begun to take
the halter off its neck.
“ Stop,” cried the little man, " I bought that
horse as he stood, the halter included.”
“ No, no, only the horse,” said Boy’s father.
“ How could I lead the horse away without
a halter ? but to stop all dispute you shall have
another £100.” The little old man threw
down the money, jumped on the horse and
galloped away.
“ I’ve caught you at last,” said he to the
horse, “now I mean to kill you; liar and thief
that you are, for such sins you must die.”
The little old man in brown galloped the horse
up hills, and down dales and across rivers, but
the horse never seemed even to tire. “ Well,
as you won’t die in one way you must in an-
other. I shall have a goad made in such a
way that every time I strike you with it blood
will flow.”


At the first blacksmith’s to which he came,
he stopped and called aloud for the smith to
come out. Out came the smith, holding a
heavy hammer in his hand, and the little old
man in brown gave his directions for the goad ;
but the smith was not clever, so the old man
had to get down, and go into the smithy to
draw a plan of what he wanted made. The
horse was left in charge of a boy. “Take
the halter off my neck.” The boy in charge
was so surprised to hear a horse speak that he
obeyed, and the horse at once scampered off.
“ Hey, mister, mister, your horse is running
away.” These words brought the little old
man out very quickly; sure enough there was
the horse some distance off, galloping as fast
as he could go. The old man changed himself
into a horse and galloped after him. Of course
there was no one to place a halter on him, so
there was no halter to take off, and he could
change again as soon as he wished to. The
fresh horse soon gained upon the tired one.
“ Dear, dear, this will never do, I must
dodge him. I’ll change into a hare and sneak
off into the bushes,” thought the boy; but no
sooner had the boy become a hare than the
old man became a greyhound, and began to
get very close to him indeed. “ Oh, dear!
he is gaining on me, I shall change into a bird,


and fly into the trees ; ” but no sooner had the
boy become a little bird than the old man
became a hawk and got closer still.
“ Look ! ” cried a lady who sat at the window
in her room, “ look at the hawk chasing that
poor little bird.” Quickly she opened the
window, and the little bird flew in. To her
astonishment it changed at once into a ring,
and, 10, there it was on her finger !
A knock was heard at the door. “ Come
in,” said the lady. In came a little old man
dressed in brown.
“ Madam, I have lost a little bird; it was
being chased by a hawk; it flew in here.”
“ Yes,” answered the lady; “ a strange
thing happened ; no sooner had it flown in here
than it became a ring on my finger.”
“ Madam, I claim my property,” said the
little old man, stretching out his hand for the
ring.
She took off the ring sadly, but it slipped
from her fingers and rolled into the passage.
“ What shall Ido ? ” thought the boy. “ I
know. I’ll turn into a great bundle of straw,
and crowd him out of the place.” You see, he
was such a selfish boy he never even thought
about the lady who had allowed him to fly into
the room.
The lady was horrified to see the door filled


up with straw ; but, lo ! the little old man
at once turned himself into a donkey, and began
to eat the straw. At every mouthful he of
course ate what was really a piece of the boy,
and the boy knew he must soon die at that rate.
Hurriedly the boy changed himself into a mouse,
but, alas ! there was no mouse-hole for him to
run and hide in, and before he could reach the
door, the cat that belonged to the lady saw
him, pounced upon him, and ate him up.
So that was the end of the boy who tried to
get rich by stealing and lying. You might
think that the £l,lOO the old man had given
the father made him a rich man for life.
Not so, the neighbours and he soon spent it in
gambling and drink, and in a short time he was
as poor as he had been before his son began
practising his magic tricks.


\


THE MAGIC GUN


/T~ f>\i A 4j&(|
\i/y; 1 ■ y- “Jyiffl i^m
“ BARAK TELLING THE STORY OF THE MAGIC GUN.


was September, the wattle blossom
month, and many people were in
and around beautiful Healesville,
where the wattle is to be seen at
its best. Old King Barak, the last King of the
Yarra tribe, sat outside his hut at Coranderrk,
surrounded by white people.
“ You all too greedy,” he grumbled, “ you
come to see black man, black man make native
fire, black man throw boomerang, black man
throw spear ; white man give him black brother
pennies, pah, white man greedy, no give black
man baccy, only pennies.” A few of the white
people gave the dirty old chief a silver coin,
then they went off to another hut to buy native
baskets, and to see the funny black babies.
One small boy stayed behind.
“ I am not greedy, Barak; see, I have
brought you a shilling.”
Barak greedily snatched the shilling
“ Last time,” said the boy, “ you told me the
story of the Yarra Yarra, and you promised to


tell me the story of the Magic Gun to-day if I
brought you another shilling. Do be quick
and tell me, because the others will want to go
back to the township as soon as they have
bought some baskets and things.”
Charmed by the gift of the shilling, the old
man told the small white boy the story of
the Magic Gun in quavering voice, sometimes
scarcely to be heard, for he was very frail;
indeed, though little Tom Jones did not know
it, this was the last time he, or any one else,
was to hear the story of the Magic Gun from
poor old King Barak of Coranderrk Station.
Tom drew a deep breath as the old man
finished his story.
“ Let me look at the gun, Barak,” he pleaded.
The old black took him into his hut, and
proudly showed him an old-fashioned gun.
“ And that is the gun that Buckly, the white
man who was lost and lived among the blacks,
really used ? ”
“ Course it is, didn’t I tell you,” said King
Barak.
“ And he really used nails instead of bullets ? ”
“ Course he did with this gun, it’s a Magic
Gun,” answered the old man.
“ And he put his knife into its ”
“ Tom, Tom, we are going, come along,”
called the voice of authority, so Tom could not


finish his questioning, but had to drive away
with the others.
That night, when the others were fast asleep
in bed, Tom dressed himself very quietly —
there was no need to get a candle, for there was
a bright moon by whose light he could see quite
well. He hurried, for he meant to go to Coran-
derrk Station, two miles away, sneak Barak’s
Magic Gun, and just see for himself what its
powers were like.
Fortune favoured Tom. Barak had somehow
or other got some beer, although no one was
allowed to sell beer to black men. Barak was
in a drunken sleep and had not locked his door.
Tom tiptoed in, took the Magic Gun from its
place on the wall, and went out on his search
for game. Tom walked steadily on until he
was some miles from home. By this time the
sun was rising, the whole country was bathed
in a golden and purple light, but Tom had
no thoughts for beauty or scenery. The Magic
Gun filled his thoughts. He walked until, from
very weariness, he sat down to rest against a
log; not a thing had he seen upon which to
try the Magic Gun, which had to be primed
with nails instead of powder.
He enjoyed the bread and butter he had
brought with him, and after he had finished it
he felt rather sleepy—indeed, he closed his


eyes for a moment —only for a moment, how-
ever, for just as he was pinching himself to keep
awake, he saw a big old man kangaroo standing
erect, looking at him, not many feet away.
Stealthily Tom took his Magic Gun from the
ground, raised himself and prepared to fire.
With a bound the kangaroo was off, Tom follow-
ing at a hot pace.
“ Sure luck with the Magic Gun,” said Tom
to himself, for though the kangaroo went like
the wind, Tom kept up with it. On and on
they went, for miles and miles it seemed to Tom,
until at last the kangaroo seemed to be winded,
for he suddenly stopped and backed up against
a tree facing Tom. With a shaky hand Tom
put in six nails, raised the gun to his shoulder
and fired.
Bang went the gun; the air was so full of
smoke that for some minutes nothing could
be seen for it, but as it cleared away Tom
shouted for joy, for the old man kangaroo was
nailed to the tree as securely as if he had been
held by several pairs of hands, while the nails
were driven in.
“ Gour - gour - gah - gah - ah - ah - ah - ah - ah -
ah-ah-ah ! ”
A shout of laughter came from the tree-top.
Tom, looking up, saw an old kookooburra (or
laughing jackass) with head bent back, laughing


and chuckling; soon he was joined by two
young birds. The old one flew down, looked
first at the dead kangaroo, then at Tom, after
which he flew back to the branch on which
he had been sitting and indulged in another
burst of laughter ; in this he was joined by the
two young birds.
It seemed to Tom to be a personal insult.
They must be laughing at him, because he knew
no better than to shoot a kangaroo. He
remembered now, the kangaroo was always
hunted with dogs, never shot.
“ Cheeky things,” said Tom, “ I’ll teach them
a lesson. They know I dare not shoot a kookoo-
burra, so they think they can laugh at me as
much as they like. I know what I’ll do, with
this Magic Gun I can split the branch on which
they are standing, then they won’t laugh so
loud and long. One nail will be enough to do
it.”
No sooner thought of than it was done.
Bang went the gun once more, and before those
rude kookooburras could fly away, the branch
had opened, in slipped their little toes, and
there they were caught nicely in a trap.
“ Gour - gour - gah - gah - ah - ah - ah - ah - ah-
ah ! ” laughed the three trapped birds, but this
time they were laughing at their own silliness in
being caught so easily.


“ They shall just stay there until I have been
down the river and back again; but to go down
the river I must have something to sail or row
in. King Barak said that a knife was the thing
to use instead of powder for that work. Now
for making a canoe with the Magic Gun,” said
Tom, at the same time placing an open pen-
knife in the gun. Once more he raised it to his
shoulder, but this time he fired at a great gum
tree. The knife shot forth, struck the tree,
and, as if guided by an invisible hand, cut the
bark to the exact size and shape of a canoe.
Tom gave a strong tug and pulled the bark clean
away from the tree. There it lay, a very strong
canoe, and in a short time Tom had dragged it
across to the river, launched it, sprang in, and
using the gun as a paddle, sailed gaily down the
river.
It was so jolly! Of course it would have
been better fun if some one had been with him,
but then, none of the others really believed in
the power of the Magic Gun, and King Barak
said that if an unbeliever were present when
he tried to use it, nothing could come of it.
Down the river went the canoe, nearing the
dreadful place where the undercurrents met,
the undercurrents which no one would face,
not even the blacks, except in a magic canoe.
Tom could now see the bridge which was just


the other side of the dreaded part, where any-
thing that was thrown in got sucked down.
As he looked his blood froze in his veins, and
his heart seemed to stop beating with fear of
what he saw. From under the bridge came
an awful shapeless mass, the only distinct part
about it being a head with glaring eyes and big
horns.
“ The Bunyip,” wailed Tom, trying now to
paddle to the shore and so escape the horrid
thing coming towards him. Suddenly, a happy
thought struck him. Why, of course, the
Magic Gun could kill even a “ Bunyip.”
With trembling hands he placed his knife
in the muzzle of the gun, fired, and saw the
knife describe a circle over the Bunyip’s head
and fall into the water. Hurriedly he took
some nails from his pocket and charged the gun
with them, fired, and was horrified to see that
when the nails struck the Bunyip, fire and
smoke came from every hole made by them.
Nearer and nearer came the horrid flame-
belching creature until it touched the boat, and
at the same instant Tom sprang overboard,
swam to the shore, and fled, followed by the
awful Bunyip.
Faster and faster went Tom, until at last he
dropped to the ground because his legs refused
to carry him any further. Then he felt the


creature catch hold of him, and he sprang up
wildly to fight it. But instead of the awful
Bunyip, he saw his father, who gazed at his
small son in surprise, and wanted to know why
he had gone off alone so early in the morning,
why he had borrowed Barak’s silly old gun,
and what he meant by sleeping in the sun at
that time of day.
Tom denied that he had been asleep. He
looked at the Magic Gun. It was certainly
rusty, as if it had been in the water, and he
determined to get his father to go with him up
the banks of the Yarra until they should come
to the tree where he knew they would find the
kangaroo skin nailed with the nails from the
Magic Gun, and the three kookooburras caught
in the split branch of the same tree; then he
would be compelled to believe in its power.


THE UNDERGROUND LAKE


“EATING THE BARRIES.”


3iS> H'AwiA* \xmt
OM JONES went to stay with his
uncle at Mount Gambier during the
Christmas holidays, and, as he said
when he wrote to his father, ‘‘he
was enjoying every minute of his visit to the
land of lakes.”
The people who lived in and around the
Mount were arguing about the Blue Lake.
Was it really part of a great underground river,
or was it just the crater of a worn-out volcano
that had got filled up with water ? They had
argued about this for years, and Tom liked to
listen to both sides, although he knew that all
the arguing that would ever be done could
never make him believe anything but the
underground river belief.
There was the beautiful blue water, shut in
by high banks which made it look like a big
basin, half full of blue water. The water was
always fresh and sweet, no bottom could be


found in the middle of the Lake, there was
always a strong current too, oh, of course it
was one of the wonderful underground rivers !
One day Tom went down to see the man in
charge of the pumping station, with whom he
was a great chum. They had been friends
ever since Tom, soon after he came to the
Mount, had helped to clean the boat that was
wanted in a hurry to take a visitor across the
Lake. There was only one boat kept, and it
had to be as clean as man could make it before
it could go on the Blue Lake, as the people of
the town used the water for drinking.
Tom went very often to the Blue Lake. He
meant to be an explorer when he grew up, and
he was trying to fit himself for that work be-
cause he believed that whatever you meant to
be as a man you should train yourself for while
still a boy. On this special day (a day Tom
never forgot because of what happened later
through something he heard then at the pump-
ing station) he had been exploring the country
as usual, and on his way home called in to see
his friend, the man-in-charge. There were
several men talking to his friend, and just as
Tom drew near them he heard an old man say —
“ Well, I tell you what I know, not what I’ve
heard ; the Blue Lake is an underground river,
and when you hear my reason for saying that.


you’ll agree with me. Let me see, it was about
twenty years ago, when, instead of being a
grey-headed old fellow as I am now, I was a
black-headed young fellow, and I had the best
pair of grey horses in this district. I didn’t
believe in the underground river theory then,
because I didn’t know then what I did a little
while after. One day I was driving my pair
of greys along the edge of the Blue Lake, when
one of them slipped down the bank, fell into
the water and sank. I soon got some men to
help me drag the Lake, but no horse could we
find ; so I sadly set off for home with my one
grey horse. I hadn’t got very far along the
road towards McDonald’s Bay when a friend
of mine met me, leading my lost grey horse.
‘ This is yours, is it not ? ’ said my friend. It
was mine, I knew it by the brand on him. Now,
where do you think my friend found him ?
Why, in the water, on the other side of the
hill that separates the Blue Lake from McDonald
Bay. So I knew that if my horse got under-
ground in that way from Blue Lake to Mc-
Donald Bay, there must be a river flowing-
under there.”
When the old man finished telling his story,
he went away chuckling to himself, and every
one laughed at his joke, every one, that is, but
Tom, who went towards his uncle’s house


slowly, thinking, thinking, thinking about the
underground river.
When Tom reached home tea had long been
over, and to explain why he was so late he
told them the story of the grey horse as it had
been told by the old grey-headed man. Tom’s
uncle said he also thought the Blue Lake was
part of an underground river, and Tom then
determined to explore and find the hidden
openings where the river entered and went
out of the big basin.
Next morning Tom set to work at once to
explore the Blue Lake. First he made a map
of that part of the country. Then he drew a
straight line from McDonald Bay to the Lake,
then marked it straight across to the opposite
end of the Lake. This done, he made a sound-
ing line of a long rope with heavy lead tied at
the end, and leaning over the edge of the bank
he tried banging his line against the place
where he hoped the opening might be. Many
times he struck with his leaded line, but each
time it hit against the bank. Tom sighed
sadly, thinking that if only he lived in England
instead of in .Australia, there would come a
little fairy, most likely the Queen of the Fairies
herself, and she would take him down into the
water and show him the hidden openings and
other wonders. But Australia was a new


country, and very few people here believed
there were fairies anywhere.
Just as Tom had sadly given up all hope of
fairy aid, he felt the line pulled gently, oh so
gently at first, then harder and harder, until
at last he could scarcely hold it in his
hands.
“ I won’t give up,” thought Tom, “ the
worst that can happen if I fall in is a wetting.
I can easily swim out.”
He held on and was gradually drawn down
beneath the water; deeper and deeper he
went, until at last he was jerked on one side,
and found himself on the bank of a fiercely
rushing torrent.
Tom’s first thought was one of triumph.
“ I knew it was an underground river,” he
cried aloud. He jumped around as if a pistol
shot had been fired, when a voice near by said,
“ The least you might do is to thank me for
bringing you here.” There stood a tiny gnome
dressed all in green. “ I pulled the leaded
line that you threw down into the water, and
I must say that for a boy who has the sense to
try and find the opening of the river, you know
very little about your country. Australia a
new country indeed ? It was thousands of
years old before Britain was in existence. Oh,
I know what I’m talking about, for I have


lived underground for a good many hundred
years.”
Tom was so thoroughly surprised that he
stood quite still, and stared at the little gnome,
who continued : “No fairies either ? Oh in-
deed, I could tell a different story. No one
to help the poor little Australians ? The help-
ers are here right enough, but most little Aus-
tralians not only don't want the help of the
gnomes and fairies, but don't believe there
are such beings anywhere. Why, even the
one I have just helped has not a word of thanks
for what I have done for him.”
“ Oh, I do thank you, how much I can't
say; I wanted to prove that the Blue Lake is
a river, yes, I wanted to prove that more than
anything else in the world, and I am so glad
you have let me come to see it. Please may I
explore some more of the river ? ”
Not only did the kind gnome allow Tom to
see the wonders underground, but he offered
to act as guide. As soon as Tom had eaten a
bunch of wild cherries that the gnome gave
him, he was not only dry and comfortable, but
had become as small as the gnome, and could
understand the talk of bird, beast and fish.
Tom was surprised at the great change, and
told the gnome he had often enough eaten wild
cherries before, and nothing strange had taken


place; but the gnome explained that only
cherries picked by a gnome, and by him given
to a human being, had the power to so change
the one who ate them.
“ Now,” said the gnome, “ you shall see the
source of this underground river. It would
take rather long to get there by walking, so
we shall go on my airship/'
He gave a strange cry, and at once was an-
swered by a bird which was something like an
albatross. It flew down by the gnome.
“ Come,” said the little fellow, at the same
time jumping on the back of the big bird.
Tom took his place next to his guide, and at
the gnome's bidding the bird rose and flew up-
stream. It was a delightful sensation of rush-
ing, swooping, then rising again, making Tom
just a little frightened at first ; but the bird
had such a broad back, with such a comfortable
hollow place for Tom to nestle into, that he
soon enjoyed his sail through the air.
“ Don't bother to look at the places we pass,
just get used to this way of travel, and on our
return journey I shall point out the things of
interest.”
Tom obeyed, for he did not care to look down
from his lofty perch ; and by the time they
reached the source of the river he had become
quite used to the rapid rush and could look


about fearlessly. Now the river came bubbling
out of the hills far away in the north of a South
Australian spring which flowed along for a
few miles and then seemed to trickle back into
the earth ; but instead of doing that it trickled
down into a cave, a big wonderful cave, lighted
up by thousands of strange white glistening
things, some hanging from the roof, others
standing upright on the floor.
“ Oh,” cried Tom, clapping his hands joy-
ously, “ it’s the fairies’ palace, I know.” The
gnome told him it was only one of many, for
Australia was just honeycombed with them.
A few had been found by the human beings,
for instance, the Narracoorte Caves and the
Buchan Caves, both of which were really far
too near the surface of the earth for safety,
that is, for the safety of the fairies.
“ There are no human beings living near
this cave for miles and miles,” said Tom’s
guide ; “ indeed, we feel sure some of our caves
will never be found, and this is one of them.”
“ Why are no fairies here now ? ” began Tom ;
but his question ended in a shriek, for first he
felt some invisible hands pull his hair on one
side, then on the other, while some one else
tickled his sides and tweaked his ears and nose.
All done so gently, that, after the first shriek,
Tom felt ashamed of his fear, especially as he


saw the gnome grinning at him in a friendly
way. Tom entered into the joke too. “ I
know who you are, you need not hide ; please,
oh please let me see you.”
“ Shut your eyes,” said a sweet voice.
Tom obeyed. He felt something pass swiftly
near his face, but he remained quite still with
eyes closed. “ Open,” cried the same voice.
He had not to be told twice, and the sight that
met his eyes kept him as still and silent as
when he had been surprised at seeing the gnome.
The place seemed to be just full of fairies, all
dressed in green and gold, some sitting on the
beautiful standing crystal, others floating in
the air, others peeping from behind the hanging
crystals, while in front of Tom stood the Queen
surrounded by her fairies in waiting. He knew
she was the Queen by the crown on her head,
and the sceptre in her hand.
“Do homage,” whispered the gnome; so
down on one knee went Tom and kissed the
tiny hand held out by Her Majesty.
“ Oh, you are beautiful, beautiful,” said
Tom. “ You are as beautiful as the golden
wattle blossom on the green trees.” What a
laugh rang through the crystal cave ! A laugh
like the tinkling of hundreds of tiny golden
bells.
“ Little boy, if you had the magic sight with


which to look at the wattle trees, you would
see that often when people think they are
looking at wattle blossom they are really looking
at the Fairies of the Sunny South/ ’
“ Why does the wattle blossom die so soon ? ”
said the Queen.
“ Indeed,” said Tom, “ I have often won-
dered why it lasts so short a time when once
it is picked.”
“ Because the fairies, who play amongst it,
fly away from every branch the humans break
off from the trees.”
“ I shan't pick any more,” said Tom ; “ but,
oh, I do hope I shall have the magic sight and
be able to see you among the blossom next
wattle time.”
“ Unless we give you the power, you will
not be able to see us. We were here when you
came into the cave, and we meant to let you
see us because we know about the Magic Gun.
We know too that you believe in and love
fairies.”
“ Now you shall join in a game with my sub-
jects. After that we must say good-bye, for
I and my fairies have much work to do.”
Tom eujoyed the fairy game very much.
The fairy by a wave of her sceptre, gave him
the power to float through the air, and the
game was one of hide and seek among the


crystals. All too soon for Tom, the fairies, in
obedience to a word from Her Majesty, ceased
their play, and stood before her. She gave her
commands, they said good-bye to Tom, and,
in a moment he and the gnome were alone
once more.
“ Don’t look so sad,” said the gnome, “ for I
have good news for you. Just listen to this.
The fairy Queen was so pleased with you to-
day, that she has consented to a plan of mine
for you to see just where the water enters and
leaves the place known as the Blue Lake.
When we get down to the place where I pulled
you into the water, I have permission to turn
you into a fish. You may stay in the Blue
Lake for a whole day, and, as soon as you swim
through the place where the river flows into
the sea, you will turn into a boy again, and
just swim to land.”
Tom thanked the gnome, you may be sure,
and was eager to be off at once. So getting
on to the big bird’s back again, they flew
quickly away on the return journey. This
time Tom had no fear. He looked down at
the water below, and at the banks of the river
without the least tremble ; but he could not
properly enjoy the wonderful things he saw
because he was thinking all the time of the
treat in store for him.


Arrived at the entrance to the lake, Tom
was given to eat nothing more than a blade of
grass picked from the bank of the river. He
felt a shudder pass through him, and it seemed
as if the water called and beckoned to him —
he could not keep back.
“ Good-bye, kind little gnome, I must jump
into the water. Thank you! Thank you!
Thank you! ”
He found himself floating through the water
murmuring “ Thank you, thank you,” but
already he was some distance across the Lake.
What fun it was floating about without the
least effort! He swam across to the landing
stage where the caretaker keeps the very boat
Tom helped, one day, to clean. He poked his
nose out to look at things.
“A fish! a fish! I’m positive I saw a fish,”
exclaimed a man who was standing on the
steps talking to the caretaker.
“ I’m positive you did not see a fish, sir,”
answered the other. “ I have lived here long
enough, and at first I fished often enough, but
I never saw a fish or felt a bite ; nothing lives
in this water.”
Tom poked up his nose again, this time to
see who was talking to the man-in-charge, for
the voice of the man seemed familiar to him.
The man was his uncle. It was such a surprise


to see his uncle there, that Tom gave a jump
in the water. Both men were looking at the
spot, and this time it was the man-in-charge
who cried, “ A fish ! a fish ! I’m positive I saw a
fish.” Then he darted away to a place from
which he drew forth a rod, baited it, jumped into
his boat, and with Tom’s uncle rowed to a spot
where Tom had been just a few minutes before.
“ Now for some fun,” thought Tom. “ I’ll
nibble the line some distance above the hook,
and they will get wild after a time.” And they
did get wild when time after time the line was
dragged down, and yet the bait was never
touched. Tom at last grew quite careless, he
nibbled nearer and nearer the hook, and at
last was caught. How it happened he did not
know, but he was firmly hooked; it hurt his lip
when he tried to back away, so he at last allowed
the man to pull him up into the boat. “If
there is one fish there must be more,” cried his
uncle; “unhook him and bait again.”
It hurt Tom worse still when the hook was
dragged out of his lip, but what his uncle said
hurt the worst: it was, “ I’ll put the poor thing
out of its misery, give me your pocket knife.”
He held Tom, the fish, in his left hand, took the
knife, and was just going to stab when Tom
cried out in agony, “ Uncle, uncle, don’t you
know me.”


Both men stopped what they were doing to
look at the fish! “It spoke/’ said Tom’s
uncle. In his surprise he did not hold the poor
fish so tightly. Tom gave a flap, a jump, and as
he reached the water, he cried aloud, “ Hurrah !
hurrah! ”
“ No more fishing here for me,” said Tom’s
uncle. “ Nor for me,” said the man-in-charge,
and they rowed quickly to land.
Tom lost no time in getting away, right away,
from the place where he had so nearly met his
death.
“ I won’t be inquisitive again as long as I’m a
fish,” he said, and swam straight for the place
he had marked as the part where the river ran
out from the Lake to join the sea. Ugh! as he
floated through the big opening into the under-
ground river, he seemed to be able to feel the
darkness, because it was so black, but after a
little while his eyes got used to it, and presently
he saw on either side of the river many beauti-
ful crystals which glowed softly. He knew he
was now passing through another cave, and he
wondered if any fairiesJwere watching him. Then
the river wound round again, and, lo ! there was
still another cave shining brightly on all sides, for
its wall roof and floor were almost covered with
fungi.
“ Some of us are here,” cried a sweet voice,


" THE FISH GAVE A FLAP, A JUMP, AND REACHED THE WATER.”


“ and you shall have just a glimpse of us at our
work.” At the same instant he saw fairies in all
directions, all hard at work, making the fungi
grow brighter and brighter.
“ Tell me what you are doing,” said Tom.
“ How do you make it all glow like that ? ”
“ The fairies’ secret, little man. Good-bye !
Good-bye.”
“ Good-bye,” answered Tom. “ Thank you
for the glimpse.”
He had scarcely finished speaking when he
felt himself being borne along at an awful pace ;
the water was rushing to meet the sea. They
met, and Tom felt himself hurled down ever
so far below the surface of the water, then
tossed up again. He had gone down as a fish,
but he came up as a boy, and his wet clothes
kept him from swimming very easily. Just as he
thought he would not have strength to swim
much further, he heard a voice say —“ There is a
boy sinking, pull over and take him in the
boat.”
In a few minutes he was safe among a boat-
load of picnickers who had driven from the
Mount to Dingley Dell, the beautiful place
where Adam Lindsay Gordon lived for many
years.
“ Why, it is young Tom Jones,” cried one of
the rowers. “ Did you walk all the way here


from your uncle’s place in the Mount ? It is a
good nineteen miles.”
“ No,” answered truthful Tom. “ I swam
from the Blue Lake.”
But no one would listen to his tale of adven-
tures. They hurried him to “ Adam Lindsay
Gordon’s ” Cottage, wrapped him in shawls, and
soon drove away with him to a doctor, because,
they said, he was raving. In vain Tom pointed
to a nasty jagged cut in his lip, and told them
he had been a fish for a time. They would not
listen, and even to this day, if he begins to tell
his wondrous adventures, they smile so broadly
that Tom gives up the attempt to make them
know the truth about the river theory.
Tom knows what he knows, however, and he
is certain he has not seen the last of the fairies,
but that in the wattle blossom season they
will allow him to see them among the golden
blossoms on the river banks.




THE ORIGIN OF THE YARRA YARRA
(Ever-flowing)


1 ' ■“ ’ f'
“ EARAK SNATCHED THE HONEYCOMB AWAY, AND PUT IT IN HIS MOUTH.”


The Origin ot
the Yarra
Yarra
(Ever-flowing)
ONG years ago, before the white men
came to the Sunny South, there
lived a little black boy with his
mother and father near the happy
hunting grounds among the Baw Baw Moun-
tains. Barak was the little boy’s name.
Barak was all very much of everything about
him. He was very fat and shiny, his eyes were
very black, his hair very frizzy, his nose very
flat, and his lips very thick, his laugh very jolly,
and his heart very kind.
One day his mother said to him, “ Barak,
your mother is sad ; honey is the only medicine
that will make her happy. Go, find the wild
honey and bring some in the honeycomb.”
Barak being very kind, went to look for honey
for his mother. A long, long way he went
before he found a honey tree, and when he
found one he sat down under it and cried, for a


big, big bear was licking his paws after having
eaten all the honey.
“ 800 hoo! 800 hoo! ” cried Barak.
“ Mother is sad because she has no honey, and
you have eaten it all up.”
“ Good little fat boy,” said the bear, “ there
is another honey tree behind this one. I am
very thirsty, and the water is a long way from
here; bring me some water, and I will climb
the tree and give you honey.”
Barak dried his tears and smiled.
“ Good, big bear, bring me the honey first,
then I will get the water for you.”
Now the bear was very thirsty indeed after
having eaten so much sweet honey, and the
sun was shining so fiercely that he really felt
too hot and tired to walk to the water, while
he could easily climb the honey tree. Barak
stood under the tree, watching the bear, who
quickly brought down a small piece of honey-
comb.
“ Give it to me to take to my mother,” said
Barak.
“ When I have drunk the water, you may
have the honeycomb,” said the bear, watching
the golden honey drop slowly from the comb.
But even while he was speaking, Barak snatched
the honeycomb away, and when the bear tried
to get it back again, the little boy put it in his


mouth, and the honey dropped down his throat.
“ Where is the water you promised me ? ”
growled the bear.
“ I promised to get you some water if you
gave me some honey, but you would not give
me the honey.”
“You have eaten the honey,” cried the big
bear.
“ But you did not give it me, big bear; I
took it.”
Then the big bear took up stones to kill the
fat little black boy, who ran quickly behind a
tree, and there was such a chasing around and
around that tree that at last Barak got so
tired he thought he must fall to the ground,
but he kept on running, and he cried aloud to
the Great Spirit to help him.
Now the Great Spirit knew that Barak had
wanted the honey for his mother, and that he
had only eaten it so that the big bear should
not get it again. So when he heard the little
boy cry to him for help when the big bear’s
breath was hot on him as he ran, the kind Great
Spirit was sorry for the little boy who had only
been foolish.
“ I will send a Shining One to help him,” he
said.
How glad Barak was when a Shining One
suddenly caught him up in his arms and ran


away with him. It was a hot, hot day; but
Barak could hear, first, the gurgle of a stream,
then the sound of deep running water, and as
he peeped over the shoulder of the Shining
One to see if the bear were very near, he saw a
strange sight, for as the Shining One ran, he
dragged his right foot along the ground, and
the earth opened and water flowed in the
opening.
In and out among the trees, often doubling
back, then on again, ran the Shining One,
with the bear following fast. All day long they
went, until the sun went down like a ball of fire
and the moon rose looking very much like the
fiery sun, showing that the next day would be
another scorcher.
In the moonlight the big bear looked very
terrible.
“He is coming nearer ! ” cried Barak. “ Oh,
don’t let him catch me ! ”
“ Don’t be afraid,” said the Shining One,
in a quiet voice that made Barak feel happy
even in his fear. “ Tell me what you can see
following the bear ? ”
“ Yarra Yarra it is,” said the boy joyfully;
“ a deep swift river flows in the track you make
with your foot as you pass along.”
“ And look in front of you now, what do you
see there ? ”


“ The sea, the beautiful sea,” said Barak.
“ We will go on the sea to the Great Spirit
who sent me when you called to Him for help;
but the bear, who only thinks of revenge, will
be caught between the river and the deep blue
sea.”
And so it happened.
Barak was taken in the Shining One’s arms
right up to the Great Spirit who had heard and
answered his cry for help, and the bear, who
only wanted revenge, was drowned.
Barak’s mother waited long for the honey.
When she found no dear little black son coming
back to her, she followed his tracks until she
came to the tree from which the chase had
begun. There she found marks of her dear
boy’s feet, and knew he had been chased by a
big, big bear. There, too, she found, where
all had been dry and hard, a hole in the earth,
as if some one had thrust in their foot with
great force, and from this hole flowed water.
Barak’s mother followed the flowing water
for many days, for she could not go fast like
the Shining One. At last she came to the
place where the water flowed into the sea, and
there, on the seashore, was the big bear quite
dead and harmless. Far away over the seas
was a bright, beautiful light, and even as the
lonely mother stood looking at it, the bright


“ FINDING THE FOOTPRINT OF THE ‘SHINING ONE.’ ”


clouds parted, there came forth the Shining
One, and as he left the golden glory Barak’s
face shone out. He beckoned with his hand,
and his mother heard him say, “ Come with
the Shining One, mother ; I am waiting for you
here.”




FORGET-ME-NOT


“THE MAN IN THE MOON.”


I % ®
jARIE, Marie, go and make those
boys cease their quarrelling.” It
was the old housekeeper who ruled
over “ Sunny Farm ” whose voice
could be heard calling to Marie, her daughter,
and the boys who were quarrelling were the
seven sons of King Olaf, who, wishing them to
be strong sturdy fellows, had sent them to live
at a farm in the country, for they had all been
ill, and the sweet fresh air and pure milk and
the outdoor life would do more to make them
strong and healthy than all the medicine in the
world. So said the Court physician (who per-
haps was tired of having to doctor such trouble-
some patients).
At first they enjoyed the free country life,
but after a short time they tired of it, and longed
for the excitement of town and the palace.


At least, six out of the seven princes were tired
of it, but the seventh, Prince Charlie, wished
he might stay there always. His days were
always full and happy, for, unless his brothers
insisted upon his joining in their rough games,
he followed the farmer at the animals’ feeding
time, watched the chaff-cutting, and the hundred
and one interesting things at the farm, and
when he was tired would go indoors and sit in
the big cool kitchen, where he was sure to find
Marie, gentle, blue-eyed Marie, busily sewing,
or, perchance, reading a book. Marie always
greeted his entrance with a smile, and willingly
read to him, or told him a story while she plied
her needle. To-day, however, the princes had
insisted that Charlie must join in their game,
which consisted of each throwing up a golden
ball at the same time to see which could throw
his the highest. They all threw their balls
at the same time, so, of course, it was quite
impossible to say whose went highest, and a
great noise and squabbling ensued. Such a
noise that it disturbed the farmer’s wife in the
kitchen, so she sent her little daughter Marie
to make peace amongst them.
Out ran Marie to do her mother’s bidding,
but at the door she saw an old bent man with
a bundle of sticks on his back, and a wallet at
his side. He was listening to the great hubbub


coming from the field where the princes were
quarrelling.
“ Hey day! where away so fast ? ” he asked,
as Marie was running past him after having
made him a deep curtsey.
“ Mother sent me to stop that dreadful noise,
but I know it will be hard work. They are
growing more and more disagreeable every
day.”
She ran on, and, when she reached the princes,
they were actually fighting with their fists.
The only one who would listen to her pleading
was Prince Charlie, who readily left his brothers
and went with her back to the house.
When they entered the kitchen, the old bent
man was enjoying a cup of tea. He looked up
and asked how Marie had managed the quarrel,
as the noise seemed as great as ever.
“ They would not stop, at least, I mean that
six of them would not. Of course Prince
Charlie came away. He does not care for
fights.”
“ Ah, Ell remember that,” said the Old Man,
and that night, when the princes were in bed
and asleep, the Old Man (who was no less a
personage than the Old Man in the Moon, who
had come to the earth for various reasons)
went to the bedroom where lay the seven
brothers, opened the golden ball of each (with


the exception of Prince Charlie’s), then, holding
each of the six in turn by the hair with his
magic tweezers, he kept them suspended in the
air until their size had become so small that
they could easily be put in their golden balls,
popped them in, closed the balls, and placed the
six of them in his wallet.
All this had been done without a word being
said to the farmer or his wife. The Old Man
came back to the room, and sat down again by
the fire, remarking that he would go to bed
now, as the moon would be level with the earth
at four o’clock, and he must be there punctually
to step in and do his work. They had all risen
to go to their rooms, when great thundering
knocks resounded on the door, and a voice cried —
“ Open in the King’s name ! ”
The farmer hastily unlocked the door, and
there entered Prince Claude, the cousin of the
seven princes. He was followed by several
soldiers.
“ Where is the King ? ” he demanded.
“In the palace, I suppose,” answered the
farmer.
“ The King is here,” said the Prince; “do
you not know that the late King, the father of
the seven princes, died yesterday, and I have
come to take his eldest son back to the palace
to be King in his father’s place ? ”


The farmer started to go to the room where
the seven princes had slept, but he was stopped
by the Old Man of the Moon.
“ You need not go,” said the Old Man, “ it
is too late. This evening, after they had gone
to bed, I did what your wife has so often asked
me to do.”
“ What was that ? ” they cried out together.
“ Why, I took means to stop their quarrel-
ling.”
Then he told them how he had done it,
showed them the tweezers with which he had
worked the magic, showed them also the six
golden balls containing the six princes.
“ There are only six,” said the farmer’s wife.
“ Ah, yes, Prince Charlie ceased quarrelling
when told to do so, therefore he is still sleeping
in bed.”
“ He, then, must be King in his father’s
place,” said Prince Claude, but he did not mean
what he said, for he had quickly formed the
wicked plan of doing to Prince Charlie what
the Old Man had done to the other princes.
When every one was in bed, and the house
quite still and silent, Prince Claude went to the
room where the Old Man slept, quietly took the
magic tweezers and the wallet, and in a very
few minutes had secured poor Prince Charlie
in his own golden ball, and placed it with the


other six in the wallet which he then placed
by the Old Man’s side again.
At six o’clock, when the farmer roused the
household, it was dicovered that not only had
the Old Man gone, but Prince Charlie had dis-
appeared. Prince Claude pretended he knew
nothing about it, and soon gladly set off for the
palace, for he was the one who must now be
King. Poor little Marie went about her work
very sadly, taking long walks when she had
time to do so, and asking every one she met if
they had seen any one answering to the descrip-
tion of Prince Charlie.
Almost a year had gone by, when, one day,
as she wandered about further from home than
usual, she heard some one moaning, and going
towards the spot from whence the sound came,
she saw a man tied to a tree, his face all swollen
and looking full of agony.
“ Water, water, for the love of heaven, a
few drops of water ! ”
“ Poor man,” said tender-hearted Marie, and
she soon brought him some water in her hat
from the stream near by.
“You do not know me,” moaned the man,
“ but I know you, you are Marie of ‘ Sunny
Farm.’ ”
Of course Marie asked her usual question,
and this time she got an answer. The man


“MARIE FINDING THE MAN.”


told her that he was Prince Claude. This she
could not believe at first, for he was dressed in
rags. He told her what he had done to Prince
Charlie, how he had also gone to the palace,
and had been crowned King, but that his con-
science had troubled him so much that he had
done many wicked and foolish things to try and
forget his sin. He told her, too, how his sub-
jects had rebelled against him, and had driven
him away from the palace, and that robbers
had set upon him, robbed and beaten him,
taken away his good clothes, and put those
rags upon him, and had then tied him to a tree,
where, all through the hot day, he had been in
sight of the water, and could not get a drop.
“ You have been very wicked,” said Marie,
“ but at least you have told me where to look
for dear Prince Charlie. I cannot cut the
leather which binds you to the tree, so, before
I set out to find Prince Charlie, I shall run back
to the farm, and get my father to come and
set you free.” .
The farmer came, but long before he arrived
Prince Claude was dead, and all that could be
done for the wretched man was to bury him.
Not another instant did Marie lose. At once
she set off on her long journey to the point
where the moon touches the earth. For days
and days she walked, begging food at houses


“ MARIE GOING TO THE MOON.”


by the way, and at last she reached the desired
point; but, alas ! when she saw the Old Man
and asked him to give her back Prince Charlie's
ball, he told her that the balls were not in his
keeping, and the only one to help her was the
boatman who ferried a boat across daily from
the moon to the stars, for the seven balls had
been placed in the sky as seven stars. They
waited until the queer boat came alongside the
moon, and the Old Man helped Marie into the
boat.
When the boatman heard Marie's story and
her request, he at once steered towards a point
$
where shone seven stars in this fashion. * * *
* *
*
The one in the centre shone brightly, but
those around it were dim and gave but little
light. “ That is Prince Charlie's, I am sure,"
said Marie, “ the one in the middle;" and
when she looked closely at it, she found a little
mark that Prince Charlie had made upon it one
day. How she thanked the boatman! But
the boatman smiled at her sadly, for he knew
that any one onte touched by the magic tweezers
and enclosed in the golden ball, could never
be brought to life again.
The boatman rowed her back to the moon,
and the Old Man helped her out gently and
lovingly. “ Kind little girl," he said, “ you


FORGET-ME-NOT
can never see bonnie Prince Charlie again in
this world, but take the ball to the earth, bury
it in your garden, weep tears of loving sorrow
over the tiny grave, and you will be re-
warded.”
Marie clasped the ball lovingly. When she
reached the earth again, she set off at once for
home, hardly stopping to rest or eat by the
way, for she wished to see what would happen
when she buried the golden ball.
“ Oh, my dear ! my dear ! ” cried her mother,
when Marie returned, how I have missed
you! ”
“ Little one, you must never go away again ;
we cannot spare you,” said her father.
“I shall never leave you again, dear mother
and father ; for all I love is here now.”
She buried the golden ball in her garden
just under her bedroom window, and indeed she
did water the little grave with the tears of love,
as the Old Man had told her to do, and the next
time he came to visit the farm, she led him to
the little grave, and, 10, it was covered with a
pretty blue flower which had a tiny golden
centre.
“ Ah ! ” said the Old man, “ did I not tell
you you would be rewarded ? ”
“ The blue eyes and the golden hair of Prince
Charlie will never be forgotten now; they seem


IjyJ 1
to say to me, ‘ Forget-me-not, forget-me-not,’ ”
answered Marie.
And ever since that time the tiny flower has
been called “ Forget-me-not.”


THE PALACE OF TRUTH


" THEY CAME IN SIGHT OF AN ENORMOUS TREE, UPON WHICH GREW
GOLDEN APPLES.”


HERE was once a King who had three
sons, three such haughty sons, in-
deed they were as bad as it was
possible for princes to be. Their
mother had died when the youngest was a baby,
and every one had petted and spoilt them until
they had become unbearable. At last the
Queen of the Fairies decided that if they were
to do any good in the world as Princes, she had
better have a hand in their education. Tutors
they had had until at last there was not to be
found any one in the Kingdom who would
undertake to teach them. The present one had
given notice that he meant to leave, but the
Fairy Queen stopped that.
Their last day (for some time) amongst mortals
had come. Oh, it had been a terrible day for
every one in the Palace ! It seemed as if the
Princes had gone mad, and they had ended up
by breaking every piece of crockery in every
bedroom, little dreaming what hard work it
would mean for them in Fairyland.
Night came, the three Princes were in bed


and fast asleep. Suddenly they awoke,-hearing
their names distinctly called. Each Prince sat
up in bed, gazing, in something like fear, at a
lovely little vision, the Queen of the Fairies her-
self. They were only conscious of a beautiful
face, above a shimmer of gold, looking sadly at
them. “ Princes you are called, but, unless the
Fairies themselves help you, you will never be
worthy of the title. You must come with me
to the ‘ Palace of Truth,’ ” said the Queen.
“ Only give us one more chance,” they all
said together.
“You have had too many chances already ;
get up and put on your clothes.”
They obeyed in silence.
“ Turn out your pockets.” They obediently
pulled out string, knives, and other things.
“ Stand up in front of me and look at me.”
The three Princes fixed their eyes upon the
Fairy’s face. She waved her golden wand
gently to and fro, and, as she waved it over
them, they gradually grew smaller and smaller,
until at last they were as tiny as it is possible for
human beings to become.
“Now I shall call my carriage, and you may
drive with me.” She called, her voice sound-
ing like the tinkle of a silver bell, and in answer
to her call, there came through the open window
a carriage made of mother-of-pearl and drawn


by butterflies. The drive really was delightful,
and when they found themselves rapidly going
over the Black Forest, they looked at each other
joyfully.
“ We have never been allowed to go near the
Black Forest,” said Prince Thomas.
“ No, that was the one thing we could not
persuade any one to let us do, because it is
haunted by hobgoblins and devils,” said Prince
Richard.
“ You are going there, now,” replied the
Fairy, and to their astonishment the butterflies
flew down to the ground in the very heart of the
Forest. The three Princes got out of the carriage
at a sign from the Fairy Queen. She then told
them that their education in Fairyland had
begun, and they must walk through the Forest
until they arrived at the Palace of Truth.
She gave them each a present. Prince
Thomas received a tiny walking-stick. Prince
Richard two small round stones. Prince Henry
a small box. The Princes thought these were
stupid presents, but were afraid to say so ;
only they determined to throw them away as
soon as they were alone.
All too soon the Fairy Queen drove away in her
carriage, and the boys in fear took hold of hands,
and tried to feel brave, but oh dear ! how
frightened they were! As long as they kept to


a narrow path, which seemed to go on and on for
miles, nothing happened, but if they wandered
ever such a little way from the path, they heard
growls and horrid noises, and saw creatures
glaring at them. So they kept to the path and
walked forward until they felt so weary that
they really had to rest; so they sat down on the
edge of the path, in the shade of a tree, and as
they sat there they heard a curious grind, grind,
grinding noise as of two stones grinding some-
thing between them.
Their curiosity at last made them go to try
and discover what the noise really was, but, when
they attempted to go near the bush from behind
which the noise came, they were driven back
by the silly little Stick that the Fairy had given
Prince Thomas. It looked such a funny little
thing as it went hoppity, hoppity, hop on its one
leg that they could do nothing but roll on the
ground and laugh, and then the silly Stick stood
bolt upright with its crook turned towards them,
and somehow it looked exactly like their last
teacher. You see, it really was their last teacher
turned into a stick by the Fairy, and given this
work to do. When the Princes discovered the
likeness in the Stick to the tutor, they laughed
more than ever—indeed they laughed until they
could laugh no more.
As they lay very still on the ground, tired


with laughing, they heard the grinding sound
cease. Prince Thomas jumped up quickly, and
ran to look behind the bush. This time the
Stick did not attempt to stop him. There he
found three plates of bread and milk, three cups
of coffee, and three slices of bread and butter.
How the Princes enjoyed that meal, prepared
by the Two Stones who, of course, were the two
cooks from the Palace transformed by the
Fairy. After breakfast, they went on their
journey again, not because they wished to go,
for indeed they wanted to lie still under the
trees and be lazy, but the Stick drove them
along, and, if one of them dared to go away
from the right path, the Stick just whacked him
until he went back to the path.
All day they went along that narrow path,
only stopping for meals, and, when evening
came, they were really tired and gladly followed
the Stick to the shelter of a bush, where, to their
surprise, they found three nice soft blankets.
It did not take them long to roll themselves up
snugly, and they were soon fast asleep. I know
you have guessed that the blankets came out of
the wee box given by the Fairy to Prince Henry.
For days and days they marched through
the Forest, never seeming to get any nearer the
end of it. Each day was just like that first one —
The Stick compelled them to keep to the road,


their meals were prepared by the Two Stones,
and their blankets spread from the mysterious
box.
At last one day they came in sight of an
enormous tree, upon which grew golden apples,
and, for the first time during their journey in
the Forest, they saw people. But were they
people ? they looked like it, except for their
noses, which were dreadfully long. Noses of
all lengths they saw. There was one man whose
nose wound round his legs and tripped him up
when he tried to walk. “ Keep away, keep
away,” shouted this man, “ take warning by
me ; if you eat of the fruit of this tree, if you
even take a bite, you cannot leave off.” Even
while he spoke, he kept on grabbing and eating.
Fortunately for the Princes the Stick kept strict
watch, and would not even let them go on the
side near the tree, and when they were safely
past, he hopped behind, to protect any of them
running back to the fascinating fruit trees.
But soon they forgot all about the tree at the
sight which met their eyes. Straight in front
of them was a beautiful Palace, built of pure
glass, and the narrow path along which they
had journeyed for so many days led up to the
very steps of the Palace. Hoppity, hoppity,
hop went the Stick, leading the way. Open flew
the door to admit them, but it closed with a


bang when they were inside. Hoppity, hoppity,
hop went the Stick down the big hall to a room
at the far end, and when the Princes went into
the room, the Stick hung itself upon a nail by
the door, its work for the day being finished.
The room, which was to be their dining-room,
play-room, and bedroom combined, for many
days to come, was clean, but very plainly fur-
nished with three beds, three chairs, a table, and
an enormous cupboard on the top of which stood
a big Noah’s Ark. The Princes tried to open the
big cupboard, but could not ; then they thought
they would get the Noah’s Ark down and|play
with that, but it was so far out of their reach
that even a chair held on top of another chair
standing on the table was not high enough to
get it down. The Princes gazed the
coveted toy.
“ I wish,” said Prince Thomas, after some
time, “ I wish it would come down.” No
sooner had he uttered the wish than the little
men and animals all came rushing pell-mell from
their Ark, and were soon on the table. “ What
fun,” cried the Prince, “to play with things
that can come to you of their own accord.”
For some time the strange new toy charmed
the three Princes, but it was impossible for
such spoiled boys to play together for long with-
out a quarrel, and a big quarrel began between


“THE TOYS RUNNING AWAY.”


Henry and Richard for the possession of the
camels. They quarrelled so badly that fists
began to be used, and only stopped when Thomas
called to them to look at the funny playthings,
for they were all running away. Off the table
scampered animals, as well as Noah and the
other men, and before the Princes could stop
them, they had climbed up the cupboard, gone
into their Ark and shut the door. No amount
of coaxing could bring them down this time,
and as the top of the cupboard was quite out of
reach, the Princes decided to go to bed.
A real bed was very comfortable after having
lain on the ground in the Forest for so many
nights. They were so excited with the strange
Palace and the wonderful Noah’s Ark that they
could not sleep, so they talked for along time —
at least, Thomas and Henry talked, but Prince
Richard shut his eyes and tried to sleep. His
brothers’ voices kept him awake, and by degrees
the bed which had seemed so comfortable grew
harder and harder ; really he was growing more
and more grumbly, although he did not know it.
He turned from side to side impatiently, then,
alas ! a grumble slipped out: “ Bother this bed,
it is so hard that I ” The sentence was
never finished, for the bed shot up on its end
and sent Richard sprawling to the floor in the
midst of the blankets. The worst of it was that


the bed refused to allow him to sleep in it that
night. There it stood up on end, and the united
efforts of the three Princes could not bring it
into its usual position. The other Princes in-
vited Richard into their beds, but as soon as he
attempted to get in, the bed began to rise upon
end, and he was tumbled out.
“No use,” said Richard, “ I know it is my
own fault; I grumbled, so I must sleep on the
floor to-night. The Fairies mean to punish me.”
After breakfast next morning the Princes in-
tended to play with the animals of the Noah’s
Ark again, but no amount of wishing would
bring them down from their resting-place, for
morning is the time for lessons, not for toys.
While they were still standing in front of the
cupboard, looking up at the Ark and wishing
their hardest, the Stick came in and drove them
out of the room, down the big hall, and into a
small room. There he left them, and, as the
door banged behind him, they looked round the
room in curiosity. It seemed to be full of dead
flies, butterflies, and other insects, and while
they were wondering why they should be
brought into what seemed to be a burying-place
for dead insects, the Queen of the Fairies
appeared before them.
“ Princes,” she said scornfully, “ these poor
dumb things which could not protect themselves


were tormented and killed by Princes, who are
not worthy even of the term boy, which stands
for bravery—and Princes should be the leaders of
boys, the bravest of the brave.” She looked
terrible in her anger. The poor Princes dared
not utter a word.
She went on, “ You had your ‘ fun,’ as you
called it, now you have got to pay for it, and this
is the price. Every day from morning till
night, you must stay in this room, and work at
these poor little insects. Every leg and every
wing must be put on its owner’s body in the
right place. When all are ready, I shall appear.”
The Fairy vanished, and the Princes, who had
learned to obey during their journey through the
Forest, set to work. Weary work it was too,
and the worst of it was, that, if one of the
Princes grumbled ever so little, the insect upon
which he was working fell to pieces, and the parts
had to be patiently searched for, and put
together again.
At last, however, every insect was complete,
and just as the Princes gave a sigh of relief as
they looked at their finished task, there stood
the Queen of the Fairies before them. No
anger was in her face now, but a sweet loving
smile. She gently waved her wand over the
dead insects, and, 10, a buzzing and humming
immediately began as they stirred, flew round


the room, and out of the window into the fresh
air.
The Queen looked sadly at the Princes. “If
you had been cruel only, your work would now
be done, your education finished, but, alas! there
are two more rooms through which you must
go. The work will be hard, but if you will
remember that grumbling undoes the work
you grumble about, your task will be much
easier than this sad one has been to you.”
She vanished as suddenly as she had ap-
peared, and the faithful old Stick came hoppity,
hoppity, hop into the room, and, following it,
they were led into a big room full of broken
crockery. They gave a start of dismay as they
saw how much there was. Could it be possible
they had destroyed so many things ? “ Look,”
said Prince Thomas, pointing to six big tables,
“ there are the bedroom sets we smashed up
the day the Fairies took us away. Ido wish
we had been wiser, then we would not have
had to work so hard now.” His brothers
agreed, and although this was rather a selfish
motive for wishing to be good, still it was a
big step in the right direction, and the first
real step they had taken towards going back
to their father’s Palace.
They set to work with a will, patiently put-
ting the big pieces in order, and then searching


for the small bits to fit in. A long, long time
it took, and knowing that the least grumble
might mean the whole of the crockery falling
to pieces, and the pieces all having to be put
together again, they tried so hard to be patient
that not a single grumble escaped one of them.
What joy when the whole of the things were
mended! This time the Fairy did not appear,
but they were led by the Stick into another
room full of queer rolls of paper. What could
they be ? Looking closely at them, they soon
discovered. Alas ! all the bad or disobedient
or rude words they had ever spoken were
plainly to be seen. “Oh dear ! ” said Prince
Richard, “ can it be possible that we were such
bad, disobedient, rude boys ? we should have
had more niceness than that.”
“Yes, indeed,” replied his brothers.
Ah, if they had but known it, that speech
showed they were a good distance on the road
to “ home.” As they spoke the Fairy appeared
and told them they must rub out the awful
words, and then bury the rolls in the garden.
It was not very difficult work, only tedious,
and the more they rubbed, the sorrier they
became for having said such words. When
three rolls were cleaned, they each shouldered
one, and bore them through the open French
window, and down a long winding path, which


led to a flower garden quite out of sight of the
room in which they had worked at the rubbing.
There were many mounds in this garden, and
on each grew pretty flowers.
The Princes set to work to dig a hole for
each bundle. This was quite a fresh kind of
labour for them, and at first they thought it
great fun to use a pick and shovel, but, before
long, each Prince felt his back aching rather
badly. The pain grew greater and greater
until at last the grumbling began. It did not
go on very long, however, for the sight of the
three rolls, tumbling along the garden path,
making straight for the house, made them
remember the Fairy’s caution about grumbling.
At once they ran after the rolls meaning to
bring them back, but no matter how fast they
ran, the rolls kept some distance in front of
them, and reached the house first.
“ Positively no more grumbling for me,”
remarked Prince Richard.
“ Nor for me.”
“ Nor for me,” echoed his brothers.
When they had carried the rolls back once
more, and had dug until their backs ached,
they wisely lay down on the ground and rested,
then set to work again, and soon finished the
digging and buried the rolls.
When they brought the second lot of rolls


to be buried, they were delighted to see pretty
roses growing out of the mounds where they
had buried their first burdens.
At last, after many weeks of patient work,
the room was cleared of rolls, and the Princes
waited for the Fairy to appear, or for the Stick
to come and lead them to another room. Neither
of these things happening, and seeing the door
of the room open (it had been closed while
they worked at the rubbing) they went out
into the great hall. Every door on either side
of the hall was open, and boys of all sizes were
hurrying along, either coming out of the rooms,
running along the hall, or going out of the
big door at the end, while an old man, bent
nearly double, rang a big bell and called
loudly:
“ Examination day is here, hurry to the
Examination room, the Fairies are waiting
there.”
He kept on repeating this, as he walked up
and down, and the Princes quite meant to go
to the Examination, but their attention was
attracted by a queer-looking boy whose arms
flapped about as if he thought they were wings,
whose head] was rather like a big bluebottle-
fly’s, and who seemed to be trying to climb
up the wall, at the same time making a buzzing
noise with his mouth.


“ What are you doing ? ” asked one of the
Princes.
“ I’m (buzz) going to the (buzz, buzz) examin-
ation (buzz, buzz, buzz).”
“ But why are you doing that sort of thing;
do you think you are a fly ? ”
“ (Buzz) I’m only (buzz, buzz, buzz) going
to the door (buzz, buzz).” He looked at his
questioners in a surprised way. Prince Thomas
began to answer, but he never finished that
answer, for the door closed with a resounding
bang. They ran to it and tried to open it,
but it was too firmly closed against them. It
had opened for those ready for examination
to go through, and they had missed their
chance. However, the old man who had been
calling every one to go to the Examination, did
not mean to miss his chance. It was the rule
that those unfit for examination, who remained
in the hall after the big door closed, should be
taken by the old man, and given to the gnomes
for slaves.
Imagine the Princes’ surprise when they
found themselves picked up and thrust into a
great leather bag in company with the buzzing
boy, and a few other queer looking creatures
who bore some resemblance to boys. The
old man carried them to the foot of a great
mountain, rolled away a stone which concealed


a hole in the mountain, and calling out, “ Only
eight this time, here they come,” emptied the
bag into the opening. Down fell the victims,
and when they reached the bottom, the gnomes
danced around them in glee. The new-comers
were quickly set to work, and kept at it too,
and it was a good thing the Princes had learned
patience in the Palace of Truth, or they would
have grumbled and received the horrible punish-
ments they saw inflicted on the buzzing boy
and the others who had failed to learn patience
during their trial time in Fairyland.
Of course the gnomes knew there must be
some mistake as soon as they saw the Princes.
They were not failures, but they kept them
as slaves, put chains on them, and made them
work as hard as the others had to, making gold
for the earth. How much time the Princes
spent in gnomeland they never knew, but they
always kept a sharp look out for any chance to
escape, and at last it came.
The gnomes were holding a great festival,
as they always do once every thousand years,
and the right time for it came while the Princes
were with them. The slaves were set to work
alone, but most of them went to sleep when
there were no gnomes’ goads to make them
keep awake.
First the gnomes had great jumping trials.


when they jumped over the great fires, seeing,
not who could jump highest, but who could
bear to jump nearest the fire. Then they
drank quantities of a very fiery liquid that
made them first fight with each other, and
then fall into a heavy sleep. The Princes
knew this sleep would last for many hours,
so now was the chance they had longed for,
and must at once use. Quickly they filed
through the heavy chains which bound them,
and ran off in what they hoped was the right
direction. On and on they ran, although soon
tired with their unaccustomed exercise ; but
success meant freedom from slavery, so, though
very tired, they persevered in their running.
At length they saw a point of light, and
when they reached it, lo ! it led them out into
a beautiful meadow filled with green grass
and flowers. They threw themselves at full
length on the sweet smelling grass, so delightful
to touch and see and smell after their long
imprisonment in the gold-mine.
Presently Prince Thomas said, “ There is a
great thing like an umbrella here, if you will
help me, I shall climb to the top, see what there
is to be seen, and tell you, for we must soon
decide in which direction to journey on.”
The great thing was a big toadstool.
With his brothers’ help the Prince climbed


to the top, but almost at once he took a flying
leap to the ground again, crying, “ Hide, get
under this shelter, for there is a great monster
coming this way.”
They crept under the toadstool, but to their
horror, the monster stopped quite close to
them, and began to think aloud.
“ Enemies encompass me on every side, my
nephew has secretly been working against me,
telling lies, and stirring the people to rebellion.”
Here he sighed deeply. If only my three
sons were with me! but alas, the fairies took
them away many years ago, and they have
never been heard of since.”
The Princes who had listened to all the old
man (who seemed a monster to them because
of their tiny size) said, began to understand.
This was their father, the King. They peeped
out at him. Yes, their dear father, though now
an old, old man with white hair. So their
cousin, Prince Claude, was a traitor.
A great longing filled the breast of each
Prince. Oh, to be big enough to fight for and
take care of their dear father. No thought of
self now. Ah, that was just what their lessons
in Fairyland had taught therm This unselfish
desire to help another was the one thing
needed to restore them to their proper size, and
to their astonishment each saw, not only himself,


but the other two, grow and grow and grow
until they were quite as big as their father.
The King had flung himself on the ground,
and lay still with his eyes closed. Hearing a
noise, he looked up and saw three strong-looking
young men standing before him.
“ Treachery,” he cried, springing to his feet
and drawing his sword, “ Prince Claude has
sent you to follow and kill me.”
He would have struck at them, but they
stood quite still, and, as they uttered the one
word “ Father” his sword dropped from his hand.
It did not take long for them to tell him
what had happened since their disappearance
with the Fairies, neither did it take long for
him to tell of the sad state of affairs in his
Kingdom, brought about by their cousin, who
was trying to make the people rebel against
their lawful King.
Great was the rejoicing in the City that
night. A great supper was made, bonfires
were lighted, the bells were rung, and the King
presented his sons to the chief Ministers of State.
Prince Thomas being the eldest had, of course,
to remain at home, and help the King to govern
the land. Prince Richard led the Army, and
quickly put down all rebellion in the Kingdom.
Prince Henry took command of the Navy,
and gained great victories at sea.


The Kingdom, governed and guarded so
wisely by the Fairy-taught Princes, was known
throughout the whole world as the Happy
Kingdom.


3 1508 01227675 9


r*Tr~y,'' •'• v V.’ '■ "v;" ►.. ;; : .
4 ■. 1 ■
;H r * £ •< ?.*> ;>v£ { >
j.T-.f-1 riijgy'; r.r^-rs .5: * 5- |, f-V; **£. ; /V r: : . V
iHHH
i-m
