

Np A 823.2 8924 fa
BOOKS fcrthe BAIRNS -N0.226
Founded in 1896 by W. T. STEAD.
FAIRY TALES fW
AUSTRALIA..
ETHEL BUCKLAND.
LONDON ;
STEAD?S PUBLISHING HOUSE.
PRICE ONE PENNY NET


DFJ.Collis Brow^S
CHL0R0DYM3
The RELIABLE FAMILY MEDICINE. m
Used by Doctors and the Public with W
unvarying success for over 60 years.
The BEST REMEDY KNOWN for M
COUGHS, COLDS, M
ASTHMA, BRONCHITIS. M
Cuts short attacks of SPASMS, Acts like a Charm W
PALPITATION, HYSTERIA. In DIARRHEA and W
The only Palliative in NEURALGIA, 91 1
TOOTHACHE, RHEUMATISM, GOUT, complaints. 1
Always ask for a ? DR. COLLIS BROWNE,?
Of all Chemists, i/ii, a/q, + 6. . I
FENRINGS' :
For Children Outtlnr their Teeth.. They
vuisiona Are Cooling: and Soothing: (i>o not contain
Antimony, Calomel, Opium, wything injunotu to
m babe). Sold Everywhere in Stamped Boxes.U IJd. and 2m. 9d?
1 with full directions, or post free 15 and 34 stamps.
TeetMngl CHILDREN'S
Read Penning*?
Every Mother?s Book,
containing Valuable Hints on
Feeding. Teething. Weaning.
Sleeping, etc.
Ask jrour Chemist or Grocer
for a FREE Copy, or one will
be sent POST FREE on appli-
cation to ALFRED FBNNINGS.
Cowes, laU of Wight.
(Observe, FENCINGS? CHILDREN'S
POWDERS alone have the Trade Hark
thereon of" A Baby in a Cradle.")
POWDERS


/VU; H\ g y " \0 X '
BOOKS FOR THE BAIRNS.?No. .226
Edited by ESTELLE W. STEAD.
FAIRY TALES FROM
AUSTRALIA.
ETHEL BUCKLAND.
3. The Cave of Gold.
4. Blue-Fairy's Wedding.
1. Opal Land.
Kangaroo-Baby.
5. The Cow-Boy &? the Emu.
ILLUSTRATED BY BRINSLEY LE FANU.
STEAD'S PUBLISHING HOUSE,
BANK BUILDINGS, KINGSWAY, LONDON, W.C.
Exclusif pour la France :
Librairie Larousse, Rue Montparnasse 13-19, Paris.


THE LITTLE MERMAID AND THE LYRE-BIRD


fiozz^bo/R.
11, 12.*
OPAL LAND.
Many hundreds of years ago, before the English people
ever knew there was such a place as Australia, a little
mermaid went there.
She came from a beautiful palace at the bottom of the
sea, and she used to swim a long way every day, taking
with her a magic lyre, on which she played sweet music.
One sunny day she swam farther than she had ever been
before and, as she danced up on the crest of a great white
breaker, sire saw in the far distance a faint line of hills.
? Land ! land ! ? she cried, for this was the first time
she had seen land, and she swam on and on as fast as she
could until she reached a calm blue bay, and the gentle
wavelets bore her in upon a beautiful stretch of golden sand.
She was a very tiny little mermaid, and, stretching herself
out in the warm sunshine, she lay there splashing in the
little ripplets with her beautiful blue-green tail. It was so
delicious that she quite forgot her home at the bottom of
the sea, and wondered where she was and who lived in this
wonderful country in the bright gold sun, and she laughed
a merry ringing laugh for joy.
But her laugh was echoed by someone far away. The
little mermaid lay quite still and listened, and then she
laughed again. Immediately the other laugh echoed hers,
a little nearer this time, and she raised herself on her elbows,
and looked towards the wooded cliff whence the soqnd came.


But there was silence save for a faint rustle in the trees.
Again she laughed, and this time the answer came from
quite close, and the laugh was so like her own that she did
not feel the least shy or frightened. The bushes on the cliff
rustled again, and then there appeared, not another mermaid,
or a land-baby, but a very' big bird., that came half-running!
half-flying down the cliff side, right up to where the little
mermaid lay, its eyes popping out of its head with curiosity.
The little mermaid stared back at it, for she had never
seen any bird but the sea-gull, and this was such a big bird,
far bigger than she, and it had such a wonderful tail, with
two tall, curving, gold-brown feathers standing straight up,
while the feathers between them were stiff and wiry. It
looked so very inquisitive that she laughed at its rudeness,
and taking up her magic lyre, played a little time.
The bird got so excited that it danced round and round
her, uttering all sorts of weird noises.
? Oh ! you are rude,? said the little mermaid ; ? you are
only mocking me. What are you ? ?
W hat are you ? ? echoed the bird.
? Oh ! I am a mermaid,? she said.
A meimaid ! I have never seen one before ; you are
the most beautiful thing I have ever seen.?
And what are you ? ? she asked.
I am the lyre bird,? he answered proudly.
? Oh ! I hope you don?t tell lies.?
Of course I don?t. lam the lyre bird. You play on
a lyre, don t you ? Now can?t you guess why lam called
the lyre bird ? ?
Oh! yes, of course I can; it?s because your beautiful
tail is just like my lyre,? and she took up the instrument
and played again.
Quite right, quite right,? said the bird, dancing about
with delight. 6
And where am I now ? ? she asked.
You qre in a most beautiful country, where evervthing
is gold.?


?Oh ! I want to see it all,? she cried, ? and I am only a
little mermaid; I can?t walk or fly. Dear lyre bird, take
me up on your back, and let me fly with you all over this
beautiful golden world.?
? Alas ! I dare not take you,? said the lyre bird, ?? for
this country is under the power of the wicked black witch.
? What is black ? ? she asked.
? Black ! Why, it?s a colour. Oh ! no it isn?t a colour,
but it?s a sort of colour.?
? I have never seen any colour called black,? said the
little mermaid. ? Where I live it is all blue and green and
silver and gold, and when the sun kisses good morning
to Mother Sea it is rosy pink, and when he kisses her ? good-
night ? it is fiery crimson.?
? Well, this is a very wicked witch,? said the bird, ? and
she sits on the top of a rock and makes black opals.
? What are opals ? ?
? Don?t you know what opals are ? Why, they are
wonderful bits of dark stone, that are found in the rocks
where the wicked witch walks, and when she is angry there
are great streaks of fire in them, but whoever finds that
stone finds bad luck too.?
? I don?t like dark colours,? said the little mermaid. ? I
should like to make blue and green and pink opals, reflecting
all the colours in the sea. Take me up on your back, and
my magic lyre*shall protect us from the wicked witch.
? Very well,? said the bird. ? Put your arms round my
neck, and hold on tight.?
The little mermaid slung her lyre around her on a piece
of strong seaweed, and was soon on the back of the lyre bird.
Away they went, and the water dripped from her shiny
tail on to the rocks below.
It was indeed a beautiful country, so wild and free. Such
wonderful woods and trees, covered with heavily-scented
flowers, whose sweet perfume was wafted up to them as
they flew on. Strange, dark-skinned people stared up at
them, people that made the little mermaid half frightened,


STRANGE DARK-SKINNED PEOPLE STARED VP AT THEM
so fierce and savage they looked. Over vast plains they
went, where no water could be seen, on and on, far away
from the blue sea, until the sun hid his face behind the
distant hills, and the stars peeped out one by one.
Then the wicked witch awoke and set forth on her night
march, and it was not long before she heard the whirr of
the lyre bird?s wings, and spreading out her great black ones,
gave chase. The lyre bird began to tremble for fear, but
the little mermaid only laughed, and sitting up on his back,
played wild music on her magic lyre, and sang this song :
? Come to our rescue, my bright magic lyre,
Call for the thunder, the lightning and fire.
When the black storm-cloud appears in the sky,
Then shall the wicked black-opal witch die.?
The wicked witch flew on, never noticing the black
thunder-cloud that followed her, and the lightning flashed


and the thunder rolled, and all of a sudden a mighty thunder-
bolt struck the wicked witch, and she fell down into the
darkness and was burnt up, till there was nothing left of
her but a big black opal.
The lyre bird was feeling very tired, for they had been
flying for the greater part of the night, so he took the little
mermaid down to the edge of a stream, and refreshed himself
and rested. And when the sun got up and wished them a
? good morning,? the lyre bird set forth again, and carried
the little mermaid back to Mother Sea, who was sparkling
and dancing with delight at seeing her child again. As they
neared the shore where they had first met, the little meimaid
cried out with joy, for the rocks were, full of shining blue
stones like all the colours of the sea, and the sunset, and the
dawn. , ,
? Blue opals ! blue opals ! ? cried she. ? How did they
come here ?
? Why, didn?t you see that they came from the drops
of water that fell from your shiny tail when we started ?
? How lovely \ ? cried the little mermaid. ? May I take
some home ? ?
? No, no,? said the lyre bird, as he alighted on a rock
jutting out over the deep blue sea. ? Go, little mermaid,
and swim for a hundred years until you reach a land called
England, and tell the children there to come and find them
when they are grown-up.?
? But.? she said, ? I fear they may find bad luck too.?
? No,? said the bird, " not if they come to Opal Land
in October. Good-bye, you beautiful little mermaid ; you
have brought good luck to our Opal Land. I shall sit here
and wait until you come back.?
And there were big tears in his eyes when the little mermaid
kissed him and dived into the sea.
[Note. ?The lyre bird is so called because two feathers of its tail are
curved into the shape of a bare, while the feathers between them are stiff
and wiry, and look like the strings of this ancient musical instrument.
This bird is remarkable for its powers of mimicry.]


KANGAROO-BABY.
It was a very hot day. Kangaroo-Mamma had gone to
sleep in the shade at the edge of the wood, and Kangaroo-
Baby crept out of her pouch and set forth to explore. He
had never been out of Kangaroo-Mamma?s sight before, and
he felt very grand and grown-up. He hopped away into
the open some distance from the wood until he came to a
plantation of oranges, and saw a funny sort of house close by.
Kangaroo-Baby hopped towards the house, and was
suddenly very surprised to find himself quite close to a human
mamma, who had a very pale face, and was lying in the shade
fast asleep, with her mouth wide open, just like Kangaroo-
Mamma when he left her. There was a round, white bundle
close to the human mamma, and Kangaroo-Baby wondered
whatever it could be. He was so bursting with curiosity
that he hopped up to the white thing and gave it a pat.
The white thing moved. Kangaroo-Baby felt a httle
nervous, but he gave it another pat, and then the white
thing unrolled itself and sat up. It was a Boy-Baby, # and
it stared at Kangaroo-Baby with a pair of tig blue eyes.
? What are you doing ? ? it asked.
?I am exploring,? said Kangaroo-Baby ; ?my mamma
is asleep.?
??So is my mamma,? said Boy-Baby ; ? let?s go and
explore together.?
? Come along then,? said Kangaroo-Baby, and he hopped
away through the orange trees, while Boy-Baby toddled
after him as fast as his httle fat legs could carry him, but
he was only two years old, and Kangaroo-Baby got rather
impatient.


" Hurry up ! ? he said, ? or your mamma will wake up
and smack you with her paw.?
? P'raps your mamma will smack you,? said Boy-Baby,
as he hurried across the open grass towards the wood.
? Oh ! no, my mamma will only hck me,? said Kangaroo-
Baby. ? I?m going to ask her to take you for a ride in
her pouch ; it?s lovely.?
? Shan?t I be too big ? ?
? Oh ! no, she?ll squeeze you in somehow.?
? But will she hck me ? I?ve just had my bath, and I
don?t want to be licked.?
? ?Oh ! no, she won?t lick you ; she may sniff at you.
Come along through these trees.?
Boy-Baby followed Kangaroo-Baby down a little path
through tall green bushes and bright flowers, and they very
soon came to the place where Kangaroo-Mamma was sleep-
ing peacefully in the cool shade.
" Come along,? said Kangaroo-Baby. ? Now we?ll get
into her pouch. You get in first.?
Boy-Baby peeped inside. How lovely and fluffy and warm
it was ! He put one foot in, and then the other, while
Kangaroo-Baby pushed behind. But of course these two
naughty babies disturbed Kangaroo-Mamma, and she
jumped up and spied Boy-Baby in her pouch.
? \Vhat?s this ? ? she said. ? Baby, where have you been,
and who have you got here ? ?
? This is a boy-baby, Mamma, and I want you to take
him for a ride in your pouch.?
? H?m,? said Kangaroo-Mamma. ?He is very uncom-
fortable to carry ; he has such hard feet.?
So Boy-Baby scrambled out and took off his shoes, and
then Kangaroo-Mamma tucked him into her pouch by the
side of her own baby, but it was a very tight* squeeze.
Kangaroo-Mamma set forth with great bounds, and Boy-
Baby felt quite queer at first. It reminded him of his
journey on the ship all the way from England a few weeks
back. But he soon got used to it, and began to look at


all the wonderful things in the wood. There were all sorts
of trees, some with bright-coloured flowers on them which
smelt lovely, and great ferns as tall as little trees, and all
kinds of strange scarlet and green birds, parrots, and paro-
quets, like we see in England at the Zoo. And there were
funny little animals like cats, who ran about in the trees
with their babies on their backs, and foxes and squirrels
who could fly.
Presently they met some more kangaroos, who all came
crowding round to look at Boy-Baby. Kangaroo-Mamma
was rather proud of herself, and took Boy-Baby out of
her pouch and laid him on a little mossy tuft, while all the
other kangaroos made remarks.
? I don?t like his blue eyes,? said one ; ? our babies have
brown eves.?
? And he hasn?t got any tail,? said another.
? And he has only got two legs,? said another, ? and such
odd paws.?
? And he can?t hop,? said another.
Then Boy-Baby suddenly felt very shy, and he began to
cry.
? I want my mamma, I want my mamma.?
? Take him away,? cried all the kangaroos. ? Our babies
never make a noise like that.?
Kangaroo-Mamma was half frightened of the noise herself,
so she bundled Boy-Baby back into her pouch, and hopped
away as fast as she could.
? Never mind,? said Kangaroo-Baby, trying to console
him by licking his face ; ?we shall soon get back to }?our
mamma.?
When Boy-Baby saw the orange trees and the little house
again, he stopped crying, and giving Kangaroo-Baby a very
big hug, he climbed'out of Kangaroo-Mamma?s pouch, and
let her lick him as she said ? good-bye.?
Boy-Baby?s mamma was still asleep, and Kangaroo-
Mamma said she never neglected her baby like that. But
Kangaroo-Baby knew better. He was rather sad when


THE CAVE OF GOLD.
A few years ago some Englishmen heard that they might
become very rich if they went to Australia to look for gold.
So they took their wives and children, and after a long sea
voyage and a great deal of travelling, they built some rough
huts," and settled in that part of the country where gold
was likely to be found.
But at the end of six months they were nearly worn out.
It had been a very hot and dry season ; there was little
water, and no sign of rain. Every day the men came home
despairing, for there was no gold to be found, and the women
grew sad and tired out with the hardships of life.
? My daddy can?t find any gold, and he is so sad,? said
one little boy to his favourite playmate.
? And my daddy can?t find any either,? said the little
girl, ? and it?s so hot, Jack ; I want to go back to England.?
? Come along with me, Maggie,? said the boy. ? I know
of a beautiful place in the wood right down by the stream.
Let?s go and sit there in the cool. I?ve got a pineapple my
daddy brought home ; we can eat it together.?
? I wish we could find some gold,? said Maggie.
? Oh ! it?s no use thinking about gold,? said Jack.
? I don?t see why we shouldn?t,? said Maggie, doggedly.
? Well, we can?t find any,? said Jack, ? so it?s no use
talking about it. Come along.?
They set forth hand in hand, and followed the track
through the bush or open forest, with its tall lank}? gum-
trees growing far apart, their scraggy, dull-tinted leaves
affording but little shadow from the blazing sun. On and
on thev toiled, until at last they turned down a small path,


which gradually sloped down towards the stream. Maggie
felt quite cheered when she heard the sudden ringing note
of the bell-bird, which is always a sure sign that water is
near.
But what a disappointment awaited them ! for instead
of the merry little stream, a thin muddy slime crawled
between the rocks, and Maggie burst into tears.
? Oh ! Jack, I am so hot and thirsty, but we can?t drink
that.?
? Never mind, Maggie, here?s quite a nice shady place.
Let us sit here and eat some pineapple. Mhhr,} r , it?s quite
cool here, isn?t it, and the sun will soon be setting.
Maggie sank down on the ground, while Jack took out
his knife and cut her a slice of pineapple.
? Let?s watch the animals coming down to drink,? said
he. ? When I came here with Dad one day, we saw an
opossum come down with four babies on its back. Look !
there is one up in that gum-tree now,? he said, pointing to
a small, cat-like animal with very long soft fur, sitting right
up in the fork of a tree, peeping down at them.
? I can?t look, I am so tired,? said Maggie, taking the
pineapple, which refreshed her a little.
? Well, you had better go to sleep for a while, and I?ll
wake you up when it is time to go home.?
Maggie soon fell fast asleep with her head on Jack?s
shoulder, and he kept quite still for fear of waking her. The
sun began to set, and presently the opossum came down
from the gum-tree and walked gingerly up to the little
stream, but soon retreated in disgust at the mudd}? water.
And then came a very small and thin native bear, glancing
nervously about him as if he scented danger. Jack hurriedly
hid his pineapple, for he knew how the bear loved fruit and
feared he might come after it, but the bear saw him move,
and scrambled away up one of the trees as fast as it could pelt.
Jack began to feel very sleepy too, and he was just begin-
ning to doze, when he was startled by a peculiar scratching
noise. Glancing round, he saw a small brown animal creep-


PRESENTLY THE OPOSSUM CAME DOWN FROM THE GUM-TREE


ing along close to him. He soon recognised it to be that
curious little creature, the duck mole, a mixture of an animal;
a bird, and a fish, with its soft velvety coat and hind feet
like a mole, its webbed forefeet and duck?s bill. It had
evidently been asleep during the hot day, and was just
coming out to burrow in the mud for a few worms or snails
if any were to be found. Jack felt sure it would run away
when it saw him, but to his surprise it did not seem in the
least afraid, and ran right across Maggie?s dress and down
to the bed of the stream. Of course it awakened Maggie,
and she sat up and rubbed her eyes.
? Hush ! it?s a duck mole,? whispered Jack. ? Look,
it has gone down the stream.?
Maggie had never seen a duck mole before, and she jumped
to her feet and tiptoed down the bank to peep at it, but it
was running down by the mud as fast as it could go.
? Let?s follow it,? whispered Jack ; " perhaps it will lead
us to some real water.?
? Or to some gold,? said Maggie.
? Don?t be silly,? said Jack. ? Come along, quick.?
Maggie was feeling better for her sleep, and was quite
ready to do as Jack suggested. There was a little beaten
path in the sand along by the bank of the stream, and they
hurried silently along it, watching the little dark body of
the duck mole in the dusky light.
Now the duck mole must have been very hungry, for he
was so intent on hunting for grubs and snails that he did
not seem to notice Jack and Maggie. When he stopped
and thrust his flat bill into the mud, they stopped too for
fear of frightening him. He did not appear to be eating
the grubs, but just stuffed them away into his cheeks,
which grew fatter and fatter, until he could scarcely hold
any more.
The moon rose and shone through the trees, and a gentle
breeze stole up, which was so refreshing after the hot day
that the children ran on after the duck mole, and did noj
realise what a long way they had gone until they reached


a place where the stream used to tumble over quite a big
waterfall into a pool below. Here the path came to an abrupt
end, and they were confronted by a dense thicket of prickly
thorns all round. The duck mole disappeared down by the
stones, where a little trickle of water dripped slowly into
the pool below. But Jack was not going to turn back now,
and walking down into the mud, he peeped over the edge
of the waterfall, and in the clear moonlight saw two little
dark brown things running about in the greasy mud of
the dried-up pond.
? Come along. Maggie,? he whispered, ? we can easily
climb down the stones if we are careful ; I?ll go first.?
Maggie was quite a tomboy when it was not too hot,
and she was always ready to climb anywhere, so Jack led
the way from rock to rock, and they soon reached the
bottom in safety, and stood on the dry ground at the edge
of the pond watching Mr. and Mrs. Duck Mole.
Mr. Duck Mole was emptying his cheeks of the grubs, and
he and Mrs. Duck Mole were enjoying a delicious meal.
Suddenly four tiny little men, about a foot high, with
queer brown faces and dressed all in gold, came out of a
hole in the bank, and crept stealthily up behind the duck
moles, who were so busy eating that they never saw them.
Jack and Maggie held their breath, for they were the queerest
little men they had ever seen, and they wondered what was
going to happen. Suddenly the four little men pounced
upon Mr. and Mrs. Duck Mole, and gripped them by the
scruff of the neck with their little claw-like hands. The
duck moles wriggled and kicked and squealed to be let loose.
? No, no,? said the little men, ? we have been hard at
work all day making gold, and you promised to go and fetch
us some food. Now here you are eating it all yourselves.
As a punishment you shall be shut up in the cave of gold
for a week, and shall not have a morsel of food.?
? We think you are very cruel,? wailed the duck moles.
?J You have turned us out of our beautiful cave, and we
won?t put up with this treatment any longer.?


SUDDENLY THE FOUR LITTLE MEN POUNCED UPON MR. AND MRS
DUCK MOLE.
? Won?t you indeed ? ? cried the little men, shaking with
rage. ? And pray, why should we not make gold where we
choose ? We must make gold somewhere, and wherever
we go the white men come and take it away.?
?And it serves you right,? said Mr. Duck Mole. ? You
stole the gold machine from the fairies just because you
wanted to make yourselves those grand gold clothes, and
now you have turned us out of our cave. \V e shall show the
white men where your gold is, and punish you.?
? Indeed you won?t,? said the little men, ? for we shall
put you into prison at once,? and they began dragging the
duck moles towards the cave, where Jack and Maggie could
see great lumps of gold in the rock. The duck moles squealed
and struggled to escape.
? Stop ! stop ! ? cried Maggie in great distress, and she
and Jack ran after the little men, and seized one in each
hand and shook them hard until they let the duck moles


Kh
? THANK YOU, BRAVE CHILDREN,? CRIED THE DUCK MOLES
free. But as they held the little men tightly in their grasp,
they gradually ceased to struggle, and became harder and
harder, until each of them turned into a solid lump of gold.
? Thank you, thank you, brave children,? cried the
duck moles. ? Now we can take the gold machine back
to the fairies, and as a reward you shall have all the gold
in our cave. Go quickly and tell your parents where to
find it.?
But the children were so tired and exhausted that they
could only sink down on the bank clasping their lumps of
gold, and there they slept soundly until the bright morning
sun shone into their eyes, and they felt someone shaking
them, and heard the voices of their parents telling them
to wake up.
They rubbed their eyes, and when they looked around
they saw that they were back again at the top of the stream,
and their parents were rousing them.


? Oh ! children,? they cried, ? you have been asleep here
all-night, and we thought you had been stolen by the
savages.? ? . ,
"We haven?t been asleep,? said Jack ; we have beep
with the duck mole to find gold.?
? You have been dreaming, Jack ; come along home at
once.
? We have found gold,? cried the children, holding out
the solid lumps they still held in their hands.
Their parents seized it eagerly.
" Yes, it certainly is very fine gold.? they said, ? and we
certainly saw a duck mole going down the stream just now.
If we had not been so anxious to find you, we should have
tried to catch it.?
Maggie burst into tears.
?Oh ! Daddy,? she sobbed, ? promise you will never
hurt a duck mole. It was the duck mole who took us to
the gold.?
"We must all be dreaming,? said her mother ; " this is
too good to be true.?
" Let us all go home to breakfast,? said her father, ? then
if we are not still dreaming we will go and look for this
wonderful cave of gold.?
And it was not a dream, for they found the gold exactly
as the children had described.
Now there is a large gold mine near that very spot. Jack
and Maggie are a happy old married couple, and have come
back to good old England to live in a beautiful house, but
their grandsons are still finding the gold. As for Mr. and
Mrs. Duck Mole, their great-great-great-great-grandchildren
are finding snails and grubs in the stream.
rXoTE.?The duck mole is only found in South Australia ]


BLUE-FAIRY?S WEDDING.
Blue-Butterfly was flying high up in the clear blue sky
above the beautiful Blue Mountains where the blue fairies
live. He was looking for some blue flowers, where he could
settle without being seen, and so he flew over the tops of
the blue-grey trees, and peeped down through their branches.
Soon he saw a fairy glade carpeted with bright blue flowers
like bits of sky in the grass, so he came flitting down and
settled on the petal of one of them.
There was a blue orchid growing near, with a yellow
orchid close to it. Both the flowers were shut up tight,
which meant that there was a fairy fast asleep in each of them.
Blue-Butterfly loved the fairies, so he waited for them
to wake up. Presently the yellow orchid began to sway
about in the wind, which meant that the fairy was stretching
himself; then the flower opened very slowly, and out crept
a tiny elf. He was dressed all in yellow with green spots,
and he wore a little brown cap and shoes to match. He
was so like the orchid that he could hardly be seen as he
stood on the petal and unfolded his green gauzy wings.
Then the blue orchid began to sway about, and very
soon unfolded its petals. A shy little fairy crept forth in a
dress like the blue of the flower, and she also stood on the
petal and spread out her lovely silver wings. Then the little
Yellow-Elf flew across to her, and they sat side by side on
the blue petal.
" I love you,? said Yellow-Elf.
? I love you,? said Blue-Fairy.
? But I can?t marry you to-day,? said Yellow-Elf sadly,
? because a naughty bee has stolen all the honey out of
my flower, so there would be nothing for us to eat.?


FAIRY TALES FROM AUSTRALIA 21
Ys ll0,OT ck idl |
JTtv/ \\ if i


? And the dewdrop out of my flower has gone too,?
said Blue-Fairy, " so I?ve got no diamond to wear for the
wedding.?
I will find you a diamond and some honey,? cried
Blue-Butterfly, and away he flew, while Yellow-Elf and
Blue-Fairy sat hand in hand and watched him till he was
lost to sight in the blue sky.
Far, far away from the Blue Mountains flew Blue-Butterfly,
until he came to a hot sandy shore. There grew the little
ice-plant on the bare sand, the fierce sun beating down
upon it. As Blue-Butterfly neared the scorching earth, he
was almost withered by the heat. He dared not touch the
sand for fear of burning his toes, but he flew to the little
ice-plant and settled there. The leaves of the little plant
were studded with millions of tiny diamond drops, and it
was one of these that Blue-Butterfly wanted, so he nestled
down on the soft pinky flower, and said all sorts of pretty
things to her,' and told her what a wonderful little plant-*"
she was to be always so cold in such a hot place. But his
toes were getting frozen, and he had to say everything very
quickly. However, the little plant was so flattered by him
that she said he might have her biggest diamond, and away
he flew with it, very happy.
As he went back he met a bee.
? Where are you going ? ? said the bee.
? To the Blue Mountains,? said Blue-Butterfly.
? Why are going there ? ?
? I?m going to take a diamond to Blue-Fairy.?
" mat for ? ?
? For her wedding present. She is'going to marry Yellow-
Elf.?
?Oh ! dear,? said the bee, ? I stole all his honey this
morning.?
? Then,? said Blue-Butterfly, " come along with me, and
take him twice as much as you stole.?


THE COWBOY AND THE EMU.
Poor Leo was very sad because Sheilah had gone away.
Leo loved Sheilah very dearly, but the little seven-year-old
Irish girl did not love Leo at all, and used to run away
when she saw him coming towards her on his frisky pony, .
and when he brought her little presents of flowers and fruit
she used to say ? Go away, Cowboy.? ?
But Leo was not a poor ragged cowboy, although he lived
a wild life, riding about on a horse or pony, and helping his
father to look after his big cattle farm, one of the most
flourishing in Australia. Leo?s father was a very rich man,
and Sheikh?s father used to work for him, but now Sheikh?s
father had gone away north to start a farm of his own.
When Leo went to say ? good-bye ? to little Sheikh, she
said, ? Good-bye, Cowboy ; I shall miss you a little bit
even though you are a cowboy.?
How sad poor Leo felt, and when he looked in the glass
at his rough hair and sunburnt face, he sighed.
? If only I didn?t look like this, she wouldn?t call me
? Cowboy,? and she would miss me very much.? *
Th# days passed drearily by while Leo rode about in the
hot sun, getting more and more burnt, and thinking only
of little Sheikh with the big Irish eyes.
The country was very dried up. Everyone was longing
for the rain to come, and asking the travellers who came
down from the north if the rains had started there. One
day Leo met two travellers on the track near the farm.
? Has the rain started in the north ? ? he asked.
? Yes,? they replied, ? indeed it has started, for not many
days ago quite a new settlement was flooded out, and the
only child of the farmer has been lost or drowned.?
? Quick, tell me the name ! ? cried Leo.


?Oh ! it was some Irish name ; the child was called
Sheilah ?
This was enough for Leo.
?Tell my father I am going to find her,?? he said, and
before the men had time to answer he set forth at a gallop.
Other travellers stared in astonishment at the wild-looking
boy in his squash hat, flannel shirt, and leather leggings,
riding bareback at a breakneck speed, the dust of the dry
sandy soil flying in clouds behind him.
Dart was a wonderful horse, one of the strongest and
swiftest that Leo?s father owned, but he had a three days'
journey before him, and as evening drew on he grew very
tired, and Leo was compelled to rest for the night at a
settlement near the track. But he was on his way again
ere dawn, thinking only of his beloved little Sheilah, ? lost
or drowned.?
? Lost or drowned,? he said to himself all day as he
? Lost or drowned.?
{ The canter of his horse?s hoofs seemed to echo the words
" lost or drowned, lost or drowned.? The sun beat down,
the track was rough and dusty, and the food he had bought
at the settlement was not of the best. He pressed on,
determined to reach the next settlement before nightfall ;
there he would be able to give Dart a good rest and feed.
The brave little horse was getting very fatigued, and Leo
had to halt many times by the river to give him a short
rest and drink. The river was rapidly rising too. and this
showed that there must be a great deal of rain coming,
and Leo knew that before long he would find the track flooded.
There were certainly great difficulties before him, and he
felt very hopeless about it all, especially when just about
sunset Dart?s hoofs suddenly changed their ? lost or drowned
lost or drowned,? for ? drowned, drowned, drowned.? Dart
"*had gone dead lame ! Poor Leo was in despair. What
could he do ? He was within a few miles of the next settle-
ment, but Dart could hardly get on at all. He felt that
the only thing to do was to let Dart rest at once, and himself


to sleep out in the open. Perhaps the lameness would be
better in the morning, and if not he must leave Dart at the
settlement, and hire another horse there. So ended his
first day?s journey.
But when he awoke at daybreak Dart was scarcely any
better, and with a sinking heart Leo led him slowly through
another five miles of bush until he reached the settlement.
The men were just beginning their work when Leo arrived
and inquired if he might hire a horse, only to be replied by
many shakes of the head.
?It is impossible,? they said. ? The floods might be out
at any time, and all the horses would be needed.? They
told Leo he would be foolish to go on.
? I can?t help that,? said Leo. ? I must leave my horse
in your care, and go on foot.?
? You are mad, boy,? said the men, but Leo heeded not
their words. Leaving Dart in their charge, and bu}flng a
good supply of food, he went on his way with a heavy hearty
The track led on through mile after mile of bush. The
same tall slender trees with their blue-grey leaves, and
shining yellowish-white stems with long strips of bark peel-
ing off ; the shorter shrubs below, very thick in parts, with
prickly leaves and gorgeous coloured blooms, chief among
these the ? Burning-Bush,? with its tongues of flame-coloured
flowers lighting up the woods as if they were on fire, and
then the tiny bright flowers that carpeted the sandy soil.
Many kinds of birds hovered about : wonderful little parrots,
their scarlet, green, and yellow plumage flashing in the
brilliant sunshine, and snow-white cockatoos. One bird
would follow Leo all the way, laughing a shrill laugh as if
it were mocking him for his folly. It was only a ? Laughing
Jackass,? and Leo was used to any amount of them, but
to-day it seemed different ; this bird nearly drove him mad,
and presently he sank down under a tree, and covering
face with his hands, shed a few hot tears.
As he sat there he heard something rustle in the bushes,
and glancing up saw an emu coming towards him.


LEO .WAS XOT AFRAID OF THE BIRD.


Now the emu is the largest bird in Australia, and stands
six feet high. Like the ostrich it cannot fly, but runs at
such a speed that the swiftest horse cannot overtake it.
Emus are not shy birds, but if attacked they will use their
strong legs as dangerous weapons, and woe betide the man
who is kicked by an emu.
Leo was not afraid of this bird even when it came right
up to him, and taking him by the sleeve, shook him. This
was a most unusual thing for a bird to do. Leo thought
it must be fearfully hungry, so he offered it a piece of bread,
but the bird would not look at it, and again taking his
sleeve in its beak, half pulled him to his feet. Leo stood
up and stared at the bird, which suddenly crouched right
down on the ground before him.
A bright idea then flashed into Leo?s brain. ? The fairies
have sent him for me to ride,? and in another moment he
was on the back of the strong bird, who strode off at a
tremendous rate, much faster than Dart ever went, and.
seemed to know exactly the way to go. Even when it
became dark the bird never slackened its pace, and Leo
trusted himself entirely to it. Thus he travelled all night,
too excited and anxious to think of sleep.
But he again felt very downhearted at daybreak, for miles
of water flooded the country on all sides, with clumps of
forlorn-looking trees standing up here and there like islands
in a sea. Great clouds were rolling up over the sun, and
it soon began to rain heavily. How should he find Sheilah
now ? Even if she were lost and not drowned it seemed
impossible. However, as soon as it began to rain, the emu
raced along much faster than before, by all the dry places,
sometimes wading through the water from one patch of
land to another. There were wrecks of huts and tents
floating about, but Leo saw no sign of Sheilah?s parents.
He had expected to find them paddling about on rafts in
search of their child, but he did not realise that the floods
had come further south and he was still many miles from
their settlement. On and on he went through the forlorn


and dreary country, silent except for the downfall of the
rain and the patter and splash of the emu's feet in the wet.
Presently Leo saw some white birds on a patch of land
k some distance away. They were pelicans, quite a common
sight by the river, and Leo was not a bit surprised to see
them, but he wondered why the emu seemed to be making
in their direction, for the island lay out in very deep water.
But as they drew nearer he saw something else on the island,
something that made him look and look again. Yes, there
was another white thing there, certainly not a pelican, but
something very like a little girl.
To Leo?s dismay the emu suddenly stopped, for the water
was too deep to go further. Then Leo saw that the white-
thing was really a little girl, and she was waving to him.
Throwing aside his hat and knapsack, he dived into the
water and swam across to the island ; it was not far, and
he soon emerged dripping wet to find Sheilah in his arms.
But Leo drew back.
I am only a cowboy,? he said, ? and I am dripping
wet; you had better not touch me.?
" You are my own darling Leo,? said Sheilah, ? and you
can t make me wet because I have such a lovely coat and
hood of white feathers, which the dear pelicans gave me.?
Indeed Sheilah looked just like a little bird clad in white
feathers from head to foot.
? How did you get here ? Tell me all about it,? cried
Leo.
Oh ! Leo, I have been longing for you to come and
fetch me home. Do you know that the floods came up in
the night when 1 was sleeping in my little bed outside our
hut, and in the morning I found myself floating away in
. m y bed ever so far, miles and miles and miles. I cried, but
no one heard me, and at last I came to this island, where
T tbe dear white pelicans took care of me. They gave me
this lovely feather coat to keep out the wet, and they fed
me with beautiful berries. When it was night thev tucked
me up to sleep under their soft white wings, and then they


?GOOD-BYE, DEAR PELICANS.


called for the emu to go and fetch you. And now, Leo,
take me home to Daddy and Mummy.?
The pelicans had withdrawn to the other side of the island
during the meeting of the two young people, but when they
saw Leo preparing to take Sheilah away they all came
running across.
Good-bye, dear pelicans, I shall never forget you,? said
Sheilah, and then she climbed on to Leo?s back, and he
swam across to the place where the emu was waiting.
The pelicans all stood on the island and flapped thek
white wings, while Leo and Sheilah waved back to them.
The sun came out, and the good emu carried them both
away north where the floods were rapidly drying up, and
at sunset a little girl all wrapped in white feathers was
safe in the arms of her rejoicing parents.
And so it all ended happily. Sheilah?s parents made
another settlement where the floods could not reach them,
and Sheilah said she would never part from her little feather
coat, or the brave emu, or her dear darling cowbo} 7 .
THE END.
IMPORTANT.
Ready May 1 5 lk. BOOKS FOR THE BAIRNS.
No. 227, ? The Porcelain Palace of Pekin," bv
Dorothy Saunders. Price One' Penny.


A BOON TO PARENTS AND CHILDREN ALIKE.
!ETH TO A TH^E^H0IJ^E^
THE BAIRNS MAGAZINE.
MONTHLY. ONE PENNY. BLUE COVER.
Edited by ESTELLE W. STEAD.
Published at Bank Buildings, Kingsivay, London , IV. C., and
may be Ordered from any Bookseller or Newsagent.
SOME SPECIAL FEATURES.
Interesting and Instructive. ?Serial Tales and Short Stories.
The Editor usually writes a Topical Article concerning Prominent and
Notable Personages.
The Bright-Eyes Club. ?This is a Club (no entrance fee and no
subscription) which children of all ages join for the purpose ot studying
and observing Natural History facts.
Easy Competitions.? Every month Competitions are arranged,
for which prizes are awarded.
Bairns? Own Stories. ?Children write short stories on endless
subjects, and many of them are printed. Prizes are awarded.
Illustrations. ??The Bairns? Magazine? gives prominence to
illustrations in its 32 large pages.
"THE BAIRNS? MAGAZINE,? in addition to circulating widely among the
Schools and Homes of the People in Great Britain, has an ever-increasing list of
Foreign and Colonial Subscribers, and for this purpose the Manager receives
Subscriptions at the rate of 1/6 for 12 months, post free. Subscriptions can
commence at any date, and back numbers can be supplied. Address as above.


@ Scientific
g Certainties. g
The ?Allenburys? Foods are based on scientific cer- g>|
61 W tainties. Used as directed, they are exactly what a baby X M
|||X needs to develop into a healthy and robust child. The \Gp
?Allenburys? Foods are easily assimilated; digestive and kindred
jXl disorders are avoided by their use.
14SUcnburgs Foods A
m JL |S k> Pamphlet * ?Infant Feeding and Management" iBft
g ALLEN tf HANBORYS Ltd. %
? ? ? ? # * # *
m lllllll
Perspectiveland;
How Peggy
Learned to Draw.
By ROSA WAUQH.
A Practical Scholar's and
Teacher?s aid in Popularizing
Perspective for even the
youngest PuplL
Demy Svo. Fully Illuslraled. .
Price 9d. net; hy post, lOd,
STEAD'S PUBLISHING HOUSE,
Bank Buildings, Kingsway, London.
The Empire Day
Reciter
PART I. ?Patriotism and the Fatherland.
>i ll.?'The Sea and Our Sailors.
.. lll.?Our Sold ers and their Great
Deeds.
IV.?Labour Brotherhood and Peace.
48 pages
One Penny net; by post, l^o.
Stead?s Publishing House, London.
3 1508 02091230 4


A nice little boy had a n ice cake of Soap
Worthy of washing the hands of the pope **
(IngOldsby Legends),
1 rinted by W. & J. Mackay & Co., Ltd.. Chatham, and Published by the Proprietor, at
Bank Buildings. Kingsnay, London, W.C.
S< le Agents for Australia and New Zealand?Gordon A Gotch, Ltd.; South Africa-*
Central News Agency, Ltd.
NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
