

FAIRBURN’S EDITION
OF THE
LIFE, AMOURS,
AND
WONDERFUL ADVENTURES
OF THAT MOST NOTORIOUS
PICKPOCKET,
George Harrington,
GIVING A FULL ACCOUNT OF HIS
TRIAL, AND CONVICTION,
WITH MANY
CURIOUS ANECDOTES OF THIS
NOTORIOUS CHARACTER.
Embellished with a Coloured Frontispiece.
LONDON:
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY J. FAIRBURN, 110, MISORIES.
Price Sixpence.






Barrington robbing a Nobleman at Court.
Barrington taken prisoner on the Race course


FAIRBURN’S EDITION
OF THE
LIFE, AMOURS,
AND
WONDERFUL ADVENTURES
OF THAT MOST NOTORIOUS
PICKPOCKET,
George Bar ,
GIVING A FULL ACCOUNT OF HIS
TRIAL, AND CONVICTION,
WITH MANY
CURIOUS ANECDOTES OF THIS
NOTORIOUS CHARACTER-
Embellished with a Coloured Frontispiece .
LONDON:
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY J. FAIRBURN, HO.
Price Sixpence.




THE LIFE OF
GEORGE BARRINGTON
GEORGE BARRINGTON, whose crimes and virtues have justly
astonished his contemporaries, and whose character, whose good and ill
repute have now extended beyond the poles, was originally a native, and
an inhabitant of Ireland. And as it will appear in the sequel that the
name of Barrington was assumed, let it suffice to remark here, that
his father’s name was Henry Waldron, and that he was a working silver-
smith ; while his mother, whose maiden name was Naish, was a mantua-
maker, and occasionally a midwife.
Our hero was born about the year 1755, at the village of Maymooth,
in the county of Kildare. His parents, who bore a good character for
their industry, integrity, and general good behaviour, were however, never
able to rise to a state of independance, or security from indigence, owing
to their engagement in a law suit, with a more powerful and opulent re-
lative, in order to the recovery of a legacy, to which they conceived they
had a legal right. To the narrowness of their circumstances, the neglect
of their son’s education is imputed; and therefore they were incapable
of improving, or of giving a proper bias to those early indications of na-
tural abilities, and a superiority of talents, which must have inevitably
unfolded themselves even in the dawn of joung Barrington s existence.
He was, notwithstanding these obstacles, instructed in reading and writ-
ing at an early age, at their expence ; and afterwards, through the bounty
of a medical gentleman in the neighbourhood, he was initiated in the
principals of common arithmatic, the elements of geography, and the
outlines of English grammar.
When he entered on the sixteenth year of his age, he was noticed and
patronized by Dr. C — ■, of Leixlip, in the county of Dublin, a digni-
tary in the church of Ireland, of an ancient and illustrious family, and
ample fortune. Through the interest of this respectable clergyman
young Barrington was placed at a free grammar school in the Irish
capital, where his patron proposed he should fit himself for the Univer-
sity ; a theatre on which he hoped, from the genius discovered in his
young protegee at an early period of life, he might in time make such a
figure as to gratify his warmest hopes ; and, in order to enable him to
make an appearance equal to the young gentlemen with whom he was
then to associate, the Doctor supplied him very liberally with money,
and every other necessary, to render his situation in the school not only
comfortable but also respectable.- . '
This ill-fated youth enjoyed, however, but a short time the benefits
that he derived from the kindness of his patron ; for the violence of his


passions, which equalled at least the extent of his talents, precipitated
him into an action, by which he lost Doctor C ’s favour for ever,
and which, in its consequences, finally proved his ruin. When he had
been about half a year at the grammar-school, he unluckily got into a
dispute with a lad, much older, larger, and stronger than himself; the
dispute degenerated into a quarrel, and some blows ensued, in which
young Waldron suffered considerably; but, in order to be revenged, he
stabbed his antagonist with a penknife ; and, had he not been season-
ably prevented, would have in all probability, murdered him. lire
wounds which he gave did not prove so dangerous as to render the
quarrel a subject of legal investigation. The discipline of the house,
(flogging,) however, was inflicted with proper severity on the perpetrator
of so atrocious an offence, which irritated the unrelenting and vindictive
temper of the young man to such a degree, that he determined at once
to run away from school, from his family, and his friends; thus aban-
doning the fair prospects that he had before him, and blasting all die
hopes that had been fondly, though vainly, formed of the great things
that might be effected by his genius, when matured by time, and im-
proved by study.
His plan of escape was no sooner framed than it was carried into exe-
cution ; but previous to his departure, he found means to steal ten or
twelve guineas from Mr. F , the master of the school, and a gold
repeating watch from Mrs. Goldsborough, the master’s sister. With this
booty, a few shirts and two or three pair of stockings, he silently effected
his retreat from the school-house, in the middle of the night, in the
month of May, 1771 ; and pursuing the great northern road all that
night, and all the next day, he, late in the evening, arrived at the town of
Drogheda, without interruption, without accident, and in a great mea-
sure, without halting, without rest, and without food.
The first place of safety at which young Waldron thought proper to
halt, was at an obscure inn at Drogheda, where a company of strolling-
players happening to be at the time, it was the occasion of a new series
of acquaintance, which, though formed with precipitation, and on the
spur of the occasion, was retained from choice and affection for a num-
ber of years.
A John Price, the manager of this strolling company, was a native
of the town of Poole, in Dorsetshire ; of a good family, of an agreeable
figure, lively in conversation, conciliating in his manners, and had been
tolerably well educated. Having lived some time in London, w here he
was clerk to one Potter, a pettifogging attorney, he was intimately ac-
quainted with the town, and all the arts of fraud, deception, 01 violence,
that are practised in it by the lower and most unprincipled classes to
procure money. For indulging these vicious propensities he was pro-
secuted ; and having been convicted at the Old Dailey, he was at this
time an involuntary exile in Ireland, until the expiration of the term for
which he was sentenced to be transported. Phis man became quickly
the confidant, and from the confidant, the counsellor, the tutor, the sove-
reign director as it were of the young fugitive Waldron, who influenced
by “the ardour, the natural and unguarded ingenuity of a youthful mind,
to this new friend, without reserve, communicated all the circumstances
of his life and story. By his advice this unhappy youth renounced his
paternal name, assumed that of Barrington, entered into the companj,


and in the course of four days became so absolutely and formally a
strolling son of Thespis, that he performed the part of Jaffier, in “ Ve-
nice Preserved,” as usual 'vith some applause, to a crowded audience,
in a barn in the suburbs of Drogheda; and this without the assistance
of a prompter.
Though the reception he met with on his debut was very flatter-
ing to a mind like his. Price, as well as himself, thought it would not
be proper for him to appear in public so near the scene of his late de-
predations in the capital.
It was therefore resolved on by them, that the whole company should,
without delay, move to the northward, and, if possible, get to the dis-
tance of sixty or eighty miles from Dublin, before they halted for any
length of time. In order to enable so numerous a body to move with
all their baggage, it was necessary to raise money ; and in doing this
Barrington’s assistance, being the first thing that offered, he was indis-
pensably necessary. He was accordingly applied to, and he acquiesced
with a good grace, giving Price Mrs. Goldsborough’s gold repeater,
which was disposed of for the general benefit of the strollers.
This act of capricious liberality rendered him very popular among his
new associates, who deservedly considered him as a valuable acquisition
to their company. He had a speaking eye, an expressive countenance,
a tolerable theatrical figure, a very pompous enunciation, and a most
retentive memory. With these advantages, they found means to feed
his vanity with every kind of adulation, never failing to describe the fu-
ture prospects of the whole, and particularly his own, in strong and
glowing colours ; and that he would one day cut a figure on the boards
of the Dublin or the London theatre, was a compliment of course, espe-
cially while his money lasted, though their own poverty might have
convinced him that their own sufferings and miscarriages gave the most
convincing proof of the fallacy of all their views and prospects in life.
However, as soon as the necessary funds were procured, all these
children of Thespis set out for Londonderry, which was the place at
which they first designed to play. Travelling but slowly, they were a
considerable time on their journey ; and during the course of it, the pe-
netrating eyes of the experienced actresses discovered that Barrington
had made a tender impression on the heart of Miss Egerton, the young
lady who played the part of Belvidera, when he acted that of Jaffier at
Drogheda. This poor girl was the Daughter of an opulent tradesman at
Coventry. She was young and beautiful, sweet-tempered and accom-
plished, but now friendless; and, though like the rest inured to mis-
fortune, she was destitute of the experience which is generally acquired
in a series of sinister and untoward events. At the age of sixteen she
was debauched by a lieutenant of marines, with whom she fled from her
father’s house to Dublin, where, in less than three months, he abandon-
ed her, leaving her a prey to infamy, poverty, disease, and desperation.
Having been thus deceived, in the simplicity of innocency, by the
cunning and falsehood of one of the vilest and most profligate of human
beings, she had no other resource but the most extreme want, or closing
with Price, who proposed her to join his company ; which, situated as
she was, she readily agreed to do, and had been with him but a very
short time when she saw Barrington, of whom she became suddenly ena-
moured. But to the credit of our hero, though his affection was mutual
B 3


it was not of that brutal and profligate cast that so frequently disgrace s
the devious paths of youthful imprudence and dissipation. On the pa, t
of Miss Egerton, the symptoms of her affection for him were so obvious,
that, inexperienced as he was then, in matters of gallantly or intrigue,
he not only perceived her passion, but was sensible of her merit, and
returned her love with perfect sincerity. Being of an age at which love
makes almost every one a rhymer, though not a poet, he modestly ad-
dressed her in several copies of verses, all of them short, but many of
them pretty enough; as, for instance, the following lines, written a
little before her death :
Place me where endless winter reigns,
Where genial gales ne’er bless the plains ;
Beneath those cold inclement skies.
Where morbid vapours ever rise :
Place me beneath the burning zone.
Where nothing human e’er was known;
Still Egerton’s enchanting tongue,
Her looks and smiles, shall be my song.
Whether o’er burning sands I go,
Or mountains topt with trackless snow.
Or were the fam’d Pactolus strays,
And all its fabled wealth displays;
Still she alone my thoughts engage,
And ever shall from age to age.
lire freedom of living which insensibly took place among the whole
troop, in consequence of the sudden influx of young Barrington's money,
was such, that on their arrival at I .ondonderry, they found the whole
Stock nearly exhausted, and themselves, in spite of all their recent hopes,
rather receding from, than approaching the golden harvest they had
promised themselves. Price in this dilemma did not fall to insinuate to
the unfortunate Barrington, that a young man of his address and appear-
ance might very easily find means to introduce himself into some of the
public places, to which the merchants and chapmen of that commercial
city generally resorted; and that he there might, without any great
difficulty, find opportunities of picking their pockets unnoticed, and of
escaping undetected, more especially at that particular time, when the
fair being held, a favourable juncture, offered itself of executing a plan
of such a nature with safety and facility. The idea pleased our needy
adventurer, and the plan formed on it was carried into execution by him
and his trusty, confidant, John Price, the very next day, with great
success; at least such it appeared to them at that time, their acquisi-
tions having amounted, on the close of the evening, to about forty
guineas in cash, one hundred and fifty pounds, in Irish cur-
rency, in bank notes; which, however, they artfully determined not, on
any account, to circulate in that part of the kingdom in which they
were obtained. This precaution became peculiarly necessary; for
several gentlemen having been robbed, the town took the alarm, which
was the greater, or at least made the more noise, from the rarity of such
events in that part of the kingdom, where picking of pockets is said to
be very little practised or known. But whatever the alarm was, or


whatever noise it made, neither Barrington nor his accomplice were
susuected They, however, resolved to leave Derry, as soon as they
could with any appearance of propriety depart from thence: so that,
having played a iew nights as usual with more applause than profit,
they and their associates of the sock and buskin removed from London-
derry to Ballyshannon, in the county of Donnegal, and never more re-
turned into that part of the kingdom ; where George Barrington may be
considered as having commenced the business of a regular and pio-
fessed pick-pocket, in the summer of the year 1771, being then in the
36th year of his age, and having just laid by the profession of a stalling
?1 This wretched company, having now become thieves as well as. va-
grants in the eye of the law, and compelled to subsist upon the plunder
above mentioned, after travelling about a fortnight, arrived at Baby-
shannon, which is represented by those who have been there, as one of
the pleasantest, cheapest, most plentiful, and most polite country towns
in Ireland. Here Mr. Barrington, and the company to which he be-
longed, spent the autumn and winter of the year 1771; playing gene,
rally on Tuesdays and Saturdays, and picking of pockets with John
Price every day in the week, whenever opportunity offered ; a business
which though attended with some danger and certain infamy, he found
more lucrative, and more entertaining, than that of the theatre ; where
his fame and his proficiency were by no means equal to the expectation
he had raised, or to the hopes that had been formed of him on his ap-
Pe SLV&?5ter d p a art of this year, he was attacked by a fever, which
was so violent that his life was for some time despaired of; he, however,
recovered, though slowly, and the period of his convalescence was so
long that the company, notwithstanding all their former professions of
attachment, ungenerously resolved to leave him behind, and proceed to
other quarters. But his favourite, Miss Egerton, who attended him
during his illness with unremitting assiduity, resolved to stay witn him
and share his fate, whatever it might he. , ,
From Ballyshannon, on his recovery, ne moved to the southward,
with his faithful Miss Egerton, whom he had the misfortune of losing
for ever, in crossing the iiver Boyne, in which she was drowned, through
the ignorance, or more culpable negligence, of a ferryman. Barrington,
however virtuous in his attachment to Miss Egerton was for some turns
inconsolable for the loss which he had just sustained ; hut, being neither
of an age nor of a temper propitious to the continuation of sorrowful
sensations, he hastened to Limerick, where he hoped to meet 1 nee, his
old iccomnlice. On his arrival in that city, he learned that the person
alter wS he had inquired had set out for Cork ten days before, and
thither our adventurer followed him, and found him within an hour after
he entered the town gates. On their meeting, it was agreed on by
them never to think more of the stage; a resolution which was the
more easily executed, as the company to which they belonged originally,
was now broken up and dispersed. It was besides settled between
them that Price should pass for Barrington s servant; and that Bar-
rug-ton should act the part of a young gentleman of large fortune, and
of a noble family, who was not, yet quite of age, but, until he should
attain that period, travelled for his amusement. In pursuance of this


hopeful scheme, horses were purchased, and the master and man, now
united as knight errant and esquire, and well equipped for eveiy pur-
pose of depredation, accordingly took their determination to act their
several parts in the wide field of adventure ; and thus, in the summer of
1772 as the race-grounds in the south of Ireland, presented themselves
as the fairest objects, they hastened to these new scenes of spoliation,
and were successful even beyond their expectation. Picking pockets
being rather new among the gentry in Ireland, their want of precaution
rendered them a more easy prey to Mr. Barrington and his accomplice,
who found means to retire to Cork on the setting in of the winter, with
a booty of nearly IOOOh In this city they found it convenient to fix
their residence, as least till the next spring. And now it was, that
Barrington, first determined with himself to become what has been
called a gentlemen pick-pocket, and to affect both the airs and import-
ance of a man of fashion. Hence, in addition to the turpitude of his
new profession, he would have conceived himself defective, had he for-
borne to have entered into the full routine of debauchery and dissipa-
tion, including drunkenness, gaming, quarrelling, and all their various
etceteras, which swell the catalogue of crime and remorse; and for a
short time rather seduce, than gratify the appetites of the young and
thoughtless profligate. In this desperate career of vice and folly, it was
the fate of Price, the preceptor of Barrington, to be first detected in the
very act of picking the pocket of the Right Hon. H - K -
towards the end of the winter, for which he was tried, convicted, and in
a very short period, sentenced to transportation for the term ol seven
years, as it was customary at that period, to America.
Barrington naturally alarmed at the fate of his iniquitous preceptor,
without loss of time, converted all his moveable property into cash, and
taking a horse, made as precipitate a journey to Dublin as it was
possible. _ . .
On his arrival there, he lived, rather in a private and retned manner,
only lurking in the darkest evenings about the play-houses, where he
occasionally picked up a few guineas, or a watch, &c. But he was
soon weary of the sameness, and disgusted with the obscurity of a life
of comparative retirement, such as that he led in the Irish capital; so,
that when the spring and the fine weather that accompanied it returned,
he went to the races, which usually are at that season of the year in the
counties to the southward. Here it was his misfortune, at one of the
races in the county of Carlow, to be detected while picking the pocket
of Lord B ■, near whom he happened to stand. The stolen pro-
perty was consequently found in his possession, and restored imme-
diately to the owner ; who, contenting himself with the restitution of it,
and on seeing the discipline of the course inflicted on the pilferer, de-
clined all prosecution ot him. And thus, through the ill-judged and
ill-timed lenity of this nobleman, did Barrington escape that punish-
ment in Ireland, which awaited him in England. But as soon as he
escaped from the race-ground at Carlow, he again took horse, and im-
mediately set off for Dublin, where he arrived time enough that evening
to dispose of ail his useless property, and to make all the necessary
arrangements of his affairs, previous to his departure fiom Ireland,
being”now ultimately determined upon a journey to London. Two days
afterwards he embarked on board the Dorset yacht, which was then on


the point of sailing with the Duke of Leinster for Parkgate; and before
the expiration of the week, he found himself for the first time of his life,
° n The°luL^ U ofthe year 1773, may he therefore considered as the
aeraof his arrival in England, he being then about eighteen years o
age, and in the third year of his infamous profession of a common
Pi With Ck Sir Alexander Schomberg, who commanded the Dorset, there
were three other persons embarked ; and of some distinction, from whence
it appears that the connection which our adventurer formed with them
had considerable effect afterwards, in the course of the long succession
of transactions in which he was engaged. Captain i
was one of the three most conspicuous, and as it will appear a staking,
though an innocent cause of Barrington’s success in his projects of de-
predatmm n ]eman was descen d e d from a family , one of the m ost
ancient, illustrious, and noble in the British Empire. He had.served I m
the army, and possessed a fortune every way corresponding with his lank
and appearance in life. He was also of a most amiable character
generous, candid, polite, benevolent and accomplished ; perfegy ™ f
bred, and better acquainted with books than men of his-age, i?#i and
profession generally are; but unfortunately for himself,.entirely Want
of the gross ways of the world, of the artifices of designing men and the
various stratagems of intriguing women. Thus inexperienced and un-
suspecting, he became an easy dupe to the deep-laid schemes of the jn-
famous adventurers with whom it was sometimes his ill-fate to become
a °lt dicTnot require so much sagacity and penetration as Barrington a*
the time certamly possessed, to penetrate into the character of
H n and to predict the good consequences that might follow an
intimacy with a young man of his rank, disposition and family. Actuat-
ed by a sordid sense of the utility of such a connection, to one m ips
circumstances, the adventurer employed all those base arts of flattery
and insinuation, of which he had been long a perfect master, to ingra-
tiate himself with this gentleman ; and in this design he succeeded to the
utmost extent of his wishes. Young H—n was captivated by his easy
address and engaging manners, so that before they had been three days
together, that unsuspecting youth reposed unlimited confidence in him ,
and with the indiscretion, or impetuosity, usually characteristic of his
time of life, reckoned him among the number of his fastest and most
valuable friends. In order to confirm these sentiments of confidence and
friendship, which were so imprudently conceived, or so hastily adopted,
Barrington formed an artful tale, which he told as his own story; the
purport of which was, that his father was a man of a noble family in
Ireland and illustrious in England, to which country he himself now
came to study the law, in one of the inns of court; more, however, to
avoid the ill-natured severity of a harsh unrelenting step mother, which
rendered his paternal mansion in a great measure intolerable to him,
than from any predilection for the profession to which he intended to
apply himself; but the exercise of which, the ample fortune that he was
heir to would render unnecessary. . , , , . ~ ,
This story took as well as could be desired by the inventor of it;


it was settled between him and Ins new friend, that he should o i
arrival in town, enter himself of the Middle I emple, where Mr. H n
had some relations, and a numerous acquaintance, to whom he said,
he should be happy to introduce a gentleman so eminently distinguished
by his talents and his accomplishments, as well as by his fortune and
birth, as Mr. Barrington was. Such were the handsome terms in which
he expressed himself to this professed pilferer, and so great were the pie-
possessions in his favour that suggested such expressions of kindness and
"Twas also farther agreed on between them, that they should travel
together to London; and they accordingly the next day took a post-
chaise at Parkgate, and continued their journey by easy stages through
Chester, Namptwich and Coventry, where they stopped two or thiee
days, they arrived by the end of the week, at the Bath coffee-house, in
Piccadilly, which, on the recommendation of Mr. H n, who had
been several times before in the metropolis, was fixed upon as their head
quarters for the remaining part of the summer. . , , ,
4 As to the other two persons who came over with them m the yacht,
and of whom there will be ample occasion to speak at large in the se-
quel, they travelled more humbly, but more expeditiously and frugally
than Mr. Y H n and Barrington ; for on the third day
parture from the place at which they landed from Ireland, they arrived
at the Golden-cross, at Channg-Cross, with the Chestei stage-coach,
at a very moderate expense.
Though Barrington on his leaving Dublin, made a veiy genteel appea -
ance foi° a traveller, ora country gentleman yet it was indispensably
necessary to expend a considerable sum, in order to enab.e him to appear
in a manner suited to the character which he had assumed, in such an
opulent and luxurious capital as London ; for, having represented im-
sTlf as a young man of family and fortune, he must, to be consistent,
dress and live like one of rank and fashion. Of this he was perfectly
sensible, and as oeconomy was never of the number of hisi virtues he
spared no expence to procure all the various articles which the vanity of
wCen Te cunning of tradesmen, or the folly of fashion have held forth
as essentials in the composition of a well dressed man In conversation,
however, he artfully spoke of objects of this nature with great indifferent*
or contempt, affectedly holding forth the superior excellence of an en-
larged and cultivated understanding; probably, because such langua e
flattered his vanity, fondly imagining that he was drawing his cha-
racter, and exciting the admiration of his hearers, who, as.is_ gene y
the case, were ready enough to approve of his opinion on this head.
But still, the expensive manner in which he lived with Mr. ,
and those to whose acquaintance that gentleman introduced him, all of
them gay sprightly young fellows, who had money at command, in less
than a month the funds, which he had brought with him from
Ireland to about twenty guineas ; which to him, who had been now fo
some years accustomed to live like a man of affluent fortune, seemed to
Xrd Y a very inconsiderable resource. He therefore, resolutely deter-
mined to procure a supply of money by some means or other. One even-
ing whilehe was deliberating with himself on the choice of
o recruit his finance, he was interrupted in his meditations on the si -
tby the arrival of Mr. H n, and a party of his friends, who pro


posed to him to accompany them to Renelagh, where they had agreed to
meet some of their acquaintance, and to spend the evening. Their pro-
posal was, without much hesitation acceded to by Barrington ; and they
without farther loss of time, ordered coaches to set them down at that
celebrated place of amusement.
This being the first time of his visiting it, every thing he saw about it
was new to him ; but the mortifying reflection of the poverty upon which
he so closely verged at this time, banished all those pleasing sensations
which novelty and splendour, music, and gay company, usually excite in
unembarressed minds. Nothing that he heard, or that he beheld, was
capable of taking him off from the thoughts of his present situation.
Walking about in this serious mood, of which the melancholy was
heightened by the gay scenes that surrounded him, he chanced to espy
the two companions of his voyage in the Dorset yacht, to whom he only
made a slight bow of recognition ; and in less than a quarter of an hour
afterwards, he saw the Duke of L r engaged deeply in conversa-
tion with two ladies, and a Knight of the Bath, who, it afterwards turn-
ed out, was Sir W D ■: and near these he placed himself, quit-
ting, for a short time, the company to which he belonged.
While he was thus stationed, an opportunity, which he considered as
a fair one, offered itself of making a good booty ; and he availed himself
of it. He picked the Duke’s pocket of above eighty pounds, Sir W- ’s
of five and thirty guineas, and one of the ladies of her watch; with all
which he got off undiscovered, and joined Mr. H n, and his party,
as if nothing had happened out of the ordinary and common routine of
affairs, in such places of public recreation as Ranelagh.
A degree of fatality rather unfortunate for Barrington, it seems occur-
red during the perpretation of the robbery just related, that is to say, he
was observed in the very act by one of the persons who came with him
from Ireland to Parkgate, and that this man who was also a practitioner
in the same trade of infamy, lost no time in communicating what he saw
to Barrington himself, and that in a manner not by any means calculat-
ed to conceal his triumph on the occasion. In fact, this gentleman’s af-
fairs being pressing, he made very little ceremony of informing Mr.
Barrington, that unless he was willing to give him a share in the plun-
der, he should communicate to the parties robbed, without delay, the
particulars of what he had seen. The consequence of a proposal of this
nature, admitting but of two very disagreeable alternatives, Mr. Barring-
ton, as it may be imagined, naturally chose the least of those two evils;
and under pretence of being attacked with a sudden complaint, he im-
mediately retired with his new acquaintance to town, and putting up at
the Golden-cross, at Charing-cross, the booty acquired at Ranelagh,
was in some sense divided ; the new intruder contenting himself with
taking the lady’s watch, chain, &c. which were of gold, and a ten pound
bank-note; leaving all the rest of the money and bank-paper, with Mr.
Barrington, whom, he probably conceived had run the greatest risk to
obtain it at first.
But in order to cement the connection which these two were now on
the point of forming, Mr. James, (for by that feigned name this new
accomplice is to be called from henceforth,) insisted upon Barrington s
supping with him. After supper, the parties being mutually pleased with


each other, Barrington proposed they should, enter into co-partnership in
picking pockets, which the other readily agreed to.
The outline of the future operations of these adventurous colleagues,'
being adjusted, it was further agreed upon to have another interview' On
the next day at a tavern in the Strand, there to regulate their future con-
duct ; and affairs being so far arranged, and Barrington returned by
midnight to his lodgings, at the Bath coffee-house, where neither Captain
H n nor any of his party had arrived.
The next morning, at breakfast, he informed his friend Mr. H n,
that on his return last night, he chanced to meet a very worthy relation
of his. Sir i'itzwilliam Barrington, who engaged him that day to dinner;
so that it would be out of his power to make one of the party that were
to spend the day at the Thatched-house tavern; but that he would en-
deavour to contrive matters so as to join them early in the evening, and
stay to supper with them, if they were bent upon keeping it up. This
apology was quite sufficient.
Barrington having dressed, called a coach, and drove to the Crown
and Anchor tavern, where he found Mr. James. The cloth being re-
moved, and the servants withdrawn, these worthy gentlemen entered on
the business of the day, as the final arrangement was the immediate ob-
ject of’their meeting. And here it was agreed upon, that whatever either
acquired should be equally divided between them ; and that on the sale
of watches, jewels, or any other articles they might have to dispose of,
both should be present. By this provision no suspicion of fraud could
be entertained : and thus Barrington got what he extremely wished, an
introduction to a fence, or receiver of stolen goods. It was further set-
tled by them, that while Mr. if n remained in town, they should
take care not to be seen publicly together, and that Mr. James should
resume his long neglected habit of a clergyman. These weighty con-
ditions, and some others of equal magnitude and importance, being ulti-
mately adjusted to the satisfaction of these systematic plunderers ; it was
determined, that they should meet regularly. twice a week, to settle with
each other ; but never, if it could possibly be avoided, twice at the same
house. Having then adjourned to next Tuesday, they fixed on the Devil
tavern, at Temple Bar, as the place of their next meeting, our adven-
turers separated for that time, Barrington going according to his appoint-
ment, to the Thatched-house tavern, and reached it about eight in the
afternoon, he found his friend, Mr. H n, and a large party of his
acquaintance ; but though rather far gone in liquor, most of them knew
him personally, and considering him in the light in which he was repre-
sented to them by Captain H n, as a young man of condition, they
were ‘delighted with his company. But yet, to the disgrace of our hero,
it is not to be imagined here, that he repaid them with the same cordia-
lity and candour with which they had received him : by no means. He
only waited till the bills were called for, and the reckoning discharged,
when there being no further obstacle to a hasty retreat, he plundered
those who were most off their guard; or rather those whom he supposed
was possessed of the most portable kind of property. Still as the prey
then made consisted more of watches and trinkets, than ready cash, he
was under the necessity of calling upon Mr. James, his new friend, next
morning, who readily introduced him to a receiver, and they divided the
produce.


So strongly did appearance plead for him at this time, that Barring-
ton’s depredation was never imputed to him by those who suffered in
consequence of it; and though similar offences were at different, seasons,
for upwards of two years, committed by him without suspicion or detec-
tion, he preserved his fame, and even extended his acquaintance.
In the summer of 1775 he visited, as his custom was, the most cele-
brated watering-places ; and among the rest, he went to Brighton, where
he is said to have had the address to ingratiate himself into the notice
and favour of the late Duke of Ancaster, with several other persons of
rank and property, who all considered him as man of genius and ability,
and as a gentleman of fortune and noble family.
From Brighton he made an excursion to Chichester, in company with
Jxrrd L and Sir Alexander Leith, who lived at that time in the
county of Sussex. \\ hile he remained in that city, he was shewn the
curiosities of the cathedral. Among them was pointed out to him a fa-
mily vault, for the interment of the Dukes of Richmond, which was
erected some years before, by the late Duke, and inscribed,
domus ultima, i. e. The last House.
On this the following epigram is said to have been written by him,
which, being not destitute of merit in that agreeable species of composi-
tion is here given :
Did he, who thus inscrib’d this wall.
Not read, or not believe, St. Pauli
Who says. There is, where-e’er it stands.
Another house, not made with hands ;
Or shall we gather from these words.
That house is not a house of Lords,
In the beginning of the winter 1775, he again visited London, alter-
nately pursuing the same round of dissipation in which he had before
engaged, though not without some intervals of serious reflection; and
frequents habits of study, reading, and not a few exercises in the com-
position of poetry.
About the conclusion of this winter he happened to get acquainted
with one Lowe, a veiy singular character,, and one, who, like his other
friend, James, he occasionally made use of to vend his ill-gotten property.
Mr. Barrington’s new junction with Mr. Lowe, having rendered Mr.
James rather a dead weight upon his hands, he began to think about
breaking with him, which he did not find a difficult matter ; as James,
having at the bottom some, remorse of conscience, easily quitted Mr.
Barrington’s connection, and being a catholic retired to a monastry upon
tne Continent, there in all probability to end his days in piety and peace.
Barrington, on the other hand, seemed to increase in temerity and despe-
ration ; for on his forming a connection with Lowe, which was but a
short time previous to that evening in the month of January, which is
observed as the anniversary of the Queen’s birth-day, it was resolved on
between them, that, habited as a clergyman, he should repair to court,
and their endeavour, not only to pick the pockets of some of the com-
pany, but what was a much bolder, and a much more novel attempt, to
cut off the diamond orders of some of the Knights of the Garter, Bath,
and Thistle, who on such days, usually wear the collars of their resoec-
live orders over their coats. In this enteiprize he succeeded beyond the


most sanguine expectations that could have been formed, by either his
new accomplice Lowe or himself; for he found means to deprive a no-
bleman of his diamond order, and also contrived to get away from the
palace without suspicion. This being an article of too much value to
dispose of in England, it is reported that it was sold to a Dutchman, or
rather to a Dutch Jew, who came over from Holland once or twice a
year, for the sole object of buying jewels that had been stolen.
The celebrated Russian Prince Orloff paid his first visit to England in
in the winter of 1775. The high degree of estimation in which that
nobleman had long been held by the late Empress Catherine, had ulti-
mately heaped upon him a number of distinguishing favours. Among
other things of this cast, she had expressed her approbation of his merits
by presenting him with a gold snuff-box, set with brilliants, generally
supposed to have been worth no less a sum than 30,0001. _ This distin-
guished trophy having caught the eye of Barrington, and impelled him
to contrive means of getting it into his possession, he thought a fit oppor-
tunity presented itself one night at Covent- Garden Theatre; where,
getting near the Prince, he had the dexterity to convey it out of his Ex-
cellency’s waistcoat pocket into his own ; when being immediately sus-
pected by the Prince, he seized him by the collar : yet in the bustle that
took place, Barrington slipped the box into his hand, which that noble-
man gladly retained, though Barrington, to the astonishment of all
around, was secured and lodged in Tothillfields Bridewell till the Wed-
nesday following, when his examination took place at the Public Office,
Bow-street.
When Sir John Fielding being examinant, Mr. Barrington represent-
ed himself as a native of Ireland, of an affluent and respectable family.
That he had been educated in the medical line, and came to England to
improve himself by the extent of his connections. To this plausible re-
presentation he added so many tears, and seemed to rest so much upon
his being an unfortunate gentleman, rather than a guilty culprit, that
Prince Orloff declined prosecuting him, he was dismissed, with an ad-
monition from the Magistrates to amend his future conduct; but this it
will appear had no manner of influence upon his subsequent proceedings.
In fact, Barrington having gone too far to recede, every one now taking
alarm at his character and conduct, he found himself in some measure
obliged to continue in his pursuits as a pickpocket; and in this charac-
ter he occasionally attended the lobbies of both Houses of Parliament.
Being in the lobby of the Lords one day, when an appeal of an in-
teresting nature was expected to come on, so that Barrington thought to
profit by the number of genteel people that generally attended, a Mr.
G , unhappily for Barrington’s projects, recognized his person, and
applying to the Deputy Usher of the Black Rod, Mr. Barrington was
disgracefully turned out, and of course totally disappointed of the harvest
he had promised himself.
Barrington having by some means heard that Mr. G • was the
person that denounced him to the keeper of the lobby, was so indiscreet
as to threaten him with revenge for what he deemed an unmerited in-
jury ; but the Magistrates thinking otherwise, they granted, upon that
gentleman’s complaint, a warrant against Mr. Barrington to bind him
over .to keep the pace. And Barrington’s credit having sunk so very


low, that not one of all his numerous acquaintance would become surety
for him, he was compelled to go to Tolhill-fields Bridewell, where he re-
mained a considerable time under confinement, merely from his inability
to procure the bail that was required. However, having again obtained
i release from that disagreeable quarter, he had no alternative but that
jf his old profession j and therefore, in about three months afterwards,
ive find him detected in picking the pocket of a low woman at. Drury
h,ane Theatre, for which being indicted and convicted at the Old Bailey,
he was sentenced to ballast heaving, or in other words, to three years
hard labour on the river Thames, on board of the Hulks at Woolwich.
A sudden remove from ease and affluence, to a scene of wretched ser-
vitude and suffering, and the privation of almost every comfort in life,
could not but have a most sensible effect upon a man in his condition.
In short, he was not only harassed and fatigued with labour, to which he
had been unaccustomed, but even disgusted with the filthy language of
his fellow-convicts. Perhaps the mental, as well as the corporeal suf-
ferings of Barrington, did not escape the notice of Messrs. Erskine and
Duncan Campbell, the superintendants of the convicts ; for in conse-
quence of Mr. Barrington’s good behaviour, and through the interference
of these gentlemen, he was again set at liberty, after sustaining some-
thing less than a twelvemonth’s severe suffering on board the Hulks.
In less than six months after his liberation from hard labour at Wool-
wich, he was detected by one Payne, in the very act of picking pockets
at St. Sepulchre’s church during divine service, and being convicted
upon undeniable evidence at the ensuing old Bailey Sessions, he was a
second time sentenced to hard labour on board of the Hulks, and for the
term of five years.
It was upon his trial on this occasion that Mr. Barrington was first
noticed in the public prints as an able speaker. He then essayed with
no small degree of artifice to interest the feelings of the Court in his be-
half ; but the evidence of his guilt being too forcible and repeated, all
bis efforts proving abortive, he was once more removed to the Hulks,
about the middle°of the year 1778. Being a second time in this humi-
liating and disgraceful situation, he either found his imaginary 7 conse-
quence so much hurt, or that failing in a variety of plans to effect his
escape, his next attempt was to destroy himself. _ For this purpose he
took an opportunity to be seen stabbing himself with a penknife in the
breast; but as the wound, by the immediate application of medical as-
sistance, was slowly healed, he continued to linger in this new state of
wretchedness ; till happening to be seen by a gentleman that came to
visit the Hulks, it produced another event in his favour, of which we shall
presently speak more at large.
The gentleman just alluded to was Sir M L —, who being
most sensibly affected by the dejected and squalid appearance of Bar-
rington, he made a most successful use of his influence with Govern-
ment to obtain Mr. Barrington’s release from the Hulks, upon the con-
dition that he should leave the kingdom. To this Mr. Barrington glad-
ly consented, and he generously supplied him with a sum of money to
defray the expences of his removal to Ireland ; but his ill fame having
arrived before him, he was looked upon with an eye of suspicion, that
he was very shortly apprehended for picking the pocket of an Irish noble-


man of a gold watch and his money, at one of the Theatres, and was
soon after committed to the New Gaol, to be tried upon that charge.
Fortunately for Mr. Barrington, in his trial for this offence, he was
acquitted for want of evidence, and set at liberty, after receiving a Very
serious admonition from the Judge. But though the circumstances
urged against him were rather of the vague kind, he thought a specimen
of his eloquence might still possibly be wanting ; he therefore addressed
the Court with considerable animation, and enlarged with great ingenui-
ty upon what he chose to term the unaccountable force ol prejudice so
unfairly entertained against him in England, the report ot which, he
contended, had pre-occupied the minds ol too many in the sister king-
dom. In England, he said, he had been discharged as a reformed cha-
racter, and that from a place which the legislature formally and express-
ly declares to have been appointed for the sole purpose of meliorating the
condition of young offenders, rendering them useful members of society,
and paternally restoring them to the paths of virtue. He argued that it
was impossible for any man, possessed of sensibility or reflection, to re-
main uninterested in his case, and not even to feel the most lively com-
passion for him. He even insisted that, in his case, the dictates of sen-
sibility might be indulged, without the least deviation from the dictates
of'justice. . . .
But though, as we observed before, he was acquitted on this occasion,
he was perfectly convinced that the Irish capital would be too warm to
retain him. He quickly determined to leave Ireland. He accordingly
removed to the northern paits of that kingdom, through which he took
his way to Edinburgh, where he concluded that he might, for some time
at least, commit his depredations with greater safety and facility than he
could do either in London or Dublin. . ,
But in the opinion, which he had formed of the character o. the Scots,
he soon learned, by experience, that he was grossly mistaken; for he
he was quickly observed in the capital of Scotland, where the police is
more vigilant and severe, than in most other parts of the British domi-
nions. For being observed, he soon learned that he was suspected ; he
therefore thought it prudent to depart from Edinburgh, where his glean-
ings were comparatively small.
However, being determined to return to London, he took Chester in
his way and being fair time, he contrived to get possession of the amount
of six hundred pounds in cash and bank notes, with which he got clear
off, returning once more to London.
Yet such are the delusions of vice and the fatal svyeets of i!I-
--gotton wealth, that though additional danger attended his public ap-
pearance, from the infraction of the terms on which he was liberated
from his confinement on board the Hulks ; which were those of Ins leav-
ing this kingdom and never more returning to it. Still he could not
avoid the snares that awaited him ; and braving danger, he again fre-
quented' the theatres, the Opera-house and the Pantheon, for some little
time with tolerable success: but he was now too notorious to be long_
secure ; he was closely watched and well nigh detected at the latter of
these places ; at least, such strong suspicions were entertained by the
magistrates of his conduct on the occasion, that he was taken into cus-
tody, and committed to Newgate.


Here again, for want of evidence, he got clear of the charge brought
against him; but, notwithstanding this, he was unexpectedly detained
at the instance of Mr. Duncan Campbell, the superintendant of the con-
victs, for having returned to England, in violation of the conditions of
his pardon, and the consequence of the detainer was, that he was made
what is called a fine in Newgate, during the unexpired part of the time
that he was originally to have served on the river Thames. When the
period of his captivity in this prison expired, he was, as a matter of
course, set at liberty ; and as usual, no sooner obtained his liberty, than
he returned to his former practices. He, however, was now more cau-
tious ; and being connected with some accomplices of his own cast, he
was not so easily detected as he might have been with others less ex-
perienced.
In this state of alarm and anxiety he lived a considerable time, in the
society of the most profligate abandoned characters of the metropolis,
when he was seen to pick the pocket of Mr. Le Mesurier, at Drury-lane
theatre, and immediately apprehended.
Charge of him was given to one Blandy, a constable, who, either
through negligence or corruption, suffered him to make his escape. But
as the proceedings against him were carried on to an outlawry, still vari-
ous methods were made use of to apprehend him, for nearly two years
without effect.
But while the lawyers were outlawing him, and the constables en-
deavouring to take him, he was travelling in various disguises, and cha-
racters, through the northern counties of this kingdom. He visited the
great towns in those parts, as a quack-doctor, or as a clergyman; some-
times he went with an E O table, and sometimes he pretended to be a
rider to a manufacturing house at Birmingham or Manchester.
But in spite of these precautions it sometimes happened that he was
known by gentlemen whom he met, once particularly in Lincolnshire,
yet no one offered to molest or interrupt him, until he arrived at New-
castle-upon-Tyne, where, on being recognized, he was suspected of
picking pockets, and on enquiry, he was discovered to be an outlaw,
upon which he was removed, by a w rit of habeas corpus to London, and
imprisoned in Newgate, where he arrived miserable and so_ dejected, that
on learning his circumstances, some friends made a subscription for him,
by which they collected near an hundred guineas for his use, by which
he was enabled to employ council, and to take legal measures to have
the outlawry against him reversed.
This being effected he was tried for the original offence, that of steal-
ing Mr. le Mesurier’s purse ; but, through the absence of the Rev. Mr.
Adeane, a material witness for the prosecution, he was acquitted and
discharged. Being once more enlarged he again set off to Ireland, in
company with a young man of the name of Hubert, well known in town
for his fraud on his Royal Highness the Duke of York. With this ac-
complice he was so infatuated as to endeavour to carry on his depreda-
tions in Dublin, where it was never his fortune to remain for any length
of time undetected. For, Hubert being taken in the fact of picking a
gentleman’s pocket, and handing the property to Barrington, he with
great difficulty made his escape to England, where he rambled about for
some time, previous to his arrival in the capital; where he had scarcely


arrived, when he was taken into custody for picking the pocket of Mr.
Henry Hare Townsend, of a gold watch, &c.
Hubert, his accomplice was tried at Dublin, and sentenced to be
transported for seven years; but he afterwards contrived to make his
On Wednesday morning, September 15, 1790, at nine o’clock, George
Barrington was put to the bar to be arraigned, (with the other prisoners;
on an indictment, charging him with stealing, on the Ist of September,
1790, in the parish of Enfield, in the county of Middlesex, a gold watch,
chains, and seals, and a metal key, the property of Henry Hare lowns-
-611 When Mr. Barrington was asked, as usual, by the Clerk of the Ar-
rams, whether he was guilty or not guilty of the felony with which he
stood charged, he addressed Mr. Recorder (the only Judge on the bench)
as follows :
“ It is with great concern, that I interrupt the business of the Com
for a single moment, but I am under the necessity of stating to your
Lordship, that when I was taken into custody, on suspicion of this felony,
every article about my person was taken from me; and although the
gentleman, who is my accuser, did not attempt to say any money was
lost my money, viz. twenty-two guineas and some silver in a silk puise,
was taken from me, and is still detained. Perhaps I share in common
with other miserable men this hardship, I had almost saidcmelty , be-
cause it deprives prisoners of their property, which is tantamount to with-
holding the means of their defence. lam advised, my Lord, that such
proceedings are illegal, and directly contraiy to a positive a,ct of pay-
ment, 11th Henry YIII. I have made application that this money be
restored, it is however, still detained; by which detention, my Loid, 1
have been hindered from taking those proper measures for my defence,
and from obtaining that legal assistance, which my unfoitunate situation
lb'winch'address the Recorder made the following short, though
P6i » M? Barrington, it is impossible for me to decide, previous to your
trial, what is your property ; but when your prosecutor appears, every-
thing which has been taken from you, and which is not necessary to be
identified on your trial, shall be restored to you.
Mr. Townsend, the prosecutor, deposed, that on the first of Septei -
her, having entered a horse for the races at Enfield,
there at one o’clock in the afternoon : he put his watch m his waistcoat
pocket, as much for the convemency of looking at it, as to pi event the
chain from soiling his leather breeches. About a quarter past two he
feU his watch in his waistcoat pocket. As he was leading he horse,
which was to run, up to the starting post, a person dressed in a lig
coloured coat rudely rushed in from behind him, and aga.ns.the
arm which had hold of the horse ; and again repeated his push, but in
a Mn TomSTrther deposed, that from the
suit offered to him, he, accompanied with an oath, asked firing
what he wanted 1 to which he returned no answer, but observed that he


looked much confused. The conduct on the part of Barrington appear
ed very odd; but he entertained no suspicion of having been roll oca,
until Mr. Blades came up to him, and asked him, if he had not been
robbed lOn feeling his pocket he found his watch was gone. r.
Blades informed him that Barrington was on the course, and e ven y
believed that he was the thief. After this they agreed to say nothing
about the matter, until they had found the supposed offender. icy
then walked about in search of Barrington, and at last saw him on the
opposite side of the course : this was at the very moment when the
horses were going to start. Nothing occurred till after the horses were
past, after which they went up to him; and Mr. Townsend going be-
hind him, seized him by the collar, and said “ You rascal, you lave
robbed me of my watch.” No sooner had Mr. lownsend saifl t e .AT 0 j 8
but he again laid hold of him fast by one hand and arm, and Mr. Blades
took hold of the other, and conducted him to a booth.
Buxton Kendrick affirmed, that after he had been about a minute m
the booth, he heard something rattle, and looking down, he saw the
watch fall rather between his legs. John Waldeck, Mr. l ownsend s
coachman, also declared that he heard the watch jingle as it tell rom
the prisoner; that Barrington attempted to kick the watch further behind
him ; but that he picked it up and gave it to Lady Lake, in the next
booth, who was a relation of Sir. Townsend.
William Blades, the principal witness, deposed that he saw Barring-
ton at the race close to Mr. Townsend ; that he observed™ conversa-
tion at the time passing between the prosecutor and the prisoner. Soon
after this he asked Mr. Townsend if he recollected a tall thin man, m a
light-coloured coat, standing by him ; which he said he did, but knew
nothing of him. Blades after this informed Mr. lownsend that he sup-
posed he was robbed, which appearing to be the fact, they both went in
search of the prisoner, whom they apprehended, as above related.
Mary Dandy deposed, that she was standing in the next booth, and
saw the prisoner drop the watch out of his hand; after this, she looked
him full in the face, and consequently could not tell whether he kicked
it or not. She at the same time accused him of throwing the watch
down, but was immediately pulled back by some person near her.
Upon Barrington’s being again brought up to the bar, Chief Baron
Eyie, the Judge, addressed him in the following manner ; “ Prisoner,
you have heard the whole of the evidence that against you ; you are
to state the matter of fact to .he jury yourself, with the observations on
the evidence on the part of the prosecution ; and by way of intioduction
to your own evidence, if you have any yourself: your counsel are only
permitted to cross examine the witnesses on the part of the prosecution :
this is the time for you to make your defence.”
PRISONER’S DEFENCE.
“ May it please your Lordship, and you gentlemen of the jury, to fa-
vour me with your attention for a little time. The situation of every
person who has the misfortune to stand here is extremely distressing and
awkward ; mine is so in a peculiar degree : if I am totally silent, it may-
be considered, perhaps, as a proof of guilt, and if I presume to offer
those aiguments which present themselves to my mind, in my defence.


they may not, perhaps, be favoured with that attention which they might
deserve; yet Iby no means distrust the candour and benevolence of the
Jury; and therefore, I will beg leave to proceed to state the circum-
stances of the case, as they occur to me, not doubting they will meet
with some degree of credit, notwithstanding the unhappy situation I am
in. Gentlemen, 1 was on the Race Ground at Entield, observing the
race on the day that the indictment mentions, where 1 found myself
surrounded by Mr. Townsend and numbers of others; Mr. Townsend
said, “ Your name is Barrington, and you have taken my watch!”—
I told him he was right as to my name, but he accused me unjustly ;
however, 1 would go any where with him, 1 was removed from thence
to a stand, from whence the races were viewed; it consisted of two
booths, and they were separated from each other with only a railing
elbow high ; and it is a great misfortune to me, gentlemen of the jury,
that you were not able to observe the situation of those booths ; for if
you had, you would have found it nearly impossible that some circum-
stances which have come from the witnesses could be true. 1 was close
to the railing that separated the two booths, and some person said, “ Here
is a watch !” This watch Mr. Townsend claimed, and said it was his.
I was removed from there to the Angel at Edmonton, where the exami-
nation took place ; and I am sorry to be under the necessity of observing,
that a very material difference has taken place in the depositions deli-
vered that day before the Magistrate, in various respects. A witness,
the coachman, positively declares that he did not see this watch in my
hand, that he did not see me take it from my pocket, that he did not
see it drop from my person, but that he saw it on the ground, and ne
might have gone so far as to say he saw it fall. I- took the liberty of
asking him one question, Whether he had seen this watch in my hand,
whether he had seen it fall from met He declared he did not. 1 then
asked him whether he could take upon himself to swear, from the situa-
tion he stood in at the adjoining booth, that this watch might not have
dropped from some other person, he declared he could not observe any
such thing. Gentlemen, with respect to the evidence of Kendrick, he
made the same declaration then. Mr. Townsend has brought me here,
under the charge of having committed felony. He has told you, gentle-
men of the jury, that he lost a watch out of his pocket, and that pocket
is a waistcoat pocket; that he was in a very extraordinary situation;
that he was on the race ground, where certainly the greatest decorum is
not always observed ; and he was also in a situation which exposed him
more to the pressure he complained of, than any other person; for, in-
stead of his horse being in possession of his jockey or groom, he attend-
ed it himself; and I must beg leave to observe, gentlemen of the jury
that it is a custom where people bet money at races 5 , to wish to see the
horse immediately after the heat is over, so that the pressure which Mr.
Townsend had, or what he thought he had from me, could not appear
very extraordinary ; and I am under the necessity of saying, his fancy
has rather been improved on the occasion. With respect, gentlemen, to
the last witness that has appeared, I will not say any thing on the oc-
casion ; that will rest entirely with you. It was a circumstance, how-
ever, of a most extraordinary nature, that this person should never come
forward till the present moment; and whether the contradictions and


Strange accounts she has given of herself, are such as to entitle her to
any credit, particularly in a situation where the life or liberty of another
is at stake, is not for me to observe upon. Gentlemen ot the jury, it
may perhaps be expected, by many persons in this place, that I should
say a great deal about prepossession and newspaper reports ! and if I had
the ability to do it, perhaps I should not be blamed; for he who has
been the unhappy object of much defamation, has surely the right to de-
precate its baneful effects: where much pains have been taken to de-
fame, some pains may be surely allowed to abate that defamation. Gen-
tlemen, that it has been the hard lot of some unhappy persons, to have
been convicted of crimes they did really not commit, less through evi-
dence than ill-natured report, is, doubtless, certain ; and doubtless there
are many respectable persons, now in Court, fully convinced of the
truth of that observation. Such times it is to be hoped, are passed. I
dread not such a conviction in my own person ; I am well convinced of
the noble nature of a British Court of J ustice; the dignified and be-
nign principles of its Judges, and the liberal and candid spirit of its
Jurors.
“ Gentlemen, life is the gift of God ; and liberty its greatest blessing :
the power of disposing of both, or either, is the greatest man can enjoy.
It is also adventitious that, great as that power is, it cannot be better
placed than in the hands of an English jury; for they will not exercise
it like tyrants, who delight in blood, but like generous and brave men,
who delight to spare rather than destroy; and who, not forgetting they
are men themselves, lean, when they can, to the side of compassion. It
may be thought, gentlemen of the jury, that I am applying to your pas-
sions ; and if I had the power to do it, I would not fail to employ it.
The passions animate the heart; and to the passions we are indebted for
the noblest actions ; and to the passions we owe our dearest and finest
feelings; and when it is considered, the mighty power you now possess,
whatever leads to a cautious and tender discharge of it, must be thought
of great consequence : as long as the passions conduct us on the side of
benevolence, they are our best, our safest, and our most friendly guides.
Gentlemen of the jury, Mr. Townsend has deposed that he lost his
watch, but how, I trust, is by no means clear. 1 trust, gentlemen, you
will consider the great, the almost impossibility, that having had the
watch in my possession for so long a time, time sufficient to have con-
cealed it in a variety of places, to have conveyed it to town, it should
still be in my possession. You have heard from Mr. Townsend, that
there was an interval of at least half an hour between the time of losing
the watch and my being taken into custody : there is something, gentle-
men, impossible in the circumstance; and, on the other hand, it has
sometimes happened that remorse, a generous remorse, has struck the
minds of persons in such a manner, as to have induced them to surren-
der themselves into the hands of justice, rather than an innocent person
should suffer. It is not therefore, I suppose, improbable, that if Mr.
Townsond lost his watch by an act of felony, the person who had the
watch in Ws possession, feeling for the situation of an unhappy man,
might he induced to place that watch on the ground. But it is by
no means certain how Mr. Townsend lost his watch, whether by an act
of felony, or by accident; it might have fallen into the hands of some


other person, and that person, feeling for my unhappy situation, might
have been induced to restore it. I humbly hope, that the circumstances
of the case are such as may induce a scrupulous jury to make a favour-
able decision ; and I am very well convinced that you will not be led
by any other circumstances than those of the present case ; either from
reports of former misfortunes, or by the fear of my falling into similar
ones. I am now just thirty-two years of age,* (shall be so next month) ;
it is nearly half the life of man ; it not worth while being impatient to
provide for the other half, so far as to do any thing unworthy. Gentle-
men, in the course of my life I have suffered much distress, I have felt
something of the vicissitudes of fortune, and now from observation I am
convinced, upon the whole, there is no joy but what arises from the prac-
tice of virtue, and consist in the felicity of a tranquil mind, and a bene-
volent heart; sources of consolation which the most prosperous circum-
stances do not always furnish, and which may be felt under the most
indigent. It will be my study,? gentlemen, to possess them; nor will the
heaviest affliction of poverty, pain, or disgrace, cause me to part with
resolutions founded on the deepest reflection and which will end but
with life : I will perish on the pavement before I will deviate from them.
For my own part, whatever your verdict may be, I trust I shall be en-
abled to meet it with a firmness of mind. He, indeed, has little to fear
from death, whose fame is tarnished, and who has endured the ceaseless
abuse of unfeeling minds ; when Heaven accepts contrition, ifr receives
into favour when it pardons ; but man, more cruel than his Maker, pur-
sues his offending brother with unrelenting severity, and marks a devia-
tion from rectitude with a never dying infamy, and with unceasing
suspicion and reproach, which seem to exclude him from the pale of vir-
tue. Gentlemen of the jury, the thought of death may appal the rich
and prosperous ; but, on the other hand, the unfortunate cannot have
much to fear from it; yet the tenderness of nature canhot be quite sub-
dued by the utmost degree of human resolution, and I cannot be insen-
sible to the woes which must be felt by an affectionate companion and
an infant offspring; and there is besides a principle in human nature,
stronger even than the fear of death, and which can hardly fail to operate
some time or other in life ; I mean the desire of good fame. Under
that laudable influence, gentlemen, if I am acquitted, I will quickly re-
tire to some distant land, where my name and misfortunes will be alike
unknown; where harmless manners shall shield me from the imputation
of guilt, and where prejudice will not be liable to misrepresentation ;
and I do now assure you, gentlemen of the jury, that I feel a cheering
hope, even at this awful moment, that the rest of my life will be so con-
ducted, as to make me as much an object of esteem and applause,
as I am now the unhappy object of censure and suspicion.”
' After the jury’s verdict of transportation for seven years was pro-
nounced, the Lord Chief Baron thus addressed the prisoner :
“ Mr. Barrington, hitherto I have conducted myself towards you on
this trial as if I had never seen you before ; but now, when nothing
which I can say can prejudice the jury, I must say you have been treat-
* Here he makes himself three years younger than he really was.


ed with much more favour than you deserve. This ought to have been
a capital indictment, and it ought to have reached your life; and public
justice very much calls for such a sacrifice: for if ever there was a man
in the world that abused and prostituted great talents to the most un-
worthy and shameful purposes, you are that man ; and you have done
it against all warning, against the example of your own case, and of a
thousand other cases, that have occurred ; and I am afraid that now, as
the punishment does not reach your life, I cannot entertain the least
hope that you will in any manner reform ; but that the end of it will
he, that you. must be a shameful spectacle at your latter end/
Mr. Barrington bowed and retired.
On Wednesday the 22d of September, 1790, the Recorder pronounced
the sentence of the court upon him, when Barrington addressed them in
a sort of farewell speech, conceived in nearly the following terms :
“ My Lord,
“ I have a great deal to say in exenuation of the crime for which
I now stand convicted at this bar; but, upon consideration, I will not
arrest the attention of the honourable Court too long. Among the ex-
traordinary vicissitudes incident to human nature, it is the peculiar and
unfortunate lot of some devoted persons to have their best wishes, and
their most earnest endeavours, to deserve the good opinion of the most
respectable part of society, entirely frustrated. Whatever they can say,
or whatever they may do, every word and its meaning, every action and
its motive, is represented in an unfavourable light, and is distorted from
the real intention of the speaker or the actor.
“ That this has been my unhappy fate does not seem to stand in need
of any confirmation.
“ Every effort to deserve well of mankind, that my heart bore witness
to its rectitude, has been met by such measure as those, and consequent-
ly has been rendered abortive. Many of the circumstances of my life,
I can without violation of truth, declare to have, therefore happened ab-
solutely in spite of myself.
“ The world, my Lord, has given me credit for abilities much greater
than I possess, and therefore, much more than I deserved; but I have
never found any kind hand to foster these abilities.
“ I might ask, where was the generous and powerful hand that was
ever stretched forth to rescue George Barrington from infamy ? In an
age like this, which, in several respects, is so justly famed for liberal sen-
timents, it was my severe lot, that no noble-minded gentleman stepped
forward and said to me, * Barrington, you are possessed of talents which
may be useful to society. I feel for your situation, and as long as you
act the part of a good citizen, I will be your protector: you will then
have time and opoortunity to rescue yourself from the obliquy of your
former conduct.’
“ Alas, my Lord, George Barrington had never the supreme felicity
of havino- such comfort administered to his wounded spirit. As matters
have unfortunately turned out, the die is cast; and as it is I bend, re-
signed to my fate, without one murmur or complaint.”
Having thus concluded a speech, which, for the neatness of the lan-
guage, and the pathos that runs through the whole, has never been ex-


needed at that bar, he let! it with a respectful bow, and thus withdrew
tram public life in Europe, to act a part in the new world ; and though
in a different sphere, yet not much less distinguished than before. b
Agieeable to his sentence he was shortly after transported to Botany
Bay. A mutiny breaking out among the convicts during the passage
Barrington was very assiduous in quelling them, and upon their landing
was strongly recommended to Governor Phillips by the Captain, who
put him in the situation of a principal watchman, in which being found
diligent, sober, and impartial, the Governor resolved to draw him from
the line of convicts ; and, with the instrument of his emancipation he
received a grant of thirty acres of land near Paramatta. He was after-
wards made a peace officer, and thus not only received a reward for his
past conduct, but an incitement to continue it; and though not so abso-
lutely free as to return to England at his own pleasure, he nevertheless
enjoyed all the immunities of a freeman, a settler, and a civil officer and
had the additional satisfaction of, knowing that his integrity was never
suspected. J
Among other reports respecting Barrington, which reached this coun-
try relative to his decease, it was stated that he died insane. This was
so far from being founded on fact, that there was not the least appear-
ance of any thing that might be supposed to have led to such a catas-
trophe in the conduct of Barrington. The same behaviour which in-
duced the governor to place him in a superior situation at Paramatta
was the cause that he was continued in it till his decease took place, and
which was hastened by the rapid progress of an asthmatic complaint or
rather a general decay, brought on by his unremitting attention to the
duties of his office.
His property, some time before his death, as a proof of his industry
might have been estimated from his being in possession of twenty acres
of ground in wheat, thirteen sheep, fifty-five goats, and two mares.
THE END.
Fairburn, Printer, 110, Minories, London.




FAIRBURN’S
Wonderful Songster
For 1829.
BEING AN EXTENSIVE COLLECTION OF ABOUT
'V
\<Aj)
Four Hundred Songs
j
. CONTAINING ALL THE
POPULAR, HUMOROUS, WITTY, ECCENTRIC,
ji
CONIC SOTCB
OF THE PRESENT DAY :
IXCalculated to afford Wit, Fun, Mirth, and Entertainment*^
for ever and a day. rtfwA
S&Mt
WITH A PRIME COLLECTION OF '
% TOASTS AND SENTIMENTS.
lEmbellished vdth a Whimsical FrontispieceJ
sis
LONDON:
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY J. FAIRBURN,
110, MINORIES.
_ Price Two Shillings in Boards.
