

FAITHFUL IS HE THAT CALLETH.
A SERMON
PREACHED IN WESTMINSTER ABBEY ON THE
FESTIVAL OF THE CIRCUMCISION, 1884,
AT THE
CONSECRATION OF ALFRED BARRY, D.D., D.C.L.,
CANON OF WESTMINSTER AND LATE PRINCIPAL OF KING’S COLLEGE,
LONDON,
TO THE SEE OF SYDNEY, AUSTRALIA
BY
B. F. WESTCOTT, D.D., D.C.L.,
REGIUS PROFESSOR OF DIVINITY, CAMBRIDGE.
London:
MACMILLAN AND CO.
1884
Price One Shilling.




FAITHFUL IS HE THAT CALLETH.
A SERMON
PREACHED IN WESTMINSTER ABBEY ON THE
FESTIVAL OF THE CIRCUMCISION, 1884;
AT THE
CONSECRATION OF ALFRED BARRY, D.D., D.C.L.,
CANON OF WESTMINSTER AND LATE PRINCIPAL OF KING’S COLLEGE,
LONDON,
TO THE SEE OF SYDNEY, AUSTRALIA
BY
B. F. WESTCOTT, D.D., D.C.L.,
REGIUS PROFESSOR OF DIVINITY, CAMBRIDGE.
Hontron:
MACMILLAN AND CO.
1884


(£atnbrfogt:
PRINTED BY C. J. CLAY, M.A. AND SON,
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS.


A SERMON.
1 Thess. v. 24.
“ Faithful is he that calleth."
“Faithful is He that calleth' '; the context in which
this assurance stands gives it a peculiar force. St
Paul has drawn a broad portraiture of the Christian
life. He has touched upon the duties and privileges
of social organisation. He has affirmed the reality
and permanence of spiritual fellowship. He has
gathered his desires and hopes into a unique prayer.
He has sought for his readers the present consecra-
tion and the final perfection of every human power,
of spirit and soul and body, at the presence of the
Lord Jesus Christ. And then he appears to pause
for a moment in the contemplation of a destiny which
seems to be too great for man. But, as he looks, the
conviction comes that he has only put into simple
words the meaning and the promise of the Gospel.
This hallowing, this preservation, this transfigure-
ment of every faculty of sense and thought and in-
tuition, with which we are endowed, is God’s will.
God Himself reveals to us His purpose, and He
I—2


supplies all that is needful for the fulfilment of it:
“ Faithful is He that calleth.”
“He that calleth.” The words speak, as we shall
observe, of a voice which is addressed .to our whole
being; of a voice which claims the right of command;
of a voice which makes itself heard through the
whole conduct of our lives. The call which the Apo-
stle heard, the call which we hear in the silence of
our souls, is no invitation to isolate and offer to God
some fragment of our nature; no imagining of a rest-
less enthusiasm; no single cry which lives only in
the memory of him who has once listened to it. It
is a voice which constantly directs progress without
confusion; which brings accomplishment to the
divine counsel; which witnesses in man to a divine
kinsmanship. It sounds about us now, and will
sound while life lasts, in every moment of effort, in
every crisis of decision.
“Faithful is He that calleth The urgent re-
quest of distant colonies, the answer from the centre
of our most vigorous life, both consummated in the
service of to-day, bring the thought of the divine
call before us with a force which we cannot misunder-
stand. They remind us of duties of the nation, of
the Church, of the Christian minister, which we
shall do well to ponder. They enable us to feel, in
some degree, how deeply we need the sense of spiri-
tual communion in each sphere of moral activity, and
how deeply we need to confess our belief in this
Divine fellowship. Happy shall we -be if we are


taught, even through sorrows and losses (as we count
them), to recognise a fresh call to our nation, a call
of a heavenly King, while we learn now to see the
unity and the obligations of social life; a fresh call
to our Church, while we learn to see the necessity of
the progressive embodiment of a Gospel always the
same and always new; a fresh call to each minister
of Christ, while we learn to see that the sum of all
personal gifts is brought as due service of the part to
the whole, fruit at once and seed, a blessing from the
past which God will make fruitful a hundredfold for
the age to come.
1. “ Faithful is He that calleih .” The promise
as we listen to it to-day encourages us, I repeat, to
think of a national call. If we say that in the
providence of God England has been appointed to
be the mother of nations, it is with the feeling of
overwhelming responsibility, and not of indolent
pride.. We cannot but ask ourselves with sad self-
questionings whether we have as yet practically
realised that in the great family of states, as in the
circle of home, there is an inspiration of faith which
may mould the growing life, a negation of faith
which may mar it. As it is, we seem to be in
danger more and more of banishing the thought
of that which is the spring of all life from the
highest forms of life. We shrink from bringing
our deepest personal convictions to bear upon ques-
tions of state till we unconsciously forget the Divine
element in the nation. Many facts combine to


foster this temper. The intricate perplexities of
society in an old country, the pressure of class
upon class, the narrow limits which confine labour,
force us to consider the circumstances of popular
distress, and then absorbed in the engrossing study
we forget the final source of the distress. So we
fall under the temptation of seeking material so-
lutions for spiritual problems; material remedies
for spiritual maladies. The thought of spiritual
poverty, of spiritual destitution, is crowded out.
We treat the symptoms and neglect the disease
itself.
The experience of Australia, as rich m resources
as in enterprise, dissipates the illusion which animates
such efforts. Vice and squalor find a place in Sydney
no less than in London. Boundless opportunities
for industry and the independence of democratic
equality have not brought there or elsewhere uni-
versal competence or true freedom. We stand for
a time, perhaps, disheartened by the dreary spectacle,
and then we discern its lesson, fuller, I will dare to
say, of hope than of sadness. A greater, surer,
diviner trust takes the place of that which has
failed. If nature refuses to confirm the law of
progress, God restores it to us by revealing that
we were born for fellowship with Him. It grows
clear to us that if the greatest present dangers
of rich and poor are, as they surely are, moral
in their origin, they must be removed by a moral
cure; clear that if the master vices which spring


from human selfishness are to be overcome, it must
be by the invocation of a force without us and
above us; clear that if we are to have the peace
of perfect liberty, it must be by the loyal acknow-
ledgment of an absolute law; clear that if the
interests of earth are sufficient to occupy our noblest
energies, the motive for action, and the support
of action, must come from a higher sphere; clear
that the power of a great faith, of which every
soul is capable, and for which every soul was made,
is adequate, is alone adequate, to deal with evils
which make themselves felt day by day with more
urgent intensity, and to fulfil the destiny of men,
and of man, and of creation.
And this faith is committed to us in the faith of
Christ Born, Crucified, Ascended, still in God s pro-
vidence committed to us as a nation. We have not
yet used it as there is the opportunity for using it.
For more than three centuries we have been led to
develop individualism in religion and to regaid
religion simply as a matter for the soul and God.
The discipline has been priceless if it be treated as
preparatory to a larger work. And now once again
we are beginning to understand the language and
the spirit of the Jewish prophets; to feel how the
highest privilege of Israel was to be a Messianic
people; to see that the message of the Incarnation
is social no less than personal; to see that it reveals
to us the destiny not of individuals only but of
humanity; to see that it shows .an end towaids


which the nations are bidden to strive when all races
and all classes shall bring their characteristic offer-
ings to the Lord, and combine in perfect harmony
to manifest His glory, His absolute righteousness,
and wisdom, and love 1 .
Many signs show that in this respect the time of
our trial, of our call as a nation, is at hand. Such
conceptions, as I have indicated, fall in with the
temper of the age when they are divorced from all
foundation in fact. Reflections and counterfeits of
the Christian ideal meet us on all sides.- But aspira-
tions without faith are powerful only for destruction.
They can kindle a revolution, but they cannot mould
a new order. Let the ideal, however, he openly
confessed to be the embodiment of the will of God;
let it be trustfully offered in a history which is the
foreshadowing and pledge of a redemption; let it
he brought home to daily experience by sacraments
which reveal the potential glories of manhood and
nature; and its influence may become—must be-
come—irresistible. That which can regenerate and
hallow a man can regenerate and hallow a nation.
This, nothing less than this, is the meaning and
power of the announcement which still rings in our
ears, “ The Word became flesh.”
True it is, most sadly true, that the world, as it
meets our sight, is hard and pitiless. But the heart
also has its eyes 2 , and as things are, pain and sorrow
1 Rev. xxi. 24 (R.Y.).
2 Eph. i. 18 (R.Y.).


are made springs of purifying, quickening virtue.
Deep down in the fallen, yet not too deep to be
reached by love taught of God, lie the sympathies
of brotherhood. All around us we can discern
the promise of creation, the unspoken expectation
which changes the agonies of nature into the travail
pains of a more glorious birth 1 . So the great
announcement passes into life, and comes forth from
life a living faith.
How this faith shall find expression in the nation
we cannot yet tell. But the call—the call to the
nation —even now grows articulate. So may we all
answer while we wait—losing ourselves, our irony,
and our weakness, in the majesty of Him Who
speaks —“Faithful is He that calleth.”
2. “Faithful is He that calleth. The promise
which inspires national confession and effoit comes
with yet greater force to our English Church, in
which seems to lie the best hope of the social Chris-
tianity of the future. It must at least rest in a
large measure with the English Church whether the
civilisation of the southern world shall be penetrated
by Christianity as a social force 2 . To this end it
must, we readily allow, vindicate to itself more fully
than heretofore every force of truth and right and
beauty —of spirit and soul and body—by which men
are moved: it must accept more boldly the heavy
burden of command: it must trust more intensely
I—s
1 Rom. viii. 20 ff.
2 Compare Sermons d be. by Bp. Broughton, pp. xxsv. .


to the teaching of the indwelling Spirit. But here
the late past is not without encouragement. The
first Bishop of our communion outside the British
isles (Bishop Seabury) was consecrated just a hun-
dred years ago, and now 133 look to Canterbury as
the seat of their patriarch. Only eight-and-forty
years have passed since Sydney was made the centre
of an Australasian see, and now eighteen, soon to be
nineteen, sees own it as their parent. And, this
increase—this progressive increase—of the Episco-
pate, which answers to the growing belief in the
social action of the Church, has amply justified it.
The short annals of the Australasian bishoprics re-
cord examples of saintliness and of suffering, of
self-devotion and of administrative skill, not un-
worthy to be reckoned with the great examples of
the first ages. So it is that the labours of these
first Apostolic missionaries have left us far more
than scattered congregations of the faithful. A wise
organisation binds see to see and province to pro-
vince. The withdrawal of state aid has left un-
touched the sense of national obligation. The minis-
trations of the ■ English Church are still held by its
rulers to be the right of every citizen who duly
claims them 1 . Lay work and lay counsel have
1 See Dr Barry’s speech at Worcester, Guardian , Dec. 19, p. 1911.
“It is quite true that our Church in Australia is not in any sense a
State Church, but it is the heir of the old historical Christianity of
England, and I hope and trust that it will be faithful to the traditions
of this country, which holds' that every baptized Englishman, if he will
accept it, has a right to our ministrations and will be welcome to
them.”


extended the efficiency of the whole body and given
weight to its deliberations.
Nor has the effect of this wise and courageous
policy been confined to the immediate sphere of its
operation. Already these late teachings of the
youngest sisterhood of Churches have been fruitful
among ourselves. e have learnt from them the
beginnings of synodical action. Wb are learning
from them now the rights and duties of the laity.
And may we not look forward to stdl greater lessons
from the experience of societies which will he called
in fulness of time to meet new wants without sur-
rendering any part of their heritage? We believe
that the Holy Spirit still lives in the Church. . We
believe that He still speaks through its appointed
rulers. We believe that words uttered by them in
simple dependence on His guidance, and with the
solemn recognition of final responsibility, will quicken
in clergy and laity alike a spirit of reverent obedi-
ence and self-control. And if we have become dis-
used alike to obey and to command; if faith in a
living Divine authority seems to he in _ abeyance
among us; yet no long rest, no still silence can
abrogate the power of life or the prerogative of
progress. We look then for a reawakening in places
where the problems and conditions of action are
simpler than at home. It may he that movement
will come through pain and distress, hut even so the
pain will he turned to joy when we look on the open
presence of the Lord revealed in His people 1 .
1 St John xvi. 21, 22 (Ye therefore).


To-day the promise of the unity and freedom of
this larger life is vividly present to our hearts. One
is called from among us not only to the rule of a
province but to the primacy of a continent. The foun-
dations of a united Church have been firmly laid, of
which he will have to fashion the manifold super-
structure with large forethought. Such a task can
only be discharged through an intense belief in a
divine fellowship. Through that belief, we doubt
not, it will be discharged. And though it is hazard-
ous to predict, yet to-day we cannot but imagine in
the great Australia of the future an English Church
which, without sacrificing one fragment of Catholic
truth, will have embodied in fresh forms the spiritual
gifts of the states with whose growth it has grown ;
a national Church which shall answer in part to
the circumstances of a new world, and make known
to others something more of the inexhaustible wealth
of the Gospel; a Church which shall be one member
in a vast community of Churches, through which
Anglican Christianity shall be shown in various ways
to have interpreted and harmonised and hallowed
the highest capacities and endowments of man.
He at least who is called to the task of watching
over the first stages of a work happily begun will
bring to his oversight the largest possible conception
of the importance of its opportunities, the tenderness
of patience, and the courage of faith; he will trust
to the divine grace of his office; he will wait for the
slow unfolding of the divine counsel; he will show


that the Apostolic breadth of the English Com-
munion is able to embrace the manifold fulness of
religious thought and action; he will claim every
human interest as lying within the range of his
ministry; he will accept the invitation which he has
received to “advise on social movements,” as ready
and eager to face the questions of modern life with
the forces of spiritual conviction; he will listen for
each fresh call, made intelligible through the disci-
pline of self-forgetting labours, strong to obey in
spite of opposition and disappointment, by this as-
surance, which opens the treasury of heavenly force,
“ Faithful is He that calleth.”
3. For the promise has a personal application,
which we need for our support at a moment of
separation. And here, as always, the way of God
is the way of sacrifice. His voice touches us with
deep awe, that we may become capable of enduring
vigour. And from the first divine call, from the
call of the first patriarch, man’s answer has always
been simple self-surrender. At that Sovereign bid-
ding all is laid down, yet so laid down that it may
be taken again, blessed with fresh power for nobler
uses 1 .
The way of God, I say, is the way of sacrifice.
But let us not mistake the meaning of the word.
It has been well said that “in the hours of clear
reason we should say that we had never made a
sacrificeand again it may be said no less well,
1 Comp. St John x. 17.


that all which we delight to recall is sacrifice. For
sacrifice properly describes not loss to man but
devotion to God: not suffering but dedication: not
the foregoing of that which we might have enjoyed,
but the conversion of that which was offered to us
for a time into an eternal possession ; the investment
of things unstable and fleeting with a power of un-
changeable joy.
So it is that God teaches us the fulness and the
permanence of life through that which we call loss
and bereavement. At first we are poor scholars in
His school; but as the years go on the truth is
mastered. We look backward and we look forward,
and we see glimpses at least of a great counsel which
we have perhaps unconsciously furthered, or for
the furtherance of which we have perhaps uncon-
sciously prepared ourselves. We see the sorrow of
death followed by a glorious rising: we see the
gathered stores of life brought out at last to loftiest
service.
While I seek to give a personal reality to such
reflections, my own thoughts cannot but go back
this morning to college days. I cannot but think
of two friends of my own year as I knew them then,
generous rivals for the highest honours of the
University, both touched alike with that Christian
ambition which constrains us to use every gift
of God for His glory. The one (Bishop Mackenzie)
with unfaltering heroism and pathetic humility bore
the gospel to the heart of Africa, only to die there,


tended by a dying comrade, and to leave his grave
as the monument of his toil. That death was sacri-
fice, devotion to God, blest, as we know now, beyond
the utmost hope. The other has had the privilege
of unbroken labour at home, the discipline of vigor-
ous activity, the exercise of every faculty of organi-
sation and teaching, the happy necessity of study,
the inspiration of wide friendships and stirring
associations; and now he is bidden to-day to bring
the ripe results of every work and of every thought
to a ministry which needs them to the uttermost.
That life is sacrifice, devotion to God, destined to be
fruitful, as we pray, beyond our furthest power of
vision.
The issue indeed, the issue for the single minister
and for the whole Church, rests with God. But we
may at least be allowed to recognise with gratitude
the correspondence between the worker and the
work. The government of a group of English
Churches still growing, as they have hitherto grown,
with the marvellous vigour of the colonies whose
spiritual aspirations they embody, calls for the
highest gifts of Christian statesmanship. A friend-
ship of more than five-and-thirty years enables me to
know, better perhaps than some, how singularly he,
to whom it is intrusted, has been marked out for
the arduous office. The experience of Leeds and
Cheltenham, of Worcester and Westminster, of the
school board and the College council-room, the duty,
that is, of co-ordinating, under the most varied


conditions, every study of nature and history and
art with the central message of the Gospel, has
richly endowed the ruler who will have to deal with
large questions of public and clerical education, to
win authority for his high place, to commend the
counsels of faith to a population which has the faults
no less than the virtues of new states, to show that
definite convictions as to matters of controversy
furnish the widest basis for sympathy with all who
love the Truth. And, if I may express what I feel
most deeply, I can imagine no charge in which his
natural endowments could find ampler scope; no
charge in which the fruit of all his earlier labours
could have a more efficient application, not by direct
transference, but as a seminal force; no charge, I
will add, though I do not underrate the sorrow
which clouds the immediate prospect of a strange
and remote work, more certain to bring peace to the
‘‘surrendered” soul 1 , for this is true, however the
world may judge, that the most perfect fulfilment of
service is the fulfilment of joy.
Brethren, the occasion has constrained us to touch
on great thoughts, great opportunities, great labours,
great hopes ; to rise to the contemplation of a divine
unity wrought out through the ages by the power of
a spiritual fellowship revealed in the Gospel; to feel
that nations and Churches and men are strong by
faith in the will of God to which they are called to
minister; to confess inwardly, I think, that the
1 Is. xlii. 19 (Cheyne),


powers of the spiritual world are nearer to us than
we habitually suppose, and more prevailing. That
such conceptions should be intelligible and natural
to us, growing out of our circumstances and inter-
preting our sympathies, is the sign of our duty.
They are given to us —to him who goes on his far
mission, to us who remain—not as splendid theories
but as stimulants to action, that the confidence of
our prayers may not fall short of the sense of our
destiny.
And we need their invigorating inspiration. We
grow so timorous about details, so anxious to meet
every objection to the faith, that we are in danger
of forgetting that we are commissioned to proclaim
a message of glad tidings, to which the world and
life and the soul of man bear spontaneously the wit-
ness of welcome; of forgetting that our creed rests
upon a fact by which man is bound so closely to man
and earth to heaven that, while we hold it, love can
never fail and hope can never be desolate. We
grow content to interpret Christ’s promise to His
Church 1 as if it assured to us survival and not vic-
tory. We accept the position of a beleaguered gar-
rison, holding some last stronghold at desperate
odds, when Christ would have us move forward in
His Name with a great tide of conquest, before
which the last barriers of death and sin shall fall
and set free their captives. We think of ourselves
and not of God, of our feebleness and not of His
t St Matt. xvi. IS.


might, of our temporal isolation and not of His
eternal fellowship.
But to-day we hear His call; and “faithful is He
that calleth .”
Yes, “faithful is He that calleth.” In that
assurance we rejoice in our brother’s work, for the
sake of Australia and for the sake of England. He
will take with him the wealth of the old life which
he has made his own: he will give back to us the
energy of the new life which he quickens and guides :
he will help us to see the continuity of the old with
the new by a vital progress. The prayers and
memories of this loved Abbey, closely connected
from the first with our Colonial episcopate 1 , will
blend with the prayers and prophecies of the dis-
tant Cathedral: thoughts stirred here by memories
of princes and statesmen with thoughts stirred there
by names of founder-bishops blazoned on the piers 2 .
But here and there one call will still be addressed to
him and to us, fresh from day to day, bidding each
in his place occupy new realms for Christ, one call
welcomed by one prayer, the inspiration and the
stay of faith. And as often as this Festival re-
turns, when the Hope of the world was sealed by
a human Name, may God give us grace to renew the
supplications and thanksgivings with which we now
acknowledge His voice, to strengthen by medita-
tion the sympathy which unites our ancient Chapter
1 See Stanley’s Memorials , pp. 578 f.
2 Sydney Diocesan Directory 1881, pp. 30, 37.


with southern enterprise, to reflect what it means
for us and for our common faith, that one who
has entered so deeply into the work and spirit of
this place has given himself to a new world. And
so we “commend him,” as he would have us do 1 , “to
God and to the Word of His Grace,” friends who see
fulfilled the promise of his youth, pupils who treasure
the memories of his teaching, colleagues who have
known the wise strength of his counsel, Churchmen
who are familiar with the large-heartedness of his
faith, Fathers in God who send a tried fellow-labourer
to share with them, though far off, the exercise of
one spiritual authority.
Disappointments will come, failures will come,
trials of long delay and premature judgment will
come, but the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ to
which we are allowed to minister while life lasts,
the Gospel which covers all the facts of life, will go
forward. In spite of our mistakes, it will be re-
vealed through men in new glory from change to
change. And when the end of work is reached, one
sentence will convey the witness of every consecrated
soul in the retrospect of life, even the sentence in
which we have sought this morning our confidence
for work and our inspiration of joy, u Faithful is He
that calleth,” ttictoc d kaAo>n.
CAMBRIDGE: PRINTED BY C. J. CLAY, M.A. & SON, AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS.
1 Sermon at King’s College, Guardian , Dec. 27, p. 1954,


