

FAITH:
ITS NATURE, AND THE WARRANT
AND MOTIVES TO EXERCISE IT.
by william Mclntyre, a.m.
n b it c n :
■GIBBS, SHALLARD, & CO., ±O3 PI IT- STREET.




FAITH.
“He thatbelieveth on the Son hath everlasting
life.” —John iii., 36.
THE NATURE OF SAVING FAITH.
It may seem unnecessary to institute any
inquiry into the nature of faith, inasmuch
as we know, from acquaintance with the
acts of our own minds, what it is to believe.
But, when we reflect that, as is evident
from the Scriptures, there is a species of
faith that is not saving, we shall perceive
that such an inquiry is not unnecessary.
Simon Magus believed after a sort, (Acts
viii., 13,) and yet he was “in the gall of
bitterness and in the bond of iniquity.” (23.)
And we read that on a certain occasion
many believed in Christ s name, to whom,
notwithstanding, he did not commit him-
self. (John ii., 23,24.) He thus practically
pronounced their faith worthless. And he
declares “ not every one that saith unto


me, Lord, Lord, sliall enter into the king-
dom of heaven,” (Matt, vii., 21,) though
all who recognise him as “Lord” must have
some kind of faith.
The nature of the faith, that ought
to be exercised in any given case, will
depend upon the nature of its object.
Some objects of faith are related only to
the understanding. If a person of un-
questionable veracity informed me that,
travelling, say, in a paid; of this island
not previously explored, he discovered a
mountain of a certain appearance and
height; regarding his testimony as suffi-
cient evidence in such a case, I would
believe him. Here my belief or faith
would be no more than the assent of my
understanding, —the admission by my un-
derstanding of the sufficiency of the evi-
dence, and, consequently, of the truth of
the statement. There would be nothing
for me to admire or to appreciate ; I should
only be informed, that, at a certain time


and in a certain locality, a mountain in no
way remarkable was discovered. But, it
my informant related to me the circum-
stances of a recent shipwreck, attended
with a great loss of life, and described in
vivid terms the fears, the unavailing efforts,
and the protracted sufferings which pre-
ceded the disastrous and melancholy issue;
—in this case, as in the former, my under-
standing would admit the sufficiency of the
evidence and the truth of the statement j
I should believe in this sense. But in the
object of faith now presented to me there
would be not a little that addressed itself
to my heart, —that called for sympathy and
for sorrow at my hands ; and, accordingly,
if my heart remained unaffected, my faith
would be inadequate,—it would not be com-
mensurate with its object. The object of
faith in the former case would address
itself to my understanding only, and, there-
fore, the due recognition of it by the under-
standing would, in that case, be an adequate


faith ; but now the object of faith presented
to me would address itself to my heart as
well as to my understanding, and, therefore,
the recognition of it by the understanding
only would not be an adequate faith.
If a faithful servant rushed into your
presence with the alarming intelligence that
your house was on fire, and that in a few
minutes more it would be impossible for
you to effect your escape, and you coolly
replied that you believed him, but remained
composed and sat still; would he not con-
clude, notwithstanding your assurance to
the contrary, that you did not believe him?
And why would he draw this conclusion %
Because he could not but perceive that the
faith which you professed to exercise was
wholly inadequate, —that it fell far short
of being commensurate with the object of
faith presented to you. That object being
such that it addressed itself powerfully to
the heart, without the recognition of it by
the heart there could not be an adequate
recognition of it.


It is mot enough, however, in order that
faith may he adequate, that its object,
when it is such as addresses itself to the
heart as well as to the understanding, be
recognised by the heart as well as by the
understanding. It is necessary further
that it be suitably recognised by the heart.
If you are informed that somewhat has
befallen a neighbour which is greatly to his
advantage, and you believe the intelligence,
but regard the occurrence with regret ;
there is here a recognition by the heart of
an object of faith which addresses itself to
the heart, but there is not a suitable recog-
nition of it by the heart. It is regarded
with regret, whereas it should be regarded
with joy. The faith of devils comprehends
a recognition of its object by the heart,
“ they believe and tremble f —but the
recognition is not a suitable recognition,
there is nothing in it, for example, of the
adoring love with which the character of
God should be regarded.


Thus faith may be described as the
adequate recognition of its object,—the
recognition of it, according to its character,
by the heart as well as by the understand-
ing, when it is of such a nature that it
O'
addresses itself to the heart.
From the remarks that have now been
made, it may be perceived that the inade-
quacy of faith is of two kinds. One form
of inadequate faith presents itself to us,
when the object of faith addresses itself to
the heart as well as to the understanding,
but is recognised only by the understand-
ing; and another, when the object of faith
presents itself to the heart and is recog-
nised by the heart, but not suitably. The
former kind of inadequacy arises from the
disruption of the heart from the under-
standing which sin has wrought. But for
this disruption and the consequent schism
in our nature, every object presented to us
would meet with an adequate recognition,
a just recognition of the whole of its


character and of the whole of its claims.
And the latter kind of inadequacy arises
from the corruption of the heart, in conse-
quence of which it puts bitter for sweet,
and sweet for bitter.
From the view now presented of the
nature of faith in general, you will perceive
that saving faith is just an adequate recog-
nition of its object. What then constitutes
such a recognition 1 The object of saving
faith is Christ, the Saviour of sinners.—
Behold the Lamb of God who taketh away
the sins of the world—Believe on the Lord
Jesus Christ and thou shalt be saved —He
that believeth on the Son hath everlasting
life. Christ, as the object of saving faith,
is presented to us in the light of the Gospel
testimony and offer. The Gospel testimony
describes Christ’s person, his offices, and
his benefits. In his person he is unspeak-
ably glorious as the Son of God, and with
his divine glory are associated the mild
graces of his humanity. He is thus the


chiefest among ten thousand and altogether
lovely. His offices originated in his Father’s
love and in his own. The Father so loved
the world that he gave him to assume and
to execute his mediatorial offices; and he
himself so loved it that he wholly
concurred with the Father in this arrange-
ment, and in due time finished the work
which was given him to do. _A.nd his
offices, instituted by divine wisdom, are
co-extensive with our wants varied and
multiplied as these are. We are ignorant,
and he is a prophet and teaches his people.
But we are blind, not merely without
knowledge, but spiritually incapable of
receiving it \ and he, in the exercise of his
prophetic office, enlightens the eyes of the
understanding; he not only presents the
light of the truth, but also imparts to the
soul the power of spiritual vision. We
are guilty, and he, as the high priest
of his people, has made atonement for sin,
and cancels its guilt. We labour under


many •wants, and are exposed to many evils,
and he ever liveth to make intercession
for his people, and to procure for them, and
dispense to them, all the blessings that they
need. We are naturally of a rebellious
spirit, and he, in the day of his power and
by the efficacy of his grace, makes his
people willing to submit to his authority.
We are surrounded with enemies, who are
too powerful for us, but he makes his people
more than conquerors. In short, he works
in his people all the good pleasure of his
goodness, and perfects that which concerns
them. And his benefits are inestimably
precious,—peace and acceptance with God,
renewal after his image, restoration to com-
munion with him, and ultimately the full
and eternal enjoyment of him, —in a word
all that is desirable for us and would be
advantageous to us. And those benefits
derive no small enhancement from our
natural position, as guilty, condemned sin-
ners liable to eternal misery.


And Christ, as executing those offices
and bestowing those benefits, is offered to
us, —he is offered to us that he may exe-
cute his offices in our case, bestow his
benefits on us, and th us be our Saviour.
Such is the object of saving faith, —the
object of which it forms the adequate and
due recognition. Accordingly, in the exer-
cise of saving faith, while the understand-
ing assents to the truth of the Gospel testi-
mony and offer, there is besides the suitable
recognition by the heart of all that both
present \ —the excellency of Christ s person,
the grace, the suitableness and the effi-
cacious execution of his offices, and the
preciousness and fulness of his benefits,
are met with the proper affections and the
proper choice, —are dealt with suitably by
the whole soul, —not by the understanding
only, but also by the heart. Realise the
circumstances under which faith is exercised
and the office it fulfils. You feel that you
are guilty and ready to perish,—all who


exercise saving faith do, —and, while you
feel that you are in this state, the call is
addressed to you, “ Behold the Lamb of
God, —believe on him and you shall be
saved.” You direct your attention to the
Saviour thus presented and offered to you,
and you see that he is himself glorious,—
that the salvation which he bestows is
glorious,—and that he bestows it in the
exercise of loving-kindness and with mighty
power; and, now, what is necessary and
what constitutes saving faith is, that your
whole soul be suitably exercised with respect
to what is thus before you, —that you
admire, prize, choose, confide. That you
merely assent to the truth of the Gospel
message respecting Christ and his salvation
is, by no means, the whole of what the
occasion demands; it demands, besides,
the exercise of certain affections and a
certain determination and choice. If you
tell a mother that her son, who for several
tempestuous days, that to her seemed inter-


minable, was exposed at sea to the dangers
of a terrible storm, is now safe on shore,
will her faith in the intelligence be a mere
assent of the understanding? —Will not
her heart have a large share in the exercise
of it ? From the nature of its object it will
be an ardent affectionate faith. And so
also, from the nature of its object, is saving
faith. If a widowed mother were anxiously
revolving in her mind how she might be
able to make provision for herself and her
destitute family, and, while as yet she could
think of no method of accomplishing her
object, a benevolent kinsman sent word to
her, that, if she confided in him and would
be directed by him, he would undertake to
see herself and her family provided for in a
manner that would be altogether satisfac-
tory to her; and, if, reflecting upon his
character, his resources, and the terms of
his offer, she perceived that his proposal
was honourable to himself and highly de-
sirable for her, and cordially accepted it; —


this would be an exercise of faith, and you
will easily perceive that it would comprise
not only the acknowledgment of her under-
standing that his character, his resources,
and his offer were such as they appeared to
be, but also the satisfaction of her heart
with all that her understanding would thus
acknowledge, and its acceptance of the
proposal made to her.
The case, with which we deal in
exercise of saving faith, is very similar to
the one we have now supposed. To sinners
ready to perish a message from heaven is
addressed, that, if they confide in Christ and
will be directed by him, he will save them
and, when, contemplating Christ’s person,
his character, his offices, his resources, and
his benefits, surveying the method of salva-
tion, and weighing the terras of the Gospel
offer, their understanding and their hearts
are satisfied, and they accordingly accept
Christ as their only Saviour’, and his benefits
as all their salvation, —they exercise saving
faith.


But while an exercise of saving faith is
thus analogous to the exercise of faith
which our supposed case illustrates, it dif-
fers from it. The object of saving is dis-
tinguished by spiritual excellencies, and,
accordingly, saving faith includes in it the
heart’s appreciation of those excellencies,
and its satisfaction with them; whereas,
in the case which we have supposed, the
excellencies to be recognised by faith are
excellencies within the sphere of sense, and
of the present life.
There are, it appears, then, three modifi-
cations of faith by which it adapts itself to
its object. When its object addresses
itself to the understanding only, faith is the
recognition of it by the understanding.
When its object, being distinguished only
by other than spiritual qualities, addresses
itself to the heart as well as to the under-
standing, faith is the recognition of it, ac-
cording to its qualities, by the heart as
well as the understanding ; and, when its


■object, being distinguished by spiritual
qualities, addresses itself to the under-
standing and the heart, faith is the recog-
nition of it, according to its spiritual qua-
lities, by the understanding and the heai’t.
Thus saving faith, being elevated by its
object, is the highest modification of faith.
And, from its nature, you will perceive the
necessity of divine grace to enable us to
exercise it. If it were a mere assent of the'
understanding, we are capable of such assent
in our natural state and in our own strength.
But, as it implies a just appreciation of
spiritual things and a due acknowledgment
of their claims, the natural man is incapable
of it; for he “ receiveth not the things of
the Spirit of God, they are foolishness unto
him ; neither can he know them, because
they are spiritually discerned.” (1 Cor. ii.
14.) That we may exercise saving faith,
it is necessary that we be enabled by
divine grace to recognise aright the charac-
ter and claims of Chx’ist and of his salva-


tion, and to proceed aright with respect to
them.
It is objected to the view now presented
that it makes faith too complicated. In
describing the nature of faith what we have
to do is to exhibit it in its true character,
whether it may appear simple or compli-
cated. It is to be observed, however, that
the operations of the human soul, though
they appear to our ordinary consciousness
as being each of them one simple opera-
tion, will appear more complicated in any
description of them that we can offer. And,
besides, those operations are usually com-
plicated, and certainly faith is, —composed
of elements contributed by different powers
of the soul.
DISTINCTIVE PROPERTIES OF SAVING FAITH.
We shall now indicate some of the pro-
perties of the faith whose nature we have
endeavoured to describe. And, in the first
place, it is not an ignorant confidence in


Christ. It originates in knowledge of
himself and of his benefits; for, without
this knowledge, thei’e could be no such
acknowledgment of the claims of the
Saviour and of his salvation as we have
seen constitutes true faith. But the faith
of most is not thus enlightened. They
know but little of Christ and his benefits,
and they do not desire such knowledge.
They are satisfied with knowing from re-
port, that Christ is the Saviour of sinners,
and that he delivers from misery, and be-
stows happiness; and they trust that he
will deal thus with them. This is not the
true faith.
The true faith, being intelligent, is also
earnest. It is the response of the heart as
well as of the understanding to the claims
of Christ and of his salvation, —it is the
escape of the soul from a state of guilt
and condemnation to a state of acceptance,
—it is the souls reception of a glorious
Saviour and salvation, whose glory it dis-


cerns and appreciates. Thus, from its very
nature, it must be earnest. But how
languid is the faitli with which most are
satisfied 1 It is not, like true faith, the
dealing of the soul, in circumstances of
extreme urgency, with the most momentous
realities and interests.
True faith is, from its nature, operative.
Being an acknowledgment of Christ’s
claims, it is naturally and necessarily fol-
lowed by obedience to him. It implies a
just appreciation of Christ’s excellence, and
it therefore involves and awakens love to
him; and those that love him will keep
his commandments. Faith implies also a
just appreciation of spiritual blessings, and
will therefore give rise to diligent endea-
vours to obtain them.
WARRANT TO BELIEVE.
We now inquire what warrant we have to
believe. When you consider the nature
of faith, —that it is the due acknowledg-


ment of the claims of Christ and of his
salvation, —you must perceive that we not
only have full warrant but are under obli-
gation to believe. To believe on Christ is
to give to him the reception to which he
is entitled, and it must always be our duty
to give to him that reception. Accord-
ingly, it is expressly stated that this is the
•commandment of God that we believe on
him whom he hath sent. (1 John ix. 23
John vi. 29.) And, when we have a com-
mand, it of course follows that we have a
warrant, to believe.
The error to be carefully guarded
against is, that our warrant to believe de-
O 7
pends upon our own exercises or qualities,
that we are authorised to believe if we
are penitent or have spiritual desires, but
not otherwise. "We shall not be disposed
to believe unless we are penitent and have
spiritual desires, but we are warranted and
authorised to believe on the single ground,
that, from the nature of the case and from


the call and command of God, it is our
duty to believe.
MOTIVES TO BELIEVE.
We proceed now to urge the motives to
believe. These, at least so far as we shall
at present insist upon them, are presented
in these statements, —it is reasonable to
believe, —it is our duty to believe, —it
will be unspeakably to our advantage to
believe.
To urge the motives to believe is just to
persuade men to believe ; and, while we
are urging them, therefore, the proper at-
titude for you is, that of persons weighing
carefully the motives urged, stirring up
their souls to comply with them, and de-
siring earnestly that the Spirit may effec-
tually incline them to the determination
and choice which constitute compliance
with them. Assume, then, this attitude.
The first motive which we urge is, that
it is reasonable to believe. Being rational


creatures, if we do not act a rational part,
we contradict our nature, and degrade our-
selves from the rank to which it exalts us.
We should highly value the noble distinc-
tion of reason, and should ever carefully
guard against depriving ourselves of the
dignity which it confers. If we do not act
reasonably, we sink into a lower position
than irrational creatures are capable of
occupying. The position of irrational
tures is comparatively low on the scale of
God’s works, because they afford a more
limited display of his perfections and are
adapted to less exalted ends than higher
orders of creatiu’es ; it is not as being dis-
tinguished by anything morally offensive
that they occupy it. But it is on this ground
that rational creatures who act unreason-
ably occupy their low position. They are
distinguished by what is morally offensive.
It is reasonable to believe as regards the
acknowledgment by the understanding of
the truth of the Gospel. But we take it


for granted that you exercise this kind of
faith. And what we now call upon you
to consider is, that it is reasonable to be-
lieve in the sense of giving a due reception
to the Saviour and to the salvation pre-
sented and offered to you in the Gospel.
Saving faith implies a high appreciation
of its object; and is it not reasonable to
have a high appreciation of Christ, who is
infinitely glorious in his person and in his
character, and in whom, as the Saviour,
every excellency is found that could recom-
mend him in that capacity 1 He is the
Son of God, the Father’s equal,—he is also
the Son of Man, a partaker of human
nature in its highest excellence, —he is the
faithful maintainer of the principles and
the honour of the divine government, and
the compassionate and mighty deliverer of
sinners,—he exercises divine love, wisdom,
and power in effecting their deliverance, —
and he enriches them with all the benefits
of which they are capable, exalting them


to glory, honour, and immortality. And,
all this and much more being time of him,
is it not reasonable to hold him in corres-
ponding, that is, in the highest, estima-
tion 1
Saving faith also implies the cordial re-
ception of Christ as our Saviour. And is
it not reasonable that persons in so deplor-
able and helpless a condition should gladly
accept such a deliverer, a deliverer whosq
love disposes, and whose power, wisdom,
and resources enable him to perfect that
which concerneth them ? Those who exer-
cise saving faith make choice of what really
confers and constitutes blessedness ; and is
it not reasonable that we should make this
choice, and not rest in what cannot satisfy
and will soon cease ?
And, when we say that it is reasonable
to believe, we mean that this is the only
course that is reasonable. We are so cir-
cumstanced that we cannot but give some
treatment to Christ ] and the only treat-


ment that it is reasonable to give to him
is, to honour and receive him as is done in
believing. It is only by believing in Christ
that we shall attain to blessedness, and in-
tentionally, as becomes our rational nature,
glorify God ; and it is clear we do not act
reasonably, if we do not seek those ends,
and seek them in the only way in which
they are attainable.
We are commanded to give to Christ the
reception which is given to him in believ-
ing ; and, when our Sovereign commands,
the reasonable course for us is to obey.
But here a second motive to believe pre-
sents itself to our notice, —that it is our
duty to believe. The Scriptures expressly
present this motive, —“ this is his com-
mandment, that we should believe on the
name of his Son Jesus Christ,” (1 John hi.,
23 ;) and it must be our duty to believe as
it is the commandment of God that we do
so. When men are called upon to believe
in Christ, it is not a mere invitation that


is addressed to them. The invitation of our
Sovereign has the force and bears the cha-
racter of a command.
From the nature of the case, it cannot
but be our duty to believe. Is it not our
duty to honour the Son of God ? Is it not
our duty to value and receive the unspeak-
ably precious salvation, which God has
provided and offers, and which we so ur-
gently need 1 Is it not our duty to receivo
benefits, which will not only raise us from
degradation and misery to blessedness and
glory, but also bring us into a capacity to
love and serve God 1 If it were not our
duty to believe, unbelief would not be sin-
ful. And if our unbelief is not sinful,
neither was that of the Jews. But their
unbelief was treated by God as being sin-
ful ; in punishment of it they were visited
with fearful judgments, extinguished as a
nation, and dispersed over the whole earth.
It may be said that the Jews crucified
Christ, and that it was on this account that


they were dealt with in the manner referred
to. Yery true; but in crucifying Christ
they only gave expression and effect to their
unbelief; and, if their unbelief itself had
not been sinful, it woiild not have been
sinful to have acted in accordance with it.
The Scriptures uniformly represent un-
belief as sinful. Christ, promising the
Comforter to his followers, declares with
respect to him, “he will convince the
world of sin . . . because they believe not
on me.” (John xiii. 8,9.) And, addressing
the unbelieving Jews, he ascribes their un-
belief to their inexcusable indisposition to
believe—“ye will not”—ye are not willing
“to come unto me that ye might have life f
and he then assigns as the reason why
they would not come to him, that they had
not the love of God in them, and that they
received honour one of another, and sought
not the honour which cometh from God
only; and he concludes with an intima-
tion, that, inasmuch as, wilfully, from cor-


rupt motives, and in the face of abundant
evidence, they continued in unbelief, they
should be visited with condemnation. “Do
not think that I will accuse you to the
Father, there is one that accuseth you,
even Moses.” (John v., 36-47.)
It is to be observed that the duty of be-
lieving occupies such a place among our
duties, that, while we do not pei'form it,
we perform aright no other duty what-
ever.
Some would persuade themselves that it
is not their duty to believe, because they
cannot believe. If it were the case that
they could not believe though they would,
this reasoning would be plausible; but,
when the state of the case is, that they
cannot believe, simply because they will
not, the duty of believing clearly remains
unaffected. A wicked undutiful son can-
not honour his father and his mother, be-
cause, from the badness of his heart, he
will not honour them, but regards them


with dislike and aversion; but, notwith-
standing this inability, is it not his duty
to honour them? Now this case, though
certainly an extreme one in the conduct of
men towards each other, represents cor-
rectly the position of the unconverted with
respect to spiritual things. Christ himself
testifies of such, “they have both seen and
hated both me and my Father.” (John
xv, 24.)
A third motive is, that it will be un-
speakably to your advantage to believe.
He that believeth on the Son hath ever-
lasting life : and he that believeth not the
Son shall not see life, but the wrath of
God abideth on him. (John hi., 36.) The
unbelieving are thus, according to the tes-
timony of Scripture, under the wrath of
God. While they are here, it abides on
them in a manner suitable to the character
of the present state, and takes effect but to
a limited extent; but, when they go hence,
abiding on them still, it will no longer, the


period of retribution having arrived, be
restrained in its operation. They will
have their portion in everlasting fire, pre-
pared for the devil and his angels. (Matt,
xxv., 41, 4G.) How fearful is this wrath!
How deplorable the condition of those on
whom it abides ! And what an unspeak-
able advantage to be delivered from it!
This advantage is attached to faith.
And those who believe, while the wrath
of God no longer abides on them, have
everlasting life, which is the Scripture ex-
pression for consummated blessedness, and
all the circumstances under which it is
realised. They are made accepted in the
beloved, —they are enrolled among the sons
of God, —they are renewed after his image,
—they have communion with him, —and
those privileges, attainments, and experi-
ences shall all, in due time, be heightened
to the perfection of the heavenly state.
And, in the meantime, all things shall
work together to secure this result. Such


are the inestimable advantages attached to
faith.
CONCLUDING APPEAL.
Will you then believe 1 This, you may
think, is not the question in this case, but
whether the blessings of salvation shall be
granted to you. On this latter point there
is no ground for doubt. The blessings of
salvation are offered to you,—they are
pressed upon your acceptance. That you
may possess, nothing is necessary but that
you receive them, —that you believe. The
question, therefore, which you are con-
cerned to answer is the one which we have
put,- —will you believe 1 Christ is pre-
sented and offered to . you ; will you give
to him the reception which he claims and
to which he is entitled, and which you
must give to him that you may be saved ?
Will you give it to him now, for it is with
respect to the present oidy that we are
authorised to treat with you ? You must


now decide either way; you cannot escape
from either receiving or rejecting him.
Which then will you do 1 Will you not
receive him 1 Is it not due to him, do you
not owe it to yourselves that you receive
him 1 Will you not receive him then ?
Are there any who will reject him ? Has
not peace with God, —has not renewal after
his image,—has not communion with him,
—has not heaven any attractions for you 1
If they have, believe and they shall all be
yours.
Gibbs, Shallard, and Co., Printers, Sydney.






