

3-xxlUtiy
in £aae
with
Colcwca,
AND
OTHER STORIES
Price: 1/3




Vailing in Love with
Colours
Other Missionary Stories of Many Lands
Prepared for the Use of All Lovers of Children.
Arranged by J. E. POPPINS
All Profits to Overseas Missions.
Melbourne:
Young Methodist Missionary League,
134 a Little Collins Street.
288 Little Collins Street.


INDEX
1. Falling in Love with Colours 3
2. Black Magic in Papua 4
3. Mimosa 5
4. Soyla’s Gift 6
5. Driving Out Demons 7
6. Malek’s Pink Shirt 9
7. Run, Ma, Run 10
8. God Answers Prayer 11
9. Twelve Giants and No Joke 12
10. Please Make Them Snore 13
11. The Crippled Angel—A Christmas Story 14
12. Playing the Man 15
13. Bobby’s Prayer 16


Cl 84C
2 8 SEP 1945
Falling in Love with Colours
If I asked, "What is your favourite colour?” I wonder what your
answer would be. I have just read a beautiful story about colours by Miss
Rita Snowden in her book, "If I Open My Door,” and I want to share it
with you. Here it is:
"Once upon a time a very beautiful church was being built, and
before it was quite finished the people gathered and said, 'The time has
now come to get the finest artist in the world to make us a picture for the
stained-glass window over the choir.’
"As grown-up people have a way of doing, they left it to a wise
committee to choose the artist and the subject of the picture. And, because
the name of the church was to be 'The Church of the Christ-Child,’ they
wanted the picture to be about little children. Eventually they chose a
verse of a little child’s hymn as their subject:
Around the throne of God in heaven
Thousands of children stand,
Children, whose sins are all forgiven,
A holy, happy band:
Singing Glory! Glory! Glory!
"An artist was chosen. He set to work with his canvas and palette
and brushes and paints, and worked on and on until he had painted what
he knew to be quite the finest picture he had ever painted. He came to
love every inch of his canvas. There was Jesus, and all around Him the
dearest, loveliest little children you can imagine, singing 'Glory! Glory!
Glory be to God on High,’ as they stood with their little throats full of
music.
"The artist was well satisfied with his effort. He sent word to the
wise committee to come the next morning to see it, so that with their
approval he might start on the glass window right away. And then he
went to bed and to sleep, still very, very happy about his finished picture.
"But in the middle of the night it seemed to him that he heard a
noise in the studio where his precious picture stood. He listened; he heard
sounds there, so he got up and hurried in. There he found a Stranger,
with thumb in his palette, handling his tubes of paint, and actually
painting on his picture. He rushed up crying, 'Oh, stop, stop, you are
ruining it! Look what you have done already! You have spoiled it, and,
alas, the committee is coming in the morning!’ The Stranger turned calmly
round, and just as calmly said, 'When I came into the room I saw that
you had spoiled it, so I am merely making it right. You have five
colours on your palette; why did you use only one for the faces of the
little children? Who told you that their faces were all white in heaven?’
The artist looked surprised as he tried to think. 'Why, no one ever told
me. Sir,’ he answered, 'but I have always thought of it that way.’ The
Stranger smiled a rather sad smile and said, 'But now, of course, you see
how wrong you were. I have simply used the other colours you had
forgotten to use, and made some of the faces yellow, and some brown, and
some black, and some red. For these little ones have come from many,
many lands in answer to My call.’
" 'Your call?’ asked the artist, puzzled. 'What call was that, Sir?’ Then
the Stranger s strong and tender voice replied in words that were strangely
familiar, 'Suffer the little children to come unto Me, and forbid them not,
for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven.’
"And then the artist knew that the Stranger must indeed be the Lord
and Master Himself. But even as he knew it, He was gone and he was
alone, facing his changed picture. To his surprise, he found himself


smiling happily, for there were dear little yellow children with slant-up
eyes, and he knew they were singing 'Glory! Glory!’ in Chinese; and next
to them were quaint little brown children with great brown eyes; and
next to them black children, and next to them red children —the happiest,
loveliest lot of children—and white ones, too. He found himself trying to
pick out where they all came from.
"Then he awakened. He arose and rushed into his studio. It had
been a dream, but such a beautiful dream he could never forget. He took
up his palette and paints until bit by bit his picture took on the likenesses
of that seen in his dream.
Eventually the wise committee arrived, and they fell in love with the
canvas right right away. One sweet, quiet lady, the mother of lively little
boys and girls when she saw it, said with a happy sigh, "Why, it’s God’s
family at home with Him.’ ” —From "If I Open My Door,” by Rita
Snowden (Epworth Press, London).
Black Magic in Papua
Dr. Harry Judkins.
The head man of the island of Dobu, who rejoiced in the name of
Cockroach, was a nephew of old Gaganamuri, the head man in the days
of early Christian efforts on Dobu Island.
On the neighbouring Fergusson Island lived Monigiugiu, a sorcerer
by repute, who laid claim to some chief position on Dobu, and regarded
Cockroach with a great deal of jealousy.
It was necessary for Cockroach to go to Fergusson Island for gardening
purposes. On one occasion, some years ago, he, with his men, left
Dobu for the village of Si’irugu, some eight miles away, and on arrival
pulled the canoe up on the beach. He left one of the men in charge of
the canoe and a few belongings in it. Amongst these latter were his
betel-nut, and this, together with the lime, is chewed and much relished.
The lime is carried in the gourd, and conveyed to the mouth on the stick.
Scrapings from this are used in the practice of "Sumwana,” one of the
Papuan forms of "black magic.”
While Cockroach was away from the canoe, the man left in charge
absented himself. Monigiugiu, or an accomplice, went to the canoe and
scraped the end of the lime stick. Placing the scrapings in a banana leaf,
he wrapped them up and took them away. On his return to the canoe
Cockroach saw what had happened, and knew that he was the victim of
"black magic.” The men returned to Dobu with Cockroach a sick man.
Away on Normanby Island, at Sisiana, lived people who had suffered
much at the hands of Gaganamuri, Cockroach’s uncle, in the old dark
days. To these people were sent the scrapings, wrapped in banana leaf.
To this they attached leaves to represent arms and legs, and also made a
model of Cockroach. With another leaf, they made a duplicate.
Cockroach heard that the scrapings were at Sisiana, and knew that
if he could but get them back he would recover. He sent his men by
canoe to buy them with native wealth. The men went and bought what
they believed to be the scrapings, but on their return found that they
had been deceived, and had been sold the duplicate.
The people of Sisiana had a time of feasting and dancing. They
boiled the model of Cockroach in coconut milk, and later placed it on
a large stone and dropped another on it, thus crushing it. This happened
one afternoon, and before sundown Cockroach, on Dobu Island, was
dead.
All this happened within a period of 48 hours. Such is the tremendous
power of sorcery.


Mimosa
Elspeth Cornwell.
"Sister, just a minute, if you can spare it, please.” Dr. Harvey made
his way through the women’s ward of the large Chinese mission hospital,
his eyes looking grave and troubled, and Sister Betty ran quickly over
to him, wondering what was the matter. "It’s about Mimosa,” he began.
"She —it’s true what I felt about her at first—she has leprosy.” Sister
drew in her breath sharply. "How terrible! Poor, poor Mimosa!”
Born blind, Mimosa had been cast out by her parents when a tiny baby,
and although she had been rescued from death by Granny Wen, she had
been no better than a slave all through her childhood and girlhood. One
day she became so ill, and Granny Wen, who did not at all want to be
bothered with a sick girl, took her to the mission hospital. It was
discovered that one of Mimosa’s legs was so diseased that it would have
to be amputated, and when Granny Wen heard that, she was furious, and
declaring that if they took off Mimosa’s leg they could keep her for good,
for she had no further use for her, she walked off, and was never seen
at the hospital again.
So Mimosa’s leg was taken off, and, although she did not mind that
at all at first—she was so glad to have a comfortable bed, good food and
kind friends —she was feeling it very keenly now, for she had heard all
about the Lord Jesus Christ who died to save her, and she was longing
to do something for Him, but what could she do now that she was lame,
as well as blind and poor?
"Yes.” The doctor was pensive. "It is a dreadfully sad case. And
she doesn’t know about the leprosy yet.” It was a very sad-hearted man
who later that day walked over to Mimosa’s bedside. How should he
tell her? He had prayed for guidance about it, however, and he was
certain that God would give him the words, so he sat down quite calmly
and quietly, with a cheery smile full of sympathy in his face.
"Well, Mimosa, I’ve got some glad news for you.” Mimosa smiled.
"Yes, Doctor?” "You’re always longing to do something for the Lord
Jesus, aren’t you?” "Yes, oh, yes.” Mimosa almost sat up in her earnest-
ness. "But —what can a poor blind girl do?” "Well, listen to me. Supposing
the Lord Jesus wanted you to do something very hard, would you be willing
to do it for Him?”
There was silence for a little while, then, "I think I would,” said
Mimosa.
"Well, I believe Jesus is calling you to do a great work for Him,
but it will mean leaving the hospital and all your friends here and going
to the leper colony.” Mimosa was stunned for a few minutes, but she
soon spoke again, though very softly. "Does that mean that I am a leper?”
"Yes, Mimosa,” the doctor replied equally softly. "But I’m sure that
God has a very special work for you to do there among the girls and
women. He knows your great wish to work for Him, and He has opened
this door for you.” "Yes, yes,” sobbed Mimosa, "but what can I do? I
cannot read the Bible to them.”
"But, Mimosa,” said the doctor, "surely you’ve not forgotten that
wonderful memory of yours? You know it’s specially good, and you’ve
learnt whole chapters of the Bible that we’ve read to you, and lots of
verses as well. I know, because I’ve heard you repeating them. You can
recite them to the people there, and also tell of what you know yourself
of the Lord Jesus. There’s a work already to your hand.”
Mimosa stopped crying as the doctor spoke, and her face lit up with
anticipation. Oh, yes, she could use her memory. "I will gladly go wher-
ever He sends me,” she said. "That’s right. We will pray for you,
Mimosa, and God will bless and use you.” So Mimosa went to the leper
colony, where she delighted each day to sit outside the door of her little
hut and repeat the story of the Lord Jesus. —"Our Own Magazine.”


Soyla’s Gift
From the "Methodist Recorder.”
This is the story of a bag, now the property of the juvenile missionary
collectors of Hiliover Sunday School. A visitor to the Sunday school
the other week was interested to notice that the missionary offertory was
received in a most unusual bag, made of white cotton material, stitched
in red cotton. After school was over the visitor also observed that a
girl steward was putting the bag away with great care, in a small cardboard
box, with a snap mounted on the lid. Beneath the snap were printed
the words, "Soyla’s Christmas Bag.”
"Who is Soyla?” asked the visitor. "And why have you her Christmas
bag?” "It’s rather a topping story,” said the girl steward. And this is the
story.
An Indian child stood sullenly in front of the desk where a white
woman was sitting. Behind the child a khaki-clad Indian policeman
stood at respectful attention. The child seemed to be about nine years
old. Her hair was matted and mud-caked; her dress was a length of dirty,
torn muslin; her thin little arms and feet were, if possible, dirtier.
"So I leave her with you, missahibji,” said the policeman, who then
saluted, salaamed, and withdrew. Miss Morton put down her pen, and
came round from behind the desk. The child cowered back, as if from
an expected blow. Miss Morton saw, and understood. This was no time
for explanations or inquiries. She opened the door, and called. A
kindly Indian matron came in. "Omola-di,” said Miss Morton, "this is
Soyla. She is going to stay with us for a little while. She is hungry, and
frightened, and tired. Will you see if you can make her comfortable?”
"Come, little daughter,” said Omola-di.
The child hesitated, then went out of the room with the motherly
matron.
Miss Morton went back to her desk again. She looked at the account
book at which she had been working. She had a family of more than
a hundred Indian children to care for in a missionary boarding school.
The money that came to her was the money boys and girls collect. She
spent it very, very carefully, and made it go a long way.
It had been a difficult year; cholera in the nearest village had
spread to the school, and extra medicines and disinfectants had spread
to the school, and extra medicines and disinfectants had cost a good deal.
It was going to be extremely difficult to keep the school going. Miss
Morton had decided that she must not admit a single new child. And
now the magistrate had sent along this half-starved little waif. "No one
seems to know who was her father, or who her mother,” the message had
run. "The alley where she lived was wiped out last night in that big
fire. Can you take her in?” Miss Morton was in India to represent
Someone who said, "Let little children come to Me,” and she felt she
could not, in His name, say that "No.”
She was due to write mail to England that day; and she told the
story of Soyla’s arrival to her sister in Hiliover, a teacher in the Sunday
school. She read to her class about Soyla, and the Hiliover boys and girls
decided that they must help. "We’ll undertake,” they said, "to pay for
Soyla. We’ll send six pounds a year extra. It must be extra, because
we mustn’t ask the missionary society to take any of our money away
from anyone else, even to help Soyla.”
Four years went by. Soyla was thirteen, a quite ordinary but happy
schoolgirl. She was not particularly brilliant at lessons, because she had
not even begun to learn to read or write till she was nearly ten years
old, but she plodded on, and did her best.
Christmas was coming; the girls were beginning to talk about the
presents they hoped they would get. "But what about the presents you


are going to give?” said Omala-di one evening, to a group of girls who
were helping her prepare vegetables for curry. "Jesus Swami, the Lord
Jesus, said that giving is better than getting.” "But my pocket-money isn t
enough to buy presents,” said Shorenu. The others laughed, for everyone
knew how much of Shorenu’s pocket-money went to the old sweet-man.
"The best presents,” said Omala-di, when the laughter died down, "are
the ones we make with our own hands. I think every one of you ought
to make a present, at least for your mothers. Mothers deserve the best
presents of all.”
Soyla was one of the group. She did not say much, but she took
in all that was said. And she did not forget.
Term was ending. Miss Morton was in the office when bare feet
pattered to the door, and Soyla called, "May I come? ’ "Come in,”
answered Miss Morton. Soyla was holding a hand behind her back. "It
is for you,” she said breathlessly, "or, if you will send it, it is for those
boys and girls in England who send rupees for me to be at the school.
Omala-di told us that the Lord Jesus says giving is better than getting,
so I’ve made this, and it is for you and for those boys and girls, for
are you not my mother and my father?”
In the pretty Indian way Soyla touched her forehead with her gift,
and then laid it on Miss Morton’s desk. "Is it all right?” she said
anxiously. "You see, I had no money, so I had to use what I have.”
Miss Morton looked at the present. It was a small bag, made from a
piece of cotton torn from the end of one of Soyla’s precious saris (dress).
It was sewn with threads ravelled from the same sari, and embroidered
with red threads from the sari’s border.
So that is why Hillover Sunday School take their missionary offertory
in a small white cotton bag. No wonder they prize it so greatly, and
take special care of it.
Driving Out Demons
The arrival of the bullock cart in the village created a great sensation.
A stranger! A bandy (bullock cart)! Who could have come? The people,
with the children in front, crowded round. Then came the excitement.
From the bandy there alighted a Sinhalese girl and a white woman.
"Our business is to teach people,” said the Englishwoman, "children,
of course, and older ones when they are willing. Would you not like
to have your children taught, and perhaps also learn something yourself?”
"These people,” said the headman, who was called, "are very
ignorant. No one in the village can read except myself, not even my
wife or my children. But learning is good, and if you will teach them I
shall be glad. Can you not send us a teacher who can live in my house,
and teach every day?”
Thus Nona, the Sinhalese girl, came to the village. She lived in
the headman’s house, and the school prospered.
The headman’s wife was not very pleased about the new school.
She was suspicious, as ignorant people ahvays are, and she did not like
this new teaching. One morning she rushed into the room where her
husband was at work. "Aiyo! Aiyo!” she cried, "do you know what is
happening? I told you that evil would come of that woman. I have
just found her kneeling and praying to her God, and our daughters
kneeling and praying with her, while she taught them what to say.” His
wife stormed at him until he sternly bade her be silent, and commanded her
not to interfere with the teaching. Grumbling, she obeyed, but in her
heart was hate for the teacher and the teaching.
The Demons’ Revenge.
Leelawatte (Lee-la-watty), the elder girl, was ill. She complained of
pain in her chest, and tossed restlessly from side to side on her mat. The


mother, coming into the room, saw that she had high fever, and ran to
her husband.
"Now,” she cried, "you will perhaps believe. Here is Leelawatte
sick, and no doubt one of the demons is angry with us for permitting this
teaching. We must get the devil priest quickly and have the child made
well.”
The husband was somewhat doubtful about this. He had travelled a
little, and knew something of hospitals, but he was not prepared to forbid
it, though it was a very costly business.
Messengers were sent to the village some miles away, where the priest
lived. The next day, at noon, he arrived with half a dozen assistants.
All over the garden they set up little arches of bamboo, from which were
hung baskets of coconut leaves, filled with sweatmeats and all kinds of
dainties. On his head each man wore a hideous wooden mask, carved
into a demon face, with horns and tusks of a wild boar, and protruding
teeth and tongue, all painted to look more hideous still. Then the patient
wds carried from her room and laid on the veranda. This was very
important, for if she had been left in the house the devil, when he
came out of her, might remain on the premises and enter into someone
else.
On one side of the space where the priest stood was a pile of rude
torches made of dry coconut leaves and tow, and he picked up one of
these, lighted it, and to the sound of the tomtoms began to dance. As
he danced he chanted in a monotonous voice, calling on the demons. He
seemed to know hundreds of them by name, and he called to them to come.
"See,” he cried, "the generous and bountiful feast that has been
provided. Will you not come and partake of the food?” The chief of
the devil priests went on dancing. He leapt into the air, screaming more
and more loudly, while the bells which he wore clashed and jangled with
every movement. When his first torch had burnt down another was
handed to him by an assistant. He leapt about the garden, calling by
name on hosts of demons; he jumped close to the sick girl and then
drew away, as if to pull the devil out of her; he grew more and more
frantic until his eyes blazed with something almost like madness.
Leelawatte lay on her mat on the veranda, turning restlessly from
side to side. At last the chief priest came to the end of his strength.
He grew exhausted and the dancing flagged. Coming up to the
veranda, he peered into the eyes of the sick girl, but it was easy to see
that she was no better. This went on hour after hour all through the
night, but no change came to the sick one.
The ceremony lasted through the whole night, from seven o’clock
till sunrise, and as the day broke the chief devil priest confessed himself
beaten.
"It is a very strong devil, this,” he said. "We have not given him
sufficient offerings to tempt him to come out. You must do more,” he
said to the father, "and we will come again and try with bigger gifts.”
Now, since all the money that was given and all the sweetmeats
prepared for the demons belonged to the priests, who took them away
at the end of the ceremony, it was to their interest to repeat the
performance, but the headman had had enough. "No,” he said, "you
have done your best, and the gifts have been large.” The headman’s wife
broke into a torrent of reproaches, but Nona said, "Let me send for the
missionary lady.” Soon the white woman hurried to Leelawatte’s house.
She found there had been a bad attack of malaria, and possibly pneumonia.
The white woman and Nona fought together in the way of Jesus, the
Good Physician, with all the skill and love and prayers unceasing. Even-
tually Leelawatte was healed. Her father’s gratitude knew no bounds,
and even the mother was greatly moved. "Henceforth,” said the father,
"you shall teach in this village what you will.”—"Yarns on Ceylon.”


Malik’s Pink Shirt
A Story from Africa. By Edith Goreham Clarke.
It was Christmas Eve, and a hum of suppressed excitement came from
the brightly-lighted room where the boys belonging to Miss Silvester’s
orphanage were sitting round a gaily-decorated Christmas tree. They had
been singing their favourite hymns and choruses, and now the great
moment had come when each boy was to receive a parcel from the tree.
The children were taught that Christmas was a time for giving to the
Lord Jesus Christ, Who had given Himself to the world on the very
Erst Christmas Day, but on Christmas Eve each boy was given a new
shirt. To these poor little orphan boys a new shirt was a precious
possession, and one by one they eagerly took their parcel, bowed low in
gratitude, and returned to their seats.
Malik had been at the orphanage only three months, and so far he
bad worn nothing but a loin-cloth. At last his name was called, and
he sprang to his feet and hurried to receive his parcel, the first present
he had ever had. Too impatient to wait, he stood by the Christmas tree,
eagerly tearing the paper off his present, and in another moment he
was holding up a gaily-coloured pink shirt. Turning his wondering eyes
upon Miss Silvester, he said breathlessly, "Maji?” (mine).
Mis Silvester nodded her head, and in another moment Malik
had slipped the shirt over his sleek black head, and was admiring himself
in his first garment. Great was his joy to discover a pocket—a real
pocket. His eyes danced with excitement, and he again asked, "Maji?”
At Miss Silvester’s assurance that the shirt was really his, he scampered
back to his seat, hugging himself with delight. How he loved that pink
shirt! At bedtime that night it was difficult to persuade him to take it
off—he wanted to sleep in it. And the moment he was awake in the
morning he was stroking it gently with his little brown hand.
It was Christmas morning, and quite early the boys gathered in the
schoolroom, seating themselves on the mud floor. The meaning of
Christmas Day had been carefully explained to them, and for many weeks
they had been planning little gifts to present to the Lord Jesus Christ
on His birthday. After the singing of a hymn, a prayer was offered,
and then one by one the boys went forward to place their love-gifts on
the teacher’s desk. Each one carried his gift in the front of his new
shirt, so using it right at the beginning in the service of the Lord Jesus
Christ.
Then came Malik, but his hands were empty, and his shirt hung
straight down, for he had nothing to give. The missionaries looked at
him, wondering if he understood, for he had never even heard of the
Saviour who had given His life for him until he had come to the
orphanage just three short months ago. What could poor little Malik
give? What could a little five-year-old orphan give to the Lord Jesus?
Miss Silvester looked at him with a troubled expression in her eyes. Was
he too young to understand? Would he take one of the little packages,
thinking it was meant for him?
But no, Malik came right to the front, and stood quite still for some
moments, looking at the pile of gifts there. Then, with eyes brimming
over with tears, he looked into Miss Silvester’s face, and said, "I love
Him, too, but I haven’t anything to give Him.”
Miss Silvester turned away to hide the tears which came suddenly into
her eyes, and when she looked round again Malik was gazing down at his
new pink shirt, and stroking it lovingly. Then, as if he had suddenly
made up his mind, he unfastened the three buttons, took off the precious
garment, folded it very carefully, and laid it beside the other gifts.
"Jesus Christ’s present,” he said with a shining face, as he turned and
scampered back to his seat. —"Our Own Magazine.”


Run, Ma, Run
"I think it’s high time we heard something about a woman,” said
Lois. "So do I,” agreed father. "Let’s take a journey, about forty years
back, to Calabar, on the west coast of Africa. Here was a country of thick
forest, where, inland, were many scattered villages which had never known
a white man. Some of the people were cannibals. If anybody died
suddenly, it was believed to be witchcraft, and those whom the witch
doctor pointed out must die. They were always quarrelling and fighting
and getting drunk. One of the saddest things was that, if a woman had
twin babies, they thought she was bewitched, and she and the poor little
things were thrown out into the "bush” to die, unless they happened to
be rescued by a little frail Scotswoman from Aberdeen. Meet Mary
Slessor! I m going to tell you just one story about her, for there are
so many I should never get to the end of them. She had been many
years in Calabar, and had gathered about her quite a family of black
bt>ys and girls, poor little unwanted twins. The poor folk loved her,
and even the fierce, savage chiefs respected her, and would sometimes obey
her. So when, just as she was starting for a much-needed holiday, news
was brought that a man had been killed in another village, and that a
war of revenge was about to begin, she did not hesitate. Weak and ill
though she was, she went by night, crossing the forest full of snakes
and leopards, and came to the village where the trouble had started.
"The men were all armed and preparing to march on the village
where lived the man who had done the murder. "It is no use, Ma,”
they said. (They all called her "Ma,” which means "mother.”) "We must
fight to wipe out the disgrace. But we will wait till morning. Go to
bed and rest.” Tired out, Mary lay down. At cock-crow she was waked
by the women screaming, "Run, Ma, run! They are off!”
The warriors had gone! Mary ran after them as fast as her feet
would carry her, and caught them up near the other village, where they
had halted to prepare for attack. She commanded them to stay where
they were —and they actually obeyed. Going on to the village, she found
the men there drawn up ready to resist attack, sullen and silent. Then
one man stepped out and fell on his knees. "Ma,” he said, "we thank
you for coming. It is foolish to fight because of the deed of one
drunken man. We beg you to try to make peace.” "All right,” said
Mary, "but I’m not going to starve while you quarrel. Get me food, and
find a comfortable place to sit, and we will have a palaver.”
So there sat a little white woman like a judge, and the angry chiefs
argued and disputed before her. Sometimes she laughed at them and
sometimes she scolded them, and in the end it was agreed that instead of
war a fine should be paid. This was the first time such a thing had
happened. But immediately a new danger arose. Part of the fine was
paid in gin. Mary knew that if once the men began to drink, they would
quarrel and fight, and things might be worse than before. Jumping up, she
tore off some of her clothes and flung them over the bottles, as, according
to native custom this made them part of her, and to touch them would
be like hurting her. But she knew that it was too much to ask them to
go entirely without a drink, so she took the one glass they had, and gave
them just one glass of gin each, teasing and laughing to keep them in a
good humour. Then she sent them all off to their homes, and tramped
back through the forest. "That wasn’t by any means the only time that
the call came, Run, Ma, run, said father "To stop a war, to save
someone accused of witchcraft, to rescue twin babies, to help the sick—she
was always needed, and she always responded. She changed the face
of that gloomy land. 'Ma Akamba’—the great Mother—they called her.
And yet she was just a timid little Scotswoman who hated to speak in
public and was afraid of cows. It was the love of God that made her
strong.”—Joyce Reason, "Lotu,” in the "Christian World.”


God Answers Prayer
From "Our Own Magazine,” by G. E. Bennett
"I believe God answers prayer,
I am sure God answers prayer,
I have proved God answers prayer —
Glory to His Name!”
Over and over again the words were sung, with special emphasis on
the words "believe,” "sure,” and "proved.” Then with triumph would come
the last line, "Glory to His Name.” After the sixth repetition of the
chorus Mother looked up from her mending with a smile. ' Why are you
singing that so often, darling?” she inquired. I just cant help it,
Mummy, ’cos it’s true,” replied the little girl, who was playing with her
doll on the floor beside her.
"I had a letter from Auntie Kathryn this morning, and she told
me a lovely story of how God answered the prayers of a little Chinese
and his mother. Would you like to hear it?” asked mother, stooping
down to plant a kiss on Rosemary’s soft, fair hair. "Oh, yes, please.
Mummy,” cried Rosemary, "for, you know, I’m going to be a missionary
in China some day.”
Mother put her mending on one side, and picked up a letter from
her basket. It was from her sister, who was a missionary in the province
of Hunan, in China. It told of a little Chinese boy who attended a
village children’s meeting, and there learned to know and love the Lord
Jesus Christ, the "Friend of little children.” His home was a sad one,
for his father used to spend night after night away in the village, gambling
and drinking, and in consequence his mother was miserable, and often
cried. One night she was sitting up as usual, waiting for her husband to
come home, and her heart was so heavy with dark hopelessness that she
sat and sobbed and sobbed as if her heart would break, crying, "What
shall I do? What shall I do?”
After a little small Ho Long could stand it no more. "Why don’t
you pray to the Lord Jesus?” he suggested, in a hushed voice, wondering
what reception his remark would receive. "I don’t know how to pray,
sobbed the poor woman. "I’ll teach you, mother,” said the little boy,
sitting up. "Your God wouldn’t listen to me, and He can’t do anything
with your father,” replied the woman, in a hopeless voice.
By this time Ho Long was out of bed, and, kneeling beside his
mother. "Let’s pray, mother,” he coaxed. "The Lord Jesus can change
my father. He changes people’s hearts.”
"I don’t know what to say. I can’t pray,” said his mother, wdiose
only idea of prayer was to take rice and other food to offer before the
idols in the temple close by.
"Come, mother,” said Ho Long, determinedly. "I’ll say it first, and
you say it after me.”
So in the shadowy darkness the little Chinese boy taught his mother
to pray, sentence by sentence. She hardly believed that there could be
any answer to that prayer, but little eight-year-old Ho Long had no doubts
about the matter. Had he not been praying for some months now that
the Lord Jesus would change his father’s heart, and bring peace and
happiness into that little home? And he believed that the Lord Jesus
would certainly answer his prayer.
Night after night, when the father was gambling and drinking away
his earnings, Ho Long and his mother would pray together, and although
she did not as yet see any answer to her prayers, somehow it seemed to
bring comfort to the poor woman.
Then, a few months later, the Gospel Tent came to their village.
Ho Long’s father began to attend the meetings out of curiosity, and
before long he was convicted of sin, and saved by the power of the Lord


Jesus. Now there was no more gambling or drinking, and soon Ho
Long’s home was the happy place he had dreamed of, while together he
and his mother thanked God for hearing and answering their prayers.
There was a pause when Rosemary’s mother had finished reading
her sister’s letter, but presently Rosemary looked up and said: "I think
we’d better both sing my chorus again. Mummy, don’t you?” And together
the mother and her little daughter joined in singing those beautiful, true
WOrc^s "I believe God answers prayer,
I am sure God answers prayer,
I have proved God answers prayer—
Glory to His Name!”
Twelve Giants and No Joke
Edna J. Clewes.
, You all know that in India there are such things as snakes and
elephants and tigers, but I wonder if you know that there are giants, too!
The other day, as I was walking along the road, I saw twelve giants
sitting under some trees. (They couldn’t all get under one tree —they
were so big.) There they sat, all in a row, goggle-eyed, their bodies
streaked with red and blue and yellow paint, holding swords in their
hands and looking as fierce as fierce could be.
But they were not alive; they were made of clay. If they had been
alive, I think I should have run away, shouldn’t you?
Beside the giants there were a lot of enormous horses. They, too,
were made of clay. Some of them had broken legs, some had no tails,
and one hadn’t a head, even.
I looked round, and behind the horses and giants I saw the thatched
roofs of village huts. Fancy living so near to a lot of giants! Even
though they were made of clay, I don’t think I should want them for
my next-door neighbours, should you? I expect you wonder what they
were doing there. Well, I will tell you.
The people who live in that village worship, among others, a god
called Iyengar. He lives on the hilltops, so they will tell you, and his
special job is to protect them from the demons and evil spirits which
they believe prowl about in the darkness and seek to do them harm.
Close to the village you will see a hill, and on the top of the hill
the people have built a temple in which the god lives during the day, but
at night he comes down to the village, mounts one of the clay horses, and
rides round the village driving the demons away.
The giants are posted there to help him. There they are, with their
swords in their hands, ready to kill any demon that ventures near.
"How silly!” you say. "How can clay giants keep away demons, even
supposing there are any? And what is the use of clay horses with
broken legs?”
Well, you must remember that the people who live in that village
have never heard about Jesus. They do not know, as you and I do,
that the only demons are demons of fear, and hatred, and jealousy. They
are always afraid because they think that the demons will hurt them.
Why! In India a boy is even afraid to yawn for fear a demon should hop
inside him. And, of course, you never know what will happen if you
swallow a demon, do you?
Now every penny you put into your love box helps to kill one of
these demons, because it enables us to go to these people with the story
of God’s love for them, and when they know that God is their Father,
they will no longer believe in demons.
So do not forget to put your pennies in the love box, just as many
as you can spare—and even more than that. —"News from Afar.”


Please Make Them Snore
L. G. Cartwright, in "China’s Millions.
Lee Wong was a young Chinaman who lived in one of the stria*!
villages in Central China. He had been brought up to worship idols, but
when the Gospel Hall was opened, and missionaries preached the good
tidings of a Saviour who could deliver Lee Wong from his sins, the
young man joined the band of Christians, and it was not long before he,
too, could call himself by that name.
One day, only a few 7 months after Lee Wong became a Christian,
news came that brigands were on their way to the big town, which lay
ten miles to the north, sacking the villages on their way. Scarcely had
the news spread through the village than the brigands appeared. They
seemed in a hurry, and only stopped to seize all the young men they
could find; binding them securely together, they carried them off as
prisoners. Lee Wong found himself being hustled along, tied tightly
to another young man, one who had often had long talks with Lee Wong
about Christianity.
They reached the town of Hi’shien just before darkness fell, and, as
there w 7 as little resistance, they soon occupied the place. Lee Wong and
his companion were thrown roughly on the ground in a dark inner room,
after the cords which bound them had been tightened so that they cut
into their flesh. Later four soldiers threw open the door and came in,
carrying a light with them. This they placed on the floor, after locking
the door, and began to play a game of chance, of which the Chinese are
very fond.
Lee Wong lay in silence watching his captors, and as he watched he
was busy thinking. Some weeks before he had been reading a wonderful
story in the little Book which belonged to God, and which one of the
missionaries had given him. It was about a man called Peter, who had
been shut in prison, but who had had a wonderful escape. Now Peter’s
God was Lee Wong’s God, and had the missionary not said that He was
"the same yesterday, and to-day, and for ever ’?
The soldiers soon tired of their game, and began to yawn. One by
one they lay back in the shadows, ready for a snooze. Every now and
then one of them would pick up the light and take a look at the
prisoners, who lay as quiet as they could. Then Lee Wong began to pray.
"Oh, Lord,” he said, "when Peter was in prison You made the chains fall
off. Lord, do it again, please.” At the same time he prayed for his
unsaved companion, asking that he, too, might be set free, and that he
should come to know the Saviour. While he prayed, Lee Wong worked
his hands gently up and down, and presently he found, to his delight,
that he had worked his cords loose. Before long one hand was free, and
he knew it would not be long before he was free altogether. Very
quietly he stretched out his hand and touched his companion, only to find
that he, too, had succeeded in loosening his cords, although he was not
yet free of them.
Lee Wong began to pray again. "O Lord, when Peter went out
of prison, the soldiers fell asleep. Do it again. Lord; make these four
soldiers that are guarding us fall asleep.” Lee Wong lay very still
listening. The soldiers were breathing deeply, but every now and then
one of them would move, and Lee Wong knew that it it was discovered
that they had worked their cords loose they would be severely handled
and probably trussed up back to back. "O, Lord,” he prayed earnestly,
"please make them snore, so that I shall know that they are sound asleep.”
Presently one, and then another of the soldiers began to snore. Lee
Wong and his companion worked hard at their cords until at last they
were both free, and then they stood trembling on their feet. So tightly


had they been tied that it was some moments before they could move, and
when they were able to do so, they held their breath in terror as they
turned the heavy key in the lock of the door, for it made such a noise
that they felt sure the soldiers would wake. But no, they lay heavily
asleep, snoring loudly.
Very softly the two prisoners crept out, closing the door behind
them. They had to cross another room, but apparently it was empty, and
when they reached the outer door, to their joy, it stood open. Stealthily
the two stole down the dark street, keeping as much as possible to the
deepest shadows. The town was well known to Lee Wong’s companion,
and he knew of a side door by which they escaped out to the country
beyond. Two or three hours later they found themselves back in their
own village.
"Yours is indeed a God who answers prayer," Lee Wong’s companion
said, as they walked down the deserted village street. "I will follow His
way in future, and give myself to your Lord Jesus Christ."
Just then they saw a light streaming out into the night from a door
up a side street, and, knowing that it came from the Gospel Hall, the two
men turned aside to find out the reason. The Christians of the village
were praying for their fellow-Christians to be released. What joy and
rejoicing there was when Lee Wong and his companion walked into the
Gospel Hall, safe and sound! On the next day the other Christians who
had been carried off also returned, having been delivered through the
help of believers in the town.
Lee Wong never forgot that wonderful deliverance, and from that day
he was known among his companions and friends as "Peter.” His fellow-
prisoner, too, never forgot his share in the miraculous escape, and from
that night he became an earnest Christian, spending his time in seeking
to bring others to the knowledge of his Saviour.
The Crippled Angel —A Christmas Story
Hwa Mei, which means Beautiful Flower, was feeling a little sad.
In the missionary hospital where she lay they were getting ready for
Christmas, and there was to be a tableau —Mary and Joseph and the Babe,
the Shepherds and the Wise Men. These parts were to be acted by
patients, but, of course, only those who could stand could do this—except
Mary, who was a girl with a bad foot, but she could sit, so that would be
all right. But poor little Hwa Mei could not even sit, for she had a bad
hip, and had to lie flat all the time. It would be very nice to see the
tableau—but, oh, how she did wish that she could be in!
So you can imagine what a surprise she had when Sister came to
her bedside and said, "Hwa, Mei, will you be the angel?”
"What, me?” cried Hwa Mei. "Why, I can’t walk!”
"Angels can fly,” said Sister, with a twinkle in her eyes. "We’ll
put you on a white cloud, Hwa Mei, where you can look down on everybodv
else.”
And so they did! They piled up a lot of furniture and drape'd a
white sheet over it, and lifted Hwa Mei on to the top of it, so that she
lay on her tummy and looked down. They put a sparkling circlet on her
black hair, and made her a pair of great white wings which quite hid her
poor little body, and she made a lovely angel, watching over the tiny,
tiny real baby which Mary held in her lap.
It was a lovely tableau!


Playing the Man
Two Indian boys were drawing letters with their finger-tips in the
thick warm dust near the great River Godavery, It was evening. All
at once Sundar stopped drawing and looked up. "Something is happening,’
he said. "Listen.” Loud, excited voices could be heard.
"This way,” cried Sundar, and he and Ratnam ran between the trees
until they came to the comfortable, well-built houses near which they
were never allowed to play, the homes of the rich, high-caste people. The
voices came from the bare mud huts a little distance to the right, in which
lived the outcastes. "It is our own people,” cried Ratnam.
The sounds guided them toward the hut of the Christian "elder,”
who was leader of the village. Near it was a crowd of Christian outcastes
all talking excitedly. Out from among the older people darted two of the
boys’ friends, David and Yesud, bursting with news. "Your fathers have
just been taken away to prison,” they cried. "So have ours.”
"What, the fathers of all four of us!” cried Sundar in astonishment.
"Why should they be sent to prison? Besides, our fathers are the head
drummers.”
Everyone knew that it was because the drummers, whose business it
was to drum at every village festival, had joined the little company of
Christians, and no longer wished to drum for any but Christian festivals.
There was dismay on everyone’s face. In two days’ time it was Palm
Sunday. The followers of Jesus had planned to celebrate it by a proces-
sion through the outcaste village. Their leader looked downcast at the
thought, though he said, "We must do the best we can for the sake of
Jesus Swami, our Master. We will have a procession just the same,
even without the drums.”
No one was comforted by his w'ords. Whoever heard of a procession
without drums! Full of disappointment, the people turned away to go to
their own huts, the four boys lingering for a moment, their dark heads
close together.
Two days later, on the morning of Palm Sunday, the company of
Christians began to gather. All had done their best to make up for
the absence of the drummers. As they were wondering who should lead
in place of the drummers, a sound was heard which brought everyone
to a standstill. It was the sound of the drums. Looking along the road,
they saw first the drums, large, round and flat like shields, and then,
behind the drums, each with one strapped to his shoulder, the four boys—
Sundar and Ratnam, David and Yosud.
"The drummers’ sons!” cried the people in great delight. Eagerly
they fell into line behind, clapping their hands and singing to the
rhythm of the drums’ beat, now and then blowing upon their curved
horns. They went among their mud huts and round the little village, the
drummers’ sons playing steadily all the time. At the sound, others came
running in amazement to see them pass, and heard the praise of Jesus
Christ sung by all in the procession.
At last, under the mango trees by the river, the procession broke up,
and all gathered round in the shade to worship their beloved Master. The
boys, unstrapping their drums, bowed before Him with thankful hearts,
proud to have been able to serve Him with their drumming.
Later that same day, when the four friends were together, they heard
shouts and songs coming from the high caste village. "The caste people
are getting ready for their festival,” Sundar said. "Our fathers drummed
for them before they became men of Jesus.” "They would not drum now
even if they were free,” said Ratnam. "To-night’s festival is in honour


of the goddess, and will be very different from ours. After dark the
wooden image of the goddess will be carried round the streets, decorated
with flowers and lit by torches. The people will get very excited, as they
dance before it.”
The sound of preparations grew louder towards evening, but the
boys down in the outcaste quarters thought little more about them. That
n igfiF however, long after he had gone to sleep, Sundar was awakened by
loud voices at the door of the hut. Two men, holding torches, called him
to rise up and come out immediately. In the ring of light were his
three friends, Ratnam, David and Yesud, who had also been dragged from
their beds. "Sons of outcaste dogs,” cried one man roughly, "the caste
people are waiting to begin their torchlight procession, but have no
drummers. We have come to fetch you at once.”
The boys looked at each other. Then Sundar said, "You have made a
mistake. We are not the drummers. You want our fathers, and you
must go to the prison to fetch them.”
' The messenger became impatient. "Of course, you cannot drum so
well as your fathers,” he said, "but drumming will do for us to-night.
Come along.” The boys shook their heads. . "It was you, we hear, who
drummed this morning at your Jesus festival?” said the man. "That was a
Christian festival,” answered Sundar. "We cannot drum for a goddess
whom we do not worship.”
Furious at the boys’ reply, the men left them, but half an hour later
they returned with two of the police. They carried whips with long
lashes of twisted cords.
"Now,” said one of the police, "bring your drums and come with us at
once.”
For a moment the boys hesitated. Then Ratnam spoke up for them
all. Our minds are made up,” he said. "We are quite determined not
to drum for any but Jesus Swami. You can whip us or send us to prison,
as you have sent our fathers, but we will not drum for you.”
Instantly the man raised his whip and lashed the boy so mercilessly
that he cried out with pain. Each boy was beaten in the same way, but
none of them gave in.
Bruised and still smarting from their beating, the drummers’ sons
went home to bed. It was the first time that they had been thrashed for
the sake of their Master, but, in spite of this, perhaps because of this,
they felt stronger than before. They had found the strength which comes
to those who prove their loyalty to Jesus Christ. —The manuscript "Stories
from Nirmal,” lent by the Methodist Missionary Society.
BOBBY’S PRAYER.
Margarita Haywood.
Dear Father, there’s the other boy to-night
Who’s praying to a god that’s made of wood.
He asks it to take care of him till light
And love him—but it won’t do any good.
He is so far I cannot make him hear;
I’d call to him and tell him, if I could,
That You’ll take care of him, that You are near
And love him—for his god is made of wood.
I know he’d ask You if he only knew,
I know he’d love to know you if he could.
Dear God, take care of him, and love him, too —
The other boy, whose god is made of wood.


Ill


