

S PANS
Sox (3
Family Religion:
p E R M O IS^
JAMES BEATTIE,
• *
Minister of Chalmers' Church, Melbourne.
[I'URLISHED HV REQUEST OF CHALMERS’ CHURCH SESSION.]
M. L. HUTCHINSON, 15 COLLINS STREET WEST,
“Southern Cross” Office.
Price 3d- o r Distribution, 2s- 6d. per Dozen.




Family Religion:
A. JS EFJMOf^
JAMES BEATTIE,
Minister of Chalmers' Church, Melbourne.
[PUBLISHED BY REQUEST OF CHALMERS’ CHURCH SESSION.]
MELBOURNE:
M. L. HUTCHINSON, 15 COLLINS STREET WEST,
“Southern Cross” Office.


■


Religion.
And these words which I command thee this day shall be in thine
heart: And thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children, and shall
talk of them when then sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the
way, and when thou liest dowr, and when thou risest up. And thou shalt
bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall be as frontlets between
thine eyes. And thou shalt write them upon the posts of thy house and on
thy gates.”—Deut. vi. 6—9,
“As for me and my house we will serve the Lord.”—Josh, xxiv., 15.
The General Assembly of our Church at its last
meeting, enjoined all ministers to direct the attention
of their people, on some convenient day, to the subject
of family religion. I shall endeavour now, therefore,
as the Lord enables me, to discharge this duty.
The conduct of a man within the precincts of his
own home is generally the best test of his character.
Those who live with us can best judge what manner
of men and women we are. “Is such a man a Chris-
tian 1 ” was once asked of George Whitfield. “I am
not sure,” was the answer ; “ I have never lived with
him.” Certain it is that no man has any claim to be
regarded as a Christian, who lives in the neglect of
family religion. A prayerless family is a godless
family, and a family on which God frowns. A house
where God is not worshipped, is like a house in Israel
on whose door-posts the blood of the lamb was not


sprinkled; the sword of God’s vengeance shall surely
descend upon it. “ 0 Lord, pour out Thy fury upon
the heathen that know Thee not, and upon the families
that call not on Thy Name.”*
I shall set before you some motives and induce-
ments to the cultivation of family religion.
I. Nature itself teaches us that we ought to
practise it. It is a plain dictate of reason and con-
science, that we ought as families to acknowledge and
worship God. It is God who sets us in families, and
to Him we owe all our family comforts, and blessings,
and enjoyments. The members of a family are so
closely bound together, that they have common mer-
cies and calamities, common wants and interests,
common joys and sorrows. Plainly, therefore, they
ought to join in acknowledging their dependence upon
God and their obligations to Him, and in imploring
His blessing.
Moreover, if it be the duty of parents to provide
for the bodily wants of the children they have been
the means of bringing into the world, is it not also
their duty to provide for the wants of their
souls 1 If parents are bound to give their children
the training that is needful to enable them to play
their part successfully in this world, are they not also
bound to train them for the world to come ?
The very heathen practise family religion; they
* Jer. x. 25.


have their household gods whom they worship
and teach their children to worship. And when
the great Judgment Day comes, these deluded
Pagans who devoutly worship the only gods they know
of, shall rise up in judgment against the prayerless
households of this Christian land, and shall condemn
them.
11. Family religion is a Divine ordinance, plainly
inculcated in Scripture both by precepts and examples.
It is a very ancient institution; it is as old as the
human race. All the godly have practised it since
the beginning of the world. In the patriarchal age
when every man was ruler of his own family, family
worship was the only sort of worship that existed. It
was practised as far back as the days of Adam and
Seth, when we read that men began to call upon the
name of the Lord. Abraham built an altar to God
wherever he went; and so did Isaac and Jacob. “ I
know him,” said God of faithful Abraham, “ that he
will command his children and his household after him,
and they shall keep the way of the Lord.” Job, the
“ perfect and upright man,” was remarkable for his
faithful observance of this duty. It was his habit to
rise early in the morning, bring his children together,
and offer as many burnt offerings as he had sons and
daughters. What an example to parents to care
for the souls of their children separately and
individually, and make special intercession with God


on behalf of each of them ! In one of the
passages before us, Moses charges the householders
of Israel in the most emphatic terms, to make
religion the great topic of family conversation and
instruction. Dent vi., 6—9. And if the parents of
Israel were bound to show such diligence in teaching
their children the wondrous story of the Redemption
from Egypt, are not Christian parents bound to be
diligent in teaching their children the far more
wondrous story of God’s redeeming love in the gift of
His Son 1 ? Some years later, Joshua, Moses’ successor,
uttered his memorable resolution : “ As for me and my
house we will serve the Lord.” David too, at the
close of a great day of public and national worship,
did not omit his family worship; “he returned to
bless his household.” The pious Jews of New
Testament times, instructed their children in the
word of God ; young Timothy was taught in
the Scriptures by his grandmother Lois, and
his mother Eunice. The Centurion Cornelius was
a beautiful example of domestic piety. “He feared
God with all his house, and prayed to God
alway •” and so concerned was he for the spiritual
welfare of his family and relatives, that he assembled
them all to hear from Peter the words, whereby he and
all his house should be saved. The Apostle Paul enjoins
family religion when he charges parents to “ bring up
their children in the nurture and admonition of the


Lord,” and exhorts Christians to speak to one
another in psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs,
singing with grace in their hearts unto the Lord. The
Primitive Christians worshipped God in their
families, and so have true Christians in all succeeding
ages. The resolution of John Howard, the philan-
thropist, is the resolution of every true child of God :
u Wherever I have a tent, God shall have an altar.”
111. Family religion is always a result of genuine
religious revival. This was notably the case, in
those times of refreshing that visited Scotland in the
days of the second Reformation, about the middle of
the seventeenth century. The historian Kirkton tells
us, that in a great part of the country, you would not
have lodged in a family where the Lord was not wor-
shipped, by reading, singing, and prayer. Richard
Baxter gives the following account of Kidderminster
during his ministry:—“ When I came thither first
there was about one family in a street that worshipped
God and called upon his name, and when I came away
there were some streets where there was not above one
family in a side of a street that did not so; and that
did not by professing serious godliness give some
hopes of sincerity, and in those families which were
the worst, being inns and alehouses, there were
usually some persons in each that did seem to be
religious. Some of the poor men were so able in
prayer that very few ministers could match them in


order and fullness, and apt expressions, and holy
oratory with fervency. Abundance of them were
able to pray very laudably with their families or with
others. The temper of their minds, and the innocency
of their lives was much more laudable than their
parts.” Such also was the effect of the recent
revival in Scotland. In my former charge, the
worship of God was established in families that had
previously neglected it. One man who had formerly
led a careless reckless life, prayed with such enlarge-
ment and unction as to astonish all who heard him. I
remember a young Christian, whose father was con-
verted in answer to the earnest prayers of his
children, joyfully telling me that for the first time in
his life, her father had conducted family worship in
his house the preceding night. “ Our hearts were
full,” she said ;“ we wept for joy.” May God grant
that such may be the effect of the present religious
awakening among us. That will be a good evidence that
this work is indeed of God, and a blessed omen for the
future of our city and colony. I shall rejoice greatly
to hear of family worship being established in house-
holds belonging to this congregation, in which it has
hitherto been neglected. Sure lam that such will be
the result in every case, where heads of families have
been truly converted to God. No converted man or
woman can live for any length of time in the neglect
of family religion.


TV. Family religion makes family life much happier.
Members of the same family always differ more or
less in tastes, temperaments, and habits ; and as all are
naturally selfish and are much thrown in each others
way, there is constant danger of jarring and discord. I
have known members of families so ill assorted, as to take
no pleasure in each others society, and feel happier with
strangers than with one another. Love, patient con-
siderate love, is essential to domestic happiness; and
the word of God and prayer are the most powerful means
of promoting and fostering this love to one another. It
has been truly said, that “ Family prayer is the oil
which removes friction and causes the complicated
wheels of the family to move smoothly and noiselessly.”
Even when the members of a family are attached to
one another and get on well together, it makes a vast
difference when they are one in Christ, and are dear to
one another, not only in the flesh, but in the Lord.
Union to Christ sanctifies and intensifies every other
relation; love to Jesus makes natural affection deeper,
holier, and sweeter. Besides, love to Jesus gives the
stamp of eternity to the love of those who are united by
the ties of earthly relationship. The union of parents
and children, brothers and sisters, who are without God,
lasts only for a little time; it belongs to the fashion of
a world which passeth away—it ends when life ends.
But the union of brethren in the Lord never ends;
they never see one another for the last time. They may


be separated on earth, and may meet no more
in the land of the living. Their graves may be—
“ Severed far and wide
O’er mount, and stream, and sea. ”
Nevertheless, they shall meet again at the great re-union
in their Father’s house, to part no more for ever. I
heard many testimonies at home to the blessed change
that family religion makes in a household. A member
of a family, many of whom were brought to the Lord,
once said to me: “We were always a united family,
yet there is a great difference in our home now, we are
far happier together than ever we were before.” “ The
voice of rejoicing and salvation is in the tabernacles
of the righteous. ”*
Once more, the ordinance of family religion is greatly
blessed of God for the salvation of souls. It is a remark
of the godly James Haldane, that no ordinance is more
used of God—he believed hardly any ordinance is used so
much for the good of souls as the ordinance of family
religion. The best and most abundant fruits of the
gospel ministry, are reaped from among those who have
had a godly training at home. The preaching of the
Word is comparatively unfruitful among the children
of worldly and irreligious parents. This is exactly what
might be expected.
, The daily reading of the Bible in the family, is a
most important means of instructing the young in its
* Ps. cxviii. 15.


precious truths and lessons. By reading two chapters
daily, you can get through it in rather more than a
year; and in this way the minds of the children
become familiar with the contents of the Holy Scrip-
tures, “ which are able to make them wise unto salva-
tion. In a country such as this, where the education
given in the State schools is purely secular,
the children will grow up lamentably igno-
rant of the Bible unless it is daily and regu-
larly read in the family. Circumstanced as we
are in regard to religious instruction, parents are
very specially and solemnly bound to teach their children
the Scriptures at home. “If any provide not for his
own, and especially for those of his own house, he
hath denied the faith, and is worse than an infidel. ”*
If these stern words of the apostle are true in regard
to parents who neglect to feed and clothe their chil-
dren, they are emphatically true of those who with-
hold from their offspring the bread of life, and starve
and destroy their souls.
A father’s or mother’s prayers too, when they are
real and earnest, cannot fail to make a deep impres-
sion upon the hearts of children. A parent’s lowly
heartfelt confessions of sin, are powerfully fitted to
impress them with a sense of the evil of sin. His
earnest pleadings for mercy through the great atone-
ment will, by God’s blessing, teach them their need of
* 1 Tim v, 8.


Christ as their Saviour. And when they hear their
father or mother interceding with God for them, cry-
ing like Abraham, “ Oh that Ishmael may live before
Thee,” can anything be more calculated to awaken
them to concern about their salvation 1 I remember
well the impression made upon my own mind as a
child by my father’s prayers, and especially by his
prayers for his children. The feeling I had was—l
ought surely to be concerned about my own soul seeing
that my father is so much concerned about it. When
any member of the family was sick he was specially
prayed for; when any of us was going on a journey
he was tenderly committed to the care of his heavenly
Father; and an absent one was never forgotten.
Could anything be more fitted to impress the minds
of children, with a sense of the presence, the love, the
fatherly care of God, than such petitions as these 1
In families where there are servants, family reli-
gion is fitted to have a blessed effect upon them as
well as upon the children. Some of my father’s
servants were brought to the Lord in this way. One
of them became an eminent Christian, and is still a
much-valued friend ; I have enjoyed the benefit of her
prayers all my life. A friend of mine at home told
me, that during a sixteen years’ ministry he had had a
considerable number of servant girls under his roof,
and nearly all of them were brought to the Lord
during their residence in his family.


The worship of God in the family is often blessed,,
not only to members of the household, but to visitors
and friends. A remark dropt by Dr. Horatius Bonar
at family worship, was the means of awakening and
converting to God a gay, fashionable young lady of
my acquaintance. I read the other day the following
anecdote in a tract by the late Dr. James Hamilton.
“ Some years ago an Irish wanderer, his wife, and
sister asked a night’s shelter in the cabin of a pious
schoolmaster. With the characteristic hospitality of
his nation, the schoolmaster made them welcome. It
was his hour of evening worship, and when the
strangers were seated, he began by reading slowly and
solemnly the 2nd chapter of the Epistle to the Ephe-
sians, The young man sat astonished. The expres-
sions, “ dead in ti’espasses and sins,” “ children of
wrath,” “ walking according to the course of this
world,” were new to him. He sought an explanation.
He was told that this was God’s account of man’s
state by nature. He felt that it was exactly his own
state. “In this way I have walked from my child-
hood. In the service of the god of this world we
have come to your house.” He was on his way to a
fair, where he intended to pass a quantity of counter-
feit money. But God’s Word had found him out. He
produced his store of coin and begged his host to cast
it into the fire; and asked anxiously if he could obtain
the Word of God for himself. His request was com-


plied with, and next morning, with their new treasure,
the party, who had no errand at the fair, returned to
their own home.”
In this way your family worship may bring salvation
not only to your household but to friends and acquain-
tances who visit you. “ The stranger,” as Dr. Hamil-
ton remarks, “who turns aside to tarry with you for a
night may, at your family worship, hear the word that
will save his soul.”
It must never be forgotten that all genuine family re-
ligion is accompanied by holy consistent living. Unless
our lives agree with our prayers, our prayers will be
fruitless. Suppose that a Christian prays in the morn-
ing that his children may grow up Christians, and may
seek first the Kingdom of God, and that during the
day he makes it manifest, that his heart is set upon
making them rich and great ; or suppose he prays that
they may be kept from an evil world, and encourages
them to associate with the children of worldly people
—no wonder though his prayers are unanswered •no
wonder though they turn out godless or profligate.
This fatal inconsistency between prayer and practice,
goes far to explain the frequent ungodliness of the chil-
dren of professing Christians.
Here let me notice one or two objections, that are
commonly made against the observance of family wor-
ship. A common objection is the want of ability. “I
cannot pray in the presence of othei's. I have no gift of


prayer.” No one can pray aright without the Holy
Spirit, and any man who has the Holy Spirit can pray,
no matter how slender his gifts may be. The Holy
Spirit is promised as the spirit of prayer, to help our
infirmities, to teach us what to pray for and how to
pray ; so that no one can excuse himself on the score
of inability. Look to the Lord for His Holy Spirit
and He will enable you to lead the devotions of your
family, not eloquently perhaps, but suitably, and in
a way that will profit both them and yourself, and be
well pleasing to God.
The want of time is another common excuse
for the neglect of family worship. “ I have to
go away early in the morning to business, and
when I come back at night I am so tired that I am fit for
nothing.” What a dreadful state of soul such an excuse
betrays ! For what is the plain English of such an ex-
cuse as that! It just means that the salvation of a man’s
own soul, and the souls of his family, is a matter so
trivial as not to be worth the expenditure of even ten
minutes in a day. It just means that religion instead
of being man’s chief concern, is a matter of no conse-
quence at all. It just means that the glorifying and
enjoying of God, so far from being the great end of
our existence, is a matter unworthy of any serious at-
tention. Just think of it, brethren; God has made us
and sent us into this world for no other purpose than
to worship and serve Him; and yet there are men who


will have the face to say, that they cannot spare for God
so much as ten minutes in a clay ! It is marvellous
that God bears with such people as He does. If He
were a man He would not bear with them—He would
send them quick to hell; but blessed be His name, He
is God and not man.
Perhaps some one may say, “ I cannot see the good
of it; I have been present at family worship in some
people’s houses, and I always thought it a dull sort of
affair.” I have been in houses myself where it was
rather a dull affair, but it need not, and ought not to
be so. I was present some time ago at the devotions
of a Christian family, which were in a high degree
lively, interesting, and enjoyable. All the members of
the family were present from the eldest to the youngest,
visitors and servants included. First of all there was
lively hearty singing, accompanied by the harmonium.
Then a short portion of Scripture was read in an im-
pressive and telling way, so as to bring out the mean-
ing and arrest the attention. Then the father of the
family offered a fervent touching prayer not more than
three minutes in length. He referred in a way that
went to my heart, to one or two circumstances con-
nected with the family. It happened to be the birth-
day of one of the boys, and the blessing of his
Heavenly Father was earnestly invoked upon the lad
at the commencement of a new year of his life.
Another was far away in a situation in circumstances


of difficulty and trial, and preserving and helping
grace was affectionately entreated for him. All of us
had special duties to perform during the day, and
guidance and support were besought for all according
to their several wants. The whole service scarcely
lasted more than ten minutes, and it had a most
hallowing and gladsome influence upon one’s spirit. The
time spent in it was compensated for many times over,
by the refreshment, exhilaration, and energy it
imparted for the discharge of the duties of the day.
Such home scenes as these constitute the true strength
and glory of a church and a nation. God grant that
they may be multiplied a hundredfold in this city and
colony !
Let no one be deterred from the performance of this
duty, by the fear of exciting surprise and ridicule
among relatives or acquaintances. Remember that
those who allow themselves to be hindered by unworthy
fears of that sort from doing the will of God, will be
classed in the final judgment with “ the fearful and the
unbelieving, who have their portion in the lake of
fire.”* If you are ashamed to conduct worship in
your own family, then you are ashamed of Christ ;
and if you are ashamed of Him, He will be
ashamed of you when He cometh “in His own
glory, and in his Father’s, and of the holy Angels. ”f
But perhaps the real secret of your reluctance to
* Rev. xxi.-8. t Luke ix., 26.


begin the worship of God in your family is, that you
do not pray in secret. No doubt it is an act of hypo-
crisy for a man to pray with his family, who lives in
the neglect of secret prayer. But think what madness
it is not to pray. Not to pray is deliberately to scorn
the Almighty, and make Him your enemy. If you
thus persist in turning your back upon God and
departing from Him, what can God do but turn His
back upon you, and banish you from His presence for
ever 1
One often hears lamentations over the carelessness
and irreligion of many of the young people of this
colony. What is the cause of this great and sore
evil 1 It may be owing partly to several causes, but
there can be no doubt that the chief cause is the want
of living piety and godly training at home. Young
people that are wisely and piously trained turn out well
here as well as in the old countxy. Parents who lead
holy and consistent lives, and like Abraham, command
their children to keep the way of the Lord, have their
reward in Melbourne as well as in other places. The
promise “ I will be a God xmto thee and unto thy
seed after thee,” belongs to God’s people in Australia
as well as in other lands ; and if they plead that pro-
mise in faith, and in the diligent use of the means
which God has ordained, they will not be disappointed.
There are many young people in Melbourne at this
moment under serious impressions, and not far from


the kingdom of God. I greatly fear that in many
cases these impressions will wear off, and that large
numbers of these young people will remain uncon-
verted and unsaved. And why 1 Just because many
of them belong to worldly, irreligious households—
households where there is ho family altar, no real
secret prayer; where the Bible is seldom or never read,
and whei’e the vanities of the world are the one absorb-
ing theme of conversation. Yes, there are many
boys and girls, both now and at ordinary times, who
would come to Jesus if their parents would sometimes
take them aside and pray with them, and speak a
loving word to them about their souls. But alas !
their fathers and mothers, who above all others are
bound to take them by the hand and lead them to Jesus,
hinder them by their worldly influence and examples,
and keep them away from Him. Will God hold such
parents guiltless of their children’s souls? Nay, He
will surely require their blood at their parents’ hand,
I count it one of the greatest blessings of my life, a
blessing for which I shall praise God throughout eter-
nity, that from a child I was trained in the fear of the
Lord; and I beseech those of you who are parents, by the
love you bear to your children, and as you desire their
well-being here and hereafter, do not rob them of this
priceless boon. Your home may be peaceful now, and
your family circle unbroken, but it may soon be other-
wise. Before long the pattering of little feet may be


silenced, and the sound of merry voices may be
hushed, and thei*e may be empty seats at your
table, and an aching void in your hearts. And
if such should be the case, will it not add
bitterness to your grief that you did not tell
your lost darlings about Jesus, that you did not show
them the way to heaven 1 ? At all events death must part
them and you some day; they will be taken from you
or you from them. And how can you expect that you
and your children will dwell together with Christ in
heaven, if you do not serve him together on earth ?
How can you expect that as a family you will worship
God up yonder, if you do not as a family worship Him
down here 1 I solemnly and affectionately warn you,
that if you continue to shut God out of your houses,
the day is coming when the recollection of your present
home joys will only embitter your despair, when you
shall wish that you never had a household, that God
had never given you children, and that you yourselves
had never been born. Would you avert such a
fearful catastrophe 1 Would you meet all your chil-
dren at last in “ the home over there 1” Then make
Joshua’s resolution your own now, and act upon it
without a moment’s delay ; “As for me and my house,
we will serve the Lord.”
ALEX. M'KINLET & CO., PEINTEES, QUEEN STBEET, MELBOUENE.


3 1508 02231968 0


