

FAR EAST
SPOTLIGHT
THE KOREAN
CRISIS:
AN ANALYSIS OF
AMERICAN POLICY
China, Korea and the United States
"Police Action"? Or War?
Who is the "Enemy"?
U.S. Racism - Makes Enemies in Korea
and Asia
What are the American Soldiers
Fighting For?
Why "North" Koreans Fight
The "South Korean Democracy" the U.S.
Says it is Fighting For
The Korean People - Striving for
Peaceful Unification
The U.S. Korea Policy Spreads War
What Kind of "United Nations" Action?
As Asians See It
As Americans See It
Price 20c
Issued by The Committee For A Democratic Far Eastern Policy
Room 331 - 80 East 11th Street - New York 3, New York




THE KOREAN CRISIS
AN ANALYSIS OF AMERICAN POLICY
CHINA, KOREA and the UNITED STATES
With United States troops on the Manuchurlan holder and Chinese volunteers
fighting with the North Korean Army the so-called "police-action 11 begun in Korea six
months ago has brought the peoples of the world to the brink of a dlsasterous World
War.*ln the- publication “Facts On Korea" issued by the Committee for a Democratic
Far; Fastern Policy in July, 1950, it was stated;
; "In sending American armed forces into Korea and Formosa the American govern-
ment has decided to force its way back into Asia by war...We are witnessing a col-
lective effort, under American t# back through force of arms posi-
tions in Asia from which the WesbsaPH ■wmmirn recently been ousted by the action
of the people who live there!"
The Chinese people after years of struggle ejected the feudal Chiang Kai-shek
and all foreign imperialism from their country. In September they created the
Peoples Republic of China* They have expressed every determination to defend this
Republic from all foreign encroachment. They remember that It .was by the consoli-
dation of its position in Korea between 1910 and 1930 that Japan was able to launch
it attack on Manchuria in 1931. it was from Korea and Manchuria that Japan launch-
ed its full scale war on China in 1937.
Nor is today's "police-action" the first time that American policy has concern-
ed itself with Korea, In 1905,.the U,S, Government through an agreement between li.
Secretary of War, william Howard Taft and Count 'Kafeura, the Japanese Premier, mado
it possible for Japan to entrench itself in Korea, :In return the. United States re-
ceived assurances from Japan giving It a free hand in the Phillipplne Islands, Prior
to this, in 1882, U.S, Admiral Schufeldt had forced upon Korea a treaty which dis-
rupted Korea’s relations with China and strengthened Japan’s position in Korea,
The Chinese people have many,times in the past been recipients of American as-
surances that it would respect China’s territorial integrity and the right of the
Chinese people to choose their own government without interference. Most famous of
these assurances’was President Truman’s statement of Dec.ls, outlining U.S.
policy In China' In which he said;
"The United States Government has long subscribed to the principle
that the management of Internal affairs is the responsibility of
the peoples of Sovereign Nations,"
"United States support will not extend ...to United States military
intervention to, influence the course of any Chinese internal strife,"
"....The United States Government considers that the detailed steps
necessary to the achievement of political unity in China must be
worked out by the Chinese themselves and that Intervention by any
foreign government in these matters would be inappropriate,"
Four years later on July 30, Secretary of State Acheson in reviewing Am-
erican policy in China in the preceding four years indicated that the facts of Amer-
ican policy were the exact opposite of the declared policy in the statement of Pres-
ident Truman in ln his Letter of Transmittal serving as an introduction to
the State Dept, publication, "United States Relations With China", more popularly
known as the White Paper on China, Acheson wrote;


"Since V-J Day, the l&ilted States Oovenaient has authorized aid to Rationalist
China In the form of grants and credits'totaling approximately 2 billion dollar*...
hi addition the United States Government has sold the Chinese Government large
quantities of military and civilian war surplus property with a total procurement
cost of over 1 billion dollars,...The unfortunate but Inescapable fact is that the
ominous result of the civil war in China was beyond the control of the government of
the United States., .nothing that was left undone by this country has contributed to
it."
On January 5, 1950, when the question of Formosa was being discussed in the
United States Senate President Truman declared: 1
, u ln the Joint declaration at Cairo on Dec. 1, the President
of the United States* the Prime Minister and the President of China
stated that it was their purpose that territories Japan had stolen
from China, such as ’TeJBOSftt 1 Should be restored to the Republic
of China.
"The United States was a signatory to the Potsdam Declaration., .which
declared that the tens of the Cairo declaration should be carried
out. The provisions of this declaration were accepted by Japan at
the time of its surrender.
"The United States has no desire to obtain special rights or privilege 5
or to establish military bases on Formosa at this time. Nor does it
have any intention of utilizing its aimed forces to interfere in the
present situation. The United States Government will not pursue a
course which will lead to Involvement in the civil conflict in Chinr,.
Similarly the U. 6. Government will not provide military aid or advUe
to the Chinese forces bn Formosa..."
lest there be any misunderstanding of U.S. Intent, Secretary Ache son enlarged
on the President's statement that same day. He added a specific repudiation of the
idea that the disposition of Formosa had to wait on a peace treaty with Japan* He
said:
"The world must believe that we stand for principle and that we are
honorable and decent people and that we do not put forward words» as
propagandists do in other countries, only to throw them overboard
when the change in events makes the position difficult for us...
"It is important that our position in regard to China should never
subject to the slightest doubt or the slightest question... When For-
mosa was made a province of China, nobody raised any lawyer's doubt*
about that. That was regarded as In accordance with the commitments.
"How, in the opinion of some, the situation has changed. They belisve
that the forces now In control of the mainland of China, the forces
which undoubtedly will soon be recognized by some other countries,
ore not friendly to us, and therefore they want to says 'Well, we
have to wait for a treaty* *. We did not wait- for a.treaty on Korea.- We
lid not wait for a treaty on the Kuriles. We did not wait for a treaty
„on the Islands over which we have trusteeship. . ..
~«tne United States of America, Mr. Truman said this morning, is not
going to quibble on ary lawyer's words about the Integrity of our
position. Therefore, the President says, we are not going to use our
toxcas in connect lon with the present situation In Formosa.». *


On June 2 7, 195®* however, the whole policy embodied in the foregoing assur-
ances to the Chinese people was reversed* In the course of his message on the dis-
patch of U.S. forces to Korea President Truman switched to a new policy on Formosa:
"The"occupation of Fomosa hy Communist forces would he a direct threat
to the .security of the Pacific ar6a and to United States forces per-
mitting their lawful and necessary functions In that area. According-
ly, I have ordered the Seventh Fleet to prevent any attack on Formula.
"As a corollary of this action I am calling upon the Chinese Government
on Formosa to cease all air and sea operations against the mainland.
The Seventh Fleet will see that this is done.
"The determination of the future status of Formosa must await the
restoration of security in the Pacific, a peace settlement with
Japan, or consideration by the United Nations."
This pattern continued with unrelenting consistency.
On June 28, 1950, Carl levin, wrote in the New York Herald Tribune? "Both tie
general (MacArthur) and defense officials here emphasized that United States mili-
tary operations (in Korea) are to be confined exclusively to the area south of the
38th Parallel - the boundary between North and South Korea."
By October 1, 1950, this policy had also, been reversed* Writing in the New
York Tjmes, A.M, Rosenthal, Time’s correspondent at lake Success said:
"Representatives of sixty countries heard Mr. Austin say that the United Na-
tions goal of restoring peace to war tom Korea demanded'taking'of "appropriate
steps" to eliminate the ability of the North Koreans to launch new attacks.•. Di-
plomats here said Mr. Austin's warning could be taken as clear notice that the Uniteu
States felt that General MacArthur bad the right to order a crossing of the Parai'sx
and that, with or without surrender, United Nations forces would march across that
line."
Each step of the road through Korea had its "assurances" and prompt reversals.
On Oct. 25, Reuters News Agency reported that Truman said that U.S, forces
would not occupy the Korean-Manchurian border. On that same day the New York Times
carried a UP dispatch saying*
"United States and British forces will halt their advance in North Korea
forty miles from the Manchurian and Russian borders, the First Corps headquarters
announced this morning."
Today U.S. troops stand on the very border of Manchuria and the New York Post
on Nov- 21, carried the fantastic story that four U.S. generals made a point of
spitting in the Yalu river in what amounted to a kind of vindictive ceremony.
After MacArthur's forces crossed the Parallel the United Nations in a move
which followed the established pattern sanctioned the crossing.
It is important to note that the crossing of the 3&th Parallel by U.S. troops
was made with the full knowledge that the Chinese Government considered such a cross-
ing a threat to its own vital interests. On Oct. 1, Premier Chou En-lai said:
"They (the Chinese people) will not tolerate foreign aggression and will
not stand aside should the imperialists wantonly invade the territory
of their neighbor 71 ~~


In the Herald Tribune of Oct. 22. Joseph Aleop reported that at the same tine
the Chinese Government, in a more Indicating how seriously they regarded the situ-
ation, called in the Indian Ambassador to China, E.D. Panikkar, and told him that
the crossing of the 38th Parallel would necessitate Chinese intervention. TOiis de-
termination wae immediately relayed to London and Washington. Mr. Alsop'e column
in which he reported the above episode is largely preoccupied in figuring out whe-
ther the Chinese were bluffing.
The Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs issued a further warnings
"The American war of Invasion in Korea has been a serious menace to the sec-
urity of China from its very start. The American invading forces In Korea have on
Several occasions violated the territorial air of China and strafed and bombed Chi-
nese people and have violated the rights of a Chinese merchantman to sail the fci*h
spas and conducted a coerced search. Its attempts to enlarge the war in the Fast
,hre known to everybody.
"Now the Anerlcan forces are attempting to cross the 38th Parallel on a
kpale. The Chinese people cannot stand idly by with regard to such a serious et;;;
at lon created by the invasion of Korea by the United States and accomplice court.: -u-
-,.ehd with regard to the dangerous trend towards extending the war."
The Washington Poet in an editorial of Nov. 8, commenting on the many
given by the Chinese Peoples Republic said*
"After all, the U.N. forces were approaching the 275 ®ile Korean-Manchorlan
frontier, along which are dame which supply Manchuria with light and power. A?i - >
liar* situation on our border would have Incited the whole of our population,"
Since the birth of the People's Republic of China U.S, policy has been chars.t -
prized by an adamant refusal to recognize the government supported by the people ' :
China, a policy of obstructing the Peoples Republic of China from taking her rif.' v
fill seat in the United Nations, aid to the Kuomintang blockade, embargo and the
policy of Ache son in the White Paper to the effect that*
v, H ». .ultimately the profound civilization and democratic indlvidualisn of China
will reassert themselves and she will throw off the foreign yoke. X consider that
we should encourage all developements in China which now and in the future work
toward this end,"
Xn two months, August-October 1950, 22 air attacks by American planes were made
on Chinese territory. Such attacks were acknowledged in the United Nations by U.S.
delegate Warren Austin upon the complaint of the Peoples Republic of China through
numerous cables to that body by Premier Chou En-lal.
In the face of the experience of the Chinese people and their Government with
the worthlessness of the many assurances and solemn commitments of the United States
Is It any wonder that to President Truman’s latest "solemn commitment" of Nov. 16,
that*.
"We have never at any time entertained any Intention to carry hostilities in
China" - and that
"We will take every honorable step to prevent any extension of hostilities in
the Far East"
Augmented by Sec. Acheson's worried hope that America's designs would not be
misunderstood by the Chinese, the Peking radio broadcast of Nov. 17, replied*
"Acheson can be assured. There is no misunderstanding. America has lied and
smashed her way across the world to Chinese territory and into it, has seised Tai-
wan and Is threatening our neighbor Vietnam. The Chinese people are not deceived
by what they see through the curtain of lies and bellicosity."


POLICE ACTION ? OR WAR ?
U.S. Defense Department statements of American casualties in Korea show what
has developed from President Trumans*s so-called "police action". On Sept. 20, tht
figures were 13,000 killed, wounded and missing; on Oct. U they were 19,903; on
Oct. 11, 24,163; on Nov. U, 28,235: on Nov, 17, 29,996*
On Oct. 10, the New York Herald Tribune wrote: "Army officials, today disclosed
that Korean Campaign casualties returning to U.S. for hospitalization are ’being
cared for in 10 hospitals throughout the country; at the same time they designated
k other Amy hospitals which will start receiving wounded from Korea in the near
future and announced the early reopening of 2 more for the same purpose."
On Oct, 13, New York Times correspondent James reported: "The war is a long \rey
!from being over ns is evident from this Fourth Field hospital somewhere near tha
38th parallel. Set up to take care of 300 patients, for the past few days the h*n-
pital has been deluged with nearly three times that number of casualties, Patn\ r
come in at the rate of hundreds a day."
According to the New York Post of Oct- 13, there were then JOU.OOO American
military personnel in Korea - Army, lUO.OOO; Marines, 21,000; Navy, 72,000; Air
Force. 71,000.
But victory, even with this huge force, was admittedly far away. Hanson Bald-
win, military analyst for the New York Times wrote Oot. 29: "The mop up and reliabxl-
itation job in Korea is just starting. Intensive, protracted guerrilla fightirg
still lies ahead and only the future can tell whether we can clinch and consolida*.-
the victory we have won.. Curfews are still necesr.-iry
in most of the war-ravaged Korean cities. Each night there is firing, some of it
against the guerrillas and some of it by jittery, trigger-happy troops.... Therefore
we may face many months of guerrilla fighting... .Sizeable reinforcements of Koreans
who were in the Communist Manchurian armies have started to appear tn the battle
areas in Northwest Korea where the South Koreans have reported stiff fighting.
The destruction U.S, forces have caused in Korea is not only appalling but is
now admitted to have been indiscriminate and often senseless.
Hanson Baldwin reported that "virtually all the important industries Of North
Korea - 18 strategic targets - have been destroyed by our bombing. Hailroad yards
and docks have been damaged or destroyed; most of the railroad rolling stock has
been wiped out; warehouses and oil tanks have been burned out; more than UOO tunnel,s
and UOO bridges have been sealed, destroyed or damaged and great parts of Korea's
principal cities lie in ruins-... North Korea's industry is in ruins; there is noth-
ing except electric power plants to complement the food producing areas of the agri-
cultural South."
On Nov. 11th the Hew ’.York Times wrote: "The Korean war to date has caused prop-
erty losses to 1,500,000 South Koreans and has destroyed more than IJjO.OOO homes."
On Oct. 20, Eobert Martin, Overseas News Agency correspondent in Korea, report-
ed "The first flush of victory is beginning to wear thin now, and Air Force strate-
gists, examining the massive destruction wrought by raids against North Korean in-
dustrial targets, are beginning to wonder if they should not have listened more


carefully to warnings against total destruction of the enemy's industrial potential.
In three months, the B-29 Super-Portresses and carrier based planes dropped more
than 25,000 tons of bombs, demolishing or severly damaging every major factory In
North Korea, Including the biggest chemical producing center and largest fertilizer
plant in Asia. Railroad • yards and harbor Installations have been wrecked, and
nearly every important bridge has been knocked out.... The spokesmen and air force
officers agree that bombing of North Korea's industry, which they admitted were prob-
ably not converted to war production, had little if any effect on the outcome or
course of the' war."
As early as Aug* 21, Life magazine's John Osborne had reported from the Korean
front:- “No American, after seeing the actualities of war in Korea, could ever call
it a police action or dismiss it as merely the first of many 'dirty little wars'
that we must learn to take in our stride."
On Aug. 23, Max Werner, military commentator wrote in the New York Compass:
"For a campaign of its size, the Korean war is unusually extensive, ruthless and
costly." On September 1, he Judged that "the war in Korea has now become a real
war in the sense of forces Involved and of mass of weapons cm both sides."
This is war, war against the Korean people, with military personnel and war
material supplied almost entirely by the United States.
WHO IS THE "ENEMY" ?
The American troops in Korea are regarded as invaders hy all Koreans and are
resisted as such. Since the outbreak of the war there is overwhelming indication
that the -Americans (and other "UN forces") are not considered allies by either the
residents of South Korea nor by the people north of the Parallel. The fact
that the troops from the north met with no resistance from the local population as
they moved into and across territory south of the Parallel and that the 100,000
troops of Syngnan Rhee's forces dwindled to around 20,000 in the first vreek of the
war give the lie to the assumption that the US and UN forces were defending the in-
terests of the people of Korea.
Even as early as July 3, Lt* Col. Thomas MacClure, of the -American Military
Advisory Group to the Rhee regime, told the United Press In Detroit that "it would
take at least 100,000 American service men and a year to win the Korea war, because
the natives of both North and the South hate Americans"* On July 5« DP corres-
pondent Peter Kalischer cabled from Korea, "It has become safer to fight up front
than to travel behind the lines, because of the Jittery, trigger happy South Kor-
eans* The defenders have fled in terror upon seeing Soviet built tanks, yet have
taken many a pot-shot at US bombers in the sky."
In the July 2U, Life magazine, Carl Mydens described a US action and the atti-
tude of the people: "We pulled off the main road and pulled in behind a patrol to
look for a battalion which was out in the hills. Along the way we saw only a few
farmers. None waved, and some turned their backs...."
An AP dispatch dated July 25, described how the U.S. Army ceased to expect any
cooperation from the people, began to take their hostility for granted and began to
adopt brutal methods against the Korean populace: "All Korean civilians have been
ordered out of the fighting zone southeast of Taejon....ln an area once cleared of
civilians, any one in civilian clothing may be shot. All Koreans, North and South,
look alike to Americans. Soldiers sometimes take pot-shots at suspicious white-
clad figures.... Many villages suspected of harboring enemy troops and artillery
have been blasted and burned. How many people stayed too long in their thatched-
roofed cottages is not known."
6


John Osborne of Life magazine outlined the situation as it had developed a
month later, on Aug. 21; "This is a guerilla war, waged amongst and to some ex-
tent by the population of the country....! know the constricting doubt and fear
that every American in Korea comes to know as he watches those silent strangers,to
whom he cannot speak, filing down the roads... The soldiers...every time they see a
column of peasants coming toward them. ..reach for their guns, and sometimes use
their guns."
In the New York Times on Sept. 3, Hanson Baldwin wrote {"Some of our chief mil-
itary problems in Korea stem from three factors - the superior battle-field intel-
ligence of the enemy, the presence of guerrillas and Communist sympathizers behind
our lines and infiltration through our lines,often in the guise of refugees, of
enemy soldiers. We would suffer none of these disadvantages if we had the full en-
thusiastic support of the Korean population-something that obviously is lacking."
Even after the "victory” in retaking Seoul on Sept.26th,crossing of the 38th
Parallel on Oct. 9, the problem of securing Korean cooperation persisted. On Nov.2nd,
the U.S.Ambassador to Rhee’s regime, John Muccio, told the United Nations Interim
Committee on Korea, "When the UN forces arrived in the northern areas they generally
had found no one left to help keep order."( Hew York Times,Nov.2,l9so).Hanson Baldwin
said{"Without air superiority the United States forces would not be in Korea today."
(New York Times,Nov.2, 1950) "When it is recalled that the air attacks have been all
over Korea, against the population of Korea, it is evident that the Americans were
not counting on or expecting popular Korean cooperation."
Michael James reported to the N.Y.Times-on November 11; "There simply is not
enough air and armour to handle each one of the innumerable bands that have taken
over in Worth Korea's forbidding hills and mountains,"
In Pyongyang,captured capltol north of the 38th Parallel,a "wave of sabotage"
was reported on Nov, 6th (N.Y.Herald-Tribune) "Army men searching for hidden arms and
ammunition expressed concern over the possibility of a surprise revolt within
Pyongyang... American soldiers arp ordered to carry weapons at all times;the guard
details at radar stations were doubled after two such posts were attacked last night.
Three anti-tank mines planted during the night at a bridge over the Taedong River
were detonated... Twenty caches of arms,ammunition and explosives were found..."
■ ■ ■• ’ ’ 1
The New York Times wrote Nov,6:"As in the early stages of the war, UN troops
were being hampered by thousands of refugees attempting to cross the Chongchon River.
Many possibly carried concealed arms,for front line reports said there again was
much infiltration. The British Commonwealth Brigade yesterday was reported heavily
engaged with enemy forces along the Chongchon,at least some of whom apparently had
passed around the UN position disguised as refugees." The same paper wrote Nov. 7:
"General MacArthur 1 s communique yesterday told of ’continued operations 1 against the
Communist led guerrilla groups scattered throughout North and South Korea. These,
headquarters now say,constitute a serious problem for the UN forces... Guerrillas -
the majority of them North Korean Army troops cut off by th© rapid UN encircling
movements after the amphibious landing at Inchon last Sept. Were being encountered
in all sections of Korea,in groups of from a score to several thousand."
Lindsay Parrott wrote in the N.Y.Times of Nov. B; "Communist guerrillas ambushed
a train and truck convoy twenty miles north of Wonsan. Marines and Puerto Rican
troops in the neighborhood took considerable casualties in.the attack,..Observers at
the front reported that for the last week it had been dangerous for Isolated
vehicles to use the coastal road from Wonsan northward, because many enemy guerrilla
fightovo were In the hi 115..."


Guerrillas, as everyone knows, arc the people In aims* tfe are fighting the
Korean people on their own soil, and they are fighting hack*
U.S. RACISM MAKES ENEMIES IN KOREA AND ASIA
This war against the people of Korea la ftill of instances of racist contempt
that insults all Aslan peoples. It is marked by an upper-class arrogance that takes
no account of the common man. Again and again, statements "by Important U.S, figures
have shown that they place no value on the Koreans except as they may he of use to
U.S. strategy. Here are some instances.
In February and March 19H8 General John R. Hodge, commander of the US forces in
Korea,.testified before the U.N. Temporary Committee on Korea. Describing the Kor-
eans, General Hodge said, in language that a Southern Bourbon might have used about
Negroes: "We found here a decadont nation.. .Many of them thought that freedom in-
cluded freedom from work, that they would not have to work any more-* (Volume 111,
page 135 of UH.Commission Report).
On July 26, 1950, Walter Sullivan, N.Y.’ Times correspondent wrote from Korea:
"Almost invariably offi.csrr and mon refer to the Koreans as ’geeks’, a term used
during World War II fo? Pacific Island natives. National pride bums fiercely in
Korean breasts... The U 5 eoldloro* attitude has made most of the South Korean popu-
lace indifferent and might make them hostile."
Hanson Baldwin in the N.Y. Times of Nov. 3, talks of "the hordes of Asia or
armies of barbarians as in Korea".
Homer Bigart, writing from Pyongyang, in the N.Y. He raid-Tribune of Oct. 23»
tells "How the Americans Selected the New Mayor of Pyo-gyang - "It’s kind of an odd
story, like a fairy tale; Col. Melchior said f I went aoouilng around while the bat-
tle was still on and I finally spotted this old gentleman, a hotel keeper. Well,
you can always tell a man’s station In life by the clothes he wears* I could tell
by his type of dress that he was a high type person. He was wandering around by
himself and we collared him. • (See .below) “ The elite, all conservatively dress-
ed and wearing collars , followed him down the river that afternoon and waited on
the bank until Col. Melchior saw them and waved them across. ‘We sat pn a bunch of
logs and discussed govonMftnt'». .The group nominated Uouk Hin, teacher in a girl's
school, as Mayor. The others ware pedagogues, bankers and business men. Today Col.
Melchior sat with the governing committee and told them what he wanted done. Of
first priority was creation of a police force and reestablishment of courts.•»"
The basic US attitude was formally expressed to the "liberated" Korean people
by General MacArtbur in September 19*+5 ao tho United States occupied South Korea:
"The entire administrative power on the territory of Korea, south of Parallel 38, is
under my jurisdiction. The population should unreservedly obey the order issued
over my signature. Those acting against the occupation troops or violating order
and tranqulity will be mercilessly and severely punished. For the period of the
military occupation English is introduced as the official language."
On June 5* Brig-General Roberts, commanding general of the American Mili-
tary Mission gave a press interview in which he said: "In Korea the Anerican tax-
payer has an army that is a fine watch dog over the investments placed in this coun-
try and a force that represents maximum results at minimum costs. The Advisory
group was a living demonstration of how an intelligent use of s®® combat-hardened
American officers and men can train 100,000 people who will do the shooting for
you." (*x told him to get together some business men and other high type persons
form a slate. It was Just a shot in tho dark. 1 The innkeeper vent across the
to tho main part of town and collared some high type people •)


On ITov. 1, Hanson Baldwin, in the N.Y. Times also wrote of the Koreans as some-
thing to he used hy America: "The use of foreign man power In or with our army - in
Korea South Koreans were integrated Into our divisions - will he essential
if the nation is to survive the 'time of troubles' that lies ahead". According to
a U.P. dispatch in the N.Y. Herald-Tribune for ITov. 5* *4rs. Helen Taft Manning, sis-
ter of Bobert Taft and head of Bryn Mawr history department told an audience at that
college: “The real threat to civilization 1c that communism has been taken over by
primitive peoples who have no concept of individual rights and responsibilities. It
would be foolish to pretend that the forces of barbarism, such as those we are pre-
sently facing in Eastern Europe and Asia, have not again and again prevailed over a
higher form of civilization*"
On Oct. 2S, the N.Y. Compass reported: "Brig-Genoral. William Boherts, who train-
ed the South Korean Army told a recent los Angeles Town Hall luncheon meeting:
"It is my conviction that only as a last resort should white men be sent to
Asia to fight...My observations in Korea indicate that we can use native troops with
good effect. • Maybe we could even use North Korean prisoners just turn them around
and make them fight the other way. And why could we not ufce Filipinos? Or Japa-
nese? We could use these native troops instead of our own. We could' pay them as
little as five dollars a month and a bowl of rice a day -no fight, no ricel We
could go to 'town with them.*
On Aug. 16, the N.Y. Times reported Congressman Everett Scrivner (B, of Kansas)
as having suggested "subsidizing Chinese soldiers and hiring Chinese provincial gen-
erals to fight on the side of Chiang Kai-shek. 'We would probably have to pay the
Chinese soldiers under these generals one dollar American a month' ".
The result of racist U.S. attitudes;has been reported by American correspon-
dents in the field: On July,7, United Press reported from the Korean front: "The
U.S. Army officers, bitter over the failure of South Korean troops
to stand up and fight the Communists, said today they suspected deliberate sabotage
of Bepublicah weapons.•.(they) were mystified by unordered retreats carried out
without permission and in many cases without even making contact -with the enemy...
Many weapons would not work. Three of the last anti-tank guns in South Korean hands
after the fall of Seoul had no firing pine. It was with great disappointment that
the Americans watched the virtual rout of this army, an army they had thought one of
the best in Asia".
The attitude of the South Korean troops, as well as the reason for it, v/as
partly, if probably unconsciously described by,a Life correspondent on July 10: "It
was not as though they were all turning tail and running away. It was as though
they thought all the chaotic disintegration was happening to some one else".
A month later, on Aug. 11, Overseas News Agency correspondent Eobert P. Martin
described the demoralizing effect of continued bad relations with the South Koreans'.
"Mutual hatred and fear are sapping the vitality of Americans and South Koreans who
are nominal allies". On Sept. 3, in the midst of renewed propaganda boasting about
the "renewed" South Korean army, Joseph Alsop wrote in, the IT. Y. Herald-Tribune of ,
the mutual relations of the U.S. and the South Koreans.' Describing the actions of
a U.S, sergeant in a combined American-South Korean attack he wrote: "The company's
first sergeant urged the men on, shouting 'Come on, hubba hubba' and physically
driving one or two of the attacking South Koreans v/ho hung back". On Sept. 13, he
reported l "At least one division, the South Korean Capital Division, temporarily


Racism has permeated the statements and actions ef American military leaders,
columnists and commentators, and educationalists: not one of these
can plead ignorance of the culture and civilisation of Aela. Is it any wonder that
the constantly insulted peoples ef Asia are united in their determination to resist,
to any end however bitter, the attacks, physical and ideological, being made against
them by the United States? Mao Tze-tuag, leader of the Chinese people who have dem-
onstrated their determination, strength and ability to be free, said last July,
"Henceforth the Chinese people have stood up; we will never any more be an insulted
people". All Asia responds.
WHAT ARE THE AMERICAN SOIDIESRS FIGHTING FOR ?
Her can the American men sent off to Korea to attack this people, to destroy
and to kill and to .he wounded and killed see why they are there. No Koreans ever
threatened the United States. Many press dispatches indicate that the imerican sol-
diers in Korea do not like this war, that they cannot understand it despite what
they are told, that they feel more like victims than liberators - and that they teir
out their bewilderment by striking out blindly at the people. It le significant,
incidentally, that the restrictions General Mac Arthur clamped down on corresponds
referred mainly to etories describing morale, not to actual information on opera-
tions*
In tli© story that first brought General MacArthur’s wrath down on the corre :
pendents. Associated Press reporter Tom Lambert quoted a "battle weary officer 1, .
saying, on July 12, t "I never saw such a useless damned war in my life".
Richard Johnston reported in the N.Y. Times of Aug. 12, after several week>
combat: "The average GI seems not to know wlsr ho is fighting in Korea". One yco
infantryman told him; "The recruiting officer didn’t say anything about this. l‘.
fight for my country but damned if I see why I’m fighting to save this hell hoi*:’’
Al 9 year old corporal said! "I keep asking myself what I’m doing here. The fux ;■
thing is I can’t answer my own question"*
John Osborne wrote in the Aug. 21 Life: "the Anerlcan troops were fighting ’in
a land and among a people that most of them dislike, in a war that all too few of
them understand, and none of them want". In the introductory paragrajJhs of his dis-
patch Osborne wrote’. "This is a story that no imerican should ever have to write.
It is the ugly story of an ugly war... Much of this war Is alien to the American
tradition and shocking to the imerican mind". "The nature of the war", Osborne con-
tinued, "is such as to force upon our men in the field acts and attitudes of the ut-
most savagery. This means not only the usual inevitable savagery of combat in the
field but savagery in detail - the blotting out of villages where the enemy may be
hidden; the shooting and shelling of refugees who may include North Koreans in the
anonymous - white clothing of the Korean countryside, or who may be screening an
enemy march". (Osborne’s emphasis).
No wonder even Hearst correspondent Bob Considine had to report on Aug. 29*
"It’s the kind of war that turns the stomachs of Americans, and turns some of their
minds as well".
WHY "NORTH KOREANS" FIGHT ?
Just as the American policy makers had underestimated the strength of the Chi-
nese people’s forces that fought the Chiang Kai-shek armies, so they underestimate
the strength of the Korean people’s forces* Marguerite Higgins vrote from Korea,


in the N.Y. He raid-Tribune July 13,: "Americans are not adequately prepared in equip-
ment or morale for a really tough fight. Many officers and men thought the North
Korean Communists would he a pushover for American troops... They are far better than
we anticipated. They have combined primitive guerrilla warfare with a shrewd use
of modem weapons, particularly tanks".
N.Y. Times correspondent Richard Johnston wrote on July 13» that the North Kor-
eans were "idetermined, superbly directed and battle hardened troops whose resource-
fulness has given them the unquestioned initiative". On the l6th he wrote of an
American saying: "They're using every trick in the book, and they know what they
are doing."
Seeking an explanation of the way the war was going, Arthur Krock, conservative
chief Washington correspondent of the N.Y. Times in his column dated July 10, quoted
"Situation In Asia" by Owen lattimore, that the North Korean army was grounded po-
lically "...on peasants who had land to defend and industrial workers who considered
the now Government their own, since it had been based on protection of their inter-
ests". Tliis was in contrast to the South Korean army, which "consists of men who
served in the police under the Japanese, the most hated of all those who collabor-
ated with the Japanese".
Knock regarded the contentions made by Lattimore as having been fully borne .
by events. He wrote: "One does not have to agree with Lattimore's past or present
Par East policy to recognize the proved authority of these passages".
A N.Y. Times editorial on July 25> declared that the North Koreans had "....
advantage not only of initiative but also of training in tactics enabling them tv
convert regular army units at a moment's notice into guerrilla forces". Guerrllj.c
warfare, as all history teaches, can be effectively waged only by the side that hn*
the support of the people.
Hanson Baldwin, In the N.Y. Times of Sept. 10, wrote of the North Korean iimy:
"Soldier for soldier, the enemy in Korea seems to be outfighting us... The enemy's
knowledge of the country, his better use of terrain, his infiltration tactics,
superior intelligence, cross country mobility and his tough and rugged ( foot troops,
supplied by long lines of human porters, still give him a man for man advantage,
despite our air superiority". All these advantages imply popular support for the
North Korean forces.
All the experience so far demonstrates that there is no "North" and "South"
Korea, but one Korean people fighting against an alien aggressor who is trying to
destroy all that they themselves have created - people's governmental administra-
tions, a new land reform program, a new industrial society based on industrial as-
sets taken over from their former oppressors, the Japanese, and beneficial trade re-
lations with China and the Soviet Union.
The people of Korea are not crushed nor eliminated. It was not the Korean
people nor the South Korean forces (they crumbled from 100,000 to a 20,000 nucleus
of former Japanese police in the first few weeks) but it was the use of overwhelm-
ing air power that enabled the American and other troops to move northward.
THE "SOUTH KOREAN DEMOCRACY" THE U.S. SAYS IT IS FIGHTING FOR
The U.S. Government asserts that the United States (the "United Nations") Is
acting to protect a free democracy in Korea against an outside and anti-democratic
attack. Also, it affirms that the U.S. is working for the unity and independence


About the "free democracy" our Government would "protect", much information
waa given in Facts on Korean Crisis (issued in July by the Committee For A Demo-
cratic Far Eastern Policy). To that report there can be added the eloquent testi-
mony of Stanley Earl, former Secretary of the Oregon State CIO who returned from
Korea in July after having served there as labor Advisor to the U.S, Economic Coop-
eration Administration.
To quote Hr. Earl: "The Republic of Korea was not a democracy—it was a com-
plete full police state.... Corruption and graft'were every day occurrences in the
Rejublic of Korea, from top to bottom.... The Government of Korea was systematically
looting the Republic of Korea...."
"Things were rotten...so rotten in Korea that I demanded a recall to Washington
for consultation. 1 took the position that 1 would not stay in Korea farther and
lend the good name of - the American labor movement to ianythlng as corrupt as that
which existed. I thought that'the American labor movement was entitled t 6 know the
facts...
"I think the public is entitled to know what the boys are dying for over there
...They are dying for the rotten Rhee Government...
"There was no attempt to put down the corruption and graft. There was no at-
tempt made to weed out the rotten, corrupt police who existed under the Japanese
regime for, JO years."
Earl's evidence confirms that nothing had changed for the better since the evi-
dence on police oppression given before the United Nations-Temporary Commission on
Korea in Jan. 1948, evidence that Is printed in its official proceedings, but ig-
nored when the same Commission, after much wrangling, finally endorsed the police
state there. A witness at' this hearing said: "According to the actual regulations
there, a congregation of three persons or over must have the previous authority of
the police, and the police appoint an inspector or some other man to be present at
such a meeting.. .Many newspapers have closed and their editors imprisoned. When
these editors are imprisoned, they have to give information on all articles they
have written criticising local authorities, and the source of• the information they
have obtained". The chairman, Mr. Jackson of Australia, asked: "How Are they forced?
- by torture?" The witness answered: "Yes, I can cite the example of a person who
wrote aa article and they forced him to give the source of. his information by means
of torture or beatings in the prison itself" (page Jl, UNTCOK Report).
One of Stanley Earl's remarks illustrates most graphically, in terms of a con-
crete human incident, why the South Korean people would not fight to preserve Rhee's
"democracy" and why even many of his soldiers turned their guns against him. Earl
said in his July 19, 195® broadcast: "I knew two Korean boys who Joined the army so
they could get rifles, eo they could shoot Korean policemen, because they had been
so brutally set upon by Korean police.... And I think they had one object in life,
and pfobably that was to kill Korean policemen. After seeing the.way Korean police-
men operated and tortured my friends, and my Union people, I almost think it waa a
laudable ambition".
J .
Of all the groups in the South Korean population;’ labor had perhaps the great-
est reason to hate Rhee's American-sponsored "Republic of Korea". Certainly they
could find no "democracy" in Rhee's regime* Most lav's which had restricted labor in
the period of Japanese overlordship were still in force under Rhee and American mil-
itary government with new oppressive legislation added. The official United Nations
record contains the following passage, as part of the testimony given before the


UNTCQK in Seoul, January 19U6, when the American occupation forces were in control:
Vitness: "There Is a law - law 19 - which is a law preventing strike*.
A strike is a violation of that 1aw..."
Mr. Menon:' (The Commission member for India): "Is it a police law or one
of any'other authority?"
Witness: "It is a military government ordinance- It is a set of laws
promulgated by General MacArthur. Proclamation 2 is from
the general regulations promulgated by Gen. MacArthur, and
Proclamation 19 was Issued by the local military authorities..."
The South Korean economy, on which labor depends for livelihood, was grossly mis-
managed and allowed to run down. UKTCOK Report quotes the vice-president of the South
Korean Chamber of Commerce & Industary on Feb. 25» as follows:
“At present, in all the industries in South Korea, there is
a shortage of raw materials, and part of the machinery is
worn out. Only 30J6 of the capacity of both the light and
heavy industries altogether are running at present."
Stanley Earl 1 a July lsth broadcast corroborates vividly that the South Korean
Gov’t labor policy did not improve later. Freedom of assembly did not exist at all
for labor:
“It was Impossible to hold a union meeting in Korea without
the police permission...and then the police were there armed
to the teeth...at a desk...registered the people.•.took down
on paper what was said, then that was analyzed to see if there
was any leftist thought in there."
Earl told how a "red hunt" is always bound to destroy even labor leaders who pro-
test their "anti—Communism":
"My labor people were arrested time after time, but those were
the people who had fought the Communists in the labor movement
and who had cleaned the Communists out of the labor movement.
After they had done that job, then the corrupt politicians in
Korea turned on them and said they were leftists ’
Finally, Earl told of another incident that happened at the beginning of the BO-
called "South Korean fight for freedom" which we are suppoeed to accept and which
U.S. labor leaders, not pausing to examine whether this official line is in labor’s
interest, have rushed to make their owiT and are urging American workers to sacrifice
their own benefits for: Here is the incident:
"The night I left Korea, I a meeting In my home. Eight labor
leaders came to my home and asked me to stay with them because
they said they were afraid of being executed by the South
Korean police..»"
These were the same labor leaders who, according to Mr. Earl, had fought Commu-
nism in the labor movement. They were not, of course, leftists of any kind. Their
association with unions - any kind of union - was enough to endanger their lives.
There is no evidence of any genuine democracy in the Hhee Hejsiblic of South Korea
- a regime for which American citizens are becoming casualties by the thousands.
The official United States line says our action is defending Korea against an out-
side anxl.entl-deittQcra.tlc attack. To any Asian - or any fair minded person - the


"butside" attack is being made by Anerlcans. Nor by any stretching of the truth can
Koreans of the north be called "outsiders* - nor can the almost total population of
of Koreans, north and south of the 38th Parallel who are today resisting the foreign
troops on their soil, be called "outsiders”• The Korean people - all over Korea -
attacked the conditions which were worse than feudal and which held them under for-
eign rule for centuries. Their straggle for a free Korea had been kept alive
through the dark days of Japanese rule; and their latest struggle against Anerican
rule, exercised through the puppet regime of. Rhee, was on the verge of complete suc-
cess in June, 195®J Bheo'e Aabassador at Washington had just returned from Korea to
report to the State Department that Rhee was about to collapse (May 195® elections
gave his group only 22 seats out of 210 in the Assembly) and to beg for immediate
United States aid - "without which help he will utterly collapse".
The latest evidence of the rejection of the Bhee regime by the Korean people
came on Nov. 3, 195®* Nhee's own Republic of Korea National Assembly refused, by a
vote of 100 to 21, to confirm his appointment of a Premier. A petition signed by
some of tho members demanded the resignation of Rhee's entire Cabinet and blamed
Hhee's Cabinet for the war and loss of property and lives. (Associated Press,
Nov. 3 ).
Anericans who have gloried in their struggle for liberation, their Anerican
Revolution, and in their struggle for unity in the Civil War of the 1860's should
be the first to understand the Korean people's struggle for independence and unity.
Anericans have no business trying to stop or control its fulfillment.
KOREAN PEOPLE STRIVE FOR PEACEFUL UNIFICATION
The UN Commission Report states: “The people of Korea...have a passionate long-
ing for unity and independence and have a profound desire for the peaceful unifica-
tion of their country. The division of Korea has resulted In adverse economic con-
sequences in the south. The aftermath of World War II would have made the need for
outside aid urgent in any case. But if the country were united, the south would
not require such aid in the same degree”. (Vol. 1, P. of the Report)
Though the US succeeded in keeping one of the areas of Korea under a separate
and puppet regime, the people all over Korea kept up their efforts for peaceful
unification. In June a Korea United Democratic Fatherland Froht was estab-
lished to work for the peaceful unification of all Korea. 71 political parties and
social organizations participated in this Front. On June J, 195® this Front made
definite proposals for a meeting of legislators from Seoul and Pyongyang to plan
for a unified election; Rhee forbade participation in this decision by any South
Korean Legislature members. The UN Commission announced on June 10, that if the
South Korea Government would not respond to the invitation to send delegates to
the border to discuss peaceful unification it would send its own representative
across the parallel to receive the text. The UN Commission sent a representative
across the parallel to receive the text on June 10, and convey personally to the
three Northern representatives the Commission's desire for peaceful unification”.
(Document 10 in US State Dept. White Paper on Korea July 195®) Khee's regime ar-
rested the three delegates from the north.
The evidence is ample that the people of Korea were making a democratic and
non-violent attempt to unify their country. That they had a well-trained people's
army should be easily understood by the heirs of the Anerican Revolution; that
that army was well prepared to repulse attacks from the south (hundreds of such
attacks northward had been made in the months previous to June 25th) was only


T .."inc Wfee unlf '■■. ~.yn erd >**' 1 " ';'* p ’ •
#
Behind these unification and behind these peoples forces, as bases for
their aims and their strengh, were the achievments of the people of Korea.
Professor George M. McCune 1 a book, "Koera Today”, says of the northern admin-
istration:
"Reform programs were inaugurated over a wide area; nat-
natlonallzatlon of large Industry, land reforms, measures of
financlsl and monetary change, social security and labor
legislation ”
In industrial nationalization, the government "net the problem of the
status of Japanese owned properties by a forthright program of confiscation"
Such industries, and those owned by collaborators, were nationalized, while
"Korean - citizen owned factories.(were) not to be Included in the confute
iscation" and "a large segment of the economy was to remain in private hands",
"Prices rose much less InNorth Korea than they did in the South" Profiteering
was not tolerated. The benefit went to the ordinary people because, as
McCune says, "a fairly stable priceUevel is of particular benefit, of course,
to keep wager: earning groups".
Agriculture in North Korea was helped technically by "revival of the
chemical fertilizer Industry". A land refomwwas carried out based on "abol-
ition of Japanese land ownership, of land ownership by Korean landlords and
of land tenancy, and bestowing the right to exploit the land on those whorifc.
Labor legislation included "an eight hour day in general employment" for
the first time in Korean history, regular vacations and rest days, and"com-
pulsory social insurance". McCune says the labor movement in North Korea grew
in numberscand strength and "in all phases of the relationship between worker
organization and the state the attitude was distinctly partlsn" (in labors favor
- Ed.) and "distinctly in contrast to that in South Korea."
As opposed to South Korea, where collaborationists with the Japanese con-
tinued! in power under US occupation and Syngman Ehee, a North Korean goverment
legislative convention was found to include "79 members who had served more than
5 years in Japanese Jails because of independence activity, 28 who had served
more than ten years and seven who had been in jail for 15 years". Collaborat-
ors were removed from, authorith even when their skills were temporarily needed
(one of the excuses given for their permanent retention in South Korea.) "A
sizable portion of possible managerial personnel (in industry) was deemed
unuseable by the standards of political purity which excluded collaboration-
ists from positions of responsibility" and new administrators were trained
from the ranks of the independence movement and from dnlon labor.
According to radictereports from Korea, an order issued July 5,1950,
extended the land reform, till then in force only in North Korea, to all
territories in South Korea from ftwhich the forces of the landlord-dominated
Ehee Government had been driven. It stated;
"Land reform will be enforced according to the principle of con-
fiscation (from landlords) without compensation and distribution (to tenants
and small-holders) without compensation. The tenant system shall be abolished
Methods of distribution will be decided by general ttoeet-ings of farmers,. .All
debts and mortgages relation to land shall be abolished...A farm village comm-
shall be organized in each village to enforce land reform. It shall be com-
posed of from five to nine persons elected by general meetings of tenant farmers
land-less peasants and farmers with little land."
The labor laws in force in North Korea were also extended to the South
and minimum wages were raised at once. Palaces and recreational facilities


by the Ehee Government and the U.S. Military Mission for their own personnel in
cities such as Seoul, wSre turned over to the labor unions for offices, educational
and cultural institutions*
To characterise these principles and the achievements of the people In estab-
lishing the economic, political and social bases for the kind of a society that
would meet their desires and needs as "anti-democratic" is fantastic.
U.S. KOREA POLICY SPREADS WAR
The Anerlean action in Korea was tho "logical" next 'step in our Government * s
. prevailing Far Eastern policy* The theme of this policy is "Contain Communism".
'■ In this policy lias been an attempt to stop or hinder the Asian people's
movements for freedom and modernization, to support and use (even create, if neces-
sary) domestic reactionary regimes, and to exploit for military strategic purposes
the territorial position, man power and resources of Aslan lands* Actual US acts
have ihcluded (l) intervention in the internal affairs of Asian countries, (2) built!
ing 1 of US bases, (3) agreements and treaties with Asian governments which have se-
cured economic privileges for US interests, and (h) giving support..to colonial pow-
ders seeking to maintain their Asian "possessions" and privileges*
Everywhere in Asia, before June 25* the American Government's Ear Eastern
policy was meeting with defeat. It had failed to secure Manchuria as an American
base when itj moved Chiang's lU armies there in
Peoples Republic of China brought a new and powerful factor to the international
scene. The Slno-Soviet Treaty of February 195® was an example to all Asia of a new
type of international relationship in which both parties secured benefits. Within
Japan resistance to American policy was rising. Dissatisfaction with US Far Eastern
Policy by such a conservative Asian leader as Nehru, was more frequently voiced.
In Vlet-Nam, the peoples liberation movement under Ho-Chi-Minh was scoring telling
victories against the American-supported French. In the "model Eejublic" of the
Philippines popular resentment against Querlno and U.S. domination had reached "dan-
gerous" proportions.
And Korea itself presented the same problem* what do we do now? As in China,
the people's struggle for Independence and for unity was about to succeed; how
could the United States avoid the same kind of defeat in Korea that its policy had
met in China?
In Korea "the next step" in the implementation of its basic Far Eastern policy
was one which our Government had hesitated to take in relation to China - that is,
a direct American military attack on the people*
The Korea action is a first step in an open war policy. Even before the United
Nations called upon "all members to render every assistance to the UN" in the exe-
cution of its resolution calling for immediate cessation of hostilities and calling
for the authorities of North Korea to withdraw their armed forces to the Para-
llel,. Mr. Truman had ordered the US Air Force into action. In his statement on
Korea which followed on June 27, he extended American military action in Formosa,
to the Philippines and to French Indo-China, thus serving to make explicit the fact
that American military strategic objectives went far beyond Korea.
In August there was a further extension of military intervention in Formosa;
what had been ordered in June as a supposedly necessary part of the Korean opera-
tion now became preparation to defend Formosa against the Chinese People's Libera-
tion forces. Chiang Kai-shek and Mac Arthur met and on August Ist Issued statements*


"An agreement was reached between Mac Arthur and myself... The
foundation for 'tt joint defense of Formo.sa and for Sino-Anerican
military cooperation has thus been laid. It Is our conviction
that our struggle against Communist aggression will certainly
result In final victory. Now that we can again work together
as old comrades-ln-arms.. .not only will our determination in
the struggle for this common cause be strengthened, but the
peoples of all Asia will be aroused to fight Communist aggression."
General MacArthur, On his part, stated!
"It is my firm purpose to defend Formosa from Communist forces
gathering on the mainland. Plans have been made to coordinate
US and Chinese forces to meet any attack which hostile foroes
might be foolish enough to attempt."
The N.Y. Timas of Aug. 5, writing about Averill Harrlman's trip to see MacAr-
thur after his Formosa visit, said*
"MacArthur will tell Harrlman that American efforts in Korea
will be useless if the United States does not fight Commu-
nism wherever it arises in Asia. MacArthur will emphasize
that this means backing Chiang Kai-Shek in Formosa, the British
in Hong Kongf and freedom loving peoples in French Indo China,
Siam and Malaya*
Mr. Harrlman, as reported in the N.Y. Times on Aug. 10, "expressed confidence
that MacArthur would be able to repulse any attack Chinese Communists might attempt
from the mainland."
On Auguest 28, General MacArthur's letter to the Veterans of Foreign Wars was
made public in which he stated*
"The Pacific Ocean has become a vast moat to protect us as long
as we hold It...it acts as a protective shield to the Americas
and to all free lands of the Pacific Ocean area. We control it
to the shores of Asia by a chain of islands. From this Island
chain we can dominate with air power every Asiatic port from
Vladivostok to Singapore and prevent any hostile movement into
the Pacific* At the present time there is on Formosa a concen-
tration of operational air and navy bases which Is potentially
greater than any similar concentration on the Asiatic mainland
between the Yellow Sea and the Strait of Malacca. Additional
bases can be developed in a relatively short time by an ag-
gressive exploitation of all World War II Japanese facilities."
Since early August, American planes, tanks, oil, along with military personnel
have been sent to Formosa. The N.Y. Times of Aug. 1, reported six aircraft carriers
plus other units, were being taken out of moth balls in the US, giving the Chinese
Communists an added impetus to strike during August . On August 3* the N.Y. Times
reported that six jet fighters had arrived in Formosa from Okinawa: and a Chinese
air force officer said "They aren't here for decorative purposes-"
The N.Y. Herald Tribune on Aug. h, reported "Major General Fox, Gen. MacArthur'l
chief deputy of staff, headed a group of 32 officers and men arriving here (Taipei,
Formosa) to set up a permanent liason office with the Supreme Commander's Tokyo of-
fice. Fox said he would get full liason into operation and then return to Tokyo."
On the 3rd the N.Y. Herald Tribune had reported "The arrival today of Major Gen.
Howard M, Turner, commanding general of the 13th,air force provided new evidence


that the American hands-off policy toward Formosa, has been abandoned...."
Nor is Auer lean military preparation or planning confined to Formosa, to. Aig.
19, the N.Y. Times said "Col. lee V. Harris, US military attache at Saigon, In
on a French-Brltish military mission discussing ways and means of giving mutual mil-
itary support in the event of a general wax* involving Southeast Asia*
In Manchuria and in Siberia American planes on duty in the Korean war, have
dropped bombs on Chinese and Soviet towns. Mr. Austin admitted* on Aug* 31st, that
American war planes had fired on Manchurian cities on Aug. 31st (NYT 9/1/50)’ Since
then reports from China have told of at least 151 air attacks and one naval attack
within Chinese territory made by U.S. forces during September and October.
WHAT KIND OF “UNITED NATION" ACTIONS ?
On June 2U, 1950, the N.Y. HEBAH) 3BIBUNB contained the seemingly innocuous
statements "A formula whereby the United States could be made an agent for the Unit-
ed Nations in fulfilling Japan's security requirements is under consideration."
That was the week Mr. Dulles was in Japan and Korea; and the same newspaper reported
on the same day "Mr. Dulles proved himself a particularly stomg ally on the ques-
tion of Formosa as a strategic island linking American bases on Okinawa and in the
Philippines." The N.Y. Times that week reported MacArthur's views* "In the West's
defense planning Japan cannot be considered an isolated problem but must be includ-
ed as a part of the whole Pacific security problem, particularly in connection with
Formosa and Korea."
On June 25# the Korea Incident broke out. The United Nations was notified in
the early morning hours, not by its own Commission in Korea, but by the United
States, that Syngnan Ehee and his government had announced it was being attacked by
the forces north of the 38th Parallel. As the United Nations Bulletin records it -
"At the urgent request of the United States, Secretary
General Trygve Lie called an emergency meeting...."
Without waiting to hear or secure any other evidence than the word of Rhee, or
to appoint an investigation commission, or to get the views and possible assistance
of Korea's nearest neighbors, the Security Council passed a re so lut ion ( calling for
the cessation of hotilltles and, on June 27, sanctioned military action, which the
United States had already begun earlier that day on order of President Truman.
This was not the first instance in which the United States sought and received
United Nations' sanction and covering for a deed already accomplished. The same
procedure was followed in the founding of the Syngman Ehee government In I9UB. In
spite of the repeated statement that "the Government of the Republic of Korea was
established under the auspices of the UN Temporary Commission on Korea", the fact is
that that government was set up before the endorsement by the UN. Prof. McOune in
"Korea Today" writes of the circumstances under which Rhee took power in 19^8?
"The (United Nations) Commission did not.. .immediately disclose
its attitude toward the claims of the National Assembly to form
what would be the national government of all Korea..ln effect,
however, the Republic of Korea became the real government of
Korea without waiting upon the decisions of the Temporary Com-
mission. Under Rhee's leadership, the National Assembly acted,
with the cooperation of the .American command, to assume full
responsibility..On Aug. 12, China (i.e. Chiang Kai-Shek) extended
formal diplomatic recognition to the Republic of Korea, and on
the same day the US Dept, of State released a statement which


amounted to giving de facto recognition*••Thus the establishment
of the Government.. .was an established fact well before the Gen-
eral Assembly was scheduled to meet in Paris."
In another passage, McOune said:
"The (South Korea) Assembly..hastily set up its constitution,
president, committees and cabinet under the direction of Syngnan
Rhee In time for the formal investitute ceremony performed by
Gen. Mac Arthur August 15, Pinal action on the part of the
United Rations, which had originally planned a coalition Govern-
ment (our emphasis - Pd.) came in December, and was, therefore
merely a benediction.”
As to the June 25, Incident, Arthur Krock wrote in the R.Y. Times of Oct. 5. of
"the detailed and precise course pursued by the United States after the President
was notified on June the 25th of the North Korean attack: he (l) promptly decided
that the Invasion must be met with force of arms; (2) ordered the "Jih. Pleet to For-
mosa while working out other steps; and (3) quickly authorized the State Department
to request the aegis of the United Nations for American military intervention, which
the Department proposed and which was successfully managed."
The Rhee regime, creature and puppet of the United States, is being "defended”
not by the convinced will and action of the United Nations but under the forced cov-
er of the United Nations whose members are made to feel the pressure of their depen-
dence on United States aid. Even by July IU, as the N.Y. Times of that day records,
"Trygve Die, Secretary-General of the UN appealed to fifty member nations which had
endorsed the effort ‘to halt the North Korean agression* to 'consider the possibili-
ty of sending assistance Including combat forces, particularly ground forces'."
The N.Y. Times said the appeal was sent at “the request of the United States, which
is anxious to stress that it is fighting In Korea as an UN agent."
The N.Y. Times of July 23, recorded that Mr. Lie had received eleven replies:
"None pledged any ground troops"
"France said the US could have a sloop"
"Canada said it was sending three destroyers and woulk
provide an air-transport squadron"
"Bolivia offered thirty officers"
"Sweden a field hospital"
"Denmark an ambulance"
"Norway shipping"
"Greece six transport planes"
"The Philippines said it would allow Its citizens to
volunteer for Korea"
"Brazil, Argentine and Peru agreed to talk it over
with the United Nations"
The N.Y. Herald Tribune of that same, day reported: "The failure of other non-
Gommunlst UN members to come through with speedy offers of infantrymen is unfortun-
ate... the response embarrassed and disappointed Mr. Lie and the United States dele-
gat lon, though neither will admit it publicly."
19


The reason why these nations responded is suggested by the approval in the U.S.
Senate of an amendment to the Third Year Appropriation Bill for the Marshall Plan—
■ 111 || • |!That no part of the fbmds herein appropriated shall be used to
II provide assistance to any participating country which in the
HI |( opinion of the President has failed, refused or neglected to
, 3 1508 01295762 2 support the United Nations in the Korean War by supplying aimed
v personnel, materials of.var, or service."
MacArthur, under the UN flag, remains an American general. "Early in the war"
says the N.Y. Herald Tribune of Oct., 5» ""before he received specific authority from
Washington (emphasis ours--Ed-) General MacArthur sent his Air Force across the 38th
Parallel to knock out the Communist Air Force. Ee then said he would not let North
Korean planes come down to his Americans (emphasis ours.-Ed.) and then run "back
across a line that would grant them immunity. It is understood that .General MacAr-
thur feels precisely the same about North Korean ground forces.,"
Foster Halley, writing in the N.Y..Times on Oct. 1, talks about "the shots,
fired by American soldiers at Inchone and Seoul echoed loudly in Western Europe;
American successes in Korea are tremendously uplifting, to Western Germany." Earlier
this summer radio commentators' troubles'in remembering to say "United Nations"
often resulted in "United S-Nations coming over the air. When Seoul was recaptured,
it was not the United Nations flag that was raised over the Capitol building, but
the Stars and Stripes.
Not only in the military sphere tut also in the. economic, the United States-
openly and unblushlngly assumes an exclusive and dominating role.
Oct. 13, The Herald Tribune carried a UP dlcpatch saying that an BOA staff
was in Korea making an on-the-spot survey to determine what it will cost to rebuild
Korea's economy. It reports that Mr. Truman had told the EGA to concentrate on lon*
range economic projects and let the Defense Department and the United Nations take
over the job of sending immediate relief supplies. He suggested that EGA work wil
any United Nations rehabilitation project that might be set up. It stated that ti
EGA mission will look over the war damage and then work with the Korean Government
in rebuilding Korea, The N.Y. Times of Oct. 15, k a dispatch.from Tokyo„ says
"the expected early reunion of. North and South Korea through UN armed action rais-
questions as to the economic future of that country that are under caJreful study
here and in Seoul. Complete revision of the EGA approach to the problem is under
consideration following the visit of Edgar A. J. Johnson, director of the EGA pro
gram in Korea."
United States interests are to have the contracts and the profits of rehabil
tating Korea; the same industrial interests that grow rich on war materials fumi
ed our government, now will increase their riches by restoring what American ams
have demolished. It is only thousands of Koreans and Gl's who are dead.
AS ASIANS SEE IT
The Koreans - and all Asians - actually see American military forces, 30l<-,000
air, amy, naval and marine forces, killing their people and devastating their land
They read and hear the proud "boasts of -American military reporters and analysts
about "testing out our new ams in Korea", and "brutally concluding that "napalm, th
jellied gasoline 'hell "bomb 1 has proved the most effective weapon against tanks and
almost as effective against ground troops," "Napalm has proved the most outstanding
single weapon employed in the Korean war...it is one of the simplest and most eco
