

JUNE 17th, 1855,
BY
THE REYD. R. L. KING, B.A.
priiM at tip rwjittst of tjjc nf CumterlanH.
sybmst:
PUBLISHED BY W, R. PIDDINGTON, BOOKSELLER, GEORGE STREET ;
AND MAY ALSO BE HAD OF
E. MASON, BOOKSELLER AND STATIONER, PARRAMATTA.
1855,
PREACHED IN THE TEMPORARY CHURCH, ST. JOHN’S PARISH, PARRAMATTA,


Welch, Printer, Atlas Office, 185, George Street, Sydney.


ADVERTISEMENT.
Should any profit arise from the sale of these Sermons, it will he
devoted to the fund for rc-huilding St. John’s Churchy Parramatta.
R.L.K.




ssr/p/usr
X 7'S7T
SERMON I.
2 THESS. iii. 1.
Finally, brethren, pray for us, that the word of the Lord may have free course and
be glorified, even as it is with you.
These words, my beloved brethren, may be truly regarded as
one portion of a parting request from a minister of the gospel
of Jesus Christ, made to the people among whom he has been
exercising his ministry in time past. The Apostle had much
reason to feel an affectionate confidence when he wrote to these
Thessalonian Christians. The preaching of the Word, in the
first instance, in their city, had been by his own mouth. That
Word had been received by them under circumstances which
amply assured them of its divine origin ; it had stirred up the
jealousy and hatred of Satan and his friends—the opposers of
all that is truly good. Paul had reasoned in Thessalonica with
all that came to hear him, “ opening and alleging that Christ
must needs have suffered, and risen again from the dead, and
that this Jesus whom I preach unto you is Christ,” nor was
his preaching altogether without effect; for “ some believed
and consorted with Paul and Silas.” —Acts xvii. 2, 4. But a
host of opposition had been raised. —5—7 ; and then it was
found necessary that the Apostle should go to another city.
But it would appear that the persecution of the converts con-
tinued even after his departure. For he writes that they had
not only received the Word with much affliction, and at the
same time with joy in the Holy Ghost, but also that they had
suffered from their own countrymen just as the Jewish converts
suffered from the unbelieving Jews, so that he wrote, “ we our-
selves glory in you in the churches of God for your patience
and faith in all your tribulations which ye endure : which is
a manifest token of the righteous judgment of God, that V


may be counted worthy of the kingdom of God, for which ye
also suffer.” Well then might they enter into the Apostle's
feelings when he set out upon a new work and mission and la-
bour of love; and well might he appeal to them to help him
with their prayers at a throne of grace, in order that, notwith-
standing all the persecution and opposition which he might be
called upon to meet, he might be instrumental in winning souls
from the deceitful ways of sin to a knowledge of Jesus Christ
the Lord—that he might honor his blessed Master, and teach
men to their present and eternal happiness and glory, that
through the rent veil of His flesh there was access for them,
into the holy of holies not made with hands; and that through
Jesus they might have access by the Spirit unto the Father.
“Brethren,” he said, “pray for us, that the Word of the
Lord may have free course and be glorified, even as it is with
you.”
I shall endeavour very briefly, with the blessing of God, to
state, What is that Word of the Lord of which the Apos-
tle wrote; 2nd. What is it for that Word to have free course
and to be glorified; and lastly , How could the prayers of the
Thessalonians have an influence in producing this effect. And
Oh, that the Holy Spirit of God would now be present among
us, with his warming, invigorating, cheering, quickening grace
to direct and sanctify and bless our meditations.
I. First then, we have to enquire, What is THE WORD
OF THE LORD here spoken of.
In numerous instances, both in the Old and New Testa-
ment, Christ, as you are aware, is spoken of as the Word. In
the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God
and the Word was God.— John i. I. The Word was made
flesh, and dwelt among us. Therefore we may be sure that,
when the Apostle wrote of the Word of the Lord , he must
have intended some direct and plain reference to the Lord
Jesus. In truth, it is evident that by this expression he
means that Gospel which it was his privilege to preach, viz.:
that those sinners who believe in the Lord Jesus shall be saved.
} do not mean that he would confine his preaching to this one


and simple and only topic; but that this was the foundation
of the whole superstructure which, as' a wise master builder, he
had to raise. Therefore it was on another occasion that he
wrote to the Corinthians, with reference to his ministry
amongst them that he had determined to know nothing but
Jesus Christ and him crucified: This was the sum and
substance of every sermon, of every lecture. This gave
life and utility to every conversation, to every word, to every
action. Yea, as it appeared from his conduct, he would
“bring every thought into subjection to the obedience of
Christ.” He knew that the sinner could not be saved without
Him—therefore he preached of Him to them who were perish-
ing : he knew that the saint could not be edified apart from
Jesus—therefore he preached of Him to the sanctified ones.
He knew that Jesus alone,could overthrow the sell-righteous
pride of the Pharisaic Jews, as well as the temples and idols
of the superstitious heathen; and therefore, though it was a
stumbling block to the unbelieving Jews, and a laughing stock
to the polite and learned among the Gentiles, and an object of
malicious hatred to the unlearned, “he ceased not to speak
and preach Christ Jesus.” He spoke of Him as the true and
living way in which we may draw nigh unto God with accept-
ance —of his Spirit as the blessed sanctifier who will convince
men of sin, and lead them to the cross of Christ, and glorify
the blessed Saviour in their life and conduct, so that they
might have access unto the Father, “ washed and sanctified and
justified in the name of the Lord Jesus and by the Spirit of our
God; ” and of a way which might thus be opened unto them
through the grave and gate of death to a joyful resurrection
with the saints, and an “inheritance incorruptible, and unde-
filed, and that fadeth not away, reserved for them in heaven.”
Such, dear brethren, was the message with which he was
charged when he went forth to preach CHRIST among the
nations. This was the Word of the Lord for which he desired
that it “might have free course and be glorified.”
11. But this leads us to enquire in the second place, what it
is for the gospel message of salvation by the cross of C hrist to have


free course and be glorified. The idea seems to be taken, as is
not uncommon in the writings of St. Paul, from the position
of a chariot in the race. There are a large number starting,
but one only attracts the attention of the spectators—it is first
in the race—there are no obstacles, no impediments in its
way —the crowd of those which contend with and confuse and
distract each other are all left behind—it goes on triumphantly,
and presently reaches the goal, amid the cheers and plaudits
and congratulations of every beholder. It has had free course
and is glorified. So would the Apostle desire that the blessed
doctrine which he had to proclaim for the salvation of souls
might have free course and be glorified. He wished that it
might have a free course, that all unnecessary impediments
should be removed, that all hindrances to the reception of
it into the heart should be broken down, that the idols of
heathen superstition should fall before it, that hearts of men,
harder than the stone or brass of which they made their idols,
should be melted at its presence and receive it in love. He
desired that for the sake of that Gospel he himself might be
delivered from unreasonable and wicked men, and that nothing
might offer any effectual resistance to the spread of the truth
as it is in Jesus. And further, he desired that it might be glori-
fied, that it might attain the end in view, that many souls
might be won for Christ, many subjects for the Redeemer’s
kingdom ; that, like the stone spoken of by Daniel, the Gospel
which he had been commissioned to proclaim might become a
great mountain and fill all the earth. He desired that the Re-
deemer’s kingdom might be established, and heathen super-
stition overthrown; that Satan might be quelled; that souls
might be saved ; and that God might be glorified through
Jesus Christ our Lord.
And this great work had been commenced, as far as Thessa-
lonica was concerned, The effect of Paul’s preaching had
been to bring many souls to the knowledge of God and to faith
in the Lord Jesus Christ, and to simple communion with the
Holy Ghost, and under the influence of His sanctifying operation
on the heart. Therefore was it that he could, when addressing


them as in the Ist. chap., Ist epistle, ver. 2,3, 4, thank God for
them making mention of them in his prayers and also acknow-
ledge with holy gratitude and joy that their faith grew exceed-
ingly, and that the charity of every one of them all towards each
other abounded. And these blessed tempers and Christian dis-
positions, which were thus manifested by the Thessalonian con-
verts, were the very tempers and dispositions which he wished
to see cultivated over the whole earth, by every living creature.
Therefore it was that he desired their prayers for the success of
his preaching. Well did they, by blessed experience, know the
value of those Christian graces of which he spoke. Well did
they know the infinite importance of that Word of God; that
Gospel of Jesus Christ which it was his object and high privi-
lege to proclaim. Therefore he appealed to them —aid me in
the work which you know to be so important —aid in the man-
ner and by the method by which ye can do most —aid me by
praying fora blessing upon my work. cc Brethren, pray for ns,
that the Word of the Lord may have free course and be glo-
rified, even as it is with you.”
Brethren, my beloved brethren, is this Word, the Word of
the Lord, glorified, and has it free course with you ? In many
respects I think it has, as regards this parish and congregation ;
but, oh, has it free course with each of you as an individual?
Is your life a living epistle, a living testimony, to the truth as
it is in Jesus—to the efficacy of the preaching of those who
have lived and laboured among you, and watched for your souls
as they that must give account. Is it ever affording an unhe-
sitating testimony to the praise and glory of God through Jesus
Christ our Lord ? If it is, you will well understand the value
of that Word of the Lord, you will understand why Paul so
anxiously desired the Thessalonians to pray for its free course
and success wherever its sound was heard.
111. Yet it may be asked by some, What could the prayers
of the Thessalonian converts effect towards the success of Paul’s
mission? Much, every way. “The effectual fervent prayer
of a righteous man availeth much.” God delights to confer
his blessings in answer to prayer. Even when He has a bles-


sing to confer, He often waits until he is asked for it. Thus
we often find that when God’s people are found to unite in
prayer for any object, there is a gracious answer ready to
be returned. God gives them the mind to pray; He puts
it into their hearts to ask even for those things which He has
already determined to bestow upon them. And further, such
prayers bring down a blessing upon those who pray. They
return into their own bosom. They form a subject of com-
munion between the soul and God. They lead the soul to
wish for and desire those things which are for God’s glory.
They enable the soul, if I may so speak, to work together with
God—to realise a sense of his presence: and thus they exer-
cise a blessed, a sanctifying influence, an unselfish influence
over it. Oh, who then can duly appreciate the value, the
amazing importance of such supplications ? They make the
soul to resemble Jesus in one of his most precious, most lovely
offices—that of Intercessor for his people.
And if the faithful prayers of the Thessalonians could thus
call down a rich blessing, surely their conduct would be a
most valuable example of what grace could accomplish. With
their minds hallowed by such converse and communion with
the Deity, with their souls taught to pray by the spirit dwelling
in them, the Apostle could always refer to them, as to the
proofs or evidences of the truth of his doctrine. Ye are our
Epistle, he wrote to some—“ ye are our Epistle written in
the heart known and read of all men.” None could deny the
holiness of the doctrine which exercised so holy an influence,
under the Spirit’s teaching, on the whole life and conversa-
tion. Well then, for their own sakes, might he ask them
to pray; well might he ask them, that, by their example as
well as by their prayers, they might prosper his heavenly
mission.
My beloved brethren, may I be permitted this evening to
make a similar request of you, and to make it for similar
reasons? For nearly eight years I have now been labouring
among you, labouring, as I am well aware and painfully
conscious, with not all the grace, or diligence, or faithful-


ness, or self-devotedness, or wisdom, or success which might
have been found and employed, but still with the ability
which God has given me, and with some evidences, (far more
than I have deserved,) that my ministry has not been altogether
in vain in the Lord. And while 1 would thank my God for his
grace for any success which may have attended my labours, as
regards myself, under a painful consciousness of how much I
have to deplore, I would and do say, “ Enter not into judg-
ment with thy servant, oh Lord, for in thy sight shall no man
living be justified.”
And now, in the Providence of God, I have been called (not
of mine own seeking, believe me) by those in authority to go
to another parish, and to preach to the people there of “the un-
searchable riches of Christ.” For their sakes and for the suc-
cess of my mission among them, for your own sake, beloved
brethren, that ye may show a bright example to all, and call
down a rich blessing upon your own souls, as well as upon the
flock over which I have been placed, for the sake of that glo-
rious gospel which it is my high privilege and honor to preach
and proclaim to a large and important community, I would say,
in the language of my text, “Brethren, pray for us, that the
Word of the Lord may have free course and be glorified, even
as it is with you.” Brethren, pray for me, that I may be
enabled to speak the truth in love; that I may be earnest,
faithful, diligent, laborious, devout, and successful. That I
may permit no secondary object of desire to influence me, or
keep me from the plain and straight path of duty to my God my
Saviour and my people. Pray that I may have a double por-
tion of the Holy Spirit, by whose divine influence alone can I
rightly divide the word of truth to them who are waiting to
hear the words of the Lord at my mouth. Pray that 1 may
wisely as well as diligently, affectionately as well as faithfully,
feed the flock of God which he purchased with his own blood
and bring them onward unto the perfect man, unto the measure
of the stature of the fulness of Jesus Christ. Pray for me that
I may be wise to win souls to Christ, that I may be an able
minister of the New Testament, and give none offence in any


thing, that the ministry be not blamed, but that in all tilings
that I may approve myself as the minister of God, by pureness,
by knowledge, by long-suffering, by kindness, by the Holy
Ghost, by love unfeigned, by the word of truth, by the power
of God, by the armour of righteousness on the right hand and
on the left, by honor and dishonor, by evil report and good
report: as a deceiver, and yet true ; as unknown, and yet well
known; as dying, and, yet alive; as chastened, and not
killed ; as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet making
many rich ; as having nothing, and yet possessing all things.—
2 Cor. vi, 6—lo. “I would beseech you, brethren, for the
Lord Jesus Christ’s sake, and for the love of the Spirit, that
you would strive together with me in your prayers to God for
me,” — Rom. xv. 30. that I may be delivered from every
danger of doctrine or practice of the enemy; that “ utterance
may be given unto me that I may open my mouth boldly to
make known the mysteries of the Gospel.”— Eph. vi, 19. Oh,
this shall strengthen me and encourage me under every trial,
to know that God’s people are engaged in prayer for my sup-
port, and for God’s glory through Jesus Christ, by means of
my humble ministrations.
And, again, I would ask you to pray for those over whom I
shall be placed in the Lord—whose servant I shall be for
Jesus’ sake. Pray that a Pentecostal shower of the grace of
the Holy Spirit of God may be poured out upon them, that
many souls may be found willing to be saved through the
blood of Jesus Christ, and to be reconciled through his death
unto God, their heavenly Father. God is my record how
greatly I long after their souls, after them all in the bowels of
Jesus Christ; and therefore I ask you to join with me in
prayer, that their love to the Lord Jesus may abound more
and more. That they may learn to know Him whom truly to
know is life eternal. That He may be found of them a very
present help in every time of need ; and that they may be
found of Him in peace at his coming and enter into the joy of
our Lord. Have you, dear brethren, experienced the value,
the comfort, of having the Word and ordinances of God’s ap-


pointment duly administered to you ? Have you felt the infinite
value and precious nature of the redemption which is in Christ
Jesus, and of an assurance of your own personal interest in His
Atonement and Mediation ? Then will you desire that others
also may join with you in singing the praises of Him who re-
deemed you by His blood, and hath purchased you for Him-
self, to be a peculiar people, zealous of good works.
And, finally, my beloved brethren, pray not only for me and
for my future flock, but pray also for yourselves. Be thankful
that you have one who is over you in the Lord, whose minis-
trations you have long since learned to value, who is able with
much wisdom and grace, derived from above, to teach, and to
admonish, and to lead you in the good and right way. Pray for
him, that he may long be spared to the church on earth, and
may yet make many meet, by directing them to the cross of
Christ, meet for the Church in heaven. Remember for your
instruction and warning, that to whom much is given, of them
will much be required; and that having, through his ministry,
been more blessed than many others, you ought to be found
exhibiting, in a greater measure and degree than others less
highly privileged, the value, the preciousness, the reality of
the religion which you profess. Pray for yourselves then,
dear brethren, with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit,
and watch thereunto with all perseverance and supplication
—that your love may abound more and more in judgment
and in all knowledge ; that ye may approve things that are
excellent, that ye may be sincere and without offence till the
day of Christ, being filled with all the fruits of righteous-
ness which are by Jesus Christ to the glory and praise of God.
“ Forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth
unto those things which are before, press towards the mark
for the prize of your high calling of God in Christ Jesus.”
“Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest,
whatsoever things are j ust, whatsoever things are pure, what-
soever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report;
if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think of these
things.”


And, oli, are there any here who are still far from God, any
who, notwithstanding the faithful admonitions which have been
addressed to them from the word of God, are still without any
love to the Lord Jesus—still without the blessed and con-
straining influence of his Holy Spirit? May I not say in the
words of the prophet, “ If ye will not hear, my soul shall weep
in secret places for your pride.” Oh, brethren, suffer a
parting word of exlmrtation. It may, and very probably will,
be the last time that I shall be permitted to address you. Oh,
why will you not submit yourselves to Jesus and his love?
Without him you are not happy—you are not safe; without
him you will not be honored or respected in another world,
what will be your state when he comes to judge ? what will it
then profit you that you have carelessly treated him on earth,
and “despised the riches of his mercy, who now with much long
suffering calls you to repentance ** Oh, that God’s Holy Spirit
would now soften your hearts, and bring you weary and heavy
laden to the foot of the cross of Christ. Oh, that your hearts
might be pierced with living sorrow, at the sight and know-
ledge of all his precious, his infinite, his amazing, his un-
bounded love, Then “shall ye not be ashamed at his coming,’’
nor shall I be ashamed of my ministry among you, but we
shall meet together before the throne of God, and emulate each
other in singing his wondrous praise.
Finally, brethren, farewell, be stedfast in the faith, be perfect,
be of one mind, and the God of love and peace be with you, and
pour down upon you the riches of his grace, that you may be
perfect in every good word and work, and thoroughly con-
formed in all things to all the will of God. So shall an en-
trance be ministered unto you into the everlasting kingdom of
our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, where, with angels and
archangels, and all the company of heaven, you shall laud and
magnify His Glorious name, evermore praising him and say-
ing, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Hosts, heaven and earth
are full of thy glory: glory be to thee, Oh Lord most high.
Let us pray.


SERMON 11.
2 COR. iv. 5.
We preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord; and ourselves your servants
for Jesus’ sake.
These words appear to contain in a very brief space a plain
reference to some important particulars of the relation in which
the minister of the Gospel stands to his Master and to his flock.
In them the Apostle speaks of his own ministry, and assures the
Corinthian Church that his object was not to exalt himself above
his hearers, as if he required praise, or honour, or homage from
them. It was far, very far from his wish to set himself up as a
Lord over God’s heritage, or to exalt himself above those whom
he had been appointed to feed. His whole object was to lead
them to the cross of Christ, that there they might find pardon
and acceptance, peace and glory. His great endeavour was
to glorify his divine Master in word and work, by his own
ministry, and by the conversion and salvation of the people.
To accomplish this he was willing to undergo self-denial, or
labour, suffering, or even death itself. He was willing to
spend and be spent for his people’s benefit; to become their
minister, their servant, yea, their slave ; if only he could in-
duce, or entice, or persuade, or allure any among them to devote
themselves body and soul to the service and glory of his great
Master. ‘‘We preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus the
Lord ; and ourselves your servants for Jesus’ sake.”
These words, My dear Friends, 1 desire on the present oc-
casion to offer to your serious consideration, and I shall en-
deavour to show as far as it appears from them, firstly—the
position in which the minister stands as regards both Christ
and Christ’s people, and secondly —the object which in his min-


istry he must ever keep in view. And since it is the Holy Spirit
alone which can teach us to call Jesus Lord, or offer through
Him any acceptable service—join with me in supplicating his
blessed, his life-giving presence among us this morning, that
our meditations may be His glory and for the profit and com-
fort of our immortal souls.
I. We have therefore to enquire, in the first place, what is
the position of the Christian minister with regard to Christ and
his people.
His position is spoken of in the latter part of my text, as
that of the servant or slave of his people for Jesus’ sake. In
reality he is the servant of Jesus Christ, who is the great and
only head of the Church, and he is bound to serve Him by
ministering to the spiritual wants of His people.
(1.) He is a servant of Christ. The Lord Jesus hath ascen-
ded indeed into heaven, and is seated on his throne of glory
at the right hand of God, waiting until all his enemies shall
be placed beneath his feet, according to the Father’s promise.
But although He is seated on a glorious throne, and although
Lie receives the adoration of angels and archangels, He does
not forget his lowly brethren on earth—whose nature He took—
whose nature though in a glorified state He retains—whom He
covenanted to ransom—whom He died to redeem. He cannot
forget those whom He purchased with his blood. But by the
agency of the Spirit, proceeding from himself and the Father,
He sends his ministers to his people—He commits to men of
like passions with ourselves the ministry of reconciliation and
bids them go and tell men what a great, a glorious, a per-
fect salvation has been provided in his broken body and his
poured out blood—“ Go ye into all the world and preach the
gospel to every creature.” Here then we see the Christian
Minister’s position as regards Christ himself. He is one sent
by Christ, called to the work by the Holy Ghost, to declare to
man the terms of salvation in his name. What an honourable
position, what an office of high privilege. Dear brethren,
when we consider this, that the master of the house is Christ
himself, may we not regard the very meanest of the servants


in that house as in a higher, a more exalted position than the
noblest or mightiest of the great ones of the earth. Such was
the Psalmist’s feeling, “ I had rather be a doorkeeper in the
house of my God, than dwell in the tents of wickedness “for
blessed are they that dwell in thy house, they will be still
praising thee.” When I consider these things, Ido but my
duty in magnifying mine office.
(2.) Yet the Lord himself in the course of his ministry,
“ made himself of no reputation,” but in obedience to the
Father’s will, “took upon him the form of a servant.” And
so the Christian minister in his ministry, though he occupies
so honourable a position in the sight of his master, becomes
the servant of his people for Jesus’ sake. Did not the master
of the house become a servant ? Why then should those of
his household shrink from the task ? Is Jesus the less honored
now by the Hosts of Heaven, because He once veiled his
Godhead under the fashion of a man, and in the likeness of
sinful flesh ? And will his ministers have lower seats in the
courts of heaven, because they make themselves the servants
of all men for his name’s sake ? Well therefore may they
joyfully endure all things for the elect sake, that they may
attain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal
Glory. Well may they rejoice in submitting themselves to
labour, distresses, privations, self-denials, crosses, injuries,
provocations, and insults, for Christ’s sake. They are ser-
vants —servants of the Lord Jesus Christ—to minister to the
people, and therefore may very gladly take all that Christ, their
Master, may call upon them to endure; all they ask is —Let
Him he glorified. “ I have no greater joy? said the Apostle,
than to hear that my children walk in the truth.”
Such then, dear brethren, is the Christian minister’s position.
He is a servant of the Lord Jesus Christ, a servant ap-
pointed to attend to the spiritual wants of Christ’s people. He
is engaged (so to speak,) for this work, viz.—to be their servant
for Jesus’ sake. He has only one master —even Christ the
Lord; but he makes himself the servant of all, that he may
gain subjects for his crucified and risen Lord.


11. And now what is the duty of Christian ministers in the
accomplishment and fulfilment of their high office ? Is it to
seek their own ease, and honour, and temporal pleasure, riches,
power, profit, or filthy lucre? No, dear brethren, servants
have not much to do with such things as these. (Jer. xlv. 5.)
Is it their duty to please men, to flatter them, to exalt them
in their own estimation ? No ! if they seek to please men,
they cannot be the servants of Christ. (Gal. i. 10.) Is it to
spend their time, and thoughts, and regard upon abstract
questions, and endless genealogies, whereby the soul is not
edified, although the mind may be much amused? No, dear
brethren, it forms no part of their duty to attend to such
things as these. (1. Tim. i, 4.) But it is their duty to
preach Christ Jesus the Lord; to hold forth to the people sal-
vation in his name; to seek not their gifts, but themselves; to
lead them to the cross of Christ as weary, heavy-laden, hell-
deServing sinners, that there they may find rest, and peace,
and safety. It is their duty to preach Jesus Christ as the
Way, and the Truth, and the Life, as the Saviour and Re-
deemer of men, and the only Mediator and Intercessor on
behalf of his people. In short, they are to preach and pro-
claim in season and out of season, in church and out of church
in the city and in the country, in the streets, and in the lanes,
and roads, and bye-places; in the public assembly, in the
private family; to the young and vigorous, to the aged and
feeble ; at the bedside of the sick, and in the ears of the dying,
“ that there is none other name under heaven given among
man whereby we must be saved,” but only the name of
Jesus : that there is no pardon for sinners but by His blood,
that there is no acceptance for them but through His atone-
ment, that there is no justification for them but by His right-
eousness, no righteousness but by faith in Him, no faith but
by His gift, no sanctification but by His spirit, no holiness
but by His in-dwelling, no wisdom but in Himself, no heaven
if He be not ever-present there. It is to preach Christ Jesus
the Lord, it is to show people their transgression, their guilt,
their danger, their need of a Saviour; and the all-sufficiency,


the infinite perfection, the absolute perfection of the salvation
which is in Christ Jesus.
Nor is it sufficient that the proclamation of salvation through
the cross of Christ be made in the minister’s sermons, and
lectures, and conversation. His whole life must be a ser-
mon to his flock. He must preach by his conduct as well
as by his sermons, by affording an example to the flock, as
well as by declaring to them their duty in set forms of words.
And as the conduct and temper, and disposition of individuals
vary, so must he wisely fashion his preaching. Sometimes
there must be reproof, sometimes encouragement. Sometimes
there must be an earnest exhortation, sometimes prudent
advice. The ignorant must be taught, the vicious must be
warned, and if possible reclaimed, the careless must be aroused,
the weak strengthened, the feeble cherished, the timid en-
couraged, the strong warned, the self-righteous convinced of
sin, those that hunger and thirst after righteousness fed, the
afflicted comforted, until all come into the unity of the faith,
and of the knowledge of the Son of God unto the perfect man,
unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ.
Thus, while the Christian minister holds a highly honorable
position, with reference to the Lord Jesus Christ, his master,
he holds that position only in order that he may minister to
the spiritual wants of those who are committed to his care.
While his duty to them for Jesus’ sake, can never cease or
abate on earth, until he hath done all that lieth in him to bring
every soul among his flock to receive at his hands the word of
life, and believe in the Lord Jesus Christ to the saving of the
soul. (See Ordination Service.)
But privileged as is this office, and great as is the honor to
the minister and profit to his people, that he is a true and
faithful “ ambassador of Christ,” “we nevertheless have this
treasure in earthen vessels.” Therefore, as one consequence,
changes may and must occur, the pitcher may be broken at
the fountain, and the servant of Christ removed from his scene
of labour and toil to go to his reward ; and, as another conse-
quence, we, who are ministers, may, and we all do, in some


measure, fail to carry out in its fulness the glorious work
which has been committed to our charge. And when this is
the case you must bear with us and pray for us, that the work
of Christ may not be effectually hindered thereby. Yet,
painful as is the knowledge of our own imperfections (for who
is sufficient for these things ?) we know to our consolation that
the reason why the treasure has been committed to such
earthen vessels, to such poor creatures as we are, is, that “ the
excellency of the power might be of God and not of us.”
Can we take glory to ourselves that sinners are converted or
saints edified by our ministry ? No ! for all the most godly
ministers in the world, though assisted by angels and arch-
angels, could not of themselves convince one soul of sin, or
bring one single sinner to eternal happiness and glory. No ! the
work is all of God ; it is only His Spirit which convinces of sin ;
it is only His beloved Son who saves ; yet has He chosen that by
the foolishness of preaching He would save them that believe.
While the weaker and more inadequate by nature the instru-
ment employed may be, the greater and more evident will be
His almighty power as seen in the work accomplished. This
we know and are assured of, for our own comfort as well as for
your instruction. This treasure of the ministry is indeed com-
mitted to earthen vessels, but it is in order that the excellency
of the power may be of God and not of us. Not by might,
nor by power, but by the spirit of the Lord of Hosts is the
sinner brought to acknowledge Him, and through Jesus to
eternal happiness and glory. Not unto us therefore, O Lord,
not unto us, but unto thy name be all the praise, for thy loving
mercy and for thy truth’s sake.
My dear brethren. I have been sent among you, in person,
though not perhaps in name, a stranger to most of you, to
preach to you these glad tidings of the gospel of Christ, to do
the work of an Evangelist, and to fulfil the ministry committed
to my charge. It is my humble earnest desire in coming among
you to preach to you this everlasting gospel faithfully, and to
ct know nothing else among you save Jesus Christ and him
crucified.” And it is my earnest prayer that the same blessed


Spirit who distributed eminent gifts to those servants of God
who have preceded me in the charge of this Parish, and who
have gone to their reward, may also rest upon me, to enable
me to preach to you with acceptance, with fidelity, wdth affec-
tion, and with success the words of eternal life. God is my
witness, how greatly I long after you all in the bowels of Jesus
Christ, that I may make known to you the blessed hope which
we have in the atonement and mediation of the Son of God.
I would therefore preach to you “the truth as it is in Jesus,”
and would speak to you this truth in love. This is my anxious
desire, and shall be my constant endeavour. Brethren, pray
for me, that I may open my mouth boldly to make known the
mystery of the Gospel of which I am an ambassador.
I would speak, I say, the truth in love. And while it is my
earnest wish and anxiety to be diligent in this great business,
preaching the word, instant in season and out of season, re-
proving, rebuking, exhorting, with all long suffering and
doctrine, I would still do all in love, in supreme love to God my
Saviour who loved us and gave himself for us, in love to you
dear brethren, whom I have been appointed specially to care
for and regard. I would speak this truth in love to those who
now love the Lord Jesus, and endeavour both to edify them,
and to receive edification myself through their prayers and
supplications on my behalf at the throne of grace. I would
speak it in love to those who do not yet know Jesus Christ the
Lord, and who have not yet submitted themselves to his con-
trol, that they who are now erring and straying may be
brought home to him the Shepherd and Bishop of souls. I
would speak it in love towards those who may have left us for
a time, and towards those also who do not profess to belong to
our ever beloved Church of England. For of such I can say,
with affectionate sympathy, grace be with all them that love
our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity; and if any preach Him to
their people, and hold Him forth as the only Saviour for a lost,
a ruined, a perishing world, “I therein do rejoice, yea, and
will rejoice.”
And coming among you (not by my own choice or seeking)


but coming among you in this spirit of love for your souls, I ask
you, dear brethren, to receive me in love, and to implore the bles-
sing of Almighty God upon my ministry and labours among you.
1 am well aware that I can do little, very little, without your cor-
dial assistance and co-operation. I do not mean only with regard
to the building our church, the re-establishing and enlarging our
Sunday and Week day schools, and the revival and promotion
of works of piety and charity wdiich are or should be in pro-
gress among us, though these are very important matters, and
such as deserve and will require much care and consideration.
But 1 mean particularly the re-building of the spiritual house,
the renewal in the spirit of their minds of many who are now
dead in trespasses and sins, the revival of true religion in the
hearts of many who once, in childhood, used to frequent the
house of prayer, but who have almost learnt to forget what
they, knew before. I want to see not merely the blind, and
the halt, and the lame cared for in our Hospitals and Bene-
volent Institutions, but those who are spiritually blind, with
the eyes of the mind darkened and alienated in their hearts
from God, sought out in their cottages and dwellings, and
brought to the house of God to learn his ways, and to be cured
of sin by the balm of Gilead applied to their souls.
There are some in this parish who never are seen at the house
of God; such persons I wish searched out and invited to come.
Hither, indeed, they cannot come, in our New Church there will
be room for all. There are sick persons in the parish who would
be glad to receive more frequent visits than the Minister, con-
sistently with other duties, may be able to give them. In these
things, and others such as these, my beloved brethren, I require
and I ask affectionately your co-operation, your labours, your
services, your prayers. It is little that I shall be able to effect
without them. It is my unspeakable happiness to know that, in
the parish which I have just left, there are some, there are many
true servants of our common Lord, who are praying for a blessing
upon me and upon my ministry among you. May the Lord
hear their prayers, and reward them sevenfold into their bosom
for all the good they have done and said of me. But, dear


brethren, will you not pray for yourselves and for your minister,
that an abundant outpouring of the Holy Ghost may attend
this commencement of his ministry among you. Pray that it
may be as life from the dead to this parish, and that the Lord
Jesus by his Spirit may quicken the things that are ready to
die, and breathe upon the dry bones that they may rise up an
exceeding great army to his praise and glory, and your happi-
ness through eternal ages.
And may the blessing of the Lord of Hosts rest upon you,
dear brethren, and teach you “to adorn the doctrine of God
our Saviour in all things, so that denying ungodliness and
worldly lusts, you may live soberly, righteously and godly in
this present world, looking for that blessed hope and the glo-
rious appearing of our great God and Saviour Jesus Christ
who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all in-
iquity, and purify us unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of
good works.” —Titus ii, 12, 14.


