

Farewell Public Address
The Rt. Hon. Sir GEORGE H. REID,
P.C., K.C.M.G., K.C., LL.D.,
(High Commissioner for the Commonwealth)
Under the auspices of
Literary and Debating Societies
in New South Wales
Town Hall, Sydney,
Wednesday, 19th January, 1910.
Note. —Sir George Reid having consented to the printing and
distributing of this memorable Address, the generosity of a friend
has enabled the Executive Committee to carry out the work.
PHOTO, by TESLA Studios , Q.V. Markets.


SOCIETIES REPRESENTED
All Souls’ Institute, Leichhardt.
Annandale Men’s Brotherhood.
Ashfield Methodist Institute.
Ashfield Baptist.
Ashfield Parliamentary.
Balmain Methodist Central Mission.
Balmain East Congregational.
Chalmer’s Church Young Men’s Mutual Improvement,
Redfern.
Christ Churchy Enmore.
Congregational Church, Manly.
Condobolin School of Arts.
Crows’ Nest, North Sydney.
Dulwich Hill Presbyterian Mutual Improvement.
Enmore Men’s Brotherhood.
Forest Lodge Methodist Young Men’s Institute.
Homebush Methodist Institute.
Holy Trinity Young Men’s Association, Dulwich Hill.
Hunter’s Hill Congregational Church.
Jewish Literary and Debating Society of Sydney.
Kensington School of Arts.
Leichhardt Methodist Mutual Improvement.
Lewisham Baptist Young Men’s Institute.
Lindfield.
Lower Portland Debating, Stanmore.
Marrickville Congregational.
Marrickville Presbyterian Institute.
Mill Hill, Waverley.
North Sydney Congregational.
Petersham Baptist Young Men’s Guild.
Petersham Congregational Institute.
P.L.S. Women’s Debating Club.
Pitt-street Congregational.
Public Service Association, Sydney.
Pyrmont Congregational Mutual Improvement.
Eandwick Methodist Institute.
Rockdale Congregational.
School of Arts, Sydney.
Scots’ Church, Church Hill.
St. Augustine’s, Epping.
St. Aidans’, Annandale.
St. Andrew’s, Summer Hill.
St. Bridgid’s Young Men’s Society, Marrickville.
St. David’s Mutual Improvement, Surry Hills,


St. Enoch’s, Newtown.
St. Janies’ Men’s League, Phillip-street.
St. James’ Youths’ Guild, Phillip-street.
St. John’s Young Men’s Institute, Darlinghurst.
St. Jude’s Institute, Eandwick.
St. Luke’s Parish Institute, Burwood.
St. Matthias ’, Paddington.
St. Paul’s Young Churchmen’s Institute, Eedfern.
St. Paul’s, Eozelle.
St. Peter’s, Surry Hills.
St. Stephen’s, Phillip-street.
St. Stephen’s, Newtown, Young Men’s Institute.
St. Stephen’s Men’s Society, Newtown.
St. Thomas’, Balmain.
St. Thomas’ Young Men’s Club, Ashfield.
Summer Hill Parliamentary.
Surry Hills Congregational.
Sydney Parliamentary.
Tempe Park Methodist Institute.
Unitarian Social, Hyde Park.
Wagga School of Arts.
Warren Methodist Institute.
Waverley Young Men’s Guild.
Whitefield’s Devonshire-street, Congregational Institute.
William-street Methodist Young Men’s Institute.
Willoughby.
Wyong School of Arts.
Young Men’s Christian Association, Senior and Junior
Debating Societies.
Young Men’s Mutual Improvement Society, Newtown.
Young Men’s Mutual Improvement Association, Ultimo.
JEsecutive Committee:
Coleman P. Hyman, Chairman.
Robert A. Dallen. A. Eaton.
Bryce Walmslby.
J. J. V irgo, Ho7i. Secretary and Treasurer.


farewell public jfiddress
BY THE
flight }{on. Sir §eorge 7{eid.
The Right Hon. the Lord Mayor (Alderman Allen
Taylor) presided, and, in introducing Sir George Eeid,
'"'said that it was evident from the magnificent reception
that he still enjoyed the warmest admiration and respect
of the people of this great city. (Loud cheering.)
Sir George Reid, whose rising was the signal for en-
thusiastic cheering, the whole audience (which crowded
the great hall) standing, said that if he were not a sea-
soned warrior—(laughter) —this magnificent reception
would, have unmanned him. Explaining that this meeting
was called at his own suggestion, he said he felt that he
could not leave Sydney without inviting the people of this
city to meet him in the largest hall of the metropolis. He
began his public career on the support, not of one class,
but of the great mass of the people of this country —
(cheers) —and he would not leave without saying good-
bye to the whole community.
“I know you cannot all afford guinea banquet tick-
ets,” said he amid cheers and laughter, “So since you
cannot come to me, I have come to you.” (Loud cheers.)
When I decided to deliver this address I wondered whom
I should summon to my help, and I think you will admit
that I summoned the right man when I asked my friend,
Mr. Virgo, to give the proposal a start. (Cheers.)
His next thought was that he should like to make
this the occasion of a farewell address to the young men
and young Women of Sydney. There were on the plat-
form representatives of more than 50 of the literary and
debating societies throughout the metropolitan area, and
he thanked them and the societies most earnestly for the
splendid arrangements which they had made.
“Why have I wished to address the young men and
young women?” said Sir George. “Because the future of
Australia is in their keeping—(hear, hear) —and because I
feel sure that where the young men, and especially where
the young women, go, a good many people very much older
will follow. (Laughter.) Even the oldest man—l was
going to say the oldest woman, but I never knew an old
woman —(laughter)—even the oldest man can perform a
noble service in trying to smooth the path of the younger
generation. I have, as you know, delivered a number of
addresses to the young men’s societies of Sydney and


suburbs. I felt wheu I left the leadership of the Opposi-
tion—always the. Opposition!—(laughter)—that unless I
devoted some of my surplus energy to some useful public
work, I might do something rash. (Laughter.) I had a
well-reasoned motive for that course. No man is worthy
of the position of a leader of political thought unless he
bestows some attention, beyond the fighting topics of the
politicians, to the way in which the young men of the
country are shaping for the battle of life.” (Cheers.)
THE NEGLECT OF THE MIND.
How wonderful it was that so little was ever thought of the
one Godlike attribute of humanity! In their bodies there
were many insects far more wonderful than they them-
selves were—(laughter)—and one thing that made the
rank of humanity was the possession of that spark of Di-
vine nature, the human mind. Yet how often did they
think of it? How often did they try to feed it? How
often did they try to “give it a show”? (Hear, hear.)
“If you would only think half as much of the ap-
pearance of your mind,” he advised, “as you do of the
suit of clothes you wear on your body, it would be a grand
thing for the world. You, and all humanity, after all
these centuries are still in the infantile stage, when you
busy yourselves with the trivial things, and abandon the
investigation of the hidden mysteries of that immortal pro-
cess which is not only the grandest fact in the world to-
day, but if you only knew it, is the most valuable mercan-
tile asset you possess.’(Hear, hear.) What is it that equips
you for the battle of life? It is not your clothes, it is not
your body. It is this Divine power, this myster/ous sove-
reign, which sits on the throne of reason. No Darwin can
explain its design; no man of science can throw it under
the microscope. ’ ’
Some people said they did not believe in anything
they could not see, and they made that an argument for
not believing in a God. Now, the mind shared one of the
great attributes of the Supreme Being, because it was
never visible except in that which it did. Would they re-
fuse to believe in the human mind because they had never
seen it, never could see it, or because no Darwin could
trace its design, or no surgeon probe it, or no man of genius
throw its shape upon the screen? The grandest facts of
the world and the universe were the facts which th e hu-
man eye could not see. (Cheers.)
TURN FROM THE GLORIES OF SPORT.
“My object to-night,” said Sir George, “is to ask
young Australia to turn for a moment or two from the
glories of the cricket field, of football, of rowing of rac-
ing—yes, even of prize-fighting—(laughter)—I ask you


in this farewell address to think a little more than you
have done as to the best means of developing this marvel-
lous possession, which is your greatest glory. And in do-
ing this I am not playing the part of an ascetic or ab-
struse philosopher. No one amongst you has wasted more
of his life in foolish pleasures than I. (Laughter.) No one
ever devoted himself more keenly to cricket —although
cricket never seemed to devote itself to me —(laughter) •
no one took longer in his young days to do a good thing
than I did, or took a shorter time than I did to do a bad
thing—(laughter) —but now, when the advancing period
of old age had induced a clearer vision as to the value of
things I cannot do —(laughter) —I want as one of the
chief sinners of the past to devote my ripened experience
to your much more promising condition. (Applause.) I
am infinitely better qualified to s]4eak upon this battle of
life than the oldest clergyman amongst you—because*
“I’ve been there.” (Laughter.) And I hope he has not.
(Laughter and applause.)
THE BATTLE OF LIFE.
“But, as my powers of reflection have increased; as
the pleasures of one’s lower nature depart from one, he
begins to discover, at last, not from any superior virtue,
not from any superior wisdom, but from the sheer force
of chronological evolution —(laughter) —a more just way
of looking at the serious problems of life. Here, I cannot
help making a remark which points the difference between
the young man and the young woman in the battle of life.
A young man can make any number of mistakes. He
may be driven on any number of rocks, but he can float
off. He can begin again, and life still looks bright and
promising before him. If a young woman makes the slight-
est slip—perhaps, because she has got a bigger heart, per-
haps, because she has got a more loving nature,
perhaps because she has got a more noble trust —
what a hideous thing it is in life to-day that you see so few
helping hands to save those bright young natures. (Loud
cheers.) You see so many thrusting them down, down,
down! —and when they ar e right down, people go round
in the slums of great cities to bring them back again.
(Cheers.) I say, the best thing I can tell you is that if
we had half the chivalry, half the humanity that we ought
to have in these enlightened days, the young woman who
makes a mistake would have as generous a salvation as
the young man who can make a hundred mistakes.
(Cheers.) We cannot wonder, perhaps, at the ignorance
there is about this mind of ours. When we remember how
little we take the trouble to know even about our own
constitution —is it not one of the most marvellous things


in this twentieth century; is it not one of the most mar-
vellous things that, while so much depends upon the faith
of our bodily system, one of the chief subjects of every
system of public instruction —to imbue in the minds of
students a clearer conception of the laws of health- —is
avoided. Only the laws of bodily health are attended to
in our systems of public instruction, while we are a long
way off in knowledge of the laws of the mind. (Applause.)
What’s the use of loading young minds with indigestible
triumphs of memory whilst the vital things which affect
the health and strength and future of our children are left
to chance? (Applause.)
FREE EDUCATION.
“I am glad to say there have been great changes for
the better in our system of public instruction. In the first
place the child of the poorest and most obscure has at least
a chance to acquire the rudiments of an education. Just
you young men realise your advantages compared with
the generations that have passed away. Think how, dur-
ing the centuries that are passed, up to within a few
years ago, there was no country in the world, the richest,
the most enlightened, in which the noble principle of
equality of opportunity was applied to the children of the
masses of the people. We may differ as to our ideas on
the quality of human achievement, the marvellous diver-
sities which we can see in the capacity of individual minds,
and despair of a time when the human mind can be thrown
into such an equal mould that each human mind will pro-
duce exactly the same quantity and quality of achieve-
ment. But there is one great principle which is being
acknowledged too late, perhaps, that sometimes in the
dirtiest mud the purest gems were discovered; sometimes
those with the greatest advantages become decadent, and
those with the least advantages rise to the most glorious
heights of human achievement. That marvellous fact in
the history of mankind ought to teach the ruling powers
of every country—that far better than the hunt for dia-
monds in the soil is the hunt for genius amongst the great
mass of the children of the country. The search may not
be successful, but you will always be bringing forward
more and more into; light the one power that makes for
human happiness and for national superiority.” (Cheers.)
“May I ask, and I hope you will forgive me for mak-
ing use of this last occasion, and not to amuse you, but
to endeavour to attract your attention to some truths of
great importance 1 . I know there are some people even on
the press who get alarmed over my mental vigour when I
develop a vein of seriousness. (Laughter and applause.)
They wonder what is coming over Reid. Now, if some


of those gentlemen were a little more intelligent —(laugh-
ter) —or, I might say, took a little more time in the in-
tense hurry in a life which has to pour out its soul in the
night and the early hours of the morning, they would
have discovered that right through my public career my
great desire was to use any power I had to amuse in order
to instruct and to influence. (Loud applause.) I wish to
assure them beforehand that in spite of the unusually sen-
sible character of my remarks, I am in perfect health. ’ ’
—(Laughter.)
THE EIGHT WAY TO HEAD.
He advised young men and young women that as they
grew older they should drop the pretty folly of the infant
in taking up the newspaper before they could read it.
The child imitating the father, took the newspaper upside
down—he admitted that he got a better chance of under-
standing it that way—(laughter)—and his eye having
travelled along the page, the infant thought he knew
everything, and had acquired a vast store of useful know-
ledge. (Laughter.) He was afraid there was a large
number of grown-up infants in the community, who took
up a book or a newspaper, and roamed along the lines,
fancying because they had read that they understood.
Eight through school life and adult life they could not
too clearly remember that their reading was time thrown
away unless they took out of every word they read the
soul that was in it. (Cheers.) If they did not do this,
they were just as silly in the management of the mind, and
did just as much harm as if they swallowed walnuts with-
out taking the trouble to remove the skin. It was not
the quantity they read, or committed to memory, that de-
termined the nourishment they gave to their mind. The
body, if not properly treated, could cry out; it could give
one an ache; they had all felt it —(laughter)—and when
one felt it he began to think “What is it I took that
has raised this riot in my Industrial Arbitra-
tion Court? ’ ’ —(laughter)— ‘ ‘ what is it (hat has
gone on strike?’’ (Eenewed laughter.) You soon
find if you try to increase your bodily strength by taking
great quantities of food that instead of promoting your
bodily health you are ruining your constitution. He urged
them to see to it that they assimilated the mental food
just as they assimilated the physical food. (Cheers.) If
the starvation of the mind could send a thrill of pain
through the bodily mechanism, then the Divine power
within them would have a better chance. But the mind
could be starved, and never complained.
UNIYEESITY TEIUMPHS.
“One of the saddest things to my mind,’’ continued
Sir George, “is in some of the most glorious achievements


of your University. You see some young men describing
triumphant careers at the University. They have a share
of the grand thoughts and conceptions of intellects gone
thousands of years ago, and get medals, well-deserved, for
the infinite struggle they make to become native-born Eo-
mans or Athenians. But if you put before these gifted
young men some of the smallest problems of the great
throbbing world around them, some of the smallest ques-
tions affecting the very life blood of humanity to-day—
the secrets of our natural wealth, the system of our social
fabric, the possibilities of our immortal faculties, you
often find that the young man who has had to educate him-
self is infinitely more able, infinitely more ready, to fight
the battle of life. (Loud cheers.) Ido not wish to dis-
parage these noble languages of the dead. They are full
of noble thoughts that will aways live. But it is time our
educational authorities remembered that these great
accomplishments are only the humble foundation-stone of
the mind, on which is to be erected the living superstruc-
ture of intellectual power, that stands four square to all
the great movements and powers of the present time.
(Loud cheers.)
The Universities centuries ago, when science was un-
born, ware in a different position, he contended, from such
institutions at the present time. ‘‘l do hope,” said he,
"to see that noble University of ours, which has already
made wonderful strides in broadening its curriculum, do
still more. No one can go through the Sydney University
now without feeling pride in it; but there is a great deal
more to be done. The mere teaching of things is like
the mere sowing of seed. You do not get anything from
the sowing of the seed, unless you get the life crop from
the soil; and we want now to sow life seeds of instruc-
tion, which will bring up glorious crops of power and
progress, in close touch with the marvellous natural re-
sources of this fair young land of Australia.” (Cheers.)
GEEAT BEIT AIN AND GEEMANY.
They had suddenly become interested in a great na-
tion, Germany. They had become wisely thoughtful of
the naval evolution .of that great country. Its military
power was at the head of all the' military Powers of
Europe, and it was trying now to stand at the head of all
naval Powers. Trying! And why shouldn’t it? When
Great Britain was the junior to Spain and Holland, if
Spain had told Great Britain to stop growing, she would
not have done it. So you can not tell Germany to stop
growing. But you can grow faster than sh e does.
(Cheers.) He maintained that the German peril was not
in her fleets, but in that marvellous crop which Germany


had sown of intelligence, of education, of observation, and
experiment. (Cheers.) After Napoleon had smashed the
power of Prussia, the Emperor Frederick William said:
“I will redress this loss of my territory by establishing
a University.” Thus, after the battle of Jena, there
was established the great University of Berlin, which had
been the forerunner of many other noble institutions in
the German Empire, the statistics of which show that
half of the vast amounts handed over for their use were
spent in practical observation and experiment.
NEED FOE OEIGINALITY.
“It is no use educating a human mind on books. It
is no use equipping a human mind with the things that
others have done. The only law of educational progress,
just as it is the only law of industrial progress, is to keep
the exercise of the original powers in de-
veloping further discoveries and further in-
ventions which will carry the nations still farther on
the road to real power and efficiency. If all your stu-
dents in the University were such wonderful men that
they had stored within their minds all the world had ever
learned they would be worth nothing if they did not go
further and teach the world something it had not yet
learned. (Cheers.) If the mental nourishment is not
resolved into new life and the new strength of a living
mind education makes a museum of a mind, but does
not make a mind as effective as it ought to be in pushing
forward the progress of the land in which it moves and
lives. ”
MAEVELLOUS MEMOEIES.
“Some men and women have marvellous memories.
The memory is the one faculty of the mind which is en-
gaged in humble servitude. Other faculties make notes,
combine things, discover things—the memory never. The
memory, if it is a reliable one, only remembers what it
has learnt, and if it goes beyond it is something else than
memory—imagination, or originality. It is like a domestic
just on the eve of Eight-hour Day; it is not to be re-
lied on. If you overload your memory without develop-
ing the original powers of your mind, you may become
an excellent gramophone and nothing else. I have heard
men recite magnificently from long productions with
excellent emphasis, but if you ask them for an original
idea they could not give you one, unless it was something
about the menu. (Laughter.) A good memory is often
like a store overloaded with goods. You have a marvel-
lous wealth of goods in the store, but you do not know
how to handle them, or how to make use of them, ’ ’


CHANGED CONDITIONS.
Remarking that even our teachers required teaching,
and that he himself was in need of a little further train-
ing, Sir George at this stage got on to an interesting sub-
ject, throughout which he was listened to with laughing
appreciation. “Just now,” he said, “I am having the
time of my life. Just think of what I would have had to
go through between this time and the 13th of April.
Just fancy what would be before me, going round Sydney
on a political campaign. Think of the howls. (Laughter.)
Think of the scowls. But that is all over now—(cheers)
—and if I tell you I’m sorry to leave it, don’t believe
me. (Laughter and applause.) I think while I was in
the “serum” I did my fair share of fighting—(Hear,
hear, and cheers) —but now I am out of it, I wonder i
was such a fool to be in it so long—(Cheers and laugh-
ter) —but the grandest satisfaction I have now is this —
that although I always have fought for my State to the
last, although in the fight I excited many animosities
and made bitter opposition—now that I’ve retired from
the political ring, now that I’m honoured with the glori-
ous distinction of representing all the manhood and wo-
manhood of Australia—(Applause.)—l am glad to know
that the opponents of yesterday have become among the
warmest of friends and supporters.
EEEETRADE AND PROTECTION.
Sir George referred to the warm demonstrations of
goodwill that had been made towards him on recent oc-
casions by the wharf-labourers in Sydney and by street
crowds in Melbourne. “As you know,” said he, “I am
one of those ignorant foreigners known as freetraders.
(Cheers.) Still in spite of all, as I passed along that
crowded Collins-street I received a demonstration of en-
thusiasm which showed there is no real provincial jeal-
ousy in the hearts of the people of that great State.
(Loud cheers.) In the old days, when I was fighting for
freetrade, I said I did not care how many Victorian pro-
tectionists came over into New South Wales; they are
worth having at any price.” (Cheers.)
BENEFACTORS OF MANKIND.
He urged them to look upon education simply as they
looked upon food; not as the thing itself, but as the
motive power. He urged young men, the poorest and
most friendless amongst them, to think of the marvellous
triumphs of untaught, friendless, young men in the
Mother-country, who were the greatest benefactors of
mankind, who made mighty discoveries, and added more


by a single discovery to the happiness and comfort of
mankind than all the learned thinkers of the universe.
‘‘ I do not, ” said Sir George, “decry the glories of
mental power. Who can belittle the glorious minds and
achievements of a Milton and a Shakespeare? What I
say is, I’m waiting to see some of those youths who go
through the Sydney University distinguish themselves by
one successful industrial discovery, by one successful ex-
periment, which will add to the knowledge and uower of
mankind. They will come, but they have not com e yet.
•M-y great desire is to get those who carry on our educa-
tional system to remember that just as we have two legs
to our body, we have two legs to our mind. One of those
legs is the power of acquiring knowledge, and the other
the power of communicating knowledge.. The one takes
the raw material into the factory; the other constitutes
of it a new material, fit for human consumption.” Raw
material was a good thing, but if it remained raw ma-
terial, it was not half so good as if it were converted into
a manufactured article of superior excellence and utility
(Loud applause.) The real education of life, which every
young man should secure, would have to be wmrked out
for himself. (Applause.)
DEBATING PRACTICE.
He would like in every public school a debating
practice. (Hear, hear.) Essays and composition were
excellent; but in the schools the young men were on the
diet of infants. As a matter of fact, the studies of
school were only the beginning of the education of life.
A TRIBUTE TO SIR HENRY PARKES.
“Sir Henry Parkes—(Loud cheers)—a lad born in
an English county, in the direst poverty and misery, un-
able to attend any school, came out here an untutored,
destitute man. What converted him into the man who!
take him for all and all, showed the greatest power of
any man in the public life of Australia? (Loud cheers.)
There were peeping through the glorious culture that
shone in his speeches, the traces of the dire distress in
which he was born, but that added a crowning charm to
the glory of his intellectual power and the breadth of his
statesmanlike perception. He went to no school, no high
school or evening school, or University. He educated
imself (Hear, hear.) One great thing about educating
yourself is that you show in the very act of educating
yourself that the fires of ambition are alight. You have
in Sir Henry Parkes a proof of what a man can do for


himself. Some of the young men might say, ‘There is
only one Parkes.’ There will never be any more until
you do as he did.” (Cheers.)
DO A BIT OF TRAINING.
“It is so easy to fall back in the race and say, ‘lt
is no use, I haven’t the strength.’ Don’t you think
it would be better to do a bit of training first? If you
are going to run a hundred yards for a tin-pot—(laugh-
ter) —just think of the time you get up in the morning,
the trials you have accompanied by admiring friends, the
severe abstinence in diet —I am leading the simple life
just now myself, ’ ’ exclaimed Sir George, amid roars of
laughter. “Think of the heroic self-sacrifice which young
Australia is capable of to win that tin-pot, to score 50 in
a match between Tin-pot Gully and Murdering Swamp, to
acquire the faculty of turning another man head over
heels in a ‘scrum,’ or to gain a prize in a progressive
euchre intellectual struggle. (Laughter.) I do not dwell
upon the glorious ambition of a man to produce a horse
that will win a Derby or a Cup. But I ask young Aus-
tralia to throw some of that grand energy into things
higher and nobler.” (Loud cheers.)
If they would only realise that their brain was their
natural stock-in-trade! People talked about the hands
being the capital of a man. It was not the hand that
was the capital of a man, it was the brain that directed
the hand.
LOST NO MONEY IN MINING.
“If you would only see that you possess a gold
mine. It is not a prospectus mine. (Laughter.) It is not
a mine which a friend wishes to give you to enrich you
in order to make him poor indeed. (Laughter.) In the
old mining days friends used to come to me to get me
to take shares in magnificent mining properties, where
pounds would turn into thousands. That is where my
greatness of heart cam© in. I said, ‘What! Do you think
I’m that sort of friend? When you have a fortune like
that, am I going to rob you of it?’ (Loud laughter.) “I
have lost no money in mining,” continued Sir George,
“but I want to put to you a great proposition. Every
one of those heads before me contains a mine—a mine
of marvellous possibilities. If you don’t work it, don’t
wonder that it yields nothing. If you don’t work, only
scratch a little at it, don’t wonder that it yields poor
results. (Laughter and applause.) A gold mine, or even
a coal mine—when they are able to work it—(laughter)
—is bound some day to become extinct. The marvellous


attribute of the mind is that the more you work it the
richer it becomes, (Applause.) The more you call upon it
the grander the dividends it will yield you. Some people
think, when they speak of Shakespeare, that he had in his
mental scheme some rare faculties that ordinary men do
not possess. The Creator didn’t make a number of minds
on different patterns. Organically, every mind is the same,
but what marvellous differences of capacities! Just as
you notice when some enthusiastic beginner in the neigh-
bourhood brings home a violin. You acquire a feeling for
that violin, which, of course, you put aside on Sundays—
(laughter)—but let the same instrument be touched by a
child of genius, and, instead of most horrid discords, the
most delightful inspiration of the sublimest harmony float
in the atmosphere. It is the same violin, but you see
marvellous differences of result. Eemember this, you be-
gin with every faculty Shakespeare had. You may never
have the capacity even of a man of great ability, but
you start, at any rate, with that.”
TRADITIONS.
‘ ‘ Eemember that environment and heredity are all
in favour of Australians, remember that throughout ages
past there has been building up in the nature of the
British race a higher and a higher standard of ability
and of power. You are starting on the high qualities
which your ancestors built up on foundations of self-de-
votion and sacrifice. You have inherited this magnificent
nature from your mother race, and you owe a debt of
fulfilment to the traditions of the grand Mother-country
in making Australia a country worthy of the marvellous
nourishing powers which Nature has provided so abun-
dantly here to help you. Here humanity has a chance.
Here you are not robbed by political inequality; you
are not under the heel of tyranny. Every man and every
woman is part of the sovereign power of Australia. You
have this great country with its marvellous resources
ready for exploration and human industry. You have now
growing here an aristocracy of work, a new aristocracy,
an aristocracy of worth. You are at the beginning of a
new and grand time. Seize the opportunity.” (Loud
cheers.)
EDUCATIONAL REFORM.
"When I was a youth of about 16 years of age,”
continued Sir George, “1 wrote a long letter in the old
'Empire’ complaining that the Sydney University was
deficient in its purposes, inasmuch as it gave no oppor-
tunities to young men of the State who had to work for


their living. Years afterwards I went into public life.’
Two years after my entry I was offered the second po-
sition in the Government of the country —that of Colonial
Treasurer. I said, ‘No, I want to go down into the De-
partment of Public Instruction. ’ I was only there for
12 months. A point was raised upon me by one of the
lawyers, and the committee of elections and qualifica-
tions, developing a feature which I have sometimes seen
in ordinary juries, and can only now say is a feature
of eccentricity, threw me out, after 12 months of office.
But during that 12 months I succeeded at least in carry-
ing out the reform which my young hand had formulated
many years before in that newspaper article. I opened
up the University to the young men who had to work
for their living. Further than that, during my tenure
of office in the Education Department, I had the dis-
tinction of creating a novel feature in the educational
system and one which had not hitherto been heard of in
the world, 1 determined that there should not only be a
State school to teach children to read and write, but
there should be a State school to enable those youths on
leaving public schools, to better themselves in the indus-
trial occupations of the world, by which they were to fight
the battle of life, to get systematic education in their
callings. Tens of thousands of youths had passed through
the schools so established. Thousands had pased through
the high schools, the evening classes, and the University.”
“I want no brighter monument than these great edu-
cational reforms,” said Sir George, at which there was
loud cheering. He had also found a singular delicacy in
teaching young Australia the history of its own race, and
he had remedied that. He mentioned these things to
show that these appeals he was making that night for
educational reform were not the result of a sudden fancy.
AN APPEAL FOR HIGHER IDEALS.
“I had no University in my young life. My father
—and the memory of my father is a bright event in my
life—-(cheers) —was a poor man. I had to go to work
when I was 13, and I learned more in 12 months than I
ever learned before. I felt in my battle of life how
wrong it is that the State should stand aside in these
matters I appeal to the Governments of the day. I
appeal to the newspaper press to set a better fashion.
Cannot our great newspapers spare some of these corners
from the turf or sport—(cheers)-to encourage intellectual
tastes and ambitions of a higher sort? A fashion has
been set in Australia which is a public calamity. The


newspapers keep the fashion going. I do not ask them
to forget the considerations of enterprise, but I say,
‘Spare a corner or two sometimes to tell us of the nobler
ambitions and efforts of the better part of Australians.’
Why should there not, he asked, be State prizes for dis-
tinctive excellence in the way of original research, origi-
nal composition; original powers of debate, and intellec-
tual culture. These prizes should not be for the University
student alone, but should be open to all the State. If
they set a better fashion, elevated the tastes of the
people, they would begin to know the power of this great
race. (Cheers.)
“My last word to the young men and women of
Australia is, Do not forget your physical culture; do not
forget your rightful claims to enjoyment and recreation,
but remember that you miss the rarest pleasures of hu-
man life if you miss the intellectual treasures of man-
kind. Do not forget if you excel in the lower forms of
activity, you are missing the chance of excelling in those
powers which know no old age. Your capacity for sport
will gradually and perhaps soon disappear, but if you
have endeavoured to develop these immortal powers you
will have a happy life and a grand old age. ”
AWAKE! AWAKE!
“And I say at last to young Australia, with all these
magnificent advantages, with all these bright avenues for
excellence, I say to young Australia, Awake! Awake!”
Sir George Eeid resumed his seat amidst further en-
thusiasm. The audience again rose and cheered wildly.
The National Anthem having been sung, the people
gave cheers for Sir George and Lady Reid, and for their
sons (who were on the platform). Then “He’s a Jolly
Good Fellow.” Cheering was continued until Sir George
left the platform.
F. Clark, Printer, 1-3 Bowe Street, Sydney,
