

£ i til 3 *7 M
f lf.fi
A series of articles containing many useful hints to
Farmers respecting the preparation of their clips for
market, reprinted from “The Australasian.”
C. B. DEM AIN E, PRINTER, TEMPLE COURT PLACE.




FARMERS’ WOOL
R. B. S.
A series of articles containing many useful hints to
Farmers respecting the preparation of their clips for
market, reprinted from “ The Australasian.”
IHflbountf:
C. B. DEMAINE, PRINTER, TEMPLE COURT PLACE.
1885.


(wool WAREHOUSES, MELBOURNE.)
R. GOLDSBROUGH & CO., Limited
(In which arc amalgamated the Australasian Agency and Banicing Corporation
Limited, and R. Ooldshrougli <0 Co.)
CAPITAL - - - £3,000,000.
Ehrectors:
R. GOLDSBROUGH, Esq., Chairman.
.T. S. HORSFALL, Esq.
A. \V. ROBERTSON, ESQ.
HEAD OFFICE:
ANDREW ROWAN, Esq.
D. M. PARKER, Esq.
BOURKE & WILLIAM STREETS, MELBOURNE.
BRANCHES:
SYDNEY—4O Hunter St London—ls 6 & 157 Leadenhall St.
WOOL AND CRAIN BROKERS, STOCK AND STATION AGENTS.
Make Liberal Cash Advances on most favourable terms on the ensuing Clip of
Wool, and on all descriptions of Station securities, also on Tallow, Hides Wheat
ccc., on receipt of same into Warehouse.
Auction Sales of Wool held each Monday and Wednesday during the
season, and at frequent intervals during the winter months.
Separate Warehouses are set apart for the disposal of Sheepskins
Hides, and Tallow and other Station Produce, Auction sales of which 'are
held on Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays throughout the year.
Auction Sales of Grain are held each Wednesday.
Liberal Advances made at Bank Rates, on receipt of Produce into Warehouse
Current Accounts and all Departments of Finance Business conducted.
Full Rates of Interest allowed on Fixed Deposits.
F. E. STEWART , General Manager .


/r/J.
1~1~
PREFACE TO THIRD EDITION.
Our object in republishing these articles, which emanated from
this office, is again to call the attention of farmers and
small dock-masters to the necessity of carefully preparing their
wool for market if they would make the most of their
produce. Although written from a Victorian standpoint, the
hints on skirting, classing, packing, Arc., will be found useful
to all Australian wool-growers desirous of obtaining infor-
mation, no matter where located.
It is gratifying to us to observe from the wide publicity
given to these essays, the leading wool-brokers of Melbourne
and Geelong having adopted and circulated them, that our
efforts to supply a want much felt by farmers and small dock-
masters have been duly appreciated.
R. GOLLhSBROUGH & Co., Limited.
Melbourne, 15 th May , 1885.




FARMERS’ WOOL.
y 0 ' /._defective preparation of small clips.
As the season is approaching when our wool-growers will be
making preparations for shearing, we take the present as the most
opportune time to convey to the farming interest of Victoria a
few practical remarks on wool and the manner in which it should
be prepared for market. It is estimated that at the present
time about one-third of the sheep in the colony are depasturing-
on small areas of purchased land and selections, being, in fact, the
property of farmers. Their wool, which is nearly all sold in the
local markets, thus forms no mean proportion of the total offer-
ings, which last year amounted to 227,257 bales. Unfortunately,
however, for the farmer, his wool does not, as a rule, come to
market in the same order as the large clips, consequently it has
been regarded by the buyers with a certain amount of disfavour
and prejudice, which have been very detrimental to its market
value. If, therefore, the owners of small clips desire to realize
prices approximating those paid for station brands, they must
raise the standard of their wools; and it is our aim in the present
article to point out as briefly as possible those defects in growth,
“ get up,” and general character, which, if remedied in future,
will be the means of materially assisting in raising farmers’ clips
to the standard they must attain if they are to continue to be a
source of profit to the grower.
It should be received as a fundamental principle by wool-
growers that the more skilfully a clip is prepared for market the
greater will be the profit. Many a fine clip is marred by careless


handling at shearing time; for, no matter how superior the
quality of the wool may be, if proper attention is not given to
skirting, classing, and packing, comparatively poor prices have to
be accepted. The grower, however, more frequently than not,
considers his wool has been sacrificed by the selling broker, and,
instead of setting to work to discover the cause of the low prices,
he tries another broker in the following year, with the like result.
A well-got-up clip, whether large or small, is readily disposed of;
but carelessly prepared parcels are difficult of sale. The one sells
well, even in a falling market, while the other seldom or ever
realizes owner’s expectations, and leads to dissatisfaction and
endless disputes. These are truisms familiar to all conversant
with the wool trade, and we trust that the time is not far distant
when our small growers will be as keenly alive as are our large
flockmasters to the fact that the labour expended on preparing a
clip for sale is well bestowed, and brings its own reward.
Production is advancing rapidly. On the one hand immense
areas of new country are being taken up and stocked with sheep,
and stations in the settled districts, by a lavish outlay of capital,
are made to feed double the number of sheep they were able to
carry a few years ago ; while, on the other hand, farmers and
small landowners are adopting the safe course of combining
stock-raising with agriculture. Both large and small clips
are thus annually increasing in number, and as our market at the
same time is gaining in importance and popularity, the catalogues,
as a natural consequence, become larger and larger each year,
thus making it impossible for a buyer to give as much time to
each individual lot as he was able to do formerly. A catalogue
of from seven to eight and even nine hundred lots is not uncommon
during the season, and as auction sales are held each week-day
(Saturdays excepted), the extent as well as the arduousness of the
valuer’s task can easily be imagined. As so much, then, has to be
got through in a limited time, it is absolutely necessary that there
should be nothing to obstruct or impede the buyer. This is
well known to the selling broker, who, desirous that each lot
shall receive a full share of attention, offers every facility for


examination, and does all in his power to expedite the valuer’s
progress. The clips for sale are carefully divided according to
their qualities or sorts, separate lots being made of fleeces, pieces,
bellies, locks, and lambs’. The sample bales of the various lots
are cut down and opened out, thereby displaying the contents and
saving the buyer the necessity of cutting into the packages, while
carefully-prepared catalogues, giving particulars of brands, number
of bales, and description, are ready at hand. But all the broker
can do will not compensate for faults arising from careless handling.
The remedy here lies with the growers, in whose interests we
write; and we feel sure that if the suggestions we offer are
followed, farmers’ clips will in the near future be as eagerly
sought after, and will command the same competition as larger
parcels.
Few farmers, comparatively speaking, have had the opportunity
of visiting the Melbourne wool warehouses during that period of
bustling activity known as the wool season. The advantage of
comparing their wool with other lots, and of studying the manner
in which the large clips are prepared for market, is thus denied
them. To many, even the comparative terms used in the trade
are vague and meaningless ; the numerous degrees of quality from
inferior to superior have no significance. From their inability to
define the class to which their wool rightly belongs, they are
unable to fix the relation between quality and price, and the
auctioneer’s reports which appear in our columns from week to
week are, to them, confusing, if not almost valueless. This is
not to be wondered at, as few farmers have a chance of seeing
other wool than that grown by themselves or their neighbours,
and, for the quality of their own, they rely to a great extent on
what the stock salesmen inform them on purchasing. Should
they buy a draft from a high-class Riverine or Western district
flock, they anticipate realizing for the wool prices equal to those
paid for the station clip. How seldom this is the case most
farmers know, and, doubtless, few have been able to solve the
problem why it is so.
As previously stated, few small growers, owing to the nature


of their occupation and their distance from Melbourne, are able
to personally inspect the wool warehouses on a sale day. There
is, however, nothing to prevent their taking an imaginary walk
through with us, and we invite all seeking enlightenment to
accompany us in our tour of inspection. We choose a day in the
height of the season, say, just before Christmas. A catalogue of
8,000 bales, in 750 lots, is to be submitted for competition, and
we learn with interest that it includes clips from each of the
Australian colonies, Tasmania, and New Zealand. The passenger-
lift quickly lands us in the sample-rooms, which include the
whole of the upper floors. These immense rooms, which are
designed to display wool to the best advantage, are admirably
lighted, from the sides and roof, on the newest and most approved
principle. The walls, supports, &c., are painted a light lavender
tint, and the whole appearance is bright and cheerful. All
around us are the sample bales of the various clips to be offered
for sale, both large and small. They are placed in rows, with
almost mathematical accuracy, with ample passages between each
row, which passages are now crowded with buyers from the chief
manufacturing centres of the world, busily engaged in valuing.
We observe that some give their attention to the large clips,
others devote most of their time to the small parcels, while a few
inspect and value each separate lot. The first dozen lots or so
are composed of small clips, ranging from 15 to 30 bales. They
are farmers’ wools, from the creeks and billabongs of southern
Riverina, and, on the whole, are well got up, the fleeces being
fairly skirted, carefully rolled, and well packed in neat-pressed
bales. Judging from the number of fleeces which have been
opened out for examination, these lots appear to have received
their full share of attention, and there is no doubt but that they
will be keenly competed for. But for the burr, which is very
thick on the sides of some of the fleeces, these parcels would suit,
any market, the wool being of good average quality, and well
grown. In addition to this it is even in character, and each bale
is in shipping order, signs which denote careful preparation.
Passing by several large clips from southern and western


Riverina, which are known by their boldness of type, light
condition, bright appearance, and thorough combing character,
our attention is drawn to a small lot of loosely-packed, shapeless
bales, standing two feet higher than the surrounding rows. Their
contents, on examination, prove to be unclassed and unskirted,
and many fleeces are filled with short straws and pieces of
foreign matter, always a cause of great trouble and annoyance to
the stapler. There is r.ot much fault to find with the quality of
the wool, which is a merino of a good, useful character, but owing
to the careless manner in which it has been treated its n arket
value has been depreciated 2|d. per lb. It is a farmei’’s clip
from the Campaspe. The sheep had evidently been shorn on the
carelessly-swept floor of a barn or out-house, and the fleeces baled
up without any attempt at classification. A little further on we
come to a small clip of 12 bales, described as “crossbred.” The
bales are well filled by the process known as spade-packing, and
properly marked and numbered, and the wool appears of a
desirable quality. On closer inspection, however, it is found to be
very uneven in character. Mixed with fine quarter-bred wool are
strong three-quarter-bred Lincoln fleeces, worth 4d. per lb. under
the fine wool. One or more of these coarse fleeces ai’e seen on the
top of each bale, consequently the buyer takes it for granted that
they run right through the clip, and in valuing allows a margin
for the cost of classing, repacking, new bales, <tc. Probably only
fifty objectionable fleeces will be found in the whole twelve bales,
and thus, through the carelessness or the want of knowledge
displayed by the grower at shearing time, the whole clip is
condemned to be sold under its real value. Following this lot
are two or three medium-sized clips from Tasmania. They are
very attractive in appearance, their superior character being
noticeable at a distance. On handling the wool, we find it of
excellent quality, silky, soft, elastic, free, well and evenly grown,
and of good length of staple—in fact, a typical Tasmanian
merino, of the best class. Some of the fleeces, however, are
badly skirted, and in many others the locks or “ fribs are
attached to the outer side of the fleece. This is the effect of


hasty preparation or lack of proper supervision, and although the
wool will sell itself, it will he at a less price per pound than
if sent to market in proper order. An extra shake of the
fleece, at the table, before rolling, and a little deeper skirting
here and there, would have saved the owner a loss of fully |d. per
lb., all round. The next lot that attracts our attention is a clip
of 15 bales, marked “Lincoln.” It is a coast-grown wool, from
the shores of Port Phillip or Westernport Bay. The fleeces are
of large size, the fibre being long, coarse, and lustrous. Although
a description of wool not in demand just now, it would probably
realize as much as any other lot in the catalogue of the same
class, but for the cotted fleeces which are mixed through it. By
a course of natural felting while on the sheeps’ backs, caused by
much wet, or disease, the fibres of these fleeces have become so
firmly matted that it is scarcely possible for the manufacturer to
unravel them. Wool of this sort is, therefore, very objectionable,
and should always be kept apart, and packed separately. In the
present case the grower will have to take Id. per lb. less, all
round, for omitting to throw aside, as a separate quality, a few
inferior fleeces. We could go on multiplying cases; for, alas, too
many of our farmers utterly disregard the ordinary rules of a
woolshed. We find merino and longwool, fine crossbred and
Lincoln, clear fleeces and burry fleeces, white and black, and even
lambs’ and grown wool, in the same packages. These are the lots
that delay buyers, and are so frequently passed over by a large
section of the trade. Neither the British nor foreign manufac-
turer, nor the speculator for the London market, care to purchase
unclassed or irregular wools, as they cannot afford the delay the
proper assortment of such lots, prior to shipment, would necessi-
tate, and ship them in their original state they will not. The
local millowner also gives preference to even parcels, for the
mixed lots, as often as not, contain wools that are entirely
unsuited to his requirements, and he does not care for the trouble
of re-selling. The purchasing power, thus confined, in a great
measure, to the dealer and woolscourer, reduces competition, and
although the two last-named divisions form a very powerful


section of the trade, it must be admitted that when competition
is restricted, prices suffer accordingly.
How differently the practical squatter or large grower treats
his wool is patent to the most inexperienced visitor. By the aid
of skilful skirters and competent wool-classers, his clip has a
uniformity and finish about it which inspires confidence at first
sight. The fleeces, from which all the inferior portions have
been removed, are even and true to quality, the staple in each
one being of the same length, strength, and trueness. A lot
such as this can be valued with ease and certainty, a buyer
taking far less time to estimate the worth of a well-got-up clip of
500 bales than he is compelled to devote to a mixed parcel of
fifteen bales, if he is desirous of arriving at its true value.
It is chiefly to the great variety of the wools submitted in
Melbourne that our market owes its superiority, and this is
another reason why a visit to the sample-rooms of some of our
large wool-selling establishments would be of service to the
grower, as by familiarizing himself with the different classes of
wool produced in different localities, he would be better able to
select the sheep best suited to his own country. A mere cursory
glance will show him that each temperature and district in this
vast continent has a tendency to produce a distinct type of wool,
and that we have, even in a small selection like to-day’s, almost
every class of wool used in the manufacture of textile fabrics.
Here we find the long, shafty staple of Riverina—of medium
fineness, great strength, and light in condition ; the attractive
fleeces of the Western district of Victoria—fine-haired, dense,
even, and of a fine flashing lustre ; the superfine Tasmanian—
elastic, silky, dense, and well grown ; the more robust South
Australian—long-stapled, strong, soft, and of ample yolk;
together with the matchless half-breds from the Western district,
the blue mountain wools from the Upper Murray, the high-
graded clothing wools of central New South Wales and the
Queensland Downs, and the Lincoln, Leicester, and Cotswold
crossbreds from various parts of this colony and New Zealand.
Varieties sufficient to suit all climates and all requirements.


While maintaining the general superiority in the “get up” of
station clips, it must be understood that we do not assert that all
farmers’ lots are carelessly prepared for market. Some small
clips, as all habitues of the wool-rooms well know, come to hand
in good order, while many others show that an effort has been
made to make the most of the produce. These cases, however,
are the exception, and not the rule ; and in eight cases out of
ten the clips we refer to are from the neighbouring colony of
New South Wales.
Having pointed out in the foregoing article some of the
imperfections in the prevailing mode of preparing our staple for
market as practised by many farmers, we will in our next
describe the manner in which it should be treated so as to avoid
these defects in the future.


Ao. lI.—HOW TO PREPARE SMALL CLIPS FOR
MARKET.
The production of wool has, from the earliest periods, been a
source of great wealth to those countries where the industry has
been fostered. From the days of the patriarchs up to the present
time it has been one of the chief articles of commerce between
civilized nations, and many powerful states, both ancient and
modern, owe the commencement of their prosperity to the
cultivation of the “golden fleece.” As a merchantable com-
modity it is second to none, and, as a medium of exchange, it
has stood for many centuries next to money. As a trade its
buoyancy and vigour is unsurpassed, for, though subject to great
fluctuations, it is at the period of its greatest depressions that it
shows the strongest vitality. Nowhere has its development been
more rapid than in Australia, which, starting in 1807 with the
modest export of 245 lbs., now ranks as the largest wool-
producing country in the world, its total export last year
amounting to 276,151,680 lbs., equalling a money value of about
£15,000,000 sterling. Marvellous as this rate of progress has
been in the past, it promises to be far outstripped in the future,
and with this probability before us it behoves our fiockmasters
to raise the whole of their wools to such a high standard of
excellence that they shall be superior to the production of all
other countries, and thus take precedence in the markets of the
world. At the present time our best wools hold that enviable
position, and with intelligent management, care, and industry,
there is nothing to prevent the bulk of our production being
improved by judicious selection up to the same standard, so
favourable beyond all others are the climates and pastures of
Australia to the growth of fine wools.
As far as the colony of Victoria is concerned this consumma-
tion so devoutly to be wished rests to a very large extent in the
hands of our farmers, who will very soon hold one-half the sheep


in the province. It therefore becomes a matter of vital import-
ance that they should give the same attention to the breeding of
sheep and the preparation of their wool as the squatters they are
gradually succeeding are accustomed to give, otherwise the
quantity of faulty wools will increase to such an extent that the
bulk of the Port Phillip export, instead of ranking, as it now
does, from “good to superior,” will fall to “ordinary and
inferior,” and in a short time be excelled by the produce of other
countries. Already the best River Plate wools are running our
average clips very close in the continental markets, and as they
are grown under highly favourable conditions, we shall shortly
find them superseding Australian wherever a medium-priced
wool is required. As far as we can see, our best protection
against the rapidly-increasing flocks of the Argentine and
Uruguay republics, which now number upwards of 100,000,000
sheep, is in growing wool of good quality only. The system that
has been so successfully followed by the large flockmasters,
namely, that of breeding only from stock that possess some
distinct points of excellence, and by rigorously culling out all
inferior and poorly-woolled animals, must be adopted by farmers
and small growers ; and, as all must allow, it costs no more to
feed a well-bred sheep than a mongrel, it is to be presumed that,
when the different classes of wool and their respective values are
more generally understood, the sort of fleece the best interests
of the colony require should be grown will then be produced.
At the present time, however, many farmers attend more to
the mutton-producing properties in a sheep than to the quality
of the fleece, which is too often looked upon as a secondary
consideration only.
As the great desideratum is that our sheep shall grow wool
and not hair, it is necessary that their distinctive characteristics
should be described. To the unpractised eye they are much alike
in appearance, the gradation from one to the other being very
slight, for we find that the fleeces of some mongrel-bred sheep
contain fibres as harsh and coarse as hair, while some animals
whose covering is called hair produce fibres possessing many of


the properties of wool. Youatt, a distinguished authority on
sheep, says:—“ Wool is decidedly crisped and serrated; hair is
sometimes curled, hut to an inferior degree, and the irregularities
of its edge, in some few cases, assume the form of slight serra-
tions. Wool will felt ; hair will only entangle and harle to a
limited extent.” All familiar with wool know how tenaciously
the fibres hold together, and also how much more easily a staple
can be drawn from a fleece by the root end than by the tip.
This is owing to the projecting serrations or sawlike edge of the
hair, the direction being from root to point. Microscopical
observations have proved these indentations to be much more
numerous in fine than in coarse wools ; the micrometer giving in
Saxony wool 2,720, in Australian merino 2,400, injSouth Down
2,080, and in Leicester 1,860 serrations in the space of an inch.
These serrations, combined with the crisped or curling form of
the fibres, explain the felting principles of wool, and as both of
these properties are much greater in the fine than in the coarse
varieties, it at once becomes apparent why our merinos and high-
graded crossbreds are so much more useful and valuable than the
long wools. Among the other properties of wool are fineness,
softness, trueness, soundness, and elasticity. On the fineness of
the hair depends the quality of the fabric to be manufactured,
for although modern machinery will spin a fine thread from a
comparatively coarse wool, it is impossible to make a fine close
cloth with a dense pile on its surface unless the wool be fine.
On softness depends the durability and substance of the material,
and at the present time this quality is more important than fine-
ness, as it would be impossible to produce the goods now so
fashionable for ladies’ wear if the fibres of the wool used in the
manufacture were harsh or hard. In trueness exists evenness
and freedom from waste, for if the fibre is irregular in bulk an
even cloth cannot be produced, and, if very tender, the fabric
would fall to pieces in the process of manufacture. Soundness
is a most important quality, especially in all deep-grown or
combing wools, for unless the fibre be strong it will break under
the action of the comb, and is thus unfit for one of the largest


branches of the woollen trade, namely, that of the worsted
manufactory; while to elasticity is due the extreme softness and
beauty of modern fabrics, the facility with which the staple can
be worked, and its usefulness in general. In long wools the chief
characteristics are length, strength, and lustre or transparency.
There are other minor properties, but those we have enumerated
will suffice to show what qualities must be present in a fleece of
wool before it ranks as superior. Fineness, softness, and crisp-
ness are indispensable in clothing wools, whilst in combing
descriptions strength, trueness, and elasticity are the great
essentials. These are the properties which regulate the value of
wool, and from which the degrees of quality are derived.
From this brief description of wool and some of the peculiarities
of its conformation, we will proceed to show how the defects in
preparation complained of in the first article can be obviated.
Commencing with shearing, the farmer will choose a dry day, and
will be careful that the shed in which operations are to be con-
ducted is clear of all fodder, &c., and the floor swept perfectly
clean, as nothing is more unsightly in a fleece than pieces of straw
or other foreign matter picked up on the shearing floor. As
practical men only are employed, it is unnecessary to describe the
operation in full. The farmer, however, should see that each
sheep is evenly shorn, so that second cuts are unnecessary, for the
little tufts of wool which an unskilful shearer clips off after the
fleece has been removed are lost amongst the locks amongst which
they fall. Besides, the closer and more evenly a sheep is shorn,
the greater will be the next year’s crop. When the fleece is oft it
should be carefully gathered up and placed intact on the skirting-
table, which can be erected in any convenient place near the
shearing-board. Here the fleece must be opened out, and the
inferior portions, such as pieces, necks (if seedy), breechlocks, itc.,
removed and placed in separate receptacles. It will be well to
skirt sufficiently deep to remove all these lower sorts, unless the
clip, as a whole, is exceptionally burry or much stained, in which
case a lighter trimming will answer the purpose, the object in
skirting being to improve the fleece without robbing it. The


fleece, after being gently shaken to detach any locks or dirt that
may he adhering to it, is now ready for rolling. This operation is
performed by first turning hack the neck as far as the shoulder,
and then turning in the sides and narrowing the fleece mto a strip
of about 18 in. wide, the outside of the wool being turned inwards.
This strip should then be rolled firmly and evenly, beginning at
the breech end, thus leaving the best part of the fleece exposed to
view. The old custom of twisting the wool at the neck into a
rope, and winding it round the fleece for the purpose of securing
it, is very objectionable, and is rapidly going out of use. In fact,
no tying of any kind is really necessary, as the fleece, if carefully
handled, will retain the cylindrical shape imparted to it by the
rolling process as long as required. If string is used, at all, let it
be the white twine used by grocers, and not the usual sewing kind,
small strands of which frequently get mixed with the wool. The
fleece, which is now ready for packing, should be carefully placed
with the class to which it belongs, preparatory to being packed.
To decide as to the correct classification requires the skill of the
practical wool-classer, but as much subdivision is unnecessary in
small clips, any intelligent farmer, after a little experience, will
be quite equal to the task of classing sufficiently even to satisfy
buyers. If the flock does not number more than 1,000, and is of
one breed, two sorts will suffice; if above that number, three
qualities may be profitably made. Should the sheep be mixed,
more classes will be necessary. In a small merino flock all the
fine-haired, sound, and well-grown fleeces will form the first
quality, and the short, badly-grown, and tender fleeces the
second. The soundness of the fibre can be tested by stretching a
small staple between the fingers. If strong enough for the first
quality it will bear a considerable strain before breaking, but if
tender it will easily part at the weak joint. Length is not so
important as it once was. However, all fleeces having a staple
under 1| in. should be thrown with the tender wool. These two
qualities could be designated combing and clothing. A second
combing could be made of all fleeces a trifle coarser and less
showy than the firsts, provided the fibre was sound and well


grown, and the flock large enough to enable three sorts to be
made with advantage. In case there was no short or tender
wool in the hock, the second combing could take the place of the
clothing division. All fleeces showing any cross-breeding must
form a separate sort, also all black or grey wool. The sexes and
ages, such as hoggets, ewes, and wethers, make very good
divisions, and wool classed in this way commends itself to many
buyers. Although apparently a simpler method than the pre-
ceding one, it is not so in reality, as all poor, heavy, and tender
fleeces must be kept out and packed separately. This rejected
wool should be branded simply fleece. Colour is a property which,
although of minor importance, should not be lost sight of in class-
ing. The heece generally becomes stained with the colour of the
soil on which the sheep have been running, and as these shades
are at times very pronounced, the appearance of the wool is much
affected thereby. A farmer whose flock consists of sheep bred in
different localities should therefore keep the fleeces of one colour
together if possible. The colour of a fleece does not affect its
value unless the tint promises to be permanent, when the wool is
injured for all purposes where pure whiteness is necessary. The
brown, dingy, and red hues imparted by fern, charcoal, and the
shifting sands of the northern plains are the most injurious. Long
or crossbred wools should be classed according to fineness. The
highest grade will be the quarter-bred or “come-back,” the next
the half-bred, then the three-quarter bred, and last the seven-eighth
bred, and strong Lincoln or Cotswold. Lotted fleeces, which are
more or less frequent in this class of wool, must form a separate
quality, and on no account must they be allowed to be packed with
the rest of the clip. Pieces, bellies, and locks must be packed
separately, and in no instance must these inferior sorts be rolled
up in the fleece.
The process of baling up or pressing should follow without
unnecessary delay. The bale being prepared, each c’ass of wool
should be packed separately, and the quality of the contents
legibly marked on the side of each bale. Avoid packing two
sorts, such as fleece and pieces, or bellies and locks, in one bale,


it being much more profitable to make two small bales of
distinct qualities than one bale of “ mixed” wool. If the quantity
is too small for a fadge, bags will serve the purpose equally well.
Much discontent arises through growers departing from this rule,
which in nine cases out of ten is done for the sake of economy.
The shape and size of the package is also of importance. The
dimensions of a well-pressed bale are 4 ft. long by 2 ft. 6 in.
square. Packages of this shape are easily handled, and are con-
venient for stowing in the warehouses and on board ship. Few
farmers, however, possess the necessary mechanical means for
pressing, consequently their packages are wanting in neatness and
symmetry —many, in fact, being so loosely packed as to necessitate
re-pressing before shipment. Nevertheless, by packing moder-
ately, and by pressing the wool well into corners, a spade-packed
bale need not be in any way unsightly, and the contents will open
out very well if care is taken not to tear the fleece in the
operation. No packages, however small, should be allowed to
leave the farm without being properly marked with the brand,
quality, and number. The brand adopted should be one not
likely to be duplicated, and should be retained from year to year.
Where initial letters are used, the name of the farm should
follow beneath, or they should be placed within a triangle, circle,
block, &c. Numbers should run in consecutive order.
Hitherto the high prices asked for wool-presses have prevented
their use becoming general with farmers and small flockmasters,
many of whom are compelled to send their clips to market in loose
packages, much against their inclination. A light press, combining
strength, simplicity, and cheapness, has long been required, and we
are inclined to think that the machines now being constructed
by Messrs. Robinson and Sons, of A’Beckett-street, and Messrs.
T. Robinson and Co., of Elizabeth-street, will in a great measure
supply this want. The first-named makers offer their improved
screw and lever press at £3O. It is made of the best materials,
is very simple and strong, and is not liable to get out of order. It
is fitted with an improved screw with a sliding crosshead, by
which the bars are allowed to remain on a level with the top of the


press. The weight of the machine complete is 20 cwt. Messrs. T.
Robinson and Co. s price for their Speedy’s patent press is also <£3o.
These presses are worked with ratchet lever and rope, are very
simple in construction, will pack in small compass, and are said to
press equal to any screw press. They weigh about 11 cwt.
Either of these machines will turn out from 10 to 20 bales a day
with a man and a boy, and as they can be taken to pieces and
erected with ease, they could be transported from place to place
without trouble. A single press could thus be made to serve the
requirements of a comparatively large district.
Before finally closing this chapter, we would add a word of
advice in respect to selling. Do not hamper your broker with
excessive reserves. He knows the value of wool and the state of
the market, present and prospective, better than you, and, more-
over, it is to his interest to realize as high a price as possible for
the produce committed to his care. High limits lead to buying
in, and bought-in lots are not favourably received by buyers when
again offered. The result is, that in the majority of cases a
repetition of the first offer cannot be obtained, and thus the
1 eser\ e, instead of being a protection, becomes a source of loss.
If this and the other instructions contained in this article were
followed, we are satisfied that great pecuniary gain to the grower
would result, and buyers will have no cause to find fault with
farmers’ clips in future.


Vo. lII.—THE MOST PROFITABLE SHEEP FOR THE
FARM.
No colony in Australia lias shown greater progress in the art
of woolgrowing than Victoria; ancl those flockmasters who have
succeeded in doubling the value of their fleeces, as many have
done, are, we think, as much entitled to be considered benefactors
of the human race as the man who makes two blades of grass
grow where one grew before. In the older colonies of New South
Wales, Tasmania, and Western Australia, this result was not
very difficult of attainment, as the first sheep introduced by the
early settlers were of so low a type that the influence of the
climate alone was sufficient to add 100 per cent, to the value of
the fleece in a few generations. Here the case was different.
The first importations of sheep were made up of drafts from the
improved flocks of Tasmania and New South Wales, and the
scope for further improvement was, therefoi’e, considerably
restricted. However, by skilful management and unwearying
industry, aided by a climate pre-eminently suited for the develop-
ment of the ovine race, the squatters of the Wimmera and
Western districts had, at a comparatively early period in the
history of the colony, made considerable advancement, for we find
that fully thirty years ago Port Phillip wools began to take the
lead in the London market. This was, no doubt, owing to the
beneficial influence which the numerous stud flocks, then estab-
lished in the west, were commencing to exert over the rest of the
stock. At this time (1853) the whole of the sheep in the colony,
amounting to 5,594,220, were (with the exception of one or two
flocks) of the same race, and their wool, by judicious selection and
careful breeding, was gradually assuming a uniform type. In
character it was essentially a combing wool of the better sort, the
difference between one clip and another being more in condition
than in quality. Despite the troublous times which followed the
gold discoveries, bad seasons, and other difficulties, improvement


in both sheep and wool still went on, and Europe was ransacked
by our enterprising flockmasters forpure stock capable of exercising
a beneficial influence on their flocks. The requirements sought
for were increased size of carcase, heavier fleece, and more robust
wool, and the Rambouillet, Negretti, and American varieties
of the merino breed were all tried in turn, while no price was
considered too high for a ram possessing those distinctive
qualities. As population increased, and settlement was pushed
farther afield, districts which had previously been passed as not
adapted for sheep were taken up for woolgrowing, and a new era
in Victorian sheep industry may then be said to have commenced.
This fresh country was at first stocked with merinos, but, as
many of the localities were unsuited for this breed, they rapidly
deteriorated, and recourse was had to the English long-woolled
breeds. Importations of Lincolns, Leicesters, Cotswolds, and
Romney Marsh sheep arrived from time to time, some of them
being of great value, but it was not until about the year 1873
that either the pure stock or their progeny by various crosses
became sufficiently numerous to attract much attention. They
now began to be substituted for the merino by farmers and land-
owners possessing estates in close proximity to large markets, on
account of their early maturity and great fattening properties.
Wherever feed was abundant they throve well; and, so long as
due attention was paid to the fleece, they proved to be, without
doubt, the most profitable breed for the small holder. With the
majority of farmers, however, more attention was given to the
carcase than the wool, and the result is that at the present time
a large proportion of our enormous crossbred clip consists of a
fuzzy, coarse, mongrel description, possessing neither breed nor
character. This is owing either to in judicious crossing, or neglect
in selecting the soil and climate most congenial to the habits of
the long-woolled sheep, which will not thrive on unsuitable
pastures; and until these essentials are duly observed we cannot
expect any improvement in our long-wools.
Our farmers of to-day have a far wider field for improving the
coarse-woolled breeds they have adopted than the squatter of forty


years ago had for increasing the value of the merino ; for many
of the former are now cultivating sheep producing wool of a type
so low that its value could be increased fully 4d. per lb., i.e., from
od. to 9d., in two generations, without perceptibly diminishing the
animal’s inclination to fatten or mature early. It may be said
that the average Victorian farmer is not a breeder of sheep, that
he simply buys stores when he has a flush of grass, and tops them
off for the butcher, and that it matters little whether he prefers
sheep carrying bad fleeces to those with good ones, his chief
object being to select sheep that will produce the largest amount
of mutton, and to clear them off the ground as soon as they are
fat. A few years ago this, doubtless, was the case, but now many
farmers keep a permanent flock, and the practice is gaining in
favour wherever the necessary facilities exist. 'lndeed, the
system of diversified husbandry, as followed in older countries—
which is true farming—promises to become general, especially
where the land has been subjected to close cropping for many suc-
cessive seasons. Throughout the chief farming districts within a
radius of one hundred miles of Melbourne the practice of running
sheep on the arable land after the crop has been harvested, as in
England, is largely followed. If the season is favourable in the
locality referred to, a plentiful supply of nutritious herbage
springs up, which yields good pasturage for the sheep, who in
return clean the land, and also fertilize it by their droppings.
Sheep, then, as being the most profitable of all domestic animals,
will always form a large proportion of the live stock, as their
manure will become a valuable agent in the economy of the
farm.
In the selection of sheep the farmer should be governed, in a
great degree, by the situation and soil of the land he intends to
run them on, as well as by the purpose for which they are in-
tended He must also bear in mind that although sheep will
adapt themselves to changes of soil and climate, still they thrive
best when surrounded by the conditions to which they were
originally accustomed. In Victoria the country best suited by
nature for the merino is to be found in the Wimmera and Loddon


districts, a large portion of the Western district, and the moun-
tain slopes of the Upper Murray. For the longwools the greater
part of Gippsland, and the country around Colac and along the
shores of Port Phillip and Western Poi't bays, furnish the most
appropriate pastures. The one requires a dry climate and not
too luxuriant herbage, while rich succulent pastures and a more
liberal supply of moisture is necessary for the other.
For fattening off quickly for market the large-framed merino,
peculiar to southern and south-western Riverina, and the stronger
grades of half-breds commend themselves, the former for the dry
and the latter for the moist pastures. If the season is mild and feed
plentiful, both varieties will rapidly put on flesh, and when fat
will realize very full prices. A coarser sheep would certainly
produce a heavier carcase than the half-bred, but if sold within
three or four months of shearing the extra weight of mutton
would not compensate for the diminution in the value of the
fleece.
For a permanent flock the farmer should select the breed
adapted by nature for the locality they are intended to inhabit.
If the surroundings are suitable for the merino, he should secure
ewes of large and symmetrical frames and strong constitutions,
and put them to good grade rams growing a robust style of wool.
By carefully culling the progeny, and breeding only from those
females that exhibit the most profitable qualities, he would soon
put together a flock that would well repay all the care and atten-
tion devoted to its formation, for he could safely count on a heavy
clip of wool of most desirable quality, and a ready sale for his
surplus stock at good prices. On the other hand, if the locality
is most appropriate for the long-wool breed of sheep, some of the
various crossbred sorts should be selected. The best and most
profitable cross is generally allowed to be that of the Lincoln ram
with the merino ewe. The offspring are characterized by early
maturity, great propensity to fatten, and a dense fleece of good
average quality. If kept on good soil, the wethers at two years
old will weigh from 55 lbs. to 75 lbs. per carcase, and yield from
6 lbs. to 8 lbs. of wool when full-fleeced. Another good cross is


the Cotswold upon the merino. They do well on deep, rich land,
and have even been tried with a large amount of success on the
dry plains of the Loddon. They are large-framed, full-fleshed,
hardy sheep, and bear a long-stapled, heavy fleece of fair charac-
ter ; they also mature early, and thrive well. A two-year-old
wether will weigh from 50 lbs. to 65 lbs. dead weight, and yield a
fleece varying from 6 lbs. to 8 lbs. Those farmers who grow
lambs for the market would do well to try the Southdown ram
with the merino ewe. This cross produces the best lambs for the
butcher, being very symmetrical in shape and deep and full in the
flesh ; they also mature early for market. The fleece, however,
is of ordinary quality, and it would be advisable to dispose of all
the progeny as lambs. The Romney Marsh cross do Well on rich,
damp soils ; they have great hardihood, bear wet and cold better
than any other sheep, and thrive on country where other varieties
have failed. Crosses with other breeds have been tried, but, with
the exception of that of the Leicester upon the merino, they have
not proceeded far beyond the experimental stage. The Leicester
cross produces a good butcher’s sheep, as also a good lamb for the
market. They are shapely and fatten early, but carry a rather
light fleece, which diminishes in weight as the sheep advances
in age.
The extent to which the farmer should carry either of the
above crosses will depend on the object he has in view. If more
mutton is required, he breeds on with the long-woolled rams ; but
if his desire is to improve the wool, he will have recourse to a
merino sire. Whatever the required, alteration may be, a pure-
blooded ram must be used ; in fact, a crossbred sire should never
be introduced into any Hock, no matter how strongly he may
inherit the qualities of either parent. Whenever this rule is
ignored, deterioration commences, the carcase decreases in size
and loses its fine proportions, and the fleece becomes harsh,
staring, and wiry, and in a few generations the mongrel type is
reached.
In cross-breeding in sheep, it should be remembered that
though the female has the most influence over the form of the


progeny, it is the male that gives the strongest impress to the
wool.
We are aware that numerous difficulties have to be overcome
before anything like a general improvement in the small flocks of
the colony can take place ; nevertheless, the advancement already
made by our farmers in other branches of husbandry augurs well
for the future of this, and we trust that when we make our next
tour of inspection through the Melbourne wool warehouses we
shall find, by the extra care and attention given to the preparation
of their clips, that the first step has been taken towards true
progress. Improvement in stock must naturally be of slower
growth, but even this would be hastened if farmers had greater
facilities for acquiring good blood. If the practice of letting rams
for the season, or to serve a certain number of ewes, was introduced
here, it would be an immense boon to small agriculturists, as they
would thus be able to obtain the services of sires much superior
to any they could afford to buy, and the periodical changes of
blood necessary to those who breed for the fat market could be
readily procured.


GLOSSARY
Broken ... .. Large pieces ; generally good wool that has been
separated from the fleece on account of burr, or
other extraneous matter adhering to the fibres.
Bellies ... ... Wool from the belly of the sheep.
Breech-lock ... Wool from the breech of the sheep.
Burry ... ... Containing burrs.
Combing ... ... A term applied to wool of sufficient strength and
staple to comb.
Clothing ... ... Applied to short and weak wools, useless in the
worsted manufactory.
Crossbred ... ... The wool from a crossbred sheep, usually applied
in Australia to all long-wools.
Cotted ... ... Matted or felted. The effect of starvation, disease,
or exposure to much wet. Peculiar to long-wool
breeds.
Deep-grown ... ... Long in staple and sound in fibre.
Dingy... ... ... Discoloured.
Dense ... ... Thick ; closely grown.
Fallen Dead wool.
Heavy in Condition Having abundant yolk. Sodden.
Heavy ... ... Earthy, sandy.
Kemps ... ... Hairs mixed with the wool. Their presence in a
fleece seriously deteriorates its value.
Locks The daggy and small bits of wool that fall through
the rolling table.
Lustre A peculiar brilliancy, only noticeable in hard-haired
wools, such as Lincolns, Leicesters, &c.
Moity... ... ... Full of small sticks, or seeds.
Mushy ... ... Poor hungry wool, devoid of yolk.
Pieces All skirtings exclusive of bellies.
Shafty Bulky, long-stapled, and sound.
Tender ... ... Having a break in the staple ; generally the effect of
insufficient food and water, old age, or disease.
Ticky Stained or discoloured by ticks.
Yolk An oleaginous matter secreted from the glands of
the skin of the sheep. One of the chief agents
in the nourishment of the wool.
C. B, Demaine, Printer, Temple Court Place, Chancery Lane, Melbourne.




»• ■ .dfe•' •. *><


a
w
>
o
o
►n
•n
►—i
o
M
s
CD
H-*
HH a"
°§
25 *s
g|
z »
° O
Trl 3
2 £
O ®
w to
1 g
►r* P*
tn
03
fa £5
3 X
Cl p
~ 3
S 3 e*
<-*-
r< . M
CD
fa
CL
CD
3
3* C/3
P h<
X O
C/3
£• K
- •"<
W o
p?
»—<
o
w
1
4*
O
x
c
3
<r*-
CD
"S
$
O
o
r~
<=!
=0 0
22 b 9
CD * S
H ! s:
OS 6
-5 50 b
£ 0 11
& d ;
1 s
CD V j S
—H H
O * *
o
7; V §
n • |
A 1 =g
z 0 I
° 0 £
CO *
co *
E| f
I H'
o 3
-7- H»
N»
rf
(D
>■ £
CD «
m
H
co
