

FARM LIFE
FOR
REFORMATORY GIRLS.
BEING AN ACCOUNT OE A
VISIT TO “BROOKSIDB”
PRIVATE REFORMATORY.
WITH EDITORIAL, COMMENTS.
Reprinted from the Melbourne “Age” of January 25, 1850 ,
UfUlbounu, "Futonn:
MELVILLE, MULLEN & SLADE,
AND
M. L. HUTCHINSON.
1890.


FAEM LIFE
FOR
REFORMATORY GIRLS.
A VISIT TO “BROOKSIDE.”
BY MEM.
By train to Ballarat, and, after changing
carriages, on to Soaradale, a total distance of
over 100 miles; thence by coach or carriage
through the county of Grenville some 8 or 9
miles further to within a short distance of the
small and curiously named township of Oape
Clear—such is the itinerary to be followed by
anyone bent on a visit to Brooksidb. The farm
buildings which are known by this name,
nestle on well wooded ground, which
descends on the other slope to a stream called
the 'Western Creek, and are just visible from
the road. Beyond is the dense belt of forest
land skirting thePitfield Plain, which rolls away
south and west far as the eye can reach in
gentle savannah-like undulations. On this grand
stretch of pasturage country are the sheep runs
of several squatters, who number their acres and
their flocks by tens of thousands. At the pre-
sent season of the year the grass is abaked to
uniform color of dried hay, and on the occasion
of my visit dense clouds of smoke on the far
horizon told their own tale of bush fires sweep-
ing over the paddocks with the speed of a
galloping horse, licking up the tinder-like
herbage, and leaving in their wake nothing but
blackened smouldering turf. As the darkness
of night descended the sky became lit up for
miles around with a lurid glare, and here and
there what appeared to be solid masses of fire
glowed sullenly red, impressive to gaze on
though fully 25 miles away. However, this
splendid spectacle was merely “ thrown in ” by
way of supplement to the special objects of my
visit to the Oape Clear district. :
■
“ Brooksidb, ”it maybe first of all explained,
though an ordinary farm homestead in outward
appearance, is a private Reformatory School,
started and carried on by a lady who has made
it her life work to assist in the rescue of young
girls whose surroundings have, almost inevitably
in most oases, brought them into trouble. To
the majority of people the domestic cares apper-
taining to a large station establishment and a
numerous family might seem more than enough
to occupy the time and thoughts of the most
energetic of women. But in this instance the
management of an additional home circle,
involving tenfold worry and anxiety as compared
with the family one, is freely and cheerfully
undertaken in a spirit of the truest, broadest
and most practical philanthropy. I have only
to mention the name of Mrs. Eowb, wife of Mr.
W. T. Rowe of Glenfine, and daughter of
Archdeacon Stretch of Melbourne, to recall to
many minds much similar good work in
other directions, notably among the Abori-
ginals, quietly and unostentatiously carried
out in the Colony of Victoria—so quietly, indeed,
that X make sure hundreds of readers of The
Age will now for the first time learn of the
interesting reformatory experiment that is being
carried on at the farm of Brooksidb.
The buildings, the surroundings, the daily
routine of life at Brookside have in them abso-
lutely nothing that is usually associated in the
mind with the word “reformatory.” In fact,
it is only in official documents and reports that
I find the term applied in this case at all.
Among the good folks of the countryside Brook-
side is simply “Brookside,” its inmates are
“ the Brookside girls,” and with the children
themselves the place has the most endearing
name of all, “Home.” There is no look and
key supervision here, but liberty to scamper
among the fields, full and free trust
when the cows have to be brought home, hay
has to be made in the paddock beyond the


Creek, or the wood cart has to be loaded in the
forest land still further away. The establish-
ment at Brookside has now been in existence
for over two years, and not one of the girls—
they are “reformatory” girls, be it remembered,
and of their class by no means the best type —
has attempted to abscond. There have occurred
often enough, it almost goes without saying,
outbursts of temper, followed by spells of sulk-
ing in more or less remote corners, but there
has been a complete absence of “running away,”
a phrase which has special significance and
constant application in reformatories planted
in the heart of or close to great cities, where the
boys or girls have old associates to join, and old
haunts to return to. At Brookside, however,
“ running away” would simply mean a spell of
solitary contemplation of the beauties of nature;
and however much delight this might confer on
the mind of the philosopher, it is by no means
courted —the solitary part of the business more
especially—by the average city arab of either sex.
The point is one of importance as bearing on the
general question of the relative advantages of
town and country reformatories. Green fields,
most people will agree, are a very much more
wholesome restraint than iron bolts and bars.
There are three main buildings on the Brook-
side farm—one for the older girls, one for the
younger girls, and the third tenanted by the
outdoor overseer and his wife. The two classes
of children are, as far as possible, r kept apart,
so that those who, happily for themselves,
have been caught young are not further
contaminated by their * sisters older in
years or more deeply learned in ways of vice.
The whole place, inside and outside, is arranged
and conducted simply like a farm. About 1000
sheep and close on 50 head of cattle
pasture on the surrounding meadow land,
several horses are kept for the farm work
and for bringing in the fire wood, there
are between two and three score of pigs in
one paddock, and a variety of poultry
are reared. Besides all this live stock, there is
a good sized vegetable garden, and a considerable
acreage given over to the making of hay. It
will therefore be evident that there is abund-
ance of outdoor work for the girls. Then,
indoors, there is dairying to do, also baking of
bread, cooking, waiting at table, washing of
clothes, and keeping everything spic and
span. There are regular hours for sewing, and,
in the case of the younger children, for the
acquirement of “ the three R’s.” Altogether it
is a busy little community at Brookside. ‘When
I came on the scene work was in full progress.
Two .or three of the girls were in the
hay field, a few in the wash house, while others
were busy preparing the midday meal. One
damsel with browned face and flying hair
came galloping up from the hay field on
“Lady Morris,” one of the horses of the
establishment; while another emerged from
the house and unyoked our ponies, watered
and stabled them, all in the most skilful and
handy manner. I was impressed from the first
with the wholesome spirit of enjoyment in their
duties which every girl manifested. The
Amazonian young lady, for example, had been
sent to bring the horse home, and when she slid
to the ground at our feet, there was in her face
a flush of pride in her achievement, as
well as the glow caused by the healthy
exercise. In a shed close by I saw a
covered waggonette, in which on Sundays
the younger ones make the mile and a half
journey to church. Nearly all the girls, I was
told, take their spell at driving,.and are fair
adepts at managing a horse. It will thus be
seen that their training is exactly that which
will make them useful domestics at a farm or
handy women in their own country homes should
they ever become the wives of agriculturists.
There is a regular round and a periodical
interchange of duties. The gifls have an odd
way of speaking of their several avocations; for
example, I learned that so-and-so was “on the
pigs,” another “on the kitchen,” and a third
“ on the table,” while a fourth, I was informed,
was “on the baby.” The last state-
ment of duties rather puzzled me, until
I discovered that the baby was no other
than a dark-eyed two-year-old aboriginal boy,
a proUge of one of Mrs. Rowe’s daughters, who
is for the time being having a holiday stay at
Brookside. The youngster is the pet of the
place, and I was fairly surprised when, on my
asking him what he was called, he got out,
not without difficulty, in baby syllabic
language, “Tito, the fat gormandiser. ”
However, I must get “ off the baby,” and re-
sume. I had been put in possession of the main
facts connected with the past career of several
of the children. Black and sad stories, some of
them; up-bringing amidst the most terrible
surroundings, a father’s drunkenness, a
mother’s loss of all sense of shame, parental
instigation to the commission of crime—such are
among the sad causes which threatened their


undoing at the very threshold of life. All the
girls at Brookside, it may be explained, have
some circumstance attaching to their record that
precluded their being boarded out in foster
homes under the Neglected Children Act. It
is sad, indeed, to have pointed out to you a
small child of 10 or 12 years of whom
it has to be said that she knows too
much of immorality in its worst phases
to be trusted among children who are
pure and uucontaminated. However, in such a
case, especially if the girl passes young into the
hands of the authorities, much good can be
done in a year or two at such a place as Brook-
side. Close supervision amidst a wholesome
home atmosphere teaches neat and orderly
habits, breaks from the use of blasphemous
or obscene language, the uttering of which
may have become almost a second nature,
and, let us hope, completely erases from
the tablets of the memory any horrible
episodes that may have come within their
actual experience, or at least under their obser-
vation, during former unreclaimed days. All
the girls, however, have not travelled equally
far on the road to ruin. One mite of a child,
for example, with fair hair, blue eyes, and alto-
gether a pleasing face, is nothing worse than an
incorrigible little pilferer; she stole things, and,
to use her own expression, “put them up” at a
pawnbroker’s or a receiver’s, then with the pro-
ceeds she travelled about Melbourne on tramway
oars “just to see the world.” Such a girl can*
not obviously be sent to a home where there are
other children whom she might initiate into
thieving habits, but she is surely more to be
pitied than blamed. Happily, after receiving a
spell of training at Brookside, a situation will be
found for her in the country, where she will
still be under careful supervision and be far re-
moved from the city temptations which led her
astray. Another class of girls at Brook-
side are children who have proved unmanage-
able in foster homes; or, who, after being given a
chance, are boarded out, have shown themselves
incorrigible in some bad habit. These are dealt
with more firmly and easily here, and, when
trained and disciplined to some extent, will be
placed in carefully selected situations, in which
they will have yet another opportunity of re-
deeming themselves.
There is a wonderful difference in general
appearance and cast of countenance between the
children who have come to Brookside while
still young and those who have reached it when
further advanced in years. Yet these
pleasanter faced youngsters in the other
house are precisely the same material, drawn
from the same class of people, and from the
same surroundings. However, in their case the
work of rescue has been effected in time, and
there is nothing in the life at Brookside to give
the stolid sullen look which reformatory
children in almost every country are
too apt to present. The older girls are
immeasurably more difficult to deal with, and it
s hardly possible that the results can prove
equally satisfactory as with the younger
children. Still, true philanthropy sets down
no one as absolutely irreclaimable, and the
results already attained at Brookside show
that in instances where the hope of per*
manent reformation was at first very small
indeed girls are growing up to be respectable and
useful women, attached to the situations in
which they have been placed, and trusted
in every way by their employers. It is
remarkable how speedily and how deeply
attached to country life these rescued Melbourne
waifs become. At first probably the girl all too
clearly pines for the busy streets, the congenial
slums, the excitement around the drink shops,
or yet worse resorts. But gradually the
quiet pleasures of farm life grow to be
appreciated. Hand-reared calves and pet
lambs become' a constant delight, and even
the feeding of the pigs, common and un-
interesting as it may appear to most minds,
is a source of gratification and honor to the girl
who is, for the space of a current week, “on the
pigs,” as their phrase goes. The milking of
cows, the making of butter, the tending of the
poultry, the work in the garden, all grow to be
agreeable incidents of everyday life. A
rough ride cavalier fashion and bare
backed, a tumble among the sweet
smelling hay, a bath in the creek with plentiful
splashing and laughing, a drive and picnic among
the adjoining forest trees—these are pleasures
keenly relished by young folks whose lives have
hitherto been spent shut up within brick walls
in reeking Melbourne slums, but whose
hearts still retain some of the freshness
and purity and delight in nature which
is surely the birthright of every child.
In such a home as that at Brookside punish-
ments have neither to be severe nor frequently
inflicted. To be subjected to three days* soli-
tary treatment —that is, to have to work, sew,
and eat without companionship, not out of sight


of the others, but holding no converse with
them—soon brings the most stubborn will into
subjection. The threat of being sent way alto-
gether—a threat which occasionally has to be
carried into effect, the girl in such a
case returning to the city establishment at
Coburg—quickly turns persistent misconduct
into tearful penitence and very humble solicita-
tion for another chance. The great difficulty is
that the inmates become even too much attached
to their farm home. One girl, for example,
whose previous record, by the way, was one of
really terrible depravity for so young a child,
had to be sent back from her situation after
a week’s trial; she had simply cried herself ill, all
to get taken again to Brookside. I saw her on
the occasion of my visit busy setting the dinner
table with nimble fingers and pleased face. She
will be given another trial in a situation after a
month or so, when it is hoped she will
see more clearly that she cannot always
remain where she is at present. There
are several similar instances of deep
attachment to their “ home,” as the girls always
term Brookside. This is a gratifying, though
an embarrassing, feature of the work. Mrs.
Rowe has placed it on record in one of her
official reports that she “ had no idea, in under-
taking the duties, what a wealth of affection the
poor children have to bestow, and how they
appreciate the effort to give them a fairer start
in life.” When the seeds of affection and grati-
tude, however, have taken root in such um
promising soil, the work that has been
even then accomplished is surely beyond esti-
mation.
But the labor of love does not cease when a
girl bids good-bye to the farm home at Brook-
side. She goes to a carefully selected “service
home.” The applications for the girls from
squatters, farmers, and others all within easy
distance of Brookside are much more numerous
than can be granted. There is thus a field of
selection, and such is the care exercised by the
lady who carries on this noble work that she
actually visits from her home at Glenfine,
which is nine miles across the plain from Brook-
side, every situation before she allows any of
“ her girls,” as she affectionately calls them, to
enter on the post. Thereafter, touch is always
kept with thegirl, from this point henceforward
so far placed on her own reliance, letters
are written now and then, visits are
paid at intervals, and the girl is even
invited and encouraged to return them. The
amount of work that all this entails may
be readily imagined without one word of
comment being necessary. All corres-
pondence that passes is preserved, and the
career of every girl is kept recorded in a book
devoted to this special purpose. Many of
the letters are deeply touching, and, read in
connection with the previous confessions of the
unfortunate children, reveal life stories such as
Dickens would have loved to portray, with
gentle and skilful hand, and as a lesson to all
mankind for all time. But with much that is
pathetic, there is also no small amount of
written matter which cannot but raise a smile.
With bad spelling, a slight mixture of ideas,
and perhaps also a very full heart at the
time of writing, a reformatory girl’s letter
may be irresistibly funny reading.
Then the effusions of a disappointed
or an angry parent of a certain class are occa-
sionally curious productions. One of.these, for
example, that caught my eye, had for its pur-
port to inform “his daughter” that the
writer was “sikatart” (“sick at heart,” pre-
sumably) over her “ crewel and unkind con-
duct,” that never again would he escort her to
“those tru and genuin Famely circules,” that
never would he lose his work againfor the purpose
of carrying her “spice cake and cbees
in a prison sell,” that “loose the
lion from is den and he will return
to is old habits,” so “one more fals step, and
Forme you may die like a rat in a gutter.”
However, all parents are not so renunciating as
this one. The usual experience is for a black
sheep father to try hard to get hold of his
black sheep daughter the moment she is free
from Government surveillance. It is a good
thing for the girls \tho ftre placed out in situa-
tions from Brookside that they are well over
100 miles from Melbourne and their old home
companions. The return of a reformatory girl
to city life, even though a good start in a good
situation may be got for her, in too many cases
simply means relapse to former evil
courses and the uprooting of the seed that has
been sown at the cost of so much time, labor and
money.
One word now as to the expenditure that is
involved in the maintenance of an institution
such as that at Brookside. The work, it must
be remembered, gradually grew in the hands of
Mrs. Rowe, and with a small commencement
experience was gained bit by bit. At first
only 6 girls were placed on the farm.


Now the average number is about 20.
The matron’s staff has also of necessity been
increased from 1 in the beginning to 4 now.
Every effort is made to make the farm as
nearly self-sustaining as possible. The Govern-
ment contribution for each girl, as in the case
of boarded out Neglected Children, is ss. per
week, this to cover food, clothing and everything
else. Mrs. Rowe’s figures as to the total
cost of maintaining each girl now work
out to 10s. 4d. per week. This is, however,
less by nearly one-third than is expended
on each girl in the Government reformatory
at Coburg. Farm homes, therefore, even where
the balance over ss. does not depend on private
munificence, would cost the Government less
than a city reformatory barrack. The advan-
tages of the farm system, with only a few girls
in the one Home, will, 1 venture to say, be obvious
to everyone who has perused this article.
For boya the restriction in numbers, though
beneficial, is less indispensable, particularly
where farming pursuits form the staple employ-
ment. In the Ballarat Reformatory, forexample,
which I made it a point also to visit on my
way back from Scarsdale, though the numbers
are considerable, the strict school discipline and
regular routine, in conjunction with the plan
of early licensing out, are givingexcellent results.
The lads learn useful trades, such as carpentry,
painting, blacksmith work, &c., in batches, but
chief attention is paid to agricultural work, in
which they get a very thorough training. With
girls there is no possibility of working successfully
on such a model. Domestic duties, in the dis-
charge of which the aim is that their future life
shall be spent, cannot be taught in barracks or
by the barrack system. Boarding out in Foster
homes serves admirably in the case of the
great majority of our neglected children.
But where depravity also exists some other
scheme has to be devised. The experiment car-
ried on at Brookside certainly seems to solve
the difficulty. With another such country
establishment the Girls’ Reformatory at Coburg
—which has the disadvantage of being neces-
sarily conducted to some extent on the barrack
system, plus this extra grave drawback, that the
building is actually within the Pentridge prison
stockade, and surrounded, morally and literally,
by the prison air—might be abolished alto-
gether. It would be better for the
State finances, better for the girls
themselves, and better for the whole com-
munity, whose prosperity greatly depends on
the stoppage of the supply of juvenile criminals.
To rescue early is very important, but hardly
less so is to rescue thoroughly. I have visited
reformatories and studied reformatory work in
several parts of the world, and I am convinced
that in Mrs. Rowe’s farm at Brook-
side Victoria possesses the germ of the
idea which, fructifying side by side
with the excellent “foster home system ” for
children who have been neglected but are not
depraved, should give us the solution
of one of the most difficult problems that has to
be faced in every civilised country, namely, the
and treatment of children who are on
he verge or within the actual border of crimi-
nality or vicious living.
EDITORIAL. COMMENTS.
The description of the Reformatory Farm for
girls at BROOKSIDE which will be found
on another page of our present issue, sug-
gests a number of important points in
regard to one of the gravest questions of
theday, namely, the rescue op friendless
or depraved children. Much good work
in this direction has been done in Melbourne
in the past, there being at present between
2000 and 3000 of our waifs and strays of
both sexes boarded out in happy Foster
homes, away from the unwholesome sur-
roundings of their earlier years. However,
so long as we have such factors to reckon
with as the death, the destitution, the
desertion, the imprisonment, or the pro-
fligacy of parents, we shall always
have children living in an atmosphere of
crime and neglect, and, if left to them-
selves, growing up inevitably to swell the
ranks of tfye depraved classes. It is
therefore a matter of first importance to
the whole community that this supply of
criminals should be cut off at its very
source. To effect this it is the duty of
the State to see that every child has a fair
start in life, or at least is not left to grow
up under circumstances that render moral
contamination simply an absolute certainty.
It is now seventeen or eighteen years
since the larrack system of treating “ neg-
lected children ” in this colony was abolished,
and the plan of Boarding out in country


foster Homes substituted. The happiest
results have followed, and the old type
of barrack-reared child has practically
ceased to exist among us. Under the
new system a girl, for example, whom
parental neglect has left to wander unre-
strained through the streets at all hours, or
whose worst fault may have been that her
mother used to beat her black and blueif she
did notreturn home each evening with some
stolen article, is not condemned to pass the
remaining years of her youth in an estab-
lishment that differs only in degree
from a gaol. She has a home found for her
where she will have that amount of super-
vision and domestic influence that suffices
to keep the great majority of children in
the path of honesty and respectability. The
Government department that deals with
Neglected Children has two duties to perform
in every case of boarding out. The foster
parents or parent must be known to be
suitable persons to have the child entrusted
to their care, and the most scrupulously
careful precautions must be taken that no
really bad boy or girl is allowed into a
home circle where the incomer may exercise
a corrupting influence. Happily the keen
competition for the children—a competition
that in most cases has a higher motive
than a mere pecuniary one, for the
Government allowance of ss. a week can-
not defray the entire cost of maintenance
and up-bringing—gives the department a
wide field as regards the choice of homes;
and the care exercised in making this selec-
tion is shown by the fact that in a large
proportion of cases the quondam street
Arab becomes practically an adopted child,
and in due course passes from his foster
home into the general community without
his associates knowing anything about the
special circumstances of his earlier years.
In the case of children, however, whose
familiarity with or actual participation in
crime renders it impossible to settle them
in the ordinary way in a foster home, a dif-
ferent course must be followed. In their
case, a school of some kind, where closer
supervision and stricter disciplinary train-
ing can be ensured, is undoubtedly neces-
sary.
But the old barbarous idea of immur-
ing a boy or girl in such a Reformatory
establishment for five or seven years
is, in Victoria at least, dead and
gone. At Ballarat, for example, a boy
can work his way out in nine months,
and, when placed in a suitable situation, he
is free to make his way in the world, the
only restraint placed on him being careful
but unobtrusive supervision exercised by
the Government department with a view
to pull him up at once should he again go
wrong. So with the Coburg and Brook-
side institutions for girls ; these serve as
probationary schools and filtering depots,
whence the girl who shows a disposition
to rise to the surface passes out after a
somewhat longer time to a situation and a
position of self-responsibility. Nearly every-
one, however, who reads our Special’s
account of the reformatory farm at Brook-
side will, we fancy, take the view that the
country establishment is far and away
better calculated to lead to permanently
good results than the town one at
Coburg. Farm life for girls of this
class is a much more suitable after-
career than service in a situation in
Melbourne, even when the latter can be
procured under the circumstances of such a
stigma to character as committal to a
reformatory ordinarily involves. In the
country the girl is completely removed
from her old associations, and from the
temptations to vice which formerly were
proving too strong for her. In a farm
house she much more readily becomes
one of the family, and has very much brighter
prospects of reaching the highest goal
of every true woman, marriage and her
own home circle. In city service, a refor-
matory girl, however little she may be to
blame from the point of view of moral
responsibility, is apt to be looked at
with distrust. If there be other servants
in the household, she is liable to have her
past career, whatever it be, ferreted out
and brought against her at all times and
on every pretext. If she be the only
domestic kept, she in too many cases
finds herself in a position of isola-
tion and social ostracism that might well


drive one with a better balanced and
more stably fixed mind to evil ways.
Country service is free from these objec-
tions, and for a rough little girl it supplies
the most steadying of influences. Regret
has been very freely expressed in Mel-
bourne that the Servants’ Training School
at Richmond has now ceased its operations.
But it must be remembered that the
expansion of the Foster home system has
really rendered this establishment out of
place. The good, or at least well disposed,
girls go to foster homes, which for the
future have the first claim on the services
and on the affection of the children.
To remove these from their homes and
place them in such an institution as that
which until recently existed in Richmond
would be unjust and cruel both to the
foster parents and to the girls themselves.
On the other hand, to train for city service
girls who have already once been under the
influence of evil associations would, as we
haveseen,bea mistake on every ground. The
interesting experiment, however, that has
now for over two years back been carried on
at Brookside affords the clue as to how the
residuum of our neglected or depraved girls
who are ineligible for foster homes can be
disposed of in the very best manner for the
children themselves and for the community
at large.
To every thoughtful mind this train of
argument will suggest the query, Can
the Girls’ Reformatory at Coburg be dis-
pensed with altogether ? Cannot the far
healthier life—healthier from both the
moral and the physical points of view—
of such a country homestead as that
of Brookside be substituted for this
confined, lock-and-key, joylessandunhome-
like existence within the very stockade
of a great city prison ? The work
that has been carried out at Brookside is
due to the benevolence, large mindedness
and self sacrifice of one lady, Mrs. W. T.
Rowe, of Glenfine. Can no one else be
found to emulate this truly noble example ?
One other such establishment as Brookside
would enable the Coburg Reformatory to
be abolished. A few incorrigible or ex-
tremely depraved cases might have to be
differently dealt with, but this difficulty
could easily be provided for. We have rich
and philanthropic men and women amongst
us. Cannotoneoftheirnumberbeinducedto
carry this splendid work to completion ?
It may be admitted that the combination
of qualities such as exists in the case of
the lady who has made Brookside such a
success will be very difficult to find. More-
over, it is impossible for Government to
delegate its duties and responsibilities in
this matter without the most stringent
moral and material safeguards. Still,
when the problem has been solved in one
case, the hope may be indulged in that it
may be solved in another. The point may
also be suggested to the various
religious and philanthropic bodies who
have done good work in assisting
in the rescue of our city waifs and
strays. Everyone may not be capable of
undertaking single handed the duties and
responsibilities that Mrs. Rowe has so
cheerfully accepted. But combination
might give the colony another Brookside,
and enable the last drawback to the full
efficiency of our reformatory system to be
wiped away. in ii|| in i i|i| ■ n >ll mi n m ifi
'fidgerton and Moore, Printers, 241 and 243 Flinders Lane, Melbourne,
