

FATHER O’LEARY.
TO THE
POOR IRISH CATHOLICS
OF
ST. GILEŚ' S.
JVIv Dear Cou.vtbymex,
X HAVE already warned you of a-.uos( dangerous
snare laid to ruin the Faith of your children; and
I wish to warn you of it again. But before I say
a word more I have one plain question to ask you ;
Will you follow your own Clergy , or will you fol-
low those who cry them down , and who treat your
Religion with bitter ridicule? Which will you
believe ? This is the point. r
Now here is another question : Will Mr. Finigan
submit to the decision of the Bishop, or of the
Clergy ? This is the true'touchstone.
If he will not submit, you see what sort of a Ca-
tholic he must be: if he do submit, his Committee
can have nothing more to do with him ; and that
will shew you, my dear countrymen, what is their
main design and intention.
But what they are now doing in St. Giles’s is but
a part of an extensive conspiracy against your Re-
ligion; of which fact there exists abundance of
proof contained in documents of the tnost curious
nature.
If they arc frienda/of your country, let them


prove it by obtaining your emancipation; by doing
away vulgar prejudices and horrid falsehoods,
which are disgraceful to a civilized people; in-
stead of canting and whining, amidst their expe-
riences, about the superstition, paganism and idol-
atry of the Irish Roman Catholics. To slander
your Religion is not to shew much friendship to
your country.
“ They have distributed large alms among the
poor.” They have, and we all thank them for their
benevolence. To feed hungry, to give drink
to the thirsty, to clothe tn«f naked, to visit the sick,
are most amiable and interesting works of mercy.
Every one must commend, every one must praise
the'doers of such works.
Rut can this entitle them to establish a kind of
spiritual slave-trade ?
The best slaves, we are told, are those who have
been caught and carried off in their, infancy; be-
cause they have no remembrance of their native
country, and they take to their work with less re-
luctance.
So, in this new and monstrous species of spiri-
tual slave-trade, the best proselytes, indeed almost
the only proselytes, will be such as have been pre-
vented in their youth, and at school , from learning
the Religion of their forefathers, and have then
been fixed by indentures or otherwise in sbirte of
those evangelical plantations where a virulent kind
of the Bibliomania is prevalent, anti usually proves
to be an incurable disorder.
“ Your children are conducted to St. Patrick’s
Chapel” —But is there no instance of any one of
them being punished for having dared to take holy
water ? A good cure for superstition ! Here is a
cloven foot at least! my dear countrymen.
“ They have not tampered with the children in
the schools.” Good souls ! but have they tampered
with nobody out of the schools ? Have none been
conducted to the Swaddling Chapel in Eagle-street ?


Has the Master not been initiated there? Have
none of the poor Catholics been at any time solicited
to hear fine words against your Priests and your
Religion in their meeting-houses ? Here is another
cloven foot. Mark it well.
Till Christmas last the poor unconscious children
were obliged to wear the badge of the infamous
Orange faction. Can this be denied ? And what
was the meaning of it? What! another cloven
foot!
Have none of the parentftpr relations of the poor
Catholics of St. Giles’s been bribed with half-
crowns to leave the children at the school against
their consciences ? Bless me, here is another cloven
foot, I declare! What is to come next?
“ If it had been the grand object of the sup-
porters of these schools to proselyte your children,
a Protestant Catechism would have been used in the
schools, and a Protestant Clergyman would have
been employed to instruct them in Protestant prin-
ciples.” Would they? Oh! that would have
been stupidity indeed. They are not capable of
such folly. They know that if the Devil had ap-
peared to Eve in his real character , and avowing
his intentions, instead of putting on the sly disguise
of the serpent, his designs would have completely
failed. It was the word Catholic over the door that
deceived you all, my dear countrymen. If they
had put up The St. Giles's Irish Swaddlers ’
Schools, the place would have been shunned like
the pest-house.
“ They wish to teach your children to read and
write.” Cannot these things be learned in the Ca-
tholic schools ? Cannot these gentlemen assist the
Catholic schools ? If not, they must have some se-
cret design.
“ They wish to make them loyal subjects." Ex-
cellent! Then the Catholic Religion is not capa-
ble of making them loyal subjects:; and here you
see, my dear, country men, why the Catechism is a


forbidden book, and why the priests are prohibited
to give them any religious instruction in the schools.
They roust be uncatholicised to become loyal sub-
jects !!
But then they tench the Bible. Mercy upon us!
Why yesterday the Bible was so plain that every
babe could understand it without note or comment ;
and now the schools are for the express purpose of
teaching it without note or comment, or any reli-
gious instruction. This is capital, to be sure.
And where are thosa forty children whom, ac-
cording to their report, they have placed out or ap-
prenticed? Parents, this is a serious question. They
are perhaps learning experiences and weeping over
their lot. Irishmen, have you sold your children
for a bribe ?
I had used the name of Father O’Leary for a
watchword; but it appears the good people have
been so dreadfully frightened at the very name of
Father O’Leary, that they quite forgot he has been
dead these many years! But, my dear countrymen,
they are right; for he is not dead: he lives in your
hearts, and by his memory I ask you, Will you
follow your own Clergy, or will you renounce
them and abandon your children ?
I remain, dear Countrymen,
Your sincere Friend and Well-wisher,
AN IRISH ROMAN CATHOLIC.
N. B. The real Catholic , as he calls himself, ad-
dresses the Irish as descendants of St. Patrick!
What an extraordinary family, considering that
JSt. Patrick was a Popish Bishop without either
wife or children I!
Printed by JK IC. Jndreves, 5, Orangt-sUtei, Red-Lion
Square,
