

FEDERATION
OF
THE MASSES.
By C. J. ADERTON.
Sebastopol:
PUBLISHED BY C. J. ALDERTON.
1890.


FEDERATION
OF THE MASSES,
AND
THEIR POLITICAL RIGHTS.
By C. J. ALDERTON.
“ LET BROTHERLY LOVE CONTINUE.”
BALLARAT:
C. J. ALDERTON, PUBLISHER, SEBASTOPOL, VICTORIA.
MDCCCXC.




CONTENTS.
5
Introduction ...
Ourselves ... •••
Man’s Inhumanity to Man ... ••• ••• •••
Mr. Service’s Speech ... ... •••
Our actual state of Borrowing ... •• • •• •
The Grand Army of Toilers ••• 65
Ye discern not the Signs of the Times ... ••• 79
Why stay the Progress of Unity amongst Men ? 97
Man to enter on a new Epoch HO
123
Addendum




INTRODUCTION.
% N the year eighteen hundred and ninety, first month,
in the reign of survivals from barbaric tribes, my
heart became troubled at the complicated systems of
the various and manifold forms of their progressive state
of knowledge. Far from censuring with any narrow
mindedness the general pursuit of their political conduct,
I saw how valuable every progressive year might become
more useful in conserving the political rights of a nation,
likewise to keep pace with the progress of human
knowledge.
There is no need to denounce the fruits of advancement
that has been made in the curriculum of our present
system of education, although a vast territory can be
traversed, whereby practical instructive lessons could take
the place of many that are now of little service to the
young of our day.
I have further observed the intensity of rulers’ actions,
caused, as I have presumed, by an inordinate desire on
their part to stunt the growth of minds, whom they have
to call upon to protect their interests should any foreign
power invade their shores.
These companies of progressive statesmen, have, doubt-
less, displayed an energy and intelligence whereby their
labors have, through all time, enriched the rich, while


their judgments have forced the poor to become poorer.
This unseemingly conduct on the part of rulers, has brought
forth comment in a remarkable degree, distinguished by
unbearable features ; first, by recklessly granting the public
estate to men that desire only to add suffering to the
dupes of their own kind.
This spirit of antiquated conservatism is demoralising
in the latter part of this nineteenth century. It is a
disgrace to the intellectual growth of the present day, like-
wise to the moral nature of man.
Why are not all who have the intellectual ability to
govern honourably distinguished for their attachment to
the outcasts of their race ? The answer is obvious!
Therefore, I ask you to seal the supplications recorded in
this little work for the raising up of the forced fallen ones.
What benefit can a people derive by not blending
together the Celt, Angle, Teuton, Frank, or any other races
where these people are allied like blood relations.
This sentiment should always lend a peculiar charm to
oppressed communities, however the majority of citizens in
all governed lands invariably raise very formidable barriers
to the liberty of opinion ; within these barriers an author
may write whatever he pleases, however history repeats
that he will repent it if ever he steps beyond the interests
of a favored few.
Let this truism absolutely sway the conduct of those
citizens who have long suffered from blows that have
crushed their manhood.
Before I attempted to publish my opinions I imagined
that I held them in common with my fellow-workmen; and
I feel confident that when they are declared openly I shall
not be censured by overbearing opponents, or by men who
have not the courage to speak like myself, therefore I fear
not being oppressed by the daily efforts of those who have


depleted the blood from the vitals of the bone and oi
all governed lands.
Passive obedience to political wrongs daily increases the
baneful effects in the human scale ; therefore the heart
throbs at the indifferentism of public spirit.
It is an idolatrous feeling to be always living in fear and
dread of men whom we elect to power to govern us.
However, with all past impotencies and present eccen-
tricities of the variegated clays, they are not in the future,
as in the past, likely to starve and see their families dying
around them for party interests to be clothed in velvet.
It will be a great crisis when the federation of labor will
make them a law unto themselves. Why live in fear
of being thrown out of employment within your own
possessions ? As the blood is the life of every indi-
vidual, so also is the federating of labor necessary to bind
existence to more agreeable conditions.
k Who can enumerate all the evils of modern legislation ?
Verily, verily, self-interested men make and exact laws
for fools to obey them; hence the friction between capital
and labor.
However, the Sovereign can no longer say, “ You shall
think as Ido on pain of death but he says, “ You are
free to think differently to me, and to retain your life, your
property, and all that you possess ; but if such be your
determination I will weave a web whereby you shall
remain an alien among your brethren.
You may think that you enjoy your civil rights, but you
deceive yourselves by not federating together. We being
numbered as the unfortunate class of toilers are supposed
to inhabit a free country, but, do we find shelter from those
whom we have placed in authority over the nation. Nay.
Intellectual principles should exercise an influence over


those whom we place in authority so that its powers should
no longer baffle the toils of oppression.
At the present day.it must be perfectly clear that our
political governing company in Victoria have gathered all
the powers of society into their own hands likewise con-
quered all opposition with the energy of a complete
majority at their backs ; therefore, they have considered
themselves absolutely invested with the right of making
and executing laws to gratify their caprices.
When citizens feel themselves wronged in Victoria, to
whom can they apply for redress ? If to public opinion,
public opinion must constitute the majority; therefore, be
careful that your verdicts do not preponderate over your
natural interests.
This little work is speaking of the national defects of
democratic institutions ; and the evil complained of consists
in the exact ratio of the power that entertains opinions
hostile to their interests, namely, the majority.
However, I feel confident that I have penned lessons of
instruction for those who are ekeing out a miserable
existence ; therefore, I conclude by delegating to maturer
and abler hands my feeble attempt in expressing the force
of my convictions.
Sebastopol, near Ballarat,
January Ist, 1890.
8
Federation of the Masses.


FEDERATION OF THE MASSES.
CHAPTER I.
OURSELVES.
<TF)ERHAPS the civilised custom which permits society
IP to be broken up into various groups, will not easily
submit to the proclamation that is contained in
this little work. , . ,
Judging from what we have already experienced on
this important subject, we look forward with confidence
to the time when all trades and vocations in Victoria will
announce to the world the advent of Federation. If every
one who believes in the Apostle’s injunction would avow it,
“Let brotherly love continue,” what a power would be
established in its cause ! Truly the dawn of brighter
days in the world’s history is now appearing, as tins
subject the most important to the welfare and happiness
of mankind—receives that consideration which its im-
portance demands, but which is now almost hidden from
suffering humanity by political strategists.
It is of much practical consequence to know whether
we are going up hill or down, or remaining stationary
from selfish motives of those who hold the reins of
government. The terrible struggle for subsistence, caused
by antagonism between capital and labor is well known.
I have looked at the Federation Labor question
in perhaps most all of its aspects. When an individual
has an idea tending towards the promotion of his fellow-
men, he should immediately seek another to share it.
This being secured, the second should find a third, the
third a fourth, the fourth a fifth; when, here we have a
federal labor institution formed. These five constitute


a power; they convoke meetings; issue proclamations
throughout the nation, inviting every trade and vocation
to become members. Three months from the date of
proclamation, thousands become members of such an
organisation, astonishing the chiefs in their enterprising
genius who subjugate the bone and sinew of the nation.
In order to live under the present conditions, we must
have a special orginisation, and differ singularly from
those whom we elect to power.
At the present time there is no apparent activity in
political matters; no indication of genuine growth ; and
no practical dealing with the needs of men. If we
consider how limited is our vision of another’s needs, how
our best is, comparatively speaking, but hardness of heart,
we shall see comfort in the thought that the one great
Federal Organisation can rescue the wretched from their
sufferings.
What is the recipe for sweetening the bitters of
adversity ? Answer : Federation of individuals and self-
protection.
Mr. J. S. Mill, “On Liberty,” p.p. 21, 22, says, “The
sole end for which mankind are warranted, individually or
collectively, in interfering with the liberty of the action
of any of their number, is self-protection.”
Endorsing this statement, the federating principle is not
only an individual but collective right, the first of all
duties, strengthening the moral welfare of every person ;
and it is to be deplored that any sluggish apathy exists in
retarding its progress.
It is evident that the industrial classes in the long past,
as well as up to the present, bequeathed their liberty,
freedom, and political rights over to their enemies, and,
likewise, refused to be led by far-seeing progressive
natures.
When the spirit of unity of purpose has become acknow-
ledged, it is possible to restore common rights, and the
permanent independence of the groaning millions, whose
privileges of manhood are now usurped.
Victoria of the present day has clearly shown that she
remains more intolerant than had been imagined. There
is something of the vandal in her, especially in the
10
Federation of the Masses.


alienating of public property, and recklessly involving the
nation in debt. , , , » , na
We as a people have fallen into the hands of syndicates,
or sequestrators, and they have taken from own.
It is a poor use to which to put our schooling if the days
of our education leave us no better than they found us,
with no deeper gaze into life ; with no new earnestness of
purpose; no keener vibration for the throb of another s
pain ; no widened views of law-makers’ dealings with us,
no quickened sense of their cupidity. vv^ovi
I know a case more grievous still; it is that of a man
who has run against the world, and never succeeded m
finding the capricious schemes of those men who have so
long deposited that fertilizing oratory that saps the menta
freedom of men to devastation, misery, and vice. .
It appears to me that, in relation to our political allairs,
we ought to distinguish between opinion and taction.
“ Blind, wretched man ! in what dark paths of strife
Thou walk’st the little journey of thy life. . ~
Bv whom are mankind led in civilised countries . By
those who can read and write! Then, it necessarily
follows, that those who are unable to read and write, must
place their political business in the hands of those who
have acquired a knowledge of letters.
0 ye, who, like myself, lay black on white, call to
remembrance how long we have been compelled to listen
to flattering platform addresses, likewise swallow miscel-
laneous rubbish repugnant to our feelings ! Are we to be
made rational by being deceived? No! The masses
must awaken to the importance of this momentous subject.
As it is in the power of the industrial classes to organise
for the purpose of asserting and maintaining their pohtica
rights, I would suggest that immediate action be taken by
logical means to redress the wrongs that the present
generation have to endure. •
h There are, doubtless, many ways of overcoming the
evils complained of; but, one method I hold consists m
united action. Most certainly the time must come when
fair political play will be meted out m the state, and that
such P principles will be the prevailing policy for all time.
In that day people will live without injuring their neig


hours. This desirable end is every man’s business. Then
let every one arouse himself determinedly to this important
matter.
Inform your chiefs and representatives that they have
considered you to be no better than whim horses, and that
you have discovered their caprices, and found that they
themselves are wanting. Don’t let them rest. Do your
duty. Go in deputation to the premier; keep your tempers ;
And, once you begin, never leave off until you succeed. It
is folly to begin if you do not mean to score a victory.
The general property of the nation belongs to every
taxpayer. No honest representative will try to dispossess
you of your inherent right. This movement ought to be
supported in every borough, shire, town and city. Let
your reciprocal interests be involved under the federal
banner. Let your law-makers understand that you will
no longer suffer from political aggression, that you will
be free.
Let us one and all educate ourselves politically. It is
essentially necessary to the interests of every tax-payer, that
each should commence to study assiduously how laws shall
be enacted to govern the whole. Let us suppose that we
have a well constituted government governing us, and this
power, from unforeseen circumstances, fail to carry on the
business of the nation from the want of unanimity, what
would be the result in this our day ? In this position
political ability would be the only public credential, which
we at the present day lack. Therefore, it necessarily
follows that every ode who desires to enjoy his political
rights must acquire a knowlege of the requirements of
every individual before the natural birthright of each can
be secured.
The great mass of civilised people persistently demand
and blatantly clamour that priests, lawyers, judges, and
governors of gaols shall determine our affairs temporally,
whether their arguments be just or unjust.
Poor dupes, how easily brought into subjection !
No wonder the battle of our lives are so hard to fight,
when a few designing men know too well that did we array
ourselves with steel armour we could not reverse the de-
cisions that forcibly launch us into disasters.


What a great part does knowledge perform in our world-
ly affairs yet it is argued that it is necessary to stifle the
convictions of the industrial classes ; and what stall greater
functions it might perform did but this subjected race
appreciate their own sterling worth.
P lt will be admitted that democracy is not the ruled any
particular individual but of the many—of the all.
P In democracy there is no prescript™ right belonging to
any one to rule others. The people elect or choose tnffll
rulers • that is, the people desire to have a certain thing
or number of things done, and they elect or appoint or give
employment to a number of men, at three hundred pounds
or more per annum, as they, the voters may determine. A
general election determines who shall execute the people s
then, in its truest sense has no superior, no
hereditary ruler, no master, no owner of themselves, nor
of acres of land by hereditary right.
Democracy acts according to the requirements of
under such conditions, must grow powerful.
Democracy is native rule, not the rule of a foreigner.
Democracy is a law not made positively or absolutely lor
thf. convenience of the representative of the people as m
Victoria, but for the well-being of the multitude them-
selves, who abide by the enactments formulated m Parha-
“Democracy should demand the legal right to call a
member to account, who ignores the pledges made on his
candidature and, if evidence produced fails being satis-
factory, a two-thirds majority vote should compel him to
education for the masses should be the curric-
ulum to establish a well-founded federal institution
This expedient would prove of immense good to the
groaning outcasts of society ; likewise, prevent members
fr °“emoCT“tic B people^o principles are impelled to
view land monopoly as demoralising ; furthermore, they
must demand that all lands shall no longer be subject to
13
Federation of the Masses


the fall of the hammer; in other words the emancipation of
the groaning millions from their miseries must be achieved,
not by force, but by fair reasoning, Democrats of Victoria
have too long pandered to men, who have by self-con-
stituting themselves rulers, insolently dictated as to what
we should do with our own property.
The alienation of lands unto the few (when the cry
from the masses, in the year 1854, protested against it in
Melbourne, with “ Unlock the Lands ”) have made them
rich, while leaving the many in wretchedness and misery.
Is this monstrous handicapping to be perpetuated in this
comparatively enlightened age ?
The principle of federation enjoyed will be a means to
an end ; it will force us to acknowledge that we are a
power, and no longer victims to sudden, senseless passion,
like men under the influence of some unknown agency.
It is startling to witness the weakness of multitudes, whom
the statesmen can influence to madness by their political
chicanery. The use of the reason is chequered by cunning,
mingled with cupidity. Reason is the only power that
can fertilise the world with genuine freedom.
Briefly, we will ask ourselves what produced the cause,
in the year 1889, whereby the dock-labourers in London
discovered that their well-being was not in the constitution
of their native country ?
Ah! the struggle for existence tormented the vitals of
every individual member; death was preferable to life
under their enslavement, hence the crisis.
Yes, tormented by the cupidity of their masters, they
resented the opposing power of those who imposed on
them and their families such inhuman tortures.
However, the Australians contributed £30,800, blended
with democratic sympathy to alleviate their long standing
miseries.
It is here manifest that no agency outside of human
philanthropy came to the rescue of the home and continen-
tal strikers who were emaciated from the want of proper
nourishment. In fine, the strong overpowered the weak,
manifesting clearly that federation of all trades and voca-
tions is absolutely essential to their well-being.
By dear-bought experience we have learned that our
14
Federation of the Masses.


masters desire to enjoy too much from our earthly frames ;
therefore, we desire nothing but a fair wage for our daily
labors ; resentment we cannot but feel, and in our anxiety
for a better methodical system to govern, we, in the dark- j
ness of our political rights, urge upon all trades and
vocations to federate themselves, whereby our rights may
be determined.
To return to the principles of democracy, Why do we in
political matters rarely find two or more persons regarding
things in the same light, notwithstanding the requirements
being equal ?
Politicians pretend to be engaged after the welfare ot
the industrial classes. Is it so ? Nay ! Why not ?
Because they study to dupe their supporters, while at
the same time assist in keeping them in slavery.
Statesmen not only do this, but they make ot us
harlequins for their sport,
it would be wrong, therefore, I presume, to intimidate
the Australian native and their promising order into the
belief that if political subjects were more generally
discussed at their meetings, sports for the politician would
soon be dispelled to the winds, and a more free and
enlightened people would soon stand in the place ot the
present harlequins and whim horses.
What are men asking for, re the numerous strikes?
They are asking for a more equal distribution of the
world’s wealth. ,
Men argue thus That if we have a more equal
distribution of the world’s wealth we should be happier;
we should have more time on our hands to study, to
educate ourselves and our children ; and the world would
be better. What are we now doing? Largely trading
upon each others ignorance and rights. We enter into
competition, we press the laborer down, crushing his
frame-work in the battle of life for subsistence : and what
for J o uld the silence of the tomb, possessed with myriads
of human beings of ages gone by, be substituted for the
present race, what hideous forms and perplexing com-
plaints from the numerous people would alight upon ouy
ears.


So my friends, while you resolve to crush the proposition
respecting tne federating of the masses, so sure would you
puzzle a Socrates or a Plato to know what to put in its
place for the better well-being of all people.
What is this conundrum that involves obedience and
subserviency to the men who talk so much about the state
of the country, and perform but little to advance its
prosperity or develop its resources ?
Both theological and political heads have continued to
manage, up to the year 1890, to guide public opinion, to
serve their own ends, with but small reference to the
public weal.
Federation of the masses would transform this aggra-
vating formula, while the people would adapt themselves
to their political privileges, which now stands at variance
with their interests.
Public opinion under the federation principle, would not
I only guide ministers, but also Parliament itself. It would
also discover that nature was no longer blameable for not
giving a plate to every man, woman, and child, ushered on
this our planet.
Be no longer deceived, no man descended from his stock
was designed by nature to become living or live stock to
his own species.
Man despises the natural laws that govern him, and
neglects the reality of the revolutions of his misfortunes,
hence the multiplied misery and wretchedness that
persecutes his senses, leaving him an animated automaton
without understanding.
How is this bondage to be removed from the industrial
classes ?
By federating together !
How is political knowledge to be acquired ?
By unity of purpose !
Cowardly man, why longer delay ?
Why pinion youselves to the delirium of cranks and
unscrupulous individuals ?
Why longer suffer from the allurements of avarice, from
interested oppressors, who fail to respect you, or defend
your rights ?


Will man still continue to give encouragement to this
cruel political scourge ?
Live in poverty for the purpose of supporting men with J
long appendages to their names and their retinue, govern-
meats, and political representatives, and their friends.
What a swarm of bees could be enumerated producing
honey in the sacred name of justice.
Unfold this barbaric riddle : You have experienced, from
past and present legislation, the mischief and misery this
custom entails upon society.
Why suffer yourselves and families to be called outcasts |
of society ? .
Why is the world at the present time so full of injustice?
Because people would rather suffer than examine for
themselves.
However, the time has arrived for immediate action, re
the prying into the mysterious depths of public finance.
At the present moment nobody seems to the
public accounts in the aggregate, not at the right time,
and we, victims of sluggish apathy, find out by dear-bought
experience, that a small number of our kind rob us, devour
us, and we silently suffer!
What cruelty and insolence of the representative power,
my indignation will not be appeased.
Surely the people have sacrificed their reason, and the
rulers of nations are more despicable than their supporters.
Are the people of Victoria satisfied that they are living
under the rule of democracy ? If so, ignorance and pride
manifestly invades the territory of their reasoning.
This great work of democracy now entered upon, will,
doubtless, be long accomplishing its ends, because it is
necessary that one and the same resolve should be com-
municated throughout the nations, that the unanimity of
opinion should assimilate the great mass of heterogenous
elements. ,
Principles, not men, follow a warranted conclusion that
no Premier should be allowed to spend fifteen millions a
year of the tax-payers money without censure.
The immaculate Railway Commissioner and partisan to
the Premier, with his three thousand pounds per annum,
requires shunting to distant lands by the people.


Democracy of the present day is practically a melo-
drama, whereby a painful reality discloses that we are
becoming a race of automata.
We are fettered by prejudice, manacled by a small
number of anarchists, if I may speak so, who defy the
opposition to question them on public matters.
Hear the words of a Premier, “ The Minister shall tell
you nothing more now. • You may talk as you like.”
The heads of our representatives in Parliament,
especially those on the opposition side of the house, may
be compared to an empty warehouse secured by locks and
bars, to prevent marauders from taking away nothing.
The government of the day, discovering their weakness,
looked upon them with no sympathy or fellow-feeling'
which they could not understand.
This bombast and tyranny of a Premier, seemingly, have
struck the people of Victoria with stupor, so much so that
they have failed to distinguish right from wrong; hence
the depravity of the natural senses.
Does this usurpation of political rights, by the govern-
ment of Victoria, turn to the advantage of the people ?
Can liberty and justice spring up out of the bosom of
men who alienate the rightful property of the voters to
their partisans ?
View the consensis of opinion in Victoria. Are not the
mass of the people passive and indifferent as to how their
property is taken from them ?
Shall we, as a people, bow perpetually subservient to
the self-interests of any government who do not manifest
any desire to foster public interest ?
These are questions for the people. Your wants call
upon _ you to investigate, notwithstanding the fact that
questions both abstruse and difficult may present them-
selves before you.
It is absolutely necessary for a people to become at once
courageous ; that every individual should see the necessity
of banishing from their parliamentary institutions all
faddists and factious parties, and apply the fountain of
reason towards the united interests of the individual classes.
Is it not time that the people felt it necessary to do


something for themselves, when they know that rapacity
and fraud fill the pockets of those who rule ?
It is an admitted fact that politicians in all ages have
been so completely debauched by the subserviency of the
people, that severity and seductiveness were found to be
the only planks to knit the hearts and affections more
closely together, and caused us to acknowledge hereditary
right with more tenderness-
To enumerate in detail the motly inoffensive voters that
cherish the principles of federation in a limited form,
would occupy more space than lam allowed. Suffice it to
say that bakers, butchers, coach builders, cabmen, drapers,
dairyman, engine-drivers,- foundrymen, grocers, _ iron-
workers, joiners, miners, etc., etc., are interested in the
contest, re the federating principle.
By considering such a result that all trades and voca-
tions will ultimately federate, it will be seen and admitted,
I think, without consternation, that dividing the whole
into so many organizations does not perfect society,
therefore, many whose names are now recorded in the
book of honor, must necessarily fall back into the ranks to
make place for more progressive, worthy, and faithful
representatives.
“ The cunning statesman, whose untiring skill.
Fashions and bends the present to his will.”
If two-fifths of a community combine, for the purpose of
increasing their worldly stock, how much more be
the advantage to a nation, to have the five-fifths enjoying
their reciprocal interests.


CHAPTER II.
“MAN’S INHUMANITY TO MAN
MAKES COUNTLESS THOUSANDS MOURN.
*N the ranks of society the industrial classes have been
termed the uncultured portion, and when left entirely
to a rational explanation, the term cannot be offensive.
When we picture to ourselves the depths of misery,
wretchedness, and depravity, even in our midst, blended
with ignorance and superstition in which the minds of the
people are steeped, we cannot fail to see the want in intro-
ducing a work dealing with the federating principle, and
likewise the many new movements in thought and labor.
In undertaking to reform political and social questions,
man has to reflect studiously over the combative principles
of the age in which he lives, and under which communities
suffer. We find evidence recorded on the pages of history
that informs us of facts, which painfully disclose the
weakness and obstinacy of uninstructed races of human
beings. Those unfortunates, being unguarded, were tre-
mendously handicapped by stratagists, whose expanded
reason laid secret and hidden plots for the purpose of
extending their power, likewise to environ the credulous
tribe into obedience and subserviency.
Every political representative of the present day guides
his tongue to this particular end, and its gigantic dimensions
are too glaringly before us.
What a formidable and fertile root this cancer. It has
developed itself to the gratification of every ruler, repre-
sentative, and teacher in Victoria, to the mental equanimity
of a passive and seduced race.
The investigations of the researching student decide


that man in his ignorance and credulity, creates no
uneasiness on the part of statesmen to govern them.
Experience teaches us that the groaning nmlions in all
civilised lands laudably praise men for their deceit, not-
withstanding the deplorable sights of known distress in
their midst. , , -
Dishonour is shadowed on every side of the portals ol
political institutions ; and yet man, with his inexhaustible
hope and confidence, points to the boon that may issue
from platform addresses. But, mark here 1 political se-
duction does not always arise in defiance of your will, it
is your own seal, with the monogram of approval.
These remarks are only designed to form a repertory o
that knowledge which has been handed down to a seduced
people from time to time, without any perceptible onslaught
into political blunders that have plunged millions into
distress, depression, and last, not least, into freaks ot
suicidal mania.
I feel unable to discover what better mode men can
have for boycotting themselves, than to decree to pander
to designing persons.
A government concerned in the welfare of its people,
will not concede to a company the right to cut timber over
an area of 5000 acres, for forty two years on the payment
of two shillings and sixpence per hundred feet cut. .
To concede to every man his political right, would be\
the only true and legitimate basis on which we could
establish a better social organization.
For every social wrong there must be a remedy, the
solution of which can be nothing less than the abolition
of the wrong. , , #l . . , .
Half-way measures, coupled with semi-anarchism, do
not appease our variances. We, as a people,, have been
misled into a never-ending labyrinth of calamities.
What we immediately require is to federate for the
purpose of removing the inequalities now existing, the dry
rot is now consuming our physical powers; and to subvert
the designs now plotted by wily cunning legislators, we
must federate ourselves. # .
What is the object of every citizen, mechanic, or
labourer ? His or their first duty is to find out the easiest


method whereby to earn their living, and by transforming
their labor into the form of wealth, they are able to possess
and enjoy the fruits of their labor, and for those depending
upon them. But he finds, owing to the fierce competition,
the wages of labor are very inadequate to support him and
his family; or it may be that he cannot procure employ-
ment however willing to undertake it (in like circumstances
the writer has been manifold times); or perhaps he en-
rolls himself among the unemployed, receiving from the
government a charitable wage ; or it may be (as it has been)
that in his desperation he resorts to suicide.
!. I* cannot be denied that this last has been the fate of
thousands, driven to it from sheer necessity, from political
aggression, from coercion, the prevailing principle that
inspires the victim with dread of early starvation.
Are these pictures of abjectness issued from the natural
inclinations of their hearts ? Nay, the pressure of the
times regulated their fate. These instructive lessons to
mankind are trampled on, and the lives of the masses are
cut short by violence, and from political injustice.
Let this so-called fugitive class arm themselves by
federating, and suffer no longer to be ruled by aggressive
standards.
Why longer perpetuate laws that misleads the judgment,
and fills the hearts with sorrow and uncertainty ?
We are too slow in grasping the sensations that assemble
in our political institutions.
How much better was the free-born Englishman who
lived in the time of his Saxon ancestors ! He would, at
that remote period of legislation, on arriving at age, take
the wife allotted to him, with his house and his seed-
plot, and enjoy an equal share in the great fields of labor
with his fellow men ; he would also have been privileged
to gather fagots, take game in the common wood, and
graze his cattle on the common pasturage ; unlike the
present day (when neighbours around you will find fault
at their neighbours cattle sheltering under their trees,
when ministers of lands can concede not only reserves to
their private friends, but also large tracts of country,
whose area reaches 5000 acres).
The Tudor system of lapd grabbing still continues


unproductive to the masses ; therefore, to wish to enjoy at
the expense of another is a false calculation to meet the
requirements of a people.
The results of such proceedings are but reprisals,
whereby factious parties ally themselves into training, for
the purpose of manifesting their political genius to the
complicated elements of their own species.
Comparing legislation in the nineteenth century with
that of the Saxons and Tudors looks rather like drifting
ino a lapse of barbarism, owing to the numerous syndicates
now organised for the purpose of usurping the rights of
their neighbours.
To recapitulate in respect of those unfortunates who
have either perished by starvation or committed suicide
from the dread of it, what are we to say to those govern-
ments where such an excited struggle exists among men ?
What would be the verdict of a coroner’s jury in such
cases outside of law institutions ?
The answer is obvious.
Then, when it is obvious that men destroy themselves
from fear of starvation, we must draw a line of demarcation
between the governed and those who govern.
We must dispel to the winds for ever the rulers that
ally themselves with land monopolists or syndicates of any
kind, they inevitably burden the laborer with toil.
Do the vast majority of colonists in the Australian 1
empire know that they are a disinterested people, while
syndicates are prowling the nation ? The men who suffer
most from the intrigues of their political representatives,
cannot see that the agents, whom he helps to enrich for
their services rendered, holds the curb of despotism o\er
them still we call ourselves a democratic community.
How long shall we survive under the present intolerant
land system, which is subversive of all democracy?
Democracy, as it is at the present day, is a stumbling
block to liberty, notwithstanding the rapid and wide-spread
growth of political intelligence in Victoria.
Let us look forward to the necessity of adhering to thpse
developed minds who are now stirring certain ambitions
and aspirations; who desire also to keep us beings subju-,
gated to their inordinate desires. Doubtless this class of
23
Federation of the Masses


men would distinguish themselves by their generous dis-
position to labor arduously for the purpose of alleviating
the miseries of their fellowmen.
Let every man, who has the future at heart for himself
and his offspring, study what should be the laws that
govern him, and deal with the same as they do with the
materials to perfect any work.
Note, the epoch of extortionate greed and syndicate
movements will soon pass away when you bestir your-
selves to achieve your political rights. Then will the sun
of liberty dawn upon your honest industry, and take
the place over the heads of men who now disfranchise you
of your political privileges.
True, Labor is beginning to ask questions. Why
should we not represent ourselves in parliament? Our
parliamentary representatives have disregarded justice,
popular opinion, and popular rights. It must be palpably
clear to many that we receive no other mark of attention
from our rulers, than to keep us as whim-horses, whereby
we must bow subserviently to their demands.
What instructive lessons to mankind! Ah, he refuses
to look at these designers f And surely all this is called
absolute progression. Can we wonder at the condition of
man being so helpless and so oppressed? Indeed, it seems
to me impossible to advance any reason for supposing the
contrary.
Let every man take under review his own intelligence,
then he will see directly that the knowledge of foot-ball,
cricket, horse racing, and gambling, supersedes that of his
political genius, and his reason.
Paradoxical as this may seem, has there been a man
outside of parliament that sought redress in reference to
the conduct of the Political Company, who smuggled
through a thin house an additional £IOOO per annum,
for Mr. although the modest sum of sixpence a
day extra to railway workmen was refused.
This Political Company’s record surfeits to repletion
with extravagance of public monies. Down trodden
labor found no generous supporter in this company. No,
they were doomed to disappointment.
No representative came before the country to relate


how parliamentary duties were discharged. Nay, their
silence added inhumanity to the natural and melancholy
severity of the law. Such conduct on the part ot our
representatives and government, should have excited a
degree of reprobation among all classes so strong indeed,
that it baffles all my understanding to give the reader
an adequate conception of their sluggish apathy m political
!H9jtt6rS •
If men presume that their chief business of life is only
to study how to eat, drink, work, and sleep, such con-
clusions must inevitably give encouragement to rapacious
invaders to subdue their rights. . „
0 my countrymen! when will you learn wisdom from
the oppression of those whom you elect to power? How
they, in your ignorance, plunge you into obedience and
servitude by their cajolery. 0, unhappy man! why not
unite into one brotherhood and defy the invasion ot your
Sviiat oppresses the labourer so much is the inability of
knowing their own strength and capabilities, they know
not that the power is invested in themselves to benefit
their position, likewise of overthrowing the power whom
they elect to govern. . ,
How deplorable is their negligence respecting our duties!
To acquire knowledge, and retire immediately after its
acquisition into obscurity, leaves reason to be scorned by
instinct of the lower animals.
The rulers of nations may well be termed unscrupulous
gamblers, who gamble with national wealth and other
resources of the nation. To substantiate the accusation
re political gamblers, we will review briefly the Education
Endowment Bill, 1889, which was abandoned at the close
of the session of that year. The machinery provided for
carrying out the endowment principle, was one of the most
glaring, vicious, and conjuring design, that a minister of
the Crown could have plotted off. It is inexplicable to
rational minds how the Minister could have introduced a
bill which proposed to place 2,000,000 acres of the public
estate at the absolute disposal of a fashionable clique ot
politicians who would have had power, at their pleasure,
to exchange rich areas of this land for worthless patches


in the possession of their friends, and the right to mort-
gage the lands they possessed in trust, in order to purchase
others in the possession of private persons.
Had this coalition Minister of Education studied design-
edly to promote jobbery and corruption, the purpose could
not have been more effectually contemplated.
This surprising impudence of one of our chiefs baffles
all description of trust confided to him; such conduct be-
tween citizens respecting their private property would be
tantamount to fraud, and litigation. This spirit of
estrangement and division among men strengthens the
backbone of power, hence the gambling with the public
estate.
How is it possible for taxpayers to paddle their own
canoe, without political education, on such troubled waters?
How significant are the lines of a celebrated poet, when
he says:—
The world is a bundle of hay.
Mankind are the asses who pull,
Each tugs it a different way,
And the greatest of all is John Bull.
Verily, Verily, reality is described in the above lines.
I may illustrate this by directing your attention to the
misery, wretchedness, and depravity which you see around
you day by day. Scattered over the surface of the earth,
we have many countries in varied forms and conditions.
These, again, are peopled by different races, each with its
own language, manners, customs, and religions, all differ-
ing, yet all belonging to the same planet which binds
mankind generally; that is, by sympathy in nationality,
religion, and should be in relationship, while sojourning
in this mortal frame.
How applicable are the following lines to statesman who
squander public monies, public lands, &c,, &c.:—
To basely crawl, yet wear a face of pride ;
To rob the public, yet o’er law preside;
Salute a friend, yet stung in the embrace;
Such is the honour which in courts take place.
From the standpoint of the above lines, the industrial
classes must unite, likewise federate themselves into one
gigantic order, not only to keep themselves from serfdom,
26
Federation of the Masses.


but to command that status that in sickness or accident J
fhey oan“the demand required to alleviate any suffer- I
in CtMS
sTlet l^cSLg 0 voice of the Australian
native utter forth their melodious tones for freedom and
" more equable form of taxation. How dep orable rn the
past have been our negligence to ' '“Vf'. , f
p Let us summon the spiritofOTt 'When.who fought for
our liberty and welfare, and let the civilised
vividlv return. Have not governments of civilised
countries in the past, as well as the present day, shown
themselves to be* Shylocks, who have —d immense
fortunes by pestiferously manipulating the public fund
all Have P the y people of those lands resented or reproached
the men who systematically plundered their .
Ah ! the happiness of these people who slumber in silent
apathy, have Teen destroyed by seduction by a
please system, wandering tteir eyw
the taxpayers of the Australians at the present day are
m
rulers perpetually mislead us, should we not hasten by
speedv remedies to overthrow the judgment of this motly t
crew y Doubtless in seeking redress, embarassments unfore-
seenlv will arise when entering into the explication of your
3 kws but this teaches us that the more assiduous
should be our efforts. Surely, the incessant lamentations
of the groaning millions call forth our sympathies and
° U pSs, in this our day, has proved a failure to unhappy
tradesmen, hence strikes that no tongue can tell the
dl Howmany r of this unhappy sort have we heard exclaim,
rmt a bullet to my head unknown to myself, lest this
great sea of trouble overwhelm me, or outrage the limits
° f O Lft“manity, and obstinate in your opinions.
Nothing 3a exceed your shaUowness, you are an
27
Federation of the Masses.


oppressed people by the operation of unjust laws made by
yourselves, unknowingly perchance, to the interests of
those who have tampered with your birthrights. Do you
know that your indifference to your laws, produces a
thousand and one calamities among men who have had to
bear the fatigue of the day in agony. Behold the miners
and others whose health has been undermined by fumes
poisonous to their systems, all their faculties impaired
through bad ventilation in the mines, also from fumes of
factories, where they eke out a miserable existence. Yes!
This is true to such an alarming degree, that hundreds
have died from blood poisoning leaving their wives and
families destitute of means and outcasts of society. The
federating principle under these conditions would restore
to the oppressed, Justice, Equality of Opportunity, Liberty,
and Fraternity; or in other words, “Do unto another
only that which thou wouldst he should do unto thee.”
No better definition can be attributed to justice.
Is it right or rational for men to cede the right of
another to because he is born rich, and that the weak
must yield to his caprices and domination ? No! Man by
so doing, sacrifices the respect that he should hold to him-
self, while ignoring the reciprocal relationship that should
knit the bonds of justice more closely together.
We as a community of reasonable beings (pardon me
for the term reasonable), have lived, and still live together,
estranged, instead of incorporating by organization our
political sentiments and reciprocal wants.
The loss of this united force revolutionizes the security
of the whole, as at present. In point of fact, society is
forced into a perpetual struggle, whereby that glorious
prospect of freedom is transferred over to those who
rule for the purpose of gambling with public interests.
We, as a people, are involved in a labyrinth of political
injustices; and the man who dare single himself out
courageously to speak of those enormities would be viewed
with suspicion and diffidence.
To be freed from parasites and usurpers of common
rights, we must necessarily federate together, and become
a race superior in intellect for the purpose of grasping the
more abstruse political questions that now oppress the
28
Federation of the Masses.


present generation. The young Australian natives in
their respective callings are infatuated, however, beyond
belief, contrary to that principle which should foster
Liberty, Freedom, and Fraternity. They have also hither-
to neglected to observe what are the rights of every indi-
vidual.
Why? Because such considerations imply a sacrifice
of study to games, such as football, cricketing, &c., &c.
This is to be deplored.
Man thus persuades himself into error, and swells the
number of unfortunates, an actual process unfortunately
for the working classes; which blends splendour with
illusion.
Let us take under our consideration what would flow
from the principles and actions of a commonwealth, whose
only care was the welfare of each other. One would see
in such monuments a fond devotedness to their species, a
nation of progressive principles, whose desire for Freedom
and Fraternity would adorn and beautify the nation in
which they lived.
However, there are cranks among us who never will be
persuaded that a satisfactory equivalent can be introduced
for the repose and tranquility of a people. It may be
safely asserted that this disposition of obstinacy produces
the wretchedness so glaring in every civilised part of the
world.
How debasing becomes this influence, when we suffer
ourselves to become the victims of worry, wretchedness,
and criticism. How strange and sad it is to see sensible
men and women permitting themselves to be depressed
and sore at heart from petty officials, whom they elect to
govern their interests.
If we look back to anything in this life it must be with
regret that we have contributed to the faults and feelings
of those whom we now charge with having been deaf to
our entreaties.
How fatal are the moments whereupon hinges our
political destiny; a proof that we want nothing but educa-
tion to raise the Australian colonies to a standard with-
out a parallel. Ah, my fellow workmen, it is surely
something very unpleasant to think of the number of


persons who live, and have lived mainly, if not entirely,
from the sweat of their fellow creatures, at the same time
devote with selfish energy his talents to increase the
number of his dollars.
With one common language we stand pre-eminently
over other races, therefore, by federating together, we can
establish a real fraternity amongst mankind, likewise merit
the name of being the pioneers of morality, liberty, and
social happiness.
There cannot be a more engaging or solemn subject for
contemplation than the study of the decadence of nations,
the cause of their decay, and the misery and wretchedness
endured therefrom.
The woes and sorrows of the poor, and the grievous ills
that flow from social inequalities; of the half starved
vagrant that hides his sores and his rags in some boiler or
loathesome cellar; of the mother who toils day and night
in order to keep body and soul together for her children
and herself. The picture is a gloomy one; but it is only
fair to say that the agency of this misery is based on the
principle of separation.
The numerous ills surrounding life and their severity are
not alleviated by the divergency of opinion, but by federat-
ing together. Injustice to yourselves is not a recipe for
redress; it will not comfort you in your despondency,
direct you in your perplexity, nor console you in your slug-
gish apathy respecting your political rights.
It will be admitted that few can get through this life
without sympathy ; many are the better for kindly advice;
hence the limited resource of my thoughts that pen words
that breathe and flow with the spirit of sympathy and
good wishes towards my fellow workmen.
If three-fifths of a community*combine, for the purpose of
increasing their worldly stock, how much more would be
the advantage to a nation, to have the five-fifths enjoying
their reciprocal interests.


CHAPTER III.
MR. SERVICE’S SPEECH.
s the fruit of knowledge is power, so will the federa-
ting principle of mankind be acknowledged as t re
attractive adjunct to demolish the caprices of men
who scruple not to plunge their fellow-creatures into want,
distress, and suffering: The world will for ever acknow-
ledge as its leaders and heroes the men who can narrow
and dwarf the selfish and inordinate desires of their species;
men that now keep wretched and ill-clad people before
them as an index to their prosperity.
The establishment of a federal institute must be model-
led and brought to such a standard that, before another
election crisis, the masses will find themselves better
acquainted, under the quiet and collective powers of ob-
servation, with forces that will overthrow the intrigues of
designing statesmen. ..
It is surprising to think how people take delight m the
misery of their own kind —ah ! even to insanity itselt.
One remarkable thing is that we should take so much
trouble at general elections to do that which has proved to
be of no material benefit to the masses. This perpetua-
tion of ignorance being recognised, law-makers keep
masters of the situation to seduce. But would it not be
a source of immense benefit to us if we did but resolve to
federate ourselves for the purpose of acquiring a knowledge
of our political mistakes, and learn, practically how to
defeat the enterprise of adepts and partisans elected to our
parliamentary institutions.
We should, by the simple act of federating, expunge
from the surface of the Earth a peculiar people, icmaikab c


in the past for their political trickery, their feet would no
longer disgrace the floor of our parliamentary institutions.
This influence of the federating principle would rela-
tively attract their genius, and we should benefit by their
co-operation.
These remarks, strange as they may appear, would, put
into practice, bind in harmonious connection all the varied
’ links in the chain of social interests. Labor would no
longer envy capital; capital would no longer stint labor of
its due reward. Daily experience shows that it is energetic
individualism which produces the most powerful effects
upon the life and actions of others, and really embodies
the principle of federation, and the best means of educating
uninformed.
Note, any remark that holds true of actual life, as well
as that which leads to the interest of the whole, should
be realised, and held together for practical purposes ; for
all experience serves to illustrate and enforce the lesson
that man perfects himself by gatheringphrases from the
utterances of men that truly fit them for the duties and
business of life.
The spirit of self-help, as exhibited in the energetic
action of our statesmen, furnishes the true material for
federating ourselves. Furthermore, I believe that no
'Tiealthier doctrine than self-help could be inculcated among
citizens, because our political independence is dependent
upon ourselves ; and what brighter prospect is there than
the present for utilising our energies ? Hitherto, we have
made no effort to accomplish this great end. The gigantic
agent of all our political troiibles is our sluggish apathy in
things which concern us the most, and that which directly
manifests itself antagonistically to our political interests,
we speedily prepare the way to exhibit our human
idolitary in its most degrading form—a worship of an
elective power, as heathenish in its effects as the worship
of an alligator.
All nations have lavished their praises on the value of
legislation, but at all times a delusion over estimated its
limits. National progress is the result of individual energy,
not of a factious few, as natural decay is of individual
idleness.


Old fallacies as to human progress must be shattered
under the principles of federation, such as “bogus budge s,
and the principles of consolidation must display the nature
of our progress. That a misunderstanding has existed too
long between leglislators and ourselves cannot be denied,
and to live upon such conditions in future if no such
mistakes had been made, would be manifesting mdolen
neglect of our own affairs. At the present day some call
for a Gillies, others for a Service, others for a more pro-
gressive assemblage of members to adorn our parliamen-
tary institutions, and when they found quietus is
restored. But, alas! we have been mistaken, the pro-
fession secure everything for themselves and leave nothing
for the people. . J , ,
How easily might this pernicious system of political
aggression be extinguished, instead of living like a peop e
who appear not even to know why they are living, ant
affecting not to believe in anything that menaces their
political rights. _ ,
Tricky governments in all lands, celebrated tor their
cunning and admirable education, serve the people accord-
ing as the scales are removed from their blindness.
Miserable representatives who endeavour to crush by
horrible impudence the political rights of man. Let e\ery
organization in Australia rally round and strive to become
one powerful factor, both socially and politically.
A common-wealth that can support each political mon-
ster, suchas the past has proved, is a whic
should be immediately solved. The simple truth is that
we have been both headstrong and bigoted, hence 1 10
ignorance of not knowing the powers invested in ourselves.
It will be admitted that the chief points of our knowledge
should be the weapons in our earthly campaign, to make
the struggle easy for existence, and of this fact we are but
too often and painfully plunged into misery and wretched-
U6SS*
In opposition to all old theories, citizens should carer
fully disintegrate every law enacted, and formulate a
standard of opinion from the varied experiences as to the
greatest good for the greatest number. _ Man s only to®
throughout all civilised lands has been himself, he leers


not liis own power and supremacy, hence his servility and
obedience.
The failure of all intellects elected to power to accom-
plish the business they ostensibly set forth at their
respective candidatures, is of itself suggestive that they
lacked the essential elements necessary for debating and
securing the people’s rights.
The strength of a people is never so apparent as when
industriously employed contrasting the elements elected to
power. Not only have men in the past as well as the
present stepped forward with inferior knowledge to repre-
sent us in parliament, but we have endorsed their harangue,
forced them to believe that they possessed giant intellects,
incomparable to emancipate the groaning millions from
their sufferings.
The only circumstance which I conceive alleviates the
sufferings of the many, is the justice that is promised to
be meted out to them after death ! It is deplorable that no
present changes take place for bettering their situation, and
as a necessary consequence, their sufferings are not abated.
Is it possible to conceive that politicians can disguise
from their thoughts that the continuation of such political
seductions might, sooner or later, excite a general revolt,
of which they would be the first victims ?
In order to avoid any threatened storm or revolt,
establish a federal institution, whereby revengeful
purposes will not be resorted to. How bitterly we have
been deceived in thus deluding ourselves by vain hopes,
by intriguing politicians.
Aye ! common-wealths make the dreadful sacrifice of
their political rights, leaving the representative juggler to
conciliate with governments against their national in-
terests.
Time in its perpetual march inflicts the same political
smarts, the same sorrows ; aye, and the same disappoint-
ments. This fact is a deplorable one, because the con-
ception of the individual classes is so inadequate to grasp
the enormous handicapping that they have to submit to.
The working classes have too long delayed their consider-
ations respecting the mist and fog they continually live in.
Laws are enacted openly, in defiance of their temporal
34
Federation of the Masses.


rights; hence the strikes, wretchedness, misery, and
depravity in our land. .. . n
This number one legislation has become so paintui to an
sober and rational citizens, that they have been taught a
lesson; and it is to be hoped ere long that such acknow-
ledgments will prove useful and lasting to the many.
I cannot do better at this juncture, than lay before my
fellow-workmen the views expressed by Mr. Service, ex-
Premier and ex-Treasurer of the colony of Victoria. The
following is a reply to a request upon the series of articles
published in The Argus on the actual condition of the
public finances.
(The present Premier and Treasurer, Mr. Gillies, was
charged with depleting public funds unduly, and shaved
the Treasury rather too close for the future credit of the
country. , ,
Mr. Service said ;—I have noted what has appeared in
The Argus in regard to our financial position, and I must
be permitted to say that the articles have been written with
admirable and rare perspicuity or clearness. In reference
to the carrying forward of the expenditure of one year to
another, I may say that the principle that no money spent
in one year should be charged to the debit of the following
year, and that a balance shown, should be a solid cash
balance, is a thoroughly sound one. But we have to con-
sider the trust funds.
Mr. Gillies in his budget, showed a credit balance in tlie
books of £1,704,000, but The Argus says that, of that
amount £1,200,000 should be written off, because the
money was earned and expended before the end of the last
financial year. That would leave the balance at only
£500,000. But there is £945,000 in trust funds which is
not appropriated, but which, under existing circumstances,
we cannot ignore. It lies to the credit of the public
account, and if it be added to the £500,000, we have a
cash balance of £1,500,000 in sound numbers. And it is
quite legitimate that this should be done.
Trust funds must be used one way or another, because
the government is paying interest on them, and is bound
to use them in some shape. And Ido not consider it an
illegitimate use of these funds to apply them towaids


anticipating payments, such as the payment of interest on
Ist of July, which, though belonging to the accounts of
the next year, must necessarily come out of the cash
account in the year proceeding.
The principle of financing is as simple as it can be, if
you stick to the practice of never spending any money
until you get it, and never spending more than you get.
That is really a fundamental principle ; but in a compli-
cated system of finance, such as a national system, a man
must be able to look ahead.
If the trust funds were permanently invested, if they no
longer formed part of the cash balance, it would be a
matter of necessity to return to the system of debiting to
the year every penny paid in the year ; but with all this
money in hand, I don’t see that it could be better em-
ployed than it is.
Twelve months’ interest is paid in twelve months after
all, and the only difference is that, being a quarter behind,
we charge to the year that is last passed a little less than
its share.
I would say that it must be borne in mind that for all
practical purposes the Treasurer may take the trust funds
as forming part of the ways and means for the year—part
of the ways and means of the year unvoted by parliament,
and unauthorised except by custom.
Parliament has sanctioned the use to which they are
put, and is a very legitimate use. I am decidedly of
opinion that we are going much too fast.
I have no hesitation in saying that.
It is but a few years back—l think at the time when I
was in office, so far as I can remember—that a loan ex-
penditure of £2,000,000 per annum was regarded as
ample.
I was anxious last session to obtain an insight into our
affairs, so as to be able to judge as to how far our pros-
perity was based upon borrowed money, and so I moved
for a return of the loan expenditure spread over a series of
years. The return was laid on the table of the Legislative
Council on the last day of the session, but, as it has not
yet been printed, I have not had an opportunity of study-
ing it. But, I assume, the statement in the Argus is
36
Federation of the Masses.


correct, and that we have been expending £4,000,000 of
loan money per annum.
That amount is out of all proportion.
We are creating a class of men—a large class of work- t
men —who are totally dependent upon the expenditure of |
borrowed money for work, and some day, and beioie \eiy
long, wo must face our position, and decide upon a slacken-
ing, if not a stoppage in our borrowing. _ I
Borrowing to a limited extent is desirable if the money \
is used for productive works. .
The difference between legitimate borrowing and illegiti-
mate borrowing, is the difference between one glass of
wine taken by a man and a half-a-dozen glasses. The one is
a gentle stimulant, which may do good, the half-a-dozen
will produce greater depression than existed before, and do
injury to the whole physical system. _ _
You cannot look too far ahead in this piactical world,
and you cannot take too much into account great contin-
gencies, such as a European war, which are_ always
possible. At the same time, however, I don’t think that
the London market is now so easily or suddenly effected.
They look upon us as being a progressive, sound-headed
people, and, therefore, do not now regard as serious
passing matters which at one time might have arrested
their attention. , \
What they do look at, however, is the total indebtedness
of the colony, and they calculate what is the burden o
debt per head. .
When they find that we are over borrowing, they will
begin to shake their heads. It is that possibility which
we must avoid; but lam afraid that is just the position to
which we are rapidly coming. We are borrowing too
ext'year (1890), we will float a loan already authorised
amounting to £5,600,000 ; and next year also a bill will
probably be brought in for an additional loan of £8,000,000
to £10,000,000. We have already borrowed £37,000,000,
so if we add £13,000,000 to that amount we will have a
total of £50,000,000, or £6O for every man, woman, and
child in the community. „
It is not likely that there will be any sudden stoppage of


supplies. The first indication will be a fall in the value
of our debentures.
_ A wise Treasurer will show us his wisdom by exercising
his prudence ; by even fighting in parliament against the
desire for reckless borrowing, and by pointing out the
necessity for “ca ing canny.” Mr. Gillies and Mr. Munro
well know what that means.
I will interpret it. It means “ proceed with caution.”
I I have read what has been urged in regard to separating
\ ie railway accounts from the general accounts, and with
much of it I cordially agree,
r— I remember that some years ago Mr. Lyell and other
gentlemen submitted that the commercial departments of
the government should have their balance sheets kept
altogether separate from those of the administrative
departments. But that has always been the practice.
Every department is kept separate, but surely there can
be no objection to their balance sheets being stitched
together. This is all that is done.
The idea of separating the commercial from the adminis-
trative departments has never taken root. But so far as the
Railway Department is concerned, I don’t think it would
be an improvement if we had a special balance sheet
prepared in the manner in which the balance sheet of a
Railway company in England is prepared.
There should be means of ascertaining at a glance what
words are charged to capital account.
I or example, I see that they are laying new rails on the
Adelaide line, but do not no whether or not the expenditure
is to be debited to capital or current account, or partlv to
both. r J
There should be such an audit, and such a clear state-
ment as would enable every one to see if the money was
properly applied.
I have noticed, too, the trouble caused by the under
estimating in connection with the railway department. I
cannot understand why the Commissioners should continue
to estimate that working expenses will be equal to 58 per
cent, on earnings, when experience shows us, year after
year, that they are greater.
Last year they amounted to 62 per cent) and care should
38
Federation of the Masses.


be taken not to commence the year with a manifest error
in the calculations. , ..
As to the cost of railway works, the continuous under-
estimating is very reprehensible. I feel very strongly on
the pointfand I would go the length of making the person
who furnished the estimate, responsible for it being u
reasonably correct (or, in other words, dismissal for mcom-
petency).
The words in brackets are mine. . _ ,
I quite admit that part of the excess is due to the
increased cost of land, but I would make the Engineer
produce his books, and show how much he put down tor
lands, and how much for works.
If it is true, as stated in The Argus , that there have
been estimates for engineering works 50 per cent, below
cost, it shows that there has been something grievously
wrong in the calculations. It will be the duty of the
Government to see that such mistakes do not occur yeai
aft A "wise man will always over-estimate rather than
under-estimate. „ ~ _
This is the version given by The Argus , re the opinions
of Mr. Service on the public purse. >
Touching the views of Mr. Service on the public purse,
I feel constrained to assert, that unity, m the interests o
each and all, should be the dominant idea m individual
matters. This principle, to be adopted, would produce
intrinsic value to the cause of suffering humanity.
Dr. Strong, in his address at the Town Hall, Melbourne,
on June the 9th, 1890, related that he “ had not himself
been in any of the large sweating dens, but he had again
and again been in houses which might well be designated
hovels; and where poor women, deserted wives with
sick and drunken husbands, were sweating from morning
till night, to make a paltry sum of 2/- to support their^
Mr. 6 Deakin also said at the same meeting that they
“ had information that showed only too clearly that the
malady was among the community already. i-heve .is
no use people beating about the bush, let us frankly and
fairly face it and cut it out.


Scenes of triumph, as well as of horror, have been
enacted in Victoria. But, alas! The central monument
that lifts itself above the group of electorates in Victoria,
needs an effort on the part of every individual to realise
who is living with him in the latter half of the nineteenth
century, and that the industrial classes as a whole are
sweated “ whim horses.”
While ignorance and prejudice continue to be strong
barriers to the march of freedom, so long will the laboring
classes be cooped up together like fowls in a coop ; evidently
to fascinate the eye of man, not for that of God.
How many of this unfortunate class would prefer hiding
from public gaze, being clearly attributable to the fact,
that rapacity for wealth is permeating the minds of a few,
who away from business heartily enjoy existence without
taking a glance at the thousands around in abject poverty,
miserty, and wretchedness. Ah !
/ I could a tale unfold, whose lightest word
I Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,
j Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their spheres.
J Thy knotted and combined locks to part,
I And each particular hair to stand on end,
/ Like quills upon the fretful porcupine :
j But this eternal blazen must not be
To ears of flesh and blood, List, list, O ! list.
Shakespeare, Hamlet, Act 1,
The cementing of new ideas must work into the very
centre of Victoria.
Victoria is full of vague aspirations, half-formed and
impracticable theories of social and political perfection, and
an uneasy feeling is perceptible that the old order of things
is dying out, giving place to new.
A little friction that would but rend the crust of modern
fashion, in these times of sweating and suspended ani-
mation, would disturb the enjoyment of those who would
laugh over the astonishing rudeness of the writer that
would advocate the principles of federating the masses.
J. S. Mill once said : —The worth of a state, in the long
run, is the worth of the individuals composing it.” No
body of people in their senses would permit a few of their
kindred to keep the mass of a nation in involvements and
wretchedness year by year. Yet, the character of a general
40
Federation of the Masses.


tax-payer is not a whit better than the tribes that slaughter
and pillage; therefore I would suggest the following:—
« Wanted intelligent men for the colony of Victoria. Must
be of progressive abilities, likewise advocates to the umty
of purpose and federal organization of all trades. This
advertisement would be very a propos in adjusting the m-
competency of our law-makers. . ,
It would likewise prove a panacea in relieving the
country from being egregiously humbugged with political
“fad”. How is it that governments in all lands ignore
the people’s voice and cede to the dictates of lawyers?
Why are the peoples of a nation not supposed to know
the imperial measure of sap which is extorted from their
political rights ? ,
What is the definition of a statesman, politician, and
lawyer? . .
Incorporated together the modern meaning signifies jug-
gler. They are to be distinguished by their robes and
wigs, by deceiving the majority to the comfort of the few,
while participating enormously the benefits accruing from
the property of their fellowmen. 0 tempora! 0 mores.
It we will but review the conditions and circumstances
that produce this fault finding, we shall at a glance per-
ceive that we, as fault finders or complainants in the case,
are but accomplices to the oppression that we have to
endure. The supposed virtuous man depraves himself by
becoming a parasite of the seducing fraternity; therefore,
it is the craft of man that works the destruction of the
many; and the inevitable must be, that the wisdom of the
oppressed must and can only save them from the powerful.
There is one thing certain, while people remain inactive
towards their political rights, conquerors will seduce,
chiefs will oppress, the oppressed will continue to be
“Whim Horses,” and the few will continue to plunder
the nation. „
A writer of repute estimates knowledge as power. Me
says, “By the help of knowledge and information we are
never left without resources and means of subsistence;
and hence a philosopher who had suffered shipwreck,
observed justly to his companions, who were lamenting
the loss of their fortunes, ‘As for me I carry all my fortune


in myself.’ ” This lesson teaches the want of government
within ourselves, while fostering a principle of despotism,
tyianny, and legal robbery. Rash would he be, however,
who would assume that this little work will be the last of
the federation cause.
Victoria, like other nations, is crushing the bone and
sinew of its people under the weight and caprices of its
powerful enemies, but the national spirit I trust is not
yet dead. On the contrary, the people of Australia, under
oppression, are developing qualities that were not visible
in the fifties, or in the days of their prosperity.
A common hate has had power, for a time at least, to
weld factions into power, but federation of the masses,
with the first smile of good fortune to its cause, will
remove persistently the powerful enemies that govern.
It would be hard to prophesy what benefits might be
the future blessings of a race that has been so long
oppressed, and still manifesting a love for independence.
It is the dollars of a wealthy lower order in Victoria that
throttles his unfortunate neighbour, and not for one
moment can the ruling power afford to slacken their grasp.
When the flood of immigration entered upon our shores
in the fifties, the imposing magnitude of our gold resources
must be pronounced to have been more than of common
interest; consequently, two-thirds of the arrivals made off
immediately for the JLI Dorada, while those of governing
ambitions remained in the city, laying down on firm lines
the foundation of its national policy, besides holding the
balance of power in their own hands.
The natural tendency of this latter class, holding within
its grasp the forces that were pouring in a resistless torrent
over Victoria, we find that in a very short space of time
the most fertile lands of the nation became transferred into
their hands, causing the first shock of the people to cry
out, “ Unlock the lands.” J
Political convulsions in the earliest beginnings of con-
stitutional government, endeavoured to overthrow the then
existing power, but, alas! it was only making a breach for
another, and still stronger, to be in turn absorbed in the
same degenerate trade.
Victoria, during this rapacious work, was constantly


acquiring from without by the westward movement of
population and commerce, vast additions to her stock ot
“ifif possible to suppose that while the gold fields carried
such an effectual charm, that the people could keep pace
with the intrigues of men who held office for their persona
aggrandisements? If so, the perceptive and intellectual
faculties would not prove a curiosity, but one of the
wonders of the world. . , , <•
We as a people, appear to have fallen into a state of
depression and despair, and view political aggression as
being mere accidents of nature, whereby the groups of
poverty, depravity, and crime, can be traced to those who
g °Re™ew the sur-charge ot taxes with the Irish people at
the present day in their native land ; their possessions aie
burdensome and the humble tenant toils to enrich the
man of opulence, under no common guarantee or protection.
In Victoria the inception of this aggravated calamity is
rapidly subjugating the people by vile compacts of coalitions
who apportion out power to their nearest friends, creating
a spirit for federating all trades together. »
Let the people of the Australians note the disorders ot
thpir rulers and of the many rivals who desire to gam
ascendency,’ whereby the whole power of the nation shall
under their rule. This increasing desire for
popTarity with the few. should be instructive lessons to
we have in the past exposed our weakness,
and have slept well after hearing the “ lullaby of those
rivals! A great deal of political nonsense is uttered at
general elections, for the purpose of firing the minds of the
electors with enthusiasm, and honey-comb their minds foi
their own aggrandisements. What a mockery, what a
refinement of cruelty, seducing the poor who hye in cellars
or arrets or spend their time in the open air m filth and
wretchedness, wMle the seducer sings a victory mtnumph
over them. Anyhow, we can hardly think that human
natures, beset with wants, destitute of resources, would
ignore the establishment of a federal institution.
V Dark and mysterious scenes of suffering are endure y


many of our kindred, in the mines as well as in large cities
and towns; and yet the many social and political revolu-
tions that take place, scarcely a ripple is to be noticed on
the even current of common-wealth.
Political ambition and an unwise passion for aggrandise-
ment have aroused the suspicions of the tax-payer, also
awakened them to the necessity of acknowledging that
they have become weary of parental government.
The federating principle is moving gradually onward
towards a crisis in the world’s history, which must become
of interest in every thing that concerns us. Old problems
are passing away, and new are waiting for solution on a
scale that unity is strength. The angry and boiling waters
of popular passion declare that they no longer can pull in
the same boat with those who have insincerely represented
them, hence the necessity of federating together.
The hard needs of man necessarily compels him to
federate, and win his hard bread with sweat under more
favoi'able circumstances than he has hitherto done. We
must no longer yield to the strongholds of political associ-
ations that bind us to pay homage to the very walls and
stones of their government buildings.
t “Methinks I see in my mind a noble and puissant
nation rousing herself like a strong man from sleep, and
shaking her invincible locks.”— Milton.
Breathes there a man with soul so dead,
Who never to himself hath said.
This is my own, my native land.— Scott.
Did man but understand what universal good would
flow from a rational conception of the wants of the wretch
who helplessly becomes the slave to titles and pelf, such a
one would no longer flatter a McCulloch, Berry, or a
Gillies, to retard the progress of a federal institution,
, It is palpably clear that the working men of Victoria are
nothing more nor less than animated automatons in the
eyes of their law makers. But who is to blame? The
oppressed themselves; they have the franchise, do they
understand its importance ? I fear not. Have the work-
ing men ever attempted in an absolute form to organise
for the purpose of abolishing all laws that oppress their
ra,nks ?


Have democratic clubs been established throughout
the length and breadth of the land for emancipating pur-
poses? Nay! Consequently the people resemble moths
that are easily caught by glare, in grief, while sharpers are
permitted to gratify their seductive principles, under the
hollow pretence of conserving their political rights. For
the sake of suffering humanity, who are struggling for
subsistence, what words can we coin adequately to adjust
the miseries of the workers whose brains are addled from
wily toadies.
The working men of Australia will never find theirM
proper sphere until the federation principle is acknowledged;»
and to refuse its acceptance, anything more cowardly can-
not be imagined. The federation principle is a pearl of
thought, expressed in terms that must remain indelible in
the memory, the truest test of man’s worth. Searching, and
mainly sensible as to results, will prove a sure sign towards
ascendency in a people, while on the other hand, accepting
everything, whether it may be really useful or not, will prove
the opposite. Such must prove an idle pretence, and dis-
interesting resolve towards liberty, freedom, and fraternity.
There is nothing to cavil at, but much to praise in unity of
purpose, therefore, I wield my pen to lessen the interposing
obstacles now so destructive to the toiler. The more
we become known, the better shall we be liked;
and the more our oppressors are known, the more will_
they be despised. We want no right any free man
does not claim ; this is the sole reason why it is sought to
establish a federal institution for all trades and vocations.
Our imperfect natures take more interest in sports and
games than about the laws that should govern them,
hence the inch by inch progressive legislation. Yet we
must not despair, so far as can be judged by the numerous
groups that have federated together, but that we shall
subvert the present order of things decidedly disagreeable
to the gentlemen who descend to deceive.
Isolated from the collegiate scholar, the great body of a
commonwealth cannot look to powerful protectors to con-
serve their rights ; professedly, they repudiate our claims,
and introduce some primitive genius, leaving a disinterested
people lamenting.


. T he solid foundation of political liberty and political
rights must lest upon the intellectual character of every
individual, which is, also, the only sure panacea for social
security and national progress. The value of legislation
can only be estimated as a productive agent while it enacts
laws foi human advancement; but as to its usefulness in
the latter part of the nineteenth century, misery, want,
and wretchedness in the land has proved it to be a
monstrous failure.
It is true the best of men may fail, in the best of causes.
But even these best of men may have persevered to succeed
in pleasing a government, or factious party, instead of
trying to crush the abstruse environments surrounding the
toiler. Failure in any good cause is admitted to be
honorable, whilst success in overthrowing the helpless is
infamous. However, modern legislation has proved a
negative, restrictive than positive as to the requirements of
a people ; therefore, we must tenaciously hold to federating
ourselves.
/ Have you forgotten, fellow-workmen, the trickery and
/ corruption that was practised to gull us with a fictitious
I surplus, for the purpose of augmenting the salaries of well-
paid officials. Free passes by land and water to and from
Maori land, to members of parliament, their wives, their
friends, and their wives’ friends, etc., etc., manifesting in
a forcible manner the best way to secure themselves,
whilst teaching us at the same time, to make no delay in
federating ourselves.
This doctrine clearly means, if continued, a speedy way
for national confusion ; that is, if we take Victorians to be
as wideawake a people as they are credited for. A federal
convention of the masses would speedily furnish our par-
liamentary representatives with direct issues to discuss
and decide upon relative to their requirements. If the tax-
payer would but look into his political duties as a merchant
supervises his commercial concerns, government then
could not utilise national property in such ways that would
prove unproductive to the whole.
Enquiry should both show and determine in the interests
of the public what legislation could be agreed upon to
lessen crime, poverty, and depravity from our midst,


therefore “Hope deferred maketh the heart sick,” as saith
the Scripture proverb. Goldsmith, in his humanitarian
nature, speaks of the peasantry in the following strain; —
111 fares the land, to hastening ills a prey,
Where wealth accumulates, and men decay,
Princes and lords may flourish or may fade,
A breath can make them, as a breath has made j
But a bold peasantry, their country’s pride,
When once destroy’d, can never be supplied.”
If four-fifths of a community combine for the purpose
of increasing their worldly stock, how much more would be
the advantage to a nation, to have the five-fifths enjoying
their reciprocal interests.
47
Federation of the Masses.


CHAPTER IV.
OUR ACTUAL STATE OF BORROWING.
*T the present day, we have trained men for the
medical profession and, whether in hospitals or in
private families, their aid in sickness is universally
held to be indispensible. Surely we have undeniable
evidence and instances, in which the presence of a trained
politician could not be found in any house, nor a domestic
capable of rendering intelligently the rightful powers and
responsibilities of their habitations ; consequently, to fit
us for all the duties this life imposes upon us to discharge,
it must be of considerable duration, must embrace a con-
siderable variety of experience, and must be guided by
careful and unprejudicial thought. In other words, political
education can only be acquired and completed at the cost
of much time and study.
a nation’s property ? If so, is it not only a secondary object
Is political education necessary to maintain the rights of
with the toiler, and a primary object with the autocrat?
If it is important to the one, it is also important to the
other. Therefore, let us federate ourselves for real and
practical advantages.
It is especially on this latter plea that I became desirous
to write this little work, and I am hopeful that good
results will follow my appeal. However, I wish we could
but claim the natural endowments of the “bees,” who
resent the intrusion of every invader that dare venture
upon their property. If we did only attack the unwelcome
statesman with such determination, the whole of the
48
Federation of the Masses,


oppressing party would be put to flight, and scattered in
every direction, to seek other means for their subsistence.
One bee could make all the tenants of a law-making
institution fugitives in the land, notwithstanding the forces
of the militia and constabulary at their backs ; and yet we,
as tax-payers, a million strong, cannot find a giant mind to
come forth and plead for the emancipation of the wretched
and depraved. '-i
As an illustration what the power of industry and
application can or may do, Mr. Disraeli once said on his
first appearance in the House of Commons, when his
oratorical utterances proved a failure; —“ I have begun
several times many things, and succeeded in them at last.
I shall sit down now, but the time will come when you
will hear me.” The time did come, when Disraeli
succeeded in demanding the attention of both legislatures,
and forced them to laugh with him, instead of them at him. (
This trait of human character may unquestionably be
acquired, and serve to illustrate that a people bent upon
freedom, and the restoration of their national rights, need
not be cowering or daunted in the attempt. The federatr
ing of all trades would more closely identify our interests,
and keep us from grovelling in the dust, and instead of
humiliating, we should be aspiring, and become fully
persuaded that we knew infinitely more respecting the
requirements of the nation, than those who had been
elected to power.
The press, with its mighty weapon, could endorse to-day
the immediate necessity of federating the people into one
consolidated principle. To the press we owe many con-
gratulations, but it has proved not to be the great reformer
of social life that the people accredits to it. The press
disseminates but a part of the various ideas and senti-
ments of a people, consequently, the pace of enlightenment
and civilization is retarded.
However, we must be careful not to allow it to degene-
rate, but encourage it bj fair means to give us, a people,
fair play. Let us aim at the goal, whereby the power of
the press may be wielded and blended towards the interests
of the whole. The press must yield to the sentiments and
verdicts of the people, no matter in what station of life we


1880
£2,000,000
1881
No loan.
1882
No loan.
1888
£4,000,000
1884
1,364,000
1885
819,000
Total for six years ...
£8,188,000
1886
£1,500,000
1887
3,000,000
1888
1,500,000
1889
3,000,000
1890 (authorised)..,
5,600,000
Total for five years ..,
£14,600,000
Debt on 30th June, 1889 £37,627,000
Authorised loan to be floated, 1890 5,600,000
Total in 1890 £42,227,000
may be placed, as long as those sentiments can be con-
strued to be in accordance with the interests of the whole.
It may be an interesting table to many, to know what is
our actual state of borrowing. The following is extracted
from 7 he Argus :
For the ensuing years the table is :
The gross total of the public debt will now stand as
follows:
The interest on the present is £1,537,000 per annum.
If the proposed loan is floated the interest will be £1,783,000
per annum.
Thus the press furnishes the knowledge whereby the
general tax-payer acquires the information which character-
ises this mighty institution more powerful than the sword.
It exposes the extravagances of rulers and their short-
comings ; it also opens up the breach whereby the feelings
of compassion can enter, to succour and defend the friend-
less. I feel that our efforts are rapidly inclining in the


direction of the subject before us, but to consummate this
desired end, the press, as a physician, must freely use its
lance, to effectually counteract the poison that_ is now
deposited in the minds of the antiquated conservative.
The press, at the present day, have the power to turn
men’s minds, more especially that of the toiler, and in-
fluence their actions to madness, which must be acknow-
ledged as not being a sound directory to guide us. In the
capacity for rule, the statesman should be moulded so as
to realise lofty purposes, and shape events in self-repression
and self-sacrifice, and silent fortitude : these three qualities
differentiate the statesman from the masses. Aye! and
when these distinguishable qualities are not manifest, the
press, with its weapon, can attack the bold adventurer
that rules, keenly and wisely for the peoples good. But
the great practical lesson taught is, Why do we, as a
people, as supposed intelligent beings, hold such discordant
views respecting our political rights ?
It may be obvious to all rational minds, that the
difference of opinion which exists among men, rests upon
the fundamental basis that we do not see the same objects
with equal clearness, in fact as they really are. Here it
appears, that the cause of all our disputes is the cause of
all our calamities, therefore the wide-spread dissentions
which are sowed broad-cast throughout nations, is the
mainspring whereby we confirm the laws that govern us.
But is this intelligence ? Is it rational ? Are we not
born under the same organization ? Why do we recipro-
cally and formidably cause the evils of which we complain ?
Is it thus ?—Our passions and prejudices force us to
swear that there is no bitterness in gall, nor sweetness in
sugar; hence, this nonconformity of compliance moulds
the uncertainty of what is right. The establishment of a
Coalition Government in Victoria is a most peculiar
organization, its gradual development manifestly shows
that they, as a government, can subvert all overt oppo-
sition, and implant in the breasts of the tax-payer, evidence,
that not only intoxicates the senses, but exonerates them
from being fantastic beings. >
Thus wo discover in the admiration of our credulity,
that we degrade ourselves, forfeit our elective power, assist


in perpetuating disorder, and dissolve that reciprocal con-
nection which should tie the bonds of amity and friendship
throughout society.
Political institutions, apparently, are but expedients
whereby the masses are ruled solely to satisfy the projects
of ambitious men. It is time that the toiler began to
expand his faculties, and add to his superficial mind
the facts which serve only to subvert the abortive results
arising from political assemblies.
To recapitulate, I mentioned that the press with its
weapon attacks the bold adventurer that rules, keenly and
wisely for the people. This sentiment seems to dazzle the
public mind, who seem to imagine that newspaper pro-
prietors are an association of philanthropic gentlemen,
banded together simply for the purpose of enlightening the
public mind, impartially and disinterestedly.
This construction is but farcical.
A newspaper editor is a man supposed to have literary
ability, so as to be able to manufacture leading articles,
so as his paper may not only sell at the highest rate, but
become the most popular.
Like any other vendor, his study is to please his
customers, therefore he will produce an article to suit
their taste. For instance, if bis customers are liberals, he
will endeavour to suit their wants ; if conservatives, he will
not manufacture articles giving account of educational
progress and its aims for liberty. Customers of the con-
servative type want a graphic and detailed epitome of news
which refers to the poverty stricken class of the nation,
speeches of lords and court gossip, information about
personages that was accidently launched upon this earth
with three feet (nothing) of appendages blended to their
baptismal names, and last, but not least, news about the
various religious sects.
Who helped to build up this aristocracy ?
Our fathers and their descendents.
Then the scrutinising and criticising nature will observe,
that at the present day the press panders to the conven-
tional opinion of the hour. Let a people only review
their misplaced confidence in newspaper reports, will they
not discover how they have been allured and betrayed into
52
Federation of the Masses.


the hands of men whose duplicity have robbed them of
their land portion, likewise plunged them to endure the
bitter pangs of hunger and painful anxiety.
All politicians anathematise the conduct of their sup-
porters if they dare attempt to indulge in debating political
subjects. Aye, they insult men who believe in the ex-
pansion of reason, whose hearts are inspired by sentiments
to assist in removing the entanglements that have crushed
the toiler to the base of a slave. The people’s right is
justice, and their watchword shall be, “ Let us federate
together.
Experience has further taught us, that the man whose
ambition is for to rule, may be compared to the common
fly ; intrusive, audaciously impudent, and annoying ; also
unscrupulous, like the gnawing animals that have an
instinct for destroying valuable papers and other pro-
perty. Furthermore, the industrial classes overlook the
important fact that they acquiesced in the gnawing
political principle, and abide by the plans plotted for
shunting them from pillar to post.
These surveyors of human nature are surrounded by all
the luxuries that duplicity could devise, yet nothing can
persuade them that they are accessories both to crime and
poverty. This is extremely touching, but the people do
not seem to think it so, notwithstanding the fact that the
medicine is prescribed daily, and that the same doctors
claim the prerogative of holding for three years the public
diploma. All these things occur through a sluggish
apathy on the part of the tax-payer, not unpardonable in
these days of education.
However, the day has arrived when such lolly-pops
should be refused.
What reparation is there for the groaning millions while
lolly-pops of gall allure into a mistaken career ?
What will be the storm of vituperation when true
democratic principles are allied to sound educational
principles ?
Conundrum : Debate the question.
How commonwealths can affect to play the part of an
educated progressive people, while such pictures of want
largely constitute the bulk of the nation, baffles all
53
Federation of the Masses.


description of rational enquiry. The great leading topic
throughout the nation should be, What are the principles
of democracy.
This departure from rusty old conventional tragic scenes
in former legislatures would be of profitable service to a
community, likewise to newspaper editors during any
“ dull season.” How unthinking and giddy must be a
community that allows officialism to stab the toiler
thoroughly into crime, wretchedness, and want, and when
redress is sought it invariably happens that an abrupt
termination on the part of the official is the only alleviation
to the appellant’s sufferings.
Note, so sure as an excessive influx of water suspends
the working operations of a mine so sure, will the frozen
apathy of the people, re their political rights, mar their
domestic happiness. People are inveigled into poverty by
political sophistry, by men that are both impertinent and
overbearing.
The reader will easily comprehend that to convert a
nation from the badge of poverty, unity of purpose and
federating together is the only weapon that can make us
boast of'our civilization and enlightenment.
Therefore, the causes which lead to the Alpha of any
reform, whether it be Socialism, Nihilism, or any other
“ ism,” let their subjects be thrashed out to the bitter end,
under the consolidated efforts of a Federal Union. It has
long been felt in Victoria that a new effort should be made
to promote the conditions of every class of labor, but the
wily gnawing animal notable for his distinguished acumen,
knows too well the type of creatures with whom he has to
deal with.
Furthermore, it is characteristic of the world that it
always loves a blustering, notorious man, and some times
strains the bronchial tubes with deafening cheers, in loud-
sounding praises for his duplicity and conjuring.
It is not to be wondered at that our law-making gentle-
men, after receiving such praises should return to their
homes inflated with vanity and pride.
How often have we been deluded with newspaper reports
describing renegade politicians in fulsome composition as
the greatest statesmen of the age —men who are selling
54
Federation of the Masses.


humanity by debasing debates and tyranny. However, we
hope that the hour has struck twelve, and awakened the
toiler to know that there is but one brotherhood to boast of;
one society to constitute the whole.
Power like a desolating pestilence, 4
Pollutes wbate’er it touches ; and obedience.
Bane of all genius, virtue, freedom, truth,
Makes slaves of men, and of the human frame
A mechanized automaton. —Shelly, Queen Mab.
Power with its sinister influences have forced diseases
throughout the nation like an aggravated blight, into the
most humble and inoffensive associations. Competent
tribunals will have to decide whether the social and political
enjoyments of a people shall continue to be violently out-
raged, without adaptation, forced upon modern legislation.
Victoria is rapidly becoming a hideous desert for tramps.
Every narrow channel and stagnant pool is in constructive
barriers, for the purpose of intercepting the march of
progress among the toilers.
Another evil unjust to ourselves is the perpetuating and
encouraging of a custom in giving away our cash to visitors
of large estates and possessors of tons of coin; while
poverty and wretchedness is in our land. Is it rational
that these idols should be adored by so many worshippers
whose frenzy for spending public monies is indelibly
written on the records of the nation.
To be blissfully unconscious that we are victims of
incapacity leaves us to be “ peculiar personages” of very
low grade, therefore, by federating together we shall
immediately bring to the front a society utterly abhorring
to all stealthy principles. Look at governments after
governments stuffing their departments not only with
their own pelatives, but accept credentials from those
imported notables to make place in our government offices
for some of their distant friends. However, so far as our
acts are known abroad they must be viewed as being both
foolish and false to our interests, politically, in the extreme
so foolish and so false that it seemed incredible that we
as Democrats could play such parts.
Note, I would like to ask through this little work, by
way of justification to ourselves, if it is not time to form a


defence club, whereby those evils complained of could be
effaced through all time.
Rulers and their followers seem determined to crush the
very bone and sinew that keeps a nation together. They
will continue to do so, while no defence intercepts their
whims. It is their self-interests to plod together, then it
is also to our interest to ffderate together.
Is it logically to infer, that an intelligent people, aye,
and independent people, who absolute!}' enjoy privileges to
tread underfoot all tyranny, will submit to the caprices of
men, who study continually to destroy the peasantry of
the nation. All who are on liberty’s side are solicited by
one of Victoria’s pioneers that you should unite more
strongly for the purpose of skimming the surface of things
cautiously but gamely.
Note, our present condition forces us to acknowledge
that we must blend together in opposition to all blatant
outcries; we must see all misrule abrogated, nothing
abortive to our interests must exist, neither must we be
longer bound in swaddling clothes like little children. If
we were alive to our political interests no one could harm
us or injure us in the slightest degree.
It is a stigma on modern civilisation to record that we
live under compulsion degrading our status. Man has not
yet begun to perceive his subjection to forces merely relative
to himself, hence he suffers more ills, pain, misery, and
disappointments, than he tastes pleasure. Society to-day
refuse to reason from comparison, but transfer their
political rights over to corporations, whose reciprocal
affinities prove fatal to the public weal.
Our ignorance manifestly instructs the distinguished
I scholar to look down upon us as mere automatons or
“ whim horses.” To make an assertion of this kind with-
out proof may give offence; this I desire to avoid. To
conform with my remarks, it will be necessary to state
that the man of sense examines and integrates, or separates,
every question set forth, so that he may not only be
consistent with himself, but leave himself capable to stand
against any overt or public opposition that may overtake
him.
Is it so with the multitude ? The answer is obvious.
56
Federation of the Masses.


Again, the majority of citizens in our motley crowd, require
men with long appendages to their names to act as
Governors for us ; men with heads but little in them, to sit
and adjudicate our differences ; excise officers to keep us
honest; inspectors over commodities of consumption to pre-
vent us from being slowly tortured to death from adultera-
tions, whereby Federation would wrestle gamely to put
away this polluted variety of trickeries. _
Agreeing that such transformation of things may be seen
as an enigma, and not comprehended by the originators,
still it must be admitted that the federation of all trades
and vocations would prove to be the only true signals and
characteristics of an enlightened people, whereby the
student in his pursuit for fame would find it more ardous
and difficult to invent so much prodigious nonsense that at
present captivates commonwealths.
Furthermore, if we are not absolutely reduced to slavery,
we are to subserviency by the power of the few who
industriously work to force the charmed to cheer on all
occasions where their interests are involved. ihus
Democracy is trodden underfoot, and so great is the destitu-
tion, that at the time I am penning these lines, I read from
one of our local papers an extract from a Sydney journal,
which runs thus“ So great is the destitution prevailing
“in Svdney that over two thousand people, including
“ whole families, have nightly to take refuge in the domain
heavy burdens under which the industrial
classes now have to groan, and no redress is sought for
whereby the sufferings of those outcasts may be alleviated
or restored to that natural status in which nature intended
Democracy under such strains is no better than absolute
™ How can a people murmur being taken to task when
such glaring insults are imposed upon their kind .
If we do not carry out the conditions forced upon us by
such examples of poverty that is being pictured to our view
how is it possible to defeat the present wealthy ignorance
that sways communities under theii power ?
What a national policy should be has been well described


, by a French writer as follows “ The supreme policy of
■ every nation is to develop its own resources.” The
most profitable sales to a country are those made from one
producer to another within the nation. A protective
policy teaches us that it is our duty to place taxation so as
to encourage the manufacture of our own produce among
ourselves.
Is this our case in prospective Victoria ?
/'Assisted emigration is nothing more nor less than
J protection to capital, for if it is looked at carefully, a people
I would see that by it and for it they were taxed to bring out
JL people to compete with them in their own labor market.
Shall we remain through all time waiting .the doubtful
help of governments to free us from the scenes of misery,
poverty, and Wretchedness, while the power is in our own
hands.
Can we not find enough and to spare of willing hands
ready to repair the breaches that presses man into misery ?
Delays prolong the encompassed misery in our land, and
little marvel I when the interests of a people are left
Entirely to unwilling ears for their deliverance. * Strong in
our obedience, we suffer to be questioned by professors from
the great school of cupidity. It is admitted that democracy
(is making advances in many parts of the world. The
general tendency of both legislation and government in
the mother country, “ is to favor this advance.”
«“ The toe of the peasant is drawing nearer the heel of the
courtier.”
/ This truism acknowledged, every Australian should be
impassioned to consecrate their native land under the
banner of federating all trades and vocations together.
Society would be largely benefited in the mass inasmuch
as poverty would be be lessened, and society transferred
from wild wonderment into that of just tribunals.
Surely if ever man knew, he ought to know how his
happiness was entangled by webs of deceit.
Poor dupes!
Continually are we strengthening the weavers at their
looms, and these various compacts smite us in return.
Wonderful acumen and sharpness of intellect, while


struggling in the storms tbst strew the land with
wretchedness.
But man, proud man,
Brest in a little brief authority,
Most ignorant of what he’s most assur’d,— t
His glassy essence, like an angry ape,
Plays such fantastic tricks before high heaven,
As make the angels weep. —Shakespeare.
Notwithstanding the past errors of judgment, re ouy
political rights, let us suppose that we immediately trans-
form our dislikes into agreeable likes, counselling our
chiefs to remain no longer our mortal foe.
This dictation, doubtless, brother workmen, would put
the oratorical birds to flight, and the decree would cause a
flutter, because we should no longer be the accomplices of
the misery, wretchedness, and anguish, which devastates
the land in which we should control. Reviewing the
numerous societies now in existence, their constitution
signifies only comaion intrigue rather than compliance to
the subject before us. For this reason democracy is a
sham, but unanimity would dispel the darkness that now
misleads our understanding.
This is worthy of a people’s consideration.
How significant are the lines of a poet when he says ; —-
■' The world is a hu' die of hay.
Mankind are the asses who pull.
Each tugs it a different way,
And the greatest of all is John Bull."
Verily, reality is described in the above lines.
Unmistakably, we live enshrouded with dread of our
chiefs, and live troublesome neighbours in our respective
localities ; fighting like devils for conciliation, and hating
each other for the love of God.
All this shows to a demonstration a people’s simplicity,
who have divided themselves from the quackery of spiders,
against the true principles of democracy.
My suspicion is that the dollar takes the place of reason,
consequently happiness diminishes, and the poisoned cup
of life is still administered. Thus we observe that the
supremacy of the civil power in temporal things, is $
national evil.


However, under any circumstances, I think that the
federating of all trades and vocations should be a sacred
tie, and should not be sundered without a frank and free
explanation on the part of the young Australians.
As for myself, I have long sought by converse for federal
union, and have labored in my humble way to show that
fraternal recognition would not intrude upon the property
of others. Holding, as I do, that all our existing laws are
of no more importance to the welfare of the nation than
the shape of the cup is to the man who is parched with
thirst. I advocate that federating together adheres to us
as citizens the highest law of unity. I yet hope to see the
federating principle enjoyed by all young Australians.
I hope that workmen will be more generally elected to
parliament, and that we shall find them thorough-going
men, debating the healthy state of public opinion, and
advancing social problems. Hence it follows, under such
conditions, that our reciprocal connections would be less
complicated, and our enjoyments vastly multiplied.
, This would be sapping the very foundations of misrule
that the toiler so long have endured. Laboring separately
to accomplish such great ends only produces disorder and
_ indifferentism.
Experience and investigation have proved that modern
legislation is abortive to public interests.
“ When men began to unite in society, they found it
necessary to enlarge the means of their subsistence, and
consequently to apply themselves to agriculture ; and the
practice of agriculture required the observation and
knowledge of the seasons.” Yes, it is time men began to
unfold their faculties, and declare their power. Rent has
recklessly and in a rascally manner swamped the industrial
classes, by favoring the powerful and hood-winking the
weak.
Nothing could be more capricious than such a mode of
government. Still we have regarded the doings of those
political weavers with a true spirit of philanthrophy.
Honest statesmen, as far as they know, will treat all
their subjects alike, they will detest favorites, scorn
prejudices, and have no personal spite to gratify.
Fools and cranks argue, where can you find those men ?


Federating together must inevitably solve the question.
Political stratagem is based upon fraud, and fraudently
conducted.
Review the pages of history.
Surely, there must come a time when this corrupt
system of governing must be overthrown, and honest men
iound to rule in justice. Passive obedience, both past and
present, has benumbed all the faculties of man, and plunged
him into a state of dire poverty.
Why longer live insensible to a power that destroys our
happiness ? , , ,
Why have we submitted our manhood to be reduced to
mere machines ?
Why do we believe that obscure and imaginary agents
feel interested in retarding our progress to unity of purpose ?
Why do we remain hide-bound as it were to a brutal law
like “ doves” when a system of white slavery is perpetuated
in a British colony ? „ , . .
omy countrymen ! let us be one vast family; and Sll * ce
experience has taught us that we are all constituted alike,
let there be but one law for rich and poor.
If laws are enacted with equal impositions or exactions
upon each and every individual is it reasonable to suppose
that each aggravated misery, poverty, ruin, and sonow
would exist in our midst ?
1 would ask each and every one of my kind to lace tms s
problem. Then we need not fear the monument, or monu-
ments, that would shrink from the efforts of those who
were advocating the federating movements for the welfare
and happiness of its people. .
This is not an idle question but one full of importance ,
for our ideas respecting our wants should have a practical
bearing towards a nation’s happiness. Furthermore, if we
regard those who make laws with dull, stupid indifference,
we shall have to spend a life of disappointments, whereas
if we make ourselves keenly alive to their trickeries, we
shall at least live a life of feeling, of thought, and of
sentiment. ,
This acquisition of knowledge infinitely and supremely
above all other would produce the true elements for
federating a people. It is the weaving together of opinions


that would form the “ Detective” whereby the system of
federation would be commended, and its action endorsed
rapidly by thousands of employees. However, a federal
organization is deserving public acknowledgment from
every well-wisher of humanity.
Are we in the year 1890 a free people 9 No.
Are we an enslaved people 9
Yes; we have the enslavers and the enslaved.
The enslavers are those who despise liberty,, and sweat
their fellow men.
The enslaved are those who have to endure oppression.
This is the cause of the disease whereby Democracy isi
practically extinct in Victoria, under our so-called Co-
operative Commonwealth.
How often do we hear the British indignantly boasting
that they are the paragons of human nature.
How can a people claim such a credential, that are
continually being hoodwinked by law-makers and their
employers.
Are you aware, my countrymen, that every public
building and thoroughfare throughout a nation belongs
absolutely to you, it is your property, your freehold, your
eternal right.
There can be no two opinions upon this important
subject, each and every man should share equitably in the
nation’s wealth and prosperity ; therefore it requires only
one pull, a strong pull, and every man’s pull to uphold this
right; and this general pull should become a law.
A law based upon this equitable principle would be con-,
ducive to the welfare of a people by proper adjustments.
However, stupidity, ignorance, and stubbornness in the
past, as well as the present, have retarded our progress and
impelled me to work and study, and the conviction has
resulted from my studies and experiences that we must
succeed in an enterprise like the one the subject before us
is treating upon.
If you don’t believe me examine for yourselves and see
whether I run a muck at all I see. I have exposed the
secret, how the world is a treasure house only to the few,
and it is our own fault if we don’t join in the swim with
them./if men would be but true to each other in storm or
62
Federa'ion of the Masses.


calm, in scarcity and plenty, democracy might then become
a system of acknowledged opinions whereby the ties of our
reciprocal connections could not oe broken.
Are reforms necessary to restore a people from the
poverty, oppression, and depravity, that now surrounds us?
Is it not a stupendous fact that the industrial classes
disapprove with unyielding minds to all projects of reform?
They appear with fervent desire to reverence the past
These impressions mollify reason, and forces society into
a chronic state of confusion, whereby can be traced the
unsoundness of public sentiment; and so long as the
.toiler cherishes his present principle, so long will they
maintain the power that now oppresses them.
The statesman’s heart is pretty well hardened by long
baneful licence to inflict pain at will on those poor unfor-
tunates whose intelligences are forever crushed.
No longer claim the preference of holding your unex-
perienced opinions.
What profit in the past have you reaped from your
stubbornness? , ,
Your many combats in strikes have deluged your homes
with tears.
The strong have subjected you to their will and power.
Yes, with vaulting ambition men dethrone the worker, and
triumphantly boast as to their sharpness.
All sensible people know too well that teachers of men
are awful shufflers, there is no human limit to their
ingenuity when trying to bolster up their hobby horse. It
is unpleasant to relate that we, as members to the
ingenious few, should be so defective in our natures, so
illiberal in our verdicts, as to defeat all progressive
measures that would free us from the yoke of go-as-you-
please-
What a wonderful civilisation !
Why are we continually absorbed in seeking after that
which invariably shows the same front of imposition ?
Truly we should step forward into the breach, to stay
and avert the ills incident to humanity at large. This
laudable endeavour would produce incalculable benefits to
each individual in a community, besides demolishing the
smiles of the grim monster that have at all times imposed


upon us. The very bone and sinew of all governed lands
have been looked upon as frightened birds, and scattered
broadcast throughout the nation in filthy rags. Yes ; and
we still refuse to absolve ourselves from such allegiance or
deception.
Can we expect to enjoy the fruits of democracy under
such systems of deceit and corruption ?
Who can love the fatherland when such terrifying bees
swarm the nation with unbounded duplicity, which defines
the true characteristic of a credulous and peculiar people ?
Unfortunately for the public good, credulity is an infir-
mity which produces broadcast misery, despair, and want
of courage; likewise sympathising openly with the
advocacy of those who strongly oppose the principles of
democracy.
What examples of civilisation !
What fearful records of suffering from poverty has been
inflicted on the industrial classes by men of duplicity!
Men imbued with the principles of democracy watch
every step of a government’s career, their political,aims,
and how they labor to seek and understand the requirements
of the common weal.
The dearest idol I have seen,
Is self, and nought comes in between.
Self will tare from every heart,
Q-old and silver with a dart.
Arithmetically we have set forth that four-fifths of a
community are stronger than two-fifths, then why should
we not combine the five-fifths ?


CHAPTER V.
THE GRAND ARMY OF TOILERS.
f HAVE for many years been of opinion that to discover
*]|f error, without, at the same time, trying to rectify
(sK it, is of very little service, and that the man who
labors (however unsuccessful his attempts may be) to
redress any public grievance merits infinitely more of
society at large than the lamenting philosopher, who, after
pointing out the same, contents himself with sitting down
and repining over it.
There is a proverb which justly observes, that a know-
ledge of the disease is half of the cure, we very well know
that this knowledge is only in so far serviceable as it enables
us to ascertain the means proper to be made use of; and
that the citizen will be little better for all this knowledge,
unless the remedy adapted to his or her particular ease be
duly administered. In like manner we shall act with far
greater consistency, if, instead of joining in small bands
for the sole purpose of discovering the weaknesses of others,
and lamenting over the inferiority of their members, and
their own shallowness, we on the contrary, endeavoured to
investigate the cause of such inferiority, and that from a
thorough knowledge of the requirements of a people, we
may be led to discover and prescribe the proper remedy and
cure for evils now existing.
It is with this view that I pen this little work, contribu-
ting my mite towards the accomplishment of a point so
devoutly to be wished. However, it appears from the most-
moderate calculations, that no body of men, no people,
whatever under the sun has increased in that rapid degree
as the tuneful sons of song ; we find that the bulk of all


nations strictly adhere to primitive customs, manners,
and laws. What a delusion while thirsting after liberty,
freedom, and independence. lam no professor, and I hope
that I shall not be thought too presuming however
unpopular my opinions may be respecting the federation
movement. We find in all communities there are numerous
unguarded citizens, who, like Samson, are fully aware
wherein their great strength lieth ; but unfortunately for
the wretched they have been weak enough to betray the
secret wherein their weakness has been located, hence the
fantastic tricks of wily sycophants.
Again, if we look at the present surrender of every tax-
payers natural right to their chiefs and teachers, I think
that we shall be bound to admit that we should no longer
yield submissively to the cant that now crushes our
independences.
Our subordination to laws that fail to approach our
political requirements, is sufficient within itself to arouse
overy eternal feeling to action, whereby a great and
interesting subject might be presented, inculcating prin-
ciples that Would animate a vital force tending to indepen-
dence ; the desired end sought after. In fact, our selection
of men to govern us is an example of the unmanly surrender
of our citizenship—four thousand a year to manage our
on commercial principles, is not a bad income.
However, every intelligent citizen, likewise members of
Parliament, editors of every newspaper in the colony of
Victoria, are all alike to blame for permitting silently
skilled and unskilled labor to be shorn of their money.
With this truism before us we should endeavour to equalise
the labor between the mind and the body, which inevitably
must result in a more perfect condition of both, likewise
render our actions more serviceable and skilful at the
periods of deadlocks and General Elections.
How different the contrast between the proverbial
Yankee and the young Australian. The Yankee, notable
for his fondness in endeavouring to make his mind save
his body, manifests a remarkable difference with that of
the young Australian, who delights in hammering, strain-
ing, and doing the work himself. It is apparent here tha
the want of method and habit in early life is responsible for


many evils that overtakes us in our years of early manhood
or womanhood. To demolish this deplorable teaching, a
determination of character, a firmness of principle, must
prove the great safeguard against political juggling;
therefore methodical and steady resolutions will produce
both useful and permanent benefits to society.
It is only in the cultivation and improvement of our
faculties that we can properly enjoy any of them. How-
ever, amidst such universal activity in the promotion of
education, it will be a disgrace for any man or woman in
the next generation, to confess want of knowledge in any
of the necessary branches of instruction.
Wealthy ignorance that now prevails and governs, will
stand no chance at all in the competition with moderately
circumstanced intelligence. Nay; the cobweb spinsters
will have to submit to the humiliating fact that all their
present political cunning, plotting, and intriguing, will not
avail them in the near future.
Intelligence, like that magic rod that brought forth
the water, will produce citizens that will not look at each
other with envy, but equality of fraternity. If we did but
enjoy a boundless respect for each other’s rights, the
rivalry among us for place and pay, would be less
Jesuitical.
At the present state of society, each and everyone
makes it a study to outstrip his neighbour with utterances
of courtesy, but this courtesy does not advance the cause
of federation amongst ourselves. It is time associations
were founded on the principle to work unceasingly for each
other’s good, whereby their actions would testify to ligiti-
mate their intelligent existence.
Let these sentiments be an index, whereby a general
examination will take place among men ; let each produce
the records of their life’s history, then the happiness sought
after by past expedients, yet seldom obtained, will no
longer be adhered to. In constituting a united body we
must not vainly imagine that all antiquated ideas that have
proved abortive to our welfare, can be brushed out of
existence without combating difficulties. On the contrary,
but if our ideas and expressions will but confine themselves
to the deplorable state of real suffering now endured in our
67
Federation of the Masses.


midst, I venture to predict that we should soon be capable
to resolve the enigma that builds systems to crush the
uninformed.
What will be the outcome from the action taken by the
Emperor of Germany for a conference of the great
civilised powers of Europe, in the subject re condition of
the working classes ? It must be admitted to be one of
the most progressive moves that has ever been attributed
to a monarch, and it is absolutely impossible to calculate
what stupendous issues will flow from the heterogeneous
units grouped together.
It is positively a new element in diplomacy, whereby
advanced ideas will battle for the purpose of elevating man
from his present debased condition.
This action of the Emperor of Germany sounds like the
advent of a federation song, and should kindle in the
breast of every rational man a desire to federate together.
It will be seen that this royal personage is largely
imbued with democratic emotions, and has resolved to test
the ideas of diplomatists of the western world, as to
whether the toilers of this our planet shall continue to go
on languishing day by day for their subsistence, or be
relieved from their present oppressive burdens.
This great personage by accident royal leader of a great
and powerful nation, has proclaimed to the world his
humanitarian disposition to federalise not only his subjects
but the whole of Europe.
How magnanimous is the call of this youthful Emperor.
How important his declaration.
How devoted his mind to the cause of suffering
humanity.
Every working man in Victoria should give due meed of
praise to the youthful Emperor of Germany. We have
lingered too long under political oppression, the land of
oppressive associations. We have looked in wonderment at
the living monuments who have laid desolate the habita-
tions of the toilers.
We are for ever suffering defeats, at times in a state of
great commotion, while distress is pictured on every
countenance. However, let us buckle on our armour, and
animate ourselves with the determination to repel the


invading foe that stealthily takes from us our political
rights.
Let us ask ourselves a question.
Is instruction necessarily requisite to achieve and hold
our political rights ?
Answer: Yes!
Have we not found by dear bought experience, that
ignorance binds us in swaddling clothes, and that our
faculties have nothing to unfold? Therefore, our actions
fail to produce the necessary ingredient for our existence.
Furthermore, we confound rather than elucidate ; conse-
quently the perfectibility of man under chimerical ideas is
never obtained; hence follows the cause which produces
the effect, *e the inordinate desire of some few to oppose the
political interests and rights of the many.
This being admitted, political education and self-educa-
tion is not only consistent for the well-being of society, but
is likewise a powerful motor to make the people strong
from cowering before the wealthy lower order.
Political education once acquired, will emancipate man
from crouching to the statesman whose records are replete
with dishonest laws and cruel wrongs towards the bone
and sinew of the nation. Unity will destroy rivalry
between man and man; therefore labor combined with
intelligence, must, and will at no distant date, prove itself
to be the sovereign power of a nation.
It must not be forgotten that we have growing up in the
Australiaus a native element, and in that new stream of
life the voting power is commencing to overwhelm that of
the old pioneers, and in many instances they are in the
ascendency over their parents in intelligence, therefore we
may expect to see rising up a generation of men both
honest and unselfish, men that will with scornful mien
shunt all hatred, injustice, and every evil production which
may tend to injure the preservation of society.
Is it not presumable to predict that federation of the
toilers is a movement that will ere long announce to the
world its advent ? Is it not really deplorable to live under
governments that hurl mankind into a state of confusion,
to enable their fraternity, under a shameful mass of jobbery,
to make sport of those whom they have seduced ?


The influence of legislative institutions in all civilised
lands have too long denied the people the right to enjoy
the fruits of the earth.
Unity of purpose will work out the equitable problem of
life, it will restore happiness, where misery now dwells :
then we shall be comforted with the following words :
“Behold how good and pleasant a thing it is to see
brethren live together in unity.”
It is as the sweet dew on Hermon, and the fragrant
ointment poured on Aaron’s head.
I Let all be of one mind and one heart, “ that all may be
one.”
Amid warnings, trials, misery, poverty, and wretched-
ness, federating together is the only method toward the
temporal salvation of men.
Perhaps there never was a time when the toiler had to
endure so much haughty scorn as at the present day;
hence the necessity for trying ourselves by such a test as
this little work suggests.*
The true evidence of our state can only be known by
federating together, thus: —The tree is known by its fruit,
—by their fruits ye shall know them.
Federation of the masses would not only secure mutual
protection, but a reciprocal companionship. In a word,
unity of purpose and unity of action would put an end
finally to the ceaseless strikes of a people.
The British people have passed through, and are now
passing through, in the latter half of the nineteenth century,
the ordeal of political aggression, but in their eventful
history, the “grand army” of toilers will, with glittering
spires, erect in front of their legislative institutions a
citadel bearing the name—“ Unity is Strength; Divided
we Fall.
It needs an effort on the part of the multitude to realise
how they are actually living in this epoch, or in other
words, in this remarkable period of time. Amongst the
steps that appear to be most needful in the interests of our
progress and welfare is “ that all may be one,” so that the
harlot’s poodle shall not flourish in surfeitings, while the
groaning millions have to endure want.
Man born and forced into adversity and passes a life-
70
Federation of the Masses.


time in such circumstances is not favored with opportunities
to become useful in order to promote the welfare and
happiness of his kind.
Experience and comprehension teaches us that unity
among men must not only promote the general welfare, but
be the base work to reduce the lamentable conditions of
the ppeople.—Byron said,
f ‘ Men grow pale.
Lest, their own judgments should become too bright.”
Alas, for suffering humanity, the words of the poet are
but too true!
Where are peaceful and reciprocal relations to find a
solid basis ? It is only to be found by hoisting the Federal
Banner, by throwing away the present indifferentism that
now enslaves the toiler.
Another Scriptural injunction we disastrously put to
flight, “Bear ye one another’s burdens,” instead of
cherishing the present selfishness of society. The following
lines are appropriate to our subject:—
“ Each man shall find his own in all men’s good, I
And all men work in noble brotherhood.”
A mistake there may be in sending an innocent man to
the scaffold, but a mistake there cannot be in federating
together to meet the requirements of a people.
Why not commence and revere the federal movement
that must inevitably dispel the mysterious obscurity which
now enslaves the multitude ? It will regulate the conditions
of society (it will also regulate the fiscal policy of the nation);
it will demolish the present divergent views and opinions
which now stand an awkward quantity in the sun of our
happiness.
The subject for the masses to study is the defence of
their rights, likewise to establish democracy on a sound
and concrete basis. If there is any grit with the industrial
classes, the argument that two multiples joined together
increases the power of units, it is also sound that a people
should annex their units under the same principles of com-
bination, for the noticeable object of burying to oblivion
the half-formed and impracticable theories of statesmen
and politicians.


Individuality, in process of time, will become a power*
and that individuality will demand justice, and this
demand for justice must refer to the pages of history to
learn how their progenitors with fancied happiness were
seduced and enchanted by their chiefs.
To dissolve the ideas of our patriarchial fathers, we must
impose upon ourselves a task, and that task will involve’
many complications ; however, let us not in any way
clandestinely or secretly usurp our rights.
The old pagan myths have still a strong hold on the
minds of the toilers, and unfortunately they manifest a
more implicit determination in renewing their superstitions
than devoting their energies to the refreshing studies of
how they shall enjoy a better existence.
Have we ever asked ourselves the question whether the
supremacy of our coalition governments surpassed its pre-
decessors in steering the state ship through storms ?
Have they legislated to better advantage towards the
people ? Nay! Thousands in this democratic land
(Victoria) are living degraded among men, and their status
continues immediately to be devoted to servitude. How-
ever, facts are stubborn things, so goes the saying,,
“ every man for himself, and the devil take the hindmost.”
Ah, my fellow workman, the text in this little work
suggests to you that you are “fighting like devils for
conciliation, while hating each other for the love of God.”
Then I humbly ask you to federate yourselves if only
for the freedom of the helpless. Let us dedicate to reason
our desire to zealously dictate to anything and everything
save the surrender of principle to those whom we elect to
power to govern us.
All readable men are familiar with the fact that they
have progressed from a lower state and risen to the
intellectual standard he has now attained, and that he is
destined still higher.
Why, it may be asked, are we continually inspired with
the mad battlement of our chiefs and district represen-
tatives? Do we not outrage propriety, dishonor ourselves,
our wives, the virtue of our daughters, much less our
kindred type by being entangled by them ?
72
Federation of the Masses.


Should not their names he set as jewels in the core of
our hearts as of any of our chiefs or representatives ?
Have you ever observed, my countrymen, that a weighty
purse retards the toiler from enjoying his political rights?
It would be unjust on my part should I forget to mention
that there are in our midst indefatigable workers ; men
who are working with courage and with distinguished zeal
for the purpose of elevating the standard of the toileis.
Are those brave men supported by the enslaved who
have to endure want, misery, and wretchedness? _
Nay! This overlooked agency knoweth not its power,
but flinches at the authority whom they have elected to
conserve their rights.
Look boldly at the ghastly business of all teachers of
men ; look at their tinseled speeches; look at the barrenness
of our intelligence: then we shall see the cause of our
weakness with disgust. . .....
Life, seemingly, is departed from us; likewise intelli-
gence ; the body, unfortunately, is all that remains; hence
the misery, confusion, and seduction, that now prevails in
our ranks.
This is to be deplored.
Fellow workmen, let the pride of your life be in working
for the accomplishment of a federal organization with all
trades and conditions of men.
For instance, had men been true to each other, and all
their words, actions, and addresses tended toward the
reciprocal connexions between man and man, the world we
now live in might have been a real paradise.
The pages of history are replete with information of the
endeavours of men, who have had engraved in their
understanding with intoxicating pride, the necessity of all
enjoying the equality of civil, social, and political rights ;
but this noble nation, which arises essentially from
democratic views of politics, has never animated the mind
of the English toiler.
Man, in his indifferentism, is continually persuaded to
have his human happiness destroyed by the aspirations of
those deceiving props who have depleted from them their
temporal birthright.
73
Federation of the Masses.


Why should we stultify our thoughts when the power of
electing is in our hands ?
Why oppose the lessons of science, and retard the
progress of general education ?
Is it not known that the progress of mankind is thwarted
by such conduct, while trampling the franchise under our
feet?
Truly, nothing can excel the inventive genius and
malignity of our statesman and teachers. They have
fostered ignorance till recently ; forced obedience to their
laws and caprices, and they have excelled in holding
supreme sway over their dupes, or in other words the
general taxpayer.
0 tempora! 0 mores !
Another institution and ingredient is retrograding fast
into the grooves of heathenism—l refer to the modern
newspaper.
A newspaper that prides in writing falsehood wholesale,
to win its ends politically or financially, deserves the
bitterest contempt of a nation.
Will you, 0 my countrymen, consent to live and re-
produce under such baneful and monsters conditions ?
Fancy the following atrocious acts of kings and queens
who look upon starving millions and smile.
Surely the time has come to make it imperatively
necessary to establish a federation of the enslaved. Urgent
political reforms must ere long dawn upon the Australias,
Speaking on reforms, Carlyle speaks sensationally in the
following terms :—A man willing to work, and unable to
find work, is perhaps the saddest sight that is exhibited
under the sun—seeking leave to toil that he might be fed
and shattered! Are the workmen of Victoria resembling
this doleful picture?
The answer is obvious.
Are kings and queens, governments and lords like
ourselves, survivals from a barbaric age? If so, we have
no desire to see them unnecessarily degraded, but we should
desire that a people shall be free instead of captives.
And now for a tit bit.
■" I have read somewhere that there are certain insects
that lay their eggs in the very body of some other insect,


and they sting that insect just enough to paralyse but not
to kill it, and when the eggs are hatched the young set to
work to devour the actual incubation of their organi-
zation.
The political methods with statesmen are not to kill us
outright —barring one pretence—except we claim and
demand our rights; then they in their little brief authority
chloroform us with flattering and insincere promises.
This process of statesmen works admirably with the
bone and sinew of the nation ; they, evidently, neither
regret nor desire to accomplish anything; hence the
immediate necessity to federate ourselves.
The toiler eats and drinks, and laughs probably, though,
indeed, real mirth he never enjoys.
Those shrivelled up characters, whose narrow hearts are
not capable of resisting, but submit to anything because
incapable of grasping anything, have never excited my
respect or my emulation.
They remind me of the barren fig-tree, all shrunk and
withered under climatic influences.
We want to know what it is that determines the division
of men. The bringing together of these current state-
ments will show at a glance that the solution is not very
abstruse or difficult; on the contrary, such statements
glaringly show that we, as a people, are very obtuse to our
duties.
Let us make a comparison without giving offence.
The industrial classes, unfortunately for their happiness,
resemble the tiger shut up in a cage; at first it roars with
indignation, and dashes itself against the bars, then,
wearied out, cheats its despair by that monotonous to and
fro in his den.
Is this the picture, the monster that we have to strive
against ? Ah litis a remarkable fact that our best natures
are the easiest subdued; we have manifested in ourselves a
hollowness and inaptness to resist; we, evidently, are
harrassed by scruples; we have also a difficulty in com-
prehending ; consequently, our very delicacy prepares our
bondage.
Little qualified to defend ourselves, we have to suffer;
the friction of our laws do not lacerate sufficiently painful
75
Federation of the Masses.


to arouse our feelings; though our muscular strength
could lift with a finger many of our oppressors.
Power, never strained by a doubt, glide over things
which prostrate the bone and sinew of the nation.
Yes, we tremble before men, the most brutal scares the
most; but we seldom hear of man trembling before a God.
But we live on, and live perpetually in bondage.
All this is weakness, nothing more!
Your aid to freedom I implore.
Ah! oppressed by men, tyrannised over by ideas; our
very vitals are subjected and prostrated beneath the heel of
wealth, and often decays absolutely under the imposing
burden.
Money and not brains is the Nasmyth power of op-
pression, it looks at progress with startling emotions, and
maddens outright in the attempt to crush the poor in the
dust.
When man becomes possessed of large material sources,
he then arrogates to himself the right to grant or refuse
enjoyments ; all are supposed to yield under the jurisdiction
of the dollar ; it is supposed to balance general questions,
it solves problems as it pleases, sometimes unknowingly
and accidently meets out justice. Even those who seem
to obey the power of money, feel the'pressure of its heavy
load, and yet will not federate together.
Seeing that money is power, let us not delay in uniting
our forces, let us show in a true public spirit that we
are awakened to the fact that we, as a people, have to lay
the foundations of the future state of the Australian
colonies, so that generations to come shall reap the harvest
of our work.
Fellow workman, the liberty that you now enjoy has
been transmitted to you from the thoughts and actions of
your forefathers. Bathe in it, wash in it, think of it
seriously, for the countless millions of unborn human
beings, who must suffer or enjoy from your present
intellectual or dormant state.
Here again I must repeat and emphasise what I have
said before, namely, Under an accumulation of political
dodgeries, no man can be considered a free agent.


No man willingly oppresses himself to become an index
post or servile monument for men to sneer at. Then, I
am very glad to think after reflection, that the dark and
subduing object of our amazement rests upon law-makers’
shoulders, and not that of ours. >
What would the world have been by this time, if the cry
for rest and peace had been listened to ? if the energetic,
the plucky, had been governed by the majority ?
Cities would never have been founded, roads never
constructed, commerce and trade would never have been
known, the world would never have been explored, and
mankind would have been but scattered groups of savages,
destitute of arts and other intellectual knowledge.
All the progress the world has ever made, is the outcome
of plodding persons, born with a genius to torment as well
as to pacify their neighbours, and to keep the world
oscillating like the piston of an engine.
The world grumbles, sneers, persecutes, and then
follows the lead of the very men it has been persecuting.
Happiness is as the glory of the sunshine, and when I
picture to myself the prims and anguish of men whose
arduous toils have been for the public good, I seem to see
one of those ancient processions whose fantastic tricks
taint the atmosphere with barbarous ideas, and resembles
the passive obedience we pay to our chiefs.
Strange, but true, man’s heart is not only an alembic or
still where ideas are elaborated, it is a volcano throwing
out its lava, consuming thousands upon thousands in
abject poverty and misery.
I do not think any rational man can look down into
this governing crater without a shudder. Here we have a
repudiated selfishness taking an honourable name to govern;
it calls itself ambition, a noble ambition. Yes; and to
shut the door against this power under the present
condition of society, you might as well attempt to stay
the rain from falling.
Why, chosen of the multitude, encourage that which
oppresses the fallen?
0 my countrymen, no one knows us!
Why ? because we have neither an official character nor
77
Federation of the Masses


situation, nor anything that distinguishes us from the
brute.
What! not one prominent feature in thy whole existence ?
What! thou wilt pass away, and, with the exception of
thy wife and children and some poor people, no one will
ever remark thy death!
Thy name has never figured in the columns of a
newspaper. This neighbour, that relative, who were by
no means your superiors, take rank in your distriqt; they
have weight, they are looked up to; and thou, what art
thou, then? A Christian, a citizen, a parent,—is that
anything to speak of?
To be something. Once let that idea get rooted in the
heart and in your neighbourhood, that you are a justice
of the peace, a councillor, a weighty dollar man, believe
me, you will receive a reward forced upon you to say my
election at all times will be both safe and sure.
Ah, my readers ! the heart has its tyrant!
Do not misapprehend me.
I can well understand the passionate love of action.
Let us not limit the range of the human mind. Who-
ever feels himself strong, let him exercise his strength ;
this is the duty of life, and I see no fairer spectacle. I
can scarcely know any grander teaching than a life
consecrated to the welfare of the whole of a nation’s
community.
When man can get out of self to follow the fortunes of
an idea, when he falls in love with a righteous cause,
fights for some equitable public question, forfeits life (if
need be), for the honour of his conviction—why that is
glorious, the general level is raised, and the whole world
receives an impetus forward.
Note, the ideal exercise of life manifests cruelties toward
those who serve it; and the stigmata of human idolatry
marks the oppressed with deep-seated wounds.
, And homeless, near a thousand homes I stood,
I And near a thousand tables pined and wanted food,
Wobds worth.— Guilt and Sorrow.
78
Federation of the Masses.


CHAPTEE VI.
" YE DISCERN NOT THE SIGNS OF THE TIMES.”
NVY, malice, hatred, and all uncharitableness flows
from the desire to organise into small bands, or
bandits. This decisive and impracticable course of
procedure devastates the rights and interests of men,
leaving them helpless and destitute ; wandering from place
to place in search of employment for the support of them-
selves and families, whom they have been compelled to
leave behind to patiently wait an answer as to results.
And what must be the end of this ?
We do not know; we are not prophets ; but we can guess.
Federation of the people must be known ere long in this
age of transition ; society must cast off its old skin to make
way for a new and better one.
We “ discern not the signs of the times we dream as it
were, while others watch and work for the increment we
should share.
The federating of all trades and conditions of men,
would manifestly evince the mouth-piece of the people ;
not as now ; it would announce to the world their senti-
ments, it would also give utterance to their yearnings, and
finally, it would brighten the vague hopes of the masses
into a perfect and more practicable shape.
Surely people who are termed humane will not envy
themselves the pleasures to work in bringing this great
undertaking to a success.
A painful age has dawned upon us, and by the most
brutal of laws now existing. Magistrates and other officials,
besides numerous private citizens, have periodically to
79
Federation of the Masses


distribute bread and firewood tickets to our kindred, besides
blankets and other necessaries to the deserving and
distressed poor. Note, to the deserving, and small sums of
money to those strongly recommended by the relieving
officers of the parishes in the district where this state of
things prevail.
Can we look with pride at those who have to submit and
surrender themselves to soup kitchens, and places for
nightly refuge.
Eulers henceforth must admit that they are only
I servants of the people ; delegates, and not masters ; paid
servants, not insolent conspirators, who rule only for their
own ends.
Try your hands and your efforts towards the federating
movement, then you will early find out that the conundrum
which forces men to soup kitchens and places of nightly
refuge, can be easily solved.
Statesmen, at the present day, force thousands to
believe that they can prevent the taking place of an
earthquake by ironhooping the ground; also our teachers
and representatives of our interests, have persuaded land-
owners living by the sea, that they could stop its ebb and
flow from depreciating the value of their possessions.
We can scarcely think that there have been such fools
as to help to spread the credulity that the world is now
left to dispel.
Yes, such is the fact.
It is not very easy to understand the drift of Victorian
politics just now. It is commonly supposed that the
public affairs of the nation are under the management of
Gillies, Deakin, and Company, and that for the last seven
years they have stood at the helm of the vessel of the
state.
Nevertheless, it is not clear, even to the present day,
what is the haven for which they are steering, nor, indeed,
whether they have made up their minds to claim an
Australian hereditary right to govern.
That they have handled their craft in stormy weather,
and in dangerous seas is obvious enough—when rough
work has to be done, this company appear well qualified to
do it upon antiquated lines. But their countrymen, so far
80
Federation of the Masses .


as they take any thought of the business of the nation —and
that is not very far —have a right to ask them when the
gallant ship will be full manned to meet every tax-payer’s
requirement.
Can it be a fact that this company desire the re-establish-
ment of monarchy in Victoria ?
May it be received with confidence that this company
rejects all idea of being landed at last in a republican form
of government ? Or is there not too much room for sus-
pecting that this company is on the outlook for oppor-
tunities, not so much as to settle the interests of Victoria,
as to minister to the self-importance of the country itself.
This hint, however, honest or otherwise, may teach us a
lesson, that it is possible for wilful rulers, undesignedly, to
bring to pass precisely those results which they protest
against most loudly.
May the suggestion herein recommended, as to the next
step to be taken by the industrial classes, re federating
together, which is not unconstitutional under the present
pressure, be strengthened by a vote of confidence from all
trades and unions in Victoria.
No men should come forward who desire to waste labor
upon uncertainties ; and it must be tolerably clear by this
time that whilst this governing company retains office, we
as toilers may bid farewell to equality of opportunity and
the enjoyment of our political rights.
Let us raise men, in this our adopted country, whose
patriotic desires and actions will have a lasting good for
the people’s welfare.
The present era of self-government under the present
company daily opens despondently for the public weal.
Daily are the unemployed at the Public Works Department
confronted with the insulting retort that their standard-
bearer periodically appears before them soliciting, with a
sinister look, the temper of the people.
However, my countrymen, you must not be surprised to
learn from this little work that federation of the masses will
prove the only panacea to shunt insults to oblivion from
those whom you employ to book-keep your accounts ; like-,
wise prevent the conditions of society being disturbed,


The units that we employ to look after our interests walk
about as though a fire was kindled within their outward
garb, and appearances manifests that they want to shine,
and that it should be generally known that they exist, and
that they should be talked of, ay, and taken note of.
My demeanour, you see, and my happiness, come from
notoriety.
Am I really known ? has my name been awarded append-
ages ? am I likely to be knighted ? are my talents acknow-
ledged by the whim-horse ? If so, I need not noise abroad
my broad acres nor the weight of my monej-bags.
If some one were to run to me with the intelligence that
I am to be made popular by their votes, welcome indeed
would be that friend ;he brings me sunshine. This is the
only power that can force me to play a prominent part on
the world’s stage, to reach this I feel capable of all sacri-
fice whatever ; I will take interest in the Esquimaux, the
Chinee, the Central African; I will become a philanthro-
pist ; espouse public affairs ; my fortune, my family, myself
—take them all; but give me shouts from the populace,
and down to the grocer, butcher, draper, in the various
streets. Ay! Let the whole nation know that lam
somebody.
Perhaps you will laugh at this caricature, fellow-workman;
for me, I find the world so constituted! I look upon the
success of my species in arms with painful emotions, and
my casement trembles and crumbles at their triumphant
victories; my wounds seek in vain to dethrone their
oppressive tactics, but the defects of my nature and my
kindred defeats every purpose.
This man compromises my future, exerts an inimical
Influence around me.
How then can I think well of him ?
Then I repeat, let us federate ourselves, and no longer
nurse antipathy to the cause of one great union.
Horrible this division among men!
You may contradict me, but my conscience cries out
that it is too true.
Men will try to' hide their sores, but I assure you that
the more we conceal them the more they spread.
Hence the present misery in the land,
82
Federation of the Masses.


And besides what does rulers care about the toilers i
perishing? It is all one to them. V
To recapitulate, we must as a people federate our
interests, we must study both social and political questions.
Political expediency demands that we should place to
our credit a principle whereby we can or may claim the
honours of sowing equality of opportunity broadcast in
every latitude. _ ,
Why should we through all time by reproduction be
shunted out of the social and political world ?
Why should we and our offspring be doomed to the
servile work of the nation ?
Answer —because we live in bandit groups, suffering
from local impressions and sectarian education, the
to all rapid progress.
To the native born subjects. Ask yourselves whether
you have been treated courteously by your masters, after
serving an apprenticeship of four, five, or six years.
To have undertaken this task, were it possible a few
centuries back, I would have been proclaimed an outlaw,
driven into exile for holding opinions which, although
considered revolutionary in their day, are orthodox and
reasonable in ours.
If oppression has bent our frail frames, debased our
original status, let us stand forth in one happy cluster and
determinedly exclaim that we will no longer be subdued.
What are the estates of dukes, barons, lords, and last
not least, the sinecures of crown heads ? Are these names
handed down to us from our first parents or protoplasts?
The answer is obvious.
Will any rational man condemn me for my weak efforts
in demanding from my fellow-toiler a determination to
federate? Does it not concern us all, however humble our
station in life, to be continually meddling with the affairs
of the nation ?
I feel presumptuous enough to assert, that our statesmen
would have no hesitation in declaring that they are the
only individuals that can govern this colony aright (bar
the surplus budget), and that the daily bread we consume
for our support, absolutely depends on their intelligence.


I will furnish you, my brother workmen, with the
utterances of a man who rose from the ranks to represent
a city in Scotland in the House of Commons. It runs
thus:—
“ The uninformed mob may swell a nation’s bulk ; and
| the titled, tinseled, courtly throng, may be its feathered
ornament; but the number of those who are elevated
enough in life to reason and to reflect, yet low enough to
keep clear of a venal contagion of a court: these are a
nation’s strength.”
This same man concluded with the supplication that our
political discussions and movements should tend to the
benefit of the whole ; more especially those who are daily
crying for bread.
He also incorporated with his remarks a few lines
appropriate to this little work.
That the desolate poor may find shelter and bread,
/i That the sick may be comforted, nourished, and fed,
That the sorrow may cease of the sighing and sad,
That the spirit bowed down may be lifted and glad,
That brother the hand of his brother may clasp,
From ocean to ocean in friendliest grasp,
That from North and from South, and from East and from West,
The horror of war be for ever at rest.
Statescraft consists in manipulating the profits of those
who have neither shelter nor bread, for their parasites
aggrandisement; and we, as a people, applaud the deed!
Federate, federate, federate, and stay the excessive
demands made on the public purse. Neither submit to
sinecures, which, somehow or other, carry high emolu-
ments with them in the midst of want and wretchedness.
We, as a people, acknowledge freedom cannot enter the
Public Service without submitting to some stringent
examination.
Why should this formula be endorsed by the people,
when they know too well that the son of a father, a lucky
gold digger, takes precedence without standing the test of
examination ?
Is this forever to be tolerated ?
Our political system is a tug-of-war between Service,
Berry, and Gillies, Deakin, and company.


This privileged class ever has been possessed with
■strongly fortified positions against our interests; they
federate, they act together, hence our subserviency to a
concentrated activity, to a combination or federation.
Let us consider the natural forces which force us to be
subordinate to their will; no scientist, no philosopher can
prevent their movements. These forces are progressive in
their respective orders ; rapidly they perform their duties ;
and we have but very little fault to find with their
revolutions.
I would it were so with us workmen, so that we might
diminish the weight of misery and increase the sum of
human happiness. Nothing more frightfully impressive
can well be conceived than the story of the toiler who daily
suffer from want, either of cash, food, or clothing.
If practical reforms are too long delayed, I apprehend
that a more active, and a more ready expression of ideas
will be manifest among the toilers ; and I think that every
rational man will be one with them in defending their
cause.
The contemptible and crushing policy of the present and
past governments in Australia have proved abortive to the
interests of the workers; the moonstruck policy of all
governments has not proved progress to prosperity, on
the contrary, they have fostered deeper poverty and
pauperism throughout the nation.
There is another cancer embodied and incorporated in
our law-making institutions, and it appears even unto this
day to be perpetuated and endorsed by society as being the
only true method of demonstrating all abstruse problems or
questions that affect the whole. ... . .
It has been argued that where any insignificant majority
attempts to oppose the declaration of any majority, no
matter how wrong their decisions may be, or how injurious
to the public weal, the minority must cede, even were their
lives at stake. ...
Oh joy supreme of meeting with thought, of giving it a
form, a voice; if only others of my kindred send it forth
flowing with freshness, thrilling with determination through
the land, that reason shall be consulted before yielding to


Vthe caprices of illiterate majorities, there will be in it
something of the sublime !
JHow beautiful, how progressive, this thought! Push on
monotonous days ; pile up your difficulties.
Now is the time.
J Creative intellect, ponder over your slow-winged thoughts,
face your sluggish apathy, then you will acknowledge how
you have been brought captive to ambitious combinations.
Crouching creatures, all compounded of inflation and
impotence ; and yet this suffering of ours is tolerated.
I Is it not insanity to be obedient to men whom we
I distrust ?
Believe me, we have found them ; they have nearly
consumed us. There is running through my veins a
feeling of disquietude and agitation; a giant effort to
gather thoughts so as to enable my pen to macadamise
the pathway whereby my fellow workmen may free them-
selves from their bonds.
The present sum of human woe, the aggregate of crime,
1 must weigh upon every rational mind, it bears a world of
| burden which must be lessened; which must be crushed
out of existence by the united force of unity, under pain of
being crushed beneath it.
Again, where is the statesmen or representatives of any
constituency after being elected to power, but what becomes
early at wide variance with the majority of their constit-
uents on points of national policy.
If men will but federate together, they who have in the
past “ sown in tears,” shall in the future “ reap in joy.”
To rise gently, swelling our numbers in conference form,
' it may be expected that the exact wrinkle to disturb the
present non-transparency of the surface, will be trans-
formed into one huge organization of all trades none
excepted.
However, the prerogative of mercy towards the wretched
poor, and helpless, depends absolutely upon our voting to
parliament men that have views relative to our require-
ments ; not men that are continually drawing the sap from
the bone and sinew of the nation; such men have in the
past proved themselves to be the eternal instruments of all
misfortunes that befall the industrial classes.
86
Federation of the Masses.


In this turbid, rushing life, when the essence of the
spirit of the age is selfishness, is the world not a theatre
of imbeciles to encourage hearts hardened by selfish
ambition ; to pass through life over-burdening with sorrow, L
hearts bruised with sadness ?
The mission of the industrial classes of Australia, should
be the harbinger and the pioneer to foster true democratic
principles. This is the problem to work out in all self-
governed lands.
Battles are not won by the disconnected efforts of
brigades or divisions but by the proper application of the
combined powers of all acting under the direction of one
head.
An European army in the field may be looked upon as
the model whereby federation of the masses may be safely
established and brought to success.
The private soldiers are the workers, and from them,
through all grades up to the commander-in-chief, there is
'one continuous theme of responsibility.
To perfect the scheme of federation with all trades the
project will meet with formidable barriers no doubt. But,
however irksome the work, always regard the movement as
being conducive to the interests of all conditions of men in
Australia. Then, with brave hearts and determined minds, >
let us work, this will prove to be the great essential.
The inert or inactive contemplation of our troubles
exercises an unwholesome fascination over our nature.
A dislike to federate together will lurk in our frames like
poison beneath the fang of the serpent. If you have a voice
free yourselves from the political impositions that now
crushes your manhood and makes of you a spinning-jenny.
If you did but know what delight it gives just to move
about the earth; yes, to plant subjects before your comrades
either on paper or impromptu form, and prune where
necessary ; the gladness of nature then buds and overflows
on you for your philanthropic efforts. _ -
The cup filled with delicious information and striking
upon your lips may force you to exclaim, “ Federate
together ! Federate ! Federate !”
My heart contracts.
I have found one, methinks, whose vitals are mingled


with mine ; they convey thoughts of progression re Federa-
tion, and speaks to me mouth to mouth.
/ Oh ! yes, I am quite aware that the sum of human
f agony has been caused by the early efforts of the Tory
fraternity; and that in order to be a statesman, it is
generally conceded that a certain amount of indifference to
human suffering is requisite. Statesmen would never
have enacted laws to strike such terrible blows upon the
bone and sinew of the nation had they been constantly
filled with pity to relieve the misery, and wretchedness
that pervaded the empire.
A like callousness of heart is a necessary characteristic
of the man who undertakes to teach that which he fails to
prove. At all events, he ought to know in this democratic
land, that his presence is not required before young men of
intelligence.
Great minds inform us that they have found for the
thousandth time that, since conventional institutions layed
their first foundation on this earth, terrible attacks have
been made upon the weak, confiscating both their property
and their rights. Well then, if automatons had but
reasoning faculties, instead of acting by rule, moving
mechanically, is it possible to believe that they would not,
ere this, have stirred up and qualified their insensibility to
have freed themselves from the yoke of political aggression ?
It is not enough for me to think of the sufferings of the
groaning millions around us, I must express my sympathies
before you, with the aim to convert you to the sensibility
of federating yourselves into one gigantic organization.
When you have some cherished being or friend beside
you, does it suffice you only to think of him—not to speak
to him ? Why, would not that be a torture.
Exactly so with the writer of this instructive (I trust)
little work.
Ah'! if the fear of defeat did not restrain us how far more
freely would our hearts give expression.
Circumstances pressing me hard I shall venture to remind
you, fellow-workmen, that our daily acts, words, and
thoughts, create events, and in our ignorance we grasp
everything that deceives us.
But what makes me so tedious a creature to undertake


this task of writing to my kindred ? Because lam smitten
with the same blows; Igo on repeating the same cries ; I
tell and re-tell my afflictions and my adverses, until
monotony sets in and I weary even the noblest hearts.
The friendship of numbers of my species have been worn
out by lamentations. How many thousands of my fellow-
creatures can endorse my statement; who have trembled at
the thought of encountering the same inner conflicts.
The exactions of hard natures have produced barriers
insufferable to man.
We are afraid of men who are placed in power instead of
them being afraid that we should dethrone them.
Do not forget that the power is in our hands.
Men of ambition placed in power exacts everything,
gives little, and often understands but little, and that little
is self.
This we must no longer suffer.
What weakness checks us ? what fear silences ?
Strength will indeed be required to emancipate the fallen;
without persistence on our part, without a tremendous
effort, all freedom, liberty, and equality of political rights
will vanish like chaff before the wind.
Eelate to each other how your ignorance has deceived
you in the political world ; and how you were crumbling
away before the martyrs of your own folly. At last your
tottering steps came upon this little work photographing
the rising road to freedom, and the way to lessen the
present misery now so glaring before us.
Is it not so ?
It was a brother that you were in need of.
Blessed poverty ! thou art the beginning of wealth.
Yes, federate, and be transported to the realms of light,
without causing the pain that we have so long endured.
Kindle, brother workman, an ardent thirst for the hap- 1
piness of the unhappy. It is worth working for even
though suffering confronts our efforts in our first attempts.
Good judgment is often times more valuable than years
of experience. Some workmen will not put the least bit
of calculation into a piece of work ; and they might work
on for years, putting out all their physical energy upon


the work, never for a moment doubting that that is the
only means of accomplishing it.
“But turn to the proverbial Yankee, who is not par-
ticularly fond of exerting himself physically, and who
generally contrives to make his mind save his body; and
quite a difference is noticed. Instead of hammering, strain-
ing, and doing the work himself, he deliberately sets
down to ‘ figure out ’ some device for accomplishing
the same result.
> If a difficult task presents itself, where apparently con-
siderable muscle is required, he looks the thing over, and
generally contrives some means of doing it without ‘ putting
his shoulder to the wheel.’
In other words, he lets his mind help his hands.
Here is just where the intelligent and thoughtful work-
man has the advantage of the illiterate and ignorant, and
is the reason why we find some really good workmen, so
far as physical force is concerned, plodding along, earning
barely enough to support themselves.
Let your mind at all times help your hands, and you
will find your work easier, your life happier, and your
condition generally much improved.” I have taken the
above abstract, with slight alterations, from the “ Practical
Mechanic,” Worcester, Mass.
We must confess, I think, that the abstract before us is
simple, and fertile with material to suit future generations.
The present condition of society may be regarded as
being a terrible misfortune to the interests of the whole;
it becomes intolerable when we place comparisons with the
lot of each brother and sister in the harness of life.
To keep consistent with my subject, the pressure of
anguish among the uninformed, arises from their own
curious crotchets, as well as ignorance. For instance, in
the industrial department all occupations are both loath
and scrupulous to blend their ideas together, notwith-
standing the fact that unity is strength, and division is
defeat.
This is an insult to human intelligence outside of an
insane asylum.
Of course, the more we can improve each other
physically, mentally, and morally, the better for all ; and


hence every effort to its acquirement ought to be warmly
welcomed.
It is to be deplored that the tension of the public mind
could not be as readily adjusted as the tension of the
numerous sewing machines now in use.
The growth and modifications of our present rotten
system of legislation, depends absolutely upon the blending
together of all trades and conditions of men. The tacit
assumption for centuries past, has been that both states-
men and the people decided to leave everything to find its
own level, and allowing labor and capital to adjust their
disputes without help from the legislature.
This decree will be found to be one-sided while society
is constituted as at present; but transform present ano-
malies into one gigantic order, then each will have equality
of opportunity; although in all the departments of life a
division of labor must be the result. .
Again, if combinations of the wealthy are indispensable I
to their interests, how much more so the practical value of 1
the working classes ?
To arrive at this consummation all miserable bickerings
must be put to flight, and in its place a wholesome
sagacious realisation of that principle whereby the ground
that has been won may be retained, and the march
forward to further equitable successes made more rapidly
than has hitherto been.
Did it ever occur to you fellow workmen that our motley
crowd in its bewildered condition, in its suspended
animation in misery, was not thought so much of as the
snow-flake that decorates the flagstones in a tropical
clime ? Why should we consume our days thus ?
Let us in unanimity begin to instruct our profound
ignorance, and supply ourselves with that nourishment
that will increase our happiness, and so live free from the
burning solicitude for the morrow.
The embodiment of all trades unions might very well
have been identical long before this period of civilisation,
for there is nothing conflicting in their interests, and it
has been bad judgment to leave the way open for Crown
heads to adjust the remuneration and hours of labor for
the industrial classes.


The trades and their organizations, doubtless, have done
much to advance their genuine interests, but the formid-
able handicaps that now embarrass them are insuperably
stronger than the advocates of freedom are aware of.
The constitution of the present trades’ unions may be
compared to the redundant branches of a fruit tree ; the
tree must be pruned before fruit can be expected therefrom.
Therefore, prune your organizations ; lop off the redundant
branches ; make one huge trunk, or union ; then the first
budding of your conclave will then admit that they never
saw a flower grow out of a stone; nor the need of
constables or soldiers being summoned for the protection
of the public interests.
How can you expect that the weeping eye and the
broken heart can cease weeping while the various compacts
can be seen to be but counterfeits of design, like that of a
false jewel set in a ring ?
Where freedom, liberty, and equality of political rights
give a propriety, unanimity gives a possession.
Here, then, is happiness in the uniting of the various
factious parties, and in accordance with the scriptural
injunction, “ Be in brotherly love.”
See how little cause a child hath to fear to fight the
battles of this life.
This is a cordial to. the weeping human willows of a
nation.
Plutarch reports of Alexander that he caused to be
painted on a table a sword within a wheel, implying that
what he had gotten by his sword was subject to be turned
about with the wheel of providence ; then, as might has
had the longest lease of our rights, it would only be just
by reason to set the wheel of providence turning in favor
of the oppressed.
To explore the ruins of crumbling humanity, what
recesses of horror would present the true state of misery
in those chambers. But what I supplicate for on the part
of starving and unemployed people, is that we, and not
our legislators, shall be the judges to pronounce the gauge
whereby the appetites and wants of millions of people are
satisfied.
Jlaye we not by dear-bought experience found out that
92
Federation of the Masses.


our legislators do not deal even-handed justice to the
people ?
How can such laws stand for all time.
Nay, such institutions based upon injustice, cannot
•stand the test of the federating principle.
What a trade for an assemblage of erudite scholars to
enact laws on the principle of sliding-scale, whereby the
few secure the largest measure of profits from the resources
of the nation.
The official forms through which the collection of our
duties are gathered, must be admitted to be of a very
complex nature, they are bristled with difficulties in the
shape of conflicting valuations, differential rates, and
identification of nationalities, which necessitate the abun-
dance of oaths, declarations, and affidavits, and of
consequent perjury, besides affording irresistible temp-
tations to bribery, and finally, smuggling with all its
demoralising influences; thus, government become the
cause of crime.
Too often in the walks of life do we hear that we have
plenty of law but very little justice meted out to us.
This phrase bears but very little significance up to date.
To arrest this long continued practice of seduction, no
other method but that of federating together can restore
the equality of political rights to the long oppressed.
Powerless though I may be in writing this little work
for the purpose of melting the cankered impressions of the
past, the lives of all men necessarily require stimulants to
aid them in the world’s curiosity shop.
To this end am I working, with no other emotions than
horror-struck feeling at the throbbing hearts of my desti-
tute countrymen.
Of all the revolutions which have in the past taken
place upon the great theatre of the world, there cannot be
one more calculated to excite the gratitude of the pious
than that which I have penned in this work, namely,
“ Federation of the Masses.”
To organize for the purpose of federating together, we
must dispel the bigotry of men now so rampant, and con-
fute the cavils of seducers by harmonising principles into
one comprehensive plan.
93
Federation of the Masses.


Such a design as to federate the masses may superficially
appear above human ingenuity to contrive as surpassing
human power to execute. The plan and execution thereof
■ depends absolutely upon the transformation of sentiment
that can be made upon those who are now suffering the
pangs of misery, wretchedness, and want.
Doubtless, numerous and formidable obstacles will
oppose the growth of such radical reforms herein noted,
but the lamentably gradual reformation of public enor-
mities have been progressing only to keep the masses on
par with the brutal herd.
Be just, 0 ye men of understanding !
To quote scripture, “ Look not every man on his own
things, but every man also on the things of others.” If
this apostolic injunction is worthy of our consideration as
being revealed to us from a higher power, no difficulty can
confront us in federating together, if we do but comply
with the ‘heavenly proclamation, Look not every man on
his own things, but every man also on the things of others.
However, any obstruction that may attempt to oppose
the fraternising of the industrial classes, signifies that
there is an immeasurable distance between the conceptions
of the toiler and those elected to power to govern. As
long as ignorance, poverty, and crime defile the face of the
land, so long is the work of those whom we elect to power
incomplete.
Note, we must not twist and turn the plan or idea of
federating together into all sorts of unfair shapes to suit
party ends ; nay, we must be conscious that we are under-
taking a task in the interests of the oppressed,
I Let it be henceforth engraven on the memories of the
toilers, “ that the people must be free in proportion as they
will it,” not by foolishly lending themselves to a mass of
verbiage for seducers aggrandisement.
Fellow workmen, the deprivation of political rights,
manipulated from us by selfish legislators, cannot be any
longer tolerated without seeking for redress, and this
determination must emanate directly from those who are
duped.
We are dishonest to ourselves by not demanding that
the national exchequer shall be a little more under our


control than has hitherto been in the past. The very
absence of our persons, and the reticence of our voices, is
a sign that indifferentism is deeply rooted in our midst;
therefore, courage is needed to produce a reaction in this
necessary work of reform.
The reader will perceive at a small amount of trouble that
our legislative institutions have been erected for the
absolute purpose of dividing man from his own kind,
besides unjustly imposing taxes to grind the vitals of their
very supporters.
This is to be deplored.
I have oftimes thought that to have the mind free we
must reject all class education, and no longer remain the
victims of teachers who, perchance, are insensibly aware
that they are deceiving their students.
No one can, unmoved, look at the working classes and
say that the distress now endured by them exists solely
from the ready adhesion of receiving incautiously the
teachings of parents and public men. It is impossible to
conceive a plan whereby the masses can be federated to-
gether under a more practical and complete system of
education and legislation.
Where there is no combat there is no victory.
Certainly the world is very much of the opinion that we
as a people have an insurmountable quantity of law, but
very scanty supplies of justice.
If we want to enjoy our political rights we must be
combatants and not spectators, then we shall be able to
explain to those whom we elect to power the results of our
greivances. This plan of adoption would precisely be the
quality to overcome the difficulties so long complained of.
What an ascendency to pass from such names as political
seduction and other political entanglements that have in
the past baffled our understanding. It may be fairly
demonstrated that in the majority of cases the industrial
classes fail from enjoying their temporal rights from want
of thinking, and from not knowing their exact weight of
power. There is also a necessary ingredient required of
every man to know what his powers are, so as not to go
out of his depth. Federation of the masses will accomplish,
if carried out, one of the grandest undertakings of modern
95
Federation of the Masses.


times in the teeth of contemptuous, seducing, imposing,
and flattering legislators.
Reason, like time, will make its own way, and prejudice
will fall in a combat with interest.
Can we be surprised at the present abject state of the
human mind when every citizen figures as a man, but
represents only a breathing automaton ? This sort of
unawakened reason may last a few years more, but it
cannot defy the tax-payer in attempting to emerge from
the present condition of being governed by bad laws, or in
other words, laws inadequate to meet the requirements of
the whole.
Is it not a fact that governments watch prosperity as its
prey, and permits only the chosen to be nursed by them ?
Federation of the masses is the grand challenge to
wholesale reforms, with an army of combatants complying'
with the decisions of their huge organizations.
The vain ambition of man to outshine his kindred stings
the sober breast with pain and wonder. Federation of the
industrial classes signifies what is best for their interests ;
and I believe it to be the true security of sweeping away
personal hatred, while inspiring the whole to defend their
civil and political rights. However, accept the poet’s
suggestion:—
A little learning is a dangerous thing.
Drink deep or taste not the Pieran spring.
Its shallow draughts intoxicate the brain.
And drinking largely sobers us again.
—Pope. Essays on Criticism,
96
Federation of the Masses.


CHAPTER VII.
WHY STAY THE PROGRESS OF UNITY AMONGST MEN?
f REALLY hope that the time is not far distant when
the man who knows but little, and tells only what he
knows, will make his mind clear to federate himself
with his more intelligent comrades, so that he may be-
come a law unto himself.
Let us suppose a case in our city, where so many girls
are hourly toiling for their subsistence, and that one of
them are inhumanly abused by the employer; does not
her case demand justice at our hands, and that with one
voice as to make the government of the day sensible to
our demands ?
Then I ask, would this action of ours be entitled to the
name of Federation. ?
Why stay the progress of unity at this stage, supposing
triumph has been won ?
Why do we decorate our streets with animation ;• for the
purpose only to resemble pictures hanging upon the walls
of some picture gallery.
It is an unhappy thing that we should have to reflect
after placing men in power to act for us. Such ascendency
to office should not excite their avidity to plunder from us
our inherent and political rights.
However, “ Who would free themselves must strike the
blow.’’
Federation of the people will restore to the nation a more
liberal method of legislation, and produce a better state of
independence in the interests of the citizen and the
government.
It would be difficult to point out to day a single nation


living under a system of good laws. Laws have proceeded
in Victoria, from the interest of the legislator, from the
urgency of the moment, from ignorance, and have accord-
ingly been made at random, and failed to meet the
requirements of the bone and protection of the land.
Remember, that one unjust statesman can prove suffi-
cient to ruin his country; therefore, let us federate ourselves
so as we may prove able to avert the designing purposes of
the enemies of freedom.
It has been said by a writer of the last century, that the
first ambitious man corrupted the earth. “ I confess,” said
he, “ that in general most of our brethren have acquired not
only the seed of corruption, but the power of promulgating
it-”
The same writer enquires in the following strain thus :
—“ Why since we are always complaining of our ills ; are
we so reluctant in removing them ?”
Why prefer oppression to the happy labors of establishing
one class of organisation ? Remember, “ thinking implies
effort.” Consequently where there is no effort there can
be no systematic thinking.
It is essential to the soundness of our political institu-
tions to federate ourselves, and become sentinels over those
whom we elect to power. Have we not elected men like
ourselves to power who have thought it degrading to mix
with whim-horses until election periods cast their lots
into our ranks ?
The law at the present day forbids theft, and yet law-
makers steal from us our natural right. Federation of the
masses would always be a gigantic barrier against such
innovations to justice, and transform the present impotent
imbecilities now so pregnant at general elections.
I What different lots our stars accord I
This babe to be hailed and wooed as a lord !
And that to be shunned as a leper!
One to the world’s wine, honey, and corn,
Another, like Colchester native, born
To its vinegar, cabbage, and pepper.— Hood.
The testimony of Hood’s lines may be declared invaluable
as to the immediate necessity of federating the industrial
98
Federation of the Masses.


classes. Among the varied races of living beings which
inhabit this world, none have excited so much speculation
and general interest as those to whom this little work refers.
Reforms now enjoyed have become rusty, every day new
facts efface those of the preceding day.
Time is continually altering or destroying, and concep-_
tions as well as things fall finally into oblivion, therefore
federating together necessarily will command our attention
while in this world’s campaign. It would also prove to be
of vast utility, instructing man that envy, malice, hatred,
and all uncharitableness, was the pitfall to the toiler’s ruin.
Hear the words of Bishop Porteous :
Envy, eldest born of hell, etnbrued
Her hands in blood, and taught the sons of men
To make a death which nature never made,
And God abhorred ; with violence rude to break
The thread of life, ere half its length was run.
And rob a wretched brother of his being.
With joy Ambition saw, and soon improved
The execrable deed. ’Twas not enough
By subtle fraud to snatch a single life.
. J*uny impiety! Whole kingdoms fell
To sate the lust of power; more horrid still,
The foulest etain and scandal of our nature
Became its boast. One murder made a villain,
Millions, a hero. Princes were privileged
To kill, and numbers sanctified the crime.
Ah! Why will kings forget that they are men ?
And men that they are brethren ? Why delight
In human sacrifice ? Why burst the ties
Of nature, that should knit their souls together
ln one soft bond of amity and love ?
The gaudy trickery, with its licensed powers, has been
too willingly received by the oppressed, their senses have
become depraved, while the very instinct of their happiness
is utterly destroyed. There are recurrent periods in the
life of man when he has been compelled to accept Macbeth’s
phrase, “I have supped full of horrors.” Doubtless this
phrase was never more applicable in Victoria than at the
present day. The thinking mind becomes fairly shocked
with a sense of the gloomy aspect of legislative affairs, and
by no etfort of reasoning or pleading can it be altered.
Extensive loans increasing alarmingly the national debt,
99
Federation of the Masses.


introducing to the nation bogus budgets, increasing salaries
to railway heads, and installing civil servants in sinecures.
This irregularity with the people’s purse should be a direct
guarantee and fertile lesson to the toilers, that the superior
intelligence of this age considers it to be sheer folly to close
their eyes against such facts disclosed, merely because they
are at variance with weighty money bag holders.
Tennyson once said:—“How long, 0 God, shall man be
ridden down and trampled under by the last and least of
men ?’*
Yes, I have known and felt the pangs of oppression, how
hard it has been to climb against the wealth of individuals
or “wealthy lower orders.” Let not country, class, or
creed, stay the march in federating together ; what is one
man’s rights is every man’s rights, therefore blend those
reciprocal connections so as to weld the bond of amity and
love to the interests of all.
How can man honor man when he knows that his mu-
tulated form is distorted, and the increment of his toil
squandered by the spiders of the nation.
Shall we, in presence of this grievous wrong, consider
ourselves justified in submitting with fear to the extrava-
gant acts of men whom we elect to power ? Foolishly, the
working classes remain the bees whereby the spiders per-
petually weave their webs, conscious that their influence
operate opposite to the interests of the whim horses.
Eeason and conscience must construct a federal army
for the nation’s good.
We must fight out this worthy battle against all
necromancers, and force the law to acknowledge our
contents. The education of the people must be encou-
raged ; it must not be sacrificed to keep in accord with old
rusty traditions ; on the contrary, the people, through
their representatives, must force a declaration to be
presented to the government of the day, with regard to the
advisiability of their political rights, and to protest against
any further political imposition from acts done in their
governing capacity.
This course adopted, man will no longer feel himself
handled child-like by those whom he elects to power. We


have seen enough of the mischief of varied and secret
societies, therefore, let us become more inquisitive, and no
longer infringe upon the liberty and rights of each other.
Let every man be fully convinced in his own mind that
in investigating any subject, it is necessary to grub direct
to the root of the matter ; for to arrive at a just conclusion
this inevitably must be done.
Secrecy in private or public interests, stands a formid-
able, gigantic, treacherous, unmanly tactic, a vice of vices
which should not be tolerated. Here we are, like other
animals, struggling for subsist nee, while each and every
man attempts daily to ravish from his neighbour the fruits
of his labor.
What can repel this rapacious desire of man, this
existing principle of unmanly practices? Nothing but
uniting the toilers’ interests can increase their strength.
0 my countrymen, why so slow in learning ?
Why allow the few to vaunt their cunningly devised
schemes against the bone and sinew of the nation ?
The poor are daily becoming poorer, hence the immediate
necessity of uniting their powers.
How many years are to pass away before the people
shall enjoy the profits derived from the resources of their
country ? Poor suffering humanity! your silence stings
your vitals. Necessity invented knives and forks, etc.,
etc.; then let necessity establish a federal organization to
cheer the hearts now broken, and bodies needing food and
raiment.
The unskilled workmen are to be compared to defeated
armies that have fled before their conquerors for conceal-
ment. So it has been, and still is the case with the toiler,
the majority of whom have to seek fresh fields and
pastures new periodically for employment.
Hastening by pressure to leave their wives and families
behind, distinctly appears that our individual energies
leave us painfully to grope our way for subsistence in
wonderland, notwithstanding the fact that we elect to office
men like ourselves, insuring them constant employment
with high remuneration.
1 cannot do better than quote a few lines from one who
saw the cowardice of the unskilled laborerer in his day.


His lines run in the following strain ?
Why hesitate ? Ye are full-bearded men.
With God-implanted will and courage, if
Ye dare but show it. Never yet was will
But found some way to work it out;
Nor e’er did Fortune frown on him who dared.
Shall we, in presence of this grievous wrong.
In this supremest moment of all time,
Stand trembling, cowering, when with one bold stroke
These groaning millions might be ever free ?
And that one stroke so just, so greatly good,
So level with the happiness of men,
That all the angels will applaud the deed ! — Tatlob.
Federalization of the masses is embodied in the above
lines ; therefore, with sublime courage and manly honesty,
proclaim, 0 ye sons of toil, fearlessly the advent of your
united forces.
Has your mind ever been brought to consider what a
slowly progressing race of beings the human family has,
from generation to generation, proved itself to be, more
especially when you sow the seeds of reform ?
What an idea of circumstances, to be perpetually con-
spiring or combining to plot against each other, the same
as statesmen practice with the taxpayer. I ask —and drive
home the query to your inward consciousness—can you
believe, after a moments reflection, that the united forces
of labor banding together can possibly be detrimental to its
own interests ?
Its sound, doubtless, will make some men feel that the
advocacy of federating the masses will contain something
too difficult for the ordinary understanding to cope with.
However this may be, the people of Victoria, likewise the
units of all governed lands, must muster in conclave and
there unitedly exclaim :
Why clutch an existence of insult and want ?
Why stand to be plucked by a legion of rant ?
Or hoodwinked for ever with twaddle extant,
All for the tyrants who grind you by grant.
Yes, by the grant of the workers of Victoria; aye, the
Australias ; aye, by the toilers of all governed lands.
These workmen are simply madmen to elect, to grant
their rights over to coercive factions.
102
Federation of the Masses.


Notwithstanding this imbecility among the workmen of
different nations, no art of reasoning can impress their
minds with the fact that they are but the prey to inordinate
desires.
May the sweet music of unanimity among men, early
herald the advent of assembled whim horses, and strike the
tuning fork, whereby the general sentiment of the toiler will
unite stronger the identity of interests.
If we want a nearer adjustment of our political rights,
we must pride ourselves in the fact that we must float our
talents to realise our object.
Adoration of law and a tenacious elasticity in its
unlimited power, are marked characteristics of the British
people. This belief is not at all confined to the uninformed,
it is shared very largely by the intelligent. Notwithstanding
the numerous evils arising from this cankered belief, and
the failure of years to remove it, hope springs eternal in
the belief that somewhere in the human intellect, a formula
of words may be found, when enacted into a law will have
a magic effect on the springs or temperaments of human
movements, their passions and appetites.
Doubtless, we shall find in our ranks many obstinate
cranks, who will regard the plan of campaign, re federating
together, another addition to the number of wrong methods,
and a consequent barrenness of results will follow the goal
of the federating fraternity.
However, this may be, I earnestly entreat my fellow-
workmen not to listen, or be swayed by any of the kind
outside of their ranks.
Again, politically, nothing is good for the nation unless
it makes the community better; therefore the vices now
so fertile in all governed lands are not counterbalanced by
merits preferable to the heathen. Furthermore, laws that
are not considered expedient for those who rule, how can
they be suited for those who have to abide by intimidation
to the laws they enact ?
This statement may appear a mere useless repitition of
dealing with a subject, but it implies a careless action of
those who have the power in their own hands, and yet
surrender that power to gratify the solicitations of theii
enemies.


To impart more life and vividness into political matters,
we must command a stronger army than hitherto, and to
do this, leaguing of the oppressed is the only means to the
object sought. We must buckle up our armour without
delay; we must also use our utmost endeavours to have
no distrust of our courage and bravery, but enter into our
cause the same as aspirants for legislative honors.
Messrs. Never-mind-his-own-business are too numerous in
the toilers’ ranks ; the faddist stands on the world’s plane
as a pretended reformer, denouncing everything, and
prohibiting that what they indulge in themselves. Fede-
ration of the masses in Victoria, would be a bright example
to set before the world ; also to inherit the wide-spread
blessings of bleeding hearts, and crumbling monuments of
society.
“It is an ill wind that blows nobody good.” Conse-
quently by the long suffering through the loss of our
political rights, we are necessitated to wreck the present
defective policy of our legislators for the benefit of genera-
tions yet unborn.
Nothing perhaps is more abused than conscience. Some
men form an idea of certain things, and at once drag their
conscience into it; and what should be simply a matter of
opinion, in which good men may safely differ, is made a
matter of conscience; and brotherly kindness and charity
are fearfully outraged by this tithing of differences hence
the present confusion.
Men’s consciences daily prove that their utterances and
actions impose upon the less informed, triumphing over the
very men that returns them to power.
To be unsettled in politics argues want of judgement; if
men’s heads were not giddy they would not reel so fast
from one opinion to another. It argues lightness ; feathers
will be blown every way, so will feathery politicians.
Children are fickle, the same as children of larger growth,
sometimes of one mind, sometimes of another; nothing
pleases them long; so unsettled politicians are childish ;
those principles they embrace at one time, they reject at
another; sometimes in favor' of Conservatism, and soon
after they have a good mind to turn Liberals according to
the fluctuation and receding of the powerful dollar. °


The voice of a people can be made to represent the fall of
a Nasmyth hammer. Every blow of the hammer, or voice*
is to fasten the cords of unity among men. This is the
great design of federating the masses not only for the
enlightening of the uninformed, but for the establishing of
laws so that we should be grounded in the knowledge of
fundamentals.
The plant which is being continually removed never
thrives. Then, a man can no more grow in the knowledge
of his political rights when he is unsettled, than a bone
can grow in the body that is out of joint. Political
seducers are factors ; enemies to their race ; they are of all
others the greatest felons ; they rob you of your land, your
birthright; seducers have silver tongues—a fair tongue can
put off bad wares; they have practised legedemain to
deceive.
The knowledge of principles conduceth to the making of
good and complete laws for a nation. It is evident that
there must be a principle of knowledge within us —first
grounded, and then settled —to stand against shaky
political times.
Why is the reason so many people are unsettled in
civilised lands ?
It is because they are too ready to embrace every novel
opinion!
As the body cannot be strong and active that is paralysed,
so neither can the masses be strong in political knowledge ;
therefore, he who wants intelligence to strengthen his
status must necessarily cede to the principles of leaguing
together.
Let the assembling of the working classes be an antidote
against any further political impositions; the want of
conformity to this principle is a violation to the political
rights of man ; and signifies what slight thoughts can be
running through the cells of our minds at the present
degraded and imperfect condition of society.
All men have a desire to be happy, yet opposeth that
which should promote happiness ; he hates to be reformed
politically.
Where is, then, the knowledge of man when his head is
so empty to fight in opposition to his temporal salvation ?


Man’s affections are misplaced, set on wrong objects ;
they cleave to us as blackness to the skin of the Ethiopian,
which cannot be got rid of.
What is the aggravation of the working classes ? Servi-
tude. It is, they hate those who rule over them, and by
our ignorance we are enslaved to them: we are their
drudgery, they steer us which way they will, and never
steer us but into disappointments.
A chief can do what he likes with an obedient tribe, he
can cause them to curse the day of their birth by reason of
their servitude, and proclaim a feast for the perpetuity of
their obedience. Even now the inhabitants of our country
Seem only in course of being slowly reclaimed from a state
of stupor or semi-barbarism.
Here we dwell surrounded on all sides by syndicates who
Secretly plot to deprive the people of their inherent and
natural rights.
Victorians like all other so-called civilised and en-
lightened people are replete with vague aspirations and
hopes, half-formed and impracticable theories of social and
political perfection, there is not yet formed a political
organization where the friction of mind with mind can
come in contact to discuss the advisability of renovating
society from its present wretchedness and criminality.
Leaguing together into one huge organization might, with
advantage to the whole world, be introduced aiid fostered
beneficially to our rising generation more especially to take
precedence in mir Golden City* Ballarat.
What a reStleSs, excited) and uneasy feeling precedes the
time when “ the old order changes, giving place to new.”
I sincerely hope that the bonds of loyalty to the enslavers
(both rulers and newspaper compacts, etc.,) will not longer
retard the progress towards man’s happiness ; but, when
the proclamation for leaguing together resounds through
the land, giant minds will come forth and associate
intimately with all the important affairs of the humblest
peasant.
So men may write to teach their neighbours, but their
subjects have failed conveying right impressions, “ alas ! ”
they exclaim, “ I have labored in vain ; ploughed in stub-
born fields where no seed would take root.”


Yes, the wise man said, “ fools despise instruction,” they
rage at those who attempt to free them from designing
cliques, as if a patient should rage at the physician, when
he brings him a cordial; thus backward are men to their
earthly salvation. By nature, it is said, we are dead, there?
fore unfit for teaching ; who will come forth and make an
oration to the dead in this golden land ?
I have undertaken the task in a limited form, to make
the dead hear in hope that they will resurrect from their
present sluggish apathy by federating together in love of
interests, by improving the light of reason which is now
too dull to fathom the secrets of men whose outrageous
duplicity plunges the toiler into pitfalls of misery, want,
and wretchedness.
The ancient physic was without measure, they would
exclaim anoint us with knowledge.
Knowledge is as milk in the breast for the child, then is
there a man so dull that will not federate himself with his
kindred so as to enable him to fathom the secrets that
now makes him subservient to tricksters.
Our passive obedience to laws that perpetually impose
upon us a penalty whereby millions have had to endure,
and still have to endure, oppression, imposition, and
startling cases of want.
Ah ! the severity of those whom we elect to power, and
backed up by newspaper compacts have brought us to our
senses I trust, and that by reason we shall ere Jong become
united into one class organization ; attornies to our interests
instead of clients, whereby we shall be better able to plead
our cause than we have hitherto done.
Federalization of the working classes must become a
historic phrase. It must represent to the world something
noble and heroic.
If we consider how limited is our discernment of another’s
needs, we shall perceive at a glance that our pity is, com-
paratively speaking, but hardness of heart, why do we
loiter ?
Why should we delay ?
Why not organize at once ?
One might multiply illustrations by the thousand why
the industrial classes keep adding wormwood to theq.


sufferings; but this little book unfortunately cannot supply
all the recipes for turning wormwood into wine.
Aristotle thought that the deaf and dumb could not
acquire knowledge ; this postulate we have lived out; and
St. Augustine denied that they could be instructed in the
Christian faith.
Are there any such Aristotles and St. Augustines living
in Australia that will deny that the working classes are so
deaf and blind not to understand that federation of their
classes is not sound ?
As free commercial intercourse tends to soften down
national animosities, so will federation of the masses wipe
away strife, and unite the bonds of friendship more closely
together.
If ye fulfil the royal law, according to scripture, “ Thou
shalt love thy neighbour as thyself,” ye do well.
“ Little deeds of kindness.
Little words of love,
Make our earth an Fden,
Like the heaven above.”
Do these lines refer to the subject before us ?
Here is the rub.
Experience cries aloud that so many organizations for
the instruction of each have not yet secured talents equal
to the demand in overthrowing what is now supposed to
be an impregnable foe, namely, the institutions that now
trouble all governed nations.
Generations have passed away who resorted to tactics
for the legislating on labor, but every effort, even to the
latter part of the nineteenth century, have proved unavail-
ing for their interests. The whole mental force of collo-
quial art and polluted power concentrate their efforts to
catch their kindred asleep.
Federation of the bone and sinew of the nation must
become a factor in modern life.
Industrial reforms must come from the voice of the
people : socialism, nihilism, and home rule, are distinctive
signs of reform ; while federation of the whole will be the
desired consummation “devoutly to be wished for.”
This is the recipe which has too long been forgotten, and
108
Federation of the Masses.


the forgetting of which overloads the earth with wide-spread
misery and ceaseless confusion.
Reason, reason, reason, among ourselves.
Any recognition of an evil is always a further step
towards its removal.
Life is not without its compensations if only sought
after.
Outraged humanity must speak : not in vengeance, but
in protest. What lam writing to-day, re the federation of
the masses, humanity in its suffering dens must endorse
the sentiments herein, long studied for the benefit of its
conditions.
There is a tide in the affairs of men,
Which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune;
Omitted, all the voyage of their life
Is bound in shallows and in miseries.
Shakespeare, Julius Cmsar, Act 4, Sec. 3.
This tide in the affairs of man is now at its flood, and
the insolence of office will no longer be unheeded; the long
enchanters of passive obedience will be put to flight, while
the political rights of man will be transformed from
darkness into light.


CHAPTER VIII.
MAN TO ENTER ON A NEW EPOCH.
as a people, boasting of our civilisation and
enlightenment, teachers of the lower order of
«-'Cv our species, desirous at all times to live on good
terms with our brethren, yet confident that we cannot
have too much knowledge to fight and defend ourselves
when occasion requires it, to firmly stand against any
encroachments that might be made politically or otherwise.
Let us hope that the day is not far distant when every
citizen will unite to bring about a blessed brotherhood of
the whole world, under the name of “ Federation of the
Masses.”
At the present day all seems infected with an arrogant
and exclusive right to prove a title, which, under syndicate
form, mars the fortunes of honest men.
However, man is about to enter on a new epoch in his
history. There never was a period when the signs of the
times forebode such a struggle between capital and labor,
between the enslaved and the enslaver, as at this our day.
The industrial classes have proved themselves to be
proverbial for their dulness and stupidity; they have been
hunted down by men in numerous instances inferior in
intelligence to themselves. Therefore, by banding together
would produce a force in our earthly campaign which
would establish that equipoise that has been so long
violated against the force of appeal.
The grave and dignified conduct of men who depend
upon our votes for their successes, soon forget their former


adversities, and by their severity and high-handed measures,
thousands are yearly plunged into a state of abject poverty
and wretchedness.
However, federating together will necessitate us to take
judicial notice of all violations that may be attempted to be
imposed upon us. This great fight, and one which is
worth while striving for, will denounce the appendages of
men whom we have listened to as being something superior
to ourselves. However, whatever may be the faults of the
present age —and they are many and great—federation of
all trades and vocations can ornament their political
institutions with the emblem: Here are the modern
notions of comfort, and perfect legislation.
This forced action of the working classes in denouncing
political imposition will characterise a distinguishing
feature, whereby more mental enjoyment and less necro-
mancing will be studied to oppress the masses of Victoria.
No doubt this little work will be condemned by those
necromancers who will do their uttermost to keep my
fellow-workmen still in darkness.
Doubtless, they will dread the time and advent of the
masses leaguing together, they will then see that we have
awakened and determined to act for ourselves and that the
earthly day of judgment had fallen upon them.
If we desire to free ourselves from political aggression,
We must become like watch-dogs over the actions of men
who govern us ; we must keep our eye fixedly on their
movements, lest they give us the slip.
’Tis a foolish thing to always be complaining against
political wrongs, when redress we can demand.
Sincerity of purpose will accomplish the alpha of
federation of the masses.
As children bear the name of their parents, let us write
the name of federation upon our national banner, bequeath-
ing to future generations honor and dignity.
Why should the few carry the nation about them like a
diamond necklace upon a spoiled child ?
Why are the toilers not known only at election periods ?
Federation of the masses will make us all joint-heirs and
co-partners with our earthly interests, it will dethrone the
jugglers, it will prove no delusion, neither a snare.


Here is the only door of escape which has really been
shut against many suffering generations, depressed workers,
and trodden down items in the human total. We must
learn to join hands and trust one another, this will prove
the fundamental and lasting principle of leaguing together.
I presume that my readers will set me down as a con-
undrum when I say that, as the days roll on, federation of
the masses will more forcibly appeal to the imagination,
and that a satisfactory solution of its benefits will be
arrived at.
It must only be presumed that I am endeavouring here
merely to posit the problem, not to solve it; to show the
conditions a solution must fulfil, not to assert or deny the
impossibility of any other solution.
I am not such a fool in these thinking and progressive
times to say all what I really think about my countrymen
on the subject of leaguing together, such would be intolerant
in the latter part of this nineteenth century. If I did my
conclusions would certainly not be against the attempt to
unite our forces.
When I look side by side with man and find the extremes
both of wealth and poverty so great; I exclaim federate
together; because the poverty and suffering in the land
calls forth universal sympathy.
0, what is there in the world that we should so idolise
it ? Is it rational to imagine that God breathed into us
souls only to shoot arrows of oppression upon our fallen
kindred ?
Alas ! alas!
“ 111 fares the land, to hastening ills a prey.
Where wealth accumulates, and men decay.
Princes and lords may flourish or may fade,
A breath can make them as a breath has made,
But a bold peasantry, their country’s pride,
When once destroyed, can never be supplied.”
The superlative sentiment conveyed in the above lines,
have not been appreciated by the industrial classes, for
whom they were intended ; they know not the worth of them.
However, aggravation of this loss is not an eternal irre-
parable loss; because leaguing together can recover and
reproduce that which has been abstracted from us.


Take heed of those things tvhich will keep you slaved
eternally, then we may early look for the advent of amal-
gamated clays uniting together.
We cannot enjoy our rights without labor, therefore, let
us do what we are able. When we commence to Spread
the soils of our endeavours, reason will swell upon these
soils, and carry us swiftly into the bonds of unanimity.
Is it an easy matter for a dead man to restore himself to
life ?
Is the reformation of wrongs endured for generations
past to be accomplished easily ? Are there no pangs in the
warfare to suffer ?
The way to possess political reforms must be by com-
bination, but the mistake about the way is the present
diversity of sentiment.
Take heed of delays, for Cassar, deferring to read a letter
put into his hand, was killed in the senate house*
This world is all a fleeting show,
For man’s illusion given ;
The smiles of joy, the tears of woe.
Deceitful shine, deceitful flow, —
There’s nothing true but heaven.— Mooee, Sacred Songs.
Working for to gain a better inheritance of political
rights is like digging in a gold mine ; the digging is labor,
but securing the gold is pleasure; then let us bestir our-
selves to the labor of leaguing together into a solid compact
of pleasure and possession.
How industrious are we to consolidate ourselves in the
militia, not for any better enjoyment of our earthly happi-
ness, but to the delight of kings and queens, their sons and
daughters.
What will reward our efforts with a more equitable share
of gold and fields of corn than federating together ?
To federate the masses new principles will be enjoyed for
the purpose of satisfying human requirements, by embel-
lishing also the order to which they belong, while setting
it forth as a diamond that sparkles in a ring.
What greater aim can man have than to be employed
gathering his kindred together for unity of purpose ? It is
the highest ensign of honor that a mortal creature is
capable of!
113
Federation of the Masses.


We may lawfully combine against the plots of our
legislators, that they may prove abortive; that, though
they have a design upon us, they may not have their desire
upon us.
How can we keep from political snares which are
perpetually waylaying us, without federating ourselves
against the evils complained of ?
To be scriptural we are told to be “wise as serpents.”
The serpent, it is said, hath a singular sharpness of sight;
therefore, among the Grecians a serpent’s eye was a
proverbial speech for one of a quick understanding ;in this
we should be like the serpent.
Get the serpents eye; have a quick insight into the
mysteries and secrets of our parliamentary institutions.
Knowledge must be admitted to be the ornament of men.
He who hath no knowledge, and will persist presumptu-
ously to steer the state helm against all difficulties safely,
is as if one should say he hath a good eye, when he hath
no sight.
In this let us become like the serpent, of a quick under-
standing. It is wisdom in the husbandman to know the
fit time for pruning of trees, sowing of seeds; so it is no
less wisdom for us, as a people, to know how to blend
together, for the purpose of improving the condition of the
bone and sinew of the nation.
Education will both cultivate and refine the nature of
citizens; it will also build an impenetrable wall against all
political scourges.
Manual labor all over civilised lands are crying aloud
for a fair share of the products of the earth ; that is, wages
such as will support the toiler at a sufficient standard of
comfort. No matter in which direction we turn, we see
unmistakeable evidence of poverty around us, caused by the
mischief which has been wrought by separation of the
whole.
Surely experience and observation should be sufficient
helpmates to guide man’s efforts in establishing a federal
union for all trades and vocations.
Clearly, some fresh guarantees are wanted to make our
laws more real than at present; better men or better laws,
or both, are absolutely necessary to elevate the grovelling


masses from the attractive temptations which now surround
them.
To the perpetual honor of the industrial classes, and,
indeed, of all sorts of people, be it ever remembered, that
we have been taught to “ love our neighbours as ourselves,”
and “ have peace with one another.”
Does the world present this picture ?
The answer is :
“ Man’s inhumanity to man
Makes countless thousands mourn.”
Burns’s lines emphatically pronounce that all Scriptural
injunctions avail but little in this life.
Is it possible to pen sentiments whereby man will shake
off the backwardness of duty, as Paul shook off the viper.
Ah ! too much oil chokes the lamp, in like manner our
carriage and behaviour. Our very patterns of prudence and
piety do not keep up the credit of the precept laid down,
having “ peace with one another,” and “ loving our neigh-
bour as ourselves.”
The ancestors of the present Joneses, Williamses,
Thomases, Llewellyns, and others of that race, were never
conquered by the Roman legions nor of Napoleon’s day ;
then, in all our contests it would be well to follow this
noble race that never struck their colors before the greatest
leaders of men.
This little work may do more than record a protest
against existing injustices, it may possibly set up an action
hitherto not conceived.
If the workmen of Great Britain and the Colonies have
received large benefits from the present numerous unions
now in existence, how much more advantageous would one
federated union prove ? Such consolidated principles
would explode factious parties, blacklegs, and other
approaches that operate against the toiler of the nation.
The present constitution of society may be designated
thus : —“ Every man for himself, and the devil take the
hindermost.”
Then let us observe that:—
“ Freedom’s battle once begun,
Though baffled oft, is ever won.”
Only think of the off-shoots of the mother country


finding themselves some bright morning inspired with a
zeal to assemble themselves in the Australias to represent
a most progressive and enlightened order in the population,
namely, Federation of the Masses ; for the purpose of
making political liberty better understood, and more
promptly to relieve distress.
A federal institution with its combinations would
enquire whether the laws of a nation past and present,
through which mankind has been plodding, were the best
that could be enacted for the benefit of ths whole, or only
part of that whole.
However,
" If good we plant not, vice will fill the place,
And rankest weeds the richest soils deface.”
The lowly meekness and passive long sufferings of the
poor in the land has been exemplified until lately; forced
by want, and hunger, strike contentions have raised their
voices against rank and purse.
The labor revolution goes on apace in the mother
country, and the most startling of all strikes ever yet
heard of there is announced. “ Between 200,000 and
300,000 men are said to be out on strike in the coal
districts of Great Britain.”
On the Tyne 300,000 engineers are reported on strike
for shorter hours, while the English colliers strike is echoed
in Scotland by a miners strike there in the coal district.
This intelligence clearly demonstrates that the bone and
sinew of the mother country are determined to lesson the
inequalities that have so long crushed their manhood.
The products of labor and capital have come to be better
understood by the masses, who contribute the Herculean
share of the national force; likewise the requisite to bring
it into action.
The literature of this subject on Federation must grow
apace, consequently extensive studies will engross the
attention of all the democrats who will be proud of their
work in the popular cause.
Our political and social reforms in the past have been too
slow in their progressive march, hence the startling pover-
ty, misery, and degradation in our midst.


Let us, therefore, league together, and blend our voices
with heartiness and earnestness, denoting that the present
systems of legislation are not in conformity with modern
notions of comfort for the people.
Laws are enacted throughout all legislative institutions
only for the purpose of dethroning a weak man, that a
stronger (in weight of money bags) may take his place.
No geographical or race limitations should retard the
progress of political liberties. It has been through all time
that impenetrable fortress of prejudice which has hindered
the inequalities of man from being adjusted honestly.
As an encouragement to my fellow-workman, let there
be more elasticity running through our veins; more vital
energy to arouse the slumbering apathies that has made our
lives a burdensome and eventful history.
Poor, ill-clad, oppressed, born the victim and object of
political injustice, a dupe to the interests of the ambitious
and governing few, a slave from always
struggling for subsistence difficult to procure ; this pano-
rama of injustices impels me onward to exclaim to my fel-
low workmen, “Federate!”
As a father loves his only son because he has nothing
else to love ; let us cherish the desire, without embarrass-
ment, to give attention to that insuperable bar that
hitherto has defied the approach of the oppressed.
“O, unhappy peasant! seize the transient hour;
Improve each moment as it flies.
Life’s a short summer, man a flower;
He dies —alas! how soon he dies !”
There is one thing to be observed in the actions of the
industrial classes, both here and in the mother country :
Their past mournful silence has burst forth like an eruption
of the earth, contrary to the wishes of their rulers and
employers.
Ah !
“ It’s hardly in a body’s power,
To keep at times frae burning sour.” — Burns.
The great importance of this outburst among the
is not yet realised, nor hardly appreciated ; destitute of al
the comforts of life, sometimes of its necessities, they at
times “ canna help burning sour,” but long submission to


conscious degradation, has almost driven them to a lament-
able distraction.
It is to be hoped that employers of labor will co-operate
with their employees in consolidating a federal union. No
institution could prove so beneficial to the interests of a
community as a federal union, both for its defence and
preservation of the whole.
The working classes in the past have been saved the
trouble of thinking for themselves, by the constant inter-
ference of their political and social teachers. However,
we hope that this gloomy seed-time has gone, and that
those wasted talents never again will rust; because those
past periods of sluggish apathy have taught men that such
indifference have brought down upon communities excessive
weight of sorrow, depression, and an atmosphere difficult
to breathe, arising from seducing speeches.
The industrial classes may be termed a noble army of
martyrs, who are henceforth destined to crown their heads
and their families with thrilling realities of their wisdom,
by ridiculing the blandishments of the countless exhibitions
of fraud from a governing principle, unmistakeably opposed
to the enjoyments and comforts of their daily life.
How utterly worthless this fashionable world, this magic
composition of flesh and blood, that has so long tampered
with the rights of man, menacing all efforts to freedom or
unionism. The industrial classes have at last discovered
that the policy enjoyed by those who rule and those
who employ are directly opposed to the law of God ;
therefore, they have rent asunder with indignation the
energy and emphasis of their heart against any further
imposition of political and civil injustices.
The present state and condition of Victoria, rightly and
humanely considered, must undo every deceitful and
oppressive fancy which desires to disturb the happiness of
those whose plaintive voices and physical power consolidates
the nation to a peaceful end.
0 vain and inconsistent world! 0 fleeting and tran-
sient life ! When will the sons of men learn to think of
these as they ought! When will they learn, humanity from
the afflictions of their brethren; or moderation and
wisdom from the sense of their own fugitive state ?


The steady patient labor of the oppressed that cultivate
the fields and work in mines, mills, and factories, brings
honor to the national character ; yet, their comforts and
happiness are discountenanced by the conduct of capitalists
and legislators.
Who can be insensible to the fact that the bond ol
brotherhood is only united among the holy trinity of the
world, namely, £ s. d., millionaires and their fraternity.
We hope that better things will spring from the natives
of this country (Victoria); we must believe that political
reformation in a radical form must ere long be the motto
of the toilers of the Australias; and that every yoke of
oppression must be banished from the eastern climes.
The spirit of the nation in the past, has been a persecu-
ting spirit; but the masses now exclaim, reciprocal
interests and a more humanitarian feeling must come to
our rescue.
This proclamation sent forth throughout the land will
represent the inception of a Federal Union, which will
gather together worthy physicians to heal our wounds,
permitting each to enjoy the dictates of his own conscience,
and not denying to any one freedom of expression and of
action, socially, politically, or otherwise.
Many may have access to this little work, and live and
die ignorant of its instructive pages, as if it had never been
unfolded to them. However, corrupt governments, which
fears and abhors the progress of enlightenment, lest it
should shake their edifices, unfolds to us one of the many
instances in which we have been trammelled, and still are
in our ranks.
Mr. Purves, the President of the A. N. A., and _ a
gentlemen of no mean authority, has, recently, in a brief
sentence, summed up the solution in progressive
problem penned in this little work in the following terms:—
“ Educate the people to see the incalculable value of unity
of action on great questions ; educate them to seek a wise
decision between federal and provincial matters, and to
rely entirely on themselves to formulate a constitution
fitted to the country, suited to the requirements and
acceptable to the genius of the people.”
Here is a volume in itself, expressed in few words, and,
119
Federation of the Masses


doubtless, unity of action wisely and honestly conducted,
would prove a genius that otherwise might take centuries
to achieve.
There should not be anything uncommon to the native
born in the story of federating together.
I have penned this little work because it is common and
every day talk and it contains simple statements of facts
which should at once be nurtured under all circumstances..
However, beware of cranks, and place seekers in all
progressive movements, who desire to be distinguished by
the following hi-f'alutin appendages : —The Hon. ,
Minister of , P.W., of Victoria, Australia. The
Hon. Mr. Nobody, Esq,, M.L.C. ; the Hon. Mr. Schemer,
Secretary to Mr. Nobody, etc., etc. To enumerate all
of the hi-falutin appendages within our ranks, would
occupy more space than I can now afford; however,
inference can now be gathered from experience of the
numerous distinctions now moving in society.
Where is to be the end of this growing appetite for
appendages for selfish ends ?
Let experience serve to show what kind of men govern
us during our struggle for subsistence.
We have felt that the chief point of our existence is to be
useful, it is essential to the character and credit of our in-
telligence, not merely for party purposes to adjust our
political rights, but to be in conjunction with each other
for the purpose of consolidating our reciprocal interests.
Deeds are what are wanted ; enough and more than
enough has been already of base, idle words, in view to the
settlement of a people ; therefore, knowledge is the lamp
and star to guide us in this life.
It shows us what we are to do.
If we do not know the difference between living under
impositions and living by enjoying privileges, we are nothing
better than the beasts ; our reason is gone, which unfits us
for happiness.
Cranks and place seekers would make us believe that the
more we get in the way of happiness the more we want;
but they forget that their covetousness engrosseth all their
time and thoughts to have a full purse, instead of entering
into a bold contest to secure the rights of man.


The punishment that all laboring classes now have to
endure arises from political injustices; they have penetrated
the marrow of those “ whim horses,” their hardships have
become greater than they can bear; hence the numerous
strikes this day throughout all governed lands.
Oppression in the circles of the masses has reduced them
to despair, they are like living men in hell; despair has
not only sucked out his marrow but the vital blood of his
progeny.
How many will you hear in this day of enlightenment
exclaim, what disables us for duties which are legitimate,
and which must ere long become imperative ? 0, how
foolish was Ito refuse instruction ! Ah! it is too late now;
place-seekers band us together in the flesh for a
directly against our consciences. Nevertheless, experience
without education forces him to plod on stubbornly while
the world looks upon him as an inferior ally.
What is it to have skill in a shop while remaining
ignorant of that commodity which produces the greatest
profit ?
Is there a likelihood that man will ever live to enjoy his
temporal rights ? His comforts are now broken ; his
birthright has been stolen from him ; his liberty, in con-
sequence, has fled ; friends, true, he has none ; enemies to
his political cause are numerous ; he is for unity of action,
they are for oppression; and wherever he looks all speaks
confusion.
No window of hope at present opens in the darkest
recesses where human sufferings are intolerable !
Federation of the masses should be the endless theme
among men.
When we see man, woman, or child, lost in misery, and
their case utterly hopeless, we often hear the lamentation,
“ God help them, what lost creatures !”
How unfamiliar this pretended lamentable people are
with the plan of the world : sympathy abounding for them-
selves, expression only for the suffering.
0 fellow-workmen, let not our limited intelligence prove
an abortion to the cause enunciated in this little work ;
rather let us combat all difficulties by proper means, by


placing every unit that is indolent into active service, to
the cause of leaguing together for the welfare of the whole.
My parting wishes and desires for you are, that the good
wishes towards your welfare herein penned, may be well
rooted in every heart, capable also of producing abundance
of fruit; this end accomplished, my labors will not be lost
in reminding you of the ravening wolves that have caused
divisions and contentions among you.


ADDENDUM.
THE WRITER OF THE FOREGOING TO MOTHERS.
Sebastopol, Ist January, 1890.
My Dear Friends. —When at the fireside or at other
places of conveniences we at times dissect our feelings, and
oft times wonder whether they were real or fanciful; but
after wise deliberations we find that we have fallen into the
habit of casting off our mental clothing in like manner as
we take off our daily dress before retiring to rest.
Again, we experience to our chagrin that most of us
insensibly transfer our right of thinking to men whose
miscellaneous rubbish terminates without measure in
increasing by conspiracy outcasts who remain in our form
and shape in hideous wretchedness.
I wish it to be understood that I am sensible to the fact
that this little work will not escape being misrepresented,
and maligned. And so will any man be who attempts to
remove any portion of sluggishness from the minds of his
fellow-man, or to point out their faults, or to instruct them
in their social and political duties.
Notwithstanding this fact, continual disorganization is
the present order of things, therefore, it is the duty of every
mother to study earnestly the principles of leaguing
together, for the better maintenance of themselves and
their offspring.
I am quite certain that parents of families at the present
day desert their own for the better maintenance of those
whom they elect to power. The cause of the bitter oppres-
sion which has placed communities in its iron grasp is the


voting for men to adjust our rights in parliament who do
not entertain opinion which we approve. Hence the
confusion.
Consider, 0 ye mothers, progression must adhere to the
principles of federation. Inhuman monsters must be
dethroned from their enchanting edifices; therefore, in
misery’s darkest hut minister to every one distressed the
immediate necessity of federating together.
Why attribute to God the faults of temporal power,
when the power is enthroned in the person of the outcast
for redress ? Could we but digest the following lines in
the present awful state of things, when the Australias are
literally steaming with contagion, re land booms, syndicates
formed to oppress the poor, and also many other factions
that could be enumerated if space would but permit.
Pope writes in his Universal Prayer—
Teach me to feel another’s woe,
To hide the faults I see;
That mercy I to others show,
That mercy show to me.
The nearest description of sentiment that could be
penned approaching the necessity for communities to
federate together are in the lines recorded in Pope’s
Universal prayer.
Progression determines that nothing shall continue long
in one mould.
This seems fair.
Time augments the deep and sweeping thoughts to
reform.
Byron says that these deep and sweeping thoughts of
mothers overpower all others, and conduct the world at
last to freedom.
How sweetly and sublimely the principles of federation
dawn upon progressive thought, when life within is
animated with all conditions of men.
Ye, 0 mothers, can trace our enslavement backwards
to force and fraud; therefore, the only panacea to freedom,
is to enlist your sympathies and force to exterminate the
injustice which we now have to endure.
The modern political sentiment of equality and frater-
124
Federation of the Masses.


nitv is too slow in its progress even under the stimulating
influences of our education act; there lacks the principle o
federation and domestic unanimity. .
Man in his low condition has, in innumerable instances,
looked upon his wife the same as Petruchio looked upon
Catherine, thus“ She is my goods, my chattels ; she is
my house, my household stuff, my field, my barn, my horse,
my ox, my ass, my anything.” , , _ ,
Consider, 0 ye mothers, these observations of Petru-
chio’s ; for a glimpse of this truth refer to your police records,
aye, and also in your domestic circles. To see one half of
the human race excluded by the other from all participa-
tion of government in this enlightened age is one of those
so-called intellectual conundrums which remains apparently
impossible to explain. . ,
If the abstract rights of man will bear discussion and
explanation, those of woman should not be excluded from
the same test; though the majority of opinion in Victoria
prevails in favor of Petruchio’s plan of reasoning.
Consider, 0 ye mothers, I address you as a power with
the hope that the purity of reasoning will henceforth flow
through all your veins, and that when men contend tor
their freedom, and are allowed to be judges for themselves
respecting their own happiness, the same franchise shall
not be thought inconsistent or unjust to be granted to you.
If those vices which swarm around accumulated wealth
are allowed to continue in its growth, public sentiment
will for ever be partly extinguished, morals will be
destroyed, while legislators will exact laws too execrable
to be put into execution ; people will become brazen-iaced,
while our political liberty will remain incomplete. _
May this leaguing together of the masses, combined
with woman’s influence, explode the present differences
between man and man, and restore civilization to that
impartial basis when man, woman, and child can exclaim
with cheerful voices we now participate equally in our
na sTcfety g at S the present day, especially those with heavy
money bags, rear their brazen front agamst “ equality o
opportunity.” . . n
Dismissing men in their deformities under gay orna-
125
Federation of the Masses.


mental drapery, I wish to show mothers that elegance is
inferior to virtue, that the first object of laudable ambition
is to obtain a character as a human being, regardless of
the distinction re hereditary honors.
To do this, the introduction of the influence of mothers,
who have struggled hard with the trials of life, and toiled
almost incessantly to procure bread for their families,
would achieve the goal of our subject and secure lasting
success.
Mothers to be in keeping with my subject must believe
the sentiments of the departed and their testimony.
Examine and contemplate over the events that have
reduced you to enslavement; while your political rights
have been withheld by giant forces, reducing you to a
state of abjectness.
Let us hope that mothers are not so stubborn in this
passive season of national repose to object to terms within
the reach of every individual, to calmly deliberate as to
their requirements by individual thought and action.
Remember, 0 ye mothers of sons and daughters, whose
years are matured, to judge between right and wrong, to
that which is just and unjust between the favored few, and
those whose education have been neglected.
Remember, I say ;
God’s world is worthy of our love,
—-"’T If labor did its fruits inherit;
If blood ne’er ruled instead of brains.
And wealth ne’er placed its heel on merit.
That nobler name than king or lord—
The name of man—oh ! guard and cherish ;
And freedom’s sacred lands shall live,
When guilty thrones and crowns shall perish.
—Sheldon ShadwicTc.
More intelligent helpers of the poor are needed, it is the
insufficiencies of this world’s goods among the toilers that
corrodes their vitals ; hence the necessity of transforming
ourselves quickly from breathing automatons to brilliant
rational beings.
To do everything in an orderly manner is a most
important precept to observe at the inception of establish-
ing a federal union. The present negligent kind of guess
work, as to how our laws shall be enacted and administered,
126
Federation of the Masses.


snatched only from the muddy current of conversation,
deserves reasonable and strong contempt from all
thoughtful minds.
If we as citizens feel that our liberty is departing from
us, and that such departure forces us to feel discontented,
and that we desire to organise every trade and vocation
into one institution for the purpose of casting off the yoke
of oppression so long endured, who can stay the project.
It has been wisely said of those whom we have elected to
power to govern us that they have mutually supported each
other, while the liberty of the subject has been not only
chimerical but trodden down.
“ To basely crawl, yet wear a face of pride;
To rob the public, yet o’er law preside;
Salute a friend, yet stung in the embrace—
Such is the honour which in courts takes place.”
No people on earth have, upon the whole, more reason
to be dissatisfied with their lot than the people of Australia;
thousands of them know it to their sorrow ; Esmond is not
excluded.
In no country is old age and poverty so scorned and
looked upon as being evil as in the Australias.
To be young and poor is perchance not so much minded,
because there is a possibility of these “ whim horses ”
becoming rich ; but the old and indigent are shunted con-
temptuously from post to pillar resembling a venomous
snake.
Most certain it is that this rage for boycotting old men
in Victoria is daily increasing amongst us, insomuch, that
even at the years of thirty-five, bar the elected ones to
power, cannot tolerate them.
Federating together is replete with wisdom among
intellectual communities, and its non-existence exposes a
people to danger, viz., misery, depravity, wretchedness, and
want.
It is wonderful how ridiculous the affairs of this world
are managed. Experience teaches us that the interests of
a few shunt the interests of the many in a state o
obedience But the observant taxpayer of either sex will
observe that the few manage their affairs with much more
application, industry, and address than the public do their
127
Federation of the Masses.


hence the necessity of complying with the instructive lesson
herein suggested.
We assemble Parliaments and elect councillors, for the
purpose of having the benefit of their wisdom ; but, alas, for
the tax-payer, he necessarily has to suffer inconvenience
from their collected passions, prejudices, and private
interests.
X must not forgot to toll you, tliut tnosG ussomblios uro
always held under the canopy of heaven, weather permitting,
but when the seasons are not favorable, the inferior multi-
tude are neglected. I have not indeed, yet thought of a
better remedy to free mankind from their present oppres-
sion than that of all classes federating together, because
masons, carpenters, smiths, and other honest tradesmen,
supply the backbone of a nation.
Mothers ! I have done my best j
I leave you all to do the rest.
Your husbands toil in anguished pain,
Baffled, yet they still complain ;
Therefore, let your motto be —
Liberty! Fraternity!
THE END.
James Curtis, Printer, Ballarat.




