





Federation
By Edward Dowling.
/y 1 K O O
/
The most important national movement Australians have ever engaged
in is that for securing the early union of the Australasian Colonies.
During the first half of the century the colonists had many public
demonstrations to endeavour to secure from the Imperial Government
the benefits of representative institutions, independent judicial autho-
rities, freedom of the press, cessation of transportation, opening of the
public lands, and other desired reforms; but it is evident that the
interests affected by the present federation movement are far greater
than those involved in any previous agitation. Although in the early
days of New South Wales the Colonial Office in London was opposed
to some of the aims of the colonists, the Home authorities are now
found desiring that the self-governing dependencies in Australasia
should become federated as soon as possible.
Considering that the vast majority of Australians are also in favour
of the early consummation of the union, it is remarkable that its
advocacy has not made much headway except during the past few
years. This past apathy can only be accounted for by the friction
principally engendered amongst residents in the various Colonies
through their taking into consideration only provincial interests, and
so wholly ignoring the compensating benefits accruing under a proper
form of Federal Government.
A competent authority on the working of civil government. Sir R.
C. Baker, President of the Legislative Council of South Australia, in
a recent public address, enumerates the following advantages that
would accrue from federation, besides the great boon of intercolonial
freetrade : —“ There would be gains in economy and efficiency in
defence ; in the status and powers of the Colonies ; in naturalisation ;
in the power to exclude undesirable aliens ; in economy and efficiency
of postal and telegraphic services; in quarantine; in marine; in the
control of the currency; in banking laws ; in copyright, trade marks,
and patents; in having uniform marriage and divorce laws ; in pro-
viding for facilities for recovering debts and claims ; in regard to the
influx of criminals ; in the power to make treaties with other countries ;
in the regulation of the rivers; in the consolidation of our debt; and
in regard to our railways.”
The peoples of the Australasian Colonies required to be specially
educated regarding the form and working of a Federal
as, unlike the residents in Upper and Lower Canada, they have not had
a neighbouring Confederacy to familiarise them for nearly, dy
with the benefits to be derived from a united political ~ The
% 322-95-6 (b)


various Colonies of the Australasian group, however, have become
closely allied to each other through the circumstances of their isolated
geographical position, common speech, and similar institutions, so that
they are better prepared for union than the Provinces of Ontario and
Quebec, whose people when federating had to contend against different
languages, customs, and currency.
The idea of Australian federation is as old as the fact of Australian
subdivision. The territory of New South Wales once comprised every-
thing east of the 129th meridian of longitude, including the whole
present extent of Queensland, Victoria, Tasmania, and South Austra-
lia. Out of this enormous territory, the province of South Australia,
which had never yet been permanently settled, was carved in 1836.
The Port Phillip and Moreton Bay districts were settled from Sydney,
and continued to form part of New South Wales until the urgent
demands of the settlers for local self-government led to the separation
of Victoria in 1851 and of Queensland in 1859.
The agitations in the southern and northern portions of New South
Wales for separation only proved successful owing to the importance of
the settlements in which Melbourne and Brisbane formed commercial
centres, and the difficulty then experienced of securing effective repre-
sentation of local wants at a distant seat of government. Notwith-
standing, however, the vastly increased means of internal and external
communication now available, a proposal for Victoria to re-enter
partnership with New South Wales—made in 1894 by Sir George
Bibbs in a letter to the late Sir James Patterson—had but little
support in either Colony, as the great majority of their peoples,
although favourable to a federation of the various State Govern-
ments, are not prepared for amalgamation or unification under one
Government.
Probably the subdivision of the Australian Colonies has not yet
reached its limit. There is at present an agitation for separation in
Central and Northern Queensland; the Northern Territory of South
Australia is obviously destined to form a separate Colony; and the
great size of Western Australia makes further subdivision probable.
But the multiplication of states need not interfere with the question
of federation, and may even make some of its problems easier to
solve.
From the very beginning, however, of the separation epoch states-
men, both in England and Australia, whilst recognising the need for
subdivision, foresaw the need of partial union for purposes of common
concern, and especially for the establishment of a common tariff. In
1849 a Committee of the Privy Council had, at the instance of Earl
Grey, the Secretary of State for the Colonies, inquired into the
government of the Australian Colonies, and had recommended that
Victoria should be erected into a separate Colony with a separate
legislature; but that to provide for certain common purposes there
should also be a central authority consisting of a Governor-General of
Australia and a General Assembly to legislate on specified subjects of
intercolonial interest. These recommendations were embodied in a
Bill introduced into the Imperial Parliament in 1850; but the clauses
relating to the establishment of a Federal Legislature, though actually
carried in both Houses, caused so much opposition that they were


abandoned by the Government as premature, and the Act as passed
provided for the complete separation of Victoria, postponing the
question of partial re-union for further consideration.
Again, prior to Responsible Government being granted in 1850 to
New South Wales and Victoria, statesmen in both Colonies unsuccess-
fully advocated that provision should be made for the establishment of
a General Assembly to legislate on matters of common Australian
concern. The reports of the committees appointed in New South
Wales and Victoria respectively in 1858 to draw up Constitutions for
those Colonies dwelt on the necessity of some such General Assembly ;
but the Constitution Acts were eventually passed by the Imperial
Parliament without any provision of the kind, the Home Government
being of opinion (to quote Lord Russell’s despatch) that “ the present
is not a proper opportunity for such an enactment, although they will
give the fullest consideration to any propositions on the subject which
may emanate in concurrence from the respective Legislatures.”
During the next few years the question of federal union was kept
before the legislatures of the several Colonies by means of select com-
mittees, royal commissions, and reports. The leading spirits seem to
have been Sir E. Deas-Thomson in New South Wales and Sir Charles
Gavan Duffy in Victoria; but the movement was confined to a few far-
sighted politicians, and produced no general effect. Their efforts,
however, helped to leaven the parliamentary mind, and the result was
a period of intercolonial conferences, * dating from 1863 onwards,
which were prolific in resolutions in favour of some form of union, but
ed to no definite scheme and no direct result. At this time we find
Deniehy—an Australian disciple of the philosophic De Quincey—
lamenting, in an eloquent plea for the federation of the Colonies, the
difficulty of weaning many of the politicians of that day from the sole
advocacy of local wants.
At last a conference of all the Australasian Colonies, including Fiji,
which was held in 1883 to consider the question of French claims in the
New Hebrides, led to an Imperial statute being passed for the creation
of a Federal Council of Australasia, with power to legislate on a narrow
list of matters, neither of Imperial nor purely local interest, such as
fisheries, intercolonial legal process, and the influx of criminals. This
Act actually provided a kind of federal legislature for such of the
Australian Colonies as cared to join, and has since 1885 formed a loose
bond of union for legislative purposes between Victoria, Queensland,
Western Australia, and Tasmania. South Australia also joined for a
time, but afterwards withdrew. The Federal Council has no executive,
and no judicial powers, and consists only of two delegates from each
colony represented; so that it effects not a true federation, but only a
loose confederation like that of the American states of 1771, “ which
had no judiciary to enforce its Acts, and no executive head to represent
and administer its authority.” On these grounds New South Wales
has persistently refused to join the Federal Council, which, partly for
this reason, and partly owing to its want of popular initiative and its
imperfectly representative basis, has not achieved any important work.
At a conference of Australasian delegates held in London in 1887
a scheme of Australasian naval defence was approved, and a consequent
Imperial statute provides for the maintenance—partly at the expense


of the Colonies —during a period of ten years on the Australian station
of seven men-of-war ships, four of which are to be kept permanently
in commission, the other three being held in reserve in Australasian
ports. In 1889 the report of an Imperial commissioner, Major-General
Edwards, on Australian land defences, gave great impetus to the
federal movement. Sir Henry Parkes took the.matter up, and another
intercolonial conference was held in Melbourne in 1890, presided over
by Mr. Duncan Gillies, and attended by Sir Henry Parkes and Mr.
William McMillan as delegates from the New South Wales Govern-
ment. The result of this conference was the assembling of the Sydney
Convention of 1891, which for the first time crystallised the federal
movement into a definite shape by preparing a draft Constitution to
be recommended for the proposed Commonwealth of Australia. This
Convention was the most important conference of Australian statesmen
ever brought together. There were forty-four delegates present from
the seven Colonies of Australasia. Sir Henry Parkes was elected as
President ; in addition to whom the following gentlemen were members
of the New South Wales Delegation : —Mr. William McMillan, Sir J.
P. Abbott, Sir George Dibbs, Mr. W. H. Suttor, Mr. Edmund Barton,
and Sir Patrick Jennings.
The draft Commonwealth Bill, as adopted by the National Con-
vention of 1891, provides for a complete scheme for federal govern-
ment—legislative, executive, and judiciary. It aims at a federation
of the modern type, but differs from the Canadian Constitution in
many respects, as the earlier federal systems of the United States and
Switzerland were conceived to be more suited to the circumstances of
Australia, especially with regard to the maintenance of state rights.
The Commonwealth Bill is admitted to have been drafted in an admir-
able manner, although there had been much difference of opinion
expressed by the delegates in the discussions which took place with
regard to the delimitation of central and provincial powers and the
right of the Federal Senate to amend money bills. The necessity for
the exact relation of the states to the general government being pro-
perly defined is illustrated by the fact that when the Constitution of
the United States was being made, both Hamilton and Madison left the
power to deal with the institution of African slavery open to doubtful
construction, which compromise afterwards led to the terrible Civil
War between the North and the South.
The Commonwealth Bill provides for a Federal Legislature of two
chambers; a House of Representatives (corresponding to that of the
United States) composed of elected representatives from each colony
in proportion to population; and a Senate (also comparable to that of
the United States) elected by the State Legislatures on a basis of
equality the smallest State sending as many senators as the largest.
This fundamental compromise of the federal system—giving the pre-
ponderance in the one chamber to the majority of individual citizens, in
the other to the majority of States—is recognised in the Constitutions
of the United States and of Switzerland, and receives a partial appli-
lication in the Dominion of Canada, and in the Federal Empire of
Germany. It safeguards alike the interests of the smaller states who
would otherwise shrink from joining in the union, and the interests
of the nation, which is supreme in the national chamber of the


Legislature. The form of Executive proposed is, as in Canada, the
British system of a ministry nominally appointed by the Crown (that
is the Governor-General) but in reality responsible to and dependent
on the confidence of the House of Representatives. A Federal Supreme
Court is also provided as a general court of appeal for all Australia, and
with an original jurisdiction in intercolonial matters. With regard to
the relation of the Federal Parliament to the State Parliaments, the
bill adopts the principle established in the United States, where the
federal powers conferred by the Constitution are strictly delegated
powers, and the states retain all rights not expressly and exclusively
conferred on the Union.
It was intended at the time that this draft bill should be discussed
in detail in all the Australian Legislatures, then referred to a second
convention to harmonise such amendments as might have been
suggested, and finally submitted in some way for the acceptance or
rejection of the people of each Colony. This process, however, broke
down. The different Parliaments could not spare time in the pressure
of provincial and party politics to discuss the Federal Constitution in
detail, and for a time the question of federal union dropped into
neglect, and the impetus of the Sydney Convention seemed lost. At
this stage the movement assumed a new phase by spreading from the
parliament to the people. The Commonwealth Bill had been an
immense educational influence, had given definite shape to the national
aspirations, and aroused the interest and the criticism of a large
proportion of the general public. At the same time a financial
panic and severe commercial depression made prominent the weakness
of isolation, and suggested practical arguments in favour of a speedy
national union. The movement neglected by the politicians began to
be taken up by the citizens. Foremost in this new movement was the
Australian Natives’ Association, who, taking advantage of their estab-
lished organisation had already held a conference of delegates from
all its branches in the five Colonies on the continent at the Melbourne
Town Hall, on the 25th and 26th January, 1890, under the presidency
of the late Sir John Bray, when resolutions were passed containing a
proposed basis for a federal constitution.
Moreover, federation leagues to assist in the movement were
formed in metropolitan, suburban, and country centres, especially
along’ the Victorian border. It has been the policy of the various
branches of the Australasian Federation League to assist every
Government in power in its endeavours to carry measures for securing
the union of the Colonies at the earliest possible date. Central feder-
ation leagues were also inaugurated in Melbourne in July, 1894 (under
the Presidency of Sir John Madden, Chief Justice), and in Adelaide,
in August, 1895 (under the Presidency of Mr. J. H. Simon, Q.C.).
A motion in favour of Australian federation, proposed by Sir Henry
Parkes, in the Legislative Assembly, on 30th November, 1894, was
supported by the Reid Government, and carried by fifty-five votes to
ten. A federal party was subsequently formed under the presidency
of Sir Henry Parkes, which at the time of the last general election,
and for some time afterwards, carried on its operations and held
public meetings in the city, suburbs, and country towns.


The cause of Australian union has been removed from the academic
to a practical stage by the action of Mr. G. H. Reid, the present leader
of the movement, in convening a meeting of the Premiers at Hobart,
in January, 1895, and in subsequently preparing and carrying through
the New South Wales Parliament a Federal Enabling Bill “broad-based
upon the people’s will.” The South Australian, Victorian, and Tasmanian
Legislatures have also passed that bill by large majorities; so that when
the Queensland Parliament has had an opportunity to deal with it ten
representatives to the statutory Convention, as provided for in the
Enabling Act, can be elected in each of the Colonies. The fact that
the Premier was triumphantly returned at the last general election
shows—although Australian federation was not the chief question sub-
mitted to the electors by the Government—that the great bulk of the
electors were not opposed to the proposals carried at the Hobart con-
ference for a popular initiative to the national work of moulding a
federal constitution.
Amongst the best advocates for the federation of the Colonies have
been representative ministers of religion, who in many addresses have
eloquently pleaded, away from provincial and party ties, for a political
unity of spirit. Cardinal Moran, of Sydney, the Rev. Dr. Sevan, of
Melbourne, and the Rev. Dr. Jefferis, of Adelaide, have from time to
time delivered special and important lectures on Australian federation
in several of the Colonies.
One of the most encouraging signs in connection with the federation
movement was an understanding entered into by leading politicians
that it would be something little short of wickedness to make Aus-
tralian unity a party question ; and they have accordingly on many
occasions advocated its claims from the same platform, whilst in open
opposition to each other on other political subjects.
It was when Sir Hercules Robinson occupied the position of Governor
of New South Wales that the question of the necessity for the unity
of the Australasian Colonies was ably revived by him, in an address
delivered at Albury in 1876, and many of Her Majesty’s representa-
tives in the various Colonies, appointed since that time, have also
expressed themselves willing, as far as they constitutionally could, to
further that desired end.
A late Governor of the Colony, the Earl of Jersey, in his report to
the Marquis of Ripon on the Colonial Conference at Ottawa in 1893,
as representative of the Imperial Government, says :—•“ The visits of
the Australian delegates to Canada impressed them forcibly with the
advantages which accrue from the federation of neighbouring pro-
vinces.” History affords many examples of terrible feuds between
adjoining colonies owing to there being no basis of unity between
them ; and the present Governor of New South Wales, Lord Hampden,
has but recently remarked with regard to reprisals between Victoria
and New South Wales : —“lt seems a strange thing to me—-an unac-
countably strange thing—to find on arriving on these shores that there
is a wall of menacing tariffs and a hostile railway gauge between
friends and neighbours, residents in the same country, subjects of the
Crown, and divided only by an imaginary boundary line.”
Amongst the best workers in the federation movement are many
leading representatives of the various Trades* Halls, who perceive the


benefits to the working class which will accrue from the union of the
Colonies on a democratic basis, and also the evils that would attend
white labour through a large introduction of the coloured races. The
representative sent by the London Times (Miss Shaw), after visiting
Northern Queensland, has reported “ that the maintenance and exten-
sion of the coloured labour system must lead to the division of
Australia into two sections—tropical Australia and temperate Aus-
tralia.” The labour leaders therefore advocate that it is most desirable
that the Australian Continent should not be divided into antagonistic
northern and southern states, with coloured labourers as a standing
menace to the working of free institutions like the African negroes are
found to be in America; but that the Federal Parliament should con-
trol the admission, into any of the states, of undesirable colonists who
may otherwise, before the end of the century, materially interfere with
the social conditions of the whole of Australasia.
The proximity of China, Japan, and India to Australia renders the
latter easily accessible to hundreds of millions of the Asiatic races,
and in this nearness to these Eastern human hives is seen one of the
great dangers to the preservation of the present homogeneity of the
Anglo-Saxon race on the southern continent. Notwithstanding the
edict against Chinese coming to the United States, it is officially
reported that numbers find their way over the Pacific to British
Columbia, who after payment of a poll-tax of £lO to the Canadian
Government cross a boundary extending thousands of miles in Ijtigth
into the United States; and it is feared that as there are only similar
imaginary border lines in Australia a like condition of affairs is com-
mencing on the mainland, especially as no poll-tax is levied on servile
labour coming into the Northern Territory. The question of the
permanent settlement of coloured races in Australia may shortly
become a matter of international complication, as it is stated that the
Colonies as they are have no international rights; but with a united
government their claims to recognition would not be so readily denied.
An intercolonial conference is about being held in Sydney to consider
the desirability or not of these Colonies giving due notice that they
are prepared to make the treaty concluded between Japan and Great
Britain applicable to Australasia; and the results of this meeting of
representatives from the various Colonial Governments are looked
forward to with much interest by colonists, who, in view of 25,000
Japanese demanding the franchise in the Hawaiian group, are not in
favour of a large influx into the continent of even this intelligent,
ambitious, and warlike race from their now overcrowded island home,
as they would be far more dangerous as citizens than the com-
paratively inoffensive Kanakas from the South Seas.
Financiers and capitalists also acknowledge the good that would
accrue from colonial union, and Mr. Reginald J. Black has recently
asserted that, under a federal executive, a great saving could be
effected in the money expended for defences, and that even the cost
of a federal government might be recouped from savings made on
many overlapping services carried on by the several Colonies. He has
also shown that if one hundred millions of the public debts of the
Australasian Colonies were taken over and consolidated by a Federal
Government, Australian federal bonds would be regarded with equal


favour to Canadian Dominion bonds, so that there would probably be
a saving in interest of about £1,000,000 sterling, to be rateably shared
by the Colonies concerned. This calculation is borne out by a state-
ment made by Sir Mackenzie Bowell, Premier of Canada, when in
Sydney in 1892, that after federation the Dominion advanced so
rapidly that money was lent in the London market, most readily, at
three per cent., or about half the interest paid previously by the pro-
vinces. For the information of the Committee on Finance and Taxation
of the National Convention, an estimate was made by Mr. William
McMillan, M.P., that the outlay for the proposed Federal Government
would amount to £2,226,000, or about 11s, sd. per inhabitant, being
only one-twelfth of the expenditures of the several Colonies in 1889.
This approximate estimate, after revision by that Finance Com-
mittee shows the following items of expenditure:—Civil government,
£689,000; collection of revenue, £270,000; defence, £750,000; to
recoup loss on services, £200,000; and for interest on works taken
over by the Federal Government from the various Colonies, £367,000.
The advocates for the early union of the Colonies have often urged
the undesirability of federating them when the enemy is at the gate,
or during a war panic; as the important task of constitution making
should not be begun under pressure from without, but in a calm and
deliberate manner befitting the importance of the work. It has been
also urged that the task of defending Australia from attack by sea is
very great, as there are 8,850 miles of coastline around this island
continent; and more especially so as a naval authority like Lord
Brassey has recently stated that “ Australians should not look to the
Imperial navy for defence of harbours, for effective defence could
only be given by the action of a combined fleet and land force.”
Intercolonial freetrade and a common tariff would be the result of
a complete federal system, and the hostile Custom-houses now exist-
ing in Australian border towns could be entirely abolished, as in the
States of the American Union and in the Provinces of the Canadian
Dominion, in both which countries the traveller can pass across the
continent from province to province on railway lines over 3,000 miles
in length without interference of any kind by the various state
governments. At the present time all the Australasian Parliaments
levy taxes on protective principles, except that of New South Wales,
which has under the recent financial proposals successfully carried by
Mr. G. H. Reid, as Minister for Finance, adopted a freetrade tariff;
and by direct taxation imposed income and land taxes so as to make
up the deficiency of revenue from the Customs. The present Parlia-
ment of New South Wales displayed a generous spirit during the last
session by removing at once many restrictions to commerce between
her and the neighbouring Colonies, without requiring any reciprocity
or waiting until the Federal Legislature had dealt with the fiscal
question. This great concession should lead to the daughter Colonies
emulating the good example of the mother state, by voting that the
federal seat of government should be carved out of her territory,
somewhat as she has been dismembered for them in times past.
The selection of the national capital at Washington was due to a com-
promise entered into between Hamilton and Jefferson, and a similar
equitable arrangement might lead to the Federal City of Australia
♦


being built on the wide peninsula bounded on each side by the Parra-
matta River, the north shore of Port Jackson, and the Hawkesbury
River, called “ Walumatta ” by the Natives, which for suitableness
and beauty of situation would bear favourable comparison with and
resemblance to similar positions either on the Potomac River or the
Ottawa River, alongside whose waters the capital of the United States
or the capital of Canada has been placed.
Much of the opposition to the federation movement of late years
has arisen from advocates for dealing forthwith with local legislation;
who, however, forget that if the various Parliaments were relieved of
much of their present work they would be more likely to consider
domestic and social questions than at present. Other opponents of
federation object to surrender the control of the Customs, post and
telegraphs, the defences, the influx of aliens and paupers, the regula-
tion of the currency, banking, navigation, shipping, and other admin-
istrative arrangements of a federal nature ; although it has been well
pointed out by Mr. Edmund Barton that this control is only a transfer
by the provincial parliaments and governments to the Australian
Parliament and Government, at the dictation of the citizens, who will
gain far more as Australians than they give as provincialists.
It is generally admitted that the federal union must necessarily be
of a character not easily to be changed ; so that it is highly desirable
no colonial federation should be entered into without knowing its
nature, nor any national constitution adopted without a full conception
of its responsibilities. The discussions which have taken place, the
addresses which have been delivered, and the articles which have
been printed on the federation question, have done much to disarm
many avowed opponents in various sections of the community; and
especially to remove misconceptions of some working men as to the
purport of the movement, as it was shown to be truly “ one of the
people, by the people, and for the people.”
One of the principal objections urged against the proposed federa-
tion of the Australasian Colonies is that they are not yet ripe or
important enough for union. But it will be seen by the following
comparison made between them and the Dominion of Canada —the
only country under the British Crown with a similar union—that
these Colonies are in many respects greater than even the magnificent
British provinces on the North American continent. The figures
given also show the great material wealth contained within the
borders of Australasia, which often hitherto has not been fairly con-
trasted by the figures published solely for New South Wales or some
other settlement of the Australian group being compared with total
figures of federated countries such as Canada, containing as they do
the total statistics for nearly all the North American provinces; so
that strangers, unacquainted with the geography of the Australasian
Colonies, sometimes gain a wrong impression of their collective
progress and resources through no recognised political union existing
between them.
As the other Colonies of the Australasian group are mainly off-shoots
from New South Wales it is only reasonable their progress should be
noted in connection with that of the parent settlement. The Colonies
of New South Wales, Tasmania, Western Australia, South Australia,
ig 322-95-6 (c)


New Zealand, Victoria, and Queensland occupy an area of 3,161,457
square miles, and are nearly equal in extent to the territory possessed
by the Dominion of Canada. The population of the Australasian
Colonies at the end of 1894 numbered 4,153,766, being much more
than that of the residents of the United States at the time when the
independence of that country was gained. The trade of the Austral-
asian Colonies is, however, twenty times greater than that of the
American States when they declared their independence, and shows
the much greater commercial intercourse between nations during the
present century principally obtained by the extensive use of Targe
steamships instead of small sailing vessels. In 1894 the trade of the
Australasian Colonies with the United Kingdom was £50,544,660,
or more than double that of Canada, although parts of the latter
have been settled by Europeans three times as long, her cities
are much nearer the great centres of trading operations, and she
has nearly 1,000,000 more inhabitants. The prosperity of the Austral-
asian Colonies is greatly due to the large extent of excellent pastoral
and agricultural land, accumulated wealth, invested capital, home
manufactures, and foreign trade, which have made the average wealth
of the Australian to be greater than that of the inhabitant of any
other country. The revenues of the several governments for the year
1894-5 was £27,978,675, being three times as great as that for
Canada, notwithstanding her much larger population. The exports of
Australian produce increased from £20,000,000 in 1861 to £51,000,000
in 1894, and consist principally of the produce of the pastoral, mining,
and agricultural industries, such as wool, tallow, hides, gold, silver,
copper, tin, coal, wheat, meat, butter, wine, fruit, timber, &c.
The foregoing figures exhibit the wonderful progress that has been
made by the Australasian Colonies during the last fifty years, which will
be found far greater than the development of the Canadian Provinces
during the same period ; but, it is believed, that under a similar
confederation to that of the Dominion of Canada the progress of
Australasia would have been much more than the totals given. The
trade of the Australasian Colonies in yearly value amounts to
£112,000,000, and the exports and imports reach a grand total sea-
wards of 17,350,000 tons. Australasia has constructed 13,788 miles
of substantial railways, connecting all the chief cities, and 47,558
miles of telegraphs on poles conveying messages to all parts of the
Australian Continent. Her pastures feed 121,161,000 sheep, 13,315,000
horned cattle, 1,891,000 horses, and 1,191,000 swine; and the increase
to the crops during the last half-century is much greater than what
has been reaped in the Canadian Dominion.
Many years ago the question was raised as to the policy of obtaining
freedom and independence for the golden lands of Australia, but it is
evident that the time for departure from under the aegis of the
greatest empire in history has not arrived. Dismemberment of the
British Empire is now deprecated by English and Australian states-
men, and under the present liberal colonial policy of the Imperial
Government —which has allowed the full enjoyment of free institu-
tions —many years must elapse before the great majority of Austra-
lians would desire to see their country an independent state. The
present century is remarkable for the achievement of Federation
i...


in Germany amidst turmoil and bloodshed, but it is believed that
the foundations of the Australian Commonwealth will in a few years
be well and truly laid in perfect peace.
The Eastern home of the original inhabitants of the British Isles
is said to have been in the cities of the Medes, whence tribes of
them migrated westward along the shores of the Mediterranean until
they arrived in Britain; and in the same manner their descendants
afterwards crossed the Atlantic to America. As the tide of civiliza-
tion still rolls westward, continuous waves of immigration must here-
after flow, not only out of the countries of Europe but also from the
large populations in North America, to the Australian continent and
to the adjacent islands in Oceana, especially when the Nicaragua
Canal has been opened from the Atlantic to the Pacific shores. The
island-continent of Australia from its unique geographical position
should, therefore, hereafter become the connecting link between the
civilizations of the East and West, and consequently the centre of
that Greater Britain which will doubtless form one member of a pact
between the English speaking races, who in another century, judging
from their present progress, should number 1,000,000,000 persons,
and be the controlling powers in every quarter of the globe.
Sydney : Charles Potter, Government Printer.—lB96.






