

FEDERATION OE AUSTRALASIA.
SPEECHES
OF THE
HON. S. W. GRIFFITH, Q.C.,
(PREMIER OE QUEENSLAND),
B. D. MOREHEAD, Esquire, M.L.A.,
(ACTING LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION),
ON THE MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE DRAFT
FEDERAL COUNCIL BILL ADOPTED BY THE
CONVENTION HELD IN SYDNEY IN 1883.
22nd JULY, 1881.
BRISBANE:
BY AUTHORITY : EDMUND GREGORY, ACTING GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
frfoio




E E DEII AT lON OE AUSTRALASIA.
SPEECHES
OF THE
HON. S. W. GRIFFITH, Q.C.,
(PREMIER OF QUEENSLAND),
B. I). MOREHEAD, Esquire, MX.A.,
(ACTING LEADER OE THE OPPOSITION),
GIST THE MOTION FOE THE ADOPTION OF THE DRAFT
FEDERAL COUNCIL BILL ADOPTED BY THE
CONVENTION HELD IN SYDNEY IN 1883.
22nd JULY, 1884.
BRISBANE:
BY AUTHORITY : EDMUND GREGORY, ACTING GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1884.


■


/7J050 /A 70/
Q (Jn~7.
FEDERAL COUNCIL OE AUSTRALASIA.
The PREMIER said: Mr. Speaker, —In moving the motion stand-
ing in my name —•
That a humble Address be presented to Her Majesty, praying that Her
Majesty may be graciously pleased to cause a measure to be submitted to
the Imperial Parliament for the purpose of constituting a Federal Council of
Australasia, upon the basis of the Draft Bill adopted bj r the Convention held
in Sydney in the months of November and December, 1883 —-
I do not think it necessary to go at very great length into the whole
question of the federation of the Australasian Colonies. The subject
has been mooted on various occasions from, 1 think, the year 1857,
which I believe was the first occasion upon which the question was
formally brought forward in the Legislature of Victoria. It has
been dealt with occasionally since then, more or less spasmodically,
and various schemes have been suggested. One of the latest that
was brought formally under the notice of the colonies was a Draft
Bill framed by Sir Henry Parkes, and submitted to the Con-
ference held in 1881, at which the hon. the leader of the Opposition
was present. That Bill was not assented to by the majority of the
Colonies represented at that Conference, although I have lately seen
it stated in an English magazine that it was assented to. There
were three Colonies in favour of the Bill with certain modifications,
three against it, and one did not vote. The scheme of that Bill was
that each Colony should, by an Act of its own Legislature, constitute
the Council —a scheme, of course, quite impracticable. The authority
that constitutes a federal government must be greater than either
of the Colonies individually, or all of them collectively, because what
is desired, I think, more than anything else is the power of going
beyond the territorial limits of the several Colonies. So far as our own
territorial matters are concerned, we have legislative authority to our
borders, and over three miles beyond, seaward ; but it is in dealing
with matters beyond the Colony —transferring people from one Colony
to another; maintaining discipline in ships belonging to the Colony
when beyond our waters; conveying offenders from one part of the


Colony to another—a matter that particularly affects Queensland —that
we find the defect in our legislative authority. And, sir, apart from
these matters there are others of still greater consequence. The
position of the Australian Colonies has of late, as I have previously had
occasion to show, very considerably changed—l mean their position with
respect to the Imperial Government. We are now recognised more as
an integral and important part of the Empire; we are consulted
upon many matters upon which until lately it was not the practice to
consult us ; and, as must naturally follow, while we are all separated
and have no common means of making our views known —no way of
speaking with one united voice—less weight is no doubt attributed to
our separate opinions, even if they he identical, than would he the case
if we were even partially one body speaking with a united voice. I
believe myself that the time has not arrived in Australia, and may be
distant —not very far, but at some distance—when there will be
a general federation, legislative and administrative, such as the federa-
tion of what is now called the Dominion of Canada. I think it is
undesirable, for many reasons, that such a federation should be brought
about at the present time. There are many matters which may just
now be done better by the Colonies individually—at least that is my
opinion—but I think there are many matters upon which we can act
together. Ido not think we are ever likely to start with a full-fledged
federation, with a Constitution like that of the Canadian Dominion,
imposed upon us from outside ; I do not think we are ever likely to
begin federation in Australia in that way. My own opinion is that
we must begin at the other end; we must unite for such things as we
are capable of uniting for at the present time ; and as we get into the
habit of working in concert with one another, and dealing with those
matters which we may fairly be trusted to manage for ourselves, as a
united community in Australasia, we shall gradually find the necessity
of expanding the sphere of our operations; so that I believe a
commencement of this sort will inevitably lead up to a federation
as grand as, if not grander than, that of the Dominion of Canada.
But I believe this is the proper way to begin, and not to wait until
we are able to adopt a complete legislative and executive scheme.
These views, I think, were those of all the members of the Conven-
tion which met in Sydney last year, and, a general unanimity having


been found to exist on the subject, a committee was appointed to prepare
a Draft Bill as a suggestion to Her Majesty’s Imperial officers of
wbat colonists thought should be the basis of the Bill submitted
to the Imperial Parliament to enable the Colonies to unite in such
federal action if they thought fit. The Resolution by which this Bill
was adopted indicated exactly the scope of the action which the
members of the Convention thought was needed. It is to be found in
the proceedings of the Convention, and is a Resolution moved by
myself ;
“That this Convention, recognising that the time has not yet arrived
at which a complete Federal Union of the Australian Colonies can be
attained, but considering that there are many matters of general interest
with respect to which united action would be advantageous, adopts the
accompanying Draft Bill for the constitution of a Federal Council, as
defining the matters upon which, in its opinion, such united action is both
desirable and practicable at the present time, and as embodying the
provisions best adapted to secure that object, so far as it is now capable of
attainment.”
That Resolution exactly expresses the position which I think the Colonies
may adopt at the present time. At the same time Ido not wish it to
be understood for a moment that I expect or desire that a more com-
plete federation should be long deferred. I venture to hope that I
shall myself sit in the Federal Parliament of Australasia and take some
part in its proceedings, and that before I am an old man. In the
meantime I believe that all who desire to see united action of the Aus-
tralasian Colonies, and to see that strength which can only be attained
by united action, will best attain their object by endeavouring to assist
in the inception of a system of federal action such as that now con-
templated. Ido not think I need further advert to the question at
large, so I will proceed to call attention to the scheme of the Draft Bill
with which the Resolution lam moving deals. In many of the Colonies
the objection has been raised from time to time that it would be very
undesirable to give up our individual liberty to a Federal Council or
Federal Parliament. There is a great deal of force in that, and as to
some matters especially —for instance, the tariff. At the present
time, neither Hew South Wales nor Victoria would be willing to
submit their fiscal relations to the judgment of a federated parliament.


Whether they should he willing to do so is an open question; at any rate
they are not. Indeed, if I remember rightly, at the Convention at
which my hon. friend opposite was present in 1881, Victoria stood
alone in its view upon this subject. However, that is a matter which
is clearly not obtainable at the present time, even if desirable. Before
going into details, I may mention that at the Convention the question
was considered whether there should be some sort of federal
executive; that is to say, officers who should carry out as an executive
the decrees, or enforce the laws of the Council; but on consideration
this Avas pointed out —that if you have executive officers you must have
funds to enable them to act; and as soon as you get into the question
of funds you deal with the question of revenue; and as soon
as you deal with the question of federal revenue you involve, practically,
the whole work of administration. So it was considered impracticable
to deal with anything but legislative measures at the present
time. This Bill, it will be observed, deals only with matters that may
be dealt with by legislation, and they are matters with respect to
which no Colony will be surrendering any right of independent action
that is of any particular value to it. I am sure there are a great
many matters upon which we have to legislate, with regard to which
we must all recognise, as we are dealing with them, that it would be
far better if, instead of dealing with them for this Colony alone, we
were dealing with them for the whole of Australasia—questions upon
which there would probably be no difference of opinion, and measures
which are defective only because of the limitation of their operation.
The scheme of the Federal Council as it is proposed to constitute it is
this; That each of the Colonies possessing free institutions shall send
two members, and each of the Crown Colonies one ; the mode of
appointment of members to be fixed by each Colony as it should think
fit; and it is proposed that the Council should sit at least once in
every two years. Now, with respect to the representation of the
different Colonies, I confess that I was rather surprised at the larger
Colonies agreeing to the basis of an equal representation for each
Colony. For my part, I should be willing to concede a larger repre-
sentation to the larger Colonies; but, strangely enough, the objection
to that came from the representatives of the larger Colonies of New
South Wales and Victoria, and not from any of the others, who would,


I believe, all have agreed to give larger representation. It was at
their own desire, although their attention Avas called to the possibility
that their Colonies, Avith a larger population, would object to being
outvoted by smaller numbers. Ido not think myself that that will be,
or can be, a permanent basis of representation; but, considering that
legislative powers only are proposed to be given to the Council, there
Avould probably be no objection to it at the present time, and at any rate
avc in this Colony need not object to it. With respect to the appoint-
ment of members of the Council, the scheme proposed in this Bill
differs materially from the Parkes Draft, in which it was proposed that
members of the Legislatures of the several Colonies should be
appointed, and that on being appointed they should cease to be
members of the Legislature. I think that a most unsatisfactory
mode of dealing Avith the question. As to the best mode of appointing
members, that is a matter Avhich is hard to settle. The whole
scheme is tentative. It is adopted as a scheme Avhich will
probably work at the present time, and the defects of which
Avill be found out in the working and can then be remedied.
One Colony may think it desirable, perhaps, that its representatives
in the Council should be appointed by the Governor with the advice
of Ministers, and by commission. Another Colony, Avith an
Upper House constituted more like the Senates of the United
States, might think the members should be elected by the Legislative
Council. Others might think it desirable that they should be
elected by members of both Houses jointly ; while another Colony
might think there should be a popular election. I do not know
Avhat Avill be considered the best mode for this Colony to adopt }
but at present I am disposed to think that it is better members
should be appointed by the Governor in Council. It is a matter
that will have to be settled by the Legislature of this Colony
before it can take any part in the proceedings of the Federal Council.
Passing from the constitution of the Council Ave come to the place of
meeting. It is proposed that the first session shall be held in Hobart;
and subsequent sessions are to be held in such Colony as the Council
shall from time to time determine. To that there can probably be no
exception; it is at least as good a way of settling it as any other. The
Council will be summoned and prorogued by the Governor of the


Colony in which the session is held. There is a provision with regard
to special sessions, to deal with such special matters as may he men-
tioned in the Proclamation convening them. Those, also, until otherwise
determined, are to he summoned hy the Governor of Tasmania, and
to he held in Hohart. The Council will elect its own president, who
will have a vote, hut not a casting vote. Then there is the ordinary
provision contained in other Acts of this kind, for members to take
the oath of allegiance. Then comes what is undoubtedly the most
important clause of the Bill—the 15th. It defines the powers the
Federal Council is to have; —
“ Saving Her Majesty’s prerogative, and subject to the provisions
herein contained with respect to the operation of this Act, the Council shall
have legislative authority over all Her Majesty’s Possessions in Australasia
and over all British ships sailing between them, in respect to the several
matters following:—
(a) “ The relations of Australasia with the Islands of the Pacific.”
That is a matter to which lately a great deal of attention has been
directed. "We have no effectual means of dealing with those relations.
We can only make laws to be enforced in our own Colony .Wo cannot
extend our powers in any way either to ships or trade except while in
our own waters. With respect to that I do not expect that the
Federal Council itself will be able to make any laws which will have
much effect with respect to ships sailing there.
{b) “ Prevention of the influx of Criminals.”
Another matter to be dealt with is the prevention of the influx of criminals.
Probably no one denies that it is desirable that Australasia should be
able to speak with a united voice on these matters, especially when there
is imminent danger, as at the present time—and still more imminent
danger perhaps in the future—of the Pacific Ocean being made a sink
into which is to be discharged the scum of Europe. Upon that we
can legislate for ourselves, but in order to make a measure effective it
must be enforced. And the probability of success in enacting strin-
gent provisions will be increased by a united request for the Eoyal
assent, because a measure of that sort will have to be reserved for Her
Majesty’s assent. I regret that I have been unable this session, so
far, to lay on the table the Bill which I prepared dealing with this


subject. I have sent it to the other Colonies, but I have not yet received
their views on the subject. I am quite sure that if the different indi-
vidual Colonies deal with the subject alike—or if the Federal Council,
which will represent 3,000,000 of Her Majesty’s subjects, passes a Bill
on the subject —there will be no difficulty in obtaining the Royal
assent to it. We have in these Colonies 3,000,000 of British subjects,
so that they are almost as populous as the United States were at the
time of the establishment of a separate nation, and certainly much
more wealthy ; while the trade of the United States at that time is not
to be compared to ours.
(c) “ Fisheries in Australasian waters beyond territorial limits.”
That is a matter upon which, as I have already stated, our authority
only exists within three miles of our shores. All sorts of things may
be done without authority beyond that limit. I introduced a Bill this
evening which endeavours to deal with this subject, because at present
the matter is highly unsatisfactory.
{d) “ The service of civil process of the Courts of any Colony within Her
Majesty’s possessions in Australasia out of the jurisdiction of the Colony in
which it is issued.”
That is a matter upon which united action is required.
(e) “The enforcement of judgments of Courts of Law of any Colony
beyond the limits of the colony.”
Here again we have another matter requiring attention.
The next subject is—-
(/) “The enforcement of criminal process beyond the limits of the
Colony in which it is issued, and the extradition of offenders (including
deserters of wives and children and deserters from the Imperial or Colonial
naval or military forces).”
This is a matter which all will admit ought to be dealt with. At pre-
sent the Colonies are like foreign States, and the mode of procedure is
exceedingly unsatisfactory. It will be far better to have a general
law dealing with the whole of Australasia as one country and not as
several countries.
Another subject is—
iff) “ The custody of offenders on board of ships belonging to Her
Majesty’s Colonial Governments beyond territorial limits.”


Of course Australasian ships should be allowed to exercise police
jurisdiction in Australasian seas. At present our limit is three
miles ; beyond that limit an offender in custody in colonial ships
is not in lawful custody at all—no more in lawful custody, in fact,
than is a man who while walking down the street is forcibly seized and
carried away. That is an unfortunate state of affairs, and requires
attention.
Then the Bill provides that other matters may he referred to
the Council by the Legislatures of any two or more Colonies. Some of
the Colonies may think it wise to refer them to the Council; others
may prefer to take independent action upon them. They are grouped
together in a subsection :
{h) “ General Defences, Quarantine, Patents of Invention and Discovery,
Copyright, Bills of Exchange and Promissory Notes, Uniformity of
Weights and Measures, Eocognition in other Colonies of any Marriage or
Divorce duly solemnised or decreed in any Colony, Naturalisation of Aliens,
Status of Corporations and Joint Stock Companies in other Colonies than
that in which they have been constituted, and any other matters of general
Australasian interest with respect to which the Legislatures of the several
Colonics can legislate within their own limits, and as to which it is deemed
desirable that there should be a law of general application.”
I will say a word or two on these subjects. With regard to General
Defences, I do not think that the time has yet arrived when we shall
be able to submit to the Federal Council any system of general
defence. There will be considerable difficulty, because there will be
considerable expense involved. Still it is desirable that some power
of that kind should be given. The Imperial Parliament, about three
years since, gave the Colonies power to legislate for the control of
their own troops beyond their own limits. That was a new power to
them, and conferred for the first time, so that at the present time we
can actually regulate our forces, of whatever kind they may be, even
if they go to New South Wales or anywhere else. It would be much
more desirable that there should be some general scheme of defence,
contributed to by all the Colonies, and power to pass some general law
for the regulation and management of our forces. With respect
to Quarantine, the necessity is every day becoming much more
apparent for some general united action instead of the isolated action


which takes place at present. Undoubtedly there ought to be some
federal stations where quarantine should be performed —one on the
south-western corner of the continent, where ships coming from the
Indian Ocean, round Cape Leeuwin, would first arrive, and where
information could be telegraphed all over Australia, and -where
quarantine could be performed, not at the sole cost of Western
Australia, but at that of the different Colonies who share the benefit.
In the same way there should be another at Cape York, or thereabouts,
when it is placed within telegraphic communication, as it will be
before long.
Mr. MOREHEAD : That principle was brought forward in 1881.
The PREMIER : The principle was mentioned; but nobody had
been able to put forward any practical scheme for carrying it out,
yet the Federal Council might be able to do so. In respect to
Patents of Invention and Discovery, there is no objection to their
being left in the clause, although I am happy to say that, by an Act
passed by the Imperial Parliament last year, which I propose to take
advantage of in a Bill, the second reading of which I shall move this
evening, much of its importance is taken away. With respect to
Copyright, that is a matter we cannot deal with practically unless
we have branch registry offices in the Colonies. At present the
copyright laws are in force all over Australia, but a copyright can
only be acquired by registration in England, at Stationers’ Hall,
and by compliance with the provisions of the Imperial Acts.
Uniformity in the law relating to Bills of Exchange and Promissory
Motes is very desirable, and so with regard to Weights and Measures
and the mode of testing them ; so also is the recognition of Marriages
solemnised in any Colony : what the law is at present it is very diffi-
cult to say. The Naturalisation of Aliens is another very important
matter; and so, likewise, is the Status of Corporations and Joint Stock
Companies in other Colonies. It is very desirable that the law on that
subject should be known ; but there are not many people at present who
can assert that they do know it.
The 16th clause enables the Federal Council to sit as
arbitrators, if necessary, to determine any question relating to
relations between one Colony and another. Sections 17, 18, 19,


and 20 provide for the assent to Bills passed by the Council, and
Her Majesty’s power of disallowance. It is proposed that a Bill
shall be assented to by the Governor of the Colony in which the
Conference is sitting, and then transmitted to Her Majesty. The
22nd clause provides for cases of repugnancy. An Act of the Federal
Council will override any inconsistent laws in force in any Colony. If
there are two laws, that of the Council must prevail. Then follow some
clauses which I need not advert to in detail, such as “ Standing Orders,”
“ Temporary Committees,” “ Appointment of necessary Officers, and
mode of their Remuneration,” “Expenditure to be shared according
to the population.” The 29th section also provides for another
function of the Council, which is to speak as the mouthpiece of the
united Colonies, and reads as follows :
“ The Council may make such representations or recommendations to
Her Majesty as it may think fit, with respect to any matters of general
Australasian interest, or to the relations of Her Majesty’s possessions in
Australasia with the possessions of foreign powers.”
That I believe to be very important. At the present time a conference
is an informal meeting. It represents the Governments for the time
being, but it is not permanent. Since the time when the last Con-
vention was sitting in Sydney one Government has gone out and
another come in, and another is in imminent peril. A body speak-
ing with the united voice of the Colonies would speak with very great
force ; it would undoubtedly represent Australasia, and it would
command attention. In fact, I venture to anticipate, not perhaps in
the first session, but before such a body had existed five or six years,
that their representations on matters of general Australasian interest
would be accepted with as much respect as those of any of the powers
of Europe. Let it be remembered, we are certainly a very much more
important country than, say, Egypt; and we are much more wealthy in
commerce and resources than many of the minor powers of Europe.
But we cannot speak out with a united voice; we are a number of
isolatedbodies. It would be of the greatest advantage that we should be
able to speak together ; then our representations would be attended to. I
donotthink we have had much to complain oflately as to want of attention
to our representations; but what promptitude is shown depends very much
upon the gentleman who for the time being advises Her Majesty in


respect to her Colonial possessions. The hon. gentleman at present in
office is not so sympathetic as some others have been; hut as a rule
we have of late little reason to complain that our wishes and representa-
tions have not received proper attention. The 30th clause of the draft
Bill provides that the Act shall not come into operation in respect of any
Colony until the Legislature of such Colony shall have passed an Act
adopting it; so that if on future consideration it may he thought that
the provisions of the Act to he passed by the Imperial Parliament are
not suitable, any Colony can stand out and refuse to come under it;
hut Ido not anticipate any result of that kind. Ido not, of course,
know in what form the Imperial Parliament may pass a measure of
this sort, hut I am sure that in dealing with the matter they wiil he
actuated by the same desire as we are —namely, to assist in facilitating
united action on the part of the Australasian Colonies.
I do not know that I can add much more that will he of use in
enabling this House to deal with the matter ; I have adverted briefly to
the different divisions of the subject, and hon. members are so familiar
Avith the events of the last year or tAvo, and especially of the last few
mouths, that anything I can add further Avould be unnecessary. I look
forward confidently to the passing of a measure of this kind by the
Imperial Parliament, and, I hope, before the close of the year. It will
not be passed during the present session of Parliament, but there is
likely to bo another session before the close of the year, and during that
session I think it is probable that a measure of the kind under con-
sideration will be adopted, because the Legislatures of Tasmania and
Victoria have already adopted addresses praying Her Majesty to take
action in the matter. The Legislature of South Australia will probably
deal with the matter in the same manner this week, and I hope both
Houses of this Parliament will do so Avithin eight days from the
present time. Even if no other Legislatures adopt a similar course,
that will be sufficient for the Imperial Parliament to take action. lam
confident that if the experiment is tried in four Colonies—and there
is a probability that four Colonies Avill address Her Majesty
on the subject—that as soon as provision has been made for
establishing a Federal Council, and as soon as that Council has sat
once or tAvice and shown Avhat advantages may be derived from such
united action, any opposition that might exist in, say, one or more of


the other Colonies will disappear. No Colony will care to stand out if
the other Colonies are acting together in concert. As I said in opening,
the measure is, confessedly, not a perfect measure for the federation
of Australasia. It has been framed with a desire to indicate the
points upon which common action is at present both desirable and
practicable, and I believe that the action which will be taken
on the present lines will gradually, and not very slowly either,
show many other points upon which common action is desirable; and
I believe, also, that a foundation will be laid by this scheme which
will lead, during the lifetime of most members of this House, to the
establishment, in the Australasian dominions of Her Majesty, of a
dominion as powerful and as influential as the Dominion of Canada,
even if it does not, as I anticipate it will, outstrip that magnificent
possession of the Crown. I beg to move the resolution standing in
my name.
Mr. MORE (IE AD: I think, sir, I shall be doing no more than my
duty, and shall be expressing the opinion of every member of the
House, to whichever side he belongs, if I commence the few remarks
I have to make by paying a tribute to the Premier for the way in
which he has moved the Resolution you have just put to the House.
At the same time I almost think I should be failing in my duty if I
did not say at once that that motion was made consequent on the
action taken by the late Premier. lam not cavilling; I have no
intention of saying anything, especially on an occasion like this, that
would hurt the feelings of any hon. member on either side of the
House; but what I mean is, that had it not been for the action taken
by the late Premier of this Colony—who is not now in his place—that
Conference, or Convention (as it was subsequently called), which is
likely, I believe, to lead to very good results, would never have been held.
1 say, all credit is due to Sir Thomas Mcllwraith for the way in which
he upheld the rights, not only of Queensland, but of all the Colonies in the
Australasian group. However much we may differ from Sir Thomas
Mcllwraith in politics generally, we shall all agree that, at
any rate in that particular, he showed himself to be a true
Australian patriot, and a true Australian statesman. With
regard to this particular Bill, while not in any way pre-


tending to oppose it —in fact, doing all I possibly can to have it
passed—l still, at the same time, think it is by no means a perfect
measure; nor does the Premier, I admit, assert that it is. Ido not
think his comparison between the position of the Dominion of Canada
and the position of these Colonies is a proper one ; the positions are
in no way parallel. We, here, are an isolated power, and will he
for all time, unless some catastrophe which none of us anticipates
joins us to the mainland. The position of Canada was entirely different,
and the circumstances which forced her into a federal union are
perfectly distinct from those that appertain to this island. We are
here, and shall he for all time when we are federated—which I hope
we shall he —a nation within ourselves. We have no one to fight with,
unless we fight among ourselves, which is not a usual thing, as you
know, Mr. Speaker. We should only have our internal quarrels to
settle, and, such being the case, I maintain that no fair parallel can
he drawn between the position of these Colonies and of the Dominion
of Canada. The Premier also pointed out, and very properly, that
this must he considered simply as the initiation of federation, and by
no means pretended to cover the whole field. The fiscal systems of
the Colonies, for instance, are so different that it will take a great
many years to enable us to agree upon a general scheme of fiscal
federation. It is a matter to he regretted that New South Wales, so
far as we know —in some respects the most important Colony in the
Australian group —does not take the decided action that has
been taken hy the other Colonies. It is also a matter to he
regretted that the Colony of Victoria has taken such an
ultra-determined stand on certain points connected with this
important question. It appears to me, with all due deference to Mr,
Service, that if he had gone a little slower, and had listened to the
counsel even of our own Premier—who, I take it, is not altogether an
unwise man —if he had listened to the counsel even of our own
Premier, and of those of the other colonies, he would not have put up
his hack in such a very porcupine-like way against Prance. We
cannot heat Prance yet, nor do we want to fight her at any time.
What we want to do is to deal firmly and gently with powers that
have certainly equal rights in these seas with ourselves, and to point out
to them that they would he doing a great injury to a neighbouring and


friendly State if they did certain things. There has been lately too
much hectoring and threatening on the part of some of the Australian
Colonies, which may not help us in getting that federation which we
all desire.
With regard to many of the clauses of the Bill, I think that,
although they no doubt had to he drafted in a particular direc-
tion so as to include all the fish in the net, they are to a certain
extent unsatisfactory. I think a Crown Colony has no right to he repre-
sented in a Federal Council. The federation should he a group of respon-
sibly governed Colonies, and the Convention should, therefore, have put
the Crown Colonies altogether on one side. The Premier, I admit, has
a great advantage over every other member of the House in the dis-
cussion of the question, because he was present at the Convention and
heard, of course, a great deal more than was made public. I regret
myself —and I think even the Premier will regret it —-that the Press
was not allowed admission to that Convention. All our knowledge of
the proceedings of the Convention, except what the Premier has told
us to-night, has been obtained from the official records ; and beyond
that there is nothing. On a question dealing with the federation of
the whole Australian group, reporters should certainly have been
present, and then we should have been made acquainted with the
various expressions of opinion from the representatives of the different
Colonies who met at that Convention. That would have greatly helped
us in discussing the question ; for it is evident, from the construction
of the Bill, that there was a considerable clashing of opinion, which
has apparently resulted in a compromise. For instance, the reso-
lution that the first meeting of the Federal Council should be
held at Hobart. The name of the town might well have been
left blank for the Federal Council itself to have decided. The
Premier says he was astonished at the leniency on the part of
New South Wales and Victoria, with so very much larger a popu-
lation and revenue than this Colony and South Australia, in allowing
equal representation to all the Colonies. I maintain that this
-Colony and Tasmania are noton the same level, and that Queens-
land is in quite as good a position as any Colony in the Australian
group. We have everything within ourselves without federation.
We have all the elements of an empire, if we choose to assert it. We


can grow corn, sugar, tea—everything that can be produced in a
temperate or a tropical region, and we have the finest grazing land in
the world. In fact, we have nothing to gain by federation. Ido not
say we have nothing to lose without it; but we were in a masterful
position, and we should have held it as against, at any rate, the pre-
tentions of Tasmania ; and I would even say, at the risk of people
being made very angry, as against Victoria. We have all these things
within ourselves. At the same time, I firmly and thoroughly believe
in a confederation of the Colonies in order to make us a great and
homogeneous whole. There is one object, I take it, which we have in
common, and that is, that we should have a government of the great
English-speaking races —that we should make a “ Greater Britain ”
in the Southern seas. That is our sole object—at least, I take it that
is our sole object—the object which every hon. member in this House
desires to see carried out. We are desirous to form a new England in
the Pacific; that, no matter what may happen in years to come, when,
should we even separate from the mother-land —and I hope we shall
not—all her traditions, her home life, and everything great and good
in the mother-country shall come unto us in the Southern seas. That
is what we all hope for, and that is why I believe in the federation of the
English-speaking races in these Colonies. The time has probably not
yet arrived when we can sink all our differences and bickerings —all our
little, as it were, vestry differences. The time possibly has not yet
arrived for that, but the time, I believe, has arrived when we should
ask the Parliament of Great Britain to give us an Enabling Bill, to
enable us, at any rate, to see how we can settle those differences and
lay the basis of the great nation which we must be in the future. I
do not think it is necessary for me to traverse the clauses of this Bill;
suffice it to say, I believe, and I am sure that I am expressing the
opinion of every member on this side of the House when I say that I
for one firmly believe in the principle affirmed in this Bill. We may
differ as to the details of the measure, but I am sure all members of
this House will agree in attempting to pass such a measure as will
enable us to federate with the other colonies, and make for ourselves a
“ Greater Britain ” in the Southern seas. I beg to second the hon.
gentleman’s resolution.
By Authority: Edmund Gregory, Acting Government Printer, William street Brisbane.


