





FEDERAL CONSTITUTIONS
WITHIN THE EMPIRE
AN ADDRESS DELIVERED BEFORE THE
SOCIETY OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION
R. B. HALDANE, Esq., Q.C, M.P.
AT A MEETING HELD AT THE ROYAL
COLONIAL INSTITUTE, FRIDAY, MAY 4 th, 1900
LONDON
JOHN MURRAY ALBEMARLE STREET




FEDERAL CONSTITUTIONS WITHIN THE
EMPIRE.
[An Address delivered before the Society of Comparative Legislation by R. B.
Haldane, Esq., Q.C., M.P., at a Meeting held at the Royal Colonial
Institute , on Friday , May 4th, igoo.]
I have written this paper with a somewhat selfish object. My purpose
was to try to get plainly before my own eyes, quite as much as before
the eyes of those who are so good as to come here to-day, certain
phenomena pertaining to those derivative constitutions of our Empire
which have been created by the Crown and by Parliament. The
phenomena to which I refer arise out of and vary with certain relation-
ships to the parent Government. These particular relationships are
nowhere expressed in writing; but they none the less form part of the
body of custom of the Imperial Constitution, and, like the rest of that body
of custom, they are constantly, though slowly and silently, undergoing a
process of modification and development. Just for this reason they are
elusive and difficult to express. In this respect they resemble other
principles of our unwritten and progressive Constitution, the statement of
which, adequate and accurate for the generation in which it was made,
has become untrue for the next. Such statements do not the less
represent reality, because the reality is constantly changing.
We are, then, to endeavour to get some light on the nature of the
unwritten relations of the Imperial Government to the derivative con-
stitutions which have grown out of the parent stem, as these consti-
tutions stand in the year 1900, The practical interest of the search is
that with the consolidation of derivative constitutions upon so-called
federal principles, which is beginning to be so much talked about, a new
set of problems is emerging for solution. This process of consolidation
began with Canada in 1867. To-day we are the witnesses of another
instance of it of the most striking importance.
Let us start on our path of enquiry from a very obvious illustration.
The form of the enacting clause of an Act of Parliament is framed thus:
“ Be it enacted by the Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty, by and with the
advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons
in this present Parliament assembled; and by the authority of the same.”


Suppose an intelligent stranger, knowing nothing of the realities of our
system of government, were to sit down to its study and begin with this
clause, what would he conclude? He would picture to himself the
Queen sitting at Windsor or Osborne or Balmoral, evolving in the
Royal mind what is called abroad a project of legislation. He would
picture Her Majesty as then summoning, to begin with, the Lords Spiritual,
the Bishops, and requesting first their advice and then their consent.
He would next imagine a procession of the Peers Temporal to the Royal
presence, and a similar council being held. And finally he would figure
to himself, as a formality at the finish, the Commons being asked
whether they had anything different to say. Now our stranger student
would have drawn his inferences correctly enough. In them there would
be only one shortcoming; his picture would be one of the English
Government as administered, not by Queen Victoria, but by Henry VIII.
and the other Tudors. The form has survived while the substance has
changed.
There is a passage which admirably describes what that substance is
to-day in a letter written by no less a personage than the Queen herself
to the Emperor Napoleon 111., in which she explains her constitutional
position. I quote from the third volume of Sir Theodore Martin’s Life of
the Prince Consort. Her Majesty writes: “I am bound by certain rules
and usages. I have no uncontrolled power of decision. I must adopt
the advice of a council of ministers, and these ministers have to meet
and agree on a course of action, after having arrived at a joint conviction
of its justice and utility. They have, at the same time, to take care that
the steps which they wish to take are not only in accordance with the best
interests of the country, but also such that they can be explained to and
defended in Parliament, and that their fitness may be brought home to
the conviction of the nation.” As the outcome of a slow process, the
Sovereign has ceased to govern, and now only reigns. In England this
was brought about chiefly by the control of the Parliament over Supplies.
This is not necessarily so, nor has it always and everywhere been the case.
In other parts of the Queen’s dominions it is through different means
that a similar result has come about. The Channel Islands are the
remaining portion of the territories of that Duchy of Normandy which
King John lost. The kings and queens of our country have held them
as dukes and duchesses of Normandy. The people of the Channel
Islands have succeeded in establishing the right of constitutional govern-
ment in their islands. It is true that the question whether the Crown can
properly claim to legislate there by Order in Council without the advice
and consent of the States or local Parliaments was nominally left open
in the great case which was heard before a Special Committee of the
Privy Council in 1894, and in which a pile of constitutional documents
was brought together, of which it is surprising that no historian should


as yet have given any account beyond the rather meagre one in a late
volume of State trials. But practically the Privy Council, in recalling the
obnoxious Order in Council upon minor grounds, intimated to the home
advisers of the Sovereign that never again ought the larger and more
interesting claim to be brought forward. It may therefore be safely
assumed that, for example, in Jersey, not less than in Great Britain, the
Queen reigns without governing. I was of counsel in that case, and
had to study a series of documents commencing at a date a century
before the Conquest, and I remember being struck with the difference
between the ways in which this result had been attained in England
and in the Channel Islands. Here the concession has by degrees been
wrung from the Crown as the price of financial assistance. > There
it was by degrees obtained as the reward for assistance in the various
wars with France. The charters and other documents, which disclose the
story of the process, were laboriously collected and arranged in several
bulky volumes, which are none the less worthy of the attention of an
enterprising historian because they repose in a lumber-room at the Privy
Council office, covered with dust and neglect.
Another more familiar, but not less instructive, instance of the binding
force of an unwritten restriction which has slowly come into existence
is the constitutional impotence of the House of Lords, or any other upper
chamber subject to the usages of the British Constitution, to amend a
Money Bill. The House of Lords has full legal power to make such an
amendment, and every court would be bound to take cognisance of and
give effect to it. But as the result of the development of our Constitution
amid a succession of struggles over the Commons’ claim to the exclusive
title to grant Supply, the Lords have become bound hand and foot by
chains which are not the less real because they are invisible to the
legal eye.
It is just this type of unwritten restriction on powers which theo-
retically are perfect from a legal point of view that I want to say
something about this afternoon in connection with the various forms
of Colonial Constitution —something very imperfect, for the subject is
new, but something of which the reality is becoming in each generation
more clearly recognised by the statesmen who have to administer the
Colonial Office under successive governments. To the modern student
of constitutional development in Colonial Government it is, for instance,
astonishing to read such despatches as were very properly written thirty
years ago by the first Governor of Queensland, Sir George Bowen, a
man of real ability, and to reflect that they were written with the full
assent not only of the Duke of Newcastle, the Colonial Secretary of the
day, but apparently of the people of Queensland. Sir George claimed,
among a multitude of other rights which now seem to us very odd, a
constitutional right to revise the decisions of his ministers about such


matters as appointments to public offices. A claim' like this may have
been, and possibly was, constitutionally correct in those days. But since
iB6O a great evolution has taken place in the position of a Colonial
Governor. It is still true that he is freer to act on his own initiative
than is the Sovereign at home, who has delegated to him his powers.
If he has none of the divinity that doth hedge round a king, if, as was
established by the Privy Council in such cases as Hill v. Bigge (3 Moore
P.C. 465), Cameron v. Kyle (3 Knapp 332), and Musgrave v. Pulido
(5 Ap. Cas. 102), he is, unlike the Sovereign, liable to be sued in the
courts of the colony for acts that are illegal and done in excess of his
authority, still, he is something more than a mere part of the Colonial
Constitution; he also represents the Imperial Government, and he is
therefore free, in cases which seem to him to touch the Imperial interests,
to act on advice other than that of his ministers. He may, for example,
veto a Bill where, in an analogous case at home, the Sovereign would
not be free to veto. He may, under the Colonial Office Regulations of
1892, obtain the advice of the Imperial law officers through the Secretary
of State. But these exceptions arise out of a distinct reason—the inherent
and necessary title of the Imperial Government to the decision of such
questions as really concern the Empire generally, and for this purpose to
have its interests watched over by its own representative Governor, who
has thus a double duty to perform. So far as his position is merely that
of Governor under a Constitution permeated by the usages of that British
model after which it is fashioned, so far must he in every practicable case
act upon the advice of his ministers. This at least has become true
to-day, whatever may have been the case in those days of Sir George
Bowen, in which the Colony of Queensland had only just received its
separate Constitution.
I have dwelt on this topic as an illustration of the extent to which
the Constitutions of our Colonies have of late years developed, after the very
fashion of the general Constitution at home. Like the latter, they are
really in the main unwritten. The Acts which constitute them are but
the skeletons which the practice of governors, ministers, parliaments, and
judges have to endow with flesh and blood before the dry bones can
live. The process of endowment may be gradual. The stature of the
living model is not attained at once. A set of constitutional and legal
precedents has to be established in each case, and this takes time. Changes
of view may and do occur; and this is because, even where the Acts of
the Imperial Parliament calling our Colonial Constitutions into life are
never so elaborate and precise, the true substance is unwritten. No stranger
could make out the real position of, say, the Governor-General of Canada
from the words of the British North America Act of 1867, any more
than he could, in the illustration already given of the enacting words of
an Imperial Statute, ascertain the real position to-day of the Queen. It


is not merely that the common form of the modern Colonial Constitution
Acts confers on the Colonial legislatures large powers to alter the con-
stitution conferred oh them? —powers which, for example, were in a
striking fashion exercised by Manitoba in 1876, when her Parliament abolished
the Upper House of the Legislature, and her Governor decided that he
was not even entitled to reserve the Bill, so clear was the constitutional
right arising out of the principle of responsible government; it is because
the British Constitution is in its essence neither rigid nor even written,
and because every constitution which is modelled after it tends to resemble
it in every point where the express provisions of an Imperial Statute do
not stand in the way.
We may thus expect to find in the various forms of constitution which
obtain throughout the Queen’s dominions this process of silent approxima-
tion to the parent example manifesting itself. We shall expect to find this
not less in the relationship to the home Government than elsewhere.
For, subject always to this, that the home Government is and must remain
charged with the burden of Imperial interests, and must act on its own
initiative through the Governor who represents it in the colony, the rela-
tionship in all other respects of the Colonial Parliament, not only to its
Governor, but through him to the Imperial Government and Parliament,
must tend, whatever it is in the eyes of the theorist and the lawyer, to
become in the eye of the statesman similar to that of the Imperial Parliament
to the Crown. This is the direct and inevitable work of our familiar'
machinery of responsible government wherever put in operation; and its
attainment can, under British traditions, never be more than a question of
time. So complete does the growth become that there may even, in certain
cases, as I will presently show, arrive a time at which courts of law can and do
take cognisance of the developed relationship. Let us, in order to get the
conception of this growth clear, begin by glancing at certain of the forms of
government, outside Great Britain and Ireland, of the Queen’s dominions.
The earliest of these forms in point of origin is that which one finds
with varying characteristics in those constitutions of a feudal origin which
obtain in the islands adjacent to Great Britain, Jersey and Guernsey (the
latter, for this purpose, including Alderney and Sark), and the Isle of Man.
The relationship of the Crown to the islanders, so far as the active business
of government is concerned, has varied enormously. If it is using loose
language to say that the monarchy has changed in these islands from an
absolute to a limited one, it is at least approximately true. In Jersey, for
example, a progress of charters, to which I have already referred, granting
privileges to the people in consideration of the assistance rendered by them
in successive wars with France, has helped materially towards the establish-
ment of constitutional government. At last, in 1771, a code for this island
was assented to by the Crown which is not the foundation, but one of the
expressions, of its constitutional liberties. Under the provisions of this


code it was laid down that no laws or ordinances should be passed unless
by the States or Parliament of the island. It was further provided that all
warrants and documents manifesting the executive will of the Crown should
be registered by the Royal Court of the island. It is not probable, in view
of the decision of the Privy Council in 1894, already adverted to, that the
home Government will nowadays refuse to recognise the right of the States
to consider and give or refuse its assent to every projected law, whether it
originates with the Crown or, as in future it is likely always to do, with
the States. If Jersey—and the same thing is true of the other islands
referred to —had been larger and more important and at a greater distance
from London, there is little doubt that under this form of constitution she
could have obtained for herself a freedom as complete as she could have
gained under those parliamentary forms where, theoretically and in the
eyes of a court of law, the Imperial Parliament can do everything, while
constitutionally in local matters it can do nothing. What is interesting is
that in the case of an appanage of the Crown, such as Jersey, tribunals
of justice can do, what they cannot do where there is a so-called
statutory constitution, take notice of the very important unwritten limita-
tions on the theoretical powers of the Home Government, which remain
binding so long as an Act of the Imperial Parliament is not invoked.
Thus the validity of Orders in Council, which, so far as the Imperial
Parliament was concerned, the Crown was free to make for the Channel
Islands, has been impeached, and successfully impeached, before the Privy
Council, on grounds which no court of law could have taken cognisance
of had such a case arisen in regard to Canada or Australia. Of such cases
some are reported in the Law Reports, while of others, not so reported, I
have had personal cognisance in Channel Islands cases in which the Privy
Council has treated constitutionality and legality as though, in dealing with the
Constitution of these islands, they were equally within its capacity to notice.
A still more striking illustration of the capacity of a court of law to
take notice of what, in its inception at least, seems to have been properl,
a constitutional restriction on the powers of the Crown arises in the
case of the next form of Colonial Government, that of a Crown colony,
where the privilege of holding a legislative assembly has once been granted
by the Crown in its charter. In such a case Lord Mansfield, in a judg-
ment the authority of which has never been questioned, held, in a common
law action tried at the Guildhall in 1774, 1 that a court of law would treat
the grant of the privilege of making laws in a representative assembly as
irrevocable and exclusive, and would declare void a subsequent Order in
Council purporting to levy a tax. Of course Parliament could have validly
legislated, but the point was that the ordinary and natural paramount
authority was held to have committed legal as well as constitutional suicide,
and put itself in the position of being unable to recall its own Act. The
1 Campbell v. Hall (1 Cowper 204 ; 20 State Trials 239).


constitutional reason for this it is easy to see; the legal reason is much
more obscure. But there it stands established by great authority that such
legal reason exists.
I turn now to the ordinary type of statutory constitution established
in the most important portions of the Empire by Act of the Imperial
Parliament, where the right of self-government granted is of responsible as
well as representative government. Here the courts confine what they take
cognisance of to the provisions of the Statute. The Imperial Parliament
they of course treat as supreme, and where the language of the Statute
leaves the Crown nominally free to act on its own initiative, the courts
decline to take notice of these constitutional restrictions on the exercise
of that power which we all know to exist. But these constitutional
restrictions have other than legal sanctions, and they have become much
more definitely recognised, as the theory of Colonial Government has
developed during the last quarter of a century. A striking case of the
manifestation of a desire that they should exist in full force is to be
found in the preamble to that British North America Act of 1867 which
gave Canada her present Federal Constitution, and which I take to mean
that the statutory framework was meant to be filled up from the store-
house of unwritten tradition. “ Whereas,” so runs the preamble to the
Statute, “the Provinces of Canada, Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick have
expressed their desire to be federally united into one dominion under the
Crown of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, with a
Constitution similar in principle to that of the United Kingdom.” The
Act goes on to declare that the executive power of the Government of
the Dominion is vested in the Queen, to establish a Privy Council for
Canada, which is to advise the Governor-General, to constitute a Parlia-
ment for Canada, to set constitutions for the provinces, and to distribute
legislative powers under the famous 91st and 92nd sections between the
Dominion and Provincial Parliaments, conferring, however, on the Dominion
Parliament the general common form power of making laws for the peace,
order, and good government of Canada, and reserving to it all powers
not expressly given to the Provincial Parliaments. Now from the very
first the words which I have quoted from the preamble made it clear that
in the Constitution of Canada the Crown, except as regards Imperial
matters, which were not delegated, and to which that Constitution
consequently did not extend, was intended to be in just the same position
towards the Canadian Parliament in point of constitutional usage as is the
Crown to Parliament at home. Not only responsible government, but
responsible government free from interference from Downing Street, was
intended to be granted so far as purely Canadian affairs were concerned.
That this was no small matter will be realised quickly by any one who
consults the learned work of the late Mr. Todd, the Librarian of the
Canadian Parliament, who has written a treatise on Parliamentary Govern-


ment in the Colonies of an authority which places it alongside of that
of Sir Erskine May’s great home book. One has only to contrast the
principles laid down in the despatches from Lord Carnarvon and his
successors to the Canadian Governors-General with those written from
Downing Street by the Duke of Newcastle only seven years previously, to
see how remarkable was the advance recognised. Besides what the
preamble expresses, and what, though not new or necessary to be
expressed now in any analogous case, was new in 1867, there was
another remarkable feature about the Act of 1867.
Not only is the power of giving or withholding the Royal Assent to
Bills passed by the Provincial Legislatures and Lieutenant-Governors
conferred on the Governor-General, but by ss. 58 and 59 the appointment
and dismissal of the Lieutenant-Governors themselves were placed with the
Governor-General, as distinguished from Her Majesty in person. Now this
is a remarkable provision, for a reason which I will point out. Soon
after the Act passed, the Supreme Court of Canada—which was
established with a view to obtaining an interpretation of the Constitution
upon the spot, and which has done much valuable work of this kind —
began to show a tendency in its judgments which caused suspicion and
friction in the Provinces. This court laid stress on those provisions in
the Act which seemed to point to the principle of union of the
Provinces, and they laid down principles which if accepted would have
placed the Provinces in the position of subordinate governments. A series
of questions emerged sharply, of such delicacy that it was essential that
they should be decided by an arbiter holding an absolutely even hand
between the contending parties, and simply interpreting the words of the
Dominion Act in the light of that British Constitution which its object
was to reproduce. Such an arbiter was found in the Imperial Privy
Council. A series of cases was presented to it, some by way of appeal
from the Supreme Court of Canada, and some by way of special reference
under special Acts passed concurrently by the Dominion and Provincial
Parliaments. In the end the Privy Council settled that the true view of
the Act was that it established a federal distribution of not only legislative
but executive powers, and that in the matters delegated to them the
Provincial Governments had an authority as high as that of the Central
Government. The relationship was, in other words, held to be one of
strict co-ordination, and that in executive as well as legislative matters.
On this principle one burning conflict after another was stilled. The
control of the liquor laws, the limits of direct taxation, the Government
titles to gold and silver, the right to appoint Queen’s Counsel, the control
of the fisheries in the great lakes and rivers, the exact provincial
boundaries, the adjustment of debt, —these and many other issues were
peacefully resolved as between the Dominion and the Provinces. But
while to the legal principle of construction which the Privy Council


established there is no real exception, a remarkable exception to the
constitutional principle has, by the combined operation of the language of
the Act and of the usages which it imported, been created in regard to
that office of Lieutenant-Governor to which I have adverted. In the
eye of the courts the Lieutenant-Governor of a Canadian province,
when appointed, holds directly from the Crown and exercises, where
necessary, on provincial advice, all prerogative powers within the scope
of the Provincial Constitution. The distribution of executive power is
federal. But under ss, 58 and 59 of the British North America Act the
power to appoint and dismiss every Lieutenant-Governor rests with the
Governor-General. Accordingly, when the majority of the Dominion
Parliament and the Dominion Ministry desired to dismiss Mr. Letellier,
the Lieutenant-Governor of Quebec, although supported by a majority
in the Provincial Parliament, the Home Government advised Lord Dufferin,
the Governor-General, that he must act on the request of his Dominion
Ministers if pressed.
The Constitution of Canada sprang at once into full life and vigour
because the Imperial Parliament was in 1867 simply giving effect to exhaustive
resolutions passed by the federating provinces. The South Africa Act of
ten years later, which proceeded on no such definite impulse from within,
was stillborn. There is, indeed, another reason why it is not likely ever,
as originally framed, to come to life. It was in the main a mere copy of
the Canadian Act. Now the Canadian Act has been, between the Supreme
Court of Canada and the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, inter-
preted with a view to the circumstances of Canada. The (relatively to the
Central Government) absolutely equal authority and status which has been
attributed by the decisions of these tribunals to the Provincial Governments
is an illustration of this. If the similar language of the South Africa
Act had to be applied, it would, however, inevitably be found that the
courts were hampered in their interpretation of it by the tradition which
had grown up under Canadian decisions, and the Constitution it established
would probably prove to be unfit for South Africa as it is to-day. From
this danger the latest and most interesting example of a constitution framed
after the British model for a distant but great portion of the Queen’s
dominions has been happily, in large measure, delivered. The Australasian
Commonwealth Bill, so much in the minds of all of us at this moment, is
the outcome of no scheme elaborated in Downing Street, but of the delibera-
tions of Australasian statesmen conferring on the spot. Like the scheme
worked out by a similar process for Canada, a scheme from which it is
not unnatural that it should differ in very important respects, it proposes to
do much more than establish a statutory Colonial Constitution of the old-
fashioned type. Of the constitution contemplated by the Commonwealth
Bill it is not too much to say what was said by a distinguished Canadian
lawyer, Mr. Justice Gwynne, in delivering judgment in the Supreme Court


in the case of The Maritimeßank v. The Queen (4 Cartwright 421): “We
make a very great mistake if we treat the Dominion of Canada, constituted
as it is, as a mere colony. The aspirations of the founders of the scheme
of confederation will, I fear, prove to be a mere delusion if the Constitution
given to the Dominion has not elevated it to a condition much more exalted
than, and different from, the condition of a colony, which is a term that,
in my opinion, never should be used as designative of the Dominion of
Canada.” If by “colony” the learned judge meant a part of the Empire
where there is a mere delegation for local purposes of Imperial authority,
constitutionally alterable without consultation of the inhabitants, a mere
stage in advance of the old-fashioned plantation, his words are clearly true.
One aspect, at least, of the view for which he was contending finds con-
firmation in the words used by Lord Selborne about a case which falls far
short of the level of constitutional government reached in Canada—the case
of the Legislature of India. In his judgment in the Privy Council in The
Queen v. Burah (3 Ap. Cas. 904) Lord Selborne said: “ The Indian
Legislature has powers expressly limited by the Act of the Imperial Parliament
which created it, and it can, of course, do nothing beyond the limits which
circumscribe these powers. But when acting within those limits, it is not
in any sense an agent or delegate of the Imperial Parliament, but has, and
was intended to have, plenary powers of legislation as large and of the same
nature' as those of Parliament itself.”
Time will not permit me to linger over the topic, fascinating to a con-
stitutional lawyer, of the novel and original scheme of the Australasian
Commonwealth. I can only draw attention to one or two of its features.
In the first place s. 51 limits the power of the Federal Parliament to
make laws to certain very important, but none the less restricted and
defined, matters, giving this Parliament no general legislative powers.
In this point the Bill approximates more nearly to the precedent of the
United States Constitution than to that of Canada, which gives general
powers to the Dominion Parliament and only specified powers to the
Provincial Legislatures. Indeed, the scheme of the Australasian proposals,
as disclosed by the very words of s. 106, is to leave the State
Constitutions as they are at present, only subtracting from them such
powers as are necessary for the erection of the Federal Constitution.
This section is followed up by the 109th, which provides that, in case of
a conflict of laws, those of the new Commonwealth are to prevail. There
is no such express provision in the Canadian Act; but the Privy Council
has decided, in Union Bank v. Tennant (1894 Ap. Cas. 31) and other cases,
that it is implied. There is no provision, such as gave rise in Canada
to the constitutional dispute over the Letellier case, enabling the
Governor-General of the Commonwealth to appoint the State Governors.
Such a provision would, indeed, have been hardly consistent with the
scheme of the new Constitution, which is to leave State rights intact


except where expressly interfered with. S. 70 provides for a federal
distribution of executive power. SS. 53 to 56 inclusive enact and
make written provisions, most of which exist similarly in the parent
British Constitution, but are there unwritten. S. 57 contains an ingenious
and novel provision for reconciling the two Houses of Parliament in case
of serious differences by making them, but not until after a dissolution,
vote together. The final section of the Bill provides for the alteration
of the Constitution and for the preservation, in a decision on such altera-
tion, of State rights by means of a submission of the new law to the
electors in each State. The analogy to the United States Constitution
stops very soon. The American Constitution knows but little of what
we Britons mean by “ responsible government.” It makes the Executive
in a large measure independent of the Legislature. But the Australasian
Commonwealth Constitution breathes in every clause the spirit of true
responsible government. The Executive really flows from, and is con-
trolled by, the Legislature in this as in any constitution of the British
type. Truly it looks as though a man-child were about to be born of the
Imperial Parliament. .
I have indicated the fashion in which the functions of the Crown and
of the Colonial Governors have by degrees become circumscribed by the
silken bonds of constitutional usage. I have sketched what, in other
words, may be described as the operation of responsible government in
cutting down the prerogative, and in making local the advice upon which
it is to be exercised. But there is another tendency which is equally
apparent. The Imperial Parliament does not coerce her children. The
bonds of empire are the bonds, not of any law, written or unwritten, but
of a common heritage of history, of interest, and of blood. The result
is that the problem of when the Imperial Parliament is justified in inter-
fering is getting to be a more and more deliberate one. Fortunately it
rarely arises; and lam convinced that it will arise yet more rarely as
soon as the people of those distant dominions of the Queen where our
Constitution has been reproduced realise that there is no desire to interfere
with their absolute right of autonomy in their own concerns, but only an
aspiration to keep the Empire together, and to pervade its institutions
with a spirit that is imperial in the noblest sense. For the existence of the
existing Constitution of the Empire I am persuaded that it is desirable,
and indeed essential, that the Home Parliament should remain in theory
and in law supreme. Constitutionally we are all getting to undei stand
how this relationship of the mother to her children is tempered. No doubt
it would be possible for the Imperial Parliament to renounce this supremacy,
to delegate some authority to Colonial Legislatures, and the rest to a purel)
British Legislature. She might put herself, so to speak, to sleep, and the
Parliaments which had taken her place would be co-ordinate only, like
the legislatures which exist side by side in Canada, and are to do so in the


coming Commonwealth of Australasia, with no supreme authority among
them. Any one who desires to see how as a matter of law this could
be done has only to turn up the chapter in England’s Case against Home
Rule —the ingenious book written by Mr. Dicey on Mr. Gladstone’s Irish
proposals of 1886. Mr. Gladstone’s Bill was not intended to do anything
of the kind, whatever its language may have suggested to Mr. Dicey.
But he has shown how the thing can be done. Now I have always
disliked the words “ Imperial Federation ” just for this reason. It is all
very well to use the word “ federation ” when you are speaking of the
consolidation into a dominion or commonwealth of a group of derivative
constitutions, such as those of which I have been speaking in British
North America and Australasia; but is it appropriate to use it of any
conceivable relationship between the Imperial Government as the keystone
of our Empire, as it is now, and what are called the Colonies? You
could create a federation of the Imperial and Colonial Governments, no
doubt; but in creating it you would, if you followed the principle which
the word implies, break up the Constitution of the Empire and substitute—
at least so I think —what would in the main be a rigid and inelastic
constitution for the unwritten and developing one which has so far worked
well. The ideal of Imperial Federation is a fine ideal; but I think it will
have to be attained by other means than federation in the legal sense.
While the Imperial Parliament remains legally supreme, and consequently
a most useful tool for effecting ends in which all concerned have concurred,
we are rapidly recognising that it is constitutionally bound so far as the
Colonies are concerned, just as the Crown has recognised that it is itself
analogously constitutionally bound. The real meaning of the new doctrine
of continuity in external policy seems to me to be the recognition that in
foreign and Colonial affairs Parliament is a trustee of its powers not only
for the electors of Great Britain and Ireland, but for the Empire at large.
More and more do successive Parliaments seem to tend to be guided by the
ministers of the day in;their proceedings with regard to these Foreign and
Colonial affairs. The constituencies at home are beginning to recognise
this. lam certain that those whom I myself represent would rebuke me
for disloyalty to the principles of representative and democratic government
if I asked them at an election to let a party issue be raised about the
policy of our Parliament with regard to, say, the internal government of
Australasia. This, they would point out to me, is by your own principles
for Australasia herself, and your business as representing us is merely to
see that the Colonial Office, in applying to the Imperial Parliament for
powers, is acting in accordance with Australasian wishes.
In the nature of things all this must become yet more apparent. It will
inevitably be accompanied by closer and more frequent consultations
between the Queen’s Ministers in London and the- Queen’s Ministers in
the other and more distant parts of her dominions. Some form of


council may grow up, some form even of representation in our common
Parliament. But it is not the machinery that matters : indeed, the less
we have of it, in all probability the better. What is wanted is such a
sense of responsibility and constitutional usage, checking the hasty exercise
of legal power on the part of the Houses of the Imperial Legislature,
as shall make its relationship to the distant subjects of the Crown become
as easy as is that of the Crown itself. This appears to be the true notion
of a closer Imperial connection, a connection the form of which it is
useless to try to define in advance or express in terms of abstract principles.
Events in the past have so ordained it that the centre of the Empire is
London, and not Sydney, nor Ottawa, nor Capetown. If the past had been
different, this too might have been different. If the Empire continues to
cohere, it may still be otherwise. Who can say that at some future period
the metropolis of the British people will not be found at some spot to-day
reckoned remote, but then become the centre ? What is important is that,
come what changes may, the unity of our race and of that link which is
its precious possession should never be impaired or lost sight of.
And this leads me, in conclusion, to say a few words about a topic
which, I cannot but think, appears more thorny than it really is.
The inevitable outcome of the growing importance and magnitude of
the more distant parts of the Queen’s self-governing dominions is that
they will more and more rely on their own tribunals for the administration
of justice. This is as it ought to be. It is a tendency implied in the
very notion of self-government, in that very power of making laws for
peace, order, and good government which is the common form of the
instruments under which our fellow subjects beyond the seas rule them-
selves under the Queen’s flag. But there is a class of question, a class
small in number, but large in importance, which reaches beyond the
analogy of ordinary litigation. Some of the questions which belong to
this class concern the ascertainment of the true principles which underlie
the type of British Constitution, unwritten as much as written, under
which all of us who are subjects of the Sovereign live. Some others of
such questions concern topics such as the great principles of that system
of Common Law, itself elastic and developing, which is our common
heritage. In an Empire such as ours surely there is room for a great
and final arbiter, a tribunal chosen not from one locality nor from one
people, but selected from the best brains of the various peoples and various
localities which compose that Empire, a tribunal to which appeal might
be made in last resort for the sake of uniformity in great and governing
principles. The institution of such a tribunal seems to grow, almost as of
necessity, out of our common Constitution. It should be invoked, not
frequently nor as of course, but only on grave occasions of general interest.
It would not interfere with the finality in ordinary cases of the judgments
delivered by the various High Courts of Appeal in or out ot England ;


but it would remain as a unifying influence, a bond corresponding in
judicial matters of Imperial importance to the unifying influence where
Imperial interests are touched, of the executive powers of the Crown. It
is not difficult to conceive a Court of Imperial Justice! such that the
Empire as a whole would be proud of it, as the greatest of ancient or
modern times, and would feel its rule a benefit and no burden.
But this is a speculation lying beyond the scope of a paper which has
already become too long; and I have only touched on it because it seemed
to me that no discussion such as that which has engaged us this afternoon
would have been complete without a reference to it.
Printed by Hasell, IVatson & Viney, Ld., London and Aylesbury.




8811 i I mS |wl
if I t I I f||li f'. m WMM: mm immw lk,\
I mt | B I mmmm
? / * r| sfi& l 4 Sfy -Mvv: v !
4 , , . , && || 11 > 4:J> jg r li ■» / sang pi |m - '•'*{,! -*-$
*'' r- * f »>$M >''/&**<
t// . s ifM il,s # *li* 11
,y , « i | y i mi 41 « f mHI i ' iJ i fßw i m
o'' I ife « ? | ; 1 1 & I I 1 piSi
■ ■ ■,- ■'•• / 1 '■ ’r V > , • ''*i l<r i
'
, I i i ,*' |gM| wm , ,Iw ’ *
1 > I ? m §i « Ml 1
i. r 1 . • * / < sr* ff 7 6 ’ '■<,'/ 1 t*k', w ■> - ' 'AX- V. • 1 vt> ;gV| * ArA ;< &
" i tf II 1 A* \ | llp mm * n7 Ktf
, I mi m *lm & wm * f M w '
I pi I»SPHSi 11 . ;•-ste
' * ; ’ I<t 11 md mm ■•■ - &;!*#
' 1 , *t fi&a #>> i/i vvA ••
, y^MWw
