

FEDERATION;
REPRINTED FROM “SYDNEY DAILY TELEGRAPH.”
F9f/f
(AUTHOR OF “ECCE HOMO” IN POLITICAL ECONOMY
£ ***
JK •. ’jP '"’
H. T. DUNN & CO., Printers, Queen’s Chambers, Queens’ Place.
1890.




FFSI^
FEDERATION;
NATIONAL AND IMPERIAL
3?. CT. GKA-IsriDOltT
(AUTHOR OF “ECCE HOMO” IN POLITICAL ECONOMY)
REPRINTED FROM “SYDNEY DAILY TELEGRAPH.”
“I not only do not sympathise with the policy of “Australia for the
Australians” as a just and patriotic national aspiration, but I regard it as
injurious (if indeed it ever could be possible) to the best interests of these
colonies, to the occupation and development of large portions of valuable
territories in these seas, and as hostile to the legitimate claims and rights
of other portions of the world. It is, it seems to me, to shut ourselves out
from the higher civilization of Europe, and not only to deprive ourselves of
its inestimable advantages, but to provoke its hostility ; and to do this
when we are entirely without the means of occupying with advantage the
territories which we should only hold for the purpose of excluding others.”
—William Bede Dalley.
11. T. DUNN & CO., Printers, Queen’s Chambers, Queens’ Place.
1890,


From my reply (“Daily Telegraph ,” January
18th), to the various criticisms on my article on
Federation, I extract the concluding remarks; they
will serve as an introduction to the following pages :
“In conclusion, and lest through the length of my first
letter I may not have made my contentions clear to superficial
readers, I would briefly say that I (as well as other Australian
natives who think and feel most strongly with me) am as earnest
and enthusiastic an advocate for national Australian federation
as any man in these colonies. What I object to is the proposal
being used avowedly as a means and stepping stone to separation
from the British Empire—a policy to which lam unflinchingly
opposed. Had those who constituted the separatist party adopted
your own excellent advice and “ refrained from torturing them-
selves about the possibilities of the united group .of colonies
throwing off English rule and adopting republican institutions,”
my letters would neither have been written nor been needed, as a
federated Australia left to herself might be safely trusted to
develop a larger-spirited idea of patriotism than prevails in certain
quarters at the present time, and to her maturer wisdom might be
left the choice, when the time arrived, between republicanism and
Imperial federation.
P J. G.
Glebe Point,
Sydney.


FEDERATION;
NATIONAL AND IMPERIAL.
It seems to me extremely strange that so many of those who
profess to have the cause of federation most at heart shouM preju-
dice it as they do—nay, should thrust at its very vitals—by
regarding it as a mere stepping stone for the separation of
Australia from the British Empire and for the comparative isola-
tion of this great continent from the rest of the civilised world
through the establishment of a solitary republic in these distant
southern seas. It may be that in the womb of time there is already
engendered a Republic of Australia. It may be that with the
terriffic strife that seems inevitably to threaten the whole world
there is decreed the abolition of all empires, monarchies and
dynasties, the oversetting of all thrones, and the melting down
of crowns and sceptres into bullion for a communistic rabble.
But with all these things we are no more practically concerned
at this present moment than we are with the visions, dreams, or
prophecies of the Apocalypse, and we may well remember the
Italian proverb, “ What will be shall be,” and avoid the use of
the great question of federation as a stalking-horse on which to
air theories and views which, to say the least of them, are revolu-
tionary, unpatriotic and disloyal.
To me the term “ republic ” has no charms, there is no
music in it to my ears ; not because I am what some men un-
warrantably designate a “ foreigner ” on these fair shores, but
because, on the contrary, I am a born Australian, proud of my
native land, and passionately attached to her, conscious of her
great potentialities and indignant that her magnificent future
should be imperilled and the patriotism of her best and truest
sons should be villified before the world by irresponsible utter-
ances and silly bluster such as is best compared to the bombast
of the boy who mistakes the down upon his lip for a moustache,
and buys a shilling razor on the strength of it. While some of
the most thoughtful Englishmen that come among us and make
Australia their second home are aiding us with their best counsel


and warm sympathies to accomplish that federal nationality
which is rightly and properly Australian (as distinguished
from English, Scotch, or Irish, or Canadian), these noisy dema-
gogues—pressmen and politicians—are doing their best—it may
be unintentionally—to defeat, retard, or injure the cause they
profess so warmly to espouse, and are disgusting the thinking sons
of New South Wales with a platform of inflated jargon like the
Chief Justice of Queensland’s recent utterance, the thickest plank
of which is that choice exordium of political slang “ Brethren
let’s cut the painter.” There are tens of thousands of Australian
natives who, like myself, refuse to even entertain the question of
the severance of our individual native land from the great country
of our forefathers at the bidding of a clamoring clique, or to listen
to the senseless cry,
“AUSTRALIA FOR THE AUSTRALIANS,”
as if the child of a few summers who has happened to be born in
Wollongong or Maitland has a greater claim to be regarded as an
Australian than his English father, who has toiled, perhaps, a
quarter of a century in our midst, doing his best and ablest to
advance the welfare of his family and the interests of the country.
These petty politicians, whose minds seem of the narrowest, are
every whit as dangerous to the cause of national Australian
unity as the avowed provincialists, and stick up everywhere the
barriers and hurdles of protection, and make a breakneck steeple-
chase of what should be a royal road to federation.
It is against this dangerous and fanatical class of agitators
that I desire to raise my voice in warning to my fellow-countrymen
of Australian native nationality, feeling sure that if the great
and noble cause of Australian federation is to be viewed in the
light of any possible ulterior consequences at all, the view of it
should be taken as leading eventually to Imperial federation, and
not to the contingent disintegration of the Empire.
In connection with the foregoing expressions of opinion, it
may be desirable to inquire briefly what we—and, more particu-
larly, we of New South Wales—should gain or lose, firstly by
Australian federation, and secondly, by separation from the
Empire, and the establishment of an Australian Republic, on the
one hand; and on the other, by Imperial federation. Taking
first the question of Australian federation, which is more parti-
cularly before these colonies at the present time, each colony
would have to sacrifice some portion of that personal liberty and


that colonial (or provincial) individuality which to some minds
seems a priceless boon. We can at present impose what taxes we
think proper (good or evil), we can make a railway gauge what
width we will, regardless of the convenience or necessities of our
neighbors or of the continent at large, and we can charge a penny
or a shilling for the postage of a letter for five miles or five
hundred, and no one can say us “ yea ” or “ nay.” But is not this
liberty something like the liberty of the irresponsible bachelor
with his latchkey, who feels that he has neither social claims upon
him nor social duties to perform, and who blithely trolls at 3 a.m.
the jovial ditty of the Miller of the Dee :
I care for nobody, no, not I,
And nobody cares for me.
And then—this individuality—what is it after all ? Is there more
real individuality in the colony of New South Wales than in the
townships of Newcastle, Dubbo, Bathurst or Temora ? Is there
as much, as distinguished from the individuality of Queensland or
Victoria, as I have always been given to understand exists
between not merely the inhabitants of Ireland and Great Britain
but between citizens of Manchester and London or of Bath and
Glasgow ? A certain amount of individuality we, of course, possess
and should be proud of, and should seek to fasten and develop in
wholesome rivalry with other communities throughout the
continent; but this should rather be promoted by the subdivision
of the larger colonies—as will certainly take place in South Aus-
tralia, and in Western Australia when she receives responsible
government—and by the increased development of municipal and
county institutions, through some well-ordered measure of
LOCAL GOVERNMENT,
than by the maintenance of the semi-isolation of the present
colonies as they now stand towards each other. Possibly, too, we
might—l say, possibly we might, for Ido not think we should—
have to sacrifice for a time our fiscal and political pre-eminence at
the shrine of Australasian federation, and submit to the imposition
of protection duties upon articles imported from countries beyond
the boundaries of Australasian territory. The sacrifice would be a
great one, but if it should prove an imperative condition of
present federation it might be worth the making in consideration
of the splendid results that would ensue ; and at any rate it would
be the heaviest that, under any circumstances, we could be called
upon to make. But in return for such sacrifices what should we


gain ? Firstly, we should gain immeasurably in importance in the
eyes of the world. We Australians may pride ourselves, and
justly, in the consciousness of what we are, but it is useless to
disguise from ourselves the fact that we are most inadequately
known to the great northern world. There are millions and millions
of our English-speaking brethren—men and women fairly educated
and generally well informed upon most subjects—to whom “ Aus-
tralia” is little more than a geographical expression, and New
Zealand, Tasmania and Fiji almost synonymous with the “Cannibal
Islands.” Uncertainty exists as to whether Victoria is the capital
of Australia or the island of New South Wales and whether
Sydney is not “ somewhere or other in Van Dieman’s Land,” and
yet the folks who talk in this manner can find their way about
the streets of Paris, Frankfort or Vienna as easily as in London,
Edinburgh or Belfast.
To some extent—though in a far less dogree, from many
causes-—it was the same with Canada before the various provinces
were federated into the great Dominion whose area is almost that
of the United States, and all that was Canadian found expression
in little more than the two words, Quebec and Montreal. But
many circumstances combine to indicate for a Dominion of Aus-
tralasia, a prouder position in the world than even for the
Dominion of Canada, and the simple word “ Australia,” as the
expression of a great federated common-wealth, would arrest the
ear of nations as do German and Italy, while Victoria, New
South Wales or Queensland separately are no more regarded than
Avere Parma, the Sicilies and the Papal States before the days
of Italian or Hanover, Baden or Bavana, before the days of
German unity. But what is of far greater moment, we should
gain in a no less degree is the power to command the attention
of the Imperial Government and of the English people. As re-
gards the people this is already apparent in the interest that has
been manifested in, and the discussion that has been bestowed
upon, even our talk of Australian federation. That until quite
recently—until, perhaps, the holding of the Melbourne and
Sydney International. Exhibitions, and the dispatch of troops
from New South Wales to the Soudan—these colonies have been
regarded at Downing-street, if not at St. Stephen’s, as mere re-
mote dependencies of the Empire, and as affording sinecures
or the appointment to the gubernatorial office of superannuated
econd-rate diplomatists is a proposition too self-evident to need
nsisrence on; but this is, happily,


A RECORD OF THE PAST,
and no head of the Colonial Office would now dare to flout even
a single one of the isolated colonies as they did years ago. But
with how much more weight would come the representations of
the Governor-General of the Dominion of Australia on any sub-
ject of grave national importance to us, such as the French
recidiviste question, the growing power of Russia in the North
Pacific, the aggressive attitude of Germany towards trade in
Oceania or the irruption of pauper immigrants or alien and
inferior races. And though we have no cause, as matters'stand,
to feel ashamed of the confidence that is felt by English capita-
lists in isolated Australian enterprises, how much greater would
be that confidence if our railway, telegraph and postal system
were unified and a federal army and navy were controlled under
our powerful Government; if a great dominion bank were estab-
lished, like the Bank of England ; and if our enlightened'fiscal
policy prevailed from the Pacific to the Indian Ocean and from
the Gulf of Carpentaria to Cape Otway. Whether with even a
federal army and navy we should be strong enough for all national
purposes may well be doubted ; but there can hardly be a question
that, in their present condition, these colonies are comparatively
powerless for even the simplest purposes of self-defence, but that,
unified, they would at least present a very imposing front and
obstacle to any hostile or invading foe. While as to the increasing
means of national development, their phases are so protean, their
shapes so various, that it would demand almost an encyclopaedia
to enumerate them. In mining, agriculture, pastoral pursuits
and commerce, in self-government, in science, literature and in
the arts of strides would be of seven-leagued progression, like the
giant’s in the fairy tale, because the narrow barriers that divide
us and that impede the electric touch of mind with mind would
all be cleared away, and a fair field and no favor would be
broadly opened out to all the keenest intellects within our midst.
The progress which united Italy has made affords an indic-
ation of what would be accomplished by a unified Australia, and
assuredly with rapidly increasing wealth and larger mindedness
the fallacies of protection, if for a time they were permitted to
exist, would vanish like the morning mists before the noontide
sun, and the glorious flag of
FISCAL FREEDOM
would proudly wave throughout these southern seas.


And now, supposing that Australian federation were accom
plished, what should we gain or lose by separation from the
British Empire, and by the establishment of a republic ? We
should gain the empty glory of calling ourselves “ independent,”
and of “ governing ourselves.” These, however, are but “ words,
words, words,” and show themselves as such directly the limelight
of analysis is thrown upon them. There is no such thing as in-
dependence ; the thing is absolutely non-existent. Just as we
owe our very being to a father and a mother, so is every mortal
dependent on his fellowmen so long as breath is in him even to
the hermit in his cell: and every city, province, country, empire
is, in like manner, dependent upon others. The truer statesman-
ship is rather in casting about to see how we may benefit others
m benefiting ourselves, and in so uniting philanthropy with com-
merce, than in slinking like a rat into our hole or burying our
head in the desert sands like the benighted ostrich, and proclaim-
ing from such seclusion that we are “independent.” While, as to
self government the tendency of all the most advancing nations is
towards union in all that concerns the larger fields of legislation
and executive power, relegating to local Governments of increas-
ingly high organisation the disposal of all the numerous and by no
means unimportant matters of topical and individual concern.
As a republic we should possess nothing (except the opportunity
for idle “ brag ”) that we could not enjoy as a federal dominion,
an integral portion of the British Empire, while, on the other
hand we should sink in the estimation of the world to the level
of the South American republics, Bolivia, Chili and Peru. Much
ignorant and idle talk is frequently indulged in on the subject of
republics ; but if of the two greatest examples of republican in-
stitutions we leave France out of the field of vision (for the reason
that she is no more republican at heart than she is Imperial or
Legitimist, and that with her mercurial character and tempera-
ment a breath of the political atmosphere might place a monarch
on her throne), we are confronted with America; and what do
we find there? We find a President who, during his four years’
term of office, wields a greater personal power than any consti-
tutional king or emperor in the world, who is almost as great an
autocrat as the Czar of Russia, and whose election periodically
stirs up the most rancorous party hatred, and plunges the Re-
public into little short of anarchy for months together. Is this
the Constitution that should form a model for us ? Is this what we
Australians should look to as the ideal of our future national life ?


NO GREATER MISCHIEF
can be clone this country than in the constant habit of pointing to
the United States as the embodiment of human wisdom and to
their political experience as the panacea for all human ill. On the
contrary, of all countries with which we are accustomed to associate
boundless wealth and inexhaustible resources, liberty, equality, &c.,
and where we find the very embodiment of democracy it is
the United States from which has sprung the “prophet of San
Francisco ” (Henry George), whose picture of the misery and cor-
ruption and fearful struggle for existence in America is remarkable
evidence that in this republican “ new world ” the pressure and in-
equality is as great as is to be found in the oldest and most
crowded monarchies in the world. Hear, too, what the Duke of
Argyle says in writing, in the Nineteenth Century, anent the cor-
ruption that exists notoriously in America as compared with most
progressive and highly-civilized countries :
“ In the disposal and application of wealth, as well as in the
acquisition of it, are men more pure and honest when they act in
public capacities as members of a Government or of a Legislature
than when they act in private capacities towards their fellowmen?
Is it not notoriously the reverse ? Is it not obvious that men
will do and are constantly seen doing, as politicians, what they
would be ashamed to do in private life ? And has not this been
proved under all the forms which Government has taken in the
history of political societies 1 Lastly, I will ask one other ques-
tion—ls it not true that, to say the very least, this inherent
tendency to corruption has received no check from the democratic
constitutions of these many ‘ new worlds ’ in which kings were
left behind, and aristocracies have not had time to be estab-
lished ?”
These are remarkable words, come they from peer or peasant,
and should lead us to pause with fearful hesitancy before we cast
away the kernel of association with the British Empire for the
husk of
COMMUNISTIC BRAGGADOCIO.
The Colonial Office may make mistakes, and public opinion in
England upon Australasian questions may be uninformed; bu
to talk about English “intrigue” respecting anything connected
with Australia is simply childish, to question the purity and
patriotism of English Governments and English politics, as com-
pared with those of any other country in the world, is to display


gross ignorance, and to pelt with the mud of tenth rate satire the
royal and aristocratic institutions of the Old World—imperfect
as they may be, like everything that is human—is but to practice
the pitiful and impotent spite of iEsop’s reynard and the grapes.
So long as we are part and parcel of the British Empire the
political and great historical prestige of England is the joint and
lineal heritage of us Australians equally with the Londoner, the
Liverpoolian and the Man of Kent. Chaucer belongs as much to
Sydney as to Southwark, Shakespeare to Adelaide or Melbourne
as to Stratford-upon-Avon, and Hampden as fully to Macquarie-
street as to St. Stephen’s, Westminster. Why should we cast
these priceless associations to the winds and make a Simon Peter
of ourselves by denying our political paternity ? Why illegiti-
mise ourselves and make Australia the terminus a quo of a new
race, like the bastard son of some great time-honored and noble
house ?
There is still to be considered the strategical and political
position of Australia. So long as we form a portion of the
British Empire no power on earth would dare to touch us except
it were at war with England and wished to inflict a wound upon
her through her colonies. But supposing that we stood alone,
who is there foolish enough to suppose that the Great Powers
have not an eye to our best resources and our already wonderful
wealth, considering our age and population. Has political
morality ever saved nations from attack if it were to the interest
of more powerful nations to attack them ? Is it doing so at the
present moment? Do not the Eastern (European), the East
African, the Samoan and other complications point in an entirely
opposite direction ? Are not these conclusions enforced by the
manner in which France behaved towards us in the matter of the
New Hebrides, by the conduct of Germany towards us in New
Guinea, and by the cool way in which Russia, with her great
Pacific arsenal of Vladivistock, sent a man-of-war—of course, in a
friendly way— but uninvited, unexpected ai*d unwanted,-into the
heart of our city waters, to take stock and reconnoitre, and trans-
mit the observations to the naval authorities at St. Petersburg ?
It cannot be too strongly borne in mind that now we have quitted
the nursery and thrown off leading-strings we must inevitably
play our part with other nations in the world. We cannot stand
aloof, however much we may desire it. The free navigation of
the Suez Canal and Mediterranean, as well as of the broad Pacific,
are as lifeblood to our commerce and development, and they are


as essential to Australia as to England. But our chief western
maritime connection with the northern world is perpetually
menaced by France and Russia, while that to the East, across the
“ watery waste,” might be under certain remote contingencies, by
the United States. Certainly, the extension of the
MONRO DOCTRINE
to the whole Pacific is a hypothesis so shadowy that it scarcely
needs to be entertained, though the Samoan business affords
strong evidence that America will not allow the continental Euro-
pean nations at all events to acquire a predominating influence in
the Pacific; but the commercial safety of the Suez Canal is a
matter that we should constantly keep in view. However the
European question may become complicated from time to time
with various minor issues, and however its main points may
become temporarily obscured, the permanent elements of jealousy
and discord and the hatred of France towards England for our
ascendancy in Egypt, and towards Italy for her growing power
and influence in the Mediterranean, and the determination of
Russia to acquire, if possible, Constantinople, and so (with France)
t’ie control of Egypt, the Levant, the Suez Canal and the Red
Sea, and inflict a mortal wound on the British Empire through
the difficulty of her communication both with India and Australia.
To say, then, that a probable republic of Australia would neces-
sarily be exempt from foreign attack, is to wilfully shut our eyes
to the circumstances that surround us; to say that wp should be
strong enough to resist, unaided, either France or Russia, and
possibly the two combined, is to talk nonsense.
And now let us turn for a few moments to Imperial federation
and see what we have to hope from that. And here let me say
once for all that no man can be more opposed than I am to
Imperialistic “ gush.” On the contrary, I am, as I have stated,
an Australian native, and I am moreover a thorough Democrat;
but for all that I hold most strongly that the truest and most
liberal Democratic sentiments may go hand in hand with most
loyal patriotism towards the Crown, the Empire and Imperial
interests. I subscribe in toto to Mr. Gladstone's dictum that
“ the name of the Queen is still the symbol and her office the
fount of all lawful powers.” And when I speak of Imperial
federation, I assume that
AUSTRALIAN FEDERATION HAS BEEN ACCOMPLISHED,
and the opportunity is presented to us of choosing between the


larger measure of accomplishment in our future national life
through this Imperial federation or the narrowing of it through
our adoption of an Australian Republic. With the latter position
I have just dwelt: of the former I would say that by it we should
stand before the world, not as a dependency, but as an integral
portion of the British Empire and as enjoying equal Imperial
rights with Great Britain, with a home-ruled Ireland, with the
Dominion of Canada and with the Indian Empire. In this con-
nection the observations of the Earl of Onslow, the new Governor
of Hew Zealand, made on the occasion of the opening of the
International Exhibition of that colony at Dunedin, seem singu-
larly appropriate. His Excellency said :
“ There is one thing which I think your Governor should
remind you of, and that is of the extent and power of Imperial
England, of that Empire which possesses the most' extensive
territory and the largest population in the world, the greatest
wealth and the greatest commerce of modern times—an Empire
which conducts under one flag one-third of the trade of the globe,
and which waves that flag over every sea and one-eighth of its
dry land, while the Queen’s sceptre rules over one-fifth of the
people of the earth—and yet an Empire held together by bonds
looser than any that bind together other Empires of to-day, or
that had ever united an Empire in the past, bonds which can
hardly be defined and which depend almost entirely on settlement
with a dash of self-interest.”
Whenever Imperial federation comes to be effected these
“ hardly defined bonds ” will have to receive a closer definition of
their nature. And that definition will assume something of the
form enunciated by Professor Seely in these words: —
“ Federation is the calling into existence an organ of discus-
sion and legislation for affairs common to the whole empire, and
this in such a way as not to interfere with the
LIBERTY AND SELF-GOVERNMENT
of the parts.”
Or, as the sovereignty of the Dominion of Canada in
dominion matters and the power of the federated provinces over
their own local and particular affairs were laid down in the
Canadian Act of Constitution, and as Mr. Freeman has even more
clearly still defined the matter, as pointed out by Dr. Jefferis in
his eloquent and admirable recent lecture


“Each of the members of the union must be wholly inde-
pendent in those matters which concern each member only. On
the other hand, all must be subject to a common power in those
matters which concern the whole body of the members col-
lectively.”
In connection with such a definition our relations with the
Colonial Office would have to be considerably remodelled, even if
they were not abolished and replaced by parliamentary represen-
tation ; and at any rate Australia would be placed in such a
position that in every matter relating to Imperial or
Australian affairs she could
SPEAK OUT HER MIND
and will with a voice as influential if not as powerful as Scotland,
Ireland or England and Wales. And while our own immediate
interests, if threatened by a hostile power, would receive the pro-
tection of the Empire, it is scarcely probable that we should be
called upon to fight for the protection of Imperial interests
excepting on our own shores or in the Indian Ocean, the Pacific
and the South Sea, which we may almost claim as our own waters.
In the Pacific, especially, would the closer union that would
certainly spring up between the Dominions of Canada and Aus-
tralia seem to keep to some degree in check the hostile intentions
(in case of war) of Russia towards both Dominions—else why
Vladivostock, almost on the latitude of Vancouver and the
longitude of Sydney ?—and to guard against possible complications
with China to the west of the Pacific, or America to the east.
Nationality is always a good thing, but in a complete and federal
nationality with England we should enjoy the prestige of being a
portion of the mightiest Empire in the world without the infliction
of the vast burdens that other countries have to bear in order to
maintain the results of their past military achievements. In
place of this, we should be brought into closer and closer contact
with all the great progressive forces of the old world and all its
enormous funds of its accumulated experience, free to accept its
teachings and to spurn its errors, and highly to profit by them
both. Tho historical halo of heroic deeds and noble sacrifices
which, with all her evil deeds and folly committed under circum-
stances of tyranny and treachery and ignorance and bigotry,
which, happily, these young fair bloodless climes have never
known—that halo of romance and poetry that still surrounds the
country of our fathers and always will surround her as long as


she is true to her own self should animate us with
A TRUER PATRIOTISM
than any we can gather simply from our virgin bush and sunny
seas. It should nerve us to purify and elevate our life and laws
and everything about us, and in return for our pride in the old
country make the motherland no whit less proud to be associated
with young and pure Australia as partner as well as daughter.
And should some grave internal dissension ever arise within our
midst—some unforeseen and terrible dispute, such as, a score of
years ago, cost the United States the third of a million of her
bravest sons and countless treasure—our difficulties would be
calmly, impartially and sympathetically reviewed by the keenest
intellects and justest consciences and largest hearts of our kith
and kin in a federal parliament or court of federal appeal in law
and equity, instead of resorting to the barbarous arbitrament of
civil war or calling in some foreign king or emperor or president
to arbitrate upon our case. Surely, then, instead of doing any-
thing to weaken the ties that bind us to the land from which
we all have sprung, whose history we boast of and the glory
of whose achievements we delight to share, we should seek to
strengthen them in every possible and reasonable way, looking
forward to Imperial federation as the goal of all our national
hopes, and trusting that some day that federation may be com-
pleted by the inclusion of every English-speaking power in such a
manner as shall enable the offspring of England to dictate the
terms of freedom, liberty and peace to the whole world.
In conclusion I will quote the observations of Sir Henry
Parkes made during the course of the great speech which he
delivered in the Legislative Assembly on the subject of the ad-
dress to the Queen praying for the concession of constitutional
government to Western Australia. At the very moment that a
section of the public and the press were clamoring in their
ignorant and childish bluster for the
SEPARATION OF AUSTRALIA
from the British Empire, the Premier said :
“ Anyone who has had the slightest experience of America
knows well the yearnings of the better part of that great and in-
teresting people for the mother-land. Such an one knows well in
how many instances they are more British than the British
themselves. . , I have heard from merchants in California


and in the New England States expressions that they would
rather trust to English institutions than to their own. I have
heard of expressions of unqualified respect for the manner in
which the Government of England is carried on, and I have
heard expressions of the utmost confidence in the purity of the
administration of British law, and therefore with this recollection
of my own experience, I hope it is no vain opinion of mine that
the time may come when even the United States of America and
the people of the United Kingdom and their offshoots may act in
some kind of friendly and perpetual alliance for carrying on the
great work of civilisation over the world * There
is promise of unprecedented usefulness for the British people by
uniting as one in all parts of the world where our language is
spoken. I know well that some of the most eminent and some
of the most experienced of living Americans entertain the view
even that the people of the United States may at some time or
other in the future again re-enter the bonds of unity with the
mother-country. ”
In these liberal, spirited and large-minded words we have, as
it seems to me, the crystallisation of the thoughts and sentiments
that should animate the true and patriotic Australasian in seek-
ing and aiding in the federation of Australasia as the precursor
of Imperial federation, and as the great stepping-stone, we may
well hope, to the eventual federation of the English-speaking
races throughout the world. There is a higher patriotism in the
feeling that looks to the well-being and advancement of the whole
of our great kith and kin than of that particular part of it with
which it happens to be our lot in life to be individually associated.
And just as the citizen presents a higher type of manhood than
the mere husband and the father, and the national patriot a
higher type than the mere citizen, so in the Imperial patriot wo
have still a higher type than in
THE MERE NATIONALIST,
whose aims and interests are bounded by some river, sea, or
mountain chain, albeit his own kith and kin exist across the
boundary as fully as they do in his own native land, while in the
racial cosmopolitan philanthropist we are confronted with the
highest type of all. With men of such a type the acceptance of
Euclid’s axiom, “ the whole is greater than its part,” finds prac-
tical application in the largest possible development of the
fundamental maxim of political economy, “ the greatest good of


the greatest number ; ” and so the eternal and immutable princi-
ples of freetrade—of religious, political, educational, commercial
and social freedom—find their largest and most liberal extension
in the union for the highest purposes of human life of the various
cognate elements of our great racial force, and in the federated
association of all the Anglo-Saxon people, Australians, Britons,
Canadians, Indians and Americans. To quote once more the
words of his Excellency the Earl of Onslow, “ I fervently pray
that we may be witnessing the opening scenes in a great drama,
the final tableaux of which shall present the mighty British
Empire united in one homogenous whole, but every part of which
shall be possessed of its own autonomy.”
H. T. DUNN & CO.,
General Printers, Queen’s Chambers,
Queen’s Place, Sydney
l Aff
6(3 LCO


1508
01808215


