

fl&o
/
T
FEDERATION!
SHOULD NEW ZEALAND FEDERATE
WITH THE
AUSTRALIAN COLONIES?
TO WHICH THE ANSWER IS AN EMPHATIC
YES !
J. KENNEDY BROWN.
WHITCOMBE AND TOMBS LIMITED, PRINTERS,
WELLINGTON, CHRISTCHURCH AND DUNEDIN.




FEDERATION!
SHOULD NEW ZEALAND FEDERATE
WITH THE
AUSTRALIAN COLONIES?
TO WHICH THE ANSWER IS AN EMPHATIC
YES !
J. KENNEDY BROAVN.
WHITCOMBE AND TOMBS LIMITED, PRINTERS.
WELLINGTON, CHRISTCHURCH AND DUNEDIN,




FEDERATION:
§ljmtl6 iiclu jFc&tratc luxllj
tljc Australian (Maims?
y~T propose to state the case on behalf of Colonial
Federation, as concisely as possible. I will then
endeavour to explain, as clearly as I can, the
results to New Zealand, economically and com-
mercially, should she enter the Federal Union, as also the
consequences that may safely be predicted of our refusing
to Federate. I will then ask the question which forms
the title of this pamphlet, Should New Zealand Federate
with the Australian Colonies ? and my reply to that
question will be an empathic-—Yes.
But first of all, by way of clearing the ground, a word
or two appears to be necessary with reference to the
scheme of reciprocity as formulated by the Hon. the
Premier, and which has engaged the attention of the
Conference at Hobart. Mr. Seddon, I venture to say,
deserves the greatest praise for such a laudable effort,
although from the first I regarded the proposal as utterly
hopeless. Such a Conference, however, can be productive
of nothing but good, as apart altogether from reciprocity,


other subjects of great pith and moment found their way
into the programme. Reciprocity, in any real sense, is an
impossibility on any other basis than that of Federation.
It can only apply to the natural productions of the several
Colonies, and I regard it in the highest degree improbable,
that a Federated Australia will ever become a party to
such a reciprocal treaty. We should have to show them
that the balance of profit and loss, would fall somewhat
equally upon both the contracting parties. We cannot do
this. A very cursory glance at our inter-colonial trade
will demonstrate, that this would be altogether a very one-
sided bargain. Australia is a highly important market for
New Zealand productions, and were it not for the opera-
tion of hostile tariffs, would become increasingly so. And
that not alone, for our cereal productions, for notwithstand-
ing the heavy duties, our woollen manufactures have
already found their way in considerable quantities to all
the Australian Colonies, and are rapidly becoming in-
creasingly popular. It is a very common thing to see
“New Zealand Tweeds ” advertised in most of the larger
establishments of the chief cities, and I have observed with
great surprise, that they have already found their way into
some of the more remote settlements. The Victorian
experiences a thrill of pleasure, in observing large quantities
of machinery of Victorian manufacture, passing the ports
of New South Wales, and being discharged at Queensland
ports. The New Zealander lacks the proper sentiment,
who does not equally rejoice, to observe his own Colony
occupying so much prominence, in so many ways, on his
visits to the neighbouring Colonies. He cannot fail to
observe wherever he goes that New Zealand shipping is
largely in evidence ; he will be justified even if he boasts
somewhat of its superiority. He will observe also the
splendid buildings of the Loan and Mercantile Agency
Company, chiefly to facilitate operations in New Zealand
produce, and he may even reflect that were it not for
hostile tariffs this trade, already so important, might be
enormously increased. He will be an extremely unob-
servant traveller if he fails to notice in Melbourne,
Adelaide, and Brisbane many palatial edifices which owe
their beauty to Oamaru stone. I reflect with satisfaction
that I founded the New Zealand Stone Company. The
bursting of the great “ boom ” has cast its shadow tern-


porarily over it, but there is a great future, under favour-
able conditions, for Oamaru stone in all the Colonies.
When visiting an inland town in Queensland in the far
west, I was invited to attend a trial of a Christchurch
Disc Harrow, and I felt a glow of pride at the excellent
work done and the admiration it evoked. Still further
west, approaching the Never-Never country, I observed bags
of flour with a well known New Zealand brand. The store-
keeper informed me that there is a decided prejudice in
favour of Adelaide flour. “ Eecently,” he said, “ I sent a
bag of New Zealand flour into the country, and it was
returned. I had no other in stock, but fortunately had
some empty Adelaide bags into which I transferred the
contents of the one returned and redelivered it.” “ Well,
how did the device answer? ” “My customer afterwards
informed me it was splendid flour, and to be careful always
to send him the same brand ! ” New Zealand timber for
a multitude of purposes has a monopoly of the Australian
markets. In addition to the large quantities employed in
ordinary building operations, the trade in tallow casks,
butter boxes, and the like is enormous. lam sorry to say
that Australia has annexed commercially our magnificent
forests of kauri—a huge monopoly created by greedy
exploitation—a Melbourne Company running the show to
the detriment of local enterprise. An undertaking, so
large as to be almost national, in New South Wales,
employed exclusively cement of New Zealand manufacture,
and I can vouch, from personal knowledge, with entire
satisfaction. Local jealousy intervened and a heavy duty,
promptly imposed, demolished the trade. You cannot visit
a racecourse or an agricultural show without being im-
pressed with the superiority of New Zealand live stock so
much en evidence. At Kockhampton I saw a cargo of
manganese from Auckland being landed for the Mount
Morgan Goldmining Company. The duties levied upon
produce, timber, stone, live stock, all that we ship to
Australia, are well nigh prohibitive, but, nevertheless, this
trade so large and important, overleaps such artificial
barriers. Consider the marvellous expansion that would
be the prompt result of Freetrade throughout the Colonies.
The waters confined in a graving dock, by leakage and
evaporation, would eventually reach the sea—open the
floodgates and observe the rushing waters ! It would be so


likewise with our trade and commerce. Cribbed, cabined,
and confined by artificial barriers, it languishes, those re-
moved, bow mighty and imposing the spectacle of an ex-
pandig commerce ! “ Too far away,” said Earl Glasgow
recently, “ but I have not considered the question,” Quite
so. How few indeed have considered this question so tran-
scendantly important ? How inexplicable such an admis-
sion by our late estimable Governor ! Dipping into the
immediate future we may behold the bright vision of
unification soon to girdle the Island-Continent around.
If New Zealand, I repeat, elects to be left outside this
benificent union it will prove a fatal mistake. A sea of
fire would scarcely be more disastrous to our commerce.
Watching the process attentively, we shall behold new
barriers raised higher and higher, and how unavailing all
efforts to maintain' the unequal struggle; our trade must
infallibly languish. My earnest plea is to expand this
girdle so as to include New Zealand. Let her have a fair
field and fair play for her super-abundant energies and
resources. Believe me, it is water that should unite and
not divide us. With the Pacific Ocean intervening, we
are relatively nearer to the Australian markets than are
the great bulk of Australian producers. From Freemantle
to Bourketown is one service covering 5,000 miles of navi-
gation, to complete the circle a similar distance must be
travelled. Compare such vast distances with the 1,100
miles of travel without a break from New Zealand ports to
Australia. Coming back to his own Colony, the New
Zealander impressed with such ideas may glance around to
ascertain whether there is any corresponding evidences of
Victorian, New South Wales, South Australia, or Queens-
land productions finding their way and making their mark
in this Colony, and he will be compelled to acknowledge
that there are none. He may indeed discover that Queens-
land sugar is a large import, and Australian wines also an
article of some importance. But how insignificent the
evidences of our indebtedness to Australia for such com-
modities as she produces. He may even reflect, that with
reference both to sugar and wines, his own Colony might
speedily become absolutely independent of outside supplies.
We cannot indeed grow sugar cane, but no climate or soil
in the world is better adapted for the production of beet-
root sugar, which with a little enterprise might become a


great New Zealand industry. Is there any reason, more-
over, why New Zealand wines, should not be so perfected
in their manufacture, as to take the place of the Australian
productions ?
Under such conditions, what prospect is there of the
large interests that would be directly effected by any
reciprocal treaty, permitting the competition of New Zea-
land productions ? New South Wales is indeed a splendid
example of freetrade, but it has not yet and probably
never will, get beyond the experimental stage, an experi-
ment it may safely be predicted, that would not be toler-
ated by Federated Australia. The only way to reciprocity
worthy of the name, must be through Federation. The
converse of this may be equally true, and our statesmen
discover before it is too late, that the way to Federation
may be through reciprocity, found to be impossible on any
other terms.
Any exposition of the case for Federation would be
inadequate, which failed to refer to its various forms which
are said to be “in the air.” It thus becomes a large and
important question. There is (1) Imperial Federation ;
(2) the Federation of the English-Speaking People ; (8) the
Federation of the Civilized Nations; and (4) the Federa-
tion of the World ! Here is a vast theme for the student,
the statesman, the philosopher, the poet. What a mag-
nificent vista such a sublime subject opens up for contem-
plative minds ! Is it all a chimera ? Is there any sub-
tratum of the practical in such splendid visions ? Who
indeed contemplating the triumphs of the past will dare to
limit the possibilities of the future ? They each contain
the germ of some great truth, some noble aspiration.
Such speculations ought surely to be encouraged. Great
ideals stimulates effort. The Utopias of so many yester?
days have become the common-place and familiar realities
of to-day. No bounds can be assigned to human progress.
Imperial Federation may be a mere fad, but it neverthe-
less has become the symbol of the universal desire for
closer union, a wider sympathy, a larger identification of
so many rising Colonies in the responsibilities and the
councils of the Empire, and may even in the near future
find other modes of expression.


Build on, build on, hold with a grasp of steel
Those precious truths which make a nation great:
They rightly build
Who take for the sure foundations of the state
The Common Weal.
Build on, build on,
Our faith, our hope, our love will gird her round
With fealty true,
While from the old world wrecks that strew the ground
We build anew!
The Federation of the English-Speaking Peoples con-
fronts us with difficulties still more insuperable ! Can we
conceive of any Federation of the Great Kepublic and
Great Britain ? Would any fusion of the republican and
monarchial institutions be in the least feasible ? The pro-
position has only to be stated, apparently, to be dismissed.
The idea, however, may have contributed to the recent
beneficent arbitration treaty, and may yet find other forms
of expression. That two such great nations sprung from
the same noble race, speaking the same language, profes-
sing the same religion, inheriting the same glorious tra-
ditions, should be nothing more to each other than foreign
nations, does violence to our feelings. They have much
in common, a warm friendship, a large commerce, a
common literature and civilization, but the outward visible
symbol of their blood relationship has yet to be discovered.
The Federation of all Civilized Nations, the United
States of Europe, confronts us with difficulties still more
formidable. But that likewise contains the germ of a
great truth. International arbitration, the final abitra-
ment in the matter of peace or war, the regulation of
standing armies and naval expenditure, as well as inter-
national social questions, all come within the scope of
friendly alliances. The Federal spirit may operate here,
an inspiring element of infinite value, humanizing and
civilizing the nations, until at length the Apocalyptic vision
shall be realized, the swords of the nations beaten into
pruning hooks, and brutalizing and barbarous war cease
for ever, to devastate the fairest portions of the globe.
The Federation of the race is the exclusive domain of
the poet, the dream, a beautiful dream, of the future :
“ For I dipt into the future, far as human eye could see,
“ Saw the vision of the world and all the wonders that would be,
“ Till the war-trump ceased to thunder, and the battle hags were furled
“ in the parliament of man, the federation of the world.


We shall now return to the question which more
immediately concerns us at this juncture, a very pressing
and urgent question, which has never yet had in New
Zealand the consideration which its superlative importance
warrants, viz., Colonial Federation with special reference
to New Zealand interests in the question. The Federation
of Australia is universally admitted to be a sine qua non. I
greatly deplore the marvellous apathy of New Zealand, for
I trust to demonstrate that her interests are indissolubly
bound up with Australasian Federation, that she has most
to gain and nothing to lose by Federation, that a condition
of isolation will become one of infinite peril, involving her
producers and manufacturers in tremendous disabilities,
dwarfing her intercolonial trade and commerce and
inflicting enormous injury upon her people. At one time
indeed her interest in the movement was quite as pro-
nounced as that of the other Colonies. But unfortunately
it suffered a sudden eclipse. Sir John Hall and Captain
Russell were the chosen representatives of this Colony at
the first Sydney Convention, but unfortunately those
honourable gentlemen had no mandate from the people
of New Zealand and their objections appears to me, to be
an insult to the intelligence of the latter. Sir John Hall
urged 1,200 objections—these being the miles separating
New Zealand from Australia ! But what an absurdity ?
He was addressing members of that Conference who had
probably travelled 5,000 miles to reach it. The lalter
might have gone one better and urged 5,000 objections
with equal force ! Captain Russell, who held we
could not get sufficient men in New Zealand to represent
us, was said to be the largest landed proprietor at the
Conference. Strange colleague for such men as Sir
Henry Parkes and Duncan Gillies who, representing the
greatest of the Colonies, did not possess between them as
much land as would make a decent burial ground. His
objection was that New Zealand could not find representa-
tives ! The Colony appears to have taken its cue from
those gentlemen, and seems to have indulged the hideous
nightmare ever since. Can either of those gentlemen be
held to represent the opinions of intelligent New Zea-
landers on any other conceivable question at the present
day ? A great wave of progressive liberalism, has rolled
over New Zealand since then. It is to be deplored, how-


ever, that it has never reached the question of Federation.
The latter has remained a dead letter. The 1,200 objections
hold good ! The subject has thus lain deal and buried.
Would that liberal statesman could be aroused to the full
peril of the situation, to the incapacity, insincerity, and
class selfishness of those who presumed to represent or
misrepresent New Zealand. The Premier, I venture to
anticipate, will return convinced of the inutility of recip-
rocity, and convinced likewise of the importance of Federa-
tion for this Colony. He will, I trust, have taken in the
situation at a glance. In that case he will speak with no
uncertain sound, and New Zealand will begin to discuss
the question in real earnest. It is, in my humble opinion,
the question of questions at this juncture, overshadowing
all others, in its urgency and importance.
I have pointed out the only objections urged at the
Conference held in Sydney. The arguments are so weak,
so utterly and intensely absurd, that I apologise for
reverting to them. I desire, however, to cover the whole
ground, and it may be necessary to remind some whom I
venture to address that New Zealand ports are relatively
nearer to any Federal city that will be chosen, than haif
the ports in Australia itself, more accessible and more
speedily reached. The Canadian Dominion would never
have been consummated, had such an argument any force
whatever, and the United States of America, that grand
confederacy, the land of magnificent distances, would have
remained until now a congeries of separate colonies fighting
each other with hostile tariffs and perchance the frequent
spectacle of internecine and bitter strife. It affords instead
the pleasing and magnificent spectacle, of millions of people
with one tariff and absolute freetrade among themselves.
Not having heard any other objections urged against
New Zealand confederating, it appears superfluous for me
to suggest any. There are two, however, which might be
urged, and indeed have been feebly urged by some perfunc-
tory writers, viz., the tariff and colonial independence. Others
puzzle themselves very needlessly with financial questions,
but these and similar difficulties would speedily settle
themselves-. It will be for the future Dominion Parliament
to determine what the tariff should be, whether a freetrade


or a protectionist tariff. A majority must rule in any
constitutionally governed country. Such a majority of
any Australasian Dominion would surely be more com-
petent than any conceivable majority of a mere province I
Colonial independence is moreover a petty thing compared
to the independence of a great Dominion of which we
should form an integral part. If we lose the one it is
something we part with in common with all the Colonies,
while in common with therfi, we gain the other, so incom-
parably superior, and so much more important. Let us
suppose that we met an American before the union was
consummated, and he told us he was a Marylander or a
Virginian. How insignificent his claims to citizenship.
Mark the proud consciousness with which the denizens of
every state in the union exclaim, “ I am an American
citizen.” The financial difficulty is equally a bugbear.
We in New Zealand have everything to gain and nothing
to lose. “We can wait; ” exclaims some. Yes ; but may
we not reckon without our host ? A spirit less magna-
nimous may be evolved if Federation is now consummated
and we of our free choice elect to remain in a position of
proud and egotistic isolation. We shall by delay have to
deal, not with a conference on equal terms, but with a
great confederacy, jealous of our competition and resolute
to secure her own markets for her own people. Our in-
debtedness may scare some, our unrivalled productiveness
arouse the jealousy of others who would profit largely by
taxing our productions. We voluntary choose a fool’s
paradise for ourselves, if we vainly reckon upon the entrance
being kept open upon such favourable terms indefinitely.
Now we shall be received with open arms, then we shall be
looked upon askance. It is thus, that opportunity comes
to nations as to men.
Neglected, all the voyage of this life
Is bound in shallows and in miseries.
I observe with great regret, that some of those offering
themselves as candidates for the forthcoming Convention,
lay much stress upon the losses to be sustained by their
several colonies, in giving up the right to tax their neigh-
bours. This is altogether to misapprehend the problems
involved in Federation, absurdly narrow, unpatriotic, and
unscientific. There will remain to the Dominion Parlia-


ment an ample choice of commodities for taxation, to any
extent that may be desired. The incidence only of taxation
will be shifted from one list of commodities to another,
increasing or diminishing the revenue at pleasure, a very
simple operation, but excluding from the blighting influence
of such a tariff, the natural productions of the several
Colonies. Her Majesty’s Government must of course be
carried on, strong finance must distinguish the new order
of things, but what can it matter to the taxpayer what the
list of commodities chosen for revenue purposes so long as
they reach fairly and equitably, the whole community ?
The revenue may remain the same, or may be more or less,
it is a simple matter of arithmetic. Free trade among our-
selves as in the United States of America involves the taxa-
tion exclusively of foreign importations, in its incidence
fostering and encouraging all local productions and manu-
factures, a truly protective policy. The United States and
the Canadian Dominion are both important object lessons
at this juncture, which may be opportunely commended to
the little Australians, who parade their absolute unfitness
to take part in the business of the forthcoming Convention.
There may be, although I hope not, little New Zealanders
who after the same fashion misapprehend the problems of
taxation and revenue likewise.
The proceedings of the recent conference held in New
South Wales has done much to clear the ground. It was
characterized by singular unanimity, difficulties appeared
to vanish as they were approached. We may therefore
venture to anticipate that whenever Federation is consum-
mated the following conditions will be regarded as funda-
mental.
The Dominion Parliament must be supreme. What is
known as sovereign rights, exercised by every state in the
American Union, will be rigidly excluded. Not only will
the people be one, and their destiny one, they will combine
for national defence, have uniform laws, a uniform tariff
with absolute freetrade among themselves, a state bank
supreme in finance, one educational system, the customs,
the railway, postal and telegraph services all federal and
regulated exclusively by the supreme Federal Government.
They will also regulate the local authorities whether pro-
vincial or county councils, exercising highly important but


subordinate functions. These councils will become the
training school in which members of the supreme legis-
lature will graduate, affording ample scope for budding
politicians throughout the length and breadth of the land.
The constitution of the Canadian Dominion will be
studied at this juncture with great interest. After an
interval of more than a hundred years some modifications,
some improvements even upon the American models were
to be anticipated. State jealousies have become less rampant,
and while there still remains the servile copy of American
State Governors, State Legislators, with the inevitable
Upper and Lower Chambers, State Ministers, and all the
pomp and circumstance of glorious legislation, the
shadow from which the substance has departed, with all
its petty intrigues and rivalries and jealousies, the
balance of power is much more largely in favour of the
Dominion Parliament. This will prove in these Colonies
likewise the real battle ground. Where shall the line be
drawn ? I profess my own decided preference for a further
evolution in the direction Canada has taken, as conducive
to uniformity, simplicity, economy, and good government.
I have thus summarised briefly what I regard as the
probable foundations upon which the super-structure of a
greater Australia—l wish I could say with confidence
Australasia —will be built up. It remains still to review
with equal brevity, the position of ISlew Zealand, whether
she elects to become an integral part of this magnificent
whole, or chooses a position of petty isolation.
Federal defence takes the first rank. In any great
emergency—Great Britain, for instance, being involved in
any European war—is it not conceivable, is it not indeed
absolutely certain, that the Colonies would find themselves
inadequately defended? The Duke of Devonshire made
this I think very plain, reading of course between the
lines, in a recent deliverance. Isolated, how should we
fare in such an emergency ? Our condition would be one
of the utmost danger. The combined forces of Australia
would in such supreme peril be found equal to any invading
force. The expense wdl be enormous, and trade and com-
merce for the time being dislocated, but the final result
would never be uncertain. But alone and unaided, what


defence could New Zealand make? As part of the
Federation, we should be comparatively secure. Isolated,
how perilous our position, so much more accessible and so
much less powerful. Our safety, our very existence, points
to Federation as our only means of effectual defence, and
this consideration should have great weight in our discus-
sion of Federal Union.
The question of defence may, however, be properly
regarded as more or less contingent and remote. The
commercial aspect of the question, we shall speedily
discover, to be immediate and infinitely important. That
we should deliberately and voluntarily choose commercial
warfare —a war of hostile tariffs—appears to me a reflec-
tion upon our intelligence. That we should maintain such
an unnatural warfare with near neighbours, our blood
relations and valued customers, is to me perfectly inex-
plicable. Subjects of the same Gracious Queen, speaking
the same language, and prosecuting substantially the same
objects, to remain divided by hostile tariffs, is surely an
anomaly. That such a condition of things, should have
survived for such a considerable period, that we should
calmly contemplate its continuance as a permanent institu-
tion, will be a blunder worse than a crime. A uniform
tariff will be one splendid result of Federal Union. Let
us ponder such a beneficent consummation, the abolition
of every artificial barrier, an anacronism surely, as between
friendly and neighbouring Colonies. What an impetus it
would give to production, to trade and manufactures !
What a beneficent interchange of commodities! Trade
and commerce would run to and fro without impediment.
A brighter commercial era would dawn upon Australia and
New Zealand. It would come upon us like a revelation,
as if some ghastly spell, blighting and withering us, had
vanished. Future generations will wonder at the folly
that could perpetuate such a system, artificially and wont-
only, crippling all production, all industry, all commerce.
They will look back upon the present generation as little
Colonials, the contemporaries of the little Englanders, for
having deliberately chosen isolation with its barriers, rather
than union with its freedom. And how we shall enviously
gaze across the sea, at the beneficent interchange of com-
modities throughout a greater Australia ! Have we in New


Zealand no interest in this glorious transformation ? Shall
we deliberately elect to be left out in the cold ? I trust
not, for it is not yet too late to choose so much more
wisely.
I know something of the Colonies, and I deliberately
affirm, that New Zealand would benefit more extensively
by Federation in its commercial aspects than any other of
the Colonies. We are unrivalled in our capacities, in our
climate, in our soil, in our mighty forests, in all that a
genial climate and fertile lands produce. We need fear
no competition. Our climate braces human energies, and
with enlarged conceptions and greater opportunities, we
should lead in the industrial campaign. Our productions
of the soil, our skilled manufactures—manufactures of
wool, of leather, of iron, and wood —I speak advisedly,
would not only take a high place in any Australasian
Dominion, they would be absolutely unrivalled. Of the
bounties of nature, our cerials, all that rich and fertile soil,
yield for the service of man, our fruits also and vegetables,
and not only the productions of the land, but likewise the
productions of the sea, surely our natural market for all
these is Australia, so much less favoured by the Divine
beneficence—Australia with her scorching climate, her
droughts and floods, her intermittant production, a land
almost destitute of useful timbers.
All customs duties falls upon the consumer, in their
ultimate incidence, exclaims the political economist I
What then can it matter to us ? A stupid shibboleth will
thus in skilful hands destroy a fact! Let us, however, put
a case in point by way of example A farmer, let us sup-
pose, in South Australia or Victoria, after the union, ships
a cargo of produce to Sydney or Brisbane. A similar
cargo, let us suppose, is shipped by a farmer in New Zea-
land. What then ? Is it not clear that the prices in both
cases, will be substantially the same ? The New Zealand
farmer must pay the duty, the Australian farmer would be
exempt. Let us further estimate such duties at £I,OOO.
The New Zealand farmer comparing notes with the
Australian farmer realises that he gets just £I,OOO less for
his cargo than the other. Who pays it ? The farmer or
the consumer ? Will the platitudes of shallow economists
convince his judgment, or adjust his account at his


bankers ? He may even elect, under economic conditions
he cannot fathom, to turn his back upon the economists and
the Colony they damage, and transfer his future operations
to some spot within the Federal Dominion. Under such
conditions our agriculture will languish, while our neigh-
bours are progressing by leaps and bounds. Coquetting,
as so many do with this great question, appears to me to
be nothing less than political suicide.
The financial aspects of the problem are equally im-
portant. There can be no confederation which does not
absorb individual Colonial indebtedness. Does not this
consideration touch New Zealand very nearly? We
recently escaped by a bold move, from a financial disaster
that might in its direful consequences have involved us in
National ruin. Is there any infallable security for the
future ? Shall we crouch under a burthen well nigh over-
whelming while friendly arms are stretched out to ns ?
A Federal Government would afford us that strength
which comes of union. It would reduce the rate of
interest upon our borrowed millions; it would make
borrowing all round more difficult and less demoralising;
it would become a perpetual guarantee that we should pay
our way. Jobbery and log-rolling might take alarm, for
would not the Federal Government, becoming responsible
for our finances, control and limit, all future borrowings, as
well as the methods of expenditure ?
Retrenchment would, in a multitude of ways, become
possible. The cost of government at present, so ridic-
ulously disproportioned to the population, would be
enormously reduced. Retrenchment has for years been
the shibboleth of every government without exception.
How have they accomplished it ? How paltry and insigni-
ficant the result! Why then is such wanton extravagance
of administration tolerated ? The answer is prompt and
simple ; it is that under our present system of government,
ministers are powerless to prevent it. Some invisible and
inscrutible power behind the government, and behind the
legislature circumvents, every effort at retrenchment. It is
a humiliating confession, to have to make in a self-
governing community—women’s benign influence not-
withstanding. It can no longer be explained by demo-
cratic and popular reflections upon a privileged order


caring chiefly for land, and sheep, and cattle, and nothing
whatever for the welfare of the industrial classes, it
becomes now a stigma upon liberalism, pure and simple.
Will Federation contribute to retrenchment, and as a con-
sequence reduce the cost of living to the great body of the
public ? Yes ; infallibly. Ido not indeed mean to affirm,
that any system of government yet involved by human
wisdom, is a panacea for every evil, but co-operation in
politics as in manufactures, will reduce the cost to the
minimum. The abolition of so many superfluous vice-
regal establishments, so many petty legislatures and govern-
ments, the tremendous temptations to the corrupt influence
of patronage, these are wise and benihcent ends which we
may surely anticipate —a simpler, purer, wiser, larger system,
reducing enormously, let us hope, the cost of government
and contributing proportionately to human happiness.
We shall assuredly be in danger of stereotyping every evil,
extravagance being the most conspicuous, if we reject such
an opportunity of getting rid of the incubus, and becoming
one with the promising group of colonies now so desirous
that we should cast in our lot with them.
There is still another phase of this vast question, which
requires to be considered. Till the line be drawn deiining
Federal functions, from those which will be relegated to
local control, we must be content to remain somewhat in
the dark. It would be well if we, as well as our neighbours,
displayed some intelligent interest in the solution of such
problems. We lead in some things and are justly proud,
but in reference to Federation, we lag most ignominously
behind. So far I have ventured to formulate, a system,
which takes for granted, some functions which must become
“Federal.” and which include nearly every function
administered by Colonial Governments. If the Dominion
provides for our defence, for the administration of justice,
takes over our indebtedness, secures us the inestimable
blessing of freetrade among ourselves, reduces the cost of
government, and proportionately the burthen of taxation
and the cost of living, it must follow as the night the day,
the Dominion must take over, likewise, the revenue pro-
ducing departments. Hurely this is plain enough, and
should awaken our gratitude rather than our jealousy, our
hopes for the future rather than our fears. What functions,


other than those exercised by municipalities and county
councils, would not be infinitely better administration by
the Federal Government ? The postal and telegraph
services are largely intercolonial, the administration of
justice, the police, are they not such functions as would be
best administrated by the central authority upon a uniform
system ? Those services overlap each other at so many
points that simplicity, efficiency, economy, would all be
subserved, were they under the control of the Federal
Government. Education also, both primary and secondary,
would be thus freed from imminent peril and remain a
national and rational system. The lands department
remains to be dealt with. And it is upon this question
that the battle of local interests, will rage most furiously.
Monopoly has been scotched, not killed. In some colonies
class legislation, goes merrily on. The Federal authority,
it appears to me, should have supreme control over so
important a department, delegating ample powers to sub-
ordinate administrations. What then remains for any sub-
ordinate legislature ? Is there any real necessity for such
a cumbrous and expensive system ? Four millions should
surely present less difficulty in their government, in these
colonies, with interests scarcely more diverse, than forty
millions in Great Britain, Need we follow the pernicious
model of the United States of America, in its most objec-
tionable feature, servilely copied by Canada in a milder
form ? Would not such a superstructure, be altogether dis-
proportioned to the foundations ? The Chinese Emperor
who burned down a palace, that he might enjoy the luxury
of roast pork, was scarcely more absurd, as a means to an
end, than are such demands of village politicians, so inordin-
ately jealous of local rights ! If it is held, in the final
settlement of this great question, that a local governor and
local legislature, two houses of parliament an executive,
and civil service are indispensible, it will largely modify my
sanguine anticipations of the blessings to be derived from
Federation. It will be the old muddle over again, only
more so. It would resemble the body from which the soul
has fled, the shadow without the substance, a cumbrous,
expensive, and corrupting institution. Some form of
county councils would amply suffice for purposes of local
government, and instead of one might be multiplied with
the growth of population indefinitely. The subsidies from


the central authority would be pro rata, according to popu-
lation, and it could not matter therefore, whether the pay-
ments were made in one sum or subdivided. We are thus
confronted with an apparently paradoxical advocacy at
once of centralization and decentralization. The two
methods are generally held to be mutually distructive, the
one of the other. I commend the study nevertheless, of
this phase of the question, as being specially important.
I am of opinion that one central authority, administering
intercolonial functions, with county councils, which may
be as numerous as circumstances warrant, administering
purely local affairs, rather than the ostentatious, extra-
vagant and stereotyped legislatures, is what the several
colonies require. The latter method would probably be
chosen by Queensland, by South Australia, and West
Australia, where vast territories have yet to be subdivided.
County councils I trust, will be found to solve the problem
of local government. They suffice for the metropolis of
Great Britain and other large communities, relatively so
much more important. The choice might well be left to
each Colony to remain for local purposes, one province or
several. Here then are some of the vast problems, which
will confront the statesman who will represent the Colonies
at the forthcoming convention. May wisdom and modera-
tion guide them in their deliberations !
In conclusion, I revive the question : “ Should New
Zealand federate with the Australian Colonies ?” My
answer is decidedly and emphatically —Yes. As evidencing
how ripe the Colonies are for Federation and how imposing
and splendid such a government will become, even from
the very outset, I venture to quote from a lecture I delivered
on a kindred subject some years ago at Christchurch :
“Before taking our leave of the Australian Colonies,
let us group some figures afresh, as indicating how ripe we
are for Federation, a movement in which I earnestly hope
the position of New Zealand will not be one of isolation.
The total revenues of the Australasian Colonies amounts to
over twenty millions, being four times that of Canada,
about double that of Belgium or Italy, three times that of
Portugal, more than three times that of Swedan or Norway,
and ten times that of modern Greece. Surely there is


nothing premature in such a galaxy of young and prosper-
ous Colonies uniting for mutual protection, and for the
purpose of securing, among other things, the inestimable
blessing of Freetrade among ourselves.”
Once more I warn New Zealanders of the peril and
folly of hesitating to claim their share in such a glorious
destiny as awaits Confederated Australasia. If only the
people of this Colony would awake from such a profound
sleep, our share in the immediate future would be the lion’s
share. Our choice must soon be made. There is much
peril even in delay, and should we in this supremest
moment in our history elect to run alone, ours will be a
future dark perchance and full of peril.
I have more than once referred to the United States of
America, and I will venture to close, by quoting at length
a prediction of one of her poets, as also the fulfilment as
spoken by one of her Statesmen at the end of her first
century. Thus the prediction :
Freedom’s established reign ; cities and men,
Numerous as sands upon the ocean shore,
And Empires rising where the sun descends !
The Ohio soon shall glide by many a town
Of note ! And while the Mississippi Stream
By forests shaded, now runs sweeping on,
Nations shall grow, and States not less in fame,
Than Greece and Rome of old. We too shall boast
Our Scipio’s, Solon’s, Cato’s —sage’s, Chiefs,
That in the lapse of time yet dormant lie,
Waiting the joyous hour of life and light.
And now let me quote the eloquent fulfilment of the
prediction: —
“ The advance of this country —not alone in its wealth,
which has more than doubled every ten years, but in the
increase of its population, which is even more valuable
than gold and silver—has been six times more than Great
Britain, nine times more than Austria, ten times more
than France, and is destined to give us a hundred millions
at the end of the century ; and beyond, if our Nation is to be
in its power, in its grandeur, in its resources, in its capacities,
and its opportunities, what I dare not attempt to predict.


From Orient to Occident, from mountain to mountain,
from the Atlantic to the Pacific, from hundred harboured
Maine to the Golden Gate, the future of their great
country, if only prudence, wisdom, justice, and right and
peace shall guide it, shall be beyond the portrayal of
language, beyond any words that my hfart could devise, or
my tongue can express. Our next anniversary shall find
us enjoying a fame wide as the world and eternal as the
stars, with a prosperity that shall eclipse in the future, all
the brightest glories of the present.


To Victoria...
... £833,598
New South Wales
595,099
Queensland
19,332
South Australia
12,243
Western Australia
18,571
Totals ...
... £978,843
APPENDIX.
THE following figures are taken from a compendious
report, kindly prepared for me by E. J. Yon
Dadelszen, Escp, Registrar-General. My best thanks are
due to this courteous gentleman. The whole document is
interesting and important, had there been space for it.
Report of natural products from New Zealand to
Australia for the year 1895 :
Hostile Tariffs, 1896,
The following are the items in the list over £5,000,
omitting the others amounting to over £60,000 :
Queens-
land
Victoria.
South
Australia.
Horses ... 12,992
Sheep ... 12,797
Butter ... 7,920
Cheese ... 6,264
Coals ... 7,085
Gold ...543,852
Oats ...103,328
Hops ... 9,521
Linseed ... 5,402
Malt ... 19,167
Oatmeal... 8,019
Potted Mts. 8,195
Flax ... 12,875
Potatoes... 6,871
Grass and
Clover Sd. 11,205
Timber ...109.308
Wool ... 7,484
Woollens 12,697
Cheese ... 6,264
Total £911,246
3d. lb.
4d. lb.
2/- ton
2/- ton
Bd. bsl.
Bd. lb.
5%
4/6 bsl.
4/- cwt.
4d. lb.
15/- ton
3/- 100 ft.
4d. lb.
2 1-
2d. lb.
3d. lb.
3/ 1001 b.
Bd. lb.
4/6 bsl.
9/- cwt.
2d. lb.
20/- ton
1/6100ft
Free
30%
3d. lb.
40/-
1/-
2d. lb.
4d. lb.
2/- 1001 b
6d. lb.
4/6 bsl.
2/- cwt.
2d. lb.
20/- ton
25 %
1/6 100 ft,
Free
15 %
4d. lb.
Westralia
2/6
2d. lb.
3d. lb.
4d. bsl.
4d. lb.
6d. bsl.
3/- bsl.
20/- ton
3/4 lb.
15%
20/- ton
10&20%
Tasmania.
40/-
21-
2d. Ib.
2d. lb.
1/6 1001 b
3d. lb.
Id. lb.
1/- bsl.
id. lb.
10%
Free
10/- ton
5/- 100 ft.
3d. lb.
2d. lb.




Bie> lio
F 75/o
•'A




