

| FEDERATION: I
1.-»£■ A LECTURE ■#*- i
DELIVERED IN THE
2| Mechanics' Institute, Launceston, p|
fll ON MONDAY. MAY 20, 1895.
r <Q.i\ r>r?
BY THE (xkj
Hon. N. J ■ Brown. g
| PRICE SIXPENCE.
I! Launceston:
fj “examiner” and “tasmanian” office. O
M MDCCCXCV.




FEDERATION.
LECTURE BY HON. N. J. BROWN.
Under the auspices of the Mechanics’
Institute committee, Hon. N. J. Brown,
ex-Speaker of the House of As-
sembly, delivered a lecture on the federa-
tion of the Australian colonies in the large
hall of the Institute on May 20. Mr A. B.
Biggs presided, and there was only a
moderate attendance. Archdeacon Hales,
Messrs W. Hartnoll and P. Barrett,
M’s.H.A., occupied seats on the platform.
After a few introductory remarks by the
chairman,
Hon. N. J. Brown, who was received
with" applause, said : —I have come this
evening to speak upon the question of the
federation of the Australian colonies. The
subject is a large one. That goes without
saying. 2 In attempting to deal with it
within the narrow limit of one short lecture
the wealth of material is embarrassing.
It is difficult to decide where best to begin,
how far to diverge to the right or left, and
where to finish. I hope that I shall finish
before you are tired of the subject, and I
will endeavour to avoid being unduly
discursive. But the present question is
where to begin. I think I will begin with
the historical fact that.it was only by what
appears to have been an accident, and a
very deplorable accident too, that these
Australian colonies were left to their own
devices in building up those barriers to
free interchange which many of us now
wish to have removed. In the year 1850
a bill to provide for the better government
of the Australian colonies was introduced
in the British House of Commons. This
became afterwards the Imperial act which
provided for the separation of Victoria
(then called Port Phillip) from New South
Wales, and for conferring representative
institutions upon Victoria, Tasmania, and
South Australia. The bill as it left the
House of Commons contained provisions
for the establishment of a uniform Customs
tariff for the colonies, and to assure the
continuance and fair adjustment of such a
tariff it was provided that a general council
should be established to deal with this and
with all other matters concerning the
relations of the colonies to each other.
Unfortunately in the House of Lords these
important provisions were struck out of
the bill after a long debate. During
the debate Earl Grey said, “My firm
opinion is that if the federation
clauses are adopted, they may not be
very obviously useful in the first instance,
but they will establish the beginning of
a system which will swell and develop
with the growing wants of the colonies,
and tend to build them up into one great


nation, :'ntimately and closely connected attention of many Australian colonists.
with each other, and subjects of the British
Crown.” But notwithstanding this and
other earnest appeals the clauses contain-
ing the germ of complete federation were,
as I have said, rejected. In the records of
the House of Commons I have been unable
to find any indication that when the bill
came back the Lords’ amendments were
even discussed. At that time the colonies
were looked upon as of very small
importance, and the probability is
that the amendments were accepted
without discussion, and so the act to pro-
vide for the bet’er government of the Aus-
tralian colonies became law in a form which
tn the light cf after experience we must
regard as vary incomplete.
It is unnecessary to recall to your recollec-
tion the action of the various colonies thus
left without restraint in the practice of the
pernicious art of constructing hostile tariffs
one against the other. Time after time
efforts have been made to mitigate the evil
effect of this unholy war, and to bring
about reciprocal trade relations between at
least two colonies of the group. To borrow
an Irish metaphor all such efforts have
proved as useless as “whistling jigs to
milestones.” The only directions in which
any intercolonial agreements have been
found possible have been in some partially
satisfactory arrangements as to postal and
telegraphic services and subsidies, the
maintenance of coastal lighthouses, and
the compact entered into with the
Imperial Government for assisting in
the defence of the colonies by sub-
sidising the Australian squadron.
Leaving for a time the consideration of
hostile tariffs and other unpleasant
features of Australian history, let me
briefly refer to what occurred in the year
1881. In that year, as many will re-
member, certain action taken by Germany
as regards New Guinea, and by France as
regards the transportation of criminals to
New Caledonia and a threatened occupa-
tion of the New Hebrides, aroused the
and a conference was assembled in Sydney
to consider these and other events which
had caused a decided growth of public
opinion in favour of forming a body to
give authoritative expression to the united
voice of Australia on subjects of general
concern. The result was the organisation
of the Federal Council.
The Federal Council has been variously
described by different public writers
and speakers. By some it has been
called a sham, an abortion, a delu-
sion, and a snare, and one critic, un-
fortunately a Tasmanian member of the
Council, has been so careless as to the
accuracy and the meaning and effect of the
language he used as to describe it as a
" ghastly failure.” But those who know
its origin and its functions and all the
circumstances of its existence up to
the present know that these un-
favourable criticisms are unwarranted.
In so far as it has been a failure
at all, such failure has been partly
owing to a breach of faith on the part of
some New South Wales politicians who
assisted at its birth and afterwards aban-
doned it, partly to the indefensible action
of men amongst ourselves, who, incapable
of rising above petty local and personal
considerations, made use of the Council as
a means of punishing their political oppo-
nents and rewarding their political friends,
and partly to the reluctance of the few
colonies represented to exercise the full
powers of the Council in a way that might
have the effect of retarding the
inclusion of others who stood out. Ytt not-
withstanding these drawbacks the Federal
Council has done some useful work. Ifhas
stood as the one authoritative embodiment
of the federal principle, and in that respect
has urdoubtedly bad an educational effect.
In the opinion of some thoughtful men
it is regarded as quite possible that if the
present <ffort to bring about complete
union should tail, then the way to federa-
tion may yet be found to lie throughfthe


full development and use by three or more passed beyond the three-mile limit of the
colonies of the powers and functions of the
Council. It was avowedly established as a
mere tentative institution and as a step-
ping stone to higher developments of
national feelings and aspirations. It will
be useful to glance briefly at some of its
work, accomplished, as is admitted, under
most disadvantageous conditions. I will
mention only four of the measures which
are now operative, the Intercolonial Judg-
ments Act, the Queensland Pearl
Fisheries Act, the Western Australian Pearl
Fisheries Act, and the act relating to the
defences of Thursday Island and King
George’s Sound. The first of these will
perhaps at present be regarded as the only
one in which Tasmania can have any pos-
sible interest. Many of those engaged in
the legal profession and in commerce know
that the power given by it to enforce in
the other colonies which have adopted the
act the judgments obtained in the courts
here and vice versa has proved most
useful. As regards the Pearl Fisheries
and Defence Acts I especially ask you
to note that they were necessary because
no colony has any jurisdiction outside of
three miles from its shore, and in the case
of the pearl fisheries it was found that
lawless people of several nationalities were
gathering on the Queensland and West
Australian coasts and becoming a menace
to peaceable and orderly traders and others.
The legislative jurisdiction of the Federal
Council extends to the whole of the Pacific
Ocean so far as British control extends,and
so a remedy has been found for what
threatened to grow into a great evil. The
legislation relating to the defences of
Thursday Island and King George’s Sound
was also rendered necessary by the same
disability of the colonies immediately
interested. Whenever it might become
necessary to send detachments of artillery-
men from South Australia to King
George’s Sound, or from Queensland
or Victoria to Thursday Island, the
moment the ships conveying such troops
colony in which they were enlisted the
troops would become absolutely free from
all discipline and control. These matters
may appear remote, but I refer to them a«
showing the necessity for federal action,
especially in matters of defence. More-
over, it would be a mistake to suppose that
they are without interest to us in Tas-
mania. England’s next great war will
unquestionably be a naval war, and it is
recognised by the best authorities in
strategy that Thursday Island, King
George’s Sound, and Tasmania are the
three points the possession of any one
of which would place an enemy in the
best possible positions to harass and
plunder the commerce of the colonies.
Tasmania can do but little from her own
resources for her defence. And, indeed, if
she could do more it would not be just to
call upon her to do so. Her t fit ctive forti-
fication must be undertaken in the common
interest by a federal authority at the
federal expense.
Dissatisfaction with the incomplete-
ness of the Federal Council was
natural, and its warmest supporters have
always been, and are now, per-
fectly ready to welcome any practic-
able scheme for perfecting the edifice which
the Federal Council was only designed
to lay the foundation for. Accordingly
when the Sydney Convention of 1891 had
formulated the Commonwealth Bill it was
seen that a distinct step in advance had
been taken, and the manifestation of in-
creased public interest in the question was
warmly welcomed by all true federalists.
Of some of the most important provisions
of the Commonwealth Bill I will speak
later on.
I pass now to the assembling of the
Premiers in Hobart in January last. It
was held by many of the public men of the
colonies, and the opinion took a strong
hold of Australian electors generally, that
tne election of the members of the Sydney
Convention of 1891 by the various


Parliaments had been unwarranted by approve, the Parliaments of those Colonies
any express sanction of the people, and
that the mandate of the electors should
have been directly obtained before the
formulation of any such important scheme
of federation as that contemplated had
been undertaken. The prevalence of this
feeling, combined with certain local in-
fluences in each colony, had prevented the
Commonwealth Bill from receiving the
necessary consideration from the various
Parliaments. A proposal for a meeting of
Premiers at Hobart to consider by what
means the work could be commenced de
novo with the best prospects of securir g
popular support was therefore gladly con-
curred in by both opponents and sup-
porters of what had already been done.
This meeting of the Premiers audits results
have been so recently discussed in the
press of this and other colonies that it is
unnecessary to say much of them. It will
be sufficient to indicate briefly the main
features of what is known as “ The
Premiers’ scheme.” A bill called the
Australasian Federation Enabling Bill has
been drafted, and each of the Premiers is
pledged, after the mother colony of New
South Wales has led the way, to introduce
it into their respective Parliaments and to
use all their influence to secure its
acceptance. This bill provides for the
election of a convention composed of 10
members from each of the Colonies that may
accept the proposal. These members are to
be chosen by the electors from the House of
Assembly in each Colony. After the con-
vention has finally agreed to the form of a
measure to provide a federal constitution
the result of their deliberations is to be
submitted for the approval or rejection of
the electors, such approval or rejection to
be signified by a direct vote. That is to say,
in each colony, on a certain day to be fixed,
the electors will be supplied with ballot
papers on which they will record their ap-
proval or disapproval of the federal consti-
tution submitted to them. If a majority
of the electors in any three of the Colonies
may each of them, by the usual form of
address to Her Majesty the Queen, request
that the federal constitution may
be placed before the Imperial Par-
liament for its final sanction. It
would appear difficult to devise a scheme
more thoroughly and completely satisfying
all the conditions which from time to time
have been insisted upon as necessary to
secure to the electors the utmost possible
liberty of choice, with full knowledge of
the question that they are asked to decide
upon. At the same time the rights and
privileges of the several Parliaments are
fully conserved. Both in the initial stage
of agreeing to the necessary measure for
the election of members of the convention,
and in the final stage of agreeing to an
address to the Queen, asking for
the Imperial sanction, the Parliaments
will have a real and potent influence, and
they will also have placed upon them a
grave responsibility.
Assuming that the preliminary arrange-
ments for the election of the members of
the convention will be completed, and. the
convention in due time will assemble, it
will be safe to assume also that the Com-
monwealth Bill of 1891 will form the basis
of the deliberations of the convention. I
propose, therefore, to place before you as
concisely as possible an explanation of the
principal provisions contained in that bill.
Before doing so perhaps I may remind you
that, as regards the drafting of the bill,
some of the highest authorities on constitu-
tional law and legal enactments have pro-
nounced it to be a masterpiece of arrange-
ment and skilful draftsmanship. Some
modifications will doubtless be found to be
necessary, and these we may be sure will
be considered in due course by the conven-
tion. In the meantime let ub see what are
its main features which require attention.
The name of the union of states is
proposed to be “ The Commonwealth of
Australia.” Now, I suppose that if the
union can be accomplished on the desired


lines no sincere federalist will be disposed authorities, and all references and commu-
to quarrel about the name given to it.
But I must confess that personally I do
not like this name ; I think that the name
of “ The Federated States of Australia ”
would be much more appropriate and more
in accordance with the fitness of things.
But whatever the name may be
the federated stales will hereafter b e
called "Australia,” just as the “ Dominion
of Canada” is called “ Canada.” It may be
noted in passing that the term “ Common-
wealth” was selected partly as a concession
to certain ardent republicans, who, in some
of the older colonies are sometimes very
noisy and self-assertive, and of whom it
may be said—they are a peculiar people,
much given to violent denunciations of
imaginary foes. It is currently reported
that a certain old lady derived much com-
fort from the word " Mesopotamia,” which
she described as " a blessed word.” Pos-
sibly some may derive the same sort of
satisfaction from the word “ Common-
wealth,” and so for the present we will
leave them in the enjoyment of it.
But to proceed with graver matters.
There is to be a Governor-General ap-
pointed by the Queen, and the Governor-
General will be the sole visible connecting
link between the federated states and the
mother land. There are now, and there
will, we may well hope, continue to be
other links of a less tangible but more
powerful description. The bonds of kin-
ship, fellowship in the great traditions
of the past, pride in the glorious annals of
army and fleet, and attachment to the
empire to whose enterprise and sacrifices
of blood and treasure we owe our very
existence as Australian colonists—these will
remain. The grand old mother of freedom
and of free nations will most surely retain
the affections, and in case of need will
obtain the support, of her free and untram*
melled offspring. The Governor-General as
representative of che Queen will be
the sole medium of communication between
the Federal Government and Imperial
nications from the several states will be
made through him. It may be noted in
passing that for united Australia one
Agent-General or Commissioner will suffice,
as one commissioner in London now suffices
for the Dominion of Canada. As regards
the Goven ors of the several states (you will
observe that we now speak of “ States,”
not of “ colonies”) it is proposed that the
Parliament of each State may make
such provisions as it thinks fit as
to the manner of the appointment of
the Governor of the State and for the
tenure of his office, and for his
removal from office. So that if any of the
States desire to elect a Governor in pre-
ference to leaving the office to be filled by
appointment of the Imperial authorities,
they can do so. The Federal Legislature
is to consist of a House of Representatives
and a Senate. The House of Representa-
tives is to be composed of members chosen
every three years by the people ef the
several states, and until the Parliament
otherwise provides each state is to have one
representative for every 30,000 of its people.
Under this provision Tasmania with its
present population would be entitled
to only five representatives, but the
Senate is to be composed of the
uniform number of eight membeis
of each State, and the senators are to be
chosen for a term of six years. It is to be
noted that by this provision the weakest
state in the union will, in regard to the
ultimate control of all important legisla-
tion, be placed upon an equal footing with
the most powerful states. This is a feature
of the proposed federal constitution which
requires more explanation than it is
possible to give to it this evening. It must
be sufficient for the present to say that by
the provision of equal representation in
the Senate the State rights of Tasmania
would be amply safeguarded.
There are many points of interest con-
nected with the powers and functions pro-
posed to be given to theFedoral Parliament,


but I must confine my attention this hops,value £32,069, duty £17,362 j potatoes^
evening to only two subjects, the tariff
and the public debts of the several States.
Before I proceed there is just one matter
to which I think it essential that your
particular attention should be drawn. It
is this. A distinguishing and important
principle of the proposed constitution is
that outside of the matters of general
concern which are specially delegated to
the control of the Federal Parliament
there will be no interference whatever with
State rights and privileges. This is the
principle embodied in the constitution of
the United States. In the Canadian con-
stitution the opposite principle has been
adopted. That is to say, the powers and
functions left with the States are specially
defined, and all undefined powers and
functions are placed in the hands of the
Federal Parliament. It is important that
this distinction should be borne in mind.
We now arrive at the question of the
Customs tariff, which is regarded by many
as the crux of the whole problem. I pro-
pose to enquire what effect a uniform
Customs tarff with intercolonial free-
trade is likely to have, first, on the interests
of Tasmania as a community, and second,
on some individual Tasmanian producers.
For the two years 1893 and 1894 the
average value of importations of and duty
collected on various articles of food
were as follows:-Animal food, including
bacon, hams, cheese, and preserved meats,
value £10,386, duty levied £2069 ; vege-
table products, including wheat, flour,
maize, and fruit of all kinds, value £24,411,
duty levied £7023; sheep and cattle, value
£25,429, duty levied £6725 ; totals, value
£60,226, duty £15,817. In round figures the
duties collected amounted to £16,000. For
the year 1892, the last year for which
figures are obtainable, the value of and
amount of duty charged by other Colonies
on our productions of the same class w ere
as follows : —Animal food (bacon, hams,
etc.), value £3831, duty levied £163 ; fruit
of all kinds, value £99,902, duty £34,024;
value £55,486, duty £14,086 j grain, value
£34.909, duty £8452; other vegetable pro-
ducts, value £lB3l, duty £553; sheep and
cattle, value £45,824, duty £lB9.
Totals, value £273.852, duty £74.829
—in round figures say £75,000.
Of course these amounts vary very much
from year to year. But from those given
we can obtain a fairly correct idea of the
relative proportion between the duties
levied by us and those charged against us
by the other colonies. From these figures
it appears that while the Tasmanian
revenue benefits by the protective duties
on the articles named to the comparatively
small extent of about £16,000 per annum
the producers generally are hampered and
suffer loss in selling their produce in the
markets of the other colonies to the extent
of nearly five times that amount. Obviously
if the community gains only £16,000 per
annum by the protective duties levied as
against the other colonies, and on the
other hand the producers lose by deduction
from the value of their produce to the
extent of £75,000 in the shape of
duties levied against them by the
other colonies, the wealth of the com-
munity must be diminished by the difference
between the two amounts, or about £59,00q
per annum. So that the conclusion is
inevitable that if all the intercolonial
duties on the products enumerated were
swept away the community as a whole
would benefit to the extent of about
£59,000 *
# Notb.— Since this lecture was delivered
it has been pointed out to me that if, as
freetraders contend, taxation of imports
falls upon the consumer, the above argu-
ment requires some qualification. On con-
sideiation, I admit that it if not quite
accurate to contend that the balance above
given represents loss to the community in
pounds sterling, but it is beyond question
that production and trade are harassed
and restricted by duties imposed on our
products in other colonies. It would be
impossible to estimate what this indefinite
loss amounts to. It will, however, be more
accurate to say that a very large portion of
the sum named (£59,000) must be set down
as loss to the community by restriction of
production and trade, and I substitute this
statement for that in the text.—N.J.B,


somewhat curious coincidence duty of, say, ,£3 per ton on his product.
It is
that this amount is almost precisely
the sum which has recently been publicly
stated by a candidate for a seat in the
Legislative Council as representing the loss
that Tasmania would annually incur by
the adoption of a federal tariff and free
intercolonial exchange of commodities and
manufactures. This statement was based
on a memorandum furnished by our most
excellent statistician, Mr K. M. Johnston,
and it was put forward during the recent
contest for the representation of the dis-
trict of Tamar in the Legislative Council
by the present member for that consti-
tuency, the Hon. George Collins. I have
here a copy of Mr Johnston’s memorandum,
which is public property, as it was
originally furnished to the Hobart Cham-
ber of Commerce. After reading ex-
tracts Mr Brown proceeded—Now what
I wish to point out first is this :
confining our attention to the figures
relating to Tasmania only, £58,142, and
accepting these figures, as I do with the
greatest confidence, as representing the
loss of revenue as stated, the loss will not
be the loss of Tasmania in the sense in
which the word loss is ordinarily used.
Under the proposed federal arrangement
the loss will be the loss of the federal
exchequer, and it will be the duty of the
Finance Minister of the Federal Govern-
ment to devise means for supplying the
loss. This may be done in several ways.
But the most obvious and probably the least
objectionable way will be by an exten-
sion of the existing system of excise.
As an illustration I will refer to two com-
modities, Queensland sugar and our own
Tasmanian woollen goods. Queensland
sugar imported into Tasmania is now
liable to a duty of £6 per ton, and I
believe the duty is not much less in any of
the other colonies. Our woollen manu-
factures are liable to various duties,
ranging from 10 per cent, ad valorem up to
30 per cent. It is very obvious that the
Queensland sugar planter niaia»s-an excise
With
and our woollen manufacturers with an
excise duty of say five per cent, and at the
same time having free access to alt the
markets of the Federation, would both be
in a very much better position than that
which they now occupy. Queensland poli-
ticians have admitted to me that the
change would be welcomed by the sugar
planters.
It must be remembered that the whole of
the revenue from Customs and excise is to
go into the Federal Exchequer, and after
providing for certain charges for the col-
lection of Customs and excise duties, for
intercolonial post and telegraph services,
for defences, for federal quarantine, and, I
hope, for interest on the public debt, the
balance is to be returned to the various
colonies on some basis to be agreed upon,
probably, as the only fair way, on the basis
of population. So that this bogey of loss
to Tasmania may, I hope, be regarded as
disposed of. The community as a whole
will, as I have stated, be largely benefited
by the removal of the taxes imposed by
other colonies upon the products of our
land.
But individual producers will undoubt-
edly suffer some considerable, though it
may be hoped only temporary loss. The
growers of wheat and the producers of fat
stock will have to face very changed con-
ditions when the present protective duties
of about lOd per bushel on wheat, £2 per
head on cattle, and 2s per head on sheep
are abolished. In approaching this part
of the subject, I desire to state most em-
phatically that my sympathies are entirely
with the occupiers and cultivators of the
land. Ali,my life has been spent amongst
them, and I have the honour to represent
in Parliament one of the most important
rural constituencies in Tasmania. I would
be one of the last to advocate any course
of action which would be in the long run
detrimental to their interests. But I see
very plainly that the general pros-
perity of the community is one


essential condition to their prosperity, he has had almost forced upon him during
and I feel very strongly that if by
some present sacrifices on their part
the general prosperity can be promoted
they will hereafter have cause to
congratulate themselves that such sacri-
fices were forced upon them. For it must be
remembered that there will not only be a
free interchange of commodities, but there
will also be a free interchange of capital.
All intercolonial duties being abolished
there will be no reason why any manufac-
tures now carried on, for instance, in
Victoria should not be established on the
banks of the Tamar or the Derwent. Indeed,
there are many reasons why, from her
favourable geographical position and her
many other advantages, taken in conjunc-
tion with the modern developments of
ocean transport, Tasmania may be expected
to become the home of many manufacturing
industries. Looked at from this point of
view,our splendid water power is likely to be
one of our most valuable natural assets.
With an extended mining and manufactur-
ing population, affording a certain home
market, our producers should surely be
able to hold their own as against pro-
ducers elsewhere.
The natural protection afforded to us
by our insular position must always
be an advantage. On enquiry I find
that the natural protection is [stated
by competent and reliable authorities
engaged in trade as follows: —Wheat—
Freight, wharfage, insurance, and other
charges, 5d per bushel. Cattle —Ditto,
ditto, £2 10s per head. Sheep—Ditto,
ditto, 2s 6d per head. Moreover, there are
certain circumstances connected with the
markets for wheat and for fat stock, which
make it clear that the actual protection ob-
tained from the present duties is very
much lees than the duties themselves. For
instance, I am informed by a southern
miller largely engaged in the trade that
while the actual cost of wheat landed at
Hobart the present duty of lOd
per bushel) is about 3s 4d per bushel, yet
the last three months man} thousands of
bushels more than he wished to buy at 3s
per bushel. There being only a local
market local competition keeps the prices
down, and the same thing occurs with
regard to fat stock. To many it
will be a matter for regret to see the grain
grower and the meat producer deprived of
whatever advantage they at present pos-
sess, but we are faced with the unpleasant
question, “ Are we to consider as para-
mount the general good of the community
or the interests of a few engaged in
particular industries P” In my opinion
the true and statesmanlike way of assist-
ing the landholders in their present diffi-
culties would be by relieving land from
some of the burdens and charges which are
now bearing with crushing weight upon
many of its owners and occupiers. Beyond
all question federation will cause a great
expansion of trade and industries generally,
and it is inconceivable that the owners and
occupiers of land will not benefit largely
by that expansion. At all events there
can be no federation without the abolition
of all hostile tariffs between the colonies,
and therefore if we are to have federation
hostile tariffs must go. I have stated th e
case fairly and openly and the landholders
must decide for themselves on which side
the balance of advantages will be found.
With regard to these tariffs there is an
aspect of the case which perhaps only re-
motely concerns us, but which, as regards
the continental Colonies, demands serious
consideration. It must be remembered
that the position of our neighbours on the
continent as to their boundaries is different
from ours in this happy sea-girt land.
There the boundary is often only a line
drawn upon a map, so that where settle-
ment has taken place on the boundary this
is what may happen. If a farmer’s hen
flies to a neighbouring poultry yard and
there lays an egg, or if a cow strays into
an adjacent paddock and there produces a
calf, if the law were strictly enforced the


egg and the calf would be liable for set out to supply the wants of the con-
Customs duty before they could be restored
to their owner. But this, of course, is only
a ludicrous way of putting the case. The
more serious view to which I wish to call
attention is this : there can be no question
that, if the border duties are continued
and changed and increased from time to
time a great deal of irritation and angry
feeling, amounting even to exasperation,
will grow up. As the stronger colonies
grow more powerful and become
possessed of more numerous and
better equipped military forces this angry
feeling will be very easily fanned by some
ambitious and reckless politicians or agita-
tors up to the fighting point. No doubt
the Imperial power would be invoked if
necessary to suppress any prolonged dis-
order. But what a spectacle in the mean-
time would be displayed to the civilised
world—a spectacle such as we are accus-
tomed to read of in connection with soma
of the dirty little South American Repub-
lics, but which would be shameful indeed if
the combatants were men of the British
race. But without dwelling on this picture
of the future, which remote, as some may
consider it, is not at all impossible, or
one may even say improbable, let
us look at the matter for a moment
from a less alarming standpoint. We pray
to God, at least I suppose some of us some-
times pray to God, that he will “ be
pleased to give and preserve to our use the
kindly fruits of the earth, so that in due
season we may enjoy them,” God does
give us the kindly fruits of the earth. He
gives us in the north the orange, the
grape, the lemon, the banana, the guava,
and other tropical and sub-tropical fruits.
In the south he gives us the apple, the
quince, the pear, the apricot, and other
fruits which flourish best in a cool climate.
The consumers in the north desire to
obtain the fruits of the south. The
consumers in the south are equally de-
sirous to possess and enjoy the fruits of the
north. The producers north and south
sumers, and what happens ? At a certain
point they find a line drawn from east to
west, and along this line a cordon of sen-
tinels in the shape of hungry Customs
House officials. These sentinels are em-
p >wered by law to demand and to take a
bite out of the fruit from the north and
from the south, and a large bite it is too,
before they will permit the producer to
pass with the fruit from either side of the
east and west line to the other. And a bad
feature of this bad case is this bite
which the Customs officers take out of the
fruit does not all go to swell the revenues of
the respective Governments which employ
them ; on the contrary a large portion
goes to support the Customs officers, their
wives and families, and the organisation of
which they form a part. Surely but for the
folly and stupidity of men a system such as
this would not be allowed to prolong its
existence for a day. It is lamentable that
we, the citizens of Australia, the inheritors
of a vast domain, with almost every possible
variety of soils and climate, should be
thus wantonly and mischievously ham-
pered in our enjoyment of the fruits which
these various climates and soils produce.
We will now consider the question
of the public debts of the Colonies. In the
Commonwealth Bill there is only one
clause relating to the public debts of the
States, and that simply provides that the
Federal Parliament may, with the consent
of all the states, make laws for taking over
and consolidating the whole of the public
debt of any state or states. Now, it is very
certain that when this subject comes under
the consideration of the convention a
strong effort will be made to render the
duties and functions of the Federal Parlia-
ment in relation to the public debt more
definite and precise. In fact I do not think
that any colony would be justified in
agreeing to federate unless the Federal Con-
stitution Act provides in exact terms that
the right of the Federal Government to
take over the Customs and excise revenue


shall carry with it the obligation to take
over and provide for the interest of the
whole of the public debts of the States
joining in the federation. There can be no
doubt that federal bonds or debentures
carrying interest at the rate of 3 per cent,
will be eagerly taken up by those seeking
for safe investments at a moderate rate of
interest. The average rate of interest
paid by all the Colonies now, ex-
cluding New Zealand, is slightly over
4 per cent. Time does not permit
of dealing with the question of the debts
of all the Colonies, so I will deal only with
the Tasmanian debt. Now what do you
suppose would be the amount saved to the
Tasmanian taxpayers by the conversion of
our debt into 3 per cent, debentures ? No
less a sum than from .£75,000 to
per annum. .£75,000—a large portion of
which amount is wrung out of the hard'
pressed landowners by means of the Real
Estate Duty. Surely no landowner could
do otherwise than rejoice over the possi-
bility of an arrangement which would
bring with it such relief, even if a condi-
tion of the arrangement is the loss of the
protection that he now enjoys in regard to
the grain and meat that he produces.
Before I conclude I will refer to a subject
which should have a special interest for
woolgrowers. All who have paid attention
to the recent course of events abroad must
know that during the next few years oppor-
tunities are certain to arise for a great
extension of trade between Australia and
Japan and China. Wbat these oppor-
tunities are likely to be are set forth in a
report from Commissioners recently de-
spatched to Japan by the Victorian Go-
vernment to enquire into the subject. It
is sufficient to say that the Commissioners
reported very favourably upon the open-
ings offered by the Japanese markets for
wool, meat, and other produce. But if
we wish to sell to the Japanese we
must be prepared to buy from them. This
involves a reciprocal trade treaty. Such a
treaty has been entered into by the British
Government at the beginning of this year,
and the Australian colonies have been
allowed two years from the date of the
signing of the treaty to decide whether
they will become parties to it or not. It
has been pointed out by those who have
written on the subject that to Australia,
as a silver-producing country, it is of the
first importance to secure as large an
extension of commercial relations as pos-
sible with those markets in which a silver
currency prevails. This treaty, involving
as it does matters of such moment to the
future of the whole of Australia,
has of course been brought under
the notice of the several Govern-
ments by the Colonial Office. But the
Premier (Sir Edward Braddon) informs me
that so far as he is aware nothing definite
has been done about it. Indeed it is almost
hopeless to expect that anything definite
or satisfactory could be done about it by
seven separate authorities. A writer in the
London Times sa; s most truly—“ Mani-
festly it is one of the questions with which
a federated Australia would be in a better
position to deal than the existing congeries
of disunited colonies.” We must hope that
a federal authority capable of dealing
satisfactorily with this and other like ques-
tions will be established before very long.
I have now dealt as fully as the time at my
disposal would permit with someof the main
features of the subject under ourconsider-
tion. There are many phases which I have
necessarily omitted to notice; but I
that I have said enough to arouse atten-
tion, and to convince many of those who
have hitherto been either hostile or in-
different to the federation of the colonies
that there are good grounds for them to
re-consider their position. We come of a
race of whom it has been said—
“ They sailed wherever ship could sail,
And founded many a mighty state ;
Pray God their greatness do not fail
Through craven fear of being great.”
We will be degenerate indeed if we fail to
do our part in helping to build up the


great Australian nation of the future, you will cling to and perpetuate the weak-
When you, the electors of Tasmania, ness which is inseparable from strife, dis-
together with the electors of the other cord, and dissension, or whether you will
colonies, are called upon to vote on this call to your aid the strength that is given
question you will have to decide whether by unity, peace, and concord.
11542 Printed at the “ Launceston Examiner ” Office.


J ntp
BlßLio
C 7c*) ~)
1508
00074434


7»3|


