

COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
FEDERAL PARLIAMENT HOUSE
ARCHITECTURAL COMPETITION.


COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
Federal Parliament House Architectural Competition.
REGISTRATION.
Each intending competitor must detach and forward this sheet to Department of Homs Affairs, Melbourne, Australia.
Commonwealth Minister of State for Home Affairs,
Melbourne,
Australia .
The undersigned hereby acknowledges receipt of copy of Programme for the Federal
Parliament House Architectural Competition, and registers application for any Special
Information that may be communicated from the Federal Capital Director of Design
and Construction to intending competitors.
The undersigned has engaged in the actual practice of architecture, having designed
and supervised building construction.
Signature -
Address in full
Witness
Address in full
©
• \
rv>
juste. Date.:


PROGRAMME.
CONTENTS.
1. PEEAMBLE. page
1.0. Purpose .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1
S. CONDITIONS.
2.1. APPLICATION.
2.11. Qualification of Applicants ■■ .. .. .. .. .. 1
2.12. General Information .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. 1
2.13. Special Information . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1
2.2. DESIGNS.
2.21. Preparation .. .. .. ... .. .. .. .. .. 2
2.22. Submission .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2
2.23. Custody .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2
2.24. Publicity .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. 2
2,2 b. Return . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2
2.26. Adjudication .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3
2.27. Prcmiation .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3
2,3. EXECUTION OF BUILDING.
2.31. Employment of Architect .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3
2.311. Extent of Services .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3
2.312. Remuneration .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3
3. INSTRUCTIONS.
3.0. DESIGN POLICY.
3.1. THE SITE.
3.11. Position .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4
3.12. Climate .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4
3.13. Topography .. .. .. .. . . .. .. .. . . 4
3.14. Yegotation .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. 4
3.15. Setting in Projected City .. .. .. . . .. .. 4
3.151. Sotting in the Public Buildings Group .. .. .. .. .. 5
3.1511. Setting in the Government Buildings Group .. .. .. 5
3.2. FACILITIES.
3.21. Materials and Appliances .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5
3.22. Funds .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 0
3.8. FUNCTIONS.
3.31. General—
-3.311. Public Accommodation .. .. .. .. .. .. 0
3.312. Public and Members’ Accommodation .. .. .. .. .. 6
3.3121. Library .. .. .. .. .. ~. ~ 6
3.313. Members’Accommodation .. .. .. .. .. .. 7
3.3131. Recreation .. .. ~ .. .. .. 7
3.3132. Refreshment .. .. .. .. .. .. 7
3.314. Legislative Drafting Office .. .. .. .. .. .. 7
8.315. Official Reporting Department.. .. .. .. .. .. 7
3.316. Newspaper Representation .. .. .. .. .. .. 8
3.317. Post, Telegraph, and Telephone Office , . .. .. .. .. 8
3.318. Caretaker’s Apartment .. .. .. .. .. . . 8
3.32. House of Representatives .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 8
3.33. Senate .. .. .. .. .. •• •• •• 9
ILLUSTRATIONS.
Canberra—Two Views of Present Condition.
Government Group Site. —Plan.
Government Group Site.—Elevation and Section.
Government Group.—Preliminary Diagram.
Public Group. —Preliminary Diagram.
Government Group.—Preliminary Elevation,
Government Group.—Preliminary Section.
Entire City.—Preliminary Perspective.
Entire City,—Preliminary Plan.
F. 4616.


COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
FEDERAL PARLIAMENT HOUSE ARCHITECTURAL COMPETITION.
1. PREAMBLE.
Purpose. —The Government of the Commonwealth of Australia, having under
construction the Federal Capital City at Canberra, desires to secure the services of
an architect or architects to design, in harmony with the objects and policies of
the general design for the city, the first of its important public buildings. _ The foremost
of; these buildings in importance and in order of construction is Parliament House,
for which tentative designs are invited in international competition open to all
qualified architects. If any premiated design additional to the first shall have been
specially commended by the Adjudicators on account of exceptional merit, it is
possible that the Commonwealth may subsequently commission the author thereof in
connexion with other buildings at the Capita,! ; but it must be understood that such
commendation does not entitle the said architect to any tight for such future
employment.
2. CONDITIONS.
These conditions are mandatory, and failure on part of a competitor to
conform to the same will exclude his design.
2.1. APPLICATION.
2.11. Qualification of Applicants.— lntending competitors are required to
acknowledge receipt of Programme of Competition on accompanying Eegistration
Norm indicating responsible architectural practice in design and supervision of budding
construction. Satisfactory compliance with this condition will be a first essential to
candidacy for employment in connexion with the execution of this work. No
adjudicator nor advisor nor employe of the Commonwealth of Australm shall compete
or assist a competitor. No competitor shall submit more than one design.
2.12. General Information.—Eegistration Norms and Programmes can be
obtained by addressing any of the following places
Department of Home Affairs, Melbourne ; Commonwealth Works Director,
Sydney; and Public Works Departments in Adelaide, Brisbane,
Perth, and Hobart. . , ~
London .. .. .. Office of High Commissioner of Australia.
Wellington, N.Z Public Works Department.
Cape Town .. » »
Ottawa .. . • . • )? » ”
Berlin .. .. •• The British Embassy.
Madrid .. .. • • » »
Paris .. • ■ • • »
Eome .. ■ • ■ ■ » »
St. Petersburg .... „ »
Stockholm .. •• » »
Vienna .. ■ ■ ■ ■ » ”
Washington . . ■. >}.. »
2.13. Special Information.—Aclditiona]Mnformation, if necessitated,by circum-
stances, will be forwarded by the Eederal Capital Director of Design and Construction
to all registered competitors. /
1


2,2. DESIGNS.
Preparation.— All the drawings required shall be drawn with pencil or
pen, without wash or colours, except plain washes if desired, to indicate sections
or to block in openings or to show different planes of distances. All lettering shall be
of plain legible type. All rooms shall have figured dimensions. All drawings shall be
cloth-mounted on stretchers. The only drawings to be submitted are :
(1) Plan of each floor of Parliament House .. .. ]
/o\ section of Parliament House .. [Drawn to a scale of
).( Tr^ ns verse section of Parliament House .. A-inch per 1 foot
(4) 6 Elevations of Parliament House . . .. J
(5) Perspective from direction of “ Terrace Court of the Reservoir,” indicating
relationship with proposed future Departmental and Capitol Buildings,
vi , .i* lnca P? r 1 foot at nearest angle on picture plane.
(o) Detail of one architectural feature of the building, selection optional.
_ A brief description, in print or typewritten, unsigned, must accompany the
drawings mcliichng a statement of the total volume of the ultimate building in terms of
cubm feet. Cubage shall be computed to indicate as exactly as possible the actual volume
of the building, calculated from the surface level or levels of the lowest floor to the
highest points of the roof, and contained within the various outside surfaces of the
, s ‘ T 7; e actl ] al volume of projecting features of all sorts, including parapets, towers,
lanterns, bays, dormers, vaults, and exterior steps above grades shall be included, but
covered open-sided porticos or loggias shall be taken at half their volume. Light wells
of less than 400 square feet area shall not be deducted. 8
each design* C^ a^ram) 10W ™g method adopted in computing volume, shall accompany
Any language may be used at the option of the Competitor.
2.22. Submission.-— Designs shall be submitted without revealing the registered
address of the competitor or bearing any distinguishing mark, motto, or name
which could serve as _ means of identification, but with a sealed opaque packet
firmly attached containing _ name and address of the author or authors 1 with
a declaration that the design is his or their own personal work, and that the
drawings have been prepared throughout under his or their own personal
supervision. Such packet and the design to which it is attached will be given
a common number on receipt, and the former will be held and opened after adjudication
only by his Excellency the Governor-General or his deputy. Any attempt by an author
to disclose his identity in any other manner will disqualify his'design, and such design
wifl not be included in the competition. The designs shall be delivered to the Federal
Capital Director of Design and Construction, Melbourne, Australia, or to the High
Commissioner of Australia, London, England, free of cost to the Commonwealth on or
before 31st March,l9ls. Omission to so deliver will involve disqualification, unless the
Commonwealth Munster of State for Home Affairs is satisfied that the delay could not
have been forseen and is only for a period that will not interfere with the work of
investigation and adjudication.
2.23. Custody,— The Government does not accept responsibility as regards safe
transit, custody, or retransit of the designs or any documents forwarded or delivered
by a competitor, but it undertakes that all reasonable care shall be exercised to prevent
damage during the period in which they are in its possession and that insurance will
be effected based on its own estimate of value.
2.24. Publicity. —All designs and documents not excluded from the competition
may be exhibited for reasonable period after adjudication, such exhibition to be open
free to the public. Publication of designs, whether premiated or unpremiated, will in
no way entitle competitors to any claim for compensation against the Government or
its agents in regard to proprietary or other rights.
2.25. Return.— The winning design shall become the property of the Government.
All other designs will be repacked and shipped or posted for return to the several
competitors. Each competitor will be advised of their despatch. Freight and other
charges in transit will be paid by the Government to the address so named by the
competitor.


2.26. Adjudication. —The drawings will he adjudicated by a jury of architects
as follows: —
GEORGE T. POOLE of Australia.
JOHN JAMES BURNET of London and Glasgow.
VICTOR LALOUX of Paris.
OTTO WAGNER of Vienna.
LOUIS H. SULLIVAN of Chicago.
In case of disability of any adjudicator, his successor will be appointed by the
Federal Capital Director of Design and Construction.
The jury will examine all designs submitted, determine as to their conformity
with the mandatory.conditions, and select eight (8) designs in order of merit and accord
mention to such others as may be deemed especially worthy. The decision of the jury
will be final, and its announcement will be made in Melbourne within three months of
date of receipt of designs, or as soon thereafter as is possible. The report of the jury
will state its reasons for the selection and classification of the designs, in order of merit,
and a copy, accompanied by the names of the prize winners, will be sent by the Federal
Capital Director of Design and Construction to each competitor.
Immediately upon the opening of the identification envelopes by the Governor-
General the prize winners will be notified by telegraph.
2.27. Premiation.— ln accordance with the jury’s award the Government of the
Commonwealth of Australia agrees to pay within two months of adjudication premiums
as follows
To first in order of merit the sum of .. .. .. £2,000
To second ~ ~ „ ■ ■ • • • ■ 1,500
To third ~ ~ ~ • • • ■ • • 1,000
To fourth ~ ~ ~ • • ■ ■ .• • 500
To fifth „ „ „ •• ..250
To sixth ~ ~ ~ •• • •• 250
To seventh ~ ~ ~ •• •• 250
To eighth „ „ „ ■ ■ • • ■ ■ 250
2.3. EXECUTION OF BUILDING.
2.31. Employment of Architect.— The Government will employ the competitor
placed first by the jury as architect for the initial portion of the building (note reference
m, 3.22.) ; and so far as the subsequent stages of the ultimate building are concerned, it
is the intention of the Government similarly to employ him. Insomuch, however, as
the construction of the ultimate building may spread over a number of years, this state-
ment cannot be taken to bind the Government to employ the architect in these later-
stages.
2.311. Extent of the Service required.— The employment of the competitor as
architect for the construction of the building, or any part thereof, is to include the
preparation of all such working drawings and specifications in connexion with the work
to be constructed and the furnishing of all such information in connexion therewith as
the Minister for Home Affairs may require and the furnishing to the Minister of
necessary copies thereof and the supply of one permanent copy on tracing linen of the
plans, elevations, and sections of the work as executed, and also a permanent copy of
all corrected details of the work and figured plans and diagrams of all ducts, wires, pipes,
and appliances for service systems inside and outside the building. If the Government
decides to require personal supervision by the competitor employed as architect, he
'shall, in addition to the above, faithfully and diligently personally supervise the execution
of the work, and perform all such architectural services in connexion therewith as are
necessary to insure the complete carrying out of his design. No departure from the
working drawings and specifications is to be permitted without written approval of the
Minister for Home Affairs.
2.312. Remuneration— The architect will be remunerated for his services as
(а) If the employment includes personal supervision of the execution of the
work, he will be remunerated in accordance with the schedule of
percentage charges sanctioned and published by the Royal Institute
of British Architects as at the date of the first publication of this
programme in the Commonwealth Gazette ; or
(б) If his employment does not include personal supervision of the work he
will be remunerated at the rate of 3 per cent, on the calculated
cost of the actual work undertaken.


3. INSTRUCTIONS.
The following intimations are advisory and contain no recommendations that
need be considered mandatory :
3.0. DESIGN POLICY.
The Australian Commonwealth, with no historically-evolved suitable
architectural style, but with unique scope in its unlimited open continent for
national with this virgin city site under unified control, and possessed
of modern building science, appliances, and materials, is in a position to exact
unity in plan and homogeneity in expression and harmony with whole natural
environment beyond any ordinary opportunity. Since the city is to evolve gradually,
the desired unity cannot be assured by personality, nor can it under popular govern-
ment be established by authoritative decree of any arbitrary type. Hence it is desired
that the standard of design be the expression of actual functions through practical
organic planning; through the direct adaption of the inherent characteristics of the
materials used, avoiding the intrusion of irrelevant features, however time-honoured,
on the one or individual on the other; and through recognition of the
peculiar site conditions. Parliament House, with ‘the whole Government Group, is
but an element in a larger system of parallel-set public edifices, all regulated by the
same standard, which is intended to extend through the entire city and to characterize
it. Hence, appropriate scale and relationship to the other masses are imperative.
To illustrate the conception of general relationship of important structures —but not
their style there are appended plans, elevations, and sections of the Government
Group, and a general perspective view of the Capital from the prehminary city design.
3.1. THE SITE.
3.11. Position— Canberra site is of latitude 35° 15' south, longitude 149° 15'
east of Greenwich, with an average altitude of 2,000 feet in a Federal Territory of 900
square miles among the northernmost ranges of the Australian Alps.
3.12. Climate. The minimum and maximum recorded shade temperatures are
11 ’l° and 104° Eah. The average temperature during the coldest month is 39 '7° Pah.,
during the hottest month 68’4° Pah. The average yearly rainfall is 22'63 inches’.
Rains are, however, occasionally torrential. Snow is almost unknown, and of but a
few hours’ duration at the most. On an average there are 2,519 hours of bright sunshine
during the course of the year, and the rarity of the atmosphere of the altitude serves
to magnify the intensity of the rays. Winds are climatically characteristic of the
latitude. The agreeable wind is from the east, the disagreeable ones are from the
west in the winter and from the north in the summer. Provision for economical
heating .of the buildings during the winter months and arrangements throughout
for proper summer aeration and shade are essential.
3.13. Topography.— The region is generally undulating, sometimes rugged,
occasionally rocky, the outlooks between the near-by mounts being bounded by distant
blue ranges. It is proposed that the completed city shall enjoy the relief of an expanse
of artificial water, in place of the Molonglo River, which now meanders through the
city site between high banks clothed with weeping willows.
3.14. Vegetation. —The undulating flats of the city are naturally grazing plains
but the higher parts are or have been openly wooded. The sylva of the region is broad-
leaf ever-green, mostly species of encalypt; but soil and climate allow wide latitude to
horticultural embellishment.
3.15. Setting in Projected City. —A plan of the central part of the city as projected
indicates main features whose general relationship may be considered as an amphi-
theatre, with Mount Ainslie on the north in the rear, flanked on either side by Black
Mountain and Mount Pleasant, all together forming a top gallery: -with slopes to the
water, the auditorium: with waterway and flood basin, the arena: with southern slopes
reflected in the basin, the terraced stage set with monumental Government structures
sharply defined, rising tier on tier to the culminating highest forested hill of the Capitol:
and with grey Mugga Mugga, Red Hill, and the purple distant mountain ranges, sun-
reflecting, forming the back scene.


3.151. Setting in the Public Buildings Group. —The public groups in the design
of the city are treated in a broad way because the extension of this important category
of functions may go beyond any present basis of expectation. The general arrangement
of the public functions and the preliminary plan are illustrated in the accompanying
diagram, where they ate first separated into those belonging to the federation as a
whole and those concerning only the city’s immediate needs.
The architectural base lines for the federal Groups are an axis joining Ainslie
with the hill of the Capitol, passing over the lesser eminence of the Parliament Hill
between, and a co-ordinate axis from the peak of Black Mountain extending through
the water basins. These axes are not thoroughfares essentially, ■ but form park or
garden frontage for all the important structures which can be developed with the
least utilitarian limitations and afford the greatest ease and comfort for comprehensive
observation of the Capitol. In general, the arrangement of all the federal buildings
on heights about two co-ordinate axes, their individual groups, set off by formal basins
and garden features, forms one combination of parallel-set buildings, sufficiently unified
to dominate all other interests in the city.
3.1511. Setting in the Government Buildings Group.— The Capitol is isolated and
centrally focused in an extensive hill park. This building, which is intended to symbolize
Australian sentiment, achievement, and ideals, will be used for the housing of archives,
&c., and in connexion with public ceremonials. Its isolation and the height of its
site, 80 feet above the Parliament House, insure its supremacy as the objective feature,
not only of the Government Group, but of the entire city. The whole group of Govern-
ment Buildings is to be directed out from this one popular point along lines of
sequence in function. The fact that Pariiaxnent is in two Houses, in addition to the
topographical situation, precludes giving to that structure a focal significance. The
plateau stretching between the hills of the Capitol and Parliament provides sufficient
foreground for the former to set off the latter, over which, however, the court of
departmental buildings on the succeeding long terrace below may yet be seen, while
the view beyond is uninterrupted across the basin, public gardens, and along a broad
plaisance to Mount Ainslie. Parliament building, on the brow_ of its hill, has an
elevation of 50 feet above the terrace of the buildings next below, and is to be approached
therefrom, by wide ramps around the fountain end of a terrace reservoir. Prom this
terrace court the Parliament edifice has a lofty setting, stopping the long axis
of the reservoir. Crowned hy the Capitol behind, and supported on the flanks by the
lower -departmental buildings, it thus presents an opportunity for cumulative
massing. The central ten-ace court of the Government Group lies some 30 feet above
the lowest terrace of the water front, from which it is separated hy the buildings facing
the great basin, and to whose embankment access is given by ramps at the end and
flights of steps between the structures. The court terrace, however, n extended on
the roof of a central building of the waterway Embankment, which projects into the
"basin crowned toward it by an open colonnade surmounting a slight bank ox steps to
afford an open forum, beneath which the structure serves as a launch entrance or
" water gate.”
It is to be noted that the roof of Parliament House, as well as the roofs of
departmental buildings, will be important objects of view from the terrace outlooks
above; also, that framing and maintaining the open axial view through the extent
of the Public Groups are desiderata.
3.2. FACILITIES,
3.21. Materials and Appliances.— Bricks- of good quality for rough work,
of size 9" x iV x 3", are being manufactured and stored by the Government
on the ground. Although there are to he found on site_ a variety of basalts,
porphyritic rock, sandstones, and limestones, and grey granite is obtainable within the
Federal Territory, there is no stone at hand worked with sufficient economy
obtainable in sufficient size or quantity or of proven durability for general adapta-
tion throughout the public buildings. There are, however, at hand many lands and
colours of rocks suitable for base and facing aggregates m concrete construction,
and Australia is rich in building marbles, with white, grey, pink, red, black, and veined
combinations adapted to. exterior and interior facings. Lime m limited quantities is


burnt from stone on the city site. The manufacture of Portland cement is carried on
at several points in this State, and the ingredients of manufacture are to be found within
a few miles of Canberra. Steel, in large structural rolled shapes, is only obtained
at present by importation; but there are probabilities of considerable Australian
development in this direction within a few years. Reinforced concrete construction
is established and in general use. The availability of skilled plaster-workers and
materials may well facilitate general employment of that class of work. Eire-resisting
construction of the most advanced type is essential. Hardwood for finishing has been
brought in from a distance, and is undergoing seasoning on the ground.
3.22. Funds.— The ultimate cost of the Parliament House shall be considered to
be within the sum of £1,000,000, but provision shall be made in the designing to allow
for an initial housing as an integral constructional feature of the completed building,
providing for the immediately necessary functions without external embellishment.
The functions suggested as most necessary to the initial structure are printed in italics
in the subsequent enumerations. The cost of the first necessary portion should not
exceed £250,000. Economy in obtaining a maximum effectiveness with direct means
will be an important element in the ultimate design, while satisfying the fundamental
necessities in an economic arrangement of a “ shell ” or “ core ” for immediate
purposes will be an important factor.
3.3. FUNCTIONS.
■^ >a,r^am( cons ists of two elective bodies, the House of Representatives
and the Senate, to the former of which is responsible the administrative “ Government/’
drawn from members of both Houses, and comprising the Prime Minister and Ministers
for various Departments for the administration of all Government affairs. The essential
requirements concern either the House of Representatives, the Senate or both
(general), provision for which should be in accord. Women are equally eligible
with men for membership. Convenience of access to Session Chambers is required
tor summons oi an members to division vote on tbree minutes* notice.
3-31. General.— Allow ample corridors, stairs, and lifts. Local wardrobe, lavatory
and toilet provision for men and for women shall accompany all groups J
Heating and ventilating systems shall be provided throughout '
3.311. Public Accommodation. —Entrance Hall giving access to
Galleries, Exterior Observation Balconies, Roof Promenades
Sec., and served with— 5
Aggregate. Floor
Areas, suggested
minimum In
square feet.
Eoom for Doorkeepers .. .. . _
Room for three Policemen
2 Reception Rooms
General Lobby, or Reception Hall, suitable for Ceremonials and 8,000
Banquets, with direct connexions, with doorkeeper, to principal Public
and Members' Sections.
3.312. Public and Members’ Accommodation—
Library—
Quarters so placed as to allow scope for expansion and to
give access for the public separately from members;
combining National and Parliamentary Libraries until
specified capacity is outgrown, when independent
Library quarters may be established elsewhere, as
provided for in Government group reservation.
Administration—
-2 Rooms for Librarian .. ..
1 Room for Assistant Librarian
1 Room for Chief Cataloguer .. .. ’ ’
1 Room for Five Assistant Cataloguers
1 Room for Binders .. .. ~ _ ~
1 Room for Accountant .. . ’ ’ ’ '’ [ 4,UUU
1 Room for Assistant, Attendants, Messengers (five)
1 Room for receiving ..
1 Room for packing


Books—
Boom for 250,000 volumes ; 6,000 volumes of newspapers,
preferably flat on roller shelves ; and 50,000 volumes of
Aggregate fcloor
Areas, suggested
minimum In
square foefc.
documents
Temporary accommodation for members only shall provide 1
for 5,000 volumes books; 200 periodical files; 200 poOO
newspaper files
1 Boom for collection of rare books, plate, medals, maps, &c.
Public Accommodation —
1 Periodical Boom .. • • • • • • •■ 1 nnn
1 Beading Boom • •• S ’ UUU
6 Study Booms (small, with provision for typewriting) .. )
Members' Accommodation—
-1 Periodical Room .. ■ • • • ■ • •• I 2,500
1 Reading Room .. • ■ • • • • • • >
3.313. Members’ Accommodation—
Recreation and Refreshment Services (preferably on one floor) '
1 Billiard-room , with room for three tables, with lounges
adjacent..
Members’ Dining-room or rooms, to seat 250
1 Officers’ Dining-room, to seat 30 .. ■ ■ •• I 8,600
1 Press Dining-room, to seat 30, or service to equivalent room
in Press suite
1 Strangers’ Dining-room, to seat 20
2 Strangers’ Dining-rooms, to seat 10 each
2 Strangers’ Dining-rooms, to seat 6 each ..
1 Kitchen with —
Scullery at one end, not separate
Store-room
Larder .. • ■ ■ • • ■ ■ •
Refrigerator .. ■ • • • • • • • 4-,UUU
Stock Cellar
Fuel-room .. . ■
Serving-rooms, between Kitchen and Dining-rooms, with
Pantries
2 Rooms for Stewards ..
2 Roams for Staff changing dress .. ■ • • • 1
Lavatory .. • • • • ■ • • • 1,500
Bath .. ■ ■ • •
1 Spare Room for Staff
3.314. Legislative Drafting Office—
-2 Rooms .. • • • • • • • • * ■
, ;3.315. Official Reporting Department—
(Suite on same floor with, and as close as practicable to,
the reportorial allotments in the two Session Chambers.)
1 Room for Chief Reporter
1 Room for Second Reporter
6 Rooms for Assistant Reporters, two in each
1 Room for Reference Library and Retiring
1 Room for Typewriters’ Retiring
1 Room for Clerk and Accountant .. ■■ f 6,000
1 Room for Messengers and Stores
10 Booms for Typewriting, minimum dimension
10' x 10'. (Four of these may be in separate
suite adjacent to House of Bepresentatives,
and two in separate suite adjacent to Senate) ..
gr. 4816. B


Aggregate Floor
Areas, suggested
minimum in
square feet.
3.316. Newspaper Representation—
Press Writers’ Assembly-room —
(Dining-room for Press (which see) may serve for this '
if not readily connected with Kitchen service) .. 700
13 Suites of 2 rooms each assigned to separate news agencies
convenient of access to Reporters’ Galleries in Session
Chambers , .. .. .. • • • • 5,000
3.317. Post, Telegraph, and Telephone Office—
I Office .. I 500
1 Room adjacent for switchboard .. .. .. J
■3.318. Caretaker’s Apartment—
-1 Office '
1 Living Boom .. .. .. .. . . •
1 Dining-room .. .. .. ■ ■ •■ - 1,500
1 Kitchen
2 Bedrooms
3.32. House of Representatives—
Representatives’ Lobby—
-1 room of general access ... .. .. 2,000
Strangers —
3 Waiting-rooms .. .. .. .. | 2 ()00
3 Women’s Retiring-rooms .. . . .. J 5
1 Session Chamber—light and airy, to seat initial membership'
of 100, with lateral tier benches without desks and
provide for ultimate expansion to seat possible member-
ship of 300. Include —
Speaker’s Dais and seat
Speaker’s Gallery, to seat 150 persons .. .. r 5,000
Official Reporters’ Desks on floor at centre table, or in
6 gallery near floor
Newspaper Reporters’ Gallery, near or at front, set
low with desk equipment for 30 reporters
Public Gallery, to seat 200 persons ._. <•..
Administrative Reference —
7 Rooms, accessory to Sessicm Chamber (for
arranging data required for immediate information
in Sessions)
Speaker’s Suite —
1 Ante-room
1 Reception and Dining-room
1 Library .. .. •• ■ ■ • •
1 Bedroom, with bath, toilet ..
Government Whip—
-1 Room
Government Supporters—
-1 Room for assembling ( present ) 100 to (ultimately) 300
The Ministry — . 23,000?
1 Room for assembling and deputations, with lavatory
and toilet .. .. • • • •
1 Suite of 2 rooms for Prime Minister
8 Rooms for other Ministers
The Opposition—
-1 Room for assembling 50 to (ultimately) 150 members
Opposition Leader —
1 Suite of two Rooms
Extra Parties —
2 Rooms en suite
Chairman of Committees —
1 Room
Committees —
4 Booms .. • ■ • ■ ► • •


Officers
Clerk —•
Aggregate Floor
Areas, suggested
minimum in
square feet.
1 Office .. .. . • • • •■'
1 Bedroom, hath, and toilet
Clerk Assistant —
1 Office ..
I Bedroom, hath, and toilet ..
Berjeant-at-A.rms — 3,000
1 Office, convenient to Clerk
1 Bedroom, hath, and toilet
Clerical A ssistance —
3 Officers
Messengers—
-2 Rooms, with haths and toilet accommodation 1
Records — 1
1 Room for ready access to current files in standing cases
of face area of 1,500 square feet, for Parliamen-
tary Papers, Bills, Acts, and Records.
Also storage vault space, for 15,000 superficial feet of
standing case frontage, elsewhere available.
Housekeeper’s Quarters —
(5 Rooms .. • • • ■ • • * ■ i ’ uuu
3.33. Senate
Senators' Lobby- 9
1 Room of general access .. . • • • • • /iUUU
Public Reception ] 0
3 Rooms • ■ ■ ■ uuu
2 Women's Retiring-rooms ■ ■ . ‘, " 1
1 Session Chamber- a light and airy room, to seat initial mem-'
her ship of 50, with lateral tier benches, and provision
for ultimate expansion to seat possible membership of
150. Include
President’s Dais and seat
President's Guests’ Gallery, to seat 250
Official Reporters' desks on floor at centre tablel
or in gallery near floor level .. • • 5,000
Newspaper Reporters' Gallery, near or at front,
with desk equipment for 20 reporters
Public Gallery, to seat 300 persons ..
Insomuch as Parliament is opened by the Governor-General in this
Chamber, provision should he made for accommodating on such occasions
the members of the House of Representatives.
Administrative Reference —
7 Rooms accessory to Session Chamber • • ■ •
(For arrangement of data required for immediate
information in Sessions.)
President’s Suite —
1 Ante-room
1 Reception and Dining-room . •
1 Library . - • ■ ■ •
1 Bedroom, with lavatory and toilet
* Government Whip — 14 000
1 Room • • • ■ • • '' ‘ ‘ 5
Ministers —
4 Suites of 2 Rooms
Leader of Opposition—
-2 Rooms
Extra Party —
1 Room • •
Chairman of Committee’s Suite—
-2 Rooms • - • • - •
Committees—
-2 Rooms for assembly .. • ■


Officers —
Clerk —
Aggregate Floor
Anas, suggested
minimum in
square ieofc.
1 Office, convenient to President .. ~
1 Bedroom, with hath and toilet
Clerk Assistant
1 Office, convenient to Clerk
1 Bedroom, with bath and toilet
Usher—
-1 Office, convenient to Clerk .. .. f 3,000
1 Bedroom, with hath and'toilet .. .. |
Clerical Assistance — I
3 Offices
Messengers—
-2 Rooms .. .. ..
Records—
-1 Boom for ready access to current files in standing
cases of face area of 7,500 square feet.
Also storage vcmlt for old files, 7,500 superficial feet of
standing case frontage, elsewhere.
Housekeeper's Quarters —•
6 Rooms ~ .. .. ~ .. 1,000
Printed and Published for the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia by Albert J. Umixts,
Government Printer for the State of Victoria.


CANBERRA,—VIEW IN PRESENT CONDITION.
from painting by W.Lister Lister
CANBERRA.— VIEW IN PRESENT CONDITION.
From painting by Penleigh Boyd.
TWO VIEWS OF SITE FROM DIFFERENT POINTS ON PLEASANT HILL,


GOVERNMENT GROUP SITE.-PUAN.




DIAGRAM OF GOVERNMENT GROUP.
DIAGRAM OF PUBLIC GROUPS.


GOVERNMENT GROUP. PRELIMINARY ELEVATION.
GOVERNMENT GROUP, PRELIMINARY SEC TION
5


ENTIRE CITY—PRELIM INARY PERSPECT IVE.
6
