

PY ftroacis i'c|r)
FEDERATION.
MAY 23, 1893.
Wo nr© again face to face with the
taiomantous question of Federation. I feel
that I would like to have a Pres*
at my -command. Not that it makes
any difference to the present inhabitants
whether we have Federation or not, but
sometimes, like the old adage “ A stitch in
time saves nine,” and to neglect one’s duty
at a time like this is equivalent to closing
your eyes to the perpetration of a felony,
expecting to hear a reward offered. For
the present condition of things reminds
me very much of a Judge waiting on the
verdict of a jury. If they cannot agree
they are returned to solitary confinement.
Yet we are told what the majority does
must be right. Is the Judge the majority ?
or is the opinion of the majority of the
jury any guide to the legal or moral justice
of the case P They are not barristers, nor
■are they clergymen, and if they were, I
fear such treatment would soon fill them
up with a desire to secure their own free-
dom, regardless of the prisoner’s comfort.
So it is with Federation—nor, that the
majority of the people are scientists or
political shining lights. But they are
anxious to get out of the state of seige
they have been placed in. They are told
they will get this, that, and the other when,
they Federate, which is equal to informing
them that they will get nothing till they
do. This is what wc are pleased to accept
as legislation. If we were to call it co-
ercion it would bring contempt upon ns.
They call it an appeal to people’s intelli-
gence, while they fail to see tha : they
are forcing questions upon the people that
they ar® in no way fitted to deal with- It
could be said with more truth that it was
an appeal to their ignorance which they
are as reluctant to expose as they are to
put there hand in their pocket. Bat from
this you must not infer that there is no
intelligence amongst the opponents of
Federation. You must bear in mind that
the conditions of the two parties are totally
different. The one is a patriotic cans®,
while the other is a financial or commercial
■one. And unless you can touch the people’s
pocket, or show them where they are to
touch another’s, no good can be got of
them. See bow they snapped at Free-
trade. The first step to their ruin. And
see now how they wish to make Protection
a recommendation to Federation. Like
moths, they fly in a dark night to the
Tame they perish on. Nor is it those who
i.ssist the cause mast that receive the
.greatest benefit. Apart from the few
the great mass are left to struggle in the
mire competing one against another to
serve those who have served them so faith-
lessly. When election time comes round
they are always ready to forget their mis
fortunes! to bo guided by outward appear-
ances which lead ihem to believe that their
misfortunes are greater than any other’s.
(lot ! There arc men hers who lose their
fives'. Not only is there comfort and
happiness -denied, but they are consigned.
to excruciating torture. They start life%J
being dwarfed and demented by poverty,
half-a-crown a week, and nothing to begin
with. Later on there are men working
laborious work on the poorest of living,
sleeping anyhow and anywhere, and latterly
they are tramping the country, and found
dead like a dog on the road side, to avoid
which many of them are found in gaol, the
hospital and Benevolent Asylum.
0 death, the poor man’s dearest friend.
The kindest and the best ;
’Welcome the hour my weary bones.
When laid with thee at rest.
The great, the wealthy fear the blow,
Prom pomp and pleasure torn;
But O ! a bless’d relief to those
Who weary laden mourn !
O ! the sentiments of such inen as these
are jewels compared to tha glowing
eloquence of the college bred, who would
spend days and nights studying how they
were to mislead mankind. Nor is the
worst reached, but they are fast preparing
the way. It is derision to talk of charity
in our condition. Pew have more than
they require. If they had, they have no
guarantee that charity would be extended
to them in a time of need, and people i®
keep their pockets closed or secrete their
circumstances would be disposed to say
harsh things of them. There is bnt two
ways to live, the right and the wrong.
We have the latter in its most exaggerated
form. The magnitude of it is no recom-
mendation. You cannot show me a country
on the face of the earth where constitutional
government exists that its inhabitants have
not been dragged through the mire like
so many dead cats. To say that our
present conditions are better than slavery
is mockery. A horse or a dog is in a better
position than one half of you. If poverty
does not overtake you it at least gives
some of you a good deal of trouble, not t©
speak of what your privileges cost society..
And the pleasure you must have in your
surroundings. No man can more than
live, and if the few can keep the many, how
much easier would it be for the many to
keep the few. Bat you cannot do this
under constitutional government, which in
other words means Mob rule. We prac-
tise in the aggregate what we condemn in
the abstract. “We see the mote in an-
other’s eye, while w T e fail to see the beam
in our own.” To have a friendly fight we
reduce our bullets to ballots. No room fer-
tile peacable and well-disposed here.
They must stand and look on, as they are
in the minority. All things come to him
who waits.
See the mighty host advancing,
Satan leading on,
Miahty men around us falling.
Courage almost gone, &e.
The prodigal child,
Wm. lyell.
Wyalong,
Printed at the Wyaiong Abgus, Neeld-street,
W yatoug-
