

CONffIDEiITIAL until 8 p.m. (S, .T. ) , March 28, 1951.
FEDERAL PARLIAME TARY LABOR PARTY
STATEMENT OF POLICY
GENERAL ELECTIONS, 1951
by
THE LEADER OP THE OPPOSITION
(Mr. J.B. CHIPLEY)
Polling Day April 28, 1951.
For additional copies of this
document, kindly write to
D.K, Rodgers, office of the
Leader of the Opposition,
Bth Floor, Commonwealth Bank,
Martin Place, Sydney, . S.T.


SUMMARY.
"•••arrest the runaway Menzies £ end place it under restraint," Page 1
■'.• ,Coramonweaith must be armed with sufficient power to regulate
prices and profits.” Page 2
”...|t will be possible to obtain the fullest co-operation with the
i;.G.T.U.and the great trades unions in carrying out Labpr's
programme for stabilising the economy...” Page 2.
”We will negotiate with the trades unions and employer organisations
with the object of increasing production,minimising stoppages of
works and giving trades unions an important share in the
responsibility of production drives...” Page 2
"Labor will maintain and enforce legislation.•.dealing with...
irregularities and malpractices in trades union ballots.” Page 3
"The Labor Party pledges Itself to eliminate all seditious and
subversive activities.....We believe that the Resent laws are
sufficient...but, if they are not,...the people will be asked to
give the Commonwealth Parliament 'additional Constitutional powers...”
Page 3,
"••• o ur party i s second to none in its opposition to Communism.
...we will not hesitate...to bring down the full rigor of the
law on those proved to be engaged in clearly subversive activity in
any walk of life. If need be,we shall strengthen the law to combat
such activity.” Page k
"...the Labor Government will maintain and develop Australia’s defence
programme in keeping with our obligations as a member of the British
Oommonvvealth and also of the United Nations." Page
"..maintain the existing exchange rate with the British JS." Page 5*
"...there will be no imposition of an outside bank board...” page 6.
"Labor will assist legitimate home-makers..." Page 6,
"...an immediate review of the Government’s immigration policy..•" Page 6.
"...increase by 10/- a week the maximum rate of pension for the aged and
the invalid." Page 6, class widows’ pensions will be increased
by 10/- a week..." Page 7* "War .ensions will be increased.«."Page
7. "Labor pledged itself,,.to increase first child endowment to
10/- I no® re-affirm,.,this pledge." Page 7.
"Labor's health p01icy...." Page 7.
"Labor will not permit resources to be diverted from developmental
schemes which add to the basic strength of the national manufacturing
and rural industries." Page 8.
"Main features of Labor’s rural policy..." Page 8.
"Labor is pledged to repeal the Wool Sales Deduction Wet and amounts
already collected under it will be refunded in due course." Page 9«
"...immediate review of...saies tax legislation." Page 9*
"The Labor Party is concerned at certain aspects of the foreign policy
of the Menzies-Padden Government.
"Labor has always favored close co-operation with the United States. But
it is imperative that our relationship with Britain should be
strengthened..." page 10.
"Labor will firm oppose the proposal for the re-armament of Japan." Page
1 0.


Ladies and gentlemen, and fellow-citizens of Australia
Fifteen months ago, the Menzies-Padden coalition took over the
reins of Australian government. They were full of promisee, they raised
false hopes - above all they undertook to put value back into the £,
What has happened in 15 months?
Every housewife knows wo have suffered the most disastrous
inflation in Australian history. Every wage and salary earner knows that
the value of the £ has fallen to the lowest point in our history. Those on
pensions, superannuation and fixed incomes generally have experienced
downright hardship and face the future, if the Menzios Government continues
in office, with fear and dread. All sections of the community are throatene
In May, 1948, the Menzies-Padden parties defeated Labour 1 s Price
Control referendum. In so doing, they kicked the foundations from under
Australian price stability. Up to that point, Labor had given Australia
a price stability record with which only one other country in the world
could compare.
After that date, wo became constitutionally disarmed in the face
of inflation at home and abroad. Every housewife knows, from her own
budgetary struggles, that there is truth in the recent figures which show
Australia to have been in the ferefront of the race to runaway inflation in
the past 12 months. The housewife and her husband both know that quarterly
cost-of-living adjustments, even of 10/- or 12/- , still leave them chasing
hopelessly behind the onward rush of everyday food and clothing prices.
What is the key, the central, the inescapable issue of this
election which Mr. Menzies has despairingly rushed upon you?
Labor bolls you, without hesitation, that the one and only problem
is to arrest the runaway J|enzies £ and to place it under restraint.
What has crippled Australia’s resistance to inflation over the
past 15 months has not boon any deadlock between the House of Representatives
and the Senate. It has been the deadlock, still unbroken, between the
warring, sectional interests within the Menzies-Padden Cabinet.
In 15 months, they have still failed to produce a policy for
economic stability.
HALT INFLATION
The Labor Party pledges itself to take every measure necessary
to halt the present disastrous inflation. To do that, a programme is
required to stabilise the Australian economy.


An essential part of this programme is that the Commonwealth
must be armed with sufficient power to regulate prices and profits.
Effective regulation of prices is urgent, yet the Menzies-Paddon Govern-
ment has shown its utter contempt for the wishes of the Australian people.
The Liberal and Country parties pledged themselves at the last
election to restore full purchasing value to the Australian £. But their
pledge was dishonoured and the value of the £ has fallen rapidly under
their administration.
Yet, when the Labor Party in the Senate passed a Bill to permit
the people of Australia to confer on the Parliament the necessary power to
regulate prices, the Menzies-Padden Government did not oven permit the
Bill to bo considered by the House of Representatives.
I point out to you that established authorities already exist in
Australia which are legally empowered to regulate wages, salaries and
conditions bf employment in industry. I refer, of course, to the
Commonwealth and State Arbitration Courts and tribunals. Wages and
salaries constitute an important element in the Australian economic and
cost structure which is, in fact, under continuous regulation.
PRICES. PROFITS. WAGES
The Labor Party is satisfied that the Commonwealth Parliament
must be given power to control prices and profits effectively. Whon that
power has been obtained and justly exercised by a Labor Government, I am
certain that it will be possible to obtain the fullest co-operation with
the A.C.T.U. and the groat trades unions in carrying out Labor’s
programme for stabilising the economy of .Australia, \Yo will negotiate
with the trades unions and employer organisations with the object of
increasing production, minimising stoppages of work and giving trades
unions an important share in the responsibility of production drives -
while firmly rejecting the dangerous and futile expedients for repressive
legislation favored by the present anti-Labor Government,
Such agreements with the great body of organised workers would
most certainly lead to a firm understanding that, subject to effective
price and profit control, the trades unions would co-operate most
actively with a Labor Government to achieve and maintain economic
stability in this country.


TRADES UNION BALLOTS
Labor will maintain and enforce the legislation passed by the
Labor Government in dealing with the subject of irregularities and
malpractices in trades union ballots. This legislation has been largely
availed of and, if further experience reveals any defects, we will proceed
to enact all necessary- amendments.
The Labor Party pledges Itself to eliminate all seditious and
subversive activities and to attack all forms of industrial sabotage. Its
method of doing so will not follow the illegal and unconstitutional
measures of the Menzies-Fadden Government but will be based upon existing
laws which are stringent and far-reaching in character. In substance,
they are based on British practice and they mean that the laws of seditior
will be applied in accordance with the due processes of law and the
established principles of British justice.
V/e believe that the present laws are sufficient for the purpose
required but if they are not they will be amended and, if necessary, the
people will be asked to give the Commonwealth Parliament additional
constitutional powers on the subject.
COMMUNISM.
What is the position now?
The Menzios-Padden Government has achieved nothing and the
condition of the economy has declined almost "beyond recognition.
Next Week, you will be told by the Government that its failure is due to
Labor. First of all, it will tell you that for many months we failed to
lot the Communist Party Dissolution Bill through. What is the truth?
It would not have mattered whether that bill was passed in one month or
in 12 months. As soon as the High Court had time to examine it; six of
the seven justices, five appointed bj* - non-Labor governments, came back
with the clear answer that the measure, from top oo bottom, was
unmistakeably illegal and unconstitutional.
As a matter of fact, Labor had striven for months to have struck
out of the bill those monstrous provisions that threatened the basic
British liberties of innocent and loyal trades unionists and on the
say-so - not of the courts, of justice - but of the Government consisting
of party politicians.


The Communist Party Dissolution Act is now shown to have been
illegal and void from the outset and, therefore, has no significance
whatsoever for the abject failures of the Menzies-Padden Government in
the past 15 months.
On behalf of the Labor party, I say that our party is second to
none in its opposition to Communism, kb know what has happened to
democratic labor parties and their members wherever Communism has come
to power. At tho same time, the Labor Movement refuses to be panicked
into indlscfiminato repression and gaoling of strikers - at best a,
futile policy. But wo did not hesitate when we were the Government, and
we will not hesitate in the future, to bring down tho full rigor of tbo
law on those proved to be engaged in clearly subversive activity in any
walk of life. If need bo, we shall strengthen the law to combat such
activity.
You will next be told that Labor frustrated the Government's
programme by holding up the National Service Bill for examination by a
Select Committee of the Senate. But you know that, if the Government had.
/
been sincere, it could have introduced compulsory military training on
the day it took office under existing law yet it failed to do so.
After the elections, the Labor Government will immediately
examine the scheme of compulsory military service with n view to
determining, in the light of the then existing economic and industrial
conditions, the future operation of tho scheme. Labor* remains pledged
against conscription for overseas service.
DEFENCE
The Labor Government, in the recent post-war years, was the
first Government in Commonwealth history to give to the three armed
services a balanced long-term programme to enable them to plan ahead
with certainty and without risk of interruption or curtailment.
When returned, the Labor Government will maintain and develop
Australia's defence programme in keeping with our obligations ns a
member of the British Commonwealtn and also of the United Nations.
The Labor Government will maintain its defence programme with
special emphasis on modern scientific development, such as the rocket
range. It will maintain an up-to-date air force and in the development
of the navy will give special attention to anti-submarine defence*


The tmrd attack on Labor which will be offered to you in the
next few weeks, will be on our attitude to the recent bill dealing with
secret ballots in trades unions,
what are the facts?
Existing arbitration legislation - all of it passed by the last
L2..bor Government - already provides for secret ballots in connection with
industrial disputes and fop the correction of any irregularities in the
proper conduct of ballots for trades union officers. Moreover, trades
unions already have secret ballots under their rules for the election of
their officers. In addition, the existing legislation of the Labor
Government provides for an appeal to the ..rbitration Court if any member
of a union feels that such ballot has not been properly conducted. If he
satisfies the Court of the justice of the case, the ballot is set aside.
Even if he loses the case, his costs map/' be provided for by court order.
In any case, when did Mr. Menzies bring forward this measure of
interference with trades union rights? Not 15 months ago when ho took
office; not even six months ago; but three weeks ago, as pure “window-
dressing* 1 when he had already decided to press for the earliest possible
double dissolution of Parliament,
I leave you to judge of his good faith in this matter.
So much for the alibis 'Which the Menzies Government will offer
for their 15 months of “do-nothing** government.
ECONOMICS AND FINANCE
Mr. Menzies deliberately confuses tae issue for you by
distorting the relationship between subversive activities and the great
economic problems which he has so completely failed to tackle. Labor will
not treat you like that, h'e believe that the bread-and-butter issues of
economics and finance are the basic ones in Australia today and we will
tell you frankly now where we stand on these issues.
It will be our policy to maintain the existing exchange rate
with the British £. Vie will provide an authority to investigate reason-
able claims for relief from special disabilities caused by the
importation of essential goods at high overseas prices.
As far as Australian industries are concerned. Labor will maintain its
policy of full tariff protection.
We will retain the 1945 Banking ~ct and carry on a vigorous
development of the Commonwealth Bank as required by that legislation.
Me will clear the 1947 Bank Nationalisation Act off the statute book.


since it is now legally inoperative following the Privy Council’s
judgment upon it. Under Labor, there will be no imposition of an outside
bank board with representatives of private commercial interests to
I
dominate, without any financial responsibility, the policy of our people's
bank, and the fate of your savings.
When the Labor Government is returned to power, it will make a
thorough review of the recent credit-restriction policies of the
Menzies-Ffedden Cabinet.
Labor will assist legitimate home-makers by subsidising their
expenditure up to a limit of £3,000 and by reducing interest rates on
housing loans to the lowest practicable figure. In doing this, we will
bo going a very long way towards helping home-makers.
MIGRATION
The urgency of the housing problem throughout Australia today
calls for an immediate review of the Menzies-Fadden Government's immigration
policy with a view to determining an annual number of arrivals that is
within the capacity of the country to absorb.
This review should also cover the question of the proper seladdon
of types of persons most needed for national developmental and other
(
essential undertakings of Commonwealth and State Governments and of local
government authorities.
The Labor Party stresses that the plans of the Menzies Govern-
ment on immigration differ from those of the last Labor Government in
that proper regard is not now being paid to the numbers and the selection
of those migrants likely to make the, best contribution to the solution of
our housing and economic problems.
SOCIAL SERVICES
Labor, which has always pioneered advances in social services,
has an extensive programme ready for improving the existing social
services and henofits.
\7e propose to continue our efforts to eliminate the means test.
Aa our next instalment, we pledge ourselves to raise the permissible
income limit by 10/- a week and to increase the property limitation
from £750 to £lOOO.
On the positive side, we will increase by 10/- a week the
maximum rate of pension for the aged and the invalid.


In addition, the maximum rate for A class widows.*, pensions will
be increased by 10/- a week and other widows’ pensions will be increased
proportionately by your Labor Government.
Ivar pensions will be increased in the light of the reduced
purchasing power of the £ since December 19d9.
All pension payments will be kept under constant review.
The rate of unemployment end sickness benefits will also be
reviewed and adjusted from time to time.
Last year, in the Senate, Labor inserted a provision in .thee
Child Endowment for a payment of 10/- a week for the first child in
every Australian family. The Government cut this down by half to 5/- •
Labor pledged itself at that time, when returned to office, to increase
first child endowment to 10/-. I now re-affirra Labor's intention to honour
this pledge.
The Labor Government will examine proposals for a system of
marriage loans.
NATIONAL HEALTH
Mr. Menzies' failure to grapple with inflation, has been
only in the last 15 months by Sir Earle Page’s utter failure to provide ’/
this country with any effective national health scheme. He has produced?
enough words to bolster up half a dozen health schemes, but ruth La
that Australia still lacks anything approaching a complete health coverage,
such as the Australian people unmistakeably demanded when they carried the
social services amendment to the Constitution in f
Labor’s health policy will make provision for the payment by the
Commonwealth of a substantial proportion of medical fees; for an extended
pharmaceutical benefits scheme on the basis of voluntary participation
odj* doctors; for increased assistance to hospitals; for a free dental
service for children under 16 years; and for a national drive, in
co-operation with t ..e States, against currently threatening epidemic
diseases.
The conditions of aborigines under Commonwealth jurisdiction
have recently given cause for concern, notably in the Darwin area. One
of the first duties of Labor’s Minister for the Interior will be to
institute a thorough review of aborigines’ living and industrial conditions.


NATIONAL DEVERLOPMENT
When last in office, Labor inaugurated the most imaginative
programme of productive national development works ever undertaken in
this country. Some, like the Snowy River project, were undertaken as
Commonwealth responsibilities. Others were surveyed jointly with the
State Governments, the Commonwealth undertaking to provide funds and
other assistance where there was a real prospect of useful development.
Today, there is disquiet in many parts of .Australia on account of
statements by present Ministers 'who have suggested that they are consider-
ing the curtailment of progress in schemes like tX.t on the Snowy River
which hold out the promise of permanent relief from the power shortages
'Which are holding back real advances in Australian standards of living
today.
Labor will not permit resources to be diverted from developmental
schemes which add to the basic strength of the national raanufacturing
and rural industries.
The Snowy River project will be accelerated. Every effort will
be made to assist development of the Callide and Blair Athol coalfields,
and potential povfer end irrigation scheme areas such as the Burdekin
Valley and the Clarence River. The Glen Davis shale development will be
retained and re-organised for an experimental period of three years and,
after two years, the results will be assessed.
The Commonwealth will give assistance, in the States concerned,
in the provision, importation and installation of modern equipment to
ensure continuous services of power, gas and light. In several areas,
particularly in Queensland and western Australia, resources development
is handicapped by inadequate port and harbour facilities.
RURAL POLICY.
The main features of Labor’s rural policy are:
1. The wheat stabilisation plan, which came into being under the
Labor Government, will be extended for a further five years,
with the co-operation of the State Governments and the approval
.of the wheatgrowers.
2. Our earlier procedures to determine costs of production in the
dairy, wheat and other primary industries will be continued.


3* T7e will extend for a furt'er five years a guaranteed price for
dairy products. In this and other cases, we will secure regular,
periodic review of United Kingdom purchasing contracts.
4. The Labor Government will co-operate with the State Governments to
develop tropical agriculture in northern New South wales, Queensland,
and 'western J.ustralia.
To vvoolgrowers, I want to say two things:
First, Labor is pledged to repeal the Wool Sales Deduction
.act and the amounts already c olleoted under it will be refunded in due
course.
Second, Labor will offer a ballot to growers on the establishment
of a post-Joint Organisation Scheme.
My colleague, the former Minister for Commerce and agriculture
(Mr. Pollard) will speak to you on Labor's rural policy in more detail
over the national network next week.
The Labor Government intends to have an immediate review of the
Menzles-Padden sales tax legislation, particularly as it concerns the
heavy additional imposts on everyday necessities such as radios, women’s
handbags end cosmetics.
The last Labor Government was the first since Federation to enter
actively into the field of education and cultural development. It built
up a proud record and increased the Commonwealth's contribution from
£1,000,000 to £20,000,000 a year. When returned, the Labor Government
on
will press/ with this important feature of our national life. In
particular, the Commonwealth Government will give assistance to public
libraries, art 'galleries, national theatre and national orchestral
projects.
In 19*4-2, the Labor Government established "legal service
bureaux" throughout Australia and a very large number of service men and
women have been helped by the free legal advice given by the Commonwealth
offices of this organisation. Recently, the Menzles-Fadden Government
has adopted a policy of reduction and retrenchment in the bureaux. The
Labor Government will restore the services as existing prior to December
191*9.


FOREING POLICY.
The Labor* Party is concerned at certain aspects of the foreign
policy of the Menzies-Padden Government. The Labor Government played a
prominent part in the formation and development of the United Nations,
which is the world organisation,fcr peace; but the support of the
present Government for the United Nations is neither strong nor consistent.
Labor has always favored close co-operation with the United
States. But it is imperative that our relationship with Britain should
be strengthened and also that the principles of the United Nations should
be firmly adhered to.
Y/e should insist that the primary purpose of the United Nations
is the prevention of wars and the settlement of international disputes
by conciliation.
In such matters, a policy of mere expediency is a very dangerous
guide. N good illustration of this is the problem of the re-armaraent
of Japan. It was solemnly agreed in the Japanese armistice and in the
decisions of the Allied nations in the Par Eastern Commission that Japan
should not only become de-militarised but should remain de-rnilitarised.
Yet, today, it is proposed, as a matter of expediency, to re-arra
the Japanese in which event the South lacific might again become an
area of future Japanese aggression.
Labor Will firmly oppose the proposal for the re-armament of
Japan, "DO-NOTHING” GOVERNMENT
The Labor Government will wage war increasingly against
inflation.
Labor offers you actionl
Labor offers you a positive policyl
Clear the way for Labor I
Throw out the Menzies "do-nothing* Governmentl
