

! PVtyo
FEDERATION,
IMPERIAL
I or
' DEMOCRATIC.
SHORT ESSAYS (MOSTLY REPRINTED), WITH AN
INTRODUCTION,
By JAMES G DRAKE, M.L.A.,
OF QUEENSLAND, AUSTRALIA
PRICE THREEPENCE.
BENJAMIN WOODCOCK, PRINTER, BRISBANE.
•. " ; w r **Hf la.-Ju ./’.I




FEDERATION,
IMPERIAL
DEMOCRATIC.


A U S T R ALASIA.
Oh, fair Ideal, unto whom,
Through days of doubt and nights of gloom,
Brave hearts have clung, while lips of scorn,
Made mock of thee as but a dream
Already on the heights of morn
We see thy golden sandals gleam,
And, glimmering through the clouds that wrap thee yet,
The seven stars that are thy coronet.
J. Jir.fNTOV Stephens,


Introduction
Imperial Federation
Democratic Federation
In Hoc Signo Vinces
Queensland and South Carolina
Waiting for the People
The Barrier Beyond




INTRODUCTION.
Federation, until recently the study of the few, has now ad-
vanced into the domain of questions which demand the earnest
attention of all. The action of the other Australian colonies in
agreeing to send delegates to a convention is forcing the Govern-
ment of Queensland to follow suit.
Up to the time of the passing of the Pacific Island Labourers
(Extension) Act of 1892 there was no colony in the group more
forward than Queensland in federal matters or more vociferous in
protesting devotion to the Federal Spirit. Her declension from
that high position was sharply marked by her curt refusal to
attend a conferery:e of Premiers to consider the broad question of
the introduction of alien races into Australia; and since then
there has been an evident disposition on the part of her Govern-
ment to lag behind and to be “ happy to be left out,” if such a
thing could be managed without scandal. Rumours are now
current of a plot to send down as delegates certain selected mem-
bers of Parliament who will represent the peculiar views held by
the Government and misrepresent the wishes and aspirations of
the people. The People of Queensland, to whom the imminence
of an Asiatic invasion is of greater moment than the convenience
of the sugar industry, are deeply concerned in the question
whether they are to be allowed to join with the other colonies in
discussing on equal terms the lines upon which the colonies will
federate, or whether they are to stand aside and allow the remain-
der of the group to prepare and initiate a scheme without regard
to the dangers to which Queensland is specially exposed.
With a view to arousing interest in the question and exciting
discussion lam publishing this little pamphlet. All the articles, ex-
cepting the first, have previously been printed, but not in Queens-
land. The collection would not have been complete without
some attempt to show' what are the aims of the Imperial Federa-


tion Party. It is not easy to write with certainty on this branch
of the subject. The League (now dissolved) which had for its
object the development of Imperial Federation was chary of
publishing its plan of operations ; and it was sometimes charged
with not having any plan at all. Sir Daniel Cooper, whom I have
taken the liberty of criticising, is certainly the most outspoken ad-
vocate on the subject I have yet met with, and I have therefore
accepted him as my authority.
The various occasions which gave rise to the other articles are
explained, where necessary, by head note. Written at different
times, extending over nearly twelve months, and having different
immediate objects in view, it is probable that they will be found
to contain frequent repetitions and perhaps some apparent in-
consistencies. I venture to think, however, that there is no real
inconsistency. My object throughout was and is to defeat the
designs of the Imperialists, and to direct and consolidate public
opinion in the seven colonies in favour of a Democratic Fede-
ration upon a Pure Representative basis.
May 15 th, 1896.


IMPERIAL FEDERATION.
“Surely in vain the net is spread in the sight of any bird.”
Prov. 1, ver. 17.
“ The conception of a British Empire, homologous, homogeneous,
knit together bj bonds that, while welding the whole into an organism
of irrefragable and resistless unity, will at the same time endow the
several parts with all the individual flexibility necessary to the utmost
freedom of local action, is magnificent and inspiring. Small wonder
that it has especially fascinated those whose realisation of the mighty
power that radiates over the whole habitable globe from the small but
dynamic centre of the British Isles, has been enlarged and deepened by
long colonial experience, and close persona; observation of the illimit-
able future possibilities of those great yet widely separated countries
over which the flag of England waves For a realisation of the
potentialities of a confederation of the British dominions impresses him
who attains to it with a two-fold solemnity—born, on the one hand, of
visions of the stupendous magnitude of an Empire that encircles the
globe and includes all zones in its beneficent grip ; and roused, on the
other, by a recognition of the calamitous consequences both to the
mother country and her children if any malign misunderstandings
should sever their affectionate alliance, or exchange their mutual help-
fulness for the coldness of strangers, or it may be the hostility of
foes.”
The above-quoted passage is the commencement of an essay
entitled “IMPERIAL FEDERATION, what b is, and how to
get it,” by Sir Daniel Cooper, Bart., G.C.M.G. The essay is
addressed to Lord Knutsford, as Secretary for the colonies, and
the covering letter is dated November 21st, 1891 ; and the essay,
with the letter, is published in pamphlet form by Street &, Co.,
Cornhill, London.
Picking our way through the big words, and grouping the ideas
according to their natural order, it appears:—
1. That the writer has realised the mighty power that already
exists and radiates, etc.
2. That he has attained to a realisation oi the potentialities
of a Confederation of the British Dominions, which does not yet
exist, but might exist, and
3. Looking beyond the Confederation, he has conceived the
idea of a British Empire consisting of these British Dominions
welded into an organism of irrefragable and resistless unity.
It is this last conception—the organism of irrefragable and re-
sistless unity—that the writer finds magnificent and inspiring.
This then is Imperial Federation, the mysterious, elusive phantasy
which the Imperial Federation League has for so long been unable
or unwilling to describe or explain. The correctness of my precis


of the opening passage will appear upon a perusal of the succeed-
ing portion of the pamphlet, in which the writer proceeds to
discuss the very important question, “ how to get it ! ”
The ultimate structure, he writes, i.e., of course, the organism
of irrefragable and resistless unity, “ must be built upon sub-Con-
federaeies of the several constituents of the Colonial groups
among themselves.”
“ Thus the real and earnest Teachings of Australasia towards Fede-
ration are full of hopefulness, and every encouragement should be given
to its colonies to federate on the lines agreed to by their representa-
tives at the Sydney Conference of 1890.”
We may fairly presume from this that the movement which
commenced in Australia about 1890, and which led to the Austra-
lasian Convention, was a movement that enjoyed the patronage of
the Imperial JFederationists. The outcome of the labours of the
Convention was the Commonwealth Bill, adopted by the National
Australasian Convention on the 9th April, 1891. Comparing this
date with the date of Sir Daniel’s covering letter, we may assume
that Sir Daniel was aware of the nature of that Bill, and com-
placently regarded it as an indication that we were travelling on
gaily and blindly along the broad highroad that leads to Imperial
Federation.
Now, the five points of the Imperial Federation scheme, upon
which Sir Daniel demands to have “ a clear understanding from
the beginning,” are these ;
“1. The first is that Gfreat Britain must be the main-spring and
the centre of federative action. It must be her privilege and her duty
to guide, control, and accelerate the changes required from time to
time.
“2. The Sub-Confederations must be complete within themselves.
There must be no Newfoundland outside Canada ; no Australian
Colony outside the Antipodean Dominion ; no erring brother in South
Africa or the West Indies allowed to go in peace, or to pursue his own
independent way No colony must be allowed to secede, or hold aloof,
on any ground, unless with the permission of every other member of
the group, and of Great Britain. To federate with looseness would be
to throw' away the entire teaching of the great civil war in the United
States, and to show the ingratitude of indifference to lessons placed at
our disposal free of cost.
“3. The tariff of each colony, existing at the time when the Sub-
Confederation is formed, should be maintained until the Central
Government is in working order, when there will be machinery for
agreeing upon one general tariff. Then, too, will be the time for
arranging the mutual relationships of the Confederacy and its members
as to taxation.
“4. The arrangements for the cost of the joint Empire and its
different parts will have to be made in the same way, and arranged ac-
cording to circumstances.
“5. The Sub-Confederations would start with Free Trade with each
other, and that, one may fain hope, would be the initial step towards
the abolition of customs duties and the establishment of Free Trade
within the whole Imperial Empire. Whether.there be or be not tariffs
against the foreigner is a matter with which we need not concern our-
selves now.”


This, if somewhat dogmatic, is quite clear and free from
ambiguity. We have got first to be welded, and no attention is
going to be paid to the protests of any reluctant minority. Our
tariffs, and our mutual relationships as to taxation ai’e to be
allowed to remain in the background until the welding is complete,
and then it will be too late for an}' separate colony to object be-
cause it will have been welded, and no separate colony is to be
allowed to go in peace. Likewise, after the welding is complete,
the arrangements for the cost of the Empire will be made according
to circumstances. And, lastly, again after the welding is complete ,
the English Freetrader may ‘ £ fain hope ” for the establishment of
Free Trade within the whole Imperial Empire, or at least the
colonies that are welded will be prevented from imposing customs
duties upon British manufactures. And the writer has a very
cogent reason for declining to go into these details before the
welding is accomplished. He # expressly deprecates such a course
on the ground that the colonies, if they knew what was in front of
them, might get frightened and jump back before the beneficent-
grip had them safe. He urges that to attempt to formulate a
definite scheme ‘‘ is at least undesirable, and fraught even with
harm.”
“ To puslJ forward at this moment controversies not only of this kind
[problems as to the coast of defence, whether on land or by sea, and
by whom it is to be borne,] but also problems relating to the internal
laws and institutions of the federated states, and especially of their
fiscal relationships to one another and the outside world, is simply to
throw discredit on the whole movement. It is the best way, in the
present state of the colonies, as to population and public burdens, to
Mghten them off from federation and cause them to draw back.”
Here we find a great obstacle to Imperial Federation. We
are not to know the cost beforehand for fear that it will frighten
us off, and yet we shall not be quite so foolish as to go into
anything without carefully counting the cost first. The cost, if
we knew it, would frighten us; the unknown cost does frighten
us. This is surely an irrefragable and resistless argument against
the whole scheme. Sir Daniel thinks, quite without warrant,
that the colonies will not insist upon having a clear knowledge of
these matters beforehand, and be naively recommends that
“ while the back is being trained for the burden it will ultimately
bear with ease,” he and his friends should keep quiet; and he ex-
presses a hope that the monetary aspects ol the question vyil 1
settle themselves.
It is truly wonderful that any one who has lived in these
colonies could give the people credit for having so little sense. If
such schemes were only foolish we might let them pass unnoticed ;
but they are actively mischievous and ought to be exposed
Australia is calmly pursuing the path that leads to independence.
Intercolonial federation must and will be embraced by the people
of Australia as a necessary stage in the journey. When that is


achieved, it is devoutly to be hoped that the great community
ushered inio existence will preserve unimpaired its friendly
relations with Great Britain, and live on terms of amity and
close alliance with the people from whom we have sprung.
Nothing is likely to disturb our relations unless it is the work of
those who would seek to draw us into entangling and undefined
engagements. Such meddlers are the enemies of Australia, and
not the true friends of Great Britain. But Sir Daniel we cannot
regard as an enemy. In candidly telling us so much, he may
prove to be our best friend for “ surely in vain the net is spread in
the sight of any bird


DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION.
[Written shortly after the publication of the scheme of Sir George
R. Dibhs for the unification of New South Wales and Victoria.
Reprinted from The Sydney “• Bulletin” of August 25th, 1894.]
The first thing necessary is to have a clear conception of the
purposes for which the Federation of the Australian provinces is
desirable, and of the relative importance of those purposes. The
prime necessity for Federation arises, in my judgment, in connec-
tion with Defence—Defence against two forms of danger, viz , (1)
hostile invasion, and (2) industrial aggression, through the syste-
matic introduction of cheap labour (of whatever kind), or of the
products of such labour. These matters are of the most vital im-
portance, and the}'- are exactly those which, to a greater degree
than any other, can be better undertaken and more efficiently
dealt with by a Federal body than they could be by separate and
disunited provinces. The first—hostile invasion-—is of such
a deadly nature as to comprehend all other misfortunes, and I,
therefore, give it ihe place of first importance ; the second—-indus-
trial aggression—though net quite so faral in its nature (because
remediable up to a certain, though undefined point), is an ever-
present evil, one which is already upon us, and which will tend to
intensify itself unless met and coped with in the early stages of
it? growth. These evils are equally the concern of all the pro-
vinces. A hostile invasion of Tasmania would be a deadly injury
to all the provinces, just as the constant influx of Asiatics in
Queensland and the Northern Territory, and the importation of
the products of cheap labour into New 7 South Wales, is an indus-
trial and very serious injury to the whole of Australia The Asia-
tic invasion has already impressed itself upon the people of Aus-
tralia as being equally a matter of common concern, on whatever
point of the coast the landing may be effected.
* * *
Neither of the schemes put before tbe people of Australia up to
the present time is, in my opinion, likely to lead to any workable
system of Federation. The Commonwealth Bill, product of the
Convention of 1891, may be put on one side at once. Any pro-
posal to force the warm life of Australia into a rigid, machine-
made mould is foredoomed to failure. Federation, to be healthy,
should be a growth, and the first long step towards Federation is
gained when the provinces can agree to come together for even
one purpose. Speaking of federal Government, Freeman says


that it is “ a more delicate and artificial structure ” than either the
kindom or the independent city ; “ its perfect form is a late growth
of a very high state of political culture ; it is, even more than other
forms of government, essentially the creation of circumstances, and
it will, even less than other forms, bear thoughtlessly transplant-
ing to soils where circumstances have not prepared the ground for
it.” But the Convention Bill bears birth-marks which condemn it
utterly ; and the one permanently useful result of the Convention
will be to demonstrate for ever the futility of attempting, at this
sta"e of Australian history, to foist any Imperialistic yoke on to
the"necks of the people of Australia. It was the natural outcome
of the deliberations of a little body of self-elected notables, and
should be a warning for all time to the people of Australia not to
plant thistles and look to gather grapes therefrom.
# * *
The scheme of Sir G. R. Dibbs, if simpler in its conception than
the Convention scheme, appears to me to be equally far, though
not in the same direction, from the highway that leads to Austra-
lian Federation, in that it is directly opposed to the tendency ap-
parent in Australia, and more especially in Queensland, towards
further segregation for the purpose of securing to particular dis-
tricts the benefits of self-government. Whether we approve of
that tendency or not is quite another matter. It is a fact that
has to be reckoned with, and if wo are going to build with an idea
to permanence, we must recognise facts and shape our course in
obedience to them. Personally, I think that the prospects of Fe-
deration are more hopeful where there are a number of provinces
of fairly equal dimensions and strength, than when they are few in
number, and (most objectionable of all, from the point of view of
a federalist) where one province is so large and powerful as to prac-
tically overshadow the others. Were Victoria to accept the scheme
of Sir G. R. Dibbs, Federation would, I venture to think, be post-
poned until the natural forces that make for segregation had
worked out the disunion of the united province, or perhaps its
division into several units. On the other hand, with a good sys-
tem of Federation, I see no reason why the tendency towards seg-
regation should not be allowed fair play up to the limit at which
it is checked by the counteracting tendency towards Federation
for the purpose of obtaining united action in regard to our external
dealings.
Both the schemes have the same fault in that they leave out of
count the people who are to be governed and who are to provide
the necessary means of carrying on the government. I his is the
fault that runs through the whole system of government as we see
it in operation in the various provinces. It is that which produces
the weakness, vacillation, and uncertainty so noticeable in all co-
lonial administrations. Some are worse than other?, but in no


ease do we find a loyal attempt to carry out the will of the people
as constitutionally expressed. All the governments seem to be,
more or less, artificial contrivances of foreign origin for the pur-
pose of outwitting the people and securing the dominancy of the
classes. This is the fruitful source of all weakness. The spread
of education and the influence of a cheap press has developed a
knowledge of the principles ot government and an aptitude for
politics among the people, more complete and more widely diffused
than has ever before been known in the history of the world ; and
there will never be strength in any government that will not
march with the people, and that cannot make good its claim, on
the ground of superior ability, to occupy the position of leadership.
The form of government in each of the provinces is that of a con-
stitutional Democracy, and the people are continually and right-
fully striving to put their will on the statute-book, whilst the go-
verning class, grudgingly admitting the theoretical right of the
people to rule, ar« using all the constitutional machinery of which
their superior knowledge gives them the command, to force their
will upon the people. The result is a continual fight between this
governing class, having the control of the machinery of govern-
ment, and the great bulk of the people, who have the constitutional
right to be the rulers, but who have not yet the knowledge and
experience to enable them to use their power effectively, and make
good their right.
From this causelarises the “government by contradiction,” to
which you so frequently call attention in your columns and that
form of government will continue, and the cowsequent vacillation
and uncertainty will continue, until those who havh hitherto mo-
nopolised power loyally accept the will of the people as the su-
preme law, and lend their aid to constitutionally give effect to it.
It is said that in the times of the Greeks there were Oligarchies,
the members of which were accustomed to “bind themselves by
an oath to be evil-minded to the people.” Ours do not bind them-
selves by an oath, but they are frequently bound just as strongly
by their class interests to be evil-minded to the people. “ The
one abjectly and incurably Tory Government in this continent,”
which you compare with the Democratic Government of South
Australia, is no true indication of the state of political feeling in
Queensland. A few of the leading members of the progressive
party went over and joined hands with the Tories, initiated a
“ revolution of reaction,” and succeeded in reversing in a couple of
years the legislation of the previous seven. But that revolutionary
wave has already spent its force, and Queensland now sees what it
has led to, and is ready to accept a government just as progressive
as the last was reactionary. So the see-saw goes on, to the
destruction of the peace and prosperity of the provinces, and I, for
one, cam see no assurance of anything better until the conflict


between the governments and the peoples is finished by the
complete adoption of the principle of the government of the people,
by the people, and for the peopie. Then Australia will see govern-
ments that are respected and leared ; strong for all good purposes;
and able to carry out great works in the interest and for the
benefit ot the community.
# * # * *
-:(■ * *
This may seem to be a digression, but I wish to emphasize ray
opinion that no scheme of federation emanating exclusively from
the governing class in Australia and tainted, as all such will
always be, with Imperialism, will ever command that amount of
popular support that is necessary in these days to carry anything
in politics to a permanently successful issue. The successes of the
classes, won as they are too often by false promises at elections, by
violation of election pledges afterwards, and by disingenuous half-
concessions to the democratic party, are feeble, evanescent and
verv often the prelude to unexpected and almost revolutionary
democratic victories. The keynote of success in any attempt to
realise Federation in our time is, I think, trust in the people I,
therefore, frankly accept the position that the will of the people is
the supreme law in politics, and address myself to the consideration
of the means by which government of the people could, in a con-
stitutional manner, be given effect to in the administration of that
portion of the affairs of Australia which cannot be conveniently
deaf: with by the individual and isolated provinces.
FEDERAL ASSEMBLY AND EXECUTIVE.
To obtain a 'fair and just representation of the people of the
federated provinces, I would propose that representatives be
elected by universal suffrage, and in the proportion of one repre-
sentative to every 30,000 of the inhabitants (the quota adopted in
tlm Commonwealth Bill). That would furnish an Assembly of
115 representatives to represent the 3| millions of persons living
in the five mainland provinces and in Tasmania. (I have not
included New Zealand. If that province came in, the numbers
would approximate to 140 tor four millions of people). The only
qualification in the suffrage should be in the direction of requiring
that the elector should have resided for a certain time—say three
or five years—in Australia. The number excluded by such a
qualification would be very small, and no hardship would. I think
be inflicted, seeing that the disfranchisement would, in the case of
any person who had permanently settled, very quickly cure itself.
I suggest that the representatives should be elected for three years,
and that one-third should retire annually. This would give a
truly representative body, possessing the element of stability, and
yet responsive to the developments of public opinion. The Execu-
tive might consist of a certain number of the representatives,
according to convenience, chosen from the Assembly ; I can see no
advantage in a total separation of the Executive from the Legisla-
ture. Both Executive and Assembly would be presided over by a


Governor-General appointed by the Crown. Having banished
the idea of government by contradiction, i.e., by a system of
checks and balances which only delay or prevent the carrying out
of the will ot the people, there would be no need for a costly and
cumbersome Senate. The interests of the individual provinces
could be amply safe-guarded by requiring that all measures should
be submitted a second time to the Assembly sitting as a Senate,
at which second sitting the representatives would vote as provinces,
the votes of a majority of the representatives of any one province
being reckoned as the vote of that province. This would give that
protection of the rights of individual provinces that is essential in
any true federal government.
FEDERAL STATE AND CAPITAL.
One of the chief stumbling-blocks in the way of Federation
hitherto has been the localisation of the capital. That would be
removed by constituting, as soon as might be after the federal
body had been formed, a new and separate Federal State to be
under the entire government and control of the Federal Govern-
ment. It should be in the interior, and, as nearly as circum-
stances would permit, equidistant from the capitals of the several
provinces. There is room between E. lat. 2Gdeg. and 3Udeg., and
S. long. 140 deg. and 146 deg. to carve out an inland State of any
size up to 100,000 square miles. 1 should think that 50,000
square miles woujd be a convenient size, being less than the area
of any present or contemplated province, except Tasmania. The
area I have mentioned comprises a portion each of New South
Wales, South Australia, and Queensland. The country, with the
exception of the towns of Ounnamulla and Thargomindah, is
entirely under pastoral occupation ; and, as some of the pastoralists
on the Queensland side are now complaining that their industry
is not sufficiently profitable to enable them to pay the very low
rent collected by the Queensland Government, they would probably
gladly accept moderate compensation for disturbance if some por-
tions of their runs should be required for more profitable use. A
federal capital situated about equally distant from Bourke and
Charleville would be fairly accessible from Adelaide, Melbourne,
Sydney, Brisbane, Rockhampton, and Townsville, and, in point of
distance, it would not be very much further from the Gulf than
from our Northern capitals. With improvements in railway com-
munication, which would instantly follow the adoption of such a
scheme, the journey from each of the capitals, with the exception
of Hobart and Perth, would mean no more then one night on
wheels, the utmost achievement that can be hoped for in this land
of magnificent distances.
* # * * *
>P #
Let me here express the opinion that no legitimate objection
can be made to the locality mentioned on the score of heat. Ihe
heat of the interior, marvellous to relate, becomes less and less


with the progress of science and investigation, and one is not over-
rash in anticipating the time when the warm, dry climate of the
interior will be more highly esteemed than the cooler but moister
regions on the sea-board. Ooghlau, speaking of Bourke, which
almost touches the 30th parallel, says : —“ Bourke has the same
latitudeasCairo, yet its mean summer temperature is 1.3. less, and
its mean annual temperature is 4° Jess than is the case in the
Egyptian city. New Orleans also lies on the same parallel, but
the American city is 4° hotter in summer. A» regards winter
temperature, Bourke leaves little to be desired, dhe mean winter
reading of the thermometer is 54 5, and, accompanied as this_ is
by clear skies and an absence of snow, the season is both refreshing
and enjoyable.” And, in this district, the supply of artesian
water is, according to present inexhaustible, the bore
at Charleville (on the border of the district indicated) yielding no
less than 3,U00;000 gallons per day. With a scientific system of
water storage and distribution, there is no reason why the country-
should not become a perfect garden; and in the midst of it, in a
climate like that of Cairo and Thebes, would arise, as if by magic,
the Federal Metropolis of Australia, a city of stone and marble,
beautiful to the eye, and more enduring than any city built upon
the seaboard.
The representation in the Federal Assembly being established
on a population basis, the sea-board provinces would be stimulated
to friendly rivalry, seeing that every increase of population would
mean a corresponding increase in their representation and impor-
tance in the Federal Legislature. This rivalry would, however,
36 guarded against abuse by federal laws against indented laboui
and other forms of artificial immigration. Under fair conditions,
each province would be worthily engaged in making its tenitory
as attractive as possible to all classes. In case it should be urged
that the best men in the coast provinces would not be willing to
give their services as representatives in an interior State, 1 reply
that the best men are those who will give their services. Let it
always be insisted upon that the interests of the State are of more
importance than the interests of any individual in the State. I
think that Australia has in the past rather lost than gained in
accepting the services of those who can only devote the odds and
ends of their time to public duties, and that it would be a good
thing to insert in any future federal constitution a clause requiting
that the sittings of the Assembly shall begin at 10 a.m. and con-
clude, if not sooner, at 4 p.m. This would insure to the service
of the State the best hours of the day, and for the remainder
legislators need have no difficulty in finding useful employment.
The statesman does not live, certainly not in Australia, who can
truthfully say that his education is complete.


FEDERAL REVENUE.
The Federal Government would at the outset collect the Cus-
toms duties, and, I think, by its own officers. This would mean
a revenue of 71- millions, but as at first the Federal Government
would probably not be charged with any functions involving a
large expenditure, a very large portion of it w r ould be returned to
the provincial Governments. Regarding, as I do, the benefits of
Federation as being shared equally by each of the provinces, the
expense of the Federal body should be contributed on a population
basis. The surplus remaining after deducting the expenditure of
the Federal Government would, therefore, be returned to the
province exactly according to the rate per head of the Customs
taxation in that province, less its proportion, on a population basis,
of the federal expenditure. As it is generally allowed that the
appointment of a Governor-General would render the retention of
separate Governors in each of the provinces unnecessary, and as
the duties discharged by the Federal Government would from the
first relieve the provinces of a considerable amount of expenditure,
it is probable that the total cost of government over tin* whole of
Australia would not, even at the outset, be increased to any con-
siderable extent, if at all. Should there be any deficiency in
provincial revenue, owing to the expense of Federal Government,
it would have to be made up by direct taxation ; and the provincial
governments have in wealth, especially the wealth of absentees, a
source of taxation which, up to the present time, has hardly been
tapped.
FEDERAL DUTIES.
In spite of all the animosity that has been evinced, from time
to time, against the defence forces of the various provinces, I still
hold to ray opinion that national defence is the first duty of the
individual citizen and the first duty of the State. Perhaps the
want ot appreciation of the need of defence on the part of the
people at large may be regarded as an evidence that they do not
value at a very high rate the advantages they enjoy in our present
imperfect state of civilisation. All the same, there is even in our
lowest depths a lower deep to which we might fall, and we have
always, so long as we maintain our national integrity, the bright
prospect of being able to rise to higher levels of prosperity where
we should have cause to set a very high rate on our privileges.
Given a constitution which shall open to all tree access to the
sources of wealth and power, and bring the advantages of
civilisation and invention within the reach ot all, and Australia
will never want for defenders. “ That public virtue which, among
the ancients, was denomiated patriotism, is derived from a strong
sense of our own interest in the preservation and prosperity of the
free government of which we are members.” The duty of
national defence has already been, to a certain extent, relegated
to the Federal Council, and there would probably be no difficulty
in placing the whole system in the hands of a Federal Govern-


ment. The majority of the pi’ovinces have also already shown a
desire to take concerted action in the direction of excluding
coloured and other alien races from Australia, and there can he
no doubt that the vast majority of the people of every province
would be strongly in favour of united action. Assimilation of
Customs tariffs, and regulation of excise and bounties, with a view
to the establishment of absolute Freetrade throughout Australia,
present greater difficulties, but none that need be regarded as
insuperable.
* * * * *
Other matters of Federal concern—the pooling of our debts,
union of railway systems, Federal Court of Appeal, post and
telegraphs, currency, and land laws could be entrusted to the
Federal body as unanimity between the various provinces and
consequent confidence in the central body, was obtained. I think
that the establishment of a university, with agricultural college,
military college and school of mines attached should also be en-
trusted to the Federal Government. Professors of the highest
attainments should there be found to train the sons of Australia
in the industrial arts, and instructors to teach their “ hands to war
and their fingers to fight,” if the occasion should ever arise, in
defence of their homes and liberties. Che home of the Federal
Government should be also the seat of learning and the centre of
defence. And here, secure in its remoteness from all foes, would
bo a splendid field for the most exalted experiments in sociology.
The land, reserved from the first as the inalienable heritage of a : l,
would be the great federal asset, and, as the population increased,
the revenues derived from the use and occupation of ttie land
could be devoted to the adornment of the city, and to the comfort
and convenience of the citizens. Co-operation, both distributive
and productive, with or without State control, could be tried on a
scale sufficiently large to test the practicability of a complete
system of collectivism ; and, out of the abundance of the revenue
derived from land values, free railways and tramways, and free
post and telegraph services might possibly be maintained. Pro-
hibition might be given a fair trial, and I am one of those who
think—in spite of the failure at Mildura —that once established
as the law of a virgin State, it would remain law for ever, and by
the contagion of example would gradually spread to the other
provinces, until it became the law of Australia.
*■* * * *
I do not disguise from myself that the ideal which I have
sketched will prove exceedingly repulsive to the average politician,
and to the selfish individualist. Under cover of the parrot cry
of impracticability will he arrayed against it the opposition of the
leading politicians, ever hungering after the ginger-bread of Im-
perialism ; of the coast trader, anxious for profits arising from his
trade relations with foreign mercantile houses ; of the property
owner, always thinking of magnifying his own town and province


by cuthroat competition with his neighbours ; of the fossil Tory
everywhere with his first principle of “mistrust of the people
tempered by fearand of the whole tribe of land speculators and
jobbers who can see good in nothing that does not hold forth the
prospect of traffic in unearned increment. It is waste of time to
attempt to conciliate where opposition is certain. As the sun of
Australian Unity arises in its splendour the shadows of Im-
perialism and absenteeism that have so long rested on these fair
provinces will be dispersed ; the passion lor Australia will cast out
the passion for Europe ; and we shall raise our eyes to our own
bright future, and wnnder why we, like the man with the muck-
rake, have so long foreborne to look up and realise the glorious
possibilities of this our country.
THE FIRST PRACTICAL STEP.
How can we move towards tins ideal ? I think the course is
clear. In the Federal Council, now existing in a feeble, apologetic
way, we have a body expressly designed for the purpose ol paving
the way for a Federation. The preamble ol the Act declares that
the Council is constituted “for the purpose of dealing with such
matters of common Australasian interest, in respect to which
united action is deiirable, as can he dealt with without unduly
interfering with the management of the internal affairs ol the
several colonies by their respective legislatures. It has been a
pretty poor thing so far, because it has consisted only ol self'
appointed politicians with a liking lor an occasional picnic, but
let the breath of the representative principle be breathed into its
nostrils and I believe the Council may yet become a living
organism endowed with great potentialities icr good. Under the
amendment proposed last year and assented to, I think, by ail the
provinces that have taken part in the proceedings of the Council
hitherto, the number of representatives is increased to five for
each province. The suggestion I would make is that New South
Wales, abandoning her policy of isolation, come into the Council
and send down five mem bets sleeted by universal suffrage. To
form an estimate of the enormous preponderance of weight that
five members representing over a million of people would possess
over the nominees ol the other provinces representing only them-
selves, we have but to observe the weight that an elected Assembly
has over a nominee Council, even when, under the letter of the
Constitution, the powers of each are equal. The other colonies
would be bound at once to strengthen their representation by the
same means, with the result that we should have a body of 30
men, representing three and a-halt millions ol people, meeting to-
gether actually charged with the duty of finding means of dealing
efficiently with those matteis which belong to the peace and welfaie
of Australasia. New South Wales would have the honour of
having set the pace ; none of the other provinces would dare to
step short; and the first great stride will have been taken towards
the achievement of Democratic Federation.


IN HOC SIGNO VINCES.
[Written in view of the Conference of Australian Premiers, held in
January, 1895. Reprinted from The Commonwealth, December 7, 1894.]
The National Australian Convention of 1891, though it fell
short of satisfying the aspirations of the more sanguine of its
promoters, was not wholly barren of results. It gave us a draft
Constitution, beautiful to look upon, which will probably form the
groundwork of the Constitution under which Australia is destined
in the fulness of time to become a nation. The weak point of
the Convention was the entire absence of the representative
element. It was an assemblage of eminent men without any man-
date from the people. “ March with the people,” said the French
tribune, “and you march to victory \ march without the people,
you march into night.” The Convention marched without the
people, and the people have treated the product of its skill and
ingenuity with contemptuous indifference.
* * * * *
Upon what grounds did the members of the Convention base a
hope that the people of Australia would accept and adopt,
without question or cavil, their beautiful scheme? The very
form of Government which they presented for acceptance made
provision for the representation of the people in one, at least,»of
the branches of the proposed legislature. But why 1 If the
people of Australia were prepared to leave the work of making
the Constitution to a handful of notables, why should they not
leave to the same body the work of governing the country under
the Constitution so made ? Is the making of a compact of less
importance than the carrying out of its provisions? It must
appear to a reasonable mind that if the people were to play an
important part in the work of legislation under the Constitution,
they should have been pallea in to assist in the earlier work of
deciding what form the Constitution should take. Unfortunately
for any hopes of ultimate success, the members of the Convention
were all nominees—selected by the Parliament, not elected by the
people—and the rejection by tne people of proposals which ap-
peared to be admirable to a nominee body was just what might
have been expected under the circumstances. Allowing that those
who occupy the most eminent positions in the political world will,
other things being equal, be the persons who possess in more than
ordinary degree the qualities requisite for the practical work of
legislation, yet I cannot admit that a collection of notables could
properly represent the people from amongst whom they had risen.


I leave even heard it asserted that those who by the devious paths
of politics mount to positions of eminence are not always the
wisest or the most honest; but whether they be so or not, lam
quite sure that they are not typical of the average man. On the
contrary, their journey to eminence has of necessity carried them
out of touch with the people, and we can never be quite sure
that they do not occupy their exalted situations rather in defiance
of the people than by their goodwill. If anyone has the curiosity
to make out a list of the gentlemen who are engaged in carrying
on Her Majesty’s Government in the various colonies to-day, and
will compare it with the list of the members of the National
Australasian Convention of three short years ago, he will find a
rather startling justification for the doubt that has been troubling
me on this point.
# * *- *
I am not disposed to express any regret that the people of
Australia have so unanimously scouted the Convention Scheme.
It was, I think, a true instinct of the people that led them to refuse
to have anything to do with a Constitution which, according to a
resolution of the Convention, they must accept or reject, but
might not amend. The Convention no doubt included some wise
heads, but people in the aggregate is always wiser than its
rulers; and thinkers amongst the people might very well regard
with a just suspicion any attempt to draw them into the ac-
ceptance of a scheme of Federation, before they could have at
least as good an opportunity as the members of the Convention
had of considering the scheme in all its details, and following out
to their remotest possible consequences, the principles contained
in its provisions. In a matter of such transcendent importance, it
is better to advance slowly, than to accept in haste, obligations
which might in the future prove to be uncongenial and irksome
bonds. Supposing, for argument’s sake, that the scheme recom-
mended in 1891 had been blindly accepted by the colonies, and
consummated in 1892, how would the infant union have stood the
shock of the financial collapse that came in the first quarter of
1893. While fully impressed with a sense of the advantages,
especially in the sphere of finance, which would result from en-
lightened Federal action, I am unable to believe that an elaborate
union of the colonies only recently formed, could have withstood
the rough shock of such a catastrophe. Accustomed only to inde-
pendent provincial action, the leading politicians of each province,
caught in the agony of a crisis, would have looked almost ex-
clusively to the interests of the particular province with which
they were personally indentified; and, in their anxiety to protect
the interests of that province and perhaps to save their own
political reputation, they would have been, I fear, rather apt to
attach a fictitious importance to the particular pet panacea that
commended itself to their wisdom. Each province would have


sought to work out its own salvation according to its own method;
each would have been prone to believe that it had been dragged
down by its neighbour. Could a Central Government, not firmly
fixed in the affections of any section of the people, have stood the
strain] You see, the Federal idea is new to us, and not until the
contemplation of Australian affairs in the broader Federal aspect
has become a habit of the mind with us, can we hope to secure the
full benefits that Federalism would confer. To accept a
mechanical tie before the union of thought and sentiment has
been developed, would expose us to the danger of an early and
most disheartening breakdown.
# * * *
Caution in the acceptance of any elaborate scheme of leading
politicians does not, however, necessarily imply want of ardour in
the cause of Federation. My contemplation of the work that has
been already done or attempted leads me to think that the impulse
towards Federation should and will come from the people. Every
thing that helps to bring about a true feeling of Australian unity
is solid gain ; but when we seek, in advance of popular sentiment,
to impose a tie we run the fearful risk of finding out too late that
the tie is a galling fetter. That is the greatest danger, from a
Federal point of view-, that can befall Australia. In parenthesis,
allow me to say that the appearance of The Commonwealth, de-
voted to the work of preparing the way for political Federation
inspires me with more hope than does the inclusion of
“ Federation ” in the programme of any party government.
I think that if the eminent men who have been occupied in the
past in devising schemes would condescend to go down to the
people, study their wants and feelings, cultivate in them the
Federal sentiment, and assist in directing the natural forces on
the continent that are making for union, they would be doing
better work than in seeking to build up an imposing showy super-
structure upon a foundation which has not yet consolidated. The
main tendency of the Australian people is towards union, not dis-
union. No people more homogeneous are to be found on the face
of the earth. The traveller in Australia has continually to remind
himself of the colony he is in ; no peculiarity of dialect or manners
will afford him a clue. Nor need we fear any change of tendency.
Our homogeneity will be preserved for all time by the influence
of our school system, and by the dissemination of the same
literature over ail parts of the continent. English dialects and
foreign languages, imported in moderate quantities, will merge
in one Australian tongue. Our common origin, the acceptance
of the same forms of religious belief, and the enjoyment of
Australians all moulded upon the same model, will effectually
keep us one people. Should foreign foes menace us—a con-
tingency not so improbable as some people fondly believe—they
will drive us closer together, not separate us.
*****


Why, then, should we be told that we must accept in haste a
scheme compounded of the United States and the Canadian
Constitutions. We are not Yankees ;we are not Canadians ; we
are Australians. Moreover, the precedents are neither atti’active
nor exactly to the point. The Constitution of the United States
of America, “ extorted from the grinding necessities of a reluctant
people,” carried within it the seeds of a disastrous civil war, and
it was only by the supremest effort that the democratic north was
able to prevent the establishment in the Southern States of a
hostile empire, whose “ corner-stone” was to be slavery. In the
case of Canada, sufficient time has nor yet elapsed to demonstrate
whether a unification, devised principally to arrest separatists
tendencies, will be strong enough to hold together the somewhat
discordant elements contained within the dominion. There is no
need for haste in our case, because there is no cause for fear as to
our future. The people in the mass have everything to gain and
nothing to lose by Federation : but the exact form of Federation
should he the outcome of the highest wisdom and the most mature
deliberation. Freedom of secession is al solutely incompatible
with the strength that is necessary to ensure stability ; therefore
when we choose we must choose wisely, because finally, and I do
not think t|iat the greatest of our politicians can, by hard
thinking,, forecast with any degree of certainty, the exact form of
Federation that will fit the genius of Australia. Meanwhile,
beneath the political surface the work of Federation is continually
going on. The interests of the people, as men and women, are seen
cleaily to be in the direction of unity; and the division into
colonies is as clearly seen to be artificial. On all the great
questions of the day in the too much neglected domain of social
legislation, the views of nine-tenths of the people of all the colonies
are in practical harmony. If one colony amends its marriage
laws, we know for certain that all the colonies in quick succession
demand the same reform ; if one colony makes a move in the
direction of settling its people on the land, all the others will
follow ; enfranchisement of women demanded in one colony to-day
will be demanded to-morrow in all. But it is in matters relating
to trade and property, more particularly property in land, that
local differences and antagonisms arise. Rivalries between
different ports for the profits of trade and the increment of land
values, consequent upon the growth of population, are accountable
nearly entirely for our intercolonial differences ; and upon these
local differences and rivalries is built the whole fabric of inter-
colonial party politics. A great advance would be made towards
Federation if we could only restrain the fury of politicians wffio,
under the pretence of a narrow local patriotism, are intent upon
stealing their neighbours’ trade by means of differential railway
rates and border taxes.


Is it a wonder that the people of Australia attach so much im-
portance to the one point which the Convention seemed to think
had been inconveniently and unnecessarily obtruded upon its
deliberations? I refer to the question of the electoral qualification
for the representative chamber in the Federal Parliament. The
proposed amendment that—“No property qualification shall be
necessary for electors of the House of Representatives, and each
elector shall have one vote for one electoral district only- ”
brushed aside in such lordly style by the Convention, is yet. to my
thinking, the very key of the position. In every colony of the
group the heart of the people is set towards the purification and
strengthening of the electoral basis of government ; and no
Australian who is not at heart a Tory, will consent to any anti-
democratic change in the Constitution under which he lives. Yet
that is what would happen if the people of Australia accepted a
Constitution which included an electoral system less liberal than
that of the most advanced of the electoral systems in operation in
any one of the contracting colonies. The people are being asked
to withdraw a certain portion of their affairs from the present
colonial legislatures and to hand that portion over to the control
of a new legislature : and they have a right to insist that the new
legislature shall be at least as democratic as the colonial legislatures
to which they now pay allegiance. Why should the citizen of
New youth Wales who has fought, and fought successfully against
a vicious electoral system in his own colony surrender the control
if any portion of his affairs to a government based upon an electoral
system which retains the vices he has succeeded in eradicating from
the New South Whiles system ?
*■ # # * #
I do not think it necessary here to refer to the constitution and
powers of the proposed senate under the (’onstitution scheme
further then to suggest that were the Representative House upon a
pure electoral base conceded, I think that the objections urged by
the larger colonies against giving to the Senate some real (though,
of course, limited) power would thereby be robbed of much’ of
their force.
# # * * *
The elaborate Constitution framed by the nominee Convention
having been rejected, the next step in our progress towards the
achievement of political Federation appears to me to require the
summoning of a Convention of representatives elected upon the
widest and purest suffrage, for the purpose of finding out what
form of Federation will be acceptable to the people. Upon this
very important point I should like to quote the emphatic words of
Alexander Hamilton, when urging the adoption of the United
States Constitution. He says :
“ It has not a little contributed to the infirmities of the existing
Federal system, that it never had a ratification by the People. Resting
on no better foundation than the consent of the several legislatures,


it has been exposed to frequent and intricate questions concerning
the validity of its powers, ami has, in some instances, given birth to
the enormous doctrine of a right of legislative repeal. Owing its rati-
fication to the law of a State, it has been contended that the same
authority might repeal the law by which it was ratified. However
gross a heresy it may be to maintain that a party to a compact has a
right to revoke that compact , the doctrine itself has had respectable
advocates. The possibility of a question of this nature proves the
necessity of laying the foundations of our National Government deeper
than in the mere sanction of delegated authority. The fabric of
American Empire ought to rest on the solid basis of THE CONSENT
OF THE PEOPLE. The streams of national power ought to flow im-
mediately from that pure original fountain of all legitimate authority,’
* « * * *
Let a second Convention be summoned. The Federal Council,
vitalised by a strong infusion of the elective principle would answer
the purpose. There is no need to anticipate that the decision of
anv body truly representative of the people will fail to obtain ready
and cheerful ratification by the people whom they represent. It
is almost certain that such a Convention would stipulate tor a
.Representative House upon the single suffrage basis. I think
that such a stipulation would be reasonable, and that no
Federation on any other basis will be acceptable. “Federal
Government based upon equality of voting rights ! ” What could
be better calcinated to awake the enthusiasm of the great mass of
the people'! To that standard would be attracted the support and
sympathy of every man and every woman in the present colonies
who is striving to extend and purity the franchise in bis or her
provincial home ; and the strong political and social pressure
which would be thereby evoked, would immensely strengthen the
hands of sincere Federationists. And why should those who have
heretofore taken the leading part in this great movement, hesitate
to call the ei thusiasu; of the masses to their aid 1 When the day
of trouble for Australia comes—as it probably will come —it will
be to the whole people that the appeal must be made. The
patriotism of the Australian people will be the key-note to be
struck then. Why not strike the key-note now %
* # * % *
In writing this I have largely availed myself of your invitation
to a “ fair and free discussion of Federal Questions in every aspect
and from every point of view.” lam conscious that my views
may probably not be exactly in accord with those of others of
your contributors, but if the position I take up is an erroneous
one it is better that the error should be exposed and refuted than
left to lie as a snare in the path to success. I will.- also, freely
admit that circumstances might arise of such a nature that it
would be the part of true wisdom to accept even a maimed and
imperfect Central Government for the purpose of defence from
external aggression rather than incur the dangers of divided
counsels j but 1 do not waver in my opinion that no form of


Government that falls short of complete Representative
Democracy will avail to give perfect security to United Australia,
or ensure that tranquility within her borders without which no
nation can ever become either prosperous or truly great.
[Our able correspondent seems to have fallen into error upon one
matter of fact. The people have neither “ rejected ” nor “ unanimously
scouted ” the Commonwealth Bill. They have never had the chance
either of rejecting or accepting that draft of a Federal Constitution.
The Convention recommended that the draft should be submitted to the
people; but the provincial parliaments intercepted the Bill on its transit
to the people and brought about the present dead lock.— The Editors.]
REPLY.
Your critical footnote to the article of mine which you were
o-ood enough to print in your last issue, is itself open to criticism.
A reference to the context will show that the expressions objected
to, “ rejected” and “ unanimously scouted” were not applied to the
“ Commonwealth Bill,” but to the proposals or the scheme of the
Convention. I know that the Commonwealth Bill has never been
formally presented to the people for acceptance or rejection, and I
think that the reason why “ the provincial parliaments intercepted
the Bill in its transit” was that they found no indication of any
strong desire on the part of the people for its prompt delivery.
My opinion about the attitude of the people was expressed (in the
opening paragraph of my article) thus : —“ The Convention
marched without the people, and the people treated the product of
its shill and ingenuity with contemptuous indifference .” Perhaps
it would have been better had I refrained from varying that
expression. However, if 11 despised’ will more exactly fit the
facts than '‘rejected,” and “ignored” be an improvement on
“ scouted,” 1 have no objection to the emendation. I only want
to emphasise my contention that the failure of the Bill to obtain
at the hands of the public the serious consideration which it
deserved was owing to the fatal fault committed at the outset in
constituting the Convention upon a non-representative basis.
The people who have to live in the house should be allowed to
design it.


QUEENSLAND AND SOUTH CAROLINA.
[Mr. E. W. O’Sullivan, M.P., contributed an article to The
Commonwealth, in which he suggested that the other colonies should
federate without Queensland, and “ decline to trade with that South
Carolina of the Antipodes,” until she abandoned her colored labor
policy. The following reply appeared in the January, 1895 number of
the same journal.]
In the November number of The Commonwealth, Mr. E. W.
O’Sullivan stigmatises Queensland as the “ South Carolina of the
Antipodes.” I do not think that Queensland has yet reached
that bad eminence ; 1 hope she never will. Nevertheless, it is
useless to deny that there are certain disquieting facts which give a
color of justification to the repi oach. I have myself, when reading
the history of the great slavery struggle in the United States, been
struck by analogies, sometimes remarkably close, between the
history of that period and the history of the growth and develop-
ment in Australia of Vhe system of qualified slavery which is politely
described as “ servile labor The similarities are sufficiently
close to teach us useful lessons which may help us to avoid great
disasters in the future. “Wisdom is better than weapons of war.”
* * * * *
It is frequently asserted that there is a fundamental difference
between slave labor and labor by inferior races under some form of
bondage for a limited term ; and by magnifying this difference the
advocates of the system of servile labor seek to avoid the condem-
nation which history, rightly read, must pass upon their peculiar
institution. I have always contended that, however great may be
the difference between the two systems from a religious or a moral
point of view, they, are, economically considered, and in their
political consequences, essentially the same. Either system, pur-
sued long enough, will bring us to the same Result. They are
converging roads leading to the same point. Let me quote the
words of an American statesman, predicting the inevitable result
of slavery in the United States ;
“Our country is a theatre, which exhibits, in full operation, two
radically different political systems ; the one resting on the basis of
servile or slave labor, the other on the voluntary labor of freemen.
The laborers who are enslaved are all negroes, or persons more or less
purely of African derivation. But this is only accidental. The
principle of the system is, that labor in every society, by whomsoever
performed, is necessarily unintellectual, grovelling and base, and that
the laborer, equally for his own good and for the welfare of the State,
ought to be enslaved. The white laboring man, whether native or
foreigner, is not enslaved, only because he cannot, as yet, be reduced


to bondage . . The free-labor system educates all alike,
and by opening all the fields of industrial employment, and all the
departments of authority, to the unchecked and equal rivalry of all
classes of men, at once secures universal contentment, and brings into
the highest possible activity, all the physical, moral, and social energies
of the whole State. In States where the slave system prevails, the
masters, directly or indirectly, secure all political power, and constitute
a ruling aristrocracy. In States where the free-labor system prevails,
universal suffrage necessarily obtains, and the State inevitably be-
comes, sooner or later, a Republic or Democracy.
The two systems are at once perceived to be incongruous. But they
are more than incongruous—they are incompatible. They never have
permanently existed together in one country, and they never can. It
would be easy to demonstrate this impossibility, from the irreconcilable
contrast between their great principles and characteristics.
Thus these antagonistic systems are continually coming into closer con-
tact, and collision results .... They who think that
“ The contest is not between the North and South as geographical
sections, for between such sections merely there can be no contest.
. . , But the real contest is between the two forms of society
which have become established, the one at the north and the other at
the south. .... The one, embodying the principle
that equality is the right of man, expands upon the horizontal plane
of pure Democracy ; the other, embodying the principle that it is not
the right of man but of equals only, has taken to itself the rounded
form of social aristocracy. . . . Such are the two forms
it is accidental, unnecessary, the work of interested or fanatical agita-
tors, and therefore ephemeral, mistake the case altogether. It is an
irrepressible conflict between opposing and enduring forces, and it means
that the United States must and will, sooner or later, become either
entirely a slave-holding or entirely a free-labor nation.” (William H.
Seward, New York, October 25th, 1858. Quoted from “ Representative
American Orations,” Vol. Ill, p 35 et seq.)
* * * * *
Next I will quote the opinion of a South Carolinian expressed
during the war :
of society which had come to contest within the structure of the recent
union. And the contest for existence was inevitable. (Hon. L.W. Spratt,
editor of Charleston Mercury, and representative of Charleston in the
South Carolinian Convention, quoted from The Revolution in America,”
Political Essays by Professor J. E. Cairnes, p 65.)
Just another Southern opinion :
“Two opposite and conflicting forms of society cannot, among
civilized men, co-exist and endure. The one must give way and cease
to exist ; the other become universal. If free society be unnatural,
immoral, unchristian, it must fall, and give way to slave society, a social
system old as the world, universal as man. (Richmond Enquirer, quoted
from “ The Slave Power,” Professor Cairnes, p 154.)
Here is northern and southern opinion, both very emphatic on
the point that the institution of servile or slave labor creates a
system, social and political, which cannot in any country co-exist
with Democratic Institutions. That proposition may, I think, be
allowed to have been proved beyond doubt. The American
people have worked the problem out to duality, and sealed the
demonstration with their blood.
* # * * *


Yet there are educated, well informed people who, knowing the
results that will surely follow, regard with complacency the
perpetuation of the system of servile labor in Australia. Their
programme has been outlined with refreshing candour by the
talented lady correspondent, of The Times, who recently made a
tour through the Australasian Colonies. In an address delivered
at the Royal Colonial Institute in London, on the 9th January,
1894, the future division of Australia into twm sections, under
radically different forms of government, is calmly discussed. As
becomes the representative of the great English daily, that
throughout the American Civil War championed the cause of the
south, Miss Shaw does not stoop to any of those refined distinctions
between slavery and servile labor that are fashionable in political
circles on this side ; she resolutely takes up the position that the
maintenance and extension of the servile labor system will lead to
the division of Australia into two sections, and accepts the
inevitable with evident satisfaction. After referring to the division
of Australia into Tropical Australia and Temperate Australia—a
division which she holds to be an established fact, and to the
melange of colored laborers that she found flourishing in the north,
Miss Shaw, proceeding on the supposition that the system of ser-
vile labor is to be perpetuated, very candid and logical
forecast of the future :
“The business of the politician of Temperate Australia will be to
regulate the working of a Constitution based upon universal suffrage,
in which every member of the community, women probably as well as
men, will exercise the rights and responsibilities of self-government.
The’business of the politician of Tropical Australia will, on the con-
trary. in all probability be to find means by which the affairs of a large
servile population may be justly administered by a relatively small,
and consequently aristocratic, body of white men.’
It is very interesting to compare this passage with the quotations
given from American sources. The modern writer describes the
necessary results of the employment of large bodies of servile
laborers in nearly the same terms as those used by the American
writers of the civil war period to describe the political results of the
system of American slavery. It will be observed that it is the
employment of servile labor of the character found existing in
Queensland upon which these conclusions are based. The labor
system here referred to as requiring an aristocratic form of govern-
ment incompatible with Democratic institutions is not slavery ;it
is the employment of a mixed population of all races having the
one common characteristic of being incapable of taking any part
in the government of the country. It is the system which, on a
limited”scale, came under Miss Shaw’s personal observation during
her tour in the North. After speaking of the Chinese, Javanese,
Japanese, Malays and Cingalese whom she found already installed,
she adds :
“ And with the exception perhaps, of the negro and the Indian
coolie, who have not ytt made good their footing on the continent,


there are specimens to he found in the fields and sugar plantations of
almost every type of people accustomed to work under a tropical sun.”
3ff #f
Of the arguments advanced in defence of the system of aristo-
cratic government, upon the basis of servile labor, it is not difficult
to show the close family likeness they bear to those used to sup-
port the system of slavery attempted to be maintained on
American soil. In fact, they are practically the same. The
philanthropic inquirer is told that the laborer under that system is
really better off, if he only knew it, than the tree white man in
countries where Democratic institutions prevail. The corres-
pondent of The Times , in this case, became convinced, after a very
careful inquiry, that: —
“In no country which I have yet visited, in any quarter of the
globe, is the manual laborer so well provided for, so liberally paid, or
so carefully safeguarded from oppression, as the South Sea Islander
employed in Queensland.”
Compare this with the view taken of American slavery by the
Saturday Review , a fellow-laborer with The Times in the same
political vineyard ;
“ The negroes have been slaves for generations. They are used to
slavery, and for the most part, contented with it. They are plentifully
fed, for food is cheap and abundant; and even their legal allowance is
more than they can possibly eat. They are well housed—as racehorses
or hunters are well housed in this country— because they are costly
chattels. They are well clothed, as the climate requires. In a word,
the vast majority of them have no grievance whatever, except in the
fact that they are slaves. (S.R., October 11th, 1862. “ The Revolution
in America,” p 71.)”
And not only is their lot enjoyable as compared with that of
their white brother, but it is claimed that they are superior as
workers in the work for which they are required. Again The
Times correspondent (1894):
“ The difference between a Kanaka, a Javanese, or Malay laboring
in the fields under a tropical sun, and a white man working under the
same conditions, is as the difference between a humming bird and a
sick sparrow.”
A competition was got up “ on one small plantation,” and the
result was all in favor of servile labor. The Kanakas were
finished at three in the afternoon, while the poor whites were
working till the moon rose.
Compare the Saturday Review (1861);
“ It would be hasty to infer, as a great many philanthropists have
done, that free labour would answer better than slave labor in the
south. The southern planters are keen enough speculators to have
discovered the fact if it were true. In reality the experiment has been
tried and resulted in favor of slave labor.” (S.R., November 2nd
1861. “ The Slave Power,” p. 121.)
It is unnecessary to pursue the parallel further. There is very
little on the subject of servile labor in the paper in question,
which could not be easily matched by writings in The Times, the
Saturday Reviev) and other Southern sympathisers during the
American civil war. Two things, however, in connection with


this deliverance have excited my astonishment ; First, the sudden
boldness of the Colonial party in England in openly advocating
the division of Australia on colour lines, and second, the un-
explained silence of Australian statesmen who have hitherto been
prominent in the work of Australian Federation. Lest you
should think seriously of Mr. O’Sullivan’s suggestion that the
other Australias should unite without Queensland “ and decline to
trade with that South Carolina of the Antipodes,” let me just add
that there is yet a powerful party in Queensland quite alive to the
evil tendencies of servile labor, and invincibly opposed to any
extension or perpetuation of the system, and so soon as it is fully
recognised that the contest of the future lies between Union on
the basis of white labor on the one hand, and divided Australia
on the other, I have no doubt that the public opinion in favor of
Union will be overwhelming. And the sooner the inevitable
issue is accepted the better it will be, in my humble judgment, for
the people of Australia.
P.S. —I see by the number of The Times (weekly) that has just
come to hand that Miss Shaw has delivered a further lecture be-
fore the Royal Colonial Institute. ''This time the subject is
“ Colonial Expansion.” The tone of the gathering may be judged
by the discussion which followed. It is reported by The Times
thus; —
“In the discussion which followed, Sir Charles Warren, Mr. H. C.
Beeton (agent general for British Columbia), and Mr. H. H. Johnston
took part. Mr. Johnston said the British Empire was not merely the
heritage of 88 millions of Englishmen. It was a vast league in which
black men and yellow men as well as white men were joined together
—a league of peace, first and foremost, and then of commerce. That
being so, we should try to be far-sighted and should not take any
solely selfish view and think only whether certain localities were
suitable for our own race ; but we should inquire whether they might
not be of value to that portion of the yellow race which was governed
under our Hag. or even to our black fellow-subjects. To him it was
just as satisfactory a conclusion to find that a country was rather more
suitable for the Indian or for the black man than for the white man as
to find that it was wholly suited to the white man, because we had
some 250.000,000 fellow-subjects in India as against 38,000,000 of
Englishmen at home. If such countries proved a great outlet for
Indian emigration and trade, th-y would fully repay us for the time
and labor spent in acquiring them.’
In a leading article The Times says that:—
“Mr. H. H. Johnston showed in his brief speech how wide and
statesmanlike is his view of the possibilities and of the responsibilities
of the British Empire.”


WAITING FOR THE PEOPLE.
[Written before the Federal Enabling Bill had been brought forward
in the New South Wales Parliament. Reprinted from The Common-
wealth, May 7th, 1895.]
To an observer, watching from a distance the development of
the Federal idea, a change of. tone is apparent. And upon this
change there will certainly follow a corresponding change in the
nature of the support which the movement is likely to obtain.
Some of those who were most eager three years ago to complete
the edifice before the foundations were fairly laid are growing cool
even to the verge of hostility, whilst their place is being gradually
supplied by the young, ardent Australian-bc.rn, the vanguard of
that great party which will build up the real Australia that is to
be. The change augurs well, I think, for the ultimate success of
the movement; but its new supporters have not as yet quite
accommodated themselves to the altered state of things—perhaps
have not yet realised the full significance of the change that is
taking place.
The impulse that led to the assembling of the Convention of
1891 was Imperialistic rather than National. Whilst we may
generously concede that the Australian Politicians who were
ostensibly the promoters were not aware of the Imperialistic
influences at work, it is a matter beyond doubt and easily
provable that the Imnerialistic party in England regarded
the movement as a suitable means tor bringing the Aus-
tralians within the “ beneficent grip of the Empire,” and were
fervently hoping that the design might be consummated before
the Colonists had the time or the opportunity to acquaint them-
selves with the nature of the fiscal obligations and responsibilities
which such an Imperial incorporation would bring in its train.*
Whether such influence was consciously felt by the authors of the
Commonwealth Bill or not, it is quite certain that their work was
hailed with a good deal of suppressed enthusiasm by the Imperial-
istic party in England and their confederates in Australia.
Fortunately, as I think, for the welfare of Australia, the mass of
the people when without exact knowledge act upon a sure instinct;
and it was such an instinct that led them to at once repudiate—
so far as opportunity to actively repudiate was allowed to them—
the work of the Convention. For good or for evil, however, it
has been clearly admitted that the Bill failed to achieve the object
of its promoters, and I think it must also be admitted that its
failure was due to the entire absence of popular support.
See Article on Imperial Federation.


With that failure the aristocratic scheme of Federation, aiming
at ultimate development into an impossible co-partnership with
Oreat Britain, came to an end ; and it is not surprising that some
tew politicians who appeared to find their account in the success
of a fanciful scheme, as impossible of fulfilment as it would, if
fulfilled, be injurious to the national life of Australia, should have
thought that with the failure of their pet project chaos had come
again. But, as beautiful flowers will spring from the most
despised of refuse, so, it has seemed to me, the sentiment in favor
ot Australian unity, which lives down in the hearts of the people,
has been directly stimulated and strengthened through the abor-
tive Contention of 1891. Let it not be forgotten that the prime
movers, though they omitted to ask the people for a mandate, did
not hesitate to appeal to the people for support and approval.
Those glowing appeals to the patriotism of young Australia which
came from the lips of Australian orators fell upon quick ears, and
will evoke a response which is as yet but faintly heard, if at all.
The dreary debates of delegates contending for fanciful provincial
advantages, the lawyer-like dexterity in drafting clauses to recon-
cile apparently contradictory interests, the luxurious feast with
its inevitable mutual-admiration speedaes will all pass away out
of mind and be forgotten ; but the miming words addressed to
thoughtful minds - and sinking into warm hearts—these will live
and bear fruit in future constitutions.
What is the meaning of the present pause ? Are those who have
been before in the forefront of the movement amazed at the
strength of the demand that Federation, if at all, shall be Feder-
ation on a democratic basis ? We are looking to New r South
Wales to pass a bill to carry out faithfully the work which has
been entrusted to her initiation; and we are trusting that the
Premier of that Colony will not listen to the blandishments of
those who are already suggesting to him ways by which the
promise made to the people by the conferring Premiers may be
kept to the ear and broken to the hope. The future belongs to
the N'ational Party, and no work that is done now will be un-
frutiful because too democratic ; but inevitable failure and dis-
appointment will wait upon any attempt to stifle the awakening
aspirations of the Australian people, and crush their expanding
energies within the limits of a narrow hide-bound conservatism.
That the great mass of the people have not as yet given any
enthusiastic support to the movement in its new phase is not
surprising. They were very sincerely at one in their dislike of
the scheme that has miscarried, and are, perhaps, pardonably shy
of any movement that bears the name of Federation. But they
will very quickly see that if there is to be a second convention—
this time elected —they must, whether they approve or disapprove
of Federation itself, strain every nerve to ensure that it shall
indeed represent the people of Australia. They will do that, I


feel sure. The workers of to-day are politicians, keener and, I
take leave to say, better instructed than any other definable class
in the community. With what earnestness and ardour they are
engaging in the political life of each of the Colonies we all know,
and it is quite safe to predict that in the greater affairs of a
United Australia they will take a part not less intelligent and
effectual. Once let them be fully assured that the proposal to
take the will of the people is genuine, that the men who have
accepted the position of leadership are not trifling, but that such
a Convention will be summoned, and I think the workers will lay
aside their present indifference, and by joining together will give
to the movement such an impetus as will carry it to a successful
issue, past all the impediments that may be raised in the way by
open opponents and insincere friends.
It the workers want a sufficient reason to fix their wavering
faith, they may surely find it in the necessity for taking united
Federal action to check the alien invasion. This is a national
concern which clearly belongs to the people of the whole of the
continent, seeing that the evil results arising from the introduction
of the colored races, with their peculiar vices and diseases, cannot
be confined to the particular Colony where the introduction is
permitted or encouraged ; and also because the inevitable abuses
incident to the traffic in colored laborers is, in the eyes of the
world, a disgrace not to one Colony only, but to the whole of
Australia. Aor is there any prospect of the evil and its abuses
becoming less difficult to deal with as time goes on. The tendency
is distinctly the other way ; and as the supply of Kanakas is
o-iving out owing to the partial depopulation of many of the
islands, the old scheme for recruiting from New Guinea for the
Queensland plantations, never quite lost sight of since the first
attempt at annexation, is being stealthily revived and advocated
as an approaching triumph of civilisation.
Never since the Southern Colonies invited Queensland to deal
jointly with the Kanaka question has there been a time when it
was imperatively necessary that the Colonies should act together,
in council. The Anglo-Japanese treaty which, as it is dealt with,
may result in benefit to Australia or may work injury of the
most destructive and fatal character, is in itself a sufficient reason
for Australian unity ; and it is a business which cannot be safely
delayed or trifled with. There are also other circumstances which
justify us in believing that an invitation to take united action
would at the present juncture be favorably received by the vast
majority of the people of Queensland. The representations made
in 1892 that, under the new regulations, the Queensland Kanaka
traffic would be as pure as European immigration,that the imported
islander, forsaking his savage instincts, would peacefully serve his
employer in the canefield without giving trouble or annoyance to
the white population, and that the result of his labors would be a


glowing era of prosperity and high prices for the farmer—have
been shown to be wholly fallacious ; and many who were induced
by such like spurious promises to assist in re-opening the traffic
are aghast to find that in many parts of the Colony the sanctity
of the horns and life itself are threatened by the presence of
murderous hordes of savages. The traffic itself, like Vice—
“is a monsver of so dreadful mien
As to be hated needs but to be seen.”
and suppression and denials of its abases have always been
necessary to its continuance. When the eyes of the people are
fully opened to the unchangeable nature of the traffic in black
labor, an aroused public conscience will probably demand its im-
mediate discontinuance ; but even then the gradual filtering in of
colored and alien people from Asia and Polynesia through the
northern ports, if it is not checked by stringent legislation, will in
itself be sufficient to work such a complete change in the character
of our civilization in the northern parts of Australia as to lead to
the destruction of democratic institutions there, and the substitu-
tion, as Miss Shaw, the Commissioner to Australia from the
London Times , forcibly pointed out, of Government by a small
white aristocracy administering the affairs of a large servile popu-
lation. j
This is the danger that menaces, nnt Queenland only, but the
whole of Australia-; and a United Australia is alone competent
to cope with it successfully. That the introduction of aliens into
Australia ought to be controlled by a Central Federal Government
was admitted by the Convention, and the principle is embodied in
the Commonwealth Bill. Now is the time for the Colonies to
make a united movement for the legislative endorsement of that
principle. A popularly-elected Convention is the golden oppor-
tunity; and it will be a great disappointment to me if the people
of Australia do not rise to the height of the great occasion, and
give emphatic utterance to their unalterable determination that
Australia from sea to sea, shall be and remain the southern home
of Anglo-Saxon institutions and the abiding place of freedom for-
ever.


THE BARRIER BEYOND.
[Reprinted from “ The Commonwealth and the Empire,'’ a collection
of essays on Australasian Federation published in 1895.]
Federalists who have addressed themselves to a consideration
of the obstacles that lie in the path of Australian Federation,
have generally agreed in giving the place of first importance to the
barrier which hostile tariffs have raised between the Colonies, and
more particularly between Victoria and New South Wales. These
two Colonies, as the leading Colonies of the group, and as repre-
senting respectively the opposite commercial systems of pro-
tection and free trade, are naturally regarded as the champions of
the two systems, and the difference that exists between them on
this subject has come to be regarded as the “ lion in the path,”
It might be useful to consider briefly, what is the real nature of
the obstacle, and how it came into existence. Let it be borne in
mind that the difficulty we are considering does not arise because
Victoria has adopted a protectionist policy, or because New South
Wa'es has adopted what is called a free trade policy. Had both
Colonies adopted either one policy or the other, no trouble of the
kind would have occurred. The true statement of the case is, that
under the operation of opposite commercial systems, the two
Colonies have developed on different lines, and each having
adopted its own as its national policy, neither can at once accept
the policy of the other without great disturbance to the existing
commercial and industrial arrangements. Such a barrier should
not, however, daunt the sincere Federalist who believes that the
movement has a genuine national basis. If Federation is desirable
and justifiable on other grounds, that barrier must come down.
And perhaps, after all, it is not quite so solid as it looks. Is it
not common history that Victoria during the past few years has
shown leanings towards free trade—at all events with her sister
Colonies —and that New South Wales, at the present moment
(written in May, 1895,) is progressing under a system of modified
protection 1 The discovery of a via media cannot be beyond the
wisdom of Australian statesmen.
But while the Colonies are balking at this fiscal barrier, a far
more formidable barrier is steadily rising beyond. Fiscal
differences alone have never prevented union, nor torn the States
of a union asunder. Fundamental differences in political prin-
ciples have, and will do so again. “ The morbid dreams of an
unholy league between perpetual bondage and free trade,” set the


Southern States of America upon a career which left no alternative,
hut civil war then or disunion for ever after, and the
democratic North accepted the first alternative. To-day an
analogous movement is on foot in Australia. Both the move-
ment and its tendency, though almost entirely ignored in
Australia, have been noted and commented on freely by visitors.
Ihe representative of the London Times , who visited Australia
during the beginning of the year 1893, reported that she had found
two Australias existing—the one, a temperate Australia; the
other, a tropical Australia, where the wirv, auburn-haired Aus-
tralian gave place “ to the South Sea Islander,
to black-hatted industrious Chinese, to Javanese and Japanese,
Malays and Singalese, whose bright costumes harmonise with the
landscape and, apparently regarding as inevitable the separation
of these two Australias into separate and distinct political com-
munities, she forecasts future political developments, thus:
The business of the politician of temperate Australia will be to
regulate the working of a Constitution based upon universal
suffrage, in which every member of the community— women,
probably, as well as men—will exercise the rights and re-
sponsibilities of self-government. The business of the politician of
tropical Australia will, on the contrary, in all probability be to
find in cans by which the affairs of a large servile population may
be justly administered by a relatively small, and consequently
aristocratic body of white men.”
The policy of a community such as is here depicted a lar^e
servile population ruled over by a select aristocracy—-will be to
direct the industrial energies of the population to the production
almost exclusively of food and raw material for exportation, relyhm
upon foreign sources for the supply of manufactures ; and it will be
easily understood that the creation of such a state would be sure
to find favour in the eyes of the great London newspaper which
has always been the organ of the English manufactuting and
trading classes, and which, during the American Civil War, so
strongly supported the cause of the slave-holding South.
But what is the significance to Australia of this atavistic
birth in a Colony where political equality and democratic
institutions seemed to be so firmly established ] We possess
a country whose potential wmalth is absolutely beyond the power
of computation. Mount Morgan and Broken Hill have killed the
faculty of wonder, and we feel that nothing could now astonish
us. Can we, all too few to guard so rich a heritage, afford to be
divided ? Happily situated in a country which contains no
physical obstacles to internal union, shall we raise for ourselves a
barrier, as compared with which tin- highest range of mountains
in the wide world and the deepest ai d broadest rivers would be
but a trifling impediment ? Every true Australian, Federalist or
not, would say—No ! Yet such a barrier is undeniably going up


in Australia. It throws its shadow now over Queensland, and hy
the daily lengthening of that shadow all men may know at what a
rapid rate the barrier is rising. Federation, hy establishing a
federal control over the introduction of alien races, may be strong
enough to stem the tide of invasion and make the rearing of such
a harrier between Australians impossible; but if, on the other
hand, the harrier lie allowed to rise, it will eventually make
Federation itself impossible.
What has happened before will happen again. We now see the
beginnings; we shall not probably live to see the end. Let us not
despise the day of small things. The tiny coral insect works un-
seen and unsuspected till the reef approaches the surface and the
stately ship with its precious freight ot love and hope goes with
sudden wreck to untimely destruction. If we would be wise in
time, we shall brush aside the paltry obstacles in the way of
federation that jealousy or greed suggest, seek out the true means
by which all the legitimate differences between the Colonies may
be justly accommodated, and then join hands to face bravely those
real difficulties which may be met and coped with now, but for
which, if they be allowed to grow to maturity, there will be no
peaceful solution.


AUSTRALIAN FED KK ATION.
From all division let ouv land be free
For God has made her one : complete she lies
Within the unbroken circle of the skies,
And round her indivisible the sea
Breaks on her single shore ; while only we,
Her foster children, bound with sacred ties
Of one dear blood, one storied enterprise,
Are negligent of her integrity—
Her seamless garment, at great Mammon’s nod,
With hands unlilial we have basely rent,
With petty variance our souls are
And ancient kinship under toot is trod :
O let us rise, united, penitent,
And be one people,—mighty, serving God !
WJLI/lAM Gay.
Vriuted by Ji. Woodcock. Bvisbaoe,






