

PRICE SIXPENCE.
FEDERATION:
A MACHIAVELIAN SOLUTION
OF THE
AUSTRALIAN LABOUR PROBLEM,
AN ADDRESS
ffO^/2




PRICE SIXPENCE.
FEDERATION:
A MACHIAVELIAN SOLUTION
OF THE
AUSTRALIAN LABOUR PROBLEM.
AN ADDRESS
DELIVERED IN THE PROTESTANT HALL, SYDNEY
ON 28th MAY, 1891,
H. VALENTINE HAYNES.
TURNER AND HENDERSON,
HUNTER STREET.




Py ihS5/T io*>n,
16-S-77
The writer has experienced considerable difficulty in ex-
pressing his views on Federation in its connection with
Labour. A letter with that object failed to obtain publication
in the Sydney Morning Herald. A public meeting held
to give them utterance was disturbed by the systematic
interruptions of several well-dressed people, and resulted in
a highly-coloured report in some of the newspapers, from
which the subject of the address was carefully eliminated.
A letter to one of the papers* regarding its report was
published in such a mutilated form that the chief import
of the letter was destroyed. In fact, its full publication,
with foot-note attached, was even refused a place in that
paper’s advertising columns.
Evening News. For letter and foot-note, see Appendix.




FEDERATION;
A MACHIAYELIAN SOLUTION OF THE
AUSTRALIAN LABOUR PROBLEM.
The President of the Federal Convention, in one of his first
speeches, authoritatively stated that the first and principal
object of Federation is the formation of a federal army.
To guard against a possible foreign foe the colonies are
invited to federate.
The meaning of the word “ federation ” is union
between separate parties —chiefly states —for mutual benefit
and protection. It is in the family of nations what
brotherhood is in the families of men. It has been the
theme of poets, and the aspiration of mankind for ages.
A desirable consummation, therefore —federation. But here
we have a noble name applied to an ignoble purpose.
For, just as two men cannot be the brothers of a third,
except they two be also brothers; so cannot two parties
federate with a third, except they two be also federate.
But will anyone presume to say, that there is federation,
that is—union for mutual benefit and protection —
between the rich and the poor of these colonies;
between wool-grower and shearer, between merchant and
docker, between ship-owner and seaman. That there is
any union for mutual benefit and protection, between the
squatter with his million or million and-a-half of acres, and
the selector with his forty or fifty acres; whom he has


hemmed in on every side with dummies, whose few head of
stock are refused access to the only water-holes, and whose
children dare not cross a rood of the rich man’s land on
their way to school. Between the landlord of ten thousand
acres of rich alluvial flat, and the tenant farmer of one small
section, who, by incessant toil, can barely pay the rent and
live. Between the owner of the city block, with its rows of
shops and tiers of offices, and the clerk who works far into
the night that his employer may have the wherewithal to
pay a rack-rent. There is no federation here, no bond for
mutual benefit. By a line ever becoming more clearly
defined, the Australian colonists are divided into the two
antagonistic classes of “ have ” and “ have not,” and the
only federation possible, under existing conditions, is that of
rich with rich, and poor with poor. Is the true purpose of
the movement, therefore, to guard against a possible foe
without; or, is it not rather to strengthen the hands of an
actual foe within ?
To residents in the colonies it is often matter of
surprise to hear from older lands of the gross licentiousness,
the insatiable greed, and oppressive tyranny of the rich
few: and of the abject poverty, the degrading drudgery and
the servile condition of the poor many. And we wonder
they do not throw off the yoke of oppression and extortion,
and be healed of the awful social cancer. But military
force is ever the arm and support of the rich, and while
these run riot with the bounties of Nature, those hopelessly
struggle for a bare subsistence, or starve in miserable dens.
Now, to clearly apprehend the proposal to place in the
hands of the governing class a military force, that might be
used to bring about a state of things here, similar to that in
older lands, it is desirable to consider what is the relation
between the governing and the governed in these colonies.
The colonial governments having been modelled after
the pattern of the British Government, it is the practice to
compare the Colonial Houses of Legislature with the
House of Commons: and the electors in the colonies, with
the electors in Britain. But this comparison is entirely
invalid ; for in Britain the electors do not own the land,
that belongs to the peers, to the wealthy. But here, the
electors do own the land. To each elector belongs a share
in the unalienated lands, in the undeveloped mines, in the


railways, in all reservations, and in all public property,
equal to the share of every other elector. Therefore, each
elector is an equal shareholder in the magnificent, vast and
wealthy Joint Stock Proprietary Company of New South
Wales, or Victoria, or in whichever colony he is entitled to
vote. The House of Commons is the mouthpiece or organ
of the commons, who are only not serfs, because the peers
are no longer able to retain them in serfdom ; and who have
a mouthpiece, only because they refuse any longer to pay
for the improvement and protection of other people’s
property, unless they have, at least, a voice in the
expenditure. Our colonial legislatures, properly considered,
are so many boards of directors, of as many gigantic
public companies, of which the electors are the respective
shareholders.
Like the directors of ordinary public companies, the
directors of the several colonies (called members of the
legislatures) are periodically elected by the shareholders,
and are now paid for their services. They make
all appointments in the company’s service; effect all
public works; they frame all rules and regulations;
control all public property; the public estate, the
revenues, in short, have the fullest control of the company’s
entire effects and affairs. The company is an unlimited
one, and no matter what contracts, treaties, wars even,
are entered upon, the action of the representative is
binding upon the elector and his heirs. Similar powers
have been exercised before by the directors of other great
public companies, notably the British East India, and the
Dutch East India Companies. But here the comparison
abruptly, and disastrously ends. For, in the case of the
ordinary public company, while the shareholder is
responsible for the action of the director, the director in
his turn, is responsible to the shareholder for that action.
Because, above both is the law of the land in which the
company has received charter. The ordinary director’s
every official action can be brought to the light, and
weighed in the even balance of justice. All doubt or
semblance of dishonesty must be cleared. Even a mis-
application of funds would be severely dealt with, and the
delinquents compelled to make amends. The forging
and peculating director would be overtaken by swift and


fearful punishment, as a scoundrel and a criminal. “The
means to do ill-deeds, makes ill-deeds done,” and without
such safe-guards over its executive the ordinary public
company would be an impossibility. The directors of the
several colonies, in their official capacity, are subject to
no such harrassing control ; not under, but above all law,
they are above justice, too. Millions of money have been
raised in the past by the sale of the people’s land; millions
more through the customs ; and yet millions more on the
people’s credit. Yet every year the shareholders receive
not dividends, but information that the colony’s finances
are still in arrear. A country is ever governed for the
good of the governors, not of the governed ; and these
colonies are no exception.
Although a man is being robbed, as long as he
slumbers there is no violence ; but, as soon as he awakes,
there is both indignation and violence. Now, these
colonies have turned in their sleep—have shown something
of indignation—and may even put forth violence towards
those that wrong them. And the recent unsettled condition
of labour indicates an awakening consciousness of injustice,
and of wrong in the minds of the people, towards those
entrusted with the directorate of their public affairs. In
the past, many of those directors, as they have had
opportunity, have retired as wealthy landowners, or
millionaires ; and it will be a distinct disappointment to
many, with whom the opportunity remains, if the slumberer
awakes too soon. Not yet has all his property been
alienated ; he, himself, can be further pledged —sold for
more money ; and is altogether too useful and valuable a
drudge to be relinquished, if that can be avoided. He
cannot be coquetted with by Labour Commissions for
very long, and the question no longer serves to dangle
before the public mind, of Freetrade and Protection.
Now, the incidence of the Federal Convention having
been called together, immediately following the recent
labour troubles has, so far, attracted no special attention
from public writers, or speakers. That the movement was
remarkable and precipitate has been recognised. But the
desire of the aged Premier of New South Wales, to figure
therein, has been accepted as a sufficient explanation.
Every effect, however, must have its adequate cause, and it


must be doubted that the precipitate desire for Federation,
on the part of the various colonial Governments, arises from
a desire to pander to the vanity of one old man.
Remarkable and unexpected as was the convoking of
the Federal Convention, still more remarkable and un-
expected was the unanimity arrived at, by the representatives
of colonies, whose interests lie as wide apart, as Freetrade is
from Protection; as the north is from the south. So much so,
that during the sitting of the Convention, the press daily
prophesied the utter failure of the delegates, to arrive at any
mutual understanding. Therefore, it is evident, that there
is some great originating purpose, underlying the movement,
sufficiently important to the Governments of the several
colonies represented, that for its attainment they are willing,
not only to be precipitate, but also to sink many important
dividual principles.
The secrecy that surrounded the proceedings of the
delegates in committee, not only points to the probability
of such a purpose, but arouses misgivings, that its intentions
bode no good to some section, or sections of the community.
“ A people,” says Sydney Smith, “do well to watch
and suspect their rulers, and not to be defrauded of
happiness and money by false pretences.” By avoiding to
be watched, the Federal delegates have provoked suspicion,
and the question now forces itself for solution —Are there
false pretences here?
“The report of the Imperial Commission appointed
to consider the defences of all the British colonies stated that
their geographical position was a sufficient protection for
the Australian colonies. That the transportation of an
effective force to Australia would be so costly that no
foreign Power would attempt it, and if they did, with the
present mode of communication, and the English warships
in these waters, it would be impossible for them to escape
being captured. . . . Sir Henry Parkes received a
copy of this report and locked it up, and took care that it
should not be made public, or seen by press or Parliament.”
So writes the Honorable John Lucas to the Herald,
of 18th May, 1891. In face of this report of the Imperial
Commission, Sir Henry Parkes categorically stated that the
first and principal object of Federation is the formation of
a Federal Army.


Now, a Federal Army to fulfil the ostensible object of
protecting the colonies from invasion would, of course, be
large and of miscellaneous parts. A New South Wales, a
Victorian legion; a South Australian, a Western Australian,
a Tasmanian and New Zealand legion. How necessary a
Federal Army ! But how convenient should the slumberer
awake, and shake himself of his sloth, (sloth to watch and
suspect his rulers, however industrious in his daily toil).
Then, according to the provisions of Clause 52, part 6, of
the Convention Bill, if New South Wales soldiers, actuated
by patriotic motives, refused to fire upon their own country-
men it should be competent, to march in Victorians, or
Western Australians, to effect the purpose. Thus can
Queensland squatters get their sheep shorn with Victorian
bayonets : South Australian bullets arbitrate with Victorian
dock-laborers : while New Zealand gatlings, and Tasmanian
Nordenfeldts would be a strong argument to return to work
in a coal-miners strike in New South Wales. Thus should
single-sticks, not single-tax, become the law in every
colony.
Now, as the ruling classes are also invariably the
wealthier classes, we have here a purpose touching their
private interests, about which the various governments
represented at the Federal Convention could have neither
diversity of opinion, nor cause of delay. Important enough
also, to sink out of sight questions of mere public policy :
a purpose threatening to the interests of the every-day
toiler: and dark and sinister enough to require the pro-
foundest Star Chamber secrecy.
When the Honorable Bede Dailey was Premier of
New South Wales, upon no other authority than that his
ambition prompted, he offered to the British Government,
and despatched to the Soudan, an armed Australian force.
Seldom in the history of constitutional government has the
confidence of a people been more grossly violated; their
representative institutions more contemptuously spurned.
For thus trampling on the trust of a people, the Honorable
Dailey received the thanks of British royalty, the con-
gratulations of aristocracy, and the applause of Army
and Navy, which exists to uphold royalty and aristocracy.
And when he died, he gained a place amongst the illustrious
dead. To his people he bequeathed a precedent that may


lead to the needless slaughter of thousands of her sons on
any foreign battle-field; to his successors in office he
left the example of a brilliant, conspicuous, but most
unscrupulous success.
Amongst the traits that have ever characterised
aspirants after fame, has been a desire that, as their
names, so their bones, should be surrounded with enduring
honour. The present Premier of New South Wales has
not disguised his anxiety in this direction. And the Taj-
mahal, the shrine of Mausoleus, and the inchoate Sydney
State House alike attest the universality of this ambition.
Olden-time potentates when rearing shrines to perpetuate
their names, and to receive their bones, sometimes gave
sublimity to the fabric, by laying the foundation-stone in
the blood of their first-born son, and consecrating the
top stone in the blood of their youngest son.
The Honourable Bede Dailey gained St. Paul’s
Cathedral, and by no fault of his was no blood shed. His
achievement was to send forth his country’s sons to fight
the battle of the British money-lender: to strengthen the
hands of an alien tax-gatherer: to replace the shifting-yoke
upon poor Egyptian fellahs. But surely, to march into
New South Wales the troops of Victoria : into Victoria,
those of Queensland : into Queensland those of South
Australia; to dragoon these colonies throughout with
soldiers foreign to their soil; here were a bolder project, a
more notable design. Thus, with prestige and sublimity—
perchance with blood—may the Sydney State House, at
length, rear its consecrated head.
Did Dailey usurp the authority of Parliament while it
was in recess ! —His successor would supersede its powers
while in session.
Thus can the great difficulty—the Labour Question —
now fronting the various colonial governments be solved :
By placing a military establishment in the land, subject
to the control, not of an authority, necessarily within its own
borders, but in whichever colony the seat of Government
happens to be : by reducing the condition of the masses
here, to the condition of the masses in Europe : by denying
rights, and over-riding representative institutions ; thus
may the laborer be answered, and the great Labour Problem
solved.


Truly, it is necessary for the colonists to awake ; not,
however, to oppose force to force, and wrong to wrong, but
to watch and suspect their rulers, and not to be defrauded
by any false pretences.
As to the questions at present exciting angry discussion
between public writers and speakers, questions as to the
internal structure of the Federal Constitution :—Whether
the Senate would have too much power, or too little:
whether the Federal Supreme Court should be the final
Court of Appeal; whether the Governor-General should be
nominated or elected; these are mere matters of detail.
The first and principal object of Federation, as declared by
the President of the Convention, is the formation of a
Federal Army. This is the sub-structure upon which all
else is reared. And what is it but a design on the
part of the rich, for the oppression of the poor : a mighty
engine in the hands of employers for the coercion of labour?
It is another Soudan contingent, enrolled to fight, not for
British, but for Colonial capital: to strengthen the hands, not
of a Turkish, but of an Australian tax-gatherer : to place a
yoke, not on an old broken-down ox, but on a young one on
which neveryetyoke sat —upon the Australian working-man.
This is the substructure, and its bases rest upon the graves
of his own and his children’s freedom.
In the early days of responsible government, if any
ministry had concealed an important public paper, they
would have been ignominiously hurled from office. But
now there opens a wider field and undreamed of possibilities.
Not only public papers, but dark public designs require
dragging to the light. Flow vast a change within how
short a time ! Then prosperity was in the land : commerce
and industries flourished : the treasury was well filled :
the people’s credit unimpeached. Now, misery and
dissatisfaction stalk through the land: commerce languishes;
and industries decay. The people’s credit is undermined;
and the treasury has an enormous deficit. And lastly,
as a crowning act, the people’s authority is to be largely
superseded, and themselves coerced by foreign troops.
It is, indeed, necessary that we awake —to inquire into
and interest ourselves in our public affairs. It is necessary
that we regard ourselves as having each an equal share in
what remains unalienated of land, and mineral wealth.


That we regard our representatives in their proper light, as
directors entrusted with the management of our common
property. And finally that the people assume some sort of
direct control of those directors. The necessity for this is
readily seen by a comparison between the condition of
societies, of which,the directors are under proper control,and
the condition of these colonies, of which the directors are
under no sort of control whatever. Compare, for instance,
the condition of the Mutual Provident Society of Australia
with its little capital of nine millions, and its surplus for the
year, for division amongst its shareholders, of nearly half-a-
million, with the Mutual Society of New
South Wales, with its capital of thousands of millions, and
its empty treasury, and enormous debt.
As for the lands and rights that in the past have been
alienated from the people, they have been alienated by the
people’s representatives, and their action cannot be
repudiated. But let such as receive benefit in the way of
protection and improvement of their estate by the public
forces and revenues, be taxed in proportion. For the
rest —the unalienated estate —let the electors prove that they
know how to manage that which belongs to them, before
they even speak of attempting to manage what does not.
What we really want, in the colonies, is internal
Federation. This accomplished, it will be time to introduce
the wider question of intercolonial Federation.
Meanwhile, let the protest above cited be remembered.
“ A people do well to watch and suspect their rulers, and
not to be defrauded of happiness and money by false
pretences.”


APPENDIX.
The following letter to the Evening News was published
in a form so mutilated as to largely destroy its meaning.
Its publication in extenso in the form of an advertisement,
with the attached foot-note, was also refused :
To the Editor of the “ Evening News.”
Sir, —In your report of my meeting in the Protestant Hall
last night your anxiety to publish the expressions of the inevitable
larrikin has caused you to attach very secondary importance to
what was said by me.
I pointed out that if the categorical statement of the President
of the Convention stands for anything, the first and principal object
of Federation is the formation of a Federal Army. That army
would consist of contingents drawn from each colony. It would
be under the control of the Federal Government, and could be
employed in any part of the confederacy. Therefore, we should
have New Zealand or Victorian soldiers operating in Sydney, and
subject to the control, not of an authority within our own borders,
but, perhaps, in Melbourne, or wherever the seat of government
happened to be.
If you consider this aspect of the question of less importance
than the scurrilous interruptions of half-a-dozen larrikins in the
Hall, it is no wonder if they exhibit callousness; or that the
holding of public meetings in the city is fast becoming an
impossibility.
The chief and principal object of Federation, according to
Sir Henry Parkes, is the formation of a Federal Army. The
primary question, therefore, is do we require New Zealand Gatlings
or Tasmanian Nordenfeldts to preserve order in our streets ? I say
we do not, and on this ground, if no other, oppose the present
federal movement.
H. VALENTINE HAYNES.
Note to Advertisement. —The fact of the above appearing
in the advertising columns is a strong comment on the fairness of
the Evening News.




■




