

FEDERATION
AS IT AFFECTS
Western Australia.
BY THE
Hon. ALEC. MATHESON, M.L.C.,
Member of the Federal Council of Australasia.
A Paper read before the Fremantle Literary Institute on the
17th March , 1899.
PERTH PRINTING WORKS, ST. GEORGE'S TERRACE


FEDERATION
AS IT AFFECTS
Western Australia.
BY THE
Hon. ALEC. MATHESON, M.L.C.,
Member* of the Federal Council of Australasia
A Paper read before ihe Fremantle Literary Institute on the
17th March , iBgg.
PERTH PRINTING WORKS, ST. GEORGE’S TERRACE.


FEDERATION
IT AFFECTS WESTERN AUSTRALIA^
BY THE
HON. ALEC. MATHESON, M.L.C.
Member of the Federal Council of Australasia
HISTORICAL SKETCH.
I propose to commence by giving a very short resume of the
history of Australian Federation. The question is an older one
than most people realise, and was first mooted in 1849, when a
Committee of the Privy Council of England advised the separa-
tion from New South Wales of that part of Australia now called
Victoria. The idea, however, was allowed to drop, though
a Bill establishing a Federal Legislature actually passed both
Houses of the British Parliament in 1850. In 1853, when
responsible government was first granted to Victoria and New
South Wales, provision for a Federal constitution was again urged,
but without success.
In 1885 an Act was passed constituting the Federal Council
of Australasia, which, it was hoped, would supply the place, for a
time at any rate, of a proper Federal constitution. New South
Wales and South Australia, however, refused to join the Council,
and partly from this cause, and partly because the Council had
no executive or judicial powers, but chiefly because the members
being nominated and not elected by the people, had no popular


mandate, and were in no sense representative, the Federal Council
proved a failure, and has done but little work.
In 1889 Sir Henry Parkes moved in the matter anew,
prompted to a large extent by a report of Major-General Edwards,
strongly urging the necessity of a Federal defence scheme for
Australia. A conference on the subject was held in Melbourne
in 1890. As a result the Convention of 1891 was held at Sydney,
and a Commonwealth Bill was drafted which has formed the
foundation on which the present Bill has been built up.
In 1895, at the instigation of Mr. Reid, the Premier of New
South Wales, a meeting of Premiers was held at Hobart, and an
Enabling Bill having been passed by all the colonies of Australia
except Queensland, delegates were duly sent to a Convention
held at Adelaide in March, 1897. The delegates from New
South Wales, Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania were elected
by the people, and therefore carried with them the direct mandate
of the people of those colonies. In Western Australia alone the
delegates were nominated by Parliament, and the people of the
colony were ignored.
No definite result was arrived at on this occasion, or at a
further Convention held at Sydney in September, 1897, and in
January, 1898, a third Convention was held at Melbourne, when
the draft of the Bill to constitute the Commonwealth of Australia
was finally approved.
The Bill was in June, 1898, submitted for approval to the
people in the colonies of Victoria, South Australia, Tasmania and
New South Wales, but failed to secure the necessary majority of
voters in New South Wales, The other three colonies felt that
it would be impossible for them to federate in the absence of the
mother colony, though fully entitled to do so constitutionally, and
matters were at a deadlock until January of the present year, when
a meeting was held in Melbourne at which the Premiers of the
six Australian colonies were present. As a result of their
informal deliberations, it was agreed that the Commonwealth Bill
of 1898, with certain amendments and compromises, agreed to by
the conclave of Premiers, should once more be submitted to the


people of Australia for approval, and that a simple majority of the
electors in each colony should be sufficient for the acceptance or
rejection of the Bill.
In bringing the history of Federation up to date for the
purposes of to-night’s paper I have been obliged to condense as
much as possible, and many most interesting facts have had to be
omitted from record as being of no actual importance to us at the
present state of affairs.
The position to-day is simply this :
The people of Western Australia will shortly be asked to
signify their approval or disapproval to the Commonwealth Bill as
passed by the Convention of 1858, and amended by the Premiers.
No further amendment of the Bill is possible, and no option exists
to voters but either to take it or leave it as it is.
Probably no one will maintain the Bill is perfect. Students
of political law will particularly criticise the position in which
the Senate is left, but the fact remains that good or bad the
Bill will without doubt be adopted by the other colonies, and will
provide the Constitution of Federated Australia.
If therefore, you refuse to federate to-day because the Bill is
not perfect from the point of view of constitutional law, you refuse
to federate for all time, as the Constitution will necessarily continue
to be unacceptable from your point of view.
FEDERAL CONSTITUTION.
We must now pass on to the Bill itself, as you should clearly
understand its more salient points before you can fairly realise
how Federation will affect this colony.
And I may remark parenthetically that the Constitutions of
the existing colonies from the respective Governors downwards are
left entirely untouched and unaltered by the Federal Constitution,
but the Act which constituted the Federal Council of Australasia
is repealed, the Federal Council ceases to exist, and any colony
that refuses to federate is left without even that slight link to
connect it to the rest of Australia.
Ihe federal Parliament will consist of the Queen, represented


by a Governor-General, a Senate or Upper House, and a House
of Representatives.
The Senate will consist of six Senators from each Original
State, an Original State being any colony that forms part of the
Commonwealth at its foundation.
The House of Representatives will consist of double the
number of the Senate, whatever that may be; each State returning
a number of members in proportion to its population.
A special proviso exists, however, in favor of the smaller
States, that every Original State shall be represented by at least
five members.
The latest statistics at my disposal show that assuming all six
colonies federate there will be 75 members of the Lower House,
as follows :
4
New South Wales ... ... ... 26
Victoria ... ... ... ... 23
Queensland ... ... . . • 9
South Australia ... ... .. ■■■ 7
Western Australia ... .. ... 5
Tasmania ... ... ... ... 5
I lay considerable stress on this provision, as it is here we
find the first great advantage that Western Australia will derive
from becoming an Original State. On a population basis she
would be only entitled to three members in the Lower House and
one in the Upper House—four in all, as against n under the
existing provision in her favour.
The importance of this advantage cannot be gainsaid, and
has been most ably explained by the editor of the West Australian
newspaper, from whom 1 will quote as follows
“ It is obvious that the advantages which we may derive
from Federation in the largest degree centre ... on the
extent to which our representatives can make their voices felt.’
I have also made a most careful calculation, and I find that
on the basis of a population of 170,000 in 1898 it would take 21
years at the normal rate of increase before the population of
Western Australia would numerically justify the representation of


five members in the House of Representatives to which it will be
entitled by right if it joins as an Original State.
A special provision exists in tne Bill to enable the Federal
Parliament to restrict the representation granted to any States not
Original States, and it is clear that that course would be adopted.
One must not lose sight of the fact that year by year the
population of the other colonies will increase at probably a
quicker rate than our own, and as a result the disparity between
our representation and that of the other colonies on a population
basis will have a tendency to increase rather than diminish.
The first issue then before us to-day is whether we will be an
Original State with n representatives as a minimum, or be
content hereafter with the reduced number to which our population
might entitle us.
The qualification of an elector for either the Senate or the
Federal Lower House is that of a Lower House elector in this
colony, until the Federal Parliament otherwise provides; but in
no case shall any elector vote more than once.
Here we find the second advantage that Western Australia
would derive from Federation. It wW\ become immediately neces
sary to prepare new rolls eliminating from the existing electoral-
rolls all plural votes ; and it is reasonable to assume that the
necessity for revising our local Electoral Act in the same direction
should appeal to the Executive of Western Australia, if only on
the score of economy, and to obviate the need for two complete
and concurrent rolls.
It is moreover probable that the Federal Parliament will at
an early stage provide for uniformity both in the qualification of
its electors and the laws relating to electors, especial powers being
provided to that effect in the Bill, it being rightly considered that
national suffrage should be uniform throughout the nation, in view
of the fact that the members of the Lower House should repre-
sent the whole people of the Commonwealth ; and in .such a case
it would be almost impossible for this colony to preserve for its
local elections the restrictive and harrassing legislation that at
present exists.


Federation, therefore, to my mind, holds out a promise to
Western Australia of speedy electoral reform.
POWERS OF PARLIAMENT.
So much for the constitution of Parliament. We now come
to its powers, and we find these strictly defined in 39 articles, all
other legislation of every kind being carefully preserved to’the
Governments of the various States as at present.
We need only concern ourselves, however, with those particular
powers the exercise of which is likely to be of direct advantage to
this colony. No one will, I presume, deny the very great advan-
tage the mercantile community of Western Australia will derive
from uniform legislation with the rest of the Australian continent
on the following subjects : -
Banking
Insurance
Weights and measures
Bills of exchange
Bankruptcy and insolvency
Copyrights and patents
Foreign corporations
Uniformity of service and execution of civil and criminal processes,
and the judgments of the Courts of the States
Recognition throughout the Commonwealth of the laws and judicial
proceedings of the several States
Conciliation and arbitration in industrial disputes.
In social matters we shall also benefit to a large extent from
Federation. The Federal Government will provide for uniformity
m our marriage laws and those of divorce and quarantine; and
the introduction of aliens, undesirable immigrants and criminals
will also be under federal control.
Due provision is also made for the acquisition of existing
rai ways and the construction of new railways, both, however
requiring the consent of the State ; provision is also made that
the Government may raise loans on the credit of the Common-
wealth.
In this connection it is clear that the credit of the Common


wealth in the money market will be much better than that of the
separate States, and that loans to the Commonwealth will be both
easier to raise and command a better price than existing colonial
loans. It is, therefore, contemplated that the debts of the several
States shall in part be taken over by the Commonwealth. It is
unnecessary to point out the advantage this would be to Western
Australia in the existing state of its credit.
EXECUTIVE POWERS OF PARLIAMENT.
So far, 1 have dealt shortly with those abstract powers of the
Federal Parliament from which we shall in Western Australia
derive direct benefit, and now I propose to deal at length with the
administrative powers of the Parliament and its corresponding
financial responsibilities and requirements.
There are two ways of dealing with this subject; one by
confining oneself to the facts provided by the Bill, and the other
by introducing assumptions both of facts and figures suitable to
the conclusion you desire to arrive at; and this latter course has
been the one so far adopted by the local press in discussing
Federation. I propose to explain the facts in the first place, and
deal with assumptions later on.
Immediately the Commonwealth is established by proclama-
tion of the Queen, funds will be required to carry it on, and for
that purpose the whole control of the Customs and Excise
Departments of each Federal State will be forthwith transferred to
the Commonwealth, who, however, tor the first ten years of its
existence may only appropriate one-quarter of the whole revenue
from these sources, and is obliged to return the other three-
quarters to the respective States. This arrangement will remain
in force thereafter till Parliament makes some other provision.
Revenue will also be derived from the postal, telegraph and
telephone systems, which will all be taken over by the Common-
wealth.
Should the Commonwealth require further funds, provision
is made for direct taxation.
So much for the sources of revenue.
9


VPe now come to the various channels of expenditure. They
are as follows :
The payment of the Executive and civil service.
The cost of collecting customs and excise.
The cost of the postal, telegraph and telephone systems.
Naval and military defence.
Lighthouses, quarantine, etc.
Interest on any federal loan debt.
It should be carefully borne in mind that the cost of all these
departments is at present defrayed by the several States, and there
is no reason to suppose that the cost of their management will be
appreciably less under the Commonwealth. There will, therefore,
be the same amount of money spent in this colony as hitherto,
the only difference being that the Federal Government will spend
the money, and not the Western Australian Government.
Ihe small balance of expenditure required to defray the
actual cost of the Federal Government and its Civil Service will be
the only part of Western Australia’s contribution to the funds of
the Commonwealth which will be lost to this colony. What this
will probably amount to we will consider later on.
The cost of the Federal Government embraces the salary of
the Governor-General; seven Ministers of State, forming an
Executive Council; the Parliamentary and Ministerial staff; the
Federal Judges ; and the staff of the Federal Courts of Justice.
JUDICATURE.
Ihese will consist of a High Court and such other courts as
Parliament creates or appoints.
The High Court, consisting of a Chief Justice and not less
than two other Judges, will sit as a Court of Appeal from the
judgments of the Supreme Courts of the States, subject to the
conditions now restricting appeals from such Courts to the Queen-
in-Council.
Such a Court will prove of inestimable benefit to all the
States, as not only will it provide a uniform interpretation of the
States law, but it will also ensure in cases of appeal decisions in
conformity with the special conditions prevailing on the Australian
Continent.
10


FINANCE AND TRADE.
It is not necessary to deal further with the other powers of
the Federal Courts, and I will now pass on to the provisions of
the Bill dealing with finance and trade. This portion of the Bill
must be explained at some length, as it is round these clauses that
the fight of Federation or Isolation must centre; and I use the
term “ Isolation ” advisedly, as if we alone of all the Australian
colonies refuse to federate, we shall find ourselves a small Anglo-
Saxon settlement of 170,000 people cut off from the Australian
Nation and effectually separated by a waste of water, a waste of
sand, and a wall of adverse sentiment, from all participation in
the only social, educational, or political progress on the continent.
All revenue raised by the Commonwealth will form a
consolidated revenue fund, and will only be spent in the directions
provided by the constitution, and under the appropriations made
by law. The chief revenue of the Commonwealth will, of course,
be derived from Customs and Excise, as I have already pointed
out. _
When first the Commonwealth is established, the Customs
tariff existing at the moment in each colony will be continued,
but as soon as possible, and at any rate within two years, a
uniform tariff is to be established for the whole Commonwealth ;
and from that date commerce between the States is to be
absolutely free—that is to say, within two years all the States will
enjoy intercolonial free trade, with the exception, however, of
ourselves. For this colony a very special provision has been
made to meet as far as possible the supposed wishes of the
country. We are, from the moment intercolonial free trade is
established, to participate in all the benefits we can derive from
pouring our products into the other colonies free of duty, but we
are left at liberty to continue to impose our then existing rate of
Customs duties on all their products for a further term of five
years, subject, however, to a yearly reduction of these duties by
20 per cent., commencing in the second year. Ido not think
any further evidence is required of the desire of the other colonies
to deal fairly with us in this matter of Federation. As a hree-
11


trader I question whether it is to the advantage of the colony to
have had mtercolonial free trade postponed for five vears, even
though we may reap the advantage in the meanwhile ofa Tree
ntaritet throughout a.. Australia for our products, but a, a com
promise, it should meet the views of thJ i as a corn-
loss Of • fth who consider that the
Without th ” m ' B bCUr thTOUgh Fed «.ttion would leavens
" the means we *>, our own State development
revenue" of the sTf " eS ‘ abiished ’ the Customs
enue of the States will, 0 f course, be derived entirely from the
™ o rirlndto PO nre d T° Commonwealth from the rest of the
colonies of ° b ' ai " ed by the
Of Svdnev and mu, Vretona through the position
that for / ' “ d str ibuting centres, it is provided
at for- five years certain, and thereafter until Parliament alters it
I r sWpped from -
used or consumed ' COl ° ny ” ' tWch the goods «
To summarise, the position then stands like this ,-Until the
rntpostfon of untform duties of Customs, and for one year after
Cl’ Wi " C ° minUe “** a " revenuJ she cl’
quarter" of th “uT and '“cise under her present tariff, less one
P Wl ° e ’ "^ lc h he retained by the Federal
Gove e nt , bu[ wh;ch w . n be near , y y nded b ; d -
La. r o f Tt men V n ° arrying ° n the bUSiMSS ° f Common-
fa of Western Australia, During four years thereafter the
reduced bvT" fr ° ra C '' St ° mS °" interColo " ial P™ d uce will be
and f 7 i per Cent ' each year until the end of the fifth year
to theft.fi i ’a„7 ra ; ion ° f “’ at year this colony participate*
he full m all the advantages of intercolonial free-trade, fudging
on ever, by our experience in Western Australia during the last
venesTormot Th"" “‘""’I" ,h “ Whe ‘ her inter-
nes not, the revenue derived by this colony from Custom
the fa iT " I TT on,al Pr ° dUCe Wil ' diminish materially, owing to
equall ng thel LT Prod “ Cti ° n ° f C °'° nial Pr ° dUCe »
quail,n„ the local demand, and it has been found by experience
at as soon as this stage is reached the local price falls below the
12


price at which it will pay to import, and importation and revenue
__imm Customs decline concurrently.
The objection has, of course, been taken that the colony will
not be able to pay its way when it is deprived by Federation of
its Customs revenue on intercolonial products. Of course, the
assumption made here is that we should continue to derive
revenue from that source if we did not federate, and as I have
already pointed out, that assumption is a risky one ; but assuming
that it is the case, and that our loss in that direction would
amount to one quarter of our present Customs revenue, which as
far as I can ascertain without the actual figures of imports, is a
fair proportion to take for the purpose, I propose to quote a few
figures based on our income and revenue for the year ending 31st
December, 1898, to give an example of how the colony would
stand. The total revenue for that year was £2,604,943, of which
£924,883 was derived from Customs and excise. Deducting one
quarter of this sum as estimated loss on intercolonial duties, we
have left the sum of £693,662 to be collected by the Federal
Government, out of which they would credit Western Australia
with the sum of £520,247. The revenue from posts and
telegraphs to the 31st December, 1898, amounting to £204,037
must, of course, be deducted from the general revenue, and leaves
a balance of general revenue in the hands of the West Australian
Treasurer of £1,476,023, which together with the amount of
£520,247 which would be returned to Western Australia by the
Federal Treasurer, would give the sum total of £1,996,270
available for paying the interest on the West Australian debt and
for carrying on the business of the colony, which should be ample
for every purpose judging by the expenditure required to carry on
the business of the colony prior to the initiation of a spirited
public works policy by the Works Department in 1896.
I trust that these figures will once and for all dispose of the
contention that intercolonial free-trade would render it impossible
for this colony to pay its way if it joined the Federal Union. The
Morning Herald has dwelt at some length on this aspect of the
case, and it will be noticed that as far as the probable total
income which the Federal Government would derive from Customs
and excise in Western Australia is concerned, the figure that I
have adopted on a logical basis, viz., £693,662, differs but slightly
13


from the figure which that paper has adopted of £680,000, the
general element of difference being, as far as I can see, that the
Morning Herald to suit its own argument refuses to admit that
the balance of £520,000 odd returned to Western Australia by the
Federal Government, along with, roughly speaking, the 1#
millions of revenue which they may expect from other sources,
nearly two millions in all, will be sufficient to carry on the
Government of the country.
The further objection, grounded on intercolonial freetrade,
which the Mortiing Herald raises to Federation, is the ordinary
argument of the protectionist, that with a freetrade policy it is
impossible for industries to be created, or for the colony’s
resources to be properly developed.
This argument, proceeding from the editor of the Morning
Herald in particular, is a most remarkable one. No one has done
more than that paper, or gone to greater lengths, in exposing the
absolute fallacy of the protection policy which has hitherto been
afforded to the farming industry. Article after article has appeared
in its columns exposing the fallacy of the protectionist arguments,
and emphasising the fact that the enhancement of the price of
food through the food duties which have been imposed as a pro-
tection to the farmer, has done more than anything else to drive
people out of the colony. Under these circumstances it is impos-
sible to understand the motive of the Morning Herald when it
opposes Federation on the plea that local industries should be
fostered by the retention of a protective tariff. The least reflec-
tion will show that with a market in the colony limited to the
170,000 people that form its present population, the creation of
artificially fostered industries would lead to an almost immediate
glut through over production, as should we not enter the Federal
Bond, the whole of the other colonial markets would be absolutely
closed to the products of our industrial establishments, and they
would have to depend absolutely and entirely on the local
markets. The only assumption to be drawn is that the Morning
Herald is speaking in the interests of those few capitalists in the
colony who could afford to sink their capital in the creation of
manufactories, and even they appear to have overlooked the
extremely limited market which they would enjoy. It is impos-
sible to doubt that when the advocates of protection come to
14


consider carefully the circumstances under which their mar e s
would be contracted, they will find that the advantages they hope
to derive from that policy are not nearly so obvious as they appear
to be at first sight. Moreover, it appears from the statistics aval -
able on the subject that at the present moment Western Australia
is not at all so badly situated in respect to local production as one
might suppose. The value of its industrial products for the year
ending June 30, 1897. was £2 5 4*. 9& P er head ot P°P ulat^ on ’
as against £25 16s. id. in Victoria, and £26 4 s. 2d - m New
South Wales. There is no doubt that were later statistics aval
able it would be found that the value of industrial products per
head for the year ending 1898 would be at any rate equal to New
South Wales, if not in advance of that colony.
The further argument that manufactories would afford oc
cupation to a large number of workers, and so increase t e
population of the colony to the benefit of the farmers and food
producers, is hardly worth considering. It stands to reason
the number of hands employed in manufactories started to supp y
the needs of r 70,000 people would be too few to benefit the
farmer to any appreciable extent, while the entire working com-
munity throughout the colony would have to pay an enhance
price for every manufactured article they used, most of which
profit would find its way into the pockets of the manufacturers.
There is, in addition, a most curious fact, which I have dug
out of the latest statistical records of the six colonies. It is one
which I will confess came as a surprise to me, and wi o
SUrP T„e working out the proportion that factory hands bore to
population in the Eastern colonies. I found that in Victoria they
were 1 to every 23 head; in New South Wales, r to every aS ; m
Queensland, . to every 24 1 while in Western Australia they were,
in 1897, Ito every 17 head. . '.
Western Australia, therefore,, is, as a matter of fact, in
better position as regards the number of hands employed in her
manufacturing industries compared with her population, than e
older colonies in the East.
On the Victorian basis, we should only have 7,040 operatives
, /:o, „ cumins of 2,649. What then would
whereas we have 9,689— a surplus 01 2,049
be the result of artificially stimulating production i
15


In dealing with the question of industries, I wish to call
special attention to the fact that the States are left absolutely free
b rant any aid or bounty they desire to mining for gold Silver
r other metals, without any reference to the Parliament’of the
ommonwealth It is obvious that as our leading industry is the
theToc 7 ! I * f imm<SnSe advanta ge to Western
r , ! hat , the local Legislature should be absolutely unham-
pered m developing the resources of the colony. It is true that it
will be possible for any State to grant bounties in other dimctfo ns
to promote the production or export of goods, but before doing so
of ParlfamenTT/ th ° btain C ° nSent ° f b ° th Houses
parliament of the Commonwealth. Western •
therefore left in an exceptionally good position for promoting her
special industry m this respect.
Before concluding ray remarks on the freetrade aspect of
Federation, I should like to remind you of the axiom that pro
tective dut.es reduce the purchasing power of wages, and corres
pondingly pour wealth into the pockets of .he few capitalists who
can a fiord to start .ndustnal enterprises. The advantage there
e, of federation to Western Australia in this respect fs ’that it
w.ll increase the purchasing power of every wage earner by sweep
d ," eS ' and “ iS ‘° be borne in “ ind ‘hat the
age earner m this colony ,s not only the agricultural laborer and
bUt Wi ‘ h feW “ Ce P‘ ions “tire population
SEAT OF GOVERNMENT.
The question of the seat of the Federal Government is not
one which mater,ally affects this colony. Provision, as you are
, are ’ ,' S made m the amended Bill for the Federa/capitil
being located in federal territory, which is to be too squa“
miles, or to .rules square. Under these circumstances, it may be
be chLn:
There is, however, a point in connection with the Federal
termory to which I wish to call the special attention of the peopTe
of this colony. Nowhere have the evils of land speculation been
tore apparent than in the Australian colonies. Nowhere has
and speculation led to more disastrous results, and in no other
16


country of the world would it have been easier to have experi-
mented in the direction of land nationalisation. It is, however,
rarely that such a favourable opportunity has ever occurred as now
presents itself for enforcing the theory that the profits derived
from the congregation of population on a given spot leading to the
creation of a city, and the consequent enormous enhancement of
land values, should go directly to the Commonwealth, and so to
the people, and not to the land speculator. In the case of the
Federal City, it is impossible to conceive what the ultimate value
of the freehold may become as the years roll on and the Australian
people become a nation ; and if the principle is maintained from
the commencement that federal territory is the inalienable pro-
perty of the Commonwealth, the revenue to be derived from
leasing that property to those compelled by their duties to live m
the Federal City would eventually, without doubt, defray the
whole cost of carrying on the business of the Commonwealth, and
materially reduce the taxation of the whole of the States. I his is
a question which requires the most careful thought on the part of
every member of the community, and it is especially to be hoped
that when the Federal Bill is submitted to the people of this colony
for their approval or disapproval, the additional question should
be asked-—“ Do you desire that the freehold of the f ederal
City should be vested in the Federal Government without power
of alienation, or do you not ? ’
ALTERATIONS IN THE CONSTITUTION.
In view of the criticisms which have appeared in the West
A nstralian newspaper as to the position in which the Senate has
been left through the amendments to the Bill which were
introduced at the conclave of Premiers, it is desirable to impress
upon you that the constitution when once adopted cannot be
altered without the consent not only of a majority of the
electors of the Commonwealth, but of a majority of the States.
The State control of any alteration of the constitution is
therefore retained intact to a majority of the States. It follows,
therefore, that under this arrangement three little States like
Western Australia, South Australia, and Tasmania, with a
population of 700,000, could, if they wished, entirely prevent any
alteration of the constitution, even though it were supported b>
17


srrrrr a p ° puiati ° n ° f -.miens. Th e
f„ ' 0f " e mst Australian in spite of having had this
the Senate willV 0 ' 106 ’ ' nS ' StS harpin « u P on the fact that
the people a suffi and that when a referendum is sent to
be turn d I , maj ° nty ° f ,he lesser States wiil inevitably
caseTl oh er V C Side ° f thC * arger If ‘ ba ‘ be
tution would V |i° US K *T y questlon of a change of the consti-
r— it* menu, and with
weahf™ t lf I 3 r° nty " 0t ° nly ° f ‘ he ™ terS ° f the Comraon-
canse of rn , ateS ; and in th « case I cannot see where any
of public Zr W ° Uld he ’ “ being obvious that >n the interests
resolurio P 73 ™aJOrtty should always be allowed to carry a
States as hT'T “ yOU deal with individuals or
de^.“; hi ns th c at rr tf g r his f comp,aint ,o a ,ogicai
in his „,„s , h the ed,tor of the Wist Amt,Man
n his model constitution contemplated allowing the Senate to
nmd t: u M e . m ‘° ‘, he Pe ° P,e ai d “ which! to Z
b od y ’ t :":s rabie position to a,, °' v rep“‘i-
con..r; iSCOmPleteSmy “ the Bi “i il is anything but a
hav been f * m ° s ‘ "” portant Political document, but I
hav bee afra |d of weary,ng you by going too much into detail;
as tt is it has exceeded the amount of space I had intended to
devote to it, but as I worked from point to point in preparing this
paper I found ~ impossible to compress any onsecut.ve
explanation of its effect on Western Australia fntoTsma,,!
compass, I also want before I sit down to travel in the realm of
sed on that basis against Federation, and with the advantages
we may fairly assume we shall derive from the same source.
FEDERAL FINANCES.
I first propose to deal with the financial position in which we
may assume the Federal Government will find itself, and for that
P rpose must trouble you with a few figures which will, I hope
X: e r d ' oril,o,,he suggestio - —^-s
»
18


Estimated cost of Federal Civil Service
300,000
Actual cost of Posts, etc., 1897-8
2,080,407
Estimated cost of Customs, Excise, etc.
Estimated cost of Defence ...
220.000
600.000
Estimated cost of Lighthouses, Quarantine, etc.
Interest at 3 per cent, on Loans for £10,000,000
300,oco
£3,600.407
Against this expenditure we have the
probable revenue of
the Federal Government; —
£
Actual revenue from Posts, etc., 1897-8 ...
Actual revenue from Customs, Excise, 1897-b,
X
2,067,483
of
1,739,988
£6,959,955-
£3,807,471
First we have the probable expenditure of the Government
as follows : r
I have here assumed that the total revenue under a colonial
free-trade tariff will not appreciably differ from the revenue at
present collected by the combined colonies under their existing
tariffs; although, as I have already pointed out, Western
Australia may some seven years hence lose as much as a
quarter of her present Customs revenue, and there may also be a
slight shrinkage in the Customs revenue of Tasmania and Queens-
land, the Customs revenue of New South Wales, on the other
hand (which in 1898 stood at the low figure of £1 3*- P er
head as against ours of £6 ss. 9 d. per head), will undoubtedly be
largely increased, and will, if anything, more than balance the
shrinkage in the other colonies.
My reason for believing that this will be the result of the
uniform tariff is that as the existing tariffs of Victoria and South
Australia produce almost identical results per head of population,
the members for these colonies in the House of Representatives
will obviously be inclined to support each other in fixing a tariff
to which they are accustomed.
The representatives of Tasmania are equally sure to support
the highest tariff available, in view of the internal needs of their
colony; and Queensland, with an existing tariff of £2 14s. Ta-
per head, higher even than that of Tasmania, will presumably do
the same. These States have together 44 members, as against
19


26 from New South Wales, and it would be a matter of indif-
ference which way the West Australian representatives voted,
though they would presumably support Victoria and South Aus-
tralia on this question.
As regards expenditure, I have assumed that £ 10,000,000
would cover, and amply cover, the primary responsibilities of the
Commonwealth. Any interest required for the service of con-
verted State loans would, of course, be provided directly by the
•States in question.
The result shows a probable surplus of about £200,000.
COLONIAL DEFENCE.
Ihe development of colonial defence is likely to prove of
•more advantage to Western Australia than to the other colonies,
uf we join the federal movement. It should be borne in mind, as
I have already pointed out, that it was the urgent need for military
federation that led in 1889 to the first steps being taken which
resulted in the Bill we have been discussing to-night.
In 1890 a military commission was appointed to look into the
whole question, and during 1891 the Commission visited King
George’s Sound and Thursday Island, with the result that fortifica-
tions were commenced at both places. Very little, however, has
been done compared to what will have to be done in the future
as soon as Federation is an accomplished fact. It is to the
requirements of the defence organisation that we shall look more
than to anything else for the construction of a railway to Adelaide.
It is clear that no scheme of defence for federated Australia would
be complete that did not provide for a rapid and direct means of
■communication between Fremantle and Albany in Western
Australia and the Eastern Colonies, so that in case of attack
troops and provisions might be moved about from place to place
without difficulty. This, however, is not an optional matter with
the Federal Government; the Bill is emphatic on this point, it
•directs that “the Commonwealth shall protect every State against
invasion.” And this can only be done effectively in the case of
Western Australia by means of railway communication with the
East.
'The opponents of Federation will tell you that in case of
threatened invasion the Federal Government will leave Western


Australia to take care of itself, and devote all its energies and
resources to protecting the Eastern colonies. I can only say in
reply to such an assumption that it is on a par with most of the
other arguments against Federation ; it is based on the avowed
belief that the Federal Government will be devoid of any
honorable sense of its obligations, and is merely an evidence of
the insular and inveterate distrust evinced by many of our oldest
residents towards the people of the Eastern colonies.
As far as Fremantle is concerned, it is, I think, impossible to
overrate the advantage that both this town and Perth will derive
from the intercolonial railway.
In position Fremantle may fairly be compared to San
Francisco. To the south and to the north along the coast you
find the same fertile plains, admirably adapted to the cultivation
of grapes, fruits, and cereals. Going into the interior you find the
sand desert, the equivalent of the Rocky Mountains, both of them
teeming with mineral wealth ; and beyond that again you find the
fertile and populous Eastern colonies, resembling in that respect
the populous States on the eastern side of America. It is true
we are a younger country, and things here are on a smaller scale,,
but the resemblance, as far as it goes, is complete.
We all of us know the important position that San Francisco-
occupies both for wealth and population. Through its harbors-
are poured the whole of the western-bound traffic of the United
States; and the same will be the case with Fremantle. The
whole of the western-bound traffic of Australia must inevitably
centre at Fremantle. Within a year the harbor will have been
sufficiently improved to receive the largest mail boats, and every-
thing will be ready for the rapid accession of wealth, population,
and prosperity which is bound to be the lot of Fremantle the
instant the intercolonial line is completed.
Albany, it is clear, will year /after year become more im-
portant as a coaling station for the Imperial and Australian Navy,
The fortifications will undoubtedly be strengthened, and the
permanent force will be increased. I look forward to the time
when Albany will rarely be without some one or other ship of the
Federal Squadron lying in the harbour ; and when its undeniably
excellent climate in the summer is coupled with the attractions of
military bands and naval officers, I have no doubt that it will
21


become one of the leading health resorts of the Southern Hemi-
sphere ; but this end can only be arrived at through Federation.
Without Federation, I see Albany sinking into a deserted hamlet,
abandoned by the mail boats, and with perhaps no more than one
train a week to Perth. While for Fremantle I see no brighter
prospect than that of an ordinary port of call for mail steamers,
with perhaps a dozen or so of passengers arriving or leaving each
week —an isolated port in an isolated colony, shut out from all
that is civilised on the Australian continent.
You may think that this is putting the case too strongly, but
I am of a contrary opinion, and I put it to every one of you in
the Hall to-night to say what prospect of progress lies in front of
Western Australia standing by itself, with no point of contact
either politically or socially with the other colonies, and without
even a participation, such as we have had in the past, with the
Federal Council of Australasia.
And now, above all things, I want particularly to call your
attention to the fact that from every colony the cry has gone up
from the opponents of Federation that they are going to be
ruined. This is a point that you should bear carefully in mind
when you hear that this colony is going to be ruined by Federa-
tion, and you should ask the person who says so to explain
definitely and distinctly how he arrives at that conclusion. I
think you will find on investigation that it is little more than the
cry of the discontented agitator in each colony; and you will do
well to ask yourselves if every colony is going to be ruined, “Who is
going to get the plunder ?” It is obviously impossible to answer
the question, and I think it may fairly be assumed that in such a
case where you cannot find anyone partner in the Federation
absolutely satisfied that he has got everything his own way, the
chances are that the terms of the partnership have been pretty
fairly adjusted to meet the position in which each of the partners
are.
On the other hand it did not escape the notice of the
Premiers when they met in January of the present year, that it
was always possible through some unexpected occurrence some
one of the States might get into financial difficulties, and accord*
ingly a clause was added to the Bill to the effect that Parliament
might grant financial assistance to any State on such terms and


conditions as the Parliament thinks fit. This clause, therefore,
removes any possible chance of a financial catastrophe occurring
to any of the partners in the Commonwealth.
FIGHT FOR FREEDOM.
In conclusion I want to impress on you that the issue as it
stands to-day is not alone a question of Federation, but of the
sovereign right of the people to express their direct views by
voting, and I regret to say those who are likely to betray you are
to be found amongst those whom a small section of the people of
the colony sent to Parliament two years ago to represent the
whole colony. It is suggested by the opponents of Federation
that Parliament should refuse to allow the Common-
wealth Bill to be placed before the electors, and so for
the third time the people of Western Australia may be
denied the right of expressing a direct opinion on
federal questions, and it lies with you during the next few
months to make sure of freedom, or to resign yourselves to
becoming the muzzled slaves of an unrepresentative Parliament.
You must let yourselves be heard all through the colony with no
uncertain voice, insisting on your rights, and above all things
make your representatives both in the Upper and the Lower
Houses realise that the man who attempts to impede the passage
of the Enabling Bill through Parliament in the smallest way, no
matter who he may be or what his views may be on other matters,
is a marked man, a man for whom no further need exists in
political life; a man, in fact, who having once attemped to muzzle
the people, can never again be trusted to represent them.
I give you this as a watchword—“ Down with the policy of
the muzzle.” Apply it as a test to every politician who addresses
you on Federation in future before you listen to him ; ask him,
“ Do you intend to leave this question of Federation to the
unimpeded voice of a majority of voters or not ?” If he pledges
himself, then listen to him with attention ; whether his views are
right or wrong he will be an honest man, honestly striving to form
public opinion ; but if he will not pledge himself, why listen to
him ?He will be wasting your time with empty verbosity, while
all along he means to dare to arrogate to himself the right to


express for you an opinion that he does not intend to allow you to
express for yourself. The very presence of such a person
addressing a public meeting on Federation would be an insult to
the intelligence of his audience.
I can now only commend the whole question to your most
careful consideration. I have done my best to make it clear from
every point of view. And again I say, whether you agree with me
or not, let every man among you insist at any rate on his right as
a free Australian citizen to vote on this grand question of the
Federal Unity of the Australian Continent.
