

FEDERATION,
CONSIDERED IN AN HISTORICAL POINT OF VIEW
BY
W. A. WALKER,
SYDNEY GRAMMAR SCHOOL.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY J. L. HOLMES & CO., 315 PITT STREET
1883.




FEDERATION,
CONSIDERED IN AN HISTORICAL POINT OF VIEW
BY
W. A. WALKER,
SYDNEY GRAMMAR SCHOOL.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY J. L. HOLMES & CO., 315 PITT STREET
1883.




FEDERATION,
CONSIDERED IN AN HISTORICAL POINT OF VIEW.
'T'HE subject of Federation, considered historically, comprehen-
J[ sive as it is, must ever be of the greatest interest to all
those who desire to know anything of history, and in fact we
may say to everyone, for who is there so callous and indifferent
as to feel no interest in the acts of our predecessors, which have
exercised so great aii influence over our present state? The
subject is of interest then, and its value is enhanced, inasmuch
as its comprehensiveness affords a greater field for research and
speculation; and what better proof could we have of the advance
of civilization than the internal workings of a Federal constitu-
tion, what better insight into the character of the times and
advancement of the age, for although a Federal union was often
a matter of expediency or compulsion, yet its constitution afforded
a good clue to the nature of the period. From the earliest
records of history down to the present time we find instances of
Federal unions, and although the ancient ones may perhaps bear
but little resemblance to those of more modern times, yet the
principle was the same, and they were the first ideas of such
Unions, and from those primitive institutions have sprung the
more elaborate constitutions of this age. There can scarcely be
any doubt that the ancient Federal Leagues instead of indicating
any refinement in political skill were rather the natural outcome
of concerted action in any matter affecting two or more States,
and their preservation was rather due to motives of expediency
than from the growth of any common good. For, from resisting
the aggressions of any more powerful tribe, or engaging in a
common expedition, a number of States would be led to again
engage in united action, and from this beginning a League would
be formed, each tribe obeying its own chief in all external
matters, the whole being under the control of one supreme head,
who directed all engagements, and possessed unlimited power in
the working of the League and in all matters pertaining thereto;
and it is quite clear that as each State was determined to be free,
and none would confess inferiority to the others, it was to the
interest of each not to allow any State to undertake any expedi-
tion singly, lest by the acquirement of preponderating force, it
might be able to assert its superiority ; and so the League was
preserved until internal dissensions rendered its continuance


impracticable. It is more than probable that all Italy in its
earliest periods was united by Federal Leagues of this sort ; for
in ancient Roman history we read of such nations as the Samnites
sending out a force of eighty thousand men, an undertaking far
above the power of any single State, unless aided by other tribes.
But the increasing power of Rome, under whose sway nearly all
-the territory about Italy was brought, had the ultimate effect of
exterminating such Leagues, so that we possess no authentic
record of their existence, much less of their Constitution. But
in Greece, which retained its independence, we find the best
example of such Leagues, for they continued for some length of
time, and were improved by the increasing power that civilization
afforded. We will therefore cursorily glance at a few of the
most important Grecian Federal Leagues. The Greek States
were formerly governed by a king or chief, but with the excep-
tion of Lacedtemon and the Asiatic Greek colony of Carthage,
they all at a very early period threw off the regal yoke, and
instituted independent Governments. They were then formed
into Leagues of various forms. But although these differed in
many minor points, the general principle was the same ; each
State managed its own internal affairs, while all matters relating
to foreign States, or dissension among themselves, were referred
to a meeting of delegates, held in some central place. The
Boeotian League was perhaps the most remarkable, for at Thebes
a Senate was always sitting, four Councils prepared the measures
to be proposed to the Senate, and eleven magistrates were
annually chosen. Two States, for quitting the League, were
destroyed by Thebes, which possessed by far the most power, and
on that account swayed the Senate in nearly all measures. The
Achaean League appears to have been the most ancient. A Con-
gress, which was held twice a year, sat for three days, originally
at Aegium, and afterwards at Corinth, and consisted of twelve
cities or districts, having several smaller towns within their
boundaries. This meeting elected magistrates, of whom the chief
were the Srparpyo l ; and the ' who had the power to
call a meeting upon the occasion of any civil or foreign difference.
Some coins of the different States, and also of the League itself,
now exist, thus clearly showing the relation that existed between
the government of the League and of each individual State.
Arcadia was originally divided into kingdoms, which were
afterwards united by a Federal League. An assembly used to sit
at the chief towns of Mantinea and Tegea. This League, whose
slave population amounted to three hundred thousand, was one
of the strongest, but its strength was \v r asted away by internal
dissensions, which the authority of the Council was unable to
check. After they had built Megalopolis, by the advice of
Epaminondas, for the protection of the less powerful towns of the
League, Plato was entrusted with the duty of preparing a code of


rules, but declined the offer when lie learned that the people were
unwilling to admit the principle of equality of property.
The Grecian colonies in Asia Minor, namely, the iEolian,
lonian, and Dorian each formed a Federal Union upon the prin-
ciples already stated. Although the Asiatics are generally spoken
of as possessing despotic governments, yet it is probable that
from their intercourse with the Asiatic Greek colonies, they
imbibed some of the Federal principles, and in the League of
Lycia we have what Montesquien has called the model of an
excellent Federal Government, for although each State contri-
buted to the general expenses, and a Congress managed their
affairs, yet it also elected the magistrates for the towns, thus
bringing all the States practically under one head. It may be
useful to notice the Thessalian and Achaean Leagues, both of
which were in the most rude state imaginable. For, in the
former, the members allowed their obligation of obedience only in
such matters as they had themselves concurred in, while in th~
latter it was optional for any State to decline any war undertaken
by the rest. The advantage of these ancient Leagues were three-
fold, viz., the formation of a powerful body that would be able
to oppose the designs of any force aiming at its own pre-eminence
through the inability of the weaker States to resist its aggres-
sions,—the independence and equality (and hence increase of
competition) of each State by the formation of the League the
internal improvement and development of all matters pertaining
to the welfare of each State from its intercourse and association
with the others. This was the first tendency, and although the
ultimate issue was the preponderance of one power, this resulted
more from the defective mode of representation than any flaw in
the broad principle involved, or any mistake in the calculation of
the results aimed at. The Greeks more than once attempted a
very great advance upon their earlier crude formations, viz., the
establishment of a Congress composed of Deputies from nations
wholly independent. The most noteworthy was the Amphictyonic
Council or League. This famous institution consisted of twenty-
four votes, which were originally equally divided among the
twelve nations composing the League. Afterwards, when the
numbers of the Congress changed, different States had different
numbers of votes. . The number of votes however, namely
twenty-four, remained unchanged however great the number of
Deputies sent; this Council was held twice in the year, at Delphi
in the spring, and at Anthela in the autumn. Although the
results attained were not as high as those aimed at, and the
measures of the Council were often inefficacious (as was also the
case with the States of Argolis, a much less noteworthy institution,
both in practice and extent), yet it had the result of averting a
great deal of war and bloodshed, and of distributing whatever
beneficial results may have accrued from the power of any one


nation more equally over the countries composing the League.
It will also be found that any countries that have at all prospered
by the adoption of Federal principles, have adopted that form of
government from the same ideas of justice and equality as did
the first proposers of the Amphyctyonic Council. It will perhaps
be best, since the subject embraces so wide a range, to take the
most noteworthy instances of Federation which we possess —such
as the Federation of the United States of America, the Cantons
of Switzerland and the ancient States of Germany—and glancing
at the Constitutions of these countries, to note the growth and
improvement of the nation under such a polity. Let us first
consider the ancient State of Germany. It appears Germany was
first placed under one head by Charlemagne, who conquered it at
a very early period. Previous to its subjugation it had been
divided into six States, governed by Dukes, in whose places
Counts were afterwards substituted. The line of Charlemagne
remained upon the throne until the death of his grandson, Louis
the Germanic, in 911, when it failed. After this a head was
chosen by the different Counts, who thus earned the tit’e of
Electors. This practice continued up to the death of Frederick
11., in 1250, when from the inability of the Electors to choose an
Emperor, an interregnum of twenty-three years took place, which
time was filled with wars of the most devastating kind. At
length, in 1273, Rodoph, of Hapsburg, the founder of the House
of Austria, was elected, and in that House the office continued
with scarcely any interruption until 1806, when it was finally
abolished.
It appears that the ancient State of France was somewhat
similar to that just mentioned, but the difference was that the
Germanic Princes were more equally matched, and, therefore,
instead of falling under the power of one head, as the French
nobles, they retained their independence, and established a Union
of Monarchies, as in more modern times the States of America
established one of Republics. The Germanic constitution was
practically contained in four decrees. The Golden Bull, Pax
Rublica, Pax Religionis, and the Treaty of Westphalia. The
Golden Bull, which was passed in 1356, related to the manner of
choosing the Emperor and the ceremony of his coronation. It
fixed the number of Electors at seven, and defined their privi-
leges. The Pax Rublica, passed in 1495, put an end to the
manuary right, or right of private war, restrained the abuses of
the Federal privileges, and provided that any State transgressing
the laws of the Federal Body, should be punished by the common
action of the others, actii g under the direction of the Emperor.
The Pax Religionis, passed in 1555, was occasioned by the pro-
test of the Elector of Saxony and four others against the decree
of 1529 forbidding Luther’s doctrine to be received in any of the
States. To the Diet, held at Augsburg, these five States pre


sented their confession of faith, and at last in 1555, after much
dispute, a decree was passed granting toleration to all who con-
formed to either the Roman Catholic religion or the Confession of
Augsburg. It was from this protest that the name of Protestant,
which has descended to all who differ from the Church of Rome,
was derived. The Treaty of Westphalia, passed in 1648, put an
end to the thirty years war between the Protestant and Catholic
Princes, granted an introduction of the free Imperial towns
(which had gained their independence during the interregnum) to
the Common Council of the .Federal States, and decreed that
nothing affecting the Federal Body, such as the levying of troops,
the building of fortresses, the declaration of war, or the negotia-
tion of peace, could be done without the consent of the assembled
States. But the power of the Emperor was further limited by
the capitulation , which he was obliged to sign upon taking office.
In it he swore not only to govern according to the laws, but also
according to such rules as were prescribed at his election. So
attached were the nobles to this institution that on seveial occa-
sions they refused to form a code of rules for the guidance of
their Emperor. The whole constitution of the Empire was con-
tained in the Recesses, which were collections, of the decrees
passed at the Diet, which was the general Legislative Body of
the Empire. The Emperor was chosen by the seven Electors,
and the title of Empress was granted to a female, but she had no
share in the government. During the life of the Emperor his
successor could be chosen, who was called the King .of the
Romans, and was required to sign a declaration promising to
abstain from making any attempt upon the Imperial powei during
the life of the Emperor. The States which composed the Diet
were of three orders, the Electors, the Princes, and the free
Imperial towns. Both the Electors and the Free Towns have
been before mentioned. The Princes consisted of two kinds,
ecclesiastical and secular. The former amounted to twenty, of
whom three were Prince-Bishops, four Prince-Abbots, and two
Prince-Prebendaries, who were given feudal sovereignty at the
same time as ecclesiastical dignity, thus exercising both secular
and ecclesiastical authority. Each of these dignitaries had one
vote, the rest of the ecclesiastical body, which consisted of pre-
lates, abbots, &c., without the title of Prince, were divided into
two Benches, the Rhenish and Suabian each Bench having one vote.
The secular Princes consisted not only of those indicated by the
title, each of whom had one vote, but of Barons, Counts, &c.,
who, as in the ecclesiastical body, were divided into benches, each
bench having one vote. Upon all secular matteis the majoiity
decided, but°in the case of religious questions the minority was
not bound by the vote of the majority, and this custom led to
endless recrimination. The strangest part of the proceedings was
the exclusion of the Free Towns from any voice in the ultimate


settling of any question. The three colleges, viz., the Electors'
Princes, and Free Towns, deliberated separately, and upon the
attainment of any conclusion, the Electors and Princes consulted
together, and if they came to a common decision, whether the
Free Towns agreed or not, the matter was referred to the Emperor,
whose consent gave it the force of law. This was the state of
the Government of Germany until the year 1806, when it was
finally abolished. It cannot be denied that such a scheme of
government as the foregoing must produce very beneficial results
over whatever country exercised. Faults it undoubtedly had, and
the greatest drawback to its success was the jealousy existing
between the States of the Union, chiefly between the Catholic
and Protestant parties : while these two bodies, practically com-
posing the League in themselves, were at enmity and virtually
disuniting the Empire, and the lesser bodies were animated by
personal motives of rivalry and ambition, creating endless confu-
sion, the result must have necessarily been disastrous in the
extreme, and nothing but the firmness of the Emperor and the
impartial administration of laws able to control the different
bodies, could have preserved the League. That such laws did
exist, and were properly administered, is clear from the number
of years the Germanic constitution was upheld, during times
themselves turbulent, and requiring in addition to forethought for
the future, the utmost vigilance for the protection of present
interests. It will be noticed how well the possibility of absolute
sovereignty was guarded against, the limits of the powers of both
the Emperor and the Electors were clearly defined, and no trans-
gression was allowed on either side; the even balance of power
was thus preserved, and this doubtless contributed very greatly
to the preservation of peace.
It may not be amiss now to mention the Confederation of
the Rhine, so called, probably from its ancient predecessor.
After the dissolution of the old Confederation in 1806, a new one
was formed under the protection of France, the Emperor of the
French being himself Protector. The importance of the Union
droes not appear to have been considerable, except in so far as it
affected Napoleon. But of such great importance did he consider
this Protectorate to be to himself, that, after his reverses in 1813
and 1814, when he was negotiating with the allied armies and the
terms had partly been agreed upon, the proceedings fell through,
chiefly, if not altogether, owing to his refusal, (although a fact
very little known) to abandon his right of rule over this empire,
for the title of Protector, was a mere cloak to mask his position,
for the whole power seems to have been in Bonaparte’s hands.
We have now beheld Federation as composed of States under a
Monarchical Government ; let us look at its aspects, the
league in every respect being republican, as exhibited in the
Federal States of America. It would be useless to trace the


growth of the American States from their first colonization;
suffice to say that at the time of their secession from Britain,
they were colonies of opulence and of rising influence. In 1764
the British Government determined to levy certain stamp duties
upon the American Colonies. But their action provoked so great
an agitation and such antagonistic feeling that the duty on every-
thing hut tea was remitted. This however, did not satisfy the
Colonies ; the fact still remained that they were taxed, whether
in a greater or less degree, and an additional cause of indignation
was the right asserted by the British Government of taxation
whenever it seemed expedient. The opposition in America at
last culminated in the throwing overboard of some taxed tea at
Boston ; this act of defiance was punished by Britain by the passing
of the Boston Port Bill, transferring the seat of Government to
Salem. It was now seen that an open rupture was about to take
place, and preparations were made by the colonies for the
impending struggle, and hostilities were commenced at Lexington,
and after various aspects of the war the following resolution was
brought before Congress by R. C. Lee, of Virginia, on 7th June,
1776, “the united colonies are and ought to be free and inde-
pendent States, Bjut their political connection with Great Britain
is and ought to be dissolved ; ” this resolution was passed and a
declaration of independence written by Thomas Jefferson was
adopted on July 4th, by the thirteen colonies which thus became
the United States of America. The war was prolonged for some
time after this, but it ended in the consent of Britain to
acknowledge the independence of the American States. In 1778
articles of Confederation were ratified by all the States, except
Maryland, but it was soon felt that these needed amending,
especially with regard to the* clauses regulating commerce, the
forming of treaties with other nations, and the settlement of
disputes among the States. In 1787 was passed at Philadelphia
the Constitution which still forms the basis of Government. That
constitution has since been altered in many respects, but its
essential points remain the same. Each state possesses its own
independence, and by means of its legislative bodies transacts all
business referring peculiarly to itself, the Union, comprising all
the States, possessing as its legislature the Congress composed of
the Senate and the House of Representatives. The Senate
consists of two members from each State, elected by its legislature
for six years, the only conditions being that the candidate, must be
a resident of the State for which he offers himself, a citizen of
nine years standing, and at least 30 years of age. The House of
Representatives consists of 292 members chosen triennially by the
people of the different States, the number of members elected for
each State being proportionate to the population, which is taken
by a decennial census. Each State must however, be represented
by one member at least, and all members must be residents of the


State for which they are elected, he United States citizens of
seven years standing, and not less than 25 years old. Congress
must meet at least once a year, and, unless specially provided by
law, on the first Monday in December. To establish its supreme
rule, it is provided that no State can coin money, make anything
a legal tender except gold or silver, levy duties on imports and
exports without the consent of Congress, or form an agreement with
any foreign Power or another State. The whole is under a
President, who is elected every four years by the electoral college,
and is always open to re-election ; he must be a born American
citizen of 14 years standing, and at least 35 years of age. This
electoral college must consist of men who are neither Senators
nor in the House of Representatives, nor even yet holding any
position of profit under the Federal Government. Each State
chooses as many electors as it sends representatives to Congress.
Both the President and Vice-President are chosen by the majority
of this body, and in case of an equality of votes, the President is
chosen by the House of Representatives and the V ice-President
by the Senate, the only limitations being that the House of
Representatives, votes, not by individual members, but by States,
each State having one vote, and that both in the case of the
President and Vice-President, one of the three highest in the
electoral votes must be chosen. The President is commander-in-
chief of the army and navy, and has the power of veto over any
decree, until being brought before Congress for the second time,
it is passed by two-thirds of the Representatives. The Vice-
President presides in the Senate and takes the place of the
President during any illness or such sudden emergency, and upon
his death assumes his office for the unexpired portion of his time.
The business of the executive is transacted by the Cabinet,
consisting of seven members. The judicial powers of the Union
are vested in a Supreme Court, presided over by a Chief Justice,
assisted by 8 other Judges. These Judges are elected for life, and
can only be removed on impeachment, but the only cases tried
before them are transgressions of the laws of the Union, as each
State has its own law courts and Judges, most of whom are
elected by the people, only for a set period. Such is the general
constitution of the Federal States of America, and it is one under
which unparalleled advancement has been made. Of its efficacy
nothing need be said ; results are the best proof; we need only
look at the condition of the States when they gained their
independence, and contrast it with their present position. At that
time thriving and prosperous it is true, but now they stand fit to
be compared with any nation upon the earth, and did not Britain
exist, their pre-eminence could readily be established. It may be
argued that this wonderful growth of wealth and influence
proceeds more from the innate sharpness and aptitude for business
of the American, than from any material assistance afforded by


his form of Government, but it cannot be denied that however
energetic a nation may be, under such a disadvantage as an
unfavourable mode of Government, it cannot rise to any great
height, and it is therefore clear that the constitution of the United
States must have been favourable for their development, and
greatly assisted their growth. A noteworthy point in this
Federal League is the relation that the authority of the Union
bears to that exercised by each State over its own subjects. It
is of primary importance that these two should be quite distinct,
neither in any way interfering with the other, and in the case of
the American States we have a happy medium exemplified. The
whole onus of attaining this medium would fall, in this case on
the Congress, which would have to take care to establish its own
authority to a certain point, after which all other matters would
devolve upon the individual States ; the only thing to be guarded
against then, was the transgression of this limit, lest by leaving
too little power to each State, the preponderating influence of one
would be the more easily felt, and would result in its acquiring
the greatest influence and power in the Government of the Union,
and ultimately perhaps, subverting its constitution. But in
this respect forethought was exercised, and exercised so well
that although serious disagreements* have arisen and some
States are more affluent than others, either from their natural
position or resources, the independence of all has been preserved
and the benefits of the Union equally distributed.
Let us now consider the Federation of the Swiss Cantons.
These Cantons, 23 in number, are banded together for the purpose
of common defence, each however maintaining its rights of
administering its internal affairs. The independence of
Switzerland may be dated from the year 1449, when all
connection with the German Empire was severed ; but it was
not until after some time and severe struggles that the league
was actually formed on a definite basis, and its present
constitution, which we are about to consider, is a modified form of
that passed in 1848. The legislative powers are vested in a
federal assembly which is composed of the National Council and
the Senate. The National Council is elected by the Cantons, one
‘-number being chosen to represent every 20,000, but if a surplus
of over 10,000 remains, an extra member is elected. Each
Canton, and if divided, each half Canton can send at least one
member. The Senate consists of 44 members, two for each
Canton, one for each half Canton. The Federal Assembly in
addition to its usual functions has the right of concluding
defensive alliances, declaring war, and of rendering valid
the measures of each State. The members of the Federal
Council are elected by the two divisions of the Federal Assembly
* In one case, through the secession of the Southern States, a war broke out which
eventually ended in the defeat of the secessionists.


from such citizens as belong to neither of the two other bodies
nor have any calling or profession whatever. The Federal
tribunal, consisting of eleven members, elected by the Federal
Assembly, exercises all judicial sway. It decides all questions
between the Confederation and the States, or between any of the
States themselves, and it is divided into different bodies to rule
over the several courts, deciding the various kinds of accusations,
criminal or otherwise. It will thus be seen that in several
■- respects this constitution does not differ greatly from our own
Government. ■ That it is one calculated to produce prosperity,
Switzerland has already proved, for under the principle of Free
Irade also her revenue has nearly every year exceeded her
expenditure. We have now beheld Confederation, composed of
States under both Republican and Monarchical Governments ;
Monarchical, because the Electors, although possessing no legal
title, nevertheless exercised absolute sway in their own domi-
nions. It has befn oftentimes assumed that no true Federal
Government can exist, unless its States be Republican. It is
true, no doubt, that the very object of Federation is to ensure a
distribution of beneficial results, and thus in a measure to
equalize the different States composing the League ; but it differs
from Republicanism, inasmuch as while both" obtain results in
some. degrees similar, the one affecting the States, the other the
individual members of the States, they acquire them by different
means, the one by preserving the weaker party and raising it to
the standard of the stronger, the other by levelling all distinc-
tions : the argument, therefore, that a Federal League composed
of Republican States is an instance of two similar constitutions
only on a different scale, is a fallacy, since their modes of proce-
dure are essentially different. It may be that the Assembly of
Representatives, whose necessity is involved in a Federal League,
has somewhat of a Democratic cast; but this is a minor point, not
affecting the results, whatever they may be, for the same Council
might equally as well be composed of Deputies of entirely
different ranks, and yet the same results accrue ; and we can see
that were these Deputies not responsible to any Assembly of
their own State, much greater freedom would be obtained, and
the instances of contumacy would be less; for witness the ancienf
States of Germany and of Greece ; in the former, any opposition
to the decree of the Supreme Council was rare, and whenever it
did occur, was put down as being a rebellion; but in Greece, and
especially in the Asiatic possessions, so frequent were these
instances that it has been doubted whether each State was bound
by the vote of the majority.
It will be noticed that there are two kinds of Federation,
which may be denoted by the titles of Proper and Improper;
the Proper Federal Union exists when any number of independent
States, each exercising full domestic authority, combine under one


head for any set purpose, not necessarily, although generally the
case, for defence against an aggressor, and the executive of the
Union legislates upon all matters affecting the States as a body.
The Improper Federal Union may be compared to a nation,
which, having acquired property, grants to each possession a
separate legislature with a representative of the Imperial Govern-
ment as its head. In the one case the executive has for its subjects
the different States, in the other the different members of these
States. The unsatisfactory nature of the latter must be evident,
since although the acquired possessions have the semblance of
independent administration, it is clear that this could be rendered
merely nominal. For assuming the desire to curtail the power of
this Legislature, it is plain chat popular feeling which might be
inclined to regard these possessions as mere conquests, would
engender partiality, and assuming that the Imperial Representative,
wishing for a particular course, disregarded all remonstrances, the
only resource would then be to stop the supplies, which action
could be rendered ineffective by their being sent by the Imperial
Government. This case is without doubt assumed, but it indicates
a possible contingency which would not happen in a proper
Federal Union. There can be no doubt that Unions such as
those whose constitutions have been described, cannot fail to exert
a very great influence over and confer a benefit upon those estates
composing its dominions, whether we view the question externally
as regarding the relations to foreign States, or internally affecting
the individual prosperity of each estate. It is evident that in a
properly regulated Federal Union the intercourse that exists
between the different States must promote a similarity of tastes
and ideas, and this would greatly contribute to the refinement of
any pursuit or political design, through the increase of criticism
upon it, and the greater field for experiments. The mutual aid
lent by the States by means of the Union tends to disprove the
old assertion that might is right; for although in some cases this
aid would result from fear, lest the acquisition of power might
prove injurious, and help to establish a pre-eminence, and lest the
deprivation of a State’s possessions by another more powerful
might render their own position insecure, yet in every act of a
Federal body, and in every measure affecting the common interests,
an assertion so to speak is made that the independence of the
weaker States must be preserved ; and this principle is being now
universally recognized. Its great upholder is the International
Law or Law of Nations, which although not definitely formulated,
is observed by all the civilized nations of the world. It asserts
the principles of Federation on a far wider scale, but having no
court to apply them, it is observed only on account of the
increasing sense of equity and fairness, generated by a far wider
knowledge of its object by means of its application, and on account
of the fear of the establishment of another nation’s pre-eminence by


conquest. It may be compared with what takes place every day,
namely the willingness of a people to subject themselves to certain
laws, whereby they deprive themselves of a certain amount of
individual liberty of action, but receive as compensation, the right
of protection against others, and although a difference exists,
inasmuch as the acquisition of property is allowed to a citizen,
yet this difference does not exist in the principle, but it arises
from the fact that the two cases are hardly analagous, for in the
first a preponderance of power would result, which would prove
injurious to the other States, while in the second case such
acquisitions are the results of industry, and are likely to promote
the country’s prosperity. Thus then, we can recognise the
principles of Federation in an international understanding, and in
the very framework of society. We are ever associated with it ;
as a body we observe the Law of Nations, and as individuals we
are in a measure subject to it from our position as citizens of a
community.
EXCELSIOR.


SYDNEY:
J. L. HOLMES and CO., PRINTERS, Etc.,
315 PITT STREET.




