

BV APPOINTMENT
GENERAL ASSURANCE
CORPORATION
LIMITED
General building* 10-ia Queen Street
Perth, so.u-.am;, Melbourne




Jeilt!
A WELCOME
The Australian - Scottish Delegation
ON THEIR VISIT TO
PERTH
JUNE -192 S
Presented with the Greetings and Good Wishes
GENERAL ASSURANCE
CORPORATION
LIMITED


By*L l.
fy 4' i 'rl
S§S%8%SSs^' ...-.r->''- '
HHBIIBfcte^ilwBwiBi
BmB 1 ~ ‘'tiflf .
' ~ ”'
* . “
|2j*|4ftl
From the drawing by Claris JS24
Perth a Century ago


. .
■ ' " ''*4-'
COTSMEN, and, of course, Scots women,
are great home-makers, and that quality,
coupled with the other characteristics of our
race, has enabled our sons and daughters
to take a disproportionately large part in
the pioneer work of empire-building. But it is equally
true that the Scot abroad never loses his affection for his
bid “ Home,” and iu the Australian-Scottish Delegation
\vc see a practical expression of the “homing” instinct.
We arc proud and happy to welcome our kinsmen, proud
of their success in a far-off' land, proud of the lie that
binds them to “their own, their native land.” Like them,
we are anxious to strengthen and secure the bond by the
increasing* development of a mutually advantageous inter-
course in trade and commerce of every kind.
We fane}' that every Australian who steps aboard a liner
bound for Europe pictures for himself one special goal
amongst all the scenes lie plans to visit, and to many a
Scot, that picture must be the ancient, historic City of
Perth. “ Fair City” by name, fair also by nature, set linn
upon the banks of the lordly Tay amidst encircling hills ;
fair of fame, for the .sons she has bred.
If Perth holds any disappointment for the visitor it lies
in the paucity of her historic relics. Her ancient glory as
the Capital of Scotland has left little trace. Yet she had
made her mark on the annals of Scotland long before the
printing press made stories into books of history, and a
century ago, while a few shrewd Scots were pegging out
their claims upon the bare holds where Melbourne’s traffic
Page three
./fu B,RARy
0 JUN 1993
V* *


now runs thickest, she was lit subject for the artist s brush,
venerable, cultured and refined.
A mist of oblivion hides the story of Perth’s foundation.
Tradition tells us that hard by, at Scone, was the ancient
Pictish capital, and a picturesque legend relates how, on
the line of march nearly two thousand years ago, a Roman
soldier espying the river hailed the Tay as bather Tiber.
Sure it is that from the earliest times river, meadow and
hill have made Perth a pleasant place for man to dwell in.
And in the last ten centuries what a pageant of events has
passed of which her stones could bear witness !
And now in these modern days Perth’s birthright, her
station on the Tay, stands her in good stead. Still she
stands on the line of march, at the gateway to the High-
lands, a centre, too, for the traffic and markets of the fertile
valleys round about. Hers is no mushroom growth, but
she is ever ready to take a leading part in the life of the
times. In the past hundred years Perth has made a name
for herself through her dyeing industry, by her glass-
making, as an emporium for pedigreed live stock, and as
the supplier of the world’s most widely-consumed beverag-e
—good Scotch whisky. Lastly, she has been the birthplace
of a great Corporation which, from its home office in Perth,
has encircled the globe, and spread the Fair City’s name,
not upon the label of a whisky bottle, but on a document
possibly more beneficent and certainly more enduring-- a
policy of insurance.
Page jour


Pholiiimtjihx bjt Hdmiiiir. Dittvlov
Page live


F. NORIE-MILLER, Esq., J.P.
Director and General Manager


■BHHjANNINESS is always held to be the peculiar
attribute of the Scot, and when that virtue is not
BgHSI exaggerated so as to become a vice, it is just
the quality which is pre-eminently required in
the transaction of insurance business. Back in 'B5 there
met together in Perth several canny Scots, who laid their
plans to found an insurance company. Little did they
dream of the mighty structure that was to arise. They
thought to cover risks of accident within the small area of
central and northern Scotland, which the} r knew well.
But they laid the foundation well and truly.
Soon, from small beginnings, the Company began to grow,
Its manager, who took charge from its earliest infancy,
was a man of vision.
The Company flourished
and spread its organisation
over the United Kingdom,
ever in the van of insur-
ance progress. After four-
teen years the time was
ripe for extension over-
seas, and offices were
planted, first in the United
States, then in European
countries, and soon after
in Canada, South Africa,
Australia, India and other
British territories. To-day
there is scarcely a civilized
community in the world
where the Company is not
represented.
General Assurance Building, Toronto
Page seven


That Company is the “ General," and at its headquarters
in Perth the manager of its early years, Mr. F. Norie-
Miller, still rules its destinies and shapes for it a future no
less remarkable than its past.
Told thus in a few words it all seems very simple. A
trained athlete appears to run with ease. But that apparent
ease, and the success which ensues, are not attained with-
out assiduous training. And so with the “ General "it has
meant incessant concentration on the attainment of an
objective and constant watchfulness yoked to enthusiasm
and enterprise ; or, in more precise terms, a determination
to render real service, and prudence in the expansion of
business combined with liberality in its transaction.
General Assurance Building
Cape Town
Page eight
We do not propose to
trouble our readers with
an array of names and
figures. An impressive
list could be made of the
eminent men who have
been and who are connec-
ted with our organisation.
Equally effective would be
a recital of our numerous
offices at home and abroad,
or of the multiplicity of
policies issued in many
languages to cover every
insurable risk. A few
simple facts must suffice.


Page nine


Page leu


The total assets of the Corporation, including - capital at
call, are in excess of £11,000,000. and the financial
position is such that the interests of policy-holders are
secured by funds of nearly £3,000,000 in addition to the
very full provision made in the accounts for every contin-
gency. With a premium income last year in the accident
department of over £6,000,000, the Corporation’s share of
the world's business in this line is exceeded by only one
other British insurance company. Every kind of accident
insurance is transacted, but the Corporation has specialised
in motor insurance, in which sphere it is an acknowledged
leader, having - the unique distinction of a Royal Appoint-
ment as insurers to His Majesty the King. Eire and
marine insurance also contribute their growing quota to a
total annual income approximating Eight Millions Sterling.
Life assurance is conducted by the General Life Assur-
ance Company, whose head offices are at General
Buildings, Aldwyoh, London.
We set no limit to our ambition, an ambition not con-
cerned alone with pounds, shillings and pence, but an
ambition to serve an useful purpose in the protection of
individuals and the stabilization of commerce all over the
world. Insurance is not a matter of policy conditions ;
these are but words. It is not a matter of rates of premium ;
these are mere figures and tokens. Insurance is a matter
of good faith and honourable dealing between man and
man, and it is insistence upon that principle which has
made the “General" great and will make it greater still.
Page eleven


USTRAHA what does the name convey?
There are too many, even in these enlightened
days, who think of an arid and inhospitable
country, sparsely peopled by toil-worn emi-
grants, who, apart from occasional visits to capital cities
of no particular distinction, lead lives of solitude and
discomfort in constant fear of the ravages of droughts and
rabbits ! How far from the truth ! Australia, prosperous
already, is teeming- with unexploited potentialities. She
has a population more British than Britain's, that sent
nearly half-a-million of its sturdy manhood to fight the
the Empire's battles ; she has untold pastoral, agricultural
and industrial wealth. Picture, too, the stately solidity of
Melbourne’s thoroughfares, the thronging streets and
incomparable harbour of Sydney, Adelaide's queenly
boulevards, the sub-tropical luxuriance of Brisbane, the
beauties of the Swan River and Tasmania, and the valiant
St. George's Terrace, Perth, W.A,
Page Itvelvc
enterprise of Canberra.
Here, indeed, is a
people and a continent
with a great future.
The “General" has
never fostered any
illusions about Aus-
tralia. A quarter of a
century ago a Branch
Office was established
in Melbourne, and an
early connection was


formed with Win. Haughton & Company, the well-known
firm whose respected chief, Mr. R. B. M'Comas, is a
Director of the Commonwealth Bank. This happy relation-
ship has since been cemented and enlarged by the firm’s
appointment as Chief Agents in South and West Australia
and as Marine underwriters for the Commonwealth. The
Company's organisation has also been extended to New
Queen Street, Melbourne.
South Wales, Queensland and Tasmania, and all classes of
fire and. accident insurance are undertaken. Particular
mention may be made of the insurance of Motor vehicles
and the comprehensive scheme for householders' insurance.
The “General" has recently purchased an Australian
home, most conveniently situated in Queen Street, Mel-
bourne. The accompanying photograph shows the typical
old Melbourne building which will in time to come bo
replaced by a modern and more commodious office.
Page thirteen


The management is in the hands of an Australian born
and bred, well-reapecled in the insurance world, Mr.
George R. Anderson. His control is both efficacious and
sympathetic, but to make assurance doubly sure an
Australian Directorate was formed, the present membership
of which appears on the succeeding page. Amongst past
members who served their day and generation well may
be mentioned the late Mr. Andrew Ag’new of Melbourne
and Mr. A. G. Milson of Sydney.
For the convenience of Delegates we print on page
fifteen a summary of information about our Australian
Branch, and we venture to hope that when our friends
return to their homes in Australia they will not forget the
Fair City and its insurance company, the “General.” We
do not rely solely upon sentiment as between brother Scots,
but we believe that our organisation offers the best value
in service and security.
And now it remains only to wish the Delegates, one and
all, God-speed upon their journeys and a safe and happy
return to Australia. As a token of our sincerity we beg
leave to offer with our good wishes a small insurance
against railway and other accidents, and we trust that
every Delegate will take advantage of it by completing
the post card enclosed with this booklet. Particulars are
printed on the last pag*e.
In conclusion, we think we are not likely to be misunder-
stood when we say that all insurance is good, but some is
better!
Page fourteen


THE “GENERAL” IN AUSTRALIA
Directorate
Chairman —S. Tripp, Esq., Kew, Melbourne.
T. S. Trhvascus, Esq., Armadale, Melbourne.
A. A, McCrea, Esq., Camberwell, Melbourne.
G. L. Patterson, Esq., Kooyong, Melbourne.
Hon. R. G. D, Fitzgerald, Muswellbrook, N.S.W.
C. J. Henty, Esq., Wollstoncraft, Sydney.
Manage. —GEO. R. ANDERSON.
Chief Offices,
in-re Queen Street, Melbourne.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
Branch Office —7-9 Rond Street, Sydney.
Manager — T. S. Douglas.
QUEENSLAND.
Chief Agent — M. D. Davies, Empire Chambers,
Queen and Wharf Streets, Brisbane,
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Chief Agents — Win. Haughton & Company,
40 Currie Street, Adelaide.
WEST AUSTRALIA.
Chief Agents —Ww. Haughton & Company,
St. George's House, St. George’s Terrace,
Perth.
TASMANIA—
Branch Office -29 Murray Street, Hobart,
Manager - H. K. Connolly.
Page fifteen


GENERA
ACCIDENT FIRE AND LIFE
Assurance Corporation, Ltd.
Chief Offices:
GENERAL BUILDINGS, PERTH, SCOTLAND.
GENERAL BUILDINGS, ALDWYCH, LONDON, W.C.
Free Accident Insurance.
(Available only to Scottish Delegates from Australia visiting
the British Isles.)
will be paid by the above Corporation to the legal represen-
XZOU tatives of any Delegate who is killed by an accident causing
material damage to any passenger train in which he or she is travelling
as a fare-paying passenger, or who shall have been fatally injured there-
by should death result within seven days after such accident.
1 AH will he paid under the same conditions if the accident is to a
X 1 UU passenger tram-ear, public omnibus, cab, or any other road
vehicle in which ho or she may be travelling as a fare-paying passenger,
provided that death results within seven days after such incident.
£1 AH will be paid under the same conditions if the accident is to a
lUU passenger steamer of an established line of steamers plying
between ports in Great Britain, and on the holder’s return journey to
any Australian port.
Tim above sums cannot, be claimed cumulatively In respect of the same
accident, Notice of claims must bo sent to the Chief Office of the
Corporation at Perth within 80 days of the occurrence of the accident,
and medical certificates and other information must be furnished by the
person claiming, at his or her own expense, upon request for same by the
Corporation. The Policy will be available from the date of issue of
the coupon insurance ticket to the 31st December, 1928, and,extend to
cover persons between the ages of 10 and 05 years, nmV is limited to one
such coupon ticket for each holder.
Important, —To obtain advantage of this free-Insurance,
His necessary that Delegates fully complete, the enclosed
post card and forward it to the Chief Office when the
coupon ticket will be issued.
Page sixteen


SKETCH PL A M OF
