

TONI CIGARS
ARE THE BEST.
rassE
'•-mM
: A
f_NeW^ou|~hWalßsVi
i Realistic Stories |
fl of the early days of the 1
I CONVICT SETTLEMENT f
I BOTANY BAY
PUBLISHED BY
WILLIAM DYMOCK 428 GEORGE ST


li. ,di11,.,.111),..1U1i, .Itlti. ,(HK ilfc
J. BURNS, Esq., Chairman
R. PIIILP, Esq., M.L.A. J. MACPHERSON, Esq.
A. FORSYTH, Esq.
<®mral Ulnitager:
C. DANYERS, Esq.
Head Office— 2o BRIDGE ST., SYDNEY.
Fire Insurance.
Fire Insurance granted at lowestrates.
Prompt and liberal settlement of claims.
Marine Insurance.
Marine Insurance effected on Merchandise, Hulls, and Pro-
duce to and from all parts of the world.
Wool Insured from sheeps’ back until warehoused in
London.
Agents throughout Australasia.
Claims payable in London and elsewhere.
Low Rates. Prompt Settlements.
Undoubted Security.


FELONRY
NEW SOUTH WALES
By AN OLD IDENTITY.
REALISTIC STORIES OF THE EARLY DAYS OF THE
CONVICT SETTLEMENT
BOTANY BAY
Published by W. DYMOCK, 428 George Street




-31 7 "71
of Jew s>oui(| Ijlklcs,
’PJIE MURDERER
Blood hath been shed ere now i’ the olden time,
Ere human statute purg’d the gentle weal ;
Ay, and since too, murders have been perform’d
Too terrible for the ear.— Macbeth.
JOHN LYNCH, alias Dunleavey, who perished on the
scaffold at the early age of 26, was an abnormal
moral phenomenon, which happily for the honour and credit
of mankind are exceedingly rare and isolated in their
terrible results.
He arrived in the colony by the transport “ Dunvegan
Castle” from Cavan, in Ireland, at the close of 1831. There
was some doubt afterwards as to the crime for which he
was transported, some saying it was murder, others man-
slaughter, others highway robbery, which is doubtless correct,
as will be found by a reference to the indent of transporta-
tion. Crime seems to have run in the family, for in the
same ship, his father arrived, sentenced to transportation
for life, for manslaughter.
Lynch had nut been long in the colony before he
managed to escape from Hyde Park barracks, when he at
once started on his congenial career of bushranger. His
principal exploits were carried on in the district of Berriraa,
though he did not confine his operations to one district.
His highway robberies were numerous, and the renowned
Turpin could not have been more exacting in the contribu-
tions he levied on the unfortunate travellers that happened
to cross his path. His audacious method, his cool daring,
and his craftiness saved him from the grip of the police,
though he was frequently within an ace of falling into their
hands.


Whilst engaged in these lawless pursuits he was often
befriended by the notorious Mulligans, who lived on the
Goulburn Road, some little distance from Berrima. He
had made the acquaintance of Mulligan whilst he was in
the custody of the Crown, and even then had transactions
with him which were of a shady and illegal character,
Mulligan becoming the receiver of stolen goods, for which
he was expected to pay Lynch, the thief. In Lynch’s con-
fession, which he made the day before his death, he says :
“ That fellow (Mulligan), when I was starving in the
Berrima iron gang, has often passed me by without so much
as giving me a shilling, when he had many pounds which
were justly mine in his hands.” Subsequently, Lynch con-
veyed the spoils of his bushranging expeditions to Mulligan’s
house, and it appears that Mulligan was not over scrupulous
in his payment of the thief after the disposal of the goods.
In 1835 a man named Smith, a convict servant, was
murdered in a most brutal manner, at Oldbury. He had
been beaten to death with clubs and then thrown upon a
lire, with a view probably, and as subsequent events would
bear out, to remove every evidence of the crime. Smith had
been suspected by the convicts of informing the overseer of
some of their culpable deeds. Several persons were placed in
the dock and charged with the offence, and among them was
John Lynch, against whom the evidence was exceedingly
strong and it fixed upon him the principal part in the perpe-
tration of the atrocious deed. It was known that on the day
of the murder Lynch had been seen by the overseer to be
occupied and lingering about the spot where the culprits had
intended to burn the body of the victim. This evidence would
have procured a conviction when taken in conjunction with
the rest of the evidence, but when the overseer was called
into the witness box he was too drunk to stand, and his
Honor Justice Burton had to line him £SO for his contempt
of Court. The evidence of this intoxicated witness, there-
fore, could not be taken, and the prisoners were consequently
acquitted.
Lynch was attended for some time after procuring his
freedom with exceedingly good luck. He was employed at
a farm at Appin, where he met an Irish emigrant and his


•wife. With these lie struck up an acquaintance, and
noticing their simplicity and ignorance of the world, he
mentally resolved to place these qualities of Barnett and
his wife to his service, should opportunity ever offer.
After leaving the employ of Mr. M’Evoy, he engaged
with Mr. Humphrey, residing some distance from Berrima.
Not long after his engagement, however, he set off “on
business for himself,” taking with him eight or ten
bullocks, the property of his employer, which he in-
tended to dispose of in the country. He took the
way to Sydney, and, when near the Razorback, he
•was joined by a man and a black boy who had charge of a
-dray belonging to Mr. T. Cowper. The dray was destined
for Sydney market, and was well laden with bacon and
other articles of country merchandise. After some con-
versation with the man in charge of the dray, from which
lie gathered the value of its burden, he arranged to stop
with them for the night. They lit their tire and partook
of tea, Lynch resolving the while to become owner of the
property. His avarice prompted his basest nature to fever
heat, and whilst they were asleep his brains were busy with
a scheme to murder them. He afterwards said—“ If there
be such a thing as a devil, he was busy with me and would
-not leave me alone ; it was as if someone was tusrMns: at
' oo o
aiie.”
In the early morning the man went into the bush to
search for his working oxen, and Lynch was left alone with
the black boy. In perfect coolness, as though the boy were
;no more than a lamb at the shambles, Lynch struck him a
blow on the head with his axe, and killed him on the spot
He then dragged the murdered lad to a secluded place, and
•waited for the return of the man. The moment his
head was turned he felled him lifeless to the earth. After
carefully hiding the bodies (winch were afterwards found
upon Lynch’s confession), he yoked his stolen bullocks to
the dray and started on his journey to Sydney. He safely
arrived there and sold the articles lie had appropriated with
the dray, and then started back.
At what was known as the stone quarry at Bollands,
lie halted, and soon after Mr. Bawtree’s horse team and


dray came up in charge of a man named Fraser and his son.
He entered into conversation with them, and was so genial
#md entertaining that they pitched their camp along with
Ins, and turned their horses out for the night. Then they
sat around the cheerful fire whilst the loquacious Lynch
tilled their ears with falsehoods, and they told him all he
wanted to know about their master, and the value of the
load they had on. He stated, in his confession, that during
this lengthy chat he had no intention of doing any injury to
the Frasers, though he admits that he shrewdly gathered
all the information he could from them and wilfully deceived
them in return.
The next day they travelled in company, and Lynch
more than ever ingratiated himself in the good graces of
his unsuspecting companions by his skill in getting their
jaded horses to perform their task, for neither of the
Frasers were good drivers, and Lynch was clever in manag-
ing draught cattle.
They encamped for the night in Largo Brush, a little
off the road. They were not long before they all composed
themselves for sleep. Lynch making himself snug beneath
his waggon. Soon the two Frasers were fast asleep, but
the brain of Lynch was restless, and he lay awake. A
mounted policeman rode up—
“ Hey there !” he shouted.
No one answered him, for Lynch was determined not
to discover himself.
“Wake up there, you sleepy heads. Halloo! Hey
there !”
This awoke the elder Fraser, who, half asleep and half
awake, enquired what was the matter.
“ Have you seen anything of Cowper’s dray and oxen
“ I don’t know it,” was the response.
The policeman then gave an accurate description of
the dray, its contents, and the oxen, but Fraser, wishing to
get to sleep again, and being too simple-minded to follow
the details of the officer’s description, replied : “I don't
know it. We have neither seen nor heard anything
about it;” and the constable, satisfied that he could learn
nothing from this man, rode on in the darkness.


“ Whew 3” said Lynch to himself under the dray, “ this
is sharp work. This will never do. I must get rid of that
dray, and get another somehow.”
During the whole night he lay awake thinking over
the matter, and concluded he would murder the Frasers.
The thought occurred to him to do it whilst they slept, but
lie preferred to kill them whilst they were awake, and so
waited till the morning.
He arose early, and told the Frasers that he was going
to look for his bullocks. His object, ho vever, was to drive
them into the bush so as to be effectually out of the way.
He cunningly took Fraser’s dog with him and strangled it
in the bush. Then after a long absence, and after having
driven his cattle into a deep gully, he returned to his doomed
companions.
“ We’ve been waiting for you, chum,” said the elder
Fraser. “ But where are the bullocks?”
“ I’ve been hunting high and low for them,” Lynch
replied, “ and I cannot find them.”
“ Are they lost then ?” enquired the younger.
“Not they. They’re a knowing team and have given
me the slip. They’ve made off up the country for their
home, and I shall find them when I get to the other side of
Berrima.”
The two Frasers could not help laughing at the “ fix ”
they thought Lynch was in, but he had made himself so
agreeable and useful to them that they felt grieved at the
thought of losing his companionship. The son said to his
father, “ He’s such a good driver, I don’t like to leave him
behind.”
“ What are you going to do ? ” asked the other of
Lynch.
“ I hardly know ” said Lynch looking very crestfallen.
“ He has’nt got a big load on,” said young Fraser, with
a suggestive look at his father.
“ No,” replied Lynch. “If we tried I think we could
manage to get the whole lot on your dray till we reach
Berrima.”
“ And what will you do with your dray ?”


“ Leave it here, and when I get to Berrima I can get:
another team and come hack for it; you can see it’s nearly
empty.”
“ Right, my lad ; I always like to give a chum a lift
and you’re not a bad sort ” said Fraser commencing to remove
the articles from one dray to the other. “ I’ll take the few
things you have as far as Berrima, anyway.”
“ Agreed. We may come up to my own bullocks
before we get as far as that.”
That night they encamped in a flat on the other side
of Cordeux’s Hill. All the day Lynch kept his mind on his
plan of murder, but was resolved to find a lonely spot for
the deed, and to get further on the journey so as to make
escape the less difficult. This gloomy spot, he thought,,
would suit his purpose admirably.
Darkness rapidly gathered over them, and more than
ever pleased with the companionship of Lynch, the weary
Frasers fell asleep. On their consciences there wrought no
haunting crimes ; to interrupt their rest came no warning;
voice of danger. But Lynch tossed too and fro in troubled
dreams, and meditations of the morrow.
“ I must wait till daylight,” he muttered to himself.
“ There will be work to do besides killing them, and 1
must have the sunlight for that.”
Young Fraser was awake betimes and set otf over the
ridge for the horses.
“ Hold on ! I’ll go with you,” said Lynch, who was
stirring before him. “I'll give you a hand to catch’em.
Wait a minute till I get my jacket; it’s freezing cold this
morning.”
Lynch then put on his pea-jacket, not to keep himself
warm, however, but to hide the axe which he had placed
under his arm. Then he went after young Fraser and they
went together out of the sight of the camp. Then Lynch
seized the handle of this deadly weapon and, to use his own
words, “ I gave him one crack on the head, and he just
dropped like a log of wood.” In his confession he adds “If
people knew how easy it is to take life, things of this kind
would happen oftener.”


He then returned to the father, and with the utmost
unconcern commenced to jest and yarn with him. Time
went agreeably past to the unsuspecting old man till he
began to wonder what had become of “ Wully.” Lynch
placed his hand at once on his murderous instrument, but
he did not strike until the aged driver turned Ids head
away, and then the axe descended and he fell a lifeless
victim at the murderer’s feet.
“ The next business is to get rid of the bodies,” Lynch
coolly remarked to himself. He dragged the body of the
old man several yards away, lest any one coming on the
flat should observe it, and then he went to the dray and
took a spade from it. With this he returned to the body
of young Fraser and dug a hole to bury it in. This being
accomplished he went back to his other victim and disposed
of the corpse in the same manner. By the time this work
was done the sun was dipping to the westward, and the
deep red of his setting rays fell gently over the mould that
covered the graves of blood. But the murderer gazed in
the ruddy west without a pang, proud of his success, and
determined to tarry on the scene of death till the blood-red
orb should rise from eastward.
The next morning he harnessed up the horses and
resumed his journey, and by evening he had passed through
Berrima, and arrived safely at his old friends, the Mulligans.
These people had become still more notorious of late and
their place was “ a general rendezvous for bushrangers, and
a receptacle for stolen property of every description,” as
the Sydney Gazette informs us. Lynch had not forgotten
Mulligan’s transactions with him in the past, and though he
determined to consult his convenience by staying there, he
resolved upon keeping his secrets to himself.
“What are you doing with the dray, Jack?” asked
Mulligan, with a cunning smile and a knowing wink.
“ Driving it home for a man who hired me in Sydney,”
he replied snappishly.
“ What have you got in your load?” asked the woman,
who was living with Mulligan but who was not his wife.
“Oh, I’m not on for business this time. I don’t care
about dealing with such as can’t or won’t pay up.”


“Don’t be cheeky, Jack !
dray. I want some of it.”
“ And you won’t get it.
I see there’s some tea in the
It’s not mine, and what’s
more if I owned every speck of it, you shouldn’t have it,
and that settles it,” he said.
“Why can’t I have some?” the woman persisted,
without appearing to notice the language and manner of
Lynch,
“Because you’ve cheated me too often. You’re too
hard up for me, and I like people I trust to keep their
word.”
“ Oh, you needn’t fear. I’ll pay you.”
“ How much money have you got ? that’s the way to
get to business. Have you got thirty pounds? If you
haven’t you can shut up as soon as you like,” said Lynch
with the simple object of ascertaining of how much current
wealth they were possessed.
“ Thirty pounds ! ” echoed Mrs. Mulligan.
“We’ve only eight or ten pounds by us, Jack,” put in
Mulligan.
“ I’ve got nine pounds,” said the womafi, “and that’s
plenty to buy tea with.”
This information was all Lynch desired, so without
giving them any definite promise he left the Mulligans to
imagine that they should have a share “of his master’s pro-
perty ” when lie went away.
After resting there for the night, he awoke merry and
refreshed in the morning, for he had retired to rest ill-
tempered and fatigued. In the afternoon he pulled out a
pound note and sent to Gray’s public-house for rum. He
had determined upon what he called revenge, and he
resolved to give his intended victims a spree before
despatching them. When evening fell they sat round the
cheerful fire, and the “flowing bowl ” was replenished again
and again; but Lynch partook sparingly of the intoxicating
draught, and only in appearance kept pace with the bibulous
caroxrse of the Mulligans. Murder was in his heart, but on
his tongue were the gibe and jest, the merry yarn, the
jovial joke, and the rude wit of the sociable bacchante.


“Well,” to quote from his confession, “thoughts were
in my head, and the time was coming on. I began to feel
very disturbed, and I walked out of the hut. It was a clear,
cold, windy night. I looked up to the bright moon, and I
prayed to Almighty God to direct me !”
Yes, strange as it may appear, this maurauding mis-
creant, meditating murder, appealed to Heaven for direction !
From his flinty heart, from whence the foulest crimes had
taken shape, which even now throbbed with deadly purposes,
came the voice of the murderer addressed to the Great
Judge of all! With the pale lamp of night above his sinful
head, he recited the wrongs he had suffered from his
drunken friends. “ I am an injured man,” he exclaimed,
“and the Mulligans have defrauded me of what I perilled
life and liberty to obtain. That fellow, when I was starving
in the Berrima iron gang, has often passed me by without
so much as giving me a shilling, when he had many pounds
which were justly mine in his hands. And now, would it
not be right that they should lose all they possess as a judg-
ment upon them for withholding his own from the poor
prisoner? Heaven guide me and point out to me what to
do?” And with this blasphemy upon his lips he re-entered
the house.
The rum went round again, and the social laughter
drowned the voice of the whistling night wind. The blazing
Are had waned to dying embers, and seemed to plead for a
new lease of life. Yet they were all, save John Lynch, too
comfortable and too merry to feel the encroachment of the
outer cold.
“ The fire’s getting low, and the rum’s not finished,”
said Lynch, taking up his axe, “ I’ll go and chop a few
barrow loads of wood if John there will come with me, and
wheel it in.”
John was Mrs. Mulligan’s son, a lad about eighteen
years of age. He expressed his willingness at once, ami
they went to the wood-pile together. Whilst Lynch was
cutting the wood they entered into a chat. The young man
said he expected to have the farm at old Mulligan’s death,
which could not be long, and he added “if he’s too long


waiting for the Almighty to call him, I'll mayhap give him
a helping hand myself.”
“ Ah, John ! ” replied Lynch, who tells us he was really
shocked, knowing how near he was to his own departure
out of this world, “you should not speak in that way. You
don’t know what may be in store for yourself.”
John had just come back for the third barrow-load of
wood, and Lynch had finished his work. Then Lynch,
with a back-handed swing, brought the axe down on the
young man’s skull, and threw the weapon aside. The deed
was done, and covering up the corpse with some boughs,
the fiend went back to the hut. As if nothing had happened,
he took his seat before the replenished fire, and the rum was
again poured into the depleted glasses.
After a little, the mother began to enquire about her
son.
“ He offered to go into the bush to see if my horses are
all right,” Lynch replied, without a quiver in his voice.
But Mrs. Mulligan at last grew fidgetty, and kept
repeating “I wonder why John doesn’t come back.”
“ John’s all right,” said Lynch, trying to assure her.
“ I don’tthink he is,” she replied. “ Something tells me-
there’s something wrong, and if there is you’re at the bottom,
of it, Lynch.”
“ What nonsense.”
“ I’m telling the truth, Lynch.”
“ Get out! John will be hack in a minute.”
“It’s my dream ! It’s all coming true. Last night I
dreamed I gave birth of a child to you, and it was all blood,
and mangled and horrible. Lynch, what have you done-
to my son ?” And no longer able to endure the suspense,
she rushed out of the house, and coo-ed, and then came back,
so seized with frightful apprehensions that Lynch tells us
“ she would not even drink.”
Lynch was greatly troubled by the relation of her dream,
for he states : “ I hated this old woman, for she used to toss-
cups and balls and could foretell things,” but he tried still
to persuade her that nothing was wrong, whilst every
moment her agitation increased.


“ Perhaps the lad is lost in the bush,” said old Mulligan
taking down his gun with the intention of tiring it outside
so as to direct the footsteps of the absent.
“You had better not tire,” said Lynch, afraid of
atti'acting the neighbours. “ People will come, perhaps the
police; and if we are to deal it won’t answer that the dray
should be seen hei’e.”
“ Truth, lad, that’s a right thought of you,” replied the
old man folding Ids arms round the barrel of his gun.
The old woman took a knife and tried to secrete it in-
ker clothes, but fearing detection by Lynch she gave it to
her daughter, a girl about 14 years of age. Then she went
out again and went straight to the wood-pile, and seeing the
heap of boughs removed them, when the ghastly spectacle of
her murdered son was discovered.
Lynch was quickly after her, but he recollected that he
had left Mulligan’s axe on the spot of the murder. His own
was in the dray and the question was how to secure it with-
out being suspected. Never at a loss for an expedient, he-
pretended that a dog he had was troublesome, and he took
him to tie him to the dray wheel. When he returned his
axe was hidden under his thick coat.
“Now or never !” he said as he approached Muligan,
and he again prayed to God to help him !
Mulligan turned his head. One blow, and he was dead..
He then ran to meet the woman who was returning-
She knew now of his desperate purpose, and she tried to*
play on his fears. “ Lord ! she said, what brings the police-
here? There are three of them gettiim over the fence.”
o o
The brutal wretch gave her a kick in reply which caused
her to stagger, and then the axe once more did its deadly
work.
There yet remained the little girl, for whom Lynch
professed something like a lover’s affection. “ The poor
little thing,” he says, “ had never done me any injury, and
I was really sorry for her.”
When he entered the hut she fell on her knees and
pleaded for her life. Her childish suppliance passed
unheeded.


“ Now, my little girl,” he said, “ I will do for you what
I would not do for the others, for you are a good girl; you
shall have ten minutes to say your prayers.”
Through that ten minutes her piteous cries would have
melted any heart but the murderer’s. He waited till the
time had expired ; he then violated her, and murdered tier
as he had done the others.
“ Now what is the best to be done with the bodies ? ”
he asked of himself. “If I bury them in such a frequented
place their graves may be found. There are plenty of
wombat holes here at hand, but it is too troublesome to
carry all the bodies, and the native dogs might drag parts
of them out. And I don’t like the thought of burning the
bodies—it seems so inhuman. But the poor things can’t
feel anything, and it’s little odds to them whether they’re
burned or buried.”
He consequently resolved on burning them, and for
this purpose placed them all on a heap of logs near the
house where the victims had been burning a space for a
potato patch. In his confession he thus describes the
scene : “ When the fire was well made up, I was surprised
to see how the bodies burned. They flared up as if they
were so many bags filled with fat. It was an awful thing
to stand alone in the dead of night and see the four bodies
burning to ashes. By the morning there was nothing left
but a heap, like of slacked lime; I took it up in my hand,
and buried it in another part of the paddock. I may have
left, perhaps, (as he did, and which were afterwards found)
some ends of bone behind.”
He made another bonfire of Mulligan’s clothes,
and indeed for several days he kept lighting up his
“ destroyer of evidence.” Then he went down to Appin,
and brought back Barnett and his wife—the Irish immi-
grants, who were still in the employment of Mr. M'Evoy.
He hired them in Mulligan’s name, not choosing to let
them into his secrets. Their native simplicity, he knew,
could be relied upon, and their credulity would accept
anything he liked to say to them. To account for the
absence of the Mulligans after their arrival, he stated that
Mulligan and his wife had quarrelled, and the wife had


been turned out. Mulligan had been compelled to go to
Five Islands to hide, on account of a horse discovered on
his farm, which he had stolen. This story was quite suffi-
cient to satisfy the Barnetts.
Whilst he was still busy burning the proofs of his
recent crime, a man called Gordon rode up and asked if
there was any one at home.
“ Yes, the boy,” replied Mrs. Barnett, who went out
and coo-ed. Lynch left the “ large lire,” and approached
Gordon. “ You were expecting to see young Mulligan ? ”
“ Where is John, the young fellow? he enquired.
“ He has got into trouble in Goulburn,” Lynch replied.
“ And where are the others ?”
“ They have gone up to Gouldurn to see about it,” and
as Lynch turned back to attend to his lire, Gordon, quite
satisfied, rode offi
Then Lynch’s powers of invention and deception were
called into their fullest requisition. He had now to account
to the neighbours, and all others concerned, for his posses-
sion of the house, farm, and property of the Mulligans, for
he had determined to live in the house of his victims, and
on the scene of his horrible crime. We must allow
him to state how he managed this in his own words.
“ The first thing I did was to go to Gray’s Inn, and
ask to see him. On his coming out, I enquired of
him, with seeming concern, what kind of man Mulligan was
in his dealings. I knew his answer would be an inquiry
why I asked. I said that I had just come from Sydney
where I had met Mulligan and concluded a bargain with
him, but that he had failed to deliver the cattle as he had
promised. Knowing by Mulligan’s papers the persons
whom he probably owed money, I took care to go to them
and make similar inquiries. Some of them seemed to look
down upon me as a kind of flat, and that Mulligan had
taken me in. I acknowledged that I had lent him a valu-
able mare which had cost me eighty guineas, and pretended
to look very blank when it was hinted that perhaps I might
never see my mare again. Some thought that the whole
thing was made up between Mulligan and his landlord,,
‘ Smith,’ for some fraudulent purpose of their own.”


This deception proving successful, he went clown to
Sydney, and called at the Gazette office, where he inserted
the following advertisement, which we copy from the issue
»of Thursday, the 9th of September, 1841 :
CAUTIOX.
I no hereby CAUTION the public against crediting my wife,
Bridget Mulligan, or Bridget Robertson, as I will not be accountable
•for any debts she may contract after this date, she having absconded
from my place without any provocation, and taking some money
■with her.
John Mulligan.
Womberbrush, near Berrima,
September 7th, 1841.
He returned to Wombat Brush, and was told of this
advertisement as an interesting piece of news, at which
he manifested a well-feigned surprise. To complete his
plan he wrote a letter to himself, and signed it as he had
signed the advertisement, and then gave it to a man with
instructions to post it in Illawarra, at the Campbelltown
post-office, but the man thought Liverpool would do as well,
so he posted it there.
The difference between the address and the post mark
- enabled the authorities afterwards to penetrate his deception,
but his trick went so well down in his neighbourhood that
the people were all satisfied with his honesty, and a neigh-
boring farmer actually wanted the murderer to marry his
daughter.
“ I was now comfortably settled,” he says “ made
improvements on the farm, determined to clear and fence
an additional paddock, and intended to live honestly and
■do everything fair and square; but I was obliged to go
down the country to settle things with Smith, then the
landlord. He was a knowing shaver ; but I was at least as
-deep as he, so we arranged matters to the satisfaction of us
both.”
He “ intended to live honestly and do everything fair
and square !” If ever the proverb, “ Hell is paved with
good intentions ” was verified, it was so in Lynch’s case.
In February, 1842, he was returning from Sydney, and
on the 18th of that month encamped on the north side of
tthe Razorback, near the scene of former murders. When


ihe was on the point of starting on the following morning a
well-built, simple looking Irishman accosted him. This was
Kerns Landregan, who, having quarrelled with his wife had
left her, swearing never to live with her again. After a
little conversation with Lynch, he said ;
“ I must get out of the way. I don’t want to stay
■about here—-I don’t want anybody to see me.”
“ Why?” asked Lynch. “You don’t look much like a
bushranger.”
“ No, but I have done with my wife, and I don’t want her
to know where I am.”
“ What can you do ?”
“ I’m a first rate hand on a farm. During last harvest
my wife and me earned £8 a week between us.”
“ Does your wife work then?”
“ Yes ; she used to bind the sheaves for me.”
“ Well, I’m in want of a hand,” and Lynch scanned
him from top to toe. “You seem a pretty fellow. What
do you want for six months ? ”
“I can hardly say.”
“ Well, I’ll tell you what I’ll do. I’ll give you £l5 for
six months, and the run of four or five cows. Will that
suit you ? ”
“ It’s a bargain ; I’ll go with you.”
They started their journey together, Lynch carefully
drawing all the information he could out of his man. The
unsuspecting fellow ostentatiously displayed a roll of notes
and orders, amounting in all to about £4O.
“ Where was you working last?” Lynch interrogated.
“At Bryan M’Mahon’s. My wife is at Bolland’s ; I
mustn’t let her see me.”
“ Did you leave her any money?”
“ No.”
“ Is she your lawful wife ? ”
“ Yes.”
“And can you defraud your own lawful wife of the
money sir- has hardly earned by the sweat of her brow?”
asked the hypocritical monster. “ I would rather take a
musket and rob upon the highway than be guilty of such
cruelty.”


They were approaching Bolland’s, so Landregan made
no answer, but covered himself up in the cart, so as to hide
from his wife, whom Lynch saw as he passed.
At Nattai they stopped at the Woolpack Inn, where
they had dinner between 3 and 4 o’clock in the afternoon.
John Chalker, the young landlord, was playing with his
son at the time, so he did not join them. Afterwards,
however, Lynch came to him and asked him if he would
have a glass of brandy.
“ I have seen you before,” he said. “ Don’t you recollect
you called at Mulligan’s house and enquired about some fat
cattle ? ”
“ Oh, I recollect,” replied Mr. Chalker ; “ you asked
me to stop and have a feed
“ I thought I knew you.”
“ Well I must pay you for your civility. I’ve got
plenty of hay, will you take some for feed 1 ”
“ I don’t mind if I do.”
“ Then come along and I’ll give you some.”
Instead of going himself he sent Landregan with the
publican.
“ Do you know that man’s name 1 ” Landregan enquired.
“ No ” Mr. Chalker replied.
“ I’ve just hired out to him. They’re not all so hard as
you, Chalker.”
“ I know you too well, Kerns. If you could agree with
your wife I would have hired you when you asked me, but
I couldn’t put up with your row’s.”
“ I think I’ve made a good bargain this time.”
“ What is he giving you 1 ”
“ Fifteen pounds for six months and the run of five
cows.”
“ That’s more than I would give you, anyway.”
Kerns Landregan stooped to lift the hay and his hat
fell off.
“ Kerns,’ said Mr. Chalker, “'have you been giving your
hat to the cockatoos 1 The cockatoos are fond of hat linings.”
“Never mind the cockatoos,” replied Landregan,
putting the torn lining of his hat in its place.
They returned with thehay which they putin Lynch’s cart.
“ Here’s your change,” said the landlord.


“ Keep it,” said Lynch. “What will you have ?” he
asked, turning to Landregan.
“ A drop of rum.”
“ Brandy for me, another for you, landlord, and bring
my man a glass of rum and a fig of your tobacco. Here’s
the money.”
The landlord did as he was ordered, and again offered
change, but Lynch again refused to take it. Before depart-
ing the murderer made them all “ jolly,” even to the ser-
vant girls, one of whom he persisted in kissing.
Then the journey was resumed. Towards night, two
men with bundles joined them.
“Go about your business,” said Lynch, “ you look like
two thieves. Gaol’s the place for you to camp in,” and
with similar rude remarks he insulted the travellers so
that they walked on.
Now was his brain thrilling with diabolic thoughts.
With Macbeth he could have said :
“ I am in blood,
Steept in so far, that, should I wade no more,
Returning were as tedious as go o’er ;
Strange things I have in head, that will to hand;
Which must be acted e’er they may be scanned.”
His religious zeal (?) came over him. Whilst Landegran
lay soundly asleep, he was awake, imploring Divine assist-
ance, revolving in his mind the details of murder.
When morning came, Lynch eyed the stalwart labourer
as the hunter eyes the giant of the woods. “Well, my
man,” lie thought, “ I fancy I shall be able to settle you,
notwithstanding your fine limbs and my smallness. If you
have, as you foolishly boast, never met a man that could
throw you since you were sixteen years of age, you have
met one now who will throw you so that you will never
rise again.”
Landegran had been cutting some wood for the fire,
and had just thrown down the tomahawk. Lynch, care-
fully watching him, picked it up without being per-
ceived. He came closer to his victim, who was sitting
astride a long log, thoughtlessly smoking his pipe. “ Now
I must mind what I am about,” the murderer said, preparing


to strike, “ for if I do not hit fair, and he tackles me, I
shall be done.” The axe fell, and without a groan,
Landregan dropped to the earth, when, to make sure of his
crime, the murderer gave him another cut on the head,
though he tells us “the first settled him.” As he surveyed
the corpse, he said “ That’s a good start of Sunday’s work;
I must hide the corpse now, and come back afterwards and
bury him.”
He then stripped the body of all clothing, save the
shirt, and after dragging it eight or ten yards from the cart,
he carefully covered it up with branches. The clothes he
hid elsewhere, but a handkerchief, hat and belt belonging
to the deceased were taken away with the cart. “ I well
remember,” he says in his confession, ‘ taking off the belt,
(the discovery of which in my house was the strongest thing
against me at the trial), and throwing it into a small hole
of water; but afterwards perceiving the end of it above the
water, and fearing to leave it there, I pitched it into the
cart, and never thought of it since.”
The next morning Mr. Tunney, of Gobadolong, who
had been camping a little distance from the scene of the
murder, sent George Sturges, his man, to feed the bullocks.
Sturges took them to the creek and as he was bi’inging
them up again, he saw some low, thick brush about 150
yards from the highway, which had been newly cut, and a
heap of branches which appeared to be carefully laid over
each other. These he pulled aside and beheld the dead
man lying there on his back. This was about 9 o’clock.
Sturges went for his companion and they made an examina-
tion and a search for the prisoner’s clothes. They saw where
there had recently been a small fire, and where the horse
had been resting, for there were some grey hairs on the
ground where he had lain. Sturges immediately returned
to Berrima and gave information to the police.
_ Hoah Chapman, the chief constable of Berrima, with
the police magistrate and others went to the place pointed
out by Sturges. They traced from thence the track of the
cart wheels to Berrima. Chapman measured their span and
the width of the tires from the ruts of the track. Mr. Chalker
having heard of the murder, joined the company, and as


soon as he saw the corpse he recognised Landregan. He also
remembered that he had given Lynch some hay, and being
mostly rye-grass hay, he recognised some of it on the ground.
“ I know the murdered man,” Chalker exclaimed, “and I
can find the man that murdered him.”
They went to Lynch’s place and on measuring the
wheels and the tires they where found to correspond with
Noah Chapman’s measurements. The chief constable said :
“ I arrest you on suspicion of murder.” He replied, “I am
innocent. I will leave it to God and man ; I don’t blame
you, Chapman, but I do blame Chalker for interfering so
much.”
At a subsequent search, the hat, the handkerchief, and
the belt of the murdered man were found in the house.
He stoutly maintained that the hat which Chalker had
recognised by the state of the lining belonged to him. In
the court during the trial, it was placed on his head and
was seen to be several sizes to large. This was the only
time he changed colour or showed the slightest sign of
embarrassment.
He conducted his own defence in an able and ingenious
manner, and when convicted refused to admit anything
until the day before his execution, when he made the con-
fession from whicli we have frequently quoted.
When his hour had come he marched to the drop, and
faced his own death with as much unconcern and as little
fear as he had committed his numerous murders.


MARIA LANGTON.
“ -\T OW Maria, don’t be so dull. There’s Will Farrington
1 i will take you home after tea, and if he doesn’t
suit, there’s Harry Thornton, or Isaac Whittaker, or—”
“ I don’t want anybody to take me home, Mr.
Walmsley, thank you. I came to hear your son’s letter
from Botany Bay, and I have waited half an hour listening
to the silly tittle-tattle of these young dandies without you
even so much as looking at the post mark. I’m in a hurry I
must let you know, for I’ve the milking to do to-night.”
“ Read the letter now,” said Will Farrington.
“ Yea, verily ” said a quaker present “ thee had better
proceed with thy epistle for the sister is impatient.”
“ She wants to hear how Dave Berry is getting on,
may be,” put in Harry Thornton.
“Nay! nay! She’s forgotten him,” Mr. Walmsley
replied, “ It’s our George she is thinking about, and he
hasn’t forgotten you, Maria,” he said with a steady look at
her, “ for he has mentioned you in his letter.”
“Then don’t waste any time in letting me know, just
exactly what he’s got to say about me,” and the young
rustic beauty threw back her head with all the imperiousness
of a sylvan queen.
“ You might as well Mr. Walmsley,” Isaac Whittaker
added, “you know we all came to hear the letter.”
“ Yes ! yes, but I thought it was too fine a Sunday
afternoon to sit here under the chestnut tree. I thought
we might have half an hour in the orchard. However, if
you’ll all sit round, I’ll read you the letter.”
The company which had collected at the farm house of
Mr. Walmsley, a beautiful country spot in Berkshire, sat
around the old man, who drew a letter from his pocket,
wiped his glasses, and after clearing his throat commenced ;


“ I need’nt read the commencement, as it’s private and
uninteresting; I’ll start from his arrival in Sydney ;
‘ Sydney is quite a big place, and it’s as lively a town as ever
a soldier, or even a sailor wishes to see. Nearly everybody
goes to bed drunk every day of their lives, and on what they
call the “ Rocks ” they’re drunk from Sunday morning till
Saturday night. There are just upon two hundred public
houses in Sydney, and there are only about 13,000 inhabi-
tants, 400 military, and 2,000 convicts. Besides the public
houses there are any number of shanties where they sell
grog on the sly. A theatre was opened some years ago and
Governor Hunter gave permission for the actors who were
convicts to play. The audience had to give a shilling’s
worth of rum for admission, and I have now a cabbage-tree
hat on my head for which I gave a pannican of rum.” ’
“ My ! what cabbages there must be in Botany Bay to
grow into trees,’’ observed Farrington.
“ And what heads the rum must give them when they
can wear trees for hats,” said Wittaker.
“ It must be a rum country,” said Thornton, who could
not resist making a pun.
“ And no mistake,” went on the old man continuing
his letter : They drink rum out of buckets, and sometimes
knock the top of a barrel in and dip their pannicans in
one after the other till they have emptied the lot. You
can buy anything for rum, and some of the officers are
making fortunes by selling it, and trading it off for wheat
and corn, and whatever they can do business with.
‘ But its a glorious country only it’s so hot and the water
is terribly bad. There’s a spring in the town, and a sight
it is to see the convicts carrying water from it, but one
spring hardly makes a sivallow unless you want to swallow
well water which is hardly lit for a Berkshire pig to drink.
‘ Don’t I wish Maria would come and marry me now !
I’ve found a man who will buy my discharge from the
regiment and give me more wages for a week’s work than I
could make after I had finished my apprenticeship was
out with old Sedgewick, the wheelwright, in a month. I
want you to send out my indentures so that I can prove that
I have served three years at my trade before I enlisted.


‘ Tell Maria she needn’t be afraid to come, for you know,
father, I always loved her, and living here is cheap. Good
beef is from 2d. to 3d. a pound ; mutton is 2d. a pound ; and
you can buy a couple of fowls for Is. 6d. or 2s.’ “My word,
Maria, what do you think of that 1 ”
“ I think George may consider himself very lucky that
the magistrate advised him to enlist instead of sending him
to Botany Bay as a convict, as they did poor Dave, just for
poaching when there was hardly any honest food in Berk-
shire,” she replied with a sneer on her pretty mouth.
“ Oh, we’re coming to Dave Berry,” went on Mr.
Walmsley. “ Hear what George says about him. It’s
about time you gave over troubling yourself about Dave
Berry. It seems he has gone from bad to worse. George
says ; —‘ Tell Maria that the sooner she can forget Dave
and love me the better it will be for us both. Dave is a
thorough convict and has changed his name. I should not
have found him out, only the other day I was put on duty
near the prisoners’ barracks and the hospital. I saw a band
of eighteen convicts marched into an enclosed yard in the
barracks to be flogged. At about eleven o’clock in the
morning I saw four men carrying a man out of the yard—
two at the head and two at the feet. The man was scream-
ing and howling and wriggling and the blood from his back
left a track behind. The man was Dave Berry and
they were taking him to the hospital, -where, after
he had been ten days, his back got well enough for
him to go to work again in the chain gang. To be
flogged like that and to be put in the chain gang Dave
must be very bad, as quite a large number of well-behaved
convicts have got on well in the colony and have made
large fortunes. In fact the wheelwright who is going to
purchase my discharge is a convict with a conditional par-
don.—’
“1 will hear no more,” exclaimed Maria, suddenly
rising and turning away to hide the tears in her eyes.
“Let me finish it. Thex-e’s not much more,” Mr.
Walmsley said pleadingly and kindly. But Maria fairly
broke down, and with a hasty “ Good-day,” set off home at
a quick pace,


The remainder of the letter, which, after some com-
ments on Maria’s foolish conduct and affection for Dave,
was finished,consisted chiefly of instances of success among
the convicts, and conveyed the impression that it was far
better to be a convict in New South Wales than a starving
labourer in Berkshire. So deep was this impression that
the company argued for some time as to the best mode of
making themselves criminals and getting transported, and
in a comparatively short time from that memorable Sunday
afternoon the majority of the young men present were
prisoners in the hulk of a transport bound for Botany Bay.
When Maria had finished her work upon the little
farm belonging to her employer, after the event just recorded,
she retired to her room and spent most of the night in
tears and bitter thoughts. Before Dave Berry had been
transported for poaching on the game of Sir Edward Eccles-
ton, she had promised to become his wife. He had been
saving up all he could spare of his little earnings to furnish a
home against their marriage day. But the agricultural dis-
tricts of England were then in a miserable state of
poverty, and young Berry, who lived in the Paternal
cottage, was often obliged to go without food. Yet
running wild on the estate of Sir Edward Eccleston were
hares and rabbits in abundance. To spend what Dave had
saved for the marriage day would be to postpone that happy
event, and this neither he nor Maria desired.
One beautiful moonlight evening as they sat together
on the copse, under the shade of a hawthorn hedge, fragrant
with the perfume of lilac and honeysuckle, Dave picked up
a stone and carelessly threw it into the neighbouring wood.
A number of pheasants rose on their wings, and these in
their turn startled a flock of partridges. Some distance
away the wild ducks mounted from a large pond and took
a rapid flight over the woodlands.
“I wish I had my gun with'me, Maria,” said Dave.
“Why?”


“ I would not go without food in the morning.”
“You would fire at the ducks or pheasants I sup-
pose, and get into trouble like young Walmsley. Sir
Edward won’t be content another time if the magistrate
simply orders you to join the Life Guards bound for New
Holland.”
“I know that; yet why should Sir Edward Eccleston
have all the ducks and pheasants and rabbits, whilst the
poor people on the farms are starving 1 He cannot eat them
all and he forgets that they eat the farmer’s grain and spoil
his fields.”
“ Do you know, Dave, I have often said to myself ‘ God
made these creatures and not Sir Edward.’ And lam sure
God has made them as much for the poor as for the rich.”
“ That is true, my darling,” said Dave, drawing the
maiden closer to his side.
“ Only Sir Edward can shoot as many as he likes for
sport whilst if you shoot one for food you may be sent to
Botany Bay right underneath the world.”
“ But do you think it wrong to shoot one ?”
“ No ! That is, if you’re not discovered.”
“ You are my best judge of right or wrong, love. I
intend to bag something before I go to sleep to-night, and 1
will take good care I am not discovered.”
After the two had kissed “goodnight” and parted,
Dave returned to the wood with his fowling-piece in hand.
He crept cautiously along until he was within the haunts
of the partridges, then taking a random shot he tired. No
sooner had the report died away than a voice immediately
behind him shouted “You scoundrel of a poacher, I’ve
caught you at last !” It was the game-keeper.
It was useless to make excuses, useless to urge poverty
and hunger, and Sir Edward Eccleston insisted upon making
an example of Dave Berry. The magistrate fell in with
Sir Edward’s views and the poacher was sentenced to seven
years’ penal servitude at Botany Bay.
Up to the time of receiving the letter from George
Walmsley, nothing had been heard in the neighborhood of
the fate of the unfortunate young man since he sailed away
among felons in the “ General Stuart.”


Maria had suffered intensely by his loss, for she knew
him to be a kind, upright, and affectionate young man. She
loved him fondly and felt that she could never forget him.
Moreover she imagined that she had participated in causing
his misfortune, for had she not told him it was right to shoot
the creatures that God had given equally for the food
of all 1
And now the news in George Walmsley’s letter caused
her to toss sleeplessly upon her pillow. To think that the man
she loved was thousands of miles away from her at the
mercy of men who could find it in their hearts to flog him
until his wounds made tracks of blood ! The thought was
too horrible for her, and she pressed her eyelids together
as though she could see him writhing in his agony and
would shut out the sight.
Before morning she had resolved to go to him at what-
ever cost, and she could think of no better plan to further
her determination than one which would at the same
time give her revenge on Sir Edward Eccleston. The
offence of arson had been very common of late in the
district, and in nearly every case where a conviction had
been procured, the offender had been transported. She
would set fire to something or other belonging to the rich
and haughty baronet.
On Tuesday night following she went to the cattle
sheds of Sir Edward, and after liberating all the cattle, and
even carrying out a young calf, so that these innocent
creatures should not suffer by her act, she set fire to the
stalls and the hay-loft. In a few minutes the building was
in flames and in a short space was entirely consumed,
notwithstanding the efforts of those who had hastened
thither to save it.
When the excitement was over, and they we e looking
for the culprit, she boldly gave herself up to the police and
said she only wished that Sir Edward had been in the
hay-loft.
At her trial she refused to plead in her own defence,
and was absolutely silent as to the motives she had in per-
petrating such a deed. Those who knew her thought she
had gone mad, for there was not a young man for miles


round but looked upon Maria Langton as the most amiable
and harmless of her sex.
As she had hoped, she was sentenced to be trans-
ported, and in due course found herself horded among
a set of the most abandoned women and men that
even the hulks of prisons could belch forth. But she
was going to the side of her Dave and that was enough for
her.
The transport “ Friendship ” was one of the worst of
its kind and they were all bad enough at the time of which
we write. The majority of the convicts were women and
their appearance and conduct were devoid of shame. Their
language would have disgraced the foul den in Mitylene,
where the fair Marina was taken. They looked more like
brutes than Nature’s highest products—women. Some of
the men, on the contrary, were young and even handsome.
The men dressed uniformly in blue trousers and jackets, but
were compelled to carry heavy chains around the waists,
which were fettered at their ankles. The women dressed
variously, some of them having caps which they had pur-
chased before leaving port. Maria, however was content
to go bareheaded until the weather became too hot, when
she artfully tied a cambric handkerchief around her beauti-
ful head of silken auburn hair.
Scarcely was the ship beyond the shores of England
when the officers made an inspection of the women with a
view of making a shameful selection for the voyage It
need hardly be said that Maria was the most beautiful and
innocent looking of the women, and that therefore all the
officers were for claiming her. Finally the Captain, a
middle-aged brutal looking man, took her by the aim, and
with a lascivious grin, said “ My lass, I’ll look after you.”
Maria trembled with fear when she looked into his face,
though she did not comprehend his meaning. She shudder-
ingly shrank back and turned her head away. The rest of
the women were not so parlicular.
The same night, when all the women had retired to
their quarters, the keys of the prison turned in their'locks
from without, and the Captain and several of the" men
entered. Some of the women commenced singing a ribald


song, which was so horrible to Maria that she put her hands
to her ears. The Captain found her in this attitude.
“ What a pretty picture !” were his words of greeting.
Maria did not hear him, but she was enraged and disgusted
at his presence.
“ What do you want here?” she asked sharply.
“ You, of course, my duckie,” was the coarse response.
“You had better mind your own business,” she said,
in a severe tone. “If lam a convict, lam not going to be
insulted by you.”
“ Oh, you needn’t get angry, my beauty. That’ll do
you no good. Remember, I’m master aboard this ship, and
will have no insubordination, mark you. I wanted to see if
you were all right—”
“Thanks for your kindness, but after we are locked up for
the night I can look after myself without your inter- ference.”
“D - n your cheek ! But before we get to Port Jack-
son you’ll be glad of a good word from the skipper,” and
seeing the effect these words produced upon Maria he turned
on his heels and left her.
The next night, fearing another intrusion, she tried to
make her berth secure, and secretly barricaded the doors.
The keys were turned in the locks as before, but her pro-
tection was safe. After some terrible cursing and frightful
oaths, to which she was obliged to listen, the men retired,
and then she tried to get some sleep. In vain. The women,
enraged at their disappointment in not seeing the officers,
swore vengeance against the “ traitor ” who had secretly
barricaded the entrance to their prison. If Maria had
ventured among them then she would have been murdered.
On the following day she was wilfully insulted by the
captain and his officers, all of whom seemed out of temper.
Some of the men, on the slightest pretext, were fastened to
the ship’s side, and others to rings on the deck. The
sentries and sailors taunted them the whole day long, and
the women, with coarse jests and laughter, seemed to make
merry over the misfortune of these men ; but their fullest
measure of joy was in passing inhuman comments on Maria,
who had been set the humiliating task of washing the
sailors’ clothing.


When she entered the female quarters that evening
she found she had been preceded by some other women,
who retired at her approach. It was her intention to fasten
the entrance as before, but she was afraid to excite suspicion
if she did so at once. She therefore waited until the rest
had gone to their berths. Then she silently made the place,
as she thought, secure. But she was mistaken. The
women she had encountered had removed a panel, and a
little later the captain and men found an entrance without
the slightest difficulty. The captain, grinning like an ape,
approached her.
“Well, my lioness, are you tame yet?'’ he asked with
a harsh laugh.
Maria looked around for something to strike him with.
He seized her by the wrist with an iron grip.
“Oh ! that’s your game, is it ? Now look ye, I’ll have
no nonsense. If you like to behave respectably, as women
of your stamp should, I’ll see you treated well on board, and
I’ll put in a good woi’d for you when we reach Sydney. But
if you baulk me, if you try your stuck-up ways on me,
d—n me, if I don’t have you thrown overboard.”
“ The sooner the better. You can do your worst.”
“Now, come, my good wench, be reasonable.”
“ I’ll be that as soon as you are honourable.”
“ Don’t answer me back you convict hussie.”
“ Leave me, sir !”
Such was the emphasis, the force, and the determina-
tion with which she uttered these words that the Captain
mechanically obeyed, muttering, however, the suppressed
oaths of vengeance between his teeth.
Iwo days after, one of the women who had assisted in
removing the panel preferred a charge against Maria. The
charge was insubordination and an attempt to get the
women to join the men in mutiny and the capture of the
ship. There was not the slightest truth in the charge,
which had really been formulated by the captain ; but it
would admirably serve the purpose of example and revenge.
In those days mutinies were common, and the commanders
ol vessels took the earliest opportunity of crushing their
slightest signs and intimidating all who might harbour such


dangerous ideas. The captain of the “ Friendship ” was
one of the most severe in tins respect, and it mattered little
to him whether the accused were innocent or guilty, so long
as he could procure a victim as a salutary example.
Maria was sentenced to receive twenty-five strokes w ith
a cane on the bare back. She pleaded her innocence, and
with hot tears rolling down her cheeks sued for pity. She
inveighed against the Captain, and plainly told him in the
presence of all that his shameless conduct had caused her this
indignity. All to no purpose. She was compelled to strip,
and the snow-white skin, that no mortal eyes had beheld
since her e ■ rly girlhood, was exposed to the view of a set of
abandoned and scoffing convicts.
A stalwart soldier wielded the cane, which at the third
stroke drew blood. She bit her tongue and writhed under
her torture as blow after blow descended upon her tender
skin. At the twelfth blow she fainted, and the surgeon-
superintendent ordered her to be carried below. This man
had a kind spot in his heart, and the youth, the beauty and
the suffering of this young woman roused his sympathies,
convict though she was.
For several days Maria was unable to leave her berth.
She was seized with a malignant fever and at one time the
doctor despaired of her life. When by his strict attention
she recovered sufficiently she told him her story, for she x’ead
in his face that she might rely on his manhood. He at
once offered to protect her, and with genuine sympathy tried
to solace her with words of hope.
The fever that had first attacked Maria rapidly spread
among the rest of the convicts and for some time the ship
was a floating hospital. Maria, as soon as she was strong
enough, insisted upon acting as nurse, and thus she returned
with infinite attention and tenderness the cruelty of the
very women who had been the cause of her own sad
suffering.
But notwitstanding all the care with which the doctor
provided for, and Maria attended the sick, several of the
convicts died. It was a sad sight to witness the funeral of
the first six who succumbed to their malady. Men and
women were sewn up in canvas, and one after the other


thrown overboard whilst the doctor read from his prayer
book. There was splash after splash, and then the ocean
closed over them as smooth and placid as though a few
pebbles had been dropped from the ship’s side. Maria
almost envied the lot of the dead.
Scarcely had the dead dropped in their liquid gi‘ave
when a great noise attracted all hands to a group of conva-
lescent male convicts. A strong muscular man, who was
going out to serve his sentence for murder, had stunned the
sentry with a blow from his irons, and had secured his gun.
With this he shot at the captain and swore he would take
his life for having allowed the woman who had saved his
life whilst he had been down with the fever to be beaten by
that soldier lie had just felled to the ground. It was with
great difficulty that this powerful convict was secured.
One after another, as they approached, he sent them sprawl-
ing on the deck. Eventually, however, a sailor struck him
on the head with a belaying pin, and he fell unconscious.
Whilst in this state heavier irons were placed upon him,
and his hands were tightly secured. After a short consul-
tation among the officers he was adjudged guilty of murder,
and sentenced to die accordingly. As soon, therefore, as
he recovered his senses, he was carried to the ship’s side,
and the doctor again read, “We commit this body to the
deep,” whereat he was thrown overboard, so heavily ironed
that he disappeared almost immediately.
The doctor continued his kindness and friendship for
Maria until the end of the voyage, and her untiring atten-
tion to the sick and suffering procured her the respect of
even the most abandoned.
Ihe doctor more properly known as the
superintendent was very strong in his recommendations o
Maria when, after a four months voyage, the vessel anchored
in Port Jackson. A member of the Assignment Board
resolved upon having her in his employ, but a Mr. Wilkin-
son, having great influence with the Colonial Secretary,


was enabled to sway the Board in his behalf, and Maria, on
the tenth day after her arrival, was assigned to him.
Mr. Wilkinson was a bachelor, and young enough to
be susceptible to feminine charms. He had as many as
thirty-five male convicts working for him on his run in the
Hunter River district. These he employed as shepherds,
agriculturalists, shoemakers, carpenters, masons, black-
smiths, and labourers. But he had only two female convicts
in his service, and these two were neither beautiful nor
young. Moreover, they were far from amiable. Hence he
considered it a stroke of exceedingly good luck when he
learned that his intrigue with the Colonial Secretary had
procured the partiality of the Assignment Board.
Maria was taken to the house of a married friend of
Mr. Wilkinson, living in a large cottage in George Street,
on the spot where Riley Bros, clothing establishment now
is. It stood a little back from the line of the street, a
fence running parallel with the footpath, and a nicely laid
out garden setting off the enclosure.
One burning idea was in the heart of Maria. It was
to see, to speak with, to cheer up, Dave Berry. During
her stay on the “Friendship,” whilst in the harbour, and
for two days after her landing, she diligently enquired for
him, but no one knew him—at least by that name.
She was to be taken away to Newcastle on the fourth
day, Mr. Wilkinson having lodged her with his friend until
he could procure a ship bound thither. Closely watched as
she was, on the third day Maria found her anxiety and
suspense unbearable, so seizing her opportunity she secretly
left the cottage and almost ran down George Street. Where
she was going she did not know, but she knew she was look-
ing for Dave, and that one thought was sufficient to exclude
all other thoughts from her troubled mind
At last she saw a group of men and women talking
together at the corner of the street. She paused to listen.
“ It is nearly time the flogging began,” said a cruel
looking man. “If we don’t start we shall miss it.”
“What are we stopping for then?” asked a gaily
dressed woman.


“ Nothing,” replied one of the group, setting off at a
good pace, followed by the rest.
The letter of George Walmsley flashed to the mind
of Maria, and she at once determined to accompany
the motley troupe. She kept up with them until they
merged into a large concourse of people standing in a semi-
circle before a triangle in front of the barracks. The crowd
around her were laughing and jesting as though they were
awaiting the clown at the circus, but she could scarcely
refrain from tears, though she knew not who was to suffer.
Presently a few soldiers and convict overseers led a
man, totally destitute of apparel, towards tire triangle.
For shame’s sake Maria turned her back upon the degrading
spectacle, and was perfectly horrified when a woman,
immediately in front of her, lifted a little girl upon her
shoulders, the better to witness the sight. Maria made
a start to hasten away, but the crowd was too eager to
obtain a good view to allow her to pass, and she felt her
strength completely forsaking her. Another moment, and a
voice cried out: “You can stare, you lucky dogs, but I’m to
be flogged in this state because it’s the third time I’ve been
discovered chewing tobacco.”
Maria gave a faint scream. She recognised the voice
as that of Dave Berry, the man she had risked so much to
see. Now she dared not turn her head, but trembling from
crown to feet, she kept muttering to herself, “ 0 God, pity
him 1 O don’t hurt him, my poor, poor Dave !”
Thwack ! Thwack! Thwack! she heard the knotted
“cat descend upon his naked form, whilst a low murmur
of a gratified and morbid curiosity ran through the crowd.
I ifty lashes had fallen upon the prisoner, when he
exclaimed, in a tone that caused the most hardened of the
spectators to shudder, “ O for God’s sake give me a drop of
water.”
Maria scarcely heard the words, but the bitterness of
his agonised tone penetrated like a dart into her soul, and
she swooned away in the crowd.
There was a stir, a new diversion in the throng. The
flogging was over and they were liberating the prisoners’
hands and feet.


“ What is the matter ?” shouted an officer.
“ A woman dropped dead,” responded a spectator, for
in his estimation nothing short of death could shut out the
luxury of witnessing a first-rate flogging.
Room was cleared and Maria was carried into the
barracks. As they bore her unceremoniously along, the
flogged prisoner caught a glimpse of her features and form,
and his excruciating pain momentarily departed. He
recognised his heart’s brightest vision, and falling on his
knees, his eyes almost starting from his head, and his face
livid with rage and hate he exclaimed : —“ If there is a God
in this cursed hell, I swear by him I’ll make some of you
suffer for this.”
A kick from behind caused him to show his grinding
teeth, and then, with his features set in firm and sullen
defiance, he rose and walked with tottering steps by the
side of his gaolers back to his prison.
When Maria came to her senses she was taken by two
officers of the law to her lodgings. She was told she was
lucky to escape punishment for absenting herself without
leave. She begged for an interview with the man they had
flogged, but was told that such a thing was absolutely im-
possible. “ Besides,” said one of the men, “ the devil is
dangerous and might murder you.”
With a heavy heart the following day Maria was con
veyed on board the ship on which her passage had been
paid to Newcastle. She made two futile attempts to escape
and terribly exasperated Mr. Wilkinson. In due course,
however, she found herself considerably over a hundred
miles away from the only being she was longing to see.
Mr. Wilkinson was, at first, respectfully kind to her,
then he became distastefully familiar, and at last made a
proposal which Maria scorned indignantly and reproachfully.
“ You should think it a favour and a mark of my
affection and regard for you,” said Mr. Wilkinson.
Hope was beginning to desert Maria, and she felt
utterly friendless in the world. In her condition hundreds
of pure-hearted, noble-minded women have fallen. But her
womanhood revolted at this suggestion of shame, and she
replied :


“I hope I shall never live to think sin a favour, vice
affection, nor shame the evidence of regard.”
“ Tut 1 There is no sin or shame about it. It is the
common thing out here.”
“ Common or uncommon—Oh, my God ! save me from
these terrible trials!” And Maria burst into a flood of
tears.
“ There she is ! Crying to him, the whelp !”
There in the doorway stood the two assigned female
servants we have already alluded to.
“ I say, Boss, are you going to give my place to that
blasted blatherer ?” fairly shrieked the younger of the two.
“Just look at the side she puts on,” remarked the
other.
“ Maybe she’s a young queen, specially imported, eh
Boss ?” she continued, tauntingly.
“ Get to your work and mind your own business,”
exclaimed Mr. Wilkinson, his face flushed with anger.
“ Oh, no ! You don’t bilk us in that way. I’m
blowed if I’ll see a strut of a gosling bullying over me,”
was the retort of the younger woman.
“ Nor over me either.”
“ If you don’t take yourselves off I’ll make it warm for
you.”
“ Ha ! ha ! ha !” laughed the two women together.
“Do you hear me?” shouted Mr. Wilkinson, now
almost beside himself with passion.
The women laughed more loudly.
“ Ladies,” said Maria softly, seeing how matters stood
and anxious to avoid a scene, “ Ladies you need have no
jealously of me lam quite willing to rank behind you.”
“ Ladies ! What soft soap are you giving us ? ”
“ Leave her alone ; it’s him as has done it all, and we
are as much ladies as she is, anyway. Now look here, Squire
Wilkinson, what have you to say for yourself?”
“ D—n your impudence ! Clear out! ”
The two women simultaneously rushed upon him, and
with astonishing strength dragged him down. One of them
then took a chair and broke it on his ribs. Maria seeing
she was no match for either of them, ran out and shouted


for help. Several convicts were within hearing, but only
two or three made a show of understanding her. These
with the utmost possible carelessness came to the house and
simply stood at the door of the room in which Mr. Wilkinson
was endeavouring to overcome his two female assailants.
Though he was a powerful man, however, he was no match
for them. They were pulling his hair out by handfuls, and
literally plunging their linger nails into his tiesh.
“ Can’t you help me, you cowards,” gasped Mr,
Wilkinson, looking at the convicts.
But the men stood silent and motionless. There was a
species of freemasonry among them, and whilst they would
help each other out of their scrapes, they generally refused
to help a master against a convict.
“ We’ve done enough,” said the younger one, panting
for breath. “We wont kill you quite, you beauty,” at
which there was an ironical cheer from the men.
The men and two women now scampered off.
“The confounded wretches have almost murdered me,”
exclaimed Mr. Wilkinson, and added, glancing at Maria,
“all on account of your infernal mock modesty.”
Maria gave him a scornful glance, and hastily left the
room without deigning to reply.
Mr. Wilkinson carried his scars about him for
several weeks, and Maria secretly pitied him though she
treated him with studied coolness, and kept aloof from his
company as much as possible. She instinctively felt that
he was meditating some plot against her honour.
She longed to escape and get back to Sydney, but her
wits were powerless to devise a scheme to assist her. More
than once she contemplated suicide; existence under such
circumstances was becoming so intolerable to her.
One night she was aroused from her sleep by the voices
of men whom she could hear rushing to and fro. She hastily
rose and attired herself, and went out. She soon learned
the cause of the excitement. A young overseer had been
stabbed, though not fatally, whilst asleep, and he had seen
a woman after the deed was committed enter Maria’s room
which opened on a primitive verandah. It had not occurred


to Maria before, but now she suddenly recollected that this
door was open when she awakened.
In the morning Maria’s pocket knife was found in the
overseer’s hut, stained with blood, and midway between the
hut and her room her cloak was found. It was not long,
therefore, before she was taken into custody on the charge
of attempted murder, committed, and sent to Sydney for
trial.
Mr. Wilkinson annoyed at Maria’s zealous regard for
her honour, and the two women, who were the real culprits,
anxious, as they admitted to each other, “ to put her away,”
gave evidence, that conjoined to the finding of the knife
and cloak, x-aised exceedingly strong suspicions against her,
though the case was not proved. She was sent to the
Fexxxale Factory at Parramatta.
To this place the most refractoxy of the woxxxexx were
sent. It was the very sixxk of female depx’avity. Maria
shuddered at the sight of her conxpaxxions and suffex’ed
fx’oxxx a terrible dread of their coxxtamiixatioxx. It was a
conxmoxx thixxg to see the soldiers axxd others conxe to take
away the women for unhallowed uses, or to corrupt the
place with worse than profanity. On their arrival at the
barracks, spirits axxd provisions were px’ovided for a feast of
welcome. The women were almost unexceptiorxally of the
most violent temper, axxd would “ destroy the fux’niture of
their cells, break plates axxd dishes, and throw everything
provided, even for their owxx convexxiexxce, over the walls of
their prison-yard.” So turbulent had their demeanour
becoxxxe at this time that the Attorxxey-Gexxeral was
asked how far the authorities would be justified <f in
puttixxg them in haxxdcutfs or iroxx.” The Attorney-Genex*al
advised the attempt at subduing their excesses by a diet
of bread and water, and though Maria had takexx no partixx
their ixxsxxboxxlixxatioxx, she was conxpelled to sxxbsist oxx this
fax’e for several days.
Uxis treatmexxt only xxxade the woxxxexx xxxore desperate.
I hey xxxade up their ixiixxds to revolt, and attempted to set the
factory on fire, though at the risk of getting themselves burnt
to death. Of this deed, Maria, xxot being “oxxe of them,”
was at once accused, axxd thex’e beixxg ixo witxxesses to the


contrary, she suffered the loss of her beautiful head of hair
as a punishment and “ example.”
It need scarcely be said that Maria was rapidly becom-
ing hardened by these incessant and unjust persecutions.
She made up her mind to run away at the first chance, and
she had not long to wait.
The women one day swore they would make a bonfire
of the matron and her assistants, and pull the factory to the
ground The matron, in alarm, sent out for assistance, and a
sergeant’s guard from the grenadier company soon marched
into the yard of the factory. The fur caps, the mounted
bayonets, and the loaded muskets, were devoid of terror,
however, to these belligerent women. The guard was treated
with a volley of stones and broken furniture, which the
women hurled with right good will. In a few minutes the
soldiers who had received no orders to fire, and many of
whom were roundly abused by the women who knew them
too intimately, fled laughing out of the yard, and whilst the
matron was giving orders to have the police brought down,
Maria, who was watching for the opportunity, got among
the soldiers in the rear, and so unobserved made her escape.
Maria ran until the river impeded her flight. The
soldiers were too much interested and amused with their
recent adventure to take any notice of her.
A party of convicts were just pulling from the river’s
bank in a dilapidated punt. She begged of them to take her
with them to Sydney, but there were already three female
passengers on board, and not being anxious to overburden
their craft nor to introduce any possible source of inharmony,
they only laughed at her entreaties, and one of the women,
with a savage oath, for want of something better, rolled up a
paper she had apparently been reading, and threw it at Maria.
The adventures of this party may be surmised when we
inform our readers that it took them five days to make a
journey of about seven miles,
Maria mechanically picked up the paper and unfolded
it. It was a recent copy of the Gazette , and on the front


page, among the advertisements, was the otter of one
hundred pounds reward to whoever should succeed in
placing in gaol an absconder named “ Bill Langmar.”
Below was a detailed description of the runaway, which
Maria, with trembling excitement, read twice. She could
not mistake that description—she knew the man too well.
It was that of Dave Berry and none other.
For several minutes she stood like one entranced. She
dimly comprehended that the man in whose behalf she had
suffered so much was in terrible peril for an offence which
she, too, had just committed.
What was she to do? She could not go back and, when
she could once more think clearly, she knew that Sydney was
no refuge for her. She determined to risk everything, to
take to the bush and endeavour to find the man for whose
sake she had left England under the shadow of crime.
It was a terrible undertaking, and one, in her ignorance
and her agitated mental state, of which Maria could not
anticipate the difficulties.
She ffed in the direction of Penrith, and carefully
avoided meeting anyone. More than once she had to make
a circuit in the bush to avoid a gang of convicts working
on the road, cattle-drivers, or a group of travellers on
horseback. Once or twice she came near losing her way,
especially after the sun had gone down, and almost imme-
diate darkness would have followed save for the moon which
had just risen.
She had passed over twelve miles of country, and felt
both hungry and fatigued. She sat down on a fallen tree,
and listened to the shrieks and shrill notes of the parrots
lighting for the best perches among the trees. They were
at home, and she was a runaway with no other companion
than her despondency !
Hunger impelled her to pluck the leaves from the
young gum trees, and, weary and sick at heart, at last she
fell asleep in the bush.
A\ hen she awoke she was considerably refreshed, and
with a feeling that she was not far enough away from
.Sydney to be safe, she resumed her journey westward
turning her back to the first gleams of the mornino'
O*


By the time the day had fairly opened, Penrith was in
the rear, and before her she could see the dusky mists that
flanked the Blue Mountains.
But now she began to think seriously about her under-
taking. Where was she going ? Which beaten track through
the bush should she follow 1 How was she to journey with-
out food 1 Was she sure that the GazMe notice referred to
Dave Berry ? How did she know he had escaped in the
direction she was taking ? Would it not be better to return
to the factory than to perish of starvation in the bush ?
Thus moodily contemplating she walked slowly on
until becoming very tired she sat down on the bank of a
small creek. To her horror, almost at her feet she saw a
ghastly skeleton, over the bones of which innumerable flies
were swarming. A frightful stench freighted the air and
it was only by a strong effort of volition that she could keep
from fainting. She hastened away from the sickening sight,
and a shudder passed through her frame as she reflected
that such a fate might yet be hers.
She tried to continue her journey but was so exhausted
for want of food that she sought a shade in the thicket and
knelt down. A dreadful feeling of loneliness came over her,
and she burst into a flood of tears. Her tongue was com-
mencing to swell with thirst; her head swam with dizziness
and the objects about her seemed to dance in her eyes.
At length she clenched her fists, and rose to her feet.
Her will was determined to conquer her weakness. To con-
vince herself that she was strong she ran for some distance
and then walked on at as brisk a pace as the difficulties of
her path would permit. Towards evening, however, her
steps grew feeble, her feet became sore, her head drooped
forward and her arms were like burdens. Her excess of
exhaustion allayed the pangs of hunger, she almost fell
among the shrubbery, and was soon oblivious of everything
in the depth of her sleep.
When she awoke it was nearly noon of another day.
She gathered some nettles and other herbs from which she
made an unsatisfactory breakfast.
Whilst she was still munching away at the green diet
the branches of a sapling in front of her were seen to move,


In another moment a young gin stood before her. Apart
from the terror her wild appearance excited, was a horrible
burden she carried behind her neck. It was the head of a
male aboriginal !
After the first shock of surprise was over, the native
woman made signs to Maria, and in broken English made
her understand that she required her assistance to “ move
him off,” referring, of course to the head she had been
evidently compelled to carry.
Seeing Maria’s hesitancy she ran into the bush and
speedily returned with some water in a kangaroo-skin bag,
and some dried flesh of a large opossum. Maria took of
the water with greediness, and ate also of the meat, but she
displayed no intention of helping the savage to get rid of
her burden.
At length, however, seeing the earnestness of the gin’s
solicitation, she conquered her feeling of repugnance, and
after a considerable time succeeded in biting through the
strings that circled the poor creature’s neck, and to which was
fastened the ghastly cranium of a defunct native of the soil.
The joy of the aboriginal was unbounded when the
head fell to the ground behind her. She gave Maria to
understand that it was the head of her husband cut off by
“ plenty whitefellow” who had abducted her from her tribe
and compelled her to go with them, and so to carry her
husband’s head about for not being sufficiently accommo-
dating. She had made her escape from the murderers, and
was going back to her tribe.
Maria made it understood that she was looking for
the murderers, and asked her to show her the way. The
native at first showed decided signs of objection, but in
gratitude for Maria’s kindness at length consented to put
her upon the track.
Feeling reinvigorated by the incident of this strange
companionship and the meal she had had, Maria felt in fair
trim for her march. In the middle of the day they halted,
the sun was so oppresive, and then resumed their journey
till sundown. The black woman at once gathered some bark
and branches and very speedily improvised a hut largo
enough to accommodate them for the night. Then with


wonderful agility she climbed up a large tree and killed an
oppossum which fell with a thud to the ground. Apparently
fearful of Maria’s appetite she came down the tree and
climbed another some distance off and captured a young
native bear. This she had killed ami skinned with re-
markable speed and in front of the rude hut was soon
rubbing two sticks together to procure a fire. In less than
ten minutes the dry leaves and branches she had collected
were ignited and then Toontoo (the black swan , for such
was her name) threw the skinned bear on the flames and
the oppossum was placed on the embers holus bolus—-Just
as it had been killed.
Maria partook of the flesh of the native bear but could
not be induced to taste of the oppossum. Toontoo, however
ate greedily, seemingly relishing all portions alike. Then
she seated herself in the improvised hut, her hands clasped
around her knees and her head resting on them and fell
into a slumber so sound that it was late the next morning
before Maria could manage to awake her.
For several days, full of adventures and vicissitudes,
they pursued their journey. At one place they came upon
a free settler’s run, where a number of convicts were at
work without any clothing. Maria afterwards learned
that clothes and rations were often parted with for
feminine favours, at which the convict husband would
wink on account of the profits derived from his wife’s
peccadillos. It was the boast of some of these married
prisoners that they kept two bags behind the door, one for
tea and the other for sugar.
Toontoo’s services and attention, her skill in following
a track, her wonderful eyesight, her cunning, and her skill
in the supply of edibles enabled Maria to perform this
dangerous and trying journey.
Towards the close of a very hot day, they saw rising
from a ravine among the mountains the smoke of a camp
fire. Toontoo pointed to it, and Maria saw that she was
trembling with fear. By signs and broken sentences she
made it understood that the “ bad whitefellows ” by whom
she had been taken from her tribe were camping in that
spot. From that moment Maria’s arts and persuasions were


useless to induce Toontoo to longer remain with her. She
turned back on the road from whence they had come, and
before Maria could recover from her fears and astonishment
she was lost in the bush.
At that moment four armed men made their appearance.
“ Halloa, Bill!” shouted one. “ Halt! there’s fine
game here.”
The party halted and put their guns to their shoulders.
Maria put out her arms towards them and fell on her knees
supplicatingly. At this the man who had first spoken and
another come up to her.
“What the d 4 are you doing here?” the man who
appeared to be the spokesman of the party asked.
“ I am looking for an escaped prisoner,” she replied,
with a tremor in her voice.
“ Well there are four of us here. What’s yer bisnez ?
Want to peach on us?”
“ I don’t want any of you. I want to save one man I
knew in England.”
“ Want a husband, eh ? Won’t Ido ? ”
“No.”
‘ Anyhow I want a wife, and you’re not bad looking.
Bring her along, lads.”
And in spite of all entreaties, Mai’ia was forced to
accompany them.
Along the fiank of the mountain and down its slope
they led her into the ravine to the camp fire she had seen in
the distance. At their approach five others came to meet
them, and seeing the captive they were leading they raised
a lusty cheer.
“My God! ” exclaimed one of the men as Maria
approached him, “ it’s Maria !” and he ran rapidly towards
her and knelt before her.
“ Has Bill taken leave of his senses ? ” asked the spokes-
man of the capturing party of his companions.
“ He’s only malingering. He means to have her for
himself.”
“ Not if I know it. Look here, Bill Langmar, I’m the
captain of these rangers, and you’ll, maybe, be good enough
to keep away from my girl.”


“Oh, sir !” said Maria, “this is the man I have crossed
the seas to meet, and—”
“ And lam going to marry you. Step out, George,
and get your prayer-book.”
These words were addressed to a rather prepossessing
young man, whose face had a decided clerical appearance.
“ George is our parson. No §ham about it. He’s
preached often enough in Birmingham afore his fingers took
to writing other folks’ names to cheques. He’ll marry us in
a ‘ twinkle of an eye ’ as he pitches to us ”
Maria could not conceal her fears, and Dave Berry
was so overcome with emotion that he did not hear the in-
sulting language of his captain.
“ Now look alive, George. Out with your prayer-book,
for I reckon she’s not going to have me without a reg’lar
wedding.”
“ Captain,” at length Dave Berry said, “ this young
woman must be sacred hei’e—even to me. There’s not one
of us fit to touch her fingers. Years since I loved her—but
now ! What can any one of us do with love ? It was be-
cause they flogged me before her eyes that I made up my
mind to join you, to be an outlaw, to have my revenge on
the human devils who pluck the hearts out of men and put
the coals of hell in their place. When they forgot to send
out my name and even my offence to this country I took as
much of her name as I dare—l called myself ‘ Langmar ’
that I might always be thinking of Maria Langton ; and,
unfit as I am to see her, the soul plucked out of me, my
hopes rooted up, and the futui’e of two lives blasted, I say I
have too good a memory of what we were, and what we
might have been, to let even you, captain, lay a finger on
her or say one word of insult in her presence.”
These words, delivered with all the force and posture
of eloquence, almost stupified the captain. He was at a
loss what to say and how to act. Fearing, however, that
any signs of weakness might lead the gang to suspect him
of cowardice, and become an incentive to insubordination,
he determined upon asserting his authority.
“ Do you want to marry the girl and settle down, Bill
Langmar ?” he asked with a sneer.


“No ! My hopes of that are past. I have been
kicked, goaded, and flogged too low in the world for that,”
Dave replied, with a heavy sigh.
“ Well, I haven’t, and since you don’t want the girl
you shan’t stand in my way.”
Maria instinctively threw her arms around her lover’s
neck for protection.
“ Let her go !” shouted the captain.
“As long as there is life in my body no man living
shall harm her in my presence.”
“ Do you refuse to obey orders then?”
“Such orders. I’d as soon think of murdering an
angel from Heaven as fail to protect this angel on earth.”
The captain growled a fierce oath and played with his
gun. Dave Berry put his hand on the handle of his knife.
“ Look here, captain. I’ve no longer any hope of
redeeming myself in the eyes of the fiends who are in power
in this blighted country, but it would do a lot to atone for
my piesent position if you would compel me to perish pro-
tecting this brave and innocent woman. But don’t be
coward enough to shoot me. Let us have it fair. Knife to
knife, and I’m your man.”
The gang, anxious to see a good hand-to-hand fight,
loudly cheered this bold challenge, whilst Mai'ia gave a cry
of agonised fear.
The captain, furiously enraged at this defiance of his
authority, levelled his gun. Maria threw her arms around
her lover’s neck and clung upon his breast. In the fury of
his mood the captain had not noticed her action. He fired,
and Maria fell dead at Dave Ben Vs feet.
Dave clutched his knife ana rushed at his foe. The
captain stunned him with the butt end of his gun, the knife
fell from his hand, and he dropped insensible. His antago-
nist took up the knife and plunged it into the heart of his
victim.
Another month and the captain was shot by the
mounted police, and the rest of the gang were captured
later on. They perished on the scaffold.


TRUTHFUL STORIES
Told Round the Bushrangers’ Camp Fire.
ARE the cattle safe ?”
The speaker was a stalwart, muscular bush-
ranger, who addressed a couple of his companions who had
just come to join a group indolently smoking around a large
log fire.
“ All secure,” answered one of the men addressed.
“ And newly branded,” added the other.
“ How have you branded them T asked the first
speaker.
“ Well, we haven’t had to puzzle our brains much.
W e’ve given them the same brand as them we collared near
the Tom 'rhumb Lagoon in the Illawarra district.”
“ It wasn’t so hard though,” continued his companion.
“ Them we took in the Illawarra district had a T brand ;
them we’ve brought from the Namoi were only branded
with a couple of ll’s. It took careful work to make a T
into a M.”
“ Then I propose we make a night of it and spin some
yarns over the bucket. What do you say, Jack?”
These words were addressed to the squatter, whose hut
and grog shop were a few hundred yards remove from the
camp of the bushrangers.
Squatters at this time were generally escaped convicts,
ticket-of-leave men, or recent emancipists—that is men who
had been fortunate enough to procure a pardon of a con-
ditional kind from the authorities. They were called
“squatters” after a term applied to the emigrants to
America who squatted down in the forests or on the great
prairies of that mighty continent. But the majority of


squatters in New South Wales of the time of which we
write were men who cared very little about turning the
“ howling wilderness ” into a rose garden. They were too
often only the receivers of stolen property, and the agents
of the bushrangers. Though Mr. Mudie was a man with a
limited sense of justice, and a small stock of humane con-
sideration for convicts, his evidence before the Select
Committee in the House of Commons in 1837, touching the
squatters, may not be inappropriately quoted here :
Mr. Leonard: “How did they manage to dispose of
the bullock harness and other things which they stole?”
Mr. Mudie: “ They would sell it to the blacksmiths,
or to squatters, or to ticket-of-leave men, or to men that had
just become free, and had got small farms.”
The Chairman: “ Will you state to the Committee
who the squatters are ? ”
Mr. Mudie: “ They are generally men who are not
fond of working, and upon the roads where there is a suit-
able thoroughfare, there are generally particular spots where
drays halt, where they can get water for the night, and
there the squatters knock up what is called a hut ! ”
Chairman: “ Are they the receivers of stolen property
from the convicts ? ”
Mr. Mudie : “ I should think almost entirely in the
country districts.”
Chairman : “ What do they give generally in return ?”
Mr. Mudie: “ I should think noticing but spirits,
except of course, tea, sugar and tobacco ; they are almost
as fond of tobacco as spirits.”
Chairman : “ Are there a number of squatters in the
colony ? ”
Mr. Mudie: “A great many ; and these squatters are
connected with the cattle stealers.”
Jack Newgate had just made a profitable bargain with
the bushrangers, and he was therefore in high spirits.
“ I’ve no objection, lads, and I’ll join you,” was his
reply to the leader, “ I’ve not taken to the bush life to make
myself miserable, and I’ll stand a bucket of rum myself.”


“ Hurray ! ” shouted the men.
“ Bring your bucketful first,” said Steve Bullethead—
so-called by his comrades, from his head once having been
hit by a bullet from the gun of a mounted policeman.
“ And let us have quart pots and new pipes,” added
the leader.
“ Agreed, my lads; Jack Newgate’s your pal for
luxury when he meets with gen’lemen like you.”
It did not take long to place the bucket of rum in the
view of all, and for the group to settle down to smoking
after the first smack of the succulent beverage.
“ Now, who shall begin ?”
“Our captain,” replied the men.
“ No ! We’ll toss for it.”
“ Agreed.”
The lot fell to Jack Newgate.
“ Now,” said the leader of the bushrangers,” “no
making of it up. The yarns must be as near gospel as a
son-in-law is to a rollin’ pin.”
“ Or a bushranger to a bullet,” put in Bullethead.
“ Let every man just tell what he knows for facts.
That’s my principles, I hates yer yarns when they’re as
holler as a parson’s pitch at a hanging.”
“ I can’t tell a reg’lar yarn,” apologised Jack Newgate
“ but I’ll recouperate a bit of my defunct experience and
hear-says.”
“No latin if you please, and begin at once.”
The men comfortably settled themselves to listen.
THE SQUATTER’S EXPERIENCES.
We give the following as nearly as possible in the
language of the narrators :
“ Well, lads, it’s now fourteen years since I set my feet
in this country of the emu and ’possum, not to mention the
kangaroo. I needn’t tell you why I was spliced to the
darbies, for most on you knows.
About the first hard work I did, was to be harnessed
to a bullock waggon in Sydney. There were twenty of us
had to drag that waggon, tilled with stones and gravel, in


fine weather, hot weather, wet weather, and all the weather
of the almanack. Sometimes it was frightful work, for the
roads was orful, ’specially up Brickfield Hill way.
I thought Botany Bay was a land of liberty, but I was
soon sold on that point. I was suspected of knowing some-
thing about a robbery on the “ Rocks,” which I was as
ignorant of as a new born child. Well they locked me up
and gave me a couple of floggings for not telling all I knew.
At last I got out by telling a lot of lies, and another fellow
then got the floggings.
My next introduction to the cat was for not lifting my
hat to a magistrate. Darn him, he was a brute ; I got
fifty for that, and a rough fifty it was. Since then I’ve kept
a reckoning, and I’ve had in gross receipts 1417 lashes, a
pretty stiff t >tal. But one of the strokes I got in that
“ fifty ” shows on my back to this day.
Them was the days for rum, lads. T got assigned for
a month to a contractor. He wouldn’t keep me any longer
than a month, I was such a champion boozer. But I put
away some stuff in that month. I was present at the
glorious barrel spree with the soldiers of the 102nd Regi-
ment. There was a 100-acre block of land given as a grant
to about 200 soldiers of the Regiment, each coon getting an
allotment of half an acre. What does one of the officers
do but plant a hogshead of glorious rum right in the middle
of the block, and he buys up the whole lot with that blessed
fluid. (This land would now bring upwards of a million
and a half of money.)
That’s nothing, though. Do you know that one of the
richest young fellows in the district you were telling me
about is the son of a traded woman? Anyhow, it’s a real
fact. His mother was sold to his father for four gallons of
rum, and hers was not the only case by a long way.
It was a common thing for officers to get hold of valuable
properties by swapping rum for them. It’s only the other
day Jemmie Burns paid me a visit, and he tells me it was
as bad in Hobart Town. There the Government pay their
servants in rum, so in that respect it must be a glorious
country. A public-house keeper, called Terry, always had


blank deeds at his bar, ready to do business, he said, and
many’s the fool who parted with his house, stock-and-barrel,
for Terry’s grog. Jemmie heard of a bit of a spree just
before he left. Six emancipists put away between them
seven bottles of sherry and forty-one bottles of porter, and
went home nigh as sober as they left. They were up to
mark for topers, they were.
Well, I got a bit hardened by the way I was treated,
and my pals did the same. I learned to swear anything 1
was wanted, or that I thought was bad enough, just to get
out of a Hogging, and sometimes I did it in spite of a
flogging, the magistrates were such fools. My pals and me
used to roar again at their silly sentences. There was
Henry Bayne for instance. He was in the Domain party,
and he was sentenced to twenty-five every morning till he
told where the money and other things was some thief had
stolen from Bill Jacques at Parramatta. They said he was
the thief, but he knew no more about it than the man in
the moon. For nearly a month he was flogged every morn-
ing, and then sent to Port Macquarie for twelve months.
Then there was Harry Watson, charged with stealing five
sheets. He got twenty-five ticklers and told to find the
sheets or get dfty on the coming Saturday. Of course he
couldn’t find the cussed sheets, and he was brought up again
later on. What do you think his sentence was ? Fifty
lashes and work in double irons till the magistrates might
think proper to release him.
But Bridget Book and Maggie Murphy were about as
badly treated as I ever heard of, specially Bridget, for after
Murphy had been arrested and brought up they let her off
for the time being. They were charged with lifting a gown
belonging to Mary Carney. Bridget got the gown off
Maggie Murphy, and gave it to Kitty White for some rum.
Well they ordered Bridget Rook to be chained to Maggie
Murphy, “ and to remain so chained until the gown is
restored to the proper owner.” Now as the gown has never
been restored, I suppose they’re chained together yet.
I got in a bit of trouble through a pal peaching on me,
and they sent me to Norfolk Island. Of all the places in
creation it beats the lot. Talk about being hanged ! It’s


a paradise to Norfolk Island. We used to draw lots who
should be killed, or who should murder a warder, so as to
get out of the hole. I was always unlucky, and neither got
killed nor killed anybody, and half of them there had done
nothing. There they were, worn away to skeletons, work-
ing like brutes, starved like rats, and flogged till they
dropped for dead.
I was a pal of Champly and Shirby, as innocent men
as ever lived. These men kept a store near Berrima, and
they were accused of purloining tea, soap, leather, peas, and
other things from Atkinson’s place at Oldbury. Atkinson
swore he found some of his things in the prisoners’ store.
Well these men were sentenced to be hanged but they were
sent off to Norfolk Island instead.
When they had suffered worse than dogs with a bad
master a leaking kennel and the mange, Bill Webber, the
bushranger, was sentenced to swing ; that was about a year
after. The day before Ketch was ready with the rope,
Webber sends for a lawyer—the same one that defended
Champly and Shirby. He tells him that the men he
defended at the Campbelltown Assizes was as innocent of
breaking into Atkinson’s store as the lawyer himself. He
made a clean breast of it, said he had been an assigned
servant of Atkinson, knew the place, looted it and went
back into the bush. But before he went he buried the
plunder partly under a heap of stones, and partly in the
hollow of a big tree near the house. He never had time or
pluck to go back for ’em, and there sure enough they found
the whole lot.
For clearing Champly and Shirby the lawyer promised
to do his best to get Webber out of hanging. After his
death-warrant had been read to him, they told him he had
only to do a little peaching on his mates or tell them where
they could find more plunder and his life would be spared.
“No thank you he said. All I could gain would be to be
sent to Norfolk Island, and I would rather be hanged than
go there.” And he was hanged though that did’nt take
back what the two innocent men had gone through.
The greatest luxury we could look forward to, as the
immortal bard says, was to get to Sydney as witnesses.


though it was terrible to have to go back, as you can guess
from what Webber said. But we saw our old pals and
could have a tine time of it for a bit.
Well, in 1827 there were tine ructions on sea and land.
There was a vessel bringing p isoners to the Island, and
when it was about a day’s sail off, there was a mutiny led by
Walton, the biggest and pluckiest scoundrel on board. They
had planned their scheme splendidly, and killed nobody,
though they had a bit of a scuffle and a few scratches.
Walton and his men dressed up in the guards’ uniforms, and
lie gave the orders like a pirate we read about. They first
thought of going to South America, but they hadn’t the
maps and were short of water, so they struck for New
Zealand, the crew, and Harwood, the captain, managing
the ship under Walton’s directions. They got safely
to the Bay of Islands, where they found two whalers at
anchor.
“ Where are you bound for ?” asks the captains of the
whalers.
“ To the river Thames with troops and provisions,” said
Walton.
“ Are you now !” said one of the captains aforesaid,
eyeing their ship with a grin on him like a cut down a
carcase of mutton.
Sure enough,” said Walton, pacing the deck like a
performing bear.
But Captain Duke and Captain Clark, the whalers,
knew a shark from a whale, it seems. The ship looked too
awkward and out of trim, and the crew looked too lazy to
pass for a troop ship, so they sent word on shore to the
missionaries, telling them to raise a young army.
Walton and his men suspected their game and laughed.
But in a short time the natives were seen in charge of the
missionaries, “armed and ready for slaughter,” as the poet
says. The pirates were called on to surrender both from the
shore and the whalers, but they took no notice. Then the
whalers discharged their guns, and the shots were well
aimed, for they struck the vessel like young thunderbolts.
The cowards on board were frightened out of their wits.


They ran into the hold, stuck their heads in barrels, and hid
away wherever they could, some of ’em even taking to the
water.
Walton tried to come to terms, but after the firing of
a few more shots and threatening to let the natives loose on
them, stating at the same time that if they caved in the
natives shouldn’t eat ’em alive, they surrendered.
They were taken on shore but it was all that the mis-
sionaries and captains could do to keep the natives off them.
As it was, the savages stripped some of them and plundered
the vessel.
They vere brought back to Sydney and tried, and it was
only through one of the crew that they were prevented from
another mutiny on their way to Port Jackson.
This story’s a bit out of my track, lads, and I only told
it because it was about this time that a mutiny happened
on Norfolk Island for which I was brought down to Sydney
as a witness. It was in September of the same year.
One morning, when the prisoners were being mustered,
fifty-one of them rushed on the guards and overseers and
disarmed them. One of the guards was killed and another
wounded. They placed the rest in solitary cells so that no
news could be sent to the barracks, they then intended to
attack the garrison, take the fort by surprise, put the
officers in the stockades, and jump the island ; but four
soldiers, happening to leave their quarters in the hospital,
saw what was going on, and set off to give the alarm. The
convicts set off after them and shot one, wounded another,
and took one a prisoner, but the other got out of the road
and carried the news.
Seeing their danger the convicts took to the boats they
had got ready. They had arms and ammunition on board,
as well as water and provisions.
Captain Donaldson, the commandant, came down with
his troops to Kingston just as two of the boats had passed
the reef that runs round the island. The other boat was
just under weigh. The troops fired on them, but did no
damage, and the boats made for Phillip Island, about seven
miles away.


The cunning beggars only one boat behind,
and they had taken good care to disable that, and what is
more they had carried off the boatbuilder. But the boat
they had left was soon put in order, and the next morning
Captain Donaldson, Lieutenant Donnellan, and twenty-two
soldiers started off before daybreak, expecting to surprise
the absentees; but wind and tide were against them and it
was sun-up before they got there. They werq greeted with
a cheer and a volley from the rocks, but the convicts were
bad shots and only startled the fishes. The Captain and
his soldiers landed and a fight took place. The convicts
were licked, three were killed and the others took to their
heels after eleven were taken prisoners.
The soldiers returned, hoping the rest would starve,
though there were plenty of goats and pigs on the island.
After a few days the soldiers went back and brought
off ten more prisoners.
The other twenty-five stopped on the island for some
time, but after their captain, Goff, was killed, being shot
whilst he was sleeping under the rocks, they all surrendered
and I got my trip to Sydney.
I managed to get away from Norfolk at last, and as
I’ve talked long enough and you know the rest of my life
pretty well, T reckon I’d better stop yarning and herewith
jack it up.
“ Bravo,” shouted the listeners.
“ Well told,” said the leader.
“ Let me have a drink, I think I’ve earned it,” said the
narrator.
“You have,” and he was offered the quart pot of rum.
“ Who’s next ? ”
“ The Captain,” they cried together.
Without offering any objections, the Captain obeyed,
and narrated the following :
THE CAPTAIN’S YARN.
“ Well, boys, I came out when Farrell did, and I
picked up a good deal from him on the trip. He was a
skilled burglar in the old country, and bolts, bars, and locks
were about as much to him as cheese to a squirrel. You


recollect the way he robbed the Bank of Australia in
George-street, Sydney ? He and his mates worked like
niggers until they actually bored a passage under the
ground into the bank, and then collared about £6OOO in
dollars and notes.
He wasn’t a bad fellow, though, among the women.
He was always kind to them, and when the captain of our
ship ordered a poor girl to be soused with cold water on the
deck before us all, he swore like a trooper.
That was poor Mary Anne Bolton. She was in a bad
stage of consumption and as quiet and harmless as a
waning star. The doctor threw the first pail of water over
her, and the rest followed suit, threatening to keep at it
till she confessed. Poor girl she had nothing to confess,
and said she would rather die than tell a fib. Ihe con-
founded women were always getting her into trouble be-
cause she was too good for them. They dragged her out of
her bed one night and gave her a sousing. It made Farrell
wild, and he would have burglarised the ship if he could,
but he was as helpless as a chicken in the shell. She only
lived a little while after getting to Sydney.
I was one of the gang of eight who ran away from
Windsor in 1815 intending to get to New Guinea. Our
plan was to cross the Blue Mountains, make for the coast,
and then build a ship big enough to weather the gales and
put us on that island as free from convicts as Mudie’s heart
is of pity.
We took with us a few blankets, an axe, a musket, a
pistol, some powder and shot, cooking tools, clothes, and as
many provisions as we could carry. Four dogs, for hunting
and protection, we enticed with us, and four fine dogs they
were.
We kept off the road over the mountains, so as to keep
out of the way if we were followed. It was a hard thing to
keep in the right direction. The road itself was only a
beaten track, and as we went sometimes to the right of it
and sometimes to the left we had to make a way for our-
selves. In some places it was hours before we could get
clear of thickets and marshes, and at other parts we had to
fasten the blankets together and slide down them to get


down steep rocks. At one steep part of the mountains the
blankets were not long enough, though from the top they
seemed to be. Down went the first and reached the end of
the blanket, when, thinking he had only a yard or so to
drop, he let go his hold and dropped several yards into a
heap of bushes. He was stunned and didn’t cry out to us.
I followed, and when I got towards the end of the clumsy
rope I saw the predicament I was in. I tried to ascend
hand ever hand, but the blankets slipped through my
fingers and kept turning round on me. T was soon ex-
hausted, so I slid down to the end and gave myself a swing,
so as not to come down on my mate. I thought I was
never going to get to the end of my journey, and made sure
when I did get there it would be the end of my life as well.
It was lucky the thick bushes were growing right under-
neath. I fell in them with a crash, and then dropped to
the ground and started rolling down an incline, and just
managed to stop myself at the brink of an awful precipice.
I’m not religious, lads : but I believe I did pray a little
just then.
I clambered up again the best way I could and shouted
to the top of my voice to prevent the others coming down.
They heard me, and drew up the blankets.
By tins time my mate had come to his senses, fairly
shook and scared, but not much -hurt.
“ Well, here’s a go,” he said in a trembling voice,
“ they’ve drawn the blankets up, and we’ll have to die
down here, I suppose.”
I did my best to cheer him, but I hadn’t much of a
liking for the lookout myself. We seemed hemmed in on
every side with steep rocks that seemed as hard to climb as
a brick wall to a cat.
We scratched our heads and looked at each other.
In a little while we saw the blankets come down again
with four pair of trousers and two coats fastened to the
end. Even now there was a good distance to fall, but me
and ray mates pulled our duds off and made a sort of carpet,
and when the next man dropped we broke his fall and let
him gently into the bushes. We did the same with the
rest, nearly losing our balance two or three times.


W lien we were all down, I asked quite innocently,.
“ How are we going to get the blankets down ? ” Nobody
had thought of that. We couldn’t afford to lose them.
“ Besides,’’ said one, “ I cannot go about like a
kangaroo.’
“ You could think yourself lucky if you did,” says I,
“ a kangaroo skin would hide your ugly carcase.”
“ There’s something worse than having to go about
naked,” the man said who came down first, “ How are we
going to get out of here 1 ”
It was a puzzler. One of the men started to sing a
hymn, but that didn’t help us much.
Then I set off to look for the opening we had seen from
above. I started a young kangaroo, so I knew there was
foothold if I kept in his track. After many a tumble and
dangerous slide, I came on a small water bed worn in the
rocks. It was perfectly dry in many places, and I found
it led to the summit. I got up without difficulty, and after
crawling through the thick scrub, I came to the place where
the blanket rope was secured. I heard a cheer from my
mates as they saw me. I threw the blankets down to them
and got back by the watercourse as easily as Paddy Whelan
stole O’Donovan’s eggs.
The next tiling was to find our way, and it was no
easy thing. A\ e passed the place I have mentioned and
found we were descending deeper and deeper into a gully.
It grew quite dark, though we could see the daylight plain
enough far above us. Again and again we had to throw
our bundles over a big cut, and make a jump for it, until
Are got too tired to do much jumping.
By the sixth day we had made our way down to a
river. W e were in high glee at this for we were used up
for food. The last bit of our tucker was gone, and we
thought we might get some fish in the river. Well we tried.
We had neither lines nor hooks, and as for shooting them
you might as well try to shoot a whale in a tea-cup. They
simply wasn’t there.
The next three days were all the Lents of centuries
falling at once. We fasted enough but we couldn’t find any
prey. Our stomachs rubbed noses with our backbones, and


I believe a Sydney brickfielder would have passed right
through us.
At the end of that time we were just about giving up.
One weak mate, who looked as hungry as a bear after a six
months sleep, proposed killing the dogs. Poor dogs, they
looked like four clothes-lines walking on sixteen Dutch pipe
stems, with four kite strings for tails.
“No, lads,” I said, “we must respect these poor-
brutes. They've been faithful, had many a tumble, and
any amount of hard work for us, and to eat them would be
as bad as eating a mother-in-law, and a good sight worse.”
The dogs looked up at me and their big black eyes
with streaks down to the coiners of their mouths, which I
suppose were tear-tracks, seemed to thank me for my speech.
Of course I joked about the mother-in-law, for I knew it
was the best way to make my mates take pity on the hounds,
though I was hungry enough to eat a couple myself at the
time.
We started climbing the mountains again, and as we
were at the point of desperation, we put the best leg fore-
most, which isn’t saying much. However, when we had
passed over them we were rewarded. Some settlers had
just sent some herds over-, and we literally killed “the fatted
calf,” and ate like cows in clover. The dogs came in for
their share, and didn’t seem particular to a bone or two.
Some now wanted to turn back, but I thought it easier
to cross the plains than to face the mountains again.
“ Mates,” I said, “ at one end of our journey there is
liberty and a country to ourselves, at the other end is the
triangle and the gallows. Behind us are the big mountains
and slavery. Before us, the plains and freedom. Let us
go ahead.”
This put life into them, and after killing some more
calves, and taking as much flesh away as we could carry
we started off. We saw a settlement ahead of us, and ]
have learned since that this was Bathurst. We kept clear
of it so as to keep out of the hands of the soldiers or the
police. We had hard work to make our way through the
bush, but I couldn’t see the force of getting in the hands
of the enemy.


A lot of the meat we at bad, and after passing the
settlement we again ran short of provisions. We tried our
hands at hunting kangaroos and emus, but we hadn’t any
salt to put on the end of their tails, so the emus would give
us a wink, and the bucks would rear on their tails and then
give us more sea-room than we wanted. We tried to trap
them, but the brutes seemed to smell danger, and were just
as smart as policemen in keeping out of its way. We did
manage to get one or two thanks to the dogs, but we didn’t
need a sermon to teach us that the way of the transgressor
is hard, and that to hunt kangaroos you’re not acquainted
with is harder.
We came to water again, and fishing was proposed.
But there was the same want of tackle as before, and the
fishes were as cunning as the kangaroos and smarter than
the emus.
We held a council of war. It was decided that three
of the band should go back to the settlement and steal some
tackle of some kind or other. They returned with the
halyards and the flagstaff of the settlement. With these
we made lines, and with a few pins we happened to have
we made hooks and started fishing. After a little practice
we were successful. The fishes took to the bait like flies
to sugar.
This was a cheering success. We felt saved and set
off with renewed hopes along the banks of the Macquarie
River, making up our minds to follow its course to the sea,
but our strength was getting exhausted. After a bit we
could hardly struggle along, and the men got down-hearted.
One of them deserted and gave himself up at the settlement.
The rest of us determined to hold out as long as we could.
In a few days we were like walking skeletons looking
for holes to creep in out of the sun. Everything seemed to
laugh at us. We could neither get fish nor game, and the
dogs dropped their tails and hung out their tongues, and
seemed to wonder that mortals could be such fools.
I couldn’t stand this insult, though I still pitied the
faithful creatures. They had to die, and when one of my
mates said something about the ‘‘poor things” I said “It’s


better to put them out of their misery. They’ve had
enough of starvation I”
“ And so have we,” said another.
So we killed the dogs and devoured them, saving some
of the flesh for bait. With this we went fishing again, and
with the fish we caught and salad of mint and nettles w
continued our journey twenty-four days beyond Bathurst.
Once more we were like lamed camels in the desert-
Dogs were gone, bait was gone, and the nettles were
scarce. We were as helpless as castaways on a taft in the
middle of the sea. I started eating my arms, and I should
have turned into a regular cannibal if we hadn’t been
found by a tribe of blacks.
I never shoot a blackfellow out of memory of their
kindness then. We made them understand we were
hungry—which was easily to be seen, for we looked more
like dead saplings than human beings. We resolved to go
back to Bathurst and surrender. We felt completely
beaten. We made signs that we wanted them to guide us
back, and they signed back that they understood us.
In a little while the blacks brought us fish and wild
turtle, and we feasted like crows that had been waiting a
month for a lambing.
The blacks were business men, however, and I had to
give them my trousers for our meal.
We now made our way towards the settlement with
as much speed as our strength would allow. For two days
we had nothing but herbs to eat. One of the party got too
weak and he was left behind in charge of me. The rest
went on—five of them, and I followed with the weak fellow,
helping him on the best way 1 could. The five ahead
tramped towards the plains. They were helped by the
blacks, trading off their clothes for food. When near the
settlement they got quite exhausted and gave themselves
up for lost. Two white men happened to find them and
gave them some bread. They were in such a state of ex-
haustion that they could scarcely eat it. The men then
went off to the town and brought out a cart in which they
took the poor fellows to the settlement.


As for me I had an awful job. My mate soon gave
it up and I had to leave him on the plains. Some say I
should have stopped with him, but I could’nt see the use of
two dying where one would do, so I trudged on to Bathurst.
We were all taken to Windsor where we were as weak
as new born kittens for several days When we got round,
however, we gave the authorities some useful information
about the country.’
The narrator here rose to his feet and plunged his pot
into the bucket of rum, of which he took a long pull, and
then looked round with the air of a man who was fully
entitled by his exploits to be called the “ Captain of the
Gang.'’
The next story was told by Will Jones, and was as
follows:
JOHN DONAHUE AND HIS GANG.
Well, Newgate, you mentioned Webber, the bush-
ranger, in your yarn. I’ll tell you about his chief, John
Donahue, Esq., the king of the bush.
Donahue was only twenty when he arrived here, but
he was a second Napoleon. He was short, but there was no
waste about him—he was a model of muscle and bone. To
vault, run, jump, or hit a man under the jaw and floor him
senseless he hadn’t his equal. He was as plucky as a lion,
as strong as a horse, as lively as a squirrel, and as cunning
and as light-footed as a cat.
He was not long before he took to the bush. H©
often said he was never designed for a prisoner, and whilst
he lived he would be free. He made a song about himself
which his men would sing when safe and far enough away
in the bush. I learned it from Malmesley, Webber’s
mate ;
A life that is free as the bandits’ of old.
When Rome was the prey of the warriors bold,
Who knew how to buy gallant soldiers with gold,
Is the life full of danger
Of Jack, the bushranger,
Of brave Donahue !


If Ireland lies groaning, a hand at her throat,
Which foreigners have from the recreants bought.
Forget not the lessons our fathers have taught.
Though our Isle’s full of danger,
And held by the stranger,
Be brave and be true !
I’ve eft the old Island’s hospitable shores,
The land of the Emmets, the Tones, and the Moores ;
But Liberty o’er me her scalding tear pours,
And she points to the manger,
Where Hr was a stranger,
And perished for you.
Then hurl me to crime and brand me with shame,
But think not to baulk me, my spirit to tame,
For I’ll fight to the last in old Ireland’s name.
Though I be a bushranger,
You still are the stranger,
And I’m Donahue.
He soon got a gang around him, for his fame was told
by the shepherds watching their flocks, the convicts reaping
the corn, the road gangs at their work, the prisoners in the
barracks. His name was like a charm and the tales of his
courage were like the romances of the brave old knights.
He knew how to keep his men in discipline, and trained
them how to act in a body, how to fight single-handed, and
how to forage in small parties. He was like the eagle in
his flights ; seen here to-day, to-morrow vanished, nobody
knew where.
In a robbery on the highway, however, he was captured
and was taken to Sydney. At his trial he was found guilty
and sentenced to death.
The sentence was passed on him in a solemn manner,
but he only smiled and seemed as careless about his doom
as though he had been sentenced to Paradise.
On his way to the prison out of the dock, whilst his
guards were eyeing him with curiosity as a specimen of an
abandoned criminal, he made a bound, threw them aside,
and with the speed of an arrow made off.
Underwood and Macnamara were two who stood next
to him in reputation for wily pluck and desperate daring.
He joined with them and made them leaders, forming a
sort of triumvirate of authority. With fifteen others they


plundered and destroyed all they could come across near
Sydney and Parramatta. In little parties of three or four
they laid in wait for gentlemen on the highway, or knowing
them to be from home they would attack and plunder their
houses. In the avenues leading to the residences of rich
men they would order the returning master to bail-up and
deliver. They even attacked the toll-house and carried
off everything worth taking.
It was a habit of his to dress up in good holiday
clothes and walk through the streets of Sydney, sometimes
alone, and sometimes with his friends, as if he had a
charmed life and defied arrest. People who knew him
would run off to the authorities and give information as to
his whereabouts, but the moment the police were on the
alert he was no more to be found than a ghost. One day
he was heard of at Parramatta, three days later news
came to Sydney that he was at the head of his gang on the
Hunter River.
His tact and taking ways procured him a host of
friends among the settlers. They gave false information to
the police about him, and when they were dogging him
rather too hard the settlers stowed him away in their back
rooms, in the huts, or under their beds.
Of course Donahue did not forget these services, and
he was always putting profitable trade in their way. But
the authorities fell to this at last. An Act was passed
authorising the justices to issue warrants for searching the
houses of the settlers suspected. To make matters more
lively a proclamation was issued promising a reward, a free
pardon, and a cheap trip to England to any convict, and a
grant of land to any free person, who would lodge Donahue,
Macnamara, or Underwood in custody.
It seems the policemen wanted the reward. A few
days later they shot Macnamara, and took one of the gang,
Avho swung at the end of a government rope.
Donahue and his gang, a few days later, were surprised
by five policemen near Rabey They let go at each other,
and a stout fire was kept up for some time. The shots were
heard at a distance, and a party of settlers came up to help
the policemen, and for a time it was rather desperate work


nth Donahue’s men. He encouraged them on, however,
.nd they kept up their spirits until night came on, and then
hey succeeded in making their escape, Donahue carrying
>ff a wound from the encounter.
The authorities now put out their full strength and
sent detachments of the military to scour the country.
They established a military station at Longbottom. The
magistrate at Argyle, Lieut. Macalister, was one of the
officers who started to hunt the gang. He hit on a new
plan. Up to this they had attempted to follow Donahue
from place to place, but they might as well have tried to
run after a shooting star. He ordered the men under him
to keep as much as possible in one spot, keeping within a
limited circle where the bushrangers were likely to pay a
visit. His plan was to take Donahue by surprise.
They fixed on Bringelly as a likely spot. The mounted
police were ordered to keep about the locality and maintain
a strict watch.
One tine evening, at sundown, after the troopers had
been on the lookout for a fortnight, seven of them who had
just come back from a hard day’s riding in the bush, had
just unsaddled their horses, and were preparing to make all
snug for the night, when on a hill, winding down it, about
a mile oft', they saw three men on foot, one of them leading
a pack-horse. They recognised these men as a party of
Donahue’s gang.
Leaving two men to guard the camp, the police set out
on foot to attack the rangers. They were under the
command of Serjeant Hodgson. They went along carefully,
advancing slowly through the bush, for they knew the men
they had to tight.
The two parties recognised each other together, and
boldest and foremost of his men was seen Donahue.
“ Come on,” he shouted to the police, “ we’ve a warm
welcome for you,” and with that he tired. The police
returned the shot and the bushrangers posted themselves
behind the trees and kept pegging away at the attacking
party.


Donahue kept shouting to his men and he tired away
with a speed and determination that made the police
nervous. He bellowed :
Though I be a bushranger,
You still are the stranger,
And I’m Donahue.
“ Courage, lads ! We’ll show them our metal. Keep
it up 1 Don’t let it flag 1 Mark out the leaders. Make
sure of your aim. Shoot the dogs down ! Bravo, brave
boys. We’re only three, but we’re Donahues. We’ll beat
them ! We’re their match. Now keep at it. Don’t let
them scare you. They’re only paid shots. Look, they
dar’nt show themselves ! They’re a set of cowards. Fire,
lads, fire ! Let daylight into them. Touch them on the
raw ! Go at it, lads. Warm them, my pals ! Ah ”
Donahue fell dead, shot through the forehead and
neck. Muggleston, who had been an old soldier was among
the police. He was known as a good marksman, and he
quietly waited until he saw the brave Donahue’s head or
breast appear, and then fired his musket, which contained
two balls, both of which took effect.
They found a small pocket pistol on him. He had
made up his mind never to be captured alive and hang in
Sydney for the sport of the sight-seers and the glorification
of the police. He had intended to use the pistol to blow
his own brains out, rather than submit to that humiliation.
“ He was a pattern bushranger, and may we long keep
him in memory. He made war on the settlers because the
authorities had made war on him, as they make war on
us. Let’s drink a toast to the memory of the bravest of
bushrangers, Jack Donahue.”
The story had its effect on the gathering. They rose
to their feet and drank heartily.
“Jack Donahue,” they shouted together.
Then the bushranger who had told the story, gave out
the words, after which the gang sang together
We will still be bushrangers,
And shoot down the strangers,
We’re all Donahues.


A WONDERFUL INDUSTRY
->s-»l§= --
Fresh Food & lee Co
0 history of this colony would be complete if did not
refer to one who has done more good than, perhaps,
any other citizen who ever came here. We refer to the late
Mr. T. S. Mort. Unlike most men who only study them-
selves, he took altogether another line, and the more money
he made the more he spent over and for the good of the
country. Look to-day at the enormous business done in
frozen meat ; millions of carcases go yearly into the London
market ; yet the first idea was formulated by the gentleman
under notice, and it is to be regretted that his life should have
ended when his schemes were bearing fruit. They had taken
a long time to blossom, but to-day the colony reaps a great
advantage by the many results of his work, and amongst
these we must mention the N.S.W, Fresh Food and Ice Co.
If he had a pet child, this undoubtedly was it, and to-day
there is no sounder or better refrigerating company in the
world, and this is saying a great deal, yet it is quite true.
They deliver over 5000 gallons of country milk daily ; freeze


all the sheep that leave here for London ; sell butter by the
tons, and quantities of ice we should be afraid to mention,
and all they do they do well. No expense is spared, and
lately they have added the fish and game business to their
many other branches, and by aid of refrigeration, give us
English, New Zealand, and American goods equal to those
just out of the sea and rivers. They have depots in the
Royal Arcade, King-street, North Shore, Summer Hill ; and
their head works at Darling Harbour are one of the sights of
Sydney. Whatever the temperature outside you can always
be frozen there, and many who have paid these wonderful
works a visit, state there is no scene nor sight in any or all
of the colonies to equal them. Two sons of Mr. T. S. Mort,
assisted by Capt. Broomfield, another well known gentleman,
are the directors, and colonials feel proud that such works
exist in a new country, seeing, as we have before mentioned,
they can bear more than favourable comparison with those in
far older, and, perhaps, more favoured districts.
fsaeil ; {iu.b ibn


BLACK ANTS, GREY HAIRS, AND DEATH
ALIVE.
Bullethead was the next called upon. He com-
menced :
“ I shall not compete with Jones, he’s too good a
scholar for me. I’ll just give you a few cases of strange
discoveries of crime.
“ There were two men, partners on a farm not long
since, a little way from Maitland. Their names were
William Shea and Andrew Menzies. They got on well
together and were prosperous for some time. The sun and
the rains were kind to the crops and everything promised
to go along thriving.
But Shea was a bit of a miser and too greedy to be
satisfied with well-doing. One day he said to his partner,
“ Andrew, do you think the farm is good enough for two? ”
“ I do, Bill, and I am sure we’ll soon make our
fortunes.”
“ Well, I don’t. It’s hardly good enough just to live.
I don’t believe in hard work when I get old.”
“Well,” said Andrew, “you won’t have hard work
when you get old, you’ll be able to retire.”
“ Ivebeen thinking, Bill,” went on the partner, “ that
we’d better dissolve partnership. What do you want for
your share ? ”
“ More than you can give me, Bill.”
“ Aye, just now. But you know there’s plenty of land
to be had for a song, and you might even get a Government
grant if you tried. I could pay you for your share a little
later on, you know.”
Andrew Menzies burst into a laugh at his partner’s
cheek. Shea looked daggers at him and continued, “ Well,
do what you like, but I’ll have the farm.”
From that time Menzies was not seen among the
neighbours. He was a well-liked man and known about for
a sober, thrifty, industrious Scotchman. They soon missed
him, and after a bit began to enquire of Shea as to what had
become of him.


“ What liave you done with your partner, Shea I,r1 ,r
asked a neighbour, finding Shea at work with ins hoe.
Shea seemed a bit startled by the question and he
bent his head down and started work again before lie
answered.
“ He’s gone away.”
“ What has he gone away for ? ”
“ It’s no business of yours.”
“.Well, you needn’t bite my head off. We miss him,,
that’s all, and queer suspicions are about.”
“ What do you mean 1 ” he said nervously. “ What
suspicions are about ? ”
“ Well, lie might have been killed by the blacks, shot
by the bushrangers, or died suddenly. It’s not likely he
would leave a good farm like this.”
“ Whether it’s likely or not, that’s what he’s done.
See here 1 ” and he pulled out a paper which he showed to
the neighbour.
This paper was a deed with Andrew Menzies’ name on
it, stating that Menzies had sold his share of the farm to
Shea, and for which he had duly paid.
Shea now told this story far and wide. He said that
Menzies had got sick of Australia, and thought he could
better himself in the old country. He had sailed to England
and Shea had enabled him to go by buying him out.
The neighbor, however, who had first questioned Shea,,
had his suspicions aroused. He did not like Shea’s style of
answering his questions. There was a hesitation and ner-
vousness that had impressed him with the idea that Shea
knew more about Menzies’ absence than he liked to tell.
He went round among the neighbors and told them his
suspicions. At first they thought it was no business of
theirs, and whether or not there was not a tittle of evidence
of any foul play. What did it matter to them if Shea was
a bit nervous and colored up when he was asked about his
late partner.
The neighbor was persistent, however, and went to the
police. They, too, at first, were inclined to laugh at what
seemed hardly an excuse for suspicion. At length, however,
a search party was formed, headed by the police. They


hunted about the farm, in the buildings, and wherever they
thought it likely a murder would be committed, or a corpse
would be hidden, but they found nothing, not even the
slightest clue.
They were about giving the matter up, when Mr. Day,
one of the party, thought of the blacks. He engaged a few
of them to assist in the search.
Well, we all know what the blacks can do in the
tracking line when once they get on a scent.
They started in the tobacco paddock for that was the
place where Menzies and Shea had last been seen working
together, late in the evening—the very evening of the day
Shea had proposed to his partner a dissolution of partner-
ship.
The blacks, after a little searching, came to a stump
hole, when one of them suddenly stopped.
“ Look ! look I ” he said, and what had altogether
escaped the attention of the whites, before it was pointed
out, was now noticed by everybody. There were unmis-
takeable signs of the soil having been dug up and filled in
again.
“ You see ’em black ant fellow ? ” asked the black.
There was a regular tribe of them, going in and coming
out of the hole like an everlasting procession of Chinamen,
“ Them fellow got white fellow, eat him down there ! ”
“ There’s something there,” said Mr. Day, “ use your
spades.”
They dug the earth away, and sure enough they came
upon a corpse. The head had been pushed under the stump,
which had been partially left in the ground.
Though the body was falling to pieces and past recog-
nition, they knew the clothes belonged to Menzies.
“ And those gray hairs,” remarked Mr. Day, “ I’ll take
an oath they belong to our missing neighbor. I know they
are his by the length they grow on his forehead.”
There were other evidences, so that Menzies’ identity
was completely established.
They now made another search in the hut, and
found a tomahawk stained with blood, though it had
been scraped as clean as Shea could scrape it. But


the grey hairs brought the guilt right home to him. Just
where the wood entered the iron of the tomahawk, in that
part called the eye, a single grey hair was found , which, on
comparison, was seen to correspond exactly with the grey
hairs of the murdered man.
The case of John Purcell was tried in the Circuit
Court of Maitland about eighteen months afterwards. He
was charged with the murder of Joseph Palfrey at the
Rivulet in the Cassilis District.
Purcell had a wife, but not much like Ciesar’s. She
was what you may call a little flighty. Some women never
are satisfied with their homes, and the only thing they think
a husband is good for is to get her enough to eat and plenty
to show off in. They look to others for sport, and from all
accounts Mrs. Purcell was one of that kind. She fell in
love with Palfrey, and after the flirtation, jealousies, rows
at home and such like, she packed up and ran away from her
husband and children to the protecting arms of the other
man.
You might expect that Palfrey would soon disappear
after this, and he did. Nobody could tell where he had
gone to or what had become of him. But knowing that
Purcell’s wife had deserted her family and had yielded her-
self up to the missing man, the police came to the conclusion
that there had been foul play, and they arrested Purcell on
suspicion of murder, though they had no more than sus-
picion against him.
Whilst Purcell was in custody, a settler by the name
of Brady visited the place, which the crime and Purcell’s
arrest had left desolate. He had some sheep with him, and
was not a detective, but was simply looking out for a good
station, where he could graze his flock and become a pros-
perous squatter.
He had a dog with him, and when they were about a
hundred yards away from Purcell’s hut, Avhere there was a
water-hole which Brady wanted to examine for speculation’s
sake, the dog started scratching. He ordered the dog off
and saw a place where it was evident that a dog had been
before. There was the mark of a dog’s paw. Swarms of


For sundry spirituous liquors furnished for the
£ s.
d.
wake of Abel Death, and drank thereat
3 10
0
Six pounds of tobacco, pipes, and cigars ...
3 0
0
Total
£6 10
0
flies settled on the spot. He brushed them away but they
settled on the spot again. No matter how often he disturbed
these flies they would come back to the same place.
Brady had his suspicions awakened and fancied there
must be something underneath. He took his ramrod from
his gun and pushed it into a hole, down which the flies
seemed to crawl and from which they seemed to fly. When
he pulled the ramrod up it had the smell of the graveyard
on it ; and lie had no doubt now but that there was putrid
flesh below.
He dug a hole and found a dead body sewn up in a bag
at a depth of about three feet.
He gave information to the police, and they found in
this case, too, a tomahawk which told the tale. The toma-
hawk had been hidden away under a mattress of Purcell,s
bed. When it was discovered he said, “ I had some hopes
until the tomahawk was found, but I have none now.”
In exactly the same part, that is the eye, in which
Menzies’ grey hair was found, they found a few hairs of
auburn-brown, and that was the precise colour of Palfrey’s
hair. Both these men were executed.
But I don’t like continuing these yarns. They make me
too nervous for a bushranger. I’ll tell you about Abel
Death—you needn’t laugh—that was his real name.
Abel Death was something considerable of a toper. Of
course he couldn’t drink with us, but he was what business
folks call “ fond of a glass.” I’ll read you a bill that was
sent to him, and for non-payment of which he was summoned
to the court by Phillip Ryan the publican. I’ll explain it
afterwards. I copied it from the newspaper :
Abel Death, Farmer, Debtor to Phillip Ryan,
Publican.
In one of his boozing bouts, Abel, who then deserved
the cane, got a terrible attack of the blue devils, and it was
feared that Death would not live. His wife seeing his
frightful state sent off for the doctor, who had been a convict


and lived in a town about seven miles oft'. He came at
once, and never thinking for a moment that anybody in
New South Wales could have an attack of the delirium
tremens , he declared the case to be hopeless He said it
was a serious case of abscess of the stomach, cebro spinal
melingitis , enlargement of the liver, a touch on the kidneys,
brain fever, and a sprinkling of the measles. There were
also dangerous symptoms of sanguineous apoplexy, chronic
rheumatics, and sun stroke. “ Anyhow, Mrs. Death,” said
the doctor to the perplexed woman, “ you can make up your
mind for the worst. Your Death must die before another
morning comes. The best thing to do is to rub his stomach
with turpentine and syrup and let him die in peace.”
The doctor recommended the patient to be taken to a
barn close by, and to be there placed on a bed so as to let
him out of life easily.
Silently they bore him to his resting place, which was
expected to be his last, and then Mrs. Death set about
exciting herself as to the best way of doing honor to the
occasion.
“ Ah, Docther,” she said, “ it’s a wake I’ll give him,
bless his soul ! It’s not an Irishman out of the dear ould
counthry shall have a wake like his. All! pace to his ashes,
I’ll make him say that there never was the loikes of it in
the colony.”
They there and then invited the doctor to the “ foine
wake,” and at once sent news to the neighbors.
But there was a difficulty in the way. It was too far
to send to town for the drink and tobacco. The doctor got
out of the difficulty by writing an order for these essentials
to Kyan, and the messenger who took the order soon came
back with the stuff.
They made another visit to the patient. He was as
peaceful as a lamb, motionless and pale, with his eyes shut.
“ He cannot last long,” said the doctor, “ his eyes are
shut and his toes point upwards. He's dying very fast,
poor fellow.”
They went back to the house, and as one or two visitors
had arrived, they called the servants in, and determined to
start the wake at once. A bed was placed in the room and


that served as a substitute for the dead man. The pipes
and the grog were handed round, the howling and wailing
was indulged in, and throughout the night the drinking was
kept up. By morning some of the party had got a little
full, and others had dropped oft’ to sleep.
Whilst this had been going on, Mr. Death had been
sleeping as soundly as a bat. He woke up fresh as a daisy
and right as a lord. He got up and went to the house.
“ What the devil does all this mean 1 ” he shouted,
seeing the company asleep among the empty bottles.
His wife jumped up as white as a sheet and crossed
herself.
“ A ghost! the dead man’s ghost,” screamed the others,
looking for a way to run.
“ Have mercy on us ! ” faltered the doctor.
“ Holy speret,” exclaimed the wife, “haven’t we kept
up the wake long enough for ye.”
“ Wake be d d,” he exclaimed, lifting up the pokei’,
and smashing away at the empty bottles.
“ Shure and its the darlint himself. I know his little
ways. Have patience my hearty, we’ll explain the wake.”
And they did ; but Death refused to pay the bill for
it. The court decided that the doctor should pay it as he
had ordered it of Ryan. ‘lt was ’“ A shot ” shouted
the Captain rising to his feet. The rest followed, and in
less than a minute the whole party had cleared into the
bush, leaving Newgate to remove the evidences of their
entertainment.


MURDER WILL OUT;
THE SMALE WHITE TI^VTTID-
“ him, and I’ll look after the woman. See he’s
Jj gone into the tavern ; look sharp and make him your
prisoner, and I’ll see to the woman. And you, Jack, go for
the nearest doctor as quickly as your legs will carry you.”
These words were spoken by a police officer to two
constables, who hastened off to do his bidding.
As soon as Dr. Barnley, whose residence was in George
Street, near the Post Office, had arrived, he quickly made an
examination of what he declared at once to be the victim
of murder.
“ Her throat is cut from ear to ear,” he said, “ and
whoever has committed the deed is left-handed. She was
first stunned by a blow on the head with some heavy instru-
ment—a loaded cane or something of that kind.”
“ Here is the stick,” said a police officer.
“ Let me see it. Yes, the fellow is left-handed beyond a
doubt. Do you see these blood marks, made by the fingers
and thumb ? ” he asked.
“Yes was the reply; “but gracious me, that can
hardly be a man’s hand, my left hand would make two of
those I and he held his hand over the stains by way of
comparison.
“It is indeed a small hand, but what is essential
now is to observe that the finger stains and thumb mark
could only be made by grasping it in the left hand of the
murderer,” said Dr. Barnley.
The body was removed to a cottage close by, and as
the little crowd entered the door, the constable, who had
gone to a tavern nearly opposite, called his superior officer
aside and said rapidly


“ He’s in a tit; let the doctor come at once.”
The doctor was soon in the presence of a slightly built
and prepossessing young man who was leaning back in a
chair, pale, unconscious and death-like.
“ Providence has spared the hangman his job,” said
the doctor after a brief examination. “The scoundrel is
dead.”
“ Look at his left hand,” said the landlord, speaking to-
the doctor.
“ As I said ; lie has been using some sharp instrument
in that hand and has severely cut his fingers. Gad he
must have been clumsy; they’re almost cut to the bone.”
“Does he stay here?” asked the officer.
“No,” replied the landlord. “Well, that is, he stays
here sometimes, but not regular.”
“ You know him then?”
“I do, and he’s of a good family. Him and his
brother ”
“ Never mind about his brother : what is he ? ”
“ Well, I was saying, lie came from England with Ids
brother to find his sister who was transported here not very
long since.”
“ I see. Crime in the family blood. Did he find the-
sister ? ”
“Yes he did ; about a month since.”
“Have you seen her?”
“ No ; he only to'd me he had found her.”
“ Did he tell you where she was?”
“ She was assigned to Mr. Cureton before he died, and
lias since been servant to his widow.”
“ And where is the brother? ”
“ Well, I expect him here any day. He has been to-
Bathurst, but he (pointing to the deceased man) got a letter
the other day saying he was to be back very soon, as he was
very anxious to see his sister.”
“ For further information we had better wait until the
brother comes,” said the officer, noting down such items as


lie had already gathered, after which the startled company
departed, leaving the landlord and his family to see to the
dead.
The next day a blood-stained razor was found between
the scene of the murder (which was in Pitt-street, just
opposite the spot whereon have since been erected Singer’s
Sewing Machine Depot, and the tailoring establishment of
Summerfield and Co.) and the tavern. There could be no
doubt but with that instrument the horrible murder had
been committed.
At the inquest Mrs. Cureton deposed that the victim
of the crime had been in the service of her late husband and
herself for about twelve months, it might be a little more
The deceased was sober, and, as far as she knew, had con-
ducted herself respectably. Her brother came to her house
four or five weeks back to make enquiries about deceased.
Did not say that he was her brother. He said he had
known her for a considerable time in Ireland, before she
was sent out. He appeared to take great interest in her.
Did not give her permission to go out with him on the
night of the murder. The brother appeared a man of
means. The deceased had a violent temper, and appeared
to quarrel with her brother at times. She had left them
together on the night of the murder, whilst she paid a visit
to some friends at Brickfield Hill (near where Anthony
Hordern’s Emporium now is.) They had a quarrel about
something before she left. She did not pay any attention
to it, nor trouble herself what it was about, as she thought
it was only a lover’s quarrel, and no business of hers. By
his manner and conversation she formed the opinion that
he was her lover. The deceased never told her that he Avas
her brother, but used to laugh and blush Avhen taxed Avith
being fond of him. Did not know of the murder till eaidy
the next morning, when the police called to make inquiries.
Could not say what motive the murderer had in committing
the crime. The deceased was transported for being one
among a band of conspirators in Ireland, She had re-
peatedly said that her lover had been shot as a rebel, and
that she used to attend secret meetings dressed up as a
man.


After hearing the evidence of the constables, the
doctor, and the landlord, a verdict of wilful murder was
recorded against the deceased brother. At the inquest held
afterwards, the verdict given was that the brother had died
through “ visitation of God.'’
The following day, Mr. Malhady, the brother of the
deceased returned to Sydney. Before his arrival he had
learned the particulars of the terrible tragedy, and he at
once'commenced to make enquiries as to its cause. He
could find no reasons in his own mind sufficiently strong to
account for it, and he could not for a moment believe that
his brother would perpetrate such a deed. He went to the
police, and showed them the following letter which lie
had received at Bathurst: —
“ My dear brother Dan,
I have at last succeeded in finding our darling Cathleen,
bearing the name she was known by among the patriots. She has
borne up well under her sufferings and expatriation, and she is as
true to the dear old land and its unhappy children as ever. If any-
thing she is more beautiful, sorrow having added dignity to her
handsome face.
She is in the service of Mrs. Cureton, a woman she does not
like, though from what reasons I cannot divine, as the lady is
always very courteous and amiable to me, and appears to appreciate
my sister as she deserves. She only explains it by an instinctive
repulsion to her mistress, though I tell her this may arise from no
other cause than her servitude to her. I advise her to subdue her
proud spirit a little, until we can do something for her.
She is never tired of talking about the glorious and exciting
times that brought her such ruin, though she never expresses a word
of regret for the past. She is dying, she says, to see you, and like a
good, kind brother, as I know you are, you will come to your sister
as soon as ever your business will allow.
My heart has been troubling me very much of late, and I
sometimes fear —nonsense ! I fear nothing.
With fondest love from Cathleen and myself,
Your affectionate brother,
Patrick.”
The police officer handed Mr. Malhady the letter back,
after reading it, and said, “It is not the first case of the
kind.”
“ How ? What do you mean ? ”


“ Love and tenderness when things are smooth. Hate
and murder when the temper is in a storm,” was the reply
of the officer, who tried to assume a wise and philosophic
air.
“ No, no. "You are mistaken. I tell you my brother
was one of the mildest tempered men in the world,” said
Mr. Malhady, earnestly.
“So are most men until they are put out. So is the
tamed lion in the cage, until the keeper once too often puts
his head in its jaws.”
“ But you did not know him, and I did. I know his
affection for her ; her affection for him. It is impossible he
would murder her. As sure as the heavens are above us,
there has been foul play at work.”
The officer smiled.
“ 1 can easily understand your feelings,” he said kindly.
“ Your brother and sister are dead, and you do not wish a
stain to rest on their memory. But in the eyes of the law,
which must not turn from its course for pity’s sake, and
which must mount superior to blood-relationship and affec-
tions, the evidence condemns your brother, and if Providence
had not slain him, the law would have hanged him.”
“It was only circumstantial evidence,” Mr. Malhady
vehemently exclaimed. “He was not seen to commit the
murder.”
“ But he was seen to leave the victim at the approach
of the police. That was not the conduct of an innocent
man.”
Mr, Malhady momentarily recoiled at this blow, but
speedily recovering himself, he said, “ His conduct was
strange, but he might have been able to account for it had
he lived.”
“ Dead or alive, the suspicion of guilt would be equally
strong against the man who ran away from the scene of a
crime at the approach of the officers of justice.”
“ I admit itbut suspicion is not proof.”
“AVell, his letter is no disproof, for, you know, actions
speak louder than words.”
“ And there are actions that speak.”
The officer again smiled.


“ You say, or the evidence showed, that my sister’s
throat was cut by some left-handed person ? ”
“ Yes.”
“ Well, my brother was not left-handed.”
“ He might not have been, and yet have used Ids left
hand to throw us off the scent.”
“ But my brother would not be likely to use a stick in
his left hand.”
“ Why not 1 He had only a woman to kill.”
“ But all that shows premeditation, and the assumption
is that the murder was the result of a hot quarrel, when
premeditation would be impossible.”
“ You forget he had quarrelled with her more than
■once, and he may have premeditated his crime after a
former quarrel. Nay, the quarrel prior to the deed may
have been precipitated by him so as to furnish the pretext.”
“ But there is another point winch has been over-
looked.”
“ What is that ? ”
“ The doctor, in his evidence, gives it as his opinion
that the blow was struck with the stick before my sister’s
throat was cut.”
“ Yes.”
“ Only one blow was struck ? ”
“ Correct, according to evidence.”
“ Then the blow being struck before the throat was
■cut, how came the finger blood-stains upon the smaller end
■of the stick, which must have been seized to wield the blow
before blood was shed ? ”
“ That point,” said the officer, looking Mr. Malhady in
the face as though proud of the impregnability of the law,
“ that point was by no means overlooked, but the difficulty
you mention is exactly the same, whoever committed the
■deed. Supposing someone else murdered your sister, how
•do you account for the fact you have pointed out ? ”
“ The murderer might have used his weapon in a
former crime, when his hands were red with the blood of
his victim.”
“ But you forget that the weapon, as you call it, was
recognised as your brother’s.”


“ Oh, heavens ! ” exclaimed Mr. Malhady, fairly-
staggering at these words. Then recovering, as by the
remembrance of a conclusive fact, exclaimed, “ No ! no, I
tell you My brother did not murder her. The hand that
used my brother’s stick was not his! no, not his—it was
too small.”
“ Then who’s was it ? ”
“ I know not; it has yet to be discovered, and as I see
no hope from your services, if heaven but aids me, I, I
alone, will be the avenger of my sister’s and my brother’s
deaths,” and he took up his hat and left the officer to attend
to his customary duties.
He next paid a visit to Mrs. Cureton, with a view of
gathering all the particulars he could about his sister’s
habits, and his brother’s conduct towards her. She re-
ceived him with the utmost courtesy and candour, and
appeared perfectly at ease in his presence. The sympathy
she expressed for him in his painful bereavement, the words
of condolence, md the advice of philosophic resignation,
caused Mr. Malhady’s heart to go out towards her,
“ I, too,” she said, during their conversation, “ have
had grave doubts about the guilt imputed to your brother.
From what I saw of him he was too gentle and forgiving in
his disposition to be a murderer of anyone, and it seems,
now that I have had time to think over it, absolutely
impossible that he should have murdered his own sister.”
“ Oh, Mrs. Cureton,” Mr. Malhady said warmly, “ I
cannot tell you how your words comfort me. Everybody
laughs at me when I say that my brother was innocent.
You are the tirst soul that has made me sure of my sanity.
My hopes gain strength a thousand-fold to hear you speak
in that way.”
“ You see women are more intuitive than men, Mr.
Malhady. Though they cannot prove what they feel, there
is something that convinces them that the hard logic of
men and of circumstances is very often false.”
“ But h ave you any suspicions as to who could possibly
have any motive in causing my sister’s death 1 ”


“ I have often examined myself this last few clays on
that point,” she said, reflectively, “ but I must confess I am
unable to tix my suspicions on anyone.”
“ Had my sister any admirers—any lovers?”
“You can scarcely ask such a question without antici-
pating my answer. Your sister was altogether too hand-
some, and too lady-like, to escape admiration.”
“ But was there any one in particular—any lover in
the affair do you think ? ”
“ I cannot say that there was. She would not permit
any advances, or she might h >ve married long ago.”
“No doubt; but can you think of any one who seemed
to be particularly fond of her ? ”
“You ask me a serious question.”
“ I know ; and I expect a serious answer.”
“ You know that to answer you is at once to point out
a person you will immediately suspect, and who may be
perfectly innocent.”
“ True ; but I give you my word of honour that I will
suspect no one until I have some proofs to ground suspicion
upon.”
“ If you can really be so generous and self-controlled, I
will grant you the information you seek. Can you give me
the honour of your company to-morrow evening ? ”
“ I can do myself the honour to accept your invitation.”
“ Then,” she said, politely rising, “ I shall expect you
to-morrow night, and you shall meet an admirer of your
murdered sister, who would only have been too happy to
have become her husband.”
Mr. Malhady rose and walked towards the door, and
as he turned to thank her, she gracefully extended her hand,
which he took in Ins, with a strange sense of fascination
overcoming him. He stammered the usual parting courtesies
and withdrew, somewhat flurried.
The following day he went over the evidence of the
two inquests, thought over his plans like a detective, and
gave himself short lectures on discipline, self-restraint, and
placidity of countenance under strong fires of guilt’s dis-


covery, and unexpected evidence. The day seemed very
long to him, and, as evening approached, he became more
and more restive.
At the appointed time he was at the gate of 'Mrs*
Cureton’s residence. He heard a gentleman within speaking
in a loud and excited manner. He felt his heart throb as
lie paused to listen.
“ No, madam,” he heard someone saying, “ you needn’t
flatter yourself that I am in your power. I can ruin you
before you can ruin me. Recollect that if you know a few
of my secrets, I also know a few of yours.”
“ Now, Harry, don’t be unjust. I tell you that you
alone were the cause of his death.”
“ And her death, too,” Mr. Malhady added to himself.
Then with impetuous impatience, which showed how little
he had learned by his mental lectures during the day, he
knocked loudly at the door, and tried to compose his
features.
The voices at once were hushed, and Mrs. Curetou
herself opened the door, and ushered Mr. Malhady into a
cosy apartment.
“ Mr. Malhady, Captain Leyley,” she said, introducing
Mr. Malhady to a tall and soldierly looking young officer.
Captain Leyley could not be called handsome, though
many of the fair sex would have unhesitatingly described
him as good-looking. His eyes were penetrating and stern,
his mouth somewhat coai’se, his nose aquiline, his forehead
broad and receding, and his hair dark brown and inclined to
be curly.
“He looks cruel, tyrannical, and passionate,” Mr.
Malhady said to himself, after inspecting him keenly.
“Heis an animal. By all that’s holy, too, lie’s got small
hands!”
Had he obeyed the impulse of that moment he would
have rushed at the throat of the man, and have strangled
him on the spot. But he controlled himself, and tried to
make himself agreeable. But his eyes throughout the
evening were ever returning to those small white hands of
the officer.


“ I hope you will pardon me, sir,” said Mr. Malhady,
summoning an effort to manage his voice, “ but I am
informed that you were more than partially fond of my
sister ! ”
“ I pardon you, certainly, but I can scarcely say so
much of those who have evidently been making themselves
busy about my affairs.”
“ I know I tread on delicate ground, but my grief and
anxiety must be my excuse.”
“What motive can you have for asking or insinuating
such a question ? ”
“My doubts ! My hopes ! ”
“What doubts, and what hopes?”
“My doubts of the justice of the verdict against my
brother ; my hopes that I shall yet discover my sister’s
murderer.”
“If you go on at that rate I shall not paTdon you,”
said the Captain, with a scornful smile, “ I am not the
uncle of Hamlet, that you should try the effect of the play
on me.”
“ I do not mean to be offensive,” said Mr. Malhady,
taking a mental note of the Captain’s words, “ but you can
surely have no serious objection to stating whether or no
you had any attachment to my sister.”
“ Well, Mr. Malhady, I can frankly state, if that be
any relief to you, that I not only admired, but greatly
respected your sister.”
“ Thank you. When did you see her last ? ”
“ On the night of the murder.”
“On the night of the murder ! Where ? ”
“ Now come ! I am not in the witness box, recollect.”
“No, but—” Mr. Malhady checked himself, “Your
answer may be of some service to me,” he added, less
excitedly, “ and need not necessarily reflect the slightest
suspicion on you.”
“How very kind you are, Mr. Malhady. I should take
you for a priest if you only appeared as willing to give
absolution as to hear a confession,” said the captain sarcas-
tically.


“Do not gratify my anxious curiosity if you have any
objection,” was Mr. Malhady’s response.
“ As to that, I have no objection in the shape of fear;
that you may rest easy about, but I have a decided objection
to this ungentlemanly cross-questioning.”
“All villains have,” thought Mr. Malhady.
“However, if it will put an end to your impertinence,
I have no objection to telling you that I saw your sister in
your brother’s company on the very spot where she was
murdered a few minutes before the crime was committed.
Will that satisfy you ? ”
“ Why did you not state this at the inquest?”
“ There was no need to mix myself up in the affair.
But I have done. I will only add this—that if I had known
the fate in store for your sister, I should have done all in
my power to avert it, and I have answered your questions
because T loved your sister, not because I desired to remove
or justify the insult of possible suspicion your self-imposed
examination implies.”
“ You are not quarreling, gentlemen?” said Mrs Cure-
ton, entering.
“ Ho, Mrs. Cureton,” replied the captain, “ but I would
like you to tell Mr. Malhady that I consented to meet him
here this evening out of respect to the memory of his
unfortunate sister.”
“ I cannot tell him that,” she replied with a forced
laugh, “because you gave me to understand that you came
to have the pleasure of my society.”
The young officer gave her an angry look, and then
commenced to turn over the leaves of a book he had taken
up from the table.
Mr. Malhady felt very uncomfortable in the captain’s
presence after this, and a little later he rose to depart.
Mrs. Cureton followed him to the gate as he went out.
“ I could not ask you in his presence,” she said, “ but
I may presume to do so now. What are your impressions
of Captain Leyley ? ”
“ Hot very favourable,” Mr. Malhady replied.
“Hois a strange man,” said Mrs. Cureton. “Heis a
man I have failed to fathom.”


“ I heard you accuse him of being the cause of my
brother’s death. What was his reply ? ”
“I ! What did you hear 1 ” she asked in a startled tone.
Then suddenly recollecting herself she added, “ Oh, yes, that
was just as you arrived. I did not think you overheard us.”
“It was by accident. But what did he reply ? ”
“ He denied it.”
“ He is guilty, I feel convinced.”
“You remember your word of honor?”
“Yes, but he has admitted that he was on the spot a
few minutes before the murder, and that he saw my poor
unfortunate sister there and then. And have you ever
noticed how small his hands are ? ”
“ They are astonishingly small for so fine a man.”
“ These are grounds enough for suspicion. I have kept
my word of honor, and,” he said, lowering his voice, “ I sus-
pect him.”
“ I ask you only to remember that he is my friend
and that you do not jump too hastily to conclusions in you,
present state of mind. When you have anything like
proofs, then, if he were my brother, my husband, I should
say, let justice take its course.”
“ I promise you to keep my suspicions to myself until
I gather some evidence of a conclusive kind,” he replied.
“ In the meantime I can only express my deepest thanks to
you.”
“You are quite welcome. When shall I see you again?”
“As soon as you will permit me that pleasure.”
“ Then I give you an open invitation. Call whenever
you can and whenever you have nobody better to see, or
nothing better to do,” and she offered him her hand. As he
took it his frame again thrilled with a nervous emotion, and
that night he dreamt of her as a guiding angel taking him
lovingly to his sister’s murderer and bidding him take
revenge.
Time wore on and he could gain nothing further. His
visits to Mrs. Cureton grew more and more frequent, and at
length he knew that he was in love with her. “ I agree
with my brother’s estimate of her character,” he said. “ She
is a just and good woman ” The more he consulted his


feelings, the more he found that his love for Mrs. Cu reton,
and his hatred for Captain Leyley grew in inverse ratio.
One day after a pleasant drive together, she told him much
of her past life and of her present circumstances. He
deeply sympathised with her, for he was easily moved to
compassion.
“ From the first,” she said, “Captain Leyley has perse-
cuted me. He professed love whilst my husband was yet
living, and since his deatli he has made life a perfect misery
to me I hate the man, yet he persists in proposing mar-
riage, and I sometimes feel half inclined to accept his offers
just to get rid of his annoying importunities.”
“ Cannot he take No for an answer?”
Mrs. Cureton gave a sweet laugh, and looked into Mr.
Malhady’s eyes.
“He is not like you,” she said, “ I should be afraid to
say half a ‘ No ’ to you, lest you should take me seriously.”
Mr. Malhady was transported with mingled hope and
joy at this frank avowal of more than respect for him.
“ Ah,” she continued, “If that horrid man would only
go away, only leave me alone, or—” and she looked
lovingly at him as she finished, “ that I had someone to pro-
tect me from his insults.”
“ May I be that>protector,Kate ?” he asked, taking her
hand in his.
She did not answer, but she threw her arms round his
neck, and fell to weeping.
We will not weary the reader with the particulars of
their courtship, suffice it to say that a little later and they
were seated at their table as man and wife. The Captain’s
visits were forbidden, and Mr. Malhady almost forgot the
task he had imposed upon himself in the abundance of his
happiness.
One morning they received news that the Captain had
been seriously wounded in an encounter with bushrangers.
“ Let me go and see him, dear,” Mrs. Malhady said to her
husband.
He was taken aback with this request, and peremptori.y
refused it.


That night as they sat at tea, Mr. Malhady said, “ I
never noticed before that you are left handed, Kate.” Sh*
coloured, but continued cutting the bread with her left
hand.
A knock was heard at the door, and a minute later Mr.
Malhady was talking with a policeman in an adjoining room.
“ I thought you would like to know, sir,” the constable
said, “ that the police have had suspicions created by some
words of Captain Leyley. He is raving about your sister,
and keeps repeating the word ‘ murder.’ What is more we
have found one of his coats with blood on it—finger marks
that correspond, so far as size and such like is concerned, to
those on your brother’s stick.”
“Then you suspect the Captain of ? ”
“ Well, we conclude he knows something about the
matter, sir, and we should like to see you at the office in the
morning.”
“ Thank you. I shall be sure to call round.”
When Mrs. Malhady heard this she became unaccount-
ably agitated. She begged her husband to let matters rest,
and to refrain from going to the police the next morning
for her sake. When he refused to yield to her wishes, she
fainted and was ill the remainder of the night. But Mr.
Malhady was firm in his resolve, and on rhe following morn-
ing duly kept his word to the policeman.
“ How is the Captain this morning ? ” he asked.
“ Dead.”
“ Dead ! ”
“ Yes, and this is his dying confession.”
Mr. Malhady took the paper offered to him and read:—
“If she had been true to me, and had kept her pro-
mise she made before her husband died, I should not have
made this confession. But Mrs. Malhady has been shame-
lessly false, not only to me but to those her cunning and
her charms have enabled her to captivate. She is a woman
who knows her power and does not scruple to use it on the
unwary. I was fool enough to believe that she doted on
me whilst her husband was at her side, and she has repeat-
edly since then told me that she hastened his death in order
that there might be no obstacle in the way of our love. She


was designing, crafty, and cruel, and under the guise of
generosity and candour, she concealed the schemes of a
wicked woman. When I learned the contrast between her
character and the character of the unfortunate Cathleen, I
could not help discounting her in favour of her victim ; yes,
her victim, for she was Cathleen's murderess. I fell in love
with Cathleen, but I was afraid of Mrs. Cureton, her power
over me was so great, and Cathleen was so indifferent to any
advances, that I kept my affections to myself for a long
time. At length I found a way to blunt my feelings.
Cathleen’s brother made his appearance on the scene.
Neither Mrs. Cureton nor myself knew that he was her
brother, and they were so fond of each other that we took
them for lovers. Mrs. Cureton, who could never allow a
good opportunity to pass, at once set her fascinations to
work upon Patrick Malhady. She thought him a good
catch, as he was wealthy and of a good family. I became
as nothing in her eyes in comparison with him. But her
fascinations appeared unavailing, and she became terribly
jealous of Cathleen. ‘The devil loves her,’ she said to me
‘ and I’ll make her repent it.’ On the night of the murder
she permitted Cathleen to accompany her brother for a walk,
but immediately followed them. I met her, and seeing her
state of mind accompanied her to within a few paces of the
scene of fhe tragedy. She told me she intended to murder her
rival—the rival who had weakened my affections, and who was
now taking her latest lover from her. I told her she was
mad, and protested against such an exhibition of weakness
and temper. I did not believe for a moment she was sincere
and really meant to dispatch the young lady. I told her if
she did not come with me I would never see her again, and
I left her thinking she would follow me. Soon after she
overtook me in a great state of excitement. She said, ‘ I
did it.’ ‘What?’l asked. ‘I have murdered her.’ She
then told me that making a noise the brother left his sister
to ascertain its cause. She opened the razor she had con-
cealed, and in her excitement at the time she cut her left
hand. She then seized his stick, and running to Cathleen
gave her a heavy blow on the head which caused her to fall
She then hastily cut Cathleen’s throat before Mr. Malhady


could prevent her. He grabbed at the razor and cut his
hand severely before he succeeded in taking the weapon
from her. She hastened to make her escape, and after a
little he followed her, but feeling death, as he ran down
Market Street, he dropped the razor and only just managed
to reach the hotel before he expired from the effects of
the shock. Mrs. Cureton’s hands were blood-stained when
she overtook me and she stained ray coat where she touched
me. She arranged next day with some friends at Brickfield
Hill to prove an alibi. Her power over me was so great,
I was too big a coward to move in the matter.”
Mr. Malhady hastened home with strange emotions at
his heart, and horrible resolutions in his head. As he
neared his door he saw a crowd around it.
“What has happened?” he asked on coming up.
“We are very sorry for you, sir,” was the reply, “but
your wife has shot herself.”


THE TRAGEDY
THE TJTTTTA.T OH A.X, GOUSIIT-
GREAT excitement prevailed among all classes at the
unexpected and unaccountable disappearance of Mrs.
Daniels, a lady who had newly arrived in the colony with
her husband, a gentleman in the service of the Government.
Mr. Daniels was almost beside himself in his terrible
suspense, for he knew that only a serious accident or the
wickedness of others could enforce the absence of his wife
from her home. When last he saw her she was in cheei'ful
spirits, and her health, which had been so delicate in
England, had become almost robust during her brief
inurement in the sunny clime of Australia. There were
no private reasons that he could think of, no griefs, loves,
nor jealousies, nor domestic unhappiness of any kind
sufficient to account for any voluntary desertion. In his
suspense he feared everything. She might be drowned,
shot, carried away, or smitten with some fell malady which
had robbed her of her senses and placed her at the mercy of
unsympathetic strangers. After a day or so had passed he
offered a large reward to whoever should tender information
as to her whereabouts and condition. At that time the
police and criminal hunters of all kinds generally waited
until the reward was advertised before they set out after
their “game,” as they called the objects of their search.
About noon the next day a man called James Odlow,
but who was better known to the convicts, bushrangers and
defaulters of a’l kinds as “Jimie, the Rope-or-bullet,” on
account of the number of absconders he had either shot or
secured for the gallows, called on Mr. Daniels to make
some enquir es before starting on the “ hunt.” As Mr.
Daniels knew him well by reputation as a shrewd and
successful detective, who stopped before no danger nor


feared the most desperate encounter, he told him at once
that if he was successful in the speedy discovery of his wife
he would double the reward he had offered.
“Dead or alive?” asked the business-like Jimie.
Mr. Daniels did not like the question, for he loved his
wife too well to think of the possibility of her death without
a shudder.
“ Yes,” he said, after heaving a prolonged sigh ; “ dead
or alive.”
“ Well, you won’t mind answering me a few questions.
The first thing is to get a clue. I have never seen your
wife. I suppose you can give me a correct description of
her as she was when —let me see, she left the house of
her own accord ?”
“Yes, she left of her own accord.”
“Well, describe her as she was last seen, and tell me
on what business she left. I only ask these questions to
give me an idea where to start, not from idle curiosity.”
“ I understand. She left the house about four o’clock
in the afternoon on Tuesday last to visit several friends,
and she left the last people she called upon,—here are the
names of the people she visited,” handing him a written
list, —“about eight o’clock the same evening. If you will
carefully examine this portrait painting you will recognise
her anywhere. It was painted just before we left England,
and in that dress she left my house.”
“ I see. Is the colouring correct ?—the bonnet, the
cape, the bodice and the dress ?”
“It is correct in every particular, excepting her face,
which is now fuller and not so pale.”
“Was she good friends with all these people?” Mr.
Cadlow asked, pointing to the list of names in his hand.
“ From all I know she was on the best of terms with
them.”
“ And you and her ?”
“ She was all I could wish to me as a wife.”
“ No quarrels ?”
“ None.”
“ No secrets ?”
“ None that I know of.”


“ Any that you suspect ?”
“ None.”
“ Any sickness, or low spirits ?”
“ She had been very ill before her marriage for some
time, but since then her health has rapidly recovered, and
on Tuesday last she appeared to be full of life and in the
best of health.”
“ Her last visit was to Lang’s Place on Surry Hills
(close to Kidman’s large grocery warehouse in Oxford-street).
It was a pretty long distance to come alone after eight
o’clock.”
“ Yes ; but she has often done it before, and she was
too independent to accept an escort.”
“ Now, have you any enemies ?”
“ I may have several.”
“ But any particular ones? Any that would be likely
to inju’e your wife to have revenge on you ?”
“ I cannot suspect anyone who would be so dastardly a
coward.”
“ Do you suspect anyone of having fallen in love with
your wife ?”
“ No.”
“Had she any money on her when she went out?”
“ No.”
“ Humph ! Had she a quarrel with any one of the
servants ?”
“No.”
“ Did she know anybody here that she knew before she
left England ?”
“ Not many, and they are friends.”
“There was neither cause to quarrel, nor jealousy
between you with any of them ?”
“Not the slightest.”
“ Did any of the convicts have a down on her ?”
“ Not to my knowledge.”
“ Did any of them know her in England ?”
“ She has not seen anyone that knew her before we were
married.”
“ But have you any reason to believe that she knew any
of the convicts before they were transported ?”


“Yes, her cousin. But he is no longer in Sydney so far
as I have been able to gather from many enquiries ?”
“ Where is he ?”
“Up the country. He is a ticket-of-leave man.”
“ What is his name?”
“ George Milshaw.”
“ Milshaw! Milshaw. I don’t know him. How old
is he ?”
“ About my age.”
“ How does he look ?”
“He used to be very good looking. I can’t say what
he is like now.”
“ Tell me all you know about him. What was he sent
out for ? What were his feelings towards your wife? Was
he ever in love with her? Had he any reasons to fear her,
hate her, or put her out of the way ?”
Mr. Daniels colored deeply as he listened to these
questions. His heart palpitated violently and a mist seemed
to gather about his eyes. It was evident that the detective
was probing at a wound.
“ Long ago,” he said in a quivering voice, “ my wife
was exceedingly fond of her cousin, and would have married
him, if his crimes had not exposed his real character.”
The detective gave a grunt of satisfaction. Mr. Daniels
o o
proceeded :
“My wife and her sister were left orphans at an early
age, and their uncle, the father of George Milshaw, was
appointed their guardian. The wealth of their father was
willed equally to them, but in the event of the death of either,
the remaining daughter was to become its sole possessor.
In the event of both dying the money was to go to his
brother, my wife’s uncle. George Milshaw was an only son
and therefore the heir to his wealth in the event of his
cousins’ and his father’s deaths. He had always great
influence on the two young ladies, not only on account of
his fine handsome appearance, but because of his great
abilities, excellent conversational powers, and his reputation
for piety. After studying for the law, he went in for holy
orders, and was about to become a clergyman when his
villainies were found out. He induced both his cousins to


insure their lives and soon after the eldest sickened, and
ftiter lingering for some time she Avasted away and died
almost a skeleton. George Milshaw’s attentions to thi&
cousin during her sickness were unremitting and affectionate-
in the extreme, so much so that the younger sister thought
him the best and kindest man in the worM. Then it came
her turn to be seized with the same sickness. She then
tasted the kindness of her cousin as it was shown to herself.
In the invigorating summer sun he walked by her side; his
sympathy was poured into her ears as they stood together on
the beach listening to the monotonous waves as they rolled
towards them, and spent themselves at their feet; his sooth-
ing voice administered consolation and hope in the shady
woodlands of her childhood’s home ; his kindness made her
sick chamber cheerful ; his forethought anticipated her
slightest wish. She had respected him, admired him, liked
him before ; now she admitted she loved him. She made
him a voluntary promise that she would become his wife if
she did not die of her illness. Whether he had any real
affection for her or not I cannot say, but I know that she
made a lucky escape from his fatal poAver. The friend of
many of the leading men in the word of letters, a critic, a
poet, a philanthropist and a welcome guest at many an
aristocratic gathering, he had chosen a dangerous career,
and at length was detected in it. He was suspected of
having caused the death of several friends and relatives by
slow poisoning, for the sake of their insurance money, and
the proof was brought home to him with the concurrent
evidence of his crime of forgery. ?uch was his power over
others, however, that even in Newgate he Avas visited by
Lamb and Thomas Hood, and the death sentence Avas trans-
muted to transportation for the term of his natural life.”
Mr. Cadlow smiled when Mr. Daniels had finished and
he said with a knowing look, “Your wife’s cousin is villain
enough for anything.”
“ But he can have no object now in injuring my wife.”
“ I didn’t take you to be so simple, Mr. Daniels,” the
detective said, “He has been euchred once in his life, and
you have taken his right boAver ; he’s the very man ta
play the joker if he has got it.”


“ But he is away.”
“ That we have to see. I don’t suppose he annihilated
the road behind him when he went away, and Sydney’s just
in the same spot.”
After getting a few more particulars Mr. Cadlow left
Mr. Daniels, satisfied he had got a clue.
He was working out his plans in his mind as he walked
down George-street when he met a well-known character
He stopped her.
“ Well Betty, have you reformed yet ?” he asked.
“ Yes, Jimie the Rope-or-bullet, I’ve turned respectable
woman for a bit anyway.”
“ Living on the rocks yet ?”
“ No. I’ve got a bit higher this week.”
“ Who’s got the shanty now ?”
“ I don’t know, and I don’t care. He’s paid me a
■quarter’s rent in advance and given me £2O to clear out and
not trouble him till the quarter’s up, and that satisfies me.’
“ Humph. He’s a man then ?”
“ Ha, ha, ha ! Didn’t I say ‘ him V ‘ Him ’ isn’t a she
is it 1 He’s a man of the right sort too.”
“ Any girls there now?”
“ What do you take me for ?” the old woman said
drawing herself up and staring at the detective.
“ Tlie girls you kept there. Are they there yet ?”
“ Devil a one of ’em.”
“ Where have they gone ?”
“ You can just go and find out. You cannot pump me.”
“ I don’t want to, Betty. Your tank’s a bit too deep
and the contents rather foul.”
“Go along with you the Rope-or-bullet. I’m as
respectable as you.”
“Of course you are, Betty. But what sort of a man is
the fellow you have got in the house now ?”
“ He’s of the male sect, carries his head on his shoulders,
swallows with his guzzle, wears a suit of clothes, and pays
his way with his money. If you want to know his character
you can ask my foot, and, maybe, you’ll get an answer that
will give your tailor a job on your pants.”


“ How smart you’re getting. But I did not want
particularly to know. Good day.”
“ Good day. And when you want to catch me just
wait till the weasel’s asleep, Jimie,” and she left him and
went on her way laughing loudly.
Mr. Cadlow waited till late in the evening an 1 then he
went down to the shanty of Betty on the rocks. He had
delayed his visit so as to make sure of the new occupant
being at home, and that the darkness might screen him
from detection and prevent an alarm being raised.
The place was in darkness and the shutters and door
were closed. He walked round to the back and found the
same evidences of desertion. He knocked. There was no
answer. He went to the front and knocked with the same
result.
He did not like to burst the door in lest he might make
too much noise, so he went off for assistance and soon
returned with the company of two constables. They at
once tried the doors and the windows in the front and the
rear, but found them securely fastened. By the help of a
crow-bar, however, they soon succeeded in forcing one of
the windows and effected an entrance.
A light on the scene revealed the evidence of a ghastly
crime. In the centre of the room they had entered was a
pool of blood, clotted and stagnant, though fresh enough to
indicate that it had been recently spilled. A dirty bed
stood against the wall on one side, and the clothing was
displaced and thrown about in confusion. On the opposite
side was a table overthrown, and a bottle of brandy from
which the contents had been spilled, and a broken candle-
stick, containing a portion of a candle, lay on the floor.
There was every indication of a terrific struggle having
taken place in that room.
A careful examination of the house followed. All the
rooms were examined, but in this room alone was there any
evidence of the dark deed. The remaining rooms were in
applie-pie order to the very kitchen.
They then agreed that two of them had better remain
there for the night.
“Letushaveanotherhuntforthecorpse,”said Mr. Cadlow


High and low they searched in every nook, corner,
box and hole where they conceived it possible a body could
be hidden.”
“He has managed his work well,” said one of the
policemen.
“He has carried the body away somewhere,” replied
Mr. Cadlow; “but my dogs will ti’ack him.”
Mr. Cadlow and a policeman then settled themselves
and the other took his departure. The light was ex-
tinguished, the window re-fastened, and strict silence insisted
on.
The policeman was superstitious, and in the middle of
the night he touched Mr. Cadlow and whispered :
“ Do you hear anything ?”
“ No.”
“ I fancy I do.”
“ What do you hear?”
“ Groans.”
“ Where T
“ In this room.”
“ Nonsense ; you are scared.”
The policeman was inclined to think he was, and said
no more for a time. Then he whispered again—
“ I am sure there is someone groaning in the room,”
They struck a light and searched the room again.
They were not long in doing it, for the room had no place
to conceal a person in. The policeman did not seem
satisfied, but he said nothing, and the light was again put
out.
They had not been long in darkness, however, when
the policeman once more lighted the candle, and this time
left the room. His companion smiled and stayed where he
was. When the constable returned he asked—
“ Well, have you found anything ? ”
“ No; but I heard the groans, I’ll swear.”
Anywhere else but here ? ”
“Yes, in the kitchen.”
“ But there was nobody there.”
“ No ; I had a good look.”
“ Then it’s your fancy


“ May be,” and they relapsed into silence.
No one disturbed them during the night, and the next
day Mr. Cadlow left his companion to keep watch whilst he
went to make further enquiries. He felt sure that old
Betty knew more about her tenant than she liked to tell,
and he had made up his mind to watch her.
It took him nearly all the day to discover her where-
abouts, but being so well known he made sure of finding
her from the first. When, at last, he discovered her
retreat, he concealed himself within spying distance and
waited either for her exit or some stranger’s entry,
A little after dark she came out of the house, and he
followed her. She entered a public-house.
As he had expected, she came out after a little in the
•company of a tall, well-built, middle-aged man. Mr. Cadlow
watched them conversing eagerly together, and then the
man gave her something, which he took to be money. She
then departed, and the man returned to the public-house.
The detective knew that if he entered where the men
were drinking he would be recognised by some one, and his
object would be defeated. He therefore entered by the
back way and called the landlord.
“ Well, Jimie,” said the landlord, “None of you have
picked up Daniels’ reward yet. Any clue, old man.”
“ Who’s that fellow old Betty came for just now ?”
asked Mr. Cadlow, without noticing the question of thelandlord
“ Dun know. He’s a stranger.”
“ Where from ?”
“ Says he’s a squatter from the country.
“ What did old Betty want with him ?”
“ Bless you, Jimie, I mind my own business.”
“ I want to see him.”
“ Suspect him ?”
“ Mind your own business.”
“Of course come into the bar and have a drink with
him. He parts like a millionaire.”
“No. Send him here.”
“ Perhaps he won’t corroe.”
“ Whisper and tell him a friend of old Betty is here
and wants to see him on business about the house.”


“ Alright Jimie. What will you have to drink ?”
“ Rum.”
The landlord soon returned with the stranger, who
stared very hard at Cadlow and seemed inclined to retire.
“Sit down, and make yourself at home,” said the
detective assuringly. “Here, landlord, you’ve only brought
one glass. Bring another for my friend.”
The stranger seated himself and appeared to be reading
his new host with his keen penetrating eyes. But Mr.
Cadlow sat his gaze out unflinchingly.
“ What is your business with me ?” the stranger
asked.
“ Will you soon have done with that house of yours ?”
“ I don’t under.-tand you. What do you mean ?”
“ Now come, I know all about it. I act as agent for
Betty sometimes, and I’ve got her another tenant if you
don’t want too much to go out before your quarter’s up.”
“ I am still at a loss ”
“ Will the £2O you gave and two quarter’s rent down
satisfy you ?”
The stranger started, but Cadlow appeared to take no
notice.
“ What do you think of old Betty ?” the detective asked.
“ Why do you want to know?”
“ Because I wanted to tell you if you think she’s soft your
mistaken. She’s a sharp business woman, and she won’t
advance another shilling above what I have offered to you.
Didn’t she tell you about me when she saw you to-day ?”
“ Certainly not.”
“ The cunning fox. She’s a regular screw. She got some
money out of you I suppose ?”
“Yes,” answered his companion beginning to think
that his questioner really knew all about his affairs.
“ She told me she would. By the way what did you
think about the girls she had ?” I should have thought you
would have liked one of them for a housekeeper. Eh ?”
and the detective gave a short laugh.
“ I did not like them.”
“ Someone better I know.”
“ W T hat do you know ?”


“ The married woman you took there.”
“ It’s a lie !” shouted the stranger leaping suddenly to
his feet.
“ Now, now ; don’t get excited,” said Mr. Cadlow,
calmly. “ I know all about it; but of course your secret’s
safe with me. She was a fine looking woman.”
“Let me know who you are. Are you playing the
spy on me 1 ”
“ I’d scorn to do it. We don’t treat our customers in
that way.”
“You have been watching me.”
“No ; I only saw you in your cousin’s company by
accident.”
“My cousin? Devil! exclaimed the stranger, com-
pletely losing his self-possession.
“Yes, your cousin, Mr. Milshaw,” replied the
detective, rising to his feet and getting the handcuffs
ready. “ You have carried out your game at last, and I
arrest you on suspicion of having murdered her.” And
almost in a moment Mr. Milshaw was his captive.
After lodging his prisoner in custody Mr. Cadlow went
to do the same office for old Betty, who refused to walk an
inch of the road, and screamed all the time she was
carried.
Milshaw refused to give any explanation of his
presence in Sydney or his transactions with Betty. As
for her, she said that she knew nothing about any murder,
and all she knew was that the “gentleman” had done fair
by her and she had kept her word with him.
On the following morning Mr. Cadlow with some
police officers took his dogs to the shanty. No sooner were
they free from the chains than they sniffed the scent of
blood, and they made immediately for the room where the
officers had just entered. One of them then made off to
the kitchen, which was semi-detached from the rest of the
house and commenced sniffing at the chimney. The other
dogs followed, and commenced barking and trying to jump
up.
“ There we shall find her,” said Mr. Cadlow. “The
unfeeling wretch has stuck the corpse up there.”


It was with great difficulty that they could reach the
dark object, which on examination was found to be
obstructing the light from above. The removal of the
bricks was necessary.
When they had accomplished this they found the
remains of Mrs. Daniels horribly mangled. The body
had been brutally cut in pieces so as to enable the
murderer to secrete his victim in a species of some
distance up.
“ Look at this,” said Mr. Cadlow, when they had
extricated Mrs. Daniels’ head. “ She was blinded with
something before she was butchered.”
There were unmistakeable signs of this. Some
burning liquid of the nature of vitriol had been thrown
into her eyes.
At the trial Betty was acquitted, but Milshaw was
found guilty and sentenced todeath.
He refused to make any admission until the morning
of his execution. He then told the officiating clergyman
that when he learned that his cousin had married Mr.
Daniels and come out to the colony with him, he had
determined to possess her, and to be revenged upon her
for turning against him in England. He watched her
some time, unknown to her, in Sydney before he had
completed his plans. Whenall was ready he watched her
on the night she was missed,and when she was in George-
street, and nearly home, the street (near where Sands’
stationery business is now situated) being deserted, he
blinded her and pretended to run off. Then rounding he
approached her from the opposite direction. “What,
cousin,” he said, “is that you? Whatever is the matter
with you?” She said somebody had thrown something
into her face and blinded her. He then enquired where
she lived, and offered to lead her home. In her helplessness
she gladly accepted his offer. Instead of doing so, he took
her to the house ho had hired for the purpose. She
thought there was something wrong, but she cbirid do
nothing, and was suffering great pain. Wheh he got her
into the house he reproached her for not and she
struggled with him with astonishing strength. She beeamev


exhausted, and then she was absolutely at his power. He
held her on the ground whilst she bled to death, and he
cut her body up in the same spot. The next day he
removed her to the place where she was found. Had
Cadlow been a day later he would have had the blood
washed away, and perhaps the body burned. But it was
not to be.
“My last crime, for which I am about to suffer,” he
said, “ is not so refined as those I committed formerly ; but
for that you have your convict system to blame.”


MIKE HOWE,
THE TERROR OF VAN DIEMAN’S LAND.
THE adventures of Michael Howe have been written by
numerous hands, but too often have served only for a
text for exaggerated romance. Mr. Bonwick has written
a lengthy story, wherein his bushrangers quote Shakespeare
and the rest of the poets like diligent students, whilst they
show a lamentable ignorance of the simplest rules of ortho-
graphy. It is our intention to stick closely to facts as we
gather them from the annals and authoritative publications
of the time, and the contributions to history which have
been published since.
Michael Howe distinguished himself in his youth as a
careless and wayward young fellow. He had little regard
for others’ personalty which could be conveniently annexed.
He was of a roving disposition and took to the sea, where
he learned the value of discipline and command.
On his return from a voyage in the royal navy he
joined himself with a set of reckless fellows, and took part
in a daring highway robbery. For this he was tried,
sentenced to seven years’ transportation and sent out to
Botany Bay—as all the Australian convict settlements were
then generally called —as a convict.
In 1812 he arrived in Van Dieman’s Land and was
assigned to the service of Mr. Ingle, a stock owner, but he
declared, on finding his labors irksome, that “ having served
the King, he would be no man’s slave.”
At that time the colony was suffering severe inflictions
from the depredations of bushrangers. The Hobart Town
Gazette published, almost weekly, the crimes they were
committing and the names and descriptions of the
absconders.
These bandits plundered the free selectors, outraged
the natives, and murdered the shepherds and cultivators of


the soil. One of the most lawless and daring was a man
named Whitehead, who was the captain of a large gang.
This gang put the authorities at defiance, stole the cattle of
the inhabitants, and made off with every species of plunder
into the thickets of the forests, and the fastnesses of the
mountains. They got rid of their spoil by means of agents
among the shepherds and squatters.
Whilst this band of robbers were looting all the
portable property of New Norfolk Howe joined them, and
by his energy, fearlessness, and enterprise soon established
a reputation among them as a valuable acquisition. He
would risk a bullet’s passage through his skull, or a stab
through his heart for a few ounces of gunpowder, or the
possession of a firelock.
He was a good speaker of the stump species and caused
the gang to believe that they were armed against a set of
tyrants, and that their success only meant the liberty of the
country. He posed as a sort of prophet and quoted
Scripture to prove that the outlaws had no less a mission to
perform than to expel the Philistines from the Tasmanian
Canaan. All the representatives of law and the convict
management were therefore their direst foes to be mercilessly
punished. So long as these despots ruled they could only
wander in the deserts whilst the alien and stranger were
gorging on the milk and honey of the Promised Land.
Whitehead approved of Howe’s sermons and advice, so
much the more as he saw it gave the unity of enthusiasm
to his gang. To put the zeal of his men in execution he,
therefore, led them to the residence of the police magistrate,
Mr, Humphrey, whose barns and wheat stacks they
wantonly burned to the ground. It was a glorious satisfac-
tion to them to watch the element carry out their scheme of
vengeance upon this symbol of authority. But they must
show the lesser lights that their career was determined and
that all who intercepted, or were likely to intercept, the
success of their “ cause ” would meet with sinister punish
ment. They went to Pittwater and gave the district
constable a taste of their powers. They set his outbuildings
on fire and made a bonfire of his stacks.


After these successful operations they retired into the
woods whence no traces of them could be procured. Howe
was busy, however, drilling the men, appealing to their
courage, and reading the scriptures to them. The gang
was divided into sections, sentinels were posted at suitable
places, and a strict watch was kept night and day. The
prison garments were for the most part discarded, and rude
coverings were made from the skins of the kangaroos.
Their hair and beards were suffered to grow, for Howe
declared that barbers were unknown during the wanderings
of the children of Israel.
In the course of the following month (October), they
returned into the New Norfolk district with a fixed purpose
of doing more than destroying wheat-si acks. They tired off
a volley in front of the x’esidence of Mr. Carlisle, to apprise
the inmates of their vicinity, and to announce the fact that
death was to be the price of resistance. The dwelling was
defenceless, and the gang found easy admittance. They
pillaged the place, and retired to the forest. They were
again successful.
News however reached them that the colonists were
being aroused to special activities. They armed themselves
and asked for leaders and assistance from the Government
to march against the troop of robbers. A body of civilians
and a small number of soldiers were placed under the
orders of an officer of the 46th Regiment.
Whitehead and Howe were rather flattered than
otherwise on hearing of the great national stir they had
occasioned. They felt that they were quite equal to the
volunteers and soldiers who were marching against them,
and they resolved upon a trial of strength with them.
In their long talk about the dangers that faced them,
they spoke of their positions with pride, and declared their
wish that their foes should never possess their heads as
trophies of combat. Their heads were too valuable, too
sacred to be the claim to a vulgar Government reward, or
an evidence of physical courage. They therefore entered
into a solemn compact, duly sworn on the prayer-book,
that should either of them be mortally wounded in their


coming battles, the survivor would cut off the other’s head
and bear it out of the reach of the enemy.
Mr. Carlisle, whose residence had been plundered,
rapidly spread the news of the bushrangers’ whereabouts,
and went to his neighbour, Mr. M’Carty, who was the
owner of a schooner, called The Geordy.
“You had better put yourself in readiness Mr.
M'Carty” said Mr. Carlisle, “for Whitehead and his gang
are bound to capture your vessel.”
“ Oh, I’m ready for them,” Mr. M’Carty replied*
pointing to the body of men around him.
“We had better follow the cut-throats at once.
What say you, Captain?” addres-ing the officer in command
of his schooner.
“ I am ready,” and in a few minutes more the scouting
party was on the march.
They soon came upon the bushrangers and ordered
them to lay down their arms. Instead of complying with
the order they entrenched themselves behind a large fallen
tree, and opened fire, amid a shout of defiance. “ let them
have it hot, ray lads ! ” Whitehead bellowed.
A fierce exchange of shots was kept up for several
minutes, in which the attacking party came off the worst.
The settlers being in the open were exposed to the aim of
the robbers who were protected by the hollow tree
O’Birnie the master of the schooner received a ball in his
cheek, which passed through his tongue into his neck. Mr.
Carlisle was mortally wounded, and only survived about an
hour. The rest showed signs of flight, whereupon White-
head and Howe commanded them to surrender. They took
to their heels in preference, leaving, however, one of their
number behind. It was all Whitehead could do to prevent
the gang from tearing this unfortunate prisoner of war to
pieces.
When the news of this encounter reached Hobart
Town, armed parties travelled in every direction to capture
the banditti. The portion of the 46th regiment and the
volunteers already mentioned went to M'Carty’s residence
in anticipation of an atta k there.


Whitehead’s party, however, determined upon a little
pleasantrie before entering upon another dangerous enter-
prise. They paid the police magistrate, Mr. Humphrey, a
second visit, with the intention of removing from his house
anything likely to be of assistance in their capture or of
value to them personally. To enable them to make an un-
molested search they compelled the servants to tie each
other’s hands, making merry at their fears or awkwardness.
They found some handcuffs, ropes, weapons, ammunition
and other articles of value which they jokingly appropriated,
and with reckless iconoclasm revengefully destroyed the
rest.
* banditti were intoxicated with success. They had
tasted the sweets of victory, and like the tiger that has
tasted blood, thirsted for more Whitehead was so excited
that he was unable to reason calmly.
“ I’ll have my revenge on that scoundrel M'Carty for
following us with his men. I’ll burn his house to the
ground.”
Howe tried to persuade him to use caution. “You
may depend upon it M'Carty’s house will be like a garrison,
and full of soldiers.”
“So much the better. We will do for the lot,”
Whitehead replied with a significant gesture.
“ They will be all prepared ; they will be expecting us
just now. The best plan is to give them time enough to
get careless and then take them off their gnard.”
“ Oh I’m not one of your everlasting waiting men.
I believe in striking the iron while it is hot, and I mean to
have revenge before ray temper cools,” and he turned away
from Howe impatiently.
The bushrangers under Whitehead’s leadership came
stealthily to Mr. M'Carty’s house. Halting a few yards
from the entrance they were ordered to fire, and a volley of
shot was poured into the place through the windows and
other openings. The soldiers had been waiting for this
attack in ambush. They commenced a brisk fire and ere
the bushrangers could reload their weapons Whitehead had
received a mortal wound.


“ Quick, Mike ! ” “he gasped they have killed me. Cut
my head ofl and keep it out of their hands.”
This speech and his exertion to reach Howe caused the
leader to fall at the feet of his comrade, who, faithful to his
compact to prevent his head falling into the hands of the
Government, cut it off, and escaped into the bush with it.
The soldiers and the inmates, fifteen in all, made a
charge upon the gang who fled into the adjacent forest.
It was here that the soldiers were at a disadvantage, and
the bushrangers at their best. Howe commanded the men
to turn and fire upon their pursuers, and whilst the soldiers
were recovering from the consternation caused by this un-
expected salute, the bushrangers succeeded in making good
their escape. One of the soldiers was killed.
The body of Whitehead was taken to Hobart Town
and as a terror to evil doers was suspended by a gibbet on
Hunter’s Island.
Michael Howe was now elected leader of the gang.
He apparently became more religious than ever, and
solemnly “ swore in ” every one of his “ subjects.” This
ceremony over he caused them to sit down while he read to
them portions of the 7th chapter of Deuteronomy and the
Bth chapter of Joshua, substituting local names for those
mentioned in the text. He laid particular stress on the
following verses as being particularly applicable to their
case, and their “ holy ” cause “ And when the Lord thy
God shall deliver them before thee, thou shalt smite them,
and utterly destroy them; thou shalt make no covenant
with them, nor show mercy unto them And
he shall deliver their kings unto thine hand, and thou shalt
destroy their name from under heaven : therfe shall no man
be able to stand before thee.” . . , . “ And thou shalt
do to Ai and her king as thou did’st unto Jericho and her
King : only the spoil thereof, and the cattle thereof, shall
ye take for a prey unto yourselves.” Strange as it may
appear Howe’s blasphemy passed for piety in that lawless
gang, and they especially liked that portion of the reading
which authorised the capturing of the cattle and the taking
of the spoil.


The soldiers succeeded, a little later, in taking two of
the band who had separated from the rest. By this means
their firearms and a quantity of ammunition which had
been stolen from the settlers was recovered.
The Lieutenant-Governor Davey stretched his arbitrary
power beyond authorised limits and proclaimed martial law
in the colony, notwithstanding the advice and opposition of
the Deputy Judge Advoc*te ; Davey’s conduct in this
particular was an infringement on the prerogative of
Governor Macquarie, \yho pointed out that if the Lieutenant-
Governor had the power in emergencies created by
depredations similar to those caused by the crimes of the
bushrangers, “ any subaltern whose distance from the
central authority gave the plea of necessity ” could equally
declare martial law. Macquarie, therefore, promptly
countermanded the proclamation. Such was the ferment of
excitement, however, that the two bushrangers Macguire
and Burns and an accomplice, Stephens, a stock-keeper, were
tried by court-martial and condemned to death.
Howe’s plan now was to keep up the zeal of his men by
perpetual activity. They moved through the settled
districts with astonishing rapidity. Near Launceston they
plundered Mr. David Rose, and 100 miles away the
robbers reappeared at Bagdad. They returned to M’Carty’s
residence and plundered it. The mistress told them there
“ ought to be honor among thieves.” They indignantly
replied “ that they were not thieves but freebooters.” Cattle
were butchered for the sake of their hides and portable
plunder was conveyed to their forest haunts.
One day they fell in with a traveller. Howe was just
about to despatch a messenger to convey the startling
information to the colonists “ that they could set the whole
country on fire with one stick, and thresh in one night more
than could be gathered in a year.” The traveller was called
on to witness the oath of the messenger which, as usual,
was taken on the prayer book.
The desperate leader of the banditti had captured an
aboriginal girl called Mary, whose knowledge of the forest,
prowess in the capture of game, and facility of following a
track, Howe did not fail to turn to account. The girl grew


fond of him, and appeared proud of her white lord. She
became accustomed to his ways, and apparently forgot the
dusky skinned warriors and relatives among the blacks.
With this girl Howe oftened wandered alone, deserting
his “comrades inarms” and sojourning in the forests at
intervals, which, as time went on, became more frequent and
extended. These seclusions suited his disposition, though
they encouraged a spirit of insubordination among his men.
Any threat or action however, which threatened his
supremacy he punished with instant death, shooting the
rebel with his own weapon.
The Government, though so often baffled, was still
prosecuting a search for the banditti, when Howe and his
gang despatched a bold adventurer named Westlick who
followed the trade of a kangaroo hunter, with a letter
addressed “ From the Bushrangers to the Honorable T
Havey, Lieutenant Governor of Van Dieman’s Land.”
A second servant of the gang accompanied the kangaroo
hunter and both were ushered into Colonel Davey’s presence.
Westlick duly handed out the letter, whilst the other was
playing with a pistol in his belt.
“ What is that for ?” asked the Colonel.
“ That was intended for my guide here if he played me
false,” was the bold reply.
The good natured officer burst into a laugh, and
promised to give their communication his diplomatic con-
sideration.
The watchfulness of the authorities constantly
rendered the trading transactions of the bushrangers more
difficult and dangerous. A settler had lost as many as 300
head of cattle and the thieves were tracked as far as the
Murderer’s Plains. There they found only the remains of
a large fire. The cunning bushrangers had rendered the
animals down to fat and placed it on the market as tallow.
To keep their deed and the place in memory they after-
wards spoke of the Murderer’s Plains as the “ Tallow
Chandler’s Shop.”
During the periods of Howe’s absence from his men his
superstitions grew upon him. He was haunted by horrible
dreams, when, like Macbeth, his murdered victims appeared


to him, showing their wounds, pointing their weird fingers
and threatening retribution, These dreams he wrote down
with his own blood on a prepared skin of the kangaroo, by
the aid of a pointed stick.
Information at last reached Captain Nairne, who was
stationed with a small party of the 46th near the Oatland- 5 ,
that they should keep a sharp look-out for the bushrangers in
the neighbourhood of Jericho. He marched his men to the
place indicated and a man posted in a tree soon caught
sight of the gang. As soon as the bushrangers were
sufficiently near the soldiers rushed upon them. And being
taken unawares, they scattered in flight. The black
girl was with Howe. They commenced a race for life
together, the girl closely following and “ guiding his flight
to intricate fastnesses.” She was unable to keep up with her
master, who now found that she impeded his flight. He
urged her on but her strength becoming exhausted she
dropped further behind. Howe deliberately stopped, took a
pistol from his belt and fired at her, then taking to his heels
again he made his escape in a ravine.
The black girl was not killed though she was wounded in
the arm. The shot, however, which might have taken her
life, extinguished her affection. She joined with Howe’s
pursuers and aided them to the best of her powers in their
hunt for the desperado.
Colonel Ilavey was succeeded by Colonel Sorrell as
Lieutenant-Governor. He was a man of “ sterner-stuff”
and bent upon taking drastic measures for the suppression
of bushranging. Nevertheless he received a letter from
Howe addressed “ From the Governor of the Ranges to the
Governor of the Town.” In this letter Howe was arrogant
and audacious. He was willing to surrender if Colonel
Sorell would pledge his word that he would use his influence
with Macquarie to procure him free pardon and guarantee
his present safety. So far from treating this communica-
tion with contempt, the state of the country was such that
he complied with its conditions, and as the letter stipulated
that some recognised person of rank must be the bearer of
Sorell’s reply, as a guarantee of gool faith, Captain Nairne
was sent to treat with the outlaw.


The Lieutenant-Governor expected to gain some im-
portant information from Howe as to the haunts and
intentions of the bushrangers still at large. Howe was
reticent, however. He showed wonderful skill in fencing
questions, and nothing of any value to the authorities was
revealed. On the plea of ill-health he was permitted to
walk about in front of the gaol in charge of a constable ;
and thus practically at liberty, it is said, he received
constant visits from friends and admirers.
The inhabitants were roused from lethargy by the
spirited appeals of Sorell. The people of Hobart Town
subscribed large funds to be paid as rewards to those who
should assist in or actually capture the bushrangers. Sorell
himself set an example of daring and filled with his spirit a
party of military traced the bandits “to the Black Brush,
and thence to a settler’s house at the Tea Tree, where they
had dined. They had the advantage of the position, but
Geary, their leader, was slain and several others wounded.
The rain had damped the powder of the soldiers, which
prevented their muskets from telling with full effect.”
“ Howe’s love of adventure, and faith in the luck that
had hitherto attended him, caused him to soon become dis-
satisfied with his semi-captivity. A convict named Beagent,
who was in the service of Mr. Abbott, Deputy Judge
Advocate, conveyed messages for him to the captain of an
American vessel. It was arranged that Howe should
escape in this vessel, and all the preliminaries were executed
and part of the plan in operation when the plot was dis-
covered. The master of the vessel Was prevented ascending
any further up the river, and was ordered to put out to sea
without delay. But Howe, neverthe’ess, was successful in
escaping from the gaol.
He returned to the bush but avoided his previous
companions. These he could no longer trust. They had
become thoroughly disorganised. They were jealous of each
other, and Hillier resolved to procure his safety by murder-
ing his companions. He wounded one with his rifle and cut
the throat of another from ear to ear. Only two of Howe’s
companions now remained. One of them, Brown,
surrendered himself, but the other, Watts, desired to make


himself notorious by the capture of Howe. He accordingly
sought the service of a stock-keeper who knew Howe well,
and had often been of service to him. This man, Dreive,
fell in with Watts’ scheme and to carry it out they met at
a place called Longbottom. Here they encountered Howe
who carried a rifle. Watts was armed in a similar manner
but Dreive carried no weapon.
“I say, Mike,” shouted Watts, when they were within a
hundred yards of each other “If you’ll just knock out the
priming of your gun, I’ll do the same for mine.” “ What
are you afraid of ? But I don’t mind if you don’t.” And
the priming was forthwith removed.
Under pretext of cooking some breakfast for Howe Watts
and Dreive lighted a fire, and after blowing at the burning
leaves for some time Dreive asked Howe to “just use his
lungs a bit.” As soon as Howe bent down Watts threw
him on the ground, and Dreive hastily bound his hands.
They then searched him and took from him all the weapons
they could find. Then the two captors partook of break-
fast, and politely asked Howe to join them. He sullenly
declined their offered hospitality.
After making sure that their captive was adequately
secured Watts with his gun now loaded led the way in the
direction of Hobart Town. Howe followed whilst Dreive
brought up the rear. In a little while by the exercise of
tremendous strength Howe broke the cords that bound him,
and drawing a knife he had managed to conceal he
immediately stabbed Watts. In an instant he seized the
loaded gun and shot Dreive dead upon the spot.
“ Have you shot him ?” Watts found strength enough
to say.
“Yes? And I’ll do the same for you, as soon as I’m
loaded,” he replied.
Watts, however, managed to make his escape and
arrived safely at Hobart Town. He was thence forwarded
to Sydney where he died shortly after from the effects of
his wounds.
Sorell now offered a large reward, freedom and a
passage to England to any prisoner successful in the
apprehension of Howe. His reputation however stood him


in good stead and there was scarcely anyone willing to
undertake a conflict with such a desperate character. He
retired to the woods and only made his appearance when
he ran short of ammunition or food. The Sydney Gazette,
July 18, 1818 states : “ Michael Howe, the desperate bush-
ranger, was seen among the farms about a month since,
after an unaccountable disappearance for the three months
prerious. He was armed and plundered the hut of a stock-
man of a trifling property. He has several dogs with him
and is provided with ammunition.”
In October the same jear he ventured from his hiding
place in search of supplies. A man called Warburton who,
had formerly been an accomplice, and who was now anxious
to procure the reward for his capture, had entered into
league with the hunters. A bold convict named Jack
Worrall had planned with Warburton a means of securing
the prize. To this end Worrall and a soldier named Pugh
repaired to Warburton’s hut on the xflver Shannon.
Worrall and Pugh were to remain concealed in the hut
whilst Y7arburton went in search of the doomed “ Governor
of the Rangers.” In a short time Warburton met Howe
and invited him to come to his place and replenish his
depleted stores. Howe hesitated, but Warburton pushed
his hospitable solicitations with such consummate art that
Howe consented to accompany him. When they had
arrived within about a hundred yards from the hut Howe
stopped. Though the door of the hut stood open he had a
presentiment that there was danger lurking there.
Warburton ridiculed his fears and at last enticed him to
enter. Howe entered the hut slowly, “ his gun presented
and cocked.” He at once saw the trap he was in and
immediately firing his gun exclaimed : “ ]s that your game.”
Then he turned and ran for his life. Worrall ran after
Howe, whose speed was like lightning. Pugh and
Warburton also gave chase but Howe would have escaped
them had it not been for an unexpected bank down which
he fell. He was on his feet in a moment, and commenced
to climb the opposite bank when Worrall presented a pistol
at him and commanded him to stand. Howe drew another
but did not present it. The two men stood facing each


other about 15 yards apart with the bank between them-
They stared for a minute at each other in mute astonish
ment. Howe wore a lon# black beard, and was covered
with patches of kangaroo skins. Worrall had a grey beard.
Adjusting his knapsack and with one hand on his powder
horn, Howe cried out, “ Black beard against grey beard for
a million,’’ and fired. The shot, which miscarried, was
returned by Worrall. Howe staggered but again rallied and
was commencing to make for the bush when Pugh came up
and stunned him with the butt end of his rifle. Determined
to fight to the last, the bandit drew a knife and was
preparing to defend himself with it when Pugh felled him
with another blow, which he repeated until the brains were
battered out.
In Howe’s knapsack was the kangaroo skin manuscript
containing a record of his dreams, and a vision of his sister.
“He had made a list of seeds, vegetables, fruits, and even
flowers intended to adorn the seclusion which he con-
templated to occupy in his old days.
“ Five years after his death, Howe’s dwelling was found.
The site was chosen with taste, in an open undulating-
country, stretching to the western mountains. The spot was
secluded from observation, was covered with a large honey,
suckle, and on a rising slope to the stream. A gigantic tree-
prostrate, which he used as a chopping block, was the
boundary to which he permitted Warburton to approach.”


Muo
f 1152 Go,
hi CO^KJ




THK
SINGER
Manufacturing Company,
NEW YORK.
New High Arm Vibrating and
Oscillating Shuttle Machines
UNEQUALLED FOR
SPEED
STRENGTH
SIMPLICITY
HEAD OFFICE-
NEW SOUTH WALES & QUEENSLAND.
MS PITT STREET,
SYDTTEY.
