

fiie LONDON PACKET
And CHRONICLE,
And JLlojd’g Evening Post. '****'
Pnstti. asd publiskod by CHARLES BALDWIN, New Bridge Street, Blackfriars, to whom Orders may be idddressed; or to the regular News-Venders in London.— Adtkbti«»£ntc received a the OtEee.
Price 7d.j
From WEDNESDAY, July 9, to FRIDAY, July 11, 1834.
i m.j iiuiu vvjimMvauAi, July y, to ruxiJA*. JULY il. 1834. rm ~ „„„
kk __ t.— —-— ■ -- j JO. 11,203.
J Uipmai it arUamElU. , ai ,“ d iS \ tlmt L l ', Car . dth ' !1 Y h ? db , ( f rl n ness of energy, ~ ~ laws ana [ was, that the bill ought to be renewed, but'without certain |to aay)—Did their lordships think that there was anythin. I T/~ -=
, ade by those who ought to be anxious, at all new enactments. AVe have resisted these applications—we clauses. Those/acts, my lords, prove that there does exist i very peculiarly merry or amusing in being a minister at h,. i j lB Matter he (the Lord Chancellor) would say nothing.
r» w T nt\q w t n m °. eS f l Ve *v e P eace °. f Ireland (hear) who ought have exerted the ordinary powers of the law with a firm correspondence which has passed between the Lord Lieute- | the present time ? (Hear, hear.) If they did, he would in- d a j ,° n a former occasion expressed his disapprobation of
HOUSE OF LORDS, AVednesday, July 9. to dtsiiu to retain the just privileges of the government, hand, and the result has been successful; and in this in- nant of Ireland and his Majesty’s government, relative to i vite them to take a part in the reconstruction of the govern- !•’ d j ie was £tlU ot the same opinion. It was an over-
At five o’clock the Lord Chancellor took his seat on the 1 1101 _ to throw impediments in the way of such purposes, stance, at least, I may appeal to your lordships and the the renewal of this measure, which has not yet been laid on j ment. (Hear, and laughter.) But he thought they knew , a monarch and a dismemberment of Europe for
woolsack, at which time there was a full attendance of peers, 1,,, . ‘ eta J' a tne passing of this most necessary act. (Hear, country, that the administration has not shown (except your lordships’ table. (Hear from the opposition peers.) f better, if they were not aware of the annoyance which p • ■ saw no sufficient cause. But the revolution of
and below the bar, and at the foot of the throne, as many ! /. rr uas , With sur P l,lBB I heard that they supported the m the single case of tlie bill which is now before your The noble earl had made a similar admission when he com-( must attend such a situation, he was and he would tell J rans 88 H was called, though he did not call it a revolution ;
members of the House of Commons as could conveniently 1101 tne proauction of documents which vvere of a nature lordships, and which the most absolute necessity has de- plained of my right honourable friend voting in the other those noble lords that such was his feeling with reject to /« ‘nx 110 more tail it a revolution than if the noble lord
stand had assembled. " a : ' 4 nt . erea ; liem imht to be called for mid which had, I manded) any disposition to call for new and extraordinary house for the production of papers, parts of that correspond- office, that nothing but a sense of the most imperative duty tol V 8011nect8d with the county of Devon, and who ap-
The gallery appropriated for ladies was filled, and the ad- V‘ U , l pJ ie t( J say ’ llever been called for before. (Hear, powers inconsistent with the general laws of the country, ence which the noble earl said it would be inconvenient to could have kept him in office one hour after the resignation P eared to dissent from what he said, should become a lead-
joining gallery, to which peers’orders are requisite to secure J Bai *l ln cse/etters were not addressed to the minister of (Hear, hear, hear.) This, then, is the statement which I produce. Why should the noble earl decide on what papers of his noble friend.' (Hear, hear.) His noble friend had j n S. meillbe r of the government of this country, and should
admission, was likewise crowded, long before the ministers .^ vn ’ nitll whom the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland offer to your lordships. I have stated the reasons for were or were not necessary to be laid before parliament? made out his own case; but, according to the ouinion of • e^in .by putting down the press, by upsetting the lead-
appeared. ,| . y commumcd'ted in his official capacity, but were my resignation, and I look with satisfaction upon the AVhy are certain papers to be produced, and not others? I the noble duke, no sufficient explanation had been <nven of prmBl l des °f the Magna Charta, by suspending the
The Earl of MALMESBURY presented a petition from uaitssM to me; and with whatever imprudence the nature state in which I now leave the affairs of the country. It therefore, my lords, maintain that my right honourable the resignation of the Chancellor of the Exchequer. *He fthe , beas Corpus Act without the authority of parliament,
Newington, against the Poor Laws’Amendment Bill; like- rnBm mi g“t have been suffered to transpire, that did not has been said that we have done nothing: was reform of friend was perfectly justified in demanding the produc- Lord Chancellor) would only say that he differed widely -Vf by dlssolvin g the parliament itself without sufferin’-
wise a similar petition from the magistrates of the quarter 1118 nature of tne circumstances as to the propriety of parliament nothing ? AVas the passing of that delicate and tion of the whole of the correspondence on this subject, from his noble friend (the Chancellor of the Excheciuer) t l ° m , e , et eveu 01188 attBr it had been called together;
sessions of Norfolk, against certain clauses of the bill. c.iiiing i°r tlie production of the documents. (Hear, hear.) difficult measure, the abolition of colonial slavery, nothing ? between the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland and the Grown, as to his resignation. He did think that his nob-o friend f e 80uld call that a revolution which would put n end
The Earl of FALMOUTH presented a similar petition f S how to the result. I have already stated to your AVas the settlement of the East India charter, and the open- (Hear, hear, hear, from the opposition peers.) In that part of the Chancellor of Eie Exchequer oinffit not to have l ° u,, noble lord’s power, and to that government which
from a place iu Cornwall. i 1 ’ f, certam communications were made without mg of the trade of our extensive dominions in India, no- the correspondence which was not laid before parliament, it resigned. No man could admire more than he did JfP heldk,m * But he must apply it to' the noble lord.
Viscount STRANGFORD presented a petition from the / 01 ‘ Boneui ‘rence ; that the making of such thing? AVas the arrangement of the question as to the Bank would probably be found that the Lord Lieutenant had said the talent and the integrity of his noble friend and ; orn ? hmg in fhis country would do or sanction such acts ;
city of Coventry, m favour of the London and AVescmiuster Jr J“imitations was imprudence—was the extreme of impru> charter nothing ? AVere the various improvements in the —the observation being drawn out of him—that if such be he knew that he did but echo the opinion of the country when ~ V he dld > as lie should feel greatly disposed to do.
Bank Bill. hardly do otherwise than acknowledge ; but the law, of which the whole credit is due to my noble-and learn- the case with regard to your position in England, as to ren- lie said that a more honourable man in his public and private E- do f vu the lloble lor(l from llis usurped power and from
On the motion of Lord SUFFIELD, the Bodies of Crimi- J a , Y 8 tna J the members of the other house of parliament, ed friend on the woolsack, nothing ? AVere those reforms in der it desirable to dispense with these clauses of the bill. I relations—that one more upright as a minister or more vir 118 yj olent inroads upon the constitution, the noble lord
uals’ Bill was read a third time and passed. V‘? Kl |f v 01 tlie \ acts connected with these documents, and the Irish Church, on account of which we have been reproved will endeavour to do without them. It is proper, my lords, tuous as a man, did not exist in these kingdoms (Hear U °J, 110 doubt be SBllt to som e convenient place of custody
Lord FOLEY presented two petitions from congregations -I f aocumBnt s themselves, made use of that knowledge on one side that we have done too much—were they, and that those who object to the passing of the bill should hear.) His noble friend had, from an over-sense of hig h feel’ oa t«e coast of Devonshire ; yet in all this there would bo no
of Protestant Dissenters of parishes in AVorcestershire, pray- , 01 el ° himg a charge against the government for can they with truth be said to be, nothing? (Hear, hear, have the whole correspondence before them which has passed ing, been induced to take a step which he (the Lord Chancel The noble lord would be called the revolutionist
ing relief. J e non.production of documents that ought never to have hear.) The greatest regret I now feel upon quitting office, between the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland and the British go-' lor) trusted his noble friend and the countiy would not see a ? d he ( the Lord Chancellor) would be styled the restorer of
Petitions for the protection of the Established Church were loauCBtl J and charged the government also with a after that of leaving the service of my master, arises in the vernmeht. It is due, also, to ministers themselves, in justifi- occasion to rue. He, however, cast no blame—he imputed • cons!:ltut ion. In this sense he locked upon the transac-
presented by Lord Kenyon, from the Calvinist Methodists of “l ‘ * aitllj and that a & am followed up by a charge first place with respect to the bill for amending the adminis- cation of their own character. The noble lord (the Chan- none. He only said that ho differed from his noble friend • tM JV? at Pans J 110 t as a revolution, but as a restoration. But
AVales, by Lord Colchester; by the Marquis of Londonderry ; Ol ’ auiiatloll and uncertainty ; and this was done with re t ration of the poor Jaws, and in the next, with respect to ceilor of the Exchequer) was in a majority the whole of the but he could not follow his example. That example was not calllt rerotetion if they pleased. He considered it a very
by Lord Rolle, from parishes in Devonshire ;by the Earl of remice to documents which it was contrary to all propriety that measure for the settlement of tithes in Ireland, which evening on which the discussion took place respecting the pro- followed by any other member of the government save the propei one * The lato dynasty of France had deserved to
Falmouth, from parishes in Cornwall; by the Earl of Caw- ° p J oduBB ? ailct tffe production of which I had never before I verily [relieve will, if passed, have a better effect in pro- duction of the correspondence; and who knows but there noble earl at its head. These two were the only re’simiations cease i to govern tjiat country, for they tvere unfit to govern,
dor, from a parish m AVales; by Lord Stradbroke, from a . a .At : I 0 1; la ? s . llo vveyer, done, and tne conse- diicmg the ailjustment ot tithes than any other measure, .might be something in that correspondence which would ju*- which had been tendered. Avhat he had thus said would, he J nd people deserved to be free, for they had the coinage to
place m Suffolk ; and by the Marquis of Salisbury, from pa- f that my inend » the Chancellor or the Lx- whatever ; and my regret is that these measures now remain j Dry resistance to the renew al of the measure ? My lords- } hope.l. bt .Dfisidered a sufficient explanation on these points li ? n . t for sneir5 neir and were not afraid to break tliose
nshes in the counties ot Bucks and Rutland. ‘ 1 t h° nA 0t those 111 hls a^ ty 8 council ® a “ d unfinished. These are the causes tnat make me feel regret at* am sorry to say it, but my conviction is, that the noble earl. But the noble duke seemed to think that tne noble earl Cl,aius lch lm becile tyrants had tried to wear a round their
_ proxies. AnA; pLAt Z not ***** more thanis necessary)—the the present moment; but 1 leave the government with the and the noble lord in the other house, have no grounds what- (Grey) had attacked a right hon. gentleman (Sir R. Peel) in ?, , ’ (Hear, hear.) That was a revolution which was not
The Marquis of AA LSI MINSTER—My lords, it was my ** n^L ' llBl iGO , x wias, that my nobie friend the Chancellor satisfaction, at least, that, m having used my best endea- ever for deserting his Majesty’s service. (Loud cries of another place for having called for the production of certain llk , e Jy Jo give much disturbance to this government. The
intention to have submitted on Monday next a motion, to • 7^ n< 2 uel > who conducted the affairs of the govern- yours to carry into effect those measures of reform that hear, hear, from tlie opposition benches.) I should, my private and confidential communications made to the eovern- 110018 dake bad alluded to the AVest India question as one for
which I have more than once alluded, on the subject of mem m tne nouse ot Commons, was one ot those who had the country required I have not shrunk from any obstacles, lords, be happy if I were spared the necessity of ad- mem—as if they pub lid juris. There was no attack— which the present government ought not to claim any credit
proxies, but, owing to the present unsettled, and I think most impressed by the opinion of the Lord Lieutenant, nor from meeting and grappling with the many difficulties verting to the measures of the noble call’s government; the fact only was stated, and that course objected to bv ? ntl l they saw how the measure would work. He (the
disastrous, state of affairs, I shall postpone it. (Hear.) A‘A , /. elt . h ,V w macb the ground on which he that I have encountered in the peformance of my duty, but the noble earl has himself imposed the necessity his noble friend, and most properly objected to. In speak™- Lord . Chatlcellor ) did not think it was necessary
Earl GREY moved the older ot tlie day for receiving the (n A. l , \ the bill to the House or Couimoiis had l.een How I have performed it is a matter that is now before your upon me. The noble earl has spoken of the excited state in on this subject, he (the Lord Chancellor) spoke not for one I? wait any ]o,l B' time to judge, of the effect of
report of the Disturbances Suppression (Ireland) Bill. A.l ; U 1 81 him by that opimon—that he dm feel, from lordships and the country ; all I ask from you in consi- which the country was when he and his colleagues accepted government, but for all governments, when he protested tbat ineasu V e * Th ere was every reasA to hope and expect
The Earl of SHAFTESBURY then presented the report, p ‘ iss^ a tile n . l » ht before last m the House of Com- dering it is, that you will not hastily, as lam sure you office; but, in speaking of the causes of that excitement, the against the doctrine laid dow nby the noble duke in his that would w^e!l; but without any length o^*
and on the question being formally put by the LORD taat could not with satisfaction to himself, or cannot justly, accuse me of idleness and remissness in the noble earl has not alluded to the effects which the two revolu- friendly zeal for his right hon. friend in the other house tln ?? he thou B ht tllBy ought not to withhold from his
CHANCELLOR, “ That this report be received,” vvith benefit to the government, continue a member of it. performance of duty. I have been attacked on the one side tiohs which had occurred immediately before in neighbour- AA r as it, he would ask, to be endured that a government acting- noblB fr }end, from party or from personal motives, the
Earl GREY rose, and attempted to address their lord- consequence was, that.yesterday morning L received a for going too far ; 1 have been attacked on the other for ini countries—the revolutions of Paris and Brussels—had in on its own responsibility, and getting its information from P raiSB which was justly his due for that blessed act. (Hear
ships, but upon saying “ I rise, my lords,” he was unable ««ei nommynoWe friend the Chancellor of the Exchequer not going far enough, and these attacks were made when producing that excitement. Nor has the noble eari stated all various sources, and amongst others from members of its own Ai ar ‘' „ The noble duke had on this occasion, he (the Lord
to proceed, being so overcome by ills feelings, and after a ms resignation ; and 1 had afterwards a personal I have been standing in this house deprived of the support the domestic reasons for tiie state of the country when he and body, should be required to produce, not only the grounds on celIo f) knew aot why, felt it necessary to act on the de-
short pause, during which he was much cheered on the oppo- mtei v i°" with him, when I ascertained that his resolution which a minister of the crown might naturally expect to his colleagues accepted office. Begging the noble earl’s par- which they came to the conclusion as to a particular measure tensive * He dld llot kl *ow that the noble duke had acted
sition side of the house, he resumed his seat. was ruiiy and unchangeably fixed, and 1 had no other course receive here, and checked and fettered in every instance don—but I must tell him that he has forgotton to state that but also the fact whether at any time any of them had held a mor * 80 sjnee the year 1811. The noble duke had taken
The Duke of WELLINGTON then presented a great to puisue but to transmit that resignation to his Majesty, whatever. Under these circumstances I have done ail that all.-the populous towns throughout the country were at that different opinion before that conclusion was formed 9 Were ? n , “ self the defenBe of their lordships, but he (‘■he
many petitions for the protection of the Established Church, 111811 Decam e necessary to consider what 1 should do I could, and I will assert without hesitation, that the time paraded by large bodies of men having political object* they now to be told that the evidence furnished as to the r° rd Chancellor ) did n °* know, that any attack had
from parishes in the diocese of Ferns and other parts of Ire- mjseii. ic is so long a time since 1 nave felt the difficulties government of which I have formed a part has done in view. (Laughter from the ministerial, anaioud cheers Irom necessity of the renewal of the Coercion Bill, as it was called ,? n niado on ti,Bir lordships, to need the'noble duke’s
land, and from parishes in Lincolnshire and other counties, ot my situation to be greatly above the strength and energy much more since our being m office than has been done the opposition benches.) This is one reason which I could was not sufficient, but that they must also have the fact , nce * , H, s nobl e fnend ( Karl Grey) Imd imt made any Bt-
MINISTERIAL resignations. wfiiuistill possess, that I havei before now expressed a for half a century before, for the improvement of the give for the state of the country at the time the noble earl took whether, at any time, the Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland had taBk . on tkBl *‘ iordships. Ail he had said was, that in his ad-
Earl GREY then rose and addressed their lordships as wish to retire. My noble friends—members bora of the social condition of the country. (Hear, hear.) Let it be office. The noble earl had boasted of what his government held a different opinion as to the necessity of the whole or ,llllus i trat i IO » h 8 had had difficulties to struggle with. Sandy
follows:—My lords, 1 really feel quite ashamed (hear) at present and of tlie late Cabinet—well know that that wish recollected too, that we have effected these improvements, had done for the country. Mv lords, I hesitate not to say of parts of that bill? If the opinions of individual members “‘ eir lordships woukl not take that as an attack upon them,
tiie sense or weakness which I have shown on the present wjs anxiously expressed at the close ot the last session, when tlie evils were the accumulated evils of ages, which this; that during the three years and a half that the noble of the government, secretly and confidentially communicated - y > he ok for grranted, could not think for a moment
occasion. (Hear.) But the circumstances under which I (Ffoar, hear.) it was my earnest desire, at that time, to till that time no sufficient attempt had been made in any earl has presided over his Majesty’s Councils, there has been were tiius to be called for, there would ‘be an end of all oV, at auy 01 tbose difficulties had been raised by themselves
rise to address your lordships aie of no ordinary description, withdraw from office—not from any desire to shrink from way to reduce. Under such circumstances, and under the mo re blood shed in this country than there was from the government. Supposing there had been two meetings of A,ieiloble duke had declared, that he had agreed with the
and I have a duty now to perform to the house which I shall the performance of a laborious duty, but from a sense of pressure of a necessity which I could not avoid, I have re- year 1780 down to 1830 [expressions of dissent from the mi- tiie Cabinet on the subject, and that on the first it was a mat- measures 01 the noble earl’s administration where he could
« endeavour to discharge as well as lam able (hear); and in failing energy ;so that, if I had ever been competent to the signed into his Majesty’s hands the trust which lie had been material side of the house.) The noble earl lias also talked ter of doubt, but that on the next all doubts were removed andoi ? ly °PP OS «d it where he could not conscientiously go along
rising to propose to your iordships to agree with the re- discharge or that duty, I was so no longer. X consented, how- pleased to confide in me. I have done so not without a pain- of the prosperous state of affairs in other countries—of the would it be a fair ground of objection to the measure to say 1 aild no ae>ubt their lordships at-that (the opposition)
port which has been read to you bymy noble friend near me, «-ver, to abandon that purpose, m consequence of tiie strong foi seuse of t i ie difficulties in which his Majesty is placed by peaceful state of Europe generally at this moment. My lords, that it could not be brought forward until the opinions of partook ot . thu same feeing towards the administration
I have to state that I no longer do so as a minister ot representations of my colleagues, that my retirement would such a resignation at this moment, but with the firm resolu- I maintain that the peace of Europe is not more secure at this individuals on the first day were produced ? “ But then,” said ot 1118 llobie friend. His noble friend had cast no blame on
the crown, but as an individual member oi parliament, occasion a dissolution ot the government : and, m consideration to do ail that I can to lessen and remove those difficul- t i me than it was when I quitted office. In point of tact, Eu- the objectors “we must not only have the conclusion to ' Uy part that was takBll by that side. No doubt the feeling
who is strongly impressed with the necessity that it is right tion, too, of the difficulties that might be experienced at ties, and with the full persuasion that my continuance in y ope i s in a more unsettled state now than when the noble which you as a government came/ but we must also know } vas .^amongst their iordships such as the noble duke described
and fit to arm the government with powers which, m the that moment by his Majesty and the government. 1 met office would rather increase than diminish them. There is easi assumed the reins of government. At that time he talked the opinions which some of you held on some particular da v ; but U somehow happened that uith all good feeiings
ordinary course of law, it does not possess—powers that I parliament, therefore, at the commencement ol the present one point to which lam anxious to refer before I sit down, largely of the principle of non-intervention. (A r ehement before you came to taat conclusion.” This then was the J^ dships had opposed the government wherever they
consider necessary for the maintenance ot the peace ©f that session, as a minister of the crown, still anxious to effect That point is the number of my own relatives for whom I cheers* from the opposition.) On the very night in which opinion of those wise, those sensible, those logical statesmen ?° • (No, no,--from the opposition side.) Yaur lordships
country to which the law is intended to be applied, those further measures ot reform which the situation ox the have provided situations in the public service since my as- he did accept office, he declared, in the hearing of your who by the way were prepared to go all the lengths with the (f? ntll ] ued the noblB and learned lord) may say “No” at'
(Hear, hear.) My lords, I feel I should be unworthy country required. (Hear, hear.) Not long since an event sumption of the reins of government. My lords, I have been Lordships, that non-interference in the affairs of other conn- bill from what they had beard of the decision of the govern- th ‘ s Sld8 ? but we at the other side think differently. (Hear.)
tne trust which has been reposed m me if I did not occurred which again produced mme a strong desire to give most unjustly attaked in consequence of my appointing some tries was one of the three great principles on which his merit on the Saturday, but who now stopped short, and 1 have no doubt whatever that your lordships acted conscieu-
take upon myself ail the risk of any representation that has up the office I held. On that occasion some ot the most power- 0 f my own family and relations to those offices. I can as- government should be conducted. Now, my lords, I ask how called for the opinions which were held on tiie Friday. ( Here S lously ’ and b « Ba use you wished, as the noble duke has stated,
been made by me as to the necessity of this measure; I should fui members ot the Cabinet retired from it. I met that sepa- sure your iordships, that not one shilling of the public money f aP has the noble eari redeemed this promise ? Does not some noble lords expressed dissent.) He would demonstrate to . S lv « your support to the government of my noble friend,
feel myself unworthy of the situation which I held in his ration with the most painful feelings; and those feelings 1 i s carried away, either by myself or family, in thus retiring every part of Europe complain of the intervention of this it in a moment. They had the letter of the lord-lieutenant wilere you I COakk This disposition to support the govern-
, Majesty s councils it I allowed the change of circumstances sail entertain with respect to t.oo my late colleagues, f rom office. (Loud cries of hear, hear.) It is perfectly true country in its affairs ? (Hear, hear.) AVas not the quadra, on one day, stating the necessity of the measure. Now what ment was in the case of some bills which had no
in which lam now placed fo interfere with the further pro- members of this house. I then felt how inadequate 1 was that I have appointed many membersof my family to situations „i e alliance a breach of the noble earl’s promise of non- did it signify as to the bill itself what might have been said pamcuiar political bearing—in the Local Jurisdiction Bill,
gress of this bill—a bill, as I have already said, necessary for further to continue, satisfactorily to myself, to discharge the in the public service, but I can assure your lordships of this, intervention in the affairs of other states ?‘ My lords, Ido or done on a former day? It was just as absurd as to • in ?tance. In the case of that bill, your lordships allowed
the preservation of the peace of Ireland. I he grounds duties of the very important office I neld; and 1 made up my that in no instance have those situations been sinecures. In say that this country had no right whatever to inter- object to the conclusion to which the government might ? be read a second time. You allowed it to go a stage
upon which tnat opinion is founded have been so lately stated mind to retire, and to state to parliament and to the puDhc, every case, the duties of the offices to which they have been few in the affairs of Spain and Portugal. (Hear, hear.) have come on the Saturday, because it did not produce f unhe, J a f d to pass through the committee, in order that
by me that I need not repeat them; but I will add, that that I was willing, if it could fie ot seivice to the public,, to appointed have been of the most laborious and arduous na- The noble earl had also adverted to the affairs of the East the opinions which might have been given on the Fridav. Ullll £ ht hayB the advantage of your lordships’judicial
redection has confirmed me m that opinion—an opinion go on while tne administration continued united, but that tare. And I ask your lordships whether they have not and AVest Indies. AVe do not yet know whether in the ex- The noble duke had felt it necessary to enter the ques- aad that y ou might see how far it could be improved,
painfully wrung from me, from a full consideration of the after that separation it was impossible that 1 could do so to been well qualified tor the situations to which they have Pe ctatioiis he forms from these measures he is right. I hope tion of foreign politics, though there was not a single 1 ‘>u allowed it to go a stage further, and the framer of it
absolute paramount necessity, in the present state ot Ire- any beneficial purpose, ihat resolution was so decidedly been chosen? whether, indeed, most of them are not per. foGodhe is so. But the noble earl cannot boast with re- sentence in all that his noble friend had said which referred to coul *. have 110 110tlce that it was not your lordships’
land, of the renewal or the measure, both from the statements taken, that I did not think I should be diverted from it; but sons whom any government would have selected for the spect to the effects of the AVest India measure until he sees the situation of this country respecting its foreign relations. llltBlltlori to give it the full sanction of your ju-
which have come from the Lord Lieutenant of that country, again the representations of my remaining colleagues—the same offices, though they Iftd not been relations of mine ? the slaves emancipated; and let him not boast of the benefits If the noble duke had conceived that one sentence had dicial ex penence, by allowing it to pass; but just
in the various dispa/ches wmch he nas transmitted, as well application which, as your lordships know, was made by a (Hear, hear.) The situations to which they were ap- 0 f the Eaat India and China measure until he first sees how justified his reference to our foreign policy, he wished him at the twelfth hour, in the very last stage, when I
as the communications hom various quarters, m the docu- number of the members of the other house of parliament— pointed subjected them to additional expense; and I repeat it operates. My lords, lam sorry to be obliged to advert to j oy of the discovery. The noble duke seemed to think that thou S ht , tllB bill secure, I found an unusual bustle going
ments which are now lying upon your iordships taole; the and, above ail, the difficulties under which 1 should place his that, instead of myself or family, on our retirement from q,e£, questions :* the noble eari had not introduced them I there was nothing in having kept at peace with all Europe on 111 the neighbourhood of this house. Correspondence
result or all these being that Ireland cannot be safely left to Majesty fiy my retirement at that office, carrying away any ot the public money, we leave it should not have referred to them. In those instances in in the last thice years and a half. Now, what had been vvas carned on o a great extent by the general post, and the
the protection of the ordinary law, but that government must the anxious desire 1 had to cwiy th.icpoorer than when we entered on the discharge of its du- which I have opposed the measures of the noble earl, it has said bv an hon. gent., a member of the other house, to twopeun y messengers and couriers were seen passing in great
be armed with extraordinary powers. (Hear, hear.) Having that were then m and uduen I ™^ d^ 8d ties. There is yet one topic more, to which I must beg been solely because I did not approve of them. (A laugh.) whose opinion he presumed the noble duke wWd attach rluillbBis trough the streets in our neighbourhood, which
as 1 have latmiat f> f a;ed “y ? P d U ™ I i f °T t 0 f r wWch U-eTwm 1 yOUr , lo, ‘ dsln ! 3s P* rauss ‘ on , t 0 if er = 1 ha ™ On many of his measures I have liad tiie misfortune or some weiglit? The hon. member to whom he alluded had f ented too confuted for the crowds which came down here
Slot! upon tins subject, it cannot be newssar for me to add together made me retract ti e i ?»oU.tmn v ,l d.i the erem 1 sented as an enemy to the Clmrch-as endeavouring to differing from him ; but this I can say for myself, that I was once been member for, he believed, Taunton. He did not frH “* ail patters. Even the Judicial business of the morn--
any thing now upon tins part of the subject the mote have alluded to had induced mi totoim vv huh m the raise up hostility to her throughout tne country-aad that always most anxious to support him when i could ; and 1 know whether he still represented the same place, but if not fS " as tar « th “ c interrupted by the numbers who came
especially, as when I introduced the bill I went into a state- opinion ot reasonable men, mui . haveapp atd jusah„ble. the present opposition to her has been occasioned by me. mean - to support the noble earl in the measure of which he he must suppose that he sat for some other borough, for he do "’ n t 0 deli ™’ ia Pixies. When I saw this, lat once
ment ot considerable length of all the c.icumstances which My lords, m March last I completed mjlOth and at I deny the charge. lam actuated by the most friendly has given notice that he intends to move the second reading could not believe that with the peculiar opinions which he SHve up the bill as lost (hear, hear), though I could not con-
appeaied essential to establish the fact ot its being reude ed that period a man has a claim to leaie « att ve du. es feelings towards the Church, and that is the reason why. l oa §,-iday next. I repeat, my lords, that I was always once held he could be now a county member. His opinions why the decision as to its fate had been reserved to tbat
necessary. But, my lords, i.pontius occasmntvvlluaturally ot public life ; .for though he might^ da ige, u-idei oim- have been so anxious to take what appeared, to me the anxious to support the noble earl, and that I never opposed were once so strong against the corn laws that he almost late stage. It was, however, so arranged, and the bill was
he expected ot me, oy your lordships, that I should enter into nary and easy c.icumstances, the uu, es o: U e ofc I t , best measures for correcting her abuses. I have possessed him but hided the mob against d,at measure in 1818. Of course he lost « that stage. Ido not blame any of your lordships for
some explanation as to the circumstances ana events winch yet lt « probable that they would be much bettrt large patronage with reference to appointments in the The LORD CHANCELLOR said, that after the extra- could not expect that the hon. gent, could now sit for a having taken that course. 1 have no doubt it was done
have occurred, and which have Pioduced this new situation Uy a man stronger than I am, and bicssca as I am wth Church, and 1 appeal to the right reverend prelates on ordinary speech of the noble-duke who had just sat down, county, and still less for such a county as Essex; or that he from the pure desire of giving the government of my noble
m which 1 now stand. My lords, ft tan fondly be necessity good health at this period of my Ufe. I thmk I may_failly, my left, whether, in every instance, I have not shown the he must trespass upon the indulgence of their lordships for a could’have influence enough to get returned for that county, tr,eud all the support you conscientiously could. I win „ ot
to call to your lordships recollection what has passed in this be excused for having euterUimd the u ttt uon of let iug most anxious solicitude to exercise that patronage by the f ew minutes. That he rose under the influence of feelings and to defeat his noble friend (Lord Western). But what said h>r a moment suppose that it was done will any view to em.
house upon a question which was put to me, aid he answ ei i abandoned, however, a PP°. iatm ent °f persons to vacant offices who were most qua- exceedingly different from those under which he laboured Ids hon. friend-the hon. member to whom lie alluded-fbr he barrass the government. The bill was founded on the report
winch I returned. I was asked \\ het ei, m any com- i,a Ve already stated. 1 « hopes tnat « e might go on lined to hU them ? (Hear, hear.) V, itn regard to the ap.. whe n his noble friend resumed his seat was a point which still called him Ids hon. friend-they were still on habits of ot some six Tory commissioners, who would have carried its
tauuication that had taken place upon this any com- tlll those measures weie completed,.and till this session poiutment of a near relative (the Bishop of Hereford) to the he should not attempt to disguise from the house. He par- private friendship, though he differed from his hon. fnend, or P™iciple much further than I was willing logo with it:
inumcation had been made to a peisou who s k own to had dosed. But it has happened o e vise I low com , seat winch he now occupies on the bench of bishops 1 would took of what he then supposed to be the universal feeling, rather he should say tl.lt his hon. friend differed from him, >*ut, nevertheless, its fete was such as I have described. My
the strong views which he takes u the: a^iis, a I «l a » d my lords, to the cu-cnmsiance whU d^‘‘^ a ha appeal to his right rev colleagues on that bench, whether he and w hat every thing which had passed subsequently coni for he went away from those opinions which he had once held noble frit nd made no charge, or imputed no blame for
(for Ido not wish to speak of him in ay o hei te ms ? vernment of the assistance o.my noble fnend the Chan- was not deserving of the appointment ? (Hear hear, from dated him was the v?ry general feeling of tiie iiouse (hear, but which he (the Lord Chancellor) still continued to hold J a »7 embarrassment which was occasioned ; all he did was to
I was asked “whether I was any patty to th,t com- ceilor ot the Exchequer, the lading of the crown he bjsnops, and from the opposition peers.) And yet, hear), and that feeling would have indisposed him, indeed it but what said his hon. friend on thi accession of the present express his regret that any such embarrassment should have
Eiumcation ? My lords, I stated th «‘> a " dl ' l , ep “ m the House oi Commons, m whommy who though th.s appointment occurred since 1 have had the would have deprived him of the capability of entering into a administration? He remarked that if they kept the peace of existed. Ido not feel it necessary to enter upon the question
it now, that the communication was only made without ,-ested, who was my nght am, and wntmut «kmiour to preside over his Majesty s councils, my right rev. political contention, a party discussion, on tiie merits of a Europe for three months it would be a miracle. Well, they had of the Reform Bill, to which the noble duke has referred. (It
my knowledge, but that it lad Ji'T sh J.Tl.l' ™ aUCe I . felt n . l , t to , be ‘“f Ihi Uakefed OWC - lt l0 “n' ih . at a W J mntment was speedl which was an explanation merely, and not an attack, kept it now for three years_for three years and seven rnomhs; was here intimated that the Duke of Wellington had no Id-
whether such a course ought to be taken I should hare proceed. The former breach had, the Cabinet, made in lli.il and was given at the particular request or my He felt surprised, but there was no accounting for taste,-he so that in fact they hid three years and four months to spa. e verted to that measure.) Well, I thought the noble duke had
replied that no power nor influence winch I, as an m- tins new breach placed nm a n vhic l coulu sovereign It was not tor me to resist this most gracious felt surprised that this occasion should have been selected and yet they counted it no miracle; (hear, hear, and a expressly alluded to it, but I may infer that he alluded to it
dividual member of the government, might possess, should llot llop( , ; by continuing in it, to lende. any nsetuf seivice command of ins Majesty. (Hear.) It is true that since then, for bringing forward such a discussion; and he was confident laugh: and ’lie (the Lord Chancellor) say no thance of the aad include it amongst those measures in which the noble
have been wanting to prevent such a communication of tnat t 0 my sovereign or to the country On eceivm my my rev. relative has been appointed to a stall which had be- that if B by ‘ ny means the sense of their lordships could be peine of Europe being interrupted, unless something stepped d »ke would have supported the government if he could”"™
secret nature from beu.g madem tha quarer_(her hen noble friend’s resignation, therefme, I felt impelled, by an come vacantm Westminster Hall; but Ido not suppose that taken on this subject, on this occasion at least he'should in for which they well not prepared, to mar the nolicy ofthe with them. But at all events I may allude toil t fe,
being strongly impressed with the feeling that it would not be irresistible necessity-! felt that I was left no alternative any one will complain ot tnat (hear), as it was only more fi, ld himself in a large majority. Nevertheless, the noble present administration. Unless some unforeseen interposi- chat there were some divisions on it against its movers"'
to the credit ot government to make any communication what- but to tender at ‘the same time my on n resignation, durable as being more convement for the discharge of his duke had dragged him by force into the discussion, unless non of that kind should occur, lie would say that the peace I td at one of these was in the committee; and it was o-ilv
ever, much less such a communication, which was m the na- xhese resignations have been accepted, and I now stand other unties, and certainly not ot importance in a pecuniary indeed noble fords who were judges deemed it a part of of Europe was more secure at the present moment than When when its conductors threatened to cease ogo wi*h the bill
i ture of a private one, to the party alluded to. (Heal.) My herc discharging the duty of my office only till such tune point of view. My first ooject in all the ecclesiastical ap- justice that they should hear only one side, and that since they came into office; and he should consider it no slight that two of Us most determined opponents declared'that thev
lords, from the time that my opinion ol the necessity oi themca- a 3 his Majesty shall oe able to supply my place. X trust pomtments I have made lias been to select the persons 'the side of impeachment and attack—of impeachment against praise to their successors in office, whoever they might bef to were ready to bring in a similar bill with some Stl
sure was wrung from me up to the present, I have seen no rea- that in tins last scene of my political life I may have full most suited tor the office, without regard to the amount measures, and of attack against individual ministers ; and say in three years and a half hence, that they had kept the difications. This was another proof of the disposition J
son to change that opinion. But I now turn to another mattei, credit) when I say, that I wish nothing to be disguised ot emoluments, ihat of my relative is only 40001. a that thev should dispense with the somewhat inconvenient peace of Europe as well as it was left on the 9th of July, your lordships to support the administration of mv
Up to the 2dd of June I had no reason to believe that there fmm youl . lordships. I submit myself to jour censure, year, whren is not only among the lowest m this country, task of'hearing the other side. He had never heard a 1834. That he thought would be doing something for which friend. Ido not think it necessary for nie to tksoa® on
was any doubt upon the subject anywhere among ‘he mem- it - j lmye bee n in fault; I claim your indulgence ir my but vvas the munmum.agreed on tor tlie prelates in the speech less calculated to excite angry feeling than that they would deserve well of their country. He did not think lordships’ time with any further remarks on what has falfen
bers oftfie Cabinet; I had no idea that any body diffeifca errors will admit ot an excuse, and I call, a* I think i Caurch of Ireland, m the bill whicu was last year under which had just been delivered by his noble friend, that he ought to trespass on the time of their lordships by any Horn tlie noble duke. My lords, I must, before X ronriutfo
opinion with me. It was the opinion ot mvseit arid my c - ha ve a nght to do, for your just- aud kind consideration tiie consideration of your lordsmps. i have thus, my or less calculated to kindle and increase political animosity, farther remarks, but there was one point on which he would a £ ai n express my deep regret that the determination of mv
leagues, in consequence ot previous communications, t at t e of the difficult circumstances in which I have been placed, lords, made your lordships and the public tally aware (Hear.) He had never heard an address more touching in beg to offer one or two observations. He alluded to what had noble friend to retire from office is final, in
renewal of this act was indispensably required. 1 myselt (Cheers.) To you and to my countiy I submit my conduct ot the condition in which matters at present stand with painting, more candid in pretension, more fair and open in been sometimes said by a most able and intelligent individual, which lam sure very many of your lordshins mrHrirw*
instructed tlie Attorney General prepa.e abi oi its in judgment. 1 came into the government in a season ot dit- respect to his Majesty s government. 1 liave only in ad- disclosure—one in which blame against anybody, and more a member of the other house, out of whose book tiie noble in this feeling lam satisfied T might camunnd'-i m dnrie •
veaewal, which is now on the table or your lordships house; fi cu i t y. I never would have accepted tlie situation it I had ditiou to state, tnat I shall continue to act as a minister particularly against tlie noble duke, vvas more cautiously and duke had taken a leaf on this occasion. In following tlie ex- tiie house. But my sorrow is the more deeo Sr 01
but upon the 23d of June a new set of circumstances took see n the means ot forming a government without my doing ot the crown as long as ins Majesty requires my services, carefully shunned. (Hear, hear.) His noble friend had ample of tlie hon. and learned person to whom lie alluded, that my noble friend is still equal, from Ms robust
place. It is difficult to go into the statement o cucum- s - I never should have been m that situation il I could and until he has appointed a successor. But lam sure stated ins reasons for his unhappy resolution—for so he (the me noble duke made his remark—not of course in order to standing, from his imdiminished ability and hi" I'w'
stances, of which no part should have been made public ; have persuaded my noble friend, the noble maiqius (Laus- your lordships must see that, circumstanced as I am, it Lord Chancellor) raiist tali il—of retiring from office, a rest- attack.—not to accuse the government of his noble friend, but honourable and manly mind to all the duties nf All i/
but if part has been published, and has produced certain downs) near me, to accept it. I took it as a matter of neces- would not be expedient to proceed with all tlie measures lotion which no man could deplore more sincerely than lie no doubt out of pure kindness, and as a proof of tlie dispo- —that in every quality of head and heart he « We
results, which it has done, it is necessary that I, standing Bity> and I should before now have resigned but tor tne con- before the iiouse. With respect to the bill for the sup- did; and in taking leave of their lordships in his public capa- sition of which he spoke as existing at that (the opposition) statesman of the age, and while I recret thlthi®sC!?™? 7
here as charged with tlie non-performance of my duty, tinned operation of the same cause. Ine duties which that pression of disturbances m Ireland, I am anxious that it city—in laying down his office—in stating the reasons why he side of the house to give every support to the government of I may hope that he mav be still stared to
and being answerable m duty to my oveieigu, and situation imposed me I have endeavouied to discharge, should be proceeded in with the least possible delay, ba- laid down his official life—his noble friend by sonic slip ot his noble friend, or rather wot to oppose it except on cons ien- many years. My lords, ! who have mvn mv ,i ft Ku iO T
yesponsible for my own character, should state, m the clear- On the first time of my appearing in this house as a minister cause I conceive it necessary tor securing the peace and the tongue had called it his political life, but God forbid that tions grounds: that remark was that since the days of Lord foe 30 years, who have latterly* lived with Idm AiiAAi
rn manner, and without disguise, the real nature of all those of the crown 1 stated the principles on winch the government safety ot Ireland; but lam sure, my fords, you will con- his political life should yet close for many a long year. His George Gordon’s blob in 1780 more of the blood of his Ma- hourly, who have seen him iii’his unnre/ ml nmm ®l*
circumstances. On the 23d ot June I ie„eivet a lettei loin would be conducted—l stated that the tmee gieat oojects cur with me m tluuKmg tnat it would be inexpedient to noble friend in laying down before their lordships ins official jesiy’s subjects had not been shed in this country than since whereas your lordships may have seen l in/ ?,
the Lord Lieutenant, a private and confidential tetter, which 0 f government wouid be the reform ot parliament, peace, send the measures down to the other house before another life m the House of Lords, in taking leave of his colleagues the accession of his noble friend’s administration. Now, if greater preparation—l will sav and'T can ? " tS , Qt
I never would have mentioned out ot the Cabinet had X not alld economical reform. I appeal with coufadence to your administration is formed, as it is possible they may view it on the one side aud his opponents on the other, did, iie con- the noble duke had complained—if lie urged this as a matter and gladly bear mv exultin'" testimonv .V,i f* y
been obliged to do so by the necessity ot the case, m which lordships when I ask whether these three great oojects in a different light from that in which the present govern- fessed it, and so too would his noble friend confess it, indulge of blame, as showing that the government was cruel or san. him in mdre perfect intellect in ““T
letter the Lord Lieutenant did appear to taae a new view ot have not been fulfilled ? (Hear.) I know we have been meat regard it. The measure would, besides, in tlie pre- m a retrospect of what ho had done for Iris couutrj, aud of guinary, or too severe or too harsh, the complaint would be guide tiie helm of tlie state than he is at this po ' vei to
the subject, and winch, therefore, I did not tnmk it necessary f requen tly told that we have done nothing m the present sent situation of matters, be sent down to the other house what he could trust to in ins retirement for the continuance understood: but it no donbt was not intended to be Confined That my noble friend should in tiius
to lay before my colleagues. This letter appeared to be pro- session—that it lias been allowed to pass away without under great disadvantages. /What X wouid, therefore, pro- of his name in veneration among his friends and countrymen, within the walls of that house, but that the echo of the of your 'lordships and retiring- from the , p* Yd
aimed not by auy original view ot tlie subject taken by that any thing being done; but I wish your lordships to know pose to your iordships is, that tne report ot the committee he (Loud cheers.) His noble friend bad taken the opportunity, charge should rebound beyond its walls, like some of the appear somewhat dispirited' that he «h„„l,ik 1 0U ’-
illustrious person, of whom I cannot speak too highly, and fl om what quarte r these complaints come, and 1 wish you to received, but that tne house do not proceed with the third much exasperated as he was, by the foulest aim falsest ca- charges of tiie very eloquent orator to whom lie had alluded somewhat less than his usual share rf X *° h *T 6
Who, in this part of the transaction, acted m the couscieu- recollect that those who make them are themselves tlie cause reading until tilings be again 111 such a state as to afford a Minnies that public men had ever had to struggle against and whom the noble duke himself had blamed for appealing is what mav be expected—it is «L iCT '
tious discharge of his duty. Ihat lettei, I say, appeal eto 0 f them (hear, hear), occupying, as they have done, the time reasonable hope ot the measures passing- the Commons, (hear, hear i, to step aside and overwhelm his base and maiig* to the excitable feelings of his countrymen in a way which seen within, the last year and a half wh .n r w,, ° ea
he produced, not so much by any original view taken 01 til' „f the House of Commons, uignt after night, with motions With respect to the measure before your lordship s house for mint calumniators, by telling to the world the simple trutn, he must know would soon be carried out of doors. He would him to act in distrust of his own foL '1 °' Vn
state of Ireland, but by certain considerations whicu were j wiu not describe (hear, hear), but winch have excluded the administration ot tlie Poor Laws, tiie case is different, that lie retired from office, he aud his family, not only not say tiiat the charge, taken by itself) was one of unmitigated power of mind. That he should row ,*•
suggested to him from this country, without my knowledge t j le consideration of measures oi necessity. In the existence Ic is not a government or political measure. It was forced richer, but absolutely poorer than he was before Ins ac- blame, but taken in connexion with the circumstances out of which, in spite of all he ins said I hold to c • irenicnt,
or concurrence (hear, hear); considerations affecting rather G f the reformed parliament I ask your lordships whether we on the parliament by the Poor Law Commissioners, after a cession to power, albeit tiiat for three years aud up- which it arose, no blame could attach to the government, look on as a cruel calamity to tLbnnntrv of
the political state of this country than of Ireland. 1 thought have not redeemed our first promise ? At the time I entered prolonged and an impartial inquiry My intention, there- wards he had enjoyed the patronage 01 office. Was He would ask the noble duke to paint out any one brightest ornament, and one of whose most mVciVms and
the view taken in that letter was completely m oneous. upon office we were in a difficult situation with regard to fore, is to move the second reading ot the bnl on Enday next, there anything so unusual hi one so circumstanced tak- case in which tlie law had been carried into execu- brilliant possessions is my noble Mend’s SS k
I immediately, and without the loss oi a single post foreign politics. All these difficulties have not.disappeared and I will afterwards do my best to cany it through the ing a retrospect of his public life while in office? Was tion to its extreme extent in which it had not been called My lords,^unlike' the giddy character of the peopleofa neSh
wrote to him, desiring him to ieconsidei the matt ei now ; but many of them have been removed. [The Marquis house. My lords, I will not trespass longer on your lord- here any thing extraordinary in his noble friend’s easting a for by the general feeling of judges and jury by whom bouring lin'd who will one dm fa I ‘ I,™ !i
after a statement from me that such reconsideration-had by 0 f Londonderry shook Ins head.] The noble marquis ms- ships’time and attention, and have only, 111 conclusion, to glance at the charges made by his accusers, which could be the case had been tried, aud then let the noble duke say idol of°their own creation but Un ™ s hip the
his letter been rendered necessary. A suosequeiit lettei .11- gents from me, but whenever he shall think fit to make a thank your lordships for the indulgence you have extended to tairly said to caii forth such comments as tlie noble duke felt whether tlie government deserved that blame which his claims to veneration are incrensed will t N "J 81 *
rived from the Lord Lieutenant, and the result ot tne whole motion on the subject, I shall be perfectly ready to enter upon me. Hear, hear.) it hisduty to make ? But his noble friend had been repre- had been sneeringly cast upon it for too gv?at severity,and worship break the Xl ihX 6
was, that he was of opinion that Hit would be ot advantage the discussion. 1 say, distinctly, that peace is now esta- J* 1 * 5 Duke of WELLINGTON My lords, I did not in- seated as making an attack, and as calling for a‘de- for having shed more blood than all its predecessors dm iu„- fkshioned-I „y“ m m^iTikfto raifonT
id the political state ot tins country, tne omission ot the three on a firmer basis, and that there is a greater prooa- tend to have troubled your lordships oy any remarks 0,1 the fence. The noble duke seemed to think that this attack more than ten times the period of its administration. His the sober-minded nedul* of this country T mT»n tfo.
clauses might be dispensed with, as he would undertake to do bility of its continuance than there was when 1 entered upon present occasion, and certainly should not nave addressed was made in tlie noble earl’s allusion to the state ot noble friend the Lord Wef Justice of England was present of Britain including of course ti.» L P » 1
without them m Ireland; amt more especially it, by dispens- the duties of the government. (Hear, hear.) With respect to you if the noble eari had not, instead of confining himself to the nation. But could tint be said to be an attack to defend himself, He (Lord Denman) knew the pains that of mv noble friend”’thev reioice in life character J. 1 1
ing with those clauses, we could effect an extension ot tie economical reform, I believe that we snail not be reproved a statement of the reasons winch led to his resignation of which consisted only in his noble friend’s throwing put the were taken by the Cabinet, tiie hours they had sat in it their pride and pleasure to rive him their undivided mn*
term of the bill. From this letter, which lie submitted for in this house with having done too little. UV have office, and the circumstances under which that resignation challenge in his own manly manner to his accuse.?, and in deliberation before the final execution of tlie law was fcUce 5 Ind it“ inySiS ?W f^
consideration, but not as a matter of recommendation, I did reduced the expense of ail the establishments 01 the took place, adverted to otner topics, aud thought proper to an expression of bis perfect readiness to meet those accusers ordered on any of the condemned parties, and he could half a century there will have dawned no more ri’nn^rW
feel. myself compelled completely to dissent. t became a country. AVe have taken off taxes to the amount brmg into view the conduct ot former administrations. I, on any day when they might bring- forward any charges hear testimony to the fact that the few who were executed than that which first announces to the BritisAnennfo tIA
| subject of much deliberation m the Cabinet. It is painful to 0 f four millions and a half, and they were tiie therefore, think it necessary to say a tew words. Tfee noble against any measure or his government ? But nevertheless were much below the number on whom, in the opinion of the retirement of my noble friend,—that he has ceased to
me, and ought to be painful to others who force me 10 have no more difficult to take off, as they followed tne reductions earl has stated to your lordships, with great clearness, his own tins was tne ground taken by the noble duke for his com- reverend judges who tried the cases, the law ought to have chief in all measures of rational and just iSoimemlnf fw
. choice but to go into ibis explanation ; and there was, as it ma de by the administration of the uobxe duke opposite, and reasons for resigning office; but, begging the noble earl’s par- meats, whether with good feeling or with bad feeling, or been allowed to take its course. This charge was, no doubt, moderator, when their zeal and unformed omnion* JnuU
now appeared, a considerable division of opinion ia by former administrations, for which they deserve lull credit, don, he has left untouched the reasonsi winchhave induced without any feeling of other kmdi and tiie consequencewas, not made by the noble duke to cast biame mi the govern- lead them too for, and on all occasions thei? adwaflw
tiie Cabinet—but, ultimately, it was agiec on la Places to an enormous amount have been partly reduced or his noble colleague (the Chancellor of the Exchequer) to that he (the Lord Chancellor), who had come down to that ment, uut merely, as the noble duke had said, to show that protector, and let me add as truly the minister 'iftor then*
this bill should be introduced as I have introduced altogether abolished. The patronage of the crown has been abandon the service ot his sovereign. I am surprised at house, intending only to be a silent listener to an expia- the noble eari at tne head ot the government had had no easy own heart as he was certainly the servant of the Ki-io-’s o-rn
it to your lordsmps; and this has since received diminished to an extent which, having no longer an interest this, because, if there ever were men who were bound by a nation, was dragged in as a parly in a debate. Now time of it. His noble friend (Earl Gr.y) did not require to cions choice (Cheers) 7 S*&*~
the full sanction and concurrence ot the Lord Lieu- in the matter as a minister, I must say, for honesty demands kind of necessity to continue in the service ot their Sovereign, on one point on which the noble duke had touched he fuffv be reminded of that fact. He was fully convinced of it be- The Duke of WELLINGTON said a few words in evnfe
tenant. It is a new practice, anil such a circumstance, it, is more likely to render us liable to the charge of having tnose men were the noble earl and his colleagues. (Hear, concurred with him, and he would take leave to say, that of fore the noble duke had thought it necessary to allude to it. nation, hut they were, utterly inaudible in the eallerv ‘
J think, has never be ore happened in the political annals done too much than of having done too little. (Hear, hear.) hear, from the qpposinmi side ot the house.) Hie noble earl all mea who had ever held office, the present ministry would Astaras he (die Lord Chancellor) was concerned in this The question that the report be agreed to was then carried
ol this country, that a question should ause and a dis- With respect to the internal state ot the country, your lord- had referred to the speqehot a right lion, friend ot mine (Sir be tne most without excuse if they could think of leaving matter, as a member of the government, he was anxious to and the bill ordered to be engrossed 3
closure be called for of the confidential communications ot snips well recollect what that was when I came into office—l Robert Peel), which had been delivered in the House oi the service of their Ring and their country unless throngn he put upon his trial with respect to il, and he should be able Adjourned at half-past seven o’clock.
ministers of the crown between themselves, or with the need not describe it—it is now materially improved. Tne Commons, as enmarrassiug his government, and consequently au unavoidable necessity. (Hear, hear.) This had ever to show, whenever the subject came for discussion, that if .
subordinate officers ot the government. (Heal.) it ias trade of the country is in a sound healtny condition-—the leading to the noble eairl s resignation of office. Iquiteconcur been his opinion since he came into oiiice—it was his opi- the government had allowed the iaw to take its course on ten HOUSE OF COMMONS \V in\r 1n , v Titt v q
never been the pract.ce that such communications should manufacturers are generally employed—the credit of the with the noble earl 111 the propriety ot preserving secrecy m Mon to the present hour; and he felt that he should not times the number who actually did suffer, they would have , naMESPAV, July 9.
he made known to the two houses ot parliament (hear, country is improving. The revenue, too, is increasing, all confidential correspondence. But my right non. friend discharge his duty it, at all sacrifice of his comfort—at ait had the general feeling of the judges and jury and the tTWFTVP OTT OCK tTTTTivr 1
hear)—the result alone is that Which you are entitled to and the whole condition ot the country is better, witn only-begged the RigodHon. Secretary lor Ireland would let abandonment of his own ease—at the destruction, if so it country i» their favour; hut they had tempered justice On the motfon ofMr ITT7SIMON r
know. You have a right to be made acquainted with one exception, perhaps—that ol the state ot the agricul- tne House ot Couimoi know what Had passed in the way or might be, of his own peace of mind, lie did not stand by with mercy, and thev had allowed the law to take its movementln ll was Aldathird tiiSe and gSt ° n Im-
public documents; but to ask what had occurred in the tunst (hear, hear, hear) ; and even there the absence correspondence belwln the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland that gracious Monareh and that country whose sup( course only on those whom it would have been injustice P M? F 'POLL»SK resented a »etw!£',l -n
course ot the discussion of any particular measure m the of improvement rather affects the landlord, who will be and the government here, relative to the renewal of the p or t-whose cordial and hearty support-lie’ had received to the public to suffer to escape. The consequence of the
Cabinet—what _ particular opinions have been entertained called on lor a reduction ot rents, to which lie must sub- bill for the suppression ot disturbances m that during’the three years and a half of which he had been course which they had pursued was, that internal peace was fi-on^Huntfogdon aramst the Ba£ Bill h ’ petltlou
there-what different views have been takeu-at vvoat nut, than the tenant, who chiefly suffers from the had ad- country. The right lion, gentleman (Mr. Littleton) * member of the government. (near, hear.) After restored to the country, and Ins Able friend quitted office Mr BYNG Presented m kfousfram Ken.iniuwn .a «
different periods different circumstances have prevailed to ministration of the Poor Laws, and who will be relieved by had stated taat on y certain parts ot that correspoadece having said this, he need not add that 111 had not teudered his with tne pleasing consciousness tl&t the state of the conn. pa “ hom fo
alter the opinions ot any ot the different members ol the their change. Political and Trades’Unions have disappear- was intended to be produced-as much as would, m resignation. (This last sentence appeared to produce no try was happy, contrasted with that in which the noble Mr DHGDALE m4enSl Yfram
administration—to require these things, I say, is to re. ed, aud that without the application of any extraordinary bis opinion ol his Majesty s government justify tne i gUgm, sensation, and was followed by an audible titter along duke had left it on ids retirement from the administra- gainst any measure’to ne mu' tfoi
quire that il conceded, wouid render the task of powers on the part ot the government. (Hear.) It must renewal ot the measure; aud a noble lord (tne Chancellor IMe opposition benches, several peers on which seemed tS tion. The noble, duke had alluded to difficulties which he tfo. ™’ P * consumption 01 beei on
I
j
Mr. DUGDALE presented a petition from Birmingham
against any measure to permit the consumption of beer on
the premises.
Mr. FLU MPT RE presented petitions in support of the
Church, and deprecating auy measures tending t o destroy tlie
t . ... * , , , ~ M » , cAumnuiuai) r . 7- , J 1 , , , . v 7, • , oiignL aciukiitu.il, .mu wits luuuwtu uy anauaimc tuier aioa-i uunc uau mui, il uu ma icuieuifiu uyiu lue auuimiisira-
quire that which, rf conceded, vvoiud render the task ot powers on the part ot the government. (Hear.) It must renewal ol the measure; and a no ole lord (tne Chancellor j the opposition benches, several peers on which seemed tS tion. The noble duke had alluded to difficulties which he
nvernment, especially at a time like the present, not only be in your iordships’ recollection how we have been pressed ot the Exchequer), also a member ot the goveminent, ma k e it the subject or lemark amongst each other. This said had occurred in the administration, and he referred as
difficult, but aisoiuteiy impossible. (Hear.; It was with con- on this subject, how we have been reproved for supine, had said, that tiie opimon ot the Lord Lieutenant ot Ireland i was perceived by the noble and learned lord, who went on causes of them to the revolutions of Pails and of Brussels.


*iUanc« between Church and State, from JflndilUea., 0h m hi| ctfmmwulcfttbii, Mid by no mean* to commit Wmseß house, that In Con*«q»iWlcet>fhl» (the Chancellor of tji# Excbfc- few, There fc no raan who more readily than I should che pleasure of the house to brooeed with that motion
Maryi Lambeth, Nettlestead, St. Dunstan’s, Canterbury, and m what he said. As I have said, these private and confident quer’s) retirement from office, the administration was at m acknowledge the right of parliament—the right of both first p
other nlaces : also a petition from Brighton in favour oi tial communications from the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland to end. (Loud cries of hear, hear.) .p.
Captain Acheson and Lieutenant Dawson ; and from the an individual member of the Cabinet brought the subject Mr. HUME said that it was impossible that any adminle- sl ,.u‘ * “f th i 1 [ P arl ' atD ent--t 0 ~ n te^e ™ on I ' !r ; HU ‘ M E said that he had last night given that no-
parish of Fulney, in the West Riding of the county of York, again before the Cabinet the week before last. From the na- tration could be formed otherwise that on those liberal prin- r , n7° aJ °f’ 1 never naa a doubt about it -it 1 had, tice alter the statement made by the noble lord, and con-
the clergy and laity of Exeter and other places, to the same ture of these communications I was led to believe that the ciples which the noble lord opposite entertained. Attempts 1 u,°i iave that removed by the presence of a ceiving that there being no responsible minister to con-
effect. ‘ three first clauses of the act-—these, I mean, which refer to might be made, but he was much mistaken in the feelings, n °ble baron on the bench near me, who in another place duct the business of the house, and that the entire Ca-
Mr. COOPER presented a petition against the proposed meetings in the parts of Ireland not proclaimed—were not both of this house and of the country, if he did not think'it
alterations in the Beer Act. essentially necessary, and that they might he omitted from was utterly impossible at the present moment to saddle upon
Mr. EWING presented three petitions from the Chamber the new bill without endangering the peace of Ireland, the country a Tory administration. (Loud cheers.) He could
of Commerce, the students attending the Mechanics’ Insti- Under this impression I objected to the renewal of those not but again express his regret for the situation in which the
tute, and from the merchants of Glasgow, in favour of the clauses. (Hear, hear, especially from the Irish mem- country was placed. (Hear, hear.)
Bankruptcy Bill. The hon. member expressed his concur- hers.) My right hon. friends the members for Inverness, sale of beer bill.
rence in the prayer of the petitions. for Cambridge, for Edinburgh, and for Coventry, coin- Sir E. KNATCHBULL said that before he moved the
Sir W. HAE complained of the delay which had taken cided with me in taking that course, and in making that oh- order of the day for the, house resolving itself into a commit,
place in the progress of this bill through the committee. He jection. I need not state to the house that we were in a mi- tee of the whole house upon the Sale of Beer Bill, he hoped
hoped the bill would not be pressed through the house nority in the Cabinet. The Cabinet decided against us, and to be allowed to present some petitions relative to the subject,
during the present session. we had to consider whether we would acquiesce in this deci- The hon. member then presented several petitions, but from
The LORD AD Vi )C ATE admitted that great delay had sion, or whether we would break up the government. We the noise of members quitting their scats it was impossible to
taken place in affording justice to the people of Scotland with decided that it was our duty to acquiese. Upon the most hear from whence the petitions emanated,
regard to the laws of bankruptcy. The bill should have been careful consideration which I have been enabled to give the Similar petitions were presented by Mr. V. Smith ;by Mr.
passed 20 years ago. The delay which had occurred during point since, after considering carefully the course which we Scholefield from the publicans of Birmingham ; and by Mr.
the present session was for the purpose of giving the bill the then pursued, I am prepared to say now, as then, that I Godson from Kidderminster.
fullest consideration. He drew a wide distinction between am convinced that with the imperfect information we then Sir E. KNATCHBULL, in moving that the Speaker do
this kind of delay and that of which his hon. and learned had of what had occurred we were right in taking that course, now leave the chair, expressed a hope that on a measure of so
friend complained. (Hear, hear.) Ido not mean to disguise from the house that much public importance as the bill with which he was
Col. HAY presented a petition from Banff, in favour of I felt in coming to that decision that I might be, under such charged, the hon. and learned member for Cork (Mr. F.
the Scotch Bankruptcy Bill. circumstances, placed in a situation of great difficulty and em- O’Connor) would not persist in the course he proposed, and
Sir W. RAE said he had been intrusted with a petition barrassment in conducting the measure through this house, which the hon. and learned member had unquestionably the
from the Dean and Faculty of Advocates, signed by 150 of But when, on Thursday last, I heard the statement of my right to follow, —namely, of bringing forward the motion of
its members of all parties, and including some of the friends right hon. friend the Secretary for Ireland, and then for the which he had given notice.
of the hon. member, expressing a desire that the bill should first time was made aware of the nature and extent of the Mr. O’CONNOR and Mr. HUME rose together—the
he allowed to lie over till next session. Seeing that the whole communication which he had made to the hon. and learned former, however, gave way, when
bar of Scotland were so anxious in this moderate request, he gentleman, I certainly thought it most probable that the diffi- Mr. HUME said that he must submit to the house whe-
hoped the Lord Advocate would accede to it, and not hurry culties and embarrassments which I should have to encounter ther after what had taken place in the course of the evening
the bill through the house during the present session. would prove to be insuperable. The debate on Monday it would be advantageous to proceed with either this bill or
The Iord”ADVOCATE entertained the highest respect night on the motion of the hon. and learned gentleman proved | any other measure. He should therefore move that the house
for the sentiments of the bar of Scotland, and for their eu- to me that they were so, and convinced me that I could ido now adjourn. (Hear, hear.)
dcavours to improve the law by the objections they had made no longer conduct that bill or the general business of Mr. O’CONNELL seconded the motion,
to the bill, and the suggestions they had thrown out. It un- government in that house with credit to myself or with ad- Mr. F. O’CONNOR said that he should not have risen
fortunately happened however that those gentlemen whose vantage to the public. (Hear, hear.) I accordingly wrote hut for the appeal made to him by the hon. member for Kent,
assistance and support would be of the greatest benefit to the that night to Lord Grey, and requested him to tender my Though he could not consent to withdraw his motion, which
measure were so occupied during the session that no time was resignation to his Majesty, which his Majesty has been was as important to the individuals to whom it referred as
afforded them for the consideration of it, and now, when graciously pleased to accept. lam authorised by my right j the bill of the hon. baronet could be to the public, he would
the period of their vacation had arrived, they said “ Postpone hon. friends to whom I have already alluded, to say that i not stand in the way of the motion of the hon. member for
it till next session.” Now, as he was convinced this was they approve of, and concur in, the step which I have I Middlesex, which seemed to be assented to by the house,
the only time when the attention of those learned indi- taken. (Hear, hear.) I have stated to the house the rea-! He trusted that his Majesty’s Attorney General would ap-
viduals could be devoted to the subject, he thought it most sons which induced my right hon friends and myself to / point some day, or at least’assist him in fixing someday,
desirable that the bill should be proceeded with, and trusted take that course. I should be extremely sorry if the j when the subject of the imprisonment of the editors of the
their assistance would not be withheld in pointing out what course which I and my right hon. friends have pursued 1 True Sun could be brought conveniently before the house,
they considered defects in the bill, and giving the country on this occasion should not be approved by my fellow-coun- |as it had already been so frequently postponed in consequence
the benefit of their legal knowledge and experience in its trymen (cheers) ; but I should be still more grieved if it of the absence of the hon. and learned gentleman,
general amendment. [(Hear.) This measure of justice had should not be approved of by that large body ot gentlemen The ATTORNEY GENERAL said that any inliuence h.
been itoo long delayed from the people of Scotland, and in this house who have reposed so much confidence in me, i might have possessed with reference to the subject of the
the petitions which had been sent from all parts of that and who, by their handsome and steady support, have enabled i motion of the hon. and learned member for Cork was now
country showed how universally such a measure was approved me to maintain a position for which my abilities would other- |at an end, but he should at all times be ready to meet the
of. (Hear.) wise have so little qualified me. (Great cheering.) I should be | motion, and, whether iu or out of office, to defend the share he
Mr R. STEWART said, whatever the opinion entertained deeply grieved indeed if those gentlemen did not approve of my j had taken in the transaction to which that motion refeued.
W the advocates of Scotland might be, the bill had the unani- conduct. (Cheers.) Having made this statement to the house, ( (Hear.)
mous approbation of the people. He trusted no delay would I have nothing further to add, hut that I hold my office Sir B. KNATCHBULL was ready to bow to the decision
fake place in carrying it into effect. until my successor is appointed, and that until that is the case | of the house with reference to its adjournment, but hoped the
The ATTORNEY-GENERAL considered the hill a most I shall feel it my duty to conduct the ordinary business of the hon. member for Middlesex would'withdraw his motion, in
salutary measure for the improvement of the bankrupt laws government in this house. (The noble lord resumed his seat ! order to enable him (Sir E. Knatchbull) to postpone going
of Scotland and hoped his hou. and learned friend would amidst the loudest cheers.) j into committee on this bill until Friday. (Hear, hear.)
use his utmost endeavours to effect the passing of the bill Mr. LITTLETON.—After the statement which has been I Mr. HUME had no wish to impede the business of the
dining the present session. just made by my noble friend, I amsurethe house will extend house, and therefore should acquiesce in the suggestion of the
Mrf WALLACE said this was entirely a question between its indulgence to me while I address a few observations to it. hon. baronet, the member for Kent. (Hear.)
the advocates and the people of Scotland. As the measure (Hear, hear.) No individual iu this house was ever placed The order of the day was then postponed to Friday next,
was so loudly and so universally called for, he trusted the in a more painful situation than I now find myself placed in. as were also several others.
cause of the people would prevail.'- I have committed two errors. I have committed, first, central criminal courts bill.
After a few words from Mr. Gillon, Sir G. Murray, and the error of having a communication with the hon. and The SOLICITOR-GENERAL moved the third reading
Mr. Ewing, the petition was ordered to lie on the table. learned gent, opposite, without the sanction of the head of his of this bill, which had not only passed the other house of
Colonel HAY presented a petition from the bankers and Majesty’s government, and I have committed the further and ; parliament, but had been fully discussed in committee in
merchants of Elgin, complaining of clandestine emigration greater error in placing confidence in one who has proved him- this house.
to America; also a petition in favour of the Church from self so ill-deserving of it. (Hear, hear.) I must say, how- After a short desultory conversation, the bill was read a
Newland. ever, that nothing is easier, after such a thing has led to an third time.
Mr. WALLACE presented petitions from Greenock unfortunate result, than to look back and discover the course On the motion of Mr. ROTCH, a clause was added to the
against impressment; also against a general registry, and which it would have been more dignified and wise to follow, hill by way or rider, to the effect of exempting the county of
against the corn laws; and a petition from hand.loom (Hear, hear.) I am now perfectly aware that the wisest Middlesex from all the expenses, sessions papers, and calen-
weavers of Paisley, in favour of the Dorchester unionists ; thing for my own character and interests—perhaps the wisest dars, and other items incident upon this bill other than those
also a petition from Kilmarnock, in favour of vote by ballot, thing for the interests of my friends in the government, would expenses to which the county would be liable before the
Sir B. KN ATCHBULL presented several petitions from have been that I should have resigned my office the very first bill came into operation. On the motion of Mr. ROTCH,
Chatham, and other places in the county of Kent, in support moment it was communicated to me that the hopes and sin- the date of the bill coming into force was changed from
of the Church. . cere belief I had entertained that the clauses in question in ; the Ist to the 31st of October next The hill was then
Mr. MILDMAY presented 41 similar petitions from pa- the Coercion Bill would have been left out could not possibly passed,
rishes in Hampshire. _ be fulfilled. I never in my life shall forget the emotion of i The other orders of the day were then disposed oft and the
The ATTORNEY-GENERAL presented a petition from regret I experienced on receiving that communication; but I house adjourned at half-past six o’clock.
the solicitors of the Supreme Court of Scotland, against the having reflected that my resignation upon that point, and at
annuity tax; also from the shawl weavers of Edinburgh, in such a time, might have powerfully influenced the conduct HmiW DP Tnurtv Ti, r,. m
favour of free trade; also from the schoolmasters of the of others, and probably might produce a dissolution of the p .. . f ’lh ursday, J JIY 10.
Presbytery of St. Andrew’s, Fifeshire, for an increase of present government, I confess I did not think that I was an , ®, iu . onB A” tavour . lJie Church were presented by
salary ; also a petition from the same persons in support of individual of sufficient importance to justify me in taking a tie “ ai °‘ Coventry, from parishes in Worcestershire ;
the Church of Scotland. The learned gentleman said he had step that might lead to such consequences, (Hear, hear,) I aijd by the Bari of Winchilsea, from places in Essex,
also petitions to present from his old constituents at Dudley, will candidly acknowledge that I had not sufficient courage The Duke of BEAUFORT presented a petition Horn
(Laughter.) The first was from 4,200 members of benefit to take a step that might produce that risk. (Loud cheers.) a parish in Wiltshire against the Poor Laws’ Bill,
societies, praying the Friendly Societies Bill might not pass I therefore resolved to do that which I hope ryas not dis- Petitions in favour of a law for the better observance of
into a law; and the second from the retailers of beer at Dud- honourable. (Cheers.) I resolved to compromise myopinion the Sabbath were presented hv the Earl of WINCH II
ley, against the Beer Act Amendment Bill. on this point, albeit that opinion was a strong and decided SEA from nlaces in Essex
Mr. WILKS presented petitions from New and Old Slea- one, and to abstain from taking a line of conduct that might /. , vr , r .......
ford, Lincolnshire, from Cambridge, and several towns in the injure a government of the principles of which lin the main emotion ot Kora vv tiARNULiFTE the house
county of Chester, and in the neighbourhood of Manchester, most cordially approved. (Hear, hear.) My noble friend has we ° t lnto committee on the County Rate Bill,
against the Beer Act Amendment Bill; also petitions from observed that it was only on Thursday last he was aware of ° ,Mne amendments were agreed to, and the bill, with
the Dissenters of New Broad-street Chapel, against the the full extent to which I had gone in my communication to tbe amendments, was ordered to be printed.
Church-rates Bill, and from Silver-street Chapel, to the same the hon. and learned gentleman opposite. I admit that I THE ministry.
effect; and from the Dissenters of Gibraltar Chapel, for ad- ought to have communicated to my noble friend what had The Marquis of LONDONDERRY said that although
mission to the Universities. passed on that occasion. But be it borne in mind that so full the bench opposite was nearlv empty, and that the noble
Mr. HERBERT presented 115 petitions from parishes in and so entire was the conviction in my mind, not merely that earl who was lately at the head of the government was
Wiltshire, in support of the Church. the conversation which had taken place between the hoc. and ; n nj. „,ji> i,- ■5. . ~ ■
Sir R. PEEL presented similar petitions from members of learned gentleman aud myself would go no further, but that . , . ’ , . e m ,Uate ™ r °'' nd n ™>
the Established Church residing iu the Isle of Wight; also the clauses in question were sure to be abandoned, that the 11 , , e noble and learned lord was on the Woolsack,
from Breamridge, Ashstead, Binding, Milbrook, Hants, and importance of doing anything more than merely to inform f. be tyeretore thought it right to ask a question which
other places in the counties of Devon, Hants, and Derby. my noble friend that a conversation of the kind had taken bls public duty compelled him to put. Their lordships
Sir W. RAE presented a petition from the Dean and Fa- place had never once been present to my mind. (Hear, hear.) were in this extraordinary predicament that in this house
•spy of Advocates, objecting to certain parts of the Scotch I shall not detain the house further than to express my de- the notde earl told them yesterday that he had resigned,
Bankruptcy Bills, and praying that the bill might be post- sire_my most earnest anxiety—that the house may feel that aud a similar communication was made to ‘he other house
puued. n in the course which I have unfortunately taken ! have been by the noble lord the Chancellor of the Exchequer. In
Sir K. CODRINGION presented a petition from 4,000 actuated bv no other desire than to promote the peace of a r hic , 11 a i 1 4 11
inhabitants of the town of Devonport, against the Beer Act country (cheers, especially from the Irish members) which 1 1 , V . ~ °. r 011 ? woo sad
Amendment Bill. The petitioner admitted that injurious has ever, since my earliest entrance into public life, had my ~ - s <ud that with the exception ot these two individuals
effects had been produced by the operation of the Beer Bill in warmest and sincerest sympathies (great cheering), and for R overnrneut existed as before, as there were no other
some parts of the country, but they contended it was no which, be it borne in mind, I was at the time in some degree mem bers of it who had resigned. A contrary statement
reason why they should be deprived of the property they responsible. (Loud cheers.) ° was made in the other house of parliament, for the noble
had embarked in the trade upon the faith of an act of par- Mr. O’CONNELL said that the statements which had been lord the Chanci-llor of the Exchequer there said that
Lament. just made had been received by the house in the manner that himself with four others bad retired from the government
Mr. CHILDERS also presented petitions to the same effect the candid statement of an honourable gentleman ought (the Dukeof Buckingham here suggested something), aye,
rom places m the Isle of Ely. Ihe hon. member said it was (hear), and if any person was to blame for the coursewhich and that the dissolution of the admin’stratinn had
his intention to vote against the Beer Act Amendment Bill on the right hon. gentleman had taken_a course dictated by dissolution ot tae admm.strauou had taken
the third reading. He also presented a petition from the Isle his desire to obtain tranquillity for his (Mr. O’Connell’s) un- P A®’ J l b ,® ( l uesu ‘ )n * le wished to be allowed to ask the
of Ely against certain clauses in the Tithe Commutation fortunate country—if any person, he repeated, was to blame, not,le and ka' ned lord was, 11 we had at this moment
Bill. he (Mr. O’Connell) would infinitely prefer that a double a ! government at all. if any ot thevse noble ind:-
Mr. BAILLIE presented a petition from the members of share of the blame should be thrown upon him, than that vi(iuaJs still retained their seals, and whether the noble
friendly societies in Bristol against the Friendly Societies any should be cast upon the I'ight hon. gentleman, Ue was ail( i learned lord would tell him whether he (the Lord
Bill. now convinced, indeed it was impossible that he should not Chancellor) knew of his own knowledge that any indivi-
Mr. WARBURTON presented petitions from Dover, be, that the right hon. gentleman had acted with the most dual had been charged to reconstruct the administration 9
•Winchester, and another place m Hampshire, against the perfect good faith towards him, and that the right hon. gen- If there was not any government now existing he thought
Beer Act Amendment Bill. tleman entertained at the time an honest and sincere he ought to move the adjournment of the house
Sir J. SCARLET I presented petitions from several places conviction pf the truth of every word that dropped from him. 1m- 9
in the county of Norfolk, in support of the Established (Hear, hear.) Indeed, he considered the right hon. gentle- r P . A°r»TA rr nMnrr r r 1 1
Church. man utterly incapable of any thing else. (Hear, hear.) , 8 BURD CHANCELLOR.—I am charged, my
Mr. YOUNG presented a similar petition from the mem- He (Mr. O'Connell) did not rise to vindicate himself on this lords ’ b y m f noble friend who attended in bis place yes-
hers of the Established Church attending divine service at occasion, but he was sure that every one who heard him ter.iay, to give any explanation, and to answer any ques-
St. Matthew’s Chapel, Denmark-hill, Camberwell; also a would recollect that his unfortunate countrymen had re- tion that might be put, to say that he shail not he able
petition from the shipowners of South Shields, against certain posed in him the most unlimited confidence for the last 30 to attend in his place to-day,’ as indeed it is unnecessary
clauses in the Merchant Seamen’s Widows Bill. years, and that he should be the most abject of human beings for him to do, understanding as he did that nothing what-
Mr. S. LEFEVRE presented several petitions from places if he had one thought that was not absorbed in the wish ever would come on; aud that after the explanation of
tTamiifiViirA in snnnort Of the Llmrrh. tn nmmntp fhpir lihprf.iDS anil mi vani’P thPir infpvpstc . , . . ... *.
,r . 1 . i* ., r r ‘ , , " . . evei wouiu come on; ana mac alter trie explanation ot
in Hampshire in support or the Church, to promote their liberties and advance their interests. .. a„a u k j
' Mr. R THOMPSON presented a similar petition from He would ask hon. gentlemen before they condemned him y esterda y> lf he had be might have been spared
North Dalton. to recollect that if England or Scotland had been placed in f ny a PP lluat,on t 0 an *"'<r r questions, as alter stating that
Sir R. PRICE presented a petition from debtors confined in the situation Ireland was, whether their first anxiety would * ie was n ° longer a minister of the crown he was no
the King’s Bench against imprisonment for debt. not be to maintain that portion of the empire with which they iun £ er t 0 be called upon in that manner. In answering
Mr. HOSKINS presented a petition from Ross, Hereford- were connected upon a footing of equality as regarded its tiie first part of the question of the noble marquis, 1
shire, praying that a system of poor laws might be introduced rights and privileges with the rest, and if he (Mr. O’Connell) re-state what I stated yesterday, that I know of no
into Ireland. had one duty greater than another to discharge, it was to see resignations up to this moment, except those of my
Sir H. WILLOUGHBY presented a petition from the that Ireland should be their coequal iu political privileges noble friend lately the real and still the nominal
retail brewers of beer at Newcastle-under-Lyme constitutional rights. (Hear. LHe was deeply convinced head cf the’ government, and of the noble lord the
against the Beer Act Amendment Bill. that the right hon. gentleman and the noble lord were per- ri,. i? u 7 r . . ... 4 ,
Mr. J. BULLER presented petitions from two parishes fectly right in deeming the renewal of the clauses of the , “ e °f tbe Exchequer. I understand it to have
in the county of Devon, in support of the Established Coercion Bill that had been alluded to as utterly unnecessary baen sald - , e noble lord the Chancellor of the Ex-
Church. for preserving the peace of Ireland. He (Mr. O’Connell) had chequer, in the other house of parliament, that three
Mr. LT.FKOY presented petitions from the parish of Holy geted upon the suggestion then given to him in the course, he other persons [the Duke of Buckingham and Lord Lon-
Trinity, aid from Glanmire, Kilmuck, aud other parishes in had pursued, He took no merit to himself for it, but he donderry said four], take them to he four other persons,
Cork, iniupport of the Established Church of Ireland. would have been wrong if he had said a word, or if he had approved of his conduct and motives, and concurred with
The LIRD ADVOCATE presented a petition from the written a line, from which occasion might have been taken, him in the opit|ion he entertained of the propriety of his
writers t the signet against the duty on stamped certificates; should any agrarian disturbance have taken plape, to taunt resigning the office of Chancellor of the Exchequer Ido
also a pation from bo4 parochial schoolmasters of Scotland, the noble lord and the right hon. gentlemen with excesses not understand it to have been said that aov one of fho<»
and fronthree parishes in the county of Perth, praying for which it would be said his (Mr. O’Connell’s) conduct had ~ , , ... . . . y } se
an increse of salary; and a petition from the provost, coun- produced. It was only to preserve the country from that B entlem enh ad tendered hisi resignation ; but then it has
cil, and ihabitants of Edinburgh, complaining of the restric- danger that he had so acted. He was not to be considered "5 en Btated that my noble triend (the Chancellor of the
tion on ts votes of electors. as a private individual in such a case ; he did not act Exchequer) said, that the government was virtually dis-
Mr. T HITMORE presented a petition from Wolver- as such. When confidence was reposed in him he felt that he solved, or was virtually abandoned. I understand the ex-
hamptongainst the Beer Act Amendment Bill. was bound not to mention names. He did not mention pression to have been this—that by that time the noble
Mr. FKSTER presented a similar petition frpm there- names, but then the house would recollect that he had to act lord at the head of the government would have stated
tailers olbeer at TV alsall; also a petition from the members with others, and to get others to act with him,—that he had here, iu this house, that the government was virtually
of seven friendly societies of the metropolis against the to manage others; but he would state that in that manage- dissolved Your lordships will bear witness with me
Friendlyocieties’Bill ment he did not Jitter a.wordlor give a hintto any person of that that waB arl entire m i sappl .ehen S ion (hear, ‘hearh
The Spker left the chair at 6 o clock, the quarter from which he had received the intimation in .. . . , , . . v, , v J
question. He had merely stated,’in vindication of the con- 80 t , liat took the trouble, aud from whatever
{FIVE O'CLOCK SII'TING .) dqct he then pursued, that the information he had receive 4 mollve ’ “ e w h° m he may, to communicate the stare-
The Spker took the chair at 20 minutes past 5 o’clock. might he confidently relied upon. If, finding himself de- meijt made by my noble friend in this house to the Chan-
Long fore that time the house was filled with members, ceived in point of fact (though not intentionally), he had cehor of tbe Exchequer in the other house, communicated
and the gjlcry crowded with strangers, anxious to hear the acted as he had done, he conceived he was fully justified in a statement tbe very reverse of thq fact. My noble
explanatus of ministers on their retirement from office. doing so. But he did not rise to vindicate himself. If there f riend cautiously, purposely, manifestly, abstained from
A mesa:® troni the Lords announced that their lordships was blame to be cast upon any individual, he would b,e cpn- making anv such statement, and stated only that he and
had agre to the 4 per Cent. Annuities Bill, with amend- tent to receive a double share of it. He was as anxious as any the noble lord (the Chancellor of the Exchequer), had
meats • t the London T\ ater-works Bill; to the Securities man could be for the maintenance or an administration upon m .... u ...... \ •> .
H reland'Bill, with amendments; and to the Lambeth liberal principles such as those professed by the Cabinet mi- the i resignations (Hear, hear.) It is impossible
Water-whs Bill. nisters who had been alluded to. They had his (Mr. O’Con. thut my nubl ®, frleild cou d have , sa,d tbat ‘ he
quadruple treaty. nell’s) entire confidence, and he believed* that they had the con- ment was really or virtually dissolved, for then 1 could
Lord \LMERSTON presented a copy of this treaty, fidence of the country. (Cheers.) He thought that the strongest n °t have got up and stated what 1 did afterwards, and
In moviithat it do lie on the table, the noble lord said he administration that ever was formed in this country could which, if the government had been dissolved, would have
felt it hisuty to state that the delay that had arisen in the be formed upon the principles which those ministers enter- been contrary to the fact, aad would have been at once
presentatn o'f the treaty had been occasioned entirely by an tained, in conjunction with colleagues who would combine contradicted by my noble friend. It was an entire mis-
accidentjpmission in it, and that it was not in the slightest with them ip the same sentiments, and who would give to apprehension; no such statement was made here, and
degree iuutable to any hesitation on the part of the For- the country the full benefit and advantage of that measure of noue could We been m[idehere with correctness,and in ac
uegxeu vw .. j r ■ s . n ... none could nave been madenere with correctness,and in ac-
tuyuese gernment to ratify the treaty, or to any disposition reform with which their names would be eternally associated. , . , . c 4 .
to S send fat the earliest moment it could to this country. He begged to withdraw his motion. c “’ dance ' v ' lh the /“*• a “ y "’ ber «-. What 18 . ll^ ely bfi
{Hear hr.) Mr, HUME said that he would only address a few words the consequence of this state of things m which accident
'dissolcion OF the ministry — explanation of to the house. There was no man in the house that could be has placed the government, and the parliament, and the
ministers. more seriously sorry at what had occurred, and at hearing country, is another queNtion, 1 will not speculate on the
The GANCELLOR of the EXCHEQUER rose and the statement of the noble lord and the right hon. gentleman, const quence ; but if any poble lord says that it is highly
sa id Sirhaving been placed in a position which renders it He alluded especially to the statement of the noble Iprd, inexpedient that parliament should go on without a re-
necessarylat I should state to the house the reasons which that he had withdrawn from the government of the country, sponsible head of the government, X beg leave to declare
have govtned my conduct, I asked for and obtained his (Loud cries of hear.) Though he (Mr. Hume) had been t | iat j f u j]y agree with him, and so does mv noble fiiend.
Majesty’s ermission to make that statement to the house, as zealous as any man m supporting the administration of p ' v ‘ 5 ’, , f ■ . -, . mftV _
When the renewal of the Coercion Bill was first brought Lord Grey, he must say that he had been principally actuated . ~ , ’ J. . , ,
under thepnsideradon of tbe Cabinet, I felt it my duty to in doing so by the confidence which he had in the noble lord. ‘ he I thlrd « ad ‘“« o! certain measure. ; but he stated .hat
concur in le renewal of it, with the omission only of those (Cries of hear.) It was therefore with extreme regret that “ e thought the roor Law Bi.l stood in a different situa-
clauses of: relating to courts martial. I hope 1 need not he had heard that the noble lord had been placed in a tion; and, with a gallantry and disinterestedness which
say that lid so with the greatest reluctance, and that no- situation in which he was compelled to resign his office he had always shown, he said, 1,1 how just soever are the
thing woul have induced me to do so but my conviction rather than to sacrifice his principles. (Hear.) He regretted, motives that have induced me to resign my office, yet I
of the absaite necessity of the case. Afterwards private he repeated, to find that the noble lord and others of his col- ought not to make that resignation the cause of stopping
and confidetial communications, however, from the Lord leagues in whom he (Mr. Hume) and the country could a w hich I deem of so much importance to the country
Lieutenants Ireland to individual members of the govern- place confidence had been obliged to secede from the admi- / hear h ear -j .*» ani j my lio bl e friend therefore gave
ment brougt the subject again under the consideration of nistration. (Hear.) ' tha , V. „ hnilld » ir i 110 . Rforward ’ and he will do so
the Cabinetn the week before last. I may as well say that Considerable confusion was here caused by members leav- ’ f . ? ,• • .
it was at tls time that my right hon. friend the Secretary i n g the house, in the midst of which Mr. Hume sat down. to-morrow. It the reconstrupaon of this ad minis ration, or
for Irelandsuggested to me the propriety of telling the The CHANCELLOR of the EXCHEQUER said that the formation of another, §hquld be delayed so long that the
hon. and lerned gentleman opposite that the question was j n his first address to the house he had merely referred to his exigencies of the public business absolutely required it to
not yet finaly decided, and that the bill was still under own case, and to the coursewhich his right hon. friends had be at an end—if it should be delayed so long even as to
consideratioL I saw no barm in this, if it proceeded no fur- taken iu conjunction with him in regard to the Coercion Bill; interfere with the good conduct of the public business,
and lam bound to say in my own justification but he ought to have stated, what he believed Lord Grey had we k now that parliament would have a right to inter*
my right hon. fi ieud to use extreme caution 9 already stated? or was at tluit moment stating in the other ■
made a motion under similar circumstances—a motion
which I recollect I seconded on occasion of the delay that
took place in forming an administration after the lamented
death of Lord Liverporl. But though I admit fully the
right of either house of parliament in this matter, I must
say that [ do not think the state of the country to be so
strongly excited and so feverish as to make a delay of 24
hours too Jong (hear, hear.) His Majesty has been
placed in a state of great difficulty ; and whether consi-
dering the state of parties, which no men more bitterly
deplores than I do, as tending to prevent the formation of
an Administration equal to the exigencies of the public
service—l say that whether considering the state of par-
ties, or the state of parliament and of the country, I
do not begrudge 24 horns (hear, hear) —no, nor a much
longer period of time, for the performance of that most
responsible—that most difficult —that all but hopeless task
in this state of parties, since men will persist in
ing party and personal motives before public ones. (Hear,
bear, and no, no, from the opposition.) I assure your
lordships that I do not refer to this side of the house, but
I say it of all public men more or less, and I speak it in
the spirit of the most unfactious conciliation. (Hear, hear.)
1 have now answered all the questions but one of the
noble marquis'.
The Marquis of LONDONDERRY intimated that the
question about any person being entrusted with the forma-
tion of a new ministry had not been answered.
The LORD CHANCELLOR—No ; and that is just
the question that I will not answer (hear, hear, and
laughter); and what is more, neither interruptions, nor
sneers, nor a good-humoured joke—the force of which I
can feel as much as any noble lord present—shall compel
me to answer a question which duty to my Sovereign
(hear, hear) ought to make me refuse to answer. I
should betray my duty 7 to my Sovereign if I were to an-
swer it. (Hear, hear.) If I knew nothing I could answer
it—easily answer it (a laugh) —but it is because Ido know
that 1 refuse to answer; and I trust that your lordships
will think that I am not guilty of any unbecoming taci-
turnity. lam not taciturn. I can defend myself when
I am a tacked, and I can defend my friends when nay
friends are attacked ; but I think that not to preserve
silence, when any thing but silence would mar the public
service, defeat the end which we all wish to see speedily
accomplished, and prevent Jiis Majoty from gaining that
assistance which he is entitled to from all public servants,
would not betoken a proper regard for the public service.
(Hear.)
The Duke of BUCKINGHAM said that the house had
heard a long and eloquent speech from the noble and
learned lord, instead of an answer to a question whicli
every peer had a right to put—namely, whether the noble
and learned lord knew of any one having received in-
structions to re-construct the administration. The amount
°f the speech was, that the noble and learned lord knew,
but would not tell.
Lord HOWARD of EFFINGHAM interposed, upon
the score of order, and the conversation for a moment
dropped.
ihe Marquis of LONDONDELRY renewed it, by
observing that the noble and learned lord had informed
them of one thing, that to his knowledge, uu to this time,
but two individuals had resigned. Was that right?
The LORD CHANCELLOR.—Yes, quite right.
The Earl of WINCHILSEA asked when tbe house
would go into committee on the Poor Law Bill, which
the noble lord was understood to say he was inclined to
support ?
The LORD CHANCELLOR said that his noble
friend would be here to-morrow, and would then move
the second reading of it, and fix the time for the com-
mittee.
COUNTY CORONERS BILL.
The house then went into committee on the County
Coroners Bill. The several clauses, after a few verbal
amendments had been made, were then agreed to, and
the report was ordered to be brought up on Monday.
The house then adjourned at half-past six, until to-
morrow.
HOUSE OF COMMONS, Thursday, July 10.
C TWELVE O'CLOCK SITTING.)
Major BEAUOLERK brought up the report of the
committee on the Russell’s Estate Bill, which was read
a third time and passed.
Upon the motion of Lord ACHESON, the Newry and
Charlemont Roads Bill was read a third time aud passed.
WILFUL BURNING BILE..
Mr. LLOYD moved the second reading of this bill.
Mr. EWART seconded the motion.
Mr. A. SANFORD expressed a hope that the measure
would not be pressed in the then state of the house, and,
as a friend to the measure, entreated the hon. member to
withdraw it for the present.
Mr, ROEBUCK dep ecated the absence of the law
officers ot the crown, when measures so nearly affecting
the criminal laws of the country were under consideration.
He would resist the postponement of this bill, as, if the
law officers of the crown neglected their duty, the house
ought not.
Mr. ROTCH supported the second reading of the bill.
They might infer, from the absence of the law officers of
the crown, that they had no objections to make to the
bill.
illr, BERNAL said that they ought to recollect that
the aw officers of the crown had other business to attend
to in other places. He would vote for the second reading
if tie bill were pressed to a division,
idr. PEASE supported the bill*
An Hon, Member, whose name we could not learn,
said he had strong objections to the bill, and he hoped it
would be postponed.
After a few words from Mr. BROTHERTON and
Major BEAUCLERK, the bill was read a second time,
and ordered to be committed on Wednesday next.
prisoners’ counsel bill.
Upon the motion of Mr. EWART the house resolved
itself into a committee on this bill Mr. Hawes in tbe
chair.
After a desultory conversation, iu which several mem-
bers took part,
Mr. GORING moved that the house be counted, when
there not being more than 40 members present, the com-
mittee resumed.
Mr. A. SANFORD moved an amendment to the
effect, that unless the counsel against the prisoner should
make a speech for the prosecution, the counsel for the
prisoner should not be allowed to address the jury.
Mr. EWART opposed the amendment, which he said
had been negatived on a former day, in almost precisely
the same words. He hoped it would meet with the same
fate at present.
After a few words from Mr. Pease, Mr. Talbot, Mr.
Ronayne, Mr. Hardy, Mr. Goring, and Mr. O’Dwyer,
The ATTORNEY GENERAL complained of his
having been attacked by some hon. members for his ab-
sence on the present committee (hear, hear) ; but it was
absolutely impossible for him to attend to his official
duties elsewhere, and be in the house at the same time.
As to the objections to the original clause, he could not
see their force, aud he could not support the amendment,
in Scottish Courts the indictments were so minute, and
the discussion prior to the delivery of the evidence, that
the home should not imagine there was any parallel
between the two eases. He was afraid, however, that
the present number of tribunals was not sufficiently great
to allow the full operation of the proposed measure.
(Hear, hear.)
Sir D. K. SANDFORD said he should not press the
amendment.
After a few words from Mr. LLOYD and Col. WIL-
LIAMS, tbe clause was agreed to.
Mr. C. O’DWVER moved for the introduction of a new
clause, to the effect that prisoners should be permitted to
have a copy of the evidence deposed against them before
the magistrates.
The ATTORNEY GENERAL said he did not think
the intention of the bill would call for the admission of
such a clause.
BRBAK»OT OF THE GREY ADMINISTRATION.
(From the Morning News of yesterday.)
In our report of yesterday’s proceedings in parliament will
be <ound the formal announcements, made in both houses,
of the dissolution of Earl Grey’s ministry, and of the cir-
cumstances which led to that event ; in all of which our
readers will discover the closest affinity with the statements
we have from time to time made on the subject.
At such seasons as the present, rumour, with her thousand
tongues, is ever engaged in promulgating almost as many
different stories, but one of which, if any, can be true.
Among the most prominent of her versions, respecting the
new ministerial arrangements, are the formation of an ad-
ministration by Sir Robert Peel, which receives implicit
credit in some circles ; in others the Duke of Richmond is
named with equal confidence ; the Speaker is spoken of by
some; others will have the Duke of Wellington as Premier;
and there are many among those who are usually well-in-
formed on these matters, who state positively that Lord Mel-
bourne has received the commands of his Majesty to <c re-
construct” a new Whig ministry. In our next we hope to
communicate to our readers the appointment to office of men
in whom the confidence of the country may be safely re-
posed.
Meanwhile we refer to the speeches made last night in
the. House of Lords by Earl Grey and the Lord Chancellor,
and in the House of Commons by the Chancellor of the Ex-
chequer and Mr. Littleton ;—especially to that of the Lord
Chancellor, which contained some extraordinary passages
with reference to his own intention of retaining office.
(From the Morning Post of yesterday.)
The disclosures made last night by the late and present
Ministers of the Crown, in the two houses of parliament,
are, when regarded in all their variety and all their con-
tradictions, the most discreditable and the most melancholy
that were ever perhaps presented to a civilised community
by any body of persons who had arrogated to themselves,
or been invested by others with, the reputation of being fit
to conduct the affairs of a nation. The blunders of the
Whig Administration may now at least, without exaggeration,
be said to have exceeded the simplicity of childhood or the
fatuity of dotage. Such scenes as those of last night are,
we imagine, in spite of the proverb, entirely new to the world,
and, notwithstanding the painful anxiety they must produce
as to the future government of the country, the first and
predominant feeling unquestionably will be astonishment
that such men as we here see exhibited have ever been deemed,
either by themselves or others, qualified to take even the
meanest share in the management of national affaire.
The folly, the imbecility, the bad faith, which have distin-
guished the late Cabinet are made indeed painfully conspicu-
ous by the disclosures of last night; but as to the actual
position of the government, the information they afford us is
ambiguous or contradictory, while with respect to the future
prospects of the government, we can only learn from them,
what appear to be the present wishes of some of the members
of the expiring ministry.
Lord Grey says that he and Lord Althorp hare resigned.
The Lord Chancellor completes what we must suppose to
have been the meaning of Lord Grey, by stating that only two-
ministers have resigned, taking at the same time especial care-
to intimate to the country that a surrender of office is the last
thing in his own contemplation. But, in contradiction to-
these statements, we have the distinct assertion of Lord
Althorp that not only Lord Grey and himself, but his right
hon. friends—Mr. Grant, Mr. S. Rice, Mr. Abercromby. and
Mr. Ellice, have retired from office, and the farther assertion
that the administration is at an end, and that his noble friend
the Premier was at that very moment employed in commu-
nicating tliis fact to the House of Lords. From these con-
tradictory statements it is impossible to infer anything con-
clusively', unless it be that, unchanged to the last, the mem-
bers of the administration were last night as ignorant
or as regardless as usual of the intentions and
feelings of each other. Irreconcileable, however,
as the ministerial statements are, with respect to the actual
condition of the government, enough is known to satisfy the
public that the formaitou of a new administration has become
necessary.
How that administration will be formed it seems at the*
present moment impossible even to conjecture, although the
speeches of last nig ht in the two houses of parliament certainly
shed some vivid rays of light upon the wishes, and perhaps
I the expectations, of individuals and parties with reference to*
that subject. Earl Grey intimates pretty distinctly,, as it
appears to us, his desire that the Marquis of Lansdowne
should be his successor. The speech of the Lord Chancellor
must, wesuppose, be understood to mean that he neither desires
nor anticipates the formation of any ministry of which he
i cannot consistently and honourably be a leading
member. Mr. O’Connell lays aside all his former hostility
to Lord Althorp and Mr. Littleton, and indicates without
much ambiguity 7 , his readiness to assist in the government of
the country, in conjunction with that portion of the late ad-
ministration which differed from Earl Grey and the raajo-.
rity of their colleagues with respect to the Irish Coercion. Bilk
Perhaps it is not very rash to deduce the same inference from
the language of Mr. Hume. What all parties and every in-
dividual, however, who have spoken upon the subject, unite
to proclaim, is, that by whomsoever the government of the
country may now be undertaken, the task will be one of un-
precedented difficulty. Such is the deathbed confess!©#* of
the ministry which has created the difficulty it deplores
such the epitaph which friends and enemies unite to inscribe
upon its tomb.
The fact is, indeed, undeniable. And why, it will, there-
fore naturally be asked, have the late ministers of the
crown shrunk from the duty of sharing with their Sovereign
the appalling difficulties by which they have surrounded
him ? We give simply their own answer, divested merely
of its verbiage and mystification. They could not act iii
unison. They were incapable of understanding each other.
They fell by the mere effect of their own incapacity or bad
faith while no blow was aimed, no attack meditated from
without. Mr. Littleton, it will be said by superficial ob-
servers, by his thoughtlessness or his trickery, gave the
deathblow to the Administration. But the explanation,
deplorably insufficient. Why should not Mr. LR,
tleton have been removed on the proof f
his intellectual or moral unfitness, and his place supplKj u v
a more competent man ? Why, rather, since the r , Hme an .
svver will suffice for both questions, was Mr. L ; tleton ever
placed in a situation for which his incompete r ir 4 was
the fu-st notorious ? Why, hut that the K government
ux the selection of its functionaries had been |tyousl du
vested of the power ot choosing the fittest men, and reduced
to the embarrassing and disabling Necessity of choosing the
least unfit of the very few individuals who have the good for-
tune to enjoy the tee simple, 0 f a seat in the House of
Commons ?
For this evil, among others, the defunct administration
have to answer; but even this is less disgraceful to them than
the alacrity which they have shown, upon an occasion so
slight that it is scarcely intelligible, to run awav from the
work of their own hands.
(From the Times of yesterday.)
With respect to certain expressions in Lord Brougham’s
speech last night, which seem to contradict a remark of Lord
Althorp’s, it may be proper to state that, in practice, tbe re-
signation of the prime minister means substantially and in-
variably the dissolution of his cabinet, just as much as cut-
ting a man’s head off is understood to be the death of the bod v.
As neither trunk nor limbs therefore can flourish after the
decapitation of the natural subject, so neither have chan-
cellors nor secretaries of state any real existence after the po-
lical annihilation of the prime minister; and although a
lord chancellor in such a case may not literally have resigned,
it is enough that the chief of the government does it for him.
It is no doubt a most anxious topic of inquiry, who are. co
succeed the late cabinet ministers, and what is to become of
us as a nation ? The only circumstance which can yet ho-relied
upon is, we believe, that on accepting Lord Grey’s resignation-
his Majesty sent for Lord Melbourne, late Secretary for
Home Department, to ask his lordship’s counsel linder ihd
exigency thus created. What may be the attempts to form, a
new cabinet, or reconstruct the old one, it is not for us to
guess. It is easy enough to see that the only attempt which
can have the slightest chance of prospering is one which si util
have for its object the formation of a cabinet' 1, at least'ua
liberal as Lord Grey’s; and 2, more united. has
been too much of the leaven of Conservatism in the
administration just expired to admit of its enjoying any
permanency, and what did happen to he liberal in it has
been paralyzed by that which was not. The clearest of all
inferences, therefore, is, that a coalition (oi rather a distract
tion) Cabinet, comprehending either materials less of a
reform quality than ever found admission into. Lord Grey’s
or of just that same calibre of reform which after bem^
| admitted was not long since expelled from it, cannot
constitute any portion of a government destined to en-
dure for a single month. It is perfectly obvious, we would
assure the court (we need not assure the Tory faction for-
they are convinced of it), that Mr. Stanley with his three ex-*
colleagues are “ not presentable ” to the people of EmrlamC
and will not be accepted by them as members of a. liberal
Cabinet; a fortiori Sir Robert Peel and his brethren cannot
be successfully appealed to by the couit in its extremity. On
that point we are sure that the good sense of Lord Melbourne
n uv! rBe 1 ,^ s * -^ 8 f° r H pure Conservative cabinet !ft ia
all buzz. The idea of one is utterly ludicrous at such a
time. There is but one course—unflinching reform in all,
departments of the state, and to be carried on by eojicurrina.
ministers, ■
Compiqmise of sentiment, we fear, has already been carried
to an inconvenient and disastrous pitch, and we should
grieve to see the necessity for it iu important cases imposed
upon a new ministry at its very first formation. The diffi-.
culties, however, in the way of constituting any new govern-,
ment are such as will unavoidably render it a tedious work.
We trust that if the growth be slow, it will be fitted for eiu
durance and stability.
After a few words from Mr. BERNAL and Mr. C.
BULLER,
Mr. O'DWYER consented to withdraw the motion.
The ATTORNEY GENERAL proposed that the
bill should come into operation alter the 31st of October
next.
ARRIVAL OF HER MAJESTY AT ROTTERDAM.
Mr. EWART assented to the proposition, which was By the Netherlands Steam-boat Company’s vessel, the Bata- ' " .
ag 'nu \ O, .1. , j i , • , yier, Captain Dunlop, which arrived yesterday from Hol, (From the Morning Herald of yesterday T
Ihe bouse then resumed, and the chairman brought up land, we learn the safe arrival of the Queen at Rotterdam, at The question that one is inclined to a*k at mwnt
the report, which was ordered to be received on Monday six o’clock on Sunday evening. Prince Frederick of Holland, “ Where is Lord Ebrington, the official protector or Vn J 7
next. and his Princess, and the Duke and Duchess of Saxe-Weimar, dian of the Grey Administration, and his resignation-renel-
Sir R. HILL presented a petition against the bill from liad previously repaired m one of the Dutch government’s ling resolutions ?” Surely he must resolve once more that-
a parish in Suffolk. steam-boats to Helvqetsluys to meet her Majesty, with whom the King and the nation shall not withdraw their confident
After the presentation of a few petitions in favour of th - ey - , retu ™ ed to Rotterdam. Ihe English and Russian from a ministry of which the wisdom of an Ebrington apt
gpeakeHeft .he ctair. KBS, ““
I dR Msssssr*. ””«!«■>„ „
Lord R. GRObVENOR, chairman of the Monaghan Gouda, and then return to Rotterdam, whence she will con,, for their political sins, mav fulminate thete resolution. 4
election commutee, reported that one of the members of it tmue her journey to Germany by the way of Nimegpen, to preserve to the country the Ukpaid and disinterested
(Mr. Walker) had been very ill during his attendance to- : services of Lord Grey and the inestimable "talents of
day, and that he would be unable to attend to-morrow. Plymouth, July 8, Nine P M —The Maitland f jord Althorp ; but times are changed. The Whigs have not
After the examination of Mr. Walker’s medical at- transport Causet, Commander Lieutenant Spencer, R N d \ at their back, which they cajoled as
tendam, who stated that he would require several days’ has just a,rived from Lisbon, which place she left on the have not ■kino' ET? the « deuo 'f “ d i tb ty
SrSr.^dree m Mk rxr excused
rom mi tner attendance on the said commutee. Espoir was appointed to leave with the mail. The Malt- rigour upon the Dorchester unionists, and the prosecution of
T , SPPI " ,E THE ™ . land has on board 12 or 13 officers, api about 300 *he True Sun for repeating Lord Milton’s advice to the
Ine srHAKER said, that under existing circumstances marines and marine artillery, supernumeraries from the P eo Pl c > showed what reliance was to be placed upon their
he supposed hon. members who had notices on tbe hook, fl eet in the Tagus. Part of these will land at this port S>’ atit « d e when tl “’“ was served.
would put them off to some future day. He observed, that and the remainder will proceed ip the r respective divi- , Rn( from what occurred in both houses of parliament
there was a notice (No. 11), which had been given by the sions, Portsmouth, Chatham, &c. The Royal Tar has i 7’ is f vide " t *hat the nucleus of au Administration
hon. member for Middlesex, respecting the state of the na- aniicinated tbe news of the fall of Madein which is ilia 3a t** l ? place of what was recently the IV hig Cabinet.
a -a; w„« sr.'zjxa-w i,var
binet had resigned, it was his intention at the time to
bring forward such a motion ; but the information he had
since received led him to think that a motion of the kind
at the present moment would be premature (hear, hear),
and he therefore would beg to withdraw it for the present,
without fixing any day for bringing it on. At the same
time, he thought that, under existing circumstances, and
with no responsible minister in the place of the noble lord
to conduct the government business of the house, the
house should not proceed with any business of importance.
There was a motion, for instance, of great importance,
which stood for to-morrow,—he alluded to the Beer
Amendment Bill, brought in by the hon. member for
Kent; and it was bis opinion, an opinion in which he
was sure the house would concur, that before they pro-
ceeded with such a measure there should be a responsible
minister there, who could take upon himself to act in the
name of the government with reference to it. The house
he was sure would agree with him, therefore, that it would
be better not to meet to-morrow, but that after disposing
of the ordinary business to-night, they should adjourn
to Monday next. (Hear, hear.) He would therefore
move, that the house at its rising do adjourn to Monday
next.
Mr. WARBURTON seconded the motion.
The CHANCELLOR of the EXCHEQUER did not
rise to say any thing in reference to the motion, be
merely rose to make one observation in relation to what
had fallen from his hon. friend the member for Middlesex.
His hon. friend had stated, that there was no responsible
minister in the house. V/hat he (the Chancellor of the
Exchequer) bad said in the statement which he had the
honour of submitting to the house last night was, that
though he had resigned his office, he of course held it
until his successor was appointed, and that he should con-
sider himself responsible for the conducting, and bound
to conduct, the ordinary business of the house. (Hear,
hear.)
Bir L. KNATCHBULL said that it would have been
more satislactory if the noble lord had stated his own
opinion as a minister of the crown, an opinion which
of course would have great weight with the house,
whether, in reference to the measure alluded to bv
the hon. member for Middlesex, he approved of this
motion. For if the bill in.question was to be proceeded
with this session, it was obvious that it should he pro.
eeeded with without delay, and therefore he thought
the hon. member s motion should be negatived,
if such was the desire of the house and of the government
which the noble lord represented. He thought, therefore,
that the house had a right to ask from a responsible mi-
nister of the crown an expression of his opinion on the
subject.
The CHANCELLOR of the EXCHEQUER said that
the question before the house was one upon which any
hon. gentleman was as capable of forming an opinion as
he (the Chancellor of the Exchequer) was. He possessed no
knowledge that every gentleman in the house did not pos-
sess on tbe subject, and he therefore had not felt it
necessary to express an opinion upon it. On the con-
trary, in the peculiar situation which he at present tilled,
he thought it better not to express any opinion on that
subject. (Hear, hear.) He had no information what-
ever that any other hon. gentleman in the house did not
possess.
Mr. BARING certainly thought, that in the present
peculiar situation of the house, it would be more consistent
with the dignity of the crown, and more advantageous for
the discharge of the public business, that they should ad-
journ for a few days. He could not, however, agree in
opinion with the hon. member for Middlesex, that every
other business should be discussed aud proceeded with but
the Beer Amendment Bill.
Mr. HUME.—No, no.
Mr. BARING.—The hon. member’s motion was that
the house should adjourn to Monday next. If he moved
that the house should at once adjourn, he (Mr. Baring;
would support that motion.
Mr. HUME said that he had merely shaped hii
motion as it stood in order to allow the orders and busi-
ness which stood lor to-night to be postponed to some
other day.
Mr. B iRING said that under such circumstances he
perfectly agreed with the hon. gent It was due to the
crown, as well as to the dignity of the house itself, and
was also matter of public convenience, that such a course
should be taken. He must say, however, that if ever
there was a question which might be discussed without
involving thfe responsibility of the government, it would
be the question of the Beer Bill. (Cries of hear, hear,
generally and of no, no, from Mr. Hume and some other
hon. members.) If there ever was a measure, with regard
to the necessity for carrying which all parties were agreed,
it was the Beer Amendment Bill, and knowing, as he
did, that the hon. member for Middlesex, and the hon.
member who had seconded his motion, the hon. member
for Bridport, were most determined enemies of that re-
medy for which the country from all parts of it had
called, he would confess that he looked with particular
suspicion on any motion that was brought forward by
them that was calculated to delay the progress of that
measure; however, under existing circumstances, he
thought that no other course could be pursued by the
house but that nroposed by the hon. member. (Hear.)
Mr. H. GRATTAN said he should neglect his duty if
he did not express his opinion on this occasion as to the
principles of the five individuals who had retired from
the government. (Oh, oh.) He thought that as repre-
sentatives of the people they were bound to do so, and
that it would be only acting fairly towards the govern-
ment to express their opinions on the matter. They
ought to take a part in it ; he certainly would take his
part—he would express his opinion. The English mem-
bers and the Irish members, and the Scotch members,
should do the same. He begged to say that he would
give his support to those individuals, whether five or six,
who had resigned office upon such principles. As one of
the representatives of the people, he felt it his duty to
give his support to those who had retired from office upon
liberal and extended principles. A colour should be im-
parted to the government that was about to be formed
by the expression of the opinion of that house. He
could not avoid expressing bis deep regret that his right
honourable friend the Secretary for Ireland had been
obliged to resign. He thought that his right hon.
friend had been hardly and unjustly dealt with. He
(Mr. Grattan) had often opposed the noble lord (the
Chancellor of the Exchequer), but he had always done,
so with regret. He trusted that whether it was settled
that the house should sit to morrow, or that it should
adjourn to Monday, it would not separate without giving
a cheer for the five individuals who had retired from
office. (A laugh and cheers.) He had a motion on the
paper in reference to the Coercion Bill, which he now
begged to postpone. He was glad to find that the object
of his motion had been achieved. (A He trusted
that the sentiments of the five individuals to whom he
had alluded would influence the formation of whatever
new Cabinet was to be constituted, and that that Cabinet
would be framed upon liberal principles, without which
it would be vain to hope to conciliate or govern Ireland.
The motion was then put and agreed to.
It was also carried that committees should sit notwith*
standing the adjournment of the house.
Mr. PEASE moved for leave to bring in a bill to con-
solidate and amend the laws relating to the cruel treat-
ment of cattle and other animals.
Sir E. KNATCHBULL objected to the proceeding
with such a motion, as it was understood that no public
business was to be transacted until the house again
on Monday.
The gallery was cleared foy a division, but none took
place, the motion haying been withdrawn.
The house then proceeded to fix the orders of the day
for different days next week. The Beer Amendment Bill
was appointed tor Monday next.
Petitions praying for protection to the Established
Church were presented by Mr. R. Trevor from places in
Cardigan; by Mr. Escourt from parishes in Gloucesler
and Surrey ; and by Sir J. Tyrell,from parishes in Essex.
The other orders of the day were then disposed of, and
the house adjourned at a quarter.past six o’clock to Man,
day next.


devotion to a great cause which makes all considerations of
self yield to an absorbing patriotism, seem even disposed to
undergo the disagreeable labour of constructing a new Ad-
ministration.
The Courier, indeed, has discovered that no man en-
joys the confidence of the country in an equal degree
with Lord Althorp, and has kindly recommended him
to his Majesty to be the architect of the new Cabinet.
No doubt the abilities which Lord Althorp displayed
as a financier eminently entitle him to the ardent wishes of
the country for his higher elevation. Considering his cele-
brated “ tile and taxed cart” budget, and his “ boon to the
female population,” to say nothing of malt and window-tax
exploits, the country owes him a large debt of gratitude.
Still we think it will not unreasonably wish to drag him
from retirement if he is particularly desirous of returning to
the pastoral and bovine cares of his Sabine farm. He has
fallen with dignity —procumbit humi bos , and it would be a
pity to expose him to the risk of another and a heavier fall.
The grateful recollections of “ the shepherds’ dogs,” which
he has just relieved from taxation, will follow him into his
retirement, and some poet of the sheep-walks will inscribe
pastorals to his name.
(From the Morning Chronicle of yesterday.)
To a late hour last night, and, indeed, up to the time of
our going to press, nothing certain was known beyond the
fact of the resignations, except that the King, immediately
after his arrival in town, sent for Lord Melbourne, to advise
with him upon the best course to be pursued in the pre-
sent crisis. This step may be viewed as an indication of
the soundness of his Majesty’s judgment; for, under
all circumstances, Lord Melbourne will be best
able to form a popular administration. We are
sure that Lord Melbourne w T ould offer no counsel to the
King but such as the present conjuncture demands. The
only members of the late cabinet who are said to have been
yet in personal communication with the King, are Lord Mel-
bourne and the Lord Cfhancellor, and we think the public
may rest assured that these noblemen would give the very
best advice to his Majesty. We are certain that his
Majesty would not he so insane as to throw himself into
the arms of a Tory ministry ; and in consulting with
Lord Melbourne and the Lord Chancellor the King could
only wish the formation of a ministry acting on reform
principles. Indeed, the idea of any other than a Liberal
ministry conducting the affairs of the country at this time is
is too extravagant to merit a moment’s consideration.
We are quite aware of the very great difficulty in recon-
structing a ministry of which Lord Althorp is not a mem-
ber ; but the temporary difficulty, as respects his lordship,
may possibly be overcome. In any event he is essential to
the stability of such an administration, if not its natural
head. Nor can a government acceptable to the country
he formed without much popular addition. Lord Durham
eminently enjoys the confidence of the reformers through-
out the kingdom, and would give great weight to
a | re-modelled cabinet. Lord Radnor, Lord Mul-
grave, Sir J. C. Hobhouse, and many other decided reform-
ers might add much influence to the new creation. We
cannot longer move between two parties. The Tories must
be routed out from the diplomatic and official departments,
or they will counteract every beneficial effort of a reform
government. Nor should the Horse Guards be overlooked
on this occasion. We would rather see a rank Tory ad-
ministration than a weak, shuffling, and abortive ministry.
The country will view the acts of the King and Lord Mel-
bourne, during the next few days, with the deepest anxiety
and even jealousy.
(From the Times of this morning.)
In our article yesterday upon the embarrassing condi-
tion of the government, we took the opportunity of refer-
ring to a statement of the Lord Chancellor, which we find
that his lordship has since repeated, to the effect that the
only resignations of office which had yet taken place were
those of Lord Grey and Lord Althorp ; the obvious con-
clusion from which, as indeed it was put forth distinctly
by Lord Brougham, must be, that minus only the late
Premier and the late Chancellor of the Exchequer, the
government was still perfect in all its parts, while the
tacit conclusion rather left to be drawn by others than
directly annunciated by the noble and learned lord
himself, was, that with the simple substitution of ano-
ther chief, and another leader of the House of Com-
mons, the same Cabinet might do very well as it stood
(or stands), and all this disturbance be settled without
further difficulty and without any evil consequences.
We pass over, as immaterial, the open discrepancy be-
tween this view of the case, and that which manifestly
pervaded Lord Grey’s whole explanation, and which was
plainly and broadly avowed by Lord Althorp, viz. that
the Cabinet was bona fide dissolved. To Lord Brougham’s
authority we defer for the fact, that Lord Altborp’s
positive assertion, and Lord Grey’s evident assumption,
were equally unfounded ; and that the Cabinet over which
that noble earl had presided, did, so late as yesterday
afternoon, continue to exist and act, not through the
impulse of mere galvanic power, which communicates a
convulsive motion to the muscles, even after life is ex-
tinct ; hue that, from its members holding their official
geatvS, it was still possessed of all the functions of a real
government. Lord Brougham meant this, or he meant
nothing.
Such being the fact, our comment is, that we are most
deeply mortified, grieved, and alarmed, to hear it. Con-
sidering the circumstances under which the Cabinet which
reckoned Lords Grey and Althorp among its members,
has for some time past attempted to struggle, and in the
midst of which these noble lords resigned, nothing is
more obvious than that a clean sweep of the administra-
tion has become absolutely indispensable. The rubbish
must be wheeled away to the last barrowful before any
sure foundation can be laid for a new building. Good
God ! are we to have another downright fraud passed
upon the rightful expectations of the country ? Are we
to have putty and whitewash laid over “lath and plas-
ter,” and then told that such au edifice will stand the
hurricane of times like these?
Why, if, after the retreat of Mr. Stanley and the rest,
the last attempt at reconstruction out of the old unsound
materials was condemned and scorned as a piece of mi-
serable drivelling, how much worse would the case be
now, when Lords Grey and Althorp are to be added to
the Josses of the same administration ? Look at the
alleged motives for the secession of these two noble lords,
then answer us, how is it physically possible for their
colleagues to carry on the government without them,
when two retiring lords despaired of effecting that
task with the whole unbroken Cabinet ? The same
division of sentiment prevails among the members
who Lord Brougham informs us are left, as
neutralised the vigour and clogged the action of the
entire body, and, as manifested in relation to the
Irish Coercion Bill, compelled, first Lord Althorp,
and then Lord Grey, to retire from them. What is to
become of the Coercion Bill, when it is katmn, that four
gentlemen now holding Cabinet offices are hostile to
certain important clauses of that bill, and that the House
qf Commons supports them in their opposition, while the
majority of this* very Cabinet, with the House of Lords
at their hack, conscientiously insist 011 the preservation
of those peculiar clauses? We take it for granted they
not * but is the farce of balanced votes and clumsy
compromises to be played over again, until tbe whole com-
pany of ministers are irreparably disgraced ? We have
said that any new Cabinet, framed for public esteem and
confidence, must be at least as liberal as Lord Grey’s. We
jep'dU tbe expressionw-jt must be more liberal ; it must
m itself effectually of that more than half-Tory section
which has for these two sessions of Parliament paralyzed
qnd disabled the best efforts of its more patriotic and en-
lightened colleagues* Lord Lansdowne, bolstered up as
he was in youth by a system of sedulous preceptorship—
bv the anticipations of those herds of flatterers who be-
gged the noble lord’s father—the political Maecenas of
some certain coteries—and by the favour and counte-
nance qf Mr. Fox ; Lord Lansdowne, we say—and we
do so in tire discharge of a stern duty to our countrymen—-
Lord Lansdowne is a| total failure. He is not a bold,
determined, or strenuous statesman. He has no sympa-
thies with the spirit of manly and resolute reform. He has
headed the Conservatives throughout, and through his
influence in a quarter which shall bq nameless, he it
was who saddled upon the country a personage of whose
merits the noble marquis has formed a judgment which
Is the admiration of all lookers-on—to wit, the wise Lord
Auckland I Yet there are dolts who would actually ob-
trude Lord Lansdowne (of all men living !) for Prime
Minister after Lord Grey, whose very weaknesses are
more estimable than the other’s strength, exhibiting, as
they do, a high mind and a generous spirit. Lord Lans-
■dqwne’iS own promotion to the rank of Premier might be
of a piece with the scheme of a “ Coalition Cabinet,”
which we have for many months known to be a favourite
chimera of the court. But if one project more than an-
other betrays an utter ignorance of the state of opinion
throughout this country, and of the course of practical
policy which the people call it is that of a ministry
composed of antagonist materials.
The ruin of the Grey Cabinet has been that it was teo
much divided ; any thing in the shape of a qoaiitipu be-
jtween recognised Tories and the Liberals still z*emain-
iug in that Cabinet would grievously aggravate that
evil. It would be plain to all the world that such
p, conclave could never move an inch in the
path of reform, ecclesiastical or civil,—that every
measure for the extension or security of popular
rights would be irretrievably that the
mere nomination of such a Cabinet would be the precur-
sor to one of unmitigated and exclusive Tories. To such
a coalition, moreover, we are satisfied that there would be
DO encouragement eiven by Mr. Stanley. Mr. Stanley
}ias afforded mere proofs than one, that a junction with
ithe Conservatives never has been meditated by him ;
and his secession from his own natural party—the Whigs
err-on a conscientious difference ot opinion, shows that he is
not the man to make one of any half*and-half association :
as to his forming one of a mere Tory administration, that
is a supposition too absurd fpr notice. Two of our contem-
poraries—-one a morning, the other an evening, journal
are pushing the claims of as many individuals to hteh
consideration as candidates for prominent < face. The
Morning Chronicle t ikes Lord Durham, for whom we
have often declared our own goodwill, as a libtral states-
man* The Courier will have it £hat Lord A Uhorp ought
to be prime minster. The Ute Chancellor of the Exche-
quer is in his own person a modest and much-esteemed
nobleman ; but he is no more fit to be at the head of a
Cabinet, and at a season so critical as this, than any other
farmer in Northamptonshire ; and with regard to both
the noble lords so bepraised by writers in the abovemen-
tioned newspapers, we are bound to remark that, knowing
what we know, there is not a great deal either of tact or
modesty in the laboured recommendations of which they
are severally the subjects. We stated yesterday that the
formation of a Cabinet would be a difficult and tedious
task. Our opinion was powerfully borne out last night by
Lord Brougham, who said it was all but hopeless . The
country will, of course, have the good sense and justice to
wait, but wo to him who dares to trifle with it.
(From the Morning Herald of this morning.)
It is pretty clear from Lord Brougham’s speech in the
House of Lords on Wednesday night, that the Whigs,
as a body, do not mean to quit office, and that notwith-
standing the secession of the leaders in each house of
parliament, the subordinates (if under that designation
so high an officer as the Lord Chancellor can be classed)
still mean to sacrifice their natural love of retirement
and repose to the service of their country. The present
ministry, more than any other which has ever ruled the
country, have shown a peculiar aptitude to place them-
selves in a false position. Though it has for a long
time been clear that they could not long hold toge-
ther, and that iheir existence indeed depended upon a
mere thread, it is not less obvious that the reasons
assigned lath for Lord Althorp and Lord Grey’s
resignations are the most untenable and unsatisfactory
that could have been hit upon ; and that there has scarcely
been a week of the present session which did not furnish
them with more valid reasons for the step which they
have at length taken than those which they have now as-
signed. The conduct of such of their late colleagues
who retain cffice is open to the same remark. We do not
mean to say that they were bound to follow examples of
Lords Grey and Althorp in actually resigning office;
but there was a middle course which we conceive they
were bound to take, which was to tender their resig-
nations, and place their respective offices at the disposd
of the King, so that they might not embarrass his Ma-
jesty in the formation of a new ministry, or compel the
King to resort to the painful and ungracious task
of demanding their retirement. This is the inference
which we draw from Lord Brougham’s speech. If
we do the learned lord and his remaining colleagues in-
justice, it is entirely of their own producing. Whoever
may he the head of the new administration, all the offices
connected with it should and must be at his disposal ;
and though there are some members of the present
ministry, such as Lord Lansdowne, Lord Melbourne, and
Mr. Spring Rice, of whose services the country would be
glad to see the new Premier availing himself, there are
others, as Lord Palmerston, Mr. Ellice, and Mr. Thom-
son, whose continuance in office would, we are persuaded,
give any thing but general satisfaction ; and therefore,
though a different view of the matter may suit the
dingers to office, for the reasons which we have assigned
the whole of the Cabinet are bound to lay their o ffices at
the disposal of the King ; and the not having done so
must create a temporary embarrassment on all sides,
which the sooner it is removed, the sooner may the
country hope to see a permanent ministry formed.
(From the Morning Post of this morning.)
Tbe speech of the Lord Chancellor last night, in reply
to the questions of the Marquis of Londonderry, leaves
the country, if possible, rather more in the dark than
ever, both as to the number of ministers whom it has
really lost, and as to the manner in which that loss is
likely to be repaired.
The noble and learned lord repeated his statements of
Wednesday, that he knows of no resignations excepting
those of the Prime Minister and the Chancellor of the
Exchequer ; and while he intimates, or seems to inti-
mate, that to his knowledge the King has entrusted
somebody with the task of completing or reconstructing the
administration, he resolutely refuses to impart any infor-
mationas to who that somebody is. We cannot refrain from
offering a remark or two upon both parts of this extraor-
dinary speech, beginning with the latter, which we think
tbe more extraordinary of the two.
The present is, we believe, the first instance within the
memory of the living generation in which anv mystery
has been made of the name of the individual to whom
so high and important a commission as that of construct-
ing a government had been entrusted by tbe sovereign.
Ic is difficult to imagine any good reason for the secrecy
of which the Lord Chancellor is so tenacious, but there
are many strong reasons against it. To know that tbe
task of re-organising the administration has been
committed some wise and prudent statesman
allays that public anxiety and excitement which the pre-
vious dissolution of the government is sure, at first, to
have produced. It is a gratification besides to a loyal
people, which ought never for a single unnecessary mo-
ment to be withheld from them, to be assured that the
Sovereign has found a councillor to whom he has been able,
consistently with hi*, own sense of duty, to transfer the
labour, anxiety, and responsibility which are inseparable
from such a crisis in the affairs of the State. To these
considerations all that Lord Brougham has to oppose is a
of his own that a known and avowed councillor
and agent of the Sovereign, when about to exercise one
of the most important and delicate functions of the
crown, is more likely to encounter impediments and ex-
perience defeat than one who is anonymous and clandes-
tine—a notion which savours of the policy of Constanti-
nople rather than of London, and which would be a very
foolish notion any where, inasmuch as no person en-
trusted with such a commission can remain, either in
Turkey or in England, anonymous or clandestine for a
single moment towards those whose aid he has occasion to
seek, and from whom alone difficulty or failure is to be
apprehended.
That the Lord Chancellor should have reiterated
his statements of the preceding night as to th«
number of ministers who have resigned is curious
enough, but yet less curious than the narrative, or
tale, or fable (what shall we call it?), by which
the repetition was accompanied. The noble and learned
lord insists that no more than two ministers have yet
tendered their resignations, and accounts for the discre-
pancy between Lord Grey’s statement and his own on
Wednesday iu the House of Lords, and that of Lord
Althorp of the same day in the other house of parlia-
ment, by asserting that somebody must have mischiev-
ously conveyed to Lord Althorp, at the moment when
he was about to speak, false information, not as to the
actual fact, but as to what he and Lord Grey
had been saying to the lords respecting it. This
we venture to say is the most extraordinary mode
of explaining a discrepancy between a First Lord of
the Treasury and a Chancellor of the Exchequer that
was ever resorted to or imagined. It is a mode of ex-
planauon which must surely have been intended to render
poor Lord Althorp ridiculous. It conveys to the world a
very distinct intimation that in the opinion of the Lord
Chancellor, Lord Althorp is—we do not wish to employ
contemptuous or abusive terms—but precisely all that a
man entrusted with important affairs ought not to be, the
proper sport and plaything of any imposition, however ex-
travagant or absurd. It implies that the noble Chan-
cellor of the Exchequer, at a most important crisis
of public affairs, communicated to the House of Com-
mons and the country, or that he is a man likely to have
communicated, erroneous information upon the most
Suspicious authority, iu relation to a matter with which
he ought $0 have been personally well acquainted, and
with respect to which be had at least ready access to the
most authentic intelligence. This fable, fpr it can be no
other than a fable, of the Lord Chancellor’s, intimates
further that it was quite in the usual order of things for
Lord Grey and Lord Althorp severally to address
the two houses of parliament upon the same subject,
however important, without any concert or mutual
communication, in defiance of their common duty to act
upon all occasions in complete concert, and only after the
most unreserved mutual communication. The fable of
the Lord Chancellor inflicts a deeper wound upon the
Grey administration than any which it has ever suffered
from its open foes,
But although the extraordinary tale which last night
proceeded from the woolsack is pregnant tyith such infer*
eaces ae we have feebly set forth, it is utterly worthless,
nevertheless, as an explanation of the contradiction, for
sake of reconciling which the noble and learned lord af-
fects to have related it. It is certainly a most unfortunate
fact, but it is a fact, that, at the moment during which
the Lord Chancellor was labouring to reconcile this con-
tradiction, the contradiction itself was in the very act of
being substantially repeated. Lord Althorp was in the
flous.e of Commons. Twice his lordship addressed the
house. Oftpn he heard, often he made, direct allusions to
the present situation of the government. One honourable
member in his presence and hearing proposed the nove|
parliamentary proceeding of testifying by three cheers the
approbation of the House of Common* of the five mem-
bers of that assembly who had taken the proper course of
seceding from the Cabinet. But from Lord Althorp dur-
ing the whole of those proceedings not a syllable was ut-
tered in reduction of his own statement of the preceding
flight, We have seen with what ingenuity the Lord
Chancellor reconcile discrepancies. It remains for him
to-day to reconcile, if he pap, the astounding discrepancy
between his tale and Lopd Althqrp’s si|encp.
M. T. Sadler, Esa.—This gentleman, formerly M.R.
for Newark, and candidate for the representation of Leeds
at the first borough election, is no longer an inhabitant of
this town, having removed with his family to Ireland.—
Leess Times .
it is reported that an order is about to be issued from
the Ilorseguards for the substitution of trowsers for kilts
in the Highland regiment* i
IMPORTANT MEETING OF THE COUNTY
MAGISTRATES.— Thursday.
Sir John Gibbon, Bart, was voted to the chair in the
absence of Mr. Rotch, M. P.
The minutes of the 22nd and 27th of May were con-
firmed., and the County Treasurer’s and his sureties’bonds
were produced and agreed to, as were the reports of the
Committee for Accounts and for General Purposes.
Mr. Urma objected to paying large sums in the shape
of fees to the Governor of Newgate for the removal of
convicts sentenced in the Clerkenwell court to transport-
ation. Three hundred pounds a year had been charged
for the removal of 40 females. The Secretary of State
did not order such an expensive mode of removal, and it
was high time that the county should pay but one moiety,
and the City the other. The accounts were made up in a
most slovenly manner. The charge for the removal of 25
prisoners to Gosport or Portsmouth was 491., when as
many shillings, or nearly so, would effect their convey-
ance.
The Chairman suggested that it was for the committee
of accounts to allow or disallow such demands ; but it
would be better to await the formation of the central
board, which he believed would be created by the last day
of next month. He (Sir J. Gibbon) was glad there was
to be a central board.
Some conversation ensued as to the probable time the
Poor Law Amendment Bill would come out of the House
of Lords, and it was stated that ic must be returned to
the Common*.
Mr. Orrae said he would not make any specific mo-
tion, but recommended those members of the parliament
connected with Middlesex, to use their exertions to abo-
lish the fees. The governor of Newgate was paid by the
City a fixed salary, and, therefore, why should the
eounty be paying 7901- a year fees ?
Mr. Laurie was surprised at the statement of the hon.
magistrate. Middlesex had gained a large sum by the
arrangement.
The Lunatic Asylum at Hakwell —A highly
interesting and gratifying report of the visiting justices
as to the Lunatic Asylum (9th George IV., cap. 40,
sec. 3), was next read. It stated that there were then
556 inmates, but the court and the public would be
pleased to hear that 320 patients were employed as fol-
lows :
Males. Females.
Handicraft 36 Kitchen and Dairy 11
Cleaning Wards ...... 32 Cleaning Wards 33
Agriculture 66 Gardens 34
Clerk 1 Laundry ... 17
Straw-work 36
125 Knitting 70
A Magistrate observed that, indeed, it was moat
pleasing to bear such a detail, that 326 out of 556 should
be engaged and amused in regular employment. Ic spoke
volumes for the excellency of the institution.
Mr Halswell—The report just read before the court
was written by a C{ lunatic,” and the character of the
writing more resembled copper-plate than hand-writing.
The papers were handed round, and exhibited the most
beautiful letters and figures we have seen in penmanship.
Colonel Clitheroe, who brought up the report, said
that two “ criminal lunatics” had been sent to \he
Asylum, but after a representation to his Majesty’s
government, they bad been withdrawn, as it was incom-
patible with the rules to properly provide for them. In
addition to the gratifying report they had beard, he could
not help informing the court, and he hoped that it would
be made known to the public, that a man named George
Miller, who had been confined for 11 years in a private
mad-house, and who, when sent to Hanwell, was deemed
by his former keepers the most intractable they had to
deal with, was cured within nine mouths, and was dis-
charged last Saturday, and so perfectly convinced was
Dr. Ellis, their superintending physician, of kis saneness
that he had engaged him as his servant. The poor fellow
stated that they considered him incurable, because he re-
peatedly endeavoured to escape. (Hear, hear.)
The report was unanimously confirmed.
Statjs of the Prisons —The report of the visiting
justices as to the House of Correction stated that there
were 1080 prisoners—764 males, 324 females, and 15
children. They were generally healthy and orderly.
The treadmill had for a short time been disused ; but dur-
ing the time of its repair the prisoners were set to pick
oakum.
Sir John Gibson said he thought that the proper time
to submit a letter which had been addressed to the court
by the parish officer of Chelsea. It related to the case of
a female prisoner, named Rosina Flood, the mother of
five children. The woman bad been sentenced to 12
months* imprisonment and to find bail for her future
good behaviour. She had been 15 months in gaol the
last three beyond the term of her sentence as she could
not find bail. In the meantime her children were a bur-
den to Chelsea parish.
The chairman said the court had no power to interfere.
The parish might apply to the Secretary of State for the
Home Department.
Mr. Home said that in allusion to the two criminal
lunatics, who had very properly been refused admission
to the Hanwell Asylum, he vished to know what was to
he done with them. The House of Correction was not a
fit place for them ; and yet there had been seven insane
inmates at one time there.
Mr. Allen, the clerk of the peace, said the act directed
that they should be kept in strict custody during his Ma-
jesty’s pleasure.
Capt Acklam remarked that they might be admitted
into Bethlem Hospital, but that the governors were so
tenacious of admitting any but upon their own recom-
mendation. That institution was very rich from be-
quests made to it many years ago, and surely they could
afford to relieve a poor county. Their wealth was evinced
by the splendid dinners they gave, and which might be
judged of from 14 or 15 haunches of venison being con-
sumed at one feast. (Laughter.)
Mr. Laurie begged to state that the governors paid for
such dinners out of their own pockets.
Tbe question was referred for further consideration,
but the report was confirmed, as was that of
The New Prison, in which there are 217 male and
female prisoners, generally healthy and orderly.
Westminster New Bridewell.—A long discus
sion took place respecting this building, occasioned by the
taking into consideration “ a conditional contract by the
Westminster New Bridewell Comm ssioners for selling
part of their surplus land to be laid before the court for
approval (7 Geo. IV., c. 13, sec. 31).*'
The contract was ordered to be read at length, from
which it appeared that la 2r 2p of surplus land, situate
in the rear of the Bridewell, and not wanted for if, had
been sold to Rigby Wason, Esq., M.P., for 30251., condi-
tionally upon the contract being agreed to and ratified bv
the Middlesex County Court.
Captain Acklam said the contract had been agreed to
and signed by a majority of 17 against 5 at a meeting of
justices of the pence, at Westminster, and by it Mr.
Wason was bound to make good the purchase-money by
the 29th of September, or pay five per cent, interest.
The contract had been approved and voted for by a
majority, and came before that court for its confirma-
tion. The sale was iu every respect a good one; tie
land was very bad, and there was no access to it (a
laugh); it was in a low neighbourhood and for building
purposes—and he believed Mr. Watsou intended to build
a new street—it would require ten feet of concrete. He
did not think the land for which they had obtained
30251. would produce 3001. by auction. The commis-
sioners had reserved enough from it to build a sessions-
house or a vagrant-ward if required.
Mr. Laurie rose to a point of order. Was it right that
gentlemen at the same time magistrates and commission:-
ers should be parties to a contract ?
Mr. Capel defended the commissioners. The large and
magnificent prison, if he might use the term, had been
an enormous expense to the county (hear, hear), and the
sale of the waste piece of land was a clear saving of
30001. to the county.
Sir John Gibbon said it was well known the county
were at times compelled to buy land at an enormous price,
which, in the end, they did not want.
Mr. Fyler, M.P., thought the iand ought not to be
sold hastily; it might hereafter be wanted, and then they
would have to pay double 30001. to get it. (Hear.)
Mr. M‘Williara said he should meet the recommenda-
tion to contract with a direct negative.
Mr. Rotch, M.P., said that Mr. Wason would think
himself very ill-used and injured, if the contract was not
confirmed by the court. He had entered into expensive
contracts for building purposes on tbe faith of it.
Mr. Halswell said, in reply, that Mr. Wason must be
aware that it was a conditional contract, subject to the
approbation or rejection of that court. (Hear.)
Sir Charles Forbes, Bart., agreed with the last speaker.
Indeed, instead of the sale being a bargain, it might
a loss.
After a protracted argument, the question was put that
the contract for selling the land to Mr. Wason be con-
firmed, when there appeared—
For the motion 7
Against it 10
Majority 3
IRISH AND SCOTTISH PAUPERS.
Mr. Rotch, sa id tiiaif having to attend the House
of Commons, he Pegged to break in upon the settled busi-
ness just; to state, without comment, that from returns
made up to that day, the number of Irish and Scotch
passed, from the commencement of the present year, from
Middlesex, by sea conveyance, was 255 only ; and that
in the corresponding period last year the number was
2650. (Loud cries of Hear.)
The County Treasurer’s account, under tbe Westmin-
ster New Bridewell Act, was read. It slated that the
Treasurer had a balance of 2551. Ms. lid. in hand; that
35,0001. was required to pay off certain contract debts.
Captain Acklam said that sum was wanting to pay a
contract made five years ago, and, therefore, must be
paid.
Mr, Fyler, M.P., said the whole estimate of expenses
for building the Bridewell live years ago was 146,0001.
Dr. Robinson.—Will that estimate be exceeded ?
A magistrate remarked it would not.
Mr. Hall moved that 20,0001. be paid forthwith, and
15,000). at the beginning of January.
Report confirmed and motion carried.
The New North Road —Mr. Allen read a letter,
dated the sth of June, from Mr. Woodthorpe, the Town
Clerk of the Corporation of London, respecting certain
conferences between the Common Council and a commit-
tee of Middlesex magistrates, respecting the formation
of a new road or street from Holborn-hill to Holloway.
A report was also read, which stated that a special depu-
tation had waited upon Lord Althorp, who suggested that
the money necessary for carrying the improvements into
effect might be raised by Exchequer Bills, at a low per
centage.
It was proposed that the intended new street should be
60 feet wide, to commence at Holborn-bridge and termi-
nate at Holloway. The estimated total cost, made by
Mr. Mosely, the County Surveyor, was 169,0001. A
farthing rate would pay that sum off in 18 years, and a
halfpenny rate in nine years. London and Middlesex
were to bear their fair proportions of the expense.
A long detail of calculations was read, which it is un-
necessary in the present stage of the business, to enu-
merate.
Mr. Rawlinson thought the proposed road would be a
great improvement.
It was carried that the communication and report be re-
ceived.
Mr. Alderman Wilson moved that the communication
from the special committee of the Common Council be
referred to the committee of Middlesex magistrates.—
Carried.
The County Kate Sir R. Baker, the County
Treasurer, was sworn as to the correctness of his ac-
counts ; and in answer to observations from Sir John
Gibbon and other magistrates, that nearly all the pa-
rishes were in arrear, and that some of them were three
and four quarters, said, that during the last quarter the
payments were much better than he expected. The pa-
rishes were even that day paying in as fast as they could.
(Hear, hear.) The usual financial statement being read,
Mr. Hail said he had hoped they might have gone on
with less than a penny rate, but it was found impossible,
He therefore moved a rate of one penny in the pound for
the ensuing Quarter, which would produce 21,9971. 17s*
4d.
The penny rate was unanimously agreed to; and the
usual routine business having been disposed of, the court
adjourned.
COURT OF COMMON COUNCIL.
Yesterday a court was held for the dispatch of public
business.
THE RECORDER AND THE SHERIFFS OF LONDON.
Sheriff Wilson, after the minutes of the last court were
read and confirmed, said that'he held in his hand a news-
paper of that day, a paragraph in which reflected so
strongly upon the sheriffs, that he feit it to be highly in-
cumbent upon him to notice it in that court. He owed it
to his honourable colleague to state that the learned judge
who had thought proper to pass so heavy a censure did
not mean that it should apply to him (Sheriff’ Harmer)
Indeed, it was impossible that any officer of the cor-
poration could peiform his duties more strictly and
sedulously ; but it was also true that he (Sheriff Wilson)
was strict and sedulous in his attention to the duties of
the Shrievalty, and that never, except upon two occasions,
had he omitted to remain at the Old Bailey to close the
doors of the court, and for those two exceptions he could
satisfactorily account. The following was the paragraph,
under the head of “ Old Bailey,” to which he alluded :
—“The Recorder observing that neither of the High
Sheriffs was j resent, expressed his surprise and regret
that they should absent themselves on one of the most
solemn days of the sestion, and most especially
as this was the second occurrence. He desired the Clerk
if the Court to intimate to the High Sheriffs that in
future they would be expected to attend on the sentence
day, and if they did not he should adjourn the court
until they made their appearance.” He (Sheriff Wilson)
had on that morning heard from the learned judge that
the observation did not include his colleague, and he
feared that the censure sprung from a personal motive.
It happened that the learned judge had been absent upon
three occasions from his duties in Conservancy Courts,
and upon the last occasion it was stated that the
learned judge was occupied in holding a brief in the
Court of Common Pleas. Now he (Sheriff Wilson)
amongst others, at the Court of Conservancy said “ This
is too bad.”
Deputy Wood here interrupted the sheriff by sub-
mi ttng to the c urt that the public discussion of such a
subject was by no means proper. In this country, when-
e-er the conduct of a judge was made a matter of com-
plaint, the subject became one of grave inquiry, and not
to be decided upon by a sudden discussion in a Court of
Common Council.
Mr. Dixon said that he was not at all surprised at
the anxiety of the Sheriff to justify his conduct upon
seeing it so impeached. As for the course which the court
might adopt, they probably had good sense enough to act
in such a manner as could make them liable to no impu-
tation.
Sheriff Wilson proceeded.—He declared that be was
not fairly chargeable with any dereliction of his duty at
the Old Bailey, and he, at the same lime, wished it to be
understood that there was no judge upon the bemh for
whom he had a higher regard, or with respect to whom he
entertained kinder sentim ms, and he certainly little ex-
pected that the learned judge would have made such ob-
servations in bis absence. He had, upon the occasions
alluded to, engagements of an important nature to attend
to ; but he had taken care to leave behind him the Under
Sheriffs, who were qualified to perform the duties at the
Old Bailey, and there were also all the other officers in
attendance upon the bench. It was part of the doty of
the Sheriffs to attend the Lord Chief Justice of the King’s
Bench on certain occasions, but that learned judge most
readily accepted the substitution of the Under Sheriff, in
conclusion, he would appeal to all who had opportunities of
judging, whether he did not anxiously and zealously per-
form the duties of his office.
Sheriff Harmer said he bore most willing testimony to
the very strict attention which his honourable colleague
paid to the duties of his office, and said that he, too, felt
surprised at the censure which had been passed.
The Recorder said that, without making any observa-
tion as to the verbal accuracy of the newspaper account,
he should not hesitate to say that it was the buunden duty
of the sheriffs to be present on the last day of the sessions,
when the sentence of the law was to be pronounced. He
represented on that occasion, not only the corporation of
London as recorder, but all the King’s judges and the
other members of the commission, the proceedings of
which the recorder was appointed to carry to the King
himself. Now he was sure that those who elected him
expected no less than that he would act according to the
principle of justice. If he could not in tranquillity and
peace perform the duties of a judge, he certainly should
not hold the situation. Was a judge, because be'had the
pleasure of an acquaintance with an officer who hap-
pened to be a brother magistrate, to be mealy-
mouthed when that officer omitted to perform his
duty ? He had said nothing which he considered him-
self bound to retract. He meant nothing per-
sonal. He had noticed the absence of aldermen on
former occasions, and the sheriffs would see that there
was no personality. The case stood thus. The sheriff
having on a former occasion communicated with him on
the subject qf a former absence, he had not noticed that
absence ; but, finding that the fault was repeated, lie
considered it to ba his duty to point publicly the obliga-
tions of iha office, for he was determined to make no dis-
tinction with reference to rank. He .would not confine
his cemure to those whose situations were less elevated,
and the question was not what the sheriff thought, but
what the judge thought to be the sheriff’s duty. Asa
matter ot Jaw, the judge could have fined the sheriff on
the occasion alluded to ; but he was glad that his duty
did not compel him to infVct the penalty. As a matter of
Courtesy, he would say that nothing was further from his
thoughts than the idea of giving offence; but certainly
the person whom he could most readily censure for neg-
lect of duty would be his own friend. (Hear.)
Sheriff Wilson,—All I say is, that the observation
might have been privately made. That would have been
a matter of courtesy.
FEES OP THE SHERIFFS.
Mr. Charles Pearson presented u petition from Mr.
Gwynn and Mr. Roberts, tbe son of Mr. Roberts, who
hpd been in the shrievalty with Mr. Gywnn, in the year
1819, praying that the court would eause to be paid to
them the sum of 10,000’. and interest thereon, a fine
which had been inflicted upon Mosely Woolf and others,
convicted of a conspiracy lo defraud. It was, he said,
well known that the sheriffs were at enormous expenses,
without having an allow ance like that of the Lord Mayor,
and that in lieu of such allowance they were assigned the
receipt qf fines inflicted in courts qf justice ; these fines
varied very considerably, in some years not exceeding
1001., while in others it reached 40001. or 50001. Mr.
Pear»ou then moved that the petition be referred to a
committee.
Sir Peter Laurie said he bad something }ike a demand
himself, as sheriff; when he.was serving that office Da-
niel Whittle Harvey was fined 2001. lor a libel on George
the Third ; but the money, instead of going into his
pocket, went into the droits of the Admiralty, and he
never beard of it afterwards.
Deputy Wood said it was quite a mistake to suppose
that the sheriffs had a right to fines. The sheriffs were I safe, and the fair ones comfortably situated in their ne h*
the servants ot the corporation, and their right to fines J situations between decks, the David Scott was t ken in
depended on the will of the corporation. lie wished that I tow by the Hero as far as the Nore, when she parted
the committee would report to the court all the duties and I company, and the ship, with her valuable freight set
emoluments of the office in the year 1819. j sail, amidst loud huzzas from the visiters, under closelv-
Mr. Dixon also said that the sheriffs had no legal reefed fore-sails, for Sydney. It was intended, we un-
c p demand, that his Majesty’s steamer Salamander should
Ihe petition was, together with two others of a similar cmveythe David Scott to the Downs, but from some
kind, referred to a committee. misunderstanding she did not arrive.
Mr. W. Weston presented a petition from the British The females who are accommodated in the poop are
and Foreign School Society for pecuniary aid. He staled persons of very great respectability. They pay 61. extra
that the society had already afforded education to up- for the accommodations in the cabin of the poop, but they
wards of a million of poor children without regard to are provisioned iu every respect the same as the others in
sect or country. Ic was his intention to move in com- the steerage, and they are allowed the conveniences alluded
mittee for a vote of 500 guineas in aid of so great an in- to more to preserve their own peculiar associations than
stitution. for any other purpose. Mr. Marshall and Mr. Pinnock
The petition was referred to the Finance Committee. will accompany the ship through the channel, and it is
Mr. Hale, the chairman of the City Lands Committee, One to those gentlemen, as well as to Captain Nash and
communicated to the court the fact that the Islington the Emigration Committee, to state that the whole ar-
Market Bill had been lost in the House of Commons’ rangemenls of the embarkation, and the kindness they
Committee, and suggested the propriety of sending notice displayed to the women, reflect the highest credit upon
to parliament of the intention to move for a bill to en- them. It ought also to be stated that the David Scott,
large the present market at Smithfield, so as to answer which is capable of carrying 1000 tons, is the largest ship
the public convenience to the fullest extent—The court yet sent out with emigrants. The expense of this outfit
then adjourned. to g° v ernment will exceed 60091.
FEMALE EMIGRATION TO A USTR AI IA r TI J e moBt flattenn g accounts have been received of the
frrrr
tV i ‘vi*
j.i.4 sssrziit sr* ‘i™.? 1
the payment of 51. only. The remainder, comprising a w“ t h n three^ >« the country,
very small proportion of the emigrants, have beeu sent and of 217 fe-naU.- t, ‘ W . e we ™ W’f’Uy P* aced >
cut without any advance of money at all, on giving their onfvLeLHL who by that conveyance,
notes of hand to pay 61. each in the colony, within a rea- , dl > e W d 81 the exp,rat,on of five days,
sonable time after their arrival, when they have acquired w j t * ale emkrrar tTf T °‘ lo “ ore sU P lilis Y car
the means to do so. The Hero steamer. Captain Nash, Ir tie dih P OSSe > Slo,,s ’
had been engaged by the Emigration Committee, of which
Edward Forster, Esq. is chairman, and of which Messrs. SUMMER ASSIZES
Pirie, Lusbington, Bracebridge, Lewin, Crawford, Captain
Pring, R. N., and many other influential gentlemen, are NORTHAMPTON, July 9.
members, to convey the emigrants from St. Katharine’s, Valentine Brice, aged 25, was indicted for having wil,
to the ship, and at six o’clock the steamer moved along- fully set fire to a stack of hay, the property of Thomas
side the wharf, where the committee, attended by Mr. at Hackleton, in the parish of Piddington, in this
John Marshall, their active agent; Mr. Pinnock, of county, on the wight of the 9th of August, 1832—-
the Colonial Office; Captain Nash, Captain Owen, Guilty, but recommended to mercy.
and several other gentlemen, attended to look 1 7 llll 7 rm ™y
alter the fair ones, and superintend their era- SURREY SESSIONS, July 10.
barkation, which created a good deal of interest. All the conviction of three trades’ unionists.
passengers did not muster until half-past eight o’clock, and Thomas Oxley, John Reed, and William Rogers, three
the steamer was delayed beyond that time by the parting of journeymen hatters, were severally indicted for commit-
ihe women with their friends. The werd having been ting a violent assault on Chas. Tunmore, a journeyman
given for the steamer to get under weigh, the scene be- batter, in the employment of Mr. Moore, the hat-manu-
came painfully interesting from the number of females facturer, of Castle-streer, Southwark,
parting with their relations and friends. Several, over- The defendants were found Guilty; and the court
come by their feelings at leaving home, country, and kin- sentenced Oxley to two months’ imprisonment in the
dred, were deeply effected, and as they pronounced the House of Correction at Guildford ; and, at the expira-
word “farewell! ” burst into tears, or swooned in the tion of that sentence, to find two sureties of 301. each to
arms of their parents, brothers, and sisters. The leave- keep the peace. The other two defendants were sen-
taking, however, went off as well as could be expected fenced to one month’s imprisonment in the same gaol,
under such circumstances, and the majority of the women a,1( l to find similar sureties to be of good behaviour to all
appeared in high spirits. The Hero left the wharf amidst his Majesty’s subjects, but more particularly to the pro-
loud cheers from the spectators on the pier-head, who ac- secutor.
Sr.rtTTif 'it' I*" 1
bcott abi ut half-past eleven o clock, and having been made the Thames Police Office, and was put to the bar on »
fast alongside the ship the passengers were takenon board charge of receiving a large quantity of valuable books and
the vessel with their luggage, and conducted by Mr. xMar- prints, the property of Messrs- Baldwin and Cradock * in.
shall and the committee to their berths below, with the Paternoster-row. The case was attended with some ex\ra-
arrangements of which they appeared highly satisfied, ordinary circumstances, and the investigation, which lasted
About 100 sleeping places have been erected on each side of s, - vera l hours, created a good deal of interest. It appeared
theship, extendmgforeandaft, and each berth isadapted for t j iat a y ou, HT ™ an ? naaio , ( s Frampton, who was formerly in
three persons,exciusiveofaccoraraodations for 22passengers ! esemceo 1 Baldwin, and left their employ in May
• _ m, .j i as t was apprehended on Monday, on board Hip
Jin V P * ? , v°\ e * are J numerous excellent mart, lying in the London Dock, and bound to New fouth
ventilation is preserved between decks, embracing a Wales, for which colony he had paid for his nassaee and
lieight qt seven feet, av.d there is a space of at least had engaged himself as clerk to Wicker, in whose lodgings a
18 feet in width between the sleeping berths, and nearly box was found filled with new books in elegant bindings
80 feet in length, which is preserved for the usa of the which had been stolen frqm Messrs. Baldwin’s premises!
women, who will, by this arrangement, have plenty o! The box and its contents was stated by Wickers to have beeu
mom to walk about. The men’s berths are in the fore his apartments by Frampton, and he referr* d the offi-
part of the vessel, and strong bulk-heads, excluding both ™ IS t 0 another rase lying in the dock quay, and belonging to
sight and sound, separate them from all communication ~,!?!?/ S ° /°!? d to contain books and
with ihe females, and it is determined to preserve the belonging m the prosecutor,. Afte ™ tbLf facte
strictest delicacy and separation of the sexes throughout come out in evidence on Monday, Frampton was re
the voyage. An hospital capable «f accommodating 16 manded, and it was subsequently deemed necessary to
persons, his been fitted up with medicine chest and every apprehend Wickers, who is going out in the same
convenience for the use of invalids, and Mr. Docker, an s Mp> as a receiver. It was now stated by-
experienced naval surgeon, has been appointed to attend F j vans, junior, and James Fogg, surveyor of the
on the sick during the voyage. Lieu?. Marshall, R.N., Ihames police, that on Saturday night last, when they called
and his wife, who are accompanied by their family, will at tae residence of Wickers, they asked him after they had
officiate as superintendant and matron, and under their ?lt he o: L™ felTed if ** e had purchased
immediate control the passengers will be placed. The Frampton ever sinceTe lid teen a child, and had
instructions with which the committee have furnished been in the line, and could purchase books at a chean rate he
Lieutenant and Mrs. Marshall have been framed with a (Wickers) gave Frampton orders to buy some, and^that. thev
most careful attention to the wants and necessities which were packed up in cases with the Doctor’s and Brampton's
must necessarily arise during a fifteen or sixteen weeks’ boqks. On Tuesday the prisoner went on board the
voyage, and form an excellent institute upon which a ®ritomart, and brought away two cases of books, in
code of regulations may be based. The passengers are 8 .ts and bindings, chiefly the publications of Messrs. Bald-
divided into parties of eight, each party forming l a ' vm ana Cradock. Ihe value of the books, including
separate mess. To preserve the comfort’and clean li- hundred and Sr 1 ”® 1 Metropolitans., it
ness of all o« board all the packages containing clothes ped for exportation in the name of Wicker,''’and the'
not required for use during the first lour weeks were Custom-house seal was upon them. On bringing them
required to be put on board three days before the sailing on deck, Wickers repudiated the books, and said « Take
ot the vessel, and stowed in the lower hold of the ship, them away, I’ll have nothing to do with them. Go to your
and nothing but necessaries for one month’s use on the P°lice-office and open them—they belong to Frampton.” ' Hfr
voyage are allowed to be placed between decks where tbe the officers that he would not take such a character
females sleep. The provisioning of the passengers is upon as r * 1 ’ am Ptpß to Sydney with him.
a scale of great liberality. The biscuit bread is of the Wickers, said ho was a
best quality, and there is a good supply of sheep, pigs, tint the*nrowitnwhn?i audeentended
i o u a ii u . 3 . ift ? mac tne prosecutors had behaved harshly m causing him tn
fowls, fee., besides flour, cheese, beet, pork, peas and be apprehended. They asked the officers XhetheSprimer
rice. An ample allowance of wine will be served out had not given them every assistance ? F
during the voyage, and so liberal is the supply of water Evans and Fogg said he had at once answered their in-
thac each passenger will be allowed three quarts daily. f l l,ir,e s, and gave up the box when they went to his residence!
Samples of tbe bread, beef, and pork, were served to the ie y had an exact description of it before they went there!
committee, and several noblemen and gentlemen visitors, P lason er said he would give them all the assistance in
who witnessed the embarkation, pronounced the food I A?r VV S r * ,
excellent, and of the best quality. Besides the sum of 5k R-,Vdwin uv. ?? prosecution, said that Messrs,
paid by the women for their passage, thev are moreover and when the whole ll J ( f ered to a amoimt >
required to furnish themselves with sufficient clothing for suffered was developed,’ it would be ffimid attended wUh the
tbe voyage, and we did not observe one whe had failed in most aggravating circumstances. Framnton bad
this respect. exported books which he could not have come by honestlTas
Ihe want of farm servants having been much feit in ft £‘ onl y held a subordinate situation, and he contended that
the colony of New South Wales, the Emigration Com- tae account Wickers gave of the transaction on Saturday
mittee have infused into the consignment of the on l Mon(^a y> vvere very different, and, coupled
David Scott a larger quantity of country girls and e a qt that the hooks were shipped in his name, was a
persons connected with agricultural pursuits than have find Wirt He the magistrate vomldl
yet gone out in any emigrant ship from Great Bri- obtained k knew how and where the property way
tain There are no less than 15 agricultural families The prisoner’s solicitors said the property had been shhmed
on board from the counties of Kent, Surrey, Essex, and m their client’s name for mere convenience t
Suffolk. Among themlis Mr. Crooker, who may with truth when two or three persons were going out together nishin
be called a fine old English yeoman, with hi* wife, ten goods in one name. 6 >1
daughters, and two sons. This remarkably fine family s ome further discussion,
of fourteen persons were objects of great attention and 1 , Po . ole > a confidential servant in the employ of
interest; eight of the girls, rosy-cheeked smiling lasses, ventorv nf wa ® s ' vor lh aTl( lhe said ho had taken an in-
are oetween the ages of fifteen and thirty, and hare been the prosecutors^ Relieved the whole to belong to
assisted by tbe parliamentary grant. Mr. Crooker for Mr. you identify anything »
many years was the bolder and cult, valor of a large farm Poole took up two volumes and a set of prints, Hearth’s
near Bexley, in Kent, but, to use his own words, “the works, and said he could identify them. * s
black ox trod on his foot.” He became reduced, and was Mr - Broderip—By what means can" you identify them »
ultimately compelled to give up his farm. To support his Wltne ss—l gave them to Mr. Frampton myself. 3
family he accepted the situation of bailiff to a landholder. p M , r ’ o ro derip-Indeed; do you say that advisedly?
Fresh misfortunes bare lately overtaken him, and in the r S, i • s *. r *
hopes of bettering the condition of his family, he has now Rwn .l* J* ie witness ought not to have beer*
emigrated to a distant clime. He has gone out with oath if ho should not have administered: the
recommendations, and with such a family, brought upt Mi^H^
habits ol industry, they will prove an invaluable acquisition untainted witness. He could not advise him fWald as an
to the colony. Mr. Crooker is a remarkably tall, well. Mr. Broderip said he had a right to tell the witness he need
formed, healthy man, upwards of 55 years of age, but hot criminate himself, and if he did so after that caution he
apparently 15 years younger. The attention of this co «'« hold out no promise that he would not he prosecuted,
patriarch seemed to be exclusively devoted to his children, j. roole 881,1 he wished to give his evidence in favour of the-
who said they must be happy where he 'X _
was. He seemed in high spirits, and assisted the Be cautious • .toffivnlge anything, now?
sailors in heaving the capstan as if he had been all
his life at sea. Nothing hut au active life, he much, he l^lKtUd
said, would do for him; he could not be idle. This brought up. until Frampton was again,
family were loudly cheered by the visiters and crew, and Mr, Broderip said the case against Wickers amounted only
“ liod t,I4SS you ! m »y success attend you 1 ” was uttered t 0 Qn , e , of suspicion, and not sufficient to justify him in,
by numerous voices. Several other agriculturists, who SfTS'u 11 ! 8 ' , the l Jl ' isorlet ' for re-examination, but he must
have been all their lives connected with fanning pursuits ■,., KU . * llB future re-appearance to answer the charge-
and who intend cultivating ip the colony, will he of to detain Wtet 3 sol>tllors ''. onteild, ' dth at it would be harsh
more service to New South Wales than all the shin S " P T" 8 ff"'" to Sail - “ 1 le li; “ l
loads of convicts who have yet been senfthither. V H « had “ ““>
Gibbons formerly agent to Lloyd’s at Kinsale. with his Mr. Humphreys said Wickers ought to he detained. He-
wite and eight children, six well-educated girls and two Olll y pretended to claim three hooks out of the two r
sons; and Mrs. Hill, the wife of a respectable tradesman entere d in his name,
at the West-end, and sister to the late high sheriff of the -..-’'V' Broderip, after a very long discussion, allowed
colony, with seven daughters and a niece, are among the , lcl j e . rs ta S° :it ku’ge, on|his solicitors undertaking to.pro-
passengers. The attention paid to their familie! by ducc next 1 lies Jay.
these persons is deserving of great praise. Mrs. Hill is a
not accompanied by her husband, who, in consequence of v, . APOTHECARIES’ HALL.
having to settle some family business, will not be able to Names of gentlemen to whom the Court of Examiners
join her until next year. The importance of the charge S ranted certificates of qualification on Thursday last.
of such a numerous family, by a female, during such a Staffordshire.
long voyages, unaided, and with an invalid child among John Elliot Catley, of Cambridge.
them, cannot be too highly appreciated. Mrs. Gibbons George F redenck Codnngtou, of Dorsetshire.
is a cousin of Mr. O’Copncll, tbe honourable and Jamos Mapp Garthon, of Norwich.
learned member for Dublin. One berth we observed John Moss Kirkman, ol Manchester.
appropriated to the widow of a farmer, and her three ° f a ~
daughters, and another to four tall black-eyed dam- Robeit VI ood 1 hac| reri of Staffordshire.
scls, sisters, Horn Suffolk, orphans, who are going out au His Majesty, attended by Sir Herbert Tavlor bur
a matrimonial expedition. There are about a dozen Irish town at a quarter before seven o’clock cn Wednesday on
g*rls exclusive ol Mrs. Gibbons’s daughters, on board* bis return to Windsor Castle.
The majority of the emigrants are in appearance re- A correspondent states that the story relative 1 ? to nro-
spec table, and the minority, though poor, are certainly perty found by Sir George Duckett’s widow cannot 1»p
very decorous and decent. Mr. Marshall and the emi- true, Sir George being alive and well*
gratiou commit*ee have cot only made very excellent ar-- Mr. |Barrett (the Editor of the Pilot) was liberated
rangements fov the comfort, convenience, and moral care from Kilmainharn gaol on Monday last after having
of all qn board, but have made particular inquiries into suffered six months’ imprisonment, the term to which ho
the characters ot the females ; and those who came from vvaa sentenced.
a distant part of the country were not admitted as pas- Au elderly gentleman of the name of lowdell in the'Ken-
j sengers until they brought testimonials as to their good uington-ioad, oa Tuesday night put a period to his existence
j conduct and honesty trum the clergyman and inhabitants / bleeding himself in the arm. He was a person in affluent
j of the place where they resided. circumstances, and no cause can be assigned at present lor
It was not until two o’clock that the passengers and * Tiunp?’ nwmvo t i v• - 7
I their luggage were transferred from the steamer to the by Mr?Georce
.sh’p, and the committee and their agent having s een all
ightm Paper*


I fj A #l /\ f? jfc? % /
raf)m hll l r o/oO A/ c v z l./
/v \jL * \ w** 1 *-..-v- ■ y ' 7
FOREIGN INTET rraPNCE. dared positively in the House of Lords on Wednes- price of sacrificing England’s two oldest and most | THE KING’S LEVEE. I DESPKRATE ATTEMPT TO MURDER. CO»5» SSAaStStPS.
fRECEivED THif momim) dav and reiterated his assertion last night, in faithful allies, Holland and Portugal, to her most 'P S,r w ?L Ta y‘ or »J'S Sunday night, John Cannon, a constable of the metro- -corn EXCHange-(TH!s day.) _ „
(rlceived j his MOiiNiNu ) Qd yj ai)a reuerateu ji& «o o > ' b > on \v edHCftda> afternoon from Wmasor Castle, ihe Duke of pohtan police, division No. 60, was on duty at Battersea, The wheat trade is nominally as on Wednesday, hut at pro.
- answer to a question put by the Marquis oi inveterate enemy, r ranee —and, conlessedly, from ; Cumberland received his Majesty at St. James’s. j and in passing through the nursery grounds of Mr. Juer, sent with little doing. Barley and oats may also be quoted.
FRANCE. Londonderry that he had no intention of resigning, the fear of France—surrendering as a bye game j Beto “ holding-a Leves the King gave audiences m the ; a market-gardener and nurseryman, he discovered a man "ther article “‘‘grain, thcrels nothing tonoticel 18 ’ SBaS ’ dn
(from OCR PRIVATE correspondent.) Lu.«iKiem, iMi k imu ™ _ & ° , ... ~,, .° .. , , ° ; closet to some of the cabinet ministers. His Majesty also who was robbing the grounds of fruits and flowers.
PARIS. July 9* and that he knew of no resignations whatever ex- the common safety Oi Lurope, by the abandonment ; gave audiences alter the Levee to Earl Grey,Viscount Althorp, Cannon accosted him, and not being satisfied at the an- i wheat*. 1 Barley, j Oats.
Russian declaration against England. rent thn«p of Pari firev and Lord Althorp. His of the Ottoman empire to Russia, and the gift ofi^ sCount Melbourne, the Lord Chancellor, Lord John ; swers given him, he attempted to take the man into custody, English | I 280 | 3020
TheOazetteof Augsburgh has brought us “from the , P . '. . * * . , ‘ • = | Russell Sh-James Kempt, and Lord Hill. |in doing which the robber, who is a man of great stature Foreiim I*l I I I I 4 - 1 *sfo
Danube,” L e., from the Russian government, a most lordship, however, declined .stating w . . g * * GV \ Mr * c * Fergusson, on his appointment as Judge Advocate ; and strength, drew a knife, and inflicted several deep Flour (English), 3,010 sacks,
important document It is nothing less than an act of present state of the negociations, and seemed to in- rival. 1 eace and glory can be easily purchased j General; and Lieut. Governor Aretas Young, from Prince j and extensive wounds on the head and face of Cannon, who
defiance hurled against the Whig ministers of England, timat e that he was in some most confidential com- in this way, as long as we have one principle d 1 to. The tm nf l ° vf apple f- \ form ! dabl ® opp °™ n f not ; C&UIS ATOEAGES. , ,
, L’ 1 i B . „u- rpiiiii .fltinU llu,ate uc was / ° iiic following vveie presented to the King:— Ihe Earl of , withstanding he was faint from exhaustion and loss of REPOR rof the AVERAGE PRICE of CORN and GRAIN sold
a,.a id rough them at England herself. -this acicie, mun i cat j on w i t h t h e Kins’. Surely no one can tor a ot international policy to surrender upon the com- Burlington, on coming to his title; Lieut.-Gen. Sir C. Hal- ; blood. At length the villain extricated himself from in the several counties of England and Wales which governs
emanating from the Russian “ Chancellery, tells us _ ° . formation nf a cabinet mand of ambition —as lone* as we have one ally to kett > late Commander-iii-Chief of Bombay ; Viscount Kings- 1 the hold of the policeman, and ran oft’. Cannon the duty for the week ending July 4
plainly that Russia will not yield on any of the questions moment contemplate that the formation o , g y borough, by Major-Gen. King; Mr. T. W. Allies; Major pursued, and came up with him on the grounds |Wheat.|Bariey. oats. Rye j Beangq P--as.
now dividing the Russian and the English governments should be intrusted to Lord Brougham. betray as long as rivals covet one object which Ratclitfe, 6th Dragoons, on being appointed a Knight of the of Mr. Simmons, where another deadly struggle London - - 52 029 0255 o o 36 247 2
—that those governments are on the worst possible terms tu House of Commons adiourned last night interest or honour would require us to withhold. Royal Hanoverian Guelphic Order; Lieut. H. Fyers, Royal took place between the parties, the robber making Uxbridge - - sg 2316267 0 p 41 4 0 p
—that Russia will not abandon her influence over Turkey, . . Q than t u p nr Artillery; Capt. R. Rickenson, C. 8., R.N., on return from desperate attempts to run the policeman through the - |9 6 00 J 00 3 7-6 9
nor limit her naval preparations in the Black Sea; and unfcll Monday. By that daj, then, the a- Spanish Court has ffo ne to La Grania fwwi 861 ™ 6 V C °!‘ n* , ri< T’ on ap Pp mtecl C]ei ; k of f»ody with his knife, cutting through his great coat, £, s £x I ai 431124«50 0 34 6 00
that as Russia knowntho Whi«- rninistrv of Endand raiiffements will be completed, and we may , p b . 0 . as gone 10 , 1 the Oi finance; Capt. Colquhoun, R.A., on his return from body-coat, and reaching his shirt. He also attempted Kent - - . 51 7329262 o u 34 4 0 o
L “ , , K ,„j f . 1 | • where our ambassador and the other members Mexico; Command; r M‘Crea, on appointment to the Zebra; to cut the policeman’s throat, severing the coat-coliar Sussex - ’ ’] f 2 .1 PP P 1
cirmotgotowar-Ut because of its oepe.id.mr and uu- perhaps have it in our power to explain diulomatic body have i„ined them LieaU Sands, Royal Dragoons; Lieut. H. GaitskeU, R.N., and stock. Cannon, by a determined "effort, succeeded “d - - % *%g g g gg « %
ertam position , and 2d, because the ways and gome ()f - th discrepancies which at present ... 1 , 5 ■* .‘ on appointment to the Zebra; Ensign Surtees Cook, 65th in wresting the knife out of the villain’s grasp, and i Aylesbury . . 47 4 0029 0 o 0 Soli 0 0
means would not be voted by the English House of Com- } Ali tll e bpanish ministers, with the exception regiment, on his appointment; Lieut. Barbor, Bth Bengal it fell to the ground: he now endeavoured to throttle Oxford . . 48 fii o u 2ii 7 o o 35H 41 8
mons to Lord Grey or any other Whig minister to make puzzle us. As we said on Wednesday, P £ “ 0 f Count Torreno have left Madrid. The Cavall 7j returning to fndia; Capt. Yates, Royal Dragoons; Cannon by seizing him by the throat; the policeman now J! unt h i !!f ,lon . . - t? o 2?> «210!!n88 io 4? 11
war; therefore that Whig threats will be disregarded, ing-up will be attempted, but we do not . . 9 , , « . Capt. TV. Perceval, R.N.; Capt. Carew. j took the first opportunity of getting at his staff, with suiTolk gea y re _ 49 « 0233001 34 5 39 I
and Russia will persevere in her plans of aggrandisement, u- l CI . n,, in fir f rouM be found L excited Dy the approacn Ot tile j which he split the ruffian’s head open; this still further Norfolk - _ 0 10 19 700368 34 0
This is, at any rate, the substance of the following arti- tlllnk su^ cess^11ll y- Whci e, in iacl, could DC touna cholera wag e aßll it was EAST INDIA HOUSE. I exasperated him, and he called out, “ Joe and Jack, d—n huwomshire -f7uo H u 0 a ,;7 5o o
cle, which has excited much attention at Paris. The among the men now remaining in office a I remier, ffeare(J that th( . ~l ace would becollle Stock LTheH f 3 yollr f<>“* and “""‘f Thu oCrtam e -I4Sa 5 o H 1 'o 38 8 o
French journals predict that England and France cannot and a leader of the House of Commons, whom . , , .1 1 j • , hall-street for the nurDose of there b*ir»£ laid JJV 111 ’ !i0 b’om the beginning of the contest given Northumberland 43 l J 21; ill 0 3 A 1 !i
, . tl ‘ . jii , , , , riotous, when the leading authorities had with- ndjj. stietft, *Ol me puipose or taeie Deing laid, befoie him himself up for lost, was still determined to sell his life as Cumberland - of » -o » 24 j ( >o 10 0000
ir. a t“e ^ 1 meruit' 1 88 ;he was not aware that his opponent had I 5%.0%0V, * g 8 g g
’ 1 : e treaty oi alliance is mere xnotKeiy »uu gas pu£sum b or me gem tai court & reso.ution ot the llitn alt., any companions until he called out: no third party, how- Lancashire 4 5 8 (i 8 22 5 o 0 41 0 o o
connade—an 1 that Russia has nothing to tear on the side * r opain; but the genera! impression m Madrid was together with his opinion thereon, respecting the grant of ever, appeared, and the fellow then said to Cannon Derby - - i 7 « o o o o o o 42 « o o
of France. Ali this is certainly vastly agreeable, after We must say a few words on the proceedings ot the p Qrce 0 f Genetal Rodil was too small to under the provisions of the act 3rd and 4tli ; « You must either murder me, or I will you.” The Nottinghamshire 7 %25 l'> 0049 4 o 0
having sacrificed all our old allies for ihe sake of this new the two Houses of Parliament, though we know . . IV ilham I/., c. 80, g. 7. j policeman still continued determined to take his prisoner aou3 ~j u-sj o ’7 5 o d
one. The following is the ariicle in ouestion... .. , nn rprnmnlell dation to the aole to P ut down the Ca,llst ™surrecUou, The Chairman (H. St. George Tucker, Esq.) having stated if possible, although weak and exhausted from the wounds fcrwiSbi ‘i7 « » 2 i 6“oo« 9 g g
“ Banks of the Danube, June 25. tliat the y need 110 recomme utatio and we suppose that under the present cir- the purpose mr which the Court-was convened, informed the he had received; he still retained his staff (all the arms Worcaster - -if 1« ««»»J>« I « '> « 0
“ There are neoole who think thev oer-eive in the in- attention of any one; and, we confess, , . . , , P«»pi etors that the question put to their standing counsel, ;he had), with which he defended himself from the deter- Warminster - jt j-»« w jo f 0 38 o o o
xneie are people WHO mink tney per. eive in tne in J ’ . .... cumstances, the Queen must not look and his answer to it, should be read. S.,*. v,. ... u_ „ Denbighshire - 47 ‘ -f -jo u o o 0 o q o
crease of the English squadron in the Mediterranean an that under the impression made by trie ministerial „ . . * , rl T a i . .Tl lt . followine was the ouestiou raised • nn “ <l i- a . B °i l' ls al J ta o onist, «bo at kngth by a ues- Carnarvon - - .> a d-o 0 I<> u 0 0 u o 0
■ ,■ . - , ~ , , 1 . . to England for assistance. The Duke of Welling- J-ne ronowmg was tne question laisea— perate efiort got from the grasp ot the policeman and fled. Haverfordwest t Aj , If3o 1' y 0 0 0 o O
intention ot attacking Russia, they imagine that England explanations, we are not at all anxious to make . , „ „ r , . . , , . Whether trie grant ot compensation under the 3rd and Cannon from his condition was unable to overtake him, and Carmarthen 1 4a 7 ou2o 0 y o C 0 o 0
call never find the attitude of Russia, as regards the 1 dj of our j eelings . There is a ton, ru the House of Lords last mght, emphat.caily 4th Wham IV., c 85, sec. 7, may be made by the Court of cailed tor Stershlre ‘l4?§egt,3g g g 3 g ,8 g g
Ottoman Porte, m accordance with us interests, or P } B , . . stigmatized the quadruple treaty as a matter Oi Directors, without being previously submitted to and sane- the poor fellow all the aid in his power; he was placed in a somerset - 48 r290g3» 00 46 3 sg 0
tolerate a new weight thrown into the balance in fa- species ot almost unconscious hypocrisy, inse- mogt o ffi C i ol is and uncalled-for interference on ray b y theCourt °f Proprietors, if the sum granted exceeds chaise and conveyed to the house of Mr. Phillips, surgeon, of Monmouthshire 1)8 £> 0 0 0 0 „ 0 0 0 00
vour of Russia; this new weight is the Russian parable, perhaps, from the maintenance of the cour- , . ' T i T -» . : Beaufort-row, Chelsea, who promptly dressed the wounds, ‘ ’IS! 254% o 2 « I II
squadron, which was not required at a moment in J- h wh - u Hawses are more or less th(? part ° f Lord Palmerston Ihe opinion of Mr Serjeant Spankie, the Company’s * and he was put to bed, but his life is despaired of. The Dorset I 52 «J9O 2O 0 ' 3 g
which Turkey had no fleet in the Bosphorus, and tesies ot life with which all classes are more or less laW kQu the tabJe of the House 0 f Commons, t - bC d 5 P risoner apprehended on Monday in Jews’-row, Chelsea, Hants - . 52 fi Utf *258.8 g 1 40 « g 0
w u n thp I)ardanfilp«s wptp nnpn tn the Russian flao iD'ected. Individuals whom hard necessity com- . | . iindu section 7or the act ot the did ana 4th W illiam IV., oy and has undergone an examination before Captain Morris, a r _ j 71 —7 —— *
when the Dardanelles were open to the itimian nug. , f ... , . A f mai , nn( lthin.r« vvithout any comment—and we sincerely the Court ot Directors, with the approbation and confirma- .magistrate at Wuidsworth. His name is James Fraser a Im P- weekly Av. 48 11 128 il 24 G 33 11; 36 Q 45 6
The question here is not only the letter of the treaty pels to the daily task of thinking ot men and things . J tion of the India Board and withmit wipU M-antq hoin<r mv e at wanuswoun. nis name is James riasei, a
c . H 0 , t 1 11. -. , 1 ° hone that in so doing he has performed voa 01 me inaia j*oaiu, ana witnout such giants oemg pie- • notorious character. He was fully committed to Horse- Aggregate Av. of 1 2 s 723 332 11 i 26 4 4' r,
of the bdi ot July, which is so much spoken ot, and as they are, and of bringing each man 4 character ‘ , f ~b 1;f Wti . irt vmusly submUted to the Court of Proprietors, though they 1 monger-lane gaol for trial on the capital charge at the ensuing thesix week*’ , 1 , "
the incontestible rights of Russia; but the prejudice . pretensions to the test of his conduct alone are the ait act °* h,s official hie. We trust that no exceeded 6001. He was further of opinion, that the compen- Guildford assizes. duty on For. Corn j3B 8 1 19 10:12 3215: 15 6 80
done to England in her dominion of the seas. If ‘ _ , ’ , party, or modification of party, will have any thine sations, superannuations, or allowances, now under consider- ___ -
France should to-morrow ally herself with Russia, the exempt from the, perhaps, happy delusion; when ® ation, were not gratuities, or, as expressed by the by-law, SaKTKriß3Cs3>
Russian fleet might join that of the French at Toulon, they come to speak, therefore, in circumstances * 1 given m the way of gratuities. They were, in tact, com- Gross Outbade.—Between® and 7 o’clock on Wednesday Cat lfE market—(Tins Day .)
Tlnr ramm l.n issue with France on ac- i-i \ would be a mark ot disgrace to any administration pensations founded on just moral considerations, as the re- morning a carpenter named Middleton, occupying No. 5, the Pnmest young Scots this morning fetch 3s lOd to 4a per
Hut England cannot be at issue with Fiance on at J lke the present , they must offend against . = ' ward of persons whose reasonable expectations being pro- Crown-court, Dean-street, went out to leaving ?iT OeJ 0 e J best Lineotns and Dnrhams are worth 3s 8d io
count ol the lonian Islands. One may see by, the cool- „ hnm Whatever. vi.lert fnr Erin. Ufc - .„/« Ah™. S?"?**}**"’ o'd and mienor meat, maybe stated at
ne may see by the cool- . .. . .. ■ ,
Cabinets of St. James’s the sympathies of those to whom they
motives to admit, that address themselves, must expect to be called
ness wuiuu cjKidLs uciwtea tne onuuicis ui kjt. wamw o - *
and St. Petersburg!! sufficient motives to admit, that address themselves, must expect to be called CITY—FRIDAY, ONE O’CLOCK,
the presence of an English squadron in the Bosphorus harsh, cynical, and uncharitable. If, for example j The funds were unsteady all yesterday, but did not flue-
might have a vast object, and perhaps cause a coup-de- to of the explanation speeches of Lords 1 *“ te ; ve 7 ' ridd y- , Co ““ Is °P ened at 92 * to > ad ™«ced to
mam to be foreseen. Ihe present situation ot England / 1 . . . , | then receded to 92 and left off at 92 Ato jh Exche-
and France would be sufficient, if necessary, to prove Grey and Althorp, that they inspire us with strong
I quer Bills left off at 50s. to 525. pm.
the possibility of such a coup-de-main. The interest feelings of disgust, such feelings of disgust as j In the Foreign Mar k e t, and particularly in Spanish and
of the Cabinets which wish to avoid war is then to ar tful misrepresentation, affecting the tones of j Portuguese Stock, the fluctuations were in proportion much
snow themselves mediators. The mediation vvas in | ] ul tn alld submission, ought to excite, we greater, some other causes.concurring with the general state
the accord of the powers, and even Russia, who en- “'““‘•■is.O' 3 “““ ’ ° ... ~ , ... , ,
gaged not to accept the smallest village of Turkey in should say what would certainly give offence, at .* 0 a !0 r '' saclul les - e * as
Europe, and above all in the promise of Russia not to least, what thousands would prttend to be offended SI, 0 * 0 , pa " ,s 011 ».was io |. oitnguese et o a
demand the passage of the Dardanelles. The best gua. n -‘ h . nnt be vervfar 88g to J, having previously been done at 87J, and at 88*.
rantee lor the Forte would be to destroy the supremacy l ’ but what ’ | y ’ » 1 y 11118 stock 18 much better supported at present than Spanish,
of the Russian naval forces in the Slick Sea. This Rom the truth. We shall, therefore, say nothing .
consideration supposes in England, besides the will, the about the general effect of the speeches in question. onso st ,s ™ornmg are heavy, and the price for the
power of attempting a coup-de-main like that in ques- Lord Grey's explanation of his abandonment of AccoUllt has declined from 92£ gto 92g i.
tion. An attack upon Turkey would be aa iudis- ... ... tu An t,ie Spanish Stock market there has been a complete
pensable preliminary, for the’ Divan would reply °® ce * putting aside the pa e p , panic this morning, and the quotation has touched on 43. j
negatively to the demand of England, who would im- difficulty into which he and his colleagues have been being a fall of 3 per cent, from the closing price
mediately dispatch a squadron to the Black Sea. The thrown by the detection of Mr. Littleton's negocia- of yesterday, but there is a partial re-action and the
attack would more certainly be followed by a war it tions with Mr. O’Connell. Strangely enough, how- price is now 44£ j. Portuguese have also declined,
Franc* should make common cause with England, but earl would fasten upon Sir Robert but not to the extent of Spanish, the quotation being 87| to
France and England cannot des.re an European war. 110 ,le earl W ( ". , Thi _ 88). Brazilian Bonds arc 79). Mexican 43.1, and Colum-
How would the Grey ministry, or any Whig ministry. Peel the whole gravamen ot that dimculty. I nis biau 31 to 3.} . “
find the means of making war ? Where would a mi. j s characteristic; and is not the less cha- ‘
nistry, which owes every hour of its existence to a per- . •.. n 1 • . Jiclmnooi DECLARATION OF THE KING,
petuai warfare against ’the King, the Tories, and the ractenstic tor being extrem y “ * The following addresses and petitions, heartily expressive
Reformers, find in the parliament sufficient credit to R- came in to the investigation ot the of gratitude to his Majesty for his recent gracious declaration
be enabled to make such a war? The Tories are at affair almost at the last hour, and all that he did were P reseil ted to the King at the
present drawn closer to the Emperor Nicholas than wag t 0 b , 0 haye pieced and put together, and 7he o Archbishop : ofCanterbnry-From the clergy of the
Lord Grey or any Whig successor to him can be. Rns- comp l ete the fragments of the Irish cor- deanery of Taunton; the clergy of the archdelcomv of
sia would not consent to a proposal lose that we have maui - complete, me iragmeiiis ..... Salop; the clergy of the archdeaconry of Derby; the pa.
named. It most not be thought that she is afraid of Eng- respondence which had been brought out in mstal- r .shes of East Brent and South Brent, Hutton and Locking,
land in her present state ; she would not dread her more merits in the altercation between the Irish Secretary Weston-super-Weal! and Huntspill, Somerset; Filing,
united with France. On the other hand, neither must ... „,, i , A,.-, -f hi. .nmnlsint Southampton; Coleshill, Warwickshire; Danlev Wiske,
it be believed that England would see with pleasure the and Mr * ° Connell ’ 1,1 the COUrSe . h ‘ S c ® m P la,,,t » North Riding of Yorkshire; St. Nicholas, Cork ; St. Maty
destruction of the Russian fleet by an English squadron. Lord Grey advanced some new and startling doc- Shandon, Cork; Abbey Stowey, county of Cork; the
interest, which in our days is opposed to ali revolution, is trines, as to the right of parliament to inquire into
the principle which animates All the western powei*. the acts of government. His lordship asserted The Earl of Falmouth—From the gentry and inhabitants
A war made by England and France combined, no matter that a communication made bv the Lord Lieutenant of Falmouth and its vicinity ; a similar address from Pen-
with what view, would necessarily degenerate mm a re- ~_ . . , . zance and its vicinity; and a similar address from the parish
voiutionary struggle against the Conservative principle, ot Ireland, to the King s Prime Minister, and relating of Lawnhitton, in Cornwall,
and would render the powers more united together, to the government administered by the Viceroy, is Lord Saltoun—From the Lord Lieutenant, Deputy Lieu-
France and England ouir'it to make these reflections • the i , , • ■ , tenants, and landholders of Aberdeen.
idiGo ciiiu xji.g auu ouj it io maae tnese unecuions ,me not a document to which parliament has any right Mr Herbert—From Smith Wilts
increase of the English fleet in the Mediterranean cannot , 1 . a . , mi. neiouu-uomaouift wuta.
have tue motive ascribed to it, it cannot be conceived with- ot access. Let this doctrine be once sanctioned. Viscount Cole, M.P., and Mr. M. Archdall, M.P.—From
out this forced interpretation. We have seen Ancona however, and' what becomes of ministerial respon- Fex-inana*h* 511 ’ no nat >? gentry, c eigy, and Protestants of
occupied and Antwerp taken, because a French ministry sihility, and of the inquisitorial authority of parlia- Lord Prudhoe—From Chillingham, Northumberland • and
it?fnt^allnemie7““ onBtratioUS indis ‘ M, “ sable *° went ? A functionary lias but to carry on the sub- fvomtbe parishes of Alnwick, Shillbottle Lexbury, Long-
its internal enemies. J . , , houghten, Ilvington, Holystone, and Belford, Northumber-
miscellaneous. stance or public business in a correspondence, i anc |.
The Consticutionnel of to-day has published a long folded or addressed in a particular maimer, and The Marquis of Exeter—From the borough of Stamford.
article “on the appearance of the Legitimists in the he can safe j„ leave the husks ef official com- f a N o rth a mwonsMre ,d ~ Fro,n Tbrautoa and its
Chamber of Deputies. I his juste milieu journal has J , , viuriuy in iNoiinamptonsniie.
very properly said, that the re-appearance of the Royalists nnmication, to be digested by the most jealous dl^*' l a^®^- Fl ' om the archdeacon and clergy of Mid-
in thai Chamber is no ordinary event. Their number is parliament. In the particular instance, however. The Earl'Winchilsea-From Tenby and its vicinity;
small to day, but at the next general election it will be eVe u this monstrous doctrine wiil avail nothing— Leigh, county of Stafford; Sebergham, county of Carlisle;
much larger. The principles of “ order and of legiti- - wh „. h _r T, nr a Welleslev’s communications with and Ahcnagh, county of Cork.
macy ” which they advocate, the Const! utionnel fears or v - .... Mr. William Miles—From the south-eastern part of
may triumph, and it utters a piercing cry of fe;r and Lord Grey were originally confidential, or pubhet Somerset.
horror. This juste milieu print had not the sense 19 per- juris, they ceased to be entitled to any protection Mr. Blackstone, M.P—From the mayor and corporation
ceive that the government of 1830, in refusing to follow when e j tber j n t h e whole or in part, employed in Narberth
up the revolution, necessarily threw itself into the arms ... . . . T . ;l V, rrom rvaiueun.
or power of the counter revolution. That counter revo- political negociation. Is It to he said that when the Eaii Grosvenor-From Congleton, county of Chester,
q . , . ... LOl d Kenyon—From the magistrates, clergy, gentlemen,
lulnm is now marching with giant strides. representative of the Irish government opens a and illhabit / utg of Whitchurch and Wem, Shropshire, Alai-
iwe Journal des Debats is evidently very uneasy at the negociation for party purposes, with the head of pas, Cheshire; and from the officiating minister of Gresford,
new composition of the Ghamber. There are no Repub- particular part y in parliament, in which negocia- B «ibighshire, from a public meeting there held,
lican.s. I his is reahy a source of great sorrow to the * 1 J 1 . * ® , Lord Prudhoe—rrom Chillingham, Northumberland.
Doctrinaire journal. There is a party of Royalists who tion use is made ot certain documents, tke whole Lord Roll©—From towns and parishes in Devon, Honiton,
wish for order, peace, and Henry V. This party is in- parliament has not a right to a view of these Moretonhampstead, Bishopsteignton, Ipplepen, and Lifton;
mjKin ,r \ , c 1 -c also from Sudbury, m Norwich ; Dronfield, in Derby; and i
Cleaning. , . documents? Incur courts of law, if a written Rowley Regis, in Staffordshire.
ihe affairs of Luxembourg are once more on the tapis. , g iven in evjdence , oae party f or the sake Addresses tJ the same effect were also presented-From the
Ste Tb..: thVkC P ,u e fiornd and of any particular passage which it may contain, the
the Conierence ot London can scarcely again be renewed, other party has a right to make use of all the rest, eru portion of the county of Wilts ; from the parish of
Letters from the Hague state: “ only have patience, and And this rule of evidence is founded in the plainest Hartlepyol, in the county of Durham; from the several
vouwiilvsee tnat our Kmg William is as able a diplo- . , . / townships ot Poultoa in the Fylde, Thornton Carieton,
matist as he is an affectionate and paternal monarch.” principles of common sense—(or nothing is more Hardtown with Newton and Marton, in the county palatine
The Moiiiteur of to-day coiuaios a letter addressed by easy than to raise a false impression by reference to Lancaster ; from the gentlemen, clergy, and other inha-
Louis Philip to ihe bishops of France, in «hich he re- the detached passages of written composition, or the signed i hy '^,2Uo'\j 1 7(inIsV 1 s V
quests tem to per orm a uneral service in the churcues f ragments 0 f a correspondence. This was well the clergy and others residing in Bedford and the neighbour-
ot their respective dioce.>es on the 27th inst. for the souls b r 00 j ®
of those who died during the three days of July, 1830. [nit by Algernon Sydney, in his defence, when ’ ^ —
non use and funds. he said, “ You may prove Atheism from the The Case of Mr, Gee—The remaining indictment
The affairs of Russia and England, and the cuntrover- Bible if mut ilate the passage, • the fool hath said J“ r ‘-•onrpiracy, having been traversed by Edwards and
sies between the governments, occupy to day the whole of . . , . *7, , , ... his two lelJow-pnsoners, cannot come on for trial before
the public attention. The Spanish funds have fallen. in his heart there is no God, by sinking out a the 14th of August, which is the adjournment day of the
Five per Cents. French ore at IOGf 90c cash, and IOSf save the last four words.” While the whole of the next session. The prisoners will, if possible, get the in-
05c end of July ; Three per Cents. French, 771 Bbc cash. Grey and Wellesley correspondence, and all the ne- diriment removed into the King s Bench, and intend a;,.
and 77f 75c end of July. Five per Cents. Spanish 71 A; ... „ , , f ■. u „i plying for a certiorari with that view. It is at thedis-
Three per Cents, do. 471. Cortes 374. gociations raised thei eon, remained in the faithful c , e tion of the judge, when the application comes from a
“ 4 j: i.:„ m- t vf- 11’ ■ * - . , . .
THE MINISTRY. and in the division, there stood opposed to Lord Grey wood, jun., M.A., with three superb silver salvers, each hav-
We announced in the last Packet that the Grey every member of the government of whom it is pre- cLracterfaiT 'of
ministry had resigned, and it will be seen by the tended that he can open his lips in the House the grateful sense they entertain of his valuable services dur-
proceedings in parliament that our information was of Commons, viz. Lord Althorp, Mr. O’Connell, e y^-T !»*•«'“<>“*«'«f-
, TT , .1 , .1 , -i n ’ 1 3 well, Cheshire, have presented to their excellent curate, the
correct. Up to the moment that we write no defi- jyjf. Rice, Mr. C. Grant, and Mr. E. Ellice. The Rev. Lawrence Iston Fell, a piece of plate, as a mark of their
nitive arrangements are publicly known. Lord Noble Eatl therefore had no choice left but to alfcctionate re S' ard * —The Rev. A. B. Campbell, has been
Melbourne has been sent for hv MrWv • * * *j*-a a u* * p u* 1 presented by his congregation with a purse of 150 guineas, on
ivieiuuun.e nas oeen sene ror oy nis Majesty, resign, to go on with a divided Cabinet, of which his retirement from the curacy of St. Phillip’s, Birmingham.
hut not to form a cabinet ; and rumour the minority would be the masters, or to try to go ~~Gii Saturday last, a splendid tea service of massive silver,
mentions the names of Lord Althorpf on without one organ in the House of Commons, wfll?Lrech^lafeTurai^of now^on^tL^r^
Lord Lansdown, the Duke of Richmond, or Sir in regard to Lord Grey’s panegyric upon his own sentationof the Earl of Lonsdale, perpetual curate of Moresby,
Robert Pee!, as likely to become the new Premier, administration, we would remind his lordship that ! 1 h e “ r „m hi 'bv*vf.hmt a^^
iv/r 1 |. v .111 p 3 * tne girt, by voluntary subscription, ot the inhabitants of
lunch reliance, however, cannot be placed on any ot j t ; s a mucb easier matter to retreat than to advance. Brigham, and the remainder of those of Broughton, who,
these rumours, and the difficulty of deciding what KT nw Lio nwn oonfess on hv the confession of thou ? h 110 t within his parish, were anxious to join their
is to be believed is considerably augmented
by the strange discrepancies between, the mitted that the Reform Bill, their opus magnum, was a some years ago_ curate of the retired parish of Martindale,
ministerial statements. It was always sup- movement in retreat—a submission to the pressure excaeding'’one*hmidre^and^wenty
posed in former cases, that when the prime from without—in which they abandoned their own offer him a similar token of esteem and gratitude.
minister resigned the whole cabinet went with nnneinh-s The same mav ho said of the several Wednesday morning, at half-past ten o’clock, the remains
~ ... .... [Wh'^Ph- 8 - dhe same may De said 01 me several Mr. St. John Long were removed from his residence, No. 49,
him, and Lord Althorp seemed to have so stated in abandonments of the rights and interests of the Havley-etieet, Cavendish-square, for ihterment in a vault in
the House of Commons. At all events, it was sup- Church, in obedience to « the spirit of the age.” the new cemetery in the Harrow-road. The funeral cayal-
posed that the four or five members who were in These are all treating movements; and all the
the minority in the cabinet on the Irish Coercion <r) o rv acquired bv them is the glory that follows by six horses, three mourning coaches, each drawn by four
Bill, would have gone out with Lord Grey— those who run a wav Ae-ain his Inrdshin’s foreign I ]° l ‘^ s ? foliovve d by 18 nobiemen and gemiemen’s carriages.
, ~, , . 3 inose wno run away, iigain, nis lorasmp s foreign As the procession was about moving, it was somewhat inl-
and so distinctly did this appear to be understood, policy, on which he prided himself so ffiuch, has peded by a number of carriages bringing back from Mary-
that Mr. Henry Grattan actually proposed three p een altogether the policy of poltroonery He has c| u t rch, to a house within a lew doors ol Mr. St.
,• ~ . u n . cccii diiUgCiuei hr ptMicy oi poi irouneiy. ne mis Joan Long s, a very gay and numerous wedding party. The
s or them in the House of Commons, and purchased temporary peace ; but upon wliat terms ? carriages were for some minutes intermingled; and the black
obtained some success in that decorous and par- A t the price of deserting his first professed prin- «»pe hat-Unds and mcl.inel.oly looto of one party were thus
liamentary proceeding* But Lord Broucham dp • . , . . , n . . , placed in stiong opposition to the white ia\ouis and joyous
liuiienuiry proceeumg* ftui flora .Diougnam «e- c ,pie—the principle of non-intervention—at the smiles of the other.
guardianship of Mr. Littleton’s, or Mr. O’Connell's defendant, either to grant or withhold the writ. The
honour, parliament possibly had nothing to do with situation of Mrs. Canning, who is included in this in-
, , ~ , .11 ” . , , . . dictment, is rather peculiar, lor, besides the beneficial in-
it: but the case was totally changed wnen the subject . „ „ , , . . , - t - \
J o . . J terest (subject to the restriction ol not again marrying)
ot this correspondence and these negociations was which she derives from her husband’s wiil, she is also
brought into play, to influence the decision of the named in the will as executrix, and joined with her as
legislature upon a measure of the gravest import- e * eLHtor ** Alr - ol Bishop Storftoid. Since the dis-
ol closure ot her marriage the payment of her annuity,
ance * amounting to about 901. per year, has been stopped.
We have, however, really said too much upon la consequence of the system of intimidation pursued
this silly and querulous excursion of Lord Grey, by the building artizans and labourers of the metroooiis,
Between his lordship and the Chancellor of the » feting of the master builder, has been held at which
1 it has been resolved nut to employ, alter the 16di o!
Exchequer, they have told us the whole truth ot the August next, any artisan or labourer who refuses to sign
matter, though neither was ingenuous enough to a declaration that he is not a member of any trades’
tell it by himself. That truth amounts to this ; union.
, . . Unpopularity of the Clergy —The parishioners of
I lie Cabinet was divided upon the Coercion Bill; Ross have presented their late curate, the Rev. T. Under-
and in the division, there stood opposed to Lord Grey wood) j™-i M.A., with three superb silver salvers, each hav-
vided for during life had been disappointed in consequence of ; bis wife in bed in a back room on the ground floor. About
the surrender of the Company’s trade. The enactments cited i three quarters of an hour after this one of the lodgers heard a
had reference to grants of money under extraordinary struggling and moaning, as if some person was in violent
circumstances, which, if not controlled, might lead distress. She opened the door of Mrs. Middleton’s bed room,
to abuse; but the grants contemplated under the and there, to her great astonishment, found Mrs. Middleton
7th section of the 3rd and 4th William IY. were lying on the bed, bound hand and foot, with a handkerchief
of a wholly different nature, and were not liable to any over her mouth. Having released her, and given an alarm,
such suspicion. But, while he was of opinion that the Mrs. Middleton, as soon as she was able to speak, gave the
Court of Directors had a right to adopt any scale of com- following account. She said that her husband could not
pensation which might seem fiittng to them, still it ap- have proceeded more than 100 yards before she heard some
peared to him that the proprietors yet retained all their person enter the parlour adjoining her bed-room and
authority in that, as in other cases, when the subject was pull down the window-blinds. She called out to
brought before them in a regular form for discussiou, of know who was there, when her bed-room door
adopting such resolutions as they thought proper, agreeably was opened, and two men, having their faces concealed
with section, 7of the 3d and 4th William IV., bearing in with black crape, came towards her. She was about to
mind, that the compensation to be made was taken out of give an alarm, when one of them laying hold of her, swore
the funds granted to the Crown, in consequence of the gua- ft she made the least noise he would cut her throat. One of
rautee of the dividend, and held in trust by the Court of them then asked her where her husband kept his money. She
Directors, for the territory, subject to certain liabilities. said her husband had no money, to which the other replied,
Mr. Weeding moved a resolution to the effect, that underthe he knew that Middleton was never without money, and there-
existing law it was the undoubted right of that court to de- fore, if she wished to save her life, she must say where it was.
maud, that whatever plans the Court of Directors might pro- She then said it was in a box in the bed-room, but her Ims-
pose for the compensation of their civil or maritime band had the key. The men then proceeded to tie her hands
servants, the same should be submitted in the first behind her with a piece of strong cord, used for window pul-
instance to the General Court of Proprietors, prior to their lies, after which they tied her legs together, and concluded
being laid before the Board of Commissioners for the Affairs by fastening a handkerchief over her mouth, so as to prevent
of India for their approval and confirmation. her crying for assistance, having first taken off her wedding
The Chairman defended the Court of Directors. If it were ring. Having thus secured her, one of the men with a
the pleasure of tne proprietors to call for papers, and to re- chisel forced open the box and took out two purses, one
vise that which the Court of Directors had done, they must containing six sovereigns, and the other fourteen shillings,
so proceed on their own responsibility. The wish of the They also took out three Russian bonds, and then decamped.
Court of Directors had been to do justice to all parties inter- She'made all the efforts in her power to release herself,
ested. They were willing to receive any suggestion from and it was owing to her groans and struggles that one
the proprietors, but they could not allow their opinions, as of the female lodgers came so speedily to her relief. The
directors, acting under the obligation of an oath, to be lightly undisguised terror of Mrs. Middleton, and her agitation,
overruled. which continued for a considerable time, together with the
Mr. Fielder expressed his conviction that if the plan which wounds on her wrists made by the cords, which had been
had been laid before the Board of Control by the directors fastened so tightly as to cut through the skin, left no doubt
was confirmed by the former body, it would then be too late of the truth of her story, and the facts were further corro-
for the proprietors to take any measures. berated by finding a short time afterwards the three Russian
The Chairman said the plan had not been yet sanctioned bonds down the area, thrown there by the villains, who were
by the Board of Control, and therefore the case was yet open, probably ignorant of their value. Jarvis, a policeman, was
If the proprietors passed any resolutions, they must go to passing a short time after the occurrence, and on learning
the Board. what had taken place, immediately went to the house to get
After a good deal of discussion, information, so as to enable him to trace the parties.
Mr. Weeding said he would withdraw his motion if the Murderous Assault and Robbery On Tues-
Court of Directors would agree to the following, which he day night last, about nine o’clock, as Thomas Holloway,
would substitute in its place That the Court of Directors a man,'a carpenter, residing at No. 13, Stoney.
be requested to reconsider the plan proposed tor compensating . .f, , r i u u , • J
their late maritime commanders and officers, so as to adopt eet ’ l Uoro ' , B h ' was proceeding along Holborn, on lus way
the twofold scale of remuneration, that of rank and length home > he was accost < ! < i » lemale, who requested lun to
of service which had been acted on with reference to the tlfeat her to some liquor, and eventually invited him to
home service.” accompany her to her lodgings, which he consented to do.
After Mr. Weeding’s original motion had been withdrawn, and she conducted him to a notorious receptacle in Buck-
The Chairman observed, that the new motion proceeded on eridge-street, St. Giles’s, where they were introduced to an
some “ understanding,” or some u pledge.” Now he would apartment; alter a short time he fell fast asleep, when his
not enter into the consideration of this or any other question p artn er seized the opportunity and left the room to inform
upon any pledge, except that of conscientiously performing , friends be]ow that there was g , o <i game above, and
his duty under the obligation of an oath. , , , . . .. ,
After a protracted discussion, Mr. Weeding being proceeded up stairs when Holloway was awoke Iron,
determined to persist in pressing his second mo- |>lB sleep by a noise, and he overheard the parties whisper-
tion, the question tvas put on the motion, which was distinctly heard one say, u ls he asleep ? ”
negatived. The amendment of Mr. Sweet, u That teh ii Yes,” was the reply ; on which a man’s voice altered,
Court of Directors do request the Board of Control to sus- “ Let us kill the . But, bring us the knife and the
pend their answer to the plan of compensation proposed to wallet.” Holloway was greatly terrified, and jumped out
them for the maritime officers of the Company, and that of the bed, when a dark tremendous looking fellow, the
the Court of Directors do rccuns.der the plan, and lay the lemale who led hinl the l ice , and two other wo .
result before this Court, before tney submit the same to the , , . , r r , ~ .
Board of Control,” was then agreed to. meil > ru,l,ed i™ l the room ! one of the women seized him
The Court adjourned at six o’clock. b . v the thr / jM » the otbars beld hlm behind, and they
: robbed him of his hat, coat, trousers, waistcoat, money,
NEWMARKET RACES. and shoes, and beat him unmercifully; but being a
Wednesday. powerful young fellow, he fought with them, and called
The Town Plate of 501. for three-year olds; colts Bst 41b, out “ Murder,” until he made his way down stairs, but
mile and a distance of B. C. the parties escaped. On his arrival in the passage, the
Sir M. Wood s Charivari (Pavis) 1 lalldiord 0 f the Luse stood at the door, top.eve.it his
Duke of Rutland s Armadillo 2 , , _ , 1 , r . .
mi'ce or nutiana s Armadillo z , , ' , r, .
Mr. Hunter’s Morotto 3 going out to make an alarm, or pursue the thieves, on
mr. nuniei 5 morouo o , . f . . . ' •. '
Th« following not placed—Sir G. Graham’s Zulima (a good ' v bnh he a dreadful blow at his head, and felled him
fourth); Mr. Greville’s Faunus; Gen. Grosvenor’s Bon Ton; to ground, and rushed out in his shirt, making an
Mr. Wygram’s ch fby Moses or Nigel; and Mr. Clover’s b f alarm by calling “ Police,” until Walker, of the E division,
by Blackiock, dam by Amadie. Won by a length, came to his assistance and took him to the station-house,
Match—Mr. Pettit’s Mac Arab, 7st lllb (Conolly), beat where he was supplied with temporary clothing, and
Lord Tavistock sf by Rasping, out ol Morisco, Bst 7lb, by a after a strict search the man and two of the women con-
to im i OI I V^* mi r 1 n 1 7r ri t cerncd in the transaction were apprehended, and taken
Match, 100, h It, i.Y.C—Lord Exeter’s sister to Baleine, . , . , , „ e ** ’ .. .
7st 91b (Natt), beat Mr. Thornhill’s Harum Scamm, Bst7ib h statlo, l 1 “ house > but none of the property was found.
by a length 2to lon winner. -they gave their names Joseph (Jrlord, Ann Jones, and
Handicap of 15 sovs each From the starting post of B. M. Ann Reardon, all notorious characters, who have been in
to the end of the new T.Y.C. Five subs. custody on various charges. They were on Wednesday
Mr. Yates’s Sensitive, 5 yns, Bst 6lb (Pavis) 1 morning taken before the magistrates at Hatton-garden
Mr. Bloss’s Water Witch, 0 yrs, Bst 121bs 2 Police-office, and examined, when the prosecutor positively
Lord Lichfield’s Gab, 6 yrs, Bst llib 3 identified the whole of them, and they were remanded, in
Lordiiivistoiikftby Rasping, 3 yrs, bst 101 b 4 order that the stolen prouerty might be traced, and other
Mr. Sower by :s Volage, aged, 9st 131 b 5 . • , , , * 3 &
Won easy by two lengths. parties apprehended.
Sweepstakes of 10 sovs each; for two years, 6st lllb, and . U>e Islington Market Bill, after a protracted consider*,
three years, 9st. New T.Y.C. Five subs. t,ou ol 35 di *>’ s 111 committee, has been rejected by the
Mr. Yates’s Ince, 3 yrs °\n lh majority of two votes. The London corporation,
Mr. Sowerby’s Constantia, 2 yrs Oj ea ieat * who strenuously oppose 1 the bill, gained their object by
Mr. Mills’s Camlet, 2 yrs, Mr. Newton’s Heberle, 2 yrs, promising to enlarge Smiihfield Market, to the extent of
Lord Lowther’s cby Lamplighter, 2 yrs, and Mr. Wilson’s three roods, by which means they piocured the votes of
Aout °* Ridotto, two yrs, also-started- Alter the dead heat some of the original supporters of the bill. As however,
Mr. Yates and Mr. Sower bv divided, and Ince walked over. M , u ,. Q , , ■ ho jh,,,.,, > . ,
~,, . r. ~ oi . t tnev wish a portion ot the expenses to be aeiraved by
ihe Chesterfield Stakes ot 30 sovs each; 21) It; lor two-years , ~ /, . . , . r , , , . .*
old. Last half of B.M. Twenty-six subs. additional tolls it is to be hoped that the grazers will
■SirM. Wood’sc, by Camel, out,of Aspasia.... (Robinson) 1 uw'Mtnat, if tney are to send their cattle to brmthfleld,
Sir M. Wood’s f, by Emilius or Lamplighter out of Leila 2 sufficient accommodation shall be afforded them gratui-
Mr. Pettit’s Kate Kearney (91b extra) 3 tously. —Bury Post.
The following also started :—Gen. Grosvenor’s Symmetry, Mr. Hayne (“Pea Green”) is still an inmate of the
Mr. Spalding’s Lady Albert, Mr. S. Stanley’s c, out of King’s Bench Prison, notwithstanding the discharge pro-
Clansman’s Dam, Mr. Bloss’s Matilda, and Mr. Goodwin’s nonneed by the commissioners of the Insolvent Debtors’
i, by Camel, out of Galatea. Won byj length. Court. He is detained at the suit of the crown for be-
Love, Desperation, and Suicide—The llv e«“ 2UUI ' a,ld f 9i - f ' ,r » rr «»™ of ‘“® Bin ® u "* d
of Crediton were much alarmed on Thursday night last in l v , hdst be rented Burderop Park, Wilts, of Air. Galley,
consequence of the discovery that two young persons had . . w “° opposed Air. Hayne on his hearing. Ihe corn-
edmmitted suicide, by poisoning themselves, at the Royal mi»sioners have no power to discharge crown debtors; he
Oak inn, in that town. It appears that two respectable can only obtain his liberation from the Lords of the
looking young persons, a man and woman, each about the Treasury. Mr. Hayne has memorialised the Treasury for
age of twenty-two years, came to the above inn as lodgers, his discharge.
on Monday week last. Nothing in their conversation or Mr. Hume spoke against Lord Chandos’s motion, and
manner tended to excite any suspicions with the landlord vote( j f or j t
STOOS. 3B3S4JEiAHSE:.
BRITISH FUNDS—Thrusdav, Juiv 10.
3 per Cent. Consols 91 to & 4peiCent. lOlito}
Ditto,forAccount.Nov. 27,92| Long Annuities,
to India Stock, 270 j to 71$
3 per Cent. Reduced, 91$ g Bank Stock, 216$ to 17^
3$ per Cent. Reduced. 99 to 9i Exchequer Bills, 5U.s. to 52 '.
3$ per Cent. New, 98| to $ India Bonds,24s. to 26-
Friday, July 11.—(One o'clock.)
3 per Cent.Consols, 90$ 1 4 per Cent. 101$ to g
Ditto, for Account, FeL. 26,92$ Long Annuities,
to $ India Stock, £7os to 71$
3 per Cent. Reduced, 91 to | Bank Stock,2l6s to 17$
3$ per Cent. Reduced, 98$ to 9$ Exchequer Bills, 50s. to 51s
3$ per Cent. New, 93i to $ indiaßonda,23s. to 255.
FOREIGN FUNDS.— Thursday, July 10.
Belgian, sper Cent.9B to $ | Greek, 5 per Cent.
Brazilian 791 to 5 Mexican, 6 per Cent. 43 to 3$
Chilian, 6 per Cent.3l to 2 Portuguese, sper Ct.BBj to 8j
Colour l4an 31$ to 2 Regency Loan, BS| to 81
Danish,3 per Cent. 743 to 5$ Spanish, 5 per Cent. 46$ to $
Dutch, 5 per Cent. 972 to i Russian, 5 per Cent. 106 to $
Ditto, 2$ per Cent.sls 3 1 Ditto, Metallic, 5 per Cent.
Friday, July 11.—(One o’Cloek.)
Belgian, 5 percent., 98$ 1 Greek, 5 per Cent.
Brazilian, 79 to $ | Mexican, 6 per Cent. 43 to 3$
Chilian, 31 to 2 | Portuguese, sprCt. 87$ to 8$
Colombian 6 per Cent. 31 to 2 1 Regency Loan, 87$ to 8$
Danish, 3 per Cent., 743 to 5± Spanish, 5 per Cent. 4isto 3
Dutch, 5 per Cent., 97$ to 3 Russian, 5 per Cent. 1053 to 6
Ditto, 2$ per Cent., 512 to £ j Ditto Metaliics percent.
PRICE OF SHARES THIS DAY AT ONE O’CLOCK*
VngloMexican,Bl.os.to9l. Os Imperial Brazil, Sfii. Os. to
fioianos, 1151. 3s. to 1 20 i. Os. 38i. Os.
British Iron Company, 32i.105. ; Irish Provincial Bank, 461. Os
to 331. gs j to 471.05.
Canada Comp., 501. Os. 511. Os. United Mexican, 61. 15s. to
Colombian, 101. Us. to 111. Os. 7i. s*.
Del Monte,3sL 10s.to 36J. 10s. Ditto, New Scrip, 001. Os. to
Ditco,Serip,ol.os.tool.os. i oi. Os.
either with regard to Their connection or circumstances.
They arose generally at a late hour in the morning, evinced
much attachment towards each other, walked out
together during the day, were very moderate in their mode
oFiiviug, and retired at a seasonable hour to bed. On
Thursday last, however, the landlady of the inn, not finding
them down stairs at their usual hour, knocked at their bed-
room door, and was answered by the female “ that they should
be down presently,” but their not appearing by two o'clock in
the afternoon, the landlady sent her son to the bed-room door to
remind them of the hour, and he was then answered by one
of them which lie did not distinctly hear. Nothing further
was thought of them until the evening, when the landlady
became alarmed at their non-appearance, and again knocked
at their bed-room door ; receiving no reply, she burst it
open, when hearing a deep moan, she immediately ran down
stairs for assistance. On her return with two other persons,
they discovered the man quite dead, and the female in a
dying state, locked in each others arms. Medical aid was
promptly procured, and the stomach-pump applied,
but without success. On the table was found a pint
bottle, with the remains of laudanum in it, and there
is no doubt, that each of them had voluntarily taken a
considerable portion of this deadly drug. A coroner’s
inquest was held on their bodies, on Saturday last, when it
appeared that they were recently married—that the match
was disapproved of by the father of the young man, and
was clandestinely made—that they were destitute of money,
and that the husband had purchased a pint of laudanum
some days before at a druggist’s shop in Exeter, and had
premeditated self-destruction. It was also proved on the
inquest that the man’s name was Samuel Margerie,—that he
was a clock and watchmaker, at Heavitree near Exeter—
and that his wife was a respectable young woman from
Woodbury, and lately filled the situation of lady’s maid with
a respectable family resident at Dawlish. The jury in each
case brought in a verdict of Fejo de se, and the coroner
ordered their bodies to be interred at midnight (pursuant to
the act of parliament) without the usual funeral rites.—
Western Luminary ,
The primest young Scots this morning fetch 3s IGd to 4s per
stone, and the best Lincolns and Durhams are worth 3s 8d to
8s BJd? coarse steers, oid and inferior meat, may be stated at
2s4d t°os 2d. In mutton, the primest Downs sell at 4s to 4s 4d ;
and the finest Kentish and Leicester wethers at 4s to 4s 2d ; oid,
coarse, and inferior sheep and e wes are 2s 6d to3s4d; veal for
the primest calves is worth 4s to 4s 6d; and dairy-fed porkers
are 3s 8d to 4s.
_ - Per stone of 81b. (sinking the offal.)
Beet --2 s 4d to 4s Od . Veal - - 2s lOd to 4s 6d
Mutton - -2* fcd to 4s 4d) Fork - - 2s 2d to 4s Od
Lamb - 3s lOd to 5s Od
asjLir s.
SMITHFiELD, July 9.
Coarse heavy lowland meadow hay from 41 Os to 41155; new
meadow hay from 41 5s to 41 15s; useful old meadow hay from
41 .osto_.il Os; fine upland meadow and rye grass hay from
olos to ol 10s; new clover hay from 41 Os to 41155; eld clover
hay generally from 41 15s to 51 10s; very fine old ditto, 51 15s;
oat straw from 11 14s to 11 16s; wheat straw from 11 16s to
il lbs per L ad of 36 trusses.—Supply of meadow hay good,
of clover hay and straw very limited. Trade somewhat brisk,
at stationary prices.
CUMBERLAND, July 9.
Coarse heavy lowland meadow hay from 31 15s to 41 Os; new
meadow hay from 41 5s to 41 15s; useful old meadow hay from.
4i los to 51 ss; fine upland meadow and ryegrass hay from
51 los to6l Os; new clover hay from 41 Os to 41 15s; old clover
hay from -11 10s to 51 10s; oat straw from 11 12s to 11 14s;
wheat straw from 11 10s to 11 18s per load of 36 trusses.—
A moderate supply. Trade throughout very brisk, at fully
l uesaay’s quotations.
HUNGERFORD, July 9.
Coarse heavy lowland meadow hay from 31 5s to 3110 s; new
meadow hay from 3115 s to 41 lus; useful old meadow hay from
4110 s to 51 Os; fine upland meadow and rye grass hay from
ol os to 51 10s ; new clover hay from 3115 s to 41 10s; old cloves
hay from 41 5s to 51 10s; oat straw from 11 12s to li 14s?
wheat straw from 11 14s to ll 18s per load of 36
A short supply, and a sluggish trade. Prices as last quoted.
PORT MAN, July 9.
Coarse heavy lowland meadoiv hay from 78s to 90s; new
meadow ditto trom 80s to 94s ; old ditto from I‘.'ss to 120 a ; use-
ful ditto from 90s to 108 s; new clover from 82s to 90s; ®id ditto
from 95s to 112 s; wheat straw from 32s to 38s.
CO’USg'FXHr CATT2.2S
SOUTHALL, July p.
The supply of beasts and porkers moderately goad ; that of
sheep, lambs, and, for the time of year, calves, rather great.
Ihe market was rather numerously attended both by Loudon
and country buyers, but the former having, for the most pan
laid in the greater part of their week’s supply at Smithfteld, on
Monday, trade was, on the whole, dull, at the following prices
per stone of Bibs to sink the offals :-beef, from 2s lod to 4s-
mutton, 3s 2d to 4s 2d ; lamb, 4s 2d to 5s 2d:; veal, 3s 4d to
4s 2d; pork, 2s 6d to 3s 4d. Beef and lamb 2d per stone
cheaper than on this day se’nnight. Prices ocherwisestationary.
Beasts, 180; sheep and lambs, 3.42 J ; calves, 100; pigs. 29.
A considerable proportion of the small stock, and some, chough
not a great number, of the beasts left the market unsold.
ROMFORD, July 9.
Beef from 2s 8d to 3s lOd; mutton. 3s to 4s; lamb, 4s to ss:
veal, 3s 2d to 4s 2d; and pork. 2s lOdto3s 8d per stone. Milch
cows supposed to weigh, when fattened, from 70 to 90 stones
each, with their small calf, from 101 Os to 151 ss; sucking
calves, J4s to 26s i and quarter old store pigs, 12s to IBs each.
Supply rather limited, and trade, throughout, dull.
HAILS HAM, July 9.
Beef, from 3s 6d to 4s; mutton, 3s 4d to 4s 2d; Jamb, 4s fid
to os 2d; and veal, 3s fid t» 4s pei stone. Supply moderately
good; and trade on the whole, dull.
ARUNDEL, July 8.
Beef from 3a 2d to 4s ; mutton 3s 4d to 4s Od; lamb, 4s 4d to
ss; and veal, 3s 4d to 4s 2d per stone. A moderate supply..
Trade with prime iamb rather brisk ; with other meat dull.
CHICHESTER, July 9.
Beef, from 2s lOd to 3s lOd: mutton, 3s Od to 4s Od,- lamb,
4s 4d to 4s lOd ; and veal, 3s 4d to 4s Od per stone. Store sheep
and beasts were in increas d demand, at improved prices, s iy
the best of the former at 3s; store pigs, 3s 81 per stone, fatted
weight. Supply of both fat and lean stock good. Trade, with
the former, dull, the latter brisk.
EOP mji.3tiK.aTS.
BOROUGH, July 10.
The Hop Market has been very lively since last week, as the
accounts respecting the progress of the lice, &c. upon the
young shoots are now very alarming, and they continue to fol-
low them up with increased numbers; the circumstance of
shortness of bine too in many plantations renders the prospect
more unfavourable, that most persons consider it impossible to
prove a large and good crop, and at present there is great reason
to fear it will turn out a snort and indifferent one. Dutv esti-.
muted at present at 80,0001. 3
COAX. MABEET.
(The following are the prices per ton on last market day.!
s - d - d.
Chester - - - - 16* 3 i Eden Main - - - ift o
Holywell - - -18 9! W. E. HeCCou - - 2D *4
Pon top Windsor - - 17 9:W, E. Lambton - . g() 3
Tan field - 19 9 iW. E. Russell’s Lyons - jh 8
Us worth - - - 16 01W, E. Stewart’s - . on
West Hartley - - 17 3!W. E. Adelaide , - ik fi
VV. E. Bel], Robson, &Co. 18 0;W. E. Musgrave - - 17 o
VV. E. Bewick and Co. - 18 9 W. K. Fees - . - io 8
VV. E. Gosforth - - 18 9 I Blych - - - . {4 •■{
248 S? !lur .7 - Jg 0 | Hoivard’sNethertonMainlS 0
W. E. Killmgworth - 18 3 ! Hartley - - _ - ifi 9
W.E. Newmarcli - - 18 0 Liaugenneeh Coal - 24 (>■
W. E. Northumberland 18 0 I Silkstone, Wilson - . 17 o
W. E. Riddell - - 18 9IW. E. Henderson - - 16
Bell’s Primrose - 17 0 |
Ships arrived since last market day 4. The arrivals to day
of fresh ships, as on last market day, were very moderate
and the supply of coals generally iii the market was very far-
Irom being extensive to day. The Coal Exchange was well at-
tended by merchants to-day, but the business transacted was
only to a very moderate extent. Ships arrived during the pre-v
sent month, 54 ; ditto, the present week, 8.
SHIP HEWS.
BY THIS DAY’S POST.
deal, July 10.— SSW. Moderate—Arrived, the
Smith, Innes, from Jamaica. rae Frances
PORTSMOUTH, July 10—WSW—Off port, the London
Turner and the Lady Clarke, Tor. from Jamaica. Arrived, the
Cnyof Edinburgh steamer, trom Lisbon, off port, the Ann
Hope, trom Batavia; and the Simpson, Marshall -md thf
Salas. Metcalf, from Quebec. snail, and
PLYMOUTH, July 9.-SW—Arrived, the New Eagle Oniefo
from Quebec; the Percival, Spicer, from Miramichi: the
Uairett, from Galipoli; and the Kettern, Heale.from Ma
fromfft LucU. JUly 10 - Arrlved off pon - the Sandwieh^ott,
COWES.JiiIy (10—Arrived, the Bencoolen, Powell, from
ManiUa; the Avanee, Cresscroo, from Bahia, and the Pow-
hattan, Welsh, from Virginia.
foundland JUly 9 '“ Arrived * the Hart °n. Seager, from New-
FALMOUTH, July 9—Variable light breezes,—Arrived, the
Royal Adelaide, Vivian, from Quebec*; the Lowestoft, Cook,
fiom Smyrna; and t.ie Rhoda, Aberdeen, from Corfu. Off”
port, the Nancy, Hall, from Picton.
Ro™ff“:,Stc 9 -' ir,iVei ° iTvan - the Tom Bowli nev
Quebe^ L 1 Uly 9-—Arrived > the Tom Bowline, Hunter, from,
Newtouumand 10 ’ July B, ~ Arrived ’ the R °y»l iB t. V.all, from
LONDONDERRY, JulyS—Arrived, the Williams, Thoburn.
from Aiiraniichi; and the Henry, Lambert, from London.
PfiNTLAND FRITH. July 8.-Arrived, the Thomas Roberts
Narv° lS ° n , fl ° m Bathurst » and the Isabella, Ritchie, from
MARRIED.
June 21, at Spalding, G. A. Mo.-re, Esq. eldest son of Lieut. Col
G. Moore, to Ann Elizabeth, youngest daughter of the Rev. w"
Moore,-D.D. of Spalding.
June 24, Capt. J.Marknam, R.N. grandson of his Grace the late
Archbishop ot York, to Marianne. Geurgiana Davies, youngest
daughter ot the late J. B. Wood, Esq. *>
AcCranfield, Beds, Gloucestershire, the Rev. J. F. Hone AM
vicar of 1 irley, to Anne, only daughter of the late J. Grimshaw!
Esq. of Gorton House, Lancashire.
Jane 26, at Lanchester, the Rev. T. White, of Messingham
Lincolnshire, eldest son of T. White, Esq. «f Woodlaruis to
Miss Ann Eliz. Molesworth, of Eusernere, near Penrith; and
immediately afterwards J. S. White, Esq, of Durham, solicitor
third son of Mr. White, of Woodlands, to Sarah, second
daughter of J. Bovvlhy, Esq., many years registrar to the Dean
and Chapter of Durham.
DIED.
July 8, at Teddington, of scarlet fever, Susan, the wife of tho
Rev. T. W. Carr.
July 1, at Eastbourne, T. Preston, Esq. of Nottinghain-plaee, |
aged 70.
July 7. at Bedford-place, Russell-square, J. Skynner, Esn. of
Lincoln’s Inn.
July 5, T. K. Selwyn, 8.A., of Trinity College, Cambridge,
third .son of W. Selwyn, Esq. Richmond, Surrey.
June 21, ten days after his arrival at Rome, the Right Hon. J. *
Everard Lord Arundel of Warder, of a bilious fever and infiam- f
mation of the bowels, aged 48.
At Boston, Mrs. Adelaide De Camp, sister of Mrs. C. Kemble.
At Durham, in New Eivef, E. -Shafto, Esq. banker, son of the
late Sir CuGilbert Shafto, aged 61.
At Leamington, Amelia, daughter of Sir C. E. Carrington, of
Cbalfont, St. Giles, Bucks, aged 15.
July 3, at Grinkle Park, Yorkshire, Robert Wharton Myddle- $
ton. Esq. of this place, and of Old Park in the county of Dur- ,
ham, aged 74.
June 27. W. Greenwood, Esq. one of his Majesty’s justices of
the peace for Lancashire, aged 45.
Ac Bath, Lady Fraser, the w idow of the late Sir W. Fraser,
Bart, having only survived the death of her third and last sur-
viving sou. Sir J. J. Fraser, Bart, lor the space of eighteen days,
j aged 72.
I
I
