

PPrrn
FORMATION AND CULTIVATION
OF THE
A' 010 E.
;
mu
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
MELBOURNE:
PUBLISHED BY PROFESSOR HUGHES,
ACADEMY OF MUSIC,
CO 36 Russell Stkeet (Collins Steeet East).
r-




FERRARI
ON THE
FOEMATION AND CULTIVATION
OP THE
VOICE.
t
CO




CONTENTS.
Intboductoev . 5
The Foemation and Cultivation op the Voice . 8
On Singing 14
Rules foe Peactice. 19




FERRARI
ON THE
FORMATION AND CULTIVATION OF THK YOICR.
INTRODUCTORY.
Considering the number of works on the
Art of Singing already before the public, both
cheap and expensive, although most of these
works are mere compilations, it requires some
boldness in a Master to give his opinion and
offer his advice on the subject.
From my experience in teaching Singing,
and from the anatomical knowledge acquired
in my former profession (that of Medicine), I
feel confident that the real principle of the
Cultivation of the Voice is almost a sealed
book to the public, and indeed I may say to
the greater part of the musical profession; it
being a common, but most fallacious idea, that


any one with a knowledge of Music can teach
Singing.
I therefore hope that the hints I may give
will prove serviceable to amateurs, and be the
means of making professors attach more im-
portance to the cultivation of the peculiar tone
of each voice, so that it may be made agreeable
and lasting. Instead of this, voices are too
often ruined by giving pupils difficult songs, in
order to gratif} r their vanity or that of their
friends, before they have acquired the power
of sustaining the vqice throughout its natural
extent, with a firm and clear intonation.
When it is recollected that it has taken
years of application and study to enable
artistes to execute properly the songs we are
accustomed to hear attempted by almost every
amateur who is requested to sing in a drawing-
room, the absurdity of the prevailing system
becomes self-evident.
I shall divide this Treatise into two distinct
subjects —
I. — On the Cultivation of the Voice.
II. — On Singing.


The Cultivation of the Voice is that branch
of the Art of Music least understood , because
least studied, the singing the notes alone being
attended to, without cultivation of tone; the
most difficult, because the voice cannot be seen
like an instrument, and therefore requires in
its cultivation a greater amount of reflection,
patience, and self-control, than any other
study; and the most important, because it
involves the strengthening or weakening of
the chest and our mo’st vital organs, according
to the method pursued.
With regard to the second subject, Singing,
or what is commonly considered learning to
sing. This generally consists of going through
a number of songs with a master, and profiting
by his taste in embellishing and altering the
songs to suit the capabilities of the pupil. If
the voice has been properly cultivated, but
little assistance is required in this branch of
the art, as many amateurs possess much musi-
cal taste and feeling; consequently, when they
have obtained the control of their voices, they
express themselves with refinement and pro-
priety ; but without having acquired a proper


control of the voice, the more musical feeling
they possess, the more extravagant is their
singing; and what they intend to he a pathetic
performance becomes in reality a caricature.
THE FOEMATION AND CULTIVATION
OF THE VOICE.
What does this mean ? Of course I need
not say that every one who can speak has a
voice, but I maintain that every one who can
speak may sing; and yet pupils are frequently
brought to me whose friends say they have no
voice, although they have been speaking for
many years ! They mean singing voice —and
here is where the confusion arises. The only
difference between speaking and singing is,
that in speaking we strike the sound impul-
sively, and immediately leave it, whereas in
singing we have to sustain the sound with the
same form of articulation with which we struck
it impulsively. To acquire a sufficient control
of the breath in order to accomplish this,
requires both patience and strict attention.


I do not mean to assert that all possess an
equal facility for singing, as the natural organ-
isation is not always perfect: hut if sufficient
time and attention were given to the softening
of any crudities in the tones of the voice,
thousands, who, never attempt to sing, would
acquire a sufficient control over the organisa-
tion of the throat to make themselves useful
and agreeable in society, where they can now
only give their attention and applause.
In most uncultivated voices will be found
certain inequalities of tone, commonty called
breaks; to strengthen these tones, so as to
make them equal in quality with the rest of
the voice, the greatest care must be taken
never to force them. It is only by gently
coaxing and blending them with the strongest
tones of the voice in practising the scales, that
they will become of an equal quality; and if
the natural tone of the voice be cultivated at
first, a few weeks careful practice will enable
the pupil to overcome all inequalities.
The greatest difficulty in teaching Singing
is the utter impossibility of writing down, or
of showing the pupil, through the medium of


the eye, the real or natural sound of the voice.
In every other branch of the art, there is
something tangible and visible, but in Singing
all depends upon the recollection of a particu-
lar intonation, which must be communicated
orally; Singing, therefore, demands a greater
amount of intelligence on the part of the pupil,
and a more entire submission to the teacher,
than any other musical study. This great
difficulty must always remain, but there are
others which can he avoided, the most impor-
tant of which I will now proceed to consider.
Little or no attention is paid to the tone in
which children speak, consequently they too
often contract bad habits of intonation from
the earliest age, and, as they grow up, what is
merely habitual tone is mistaken for their
natural voice.
From this inattention to intonation in early
years proceeds much difficulty in the Cultiva-
tion of the Voice for Singing; and it is not
unfrequently the cause of diseases of the
throat and chest.
It is but a part of this evil system that
a most injurious habit prevails amongst the


young ladies of the present day of speaking in
a subdued, muffled tone, or what might he
called a semi- falsetto, in consequence of which
very few natural voices are heard. I must be
understood to speak more particularly of Eng-
lish ladies, as foreigners generally speak in the
natural tone of their voice.
When a young lady who has been in the
habit of speaking in this muffled tone is shown
what her real voice is, she is generally annoyed,
the fullness of the tone being offensive to her
ear ; and she frequentl} r will not for a long
time sing in her natural voice, but continues
to. use the habitual tone. The result is, that
not only does she never sing well, but soon
begins to sing out of tune, and finally loses
her voice; and, in too many instances, mate-
rially injures the chest. Indeed, I have no
hesitation in saying that hundreds of young
ladies bring upon themselves serious chest
affections from a bad method of Speaking and
Singing. A general error in the commence-
ment of Singing is to make the pupil begin the
sound piano, and make a crescendo upon it;
this causes the singer to force the breath and


thrust it forward, veiling the sound, and
causing the chest to collapse. By pursuing
such a method, the voice, instead of develop-
ing, becomes weak and husky, and the pupils
never obtain sufficient command of the breath
to be able to sustain a sound firmly, even after
years of practice. In fact, the more they
practise, the more distant they are from ob-
taining a firm intonation.
This brings me to the subject of Practice,
which is one of great importance. I can only
say it is better not to practise at all, until the
ear can perfectly distinguish between a natural
and & forced tone, and the pupil can sing the
sustained scale in the former; and for this
reason —the more a pupil practises with a
faulty intonation, although ever so willing to
improve, the more faulty becomes the voice,
and the more difficult the acquisition of flexi-
bility, all flexibility depending on entire free-
dom of muscular action.
Once able to distinguish the proper intona-
tion, then the pupil may practise two, three,
or more hours a day, without fear of fatigue,
and without endangering the voice.


I therefore strenuously advise all who wish
to sing, not to defer the commencement of
this study (as is generally the case) until the
pupil arrives at the age of seventeen or
eighteen years, by which time young ladies
ought to he good singers, but to commence
early, and, resisting the gratification of singing
a number of songs for the amusement of their
friends (the word may be taken in more senses'
than one), to devote sufficient time to what
may be termed the drudgery of Singing, so as
to enable them to acquire the power of sus-
taining the voice easily to themselves and
agreeably to the ear.
As I am fully persuaded that no hook,
without the aid of a Master who understands
the Cultivation of the Voice and organisation
of the Throat, can he of much use, I shall
only mention, in the Eules for Practice, a few
of the most common faults in Singing—since to
set forth all the peculiarities to be met with
would occupy too much space. It must, there-
fore, be left to the conscientiousness of the
Master, to correct frequently the numberless
little faults which are the great dawback of


Singers generally. To submit to this fre-
quent correction requires much patience and
good temper on the part of the pupil—but the
reward is great; for only thus can an accom-
plishment be acquired which gives more uni-
versal pleasure than any other. Were it for
this alone, Singing deserves to be made more
of a study than it is, instead of being taken
up for a few months, when the education is
being finished; but it deserves a more serious
consideration still, as a matter of health, for
there is no doubt that, provided the tone be
produced according to the principles laid down
by nature, Singing tends materially to the
healthy action of the respiratory organs, and
might frequently be employed with advantage
as an aid to strengthen them.
ON SINGING.
The most important subject in connection
with the second part of this Treatise, is that
of Articulation, a much neglected branch of
Singing.


How few singers make themselves intelligi-
ble. They might as well sing Chinese as
their own language, in most instances.
After the Italian, which is in every respect
the most pleasing to sing, the English lan-
guage is the most agreeable and easy, for in it
there are neither the nasal sounds of the
French, nor the guttural of the German. I
mention only these four languages, as being
most generally allied to music. No vocal
sound can be sustained on consonants, there-
fore the teacher should bestow the greatest
care, in the commencement of Singing, on the
proper articulation of the vowels in whatever
language he may be teaching, as in all
languages an equivalent sound will be found,
however differently the vowels be pronounced.
For example : ei in German is equivalent to i
in English; iin Italian to ein English, and
so on.
It is impossible to pronounce any two vowels
properly with the mouth in the same position,
for this reason it is of the utmost importance
that the muscles of the face and tongue should
be left perfectly free and loose, that they may


fall without force into the position which
nature has provided for the production of the
different sounds of the vowels. Unless this
is carefully attended to, it is impossible that
the full amount of the natural vibration of the
voice can be obtained, as any contraction of
the muscles of the face, throat, or tongue
must deteriorate the tone. In speaking the
English language we dwell upon the conson-
ants, but in Singing it we must do the reverse,
by sustaining the vocal sound on the vowels,
and only articulating the final consonants as
we leave the note.
The sounds of a language should be ana-
lysed as soon as the pupil is sufficiently
advanced to unite words to music; and what I
have said with regard to compound sounds in
the English language will hold good with
respect to any other.
Breath can always be taken where there is a
rest in the music, or a comma, or any other stop
in the words, or before an unaccented or short
note, but never in the middle of a word. The
first and third beats of a bar of music in com-
mon time are generally accented, and, if it can


be avoided, breath should not be taken before
either, unless it should be the beginning of a
musical phrase, but it may be taken before any
intermediate note, provided the sense of the
words be not interrupted.
Great attention should be paid to the read-
ing of the words in taking breath, so that
their proper sense may be conveyed to the
listener. This is what is called Phrasing.
Without a good method of phrasing, the finest
voice will give comparatively little pleasure,
for in it lies the greatest charm of Singing. It
will frequently be found that but little atten-
tion has been given to accentuation in setting
words to music, more particularly where the
words are a translation from one language to
another; when this is the case, a little al-
teration in the time of some of the notes
will generally give the proper accent without
changing the character of the melody, and at
the same time render the singer intelligible.
In fact the music should be made subservient
to the sense and accentuation of the words,
as far as possible without injuring the melody.
Taste and Expression can only be taught


in a very imperfect degree, for, unless the
student has the natural gift of refined musical
and poetic feeling, no master can do more in
this branch than make his pupil imitate him-
self or .others. But those who have had the
patience to obtain the control of the vocal
organisation, who have educated minds, and
made use of their reflective powers in giving a
proper reading to the words they sing, can
never fail to give pleasure to those who hear
them.
A most disagreeable and mischievous habit
has lately been gaining ground rapidly, I
allude to what is called the Tremolo, which,
although effective when very sparingly used in
highly impassioned dramatic music, is in
reality a great defect, against which every
master should resolutely set his face. It has
been introduced by some singers who have
forced their voices to such an extent that they
have lost the power of sustaining a sound, and
when once it becomes a confirmed habit, or
rather, when it cannot be prevented, the
singer’s career is nearly ended. There can-
not be a more severe satire on this pernicious


habit than that it is now adopted by the street
organs of the day.
The most florid passages and the most
elegant cadences are merely Scales and Ex-
ercises in different forms; consequently, when
the Voice can be sustained in executing these
with ease, rapidity, and equality, the difficulty
of Singing is surmounted ; for, however much
may be written upon the Art of Singing, it re-
solves itself into two great difficulties which
must be patiently overcome, viz.:—the pro-
duction of the natural or real tone of the voice,
and the proper management of the breath.
RULES FOR PRACTICE.
In commencing the cultivation of the Voice
the following Rules must be constantly borne
in mind. First of all, I should advise the
pupil, in the absence of the master, to practise
before a looking-glass, that all distortions of
the countenance may be avoided. Open the
mouth in an easy natural position, sufficiently


wide to feel that the jaw, which must be quite
loose, moves from the back or close to the ear,
as though in the act of biting or laughing,
taking care that the smiling position of the
lips does not become a grin.
Take breath easily, but deeply, avoiding all
noise in, or contraction of the throat in doing
so; the chest will thus be well expanded, and
must be kept supported as long as the note is
held. Let the tongue lie quite loosely in the
mouth, touching, but not pressing the lower
front teeth. When all this is done (which is
only a momentary proceeding) the pupil must
will the sound about to be sung, bearing in
mind that it is to be held upon the sound of a
as in father. The sound must then be articu-
lated with the same ease as in speaking, and
in the natural tone of the voice, using only as
much breath as will make the sound vibrate,
the greatest care being taken that not the
smallest quantity of breath escape that is not
converted into articulate sound.
In sustaining the sound, not the slightest
approach to a crescendo should be made till
the pupil can sustain each tone with perfect


ease, as the invariable result of neglect here is
to cause a beginner to thrust forward the
breath, and so destroy the clear vibration of
the sound, making the tone husky, and causing
the chest to collapse, which should never be
the case. To avoid this, the pupil must learn
to balance the breath so nicely, that the first
articulation produced in a free natural tone
may be sustained till the breath is expended
by imperceptible degrees.
The most common faults to be avoided in
practising are, making a rustling sound, pro-
duced by tightening the throat, as the air is
drawn into the chest, and saying ur for a,
in practising the Scales and Intervals. It is
also very common to commence with a sound
of um, and also with a noise in the throat as
of swallowing before articulating the note.
I cannot too strongly condemn the habit of
Singing with the teeth closed; this, however, is
in most cases the fault of incompetent teach-
ers, many of whom make the pupil sing the
syllables do, re, mi, etc., etc., to the intervals
when practising. Now all these tricks can be
avoided, by making the pupil open the mouth


before taking breath, which, however, should
always be done, whether bad habits have been
contracted or not.
If the foregoing Rules be strictly attended
to, the student will, in a very short time, ac-
quire a pure, mellow tone, as well as the
power of sustaining each note throughout the
compass of the voice with perfect ease, and
without fatigue to the chest or throat.
I must again repeat that many young ladies
speak habitually in a feigned voice. Here lies
a great difficulty; for should neither the pupil
nor Master know the real tone, the more
earnestly they work together, the sooner the
voice deteriorates. I cannot too strongly
advise the greatest attention to the free and
natural development of the lower tones of the
voice; it is to the stability of the voice, what
a deep foundation is to the building of a
house.
In conclusion, I must add a few words on a
subject of great importance to the pupil who
makes Singing a study; I mean the spirit in
which instruction is received.
Every emotion of the mind affects the


voice immediately; therefore it is of the
utmost importance that the pupil should re-
ceive the lesson with the mind entirely unpre-
occupied by other matters, and in a spirit of
willing submission to the teacher’s corrections,
however frequent and unimportant they may
appear; for it is simply by the constant cor-
rection of little nothings, that beauty of into-
nation and elegance of Singing are obtained.
E. Whitehead and Co., Printers, Collins Street East, Melbourne,






r fi^t
V?
SPECIAL APPOINTMENT
TO HIS EXCELLENCY SIR JOHN HENRY THOMAS
MANNERS-SUTTON, K.C.E.
E„ WHITEHEAD & CO.
Have the honour to announce to the public of Yictoiia,
that they have been appointed Die-Sinkers and Embos-
sers to His Excellency.
E. \V. & Co. having bestowed particular attention to
this branch of their business, can now confidently assert
that for workmanship they cannot be surpassed. An
inspection of specimens is respectfully solicited.
Family Arms painted on Cardboard, for framing, by
the best Heraldic Artist in the colony.
CRESTS, MONOGRAMS, & CYPHERS,
Tastefully engraved and Embossed, in a superior man-
ner, on Note-paper and Envelopes ; clearness of impres-
sion and brilliancy of colour being carefully studied.
Visiting Cards Engraved in the most fashionable
styles, and printed in a superior manner.
Address :
E. WHITEHEAD & CO.,
Stationers, Engravers, Lithographers, Die-Sinkers, and
Embossers,
67 Collins Street East, Melbourne. - (i.
H> » • * :
