

FIELD SERVICE CODE




yo Gazette Series No. I
FIE LD SERVICE CODE
~~Pul iJ
Ad pfea f°n ‘January 3, 1941,
, aSn| haMatci'i fey the Tokyo Gazette
The Tok>%4j&He Publishing House
Zyohokyoku, Marunoati, Tokyo


c Tokyo Gazette is published monthly by the
Jr°.i°R GaZ ? tC .-T U r lishinB H ° USe Under the supervision
of the Board ot Information. Its purpose is primarily to
supply information concerning the nature of problems
eing confronted today by the Japanese nation as a
. ™le and of the governmental steps being taken to
solve these problems.
The material in the Tokyo Gazette is selected mainly
from the Weekly Report, edited by the same Board. The
accuracy and comprehensiveness of data presented in the
Report are fully established. For the benefit of students
of Japanese affairs, the Tokyo Gazette is endeavouring
to maintain these qualities in the hope that its publication
will eliminate unfortunate misunderstandings and thus
contribute to world peace and international goodwill.
CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION 1
CHAPTER I 3
1. THE EMPIRE
,2. THE IMPERIAL ARMY
3. DISCIPLINE
4. UNITY
5. COOPERATION
6. AGGRESSIVENESS
7. THE CONVICTION TO WIN
CHAPTER II 10
1. PIETY
. 2. FILIAL PIETY
3. SALUTES AND MANNERS
4. THE WAY OF COMRADES IN ARMS
5. INITIATIVE IN EXEMPLARY CONDUCT
6. RESPONSIBILITY
7. VIEW OF LIFE AND DEATH
8. HONOUR
9. ■ SIMPLICITY AND FORTITUDE
10. INTEGRITY
CHAPTER 111 15
1. COUNSEL CONCERNING FIELD SERVICE
2. ACHIEVEMENTS OF SOLDIERS IN SERVICE
CONCLUSION 21


The Imperial Army,
acting uldiipjtfe displays
its true Ppque Agg- iwhenever it
attacks, ! Winning ilj engages in
combat, in orSeFTd'spread Kodo 1 far and wide
so that the enemy may look up in awe to the
august virtues of His Majesty. Those who
march to the battlefield, therefore, should
endeavour to exalt throughout the world the
glories of the Empire by fully realizing what
the country stands for and firmly upholding
the moral tenets of the Imperial Army.
The Imperial Rescript to the armed forces is
1 Literally, “ The Imperial Way,” whereby the Japanese people,
achieving a unity of mind, with the Emperor as Master and serving
Him with loyalty and devotion, endeavour to establish a highly
moral nation through whose moral influence they hope to contribute
to the peace and welfare of the world.
INTRODUCTION
1


explicit, while the regulations and manuals
clearly define conduct in combat and methods
of training. Conditions in the zone of combat,
■however, tend to cause soldiers to be swayed
by immediate events and become forgetful
of their duty. Indeed, they should be wary
there lest they run counter to their duties
as soldiers. The purpose of this code lies in
providing concrete rules of conduct, in the
light of past experience, so that those in the
zone of combat may wholly abide by the
Imperial Rescript to enhance the moral virtues
of the Imperial Army. ;
CHAPTER I
1. THE EMPIRE
Japan is the Kokoku l . The Tenno 2 rules
over it everlastingly in a line unbroken through
the ages as the successor in the high and broad
cause established by the Imperial Ancestor at
the time of the founding of the Empire.
Imperial benevolence is extended to all without
favour, while the Imperial virtues enlighten the
world. The people, too, handing down the
traditions of loyalty, filial piety and valour from
generation to generation, and enhancing there-
by the morality peculiar to the Empire, have
assisted the Throne—a perfect national unity
under the Throne which has brought about
the present national prosperity.
1 Empire or the land of Tenno.
2 The Emperor of Japan.
3
2


Sold.ers.on the field should seek to achieve.
wi h unshakable determination, their mission
ielTT theEmP " ebylayingtoheart^
essential character of the national polity.
2. THE IMPERIAL ARMY
The Army, under command of the Emperor
assists in furthering the Imperial fortunes by
erfoancmg the glories of the Empire through
the embodiment of the lofty spirit of valour
This spirit is the basic factor in realizing uni-
versal peace; for it is the spirit of justice com-
bined with valour and of valour tempered by
benevolence, in conformity with the Imperial
wishes Valour requires strictness, while
benevolence must be universal. Should there
be an enemy who dares to oppose the Imperial
rmy, the Army must resolutely resort to -
force of arms and deal him a crushing blow
However, even though force may compel the
enemy to submit, should a lapse in virtue
occur by the striking of those who do not resist
or by failure to show kindness to those who
surrender, it cannot be said that such an army
is perfect.
Modest in its strength, unostentatious in its
kindness, the Imperial Army becomes an ob-
ject of admiration when it quietly displays its
valour and benevolence.
The mission of the Imperial Army lies in
making the Imperial virtues the objects of uni-
versal admiration through the exercise of
justice tempered with mercy.
3. DISCIPLINE
The essence of discipline in the Imperial
Army lies in the lofty spirit of complete
obedience to His'Majesty, the Generalissimo.
High and low must have deeply engraved in
their minds the solemnity of the right of
5
4


command: those above should exercise the
right in all seriousness, while those below should
obey the commands in the utmost sincerity Es-
sential to victory and requisite for maintaining
peace is tne condition wherein the entire Army
united in the bonds of absolute loyalty, moves
as one in response to a command.
Especially on the battlefield is the utmost ob-
servance of the spirit of obedience necessary.
e spirit of the soldier is best -exemplified by
those who silently do their duty, joyfully brav-
ing death m obedience to a command given at
harlri*" ' ley ” "'" TOi ” g Sm ‘
4. UNITY
The Army looks up in awe to His Majesty
as its august head; it must be united in compli-
ance with the Imperial Will, as one in spirit
and m body and in single-hearted loyalty.
In keeping with the basic principles of com-
mand, an army unit should form a solid yet
genial group with its commander as its centre.
It is essential that each man, high and low,
dutifully observing his place, should be deter-
mined always to sacrifice himself for the whole,
in accordance with the intentions of the com-
mander, by reposing every confidence in his
comrades, and without giving even the slight-
est thought to personal interest and to life or
death.
'5. COOPERATION
Soldiers not only should be united in mind
in carrying out their tasks, but should display
the spirit of cooperation by forgetting them-
selves for the sake of victory.
Every unit should carry out its mission with
responsibility, upholding its honour, placing
confidence in others and assisting one another,
7
6


.volunteering to face hardships, exerting all its
strength in cooperation, and fighting valiantly
to achieve its objective.
6. AGGRESSIVENESS
Aggressiveness should constantly prevail in
combat, which must be carried out with brav-
ery and determination. When attacking, be
determined and positive, always taking the ini-
tiative, fighting vigorously and stubbornly
vowing not to cease until the enemy is crushed.
In defence, always retain the. spirit of attack
and always maintain freedom of action; never
give up a position but rather die. In pursuit,
be thorough and inexorable.
Act boldly intent upon victory; be fearless
and calm, meeting the situation courageously,
undergoing hardships with indomitable perse- ■
Vt ranee so as to overcome all obstacles.
7. THE CONVICTION TO WIN *
Faith is strength. He who has faith in com-
bat is always the victor.
The conviction to win grows from constant
and rigorous training.. Develop the strength
to conquer the enemy by every possible effort
and by improving every moment.
The destiny of the Empire rests upon victory
or defeat in battle. Do not give up under any
circumstances, keeping in mind your responsi-
bility to keep untarnished the glorious history
of the Imperial Army with its tradition of
invincibility.
9
8


CHAPTER II
1. PIETY
The Gods look upon us from above.
Pure" inW.lustir P ? tKtion by bei "g
sincere in y o u r n aCtl ° n ’ profound and
the lovaltv v y ’ Constantl y mindful of
ne loyalty y ou owe the Emperor amt w
duty to your parents. ° f y ° Ur
FILIAL PIETY
esstrJV our fi! na t Piet f “ f ° rm the
-biect is always a d uS S o7 ality; a, ° yal
Endeavour to tha u
our forefathers hv ! * & b tradit; ons of
of y „ ur " ” ! b> th ‘* a "« l,l »<”<• He Wishes
duty of a lova. u Y the
ty of a loyal subject on the battlefield.
3. SALUTES AND MANNERS
The salute is the expression of a sincere
feeling of obedience and is also a symbol of
unity between those above and those below.
Salutes must be strictly executed on the
field. If a soldier is filled with the sense of
decorum and strict in practising good manners,
it shows that he is a strong warrior.
4. THE WAY OF COMRADES IN ARMS ,
Comrades in arms, united in life and in death
for the Imperial cause, should display full
mutual trust, should always endeavour to
improve each other; assist each other in
distress, and restrain each other against ex-
cesses, in order that they may jointly fulfil
their duty as soldiers.
5. INITIATIVE IN EXEMPLARY CONDUCT
Leaders should be zealous in giving a worthy
11
10


rf: in rr ing - if there *
above, tnose below will be unruly.
'protde? PriZed ° n the field LeaderS
P ovide an example by acting more coura-
geous!} than others.
6. responsibility
Dutj is sacred. One’s responsibility is
tremely heavy. Each and every task must
a flab! 0 ™ 16 Wl *. the utmost care, until ail
available means are exhausted. Those who
have a strong sense of responsibility are the
bravest of the brave on the field.
7. VIEW OF LIFE AND DEATH
• The lofty spirit of self-sacrificing service to
the State must prevail in life and in death.
Do your duty with heart and soul, regardless
0 °r deat ih After exerting all your
powers, spiritually and physically, calmly face
death rejoicing in the hope of living in the eter-
nal cause for which you serve.
8. HONOUR
Strong are those who have a keen sense of
honour.
Meet the expectations of your family and
home community by making effort upon effort,
always mindful of the honour of your name.
If alive, do not suffer the disgrace of becoming
a prisoner; in death, do not leave behind a name
soiled by misdeeds.
-9. SIMPLICITY AND FORTITUDE
Let simplicity guide your daily life on the
battlefield; promote habits of fortitude and a
high morale.
Life on the field must be plain ; consider
privation your daily lot and endeavour to be
thrifty ; luxury saps valour. x
13
12


10. INTEGRITY
thfr* iS the foundation of the spirit of
the Warnor - Ho- can a man who cannot
the country. W °^ dly des ’ res d evote his life to
_ Be austere in your daily behaviour- deal
TZ TOUr “ ndu “ .d
CHAPTER III
1. COUNSEL CONCERNING FIELD SERVICE
(1) A moment’s negligence may result in an
unexpected catastrophe. Be constantly on
your guard. Do not despise your enemy or
the natives. Do not be negligent after a small
success. Know that carelessness brings dis-
aster.
(2) Sentry duty is important. Upon the
sentry rests the safety of an army; he also
represents the discipline of an army. Those
on sentry duty must devote their entire person
to the task which must be sternly carried out.
Accord the sentry high respect.
(4) Ideological warfare is an important
phase in modern conflict. Destroy propaganda
and fabrications of the enemy, by your
unshakable faith in the cause for which the
15
14


Empire stands, and endeavour to spread Kodo-
(5) Rumours arise from a Jack of confi-
dence. Do not be misled ; do not be agitated
by them. Firmly believe in the strength of
the Imperial Army and deeply trust your
superiors.
(6) Be mindful to protect enemy property
and resources. Requisitions, seizures, and the
destruction of goods and similar actions must
be executed in keeping with the regulations
and always under the orders of your command-
ing officer.
. (7) . Be gentle t 0 an d protect innocent
inhabitants in a spirit of benevolence in accord-
ance with the true ideal of the Imperial Army.
(8) Those on the field must not indulge in
wine and women or allow desire to becloud
their consciences thereby damaging the
prestige of the Imperial Army and causing the
dissipation of a body dedicated to service.
They should exercise self-control lest they
besmirch the pure character of warriors.
(9) Control your anger and suppress your
grudges. The ancients said, “ Consider anger
your enemy.” A moment’s violence often
leaves cause for long regret. ■
The severity of military law is designed
especially to uphold the good name of soldiers
and to preserve the dignity of the Imperial
Army. Always remember the oath that you
made and the deep emotion that you felt when
you left home ; call to mind how your parents,
your wife and your children think of you, and
avoid exposing yourself to crime.
2. ACHIEVEMENTS OF SOLDIERS IN
SERVICE
(1) Foster the tradition of respecting martial
attainments; cultivate and train the warrior’s
virtues and arts.* Remember that “Do not
17
16


allow yourself to become bored ” is the saying
Of an ancient general. - y g
the fat e D of r all T you * self t 0 WOrf y abo «t
deatl h T* 3t h ° me “ the your
- ut devote yourself wholly to service
Be always ready to meet death without regret'
by settling your affairs beforehand.
A soldier is always prepared to expose his
corpse o° the M d U, hi. taily kn „
(T n 7 may
ere is notnmg more to be regretted
an o all a victim to disease on the field Re
Particularly mindful y „ r h(Jalth
(4)°' Up tTf' ‘° “™ beCa ‘“ e °‘
V° : of rm.ndent
»Tr«n e . -T
> lortune. Always take good care of your
rms and supplies and give humane attention
to animals on the field.
(5) Virtue in the battle zone is the source
of strength in combat. Always' consider the
interests of other units and do not monopolize
billets and materials. Remember the saying
“A bird taking flight does not muddy the
water/’ Let the good reputation of the valor-
ous Imperial Army long remain the cause of
fond recollections in an alien land.
* (6) Not to boast of one’s achievements but
to give others credit is one of the most
respected traditions among warriors. Do not
begrudge • others their promotion or cherish
resentment because your services are not
recognized, but instead reflect upon your own
shortcomings.
(7) Be honest always; consider exaggera-
tions and lies as dishonourable.
(8) Always bear yourself as a member of a
great nation, treading the path of righteous-
ness and seeking justice, so that you may
enhance the prestige of the Empire. Also do
19
18


miolTcc mist. 0 ' 1,„„.
i °' to tore, “™
r* ■* -»
”* , ” r w « *> «» He country.
CONCLUSION
All of the above originate from and end in
the Imperial Rescript. Let them serve as a
guide in putting into practice this battlefield
morality so that all may be perfect in obeying
the Imperial commands.
Soldiers and officers on the field : lay to heart
the import of the above by fully realizing the
significance service to the State, in
order that you may carry out your duty as
soldiers, thus responding to the boundless
Imperial benevolence.
21
20


FIELD SERVICE CODE
(Tokyo Gazette Scries No. 1.)
Published by Mitswki Kakebi, The Tokyo Ga-etle Publishing House
Zyohokyoku, 12, 3-tyome, Marmouti, Tokyo. Printed
by K. Kosak-ai, the Kenkyusha, 2 Kaguratyc j-tyome, Usigome, Tokyo.
Price: 30 Sen
“ Japan Standard Size 86.”
