







Australian Military Handbooks.
The New Company Drill Simplified. With
Squad, Section and Platoon Drill.
Illustrated with numerous diagrams, showing Positions of
Company, Platoon and Section Commanders, and all move-
ments in Squad Drill, Platoon Drill and Company Drill, as laid
down in Infantry Training, 1914. With the Detail for all
Movements. By LiEUT. R. Stupart. Fifth edition, revised.
1/6 (postage Id)
This is a clear , simple and direct explanation of all the movements in Infantry
Drill , the diagrams showing at a glance how the various movements are carried
out . It is by far the best book obtainable on this subject .
Outposts, and Advanced, Flank and Rear
Guards.
Includes the Distribution of an Advanced Guard, Telling oft
of an Advanced Guard, Duties of Commander of the Vanguard,
Disposition of Small Advanced Guard, Disposition of a Flank
Guard, Distribution of Outposts, Duties of Outpost Company
Commander, Duties of Piquet Commander, Telling off and
Posting a Piquet, etc. By LiEUT. R. Stupart. Second edition,
revised and greatly enlarged, with 3 sketches. 1/3 (postage Id).
This is by far the best book on “ Protectionand includes a great deal of
elementary information which cannot be found anywhere else .
Handy Notes on Sequence and Detail of
Musketry Instruction.
As taught at the School of Musketry, Randwick. F'or the
use of Instructors. Includes Aiming Instruction, Tests in Aim-
ing, Essential Points in Aiming, Trigger Pressing, Firing
Instrnction, Snapshooting, etc. Second edition, revised and
greatly enlarged. 6d. (postage Id.)
Grenade Warfare. Notes on the Training
and Organization of Grenadiers.
Including Explosives, Improvised Bombs, Service Grenades,
Grenade Throwing, Bayonet Fighting, Barricading, Organiza-
tion and Tactics, Defence, Attack, Storming Parties, Night
Operations, Patrols, etc. By Eieut. G. Dyson, Grenadier
Officer, 99th Infantry Brigade, British Army. 9d. (postage Id.)
A Junior Course of First Aid.
By Coeonee G. Lane MueEINS. With many-illustrations.
6d. (postage Id.)
\
ANGUS & ROBERTSON LTD., Military Publishers,
91 Castlereagli Street, Sydney.


Hints to Non.-Coms.
Including Hints to Non-Coms., The Word of Command, The
Art of Instructing, Military Courtesy, Dress, Discipline, The
Duties of Sergeant-Major, Bandmaster, Quartermaster-Sergeant,
Sergeant Cook, Pioneer Sergeant, Signalling Sergeant, Band
Sergeant, Transport Sergeant, Armourer Sergeant, Orderly-
Room Sergeant, Color-Sergeant, Sergeant, etc. Second
edition, revised. By Lieut. R. StuparT. 1/- (postage Id.)
Aiming, Firing, and Fire Discipline Train-
ing, as taught at the School of Musketry,
Randwiek.
By Sergeant-Major Instructor F. E. Hart, With 52
full-page photographs and 22 diagrams illustrating the sub-
jects as taught at the Randwiek School of Musketry in
accordance with Musketry Regulations. 1/6 (postage Id.)
Contents ; Description of Appliances used, Qualifications of
Instructors, Care and Cleaning of Arms, Method of Teaching,
Absolute Accuracy in Aiming, Use of Tripods, Aim Teacher,
Aim Corrector, Aiming Disc, etc., Alignment of Sights,
Methods of Exposing Faults, Triangle of Error Test, Aiming
off for Wind, Aiming Up and Down, Rapidity and Consistency
of Aim, Aiming at Service, Moving and Disappearing Targets,
Snapshooting, Trigger-pressing, Firing Standing, Kneeling,
Sitting, and Prone, in the Open and behind various kinds of
Cover, Loading and Unloading, Use of Safety Catch and Cut-off,
Muscle Exercises, Tests of Elementary Training, Use of Ground
and Cover, Fire Discipline Training, Rapid Fire, Fire Orders,
Fire Control, Fire Direction, Barrack Room Instruction, etc.
Guard and Sentry Duties.
A complete Guide to the Guard Duties of Field Officer,
Captain and Subaltern of the Day, the Commander, Sergeant,
Corporal, and Private Soldier of the Guard, Arrest and Military
Custody, etc., with copy of Guard Report, Orders for a Sentry
on Post, Guard-room or Tent, etc. By UieuT. R. StuparT.
Fourth edition, revised and enlarged. 9d. (postage Id.)
Roll Book.
For Platoon, Section and Squad Commanders. Including
Duty Roster, Nominal and Attendance Rolls. 128 pages.
Pocket size. 9d. (postage Id.)
Australian Military Handbooks (continued).
ANGUS & ROBERTSON LTD., Military Publishers,
91 Castlereag-h Street, Sydney.


Infantry Pocket Book.
A concise Guide to Regulations, Field Training, Musketry,
Camp Duties, etc. Compiled by Lieut. R. Stupart. Fifth
edition, thoroughly revised, containing more than twice as
much matter as previous editions. Pocket size, waterproof
cloth cover. 1/6 (postage Id.)
An encyclopedia of military knowledge.
This book is now recognised as an accurate and indispensable guide por the
Field , the Rifle Range , in Camp , and for general reference purposes. The
section on “ Camp Duties ” has been considerably enlarged , and now contains a
great deal of information in connection with the duties of all ranks in camp ,
which cannot be found anywhere else
The Complete Musketry Instructor.
Including Description of S.M.D.E. Rifle, Care and Cleaning
of Arms, Military Vocabulary, Explanation of Musketry
Terms, Theory of Musketry. Aiming Instruction, Firing
Instruction, Miniature Range Training, Dandscape Target
Training, etc. Illustrated with numerous diagrams. By
LiEUT. R. Stupart. 2nd edition. Revised and enlarged.
1/6 (postage Id.)
This is the most comprehdnsive book on Musketry available , containing as
it does concise ) accurate and complete information on all phases of the modern
systems of Musketry Training. It is indispensable to all who wish to obtain
a thorough knowledge of this important subject .
Hints to Young Officers
In the Australian Military Forces. Including Hints to
Young Officers, The Art of Command, Hints to Company
Officers, Discipline, Military Courtesy, Mess Etiquette, Dress,
Official Correspondence, Hints on How to Lecture, Duties of
Commanding Officer, Adjutant, Quartermaster, Signalling
Officer, Transport Officer, Company Commander, Platoon Com-
mander, etc. By Lieut. R. Stupart. 1/6 (postage Id.)
Every Officer in the Permanent , Citizen , and Cadet Forces should have a copy
of this book. It is the most complete of its kind ever published , and contains a
vast amount of information which could only be learned otherwise after long
years of experience.
Musketry Small Book.
For the Australian Imperial P'orce. Includes Hints on
Shooting, Judging Distance, Grouping Practices, etc., with a
large number of diagrams for keeping a Record of Results in
Instructional and Standard Test Practices. By LiEUT. R.
Stupart. 3d. (postage Id.)
Australian Military Handbooks
ANGUS & ROBERTSON LTD., Military Publishers,
91 Castlereag’h Street, Sydney.


FIELD MESSAGE BOOK
This book is ruled in ¼in. squares.
ANGUS & ROBERTSON Ltd.
Military Publishers,
91 Castlereagh Street, Sydney.


THE PREPARATION OF REPORTS
AND MESSAGES.
1. Messages intended for the headquarters of units and
formations will be addressed by the title of the unit or for-
mation in an abbreviated form, e.g., First Division, Seventh
Inf. - Bde., Second F.A. Bde. The abbreviation H.Q. will only
W c/
be used in addressing general headquarters. The title of the
unit will be followed, if necessary, by the place to which the
message is to be sent.
Abbreviations will only be used when there can be no doubt
as to their meaning. The sender is responsible that any
abbreviations he may use are such as will be understood.
2. After the address the number of the sender’s messiage
will be given, followed by the day of the month.
If the message is in reply to, or has reference to a message
from the addressee, the number of that messtge will then be
quoted. The text of the message will come next. The mes-
sage will end with the abbreviated title of the sender’s unit
or appointment, as in para. 1 above, followed by the place
and time of despatch.
3. When the sender desires to inform different addressees
that the message has been circulated, he will add this infor-
mation at the end of the text of the mesage, thus: —
‘•'addressed 9th Light Horse, repeated Fourth Inf.,
Bde., Second F.A. Bde.”
When information has been sent to another unit, the mes-
sage will contain, at the end of the text — (unit) informed”
4. When the message is complete it will be signed in the
right-hand bottom corner, the rank of the sender, his ap-
pointment and the force he is with being stated. If the
message is despatched by signal this signature is not trans-
mitted, but the authority for despatch.


5. If a signal message is to be delivered to more than one
addresee, it facilitates despatch if separate copies for each
addressee are handed in to the signal office.
6. The following general rules should also be observed:
(a) Messages must be as concise as possible, consistent
with clearness, and precise as regards time and place.
Anything of an indefinite or conditional nature, such
as ‘ ■ dawn, ” “ dusk, ” “if possible, ’ ’ “may, ’ ’ is to be
avoided. The language used should be simple and
the handwriting easily legible.
(b) The hour of 12 will be followed by “noon” or “mid-
night ’ ’ written in w T ords. A night will be described
thus “night 29/30 Sept.” or “night 30 Sept./ 1 Oct.”
(c) The use of Roman numerals in signal messages is for-
. bidden. Important numbers should be written in
words. In messages Avhich are to be signalled the
letters AAA should be used for a full stop.
( d ) Names of places and persons will be written in block
capitals, e.g., BRISBANE and must be spelt exactly
as given on the map in use. Care is necessary to
prevent misunderstanding resulting from the exis-
tence of two or more places of the same name.
( e ) If the map is referred to, the one used must be speci-
fied unles this is already provided for in standing
orders. The position of places will be denoted either
by naming the map squares (if any) in which they
appear or by the points of the compass, e.g., wood,
600 yds. S.E. of LIVERPOOL,” or by compass bear-
ings, e.g., “hill 1,500 yds. true bearing 272° from
BROADMEADOW, C.H., ” or by description,
“cross roads | mile S.W. of second E in ADELAIDE,”
the letter indicated being underlined. A road is best
indicated by naming a sufficient number of places on
it to prevent the possibility of mistakes.
(/) Positions are to be described from right to left looking
in the direction of the enemy. The terms ‘ ‘ right ’ or
“left” are used in describing river banks, it being
assumed that the writer is looking down stream,
With this exception ambiguous terms, such as
‘ ‘ before, ” “ behind, ” “ front, ’ ’ etc., must not be used.


id) When bearings are given they will always; be true
bearings, and this should be stated.
(7i) In naming units from which a portion is excluded, the
unit will be named and the words ‘ ‘ less ”
added.
(i) If the report or message refers to troops reaching a
place at a certain time, it is assumed that the head of
the main body is meant, unless otherwise stated.
( j ) A copy of messages sent will be kept by the sender,
the copy and original being endorsed with the method
and hour of issue, e.g., 11 Pte. X, to Bde. Maj. Fourth
Inf. Bde. at 8 p.m. ’ ’“ Flag signals to 84th Infantry
at 9 a.m.
W. C. PENFOLD & CO. LTD., SYDNEY.






Hints on Health for Soldiers
In the Field, in Camp and in Bivouac. Compiled from
Army Medical Sources for Hot, Cold and Temperate Climates.
6d. (postage Id.)
Trumpet and Bugle Calls, and Soldiers'
Song Book for the Australian Army,
Including instructions for Trumpeters and Buglers, Field and
Routine Calls for Mounted Units and Infantry. With words for
all Calls. By Captain W. G. Bentley. 1/6 (postage Id.)
Map Reading and Field Sketching Simplified.
By Captain T. P. Conway, A. and I. Staff, Commonwealth
Military Forces. Based on the Official Manual, including De-
finitions, Scales (greatly simplified, with further explanation
and examples), Conventional Signs and Fettering, Methods of
Representing Hill Features, Copying and Enlarging Maps, Use
of Prismatic Compass and Protractor, Map Reading, Mutual
Visibility of Points, Principles of Sketching, Cavalry Sketching
Board, Enlarging and Adding Extra Information, Reports,
Eye and Memory Sketching, Plane-Table Sketching, The
Triangle of Error (thoroughly explained, with extra diagrams),
Panorama Drawing, Marching by the Stars, etc., thoroughly
revised and greatly extended with special reference to Austra-
lian conditions, illustrated throughout with numerous folded
coloured, and other Diagrams and Sketches. Waterproof clotl
cover, 3/6 (postage Id.)
Transport Notes for the Use of Army Service
Corps, Army Medical Corps, and Regi-
mental Transport.
Includes Organization of Transport in the Field, Horse and
Stable Management, Harnessing up, Transport by Rail, Trans-
port by Sea, Bonding Wagons, Shoeing and the Feet, Drivers’
Orders, Treatment of Sick Animals, etc. By CapT. S. G.
Gibbs, Assistant-Director of Supplies and Transport. 1/-
(postage Id.)
Scouting: Protective or Practical
Reconnaissance. ,
Specially adapted to the Training of Australian Troops. By
Major F. A. Dove. Second edition, with 21 diagrams. 6d.
(postage Id.)
Australian Military Handbooks (continued).
ANGUS & ROBERTSON LTD., Military Publishers,
91 Castlereag'h Street. Sydney.


Semaphore Alphabet Made Easy.
An easy Method of Learning how to Semaphore in a few
hours by means of a pack of 30 cards, showing Sender’s
Position “Front View.” 9d. (postage Id.)
The Cadet Handbook.
A concise Guide to Appointment and Promotion for Officers
and N.-C.O’s. Including Syllabus of Exams., Syllabus of
Training, Duties of Non-Coms., Guards and Sentries. With
Attendance Roll for Section Commanders. Compiled by LiEUT.
R. Stop art. 2nd edition, revised and enlarged. Pocket size,
cloth cover, 9d. (postage Id.)
Junior Cadet Manual.
Including the authorized Squad Drill, Physical Exercises,
Miniature Rifle Shooting, First Aid, Organized Games,
Swimming, and Life Saving. Second edition, revised.
Cloth cover, 3/6 (postage 2d.)
This new edition has been revised in accordance with the
Amendments and Instructions recently issued by the Physical
Training Instructional Staff of the Defence Department. The
proofs of the alterations, and indeed of the whole book in its
revised form, passed through the hands of the Chief Instructor
of Physical Training, who authorises the statement that the
Junior Cadet Manual now meets all the requirements of the
revised syllabus of training contained in Universal Training
Regulations , Part IV '., Junior Cadets.
Rifle Exercise and Musketry Instruction for
Cadets.
Compiled by LiEUT. R. Stupart. 3rd edition, revised
and enlarged. 64 pages, 6d. (postage Id.)
Includes Care of Arms, Rifle Exercises, Aiming Instruction,
Firing Instruction, Muscle Exercises, Tests of Elementary
Training, Explanation of Grouping, Application Practices,
Some Groups and what they mean. With Sketch of Rifle
showing all parts.
Tactical Exercise, A.
Description of a Staff Ride dealing with Operations between
Hornsby and the Nepean River, N.S.W. By Coe. H. Foster.
78 pages, 6 diagrams, 2 maps, and large map of scene of opera-
tions. 2/- (postage Id.)
/ /
Australian Military Handbooks (continued).
ANGUS & ROBERTSON LTD., Military Publishers,
91 Castlereag-li Street, Sydney-


Rifle Exercises Simplified.
Including Rifle Exercises, Description of Short Magazine
Lee-Enfield Rifle, Care of Arms, Stripping and Assembling,
Sword Exercises, Bayonet Fighting, Bayonet Fighting for Com-
petitions, etc. With numerous illustrations. 1/- (postage Id)
Light Horse Pocket Book.
A concise Guide to Regulations, Field Training, Camp
Duties, Equitation, etc. With Nominal, Troop, and Atten-
dance Rolls. Compiled by LiEUT. D. C. Howeff Price, A.
and I. Staff. 2nd edition. Pocket size, cloth cover, 1/6 (post-
age Id.)
Field Message Book.
For writing orders and reports of reconnaissance, outpost
duties, etc. With concise directions for writing,messages, etc.
130 pages duplicating J-inch ruled paper, with paper for copy-
ing messages. Pocket size, waterproof cover and elastic band,
2/6 (postage Id.)
Signalling Handbook for Australian Military
Forces.
Including Morse System, Semaphore System, Use and Care
of Apparatus, Helio., Telescope, Flags, Message Forms, Station
Routine, Training and Classification. Completely illustrated.
Compiled by a Signalling Officer. 2nd edition. 1/- (postage Id)
This book gives , in a concise and compact form , all the instruction reqmrea
for the training of Regimental Signallers , and for the examinations for
Signaller's “ Specialist ” Badges .
How to Instruct in Bayonet Fighting.
Including full Detail, Hints and Lessons on all Methods used
in Teaching Bayonet Fighting, with Directions and Rules for
Bayonet Fighting Combats, and 55 full-page photographs illus-
trating all positions. By Staff Sergeant-Major D. Faeeon.
1/6 (postage Id.)
Camps and Camp Hygiene.
By Major G. Lane Muffins, A.A.M.C., and. Dr. W. G,
Armstrong. Includes Kitchens and Cooking, Water Sup-
plies, Refuse and Garbage, Personal Hygiene, etc. 86
pages. 6d. (postage Id.)
Camps for Cadets. A Guide to Camp Duties
By Major F. A. Dove. 45 pages 6d. (postage Id.)
Australian Military Handbooks (continued).
ANG-US & ROBERTSON LTD., Military Publishers,
91 Castlereagh Street, Sydney.






