

1889
1946




Fifty Year
OF PARACON LIFE IN AUSTRALIA


P A RAGON
FACTORIES
IN
AUSTRALIA
MELBOURNE
PERTH
ADELAIDE
BRISBANE
PERTH


BOARDS OF
Mr. L E. LLOYD
Director
Damson Paragon Ltd.
Mr. C. T. WATKINS
Director
Damson Paragon (W.A.) Ltd.
MB. P. J. W. DANBY
Director
Lamson Paragon Ltd.
MR. ANDREW WILSON
Chairman of Directors
Damson Paragon Ltd.
MR. JOHN MEATH EVANS
London Director
Lamson Paragon Ltd.
DIRECTORS
MR. G. B. YOUNG
Director
Damson Paragon Ltd.
Mr. H. G EDARD
Managing Director
Lmson Paragon (W.A.) Ltd.
LAMSON PARAGON COMPANIES IN AUSTRALIA


FOREWORD
toionto.
M Moot e
\ &*£&■s ir»g jtfs&ai
stitc S jc J u^i
editor ® l & A «oxv° ral7 later Ixl tU j4> and Nir . ,
ot^ ova SCOti aaA *Cce tin®** *
U ****£« Rations ** *e cost
yi &^ cl t w idAc a,teed tH e op ioU r, a^ a
sccoted lto» eS een , t *u. Moote
* e , o eaI l Y sta 9 - * o9tty A e 9 V«'
P ec cent sold ° ut at n fata® 0 '® 9 C-stag® B ° \ ic ate sales
W M* Cattct so ptopo smo» o h eo th d«p"c
re at itA lU IUS h to ta re q^ iteA \ Aat ata
9 t through ltS at that tltn aia s\dp a s Cru*n e
\aiats did not at sale factory £ t he Ca t tire
i ;Aea, aiaA .tic sales boo na m e iat ed , tul .
b °‘V ** aU ‘X a.SA.. o*et and
~ ° i a te the 9° 7 Co»P BcltpS 8 c I tpS and ' unsi® ess
eatts, £ a fetet saks T** states B«s
C a®e ot * e Ctltablisfa 4 >® uo4et *e D< * C offlP a ° 7
n un its eie co .ordirr ate v/here n ev*
ltl ® c recently . duS try to L d CoW*^'
lnc. the m du y lti v » Cor v a
jLore bron# 1 t fc C P ate *V Chech 150 aS called
W> ito develop p at ago a £ B g\and
- .* 4 ,. ”*• B “ . ts
tt Ae fast aoa ®9\6 wge a « 4
ChecV. B°°C rt Clat't « as succeeded " a veiV be Vice'
Mi. Robe Cv and CeloP® 801 and is a o^
Jon CoW C 9“ ided ,1 ente £ P ciS p " u d„ Co® 4 ° 0 '
boo „s ba . ..siuesS'iot® ply Co.
E Cfa* Bive , son r aia9 ° tt
c omP te o fc hams oXI
C^airm aia


GOLDEN JUBILEE
5 0 YEAR OF PARGON LIFE IN AUSTRALIA 1896-1949
The Paragon Check Book Company was born in 1886 in a basement
at No. 1 North Roadmaker Street, London, and, with great daring, the 12
months’ old infant in 1887 set out to secure business in distant Australia.
Mr. John Brightman was sent out from England to introduce the Check
Book principle to Australasian Traders and act as Agent for the Company’s
products. At that date little else than Check Books, or “Counter Sales
Books” (as they are called in America, the land of their origin) was pro-
duced. Mr. Brightman booked orders for all parts of Australia and New
Zealand, posted them to England for manufacture and, in the fullness of
time (conditions permitting, and sometimes they did not), they were de-
livered. Nine months was considered prompt delivery. The success and
prospects led to the London Company deciding to open a Branch Factory in
Australia, and, if the fiscal policy of Victoria and New South Wales had
been identical, the Factory would have been established in New South
Wales, as the bulk of our business then came from that State; but, as New
South Wales then stood for free trade, and Victoria for a protective Tariff,
it was obviously to the Company’s advantage to manufacture in Victoria, and
in 1895'—but let Mr. Webb, the only survivor of the pioneers, tell the tale.
ARRIVAL IN MELBOURNE
On October 4th, 1895, the R.M.S. “Ophir” (with 6 Web Platens,
other plant and personnel, the nucleus of the Australian Branch of the
Lamson Paragon Supply Company Limited, London, on board) left Tilbury
Dock, London, on her journey to Australia. The members of the party
were Mr. J. A. Hall, General Manager; Mr. F. Broad, Secretary; Mr. J.
Clough, Works Manager, and myself (D. G. Webb) as Deputy. W’e
arrived in Melbourne on November 14th,
Mr. J. A. HALE
and had our first experience of a typical
hot day, with a blustering northerly wind
blowing. Anchored in the Bay was the
“Sunbeam,” the yacht belonging to the
late Lord Brassey, who had just taken up
his duties as Governor of Victoria. Near-
by was the convict hulk, the “Success,”
then being used for commercial purposes
as a Showboat, with its shackles, leg irons,
etc,.—a relic of bygone days when convicts
were deported to Australia. The Secre-
tary of this venture was Mr. H. B. Water-
worth, who subsequently was closely asso-
ciated with the Lamson Paragon Supply
Company, both in England and Australia.


Mr. J. CLOUGH
CONDITIONS IN AUSTRALIA
Melbourne, when we landed, was little
more than in its infancy; the bursting of the
disastrous land boom, which commenced in
1893, had caused stagation in business, bank-
ruptcies innumerable and much unemploy-
ment. Fortunes were made one day and lost
the next. City properties were offered at
£lOO to £2OO per foot. Some of the Banks
had closed. The prices of wheat and wool
had slumped, and for many years a heavy
load of adversity was experienced throughout
Victoria, It has been estimated that the loss
amounted to £200,000,000. Recovery was
slow, and skilled workers were glad to get
work at 5/- per day. Living was cheap. A
good three-course meal could be purchased
for 4d., and for 6d. a cigar or a glass of
beer was added. An hotel in Flinders Street,
kept by a Portuguese named Antonio, was
a well-known restaurant noted for the excel-
lence of its three-course 4d. meal. Hundreds
of houses were empty, and owners were only
too willing to accept nominal rentals from
tenants if only to safeguard their properties.
GOLD RUSH
Men were leaving Victoria by every boat
for the goldfields of Western Australia. At
that time, Kalgoorlie and Coolgardie were
thriving cities, full of bustle and excitement,
for new gold mines were being opened up
continually, and fortunes being made by the
favored few. I may say, in passing, that
Coolgardie today is merely a collection of
empty shops and houses. In those days,
living conditions in Western Australia were
vastly different from what they are today.
The water supply system now in operation
(mainly through the efforts of the late Lord
Forrest and C. Y. O’Connor, Engineer-in-
Chief, 1891-1902) was not then in existence,
and in some of the cities water cost 1/- per
gallon and a bath was an expensive luxury.
It was an interesting sight to see vessels
leaving Melbourne with their deck cargoes of
cabbages, potatoes and other produce for
Western Australia, then dependent upon Vic-
toria and South Australia for her supplies.
RIALTO
Mr. D. G. WEBB


MELBOURNE IN THE ’NINETIES
Melbourne was a very different city then
from what it now is, for Motor Cars, Aero-
planes, Radio, Gramophones and Cinemas
were then unknown. Co-operative Butter
Factories which, in the succeeding years,
contributed so much to the prosperity of Vic-
toria, were not then in operation. To the
men who went on the land, the valuable
assistance they received on their introduction
often meant the difference between making a
living or “going broke.” At that time, Mel-
bourne was not sewered, and the surface
water ran along deep channels at the edge of
the footpath. Youngsters used to race their
paper boats down these channels and wager
some of their personal belongings on the re-
sult. The sporting instincts of these youthful
Australians were very apparent. Mention
of sporting instincts carries my memory back
to a day in November—the ninth, to be exact
—when our ship was approaching Albany,
our first port of call in Australia. As the
boat carrying the Customs officials. Doctor,
Agents, etc., was being rowed from the
shore, a stentorian voice from the deck
shouted, “Who won the Melbourne Cup?”
and the answer came back across the waters.
“Auraria.” Electricity was not then much
used, and the street lighting was by kero-
sene and gas. The lamp-lighter went on his
rounds carrying a long stick with a per-
forated end enclosing a light. Cable cars
ran through the streets, and the Gripman’s
“Mind the curve!” is still in the memory of
many. Horse trams ran in many of the
suburbs and locomotion was not as speedy
as it now is.
AMUSEMENTS
At the present corner entrance to the
Flinders Street Railway Station, now known
as “under the clocks,” stood the Fish Market,
with a background of scenery such as one
would see in a stage set-up. At the en-
trance, a well-known character was Phil
Hanton, a purveyor of peanuts, who always
made a point of wearing a high silk hat.
Melbourne, at that time, was a hectic city,
and its night life was very gay. Hotels,
cafes and many shops were open until late
at night, and people flocked into the city
when their work for the day was over.
Miniature steam engines, painted green, with
polished brass fittings, from which saveloys
and rolls could be bought, coffee stalls, oyster
and fruit barrows, peanut vendors, etc.,
catered for the public’s wants. Bourke Street
was always thronged. Cole’s Book Arcade,
with its rainbow colored sign, catered for the
literary tastes of the people, and everyone
was free to extract any information desired
from the thousands of books on the shelves.
There were cages of monkeys and parrots to
amuse the youngsters, and an orchestra
played at intervals. The Eastern Market
was a busy place, and the rendezvous of
many of the young people of that period,
with its shooting galleries, fortune tellers, fat
men, bearded ladies and side shows. On the
other side of the street was the Waxworks,
with effigies of many of the leading personali-
ties (past and present), and other interesting
exhibits. On Eastern Hill, where part of St.
Vincent’s Hospital now stands, was the
Cyclorama, showing, with alarming reality,
the Battle of Waterloo. The building was
octagonal in shape, and was later used as a
Stadium. In those days, German Bands used
to roam the city and suburbs. (Will they
ever come again?) The Chinese community
in Little Bourke Street was quite a feature
in the city life, and the street had quite a
Celestial atmosphere. Gambling dens, Joss
houses and Chinese restaurants -were a pro-
minent feature of life in “Lilly Bourke.”
f


Mr. ROBERT RANKINE
Mr. JOHN BRIGHTMAN
Mr. ANDREW WILSON
EARLY POLITICS
At the time of our arrival, Federation was
in the making. In 1896 the Federal Enabling
Act was passed, which was consummated in
1900 when the Australian Colonies were
united and the Federal Commonwealth of
Australia was born, with Sir Edmund Barton
as its first Prime Minister. During the years
preceding 1900, two prominent Victorians,
Sir George Turner and Alfred Deakin, played
an influential part in the struggle for Federa-
tion. Sir George Turner was then Premier
of Victoria and, incidentally. Sir Alexander
Peacock was Chief Secretary. He was the
“Father” of the Wages Board System, which
did so much to benefit both employee and
employer in this State. Alfred Deakin went
into politics at the age of twenty-three, was
member for Ballarat, and was admittedly one
of the most brilliant men of his day, and was
aptly named “the silver-tongued Demos-
thenes.” It is on record that on one occa-
sion, during a debate in the Legislative As-
sembly, instead of questioning the accuracy
of his opponent’s statements in the usual
orthodox manner, Deakin referred to it as a
“necklace of negatives.” In those days
(often referred to as the “Gay Nineties”),
the Block in Collins Street, from Swanston
to Elizabeth Streets, at midday was the
promenade for well-known members of
Society, They were to be seen strolling
backwards and forwards, chatting with their
friends and discussing the political and social
problems of the moment. The feminine ele-
ment, with their latest creations and gay
parasols, made a colorful picture.
Melbourne citizens had a night-out on May
17th, 1900, The Boer War was then current,
and news had been received that Mafeking
had been relieved. Crowds thronged the city
streets. Men and youths marched in column,
singing “Rule, Britannia,” The Chinese, in
Little Bourke Street, celebrated the occasion
by letting off thousands of crackers; and
some boisterous spirits lifted trams in Bourke
Street off the rails and deposited them on the
footpath, and many a tired citizen had to
wend his way home on foot in the early hours
of the following morning. Such was the
background when the Company started busi-
ness in Melbourne,


FIRST LOCATION
Our first location was in Little Bourke
Street, near the Princess Theatre. Owing to
some hitch in the arrangements, we did not
start manufacturing in Little Bourke Street,
but moved into the upper basement in the
Rialto, between Collins Street and Flinders
Lane. The offices of the Melbourne and
Metropolitan Board of W’orks were then on
the floors above. We had partly started
operations when, one morning, Mr. P.
McCaughan (popularly known as “Paddy
McCaughan”), our landlord, and a well-
known identity in the city, burst through the
door and, in a loud voice, shouted, “What
the h.—.—■ is all this b.—■—• row about? The
men above cannot get through their work
with all this d—■ — infernal noise going on.”
Paddy was what our American friends would
call a “real tough guy.” His emphasis on
the popular Australian adjective was superb.
However, as the working out of the mathe-
matical problems of the Board of Works was
involved, we had to make a move down to
the lower basement. At that time we be-
came laborers as well as craftsmen. It might
be a job of concreting, unpacking machinery
or sweeping floors, but we were not fussy.
On more than one occasion we worked all
through the night. The hired engineering
staff were erecting shafting, etc., and we were
helping to place the machinery into position.
We worked by the light of huge flares. The
atmosphere was very oppressive, and the
men were taking their liquid nourishment out
of buckets with just a suspicion of froth on
the surface.
OUR FIRST ORDER
We were open for business on January Ist,
1896; and, after an inkpot, some pens and
pencils and a quire of blotting paper and
some account books had been purchased from
Cole’s Book Arcade, the office, with its part-
time staff of one, was ready for business.
We completed our first order in January,
after a spot of trouble in producing the
stereo plate. It was an order for 1000 No.
1 books, printed in blue ink, for a Drapery
Establishment trading as “Annotate,” a few
doors from Young & Jackson’s, in Swanston
Street; and the whole Factory staff (of two)
were greatly bucked up on completing the
first order printed in Australia by the Com-
pany and, when the day’s work was over,
had a round of drinks on the way home to
celebrate the occasion.
THE EARLY PRODUCTS
When the business was first established
the Paragon product was the sales-check
book, designed primarily for the control of
retail sales. There were two main types.—
side opening folded and interleaved.
PRAGON CHECK BOOKS OF 50YEAR AGD
GOLDEN
1896 |946


The folded book.—known then and now as
the Paragon book—-was arranged so that the
fixed carbon sheet could be placed between
the fold without handling and was used
mostly by the department stores and similar
businesses. The folded sheet comprising the
original bill or docket and the duplicate
attached was removed from the book on
completion of the entry. There were 50 bills
and duplicates to each book, which were
numbered 1-50.
The interleaved book was arranged so that
the bill could be removed whilst the duplicate
remained fixed, the carbon paper being in-
serted as a loose sheet, or folded over from
a fixed position in the back cover. This
style of book was used mostly by the retail
grocery and similar businesses.
Triplicate books were also made at this'
early date.
The well-known Paragon sales-book cover
with the Carter clip is still in wide use,
though modified to suit the. more modern
styles of sales book.
OTHER ACTIVITIES
Our output was quite good, in spite of
primitive conditions. Of course, we were
then manufacturing lor the whole of Aus-
tralasia. The Company did not, however,
confine its operations solely to counter check
books. It indented silverware, cutlery,
etc., also bicycles. This phase of the Com-
pany’s business, however, was only of short
duration. It was during our occupation of
the Rialto site that a vessel with a shipment
of paper for the Company was wrecked at
London Bridge, near Sorrento. Tons of
paper was thrown up and down the shore
for a considerable distance. Of course, this
loss slowed down production for a consider-
able period; in fact, work was practically
suspended until another shipment arrived.
COMPANY FORMED
Negotiations to form a local Company in
Australia were begun, and on 26th February,
1897, the first Check Book Company in Aus-
tralia was incorporated under the title of
“Lamson Paragon Supply Company of Aus-
tralasia Proprietary Limited,” with a nominal
capital of £75,000 in £1 shares, the London
Company retaining a small interest in the
new Company. The first Directors were F.
R. Godfrey, Chairman, and C. Murray
Puckle and E. Neale Wigg.
The paid-up capital was £28,930 in 2293
preference and 600 ordinary shares of £lO.
The first Manager and Secretary was Mr.
J. A. Hall, with Mr. John Clough as Fore-
man and Mr. D. G. Webb as Deputy.
Messrs. John Brightman and F. Broad were
the Representatives. All these men were
selected and sent out from England by the
parent house. Mr. R. T. Picking was the
Country Representative. Our Suburban Re-
presentative worked his round with the aid
of a horse and gig.
One of our early machinists was an old-
timer who had a selection somewhere in the
Dandenong Ranges. He lived in the city
during the week and went to his selection for
the week-end. He had to rise before the sun
on Monday morning and walk a considerable
distance to the nearest railway station, and
in wet weather he invariably brought a con-
siderable portion of his selection down with
him. He had a habit of caressing his face
with his hands, and his face was a reflex of,
the job he was working on. If his machine
was running on black ink, his face was
black: if bronze blue, his face was blue, but
if he was on a multi-colored machine he was
like a futurist painting.
Ms. R. T, PICKING


LAMSON PARAGON LIMITED GOLDEN JUBILEE
1896 1946
■I
Celebration
welcome
PARAGONS
VERSART
ANN
to
m
4
*
%
j
i
■f
r%
(V
A
\
MELBOURNE FACTORY JUBILEE FUNCTION
RICHMOND TOWN HALL
On Monday 23rd December, 1946, simultaneous functions were held in Melbourne, Sydney, Brisbane,
Adelaide and Perth to celebrate the Golden Jubilee of the Company in Australia.




RAPID EXPANSION
Mr. Hall did not remain with the Com-
pany in Australia very long, but resigned and
returned to England. He was succeeded by
the late Mr. Robert Rankine, who had been
connected with the Castle Check Book Com-
pany, which Company our London house had
taken over. Some of the Castle Check Book
Company’s plant was sent out to Australia
and was added to our plant. The growth of
the business made a change to larger pre-
mises necessary, and in 1899 we transferred
plant and office from the Rialto to a disused
boot factory in Shelley Street. We manu-
factured there for some 2i years and, busi-
ness still growing apace, a further move was
necessary, and we transferred our plant to
a huge, iron-roofed building in Bridge Road,
Richmond, which had previously been used
as a Skating Rink. It was a refrigerating
chamber in winter, and in summer the heat
was terrific. We used to wear our hats be-
cause of the refraction of heat from the roof.
The temperature frequently registered above
90 deg., when the machine rollers would be-
come soft and distorted and work was im-
SHELLEY STREET FACTORY, 1899
possible. Even a candle would refuse to
stand upright.
In 1902, Mr. Rankine left the Company’s
services, and was succeeded by the late Mr.
J. Brightman, who, at that time, was senior
representative. Mr. Rankine subsequently
took part in World War L, carried the rank
of Major, and achieved distinction at the
Battle of Lone Pine. Mr. A. D. Epstein
(now Sydney manager) was engaged as a
junior clerk.
In spite of adverse conditions, good work
INTERIOR BRING ROAD, FACTORY, 1902
GOLDEN JUBILEE


was done at the old Skating Rink, and the
growth of the business made a further move
necessary. Land was purchased at the corner
of Swan Street and Punt Road, Richmond,
on which a two-storied brick building was
erected, and was completed in 1905. A paper
store was erected on land adjoining the Mel-
bourne factory. E. S. Wigg & Son, Perth,
were appointed Western Australian agents.
Mr. E. Neale Wigg resigned in 1904 from
the Board of Directors, and Mr. Colin
Templeton was chosen to fill the vacant seat
on the Board.
In 1906, Mr. F. R. Godfrey died, and Mr.
Murray Puckle was elected to fill his place
as Chairman of the Board of Directors.
TRANSPORT DIFFICULTIES
Under Mr. Brightman's management, the
business grew apace, and further plant was
required. Up to this period, all the Check
Book machines used for printing, numbering,
perforating, folding and delivery in one
operation were supplied by the London
house: but, the rights lor manufacturing
these machines having been acquired by the
Australian Company, presses were success-
fully made in Australia, and the plant was
considerably enlarged by the addition of some
ten locally-made presses. Even with this en-
Mr. COLIN TEMPLETON
hanced plant, the problem was to complete
and make delivery of orders as required, and
the shortage of girl labor was acute. Trans-
port difficulties also militated against our
success, and deliveries to the back-blocks
were made by various methods. In the far
inland, camel trains were used, and in the
far North-West some deliveries were made
by lugger, and in the timber country, by bul-
PARAGON'S HOME FOR 32 YEARS (1905-1937) SWAN STREET, RICHMOND


lock waggon. A typical case was of a cus-
tomer who complained bitterly of delay in
delivery. We had forwarded by waggon,
and held the carter’s receipt, but the driver
did not arrive at his destination and the
order was reprinted and duly delivered lour
weeks later. Two months afterwards, the
original driver turned up and tendered de-
livery. He had taken a job of harvesting
en route, and parked his waggon in farm
sheds, finished his harvesting and was paid
his £5, and went leisurely on with his job
of cartage. He was indignant when taken to
task for delayed delivery. “What was he
to do? Turn down the offer of £5 for a few
d packages.”
LAMSON PARAGON LIMITED
In 1910, the Company was reconstructed
and was registered in July of that year under
the title of “Lamson Paragon Limited.”
When the new Company was formed the
paid capital was £28,930, divided into 2293
preference and 600 ordinary shares, all of £lO
each. In part payment for the business and
goodwill, the original Company received 350
preference shares and the whole of the 600
ordinaries, a total of £9500. This amount
figured in the new Company’s accounts as
goodwill, but was reduced to £7446 by de-
ducting certain reserves transferred from the
old Company, Shortly after registration, a
re-arrangement of capital was made, all the
shares being divided into £1 shares, with the
same rights as to dividend. The Imperial
Sales Recorder rights were bought and de-
veloped in this year,
ORIGIN OF NAME
It has often been asked what was the
origin of the title “Lamson Paragon.” The
word “Paragon” is self-explanatory. Mr.
Lamson was the inventor of the first cash
and change-carrying device used in Retail
Shops. Lamson was a draper at Lowell,
Massachusetts, and was looking for means to
save the time taken up by assistants in walk-
ing from the Sales Counter to the Cash Desk
and obtaining change, etc. His original con-
traption might have served for a “Heath
Robinson” model.—two hollowed-out trunks
of trees, slanting in opposite directions along
his Dry Goods Store, one sloping towards the
central change clerk’s desk and the other
back from him to the assistants at the
counter. It developed into later inventions
with the switches, rails, wires and pneumatic
tubes of today. From this humble beginning,
Lamson Store Service Company was inaugu-
rated, and now one big store in New York
has no less than 870 tube stations on its sell-
ing floors. As this Company and the sub-
sequent Check Book Company were, to some
extent, co-related, the. word “Lamson” was
incorporated in the titles of both Companies.
Mr. F. G. Wilson joined the Board of
Directors in 1910 as representing the London
shareholders. The Chairman of the Board of
Directors (Mr. F. R. Godfrey) died in this
period, and Mr. Murray Puckle was elected
Chairman. In 1911 Mr. John Brightman re-
signed from the Company’s service, and Mr.
Andrew Wilson (long associated with Sands
6 McDougall) was appointed Manager and
Secretary.
SYDNEY FACTORT, 1912
GOLDEN JUBILEE
\\ \ , ™* A ''j *
1896 1945


Mr. A. D. EPSTENIN
FIRST ROTARY PRESS
In that year, the first Rotary Press was
ordered from America through our parent
House in London, and a new era was begun.
The output of the new type of machine was
some ten times greater than that of the
original presses, and styles of books impos-
sible to manufacture under the old method
were successfully made and marketed.
SYDNEY BRANCH OPENED
Notwithstanding the additions to plant,
the demand for Paragon products grew too
rapidly for the source of supply and, after
careful consideration, it was decided to instal
a Branch Factory in Sydney, to take care of
New South Wales and Queensland orders.
This decision was influenced by the trans-
port difficulties and the natural prejudice in
all States in favor of local manufacture. A
site was secured in Surry Hills, Sydney, and
a small factory erected there. Mr. A. D.
Epstein (who had joined the Company’s ser-
vice in 1902 as a boy) was placed in charge
.—•a responsible position for so young a man
. but, though young in years, his knowledge,
judgment, loyalty and capacity for work
justified his appointment, and time proved
the wisdom of the choice. Plant was sent
from the Melbourne Factory, and Mr. J.
McDonnell, the Melbourne Deputy Foreman,
was sent up to act as Foreman of the new
Sydney Branch. The Sydney Factory was
opened in 1912, and all New South Wales,
Queensland and the Northern Territory
orders were handled from that centre,
with the exception of those from the Riverina
area, south of the Murrumbidgee which, for
purposes “of the act,’’ was held to be Vic-
torian territory. After the inevitable infantile
complaints, the Sydney Factory proved itself
a paying proposition, and in time challenged
the parent’s supremacy in output and profit—-
but we are running ahead of our narrative.
PARAGON IN NEW ZEALAND
In 1912, negotiations were entered into
with C. M. Banks, of' New Zealand, for the
New Zealand rights for Paragon Check
Books and Plic Books and, in that year, the
rights, together with the necessary plant to
manufacture, were sold to C. M. Banks
Limited, Printers and Manufacturing Station-
ers, of Wellington, New Zealand. E. Jack-
son, an experienced Machinist, was selected
from our staff and engaged by Mr. Banks to
act as Foreman, and Lamson Paragon {New
Zealand) was launched. Notwithstanding
the loss of New South Wales, Queensland
and New Zealand territories, the Melbourne
Factory maintained its output at a satisfac-
tory figure and, in a very short space of
time, even improved the turnover shown in
Mr. H. G. EDWABD


Mr. J. McDONNELL.
trading in the previously much larger terri-
tory.
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN AGENT
Mr. H. G. Edward, Proprietor o! J. W.
Barnard Limited, of Hay Street, Perth, was
appointed West Australian Agent for Lamson
Paragon Limited in this year,
A city office was established in Collins
Street, Melbourne, to develop the “Business
Systems” section of our operations, Mr. A.
J. Cottee in charge. A cabinet factory was
built adjoining the Swan Street factory, and
the necessary wood-working plant installed
for making office furniture.
CAPITAL INCREASED
In 1914 the capital was increased by the
issue of 7071 £1 shares, which brought the
paid-up capital to £37,200.
Several valuable shipments of paper were
sunk at sea by enemy action during the War
years; and, for a considerable period suc-
ceeding, the scarcity of the necessary sup-
plies, particularly paper, caused much diffi-
culty in keeping customers supplied with de-
liveries ex contracts. The commonest news-
print cost us lOd. per pound and was almost
unprocurable, even at that price, and the
actual cost of paper per book was in some
instances double the contract price of the
book itself, and when the inevitable fall in
paper costs came we had to deal drastically
with stock.
During 1916, Mr. Murray Puckle died,
and Mr. Neville Wight was chosen to fill
the vacant seat and Mr. Colin Templeton
was elected Chairman of the Board of
Directors.
A decision in 1916 on an important law
case proved the validity of one of our patent
rights, and judgment and costs were given in
our favor,
A gas strike occurred in 1917, and a great
many manufacturing concerns were compelled
to close down. We were able to carry on
by attaching a carburettor to our big gas
engine, which ran the whole of our plant.
The strike lasted six weeks, but we were able
to keep faith with our customers.
TICKET PLANT PURCHASED
In 1918, the business of W. H. Osborne,
Ticket Printer, was purchased.—plant and
contracts.—and a Ticket Printing Department
was inaugurated,
Mr. P. N. Duncan was appointed our
agent for South Australia.
Mr. G. SHIELDS
f


Mr. F. WEBBER
At the close of the War, early in 1919,
Mr. Andrew Wilson, the General Manager,
went to England, Europe and America to in-
vestigate the latest manufacturing methods
and purchase new plant. The first 60 cm,
V.K. Press was ordered; but, owing to post-
war conditions prevailing, the machine was
not delivered until 1922. This press was the
first of the new type, and contained many
new features. A co-operative agreement was
negotiated with the London Company in re-
gard to patents, information, plant and sup-
plies.
“ECLIPSE” COMPANY ACQUIRED
In 1920, the Company consolidated its
position in Sydney by the purchase of the
Eclipse Check Book Company of New South
Wales, which was an old competitor.
In 1920, Mr. I. M. Evans, Managing
Director of the Lamson Paragon Supply Com-
pany Limited, London, was appointed Lon-
don Director of Lamson Paragon Limited,
Australia.
PERTH BRANCH OPENED
The business was developing in Western
Australia, and a Branch was opened in Perth
by the purchase of the Printing Section of
the business of J. W. Barnard Limited.
Check Book plant was sent over from Mel-
bourne, and Mr. John Clough visited Perth
to supervise its installation, with Mr. F.
Webber to operate same. The Branch was
placed under the management of Mr. H. G.
Edward.
MORE SHARES ISSUED
These extensions, together with increased
activity in Victoria, made it necessary to
provide additional funds, and during January,
1920, an issue was made at par, and later in
the year a further issue was made at a pre-
mium of 2/6 per share, bringing the paid
capital to £75,000.
During 1921, a general strike of Printers
occurred in Victoria, and our employees, very
unwillingly, joined in. For some three
months we kept customers supplied by co-
opting clerical and selling staffs and appren-
tices for factory work, and many humorous
incidents naturally occurred.
In this year, Mr. F. G. Wilson went to
England and Mr. P. J. W. Danby was
chosen to fill the vacant position on the Board
of Directors and Mr. Andrew Wilson was
made Managing Director.
During this year, it was proposed by Mr.
H. G. Edward that the Wholesale Stationery
business of J. W. Barnard Limited should be
merged with that of the Company and, in
November, 1921, the subsidiary Company of
Lamson Paragon (W.A.) Limited was
formed, Mr. H. G. Edward being appointed
Managing Director. In December, 1921, the
Cremorne Theatre in Murray Street, formerly
occupied by Lamson Paragon Limited under
lease, was purchased by the new W.A. Com-
pany. This old, historic theatre, showing in
bold relief on the front elevation of the
building the year “1896,” which, strangely
enough, coincides with the date of the start of
the Company’s operations in Australia, was,
together with its surrounding gardens, once
the resort of the fashionable circle of Perth,
amongst whom was the Governor, Sir
William Robinson, whose famous song, “If
to remember me would give thee pain, Re-
member me no more,” had some application
here, as portion of the historic building was
converted by us into a composing room, and
the elaborate furnishings of the dress circle,
with its red plush and gold, looked somewhat
bizarre surrounding the type cases and stereo
pot. The stage itself, however, made quite
a good dining-room for the employees. As
consideration for the sale of the Western


Mr. R. B. CORNISH
Australian business to the new Company,
Lamson Paragon Limited received 13,334 £1
shares, which gave it the controlling interest.
The profit on the sale, £1334, was used to
write off the balance of the goodwill of the
parent Company, which had been reduced to
that figure.
In this year (1921) Mr. R. B. Cornish
(now Melbourne Manager and the Com-
pany’s Secretary) joined the Company’s
employ as junior office clerk.
FURTHER EXTENSIONS
The business in Melbourne at that time
was increasing to such an extent that addi-
tions to the Richmond Factory became neces-
sary. The increase in business may be
gauged from the statement of the General
Manager that in 1914 the whole of the Check
Book business in Australia could be handled
in the Melbourne Factory, but in 1923 it was
found impossible to cope with the Victorian
orders at these premises. The following year
saw the completion of the extensions at Rich-
mond and the concentration of the Sydney
business at the Surry Hills Factory. Miss E.
Corfe, Forewoman in our Melbourne Fac-
tory, retired this year. She joined the Com-
OUTSIDE MELBOURNE FACTORY, 1922
f


Mr. G. S. UPSTILL
pany’s service in 1902 as a girl from school,
and became an ideal forewoman. Strict, just
and capable, she was loved by all the girls
under her control. Miss M. Neill became
Forewoman in place of Miss Corfe.
In 1923, the first Victory Kidder Rotary
Press was received from London. Its instal-
lation was the beginning of a new era. The
speed at which the machine ran and the
method of delivery caused it to be termed
“The Big Noise,” and girls had to work in
relays for taking-off. Subsequently a new
method of delivery was obtained from London
and peace was restored. This press embodied
many new features, as well as possessing such
great speed that special means of dealing
with the static conditions generated were
found necessary; ultimately the difficulty was
overcome.
With the advent of the V.K. Rotary
Presses several improved features were avail-
able. The duo-numbering system was one
facility and proved to be most valuable. This
provided for the consecutive book number as
well as the page number to appear on all
copies, and it offered better and easier con-
trol over the book itself than had been pos-
sible previously.
Another feature developed on the rotary
press was the end opening folded book. This
style had been made previously, but discon-
tinued and the new end opening book was
received well because of the advantages
offered both in copy layout and operation.
A special attachment to the rotary press
provided for the “quick trip” book and thus
it became possible by using two-sided carbon
and one sheet of transparent paper to write
three copies at the same speed as two and
PARGON PICNIC PARTY, SYDNEY, 1925


have all three still attached when extracted
from the book. This idea ultimately led to
the “despatch control” triplicate sales check
book, which still stands unchallenged as the
finest design known to the sales check book
industry.
It was soon evident that, as good quality
printing was possible by rotary processes,
there was a much wider field for the useful-
ness of automatically produced carbon copy
books than for merely retail sales purposes.
Wholesale and manufacturing trades found
considerable advantage from, this develop-
ment. Books were produced in triplicate and
quadruplicate as well as duplicate, and were
often a combination of the folded and inter-
leaved types. With the ability to handle
automatically perforating, numbering, punch-
ing and glueing problems many highly com-
plicated books and forms were designed and
successfully made. There was also the ten-
dency to. demand better qualities of paper
and the whole status of the automatic carbon
copy-book industry was further raised.
In 1924, further extension to the Sydney
Factory was found necessary and was com-
pleted.
A Staff Superannuation Fund was in-
augurated in this year.
In 1925, the Secretary of the Company,
Mr. H. H. Haynes, resigned, and Mr, G. S.
Upstill, LL.B., of Robertson & Mullens Ltd.,
was engaged as Secretary,
FIRST INTERSTATE SALES CONFERENCE, MELBOURNE,1935
jjH|' lllRgl^
i ”'" “


A FEW GLIMPSES OF THE MELBOURNE FACTORY


Mr. W. B. RUSSELL
McCASKEY SYSTEMS PURCHASED
In this year, the business of McCaskey
Systems Proprietary Limited was purchased,
and this competitor was eliminated. The
McCaskey plant (which was of American
origin) was successfully installed in our fac-
tory, and their Foreman, Mr. R. L, Black-
mu r, was engaged as a special machinist.
The policy of the Directors of the Com-
pany was to keep in close touch with our
London House and American associates, and
the Managing Director (Mr. Andrew Wil-
son) and the Foreman (Mr. John Clough)
visited America, England and the Continent.
A machine with some novel features was in-
vented in California, and an arrangement
was made to inspect this machine. An ap-
pointment was made to meet Mr. Nixon,
General Manager of Lamson Paragon Supply
Company Limited, London, in San Francisco
on a specified date, and the English delegate
arrived at the appointed hotel. Half-an-hour
afterwards, the Australian delegates arrived
surely a record in appointments, as each
party had some 7000 miles to travel. A tour
of inspection was made to nearly all the asso-
ciated houses in America, and much informa-
lion was obtained. In England, a full month
was spent in the Canning Town factory, and
much useful data was obtained and further
plant ordered and agreements confirmed.
In 1928, Mr. Morgan Brock, Manufac-
turers’ Agent, was associated with Mr. W. F.
McConnell, our Adelaide Agent.
CAPITAL INCREASED
The nominal capital of the Company was
increased from 75,000 to 150,000 shares of
£1 each, and the paid-up capital to £IOO,OOO
by the issue of 25,000 shares. In this year,
a parcel of shares was sold at 44/6 each..
At this period, a severe depression occurred
throughout the whole world, and Australia was
no exception to this condition. The Directors
decided that no dividend should be paid in
1930'—ior the only time in this Company’s
history—and shares which realized 44/6 in
1929 were sold for 11/6 in 1931.
In" the year 1932, Mr. W. F. McConnell
resigned the position of Agent for South Aus-
tralia, and Mr. Morgan Brock, of Adelaide,
was appointed to succeed him in this position.
QUEENSLAND BRANCH
Circumstances made it advisable to manu-
facture our products in Queensland, and in
1927 a property was bought in Fortitude
Valley, Brisbane, and the building thereon
altered to suit our requirements: Mr.
Keyes, Accountant of our Sydney Branch,
was sent up to take charge, the necessary
plant being supplied mainly from the Sydney
and Melbourne factories.
In pursuance of the Directors’ policy, Mr,
G. S Upstil! went to England and America
and represented this Company at an Interna-
tional Conference of the Lam son Paragon
Supply Company Limited in London. He
obtained much valuable information in Eng-
land, America and the Continent, and new
ideas and methods were put into operation
on his return.
Mr. W. B. Russell was engaged in Mel-
GOLDEN JUBILEE


Mr. A. Tankard
Mr. J. Torrens
bourne in 1933 as a Business Systems expert,
and served in Victoria and Queensland, and
is now in active work in connection with our
Sydney factory.
In 1934, Mr. John Clough, our Works
Manager, retired after a period of practically
forty years’ service with the Company.
Mr. Clough possessed considerable
mechanical knowledge, and his experience in
connection with Check Book machinery, his
ability to handle men, and his capacity for
work, made him a very valuable servant of
the Company, particularly in the early period,
and he left his mark on the Paragon organi-
zation. Mr. Joseph Sullivan, an experienced
Pressman of some 37 years’ standing, was
made Works Manager.
In this year, Mr. Upstill was made Genera]
Manager.
In spite of the additions to the Perth fac-
tory, the necessity for further accommoda-
tion was so pronounced that the Board de-
cided to purchase a large property in Pier
Mr. G. B. Carter
Mr. W. H. Hamilton
Street, Perth, on the strong recommendation
of the Perth Managing Director, Mr. H. G.
Edward. Alterations and additions were
made, and in December, 1935, the plant and
stock were removed from the Murray Street
premises to the Pier Street site, and a
modern, up-to-date factory is now operating
from that centre.
In this year, Mr. John G. Ulrik was en-
gaged to take charge of the Egry agency.
Mr. Ulrik was associated with our London
House, and had been in Copenhagen and
America. His selling ability, his knowledge
of the Continuous Stationery proposition and
his mechanical flair qualified him for this
position.
In this year also, Mr. Morgan Brock, of
Adelaide, was appointed Manager of the
Brisbane factory in place of Mr. Jordan
Robinson, who retired, and Mr. A. Joy, one
of our Melbourne representatives, was sent
over to take charge of the Adelaide business.
In 1936, Mr. C. T. Watkins, of Perth, was
appointed a Director of Lamson Paragon
(W.A.) Limited.
Mr. A, A. Tankard, Chief Engineer in our
Sydney factory, was engaged.
In 1937, 25,000 shares were issued at a
premium of 5/-, providing £31,250. These
shares were offered to the shareholders in the
proportion of one to four.
The Swan Street factory having proved
too small for the extension necessary to
handle the increased business, a site was
secured on The Boulevard, close to the
Mr. P. F. Kelly


Hawthorn Bridge, and an up-to-date factory
erected, and in December, 1937, we moved
into these new quarters. All the manufactur-
ing processes were undertaken on one floor,
and a systematic and continuous flow of our
products was secured. A modern, up-to-date
dining-hall, cafeteria, etc., were installed.
In 1937, Mr. Neville Wight was elected
Chairman of the Board of Directors. In this
year also, Mr. J. G. Ulrik was appointed
Sales Manager in Melbourne, and Mr.
Charles H. Barnett was made Sales Manager
in Sydney. Mr. J. Torrens joined the Engi-
neering Department, and later became Chief
Engineer in Melbourne. Mr. H. G. Edward,
of our Perth associated house, went to Eng-
land to represent the Company at an Inter-
national Conference. Mr. Edward brought
back with him new ideas and methods of
manufacture, and obtained valuable know-
ledge to the benefit of the Australian Com-
panies, a full report of investigations made -in
America, Great Britain, Scandinavia, Holland,
Germany and Austria being furnished in
comprehensive form on his return.
In 1937, an agreement was entered into
with C. B. Smith, of Auckland, New Zealand,
for the manufacturing and vending of Continu-
ous Stationery and equipment in New Zea-
land, and the necessary plant was ultimately
supplied. This right was subsequently trans-
ferred to Messrs. Coulls, Somerville & Wilkie
Limited, Auckland and Dunedin, who are
now developing the Continuous Stationery
proposition under the name, “Interfold
Limited.”
In 1938, Mr. Webb and Mr. Sullivan both
retired. Mr. Webb had a long term of
honorable service with the Company over a
period of 43 years, and Mr. Sullivan served
for 41 years, for the last four years as Works
Manager.
Mr. W. Hamilton was appointed Factory
Manager in Melbourne, and Mr. P. Kelly
succeeded Mr. Webb.
In 1939, the paid-up capital was increased
to £150,000 by the issue of 25,000 shares at
a premium of 5/- per share.
In this year we bought the Check Book
SALES MELBOURNE, 1936
GOLDEN JUBILEE
fflSSSSSSSSSSSfimfifififaSSW!^^


Mr. A. S. JOY
Department of John Sands, of Sydney, and
thus eliminated an old competitor.
The War with Germany caused paper
supplies to be most difficult to procure.
Anticipating this difficulty, large stocks were
for some time being accumulated in all fac-
tories; but, notwithstanding this provision, the
shortage became acute, and the Australian
Mr. MORGAN BROCK
Mills, including the Australian Paper Manu-
facturers Limited, Associated Paper & Pulp
Co. Ltd. and Australian Newsprint Pty. Ltd.,
gave us very reliable co-operation.
In 1939, the property adjoining the Bris-
bane factory was purchased, and a necessary
and extensive addition was made to the build-
ing there.
EXECUTIVE CONFERENCE, MELBOURNE, 1939


Mr. J.G. ULRIK
In 1940 the first of the fully automatic
carton machines was installed in Brisbane
factory.
In this year, Mr. R. B. Cornish was ap-
pointed Secretary,
Mr ISIDOR ROBINSON
OBITUARY—MR. C TEMPLETON
In the year 1940, Mr. Colin Templeton
died. He had been a Director of this Com-
pany for 35 years and Chairman for twenty-
five. His keen, practical interest in the Com-
pany’s progress, and his sound judgment, con-
tributed very considerably to the success of
Lamson Paragon in Australia. Mr. Temple-
ton was known and loved by all Lamson
Paragon employees at Head Office and
Branches. He knew, and called by their
Christian names, a great number of the men,
and his familiar greeting, “Well, how is your
wife?” was not often addressed to a
bachelor.
Mr. Lancelot E. Lloyd was chosen to fill
the vacant seat on the Board, and Mr.
Neville Wight was elected Chairman.
The Swan Street property was sold in this
year. Mr. J. Gilbertson was appointed Ac-
countant to the Sydney Factory in this year
and was later made Assistant Manager.
Quite a fair proportion of our employees
offered, and many were called up, for War
Service from every one of our factories; and,
as a consequence, manpower shortage hamp-
ered our operations very considerably.
Mr. J. GILBERTSON
GOLDEN JUBILEE


Mr. CHAS. F. JAMES
Mr. J. L. EDWARD
ADELAIDE FACTORY OPENED
It was deemed desirable to open up a fac-
tory in Adelaide, and, a suitable building in
Wyatt Street being secured, plant and stock
from Melbourne and Sydney were sent over;
Mr. A, S. Joy, our Adelaide representative,
was appointed to take charge of this new
venture.
In 1943, Mr. Neville Wight died. He had
been associated with the Company for 27
years, and served as Chairman for two years.
Mr. G. D. Young, of John Sanderson &
Company, joined the Board of Directors, and
Mr. Andrew Wilson was elected Chairman.
In 1944, Mr. A. Joy was recalled from
Adelaide to take up the responsible work of
special “Systems” selling in Victoria, and
Mr. J. G. lilrik was appointed Manager of
the Adelaide Factory. In this year, Mr.
Irvine was sent over to Adelaide as his
assistant.
In 1945, a large factory site was secured
at Edwardstown, South Australia, as the
Adelaide premises were too small for the
extension necessary to cope with the in-
creased trade. Building operations will be
commenced as soon as possible.
In this year, the Company suffered a very
severe loss in the passing away of Mr.
Morgan Brock, of Brisbane. His fine per-
sonality, his tremendous capacity for work,
Mr. C, H. BARNETT
Mr. T. WILDING


and his absolute faith in the future of the
Queensland proposition, together with his long
experience in marketing and his ability to
handle men, all combined to make him an
ideal Manager. He took over the Brisbane
Management when it was a liability, and im-
mediately transformed it into a pronounced
success. Mr. Isidor Robinson was appointed
Brisbane Manager.
Additions were made to the Melbourne
factory in this year to allow of extension in
the Carbon Paper Department. ■
Mr. Chris Jones was appointed Sales
Manager in Melbourne.
MR. UPSTILL GOES ABROAD
In September of this year, our General
Manager, Mr. G. S, Upstill, left Australia on
a visit to our associated houses in England,
the Continent and America, to investigate
new methods of manufacturing, purchase
machinery, and, generally, obtain information.
AUTHORISED CAPITAL INCREASED
In. 1945, the authorised capital of Larnson
Paragon Limited was increased to £500,000.
An issue of 12,500 Victory Bonus Shares of
£1 each was made, in the proportion of one
bonus share for every 12 shares held on 18th
December, 1945, and a new issue of 25,000
shares of £1 each, at a premium of 5/- per
share, in the proportion of one new issue
share for every six shares held on 18th
December, 1945. On the completion of
these issues, the paid-up capital of the Com-
pany will be £187,500, the Victory Bonus
issue being portion of the amount standing
in the Company’s books to the credit of
Premium on Shares Reserve.
On Christmas Eve of this year, the
Company sustained another severe loss in
the death of Mr. J. G. Ulrik, our Adelaide
Manager. Mr. Ulrik came out from London
in 1935 to take charge of our Egry agency.
He was subsequently appointed Sales
Manager at the Melbourne House, and, in
1944 , was appointed Manager of the Adelaide
Factory. Apart from his knowledge of sys-
tems and his selling ability, he had very con-
siderable mechanical knowledge and organis-
ing power. He will be much missed in the
Paragon organisation, and by a large circle
of business and personal friends.
Mr. C. James, Assistant Sales Manager,
takes Mr. Ulrik’s place as Manager in
Adelaide.
NEW PRODUCTS
For some years the idea of making carbon
copy forms in continuous lengths had been
making headway in England and America,
and business forms in continuous rolls be-
came a further product. It will be seen later
how this continuous idea grew and became
an even greater conception than the sales
book.
GOLDEN JUBILEE
(946 '"


The typewriter manufacturers produced
special billing typewriters adapted to use
continuous stationery, provision being made
for the continuous strips to be drawn through
carbon sheets which were always in position.
There were also some early applications of
the roll form idea for hand-written forms—
the Autographic Register.
It was not long before the flat pack super-
seded the roll form. Interfold forms are con-
tinuous lengths of forms with a cross per-
foration between each form. These lengths,
in varying numbers, are brought together
folded in zigzag fashion on the perforations
and thus form packs.
Fanfold was another new form of continu-
ous stationery, pioneered in America by the
Gilman Fanfold Corpn. These forms are
carbon copies in continuous lengths, the en-
tire set being one integral, wide web, of
paper, perforated between the forms of a set
and folded longitudinally, then folded again
zigzag style into a flat pack.
We installed our first fanfold press in the
Sydney factory in 1936. We were thus
equipped to produce all kinds of continuous
stationery.
Since that time important developments in
equipment for production of continuous sta-
tionery have been made to keep pace with
the increasing demand and improve the
quality and features of the forms.
In 1934 the Australian and New Zealand
rights for the Parafold continuous stationery
typewriter attachments were secured. Up
till this time there were comparatively few
continuous stationery ' installations in the
Commonwealth, and even they were nearly
all roll form users. This attachment and its
successors—Parabar and Paratype—made it
possible to convert any standard typewriter
to continuous flat-pack stationery work. Since
we introduced attachments there has been a
steady increase in continuous stationery ideas
and businesses, large arid small, have enjoyed
the benefits. Many smaller concerns especi-
ally have been helped where the installation
of more expensive equipment may not have
been practicable.
Throughout the long period of pioneering
of Continuous Stationery we have enjoyed
the co-operation of all the typewriter and
billing machine houses.
With the considerable increase in special
rotary presses installed for carbon copy
books and forms the Auto. Plic range was
announced. These standardized books were
made in duplicate and triplicate in sizes and
styles suitable for many purposes, in addition
to sales checking, and were available with
system features such as special numbering,
etc.
Then in 1937 the “Speediset” came to
Australia. This revolutionary style of carbon
PARAGON PICNIC, MELBOURNE, 1909


PICNIC GROUP, MELBOURNE, 1908
copy form had been introduced in America
some years earlier and, in spite of the higher
costs of production, made spectacular pro-
gress because it gave speed and ultimate
economy for non-continuous writing just as
continuous , stationery gave for continuous
form writing.
It is a set of forms ready for use with one-
time carbon already inserted. Its strongest
appeal is its complete answer to delayed
action problems. Easy to use by either hand
or typewriter, its flexibility often dictates its
installation before all other kinds of forms.
As it is subject to the extra features of peg-
board and other punching, perforation and
numbering it is natural that new applications
MELBOURNE EMPLOYEES, 1939
■If Ygy S I'.K


are still being discovered. This product is
now in wide use in England and the Con-
tinent, and this Company, too, is equipped
for automatic production.
Restaurant and hotel checking books and
forms have developed over the years. Whilst
the well-designed counterfoil 100-leaf pad has
retained its popularity, other forms of con-
trol have been designed and made automati-
cally.
The Life Leaf duplicate system was an
adjunct to the Plic pen carbon book and
naturally followed the universal use of the
typewriter.
Teletype and Teleprinter communication
machines brought with them a demand for
carbon-interleaved forms, and steps were
immediately taken to enable us to manufac-
ture precision stationery for this purpose.
Continuous stationery is provided with mar-
ginal punching to engage with sprocket
platens and Formaliner tractors. The same
equipment enables us to produce precision
stationery carbon interleaved for use with
electric accounting machines.
The duplicate Carbac book was made on
rotary presses in both “loop” and interleaved
styles. The carbon copy on the front of the
second leaf was transferred from a coating
of carbon on the back of the first leaf instead
of from the usual carbon paper. A shield
inserted under the second leaf prevented the
writing impression going through further.
In the “loop” book the two leaves were still
joined by a perforation when torn out.
Stock lines in books and forms have been
built up steadily. They are usually the same
style as their standard counterparts.
Wrappers were added to our range of pro-
ducts and many attractive designs have been
produced for butter and other food packers.
They are printed on multi-colour rotary
presses.
In the beginning the binding department
made little other than sales check book
covers. Keeping pace wiith our expanding
business, it is now called upon to make a full
range of Life Leaf ledgers, binders and
indexes and also the ever-popular Paragon
self-binders, arch-post binders and delivery-
note holders.
The cabinet-making and wood-working
section employs a number of men who, with
the aid of up-to-date machinery, construct
filing cabinets and trays, staggerdex and peg-
board files, cash drawers and sundry wooden
system equipment.
From small dimensions engineering depart-
ments have emerged in Melbourne and
Sydney. Their functions are maintenance of
the plants, assembling and servicing of type-
writer and autographic register continuous
stationery installations and general equipment
development. Both States have well-set-up
workshops and the assistance of service cars
for outside maintenance.
Today the Paragon Company stands
equipped in all its factories throughout Aus-
tralia for the high-speed production of all its
carbon copy products, and plans are well
advanced for further improvements of tech-
nique, as a result of which quality and pro-
ductive capacity will be raised further.


Diary of
DATES
1887
Lamson Paragon Supply Company Limited,
of London, sent out a Traveller to book
orders for Check Books in Australia to be
manufactured in England.
1895
Messrs. J. A. Hall, F. Broad, J. Clough
and D. G. Webb left England, per S.S.
“Ophir,” with the necessary plant to open a
Branch for manufacturing Check Books in
Australia.
1896
Factory opened in Rialto, Collins Street,
Melbourne, with Mr. J. A. Hall, Manager:
Messrs. J. Brightman and F. Broad, Travel-
lers; Mr. J. Clough, Foreman, and Mr. D.
G. Webb, Deputy. Messrs. L. J. Lane and
J. McDonnell were engaged.
1897
Mr. J. A. Hall returned to England to
arrange for the purchase of new machinery
and paper supplies.
Local Company floated. Directors.—■
Mr. F. R. Godfrey, Chairman.
Mr. C. Murray Puckle.
Mr. E. Neale Wigg.
Capital, £28,930.
1898
Mr. J. A. Hall resigned and Mr. Robert
Rankine appointed Manager.
1899
Factory moved to Shelley Street.
1900
Mr. Rankine went to England by order of
the Board to negotiate an agreement with
another Company.
1901
Factory moved to Old Skating Rink, Bridge
Road, Richmond.
1902
Mr. Robert Rankine was succeeded by
Mr. John Brightman.
Mr. A. D. Epstein engaged.
1903
1904
Land purchased corner Swan Street and
Bridge Road, Richmond, and two-storied
brick factory erected.
Mr. E. Neale Wigg resigned from the
Board and Mr. Colin Templeton was chosen.
1905
Plant installed in new factory, corner of
Swan Street and Punt Road, Richmond.
1906
Paper Store erected at side of Melbourne
Factory.
1907
Check Book Presses made locally.


1908
Mr. S. Slade engaged as Junior Clerk,
1909
1910
Company reconstructed under the title,
“Lamson Paragon Limited.”
Re-arrangement of capital.
Mr. F. G. Wilson joined the Board as
representing the London shareholders.
Mr. F. R. Godfrey died, and Mr. C.
Murray Puckle elected Chairman.
Imperial Sales Recorder rights purchased.
1911
Mr. John Brightman resigned, and Mr.
Andrew Wilson appointed Manager.
First Rotary Press ordered from America,
1912
Mr, H. G. Edward appointed Agent for
Western Australia.
Sydney Factory established, under Mr. A.
D. Epstein.
New Zealand rights acquired by Mr.
C. M. Banks.
1913
City Office opened in Collins Street to
establish Office Systems business Mr. A. J.
Cottee in charge.
1914
Paid-up capital increased to £37,200.
War with Germany,
Paper supplies sunk at sea, occasioning
great scarcity.
1915
Paper costs soaring, ultimately reaching
seven times pre-war costs,
1916
Mr. C. Murray Puckie died, and Mr.
Neville Wight was chosen to fill his place.
Mr. Colin Templeton was elected Chairman.
Successfully fought law case to protect one
of our patents.
1917
Gas strike of six weeks’ duration.
1918
Purchased Ticket Printing business from
W. Osborne.
1919
Mr. Andrew Wilson went to England,
ordered plant and negotiated agreements.
Mr. P. N, Duncan appointed Adelaide
agent,
Mr. W. M. Heywood, Sydney Representa-
tive, died,
1920
Bought Eclipse Check Book Company, of
Sydney,
Mr. J. M. Evans made London Director,
Bought J. H. Barnard Limited, Manufactur-
ing Stationers, Perth.— Mr. H. G. Edward
appointed Manager.
Increased paid-up capital to £75,000.
Mr. H. Shields (Brisbane) joined.
Mr. G. M. Shields (Sydney) joined.
Agreement with Caribonum Company for
agency for Australia.
1921
Murray Street, Perth, property purchased.
Printers’ strike of three months’ duration.
Mr. P. J. W. Danby joined the Board, tak-
ing Mr. F. G. Wilson’s place.
Mr. Colin Ricketts appointed Tasmanian
Agent.
Mr. Andrew Wilson appointed Managing
Director.
Mr. R. B. Cornish joined.
Mr. C. H. Barnett joined.
1922
Formed subsidiary Company in Perth,
under the title of Lamson Paragon (W.A.)
Limited—Mr. H. G. Edward, Managing
Director.
Miss E. Corfe retired.
Opened City Office, Martin Place, Sydney
—'dosed, 1925.
1923
Built addition to Melbourne Factory.
First V.K. Rotary installed.
Goodwill written off.
Additions to Sydney Factory.
1924
Mr. Percy Smith appointed Agent in
Brisbane.
Mr. W. F. McConnell Agent in Adelaide.
Glebe property sold.
Extensions to Richmond Factory,
1925
McCaskey & Company Limited business
purchased.
Mr. H. H. Haines resigned, and Mr. G. S.
Upstill appointed Secretary.


Mr. Colin Templeton went to England,
and Mr. Neville Wight was appointed Chair-
man.
Wiz Register rights secured.
Cleveland Street, Sydney, property sold.
Visit of Sydney Cricket Team to Mel-
bourne.
1926
The Managing Director and Works
Manager visited England and America.
1927
New issue of Western Australian shares.
Brisbane' Factory opened, in charge of Mr.
Keyes, Sydney Accountant.
First V.K. Rotary Machine in Sydney.
Wag es Board reduced working hours for
Printing Industry from 48 hours per week
to 44.
Visit Melbourne Cricket Team to Sydney.
1928
Mr. S. Mullins appointed Agent in Broken
Hill.
Mr. Morgan Brock associated with Mr.
W. F. McConnell in Adelaide.
Paid-up capital further increased to
£lOO,OOO.
1929
Mr. Bob Kendall retired.
Mr. Hay visited America to investigate
Calendar and Novelty business.
1930
Mr. A. J. Robinson replaced Mr. Keyes as
Manager of Brisbane Factory.
Mr. John L. Edward joined West Aus-
tralian Company.
Mr. Isidor Robinson engaged as Clerk in
Brisbane.
Continuous Stationery introduced.
1931
1932
Mr. Morgan Brock appointed Adelaide
Agent.
1933
Mr. G. S. Upstill went to England and
America.
Mr. W. B. Russell engaged to develop
Continuous Stationery.
Pier Street property acquired in Perth.
1934
Mr. G. S. Upstill made General Manager.
City Office moved to Flinders Lane.
Mr. J. G. Ulrik engaged to handle the
Egry Agency.
Mr. }. Clough retired.
Mr. |. Sullivan appointed Works Manager.
1935
Bought Pier Street, Perth, property, and
installed Factory at that centre.
Mr. Morgan Brock appointed Brisbane
Manager, Mr. A. S. Joy taking his place as
Adelaide Manager.
1936
Mr. C. T. Watkins appointed Director,
Perth Company.
Mr. Tankard engaged as Sydney Chief
Engineer.
Mr. H. G. Edward visited England to re-
present the Australian Company at Interna-
tional Sales Conference.
Mr. T. Horne retired.
Speediset introduced.
1937
Called-up capital increased to £125,000.
Moved into new Factory in The Boule-
vard, Richmond.
Appointed Mr. |. G. Ulrik Sales Manager.
Agreement entered into with C. B. Smi th,
of Auckland, to handle Registers and Con-
tinuous Stationery.
Mr. Neville Wight elected Chairman of
the Board.
Mr. C. H. Barnett made Sales Manager,
Sydney.
Mr. |. Torrens joined Melbourne Engineer-
ing Department.
GOLDEN JUBILEE


Conference held in Melbourne—Executives
and Travelling Staffs of all Branches.
1938
Mr. D. G. Webb retired.
Swan Street property sold.
1939
Mr. Colin Templeton, Chairman.
Called-up capital increased to £150,000.
Bought Check Book Department of John
Sands, Sydney.
Purchased property adjoining the Brisbane
Factory and built extension.
Mr. R. B. Cornish -appointed Secretary.
War with Germany.
1940
Mr. Colin Templeton died, and Mr. Neville
Wight elected Chairman,
Mr. L. E. Lloyd was chosen for seat on
Board.
Mr. J. Gilbertson joined as Sydney Ac-
countant.
War Savings Groups formed.
1941
Saturday work discontinued in factories.
Further property bought in Brisbane and
new Store erected and Automatic Carton
machine installed.
Managing Director and General Manager
visited Sydney and Canberra re Rationing
of Paper Supplies.
Mr. Upstill met with a serious accident.
1942
Adelaide Factory opened in Wyatt Street
Mr. A. S. Joy, Manager.
Mr. Andrew Wilson elected Chairman.
A.R.P. Shelters erected at all Factories.
Miss Minnie Johns retired.
Lamson Paragon Limited declared an es-
sential industry,
Lamson Paragon (W.A.) Limited declared
an essential industry.
Mr. L. Wardell died.
Mr. Conway, Secretary of our Associated
House in Western Australia, retired.
1943
Mr. Neville Wight died.
Mr. G. D. Young joined the Board.
Arranged with local Paper Mills to supply
necessary paper.
Manpower shortage.
1944
Mr. A. S. Joy was appointed special Sys-
tems Representative at Head Office, and Mr.
J. G. Ulrik went to Adelaide to take the
position of Manager of this Factory.
Miss Fraser, Sydney Forewoman, retired.
Mr. }. L. Edward appointed Manager,
Western Australia.
1945
Bought Factory site at Edwardstown,
Adelaide.
Mr. Morgan Brock died this year and Mr.
Isidor Robinson appointed Brisbane Manager.
Mr. Chris Jones appointed Sales Manager
in Melbourne.
Mr. Upstill visited America, England and
the Continent.
Additions made to Melbourne Factory.
Printers’ strike in Sydney.
Authorised capital increased to £500,000' —•
£189,000 called up.


LONG SERVICE RECORDS
LONG SERVICE RECORD
One aim of this Company has been
to build up “team work.” This means
that there must be a common effort
consciously made by everyone to work
together as a team. Have we been
successful in our efforts so far?
This record of long-service em-
ployees seems to indicate satisfactory
co-operation, and, we believe, loyal
team work.
Mr. L. J. Lnae
Mr. F. W. Carr
Mr J. W. Shead
Mr. J. Suilivan
Mr. C. Hannaker
50 YEARS
LANE, L. Machine Room, Melbourne
Factory. Joined 1896. 50 years' service and
still with us.
McDONNELL, J., Works Manager, Syd-
ney Factory. Joined Melbourne Factory,
1896, subsequently transferred to Sydney.
50 years’ service and still with us.
44 YEARS
EPSTEIN, A. D„ Sydney Manager. Joined
1902, in Melbourne. Opened Sydney Fac-
tory in 1912. 44 years’ service and still in
charge.
43 YEARS
WEBB, D. G., Foreman, Composing Room,
Melbourne Factory, practically engaged by
London House and assisted in opening Mel-
bourne Factory. Joined 1896, retired 1938.
43 years’ service.
42 YEARS
CARR, F. W., Binding Department, Mel-
bourne Factory. Joined 1897, retired 1939.
42 years’ service.
JOHNS, Miss M., Machine Room, Mel-
bourne Factory. Joined 1899, retired 1941.
42 years’ service.
41 YEARS
SULLIVAN, J., Foreman, Melbourne Fac-
tory, Joined 1897, retired 1938. 41 years’
service.
SHEAD, J. W., Representative, Melbourne
Factory. Joined 1905. 41 years’ service and
still with us.
40 YEARS
CLOUGH, J., Works Manager, Melbourne
Factory, came out from. England to instal the
necessary plant. Retired 1935. 40 years’
service.
WEBBER, F., Machinist, Perth Factory.
Joined Melbourne Factory 1906, subsequently
transferred to our subsidiary, Lamson Para-


Mr. T. Joy
Mr. T. Horne
Mr.J. Parrott
Miss V. Taylor
Mr. J. Crabtree
Ms. Wardell
gon fVV.A.} Limited, Perth. 40 years’ ser-
vice and still with us,
HANNAKER, C., Machine Room, Mel-
bourne Factory. Joined 1906. 40 years’
service and still with us.
39 YEARS
JOY, T., Machine Room, Melbourne Fac-
tory. Joined 1907. 39 years’ service and
still with us.
38 YEARS
TAYLOR, Miss V., Machine Room, Mel-
bourne Factory. Joined 1908. 38 years’
service and still with us.
36 YEARS
HORNE, T., Foreman, Despatch Depart-
ment, Melbourne Factory. Joined 1900, re-
tired 1936. Enlisted in first World War. 36
years’ service.
CRABTREE, Foreman, Binding De-
partment, Melbourne Factory. Joined 1910.
36 years’ service and still with us.
35 YEARS
WILSON, Andrew, Managing Director
for Australia, Joined 1911. 35 years’ ser-
vice and still with us.
PARROTT, ].. Storeman, Melbourne Fac-
tory. Joined 1911. Enlisted first World
War. 35 years’ service and still with us.
WARDELL, L., Binding Department, Mel-
bourne Factory. Joined 1907, deceased 1942.
35 years’ service.
34 YEARS
PICKING, R. T., Representative, Mel-
bourne Factory. Joined 1899, retired 1933.
34 years’ service.
33 YEARS
HAMILTON, W. H., Factory Manager,
Melbourne Factory. Joined 1913. 33 years’
service and still with us.


LONG, H. S., Machine Room, Melbourne
Factory. Joined 1906, deceased, 1939. 33
years’ service.
REYNOLDS. E., Machine Room, Mel-
bourne Factory. Joined 1903, retired 1936.
33 years’ service.
32 YEARS
BOWMAN, A., Slitting Department, Mel-
bourne Factory. Joined 1903. Enlisted World
War I. Broken period. 32 years’ service
and still with us.
PICKING, R. A. C., Representative, Mel-
bourne Factory. Joined 1914. 32 years’
service and still with us.
FRAZER, Miss V., Forewoman, Sydney
Factory. Joined 1912, retired 1944. .32
years’ service.
THOMSON, C. V., Representative, Syd-
ney Factory. Joined 1914. 32 years’ service
and still with us.
31 YEARS
SADLER, Miss M,, Forewoman, Mel-
bourne Factory. Joined 1903, retired 1934.
31 years’ service.
30 YEARS
STEWART, Miss N., Forewoman, Syd-
ney Factory. Joined 1916. 30 years’ service
and still with us.
NEILL, Miss M., Forewoman, Melbourne
Factory. Joined 1903, retired 1933. 30
years’ service.
29 YEARS
EDWARD, H. G., Managing Director,
Lamson Paragon (W.A.) Limited, Perth.
Joined 1917. 29 years’ service and still with
us.
KENDALL, R., Carpenter, Melbourne
Factory. Joined 1900, retired 1929. 29
years’ service.
28 YEARS
CARTER, G. R., Engineer, Melbourne
Factory. Joined 1912, retired 1940, 28
years’ service.
DUVAL, G., Machine Room, Sydney
Factory. Joined 1918. 28 years’ service
and still with us.
Mr. H. S. Long
Mr. R. A. C. Picking
Mr. C. Thomson
Mr. A. Bowman
Miss V. Frazer
Miss Stewart
___ GOLDEN JUBILEE


Mr. P. N. Duncan
Mr. W. G. Bryan
Mr. H. F. Hewison
Mr. A, L. Richmond
Mr. S. Slade
Mr. C.E. Douglas
Mr. G. E. Robinson
27 YEARS
SKURRIE, E., Carter, Melbourne Factory.
Joined 1918, retired 1945. 27 years’ service.
LLOYD, Miss H., Machine Room, Mel-
bourne Factory. Joined 1919. 27 years’
service and still with us.
DUNCAN, P. N., Representative, Mel-
bourne Factory. Joined 1919. 27 years’
service and still with us.
SLADE, S., Order Department, Melbourne
Factory. Joined 1908, deceased 1935. 27
years’ service.
STANDISH, Miss E., Machine Room.
Melbourne Factory. Joined 1919. 27 years’
service and still with us.
BRYAN, W. G., Representative, Sydney
Factory. Joined 1919. 27 years’ service
and still with us.
DOUGLAS, C. E., Foreman, Composing
and Stereotyping Departments, in our sub-
sidiary, Lamson Paragon (W.A.) Limited
Perth. Joined 1918. 27 years’ service and
still with us.
RICHMOND, A. L., Purchasing and
Country Order Departments, in our subsi-
diary, Lamson Paragon (W.A.) Limited,
Perth. Joined 1918. 27 years’ 'service and
still with us.
HEWISON, H. F., Country Representa-
tive, in our subsidiary, Lamson Paragon
(W.A.) Limited, Perth. Joined 1918. 27
years’ service and still with us.
26 YEARS
ROBINSON, G. E., Representative, Syd-
ney Factory. Joined 1920. 26 years’ service
and still with us.
SHIELDS, H. Foreman, Brisbane Factory.
Joined Sydney, 1920; subsequently transferred
to Brisbane. 26 years’ service and still with
us.
Mr. H. Shields


WIGGINS, E. G., Representative, Syd-
ney Factory. Joined 1920. 26 years’ ser-
vice and still with us.
WRATTEN, R. W., Slitting Department,
Melbourne Factory. Joined 1920. 26 years’
service and still with us.
GLOSTER, A. E., Ruling Department,
Melbourne Factory. Joined 1920. 26 years’
service and still with us.
25 YEARS
BRETHRICK, Miss E., Binding Depart-
ment, Sydney Factory. Joined 1921. 25
years’ service and still with us.
COX, Miss N., Assistant Forewoman,
Sydney Factory. Joined 1921. 25 years
service and still with us.
HOYLE, A., Guillotine Cutter, Sydney
Factory. Joined 1921. 25 years’ service and
still with us.
WHIGHAM, W. }., Machine Room, Syd-
ney Factory. Joined 1921. 25 years’ service
and still with us.
PITMAN, P., Machine Room, Sydney
Factory. Joined 1921. 25 years service
and still with us.
KELLY, P. F., Foreman, Composing Room,
Melbourne Factory. Joined 1921. 25 years
service and still with us.
SHIELDS, G. M., Foreman, Sydney Fac-
tory. Joined 1921. 25 years’ service and
still with us.
RICKETTS, Colin, Tasmanian Agent.
Joined 1921. 25 years’ service and still with
us.
CORNISH, R. 8., Secretary. Joined 1921.
25 years’ service and still with us.
DREW, J., Order Department. Joined
1912. Retired 1937. 25 years’ service.
CLAREMONT, Miss C., Forewoman,
Melbourne Factory. Joined 1921. 25 years
service and still with us.
O’SULLIVAN, V., Machine Room, Mel-
bourne Factory. Joined 1921. 25 years’
service and still with us.
WOOD, A., Machine Room, Sydney Fac-
tory. Joined 1916, deceased 1941. 25 years’
service.
Mr. E. G. Wiggins
Mr. A. E. Gloster
Mr. R. W. Wratten
Miss H. Cox
Miss M. AhTberg
Mr. W. J. Whigham
GOLDEN
Ig96 x^^ 1946


Mr. A. Robinson
Miss A. Grills
Mr. A. D. Saffer
Mr. W. Swarbrick
Mr. J. McEwan
Mr. P. W. Sharpe
24 YEARS
BARNETT, C. H., Sales Manager, Sydney
Factory. Joined 1922. 24 years’ service and
still wi tii us.
DUNN, A. E., Machine Room, Sydney
Factory. Joined 1922. 24 years’ service and
still with us.
CLARKE, J. F., Composing Room, Mel-
bourne Factory. Joined 1903, retired 1927.
24 years’ service.
POLITES, Miss V., Machine Room, Mel-
bourne Factory. Joined 1922. 24 years’
service and still with us.
CUBITT, Miss G., Machine Room, Mel-
bourne Factory. Joined 1922. 24 years’
service and still with us.
23 YEARS
JOY, A. S., Special Representative, Mel-
bourne Factory. Joined 1923. 23 years’
service and still with us.
FIRTH, Miss D. M., Cashier in our sub-
sidiary, Lam son Paragon (W.A.) Limited,
Perth. Joined 1921, retired 1944. 23 years’
service.
AHLBERG, Miss M., Storewoman, Sydney
Factory. Joined 1923. 23 years' service and
still with us.
ROBINSON, A., Engineer, Sydney Fac-
tory. Joined 1912, deceased September, 1935.
23 years' service.
SWARBRICK, W., Machine Room in our
subsidiary, Lamson Paragon (W.A.) Limited,
Perth. Joined 1923. 23 years’ service and
still with us.
22 YEARS
GRILLS, Miss A.. Typiste. Joined 1923,
retired 1945. 22 years’ service.
McEWAN, J., Machine Room, Sydney
Factory. Joined 1924. 22 years’ service and
still with us.
ROWE, Miss R., Machine Room, Sydney
Factory. Joined 1924. 22 years’ service and
still with us.
HILL, W. J. C., Composing Room, Mel-
bourne Factory. Joined 1924. 22 years’
service and still with us.
MOULSON, F. F., Composing Room, Mel-
bourne Factory. Joined 1924. 22 years’
service and still with us.
SAFFER, A. D., Composing Room, Mel-
bourne Factory. Joined 1924. 22 years’
service and still with us.


WEST, F. E., Representative, Sydney Fac-
tory. Joined 1922, resigned 1944. 22 years’
service.
SHARPE, F. W., Supervisor, Despatch
Department in our subsidiary Lamson Para-
gon (W.A.) Limited, Perth. Joined 1924.
22 years' service and still with us.
21 YEARS
UPSTILL, G. S., General Manager for
Australia. Joined 1925. 21 years’ service
and still with us.
LEFFLEY, A., Composing Room, Sydney
Factory. Joined 1925. 21 years’ service and
still with us.
DUNKS, E., Slitting Department, Sydney
Factory. Joined 1925. 21 years’ service and
still with us.
CARROLL, J., Binding Department, Syd-
ney Factory. Joined 1925. 21 years’ service
and still with us.
WOODS, Miss E., Machine Room, Syd-
ney Factory. Joined 1925. 21 years’ service
and still with us.
BOOTH, Miss H., Order Department,
Melbourne Factory. Joined 1925, retired
1945. 21 years’ service.
BLACKMUR, R. L., Machine Room, Mel-
bourne Factory. Joined 1925. 21 years'
service and still with us.
LEWINS, Miss D., Machine Room, Mel-
bourne Factory. Joined 1925. 21 years
service and still with us.
ROBINSON, A., Stereo Department.
Joined 1925. 21 years’ service and still with
us.
CHESTERTON, J., , Sydney Factory.
Joined 1921, deceased 1942. 21 years’ ser-
vice.
YOUNGER, A. M., Foreman Bookbinder’
in our subsidiary, Lamson Paragon (W.A.)
Limited, Perth. Joined 1925. 21 years’ ser-
vice and still with us.
Mr. J. Carroll
Mr. A. Robinson
Mr. F. Duggan
Mr R. L. Blackmur
Mr. A. M. Yonunger
Miss B. Corfe
GOLDEN JUBILEE


Mr. E. J. Griffiths
Mr. Arnold Isaacson
Mr. L. J. Wasington
20 YEARS
DUGGAN, F., Composing Room, Mel-
bourne Factory. Joined 1926. 20 years’
service and still with us.
NOLAN, Miss M., Machine Room, Mel-
bourne Factory. Joined 1926. 20 years’
service and still with us.
CORFE, Miss E., Forewoman, Melbourne
Factory. Joined 1902, retired 1922. 20
years’ service.
TOOGOOD, Miss E., Forewoman, Mel-
bourne Factory. Joined 1917, retired 1937.
20 years’ service.
SLACK, Miss M., Forewoman, Melbourne
Factory. Joined 1920, retired 1940. 20
years’ service.
GRIFFITHS, E. J., Machine Room, Syd-
ney Factory. Joined 1926. 20 years’ ser-
vice and still with us.
CROSS, L. M., Machine Room, Sydney
Factory. Joined 1926. 20 years’ service and
still with us.
HINDE, Miss L., Typiste, Melbourne Fac-
tory. Joined 1905, retired 1925. 20 years’
service.
ISAACSON, Arnold, Representative, Mel-
bourne Factory. Joined 1905. Broken ser-
vice of 20 years and still with us.
LIDDELL, R. G., Representative in our
subsidiary, Lamson Paragon (W.A.) Limited,
Perth. Joined 1926. 20 years’ service and
still with us.
WASHINGTON, L. J., Machinist in our
subsidiary, Lamson Paragon (W’.A.) Limited,
Perth. Joined 1926. 20 years’ service and
still with us.


Name
FROM OUR
Rank
MELBOURNE FACTORY
limit
Department
GUMMING, P. . . . . . .
• • Sig
44 Heavy Wireless Section, A.I.F
Representative
BEGGS, R
2nd Field Co., 4th Div. Engineers, A.I.F.
Carpenter
BROCK, J. H
. . L.A.C
. 2 T. & M.O., R.A.A.F
Stereo.
BURNS, H. J
. L.H.Q., A.A.O.C. School, Broadmeadows
Representative
BUSH, C. A
F/Sergt. . .
Air Crew, R.A.A.F
Office
CAMP, E. C
Private . ...
5th Anti-Tank Regiment, A.M.F
Stereo.
CHATTO, T
Sapper ....
Cartographic Co., L.H.Q
Machine Room
CROFT, C. W
. . W.O.2 ....
Machine Room
DELVES, F
. A.W.A.S
Office
DORAN, E. P.* . . ..
DUNCAN, C
157 Aust. Supply Depot PL, A.I.F. . .
Representative
GOULD, K
A Squadron, 2 Aust. Tank Btn
Despatch
GRAY, H
Air Crew, R.A.A.F
Machine Room
HARRIS. G
L.H.Q. Tactical School, Beenleigh . . . .
Machine Room
HARVEY, W. J
. 52 Aust. Comp. A/A. Regiment, Sig.
Stereo.
HOOLE, H. L
Section, A.I.F
M.G.O. Branch, Designs Div., L.H.Q. .
Machine Room
JAMES, C. F
. A.A.S.C., H.Q., A.M.F
Representative
LINGFORD, T. K
• ■ A/B
• H.M.A.S. "Whangpu,” R.A.N
Office
McKELLAR, N. K. ..
Lieut
. 2nd Aust. S.R.D., A.A.S.C., A.I.F. ..
Office
McVITTY, J. D
. . L.A.C
. 6 S.F.T.S., R.A.A.F., Mallala
Office
O’CONNELL, E. M. ..
Sergt
Radar, R.A.A.F
Office
O’DEA, S. D
. A.E.M.E., A.I.F
Engineer
PICKING, K. S
. 7th Div., A.S.C., A.I.F
Representative
ROBINSON, A. H.* . .
Corp
2/8 Btn., 6 Div., A.I.F
Stereo.
RYAN, J. N
Major
. 21st Co., A.A.S.C., A.M.F
Representative
SEGGIE, W
Sergt
. “C” Coy., 24th Btn., A.M.F. . .
Engineers
SLADE, D. W
Sergt
H.Q., 2 Aust. Div. Sigs
Representative
TURNBULL, F. J
. . L.A.C
Stores Branch, R.A.A.F
Composing
WICKS, A. W
Gunner ....
“C” Co., 4 A.R.T.B., Cowra, A.M.F. . .
Composing
WITHERDEN, R. ..
.. A.C.l
W/T. Section, R.A.A.F
Office
Name
ARBUCKLE, J. A
BROWN, R W.
FROM OUR
Rank
L.A.C
Sapper
Gunner
Lieut
BRISBANE FACTORY
Unit
R.A.A.F., Printing Unit
Fortress A.A
Department
. . Machine Room
. . . Despatch
BROWN, R. A.
CHARDON, A. J.
COPELAND, C.
14th Btn., 5th Field Regt
A.S.C., A.I.F. .
. . . Machine Room
Representative
M.
Corp. .... . .
Group 171, R.A.A.F
. . . Machine Room
CUNNINGHAM,
J.
D. . ,
Private
2/33 Aust. Inf. Btn
. . . Representative
CUNNINGHAM,
K.
F. , .
O/D
R.A.N.V.R
HUMPHREY, L.
E.
Sub-Lieut. . . .
R.A.N.V.R
Lamson Paragon
ROLL OF HONOUR
WORLD WAR II.
* Enlisted 1940.


LANGE, G
LESLIE, K
. . A.C
A. Amb. Car. Co. .... . .
R.AA.F. .
. . . Composing
SHEPPARD. J, T
Sergt. (M M.) .
2/15 Aust. Inf. Bin. A.I.F
SULLY, A. E.
2/13 A.A. Regt
. , Machine Room
WILDING, T. C
R.A.N.V R. .
WILKIE, B. J
. . Cfn
WILLIAMS, H. C. . .
Sergt
Aust. Inf. Bde., Signal Section . , .
Composing
WRIGHT, W. H
2/6 Field Amb., A.I.F .
FROM
LAMSON PARAGON (W.A.)
LTD., PERTH
Name
Occupation
Rank
Unit
Service
BAILY, G. H4
Clerk
F.O
. R.A.A.F
BULLEY. V. B
Compositor
Corp
. A.I.F
4 years
CRACK, C.
App. Compositor , . .
L.A.C
. R.A.A.F
5 years
COLLINSON, R
App. Bookbinder . . .
L.A.C
. R.A.A.F
2 years
COWLEY. Miss I
Asst. Factory .....
—-—
Mun
2 years
DOUGLAS, C
App. Machinist . . . .
Corp
. A.I.F
4 years
DYSON, C, .. . . . . . . . .
Bag Machinist . .
Corp
. A.I.F
3i years
DARCY, Miss E. J
Asst. Factory
A.C.W. . . .
. W.A.A.A.F. . .
2 years
FAIRCLOUGH, L4 . . ..
App. Stereotyper . . .
P.O
. R.A.A.F
FARRELL, C. . . .
A IF
4 years
GASCOIGNE,' Miss M. . .
Typiste/Clerk
A.C.W. . . .
W.A.A.A.F. . .
2 years
JACKSON, Miss M
Asst, Factory
Sergt
W.A.A.A.F. . .
4 years
LIDDELL. R. G.
Representative
Corp
A.I.F,
3 years
MANSFIELD, W. R
App. Machinist . . . .
Stoker
R.A.N
2|- years
MUNACHEN, A
Warehouse Asst. . . .
L.A.C
R.A.A.F
4 years
MONCK, N. . .
Asst. Env. Section . .
L.A.C
R.A.A.F
2 years
MORPHEW. W
junior Storeman . . .
Stoker
R.A.N
5i years
MILNE. J.
Warehouse Asst, . . .
Sergt
A.I.F.
5 years
McDonald, j
Asst. Bag Section . .
Private ....
A.I.F
4 years
McLEOD, D.
junior Storeman . . . .
Stoker
R.A.N
1 year
NAUGHTON, F. J
Ruler
- —
Mun
3| years
PAYNE, E. . .
App. Env. Dept. . . .
Corp
R.A.A.F
6 years
RICHARDSON. Miss D. . .
Telephonist
A.C.W. .. .
W.A.A.A.F. . .
1 year
SKIPPER, C. H
Warehouse Asst. . . .
. .
R.A.N
3 years
THOMPSON. Miss I. M. . .
Clerk
Corp
A.W.A.S
4 years
URE, L. J
Warehouse Asst. . . .
Sig
A.I.F
4 years
WARD, E. F
Representative
W.O
R.A.A.F
4 years
WALTERS. M
App. Machinist . . . .
F/Sergt.
R.A.A.F
4 years
WATTS. R
Warehouse Asst. . . .
Private ....
A.I.F
4J years
WILSON, Miss E. S
Stenographer
Corp
A.W.A.S
3 2 years
$ Killed
in Action.
FROM
OUR SYDNEY FACTORY
Name
Ramie limit
Department
ANDREWS, K
. . . A.M.F., D.F.O. .
Office
BETTS, B. R
BIBLE, C
Private .
. . . A.I.F., 33rd Aust. A/A. Bty
Factory
BRYAN, W. J
. . , A.IF., 34th 12th Aust. A.F. Regiment .
Selling
CARMODY, B
Private .
. . . A.IF., 2/4th Aust. Pioneers
Composing
CHESTERTON, J. . .
Private .
. . . A.IF., 129th Brigade
Despatch
DETTMAN, R.f . .
. .. R.A.A.F. . .
DOHERTY, J.
.. A.C.l .. .
. . . R.A.A.F . .
Machinist
EPSTEIN, S. L
Private .
. . . A.IF., Dental Stores
Selling
FOREST, C. L
Private .
. . . A.IF
Stereo.
GLYNN, Miss I
. A.W.A.S
HUDSON. C. . . , . . ,
Private .
. , . A.M.F
Engineers


HUGHES, W. J. . . . .
. . L.A.C
R.A.A.F
Office
KAYE, A. J
. . L.A.C
R.A.A.F., Group 910, Pacific
Selling
KEENAN, D
A.I.F., 15th Field Ambulance
Machinist
KEMBLE. F
, A.I.F
Machinist
KIRK. A. V
R.A.A.F., Group 157
Selling
LANAGAN, H
.. LA.C
, R.A.A.F., Group 507
Office
LYNCH, E
Capt
A.I F., 2/3 Aust. Mobile A/A. Battery .
Artist
McDonnell, —
Private ....
A.I.F., 1st Aust. Mobile S/L. Unit . . . .
Composing
McLEAN, G
.. A.C.W. . . .
W.A.A.A.F
Office
NEAVE, J
A.I.F., 2/6th Aust. Inf. Brigade
Storeman
PRY, M
Corp
. A.M.F., D.F.O
Office
REED, H. G
Corp
A.I.F., 2/3rd Pioneer Reg
Composing
WEST, J. S
Sergt
. A.I.F,, 1st Btn., R.A.E.T.C
Selling
WOODBRY, H. E. ..
P/O. Writer .
R.A.N., H.M.A.S. "Australia”
Selling
FROM OUR
ADELAIDE FACTORY
Unit
Department
JUNE WICKHAM
W.A.A.F. . .
Clerical
HOWARD POLKINGHORNE .
R.A.A.F. . . .
Accountant
GWEN CONNER . . . . . . . .
W.A.A.F. . .
Factory
SHIRLEY CLAYTON
W.A.A.F. . .
Factory
CLYDE LETHEBY
R.A.N
Factory
JIM PEDLER
A.I.F
BERT BLANKS
A.M.F
Factory
Lamson Paragon Ltd.
Roil of Honor
W. J. ALLEN
W. CLEAR
W. CROSBIE
G. ELLISON
W. EMBRY
H. HALL
T. HORNE
J. PARROTT
F. G. RUSSELL f
W. D. SHARLAND
A. L. STEWART
f Killed in Action
1914 - European War - 1918
f Killed in Action.
GOLDEN ***** JUBILEE
1896 1945


PARAGON
ASSOCIATED HOUSES
IN OTHER PARTS OF THE WORLD
ARGENTINE
AUSTRIA
BELGIUM
CANADA
CEYLON
DENMARK
DUTCH EAST INDIES
EGYPT
EIRE
FINLAND
FRANCE
GREAT BRITAIN
GERMANY
ITALY
NORWAY
SOUTH AFRICA
SPAIN
SWEDEN
SWITZERLAND
THE NETHERLANDS
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
WEST INDIES


A PARAGON IDEAL
Let me but do my work from day to day,
In field or forest, at the desk or loom,
In roaring market-place or tranquil room;
Let me but find it in my heart to say,
When vagrant wishes beckon me astray,
"This is my work; my blessing, not my doom;
Of all who live, I am the one by whom
This work can be done in the right way.”
Then shall I see it not too great, nor small,
To suit my spirit and to prove my powers;
Then shall I cheerful greet the labouring hours
And cheerful turn, when the long shadows fall
At eventide, to play and love and rest,
Because I know for me my work is best.
Henry van Dyke.


