

PPICE: ONE SHILLING & SIAPCNCE


Miss Marie Le Varre,
The Beautiful Theatrical Star,
A Dainty Advocate of the Dearborn
Quality Toilet Products.
PURE MERCOLIZED WAX
is necessary to your skin and will protect it in all
weather conditions. Positively does not grow hair.
STALLAX GRANULES
The hair shampoo which cleanses the scalp and improves
the hair. Invaluable for bobbed and shingled hair.
COLLIANDUM
Rose-tinted cherry perfumed cheek colour. An improve-
ment on rouge which is harmless to the skin and
does not streak.
In use by the world’s most famous Theatrical Stars.
Economical owing to the lasting qualities of the preparations
Obtainable from reliable Chemists and Stores.
Mercolized Wax 5/6, Stallax and Colliandum 4/- per
package, or post free from
Dept. WB..
DEARBORN AUSTRALIA LTD.,
279 Clarence Street, Sydney.


YOU
nUST;
ACTUALLY
PLAT THE
Gulbransen
Zsu& t tsvncerZc
REGISTERING PIANO
Before You Can Absolutely
Know The Perfection Of
This Wonderful Instrument
Call In and Judge by Comparison
E. P. Wilks & Co.
LTD.,
321 PITT ST., SYDNEY.
OPEN FRIDA/ NIGHTS


SUFFERED FROM NERVOUS
BREAKDOWN and INSOMNIA
But regained health and strength
after taking six boxes of
R| Mean’s II Tonic
Nerve Nuts
was the experience of
Mr BOBBY WATSON,
The author of “ Fifty Years
Behind the Scenes.”
NERVE NUTS
are a nerve food and tonic
compounded in tablet form
for convenience of taking.
They strengthen the nerves and enrich the blood,
restoring physical energy and nerve force.
Boxes containing 12 days’ supply cost
3s. at all Chemists and Stores.
BOBBY WATSON has proved the value
of HEENZO as a money saving remedy for
Coughs, Colds and other Chest and Throat
Ailments. HEENZO costs 2/- everywhere.


PIANOS
Music
PLAYER PIANOS
Music Rolls
TALKING MACHINES
Records
Nicholson’s
390 George Street,
SYDNEY.




“MEET MR. WATSON.”
I have known Bobby Watson from the beginning
of his stage career —some fifty years ago—as a born
comedian who could sing and dance, and a loyal
Australian. I can picture him now on the stage of
the Criterion, with Carrie Swain, in “The Tomboy,”
when they sang—
“We’re going to be married next Sunday,
And we’ll have such a gay old time;
The boys and the girls will be dancing,
And we’ll hand round the cake and the wine.”
Prior to that event, I remember him being hunted
off the stage in “Struck Oil,” at the old Queen’s
Theatre, by Maggie Moore —incensed by his taunts
of “Dutchy! Dutchy!” That was in 1875, when
Bobby was a boy and Maggie was a slip of a girl
who did not know her own genius. Since then I
have known him, on and off the stage, during
engagements with JVC. Williamson, George Mus-
grove, Alfred Dampier, George Darrell, Harry
Rickards, and many of the managers who assisted
to build up the Australian stage. Most of my
theatrical friends of the ’seventies, ’eighties, and
’nineties have taken the Last Call, and I know few
to-day who have Bobby Watson’s intimate know-
ledge of bygone theatres and departed players, and
I feel sure that all the old hands, and most of the
new, will rejoice to hear the true stories told of
them by Bobby Watson, an old-time actor with a
young heart.
GEORGE BLACK.
Legislative Council,
16th September, 1924.




CHAPTER I.
The Introduction by the Stage Manager.
Ladies and Gentlemen, —I come before the cur-
tain to introduce Bobby Watson, who is at present
“behind the curtain,” putting his hair on straight,
touching up his nose, and attending to various other
incidentals necessary for his phiz for his proper
entry.
“Bobby” to-day is as lively as ever, though he is
over ten. To tell you the truth his age is—no —no!
I’ll let him tell you that, as he has a good joke to
explain why he happened to be born, and where.
However, Bobby has been on the Australian stage
over fifty years, having been stage-struck at a very
early age and, like another item, is “still going
strong.”
He was the original “Billy Patterson” in “Struck
Oil,” being then known as Master Watson.
I may mention that I can remember Bobby Wat-
son in my early years, as I have always had a taste
for the theatre, one of my earliest delights being
the pantomime, “Little Red Riding Hood,” that
opened the Lyceum Theatre in Pitt Street, when
Williamson and Musgrave first began partnership.
Bobby Watson, in that play, was a simple young-
ster who came in on almost every scene with a dog.
On his first appearance he had a pup under his
arm. On his second appearance the pup was a little
bigger, but with a comical wink he told the audience
it was “the very same dawg,” so on each appearance
of Simple Simon, the dog was larger and larger,
and each time Bobby Watson assured the audience
that it was “the very same dawg.” It was a gag
that spread over Sydney, and everybody used it;
in fact, when a magistrate was fining some persons
for non-registration of dogs, one person, who was
summoned, said it had already been registered.
“Then,” said the magistrate, in Bobby Watson’s
funny way, “then, it’s ‘the very same dawg?”’


That pantomime was a wonderful show. It had
Robert Courtneidge, who came on made up as a
funny ugly-looking dame, with her bald head so
blobbed that it would have made a phrenologist
weary trying to explain what they stood for. He
casually came down to the footlights, and as the
audience roared with laughter, he pointed out that
the audience needn’t laugh, as he once “took first
prize at a beauty show, but—he had to put it back,
as he was watched.”
Bobby Watson joined with Courtneidge in this
pantomime in some fine turns, one of the turns
being the song: —
“It made no difference, not a bit of difference,
And the truth to you I’ll tell:
He wanted to buy some' sausages,
But they gave a bull pup,
And that did just as well.”
In the same pantomime Alice Learner introduced
a great favorite song, “Ta-ra-ra-Boomdeay,” which
was everywhere whistled, whilst Courtneidge with
“Up I came with my little lot,” and his “Sausage
Roll” gag was wonderful. The latter ran like this:
“Do you know how to make a sausage roll? No?
Then here you are. You take a sausage. Right-o
Then you go to the top of the roof and —you let
the sausage roll to the bottom. There you see a
sausage roll!” This gag was passed from one
funny character to another, and went round the
city; also, Courtneidge got the credit for it; but
at the final performance of the pantomime he was
good enough to announce that Bobby Watson first
gave him the joke, and so he made him a handsome
present of it.
Ah, well! “Those were the days.”
Just think of the string of celebrities Bobby Wat-
son has acted with. Here are a few of them:—
Carrie Swain, Maggie Moore, J. C. Williamson,
George Gordon, Jennie Watt-Tanner, Charles War-
ner (in “Drink”), Herbert Flemming, Teddy Roycc,
Emma Temple, Oily Deering, John F. Sheridan


(“Fun on the Bristol”), Janet Achurch, Jennie
Lee, Slade Murray, George Titheradge, Dion
Boucicault, Phil Beck, Pattie Brown, Robert
Brough, Bland Holt, Kate Bishop, Hilda Spong.
Alfred Dampier, Fanny Robing, Harry Leston,
Harry Rickards, Marie Narelle, John Lemmone,
George Rignold, and other great theatrical
favourites. Now, think of all Bobby Watson will
have to say in his “Behind the Scenes” —But
whoosk! someone has stuck a pin in me through
the curtain; I guess it’s Bobby Watson. He gives
me a hint to cut the rest out, so I’ll retire and let
Bobby, “the very same dawg,” come before you
and tell you all about it, which he will do now.
CHAPTER 11.
Yes, I’m Bobby Watson. That stage-manager
chap in the last chapter would have talked to you
till you got too tired to listen to what he wanted
to say. His proper job is in Parliament, where they
have such a crowd of talkers that the fellow who
has the least to say is sarcastically labelled “The
Speaker.”
Well, I was born at a very early age at Sofala,
on ,the Turon River, not on the river, mind you,
because that would have been too damp for a chap
at my age, and I was too young then to enjoy a
bank-wet (pause for a moment, there is a joke
somewhere).
Larry Foley happened to be born at the same
place—of course, we weren’t twins, but pals. Larry
was a strong sort of chap; in fact, he was after-
wards the champion boxer of Australia, and not
only champion boxer in the fighting ring, but later
he was a champion boxer in another way, for he
shifted all the boxes out of the Devonshire Street
Cemetery to Botany Bay, to make room for the
present Central Railway Station at Sydney.
However, as I said before, I w&s born young. It
happened in November, 1861. Other great people
were born in that month, but I wasn’t interested
in many people just then. After a year in Sofala


my folks determined to leave the Turon gold fields
to come to Sydney. We didn’t use a Chalmers car
of 25 horse-power. It was a charmers’ cart of one
horse-power, the charmers being my dad, mum and
sisters and brothers —a load of 11 of us. I was
told it was an exciting trip, as we had the bush-
rangers about us, but we got to Sydney in a couple
of weeks, where my people started business in a
lolly shop in Liverpool Street, opposite to where
is now Snow’s.
You see, I was reared amongst sweet things,
which is no doubt why I have ever since tried to be
sweet and merry!
At that time there were many bands of buskers —
a sort of nigger minstrels, who would blacken their
faces and would entertain the crowd with song and
what melody they could get out of a dilapidated
concertina, bones and triangle. It seemed a great
joke to imitate them, and also an easy way to win
wealth, so I and two pals followed them round till
we learned their songs, and we blacked our faces
with burnt newspaper —you see, I always did like
newspaper paragraphs—so with the “power of the
press,” so to speak, we went forth as buskers,
starting at the corner of Campbell Street. Being
under age limit, we were looked upon as curiosities,
and so got the biggest crowd and the largest collec-
tion. One lucky gold-digger who had come to town
with a bag of good stuff, and who had evidently
taken a glass or two, was very pleased with the
world generally, and liberally subscribed to the boy
with the hat, dropping a nugget into it with other
worthwhile contributions. We liked the busking
business till we got home, when my dad thought
other parts of my anatomy should be blackened
with a strap.
(The rest of that scene need not be described.)
However, a couple of weeks later a lucky digger
friend of Dad Watson heard me warble, and
as a silver mug was being offered at the
Queen’s Theatre, in York Street, in 1872, for


the best amateur comic singer, the Dad’s
digger friend advised him “putting Bob on
for the night,” so I went for the mug. However,
other mugs went for that mug, the people in
the audience being the judges. They came pre-
pared for vigorous criticism, and so were loaded
with cabbages, tomatoes, and eggs that had seen
better days. Amongst the competitors were Johnny
Deeble, who afterwards took Beach, the world’s
champion sculler, to London, and Andy Blanchard,
whom I ever remember with a sigh of regret, for he
afterwards joined the stage.
However, talking of the mug at the Queen’s
Theatre, I had the luck to win it with a song called
“Awfully Clever.” I must have been, for I not only
won the mug, but my own mug did not receive
any of the produce the audience freely distributed
on some of the others. Jack Deeble and Andy
Blanchard, however, was well received.
“THE SILVER MUG”
On it is inscribed “Robert Watson, winner of the
Amateur Singers’ Competition, aged 11—1872.”
I cannot think of Andy without a sigh of regret,
for dear Andy had a most pathetic passing out.
It was one night at Dapto. Andy was in fine
voice and sang that touching song, “Their Heads
Nestled Closer Together.” A comic singer had
to follow him, and stood in the wing, with all his
funny make-up on him ready to do a sort of comical
clown act. There the comic man stood trying to
pick funny gags out of Andy’s pathetic ballad.
Andy had the audience with him as he sang:
A garden and in it an old apple tree,
Around it two children, a lassie turned three,
And t’other a lad of p’raps four and a half,
Are chasing each other while gaily they laugh,
The lassie soon tires of the circular race,
As vainly she follows the lad in the chase,
His stronger legs make it an unequal match.
And he merrily mocks all her efforts to catch.
She cries: “Tommy, stop!” but “Turn on Tate,” says he;
"I s’ant t’ause I t’ant run no farver,” says she,
Then frowns, and her patience, ’tis easy to see,
Has nigh reached the end of its tether.


Then Katie breaks down with a plaintive “800 hoo,”
Tom stops, and the tears are in Tommy’s eyes, too;
She says, “Oo don’t love me!” He says, “’Ess I do,”
And their heads nestled closer together.
A green lane and in it two fond lovers roam,
And place in love’s garden their bright future home,
To-morrow’s their wedding, ’tis Tommy and Kate,
But now grown to manhood and woman’s estate.
His arm round her waist tells the tale of their bliss,
As vainly she stops all his efforts to kiss,
“You mustn’t,” “I shall,” and then something goes “hiss,”
And their heads nestled closer together.
A graveyard, and in it a tiny babe’s grave,.
An early wrecked vessel on life’s cruel wave,
Their twelve-months-old darling, their loved one, their all,
Now gone from this earth at the Mighty One’s call,
A life of pure sunshine, and joy had been theirs,
With smiling face meeting all trivial cares,
Till all hopes were shattered and sped in a breath,
And life’s joys are shadowed by dread clouds of death.
There in that God’s Acre they stand, he and she,
The sun veils its head as though in sympathy;
And buried forever their lives seem to be,
In that grave ’neath the wild-growing heather.
As tears falling fast for her babe now at rest,
The man holds her close to his sorrowing breast —
“Come, cheer up my darling, it’s all for the best”;
And their heads nestled closer together.
When came the last verse, with its touching
reference to the churchyard, the audience were in
tears: —
And as dear Andy gave the last words in the
sweetest of voices, he fell to the stage —and passed
away!
The audience rose —the comedian rushed out on
the stage in all of his funny make-up, and as he
stood over poor Andy’s dead body, the tears fell
from his eyes as, with uplifted hand, he said in a
broken voice; “We have all got to answer the
Mighty One’s call,” and the curtain came slowly
down.
CHAPTER 111.
Everybody knows of Harry Rickards and his
later ownership of Australian theatres, yet it is
a long way back to 1874, when Harry Rickards,


with his wife (Carrie Rickards'), and Lizzie Wat-
son, opened a season at the School of Arts, in Pitt
Street, Sydney.
It was Harry’s first visit, but being dissatisfied
he left the concern ajid was taken up by Nick
Hegarty, who gave Harry iIOO a week and a one-
horse brougham to roam around in.
It is somewhat different to-day. A modern comic
singer, like Wilkie Bard, gets £4OO a week, but
whether he also gets the loan of a one-horse
brougham or a 25 horse-power motor, I haven’t
heard.
Anyhow, Harry Rickards in 1874 had a benefit
given him, at which Harry announced that he would
give a “beautiful silver cup” for the best imitation
of him in a song called “Brown, the Tragedian.”
The song jerked something like this:
“I’ve been a great star in my time,
But I’m reduced to a seedy-un,
On me you may glance and behold
Julius Brown, the Tragedian!”
This silver cup was a bit of a disappointment,
though I happened to win it, for it later on proved
to be pewter! However, I was compensated by
getting a hatful of money thrown on to the stage.
A year after, in 1875, I was engaged to play as a
boy with J. C. Williamson and Maggie Moore in
“Struck Oil,” at the old Queen’s Theatre, in York
Street, Sydney.
This play, with its great story of the oil field
of Pennsylvania, made the Williamson fortune, and
though he has passed away, the great Williamson
Company of to-day is its big record. The William-
son concern certainly “struck oil.”
Williamson and his wife (Maggie) toured with
that play the world over, having made their great
hit with it in this “land of sunshine.”
There were some great types in that Australian
production, including Will Andrews, the great
comedian, Will J. Hollaway, who married a widow
whose stage name was Miss Harden, and who was


the mother of Essie Jennings, who afterwards be-
came a wonderful Shakesperian actress, and whose
portrayal of Portia in “The Merchant of Venice”
was a triumph. Essie afterwards married John
Wood, the great brewer of Newcastle, passing out
a few months ago to that “Land of Rest Above.”
“Rip Van Winkle” was also played by William-
son and Maggie Moore as well as “Fritz,” after-
wards played here by J. K. Emmet. Emmet one
night was supposed to appear before the South
Australian State Governor in Adelaide, and when
the curtain rose there, Emmet was asleep on the
stage under the sweet influence of Adelaide’s well-
known wines.
Williamson also played “The Curiosity Shop,”
Williamson being Dick Swiyeller, Holloway charac-
terising Quilp, whilst Maggie Moore played “Little
Nell,” and played it so sweetly that the audience
were in tears with the wonderful pleading way
Maggie had. It is a pity that some of those great
plays are not revived to-day, instead of us having
forced upon us the present-day American rubbish
that mostly depends upon bedroom scenes and
after-consequences.
One night, as we were playing “Struck Oil,” a
little girl with a dirty face crept from Clarence
Street up the back stairs of the theatre and looked
up at Maggie, who was very fond of children, and
seeing this child, took her into her dressing room,
washed her face, tied a pretty blue ribbon round
the little girl’s hair, and made her look like a sweet
doll.
I asked her who washed her face, and she said,
pointing to Maggie, who just then was acting her
part on the stage as Lizzie Stofel, in her short
Dutch dress, said: “Dat little girl there,” and she
smiled such a smile of affection that Maggie, look-
ing from the stage, noticed it, and it also upset her
acting, and not having any children of her own, she
spent much of her would-be motherly affection
upon her.
Maggie is alive to-day and full of vim and talent.
She has had no children of her own, but she spreads


her sweet affection on her many friends. I trust
that when Australia’s oldest stage favorite, Maggie
Moore, reads these notes of the far days of old,
she will give a kind passing thought to the little
boy of that time —Bebby Watson.
CHAPTER IV.
The next post I got was particularly interesting,
as I was a harlequin in an open-air theatre on the
present site of St. Mary’s Cathedral. The
had been twice burnt out before, and the present
structure was half-way up and without a roof, and
to raise the cost of the roof a number of us got k.
gether, and in a “country fair” on the site, played
in a series of bloodthirsty and other fifteen-minute
dramas, tragedies, and pantomime*,. So I was a
hero, a villain, or a harlequin.
That country fair was a great success so far as
the crowds were concerned, and when it finished,
having been the factors in drawing the crowds, we
marched as mentioned with expanded chests to
draw our salaries, in other words to have expanded
pockets, but we were coolly informed that nobody
was going to be paid, as the chap who had the
cash had “levanted.” We didn’t exactly know what
that fancy word meant, until we were told that
there was no cash left for us, and so our week’s
Drama, Tragedy, and Pantomime culminated in a
Tragedy that hadn’t been rehearsed.
I went into the pantomime shortly after that, at
the Victoria Theatre, where McCathies’ shops now
stand. The play was called “The White Cat.”
There was a great transformation scene, and a
pretty girl (Miss Osborne) was supposed to be a
mermaid under the sea. She was lying down
dressed in light material, with a sheet of glass about
eight feet high to represent the water, and just in
front of where she was lying there was a row of
gas-jets (electric light, of course, being unknown
in those days).
As the curtain descended, with the usual coloured
glares of red and blue fires, she rose to go to her


dressing room, when a part of her light dressing
caught a gas jet and immediately she was a mass
of fire, and whilst she was in flames an old actress,
Maggie Oliver, rushed to her. Without a moment’s
thought of the terrible danger to herself, she
pluckily put her arms round the burning girl to
extinguish the flames, when her own dress lighted
and a panic followed, both in front and at the back
of the theatre, and after strenuous efforts to save
Miss Osborne, brave Maggie Oliver was rescued,
but poor Miss Osborne passed out —“in the midst
of life there is the great Unknown.”
The next affair in which I was engaged was a
sort of “country-fair” affair in the Exhibition
Building that used to grace the Botanical Gardens.
Amongst our co-workers were Johnny Cowan, one
of our best comedians, who acted as clown, and
with old Hanslow, a brother clown, who was yelling,
“Roll up and see the greatest show this grim old
world has ever held since the days of Adam and
Eve. That was long ago, ladies, but here I am.
Hanslow, sixty years of age,” when Johnny
Cowan, the other clown, made the crowd roar by
shouting, “Sixty years ‘an’ slow’ at that.”
At any rate their jibing at each other got the
crowd together, and easily enticed them in to see
“the greatest tragedies on earth, with five murders,
ladies and gentlemen, three suicides, and as much
villainy as you like.”
In the show the villain, a little chap, killed the
goody man, a party over six feet high, who one
time happened to expire rather to the front of the
small stage in which we were playing,
1 had to come on as clown after the murder, but
seeing the long legs of the dead man protruding
from the front of the drop scene, I at once said to
him: “Get up, you long-legged grass-hopper, and
die further up the stage,”
“Right O, Bobby,” said the dead man, and he got
up again and expired beyond the drop scene. It
was very touching—as it is bad enough to see a
man die once, but when he dies several times, well,
there is a time limit to tear drops.


The Exhibition was a great building of timber,
and soon after our season it caught fire and burned
for two days. It was a wonderful fire in more ways
than one. The Art Society of New South Wales
held an exhibition there at the same time, and it
was the most successful Sydney artists ever held,
for all their pictures were burnt, and as they were
all heavily insured, it proved to be the first exhibi-
tion from which Australian artists got full values
for their pictures.
Oh, yes, it was a great fire, in fact, it was ii
remarkable conflagration of particular intensity
!** j* 1111
That is the printer objecting to such big words.
Me said his machine will go smash if I fire such
big jaw-breakers into it, so I guess I’ll give him a
week’s rest.
CHAPTER V.
The next adventure I had was in a pantomime at
the old Queen’s Theatre, called “Bluebeard,” in
which Emma Wangerheim was one of the principal
characters. Emma afterwards played through the
country the principal girl parts in Gilbert and
Sullivan’s immortal operas.
Emma was an Australian and had a wonderful
voice, and, like most young Australians, she was
not “profit” in her own country. Pattie Brown
played a small part in the same pantomime.
During that pantomime of “Bluebeard,” in the
comic scene the clown (Harry Stoneham) came
on with an umbrella which was attached by copper
wire from the flies. I, as the harlequin, with my
magic wand patted the stage and away shot the
umbrella up into the flies with the clown attached
to it, and as he reached the flies the wire had got
a kink in it, and Harry the clown fell to the stage
and broke his leg. We rushed to him as the curtain
fell, and in a broken voice he said; “Take me to
hospital, don’t tell my wife.” It was a tragedy as
we took poor Harry to the hospital with his face
painted and in his clownish gear—he pleaded that
his wife be not told.


Then came the great tragedians, W. E. Sheridan
and Louise Davenport. They played “King Lear”
to crowded houses, and during their greatest suc-
cess the Queen’s Theatre was condemned as unfit
to be played in, and as they could not get another,
they had to go elsewhere.
Some of us opened at what is now the Tivoli
Theatre, then called the Victoria Hall, where we
staged “Oliver Twist,” and Pattie Brown starred
in her great part, “Oliver.” But, as the public
accepted our parts, and assured our success, you
can guess we were not Oliver Twist (there’s a joke
there—please pause a minute or two).
We next started to rehearse a piece written round
the Kelly gang, which then monopolised all the
newspaper space. We called the play “Ostracised.”
When the piece was being cast, the stage manager,
Bill South, sang out to me : “Bob, you play Sergeant
Kennedy.” I took it on, but I remembered the
character I played was shot by the real Ned Kelly,
so I thought I’d have an easy part.
Later on he said: “Bob, you now play Sergeant
Steel.” I remarked: “I’m already shot.” “Then,”
said he, “revive yourself with a pair of whiskers
and do it again.” Steel was also shot, yet I had to
come back twice after that and get shot twice
again; so that I had to do four different characters,
and get shot each time —I handed the four parts
back to him with: “You go and shoot yourself.”
So I retired from being a target, as I only had one
life and one insurance policy.
The night the piece opened there was such a
crowd around that we could not get to the theatre,
and the actors were in high falutin’ condition. They
had been absolutely “hard-up” for weeks before,
and saw a fortune staring them. But, as the cur-
tain was going up, the Inspector of Police (not
Sergeant Kennedy) would not allow the piece to
be played as there was such strong public feeling
in the matter regarding the Kelly Gang.
After that a few of us opened what was then the
Alhambra Theatre, and which is now an auction


room. One night, whilst we were playing, a young
fellow came in to give his services as a sort of try-
out. I afterwards said to him: “You should stick to
this, you’ve got some talent.” He stuck to it, and
afterwards proved a great success in Australia and
England in the person of Charlie Fanning.
Harry Rickards, who since last mentioned had
been round Australia, had come back hard-up, so
a friend of his, Gordon, hired a ferry steamer for
Sunday afternoon harbour excursions, on which
Harry would sing, so that he and Gordon would
divide what money was paid for the trip.
Harry, getting another job, Gordon engaged me
to take Harry’s part. We shared about £5 each.
Just about this time there was a young girl who
used to follow wherever I’d sing, and one day, as
I was going past a hotel at the corner of King and
Castlereagh Streets, I noted she was a barmaid
there. I heard someone calling, “Bob, come here,”
and she said, “I’m going on the stage, Bob. What
do you think about it?” I asked her “Where?”
“Down in the basement of the Imperial Arcade.”
That lady is now one of London’s great singers,
well known to-day as Florrie Forde.
Our great ones start from small beginnings,
When they start well they get good innings,
And so come out with heaps of winnings.
I wrote that jingle, so please take a week’s holi-
day to recover from the shock
CHAPTER VI.
A Circus in Pawn.
Whilst we were making things lively at the
Alhambra there popped in, one night, Teddy
McLean, and he asked me to join his “Trouba-
dours,” a troupe of singers and dancers that didn’t
hesitate tackling Gilbert and Sullivan’s “Pinafore,”
“Struck Oil,” “Henry V.,” “Othello,” or the “Merry
Wives of Windsor,” and anything down to a
minstrel show, if necessary.


We played the country towns, and when at
Nyngan we struck wet weather and considerable
discomfort.
I also struck “a circus in pawn”; in fact, the
performers couldn’t make a do of it because of the
continual rain and surrounding mud, so the circus
folk lived in the local hotel until their funds were
exhausted, and when they were turned on a cold,
damp world, put up their own tent, not so much
to give pleasure in it, as to get some sort of comfort
out of it.
The hotel proprietor, a “Mr. Murphy,” seized the
horses, the trick donkey, and the rest of the outfit,
including the elephant. Murphy may have known
something about horses, but as for elephants, well,
he began to get a bit anxious; whilst the trick
donkey also began to play up a bit and make him
uncomfortable.
An elephant in a country pub. is about as incon-
gruous as an alligator in a church, and Murphy
was having the time of his life. He’d have got
grey hairs if he hadn’t been as bald as an egg.
I happened to look in one day, and I thought I'd
joke about it, so I said: “Mr. Murphy, I see you’ve
got a customer who always carries his trunk with
him.”
“What the devil do you mean?” said Murphy.
“The elephant, of course,” I s§id, and it was lucky
I had had some training as a harlequin, for unless
I had gracefully stepped aside, my head would have
stopped a bottle.
The circus company lodged in their tent until
Murphy came along and said to the “boss of the
show”: “Come and take yer old elephant, yer
donkey, and yer whole outfit, and get to blazes I”
The “boss of the show” saw he had a good thing
on, so he up and said: “No, thank you, Mr. Murphy,
you can keep the elephant and the whole box of
tricks.”
Murphy went off his head for a while, and it
ended by him giving the “boss of the show” a
tenner to take the whole concern off his hands 1


Thereafter, whenever Murphy had a nightmare,
there was always an elephant in it, and it was a
good joke for many a day after for all town folk
to put it up to young visitors to get them to ask
Murphy “What about the elephant?” to see Murphy
“go off pop.”
I must, however, point out that the “boss of the
circus” wanted that tenner to square up some town
folks who had been supplying them with tucker,
and help them to get to the next town, where they-
struck fine weather and to where the fame of
Murphy’s elephant had already spread, so that the
circus made a pile, and the “boss of the show” sent
Murphy not only the tenner, but the money for the
whole of the debt.
“Struck Oil” in a Dining Room.
We were at Nyngan when I mentioned the circus
affair. We had no hall to play in, so had to wait
till a great crowd of carriers from all parts of the
western district, of which Nyngan was the centre,
had finished their evening meal in the large dining
room of Murphy’s hotel, when we were given the
room for our show.
We fixed up a frieze and proscenium and played
“Struck Oil,” and we did strike it rich, for the
carriers, teamsters, shearers, and other hard nuts
that packed the room, paid six shillings a head to
see us perform. And it was worth it to us, for we
tried to act in practically a few square feet of floor
space, and we had to act pretty well like statues
to “exit right” through a window, through which
the hero and heroine and all the characters had to
“entrance and exit” during the performance.
Across the Blacksoil Plains.
From Nyngan we went to Nymagee in an old
Cobb & Co.’s coach. It was a long two days’ run,
and we broke the journey and camped the night
outside a little hotel shanty.
It was a cold night, and most of us were all
huddled together round a fire. Some of us camped
in the coach. I was one of them, and huddled up


against a party that seemed rather cold, so I slipped
out and joined up with the camp party. We found
out next day the old chap inside was a corpse being
sent on to Nymagee to be buried! I was about
twenty years of age then, and thank goodness that’s
the nearest I’ve been to death in my merry life.
At Nymagee we stayed nearly a fortnight, and
did such good business that we invested in our own
transport outfit (got our own motor cars, so to
speak) in the shape of a few broken-down buggies
and horses that had seen better days, and with these
in a solemn procession we entered Cobar. There
was no brass band to welcome us or any Union
Jacks to pull up or pull down.
In the centre of the .town in those days was a
great hill, which afterwards became the great Cobar
Copper Mine, and which, I believe, is now as silent
as surfing spots in midwinter.
We went in our unlovely procession to Bourke.
This time we were accompanied by a Cobb Coach.
It is lovely country, or was then—flat as a pan-
cake, with the road running in a straight line that
never seemed to change the whole day long.
We had got some distance out when it began to
rain and the soft clay road began to be rather a
task for the poor old nags, until finally the buggies
sank up to the axles, and Cobb’s coach, evidently
getting into a rut, sank till all passengers had to
camp on the roof.
Oh! it was lovely country for ducks, and there
we stayed till the rain stopped, and the ground
began to get a bit harder; then the sunshine came
out, and our girls got out and w_alked ahead. We,
however, put in the time getting coach, buggies,
and horses out of the clay.
It was a hard job—no “44-hour” business about
it, but we did it, and as we spat on our hands after
we got things right, we felt so proud of our job
that we felt we could have shifted the whole bloom-
ing earth if someone had sweetly asked us to do so
—and gave us something to eat.


However we jabbed the nags in, and began to
move ahead to look for our girls, and incidentally
look for something to eat.
Nine miles ahead, as night began to fall, we
found the ladies in an old deserted hut, where we
slept that night. Next morning we woke early as
we felt we were on the verge of starvation, even
looking at one of the mokes with envious eyes.
However, when we got out we found more trouble
—as Cobb’s coach horses had got loose. We all
helped to find these horses, and I can tell you
there’s no fun chasing stray horses on an empty
stomach. I don’t mean the horses were on an
empty stomach, that is, to say,—l mean, —well you
know what I mean.
Well, we caught the horses, and again we
struggled along, now fairly in the black soil
country, where the soil was most affectionate and
stuck to the buggy wheels closer than a poor rela-
tion sticks to a rich uncle, and through the black
soil the poor nags pulled hard.
In the afternoon we saw something white in the
distance. We plugged ahead. That white thing
opened out into a tent. We plugged harder. That
white thing was a surveyor’s camp!
Yes, they had plenty of tucker, and the “mutton
and raw onions” of that night has ever since been
to me a dream of delight!
CHAPTER VII.
OUR BOURKE ADVENTURES.
Oh! that “mutton and raw onions” made a
heavenly repast after our couple of days’ starva-
tion.
I learned a lot that trip, and one big point was
to ever afterwards have a big lump of sympathy
for the chaps out-back, who, as my old late friend
Harry Lawson aptly puts it, are:—
—trampin’, trampin’, tra-a-ampin’, in flies an’ dust an’
heat,
Or trampin’, trampin’, tra-a-ampin’ through mud an’ slush
an’ sleet;


In the meantime, owing to the mail coach being
bogged, the mails for Bourke were a good deal
behind time (just here I might prompt and say
that late mails are not so new, as present-day
growlers seem to fancy). Well, the late mails
called for a buggy, which came from Bourke and
went down the road and loaded up the letters and
other fancy goods; and then back to Bourke it went
and included our agent in the fancy goods. He
went on to arrange for our first appearance, as we
should have opened four days before.
Saturday was now to be our opening night, and
when we arrived in Bourke the town was packed
with shearers, rouseabouts, sly-grog sellers,
drinkers, non-drinkers, informers, repudiators,
troopers, boosers, wowsers, squatters, those who
squat because they do not want to work; and those
who squat because they don’t need to; but there
they were, crowded into Bourke waiting, as we
thought, waiting to welcome “Australia’s great
Juvenile Troupe of Troubadours.”
Didn’t our chests swell, when we saw the crowd
awaiting; and didn’t our heads also swell! Let
me tell you we were not a bad company and well
deserved the crowded town that we fancied wel-
comed us.
Amongst the company was the wonderful child-
dancer and actress “Baby” Merrick, who to-day is
the wife of Mr. Frank Walton, the much-esteemed
late ex-Secretary of City Tattersall’s Club.
The company also included Sammy McLean and
Dick Matthews, who played star parts from their
very childhood in leading Australasian theatres.
Well, with expanded chests we strolled down the
main streets of Bourke, smiling to the right and
left at the many who had come to honor us. We
used up nearly our whole stock of smiles until one
of us expressed in a blushing sort of way, that “it
was—er —very nice of them —er —coming into town
to —er —do such honor to our young and humble
selves.” And it was well we said “humble,” because
when the party we spoke to fired at us: “What! we


ain’t here for you, we’re all here for a big sly-grog
case coming on,” well our chests dropped flat like
the lid of a tin can, and as for our swelled heads,
well, they almost .cracked in shrinking.
We coughed a bit and tried to pass the incident
over and make believe we had heard all about the
sly-grog case almost before it started. Well that
night the amateurs of Bourke were playing in aid
of the hospital, I mean the financial proceeds were
in aid of the hospital (for, as many people know,
amateur performers, as a rule do put people in the
hospital in a practical sense).
These Bourke amateurs were not bad, and as
our turn was not till the following night, I made
up their faces and filled them with gags about “sly-
grog informers,” which practically brought down
the house.
Bourke gave us a good time, in fact it couldn’t
have enough of us for a month. Everything and
everybody was prosperous, the local hotel keepers
had to pay £2O weekly to hire their hotels, which
can now be had for about ten shillings, take it or
leave it, and generally the latter.
We liked Bourke folk and gave them “Struck
Oil,” “Pinafore,” “William Tell,” “Pantomime,” and
even “nigger show”; in fact, we could give any-
thing wanted except Wagner, and at a stretch I
believe, we could have had a go at his stuff if the
encouragement was sufficiently strong.
We had a lot of funny incidents during our stay
in Bourke, one of the funniest being the adventure
of Phil Isaacs, who to-day is well known as being
connected with the Original Mont de Piete next
the Tivoli Theatre, Sydney.
In those early days Phil was the leading jeweller
at Bourke, and as things were a bit prosperous, he
thought he would have his window nicely decor-
ated, so he got a local artist, who was also sign
painter and more often champion beer-shifter of
Bourke, to come along and do the art work.
The artist made a nice job of the name, “Phil
Isaacs,” and was painting the word “jeweller”


underneath, when he had no sooner done the first
three letters, then a pal came along and asked him
to “come an’ ’ave one”; and as he did not return to
the job for weeks after, everybody used to smile at
the sign “Phil Isaacs, Jew.”, and many pointed out
there was no necessity accentuating that fact.
No doubt Phil to-day will laugh at that incident
of nearly forty years ago, but Phil had another
incident in his career later on, which was without
doubt just as funny.
It appears that over Phil’s Mont de Piete offices,
in Castlereagh Street, the Sydney Press Club had
its offices, whilst on the upper floor was the office
of Arthur Wood, undertaker. Everybody’s friend,
J. F. Archibald, when editor of the “Bulletin,” hap-
pened to drift into the Press Club, and congratu-
lated the journalists with being so finely situated,
between a pawn shop and an undertaker.
CHAPTER VIII.
“The Very Same Dog.”
It is interesting to note just here that by a
strange coincidence I was thrown into touch with
an old friend mentioned in a chapter of this story
in the person of the highly-esteemed public gentle-
man, J. F. Flockart, who has held the office of
President of the Commercial Travellers’ Associa-
tion. The incident happened at the farewell to Sir
Joseph and Lady Cook at the National Club, where
I was entertaining Flockart with some funny sing-
songs and amusing tales. He reminded me of the
old incident of our theatrical party putting up at
the little roadside hotel twenty-five miles from
Cobar. It appears that in those days those associ-
ated with the stage were barred from pubs. I
don’t mean being barred from the bar—as in that
sacred quarter liquor is only served when they see
the glint of the coin, but as for putting up for the
night at such dens, the stage representatives—in
plain English—were “not in it.”
However, we were put up at that particular pub,
but Friend Flockart informed me the other evening


for the first time that it was a “put up job,” as he
did the job, which consisted of his guaranteeing
that we were respectable representatives of the
Thespian art. Np doubt his recommendation on
that occasion opened the eyes of the prejudiced
publican who. no doubt, spread the report that
Thespian people were respectable, notwithstanding
the generally accepted opinion of those days, as it
was common gag to say, “take in the clothes, girls,
actors are coming,” and the great respect the stage
representatives receive to-day from the public has
no doubt been considerably built by Friend Flock-
art’s recommendation.
Now let us get back to our yarn.
In our last chapter Phil Isaacs “held the stage”
at Bourke. I mean not in the sense of his business
as pawnbroker. At any rate at that time Phil had
a great-sized pigeon house stuck in the sky on
three poles about thirty feet high. The heat in
Bourke was something rather high, in fact it kept
a chap religious, as it brought forcibly to him that
heat is no good to a chap alive or dead. At the
time we were there, it was about 116 degrees in
the shade. What it was in the sun, well hardly
anyone was game to go to measure. Sleep was
almost an impossibility with nights so hot. Phil
Isaacs conceived a brilliant idea. I don’t knoAv
whether it was to have a shorter trip to heaven in
the event of any dangerous happenings, but he
fixed up a bed in the big pigeon house, and by
the means of a ladder he would gracefully retire to
rest. He was up above the ground heat —and no
doubt had sleepful evenings.
One night, however, someone wanted a ladder
so borrowed Phil’s. It may have been the painter,
after he had a couple of heat-thirst quenchers,
wanting the ladder to finish the window job re-
ferred to in the last chapter. However, the ladder
disappeared, but as Phil had gone aloft to slumber,
it didn’t matter till the middle of the night; a great
southerly storm came on after the terrific heat of
the day. Phil awoke, as the lightning was terrific,


and there was a chance of his “mountain home”
getting first touch. He rushed for the ladder that
wasn’t there, and his yells for help almost drowned
the booms of thunder. Phil dropped the upper
house business after that, and no doubt is going to
stick to “terra-firma,” as he won’t forget the
terror of his pigeon house, and he’ll be firmer on the
ground.
We made heaps of friends in Bourke, and one of
them resolved to show practical proof of his
esteem, so he lent us his two-horse sociable and
driver for the last Sunday we stayed in the town.
Yes, we were going to have a picnic, and by gosh!
it was a picnic! We had refreshments with us, and
the driver refreshed himself several times, so much
so that before long the horses, by the erratic driv-
ing, were going along the road zig-zag fashion
from side to side, so that anyone would think the
horses also had been refreshing with something
stronger than water. We asked the driver to drive
straight. “Right-©” said he. “I’ll show you some
straight driving,” so he whipped them up and they
broke every possible regulation as to speed of
driving, the country passed by like the film of a
cinema, until a tree round which the road turned
was run into and we all got the shock of our lives.
All crockery went smash and the sociable was a
complete wreck. It seemed as if it had taken the
bulk of the strong liquid and was completely down
and out. Yes, it was a picnic, for we had to walk
back.
I tell that bit of history because of what hap-
pened to me in Walgett, the next town we were
to open at.
I hadn’t been in the town five minutes before a
policeman came along and put his hand on my
shoulder.
“Good heavens, I thought, what have I done,”
and my brain went at top speed back through my
life to try and conjure up a murder, burglary,
treason or some other crime. No, I had led a nice,
good life.


Ah! the speed of my brain travelling brought to
my mind the speed of that Bourke sociable.
Perhaps the owner was having me arrested for
the damage. Oh, law, that may mean years and
years of monotonous gaol life!
Then the policeman (he was Governor of Walgett
Gaol) broke the awful train of thought, with say-
ing: “Hullo, Bob, don’t you remember me, we met
at a party at Mrs. Cohen’s.”
I didn’t remember him, in fact, but I smiled a
smile that nearly split my face.
“Anything doing here?” I said, trying to change
the subject.
“Oh, not much,” said he, “we arrested a chap
this morning for stealing a dog.”
“Poor chap,” I thought, as I remembered that a
minute before I was afraid I’d be in his place. “I’d
like to see him,” I said.
So into the gaol yard I was ushered. It was an
awful wall of half-saplings stuck in the ground.
I saw the prisoner. Poor chap, he was just a
road-walker, was humping bluey from West Bourke
when some way out a dog chummed up with him
and followed him into Walgett.
He was a godsend to the Walgett policeman.
The people had been so respectable that the gaol
was getting rusty. The policeman had to do some-
thing or the people would say the police was un-
necessary, in those days of taxation, and all that
sort of talk of street-corner politicians, so the
policeman when he saw “poor old Billo” coming
along with the dog, he asked him with much
anxiety, “was it his dog?” and when Billo said “No,”
he evidently said “Thank God!” and with much
e nthusiasm gripped Billo and gave him a home in
the local gaol.
“They’re treating me all right,” said Billo to me,
but I want to move along and strike Bathurst
before Christmas.”
“What sort of dog was it followed you?” I
asked him.


I remembered seeing a faithful-looking mongrel
waiting outside the gaol and plaintively peeping
through the cracks in the saplings to get a look at
the good old chum he met on the road.
“Was it a bony, ginger-colored mongrel, a dog
no one would waste energy to kick, let alone to
steal?”
“Yes, it’s the very same dog,” Billo said, with
a sort of yearning in his voice as if he felt the
affection of the animal in waiting for him.
The incident of “that very same dog,” I revived
years after in the Lyceum Theatre in “Red Riding
House,” with Robert Courtneidge and Alice Lear-
mar. I was given a good part as Simple Simon
and I used the gag of “the very same dawg,” and
to my surprise and delight it was taken up and
used around Sydney and round Melbourne the fol-
lowing year and even to-day, over a quarter of a
century after the affair, I often have that gag
passed to me, “What about ‘the very same dog,'
Bob?” In fact the artist who has headed these
notes with a sketch has put the dog in the picture.
Poor old “dawg.” I can’t lose him.
CHAPTER IX.
Walgett Whimsicalities.
Walgett was quiet, not only showing its quietness
in a lack of prisoners for the local policeman to
get busy on, as mentioned in the last chapter, but
also showing in a lack of audiences for our poor
comedy-company; at least, that is what we thought
when, after the doors of the hall in which we were
appearing, had been open for some time.
One of us, a bit braver than the rest, at 8 o’clock
pulled aside the drop-curtain to peep out at the
expected crowd, when all that was seen was the
manager, Teddy McLean, sitting in the front row
with folded arms and a heavy frown. It was a hot
night, and Teddy was annoyed as the curtain went
up to time. Teddy said: “Well, if nobody comes
in, you will have to play to me.” We thought it


waste of energy, so we talked it over behind a
scene, and wasted about half an hour arguing the
point, when one of the boys went out and rushed
back with a wild look, and shouted “Why, the place
is packed.”
And so it was. •
Being a hot night, as I said before, everybody on
their way to the hall, called in to see Thompson
of the local pub., and after a few refreshers came
along and packed our place. They were all in a
jolly frame of mind and body, so that every one
of our jokes went home with a bang.
The audience had thought as there was nothing
else to do in that quiet place, they might as well
come along to help “the poor cows,” but they were
so surprised with the show we gave them, that it
was not over till early next morning on account of
the numerous encores, and what time the audience
got home that day can well be conjectured, as they
followed us home to Thompson’s, and made him
bring out all his champagne, and, yes, they gave us
the time of our life!
The funniest part of the affair was that they came
every night after that, when we determined to
give them a different show each time from Nigger-
Minstrel to “Struck Oil” and pantomime, and as
the early morning triumphal march to our hotel
took place after each performance, we remembered
Walgett for many a day after.
The Walgett folks were more than generous to
us, as they unintentionally entertained us at what
was described as a “Great Shearers’ Concert in aid
of the Local Hospital.”
On the day the concert happened it had rained
heavily, and as the soil was of that black variety
that sticks closer than a bad mother-in-law, the
great audience of shearers that packed the place
had their boots chock-a-block with black soil that
a lso lined the floor.
There were two rival camps of shearers who
supplied, what they thought, was the best talent
ln each, but as each performer came on, his rival


camp evidently didn’t appreciate his “Sim-Reeves”
like vocalism, and simply criticised him by picking
lumps of black soil from their boots and shying at
him. It was looked upon by the performers as
cowardice to retire, so it was funny to see each one
as he was butchering “Let Me Like a Soldier Fall,”
to be at the same time dodging lumps of black
soil, just as if he were a boxer, dodging an oppo-
nent’s biffs.
As each performer came out, the same practical
criticism was given by the other side, until when
the stage performance had finished, the two
sections of the audience, evidently worked up to a
fever heat, began pelting each other, giving a
definite significance to the advertisement that the
whole show was “in aid of the local hospital,” which
no doubt next day was particularly busy.
We left Walgett for Brewarrina, but also left
one of our party, Sammy McLean, w r ho preferred
clerical work in town to our troubadouring in all
kinds of weather and conditions. I mention Sammy
just here, as he figured in a remarkable scene later
on.
We reached Brewarrina, which is about thirty
miles from Walgett, and had some fun in passing
through an aboriginal camp, where the short-skirt
fashion of to-day seemed to be the fad of the chief
officers of the aborigines of those days, whose sole
clobber was a torn shirt and his modesty. It was
funny to see him proudly march into his camp with
a pile of ’possums on his head for the evening meal.
He was received by “King Billy,” who in addition
to a shirt that had seen better days, wore a half-
moon brass plate with “King Billy” engraved on it.
We paid homage to Billy by giving him a cake of
’bacca.
Brewarrina saw us open in the dining-room of
the Royal Hotel, where we had to wait till the
eaters had departed, and we had a packed room;
in fact, packed so tightly that we had only a few
feet upon which to play. There being no stage,
we had to act on the floor, so that one can imagine
our discomfort, yet the audience didn’t seem to


mind it. The fact the pantomime we played,
“William Tell,” well, told us in the big amounts we
received. ? ? ?
When I was in Brewarrina I had a queer experi-
ence. I wanted a shave, so was shown to the local
barber. He flapped me down into a chair, splashed
my jaw with water, sfnd, without any towel or cloth,
began to drag the hair out by the roots by means
of a razor that had seen better days.
After much torture I said: “You’re finished?”
“No, I’m not,” he replied, with a sort of growl. I
said, “Well, I am,” and I tried to get up. He was
a big, bulky fellow, and he poked me back, and
held me in the chair by the head till he went over
my poor jaw with his weapon. He turned aside to
wet it, and I jumped out of the chair, left his fee
on it, and joined my company with an awfully sore
face.
“Been to have a shave, Bob?” said a local
inhabitant.
“Yes,” I said, “I went to your local barber, and
he nearly killed me.”
“Oh, he’s alright,” said the local chap, “he is only
the local butcher, and he only has fits sometimes I”
I’ve shaved myself ever since.
At Brewarrina there was a travelling circus that
tempted our Jimmy Matthews from us. We missed
him, and also missed Sammy McLean, who had
left us at Walgett, and not till some years after did
I hear about either of them.
It appears that a weary, whiskered and tattered
party was slowly tramping down from Tamworth
to Sydney. It was Sammy McLean of our happy
troubadour days; and when near Scone, as dark-
ness had come on, he begged of a local party for a
place to sleep for the night.
“Down in that hut,” said the local party, “you
can doss; another bloke went in there before it
got dark.”
So the night passed on.
Next morning Sammy went down to the adjacent
creek to have a wash and a drink. There was


someone there before him. It was the earlier
dosser from the hut. They washed together, as
there is a fraternal spirit among road-swaggies
that is in no other rank. One had a drying-rag, and
he passed it on to the other. He looked at him for
a moment. The other looked back; there was a
fretting of eyebrows and a moment of thought.
Then a shout: “You’re Sammy McLean, I’ll swear,”
said one. “Y-Yes, and —bless my soul—if you
ain’t Jimmy Matthews,” and the hearty hand grip
they gave told tales of woe and misfortune that
went back to their merry troubadour days they
left in the long past.
CHAPTER X.
A Hot Time.
We had a good time at Brewarrina, and stayed
over our proper time, so much so that we had to
make up for lost time by taking a short cut across
country towards Narrabri. Our track led us to the
Barwon River, which being in the dry season, was
a series of ponds and flats, with steep and treacher-
ous banks. As we were crossing, I began to crack
a joke about “flats” and “banks”; how one has an
effect on the other in business life, but the way
across the river bed was so rocky that it took all
my brain-energy to give me sufficient mental
exercise to ascertain how to keep my seat.
Getting across was bad enough, but the climb
up the other bank was so steep that all our party
was jumbled up in a heap, so that you could not tell
the other from which. On the top of the bank we
got out to count up, and found we had lost our
pianist. As he was an absolute necessity to our
work, we started to search for him, and found him
at the bottom of the bank asleep. He had simply
rolled off into the sand and lay at the foot of the
hill as if he had “passed out.”
The fact of the matter was he was always asleep
except at mealtimes and when he had to play. He
was a funny type —long and thin —but always with
an eye to the funny side of life. He was a Dane,


and his name was Lohse, Whenever he’d be asked
his name, being a pianist, he would say: ‘Tm Low
C on the piano,” and he’d laugh for about ten
minutes after the hearer had taken about five to
understand what he was driving at.
However, we were off again on our way to
Narrabri, stopping for lunch at a little place called
Pilliga. During the meal time, the coach-driver
took off one of the wheels to grease it, letting the
axle rest on a box. After we had our lunch, we
came out and found the coach-driver wet with
perspiration, trying to put the wheel back again;
when, in the confusion, the box was worked away
from the axle, the coach fell, and a big lump of
humanity rolled from the top and flattened out the
poor mechanic at the wheel. It was sleepy Lohse
once again, who had taken advantage of the stop
of the coach to go off into a sound snooze, and
as he rolled off the coach on to the coach-driver,
the language was highly colored and mixed—both
English and Danish.
However, we all got together, and did our bit to
put the wheel on, and were about to be on our
track again, when a squatter came up to us and
asked for a lift in to Narrabri. We let him join the
party, and away we went, over the sandy plains,
with the summer sun scorching like the roof of a
baker’s oven.
It WAS hot.
People can talk about the “hot time” politicians
have in their assemblies, or aldermen have in their
wild suburban meetings, but there’s nothing as hot
as creeping along the sun-blistered sandy surface
of the western desert between Pilliga and Narrabri.
We felt the heat somewhat acutely. Our tongues
began to swell and we hoped to Heaven we would
strike a farm or something where we could get a
drink. We did strike something. It was a homel
We rushed it—even the horses seemed to fancy
there must be water there, but when we got there
We found the place had been deserted, and all we


found were two beer casks filled with what at one
time had been water, but were now half full of a
green, slimy liquid that we, in our frenzied thirsts,
rushed. The squatter was evidently particularly
thirsty, for he seemed like a maniac and drank the
water —drank deeply of it, so much so that he
collapsed in the coach after five miles had gone.
We thought he had passed away, but one of the
ladies of our party —Miss Nita Franks—luckily,
found in her belongings some whisky, the magic
touch of which so revived the squatter that before
we reached Narrabri he was his old self again!
[Of course, I know in disclosing this anecdote,
that I will be rushed by whisky proprietors as to
what brand was on the bottle, but any advertising
man interested in the matter should see the adver-
tising agent of this journal without disturbing the
trail of my story.]
We found Narrabri packed with people for the
races. It was evidently to get there as speedily
as possible that the squatter borrowed a lift from
us, also, perhaps, to save all his money so that
he could invest it on some would-be lucky horse.
Just here I might point out that, riding in a race,
one of the jockeys fell and broke his collarbone,
but Dick Morris, who was then editor of the
“Walgett Mail,” and whose horse the jockey was
riding, had the jockey looked after, and paid him
for over a year after. Dick, by the way, was after-
wards, along with my old friend, Sam Johnston, a
well-known city advertising man, on the Australian
“Star,” now the Sydney “Sun,” and the last I saw
of him was way up in Bundaberg, where he was
inspecting canefields.
We had a good time at Narrabri, with packed
houses and packed pockets, and left as happy as
larks to reach Gunnedah, practically singing all the
way. “Everything in the garden was lovely,” but
we struck a surprise at Gunnedah.
We had been well announced, and Gunnedah
folks seemed to be a prosperous lot, so on our
first night we expected to see the theatre crowded.


At the time for opening, the only individual in
the audience was a youngster, who had probably
crept through a window. There was, however, a
good crowd outside, but none of them would
venture to come in. We put our heads together,
and resolved to all act as “boosters,” but although
we made remarkable declarations as to the wonder-
ful exhibition that was to be seen inside—“ Shak-
espeare in all his glory was not arrayed as one of
these,” —that the terpsichorean effect that we were
to give them had never been seen this side of the
days of ancient Babylon—the crowd stood stiff and
cold.
Finally we decided to let them in for nothing,
but even then they would not venture!
It appears that Gunnedah had been inflicted with
some theatrical company that had proved an utter
fraud. It had been widely boomed, and Gunnedah
rushed it, but were disappointed and were evidently
of opinion that we were an echo of the previous
theatrical crowd.
However, I determined to get at least one in, so
I went up to a burly chap with wiry hair sticking
out all over his face, who was smoking a pipe
nearly the size of his hat. I threw out my chest
and posed in front of him. I felt like George
Rignold in “Henry V.”
I cleared my throat, put my left hand on my
chest, and made an oration.
I mentioned that, in order to educate Gunnedah-
ians as to the stage possibilities, I was very proud
to say that he was to be the selected one from
Gunnedah to lead the crowd, free of charge, through
the majestic portals of the barn that stood for the
theatre.
I believe I made the best speech of my life.
He listened to me for a long time, unbending,
stiff and stern. I was tired. I, however, had evi-
dently touched his heart, for he came towards me
as I was out of breath and patted me on the
shoulder with a pat that almost knocked me out:
“I like to hear you talk,” he said, “and I will tell
you what I will do. I’ll go in if you shout!”


CHAPTER XI.
The Rent.
We went ahead with our performance at Gunne-
dah, and the dead-heads of the first performance
were so pleased that they acted as walking adver-
tisements for us, giving us five other nights of
packed houses.
We might have been going on there yet, only our
manager, McLean, sued Cobb and Co., the coach
proprietors, because their coach in taking us to
Bourke arrived a couple of days late, so that we
missed two nights’ performances, with the adver-
tising and the company upkeep extra expense;
McLean therefore went for £2OO damages.
The case meant us all coming back to Sydney,
and we came up to the city with expanded chests,
ready to take our places in the Supreme Court as
necessary factors in the glorious administration of
our civic law.
Some of us spent a day or two in the Public
Library hunting for legal names that actors would
use.
I remember I spent a night and a half with a
wet towel round my head writing the great speech
I intended delivering in court. I was going to give
Shakespeare a bad doing. Shylock’s soliloquy
wouldn’t be in it; in fact, I gave my proposed
oration before the looking-glass a couple of times
until I was quite satisfied with myself, and next
morning I was ready to stalk out with one hand in
my breast and the other swinging to the breeze,
when just as I was about to proudly stalk to the
court who should block the way, but Manager
McLean! He came up with a smile that nearly
cracked his cheeks, and slapped me on the shoulder.
“It’s all right, Bob,” said he, “Cobb and Co. have
paid up in full all I asked them.”
I was in a sense disappointed, for my great
oration would not now have its opportunity, so I
thought out most what I remembered of it and
tried to turn it round for an appeal to McLean,
that as he had got two hundred golden sovereigns


for the asking, that it wouldn't be a bad idea to
split it up amongst the company. I really made a
splendid speech about it, bringing in the sweetness
of our fraternity, and how we all had faced the
trials and troubles of the far west and how beauti-
ful it would be if we also faced the joy and happi-
ness of some of the cash that had been so easily
won. •
McLean said: “Yes, Bob,” and my heart beat
like the knob of an electric alarm clock.
I thought it would be between £lO and £l5 each
—but my heart stopped beating and my jaw dropped
with a thud when he gave us one pound. He thus
showed the Scotch trait that we never expected.
Ever since then I have not been quite so enthusi-
astic over big-heartedness in Scots, although some
of my most liberal and intimate friends have come
from the bonnie land.
The rest of the company got as much as I got
from McLean, and as their expectations got just
as big a knock, we all left him to have the best
time he could on the bit of a pile he got from Cobb.
That meant a lot of us out of work, and as there
were many others in the same condition we formed
amongst ourselves a sort of “Community Com-
pary,” to open where the Tivoli now is, it being
then called the Victoria Hall.
Our company was a big concern of about thirty
perrormers, and was a big jump from our previous
pany of ten.
It might also be pointed out that the company
was a sort of socialistic concern, that is, all had
equal shares in whatever profits would be made.
Needless to say, as all were equal, there was a
lovely rush for every man to play the hero and
every girl to play the heroine. This stuck matters
up tor some time; in fact, it tended to break up
the whole affair. At last, after a heap of anxiety,
persuasion, and other such things, we decided to
vote for hero and heroine, and to pick the other
parts out of a hat.
Amongst the company was Mr. Frank Walton,
late Secretary to City Tattersall’s Club. He played


the villain. Nobody else would touch that part; so
Frank, with his big - heart, took it up.
The play was called “Ten Nights in a Bar Room/’
One may perhaps say “no wonder everybody wanted
to be the hero,” because the title of the play sug-
gested free drinks and all the joys appertaining
thereto.
My part was the good young man whom the
villain was to attempt to lead astray.
My resistance to his wicked temptations and my
grand battling for the glories of truth and justice
were to be the great features of the play.
I entered from the right, and took my place at
the side of a small table facing the audience. I
was dressed very nicely in light tweed. I had hired
the suit for the play, and it fitted me as if it was
made to order, only a bit short and a bit tight. As
I mentioned, I sat facing the audience and ruminat-
ing on the wickedness of the dastardly villain.
He then entered from the left and sauntered
heavily across the stage, flopping into a chair at
the other side of the table. He frowned heavily at
me, pulled his moustache almost off. I stood up
and dramatically exclaimed: “You wretched villain
—er —you have—er—followed me like a blood-
hound,” and as I pointed my finger at him with all
the scorn I could raise, it made a fine situation
that got a good clap from the audience.
He quietly drew a revolver, I hurriedly gripped
it. With his other hand he rapidly drew a long
knife, and in a moment we were at grips.
It was a heart-rending affair. I got him down.
The audience cheered in their excitement. We
struggled in a death grip. He tried to crush me
to the floor, which, by the way, was a wooden one
and very uneven. I was being crushed to the floor
by the brutal strength of the villain, and ;n a
moment I was forced to sitting on the floor and
something ripped. I was worked up to the excite-
ment of the audience. The cruel villain held his
knife between his teeth, and his hands clenched,
and was about to grip my throat. It was a thrilling
situation. I slipped from his grip—grabbed his


revolver —and as I swiftly rose from the floor, the
villain, cowed, stood at the back of the stage. With
a triumphant air I turned on him and pointed the
revolver; as I did so my back was turned towards
the audience, which up to then was terrified with
the tragic situation, but a scream of wild laughter
roared out as the curtain came slowly down.
I could not understand the laughter till I after-
wards found that the wooden, uneven floor held a
rusty nail that had been busy where I sat.
We had a six-night season, the second night being
packed, no doubt thinking the rusty nail affair was
part of the performance, but the audience seemed
disappointed as we had got a carpenter to remove
all rusty nails previously, and at the end of the
week we investigated the takings and found how
much we had earned for the week, and on alloca-
tion we got five shillings each!
But we paid the rent, although we, for a long
time after, concluded that it was the “rent” of the
first night that spoilt the show.
Five shillings as the hero’s fees was not much
good to me, so I left that party and was asked by
the Howard family to join them in a country tour
with Robertson’s great play, “School.”
I thought that was rather too high class for the
country folk where we intended going, so I sug-
gested that we travel on “Struck Oil.” Howard,
after some persuasion, thought as I did, and so the
“Struck Oil” company went out to win laurels, and
cash, if possible.
We decided to open at Sunny Corner. The name
seemed inviting, and silver mining was in full swing
there at the time. Some visiting speculators were
there at the time, so they strolled in, saw the per-
formance, and as they were giving a champagne
supper to the principal residents that evening, they
invited the Howard Company to join up.
It was a jolly party, and two persons there took
my special fancy, one was a jovial chap named
Robert Sands. He was afterwards one of the big
men of Australia’s greatest printing firm, John
Sands, Limited.


The other special individual at that champagne
supper was a very popular clergyman from Oberon.
He was full of fun and merry sayings, and we felt
he was a real fine, jolly chap, even though before he
left he went amongst all present at the height of
jollification and with a smile of satisfaction booked
from practically everyone there a donation for his
new church building.
I never forgot those two jolly individuals, for
one was spreading good ideas from a pulpit, and
the other has since been spreading good ideas from
a printing press, I was going to make a joke about
the Sands of Time, but I’ll let you off with this old
song:— Behind the Scenes.
When but a little boy, it was my greatest joy
To visit the theatre, I’ll admit;
How happy then I’d be the performances to see,
When seated in the gallery or pit.
I thought that all was real that the curtain would
reveal,
But I soon found what acting really means;
So began to understand, though in front it may be
grand,
It’s very different just “behind the scenes.”
The comedian on the stage who is causing lots of
fun
His heart may yet hang heavy in his breast;
Whilst the man who plays the king, though it seems
a curious thing,
In private may be very poorly dressed.
And the ladies, all so fair, who go flying through the
air,
And who look like little angels, yet instead
They often have to roam into a wretched home,
And often-times go supperless to bed.
Whilst those who play the parts of strong men with
stony hearts
May look as if their tempers were like fiends’;
If you saw them when away, you would very likely
say
They’re the mildest-looking men “behind the
scenes.


I've no doubt you are aware that there’s many a
married pair
Who in public seem so tender and so kind;
But could you only see them in their privacy,
A different state of things no doubt you’d find.
There’s the actress who’s the rage with her lover on
the stage,
They look as if they both were in their teens;
Though often when you hear each one call the other
“dear,”
They hate each other just “behind the scenes.”
CHAPTER XII.
Pattie Browne.
Well, we left Sunny Corner, and went to Orange,
where we had little luck; in fact, the attendances
were rather meagre, and so it was a sort of a “Sour
Orange” to us.
A little incident will show how sour the folks
were.
We were about to start the show one night when
there was but one solitary person in the house at
8 o’clock. We decided to wait a little while before
the curtain went up, in the hope that a few more
would stray in, and so give us some encouragement,
for there’s little fun acting to one individual, for
you see he may go to sleep, and all our histrionic
efforts would be wasted.
At five minutes past eight a second person came
in, and, though the rest of the theatre was empty,
he considered the single chap was sitting in the
seat that he wanted, so he demanded he should get
out of it. “That’s my seat,” he roared at him.
The first chap didn’t like that sort of demand,
considering the rest of the theatre was empty, and
so he refused to get up. Then the second chap got
nasty and went for him as the curtain rose.


We didn’t act, however; we left it to the two
struggling chaps on the floor below; so we watched
them as they wrestled away; in fact, the whole
company came on the stage and got a heap of fun
watching the two gladiators punching each other
and rolling over the floor—now one up, now the
other.
It was a great sight.
We did enjoy it, and after about twenty minutes
they both were dead tired, got up with black eyes,
sore noses, and torn clothes, shook hands, and went
out to the nearest pub.
Oh, yes, we did enjoy it, but too many nights of
that sort of fun didn’t pay, so we left that town
as soon as we could.
On our journey we decided, instead of coming on
to Sydney hard up, to try and make a hit at Rich-
mond. As we were playing “Margaret Catchpole”
and “Oliver Twist,” and we heard that Margaret
Catchpole’s grave was at Richmond, hence we
thought it would be a good ad. for us. Richmond
folk, however, must have had enough of Margaret
Catchpole, so they didn’t bother to hear what we
had to say about her. That left us rather hard up,
so we dropped “Margaret” at Windsor, and stuck
on “Struck Oil,” which helped us to strike oil just
as “East Lynne” is the last hope of every manager
who is at his wits’ end what to produce to get
something to pay the rent.
We, however, didn’t get a fortune at Windsor,
but managed to raise sufficient to get us back to
Sydney, and as I was mighty short, the manager
owing me several pounds, it was a case of a change
from “Oliver Twist” to “All of a Twist.”
After a little while waiting, in Sydney, like
Micawber, “for something to turn up,” I found that
pretty little Pattie Browne was fixing up a com-
pany, in which she gave me a part. There was a
fine collection of good old chaps—Bill South, Sam
Howard, and George Collier. The new company,
which was to star at the Victoria Hall (now the


Tivoli), was widely advertised, and so nearly half
of Sydney wanted to appear in it, at least so it
seemed to us.
We were a bit anxious to stop the pestering
march of would-be actors, so we arranged a scheme
to keep them away. When one would come along
we’d welcome him and put him on the stage, and
ask him to show what he could do. He would
immediately begin a wild oration, extending one
arm to its length, with the other stuck in the breast
of his waistcoat. We took the precaution to place
him over the trap-door, and just as he was in the
middle of the declamation a crash of tins would fall
from the flies to the stage; at the same time'the
trap door would flop and the terrified elocutionist
would fall into the cellar, where one of the boys
would set the red fire alight. It would flare up,
and the frightened chap would notice the open door
to a passage at the side of the theatre, and he’d
run for his life. After we did this on a few we
were not so troubled with would-be Irvings.
The Pattie Browne season was rather good, for
we all liked Pattie and acted our very souls to give
her every success.
Pattie was a Sydney girl, and, with her mate,
Bella Camb, was originally a show-girl in a panto-
mime at the old Queen’s Theatre as Sally Browne.
When Sally got popular, she asked us not to call
her “Sally” but to call her “Pattie,” and, as she
always “took the cake,” we never hesitated.
When I finished with Pattie Browne’s show I
got an invite from John L. Hall from Adelaide to
do harlequin in a pantomime with Tilly Lake as
Columbine, So off to Adelaide we went on the old
“South Australia.” We fancied ourselves some-
what, and were sure we’d be the stars of the trip.
However, it is always difficult to gauge the taste
of the public, and on that trip We were nowhere in
popularity, as the sister of Ned Kelly, the bush-
ranger (Kate Kelly), was also a passenger, and the
publicity she had got over the doings of her
brother’s bushranging, culminating in the hanging
of her brother, Ned, made her the centre of attrac-


tion, so that “the beautiful Tilly Lake, the dainty
Columbine, and the clever Robert Watson, the
popular harlequin,” who had been sent for from
over one thousand miles, were nowhere.
Kate Kelly, however, was no fool. She took all
this publicity and made as much of it as she could,
so that when she reached Adelaide she was a world-
wonder, and got an engagement as a barmaid at a
local hotel at a highly remunerative salary. Fellows
would come in, not so much to ease the thirst of
their throats, as to ease the hunger of their eyes.
Adelaide was a hot spot. We had struck it in
mid-summer, and dancing was hard work. Still, we
made good, as the show had a lot of good stars in
it, including Herbert Flemming, who afterwards
became famous in his theatrical enterprises, bring-
ing out the great monologue entertainer, Melb-B-
Spur and other stars.
After a five weeks’ run the panto, ended, and I
wanted to get back to Sydney, as the hot weather
kept up, and I didn’t care for it too much, as it
reminded me of the place where those people go to
who go to the theatre “on the nod,” and so don’t
pay.
The steamer, however, was packed. No berths
were available, so I decided to sleep on deck. I,
however, wanted something to make myself com-
fortable. I, therefore, asked the cook to let me
have the use of a blanket for the trip, hence the
first night I had a comfortable snooze in the bright,
dreamy moonlight. The next night, however, the
blanket had disappeared from where I had placed
it, and I had to sleep on a bare seat. I found after-
wards that the cook was also a bit of an engineer,
as he made that blanket a rather excellent source
of revenue winning, for he let someone else pay
him for the use of it for the trip, and it went to
someone else tile third night.
I always remember that cook as a financial
expert, and when later on Joe Cook became Federal
Treasurer, I often wondered for a bit if he were
the same chap.


CHAPTER XIII.
“A Gay Time.”
Shortly after, J, C. Williamson and Gurner sent
for me to take a part in the pantomime, in which
I acted as “Weeping Willie.” The theatre had been
renovated, and extrh money was being charged.
The former pit that was at the back of the stalls
was done away with, and the whole ground floor
area of the Sydney Theatre Royal was made one
"stalls” area.
The company that produced the panto, was a
striking one, embracing Emma Chambers, who had
been indented from London for the part of “Boy
Blue,” the principal boy.
When the prices were raised, as pointed out, the
public got annoyed, and only came in meagre
patches. The old price of a shilling jumped to three
shillings as the price for the stalls; hence the panto,
was a financial failure. However, Williamson
brought Carrie Swain along from America and
fixed up a company, for which I was surprised to
find myself hooked up by a cab and carried along
almost before I knew where I was, to play the lover
and leading comedian in “The Tomboy.”
I evidently did it properly, for a double encore
was given at the fall of the curtain, in which I was
pulled in as being responsible for at least half of it.
I had a good deal of fun during the run of that
play. When I would leave the theatre, a mate of
wine, Joe Wangeheim, would come along the road
with me, and before the Cathedral of St. Mary’s he
would chum up with an old blind fiddler and hum
Wy principal song to him, “I’m going to get married
uext Sunday,” and before long the old musician
would be jerking the tune just as if he’d been play-
in f» it for ages past.
After “The Tomboy” had a good run I got a
Wessage from the Brough & Boucicault Company
at Adelaide to come across to play in “Jack Shop-
Pard.” It was a great company, and included Fanny
“Teddy” Royce, Emma Temple, Bessie
Major and William Ward, the great dancer. “The


Forty Thieves” followed, in which I had to play
Hassan, the Captain of the Thieves. I only got a
short notice, which meant staying in my room a
couple of nights with a cold water bandage on my
head as I stuffed it with the songs and gags of the
Captain. However, the piece went well, and wor?
us many invitations, including one from a gentle
man introducing himself as Mr. Lee, a partner of
Marjeroni and Wilson, who were big theatrical
people in Melbourne. Mr. Lee chummed up with
our treasurer, Harold Ashton, and when the latter
told him we were going to have a big regatta next
day on Lake Torrens, and that all the ladies and
gents, of the company were to have a great day,
he smiled and rubbed his hands with much joy.
Amongst other events was to be the sculling
championship amongst the male and female pic-
nickers. It was an awful pull, but we were cheered
up by our new friend, Mr, Lee. He made himself
particularly merry, just as if the whole affair was
his; in fact, we all looked upon him as a merry
millionaire.
He told me to tell the ladies that for whoever
won the race he had ordered bangles and watches
and other dainty presents as trophies, which he
afterwards presented with much high-sounding
talk, winding up with a general invitation to all
ladies and gentlemen to join him in a jolly cham-
pagne and oyster supper at the Prince Alfred
Hotel, King William Street, Adelaide.
Oh! it was a great night, and a great crowd; in
fact, Lee had something like two hundred enjoying
his kind hospitality.
He was merry, and we determined to toast his
health as soon as the liquor went round. Then we
couldn’t say too much about him. He was modest,
ajid slipped into a side room. We, however, went
on saying nice things about him until the whole of
the champagne had been swallowed. Then we
continued saying nice things about him, about our-
selves and about everyone else we knew and didn’t
know. Oh, it was a wonderful time!


We wondered why more champagne wasn’t
forthcoming, so we took it as a hint to go home,
as we had already consumed quite a flood of expen-
sive liquor with our oysters. Some of us went into
an adjoining room to get our hats, and found our
friend Lee with boxes of choice cigars with which
he filled our pockets, and sent us home bright and
gay. It seemed a long journey home that night,
with ourselves full of cigars and other things (not
counting the oysters and champagne), and when
we reached our hotel, which was all in darkness,
we had to climb the verandah posts and get onto
the upper balcony, find a convenient door, and down
the dark stairway to let the ladies in.
Oh! it was a great night, and didn’t we sleep
after it all, dreaming nice things of our big-hearted
friend Lee! Oh! yes, we dreamed a lot about it,
but we didn’t dream of the awful reaction that was
to happen next morning.
It breaks my heart to have to confess it, even at
this long period, for let me whisper gently that
“Lee —was —a —bad—egg!”
It appears he had called upon the landlord who
provided the sumptuous banquet, and had filled him
with some wondrous stories of wealth, and so much
did he work into the soft heart of that landlord,
that the latter even lent him his dress suit for the
evening! and now that landlord was looking for
that dress suit, and the man who wore it!
It was a long, lonely look, but there he stood, at
the theatre asking us where had Lee got to, as he
hadn’t paid for the spree of the previous evening.
Not for the cigars, not for the champagne—no, for
nothing at all.
We explained we had only known Lee that day,
and couldn’t give the landlord any idea of where
“the man who shouted” had got to. However,
before we “went on” that night, Detective Dualey
brought along a book of photos of criminals, and
asked did we recognise anyone in it. I was the
first to answer, and pointed out, with my eyes
starting out of my head, a smiling face, for blest if
it wasn’t our generous friend Leel


It appears he had somehow got out of gaol,
where he’d been located as a notorious criminal.
He slipped out of keeping, and gave us a good time,
made a splendid haul at the principal jewellers,
and won the hearts of all the ladies, to whom he
presented the stolen jewellery, slipped from the
landlord without paying him, and in a day or two
inadvertently slipped into the grip of the police
again. The ladies, when they ascertained that the
jewellery presented to them had been stolen, also
slipped —down to the jewellers with the presents
Lee had presented them with. So the whole affair
was a slipping, of which the principal slipper, Lee,
ultimately found his outside path too slippery, and
slipped into safe custody again.
CHAPTER XIV.
It was an interesting procession of the actresses
marching down to the police court to return the
bangles, brooches, watches and bracelets that had
been presented to them by Lee, but it was felt it
was better to return the gold bracelets instead of
having to wear steel ones. However, we saw the
last act of the comedy with Lee in the prisoner’s
dock. He looked particularly jovial in the dock, in
a dainty overcoat he had stolen to hide his evening
dress, and as he stood there in the dock he threw
sundry winks at the pretty girls whose curiosity
had brought them to see the last of the chappie who
made presents to them, and the cold up-nosed look
they gave him in return would have frozen anyone
who didn’t have such a nerve. However, Lee was
taken back to gaol, where his merry beak didn’t
matter much in the long sentence he was under-
going.
Shortly after this I received a note from J. C.
Williamson in Melbourne to come across and join
up in a production called “The Streets of London.”
I was with a great company, including George
Anson, Phil Beck, H. H. Vincent, Oily Derving,
Frank Cates, Captain de Burgh, Isabel Morris,
Patty Browne and Edowin Bryer. This was in


August, 1887. I had a good time in this play,
although I had to work hard; in fact, I had two
parts. One was that I was Dan, son of the Puffy
Jones the Pieman, who was Anson. One scene
that used to take the fancy of the audience was the
second scene in Puffy’s home, where we all sat
round the table eating pies. It was funny to see
the audience roaring with laughter as we ate the
pies, my part being particularly amusing to the
audience because I ate more pies than anyone else.
The fact of the matter was they were real good
hot pies bought by the property man just before
the opening of the play, and in order to get through
my pile of pies I ate very little else during the day.
You can understand I went for those pies with con-
siderable avidity; and how the audience roared-
when I ventured on my fourth pie. Strange that
simple things like that took the fancy of an audi-
ence. I have seen the same thing in many plays;
just shout the commonplace on the stage, and the
audience will roar. One chap may accidentally tear
his pants in real life, and the people who see it
won’t think it funny; but let him tear his pants on
the stage and it makes a scream of laughter. It is
the simple things that are funny after all, and one
doesn’t wonder at Charlie Chaplin just slipping on
a banana skin and causing a scream. Well, I didn’t
mind the audience enjoying my eating the pies, for
I enjoyed that part myself. The part I had to work
hard on was helping Williamson. He was leading
character—“ Badger sort of Dick Swiveller, and
as he was manager of the show and was almost
overwhelmed with the business side he had to
“wing” the part, hence didn’t know it very well.
He therefore picked on me to prompt him from the
side or whatever part of the stage he happened to
be, and by gosh, it was a tidy part I had. First he
would be making a declaration on the left side of
the stage, and I’d be giving him the start of the
sentences; then he’d suddenly cross the stage, and
this poor devil had to fly around the back scenery
and jump over supporting props to be ready for
him on the right side, and as he was pretty active,


I got enough exercise dashing from one side to
another to digest all the pies that I ate in a scene
or two before.
It was in this piece that the “big fire scene” was
first introduced to any great size in Australia, and
it took well, particularly as we had a real fire-
engine and horses in that scene. A fire-engine and
horses are interesting enough in the street, but on
‘he stage, bless my soul, they created a sensation,
~>ecially when the hose was run out to put out
fire that never burned! How people used to
cheer this fire business, and when the hero’s home
would crash to the stage through its apparent burn-
ing, how the crowd roared!
It is hard to explain this love of the audience for
this scene. It seems the same sort of appreciation
that the average crowd has for the sensational. It
seemed the same sort of interest that was evinced
for Kate Kelly when she journeyed to Adelaide a
couple of months before. However, that fire scene
was one of the best things that cheered the audi-
ence, though it was one of the worst scenes so far
as actors were concerned, for all of us came on in
that scene; in fact, in order to make as great a
crowd as possible, we used to run in on to the stage
any stragglers in the adjoining lane. But the
stragglers never came in twice, for they got what
we got every night—the fumes from the red fire,
being of a gaseous sulphuric nature, almost choked
us, and so we hated that scene with the hardest
hate we could catch, and were mighty glad when
the hero would dash through the sulphuric fumes
in the glare of the red fires and save the important
documents, holding them aloft, as the curtain came
down amidst the wild cheers of the excited audience.
Oh, yes, that play took on, and gave Williamson
the tip for sensational stuff that afterwards made
his fortune.
CHAPTER XV.
When the sensational play was ended, Janet
Achurch engaged me as her comedian for her Ibsen
and other problem plays, including “The Doll’s


House” and “Camille.” The latter was a wonderful
affair, and Janet made a remarkable study of her
part. She represented the questionable type of
women, and kept a house of peculiar morals, if any.
Armand Duval, represented by Herbert Flemming,
was a young chap visiting that house, but fell in
love with her and she fell in love with him.
She, knowing what her type meant in comparison
with Armand’s, although she loved him so deeply,
kept her affection secret from him, although Armand
earnestly pleaded for her heart. Armand’s father,
however, heard of his son’s affection, and knowing
Camille’s type was not of a class suitable for his
son, pleaded as a father only can to her to tell the
son plainly it was not for him to expect her affec-
tion, although it broke her heart to say so.
Armand then left her, dejected, and went out into
the world.
Time passed, and Camille’s health began to
weaken. The fast life of her early days and the
heart-parting with Armand brought on consump-
tion. She knew her end was near, and she sent for
Armand to look once upon his face, and ask his
pardon for her hypocrisy in telling him she never
loved him, for her heart was ever his, although she
felt it was for him that they parted as they did.
Armand comes into the room. Camille, exhausted
and dying, lies on the sofa almost helpless. She
rises from the sofa with great difficulty, to embrace
him, and as she threw her arms around his neck and
said “Ah, Armand, I die,” a soulless wretch in the
pit said “Ha-Ha.” She again embraces Armand
with great difficulty and with heart-breaking strain,
and again the fellow in the pit cynically shouted
“Ha-Ha.”
It was enough. Camille pushed Armand aside
and rushed down to the footlights. She glared over
the stage front at the interrupter and shouted to
him; “If that man is not satisfied he can go to the
box office and get his money back.”
She then went back to Armand, threw her arms
around him again, and with great difficulty, with a


gentle, broken voice, stammered, “Good-bye,
Armand, I die,” and with wonderful, heart-breaking
acting she sank into Armand’s arms and the piece
was ended.
Down came the curtain slowly, and it had no
sooner reached the stage than Janet Achurch rushed
to the back, and we felt she was after the cynic,
and we hoped she met him and gave him a bit of
her mind.
I liked New Zealand, particularly Dunedin, where
the immortal Shamrock Hotel, that was kept by
Miss Gibbe, always had a welcome for us. We liked
that hotel, not so much because of its Irish name,
but for its popular hostess, who considered us actor
boys as her own children.
And how she looked after us 1
She fed us up like every good mother does her
beloved nippers. Poultry was ever on the table,
and when we came home after the theatre she
would make us all go into the dining-room where
she would treat us to great plates of Stewart Island
oysters about as large as saucers.
I remember one evening as we were eating our
oysters with pepper, vinegar and daintily buttered
bread, one of the party said: “I wonder if there
were pepper, vinegar and bread in the early days
of humanity?”
I immediately said: “No, I guess not, for the
word ‘vinegar* means ‘sour wine,* the French for
which is ‘vinaigre,’ hence the word ‘vinegar’ is a
bad English adaptation of the French word, and
France is not old in the days of the world’s history.”
I was going on like this for about ten minutes
trying to impress the crowd at the table how clever
I was, when the other chap, evidently having a joke
to inflict upon the party, began to get uncomfort-
able. I noticed this, so in order to block him I
went on: “You see, France cannot be said to be
old. Barely six hundred years ago when the Cru-
saders were ”
“Cut it short,” shouted the other, “cut it short—
dash it man—l’ve got a joke. I was about to say,


not having vinegar, pepper and bread and butter,
the early man who first ate a raw oyster must have
been plucky, especially if it was the size of a plate,
like the Stewart Islanders. That’s all.”
We didn’t laugh.
At those suppers there were also plates of young
crayfish, and didn’t we enjoy those happy suppers,
and her charge for our weekly stay never exceeded
one pound per head, and that in a town mostly
populated by Scots! Oh! Miss Gibbe was an angel,
and I guess that now she is not there, the tariff is
a good deal stiffer. I fancy that Miss Gibbe, with
her sweet and happy disposition, inspired the
writers of that jolly opera, “Our Miss Gibbs,” for
she was ever happy and merry in that quaint Scot-
town of Dunedin.
CHAPTER XVI.
We had a good deal of fun in Dunedin. A
contract was called for some building work, and
the lowest tender was sent in by one “Sandy
Macgee.” It was accepted, and “Sandy” was
written to and asked to start the job without delay.
“Sandy” turned up next morning with the signed
contract, and he proved to be a Chinaman! When
he came up, he was accosted with the remark
“You’re not Sandy Macgee.” “Ah,” said the Chow,
“P’raps I signum Ah Foo, I no gettum contract,
so me signum Sandy. Me gettum contract righto.”
And he did the job as smartly as he got the contract.
We had a fine time in New Zealand, with crowded
houses everywhere, the success of Janet Achurch
being remarkable.
When we arrived at Auckland, Janet considered
she would use a great advertising idea, so she
told the press she intended giving a grand “At
Home” on the stage, at which all the elite of Auck-
land were to be invited. It was a novel idea then,
and there was much uncertainty how it would take
on.
It took on alright, for the place was packed
almost to suffocation. There was music, tea, cake
and recitations. I did some of the music with a


song or two, Janet reciting, as she could well do,
although in the awful crowd she had little oppor-
tunity for dramatic play of her outflung arms.
As for the tea and cake, how the crowd went for
it! The tables were cleared in no time, and fresh
supplies went off almost as fast. It seemed as if
the crowd would never have its hunger stilled. And
then when the time came for saying good-bye,
everyone wanted to shake hands with Janet.
Before she was one-third through with them she
was sorry she had initiated such an affair; before
she was half through she felt she was foolish to
have done so; and when three-quarters through
with the handshakes, she felt she had done a
criminal act, and finally when the last lot went out
she flopped down on to a sofa, and with her tired
arms hanging over the sofa side, she said: "Thank
God it’s over at last.”
Evidently the Aucklanders fancied each personal
invitation was meant for the family and relations,
for they all turned up.
When we returned from New Zealand the com-
pany was disbanded, as Janet Achurch was going
back to England, and I linked up with Hick’s
Colored Minstrels that opened at the Old Opera
House that was on the corner of King and York
Streets, Sydney.
I was to play the part of Lawyer Marks in
“Uncle Tom’s Cabin,” there being real niggers in
the piece, amongst whom were Charlie Pope and
Irving Sayles, famous afterwards as corner men
in Harry Rickards’ Star Vaudeville Company.
Amongst the white Australians on the stage was
Alfred Woods, who long afterwards became a clever
leading man; in fact, when George Rignold gave
up Her Majesty’s Theatre, Woods took it on.
However, “Uncle Tom’s Cabin” didn’t take on
very well, and poor houses resulted. It was our
delight at the beginning of things to see young
Woods peeping through a hole in the curtain, and
suddenly rush up to the dressing-room and shout
with glee, “Another one has just come in.” Oh!


yes, we enjoyed the humour of it at first, but it
afterwards meant that we were not to get our
salaries, so we didn’t enjoy it so much, hence it
was decided to close up and go to Newcastle. We
got good houses at Newcastle, I suppose because
the miners were rather interested, because they
found that other people besides themselves wore
black faces.
From Newcastle we went to Maitland, where I
thought it was about time I got the full pay that
was owing to me, so just before the curtain rose on
a packed house, I demanded all the salary owing to
me. It was not forthcoming, so I packed up my
trunk and started out to the railway station to
come back to Sydney. Hicks, the proprietor,
seeing I was so determined, chased me dowfi the
street. I said: “I want my full salary or nothing.”
So he paid me on the spot and I returned to the
theatre, going right on to the stage to take on my
character without any change of clothes or make-
up.
I wondered for some time why Hicks was so
anxious for me to come back right away. I threw
a chest for a while, as I fancied it was because of
my striking acting, but my chest receded some-
what when I found that Hicks had sold the house
outright for two nights to two speculators at a fat
figure, hence if I didn’t go on it would have given
an excuse to the speculators that the play would
not have been up to sample.
CHAPTER XVII.
Some Stage Tricks.
I had enough of Hicks, so I unhitched from his
team and came back to Sydney, where John F.
Sheridan, who was famous as the Widow O’Brien
in “Fun on the Bristol,” engaged me to tour with
a new stunt that was thrilling London at the time
—“The Human Rocket.”
It was being performed in London by Madame
Zazelle. The curtain would rise disclosing a huge
cannon, at the side of w’hich stood two Grenadier


Guardsmen in flaring red jackets and great fur
helmets. A dainty damsel would coquettishly dance
on to the stage and throw kisses to the audience.
She would then be raised by a rope to the cannon’s
mouth, and then lowered into the mouth of the
great gun, feet first, and would disappear down
the tube, which was about 12 feet long.
One of the Guardsmen would then step forward
with great dignity—the orchestra would stop play-
ing—people would stare breathless, as the Guards-
man would solemnly lift a great ramrod, and ram
the gun as hard as he could, thrilling the people as
to what cruel treatment was being given to poor,
pretty Zazelle.
After hard ramming the Guardsman would
solemnly march back to his post behind the gun,
touch the “hole” of the gun with a long, lighted
stick, and with a loud explosion, Zazelle would be
shot out like a rocket, and catch a trapeze high in
the air!
It was a wonderful act; in fact, the police made
the theatrical people spread a great rope net
beneath the trapeze, so as to save Zazelle if she
missed the trapeze, and also to protect the audience
from any possible accident.
The news of this great London sensation came
to Australia and caused considerable interest, so
much so that I had a song about it:
“Zazelle, Zazelle—my beautiful belle—
It was wonderful fun
When she shot from the gun.
I could live and die for Zazelle.”
I never thought when I warbled that little jingle,
that I would later on be one of the performers in
a show that would specially feature this great gun
sensation. So there I was, under engagement to
tour Australia with the “Human Rocket” concern!
We could not get a dainty girl like Zazelle to be
the human rocket, so we got a rather good-looking
male trapeze performer, named Ala, to dress up as
a pretty girl—and he looked it!


It was great fun to us “in the know” to see him
lightly trip to the footlights, with his beautiful long
hair (false), his pretty, painted, red cheeks, and his
sweet, ruby-tinted lips; and as he gracefully bowed
to the audience and threw kisses to the crowd, it
was great sport to see the bald-heads in the dress
circle throw kisses back to Ala, and each fancy he
had won a mash.
Many a bouquet was left at the stage door for
the pretty “Madame” Ala, with invitations to supper
with the love-stricken bald-heads. But Ala was no
fool. He wouldn’t give the game away, and the
only after-performance relief he wanted was his
old pipe, and it was the best of fun to see him, after
throwing dainty .kisses galore to the applauding
crowd, with a pretty wink to a dress circle flirt,
step behind the stage and pull out his old, dirty
pipe and enjoy a good smoke in his girl togs.
So many days have elapsed since the big gun
item that it should be no secret to be kept this late
day, so it makes an interesting story to say how
it was done.
A visitor to the stage during the daytime would
see the alleged Grenadier Guards, dressed in frayed
shirts and badly patched pants, working compressed
air into the gun. This would be then fixed so that,
on release of a clip, the air would escape and force
out any impediment. So Ala would be shot out,
and hook on to the trapeze. At the time the clip
would be released, a head of powder at the back of
the gun would be lit, and a big crack made.
The affair took on well, and we worked our way
with it from Sydney to Melbourne. When we
reached Melbourne we found that city already had
a sensation in Professor Kennedy, the so-called
“world famous mesmerist.”
His performance was to have a set of paid ac-
complices in the theatre, who, in response to his
appeal to the audience for subjects to be mesmer-
ised, would step up to the stage from different parts
of the theatre, just as if they never heard or saw
anything like it before; and there they’d stand,
looking as innocent as they could, but all the while


well knowing what was going to happen, and know-
ing that Kennedy had no more power to mesmerise
than the leg of a chair.
And didn’t the show take on!
Crowds came to see the stage individuals do all
kinds of foolish tricks, from standing on their heads
to eating the end of what looked like raw candles,
but what were really pieces of sugar sticks.
It had a funny side to it, however, for a friend
of ours, Victor the Wrestler, a powerfully built
athlete who played Charles the Wrestler whenever
“As You Like It” was staged. Victor was a fine
type of chap, and was utterly taken in by Kennedy’s
pretended mesmerism, and fancied he had the gift
himself.
I remember a party of us were together, including
Harry Cogill, of the famous Cogill Bros., Tom
Delowry, Craydon, Ted Holland, afterwards a great
figure in Brisbane vaudeville, and Victor. We were
coming from the Caulfield races, and, whilst discuss-
ing Kennedy, Victor said: “I know I can mesmerise
anybody.”
Harry Cogill then said: “See if you can mesmerise
Bobby Watson,” at the same time giving me a wink.
I winked back.
Victor very seriously began to wave his hands in
front of my face. I pretended to be influenced, and
closed my eyes as if in a deep sleep. Victor then
folded his arms, as if he were really a victor, and said
to the party: “There, you see, I told you so. Watch
me, I will bring him back again.” He then clicked
his fingers and said: “Awake, Bobby. You’re alright.”
I then opened my eyes and tried to appear dazed, at
the same time passing the wink to Cogill; and all
clapped Victor, saying: “Well done, Vic.”
We thought no more of it, till we were astounded
to hear later on that he had borrowed the use of St.
George’s Hall from the Cogill Brothers for an after-
noon performance, and had issued hundreds of invita-
tions to the leading clergymen, doctors, physicians,
politicians, pressmen; in fact, he must have used up
a directory.


When the wonderful afternoon arrived and he
called for subjects, from various parts of the hall
came a special party of us who had rehearsed our
parts in the morning, unknown to Victor, so that soon
there were fifteen of us sitting round on a semi-circle
of chairs. Victor came to the front of the stage, very
serious looking, and received the great clapping from
the audience with much solemnity.
He said: “I shall now do my first experimong.”
He then passed along the stage, waving his hands in
front of each of us sitting on the chairs, and one by
one we purposely fell off our chairs on to the heavy
carpet; and as we lay there, a helpless-looking lot, the
audience clapped and roared with laughter as Victor
proudly bowed.
“See,” he said to the audience, “1 make them come
back,” and with clipping fingers he went along our
line, and we slowly rose, rubbing our eyes and open-
ing them wide as if we were surprised at what had
happened.
Victor then said: “I shall now make them eata the
candle”; and he approached one of us with a tallow
candle, and, waving his arms with much seriousness,
he said to the chap: “You eata the lolly.” The chap
whose turn it was to act found he couldn’t get out of
it, so, with a wry face, he bit the candle, whilst the
audience cheered Victor as the candle-biter adroitly
removed the lump of candle from his mouth and
slipped it into his pocket, in the meantime chewing,
and pretending to swallow something.
Victor was considerably delighted. He said to the
audience: “I will sew a man’s lips together.”
We fancied we had gone far enough. Some of us
began to perspire, and were hoping that something
would happen to change the rest of the performance.
That something did happen, for Barney Allen, the
well-known sport, who was “in the know,” stood up
and said he was sure the audience was satisfied.
The audience expressed their assent and heartily
clapped as Victor bowed profusely whilst the curtain
descended.


As his “subjects” we decided we would not leave
him, so as he left the theatre there were we following
him along like a lot of pet terriers. He couldn’t lose
us. Up Bourke Street, down Little Bourke Street, we
followed him, with hundreds of street curiosities
following us up. We would not leave him, as we
wanted to make him feel that his “influence” was still
with us. So he repeatedly turned and clipped his
fingers and waved his arms, saying, “You are alrighta
now,” but we and the crowd followed him round
Melbourne until the police came and took him in
charge, put him into a cab, and took him to the police
station, and held him till the crowd had disbanded.
We thought it a great joke, till soon after we heard
he had hired the Albert Hall at Adelaide to give
performances! Then we told him the joke and
explained how we had “pulled his leg.” But we had
gone too far, for poor Victor still fancied he had “the
gift.” So he went to Adelaide, a great crowd turning
up for his first performance, and when he tried to
mesmerise the strangers who came up from the crowd
and failed to do so, the audience hooted him and
demanded their money back and almost wrecked the
theatre.
Poor old Victor! We had thought it a great joke,
but we regretted it for a long time afterwards, till he
came back to Melbourne, and we made it up for him.
Then, with a smile, he said: “Yes, you were right,
boys. The only mesmeriser I do again is when I
do my wrestle, and mesmerise my opponent with a
stranglehold.”
CHAPTER XVIII
Some Memories.
When I came back to Sydney Lou de Grocn
came to see me. “You’re just the chap I want, Bob,
come to the Prince Alfred Yacht Qub’s sing-song
to-night. Sam Hordern will be there.”
I don’t know if he mentioned Sam to induce me
to come along, and intended to introduce me to
that big-hearted millionaire, and the other gay sea-


dogs, but I made up my mind to go to the “Smoko,”
and as I had a new song I thought it wouldn’t be
a bad idea to “try it on the sea dogs,” so to speak.
And they were a jolly lot of merry chaps. There
was the genial Sam, the Commodore of the party,
jolly Dr. Knaggs, a builder of bones and good jokes.
He was the Hordern family doctor, and the fine
Hordern boys to-day were babes under his careful
hand. The jolly doctor was a fine type, and I
believe instead of applying gas to a party getting
his leg amputated he’d “pull his leg” with a joke.
There was also Dr. Burne, the celebrated dentist,
who was a clever amateur actor and could roll off
lumps of Shakespeare that would to-day make
Oscar Asche perspire with anxiety of a possible
rival stage-star. There was also friend Harris, who
is still going strong as one of the big guns of the
great Hordern Emporium, and is one of the fathers
of our Automobile Club, of which he is to-day the
leader. Friend Harris always had a heart as big
as himself, in fact, it is so big that I guess there’s
little room in his precious little body for any other
organ. Every year he would organise a merry
concert party to cheer up Randwick Asylum people
—and it was my greatest pleasure, just before each
Christmas, to be in that party and do my bit to
cheer up the lonesome lives of the unfortunate little
folk. One can hardly express in cold print the
happy heart-feelings when seeing the staring eyes
of the dear youngsters watching you as you come
on to the stage, the sparkling eyes glistening as
you are about to start a song, and when you make a
funny hit, how the faces brighten up with happy
smiles, in fact, with shouts of joy. It was grand
after my first visit there, to ever be welcomed with
hearty calls “Oh, here’s Bobby.” That Randwick
Asylum with its smiling childish faces was ever my
happiest theatre.
But I am drifting in my story-yacht from the
Prince Alfred Yacht Club. Amongst its members,
I can never forget dear John Lindsay, whose tenor


voice made “Sally Horner” a song to be ever
treasured in one’s memory. He was the hubby of
“Miss Goodenough,” the popular King Street florist,
and he had a disposition that made him ever on
the lookout to do every man a good turn. He was
one of that grand sort who wanted to leave the
world a bit better than he found it, and that is the
sort of individual the world wants to-day more than
ever.
I never forget that first night I visited, with Lou
de Groen, the “Smoko” of the Yacht Club. I didn’t
know a soul there, but chanced to introduce the
new song “She Was in MY Class.” It hit the
mark, and to my surprise and delight Commodore
Hordern came over with his hands full of bever-
ages, placed them on my table, and said, “Bob, you
are in OUR class.” And he never changed his
opinion in the matter. For many Sundays after
that I was one of the guests that met at the “Man
o’ War steps” in Sydney Harbor, and as soon as I
stepped on to the yacht, the dear Commodore would
stretch out his welcome hand, and say: “Bobby,
your yachting outfit’s down below. You are in OUR
class,” and, as the poet puts it, “those days were
grand and glorious.”
And the way those yachtsmen stood by the chap
they termed their “merry pal Bob” I can never
forget.
Let me relate an important incident. It happened
a long time after the “Smoko.” I had family sick-
ness, and I guess there’s nothing like a series of
doctor’s bills to sink the ship “Ortobeprosperous.’’
Some of the “jolly yachtsmen” evidently heard of
my anxiety and so they arranged what they called a
“re-union.” They asked me could I come along and
sing a song. I didn’t feel disposed to sing any-
where, as I had a heavy heart, but I said “Of course,
I’ll come and sing a song or two for love.”
So I came along. There was a vacant chair next
the Chairman. I wondered who was coming along
for it. “Come along, Bob, this is for you,” said the
kind-hearted Commodore, and to my intense sur-


prise, I found the affair was arranged for me. It
meant some music, some supper, and a purse of
sovereigns for me, and from that day to this I will
never forget the big and generous spirit of the
grand Commodore, who, when he first heard that
the affair was being got up for me, said to the
organisers, “I’m in this as Bobby is in OUR class,”
and so after helping considerably in the arrange-
ments of the affair, he drove up in fine state to
Aaron’s Hotel, took the chair, and carried the even-
ing through in a wonderful way.
Let me here state that I have never forgotten his
kindness and the fine, open-hearted spirit he ever
displayed. It has in my humble way ever been an
inspiration, and in these days, when those old times
seem long past and gone, I can really say the
memory of that grand sportsman has always been
a guiding star for me, as it has no doubt been lor
all who have been fortunate enough to have won
his fine friendship. The presentation I mentioned
helped me in many ways besides helping to keep
the “wolf from the doctor’s door.” It got me a
press-boosting that meant a double engagement
every night at the Opera House and the Protestant
Hall, Oh! those were wonderful days.
I remember that, at the approach of Christmas
time, I began to look forward to the long-promised
engagement in the Williamson pantomime, but to
my surprise, when the preliminary list of names
came along “Robert Watson” was not amongst the
elect.
“You’ve treated me badly,” I said to Manager
George Goodman, “you’ve evidently overlooked
me.” And I went up the street feeling rather
sore. I loved pantomimes, and felt that the
public always looked for “Bobby Watson” in the
annual feast of fun. However, it is never any use
to gloom, so I went on with my singing programme,
and had forgotten my “overlooking” when I got a
note from Williamson; and when I called to see
him, he said, “Bob, I understand you feel you’ve


been overlooked. Well, here’s your chance. Johnny
Coleman, the leading comedian in the pantomime
is sick, the affair opens to-morrow night, so come
along to-night and look at a rehearsal, take the part
home, and the affair is yours to-morrow night.”
I took the part home that night and sat up till
dawn learning it, and it was a tired and sick
comedian that went home late the next night after
what was considered “a good comic character
study.”
I opened this chapter with a mention of Lou de
Groen. I remember him as a youngster with a
fife, in a fife and drum band that paraded up and
down what was called Hyde Park. There was little
of the park about it then, with its trees locked up
behind wooden plantation fences, and weeds and
long grass growing unkept; whilst the paths were
thick with dead leaves that seemed to have been
accumulating since the days of Noah. The only
thing certain about Hyde Park then, was the hide
of the people who called it a park! It was in those
long gone days that many, long since famous, began
their “climb to glory,” yet it does not seem so long
between the days of de Groen’s fife band to the
time when he conducted the great orchestra of
recent years.
It does not seem so long since some young, bright
lads in Williamson’s office began their “march up.”
There was young Tallis, a clever clerk, whose keen
acumen developed him into the great Sir George
Tallis of to-day, one of the greatest of theatrical
agents of the present age. There was a young and
brainy chap named Geach, doing clerical work in
the Williamson Castle, who, to-day, is Edwin
Geach, a shining light in the movie picture world,
and a little violin-player named Albert, whose brains
have built, during the days between, one of the
leading musical publication businesses in Australia.
Someone said that “money makes money.” He
should have more wisely put it, that “brains make
money, and money keeps it up.”


CHAPTER XIX.
Of all my engagements, the one last mentioned
was the plum, for Johnny Coleman, whom I had to
replace, suddenly got better, and J. C. Williamson
gave me £6O to walk about and be ready to take
the lead, if required. As I wasn’t required, I felt
like a Minister of the Crown, “doing nothing for a
fat fee.”
That play was “Ali Baba, or the Forty Thieves,”
and when it went on tour I was given one of the
funny women’s parts to play.
I don’t know why it is I like “funny women”
parts, especially old maids. Neither do I know
why it is if a comic dame in a pantomime says “I’m
an old maid,” the audience thinks it is funny, and
laughs. However, I liked the “old maid” parts,
and the more miserable I could look in the part
the more easily I could get the loudest laugh. The
public in a theatre has strange whims and fancies,
so different to what it has in real life—l suppose
because it comes to a theatre for a change from
real life.
When we reached Brisbane with the “Forty
Thieves” we put up at a hotel kept by a party
named Gosling. One of our party complained that
the butter “had seen better days,” and that it was
cruelty to old age to spread it on bread. The hotel
wouldn’t give us better butter, so a smart youngster
of our company said, “Why not buy our own
butter?” He said “It’s better for us bonny boys to
buy better butter,” so he went round with a pot
and bought butter from the next door grocer’s
shop. That chap made his mark later—Fred Leslie.
He used to dance with Ivy Schilling and made
many a bob.
The same hotel gave us for breakfast only one
egg each, when we could have done with two. We
put in an application for “an extra egg for Sun-
days,” But it didn t work, for, as young Leslie
said, it was “no use expecting a Gosling to produce
eggs.”


We had a good round with that “Forty Thieves”
panto.; in fact, we worked it down through Victoria
and on to Bendigo. J. C. Williamson, who was
with us, came into the theatre one morning and
said: “I wish you all to sit in the dark auditorium,
as there is a young singer going to have a trial.”
We sat in the dark hall, and there came on to the
platform a shy young girl, who sang with a voice
that was wonderfully sweet and pure. It was Amy
Castles’ first public appearance.
“What do you think of her singing?” we were
asked.
“Great,” answered the majority of us.
“She ought to have a great future,” I said.
A case of “Castles in the air,” evidently thought
one of our party, Frances Adler, for she did not
consider Amy would have a future worth while.
However, she has made a mistake, and I am sure
she has been pleased she was wrong.
Amy succeeded well, as all know, and so did
Frances Adler, who became one of the greatest of
operatic stars.
On my return to Sydney George Rignold had
vacated Her Majesty’s Theatre, and Alfred Woods,
an aspiring young tragedian, but without any
money, got a Government official to put up enough
money to enable him to lease it. He asked Garnet
Walsh to write a play for him, dealing with Indians,
bears and other wild animals. It was entitled “The
Prairie King.” But Walsh didn’t worry much; he
sent along the central feature, and a skeleton idea
of the play, without any words.
The central feature was a bridge, dropping and
letting the hero on horseback flop into a tank of
water. We turned up every day to get our parts,
but no words came along; so a few days before the
play started we were told to furnish our own
dialogue!
The two funny characters were Harry Leston and
myself. Harry was an Irishman and I was a Dutch-


man, and Harry said to me, “Bob, you’d better fix
something up for the two of us.” So I raked up
a pile of cross-gags such as:
Harry would say, “Sure, what’s good for the
hair?”
I would answer, “Get some oonions, rub thum
around yer head and ye’ll get a fine crop!”
Harry would say, “Wot —of hair, bedad?”
I would say, “No ;of oonions !” And the audience
would squeal.
The play took well, and lasted for seven weeks,
with full houses, the great tank scene crowding the
theatre. Some Indians would come in and burn
the cottages of the settlers, while the rest of the
tribe were cutting the bridge half through with
tomahawks, amid a great row by the orchestra
and howls of derision from the gods.
Then the hero, King Hedley, would come qn to
the stage on horseback, and, with mad cheers from
the audience, he would dash off the stage, to re-
appear at the other side of the bridge, which he
would attempt to cross; and when he would reach
the centre the bridge would crash and Hedley and
the moke would splash into the tank.
And there was much wild cheering when, after
the curtain dropped, Hedley would appear before
the curtain with dripping clothes; but that row was
nothing compared to the screams of applause that
would rise when Hedley would return and drag the
wet moke out before the footlights, with us poking
the animal from behind to make it get a move on.
Alfred Woods had a lively time. The success of
his management of “The Prairie King” established
him as a full-blown manager, and he began to look
for a Christmas production to follow, finally select-
ing “Robinson Crusoe” as a pantomime, with the
book by Bert Royle.
Bert was great! He could write a humorous
book on a funeral, or a song on any subject, pathetic
or otherwise, one of his best being one for John F.
Sheridan, “As in a Looking Glass,” depicting the
various stages from youth to old age.


Bert afterwards wrote, for J. C. -Williamson,
“Djin-Djin,” and other successful musical affairs.
He is now managing for the Williamson firm in
New Zealand.
When putting “Robinson Crusoe” on at Her
Majesty’s was suggested, I asked Alfred Woods to
let me play “the Dame,” as I have a great liking
for the ladies, especially old ladies. Another artist,
a pal of mine, got ahead of me and persuaded Woods
to let him have the part, so I had to be satisfied
with “Old Man Crusoe.” I was hurt, as I had made
a lot of gags for “the Dame”—however, I got my-
self busy and built up a pile of gags for the old man,
so thau when the first night came along, whenever
I got on the stage. I kept the house lively, and the
old Dame had to act up to me.
It is funny how one can build up a gag. One day
when I stood at the corner of King Street waiting
for my tram, a youngster in black pants sat on a
freshly-whitened doorstep. When he got up he had
two white blobs on his seat, and looked quite
gloomy till his young mate pointed at the two
white spots and yelled “Crown Street” —after the
“two-spot” sign on the Crown Street tram —and
both of them thought it was great fun.
I thought I’d use that gag for “Old Man Crusoe.”
I got the property-man to paint two green discs on
a cardboard and to place it upside down on a rock
on the lonely island on which I was wrecked. When
I sat down I got the green discs hooked to the
lower part of my back, so that when I got up and
surveyed the horizon, and gradually turned my back
to the audience, they saw the two big green discs
with “Newtown” written beneath, and screamed
with laughter.
“Robinson Crusoe” took on, and ran to the Alf.
Dampier season that had been booked ahead.
Dampier opened with “Robbery Under Arms,” in
which I was a little “Bobby” in another sense than
the usual Bobby Watson, and Harry Leston was a
big “Bobby,” our names in the play being Mc-
Guinness and O’Hara.


Wc were asked to brighten up the parts as shown
in the book, and Henry and I gagged all we knew,
so that play became really a comedy, and every
time the two policemen came on they got a roar
of laughter.
Dampier was Captain Starlight, and in one of
the scenes where he bails up the mail coach we got
a laugh because instead of acting the “brave police-
man,” we dodged behind a log and began to stick
our heads out with wide opened eyes, and as we
bobbed our heads up and down, the crowd would
roar, so that we always got a third curtain.
It was not long after this that George Darrell
came along with “Transported for Life,” and then
the run of success began to ease up, for the Darrell
season was a frost.
There are two meanings to the word “trans-
ported.” A girl can be so happy as to feel trans-
ported with joy—but, bless my soul, the word
“transported” in the case of the play “Transported”
had that meaning that meant exile and much dis-
comfort, for few of us got our salaries regularly.
Most of us had a bad time financially, for we could
get nothing “out of the Woods.”
However, Fate was kind to me, for Charles
Hawtrey came along with his famous play, “A Mes-
sage from Mars,” and gave me a part in it. I will
remember that play for many a day. Hawtry played
the selfish man who had a dream that cured his
selfishness, so much so that I often wished Alfred
Woods had seen the play and learnt its lesson when
his season ended some time before.
Among the children whom the Selfish Man met
in his dream, was one who was to play a wonderful
part in the future merriment of humanity —Clyde
Cook, who to-day rivals Charlie Chaplin as 'the
world’s greatest movie comedian.
Clyde Cook and his mother, whose comfort he
ever studied, left for America some time ago; and
all who knew him in the days of old were glad to
see his rise to fame in the moving pictures.


“A Message from Mars” had a most interesting
run in Sydney, after which, on the recommendation
of Maggie Moore, I was engaged by MacMahon
Bros, to play the jockey in “The Country Fair,” in
which there was to be a racecourse scene.
It had a great story.
A bad man was to put a poor old woman out of
her farm; but little Tim the Tanner, the jockey that
I played, heard of the naughty antics of the villain,
so I got a horse, “Cold Molasses,” and quietly
trained it on the farm, with the old lady not know-
ing about it, so that if the necessity arose I could
use the horse to save the farm.
When I heard the villain was going to “put the
screw” on the dear old lady, I quietly entered the
horse for the “County Fair” race, and on the great
day I took the old lady to the racecourse in the old
dilapidated buggy, and tried to cheer her up, with
“Cold Molasses” in the shafts.
At the racecourse I quietly took the old horse out
of the shafts and slipped it into the shed, and then
weighed out for the race, the old lady in the mean-
time being in a fever of excitement seeing for the
first time Tim the Tanner as a jockey on her old
nag.
The scene showed a great crowd on the stage,
which represented the racecourse. The four horses
that were to be in the race were then led across
the stage front, with the crowd shouting, also the
audience, particularly when “Cold Molasses” came
on. The horses were taken behind the stage and
put on revolving platforms. The cry went forth,
“They’re off!” The back curtain rose, showing the
four horses running their hardest, yet keeping the
same position. They were tied to poles, and their
legs were going full speed because the floors
beneath them were like revolving shutters. Sud-
denly the pole attached to “Cold Molasses” was


pushed forward from behind the scene, and the
people in the aurience rose to their feet and shouted
wildly, “ ‘Cold Molasses’ wins by a neck.”
Next day the villain came to turn the old lady
out into the cold, cruel and callous world, when
Tim the Tanner proudly sauntered up and, in a most
dramatic pose, amid the screams of delight of the
upper galleryites, gave the old lady a cheque for
£looo—and snapped his fingers in the face of the
villain, who sneaked oflf the stage amidst the wild
hoots of the audience.
Before our ’“Country Fair” Company left Mel-
bourne for Bendigo, we were delayed a few nights
in Melbourne, so that I had the chance to see John
L. Sullivan, w r ho was then the world’s champion
pugilist, starring in a play entitled “Honest Hearts
and Willing Hands.”
Before going to the theatre he was dressed in
evening dress, but he did not hurry, although he
was told he would be late for the play. Sullivan’s
part was that of a blacksimth’s striker, and he kept
putting off changing his dress for the proper cos-
tume until it was time to be on the stage for the
blacksmith-shop scene, so he went on in his even-
ing dress. Amid the roars of laughter of the
audience, he advanced to the front of the stage,
picked up the hammer, and wildly began to strike
the anvil all he knew, dressed in his evening dress,
with diamond studs and other decorations, but no
leather apron. Some of the audience excited him
by calling out “What about Jackson?”
It appears that, some time before, Larry Foley of
Sydney, who kept the White Horse Hotel in George
Street, had a boxing saloon at the back. Larry had
been Australia’s champion boxer in his early days,
and one day on the Manly steamer he noticed, a
great muscular negro working amongst the
machinery. He took him into his employ and
trained him as a boxer, and developed him into
Peter Jackson, one of the greatest boxers we have
produced.


John L. Sullivan was asked to fight Peter, but the
former drew the “color line,” so, while the play was
being acted on the night mentioned, the wag from
the gallery called out “Why don’t you fight Peter
Jackson?” Sullivan walked across to the front of
the stage and, looking up at the gallery towards the
caller, shook the hammer at him and said, “If you
are not quiet I’ll put a tail on you.” It was a wild
night.
We carried our play to Bendigo, and one morn-
ing I went out for a ride on “Cold Molasses,” to
give him some exercise, when he bolted with me,
so I clapped my arms round his neck, this being the
safest way to ride on such occasions; along the
streets I went, and I had the most thrilling moments
of my life as that horse did a run, until it got out
of breath. Then I got off, satisfied to have had a
long run and no accident; in fact, as it was put to
me, “You’re a rich man, Bob, for you’re ‘better off,’
you know.”
From Bendigo to Adelaide we went with the
“Country Fair,” and then back again to Melbourne
to the Opera House; but when we came back there,
the place was in darkness, for MacMahons had gone
bankrupt; and instead of electric light in the
treasurer’s office, there was a candle, but no money,
so I came to the conclusion, that is often preached
by religious people—they who venture into horse
racing generally become short of money (unless
they have full information as regards things
generally).
From Melbourne we came back to Sydney, where
in the Lyceum Theatre we opened with “Red Riding-
Hood”; I will never forget that, for it was in that
play I introduced “The Very Same Dog.” It may
be remembered in the first act I came in with a very
small poodle; next time I came on the stage I had
a similar dog, but a little larger. One of the actors
asked me where was the previous pup I had; I
proudly pointed to the larger dog and said, “That’s
the very same dog.” On the next entry the dog
would be a still larger one, with the same joke of


“The very same dog”; and all through the play,
whenever I came in, I had a larger dog, so that in
the last act the dog was as large as an elephant,
with, of course, two men inside working it, and
when I repeated the gag, “The very same dog,” you
can imagine the fun the audience got out of it.
CHAPTER XXI.
While I was in Brisbane, with “Red Riding
Hood,” George Reid was there advocating Federa-
tion. He held a meeting at the Exhibition Hall,
which was packed with discontented people, and
when George came out on the platform, stout and
bow-legged, and stuck his eyeglass in his eye, the
crowd would not let him say a word, but kept
shouting “Yes-No! Yes-No! Reid!
Two-faced Reid!” Reid looked through his one
eyeglass until he fixed his attention on a gaunt
figure in the centre of the hall, and pointed at him.
calling, “You! You!”
The crowd stopped shouting and looked to where
Reid was pointing, and the latter, having got quiet-
ness, pointed to the thin man and said, “Do you say
I am two-faced?”
The thin chap replied, “Yes, you are!” amidst the
wild approval of the audience.
Reid then asked the thin man, “Will you stand
on top of the chair and say I am two-faced?”
“Get up, Bill!” said several, and the tall, gaunt-
looking figure stood on the chair.
Reid carefully looked at him, thrust his eyeglass
in his eye, and said, “You are not two-faced, are
you ?”
The man said “No.”
Reid quietly came back with, “I can guess that,
because if you were two-faced you would have left
that face at home.”
That settled the “Yes-No” crowd, and Reid got
on with his speech without further interruptions.


I got a lot of fun out of “Red Riding Hood.”
Robert Courtneidge, who is now making great pro-
ductions, and who came out here and staged “The
Arcadians,” “The Midsummer Night’s Dream,” and
other plays, played the Old Dame with me.
Walter Raynham, who came to Australia and
staged the London Gaiety Plays, with Fred Leslie
and Nellie Farran, stage-managed “Red Riding
Hood.” He was a quaint type. He had a terrific
temper, but also had his happy moments.
I remember one morning when I went to the
theatre to see what part they were going to give
me, Raynham came up and said, “I guess you ought
to be able to represent Simple Simon!” I don’t
know whether he went by my facial appearance,
but after I went through the part I found there
were plenty of opportunities for fun. Raynham
then gave me full play. That was one of his
“happy moments.”
As a rule I am fond of everybody, and I used to
think I never had any enemies. Enemies are
unhealthy, and that is why I have always had the
“glad hand” for those who smile. However, during
the run of that pantomime I made my first mortal
enemy, and it happened this way: Several of the
actors determined to have a day out, so we went to
Randwick Races. Accompanying us were two
American comic dancers, Beattie and Bentley. A
horse named “Bushman” was entered for the
steeplechase, and, as they liked the name, they
determined to place all their money on him. The
horse belonged to Mr. Kelso, who told me that it
was lame, and had little chance of winning. I
pleaded with my American friends not to put any
money on it, and after much trouble persuaded
them not to do so.
“Bushman” got off last. At the first hurdle he
was still last, and just got over it by what looked
like a fluke. A couple of horses fell at that hurdle.
Old “Bushman” plodded on, and managed to get
over the second hurdle. Another horse or two
funked it at that point; “Bushman” still plodded


on, last of all. At the next hurdle he just flopped
over, a couple more of the horses falling. Old
“Bushman” was still last in the field, which was
now somewhat diminished. Near the last hurdle
he was the last one of four, but at that hurdle three
jibbed—and “Bushman” slowly crawled home —the
only horse to finish.
Those Americans looked at me as if I had
arranged the whole affair to spoil their chance of
making a fortune. It was the first time I had made
an enemy, but I hope they have forgiven me by
now.
In the pantomime there were some people who
are well known, including Slade Murray, J. R.
Greville and Sid Dean. Sid was a I well-known
cricketer in those days, and played “the Fox” in
the pantomime, standing on his hind legs to sing.
He is now in the movies in America, but whether
with the Fox Productions to-day, or not, I dtm’t
know.
For the last night of that pantomime I thought
I would be original and give the public a surprise;
so, instead of using the “property dogs” I went
round the city and got five dogs of various sizes,
from a miniature pup to the largest Newfoundland
dog in the city.
It was a great joke, coming on the first act with
a miniature pup, and working the “very same dog”
gag with a larger live animal every time. Before
the play was half through, those five dogs were
having a time behind the scenes, the row they were
making almost drowning the dialogue on the stage.
The five of them were fighting all they knew,
making a terrific pandemonium. Yes, I intended
giving the people behind the scenes a surprise—and
they got it.
My next move was to go with Bland Holt in his
New Zealand tour, with his well-known Drury Lane
sensations. There were some bright sparks in .the
company, including Walter Baker, Walter Howe,
Charlie Brown, Edith Lane and Harrie Ireland.


We started at Dunedin, and I will never forget
the happy time we had at Mrs. Gibbie’s Shamrock
Hotel.
I seldom remember hotels at which I had to stay,
as I have stayed at so many, but that particular
one had a lady boarder who was a widow, and was
evidently fond of the stage and “stagers.” Her
appreciation was of the practical nature, and a box
of cigars was sent to us at every town we had to
call at. I remember those cigars well, for as soon
as a box came, Walter Howe used to open it, take
out a handful, and with a wink all round would say,
“Ah ! Ah! the widow’s weeds.”
One night, the Dunedin College boys, learning
that Bland Holt had been a pupil of the school in
that town, gave him “a night out.” It was a night
of nights, and when he reads this in his Melbourne
home, he will certainly remember that evening.
I received a letter the other day from a reader
of these notes asking was I the same Bobby Watson
that appeared in “Red Riding Hood” in Melbourne
thirty years ago? and I replied “the very same dog.”
I’ll never forget that Melbourne performance at
the Princess Theatre under the management of
Robert Courtneidge. It was a Avonderful time, and
considering the rush of putting it on, it went well.
The rush meant rehearsing every day for weeks
before the opening, and nearly all night on Christ-
mas Eve; the most interesting sight that night was
the many mothers of the little girl-fairies waiting
in the stalls up till about three o’clock in the morn-
ing. They made a strange picture. When their
little ones came on the mothers sat up proudly and
happy, but Avhen the rest of the company came out
they had no interest.
Going home one early morning from the theatre,
past the Exhibition Building, tAvo garrotters dashed
out from the darkness of the lane. One was about
to bang me with a stick, Avhen the other called out,
“Oh, don’t knock him, he’s Bobby Watson.” I felt
a bit proud until he added, “There’s no use knockin’


him —he’s got nothing, we want to knock Court-
neidge.” I told Courtneidge next day and—he got
his life insured.
While playing in “Red Riding Hood,” Robert
Courtneidge was called to Sydney to act in a piece
called “Round the World in Eighty Days;” I had
to study his part —the leading star part of the
pantomime —and I was honored by being then the
star of the principal theatre in Australia,
When that pantomime was finished Mr. George
Musgrove sent a message to his brother, the father
of the present young Harry Musgrove: “Give
Watson whatever salary he wants, he deserves it
and Courtneidge when I met him made me a present
of the wig he had worn when he had played the
part of the Dame. It was a well-appreciated present
and formed the lasting link of keen friendship
between Courneidge and myself.
There were a fine lot of players in that panto-
mime. There was Jenny Lee, who was famous as
“Jo” —a ragged youngster with a brush-broom;
and although she was a poor, meek and mild lad
before the curtain, behind the scenes she was
mighty particular.
One time she was particularly particular as to
what sort of table was to be in a certain scene. The
property-man showed her a table he thought would
suit her. No!—she wouldn’t have it. So he showed
her another. No! —she still was adamant. Three,
four, five, six and seven tables were shown her!
She was still obstinate. Eight, nine, ten, and eleven
were put before her without any favor, until at last
the property man in despair put before her the first
one he had shown her. “Ah, yes!” she said, “that
is the very one I have been waiting for.”
When I stand to-day and look back over niy
career as a comedian, I can parade, as it were,
before my mind the many parts I have played in
the various productions, and the many fine men and
women with whom I have been associated.


I have mentioned but a few of them in these
notes, but there are others whose memory will live
in my soul till “the last call.”
I can look back and survey the remarkable
changes that have developed in the theatrical world;
the triumph of stage-display that has followed in
the modern production of Shakespeare, particularly
in the “Midsummer Night’s Dream” at Her
Majesty’s Theatre, Sydney, by George Rignold; the
wonderful development of stage decoration that
to-day has really become one of the greatest of the
arts; the working out, as it were, of old dramatic
plays such as “Called Back,” “Hie Lights of
London,” and others, that went out and gave place
to the more modern type of what one might call
“domestic drama,” such as was brought in by Mrs.
Brown-Potter; and the school of acting that came
in with such plays as “The Second Mrs. Tanqueray,”
and other remarkable social studies; and the cine-
matograph opening up what is really a new world
of dramatic and scenic art, and giving birth to a
still newer type of actor and comedian, till we find
in these days of haste, the demand for the cinema
comedy has become so great that it has reached the
highest rung of the ladder of financial success.
Mary Pickford received £70,000 each for three
pictures; Norma Talmadge, £32,000 each for eight
pictures, and later £70,000 each for eight more;
Katherine Macdonald received £120,000 for acting
in six pictures, in the following year receiving
£480,000 for acting in twelve pictures; but comedian
Charlie Chaplin received £200,000 each to produce
eight pictures, or a total fee for the year
of £1,600,000!
There is good proof that there is more than fun
in being funny!
As I stand to-day looking back over my career,
I feel in my heart that I have played a good part
in bringing happiness into the hearts of many of
my fellow people and making this serious world
somewhat brighter for my having been in it. There
are others doing the same good work now, many


may be known, but there are many not known; all
are acting- their parts to the best of their ability;
but whether we are on the stage or in the audience,
we can well join hands with the immortal Shake-
speare and say with him ;
“All the world’s a stage, all the men and women merely
players.’’
A HAPPY APPENDIX.
Since writing the last chapter I have received a
number of letters referring to my tour with the
Lemmone party, with requests for me to say some-
thing about it. I never knew how many friends I
had till I started these notes, and the letters to
hand since last month have made me add this chat
about the well-known Lemmone tour.
It was at the opening of the century, the year
1900, when I entered the happiest engagement of
my life, that with John Lemmone. It was to be a
tour that was to last seven years, during which we
visited over 350 towns in New South Wales alone,
without counting Victoria or Queensland. It was
a great experience, and we met many great people,
but none sweeter than those with whom we sang
and journeyed. Among our party were some who
have been widely known and loved. There was
Miss Marie Narelle, one of the greatest singers of
Irish songs Australia has ever seen, Miss Lilian
Frost, the popular organist, Rodda Perry, and that
greatest of managers and finest of gentlemen, John
Lemmone.
And the wonder trips we had at times!
I remember we started on the western line of
New South Wales. I took with me my eldest
son, Roy. It was a revelation for him; that, his
first coming into the country, and the way his sur-
prised eyes opened at the new things he saw, was
wonderful.
I remember one day at Millthorpe he heard a
good talking cockatoo for the first time. He could
not understand how any other two-legged items


besides human beings could talk, so he evidently
thought it was something magical, hence he opened
the cage to get closer to it, when that bird said
“Good-bye, cocky,” and flew to the bush.
I felt very despondent as that bird was a genius,
but the landlord, amused at the surprise of the
youngster, came over to me, slapped me on the
back with a smack that rattled all my teeth, and
said, with a laugh, “Don’t worry, Bob, there are
lots more in the bush.” I mention this incident to
show what fine sports the country folk are.
From Millthorpe we went to a small town called
Warren, and after playing there journeyed along
some seventy odd miles to Coonamble by mail
coach. I’ll never forget that trip; it rained hard,
and being on flat country the flood waters quickly
rose to the axles of the coach, and as the water
carried centipedes and bush insects on its surface
we soon got them about our feet.
I shall never forget the sensations of that journey.
The coach stopped, and the view before us was
one great stretch of rushing water. The coach
driver said, “Just about here the road is only 12
feet wide, and there are two great dams, one on
each side, with about 30 feet of water in each. I
can’t see the road in this muddy water, and there
is a big risk taking the coach across that narrow
track; but we can’t stay here, we can’t go back,
and we must take the risk —so here goes.” We all
looked at each other; I thought of my poor sick
boy lying asleep in my arms; I knew I could swim,
so we all said we will chance it and trust to the
Almighty—and, we luckily got over the danger of
the dams.
After we got about twenty or thirty miles further
on, we struck a little place called Bullergreen and
there, at a dirty-looking hotel, we stoppled for
refreshments. There were lots of men from around
and they were all saying, “How many points did we
get, Bill, Jack, or George,” and that was the first
time I knew the value of rain in the country.


After having a meal we thought we’d better
move on, so we started once more. I’ll never forget
how tired the ladies looked, especially Miss Lilian
Frost (who had come with us for a holiday). I
said “Are you tired, Miss Frost?” as she looked
quite a wreck; her hair all disarranged, as we had
no time to look for a comb; but she smiled and
said, like a good sport, “I don’t mind it a bit; it’s
a change from Sydney, is it not ? We admitted it
WAS!
The roads were very rough, and we were travel-
ling over what they call “corderoy roads,” which
consisted of big saplings lightly covered over with
dirt. I was not able to move for fear of waking
the little chap, but I shall never forget how John
Lemmone and Marie Narelle kept us happy by
telling funny stories.
At last, at three o’clock on the following morn-
ing, we arrived at Coonamble; the driver got down
and knocked the hotelkeeper up. He said he
thought we were not coming and that he’d let our
beds, so we said “Fix us up some way,” which he
did.
That was a cruel night, but Fate made up, and
we had a wonderful season there, getting great
compliments on our music; in fact, when we were
leaving by coach, an old fellow came, looked in, and
said “Look ’ere you folks, I’ve walked twenty miles
to hear you sing, and let me tell you you’re all
prizes and no blanks. I know a bit about singing,
I do. I belonged to a circus once meself, see ?”
Then we went to Wyalong, and on the coach was
a prisoner, handcuffed, but they don’t notice things
like that in the country. When we got there we
found there was Upper and Lower Wyalong, and
if you played in the lower town the upper town
would not patronise the show. But we played in
both, and won friends.
We were at a place called Burrowa, which was
full of Irish people, and they came out in buggies
and traps to meet us, as Marie Narelle was well


known as the best Irish singer in Australia. They
gave us a banquet and a packed house, although it
rained heavily during that night.
Another place of particular interest in which we
found ourselves was Bateman’s Bay. The room
where we had to play gave an inside view to out-
siders, and there being no seats we got some planks
from an old saw mill close by and borrowed some
gin cases from the hotel. There was no stage or
dressing-room, so we had to hang our clothes on
a bush in the yard as we went in to perform; but we
could not sing; we had to talk, for the old piano
would not sound! It was a fight against circum-
stances. Our luck was out, in fact.
Then we started for Moruya, and had gone about
ten miles when Mr. Lemmone found that the bag
with all the money in it had slipped off the coach.
John began to laugh, and said, “Oh! our luck is
still out.” But Bill, the coachdriver, took one of
the horses out, and rode it back while we waited,
and he came back victorious with the bag and the
money.
I never forget Moruya, where they had an old
bellman called Teddy, who used to go round the
streets with his bell and shout out, “To-night, to-
night, Miss Marie Narellski, the great Irish singer,
and Mr. John Lemon, the great flatulist, not for-
getting Bobby Watson the funny comicque, and
there will be a sale of fat ducks and turks at the
auction sale at three o’clock, so roll up, roll up.”
Then he would ring the bell and yell the same mix-
up round the other parts of the town. It was a
quaint advertisement.
Next we were invited to a little gold mining town
called Nerrigundah, the miners’ representative
wrote saying Mrs. Ahfat had a piano and would
lend it, and they would bring seats from the school
to sit on. We started, and we had to travel up a
steep mountain with hardly room for another
vehicle to pass, and you could not get away from
the place unless you came back the same way you
went.


We had another successful time on the South
Coast, and some time after that Miss Narelle left
us, and Mr. Lemmone was successful in finding
another star soprano. She was a little girl in short
frocks, and she filled the bill for some years with
us. This young lady is now so well and favorably
known as Miss Mabel Batchelor. We also had Miss
Mary Bourke, also well known on the concert plat-
form, and Mr. Lemmone brought a young pianist
with us who afterwards became Madame Melba’s
accompanist. There are many modern stars who
owe their success to the happy encouragement of
Mr. Lemmone.
We played Wangaratta once, and I went for a
walk round the town and saw in a shop an adver-
tisement for hair juice for restoring the hair. I
remember I went into that shop and asked the man
to show me how much his hair had grown, and he
lifted his old smoking-cap and I saw his. head was
as bald as an egg. I did not buy any “hair juice.”
This is the town that the celebrated pianist,
Paderewski, said he liked the best, as it was the
only town that they did not tell him to get his
hair cut.
We were playing in the Northern Rivers one
time, and one night whilst Mr. Lemmone was play-
ing, an old farmer walked across the hall with big
clod-hoppers and began to talk, so Mr. John said,
“My dear sir, when you have finished talking about
cows I’ll go on.” The next day a local celebrity
came in and kindly explained, “You made a great
mistake last night, Mr. Lemmone, sir,” he said.
Mr. Lemmone began to feel as if he had done
something wrong: “Why did I make a mistake, my
friend?”
“Well, you see,” the farmer explained, “you asked
Mr. Smith last night not to talk about cows, and it
wasn’t cows they was talking about, it was, pigs!”
There was another town called Ulmarra where
John asked a big fellow, who was about seven feet,
to kindly keep quiet. The big chap was very much
offended, and as he had another big fellow with


him, they came into the parlour after the concert
with murder in their eyes, and would have anni-
hilated John, but I got them in time, and after some
explanations it ended by us having drinks all round,
and John and the two shaking hands.
John was one of the gentlest of individuals I
have ever known, and had a heart almost as big as
himself. I remember one time we played at a place
called Canbelligo, and we bought copper shares and
up they rose to a big price. Many people sold, but
John and I fancied our fortunes were made and
did not sell; but the shares soon flopped in value,
and —we were sold. Yes, sold in more ways than
one, for in order to celebrate our successful entry
into the world as sensational speculators in copper
shares, we had bought two particularly fine turkeys
for the next day’s meal for the concert party.
But our luck began to change—those turkeys
were stolen —our copper shares dropped to be value-
less, and, worst luck of all, our dear little Mabel
Batchelor became ill, the doctor pronouncing it
typhoid fever. We found we could not go on, so
John Lenimone said, “I shall stay here with this
sick child and see her through.” So he stayed and
saw her nursed, till she had thoroughly recovered,
when he returned to Sydney. So ended the happiest
engagement I enjoyed during my fifty years upon
the stage, and the sweetest of the memories that
I record in this story of my life, “Behind the
Scenes.”
THE END.
NATIONAL
LIBRARY of AUSTRALIA


Wholly set up and printed in Australia by
A. E BLATYER, PBINTBB. CLARENCE LANE, SYDNEY.


THE SUN NEVER SETS
Boomerang
MOUTH ORGANS U
(he Finest Strongest, Sweetest, Loudest, and Highest Grade
Mouth Organ in the World.
The ‘‘BOOMERANG"’ Mouth Organ is easy to play; its fittings are
absolutely accurate to the smallest fraction of the inch, insuring
clear, true, sweet tone. Each reed is HAND-MADE, and HAND
TUNED by expert craftsmen. The parts are interchangeable,
Carefully selected and tested materials onlv are used in its manu-
facture. The finish of each “BOOMERANG” Mouth Organ is
perfect. Always Insist on a "Boomerang."
The Two Most Popular Types are
MINIATURE “BOOMERANG” Price, 3/-
10 Holes and 20 Reeds
Postage, 3d.
Price, 5/-
Postage, 6d.
LARGE “BOOMERANG”
ilO Holes and 40 Reeds
Other Styles from 2/- to 18/6
Write for a Price List showing illustrations and prices of all models
of "BOOMERANG” MOUTH ORGANS.
FREE “BOOMERANG” TUTOR
With each “BOOMERANG” MOUTH ORGAN, we will supply
FREE OF CHARGE an Instruction Book showing how to become an
Expert Mouth Organ Player. If you already have a ‘BOOMERANG”
MOUTH ORGAN and would like a copy of our NEW FREE TUTOR,
send us name and address, and we will mail the TUTOR to you, Free
of Charge. »
Send your Orders with stamps or postal notes to
J. ALBERT & SON
“Boomerang House,” 137/139 King St,, SYDNEY
AUo at 304/298 Little Collins St., Melbourne,
and 2/4 Willis St , Wellington, N.Z.


W. POPE
Member of City Tattersall’s Club,
Registered A.J.C
PADDOCK, RANDWICK
COMMISSIONS EXECUTED.
Satisfaction Guaranteed.
Operating on Licensed Racecourses Only.
ESTABLISHED 25 YEARS
SUFFICIENT ADDRESS-
W. POPE, Sydney.


HEY! LOOK!
Now that we have claimed yonr attention, may we hold
it for a few moments ?
When you are Requiring
Travelling Requisites
insist on
“TRIP” BRAND
They are made in Australia,
and all the leading Stores
stock them.
DON’T BUY SUBSTITUTES.
A "Trip" for a Trip
KIT BAGS SOLE MANUFACTURERS;
ATTA C HE E CASES P. & A HERFORD,
SCHOOL*IaGS - HERFORD HOUSE,”
LEGGINGS. Etc. S 3 Parramatta Road, GLEBE.
Sydney, N S.W.
TRIP” TRAVEL GOODS COMMAMD SERVICE.


Bobby
atson,
REFINED
Character Comedian
COMIC SONGS
HUMOROUS STORIES.
Children s Birthday Parties a
Specialty.
At Liberty.
c/o Paling & Co.,
Music Warehouse,
George Street f Sydney.


KB LAGER


Raimund Pechotsch
(Professor and Examiner)
Guildhall School of Music (London), London Academy
of Music, London College of Music,
IS PREPARED TO RECEIVE PUPILS
Violin, the Art of Breathing,
Voice Production,
Singing, Piano and Harmony
ALL APPLICATIONS TO
ARGENT CHAMBERS, 12 HUNTER ST.
FIRST FLOOR
THE BUTTONHOLE FANCY
COSTUME Cov.
SUPPLY FOR HIRE
ALL KINDS OF FANCY
COSTUMES.
SEND FOR A FREE LIST.
PLAYS AND OPERAS DRESSED AT
SPECIAL RATES.
Note the Address—
The Buttonhole Fancy Costume Gey.
First and Last Floors,
1.0.0. F. TEMPLE, 140 ELIZABETH ST., SYDNEY
Near Liverpool Street.


Wally Weekes
New Address:
GEORGE HOTEL
Pitt and Market Sts
SYDNEY
Money Advanced Tm”
U 0 W MONT DE DIETE
H.O.VV. 11l D. &I. Coy. I Ltd.
(Subscribed Capital £300,000)
74 CASTLEREAGH STREET,
SYDNEY.
Branches ; MELBOURNE, BRISBANE, NEWCASTLE
Phone: 9328 CITY.
JOSEPH W. HILL, General Manager.


A MAN DIED OF
HARD DRINK
A Block of Ice
fell on him and
killed him
But you’ll NEVER DIE if you
DRINK
TOOHEY'S STAG LAGER
TOOHEY’S STAG STOUT
and
Toohey’s Standard Bitter Ale
You’ll not even STAG’-ER
You’ll STAND’ARD Always.
IN BULK OR BOTTLE.


PERCY MARKS
FOR
Exclusive
Jewellery
MOUNTED IN PLATINUM
MAGNIFICENT PARISIAN DESIGNS
Diamonds
Emeralds
Pearls
Rubies
Sapphires
Harlequin Opals Black Opals
Exhibitor for the N.S.W. Government at all
International Exhibitions since 1 908.
Awarded the Grand Prize on each occasion
PERCY MARKS,
5 Hunter Street,
SYDNEY


LEWIS’S Ltd.
SPECIALISTS IN
Millinery, Flowers, Laces, Ribbons,
Hosiery, Gloves & Underwear.
PITT STREET
(Corner Strand Arcade)
Branch Shop: King Street.


Worth a Second Thought
We all appreciate consideration for
others —that is what Prohibition means.
We all deplore drunkenness —that is
what the liquor traffic is responsible for.
A Deplorable Growth.
Offences against Good Order in N.S.W.
1920. 1921. 1922. 1923.
24,059 26,646 30,079 34,514
Police Report.
We can all reduce this evil if we get
behind the Prohibition Movement.
Give your vote at the next election
only to the candidate that is pledged to
give you a fair chance to get Prohibition.
Don’t forget Prohibition is just as
successful as a motor car.
ROBERT B. S. HAMMOND.
