

Fifty Years
of
Congregationalism
in
Broken Mill.
1887-1937.
Church Jubilee Souvenir Number of “COMMUNITY,”
a Christian Sociological Journal, published monthly
by the Broken Hill Congregational Church.
AUGUST, 1937.






OFFICERS OF THE CHURCH, 1937.
MINISTER:
Rev. W. W. F. Pratt, B.A.
DEACONS:
Life Deacons : Mr. S. R. Gray and Mr. W. J. E. Middleton.
Messrs. E. B. Dow, M. A. Rankin, A. Thorn, F. Fox, S. G. Smith
SECRETARY :
Mr. M. A. Rankin.
TREASURER :
Mrs. S. G. Smith.
CHOIRMASTER :
Mr. A. Thorn.
ORGANISTS :
Mrs. C. Nunan and Mrs. F. Fox.
SUNDAY SCHOOL SUPERINTENDENT :
Miss Dorothy Read, B.A.
SUPERINTENDENT OF KINDERGARTEN DEPT. :
Miss Doris Read.
ENVELOPE SECRETARY :
Mr. A. Thorn.
CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH WOMEN’S SOCIETY :
President - * Mrs. W. W. F. Pratt, M.Sc.
Secretary - -- -- -- - Mrs. R. Carpenter.
GIRLS CLUB :
President - - Mrs. W. W. F. Pratt, M.Sc.
Secretary - -- -- -- -- - Miss E. Land
LITERARY CLUB :
President - - - Rev. W. W. F. Pratt, B.A.
Secretary - -- -- -- - Mrs. R. Carpenter.
JUNIOR GIRLS CLUB :
President - - Mrs. W. W. F. Pratt, M.Sc.
- -- -- -- -- Miss I. Smith.
YOUNG WORSHIPPERS LEAGUE :
President - - - Mrs. W. W. F. Pratt, M.Sc.
Secretary - -- -- -- -- -- Miss I. Smith.
TENNIS CLUB :
President ; • ■ ■ Rev. vV. ML F. Pratt, B.A.
Secretary - -- -- - Mr. F. Fox
LONDON MISSIONARY SOCIETY GENERAL SECRETARY :
Mrs. A. Thorn.
WATCHERS’ PRAYER UNION SECRETARY :
Mrs. C. Hayman.
J. C. Goodhart’s “Conquest.”
This booklet has the distinction of having in it a reproduction
of a work of an Australian artist of world-reputation. The inclu-
sion of the print of the beautiful etching on page one has been made
possible by the courteous generosity of Mr. J. C. Goodhart, of
Broken Hill.
Printed by the Modern Printery, Broken Hill, N.S.M.


MINISTERS, 1887-1937.
Rev. KEITH MACKAY
1887-May 1889 from Victoria
Rev. E. HAMPDEN-COOK
May 1889-December 1889, from England
Rev. J. W. JONES
May 1890—June 1891, from Hindmarsh, S.A.
Rev. W. T. KENCH
July 1892-June 1895, from Renmark, S.A.
Rev. A. HODGE
September 1895-May 1898, from Kadina, S.A.
Rev. W. S. PEARSE
January 1899-May 1901, Bordertown, S.A.
Rev. W. E. TURTON
July 1901-February 1902 (acting)
Rev. W. A. KEAY
July 1902-May 1904
Mr. N. W. BEANEY
May 1904-September 1904 (Student Pastor)
Rev. W. JARRETT
December 1904-November 1907.
Rev. A. FRANCIS
February 1908-March • 1910
Rev. R. O. NADEBAUM, B.A.
November 1910-October 1913, from Oxford
Rev. E. J. STACY
April 1914-November 1920, Maitland, S.A.
Rev. S. ROBERTS
March 1922-April 1924, Hamley Bridge, S.A.
Rev. H. V. T. WOOD
February 1925-February 1927, Wallaroo, S.A.
Rev. E. W. WEYMOUTH
December 1928-August 1933, New Zealand
Rev. W. W. F. PRATT, B.A.
October 1933 Still in charge
from the Travelling Secretaryship of the Aus-
tralian Student Christian Movement.


Members of the Fellowship, 1937.


FOREWORD.
The Broken Hill Community and the Congrega-
tional Church.
REV. WALLACE PRATT.
This Souvenir Booklet is the August, 1937 number of “Community,”
the Christian Sociological Journal published monthly by the Broken
Hill Congregational Church. This links together the life of the Church
in the past with its present life; and also suggests the distinctive
character which the Church seeks to give to its work.
This Church seeks to make the Gospel a living and powerful thing
to people by bringing that Gospel into active relation with life in every
aspect of it, individual and corporate. We believe that it is only thus
that the old —the eternal Gospel can have its ancient power amongst
us still. Thus to make the Gospel a living thing to men and women
means that we have to take into account the inescapable community-
realities of our time—the structure and ruling motives of the economic
and social system; the possibilities of real brotherhood, and of constant
creative Christian activity; the potentialities of peace and war; the
necessity for Christian revolution. We believe that man’s personal
salvation is bound up with the salvation of society; and that Christ
calls His Church to win for His Kingdom the whole community—local,
national, and international —as a necessary part of the winning for
the Kingdom thp separate men and women whose individual lives are
largely determined by the character of that community.
The Broken Hill Congregational Church takes into special account
that community-factor; and seeks, in the interest of the spiritual lives
of individual men and women, to play its part in the building of a
Christian social order.
We have done this primarily because we believe that the whole
Church throughout the World is called in this time to this community-
expression of the Gospel; but we have tried also to put into our par-
ticular local part of that world-wide task a certain distinctive character
because of two special factors : First, we are of the Congregational
order, with its tradition of freedom, democracy, individual responsibility,
unhampered thinking, and concern with community life. Second, we
are in a city of a special type in Broken Hill—an isolated city, yet.
with important connections with many parts of the world; an industrial
city with a character largely determined by that dominant industrial
interest; a city that is self-contained and self-conscious and with strong
local loyalties; a city offering special opportunities for experiment and
pioneering activity in Christian community.
A Church which is alive and adaptable has a great opportunity in
such a community. As we start out on the second fifty years of our
Congregational Church’s life, we intend, with God’s help, to make use
of that opportunity.
We feel that thereby we shall best honour the men and women
who have gone before. We dedicate ourselves to the work which they
have so faithfully begun, making covenant with them and with God
that, while we seek to adapt ourselves to contemporary needs and
opportunities, we will work still in their spirit, and keep before our-
selves as clearly as they did the things of God and the Kingdom.


Concentrated History of Broken Hill.
Mr. E. B. DOW.
The first white man to visit this district was Captain Charles Sturt
in 184 4. He travelled up the River Darling from Wentworth as far as
Menindee, and in the following years, pioneer pastoralists began to push,
up the River with their sheep and cattle.
When Burke and Wills passed through Menindee on their famous
but tragic exploration in 1860, they found a settlement there, with
several pastoral holdings established along the River, and the country
to the North and West had already been traversed by stockmen and
others.
Ernest Giles, who later made his name as an Australian explorer,
was in this country in this and following years, and had been out almost
to the Queensland border looking for suitable pastoral country.
In 1864, Charlie Carl, better known as German Charlie, established
an “hotel” at Poolamacca, but the earliest local settlement was in 1886,
when the Mt. Gipps Pastoral Company took up 1400 square miles of
country and built their homestead at Edward’s Lookout, on the South
bank of Stephens Creek. A stone weir was built across the creek to
supply water for the household, and this still stands in an almost per-
fect state of preservation at the present day. Finding the position
unsuitable the homestead was moved in 1871 to the site now known
as Old Mt. Gipps on the main north road. A small settlement had
sprung up at the site of the present reservoir, and as this was on the
mail route between Cockburn and Wilcannia, German Charlie also
moved and built a large stone hotel on the roadside, and the ruins of
this hostelry can still be seen on the now deserted track.
In 1876, two dam-sinkers, Julius Charles Nickle and Dan McLean
discovered some silver-lead ore at Thackaringa, but it was the store-
keeper from Menindee, Paddy Green, who was the first to exploit the
discovery. He shipped 3 6 tons of ore to Germany but the boat was
wrecked, and the assay results of his next parcel were so long in coming
to hand that Paddy peacefully passed away before they arrived. Pros-
pecting had been encouraged, however, and by 1880 the township of
Umberumberka, later called Silverton, had grown to such importance
that on September 17th Senior Constable Richard O’Connell arrived to
take charge of the police activities and act as Mining Warden.
From Silverton, prospectors began to spread northwards along
Apollyon Valley and Purnamoota, finding the Day Dream and other
well-known shows, but the black and forbidding broken hill, Wilyu
Wilyu Yong, was passed by as unworthy of notice.
Charles Rasp, a boundary rider on Mt. Gipps, paid several visits
to this remarkable hill and one day, believing it to be an outcrop of
tin ore, he and two mates, James Poole and David James, pegged out
a claim and registered it with Warden O’Connell, who was now resi-
dent at Mt. Gipps, in the old stone hut which can still be seen. This
was on the sth September, 1883, the day that f>ut Broken Hill on the
map of the world. Next day the Manager, Mr. George McCulloch,
and others rode to the broken hill with Rasp and they pegged out seven
blocks of 40 acres each.
This was the commencement of the opening of the great Broken
Hill lode, but things went very slowly for the first twelve months. Ex-
perienced miners at Silverton scoffed at the efforts made and refused
to be drawn to the new find.
By May of 1884 Silverton had a population of 30 00 and Purna-
moota was a thriving township with a bank, post office and stores; but
they were soon to lose their importance, for in January 1885 rich
chlorides were discovered in Rasp’s shaft, and the Broken Hill commen-
ced to boom.
Mr. William Jamieson, mining surveyor, was later appointed
manager of the original syndicate and he, with Mr. A. W. B. Orman,
moved on to the lease on 6th May, 18 85, and a house was built at the
foot of the Block 14 hill, of which only the stone chimney remains at
the present time.
On May 11th, Mr. James Hebbard, who later was manager of the
Central Mine, worked his first shift for the syndicate.
A progress association was formed in the new settlement on
November Bth and their first community job was to clear a track along
Argent Street, so that the Silverton coach might call on its way to
Mt. Gipps and Wilcannia.


After this everybody settled down to business and it was not until
26th November, 1887, that a railway connection was made with Adelaide,
and on this day the first truck load of goods was delivered over the
Silrerton Tramway Company’s line from the border.
The year 188 8 was noted for its droughty conditions and this was
followed by the formation of a company to supply water from soakages
at Stephens Creek.
September 2 2nd of this year saw the incorporation of the Muni-
cipality of Broken Hill, but early in November a disastrous fire occurred
and the township had to make a fresh start.
Congregationalism suffered a blow on 7th May, 1889, when the Rev.
Keith Mac Kay, who had been here for some time, left for other parts.
In 1891, a start was made, on the Stephens Creek Reservoir; this
was completed in the following year and a water supply was assured
for the growing town.
On February 4th, 1902, the famous steam trams started running
and were the cause of much satirical laughter and inconvenience. They
poured smoke and grime into the city for 22 years; they apparently
ran for the convenience of an army of conductors and inspectors, and
came to a peacefuL.end on 31st December, 1926, “unhonoured and
unsung.”
In 1915 the water supply was augmented by the pumping of water
from Umberumberka Reservoir, but evidently this was too costly as
we still rely on Stephens Creek and use Umberumberka as a showplace
and picnic ground. ■ .
After many years of agitation and waiting a start was made to
connect the city to Sydney by rail, and on 15th July, 1919, the section
to Menindee was officially opened, but it was not till eight years later
that the first train from the capital steamed into Broken Hill on the
morning of November Bth, 1927, just 40 years late.
Another ten years have passed and we are looking forward to
doing the 700 mile journey to Sydney in the comfort of a Diesel-engined
train of the latest design in air conditioning. This will be a fitting
jubilee gesture from a paternal government towards the long-suffering
and patient citizens of the Silver City.
The present time is a boom period in Broken Hill; and investiga-
tions on both the Northern and Southern sides of the present mines
are giving rise to hopes of important developments.
Programme of the Jubilee Celebrations.
The special visitors for the Jubilee are the Rev. E. J.
Stacv and Mrs. Stacy. Mr. Stacy was minister of the
Broken Hill Congregational Church from April 1914
till November 1920, and is at present the Secretary of
the Congregational Union of South Australia.
SATURDAY, AUGUST 14, 1937 ;
8 p.m., United Communion Service.
SUNDAY, AUGUST 15, 1937 ;
JUBILEE SERVICES.
11 a.m., Rev. E. J. Stacy.
3 p.m., Children’s Service. Play, “Stories of
the Master.”
7 p.m., Rev. E. J. Stacy.
TUESDAY, AUGUST 17, 1937 ;
In the Congregational Church Hall,
JUBILEE BANQUET.
THURSDAY, AUGUST 19, 1937 ;
JUBILEE FAIR.
Masonic Hall, afternoon and evening.
To be opened at 3 p.m. by Mrs. E. J. Stacy.


Fifty Years of Congregationalism in Broken Hill.
Mr. A. THORN.
The pioneer of Congregationalism in South Australia was Thomas
Quinton Stow, who formed the first fellowship in 183 7. To Broken
Hill this is of special interest, because, although geographically we are
in New South Wales, our Church is affiliated with the South Australian
Union; and it was as the result of conferences held in connection with
the Jubilee of Congregationalism in South Australia that it was decided
in 1887 to start work at Broken Hill. The South Australian Union
communicated with Mr. J. B. Doolette of this city, and Mr. Doolette
secured the use of a shooting gallery next to the Theatre Royal in
Argent Street for religious services. The Rev. Keith Mac Kay was sent
as the first minister.
Towards the end of 188 7 the block of land on which the Church
at present stands was bought for £2OO, and the building erected by
Messrs. Philip and Royal. South Australian friends contributed £200;
the S. A. Union £200; and in 1889 the Chapel Building Society advanced
£7OO.
A branch cause was started in the early days at Pictonville; but
in the Rev. W. T. Kench’s time the small iron hall was brought in and
placed beside the main church building and used for a Sunday School
room.
The Rev. K. Mac Kay held the pastoral charge until May 1889.
Early congregations were large, as indicated by the fact that Mr. H. H.
Evans, a school teacher and an able musician, conducted a choir of 60.
This choir included the Francis family; whose singing is still greatly
appreciated amongst us. Mr. Evans was succeeded as choir master in
September 18 9 0 by Mr. Highman. Then Mr. Rhys Francis held the
position for many years. It is worthy of note that our friend Mr. E.
H. Cropley was appointed choirmaster on February 5, 19 02. He held
the position almost continuously for 22 years; and the great work he
did is still fresh in the memories of many. A man of compelling per-
sonality and rare musical ability, Mr. Cropley was one of the best
choir conductors the city has ever had.
Amongst the earliest deacons were Messrs. J. B. Doolette and J.
McHenry Clark —who ably assisted Mr. Doolette in much of the pioneer-
ing work in the Church. Other early deacons were H. Gore, F.
Edwards, James Port and F. Williams. The first organist was Mr.
G. D. Doolette; the first Secretary Mr. Royal, and the first Treasurer
Mr. G. B. Doolette. Others of the earliest members were Mr. and
Mrs. Walter Hughes, Mrs. Constance Williams and four Misses Williams,
Messrs. H. M. Bristowe, F. W. Berrieman, Mr. and Mrs. W. Orr, Mr. and
Mrs. Avery, Mr. and Mrs. Horwood, Mr. and Mrs. A. Wilson, Miss Wilson,
Mrs. Virgo, and Miss Stevenson.
From the beginning the Church has had to contend with the diffi-
culty which comes from the migratory character of a mining population.
Thus when the Rev. E. Hampden-Cook succeeded the Rev. K. Mac Kay
in September, 18 89, only 14 of the original members remained. During
the brief pastorate of the Rev. E. Hampden-Cook about 30 names were
added.
Then followed a break of several months and difficult times for
the Rev. J. W. Jones during his ministry from May 189 0 till June 18 91;
and for the loyal pioneers who carried on after his going. The strike
of 189 2 and the migration of many people to the goldfields of W.A.
increased the difficulties of the Church; which finally appealed to the
South Australian Union to take charge. As a result, the Rev. W. T.
Kench, then a young minister at Renmark, came to take charge of this
difficult post. Mr. Kench re-formed the fellowship on its present Coven-
ant basis, the Covenant being signed on 3rd December, 1893, by 37
persons. Mr. Kench remained till June 1895. He married during his
pastorate Miss B. Williams, one of the original members.
Mr. and Mrs. S. R. Gray became associated with the Church in
18 92 and became members in 18 96, during the ministry of the Rev. A.
Hodge. Mr. J. E. Middleton came into membership on 29th April,
18 96. Mr. Gray and Mr. Middleton had association with
the Church for about thirty years, and are the only two who have
been made Life Deacons—both of these men gave exceptional service
to the Church. Mr. Gray held almost every office, including Secretary,
Treasurer, Choirmaster and Sunday School Superintendent. Mr. and
Mrs. Triphook were also amongst the pioneers who gave exceptional


and lengthy service, until 1917. Mr. G. Weir, Manager of the North
Mine, joined during Mr. Hodge’s time, and was a Deacon and Secretary.
Towards the end of Mr. Hodge’s ministry, financial troubles again beset
the Church. In May 1898 he accepted a call to New Zealand.
After a considerable vacant period, the Rev. W. S. Pearse, of Bor-
dertown, accepted a call and he worked loyally for over two years; but
financial difficulties became more serious. Endeavours were made to
secure the services of a theological student. None being available,
that pillar of Congregationalism, the Rev. J. C. Kirby, came to confer
with members. As a result the Rev. W. F. Turton served as acting
pastor from July 1901 till February 1902. After Mr. Turton’s depar-
ture, the late Rev. Martin Luther Johnson, brother of our late esteemed
friend Miss F. L. Johnson, was sent to inquire about the advisability
of continuing the cause. It was considered worth while. A number
of overtures were made and the Rev. W. A. Keay finally came for two
years, resigning in May 1904, owing to ill-health. . During Mr. Keay’s
ministry, the late Mr. Archie Godden, an able musician, became a - mem-
ber and was for a time organist and choirmaster. For some months
after Mr. Keay’s departure, Mr. N. W. Beaney was in charge as
student pastor. The Church felt unable to support a pastor, and the
Rev. W. H. Lewis, of North Adelaide, came to confer. By arrange-
ment between the Union and the Church, the Rev. W. Jarrett was enabled
to minister here from 1904 to 1907, when he resigned owing to the
ill-health of Mrs. Jarrett. At this time the Church seemed to be
stronger than for many years. On February 27, 1907, Mr. Cropley
received permission to introduce surplices for the choir. Mrs. W.
Carpenter was received into membership during Mr. Jarrett’s ministry.
She is still with us; and has the longest time of connection with the
Church of any present member.
The Rev, W. H. Rayner supplied for two months; and then the Rev.
Aaron Francis had charge from February 19 08 till March 1910. During
his ministry, Mr. E. B. Dow joined the Church and has continued till
the present time a powerful influence in the Church’s life. Mr. Dow
has done especially outstanding work as Sunday School Superintendent;
and in the young people’s work generally; as well as in the diaconate
and in other sections of the work. Miss Elsie Thorn also joined at
this time, and a$ the first organiser of the Kindergarten, and in other
directions, was for years one of the Church’s best workers.
Mr. C. A. Parsons, one of the deacons, acted as locum tenens until
November, 1910, when the Rev. R. O. Nadebaum, 8.A., accepted a call.
Luring his time the Manse was built, with the aid of a loan from the
Chapel Building Society. The Church had greatly consolidated during
the preceding 8 or 9 years.
Mr. Nadebaum left in October 1913; and the Rev. A. C. Stevens
took charge for a while as student pastor.
The Rev. E. J. Stacy, of Maitland, South Australia, then accepted
a call. Mr. Stacy was pastor from April 1914 till November 19 20,
and the work which Mr. Stacy did in moulding the character of the
Church can hardly be over-estimated. During his ministry the world
was storm-tossed in war; to say nothing of local strikes. The Church
was extremely fortunate in having a man of Mr. Stacy’s exceptional
character, organising powers and all-round ability at such a time.
During his ministry the Sunday * School building was erected, and the
debt on the Manse substantially reduced. Just before and in the early
days of the War the Church had an especially strong Young Men’s
Society with such men as Roy Arthur, Reg Thorn, Harry Chandler,
Harold Highman, D. S. Noble, J. Clayton, H. Snelling, Roy Rogers, W.
Kennedy, T. A. Spurr, and R. Adams, to mention a few that come to
mind out of a large group, some of whom were killed during the War
or settled elsewhere after it.
Much to the regret of the Church —as well as the City, for he had
been a great citizen as well as minister, Mr. Stacy at the end of 1920.
accepted a call to Fremantle.
A long period of vacancy then occurred, during which the Church
was greatly indebted to local laymen of other denominations. Mr.
Walter Northey acted as Student Pastor for 3 months. The Rev. B.
Cozens, of Rutherglen, supplied for 2 months towards the close of 19 21.
The Rev. S. Roberts, of Hamley Bridge and now of Brisbane, ministered
from March 1922 till April 1924. Another long pastorless period oc-
curred; the Church again being greatly indebted to laymen for help.
Mr. W. E. Drewett, of Adelaide, a member of the Society of Friends,
supplied during October and November 1924. The Rev. H. V. T. Wood,
of Wallaroo, became pastor in February 19 25. Early in his ministry
here Mr. Wood married Miss N. Evans, of Stow Church; and they very


much endeared themselves to the people during their all too brief
ministry of two years. Mr. Wood went to Keith in 19 27, and has
now been for some years at Mt. Lofty.
The benefit of Mr. and Mrs. Wood’s good work was largely lost by
an exceptionally long period of vacancy. The Rev. W. Hawke supplied
during October and November 19 28. During part of this pastor less
period conjoint services were held in the Congregational Church with
the Chappie Street Baptists, their church having been destroyed by fire.
The Rev. E. W. Weymouth, who had been in New Zealand, finally
took charge after the Church had carried on during a very difficult
period of two years without a pastor. The South Australian Union, of
which the Rev. E. J. Stacy had become Secretary, gave extraordinary
help to the Church at this time, having at every stage been most
generous to the Church. Mr. Weymouth was in charge from December
19 2 8 till August 19 33.
To avoid another long break the Rev. E. J. Stacy and the late Mr.
Henry Savage conferred with the Church and as a result the present
Pastor, the Rev. W. W. F. Pratt, 8.A., began his ministry here in Oc-
tober 1933. Mr. Pratt had been Travelling Secretary of the Australian
Student Christian Movement; and this Church is his first pastorate.
Early in his ministry he married Miss E. M. Edmonds, M.Sc., of Sydney.
Mr. and Mrs. Pratt have served the Church and the City for nearly four
years; and a most happy relationship exists between pastor and people.
Recently Mr. Pratt has declined a call to the North Perth Church in
order to work in this Church, now completing its 5 oth year.
A survey of these fifty years shows that there have been fifteen
pastors during that time. For ten of these years, however, the Church
was either pastorless, or was in charge of pastors in an acting capacity.
Thus the average pastorate has not been a long one; and this has acted
against the interests of the Church. Tribute has been paid to the help
given at all times by the South Australian Union. During recent years
assistance, which has been greatly appreciated, has been given also by
the New South Wales Union.
During the first fifty years of its life a very good and great tradi-
tion has been made for the Broken Hill Congregational Church; and
honour is due to all those, known and unknown, who have played their
part in building such a tradition. Special tribute is due to those who
have carried on tenaciously and heroically in times of special difficulty
and crisis. A faithful band of people has several times saved the
Church from extinction. Those who are now in Church, as it
starts on the second fifty years of its life, are inspired by their spirit
to maintain and further this great tradition of Christian faith and
service.
Broken Hill Congregational Church, 1937.


Some Community Friends of the Congregational
Church.
We wish here to make grateful mention of a number of business people
of Broken Hill who, by advertising during the last couple of years in “ Com-
munity,” have helped the Congregational Church, and the larger cause which
“Community” seeks to serve. We sincerely thank them.
We thank and recommend :
Mr. STAN. L. NEWTON, at the corner of Oxide and Blende Streets,
and also at Patton Street, South Broken Hill, who supplies timber, galvanised
iron, cement, lime, plaster sheets, doors, baths, bath-heaters, wallpapers,
Docker’s Sun Brand Paints, etc.
Mr. S. ODGERS, Manager of the ORIENT CYCLE WORKS, at 195
Argent Street, the cheapest place for all cycles and accessories ;
Mr. P. GRIFF, to whom we recommend those who are furnishing. Mr
Griffis the supplier of Kriesler Radios. Phone 708.
THE GLOBE PROPRIETARY LIMITED (inc. in the State of S.A.) sup-
pliers of “ Zenith’’ paints and stains; also wallpapers and linoleums, wire
doors, and windows. The Globe Timber Mills are at Blende Street, Railway
Town. (Phone 100, 101 ;
V. P. NANKIVELL, of 619 Lane Street, who is specially recommended
to the thoughtful housewife as one who makes a special feature of regular
calling for orders. He provides good terms with fortnightly accounts with
6d. in the £ discount ;
WARRAWEE PRIVATE HOSPITAL, medical, surgical obstetrical, chil-
dren’s, which is conducted by SISTER R. E. SIMPER, A T.N.A. ;
PENNIMENT’S SERVICE STATION, at Wills Street, Railway Town,
which makes a special feature of giving tyres on terms, with 20 weeks to pay.
EDWIN H. CROPLEY, sharebroker, and house, land, insurance, ship-
ping and general commission agent, of 387 Argent Street; (Telephone 333);
Mrs L. HAMMILL, of 103, Bromide Street, phone 261, GROCER and
supplier of fruit and vegetables, stationery and haberdashery ;
FOULDS’ BUTCHERY, of 95a Oxide Street, where high quality meat,
protected by special refrigeration, can be bought from a special air-cooled
window ',
H. C. BRENTON, FRUITERER & GREENGROCER, of 381 Argent
Street, Telephone 416. The quality of all seasonable lines is unsurpassable;
F. J. POTTER & SON, Funeral Directors, of 66 Oxide Street, whose
prompt motor service ensures quick attention in town or country. Memorial
wreaths and domes are held in stock for sale. Phone 725 ;
WICHERT’S ECONOMY STORES, the reliable grocers, of 406
Chappie Street. Phone 230;
THE HARKAWAY BOOKSHOP AND LIBRARY, of 261 Argent Street
(phone 400). The library can be joined by subscription or deposit. Reprints
and cheap editions are available.
HARVEY’S MEDICAL HALL (CHEMISTS) who are recommended for
chemist supplies and ARABIAN GREY HAIR RESTORER, restoring the
original colour of hair ;
BRENTON BROS, BAKERS, who give special quality and service in
bread and cakes which are locally baked, fresh daily ; and supplied to all sub-
urbs. Brenton Bros, of which C. J. Pinder is the proprietor, are at 342-
4 Chappie Street ;


C. E. SMITH, of 231 Oxide Street, GROCER, who collects orders and
delivers daily. Phone 158 ;
H. C. THOMAS, CHEMIST, who should be consulted for all require-
ments. Mr Thomas is in Argent Street. Phone 147.
T, ALFORD, RAILWAY TOWN, GENERAL STOREKEEPER, who is at
211 Cornish Street, phone 548. Orders are collected and delivered daily.
SHELLEY’S LIMITED, AERATED WATERS AND CORDIAL MANU-
FACTURERS, who supply drinks to suit every palate. Phone 141 ;
H. EDWARDS, QUALITY TAILORS, of Argent Street;
W. C. TEAGUE’S HOSPITAL STORE, of 280 Bromide Street, and
phone 349, which supplies quality groceries to all parts of the city.
THE MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL COMPANY (Mrs E. G. Ellis)
of 391 Argent Street (phone 460), suppliers of electrical appliances and
labour-saving devices. Mrs Ellis has a large and varied, up-to-date stock of
equipment which has a special appeal to ladies;
THE P.A.T, SERVE YOURSELF GROCERY where everyone is sure of a
welcome and of saving money.
If your home and furniture are not insured, H. M. MULLINS, House,
Land and Insurance Agent of 383 Argent Street, can offer you a comprehen-
sive policy, covering fire and numerous risks for less than you now pay for fire
alone ; and thereby save you much money.
One of the features of this town, with its population of mine workers and
associated employees, is the high quality of many of the shopping facilities.
One cannot be long in the town without coming into contact with the many
activities of the well-known SERVICE STORES, for there seems to be no
limit to the range of goods they stock, and certainly no corner of the town to
which their deliveries do not call regularly. The Service Stores main prem-
ises are at Gypsum Street, Railway Town, near the Burke Ward corner, but
they also have a branch store at 353 Oxide Street for the convenience of cus-
tomers living nearer to that locality. A unique feature peculiar to the
Service Stores is their system of refunding to all customers the cost of giving
orders by telephone.
THE BROKEN HILL ICE AND PRODUCE COMPANY do good com-
munity service in Broken Hill by manufacturing locally Alaska Ice Cream and
Eskimo Pies, which are rich, pure, wholesome and good for everybody.
Members of the Fellowship, 1937.




