

FIFTH EDITION
OF THE
AUSTRALIAN
GARDENER,
BEING
A Complete System of Gardening,
AS PRACTISED IN VICTORIA, WITH A REVISED TREATISE ON THE
CULTURE OF THE VINE.
BY
SMITH & ADAMSON,
NURSERYMEN, SEEDSMEN, & FLORISTS,
71 COLLINS STREET WEST.
Melbourne:
MASON & FIRTH, PRINTERS,
16 ELIZABETH STREET SOUTH.


CIRCULARS, BANK NOTES,
BRASS PLATES, STAMPS AND SEALS, £c.
A Large and Varied Assortment of Bottle Labels
always on sale


INDEX TO ADVERTISEMENTS.
Page
I M
ANTIBILIOUS PILLS-J. W. Blair ... ••• "*
AGRICULTURAL CHEMIST-Charles Day... - Wi » v ‘
AGRICULTURAL IMPLEMENT MAKERS—T. Robinson &Co vn
BOOKSELLERS— Caple and Co. ... ••• ”*
BOOTMAKER—James Roy ••• •"
BISCUIT BAKERS-Smith and Sons ... ••• - “/
BOOKBINDER—W. Detmold ... - - V “‘
BONE MILLS—J. Collins .~ ••• -
CRUSHING MILLS-G. Bencraft ...
COFEEE ROASTERS & MERCHANTS-J. F. M'Kenzie & Co. 118
COPPERSMITH-W. Robison
COACH BUILDERS— M‘Gregor and M'Naughton...
CLOTHIERS & OUTFITTERS-G. and J. Espie ... vm ’
COPPERPLATE & LITHOGRAPHIC PRINTERS Fergus-
. i x. n ... ...wrapper
son and Mitchell ...
CARPET WAREHOUSE—Hickinbotham and Son
DYER & SCOURER—F. Lemme ... - "*
ENGINEER—D. Gillespie... ••• •••
EYE SPECIFIC—Mrs. De Hugard
FURNITURE IMPORTERS— Ramsay Brothers ... 1 7
GUANO— Bright Brothers and Co. ... ••• "*
HATTER-J. Galvin ... - ••• -
JEWELLER & OPTICIAN—Edwin Jones
LIME & CEMENT MERCHANTS-Dyer and Co.
IRONMONGERS-J. M‘Ewan and Co. ... - -
LABOR OFFICE—Mrs. Main
LETTER-PRESS PRINTERS-Mason and Firth ... -
MILLWRIGHT, &c.—Alexander Ramsay
MILNER’S SAFES-Bright Brothers and Co.
MUSIC SELLERS—M‘CuIIoch and Stewart ...
MEDICAL GALVANIST-Mr, Charles Knight
MEDICAL HERBALIST—Madame Carole ...
MODELLERS—Mackennal and Scurry ...
MONUMENTAL STONE MASONS-Marsh and Grout... -
PICTURE FRAME MAKERS —Campi and Co.
PHOTOGRAPHIC ARTIST-B. Johnson ...
PROVIDENT INSTITUTE OF VICTORIA ... -
PRODUCE MERCHANT-W. Lawrance ... •••
SADDLERS—M‘FarIand and Sons
SEEDSMEN & FLORISTS-Smith and Adamson ... wrapper
TRUSS & BANDAGE MAKERS-Mr. and Mrs. Clubb ..
WINDOW BLIND MAKERS—Mitchener and Richardson


§g Spwial
J. SMITH & SON,
Hurtles ale t Jgamtfartttms,
113 WILLIAM STREET, MELBOURNE.
S. & S. are the Sole Manufacturers of the celebrated
VICTORIA GINGER CAKES
(Formerly MTntyre’s), so universally approved of by the Press
of Great Britain, patronised by Her Majesty the Queen, His
Excellency Sir Henry Barkly, and other distinguished people
of England and the colonies.
May be had at the principal Grocers, Confectioners, and
Railway Refreshment Rooms, &c., &c.
BONE MILLS,
175 BRUNSWICK-ST-, FITZROY,
MELBOURNE.
Are prepared to supply Bone Dust in any quantity,
either for Vines or Fruit Trees, or for general crops.
The attention of Farmers and Market Gardeners is
specially invited to J. Collins & Co.’s Bone Dust, as
the bones are ground without first extracting the
oil.
Price—Coarse . . 71. per ton
Fine . 81. „
Delivered free within five miles of Melbourne. A
liberal allowance if taken from the premises.
ORDERS PUNCTUALLY ATTENDED TO.


Vagjp, Fountains, Garden Orna-
&c., in Artificial Stone.
CEILING FLOWERS, TRUSSES, AND EVERY
DESCRIPTION OF ORNAMENT
globehb toiijr %xthtu SfulL
MAOKEOAL & SCURRY,
94 RUSSELL STREET.
-A- 3NT ID
$
A'
o
o-
A
□
Stephen Street (opposite Eastern Market), Melbourne,
Marble Chimney Pieces, Slabs for Counters, Monuments ancl
Gravestones.
Iron Railings for Cemeteries, handsome designs.


IMPORTANT FOR EVERYBODY TO KNOW.
Day’s Concentrated Compound Essence of
Red Jamaica Sarsaparilla, with
Dandelion and Potash,
Effectually removes all kinds of Skin Diseases, Eruptions,
Ulcers, Swellings, Boils, Pimples on the Face, Sore
Throats and Eyes, Bad Legs, Piles, thoroughly era-
dicates any traces of Secondary Symptoms, entirely
destroys and removes the injurious effects produced by
mercury upon the System, is the best remedy yet intro-
duced for Nervous Debility, Weakness of the Stomach,
Nausea, Flatulency, Indigestion, Biliousness, as it quickly
restores the tone of the Stomach and Nerves, increases
the muscular strength, appetite and power of digestion,
for all cases of Chest and Lung Affections, torpid or
sluggish state of the Liver, particularly Rheumatism, so
incidental to these colonies, its effects are truly wonder-
ful in working cures; and as a purifier of the blood,
for strengthening and invigorating the Constitution gene-
rally, stands unsurpassed. By the mode of preparation
the whole of the active principles are extracted, by which
its peculiar action upon the system, in warding off many
diseases the same is liable unto, renders this invaluable
Compound in such high estimation ) and for those en-
feebled by a residence in hot climates nothing better can
be had recourse to. Manufactured only by the sole
Proprietor, Mr. CHARLES DAY, Member by Examina-
tion of the Pharmaceutical Society, Great Britain,
Family and Dispensing Chemist, Medical Hall, 27
Lonsdale-street West, Melbourne. Sold in Bottles,
ss. 6d., 10s. 6d., and 215.; a great advantage in taking
the larger size. The genuine only bear facsimile of my
signature ; and when it is procured elsewhere than at
the proprietors, or his appointed Agents, please observe
this. Testimonials of its efficiency can be seen at above
address.


WHEAT SOWING-.
IMPORTANT TO FARMERS AND AGRICULTURISTS.
By Her Majesty’s Royal Letters Patent, and under tlie
Patronage of HIS EXCELLENCY SIR HENRY
BARELY, K.C.8., and tlie most influential members
of the Royal Agricultural Society of Great Britain.
Jtmrib ax frotota.
This preparation has stood the test of many years with-
out a known failure, and is the only genuine and certain
remedy for the Smut in Wheat, and real preventative to
the ravages of the Slug, Grub, Wire and Scissor Worms.
It also promotes the germination of. the Seed and growth
of the Crop; increasing the produce of the same quite
equal to a change of Seed.
N.B.—The “Farmers’ Friend, or Wheat Protector,”
supersedes Blue Stone, Lime, and all other preparations,
and one trial will be sufficient to convince Agriculturists
of the superiority of the same, and that a more econo-
mical, efficient, and certain dressing could not be prepared.
Sold in Packets, with full directions for use, at 2s. 6d.
each, which is sufficient to dress Six bushels of Seed
Wheat, without Lime or Brine.
Caution.— Every Packet of the “ Farmers’ Friend, or
Wheat Protector,” bears the Proprietor’s signature,
“ Charles Day,” without which none is genuine.
Sole Proprietor of the “ Farmers’ Friend, or Wheat
Protector,”
CHARLES XSA.-ST,
PHARMACEUTICAL AND AGRICULTURAL CHEMIST,
MEDICAL HALL,
27 LONSDALE-STREET WEST, MELBOURNE.
Agents wanted for the sale of the above throughout the
Colonies. Pure Drugs and Chemicals, Patent Medicines
and Perfumery, genuine Horse, Cattle, and Sheep Medi-
cine of all kinds. Cheese and Butter Coloring always on
sale, from fresh supplies constantly being received from
England.


NEW PREMISES,
247 ELIZABETH STREET.
T. MIIISM 4k ©©.,
Manufacturers and Importers of Agricultural Implements and
Machines of the most Modern and Improved kinds.
mmmmm
wmm.
HAND SEED DRILLS, FOR DRILLING TURNIP, ONION
CARROT, AND PARSNIP SEED, ALSO PEAS.
T- BOBUSTSONT Sc 00.
Beg to call the attention of Market Gardeners and Seedsmen
to these very useful Implements, which for their simplicity,
efficiency, and cheapness, cannot be too highly recommended.
i@- Observe the address, 247 Elizabeth Street, Melbourne.
T- ROBINSON 8c CO.


B ®fi 111 @&SQ) (k
HERBAL PHYSICIAN,
SBSMMIST & «MJB¥#TAIf£,
114 COLLINS STREET WEST,
MELBOURNE.
CONSULTATION BY LETTER, FEE ONE GUINEA.
EUROPEAN & AUSTRALIAN TESTIMONIALS
TO BE SEEN AT RESIDENCE.
AND
35 COLLINS ST. EAST, k
MELBOURNE


GKETSTTEEIVEIEI^S
Clotlmrg anir iMttffwg
ESTABLISHMENT,
41 & 43 BOURKE-ST. EAST.
Gr. & J. ESPIE
Invite attentioA ,to their extensive Stock, which is
always complete with the Newest and most Fashionable
Goods, in Broad and narrow Cloths, Doeskins, Tweeds,
Vestings, Hats, Shirts, Hosiery, Gloves, &c.
FIRST-CLASS CLOTHING MADE TO ORDER,
In the best style, at moderate prices.
Superior Ready-made Coats, Vests, and Trousers, in a great
variety of materials.
iMMtfi® tlllfS,
i Sew Shapes,
Plain Shapes,
245.
245.
60s.
60s.
per half dozen.
per half dozen.
Gr. & * J. ESPIE,
CLOTHIERS SHIRT MERCHANTS,
41 <fc 43 BourJce Street East, Melbourne,


THE AUSTRALIAN GARDENER.
PREFACE TO THE FIFTH EDITION.
The fact that the Fourth, Edition of the Australian Gardener,
which we published last year, is exhausted, is a sufficient reason
for our issuing a Fifth.
We had some intention at one time of issuing a more ex-
tended work upon Colonial Gardening, but we have abandoned
this idea for the present for the following reasons. In the first
place, we have not had leisure to give such a subject the at-
tention required ; and in the second place, the rapidity with
which each successive edition has been taken off our hands
inclines us to the belief that the Australian Gardener is, after
all, perhaps better suited to the readers for whom we intended
it than a work of greater bulk would be. We might add
another, and possibly not the least cogent reason, for re-pro-
ducing the Gardener, which is this—a more extended work
would necessarily require to be charged at a higher price, and
this would frustrate the very object which we have all along
had in view, which has been to place a knowledge of Cottage
Gardening within the reach of every cultivator in this the
land of our adoption.
We have, therefore, reproduced the Gardener just as it was,
with the exception of the article on the Grape Vine. As the
cultivation of this plant is likely to form an important interest
here at no distant date, and as the conflicting opinions which
prevail on the subject amongst practical men is likely to puzzle
the amateur how to proceed, we have deemed it right, having
a strong opinion on the subject, to make that opinion known,
which we have done as briefly and as simply as possible, so that
the mere novice in gardening may proceed to lay out his vine-
yard upon a system which we believe to be the correct one.
SMITH & ADAMSON.
Melbourne, Ist August , 1860.




FIFTH EDITION
OF THE
Australian Gardener
BEING
A COMPLETE SYSTEM OF GARDENING,
AS PRACTISED IN VICTORIA,
CONTAINING ALL NECESSARY PRACTICAL INFORMATION
ON LEADING SUBJECTS OF THE
KITCHEN GKAJRJDIEKr Sc ORCHARD 5
TOGETHER WITH A COMPREHENSIVE
£ alette of ffrt Jfloter (Sarittn,
AND REVISED TREATISE ON THE
CULTURE OF THE VINE.
BY
SMITH & ADAMSON,
NURSERYMEN, SEEDSMEN & FLORIST&,
71 COLLINS STREET WEST, MELBOURNE.




CONTENTS.
PAGE
Kitchen Garden ... ... ••• }
Introductory Remarks ... ... ... *
Asparagus
Beans
Beet ... ... ••• - \
Broccoli
Brussels Sprouts
Cabbage .... # ... ••• ••• ®
Capsicum and Chillies
Cardoon
Carrots ... ... •••
Cauliflower ... ... ••• •••
Celery ... ... ... •••
Com Salad ... ... ... - J*
Cress ... ... ... -
Cucumber ... ... ... •••
Endive ... ... ... •••
Garlic ... ... ... -
Gourd or Pumpkin ... ... ••• "
Herbs 20
Horse Radish ... ... ... 20
Jerusalem Artichoke ... ... •••
Kidney Bean ... ... ••• 21
Leek ... ... - - 21
Lettuce ... ... ... - "
Melon ... ... ••• ••• 2J
Mustard ... ... ••• ••• 2J
Onion ... ... ••• •••
Parsley ... ... ... - 25
Sr p ... “* i
Potato ... ... 26
Radish ... ... ... ... 27
Rhubarb ... ... ... ... 28
Savoy ... ... ... ... 29
Salsafy ... ... ... ... 29
Scorzonera ... ... ••• 29
Sea Kale ... ... ... ... 29


Kitchen Garden— continued. page
Spinach ... ... ... _ gg
Scarlet Runners ... ... ' gj
Tomato ... . . " oo
Turnip ... /;• ... •” ... 32
Vegetable Marrow ... ... ... 33
Kitchen Garden Calendar ... ... ... 34
Flower Garden and Shrubbeby ... ... 4g
Introductory Remarks ... ... ... 4g
Flower Garden Calendar ... * ... 49
The Orchard ... ... . gg
Introductory Remarks ... ... *’ gg
The Apple ... ... ... m< 79
Apricot ... ... .. yg
Almond ... ... ... <m 74
Cherry ... ... ... 74
Fig ••• ••• ... ... 75
Filbert ... .. 7g
Grape Vine ... ... ... 77
Loquat ... ... *’* §7
?J e S ar - - - - 83
Mulberry ... ... gg
Orange ... ... ... "* ... 89
Olive... ... ... 9q
Peach and Nectarine ... ... 9 j
?f ar - - .. 95
J lum - - ... ... 96
Quince ... ## gj
Sweet Chestnut ... ... ... 9 g
Walnut ... ... ... 9 g
Small Fruits ... ... ... ... 200
Currants ... ... ... ’’’ jqq
Gooseberry ... ... ... 201
Raspberry ... ... ... 101
Strawberry ... ... 202
Miscellaneous... ... ... 203
Tabular View of the Kitchen Garden Calendar ... 114


ADDRESS.
It is now more than four years since we were induced to
publish “The Calendar of the Kitchen Garden,” which
was followed two years after by “The Kitchen Garden.”
Both issues have long since been sold out; but instead of satis-
fying the demand for information on this subject, have only
increased it, so that we are being constantly solicited by our
numerous friends and customers to reprint them. We have
therefore prepared the present little work, which contains the
Kitchen Garden, revised and extended, and also directions
for the Flower Garden and Orchard.
Our business engagements have prevented our devoting as
much time and attention to the work as we desired, or as the
subject required, and we therefore request our readers to over-
look any defects that may be found in the arrangement, or
errors in the composition; but as to the subject matter of the
work, it has been deduced from careful observation, and is the
result of long practical experience in Victoria, and we have
every confidence in recommending it to our readers, knowing
well that the directions given may be followed with safety and
advantage*
SMITH & ADAMSON.
Melbourne, 2lth April, 1858.




THE KITCHEN GARDEN.
INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.
The choosing of a situation for the Kitchen
Garden is a most important matter, hut it must
necessarily depend so much upon local- circum-
stances, that it would be impossible to lay down
any fixed rule upon the subject. The amateur
should, therefore, take the opinion of some com-
petent practical authority, that the best site at his
command for the purpose may he selected! If
the soil on that part of the ground thus set apart
is not of a good loamy or black vegetable nature,
it ought to he made so, if not at once, by degrees,
as the crops are taken off the ground. The
ground, also, ought to he trenched, either at the
time the garden is formed, or afterwards, for such
crops as require it most; and on ground kept
continually under crop, the operation of trenching
ought to be repeated once in evere three or four
years. This system will eventually become
cheaper, and grow crops with much better success
than a continual digging, manuring, and cropping
of the same surface soil.
Of whatever shape the garden as a whole may
be, for the sake of economy, neatness and utility,
it should be so formed with walks as to have the
ground inside in squares or quarters, having two
B


sides parallel, and the angular corners if any,
should be occupied with permanent crops, such as
rhubarb, seakail, &c. If the whole is a square of
about two acres, it may be laid out on the follow-
ing simple plan:—Form a walk 5 feet wide around
the boundary, and within a border 8 to 10 feet
wide. Divide the interior space thus formed by
two other walks, running each way at equal dis-
tances, and crossing one another, thus forming the
ground within the boundary walk into nine of what
gardeners term quarters. On each side of the
walks so formed make borders of the same breadth
as that round the outside of the boundary walk,
with alleys sufficiently wide to admit of walking
round the quarters without treading on the crops.
Smaller gardens will, in addition to the boundary
walk, require only two .other walks crossing one
another and dividing the ground into four quarters.
Although fruit trees in the kitchen garden are
not commendable, yet in small places there is no
other resource but to have them there. In such
cases, instead of interplanting them through the
whole garden, the boundary border ought to be
set aside for them, and should for this purpose be
left 25 to 30 feet wide, the taller sorts of trees
being planted at the outside, and the more dwarf
sorts towards the front of the border. Edgings of j
walks may be formed of thyme, sage, marjoram, j
parsley, strawberry, thrift, or camomile; or, if
these are objectionable, on account of the harbor j
they afford for slugs, wood, brick, or slate will
answer well to make them of.
ASPARAGUS.
This highly-esteemed vegetable, at one time sos
difficult to cultivate under the cast-up-bed-and-j


deep-alley system, is now grown by many practical
gardeners as easily as an ordinary cabbage.
Sowing. —Sow the seed thinly, in drills 1± inch
deep and "one foot apart, when the plants are fit
for handling, thin them out 2 inches apart; if
thus grown in a good soil the plants will be quite
large enough for planting out permanently the
following winter.
Transplanting. —Choose a rich, deep, sandy
soil, trenched at least 18 inches deep, and well
mixed with manure in the operation ; lay out the
ground into 4 feet beds, with alleys or paths 18
inches wide, plant the roots carefully with a trowel
m lines 9 inches from the sides, and 15 inches
apart from each other, three plants will thus be
across the bed. If the soil be poor, plant in lines
1 foot apart and 6 inches from the sides.
Autumnal Top-dressing.— As the leaves turn
yellow, cut the stems close to the surface, eradicate
all weeds, stir the soil carefully with a.garden fork,
lay on a liberal dressing of half-decomposed strong
manure, that of poultry if procurable, fork over
the alleys, throwing a little of the earth from them
on the surface of the beds, finish by squaring the
bed edges and raking the whole lightly over.
Spring Dressing.— ln August, should any of
the top-dressing remain, rake it into the alleys,
and gently fork it in, carefully raise the surface of
the beds, and, should it afterwards become hard
mom heavy rain, rake it lightly to allow the shoots
to come up easily.
Salt.— Asparagus may *be much stimulated in
growth by applying a solution of salt thrice a year,
vm. : during the spring and autumn top-dressing:,
and at midsummer. 8
V U I TTING : —When the plants are one year estab-
lished, a dish or two of shoots may be cut, but it
b 2


would be greatly to tbe advantage of the plants to
allow them to grow another season undisturbed.
Cut the shoots close to the ground, previous to the
opening of the buds, when from 4to 6 inches long.
There is no risk in cutting the unseen crowns
under the system here recommended, and the beds
being low and flat have not their sides exposed to
our summer droughts.
BEANS
Succeed best in a strong, well-manured soil,
deeply dug. As the ground is being dug, plant
the large Windsor sorts 2| inches deep, the drills
being 30 inches apart, and the beans 6 inches from
each other, lightly covering them over. Mazagans
need the drills only 2 feet apart. Where the soil
is rather light, plant the beans in double rows, 3
feet apart from centre to 1 centre, and 3 inches
deep. When a crop is planted in very dry wea-
ther, water the bottoms of the drills thoroughly,
and plant the beans, after being steeped twelve
hours in water, and cover in with the soil imme-
diately, to prevent evaporation; the soil thus
watered will keep the moisture for a long time.
When the plants begin to flower, nip the tops off',
and gather the crops clean off as they become fit
for use, which will assist the plants for giving a
continuous supply.
BEET.
Were this vegetable rightly appreciated, it would
occupy a portion of every garden, and acres of thaj
mangold wurtzel variety would be grown on eveH
farm. It is easy of culture, yields a certain crop*
if attention is paid to the sowing season, while its
cost for seed is merely nominal. It flourishes
a deep, rich, and somewhat sandy soil.


Culture. —Deeply trench,, and give an ample
dressing of thoroughly decomposed manure a few
weeks before sowing. At the sowing season fork
over the ground, pulverising the lumps, then draw
drills 15 inches apart, nearly 2 inches deep, for the
dwarf varieties, and 20 inches apart for the larger
varieties, in which sow the seed thinly; when the
rough leaf is formed, thin out the plants from 6 to
9 inches apart —the size desired should determine
the distance, and stir the surface deeply with a hoe;
as they advance to a considerable size the lower
leaves" may be taken off, if required for cattle
feeding; subsequently, when they have recovered
their foliage, they may be again reduced. These
reductions of leaves, however, can only be made
at the expense of the fleshy roots, and when the
crops are grown both for cattle feeding and culi-
nary use, small portions should be set aside for
the latter of the finer varieties, and allowed to
grow undisturbed, while for the former the coarser
variety, as mangold wurtzel, may be grown, the
lower leaves of which should be used as they are
fully grown.
BROCOLI.
For the mode of growing brocoli, see the article
Cabbage, bearing in mind to allow 6 inches more
room for the early varieties, and from 9 inches to
12 inches for the large late varieties. Cauliflower
plants being now so subject to blight at some
seasons of the year, must be substituted to a great
extent with early and late varieties of brocoli,
suitable for supplying the table successively for as
long a period as possible; the crops to be planted
chiefly from the end of September to April.


BRUSSELS SPROUTS.
A handsome vegetable, of delicate flavour, highly-
esteemed, particularly well adapted for this climate,
as it withstands severe droughts, and succeeds well
in a good strong soil, well dug and manured.
Sowing.— Sow the seed broadcast, in beds, as
directed for cabbage.
Culture. —When the plants are sufficiently
strong, plant out on well-prepared rich soil, in
rows 18 inches or more apart, according to the soil.
A succession from a single sowing can be obtained
by planting out a few plant,; from the seed bed on
a sheltered spot, 4 inches apart every way; three
or four weeks after, transplant them as already
suggested. This, latter plantation often produces
a crop heavier than by the former method. Keep
the earth deeply stirred among the crops, as the
soil gets hard.
Cutting.— Go through the plantation and cut
all sprouts growing from the upright stem having
the appearance of half-blown roses, leaving the
head of the plants uncut until these sprouts are
nearly all gathered.
CABBAGE,
The most useful of all the brassica tribe, may
be cut in all stages, when it has only a few leaves,
down to the time when developed to the full-
hearted ponderous vegetable; it is as wholesome as
it is palatable.
Sowing.— On a light rich soil, laid out in beds
4 feet wide, with alleys 1 foot in breadth, sow
thinly broadcast, rake over the surface well, and
gently tread it with the hack of the rake.
Planting.— Choose a piece of ground in "good
condition, previously bearing a light crop, bastard
trench it, that is dig it doubly deep, first one spit


down and then another, without shovelling or
treading in the bottom. After applying to the sur-
face a good dressing of manure in a half-decom-
posed state, plant the large sorts 2 feet apart each
way, and the smaller 20 inches, in quincunx form;
the plants should be carefully lifted with a fork,
which preserves the fibres from injury—all mixed
or deformed ones should be rejected. If young
cabbages are required early, plant a few of the
early sorts by themselves, 1 foot apart each way.
Summer crops should be planted in a low situation,
in dull weather, in the bottoms of drills drawn out
with a hoe, so that the roots of the plants may be
benefited from the moisture of the soil, and the
tops be slightly sheltered from the hot winds.
Level in the surface about the plants at the first
or second hoeing.
Watering and Mulching. —lf drought prevail,
and advanced cabbage crops get dry at the roots,
after loosening the soil, mulch them at once with
long fresh manure, at least one inch thick, and
with a weak solution of guano or cow-manure
water thoroughly every afternoon until the plan-
tation is finished. The plants will thus keep the
moisture far a month or so.
Aphis or Blight. —The best method fordestroy-
ing this pest is a weak solution of guano, applied
to the plants overhead at an early stage of its
existence, on two successive evenings, and occa-
sionally afterwards if it continues increasing, also
lose no opportunity of showery days of applying
over the plants a slight sprinkling of dry guano,
for the purpose of being washed in with the rain ;
this ingredient is very nauseous to the insect and
feeding to the plants; examine the crops after
each application, when the leaves are dry, and kill
with the hand any little patch remaining.


Cabbage Sprouts may easily be obtained from
the medium sized sorts after the heads are cut, by
divesting the stocks of their leaves and tranversely
cross cutting the tops of the stocks about an inch
or more deep.
CAPSICUM AND CHILLIES.
For an Early Crop.—Sow a few seeds in a
4-inch pot, well drained with potsherds, and filled
with a light rich soil, water gently, and place it in
a cucumber frame. When the seed leaves are well
formed, fill up a few 3-inch pots with the same
soil as suggested for the seed, and plant two in
each, water and return the plants to the frame,
and grow them as early cucumbers, until about
the end of October, when they may be planted
out in a warm situation, protected for a few days
as suggested for cucumbers.
For a Late Crop.—Prepare a warm situation,
having a good rich soil, by digging and pulverising
the soil well, sow the seed very shallow, in patches
feet apart each way, and thin out the plants to
three. Mulch and water as soon as the dry wea-
ther sets in.
CARDOON.
The Cardoon de Tours is by the French esteemed
the best variety, because the ribs are thicker,
more tender and delicate in flavour than the com-
mon kind.
Culture.—ln a rich friable soil, of a loamy
nature, make a trench as for celery, 12 inches deep
and 22 wide, fork into the bottom of it well-decom-
posed manure, at least 4 inches thick, sow three
or four seeds together in patches 18 inches apart
along the centre; as soon as the seed leaves are I


well formed, root out all but the strongest plant in
each patch, hoe frequently among the plants, and
water thoroughly with diluted liquid manure.
When about 18 inches high rub off all the side
shoots from the crowns at the surface, and add a
little soil to support the leaves ; when they are full
grown, which will be about June or July, tie up
the leaves compactly together with a soft rope or
cord, then wind a hay or straw band moderately
tight round from the bottom to nearly the top, and
earth up to the same height; when completely
blanched, the plants are ready for use.
CARROTS.
This is one of the most useful of the tap-rooted
tribe, and is valuable on account of the length of
time it can remain in the ground or be stored for
use without detriment. Besides its culinary value,
any quantity can be sold for stock feeding. All
soils are not adapted to it, and such as are must be
prepared more or less to induce the principal root
to descend perpendicularly for its nourishment,
which results in producing a fine, long, clean-
skinned carrot.
Garden Sowing. —To produce long straight car-
rots, free from fibre in the fleshy part, spread a
good dressing of half-decomposed manure on the
surface of a deep sandy soil, free from stones or
noxious weeds, trench it fine, at least 2 spit deep,
draw drills 12 inches apart, fully 1 inch deep, for
the early horn variety, and 15 inches or 18 inches
apart from the larger varieties. If the seeds bind
together, rub them well with the hands, and sow
very thinly upon a calm day; beat them in with
the back of a rake, cover over with the same, leav-
ing the whole smooth and free of refuse.
b 3


Field Sowing.— Very few carrots are culti-
vated by means of the plough, which is surprising :
the common opinion is they require too much
labour, but by judicious management much te-
dious work can be avoided. The land being of
the kind recommended, in good condition, and
free from bad weeds, plough and harrow it as deep
as possible, previous to the sowing season, at
which time turn up deep drills with the plough,
manure them as lightly as for potatoes, turning
the drills again over the manure, so as to stand
high, about 24 or 30 inches apart from centre to
centre; with a strong 10-inch rake level the tops
of the drills, breaking or taking out all the hard
lumps. With a blunt pointed steak, nearly 6 feet
long, draw two drills on the top of each, about
2 inches from the edge, and as straight as the eye
can lead without the aid of a line, sow as already
recommended, and beat the seed tolerably firm
with the back of the rake, and cover nicely in
with the same implement.
Culture. —When the rough leaf appears, hoe
down the weeds around the sides and bottoms of
the drills with the common hoe; then, with two
small ones, 24 inches wide, and handles 1 foot
long, taking one in each hand, and with a foot on
each side of the drill, hoe between and among the
carrots, cutting down the weeds and breaking the
surface a little ; or, if the weeds are numerous and
strong, one hoe will be more expeditious; in the
course of three weeks use the large hoe again, if re-
quired ; then take the small one, and thin out to
sor 6 inches apart. When the field crop is con-
siderably advanced, the sides of the drills may be
raised up with a small drill plough, in dry
weather.
Storing. —Although .carrots are sown at vari-


ohs seasons, to keep up a supply, yet a few large
ones may be stored, being often required for pur-
poses wbicli young roots will not serve. In dry
wheather, lift the roots carefully after being well
matured. Cut the tops close to the crowns of the
carrots ; dig a trench out 12 in. deep, and 18 in.
wide, in a cold shady situation ; pile the roots up in
this to a point 12 inches above the general sur-
face ; lay over them a quantity of straw, and then
a layer of earth, beat down with the back of' a
spade to drain off the water. If as convenient,
they will keep equally well if stored in a cool cel-
lar, or shed, with a layer of dry sand over every
thick layer of carrots.
CAULIFLOWER.
The most highly esteemed of brassicas is gene-
rally grown in the best part of the kitchen garden,
and when brought to the market it supersedes all
the other of its class in point of value. Cauli-
flower plants thrive best in a deep, loamy, rich
soil, well manured for a previous crop, such as
celery, kidney beans, vegetable marrow, or onions,
all of which take well with a good feed, and do
not exhaust the soil very much.
Sowing, Planting, Watering, Mulching and
Destroying Blight.— See article Cabbage, bear-
ing in mind to allow 6 inches more room in
planting out, and raise all the plants from the
seed-bed with a trowel, as they are somewhat
more tender than the cabbage. Attend particu-
larly to the proper season for sowing, or else fail-
ures will take place. When the heads begin to
show, they ought to be looked over daily, some of
the outside leaves broken off, and placed over the
heads to ward off the sun’s rays. In order to


prolong the crop as much as possible, cut up a
quantity when at the above stage close to the
ground; tie the tops of the leaves loosely, and
place the heads in the corner of a cool-shed, or
cellar, on the floor, with their root ends stuck
closely together into a layer 6 inches deep of sand
or sandy soil, well watered; throw a gunny cloth
over the whole to prevent the admission of light
or draught, they will keep sound in this way for
nearly three weeks.
CELERY.
This is an excellent salad when grown to matu-
rity ; it is also valuable at every stage of its
growth for certain culinary purposes, and ought
to be grown separately to serve both ends.
Sowing for Early Crop.— Sow the seed in a
pot, pan, or box, well drained with potsherds or
such like materials, and filled with light rich
sandy soil; cover the seed slightly with part of
the same soil well pulverised, and, after watering,
protect with a handglass or frame. As soon as
the plants show the rough leaf, harden them off
by admitting the air gradually, but slowly, until
they are fit for handling, when they may be
pricked out 3 inches apart each way, in a warm
sheltered border, or in a rough frame with calico
covering. Water occasionally. Forty or fifty
plants will be sufficient for a first crop.
Sowing for Later Crops.— Select a low situa-
tion, sheltered from the summer droughts, with a
light rich soil, in which sow the seeds as before
directed; water when dry, and when the plants
are well fit for handling, raise them up with a fork,
and thin them out to 3 inches apart in the lines;
use the thinnings for transplanting out at the


same distance apart, and tread down again gently
with the feet the raised-up ground in the seed-
bed. To retain the moisture about plants in-
tended to stand the summer previous to planting
out in trenches, the surface of the soil ought to
be covered with powdered charcoal or droppings
from the stable.
Transplanting. —Celery being a plant which
grows naturally near the sea, it delights in marshy
places, and to grow it well and of good flavour
rich feeding is essential. To secure this, choose a
deep, rich, well-pulverised soil, which has been
well manured for a former crop. The method of
growing it depends upon the quality required.
To Groav it Fine. —Cut out a trench 2 feet
wide by 18 inches deep, into which put six inches
of well decomposed manure, and mix it well with
the soil already in the bottom of the trench; cover
this mixture with two inches deep of the soil pre-
viously taken out of the trench, and then place
the plants along the centre 9 inches or 1 foot
apart, not so deep as to cover their crowns.
Water and shade from strong sunshine, by means
of boards or straw supported on sticks laid across
the trench, until the plants begin to grow, when
these may be removed. Mulch slightly with
fresh stable manure, to keep down evaporation,
and prevent the ground from baking or cracking.
Another plan, more economical, and which can be
done with nearly equal success, is to prepare the
trench as above directed, but making it 2| feet
wide. In this case two rows of plants may be put
in the trench, and so placed as that the plants in
the one row may alternate with those in the
other.
For a General Crop. —A large supply on a
small piece of ground, of very good medium-sized


heads, may be obtained by cutting a trench of any
convenient length 5 feet wide by 12 inches deep,
and planting in rows across the trench, regulating
the distance according to the season and the size
of heads wanted —say 18 inches between, and 12
inches apart in the lines for large sizes, and for
smaller and late crops 9to 12 inches apart each
way.
Transplanting eor Culinary Use. —Dig and
manure well a piece of rich soil ; draw drills with
the hoe 4 inches deep, and 2 feet distant from one
another, in which place the plants as before di-
rected, 9 inches apart. When the plants are about
12 inches high, earth up as is done with potatoes.
Any plants remaining in the seed-bed after the
different plantations are finished, might be planted
in some corner Bor 10 inches apart, to be used
first.
Watering and Earthing up. —Celery being a
gross feeder as well as a very thirsty plant, will, if
allowed to get dry, soon become pipy and tough.
It will be necessary, therefore, so soon as the
plants make a little growth, to apply frequently
liquid cow-manure, guano, or soap suds, and oc-
casionally clean water. When the plants have
advanced to 14 inches high, put the surface soil
about their roots, tear away all side shoots from
the crowns, put a few inches of soil round them to
support their long stems, and water abundantly
with liquid a shade stronger than before. When
they are 20 inches high, remove any side shoot
still remaining, and earth up in dry weather as
follows, taking care that the centre leaves are kept
out of the soil:—Pulverise and put down care-
fully a little earth in both sides of the trench;
then gather compactly together all the outside
leaves of one plant, and hold it erect in the left


hand, whilst the right hand is used in placing and
pressing the loose earth round it. The above
plan is preferable to that sometimes practised of
tying the leaves of each plant together during the
operation of earthing up. The best plan for earth-
ing up plants placed in lines across a trench is to
take two boards the length of the lines, and place
one on each side of the vacant space between a
row of the plants; put into the space between the
boards the depth of soil required, then lift the
boards gently and repeat this in the next space,
and so on till the trench is finished; after which
gather up the tops of each plant in one hand, and
press the soil round it with the other, as formerly
directed. When the plants have completed their
growth, earth up again for the last time, leaving
only small portions of the tops exposed; three
weeks after this the plants will be well blanched.
Very early crops, after attaining the height of 14
inches, should be earthed up so as to be fit for use
when wanted, and in successions. Late or winter
crops in very wet situations ought to be planted
on the surface of the ground in lines sor 6 feet
apart, so that the removal of the soil used for
earthing up may make sufficient drainage to pre-
vent the plants from rotting.
CORN SALAD.
Winter Culture. —The first sowing of this
useful small salad, which is chiefly grown by the
French, ought to be made at the commencement
of the autumnal rains, and a successional crop put
in at intervals of every two or three months there-
after. Sow in any waste soil of a light nature in
beds four feet wide, and in shallow drills 6 inches
apart. Thin out the seedlings to 4 inches apart,
then pick the outside leaves for use as they expand.


Summer Culture. —Like other salads these
become tough and rank tasted when allowed to
remain long in the ground, therefore sow them
every month in a moist sheltered spot. Thin out
as soon as fit for handling, and when large enough
for use, cut the heads as wanted close to the sur-
face of the ground.
CRESS.
There are three species of this, well suited for
salads.
Curled or Garden Cress. This anunal
may be grown in winter on a patch of ground two
feet square, at the foot of a fence or other warm
spot, by drawing shallow drills as close as possible
with the finger or a small stick ; sow quite thick,
and gently heat the surface with the hack of a
spade, barely covering the seeds. As the rough
leaf appears, cut it for use close to the surface of
the ground, or pull it up, roots and all, and wash.
Choose a shady spot for summer, or, having no
garden, sow the seed between a single fold of a
wet flannel.
American Cress is well adapted for our cli-
mate, as it withstands the wet in winter, and
drought in summer. Sow monthly in drills 9 in-
ches apart, slightly covered with earth; when the
plants are bushy, cut the heads by the surface of
the ground.
Water Cress. —This creeping perennial is an
excellent salad. Young runners are most commonly
used for planting out; a marshy flat where the
water is renewed—a narrow stream of water two
or three inches deep running over a sandy bottom
—a creek, or the sides of a river, will all grow it
luxuriantly the greater portion of the year.


CUCUMBERS.
Rather than enter into a lengthened detail on
the cultivation of the encumber throughout the
year, the manner of growing summer crops merely
will he mentioned, and for those the assistance of
a frame will he required, which ought to he
placed on a mound of fresh stable manure, three
feet high, and about a foot all round beyond the
box of the frame; this will raise the temperature
within the frame to about 60 Fahr., which will
gradually diminish, and as it does so will harden
the young plants before planting out.
Sowing for an Early Crop.— Fill into 4-inch
pots, well drained, a good, light, rich, fibry soil,
and sow in each 4 seeds, about one quarter of an
inch deep, water gently, if the soil is dry, and
place the pots in the frame ; as soon as the seed-
leaves are well expanded, allow the three strongest
to grow; when the rough leaf appears admit a
little air during the day in fine weather, gradually
increasing it as the plants grow up, until they are
3or 4 inches high, or in other words until they
become nice and stocky, like cabbage plants fit
for planting out. In this stage they are fit for
their permanent situations.
Culture. —Let the soil intended for the plants
be deeply dug, in a situation sheltered from the
cold winds. If the ground is of a wet nature cast
it up in round ridges, 5 feet wide, a little flat-
tened along the centre of each, for one row of
plants; if the ground is naturally dry or well
drained, the plain surface is all that is necessary;
make holes in both instances two feet in diameter
and 18 inches deep for fine fruit, and somewhat
smaller for an ordinary crop, and fill to within 6
inches of the top of good rotten manure, mixed
with part of the soil taken out, over this place 3


or 4 inches of the soil, and plant in the centre of
each one potful of the cucumbers, with the balls
entire; fill up the holes with soil to the level of
the surface of the balls, which will leave the plants
in a hollow, about 2 inches under the general surface
of the ground, raise the sides of the holes slightly,
to prevent surface water running into them, place
over each patch a bell glass, partly raised in mild
days, or surround with green boughs; or, better
still, stick into the ground around and a few inches
from the plants three short stakes, sufficiently
high to support over them small pieces of gunny
bag cloths, which may remain for a few days until
the plants are established in the ground.
Sow Later Crops. —These should be sown in
the open ground, in the same manner as described
for planting out the early crop, sowing a few seeds
in each hole, and afterwards thinning out to the
three strongest plants ; a few may be started a
little earlier by placing bell glasses over the patches.
This crop requires no protection.
Thinning and Stopping of shoots are un-
necessary, except in rare cases, where they do not
branch of their own accord, when they may be
stopped and two side branches allowed to grow
out, but the less they are checked the quicker they
grow and produce fruit.
Watering and Mulching. —Cucumber plants
cannot be too richly fed, as they give out con-
tinuous supplies of fruit. In dry weather the
ground should have a good soaking of water, or
weakly diluted liquid manure, directly after being
well mulched, which will retain a moisture about the
plants for nearly a month.
Red Spider.— This insect is occasionally very
injurious to the cucumber crops, but it can only
be so when the plants are allowed to get too dry


at the roots ; a thorough watering over the leaves,
and of sufficient quantity to saturate the roots, a
few successive afternoons will destroy it.
ENDIVE.
This is a good useful salad, becoming now of
more repute than hitherto. To grow it well the
culture recommended for lettuce is exactly suit-
able.
GARLIC.
This vegetable is generally propagated from the
young bulbs or offsets not large enough for use.
Culture. —If these offsets are to be planted
early in winter, which is the proper season, choose
a good rich soil, as suitable for onions, Efnd plant
in drills, drawn one foot apart, and one inch deep,
by pressing the lower half of the offset into the
soil, leaving them in this state during winter,
without any covering ; when hoeing them in
spring, let the soil fall to them, so as to leave a
level surface. If planted in spring, cover the
bulbs about an inch deep. When the leaves get
yellow in summer, lift the bulbs and spread them
out in a shady situation for a few days to harden,
then trim into loose bunches and hang them
where they will have a free circulation of air, and
not be exposed to rain or sun.
GOURD OR PUMPKIN.
The growth of these being similar to that of the
Cucumber, a reference to the cultivation of the
latter is sufficient, noting the following differ-
ences : make the holes 8 or 9 feet apart, and re-
tain only 2 plants in each patch: the larger fruit-
ing kinds will also require boards under the fruit
while swelling, to prevent decomposition.


HERBS.
The only way of growing these with little
trouble and expense, is to procure a few plants of
all the useful sorts, as mint, marjoram, sage,
savory, thyme, hyssop, &c., and plant them to-
gether in a portion of a shady border, in lines 15
or 18 inches apart each way. If in the interior of
the country, where plants cannot be conveniently
had, sow in a warm border in lines 1 foot apart,
merely deep enough to cover the seeds ; when up,
thin out to a foot apart, water and mulch the first
summer in dry weather, and keep the surface loose.
Next autumn, or early in spring, take up and
divide the roots, and plant again 15 or 18 inches
apart, and continue making new plantings every
winter, as a means of saving them during severe
summer droughts.
HORSE RADISH.
Culture. —Select a moist situation, having a
sandy or light soil. To get fine, strong, straight
sticks, free of fibre, take out a trench 2 feet wide
and 18 inches deep, put in the bottom a good
layer of decomposed manure, mixed with the soil
taken out, and cover this with an inch or two
more of the soil; cut up the roots into portions
11 inches long, and place them along the centre of
the trench, 6or 8 inches apart ; fill up the trench
to the level with the soil taken out after breaking
the lumps. Another similar plantation should be
made the following winter, to keep up a suc-
cession.
JERUSALEM ARTICHOKES.
As these artichokes spread so much in the
ground, some out-of-the-way place should be


chosen for them; dig and manure the ground
well, select sets not larger than hen’s eggs, and
plant them whole in rows 21 feet between, and 15
inches apart in the row, and allow them to stand
two seasons without being removed. In order to
save trouble and time they may be kept for years
in the same place, by lifting for use every second
row the one year, and returning to the same place
at once the small tubers for another crop : at the
same time working in a little manure to keep up
the substance of the soil. The following winter
take up and plant the other rows in the same way.
KIDNEY BEANS.
This is the choicest of the pea tribe, and re-
quires no more care in growing it than any com-
mon sort, further than selecting a situation not
very much exposed to hot winds.
Culture. —A well worked soil of almost any
sort, with an application of some manure, if poor,
suits this crop well. Choose a warm spot for an
early crop, draw drills 18 to 30 inches apart,
according to the natural height of the beans, 11
inches deep on heavy soils, and 2 inches deep on
light soils, and plant the beans 4to 6 inches apart
in the row. Gather the beans regularly for use
as they mature, because the productiveness of the
plants* depend greatly on the clearing away of the
crop in a young state. A few rows of the white
Dutch dwarf variety should be allowed to mature
their seeds when required for stewing in winter.
LEEK.
There are few esculent vegetables more useful
than this for certain culinary purposes, and yet it
is often overlooked. Its culture is easy, and a


good plantation can be bad upon a small space of
ground.
Culture.— A very heavy crop may be produced
upon a rich loamy soil, but it grows well upon
ordinary soil with an application of manure. Sow
broadcast in beds 4 feet wide, rake the seeds well
in, and afterwards tread them slightly down ; pre-
pare for planting out when 3or 4 inches high, by
drawing deep drills 2 feet apart, and dibble the
plants in the bottom of the drills 6or 8 inches
distant, aecording to the size of the crop wanted;
for a medium crop the distances may be less.
After the plants attain a good height, the earth
may be drawn to them ; when further advanced,
earth up as is done with potatoes.
LETTUCE.
This salad is a general favorite, the outside
leaves of the plants, not fit for use in their raw
state, are excellent ampng certain soups. The
plants delight in a rich friable porous soil, well
protected from hot winds in summer, and having
a warm dry situation in winter.
Sowing.— Sow the seed thinly on a light rich
spot of ground, and when the plants grow, thin
out where too thick. Summer sowings in dry
weather should be well watered, and the surface
of the ground slightly covered with straw or
droppings from the stable.
Culture.— For winter crops plant out in dull
weather stocky plants about 15 or 18 inches apart
each way, on a well dug soil, of a dry warm porous
nature; for summer crops sow where they should
remain, and thin out to 15 or 18 inches apart, using \
the thinnings for planting out at the same dis-
tances if the weather is dull. This is a crop which
suffers very materially when planted among other I


tall crops or under the shade of trees, and should
at all times he in a quarter or border for them-
selves, where exposed to a free circulation of air.
Water and mulch in dry weather.
MELON.
The reader is referred to the remarks on the
culture of the cucumber, as applicable to this
plant, keeping in view the following differences :
Rock melon plants, on account of their bushy
habit, should be thinned out to two plants.
Water melon plants, on account of their ram-
bling habit, require 6 feet between the patches, and
the soil, if possible, of a good loamy nature with
less manure than the cucumber.
Watering is less required for melon plants, espe-
cially after the fruit begins to change in color. It
should only be applied liberally after the first
setting of the fruit, and again after the first fruits
are gathered.
MUSTARD.
Sow along with and after the same manner as
the common garden cress.
ONIONS.
This vegetable requires more labor, such as hoe-
ing and weeding during its early stage, than most
other crops, being slow of growth, and of such a
nabit as to leave the ground uncovered.
The most suitable soil for onions is one of a
loamy nature, free from obnoxious weeds and
stagnant water; but a light sandy soil in good
condition will also bear heavy crops. Dig the
ground deeply, and apply short rotten manure of
an y kind having a good substance in it.


In sowing for a small crop of onions, lay out
tlie ground in 4 feet beds with alleys 1 foot wide,
on the former draw drills eight inches apart fully
1 inch deep, sow thinly, tread the seeds down with
the back of the rake, and cover nicely in with the
same implement —for larger quantities sow in
drills 1 foot apart. When the plants are an inch
or so above the ground, use the hoe freely to loosen
the soil; one month or so afterwards thin to 4
inches apart, or, if very large bulbs are wanted, to
8 inches apart. Medium-sized onions are pre-
ferable to very large ones, both for using and
storing. Sprinkle the crops with a little guano
before an approaching rain, or in the absence of
rain, water thoroughly once or twice in a season
with a weak solution of guano.
Transplanting. —As fine large onions are some-
times required for culinary purposes, preserve a
portion of the onion ground intended for an early
crop. Early in July dig or fork the surface and
dibble in shallow some of the April sown plants in
rows 12 inches apart, or 6or 8 inches between in
rows.
Storing. —As the bulbs are ripening a prevail-
ing practice is to stop the action of the leaves by
breaking or twisting the necks of the plants with
the view of throwing the strength of the plants
into the bulbs. This is erroneous, for the
leaves are nothing more nor less than the
lungs and stomachs of the plants, and are
indispensable for elaborating the very ingre-
dient requisite for enlarging and maturing the
bulbs, and can only be prematurely interfered!
with to the damage of the bulbs without enhanc-:
ing in the least their keeping qualities. The bulbs
when ripe may be lifted, spread out for two weeks
in an airy situation; shaded from the sun and free


of wet; afterwards store them thinly on shelves
or hang them in bunches in a diy airy ceK
h r ru” P e e the S m ed '
PARSLEY
bfe herh ’ ? aS i ly obtained, and may
Su" r ° Und lf S ° Wn in W
Culture.— When required for edging; to walks
hnethM tllG fv eS o W - ith I tIlG Spade and sow a sin gle
line thinly within 3 inches of the edge of the soil
m the plants when up to 6 inches apart. If to
be grown by themselves, select a high dry spot for
cuTw l a , 1 o° W T i8t Pk " e
inch 3/ S 'I 0 * 1 ™ a P art ' scarc % a *
nch deep, sow the seed thinly and cover with the
inohi he .lt ed L mg8 are tllin out t0 12
1 ’equired Part; bGSt ° Utside leaves for use as
PARSNIP.
Phis valuable esculent should be grown in the
me manner as carrots, allowing them drills 24
nc ies apart, and thinning the plants out to 8 or
nches m the lines for a crop of large parsnips.
PEA.
turf camhW ?■- the tribe -° f ™ry easy cul-
Produc? W ° f bemg f TOWn on ™y soil ; and most
1 ouetive on a somewhat poor one.
addint TDRE ' —Dig and pu,verise th e ground well,
Poor ?od° T™!? "c 11 SOi1 ' but a little to a
feet aB art o' ™ v 0 d T arf peas in drilIs < 2 or 2 i
inches mclies deep during winter, and 3
uring summer, and 1 or 2 inches apart
c


according to the nature of the peas; sow the taller
peas, growing from 2| to 4 feet high, in drills 3to
4 feet apart, 1 inch between in the rows ; sow the
tallest peas, growing 5 to 7 feet high, in drills 4|
to 6 feet apart, 2 inches between in the row; earth
up when the plants are 6to 8 inches high, and
stake the taller sorts with stakes in proportion to
the natural height of the peas, hearing in mind as
a general rule, that all the sorts sown in summer
are dwarf, so that any fine large podding pea need
not be rejected at this season because naturally of a
tall growth. Gather the crops as soon as fit for
use, which will prolong the strength of the plants.
POTATO.
The rival of all the vegetables in many particu-
lars ; and, unlike most green crops, there is no
waste with this vegetable, as, if not required for
immediate use, it may be stored till required.
Culture. —Whole potatoes, about the size of
hen-eggs or little smaller, should be selected for
planting, being less liable than cut ones to rot
from wet or shrivel from drought. If larger pota-
toes are used, cut each up into two or three divi-
sions with buds on each ; spread them out on the
floor of a dry shed and dust them with lime, where
they may remain for two or three days before be-
ing planted. Any light soil in good condition,
without manure, heavy soil with long manure, or
even poor light soil with short manure, will grow
a potato crop well, under the conditions first stated,
and the superior qualities will be produced. In
using manure for a free soil, it ought to be put
into the bottom of the trench, under the sets,
during the operation of digging, and these should
be placed 20 to 24 inches apart in the lines,


and 9to 15 inches apart in the rows, according to
the habit of the variety; then resume the digging,
covering the sets 3or 4 inches deep. On a more
loamy soil manure and dig it regularly over, then
draw drills and plant as described; and on a free,
rich, light soil without manure, plant with a dibble
or blunt-pointed stick, by piercing holes alongside
a line placed at regular distances. For a very early
crop plant on a dry warm situation, and when the
plants are above ground, or an appearance of frost,
cover them very lightly with long fresh stable ma-
nure, and uncover in the mornings. Three pecks
of seed potatoes planted early will suffice for a mo-
derate family until the following crop succeeds.
Break all lumps on the surface before the crop is
through the ground; hoe occasionally, and earth
up as the crops advance either with the hoe or
single horse drill plough.
Storing. —Take up the potatoes when matured,
a nd store them in a dry, cool shed or cellar, or
®ake narrow pits one foot deep in any cold situa-
tion, in which pile up the potatoes to a point,
cover with old bags, then straw, and afterwards a
good layer of earth made firm with the back of
ue spade. Drain the ground around the pits so
as to keep the bottom dry.
RADISH.
Culture. —Choose a light rich sandy soil, well
and the soil broken tine, divide the ground
to 4 feet beds with alleys 1 foot wide, on the
trim er draw drills 6 inches apart, 1 inch deep in
th 'l ' anc * a ktt^e deeper in summer; sow the seed
tli tr ? a d i n and cover with the rake. When
apart ee(^ln gs are U P> tkin out to 3or 4 inches
} and take up for use when young and succu-
c 2


lent. To encourage quick growth at all times
choose for the wet season a dry warm situation on
high grounds, and for the dry season a low moist
situation with friable soil.
RHUBARB.
Culture. —The quickest and simplest plan of
having a plantation made of this excellent vegetable
is to procure at once strong plants of the best sorts;
or if seeds must be resorted to, select a good rich
deep soil, well dug and manured, draw drills 15
inches apart, inch deep, in which sow the seed;
tread and cover with the rake. When the seed-
lings are up, thin out to 9or 12 inches apart; the
following winter lift and plant again 15 inches
apart each way, so as to form fine massive roots.
The second winter after sowing prepare a piece of
good rich moist soil, free of stagnant water, by
trenching and manuring it, plant in lines 3 or 4
feet apart each way, with the crowns of the roots
about 2 inches below the surface, water occasion-
ally, while growing, with a weak solution of guano,
liquid manure, or soap-suds ; cut the flower stems
as they appear, which if they do the first year is a
sign the ground is not rich or strong enough. In
the autumn, when the leaves are matured, give a
good dressing of strong manure, and fork it in. It
is necessary to form a plantation every third year, \
as the plants when old become exhausted; this may ,
be done by tearing away side buds from the old
stocks, but two-year-old seedlings from fine sorts!
are preferable.
Forcing. —A few dishes early in the season may!
be had by covering two or three plants at one time!
with small casks, or they may be had earlier andi
of better quality by covering them with sweet fer-j
menting stable manure 15 inches thick, a part of


which should he removed when the leaves are ex-
panding, and the remainder slightly raised. When
the plants are cut from three or four times, remove
the manure, fork the soil, and allow them to grow
all the season undisturbed, and use the plants for
the same purpose the following winter.
SAVOY.
This being a hardy vegetable, it grows freely un-
der the influence of cold and wet in winter, and
can be brought to maturity during severe drought
easier than any of the other cabbage tribe. Sow
and cultivate as for cabbage.
SALSAFY.
A small portion of ground intended for carrots,
or other tap-rooted vegetables, should be set apart
for this biennial, as well as for scorzonera.
Culture.— Sow in drills 12 inches apart, 2
inches deep, tread and cover with the rake; when
the rough leaf appears, thin out the plants to 4
inches apart ; take up the roots only as required
tor use, until they show signs of growing, when
they must he lifted and stored like carrots.
SCORZONERA.
Sow along with salsafy in drills 15 inches apart,
7 * ncil es deep, and thin the young plants to 6 inches,
take up for use the same as salsafy.
SEAKALE.
This vegetable is valuable on account of its qua-
AJ- ’ . rare ness, and short duration. After the plants
in U natural rest, the young shoots grow-
S lrom the crowns early in spring are blanched,


and when 8 or 10 inches high are fit for the table ;
the ribs of the leaves are sometimes used in sum-
mer, and eaten like asparagus. The soil most
suitable is a moist, rich, deep, and friable one.
Culture. —Strong two-year-old plants should
be procured, or sow the seeds along with and in
the same way as for rhubarb. In autumn trench
the ground 20 inches or two feet deep, adding a good
dressing of half decomposed manure. Lay out the
ground in 4-feet beds with 18 inches alleys, on the
former plant the roots in patches of threes in each
patch, 2 feet apart each way ; hoe occasionally as
the ground becomes hard. In autumn, when the
leaves mature or get yellow, remove them, and
after a good dressing of short half-decomposed ma-
nure, fork the surface carefully over so as not to in-
jure the roots. In August force a few plants gently,
by covering with a box or sea-kale pot, and a layer
a foot thick of fermenting stable manure. A few
weeks afterwards put over the other roots in succes-
sion boxes or pots so tight as to exclude the light
without any other covering. The plants must be cut
before they push so much as to pipe, or show the
flower stalk, otherwise they will be valueless. Make
anew plantation every third year, for the same
reason as it is recommended to be done with rhu-
barb, and prefer seedlings to portions of old roots.
SPINACH.
An excellent variety when a change is required,
and now more valuable when it can be resorted to
in the case of failures among the cabbage crops,
three or four sowings made in autumn will supply
the table all winter and part of spring; summer
crops must be sown monthly, to keep up a succes-
sional supply.
Winter Culture. — The lettuce-leaved and


Flanders varieties are the best for winter use, as
they give off their large fleshy leaves for a consi-
derable period without running to seed.
On any good soil, well dug, draw drills 18 inches
apart, nearly 2 inches deep, sow the seed thinly,
tread and cover with the rake, or with the feet if
the soil is very light, and smooth the surface with
the rake. Thin out the young plants to 12 inches
apart, hoe or fork the ground over, allow the plants
to become large, then remove the outside leaves
for cooking when fully expanded, and continue
going over the crop in this way until the plants
become exhausted, when another succession takes
place.
Summer Culture. —The round spinach is best
suited for this season. Sow the seed in drills 12
inches apart, in some sheltered situation, in an
open piece of ground, and thin out the seedlings
to 6or 8 inches apart, at the same time use the
thinnings for cooking. When fit for use cut the
whole plants off by the surface of the ground, for
if left long they would soon become tough and run
to seed.
SCARLET RUNNER BEAN.
The success of this crop depends entirely upon
the nature of the summer, which, if showery, the
crops will he very productive—sown either in
October or January; but if very dry, and accom-
panied with much hot winds, a failure will ensue,
except in very low, sheltered, moist situations,
where small crops may be expected. It is neces-
sary to sow freely both in October and January,
or one crop fails the other will likely succeed.
Culture.— Manure and dig a well sheltered
j?°od soil ; draw drills 4 feet apart, fully 2 inches
ee P-> an( t plant 1 foot apart in the line, when the


plants are up, earth np and stake with sticks 4
feet high; or, if the situation is somewhat exposed,
draw drills 2| feet apart, and stop the runners
when 1 foot long, keep the surface loose, and
gather the pods as they become fit for use.
TOMATO.
For a few very early tomatoes sow a few seeds,
and re-pot the plants as for early cucumbers.
About the first of October plant out feet
apart, in a dry, warm spot, shade from the sun for
a few days, water and mulch in dry weather ;12
plants will be suitable for this crop.
General Crop. —ln a good, rich, free soil, well
dug and manured, sow in a drill 1 inch deep, or
in patches 3or 4 feet apart, and lightly covered
over; when the plants are up, thin out to 18 inches
apart in the drill,, and to 3 plants in each patch.
TURNIP.
This most important vegetable has now, like
all others of the brassica tribe, the blight to con-
tend with, and should be daily under inspection,
for the purpose of keeping it within bounds ; a
rich light soil is most suitable for bearing heavy
and quick crops.
Culture.— Dig and pulverise the soil well,
adding manure in proportion to its nature ; draw
drills 1 foot apart, and deep enough to merely
cover the seed, sow the seed very thin directly
after the ground is dug. When the plants are
fit for handling, thin out to Bor 9 inches apart,
hoeing the ground at the same time ; choose a
rainy day for dusting the crop with a little guano
to stimulate growth.


VEGETABLE MARROW.
This is the most useful of the cucurbita family,
being prolific in fruit bearing, and fit for cutting
in every stage while growing.
Culture. —Vegetable marrow plants require
the same treatment as the cucumber plants, with
merely the following difference :
Plant or sow in patches 8 feet apart, and thin
the plants out to two in each patch; cut the fruit
when ready, whether required for use or not.
c 3


KITCHEN GARDEN CALENDAR.
JANUARY.
Remarks. —Haying already arranged the lower
portion of the kitchen garden for summer crops,
manure, dig and fork all empty spaces, for re-
cropping in dull and wet weather, reserving the
more exposed places for peas, kidney beans, pota-
toes, winter brocoli, &c., and the lower grounds
for summer salads, and other succulent summer
crops. Water and mulch young growing crops in
dry weather, especially the cucumber family and
celery. In planting cabbages, &c., choose from
either of the former sowings strong stout plants,
suitable for withstanding drought; hoe or stir the
soil deeply among crops wherever hard. Take up
and store the onions when matured. Keep down
insects.
Brussels Sprouts. —Sow largely to use in
June.
Broad Beans. —Sow a few to ripen about April
and May.
Borecole, or German Greens. —Sow largely
to use from June.
Brocoli. —Sow a few early sorts to use in May
and June. Finish planting out late sorts early
this month.
Cauliflower. —Sow largely towards the end of
the month.
Carrots. —Sow a few early sorts to use in June
and July.
Celery. —Sow a few early to use from the end
of July, plant out former sowings as they advance, j


Cress and Mustard.— Sow fortnightly.
Kidney Beans. —Plant a medium crop to use
in April and May.
Lettuce. —Sow a few to remain until fit for
use in six or eight weeks.
Onions. —Sow a few for salads to use from
April.
Peas. —Sow a medium crop of early varieties to
use in April and May.
Potatoes.— Plant out kidneys, or other early
sorts, to use in April and May.
Radish.— Sow a few of the long sorts to use in
four or six weeks.
Savoy. —Sow a medium crop.
Scarlet Runner. —Sow a medium crop to use
in April.
Turnips. —Sow largely for use from March to
May.
FEBRUARY.
Remarks. —Attend to last month’s remarks, as
also to the thinning of young crops and the stor-
ing of roots and bulbs as they ripen. Apply a tolera-
bly strong solution of salt to asparagus beds, and
weakly diluted guano to celery plants, particularly
m showery weather, removing from the latter all
the side shoots growing from the crowns.
Brussels Sprouts. —Sow a few to use from
July to September.
Cabbage.-— Continue sowing early sorts to use
in June and July.
Cauliflower. —Sow largely to use in June and
July.
Celery.— Plant out largely as the plants ad-
vance, for winter supply.
Cress and Mustard.— Sow fortnightly.


Kidney Beans.—Sow for a succession.
Leek.— Transplant largely into drills for a
winter supply.
Lettuce.— Continue sowing to use in six or
eight weeks.
Peas.— Sow a few of early varieties to succeed
the former sowing.
Potatoes. —Plant out largely of early varieties,
to use in May and June.
Badish.— Continue sowing to use in four or six
weeks.
Spinach.— -Sow a medium crop for autumn use.
Savoy.— Sow a few, it not done last month.
Scarlet Runner.—Sow a few to succeed the
former sowing.
Turnip.— Continue sowing a few for winter use.
MARCH.
As this month advances, such crops as remain
long in the ground should occupy the higher por-
tion of the garden, while those coming off early in
autumn should still retain the lower parts. Attend
to hoeing, watering if dry, and the thinning of
young crops; earth up a few of the earliest celery,
peas, &c., plant out all the recent sowings of the
cabbage tribe, as they are fit, also celery; manure,
dig, and trench at every opportunity.
Brocoli.— Sow a few of early varieties, to use
in spring.
Cabbage.- -Sow a few of early varieties, to use
in July and August; transplant largely, if not
done last month.
Cauliflower.— Sow a few tosucced the former
crop. Transplant largely about the end of the
month.
Celery. Finish planting out in shallow
trenches, for the last crop.


Cress and Mustard.— -Continue sowing fort-
nightly.
Endive.—Sow a few for autumn use.
Lettuce.— -Continue sowing to succeed former
crops.
Onions.—Sow for spring green onions.
Peas.— Sow a few of the earliest sorts early,
in a warm situation, to use in May.
Potatoes.— Finish planting early, to succeed
the former crop.
Radish.— Continue sowing, to keep up a regular
Supply.
Spinach.— Continue sowing winter varieties to
succeed the others.
Turnip.-—So a few for spring use.
APRIL.
Much can he done in clearing the ground of
refuse, collecting manure, digging and trenching
extensively before the wet season sets in on heavy
day soils, and cropping the same early previous
to the arousal of slugs; occupy now all the higher
grounds with vegetables of all descriptions, to
come off early in summer; continue planting,
thinning, and earthing up of crops (celery ex-
cepted) if not wanted for immediate use. Keep
an eye over the blight.
Asparagus.— Cut the stems down to the surface
as they decay ; top-dress and manure with salt.
Borecole.— Sow a good supply for winter use.
Cabbage.— Sow early sorts for spring supply.
Celery.— Remove the side shoots from the
crowns of advanced crops, earthing up onlv a few
l°r immediate use. *
Cress and Mustard.—Sow fortnightly.
ucumber. —-For frame culture, sow a few seeds
succeed crops in the open ground.


Endive.—Sow largely.
Lettuce.— Sow largely, and transplant when
ready, to use in June and July.
Onion.— Sow largely to use green in spring,
and for early summer bulbing.
Potato Onion. —Plant out largely for the first
green spring onions.
Peas.-— Sow a few of early sorts towards the
end of the month, for the first supply in spring.
Radish.— Sow again.
Spinach.— Sow largely of winter varieties for
spring supply.
Turnip.— Sow a few on trial, if not done last
month.
MAY.
Attend to last month's remarks. Towards the
end of the month, divest esculent roots gone to
rest, such as rhubarb, seakale, &c.; of their leaves,
top-dress and fork the manure into the soil care-
fully ; dig up potatoes as they mature; keep down
slugs and other insects.
Asparagus.— Clear away and top-dress as re-
commended last month, and make new planta-
tions.
Borecole.— Sow a few early, if not done last
month.
Cabbage. —Finish planting out early, to head
before the spring growth, or else they go to seed.
Cauliflower. —Sow a few towards the end of
the month to use in September.
Cress and Mustard. —Sow fortnightly.
Endive. —Sow largely.
Garlic and Shallots. —Plant out a few.
Herbs. —Divide and plant out.
Horse Radish. —Divide the roots and re-plant,
storing for use all the fine clean stioks.


Lettuce. —Sow for succession.
Onions. —Continue sowing both sorts as recom-
mended last month.
Peas. —Sow largely of early sorts for September
use.
Radish. —Sow for a succession.
Rhubarb and Seakale. —Make young plan-
tations towards the end of the month.
Spinach. —Sow a little to use in spring.
JUNE.
All the wet soils should now undergo complete
drainage, and empty grounds should be turned
into action by cropping to the best advantage.
Use deeply worked soils for tap-rooted vegetables,
rich soils for succulents, as cabbage, cauliflower,
onions, &c., and the poorer soils for peas, potatoes,
&c. j continue manuring, digging and trenching
with vigour; also sowing, planting, thinning, and
earthing up crops; keeping up the temperature of
the cucumber with fresh linings.
Asparagus. —Continue making new plantations.
Broad Beans. —Sow a few for an early crop.
Carrots, —Sow the Early Horn variety for
September use.
Cauliflower.— Sow largely to use in October.
Celery.— Earth up advanced crops finally in
•By weather; remove all side shoots from the young
ones.
Cucumber.-— Sow again for forcing in a warm
frame.
Garlic and Shallots.— Plant out largely.
. Hor se Radish.— Gontinue planting out, keep-
lng in store the long straight pieces.
Leek.— Sow a few for summer use.
Lettuce.—Sow for a successional crop.


Onion.—Sow largely for summer bulbing, trans-
plant early from thinnings of former crops.
Peas.— Sow largely all commendable sorts for
spring use.
Radish.— Sow for succession.
Rhubarb and Seakale.— Plant as recommended
last month.
Spinach.— Sow a few winter varieties for a late
crop.
JULY:
All heavy trenching and draining being now
near completion, attention should be paid to the
preparing and putting in of crops at their proper
seasons, sowing very thin and shallow; admit air
to frame cucumbers in fine weather, and, if neces-
sary, renew the linings; prepare fresh manure for
forcing rhubarb and seakale. Attend to last
month's remarks.
Asparagus.— Finish planting out.
Broad Beans. —Sow largely of all commend-
able varieties, to use in October and November.
Brussels Sprouts. —Sow a few to use in De-
cember.
Borecole. —Sow a few to use in the summer
months.
Carrots. —Sow largely of early and late sorts to
use in October and November.
Cabbage.— Sow early and medium sorts to use
about the end of the year.
Cauliflower.— Sow a few, or, if not done last
month, sow largely early.
Garlic and Shallots. —Finish planting out
early.
Herbs. —lf not yet done, divide the old root and
replant.


Horse Radish. —If not yet done, finish planting
out early.
Lettuce. —Sow for a succession.
Leek. —Sow largely late this month for autumn
and winter supply.
Onion. —Continue sowing largely.
Parsnip. —Sow a few to use in November.
Peas. —Sow largely all good sorts to use in
October and November.
Potatoes. —Plant out a few early kidneys in a
dry, warm situation.
Radish.—Sow for a succession.
Rhubard and Seakale. —Finish planting out.
Savoy. —Sow a few to use in November.
Spinach. —Sow of winter sorts for the last time
. this season.
AUGUST.
All the heavy operations in improving soils
being now completed, let sowing, transplanting,
forcing, and blanching be the chief objects, either
of which, if deferred for weeks, may cause much
loss ; attend to top-dressing, timely thinning of
young crops, hoeing, earthing up, staking of tall
peas, destroying slugs and blight.
Asparagus. —Sow largely, and top-dress estab-
lished plants.
Beet.— Sow largely to use in January.
Brocoli. —Sow largely early and late varieties,
for autumn and early winter use.
Broad Beans. —Sow largely all good sorts to
use in November.
Brussels Sprouts. —Sow largelv for midsum-
mer use.
Cabbage. —Make a good sowing of early sorts
i°r summer, and late sorts, including the red, for
autumn. Transplant former sowings.


Cauliflower. —Sow largely to use from end of
November; plant out the former sowings as the
plants are ready.
Carrots. —Sow largely of early sorts for end of
summer.
Cress and Mustard. —Sow fortnightly.
Cucumber. —Sow a few in a warm frame for
planting out in October.
Herbs. —Sow largely all pot herbs, as sage,
marjoram, thyme, savory, &c.
Leek. —Sow largely for winter use; transplant
June sowing.
Lettuce. —Sow largely.
Melons, Water and Rock. —Sow a few along
with the cucumber seeds.
Onion. —Sow largely for winter keeping, trans-
plant early from former sowings.
Parsley. —Sow largely for summer supply.
Parsnip. —Sow largely for autumn use.
Peas. — Sow largely, as directed last month.
Potatoes. —Plant out largely, early and late
sorts in high grounds.
Radish. —Sow every third week.
Rhubarb. —Sow largely; gently force a few
established roots.
Salsafy and Scorzonera. — Sow largely for
autumn use.
Savoy. —Sow largely early varieties for summer i
use.
Seakale. —Sow largely and blanch.
Spinach. —Sow largely of the round variety to I
use in October.
SEPTEMBER.
The chief sowings of many crops should bel
finished, and successional ones, where necessary*


kept up. Attend to last month's remarks; plant-
ing out the young cabbages, cauliflowers, brocoli,
leeks, &c., when ready. Prepare the lower parts
of the garden for the reception of the more tender
summer crops; pinch the tops of broad bean
plants as they begin to flower.
Asparagus. —Sow early, if not done; top-dress
established plants with salt.
Broad Bean. —Sow for a successional crop.
Beet. —Sow largely, if not done last month.
Brocoli. —Do. do. do.
Brussels Sprouts. —Sow towards the end of
the month for succession. Transplant former
sowings.
Cabbage. —Sow largely in the month, if not
done last month; plant out former sowings.
Cauliflower'. —Plant out largely in a low situ-
ation.
Capsicum. —Sow a few in the cucumber frame.
Carrots. —Sow largely of late sorts for autumn
and winter use, and a few of early sorts for sum-
mer, if not done last month.
Cardoon. —Sow largely.
Celery. —Sow a few towards the end of the
month in the open ground, and under protection
for the autumn crops.
Cress and Mustard. —Sow fortnightly.
Cucumber. —Sow a few again in the frame to
plant out in November.
Garlic. —Plant out early, if not done.
Herbs. —Sow early, if not done last month.
. Kidney Beans. —Sow a few in a warm situa-
tion.
Leeks. —Sow early, if not done last month.
Lettuce. —Sow largely good varieties to use
early in December.
Melon.--Sow early along with the cucumber seeds.


Onion.— Sow thickly for pickling bulbs to ripen
in January.
Parsnip.— Sow largely for autumn and winter
supply.
Peas. —Sow largely chiefly late sorts to use
from December.
Potatoes.— Finish planting early on high
grounds; commence for a full crop in low
grounds.
Radish.— Sow every third week.
Rhubarb.— Sow early if not done previously.
Salsapy and Scorzonera.— Sow early, if not
done previously.
Savoy.— Sow early and late sorts for autumn
and winter supply.
Seakale. —Sow early, if not done; continue
blanching established plants.
Spinach.— Sow largely, if not done in August.
Shallots. —Plant along with garlic.
Turnips.— Make a good sowing towards the
end to use from November.
Tomato. —Sow with capsicum.
Vegetable Marrow and Pumpkin.— Sow with
the cucumber seed.
OCTOBER.
As this is the last very busy sowing month of
the year, works of minor importance should not
prevent a timely and proper cropping, for which
at this season the lower parts of the garden ought :
to be used, if sheltered, and the soil not wet and
sour.
Harden off such plants under cover as are soon i
to be put out. Continue thinning young crops,
pricking out young seedlings, transplanting, hoe-
ing, earthing up, staking, removing, blanching,


and forcing materials from exhausted plants and
refuse of old crops.
Asparagus. —Cut the shoots six inches long for
use.
Broad Beans. —Continue sowing for succession.
Beet. —Sow largely for autumn and winter use.
Borecole.— Sow largely to use in winter;
transplant former sowings.
Brocoli. —Sow largely for successional winter
use ; transplant stout young plants.
Brussels Sprouts. —Ditto.
Cabbage. —Make a good sowing for autumn
supply; transplant stout young plants.
Capsicum. —Sow for full crop in a warm border.
Cardoon. —Sow for full crop in trenches to re-
main so.
Carrots. —Make a good sowing of late varieties.
Celery. Sow largely in the open ground ;
prick out young seedlings.
Cress and Mustard.— Sow fortnightly.
Cucumbers.— Sow largely in the open ground ;
towards the middle of the month plant out seed-
lings from under cover.
Herbs.— Sow a few still, if not already done.
Kidney Beans. —Sow largely good sorts to use
m December.
Leek.— Sow a few to plant out in J anuary for
late crop. Transplant.
Lettuce. — Sow a few to remain until fit for
Use in November.
Melon. — See Cucumber.
Lea. —Make a good sowing of large’ podding
varieties for successional crop.
Potatoes.— Finish planting early sorts in low
Situations.
Radish. —Sow a few.
■ Rhubarb.— Remove the forcing materials;


gently tear away for use tlie outer stalks from the
other plants.
Spinach. —Sow a few of the round variety.
Savoy. —Make a good sowing to plant early in
autumn for winter use.
Scarlet Runner. —Sow largely to use in De-
cember and January.
Seakale. —Continue blanching.
Tomato.— See Cucumber.
Turnip. —Sow largely to use from December.
Vegetable Marrow.— See Cucumber.
NOVEMBER.
The garden, if it has been dealt with as directed,
will now present a well-cropped appearance at
various stages of growth. It should now be care-
fully examined, and young and tender plants pro-
tected from cold winds; mulching and watering
in dry weather should also be attended to.
Sow again where vacancies occur from wet or
cold.
Prepare for and plant early celery in trenches ;
cut down flower stalks of Rhubarb and Seakale
as they appear ; continue removing the blanching
material from the latter; discontinue cutting As-
paragus about the end of the month; take up and
store matured bulbs; keep the surface porous, and
give the garden generally a thorough cleaning up.
Broad Beans. —Plant out a few for autumn :
use.
Borecole. —Sow a few early to plant in autumn j
for late winter use.
Brocoli. —Ditto.
Brussels Sprouts. —Ditto.
Cabbage —. Ditto.
Capsicum.— See Cucumber .


Celery. —Sow largely to plant in autumn for
late crop.
Cress and Mustard. —Sow fortnightly.
Cucumber. —Sow largely early in the month,
and plant out from under cover.
Endive. —Sow with Lettuce when in demand.
Kidney Beans. —Sow largely.
Lettuce. —Sow largely where to remain if the
situation is low and moist.
Melon.— See Cucumber.
Pea.—Sow largely of early sorts.
Radish. —Sow a few.
Scarlet Runner. —Ditto.
Turnip.— See Cucumber.
Vegetable Marrow. — See Cucumber.
DECEMBER.
Use every means of preserving a healthy ap-
pearance, specially to the important crops, by
mulching, watering with liquid manure, hoeing,
and forking. In dull weather sow and plant out,
prepare vacant ground for planting next month
’with such crops as Early Potatoes, Brocoli, Cab-
bage, Leek, Celery, &c. Continue storing bulbs
as they ripen; collect herbs ; dig up green and
exposed the light Early Potatoes meant for seed.
Cabbage. —Sow a few to plant in autumn for
winter use.
Celery. —Sow a few, remove side shoots from,
and earth up advanced crops if required for im-
mediate use.
Cress and Mustard. —Sow fortnightly..
Lettuce. —Sow largely if in a low situation.
Pea. —Sow a few of early sorts.
Spinach.—Sow a few.
Turnip. —Sow a few.


THE FLOWER GARDEN
AND
SHRUBBERY.
INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.
In determining tlie position of this Garden, re-
gard must be had to the residence about which it
is to be formed, as it would he impossible to give
general directions which might he of value in any
particular case, except upon the spot, and after an
examination of all the circumstances, such as lo-
cality, aspect, extent of the ground available for
the purpose, &c. It will he well, therefore, for
the amateur on finally fixing it, to do so under the
guidance of some person of acknowledged taste
and skill in such matters. The soil ought to he
deeply dug or trenched, and, if poor, should be well
served with good rotten manure, and might be
improved by putting in, during the operation of
trenching, an addition of good black loam or peat.
Permanent shrubs should be planted out so as to
form a good contrast, and at distances apart suffi-
cient for their natural habits to be clearly dis-
played; and to keep the ground from having a
naked appearance, the spaces intervening between
these should be filled with good flowering and
fast growing plants,. which can be cut in, or re


moved altogether as the advancing growth of the
shrubs may render necessary.
In whatever style .the Flower Garden may be
laid out, either in figures, symmetrically ranged,
or thrown together promiscuously, preference
should be given to bold figures, of a roundish,
simple, easy style, free of sharp points, and of
sizes suitable for the various heights and habits of
plants ; avoid an assemblage of puzzling, long-
necked figures, as they are neither in good taste
nor suitable for the healthy growth of plants, and
require, moreover, considerable more labour to
keep them tidy than figures of a less complicated
style. In planting out, the figures of a small
garden must be filled, of course, with a miscella-
neous collection, in order to give variety, but in
larger gardens, where the dimensions of the ground
will admit of a number of figures, each of these
should be filled with plants of one variety and
color, of a habit corresponding to the size of the
figure, and there will be room for the display of
aste in filling each of the figures, so as to
contrast well with those adjacent, and with the
garden as a whole.
£ CALENDAR.
JANUARY.
gl^®marks. —At this season the flower garden
* mVe a trough examination from one end
• e other, and the following are the principal
teiyf’ 8 Wan t e d to be done. Examine that all
, er and newly-established plants, especially
D


those in exposed situations, are well protected
from the hot winds, and their roots kept cool and
moist. Tie up all plants and flowering stems liable
to be tossed about by the wind. Thin and prune
all superfluous shoots from shrubs and herbaceous
plants. Stir the soil well throughout the
whole department, which will prevent the at-
mosphere from affecting the roots, and save to a
considerable extent the tedious operation of
watering, which, however, must not be wholly ne-
glected when necessary. Propagate from layers by
cuttings or by budding as the young wood begins
to mature. Fill up vacancies with soft-wooded
plants, established in pots, of such sorts as will
flower through the season.
Plant out of pots in dull weather, into any
vacancies occurring in the grouping beds, all late
and continuous flowering plants, such as are re-
commended in the September Calendar.
Annuals. ---Sow a few of all the early flowering
hardy sorts. Thin out and tie up those sown in
former months. Remove all decayed stems of the
spring flowering varieties. Save seeds as they ripen.
Azaleas, Camellias, Rhododendrons. —Re-
move all seed pods and superfluous shoots, and
encourage growth as much as possible by renewing j
their mulching, which should now be composed of j
equal parts of old decomposed manure and peat I
soil; a little loose straw over the surface, if notj
too unsightly, would also be beneficial.
Bulbs. —Lift all the early flowering varieties]
having their stems matured, if more than two years]
in the ground, for re-arranging in autumn. Store]
the bulbs among sand in a dry, cool situation-]
Stake and tie the later flowering varieties, and cut
down all fading flower-stems to strenthen the
young bulbs just formed.


Climbers of every description should be looked
over and neatly tied up, the old flower stems of
the finer sorts and very straggling shoots cut hack.
Layer those difficult to be struck by cuttings.
Carnations.— Continue layering, if not already
done, and allow to remain on the stools till autumn.
Dahlias. —Carefully tie up those now blooming
with strong soft string or bass. Thin each of the
plants to one or two leading stems from the root,
and, if necessary, thin out some of the laterals.
Mulch, if not already done, and water profusely.
This is the best time for planting out for flowering
from April to June; put them in a sheltered situa-
tion, and, if possible, procure some good compost
to plant them in, and stake them at once. If at-
tended to, the flowers of those planted at this sea-
son will come large and stout, equal, if not superior,
to English productions of the same varieties.
Hollyhock.— Thin the flower buds, and should
the stems be getting too tall, cut off the points,
which will make good varieties and give off flowers
like Dahlias.
Roses.— Remove all suckers and side-shoots
from the worked plants, and cut close back all
weak laterals. In dull weather continue propa-
gating by layers and budding. If dry, mulch
thickly with good strong dung, if not already done,
an d cover with straw in situations where this
would not be unseemly. Destroy the green fly as
recommended. (See Article).
Shrubs.— Water well in dry weather, and
if not already done, where requisite.
FEBRUARY.
Remarks.— This being the hottest and driest
in the year, renew for the last time good
Mulchings about the roots of such trees and shrubs
d 2


as are likely to suffer from drought. Watering
will also be requisite, and this should be applied,
not at the necks of the plants merely, but beyond
the extremeties of the roots. A cool moist position
of the roots is just the life of them, and ought to
he particularly attended to at this season. Ama-
teurs often wonder how it is that many plants
which are lively enough in spring die away at this
season; the reason is obvious, through the above
directions not being attended to, the roots get
encompassed with a dry, hot soil, from which they
can obtain no moisture. Attend to last months
instructions with respect to layering, budding,
pruning straggling shoots, tying up, and removing
all decayed flower stems.
Planting out.— Any vacancies still left in the
borders or beds may he filled up with plants as
already stated (see September). The ground ought
always to he well clad, as it neither pays nor looks
well to he otherwise.
Annuals.— Continue thinning, tying up the
plants, clearing away dead stems and saving seeds.
Azaleas, Camellias, Rhododendrons.— These
plants will take a whole year, and sometimes
longer, to recover, if they once suffer from drought.
Encourage, therefore, a young growth, by apply-
ing weak liquid manure. Mulch and protect the
tops of plants not long established.
Bulbs.— Attend to last month's instructions..
Tie up Gladioli and Liliums, as they produce*
flower stems.
Carnations and Picotees.— Finish layering,
and if dry, hot weather prevail, screen the layers
with fern or other shading. Water occasionally.
Climbers.— Attend to last month's directions^
Dahlias.— Finish planting out early in the
month. Apply occasionally weak liquid manure^


mulch young plantations, continue thinning la-
terals, divest the weaker plants of flower buds, and
stronger plants of deformed buds.
Fuschias gone to rest may have branches pruned
and thinned to any choice form.
Herbaceous Plants.—Many sorts, as Mimulus,
Phlox, Penstemon, Hollyhocks, &c., often send out
flowering stems which do not form any wood buds
at the crown; in such instances cut a few of those
stems from each plant, two inches above the surface
of the ground, which will encourage the growth
of foliage.
Roses.-—Where liquid manure is plentiful, apply
a little occasionally, or where this is not convenient,
mulch to encourage luxuriant bloom during the
next and following months. Cut back old flower-
ing shoots; also the young shoots of recently-
budded plants.
Shrubs.—Stir the soil occasionally to maintain
moisture at the roots of unestablished plants.
MARCH.
Remarks.—Autumn Flowering plants will now
be showing a profusion of flowers, and shrubs ge-
nerally will have a lively appearance. Towards
the middle or end of the month remove all screens
0r shelters, and allow the plants full scope of the
atmosphere, otherwise they will become sickly in
growth. Continue pruning, budding, layering,
gathering of seeds, &c. Let the grounds be again
gone over thoroughly and everything made tidy by
orking in the manure used for mulching, hoeing,
c hpping edgings and hedges, tying, staking, storing
matured bulbs, &c. Spring plants affected with
jjfeen Ay (see Article). Commence trenching,
\gging, and manuring grounds afterwards to be
aicl out and planted.


Plant out pot plants as required to fill vacancies
of late autumn and early winter flowerings sorts.
About the end of the month pot off rooted layers
from stools to meet requirements, and place them
in a shady situation until established.
Annuals. ---Towards the end of the month sow
hardy varieties for early winter flowering.
Bedding or Grouping Plants.— Cut all strag-
gling shoots and make tidy for autumn flowering.
Encourage a vigorous growth by cutting off old
blooms, surface stirring the soil, or forking in a
little well-rotted manure about the roots.
Bulbs.— Towards the end of the month plant
out the earliest flowering varieties, as Ranunculus,
Anemone, Crocus, Narcissus, early Tulips, Ixias, &c.
Carnations.— Water the layers occasionally.
Remove the shelters.
Dahlias.— The late plantations will now be be-
ginning to flower ; continue thinning shoots and
flower buds, tie loosely, and water occasionally in
dry weather.
Herbaceous Plants.— Attend to last month’s
directions.
Pinks.— Towards the end of the month propa-
gate by cuttings, among light sandy soil in a dry
sheltered situation, and if convenient cover with
canvas for about two weeks.
Roses.— Attend to last month’s directions, keep
down green fly (see Article), and plant out if
required those established in pots.
Shrubs.— Attend to last month’s directions,!
trim the roots of young seedlings early this month; I
as directed under the article Transplanting.
APRIL.
Remarks. —Gardens and shrubberies not under-
going alterations should now have a very gay ap-


pearance. Towards the end of the month com-
mence such improvements as are to he made on
heavy soils., as altering clumps, borders, or walks,
&c., in order that they may be finished before the
rains set in. Prepare manures and soils for putting
into new gardens when forming and trenching
them. Finish the operations of clipping edgings
of walks, hedges, forking the grounds among
plants, mowing, syringing insects, &c.
Planting Out. —Where no alterations are to
be made, plant out extensively towards the end of
the month all shrubs established in pots, and soft-
wooded plants either in or out of pots. Defer
transplanting generally from the open ground until
next month.
Annuals.— Sow very extensively all the more
hardy sorts as recommended in September month.
Seedlings already up, thin out to from twelve to
eighteen inches apart in rows, and to three or four
plants in patches.
Azaleas. —Plant out extensively those in pots.
Bulbs. —All bulbs lately done flowering, such
as Liliums, late Gladioli, Yallotas, Hippeastrums,
&c., may be moved as the leaves mature, if re-
quired for replanting; if not so required, trim olf
the tops, top-dress with old manure, which fork
lightly into the ground. If large bulbs are allowed
to remain at least three years unmoved, they will
grow and flower the more profusely. Commence
taking new plantations of bulbs extensively, giving
each plenty of room according to habit.
Bedding or Grouping Plants. —Propagate by
cuttings all the soft-wooded sorts in a sheltered
shady border, among light, sandy soil, or under the
protection of bell glasses, also plant out all sorts
extensively.
Carnations. —Take up the layers towards the


end of the month, and plant at once either in lines
or to their permanent destination if ready for
them.
Camellias will now he well set with flower
buds; thin these out to one where two or three are
in a cluster; a little liquid manure occasionally
will strengthen them very much. Plant out ex-
tensively those in pots.
Climbers. — Cut close back the matured shoots
of deciduous sorts, and thin the shoots of ever-
greens not showing flower, and, for the sake of
neatness, tie in leading shoots. Plant largely out
of pots. Propagate by cuttings as directed for
bedding plants.
Daisies. —This English favourite answers well
for edgings to walks in shaded situations. To-
wards the end of the month take up, divide, and
replant in an early spot.
Dahlias. —Towards the middle of the month,
the late plants, if they have been properly attended
to and thinned, will produce fine full-formed
flowers, and will continue to do so for about two
moths. Continue last month's directions. Cut
all the dead flowers oflP the early plantation, but
not the branches for another month, except where
very unsightly.
Geraniums. —Early this month cut down the
young wood, leaving only two or three buds, and
thin out the old plants severely, so that they may
in future be kept within bounds.
Herbaceous Plants. —Cut down all matured
flower stems within an inch or two of the ground,
to encourage young wood for the following sum-
mer. Divide the roots of others gone to rest, and
replant. Sow seeds extensively.
Pansies and Violets. —Towards the end of the
month, divide the old roots and plant out in beds


or otherwise for winter and spring flowering. Pro-
pagate by cuttings scarce sorts of Pansies, and
treat them as cuttings of bedding plants.
Perennials. —Sow all hardy sorts extensively
in a warm dly border, and the more tender sorts
under glass.
Roses. —Trench and manure a good deep soil,
with a mixture of loam, if sandy, for a collection
either in a bed in the flower garden, or by them-
selves as a rosary, and plant out extensively those
in pots; prune the French, Province, Cabbage,
and Banksian varieties, according to the strength
of the plants. Cut off all decayed and superfluous
flower buds and shoots of Perpetuals, Bourbon,
and China varieties, losing no time in top-dressing
and forking the latter sorts, if not already done.
Rhododendrons. —Plant out all pot-established
plants in a moist, cool, sheltered situation, in a
mixture of light, free loam and sandy peat; apply
e arly this month a little liquid manure to those
showing flower buds.
Shrubs. —Prune and thin out, according to their
requirements, all sorts done flowering, to avoid
straggling habits. Plant out all pot-established
plants, and sow the seeds of hardy sorts as they
ripen.
MAY.
Remarks. —An additional display of flowering
productions will, this month, greatly increase the
gaiety of the Flower Garden, the cleanliness of
J.idi ought to be particularly attended to. Con-
mue improving, as directed last month, while the
. ls in working condition. And where manur-
trenching, or the laying down of new Flower
ardens or Shrubberies is required, now is the
e§ f season for doing it. Towards the end of the
d 3


month, shift carefully all seedlings, and large trees
previously prepared for planting out. Fork manure,
or compost, into the surface of all beds requiring
it. Cut back and trim soft-wooded plants done
flowering. Prepare for and sow Lawn Grasses.
Plant, or lay down, edgings to walks. Sow hedge
seeds.
Plant Out.— Towards the end of the month
transplant freely from the open ground all sorts of
plants, including hedges, such as Hawthorn, Aca-
cias, Sweetbriar, Roses, Furze, and Aborvitse.
Annuals. —Sow the last succession for the sea-
son ; thin out advanced crops as recommended last
month.
Azaleas.— Attend to the directions of last
month.
Bulbs.— Finish planting out both early and late
sorts. Attend to last month's directions with
respect to established bulbs.
Bedding Plants.— Attend to last month's
direction s. Transplant freely from the open ground,
or from pots. Top-dress and fork the ground in
established beds. Cut back young shoots to within ■
a foot or so of the old wood.
Camellias, Carnations, Climbers, Daisies, I
Geraniums, Pansies, Violets, Rhododendrons. I
—Attend to last month's directions.
Dahlias. —Attend to last month's directions.!
Cut down the tops of the first succession as they j
decay or become unsightly.
Fuschias. — Propagate from young shoots by
cuttings under glass, or from wood made the pre-j
vious summer, in a warm shaded border.
Herbaceous Plants.— Continue as directed last
month. Reduce the plants as much as possible, as
they soon become too large; plant out a few in
nursery lines for spring supply.


Roses.— Transplant extensively of all classes,
both from pots and the open ground, for beds in
Flower Garden, or promiscuous planting in bor-
ders ; continue pruning spring flowering varieties,
top-dressing and forking all sorts, where not done.
Shrubs. —Continue planting of all sorts with
vigour, in situations where they will have room to
grow undisturbed, choosing dull days for the pur-
pose ; and in the operation of planting being par-
ticular to have the roots spread out carefully.
JUNE.
Remarks. —Continue improving and designing
all the ornamental departments, as directed last
month ; also, attend to all the means required for
keeping clean and tidy those places already es-
tablished ; transplant freely; finish pruning, thin-
ning, propagating by cuttings and layers; continue
sowing grass on lawns, hedge seeds, &c.
Plant Out and transplant all trees, shrubs,
tedding, and herbaceous plants, annuals, bulbs,
&c.
Annuals. —Lose no time in thinning out, for if
too thick, heavy rains will rot them ; transplant
young plants.
Bulbs.— Finish planting out late flowering sorts,
s hr the soil about the roots of those growing.
Bedding Plants. —Those of a trailing habit
should be encouraged to run by loosening the
surface about them, propagate still by cuttings.
Climbers.— Plant and transplant extensively.
Continue pruning autumn flowering sorts, includ-
111S deciduous plants ; tie in the shoots of the
sprung flowering sorts; propagate by cuttings.
Dahlias.— Continue cutting the dead flowers
O ,? Tn plants still flowering, and the tops of the
t * lers as they decay. If the ground they occupy


is not wanted for any other purpose, a portion of
the roots may remain for early summer flowering.
Puschias.— Propagate from the young shoots,
and place over them over a little bottom heat,
under a bell glass.
Pansies, Perennials, Roses, and Shrubs.—
Attend to the directions of the two preceding
months.
JULY:
Remarks. —The laying down of new grounds
and other improvements, which may have been
proceeding during the last few months, being now
completed and in shape, the planting should be
followed up as quickly as possible, and even when
things are not so far advanced, every opportunity
should he embraced for planting out; for spring,
when it comes, will bring along with it an abun-
dance of work, in the shape of many other odds
and ends requiring to be done, and which cannot
now be thought of. Continue transplanting
and sowing grass and hedge seeds; take up the
balance of Dahlia roots that are to be lifted, and
store in a cool place until the planting season.
AUGUST.
Remarks. —Continue winter operations as re- j
gards improvements, training, and tying up winter
shoots. Sow lawn grass and hedge seeds; lose no
time in transplanting from the open ground, for
the sap will now begin to rise, although not yet
visible in the buds; avoid planting while the soil;
is very wet.
Plant Out and transplant extensively all the
hardy shrubs, trees, &c., deferring the more tender
sorts, such as Oranges, Lemons, &c., and also such


bedding out plants, as Cupheas, Lantanas, Bou-
vardia, Salvia, &c., for another month.
Annuals.— Tall varieties, in patches, will re-
quire a small branch stuck in, and a tie around
each patch.
Azaleas, Camellias, and Rhododendrons.—
Stir the soil about those having flower buds, and
apply a little liquid manure occasionally.
Bulbs. —Stir the soil about all advancing crops,
deferring the others until they appear.
Climbers.— Get a few stout, rustic poles to
stand about 6 feet high, and place them either in
the shrubbery borders, or as single specimens in
the Flower Garden or Lawn, and plant out against
each all the more hardy prominent sorts.
Dahlias. —Put a few of the choice tubers in a
little bottom heat early this month, for propagat-
ing from, plant out a few for early flowering, in
rows 4 or 5 feet apart, or promiscuously in shrub-
bery borders.
Herbaceous Plants.— Plant out of all bold-
looking sorts of various heights, for the temporary
filling up of shrubbery borders, in which the per-
manent shrubs have been planted lately, and also
for the filling up of vacancies in established shrub-
beries.
Roses. —Thin out the slender shoots, and cut
back straggling and old flowering ones, of the
China, Perpetual, Bourbon, and Noisette varieties.
SEPTEMBER.
Remarks.— Finish transplanting from the open
grounds all shrubs and trees ; tie to stakes all
those likely to be blown about by the winds, and
protect with a few branches the more tender sorts
hkely to suffer from cold winds, as being unesta-


blished, they are, at this season, very sensible of
cold. Continue mowing lawns and clipping edg-
ings of walks, surface stir the gravel on walks,
and renew it if necessary. Fork over borders of
established plants, and pulverize the soil well in
vacancies set apart for annuals ; give the whole
department a general cleaning, in preparation for
displaying the beautiful spring flowering plants.
Keep down green fly. (See article Insects .)
Plant Out. —Finish planting out hardy plants,
and, towards the end of the month, such tender
shrubs and trees from pots as are suitable for
grouping in beds, figures, or promiscuously in bor-
ders, as Dahlia, Salvia, Lantana, Habrothamnus,
Cuphea, Bouvardia, Tecoma, Plumbago, Veronica,
Wiegelia, Heliotrope, Gailardia, Shrubby Calceo-
laria, Verbena, Pansy, Petunia, Pentstemon, An-
tirrhinum, Duranta, Geranium, &c.
Annuals.— Tie up tall varieties, and save the
seeds of autumn sowings. Towards the end of the
month sow the hardy sorts either promiscuously
in borders or in rings, ovals, or squares, 9 to 12
inches in diameter, and about a quarter of an inch
deep for very small seeds, up to an inch deep for the
large seeds; or sow in beds in rows from 12 to 18
inches apart. If the soil is stiff, cover the seeds
lightly with a light, sandy soil.
Azaleas, Camellias, Rhododendrons. —Cut
down any straggling or naked plants, but avoid
knife work generally. Encourage a new growth
with an occasional watering of liquid manure.
Place pot plants in a warm, airy situation.
Bulbs, Herbaceous and Climbing Plants.—
Attend to last month's directions.
Dahlias. —Attend to last month's directions
early this month.
Roses. —Finish planting out early this month.


Thin the flower hnds of established plants; tie up
Climbing or Pillar roses ; mulch in dry weather.
Keep down green fly.
OCTOBER.
Remarks.— lt is a question" with many gardeners
whether the directions for planting out this month,
as given below, are more suited for this or the pre-
vious month. The answer to this depends altoge-
ther upon the state of the weather and the con-
dition of the soil. If, during September, genial
weather prevails, and the soil is dry, by all means
embrace the opportunity of planting out, as the
more advanced and established plants get before
the summer sets in, the less will be the risk of their
being injuriously affected by the heat and drought.
If, on the other hand, the weather be stormy and
the soil wet, during September, the planting out
had better be deferred until early this month.
Around each of the more tender and valuable
shrubs already planted, stick three or four branches
so as to cover the tops, and be about a foot dis-
tant from them, this will protect them both from
the strong cold winds that sometimes prevail this
month, and also from the sun's rays; and if, to-
wards the end of the month, the ground becomes
very dry, mulch the roots of them ; defer doing
this, however, so long as moisture is preserved
about the plants without it. Attend to last month's
directions as to cleaning, forking, and labelling,
and keeping down green fly.
Annuals. —Sow extensively all commendable
hardy sorts, also early and tender sorts late in the
month.
Bulbs.— Support Tulips, Narcissus, and other
lender, succulent, flowering stems, in lines, with
s °tt cords stretched along, and the same sorts in


patches, with 3 or 4 short sticks, and a tie round
each patch.
Daisies. —Divide the roots, and plant in a shady
situation.
Dahlias. —Towards the end of the month plant
out a few of those propagated in August and Sep-
tember, also a few of the tubers ; they may do
well, but this depends on the season. Thin out
the shoots to one or two on each of the plants
which have been in the ground all the winter.
Stake and tie at once.
Pansies. —Divide the roots, and plant in a shady
place for summej flowering.
Roses. —Continue cutting back old flower stems,
and mulch in dry weather, to deep up a supply of
flowers. Keep down the fly.
NOVEMBER.
Remarks. —Continue protecting all such plants
as are becoming brown in the foliage from cold
winds ; mulch in dry weather. Towards the end
of the month, propagate by layering and budding ;
clip edgings of walks and hedges, surface-stir the
soil, hoe and remove all decaying stems, cut the
roots of old shrubs intended to be moved next
winter. (See article Transplanting .)
Daisies and Pansies— Attend to last month’s
directions.
Annuals.— Sow early in the month.- Thin out
former sowings; those in rows to nine inches
apart, for dwarf sorts, and fifteen to eighteen
inches apart for taller sorts ; those in patches to
three or four plants in each. In dull weather
transplant out fine sorts.
Dahlias. —Thin, and tie the shoots of the first
succession as they grow, and remove the first
formed flower buds. Apply a good mulching,


and liquid manure, if it can be had conveniently.
Towards the end of the month, plant out the
residue of dormant tubers. Keep plants intended
for late flowering as cool as possible, so that they
may grow but slowly.
Hollyhocks.— For fine flowers, allow only one
stem to grow on each plant, and stake securely.
Propagate fine sorts by cuttings, placed amongst
sandy soil, under a bell glass, in a dry shady
situation. J
Roses. —Layer young shoots. Bud. —Attend
also to last months directions.
Shrubs.— Vacancies may still be filled up with
plants well established in" pots. Cut back old
flowering stems.
DECEMBER.
Remarks. —Little can be done this month in
planting out, except in filling up vacancies. A
Jew young dahlias for autumn flowering may also
be planted out, the remainder should be kept
shaded and cool, and not much stimulated to
growth, until planted out next month. Cut down
decayed flowering stems of bulbs and roses.
Protect and mulch newly established plants, when
dot previously done, and if the weather continues
dry, water thoroughly once in every three or four
Continue budding and layering roses and other
Plants. Tie up and train all climbers, and be
careful not to cut the laterals of autumn flowering l
y arieties. 6


THE ORCHARD.
INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.
The principal matters requiring notice in re-
ference to the laying down of an orchard, are
situation, drainage, the nature and preparation of
the soil, and the arrangement of the trees. As to
the first of these, viz., the situation, it must de-
pend upon local circumstances ; hut of course the
best piece of ground available for the purpose will
have to be selected, and if this must be on a very
low wet situation, the ground ought to be thrown up
into high narrow ridges, the bottom of the ridge
being deep enough to act as drainage. If, on the
contrary, a high exposure, without any natural
protection, has to be had recourse to, the planta-
tion will have to be so arranged as that the hardier
trees will be placed in a position to serve as a pro-
tection to the more tender sorts. The next thing
to be attended to after the selection of a site, is
the drainage, and if this be not well done no fruit-
ful result can be expected. In almost every soil
and situation it is requisite to some extent, and
before concluding in any particular instance that j
it is not required, make, during wet weather, I
throughout the ground, some narrow holes, deep!
enough to reach the subsoil, and if, in the course!
of a day or two, water has collected in these, I
drainage will undoubtedly be required. For fur- J


ther particulars ou this head see article Drainage.
As to the nature and preparation of the soil, a
good black deep vegetable soil on a dry sub-soil,
and having a good slope, is the best suited for an
orchard, and may be planted out as such, with
little further preparation than a good deep digging,
though at the same time even such a soil will be
considerably benefited by trenching or deep sub-
soil ploughing. Stiff, retentive soil must be
trenched, and would be greatly improved by hav-
ing some light material, such as sandy soil, ashes,
long manure, or bones, well mixed into it ; or if
this is not to be had, work it well in the trenching,
and every year, afterwards dig or fork it deep, and
throw it up as roughly as possible for exposure to
the air, adding at each digging some opening
material as above stated. Very sandy soil requires a
mixture of some stronger texture, such as the top-
spit taken off a paddock, containing either a good
loamy or black vegetable soil, or even clay and
short manure well mixed together and worked into
it in the trenching. Boggy soil, of an elastic sour
nature, composed of weeds and grass in a state of
decomposition, will be greatly ameliorated by being
cast up for exposure to atmospheric influences in
high narrow ridges, and so left for six to twelve
months. It should afterwards be mixed with lime
and clay, marl or loam, and trenched at least
eighteen inches deep. Where it is not convenient
thus to improve soils before planting, and the sea-
son at the same time desired to be taken advantage
°t> the drainage having been previously attended
t°) make pits at least four feet in diameter, and
ei ghteen to twenty-four inches deep, into which
Pm such a compost as will meet the deficiencies of
.he original soil, and plant the trees very shallow
llx the centre of the pits. During the following


twelve months collect as much as possible of the
composition required for the improvement of the
soil, and at the end of that time spread it over the
ground and dig it in between the pits. Continue
collecting composition for other twelve months,
and then trench the ground, turning down the soil
previously top-dressed, and bringing up the lower
strata to undergo the same operation with the
composition now collected. This will take two
years to put the soil in good heart, while the trees
may all the time be growing prosperously.
To give the orchard justice, the ground ought
to be kept loose on the surface, and not cropped;
but if too valuable to be so far left empty, sow a
few rows of light crops, such as peas, kidney-beans,
or the cucumber family.
The Arrangement of the Trees must, in a
great measure, depend upon the extent of the
orchard. In some instances it may occupy a few
acres, whilst in other cases a border around the
kitchen garden may be sufficient to grow all the
trees required. The following remarks will apply
more particularly to the former plan, but at the
same time information may be gathered from them
to enable the amateur to grow his trees well in
either case and under any circumstances. In an
orchard containing from two to four acres, form a
walk five feet wide all round within a border, wide
enough to plant three rows of trees. Divide the
ground within this walk with two other walks
eight feet wide, crossing one another, and cut off
all the corners sufficiently to admit the turning of
a dray or spring-cart. The ground being thus in
squares and borders, plant the tall-growing trees, I
such as Apples, Apricots,* Pears, Plums, and j
Walnuts, at the back of the borders, and along the j
centres of the squares, keeping each sort by them* *


selves. Plant the more dwarf sorts, such as the
Peach*, Cherry, Almond, Fig, Loquat*, Mulberry,
Medlar, and sweet Chestnut nearer to the walks,
and those marked thus * will have to be put in the
situation most sheltered. The trees ought to be
planted from twenty to thirty feet apart each way,
the taller sorts, especially, at the latter distance, if
the ground is only of secondary consideration; but
if limited to space, the former distance, with good
training, will be found sufficient. In suitable
places, and along the sides of the walks, plant out
some of the kinds of smaller fruit, such as Filberts,
Pomegranates, &c., from ten to fifteen feet apart,
and three or four from the walk, choosing the
higher portions of the ground for this purpose;
and on lower portions of the ground plant out
gooseberries, currants, raspberries, &c., about the
same distance from the walk, and from three to six
feet apart in the rows.
Transplanting and Sorts. —lt is a common
practice in this country, but a very bad one, to
fake up trees with their roots chopped, and leave
them exposed to the light and air for days and
even weeks together; to avoid this, lift and plant
directed under the head Transplanting. If,
however, the trees have to be taken from a distance,
dis most important that a dull day be chosen for
their lifting and packing. The roots ought to be
Peddled in a mixture of cow-dung and sandy peat,
thick enough to adhere to them, and packed at
ouce among damp straw, with gunny cloth sewed
tightly round both the roots and over the heads of
he plants, to exclude the air and drought. Thus
Packed they will keep fresh for a length of time.
. When it is borne in mind that fruit trees take
r °m three to four years to come into bearing, it
e ems superfluous to impress upon growers the ne-


cessity of getting a selection at once of really good
and useful sorts, true to name, and of such varie-
eties as will make a good succession, and yet the
fact that a large proportion of the trees planted
out year after year in this colony are bought at
random, without any knowledge whatever of what
they are, indicates that the caution is not altoge-
ther unnecessary. To save after disappointment,
which it takes a long time to remedy, the amateur
should make his selection through a practical gar-
dener, or leave it to some nurseryman on whom he
can depend.
THE APPLE,
The several varieties of the apple being so differ-
ent in their texture, they are divided into three
classes, namely the Dessert or Table Apple, com-
prising all the highly-flavoured sorts; the Kitchen
Apple, comprising the more juicy and poignant
sorts; and the Cider Apple, comprising the more
harsh or austere sorts. Many varieties of the
first two classes are suitable for both purposes; the
last is as yet but little grown in this country.
Culture.— Apple trees are sometimes propaga-
ted by cuttings, but this being a slow and uncer-
tain process, they are almost invariably grafted in
July and August on two-year-old seedlings raised j
from pips of cultivated sorts. Being about the
most hardy of all the fruit trees, they may be
planted in the more exposed portion of the
orchard.
Training and Pruning. —The modes of train-1
ing vary according to opinions of growers, some ,
fancy their trees having stems four to six feet high I
above the surface, with their tops pitched up i» I
the air, others with their branches forking froi# I


the ground; but the best plan is to have them
with stems from eighteen to twenty-four inches
high, so as to have the branches at a height from
the ground sufficient to admit of access below
them, and the head no farther exposed than is ne-
cessary.
That the whole process of forming a tree well
may be properly understood, let one of the smallest
size procurable be selected, having one long stem,
and if planted out early in winter, leave it un-
touched till the bud begins to swell, which will be
about the month of August, then cut it down to
within two and a-half feet of the ground; if planted
out later in the season, instead of cutting, disbud it
down to the above height, leaving the tops uncut
until the spring wood has made some progress.
This will maintain the required height for the stem,
and also allow nine inches for the production of
shoots. In spring, if the three upper shoots are
strong, allow them to grow, but if weakly leave
only two to grow, pinching off all the others below
them, in order that the tree may strengthen the
shoots left. Next July, cut back shoots thus left
to within four buds of their junction with the stem,
w hich will cause two more to grow from each, and
thus during the summer there will be four to six
strong shoots which will become the frame-work
°f the tree. Remove all other shoots as they
a ppear.
, Next July, that is the second winter after plant-
lng out, cut those same shoots again—the strong
ones one-half, and the weaker ones two-thirds
ba ck, and from each allow two new shoots to grow,
all others that may appear during the
Winter. This will form the tree into a good shape
a strong healthy appearance, two points of
more importance at this early stage of its


growth than a multitude of branches. In July
of the third winter endeavour to make’' the tree
basin-shaped—that is with flat circular top, the
centre open and all the shoots growing regularly
outwards ; any branch growing towards or crossing
another must be cut hack to a bud pointing in the
right direction, or removed altogether if necessary,
to preserve regularity. Shorten the leading shoots
again to buds pointing outwards; but not quite so
much as was done last year. When thinning next
summer, instead of leaving two young shoots to
grow from the top of each winter-shortened stem,
leave only one, except in cases when more may be
required to preserve symmetry, and continue clear-
ing away all superfluous or weak shoots as they
grow.
The trees being now in good shape, little prun-
ing and training will be required further than a
regulation of the branches during winter, rampant
shoots displaced, old branches taken away, and
young shoots left to fill their places, and timely
thinning so as to avoid the saw as much as possi-
ble. Though seldom attended to, summer thin-
ning, as recommended above, is for the first four
years of their growth indispensible for the benefit
of the trees, but when neglected, however, the same
rules may be carried out in the winter pruning.
Whilst a very weak tree will thus be brought into
good bearing in the course of four years, one of
more robust habit, if properly attended to in the
nursery, has its head partially formed previous to
planting out, and will in consequence come into
bearing one or two years sooner. Two and three j
years’ old trees should have short blunt-pointed 1
spurs, called fruit-spurs, thickly studded over
their branches, which must be carefully preserved!
in the pruning.


Stoking.—A fruit room is important where
fruit is grown in quantity, and ought to be so
constructed as to maintain a cool temperature, ad-
mitting a faint light without the sun’s direct rays,
and well ventilated. It ought to be shelved all
round, and upon the shelves the fruit may he
stored. Kitchen Apples may he stored three
layers thick, long keeping table Apples and Pears
in single layers. The floor under the shelves may
he used for storing Onions, Carrots, or other escu-
lent roots not liable to rot from damp.
THE APRICOT.
The Apricot, though second in point of value to
the Peach, is an earlier fruit, and adorns the or-
chard with its rich and varied colors, just as the
Cherry trees begin to lighten their burdens.
Culture. —The trees are sometimes propagated
ky grafting, in August, on two-year-old stocks,
raised from their own or Peach Kernels, hut bud-
ding in January or February is preferable. Al-
though the trees are a little hardier than the
beach, they likewise require a warm situation.
Training and Pruning. —The Apricot being
much stronger in growth than the Peach tree, to
it is closely allied, requires more room.
The fruit is produced both upon shoots of the pre-
ceding year’s growth, and also on the small, close
®purs formed upon two years’ old wood. Bear-
-111 g these two considerations in mind, the leading
Remarks on the training and pruning of the Peach
applicable for the above. When thinning out
me superfluous or useless shoots, in summer,
leave a supply of good shoots regularly dispersed
° Ve ? the trees, for fruit hearing, and moderately
Pmne them at the points the following winter.
E


THE ALMOND.
This tree is naturally of the same habit and
growth as the Peach, to which it is allied, and
requires the same treatment. It seldom gets so
much, however, the generality of growers merely
giving it sufficient pruning in winter to preserve
regularity amongst the young wood.
THE CHERRY.
This is the first stone fruit which presents itself
on the table in summer, and comes in immedi-
ately after the luscious Strawberry. The trees
grow well on a cool, moist situation.
Culture. —The Cherry is grafted, or budded,
on two-year-old stocks, raised from their own
seeds.
Training and Pruning. —The fruit is generally
produced on small spurs, on wood of two seasons
growth, which spurs continue bearing for an in-
definite period; the trees, therefore, when young,
should be got into a good shape, as recommended
for the Apple; after which little or no pruning
will be required, further than shortening back all
the strong leading shoots, to keep the trees uni-
form, removing all weak and useless shoots, and
when the trees begin to get exhausted, cutting j
back any old unfruitful branch to a younger |
healthy one. Heavy lopping of branches should |
be avoided as much as possible, as the trees, being j
of a gummy nature, are apt to become diseased!
from such incisions, timely thinning with the knife 1
is therefore indispensable.
The Morello Cherry is of a twiggy nature, I
and one which bears fruit upon the young
It should have fewer leading branches, and morel


secondary ones, for the support of young shoots,
than other sorts. Great attention should be paid
in removing all suckers from the roots, or under-
ground stems, as they appear, for a crop of these
will rob the trees of their nourishment.
THE FIG.
The Fig can be grown to perfection in this colony,
and is consequently more worthy of a place here
in the orchard than it is in Britain, where the
crops are uncertain, and the fruit of inferior
flavor. The trees are also deserving of notice,
on account of their fine large foliage, and their
peculiar mode of fructification, what is commonly
called their fruit being merely a receptacle for
those constituent parts of a flower termed the
anthers and stigmas.
Culture. —The trees are either propagated by
seeds, suckers, cuttings, or layers, handsome plants
being most easily obtained from cuttings, and
early bearing from layers.
Training and Pruning. —lt is natural for the
tig-tree to produce two sets of shoots in one
season, and from each a crop of fruit, the first
Opening in December and January, and the
second in March and April. In growing them
he chief objects are to have a few well-spread
eading branches in uniformity with the other
re es, and from these branches secondary ones,
Rowing chiefly from the centres, and tending out-
ards, upon which the young bearing shoots will
? ow , as the fruit is chiefly produced towards the
I JT er ends of the shoots; these must not be stop-
except where very strong and out of place.
jP tlie leading branches every winter, until the
[ Ua y °f the trees are filled up. When this is done,
e 2


very little more pruning is required, farther than
removing any old unfruitful branches altogether,
or cutting them down to younger ones ; and bear
in mind that their very large foliage demands
room, so as to obtain a free circulation of air and
light. Remove suckers as they appear.
THE FILBERT.
As the Filbert-tree thrives well here, and is of a
very handsome habit, and of that class from which
the grower has the pleasure of cracking his own
nut, it deserves a place in every orchard.
Culture. —The trees can either be propagated
by sowing the nuts, grafting layers, and from
suckers, the last of which is the best mode. If in
poor soil, they will require an annual application
of manure forked in among them.
Training and Pruning. —The Filbert is what
botanists call a monsecious plant, that is, having
the male and female flowers separately on the
same tree; when in flower the former are known
by their long cylindrical catkins, which fall off as
soon as performing their office; the latter flowers
are known by their slender scarlet filaments,!]
formed on the end of the buds early in spring. A ;
sufficient supply, therefore, of both these organs
must be left in the winter pruning. When planted ]
out, they should be allowed to grow naturally un-J
disturbed for one year, and, if not strong plantsJ
for two years, when they should be cut down to
within a few inches of the ground. In the folloW-l
ing summer they will push 5 or 6 strong shoot®
which in their second winter, are shortened on® |
or two thirds back, according to their strength®
a hoop is then placed round the branches, and th® I
shoots fastened out to it at regular distances, thufl I


giving the trees a very pretty habit ; but when
time is too precious, or labour too valuable for
such a fancy system, the hooping process can be
dispensed with, and the same habit aimed at in
the pruning. In summer the cut branches will
push a shoot from almost every bud ; next winter
cut these young growths close to the leading
branches, and short shoots will afterwards grow
from each of these cut places, all of which will
produce fruit the following summer. Those shoots
which have borne fruit are cut close back the fol-
lowing winter, thus securing an annual supply of
iruit-bearing shoots. The leading branches are
every winter shortened two thirds back, and
every bearing twig, at the same time, nipped off
at the points.
Remove all the suckers as they appear above
ground.
THE GRAPE-VINE.
Within the last two years a great excitement
has arisen among the vine growers of this colony
respecting the productive capabilities of the Vine.
Much has been said about the various modes of
treating it, and, although somewhat contradictory,
each has the apparent result of being satisfactory
to the grower.
. The amateur, however, has very little confidence
p an y of the numerous systems recommended to
his notice, although he is encouraged by observ-
that, as the vine seems to produce abundantly
alm °st any soil or situation, and under any mode
treatment, it must of necessity be one of the
rf ost docile and tractable of all the fruit-bearing
k«. a Jits. However, a little further examination
11 P rove that this success is but apparent and


transitory, for many vineyards, at present giving
hopes of a permanent and plentiful yield, will
after a few years decrease in the quality and
quantity of their fruit, and end in causing great
loss and disappointment. The original vine-
growers of this colony brought with them each
his own peculiar and favourite system of culture.
These systems, adapted to the colder climates
from whence they came, they followed here, and
thoughtlessly exerted their best skill to adapt our
warm climate to their systems, instead of their
systems to the climate. The various results of
these systems have been precisely similar to those
mentioned in the parable of the Sower. The
defects in these vineyards are becoming more
visible every year, in the vigour of the plantations
as well as in the yield and quality of the fruit.
The principal causes are easily accounted for, and
may be set down at once as shallow and imperfect
tillage of the soil, deficiency in drainage, thick
planting, and imperfect training.
As an evidence of these remarks, let it be sup-
posed that one acre of ground trenched in the
ordinary manner, 15 to 18 inches deep, is planted
with a collection of vines 3 to 5 feet apart, and
trained in raspberry or gooseberry fashion, with or
without stakes, and another quarter of an acre of
the same soil and situation trenched two or three
feet deep is planted with the same sorts of vines
8 by 12 feet apart, and trained on trellises. If, at
the seventh year, the productions of both sections
be brought to the market to ascertain their
respective value, that of the one acre will not
realise, on an average, more than 4d. per pound at
the present current rates, while the produce of the
quarter acre section will be worth Is. per pound,
and at the very least the same weight on the


aggregate of this will be obtained as on that of
the other, while as the former decrease yearly
both m quantity and quality, so will the latter
increase in both, thus showing the advantages and
duraiility of the one system over the other.
Situation and Shelter. —Almost any situa-
atior, except a low-lying, wet, flat, or one exposed
to extreme hot winds, is suitable for vine-growing
prodded the soil is of average quality. There is
scanely any residence that has not some portions
of its grounds adapted for vine culture. The
mot eligible situation is a sloping bank on a
norh-eastern aspect; and if it is sheltered at a
m *lerate distance by a range of hills, to in-
tecept the devastating hot winds often so fatal
™ the vines, an important point is obtained.
Artificial shelter is sometimes required and
irquently adopted by means of a belt of rapid-
gflwmg trees, planted at distances in proportion
to the nature of the exposure, but in no case
n<jrer to the vines than 50 feet.
ft must be borne in mind that shelter (whether
nairal or artificial) is simply required to break
tHlyehement force of the hot winds, and not to
mtrupt the currents of air so essential to the
heth and vigour of the vines and the quality of
theruit. J
>jiLs. —It is found that the vine will succeed
welin our poorest soils, even in such as are
deeed unfit for growing market vegetables. The
mos choice, however, is any soil composed in
panor whole of volcanic debris, mixed with
mai-clay, gravel, or sand, and a limited portion
oi >etable soil, resting upon a limestone or
Por<s subsoil. The great requirements neces-
saryor successful vinegrowing are unquestion-
aolyiorough trenching and draining, if needed ;


the process bf which, whether by the tiench-
nlough or spade, must he the effectual mixing o a
the materials to the depth of 3 feet, if upon a porous
bottom; or of from 2 to 24 feet, if upon a retentive
clay bottom. The great utility of this trenching
consists in opening up the hitherto hermetna y-
sealed virgin soil, setting at liberty all its ele-
ments in a state of chemical combination nth
those of the atmosphere. If the soil is we, it
must be drained to the depth of the sub-soil, «ich
drain on an average eight yards apart, or siih-
ciently near to carry olf all superfluous waer.
This will enable the annual shoots of the vine to
ripen perfectly in autumn, and will render foe
canes short-jointed and prepared for heavy yiels.
Manures. —On good soils the only manure ic-
cessary is about one ton of bone-dust to the acr,
mixed in the soil about the roots at the tue
of planting. At the expiration of six or setn
years, an application of well-decomposed annul
manure would be advantageous.
On poor, light soils, a quantity of suitable t-
gredients, such as lime-rubbish, crushed bors,
and broken bricks, should be mixed with rh
earth, and applied in the operation of trenchg
along with the animal manure; if the soilbe
heavy, the ingredients should be mixed with e'm
. of a porous nature, and applied in the same tin-
ner. The application of unmixed animal maire
annually is not commendable, if wine of ame
flavour be required. An annual dressing ofm-
mal manure should be applied only wherthe
vines have exhausted the soil and begin touw
symptoms of decay; its strength will then ther
go to re-establish the soil than directly tthe
P Planting. —As one cause of failure haseen


shown to be attributable to the mismanagement
of the soil, so another and more frequent cause is
to be attributed to overcrowded planting. Last
year it was clearly evident to all connected with
vine-growing, that the vines, wherever they are
crowded and closely sheltered, were completely
prostrated by the hot winds. To obviate this
great evil the vines must have ample space tor the
free and undisturbed ramification of their roots
throughout the soil, and equal room for the
spreading of their foliage in the atmosphere In
this peculiar hot climate they can only have these
facilities by being allowed double the distance at
which they are planted in colder climates.
The vineyard may be planted with cuttings ot
the \ines, or one or two-year-old plants, either ot
which methods may be successfully adopted.
Under the following circumstances the mode
of furnishing vineyards with cuttings is often very
successful; for if planted in a good soil, well pre-
pared, they will make rapid progress. Daily, as
the vines are pruned, good and strong canes should
he selected, dressed, and cut in lengths 10 to
inches long, and inserted nearly over head, m a
medium dry, light soil or sand, two or three canes
thick, using every precaution to exclude the air
from them during this operation. Allow them to
remain in this position until the whole are finished,
and preparations made for their final destina-
tions. During this period the cuttings are under-
going the same process towards the formation of
their roots, as if planted out; and they are even,
in more favourable circumstances, forming roots
if the winter is wet and cold. The above method
may be a little more tedious than the practices
commonly adopted, but it is much more satisfac-
tory, for it is highly objectionable to allow the
e 3


canes to dry to a certain extent, after being cut,
with the view of hardening the wood, then to tie
them up in large parcels and insert their ends in a
puddle or swamp for a month or two.
In planting the cuttings about the month of
July or August, two or three should be inserted
where the vine is intended to grow, for the sake of
making choice of one. The ground, if much
settled down after being trenched, when tolerably
dry, should be loosened with a fork. The cuttings
may be inserted with a common dibble, taking
care to make the soil tolerably firm about the
cutting, the firmness entirely depending upon
the texture of the soil. By all means avoid
planting while the ground is wet, and boring
large holes three or four inches in diameter for the
reception of the plants. By such a system it is
quite impossible that an equal pressure of the
soil can be framed around the cuttings, and,
besides, after a short period it will be found that
the portions of the sides of the holes unbroken in
the planting of the cuttings, will stand up all the
summer like cement, thus forming a reservoir
for the wet, as well as a cavity for the drought, to
the destruction of the cuttings.
One-year-old well-rooted plants are even pre-
ferable to two-year-old, inasmuch as the check of
removal is less detrimental to the former than
m the latter. They are also in a more portable -i
condition than cuttings, and less subject to failure, j
especially if the planter has to depend upon the j
vine-dresser to use due precaution in securing the 1
vitality of the cuttings while in his possession,
the planting m this case should be attended to
when the ground is tolerably dry. If the roots |
are long, cut them back to within 8 inches of the ]
stock, spread them well out, and avoid planting j


The distances at which vines should he planted
have lately formed a very important subject for
consideration. There is no doubt that the trellis
will supersede all other systems, both for wine-
making and table purposes. We are persuaded
that the best quality of grapes must of necessity
produce the best quality of wine, and that the
heaviest yield of the longest duration, with certain
success, is the most advantageous. In growing
therefore for the trellis, plant the vines 8 feet
apart between the rows, and 12 feet between the
plants in the row, or if the most of the ground is
required, plant the vines 6 feet apart in the rows,
and after taking off three years’ crops, every
other vine in the row should be rooted out to
allow room for the permanent plants.
Pruning and Training. —Each cutting should
be allowed to produce one stem as long as possible,
without being stopped the first summer. In
July cut it down to the lowest fourth bud, if the
cane is strong; if weak, or moderately so, cut it
down to the lowest bud. The following or second
summer allow three shoots to grow on the strong
wooded vines to give one upright and two
horizontal canes. The latter may be stopped
when 15 inches long, and the former may be
allowed to grow to its full extent. The moderate
or weak-wooded vines should be allowed only one
stem each, for the purpose of ensuring fine strong
wood as the framework of the vine extends in
dimensions.
During the second winter erect a trellis-work
5 feet high, with three rails, the upper running
along the top of the posts, and the others at
intervals of two feet. In July prune the upright
stem -down to the middle rail of the strong-
Wooded vines, and the horizontal stems of the


lower rails to within eight inches of the upright.
Of the weaker vines cut the uprights down to the
lower rail, to encourage vigorous growth. The
former may now be considered as equal to one
year in advance of the latter, and it must be
borne in mind that vines increasing less than two
inches annually in circumference, are to be con-
sidered as less than moderate growths.
The following remarks will now refer to strong
growing vines. In the third summer allow two
shoots to grow on each of the low horizontals,
one of which is to grow upright and form a fruit-
bearing shoot, and the other is again to take the
lead horizontally. Allow also three shoots to
grow from the upright, two to be tied to the
middle rail, and the third to go upwards. Stop
the horizontals when about three feet long, and
the upright when it reaches the top of the trellis-
work. Bunches of fruit will now be showing
freely. It will, however, be necessary to reduce
their number on each vine to the maximum of
six. With the finger and thumb pinch off the
points of the fruit-bearing shoots at the bunch, in
order to force the whole strength of the vine into
the shoulders of the bunches. Let their laterals
be again stopped above the first formed bud, and
all other shoots on the stems not required for
fruit-bearing be removed. In the following
winter cut back the horizontal stems of the middle
rail to within eight inches of the upright, as was
done last winter on the lower rail, and also cut
the horizontals on the lower rail to within 15
or 16 inches of their fruit-bearing shoots. Cut
the fruit-bearing shoots down to the first-formed
bud, and also the horizontals when they meet in
the trellis.
Continue the same operations of annual pruning


and training until the main horizontals extend at
least five feet along the trellis on each side of the
upright stem, when the whole framework will he
completed.
Nothing further is required to be done than
simply pruning the fruit-bearing shoots in winter
to one bud, called the spur, and stopping their
summer growths as before recommended, tying
those of the two lower rails to the rail above in an
angular direction. If the vineyard be much ex-
posed to the winds, the fruit-bearing shoots of the
top rail will require to be tied down to the rail in
a circular direction j but if the situation will al-
low of their standing erect, without risk of
breaking the shoots, they may be allowed to
stand erect. The accompanying diagram
shows a yield of twenty-eight hunches on each vine,
which ought to he of a superior quality on account
of the ample room given to the wide-spreading foli-
age, and the thin distribution of hunches over the
plants. A heavier crop of nearly equal quality of
grapes will he produced without any injury to the


vines, by allowing two bunches to grow on each
shoot. In this case the shoots must be stopped at
the second bunch instead of the first as before stated.
Care should be taken that the horizontal stems
be made to emanate from the main stem (as
shown in the diagram) in an upward direction to
the rail to which they are tied, in order that there
may be an equal flow of sap throughout the whole
plant. For the same reason, the extremities of
each of the same horizontal stems must be raised
gradually to the rail above, as shown in the
diagram.
It will be necessary, in the case of one or two
varieties of a vigorous nature, such as Scyras, to
cut out the horizontal stems annually, and to tie
in young wood, to allow them to produce their
long rambling shoots at greater lengths. They
will in this case show fruit at every second or
third bud.
Surface Stirring the Soil.— As the healthy
root action of the vine depends entirely on its
having free access to atmospherical influences at
all seasons, but more particularly during the
growing season, the vineyard, during the summer,
should be kept stirred to the depth of at least
four inches. This may be performed with a
fork or with a drag-hoe, drawn either by a horse or
by men, and should be done whenever the surface
cakes or becomes hardened, which may be four or
five times during the season.
In the month of July, immediately after the
pruning is over, take the earliest opportunity of
the ground being dry to fork or plough it suffi-
ciently deep not to injure the roots, leaving the
surface quite rough till the spring, when it may
be smoothed down with a heavy three-pronged
hoe.


THE LOQUAT.
This evergreen tree is highly ornamental as well
as useful, and may he well grown in the shrub-
beries or lawn as in the orchard.
Culture.— The plants are best grown from
seed, which when ripe should be sown in pots, and
placed in a frame where a close, humid moisture
is obtained; the following spring re-pot and
plunge them in the ground in a dry warm shel-
tered spot until two years old, when in winter
they may be planted out permanently.
To Grow them without a Frame. Choose
a comparatively dry warm border, sow a few seeds
in lines, and when two rough leaves are fully ex-
panded on each plant, cut the tap root by sending
the spade down obliquely on each side without
raising the ground, and plant out when two years
old. In planting out those grown in the border,
care must be taken to preserve all the fibres, and
lift with balls if possible, for although strong to
the appearance, they invariably suffer more or less
from shifting, while the pot plants may be planted
without any risk.
Training and Pruning. —After making about
eighteen inches growth, pinch off the top bud with
the hand, and afterwards the points of the laterals
when a few inches long, thus forming a good head
to the trees. Nothing further is necessary than
pinching the shoots occasionally when required for
filling up, removing and cutting back naked
branches of old trees, and keeping the head quite
open, to allow the large leaves plenty of exposure
to the atmosphere. The Loquat naturally is
Nearly of the same size and habit of the Fig.


THE MEDLAR,
The Medlar is grown more for the sake of
variety and ornament than for its real usefulness.
The fruit when taken from the tree requires to be
kept until it begins to decay, when it is served up
for the table, and relished by many.
Culture. —The same treatment as suggested
for the Quince may be applied to the above.
THE MULBERRY.
Of all the varieties of the Mulberry the black is
best, and, with little trouble expended upon it,
attains to great perfection in this colony. The
fruit is highly prized as a dessert, and makes also
a delicious preserve.
Culture. —This deciduous tree is of a strong
robust habit, growing eighteen to twenty feet
high. It is commonly grafted on the Cape Mul-
berry, which, being of a free growth, causes a very
quick union, and also a rapid growth. Plant out
the trees after being grafted one or two years.
Training and Pruning. —Two-year-old grafted
trees will have made fine strong wood, and when
planted out should be disbudded or cut down to
the height wanted for a clean stem. In summer
they will push out five or six strong shoots, at
once forming a rudimentary head. Next winter
cut these back according to their strength—the
weaker three-fourths, and the stronger two-thirds.
The following summer wfil send out a number of
shoots more, the weaker of which should be cut
out, and fruit will be produced upon the stronger.
During the following winters little shortening or
pruning will be required, further than thinning
where too thick, and when old cutting out the
naked branches for more suitable young ones.


THE ORANGE.
The Orange is so well known as a fine palatable
fruit in our hot country, that it recommends itself
to every one. The trees are also of such a beauti-
ful evergreen habit, with fine glossy foliage, that
even if of a fruit-bearing nature, they would
deserve the most conspicuous place in the shrub-
bery or lawn of any residence, for even the name
of orange-blossom rings sweet in the ears of all
lovers of flowers. It is frequently supposed that
the orange tree will not become fruitful in this
portion of our colony, which is so far correct in
many situations, if no better preparation is made
for them than for any common orchard tree ; but
where a little trouble is bestowed on them, success
is certain, although not perhaps to the same ex-
tent as in New South Wales. No sufficient effort
has yet been made to test their productiveness.
There are a few scattered plants about Melbourne,
and those of them in warm situations are doing
very well. One instance of this was seen at the
Melbourne Horticultural Society's Show of last
March, where D. C. M‘Arthur, Esq., Heidelberg,
exhibited some oranges, being a portion of 200 ripe
fruit which had been gathered from one tree
within the last twelve months.
Situation and Soil. —Anticipating that only
a few are to be planted, select a warm, gentle slope,
naturally dry, and well sheltered from cold winds.
The soil most recommended for them in New
South Wales is a strong deep loam of a clayey
nature, resting upon a porous sub-soil ; they also
do very well on an inferior soil, if regularly
manured and dry, drainage being the staple of
their success. Eor our colder climate the soil
should be of a lighter nature, in order that its


temperature might he somewhat in proportion to
that at New South Wales, and trenched at least
eighteen inches deep, the sub-soil (if clay) should
have over it a layer of stones, lime-rubbish, bones,
or such like opening material, and the surface-soil
well enriched with any composition suitable for
improving the original.
Culture.— ln order to secure well-established
plants, strong enough to endure the sudden in-
clemencies of the weather, procure such as have
been grafted or budded on the Lemon or Seville
Orange in six or seven inch pots, and having good
balls at the roots; plant them out either in April,
early in May, or in September, and protect from
cold spring winds, and also from the hot winds in
summer with a few boughs, stuck in around each,
which remove early in March, when the plants will
be somewhat established. Mulch the roots in
summer, and water occasionally in dry weather.
Training and Pruning. —A conical or pyra-
midal form is that which is most natural. No
pruning is necessary farther than keeping the
trees uniform, removing sickly shoots which are
are always found in the interior.
Insects. Bug and scale are the greatest
enemies, and prevail most when plants are placed
in a cold wet situation. For their removal see
article Insects.
THE OLIVE.
Although here classed merely as an orchard
production, it is deserving of occupying whole
acres, on account of its value for manufacturing
purposes.
Culture. —The trees will grow admirably on
any soil suitable for fruit trees; where plentiful/


they are propagated by what are termed trun-
cheons,, that is, large cuttings from branches not
less than one inch in diameter, cut into lengths
one foot long, and planted into trenches in July,
with two or three inches of their tops above the
surface. This, although the best system, can only
be done at the expense of old trees. Another
plan is by grafting on the wild or common Olive
when two years old. They can also be grown by
young cuttings or layers, when they require two
years or so longer to form trees.
Training and Pruning. —After the plants
make a year's growth in the orchard, cut back all
the young branches to within two or three buds of
the stock, to give the head a healthy start; and
after the head is well formed, little or no pruning
is required further than keeping a regularity in
the branches, and cutting out sickly shoots.
THE PEACH &, NECTARINE.
This first-class stone fruit is highly prized for
dessert, for preserves, and for cooking purposes.
In the meantime, the whole Peach production of
Victoria is absorbed for the first of these, but its
rapidly increasing culture will in a few years pro-
duce an abundance for all purposes. There are
two divisions in this class of fruits, namely, the
Peach and Nectarine; the former is known by its
downy skin, and the latter by its smooth skin.
These are again subdivided into two varieties,
namely, the freestone or slipstone, and the cling-
stone, so-called as the pulp parts from the stone
or adheres to it. The most esteemed of all the
varieties is the freestone peach; there are some of
the others also very excellent, and well-deserving
of a place in every collection.


Culture. —The Peach and Nectarine, being of
the same habit and growth, require exactly the
same treatment in their culture : applying then the
peach for the subject, it is propagated sometimes
by grafting, but more generally, and to a better
advantage, by budding on two-year-old peach or
almond seedlings. Many peach seedlings have,
however, been grown for sale by auction without
either grafting or budding, and fine popular names
attached, so as to tempt the amateur purchaser.
After a few years’ care and attention, he dis-
agreeably finds that their productions are of such
qualities as are only suitable for pigs. It may be
remarked that where such is the case, the first
opportunity should be taken of either budding or
grafting some good sorts upon the lower ends of
each of the leading branches, so that little or no
time may be lost in the formation of new heads.
The peach being the most tender of stone fruits,
requires a well-sheltered warm spot of the orchard,
on a dry sub-soil.
Training and Pruning. —As the peaches pro-
duce their fruit upon shoots of the preceding year’s
growth, the heads of the trees should be so formed
as to have a very few leading branches regularly
radiating from their centres, and from each of
these a few secondary branches growing sufficiently
•thin to allow plenty of young wood, without hav-
ing an overcrowded appearance. Summer thinning,
especially when the trees are young, is particularly
necessary, that the whole strength of the tree may
be expended only on such branches as will after-
wards become its framework. Taking the youngest
of the recently planted trees, say with only one
stem, cut, or rather disbud it, early in spring, down
to about two and a half feet from the ground, or
as soon as the buds begin to swell, as already


directed for apple trees. If the tree is luxuriant
next summer, many shoots will push from the
stem, among which, four of the upper strongest
should be left, and the others taken clean away
when three or four inches long ■ also, cut out that
part of the old stem which was previously dis-
budded ; new shoots growing upon those left must
he all removed, except one or two of the lowest.
Next winter, cut the first four-formed summer
shoots, the weaker three-fourths, and the stronger
two-thirds down, and the young shoots formed
upon these, if any are left, should also he cut to
their lowest hud. The following summer, allow
two of the strongest shoots to grow on each of last
yearns stems, and also one from each hud left of
the younger shoots, on which will be found two
sorts of buds: a round blunt-pointed sort, called
the blossom, or fruit bud; and a long sharp-
pointed sort, called the wood bud ; sometimes the
former are in pairs, with or without a wood bud
between, and sometimes solitary. In order to in-
duce three or four peaches to grow on each tree,
without materially weakening it, remove all the
fruit buds, except two or so, a little distance apart
at the lower end of each young shoot. On the
young leading or main stems will grow smaller
or secondary shoots, all which should be removed,
except one or two of the lowest, which are next
winter cut back to the lowest bud, as directed last
summer. In July, prune the leading shoots to
outside buds, not quite so close as last winter, say
two-thirds or one-half down; and any taking an
inward direction, or tending to another, should be
either cut clean out or to a suitable bud, keeping
in view at this important stage of growth to have
the heads of the trees regularly trained outwards,
and the branches at regular distances apart, even


although some should he cut out in order to ac-
complish this. The small laterals hearing the
blossom buds should be cut back to the wood bud
immediately above the blossom bud, if within six
or eight inches of the lower end of the shoots, but
if beyond that they must be cut down to their
lowest wood buds, except in cases when such
shoots are wanted as secondary or smaller branches
for the forming of the tree, and these should pro-
ceed from the centre so thinly that the eye can
perceive clearly their courses without interruption.
During the following summer, a few peaches will
be found, which should be thinned according to
the strength of the tree. Continue thinning the
shoots where they appear crowded, keeping in
view at all times to regulate the tree so as to be
adding fruit-bearing shoots according to the above
system, and also extending the tree without allow-
ing an over-abundant supply of branches; clear
away at the same time all weak or spindly shoots.
Be careful to preserve any young shoots which
may be found growing from wood buds at the base
of the fruit-bearing shoots, as they next July take
the place of the shoots now bearing the fruit which
is then cut out; where there are none thus grow-
ing, and the fruit-bearing ones short, the shoots
just growing from each of the points of the latter
are pruned in winter for next summer’s fruit, as
suggested for last summer; if, however, they (the
fruit-bearing shoots) are long, it is better to cut
the whole down to a wood bud near the base, in
order to prevent long naked-bottomed shoots.
Cut back the leading branches moderately to out-
side buds, in order to keep the trees basin-shaped
with fine symmetrical heads,
The grower will now find his trees reaping the
benefit of his timely pruning and thinning over


those less cared for; and any trees by chance kept
too open, may easily have a branch or two intro-
duced to fill up any vacancy ; such a circumstance,
however, is rarely or ever to be seen ; and where
large fine flavoured fruit is an object, the leaves
must have all their surfaces freely exposed to the
atmospheric influences. It is to the advantage of
the trees if summer pruning and thinning is con-
tinued in future; but when such is done away
with, the same system of securing a regular supply
of young branches and fruit-bearing shoots must
be carried out in the winter operations.
Thinning of Fruits. —The fruit in good sea-
sons sets too thickly, and should be thinned when
advanced to what gardeners term “ stoned,” that
is when about the size of a small plum, and for
the first time merely where they are close to-
gether, and in three weeks or so after thin again
to nine inches or a foot apart, or leave one and
sometimes two on each fruit-bearing shoot.
THE PEAR.
The Pear, like the Apple, varies very much in
texture, it may also be had during the greater
portion of the year, both for table and cooking
purposes, when a proper selection of sorts is made.
When choosing a collection, it is necessary to
select the best of the earliest down to the latest
Varieties. Although the earliest crops are not of
a long-keeping nature, yet such choice varieties
a s the Brown Beurre, GansePs Bergamot, and
others, may be prolonged, if desired, until
iater varieties ripen, by gathering one lot off each
| a fortnight before being ripe, and storing them in


the fruit-room, and another lot eight or ten days
after; the remainder may be gathered as wanted
for use, then follow up by using those in store,
commencing with the earliest gatherings. The
above can, however, he only successfully accom-
plished after a little experience, for some varieties,
as the Jargonelle, can only be eaten as gathered
ripe from the trees.
Culture. —The trees are propagated either by
grafting on two-year-old Quince or Pear stocks
raised from seed, or by budding on the same, and
are planted out in the orchard the first or second
year afterwards. They will grow well in a moist
situation.
Training and Pruning. —Young trees should
be cut back or disbudded after being planted out
and trained for two or three years in the same
manner as recommended for the Apple trees. As
the fruit is produced upon spurs which appear on
shoots more than one year old, the only pruning
required after the trees are well trained, will be
shortening the leading or terminal shoots a little,
removing such branches as are out of place or get
overcrowded ; and as the trees become old, cutting
back any worn-out branches to younger ones, keep-,
ing the trees well clothed with fruit-bearing spurs.
After the trees expend their strength in fruit-
bearing, the terminal shoots will become less
luxuriant, and even make very little growth ; in
such cases they should be left unpruned.
THE PLUM.
The Plum is highly prized, both for its quality
and because it ripens during the hottest sum» er


months, January and February, when fruit is very
much in request. Many of the varieties are ex-
cellent for dessert, and others esteemed more for
culinary purposes.
Culture.— The trees are propagated by bud-
ding or grafting on two-year-old seedling plum-
stocks, and sometimes, which is not commendable,
on suckers of old trees. They will do well in a
moist situation of the orchard; and, being gene-
rally of a strong growing habit, require a position
in unison with other large growing trees.
Training and Pruning. —Carry out the same
system as recommended for the Apple trees for
the proper formation of the trees. The fruit being
produced on spurs and branches at least two years
old, and the same spurs continuing fruitful for
several years, very little pruning is required after
the trees are well formed, further than in winter
shortening the terminal shoots a little according
to their vigour, cutting moderately back any strong
fruit-bearing shoots, and also any worn out fruit-
less branches to younger ones.
THE QUINCE.
This is a pretty tree, about the size of the fig
tree, and is essentially necessary in the orchard,
as the fruit is much commended for flavouring
other fruits when used for culinary purposes, and
makes of itself an excellent preserve.
Culture. —The trees are easily propagated by
cuttings made six inches long, and planted in July
or August, in nursery lines two feet apart by eight
to ten inches, and four inches deep. When two
years old the trees are fit for the orchard, where
they will grow on any soil, and in any position,
without trouble. They require but little attention,
F


further than an occasional thinning of the branches
to admit the air throughout the interior.
THE SWEET CHESTNUT.
This is a rare and beautiful tree, and its so-
called fruit, which is but the seed, is more esteemed
on account of its scarcity than for its real quali-
ties. The trees will succeed best where partially
sheltered from hot winds. They are propagated
from seed and layers, and if strong two-year-old
seedlings are grafted with the shoots or scions
taken from trees in full bearing, they will bear
two years earlier than when not grafted.
THE WALNUT.
The Walnut tree is greatly admired for its
stately appearance and beautiful fragrant foliage,
as well as its desirable fruit. It grows and bears
well on almost any soil.
Culture. —When trees can be purchased four
or five years old, previously transplanted twice,
the grower would gain considerably both in time
and labour, for such trees will become fruitful
three or four years earlier than younger ones just
lifted from the nursery lines.
Training and Pruning. —Young trees just
planted out should be well disbudded down so as
to encourage one strong growing shoot on each,
and remove all others the following summer.
Next winter, if the shoots are strong, cut them to
two and a half feet from the ground, but if not
strong allow them to remain another year, and
then cut them down to the above height. Older


trees, as already mentioned, when planted will be
about three years in advance of the younger
ones ; after cutting down the stem to its desired
height very little pruning is requisite, as the trees
naturally form good heads; any shoot or branch
may be cut back where a vacancy is desired to be
filled up, and any branch cut out where too thick.
As the fruit is produced at the extremities of the
young shoots, care must be taken not to injure the
young wood when gathering the fruit.
E 2


SMALL FRUITS.
CURRANTS.
The Red and White Currant are propagated
from cuttings planted in mid-winter, as follows :
Take tlie largest of the cuttings away from the
tops of the hushes, cut them into ten or twelve
inch lengths, remove all the buds except three or
four of the uppermost, plant them out in a good,
light soil, in lines twenty by twelve inches apart,
and about six or eight inches deep. Next winter
cut the young shoots down to their lowest buds,
and in the following winter they will he quite
large enough for the orchard. Take the hushes
carefully up, and cut away all the side roots, except
those at the lower ends of the stems. Plant
shallow, merely covering the roots with about two
inches of soil, thus giving the plants fine clean
stems without suckers, and sufficiently raising the
fruit from the surface of the ground.
Training and Pruning. —As the hushes bear
best when the heads are only a short distance from
the surface, it is necessary to keep them dwarf
and well spread out, allowing to each eight to ten
leading shoots to form a head, cutting these hack
for three winters to within six inches of the end
of each summer shoot, and all the lateral or side
shoots annually in winter to within one or two
inches of their ends, thus forming spurs as the
heads extend. After three or four years’ growth
in the orchard, they will become large enough;


and should have the leaders cut back, as recom-
mended for the smaller side shoots. The fruit is
produced from the spurs left of last year's formed
wood.
The Black Currant requires the most shel-
tered, shady situation in the orchard. Prepare
and grow the cuttings as recommended above.
After the hushes are well formed, no pruning is
requisite, further than thinning the branches oc-
casionally where too thick, and commanding a
good supply of young wood. The fruit is pro-
duced on the young wood.
GOOSEBERRY.
The same treatment is required for growing the
Gooseberry as recommended for the Currants, hut
they will grow well in a less shady situation.
Every winter thin out the shoots where too thick,
and cut back all straggling ones. When the heads
are once well-formed, leave them as much as pos-
sible to their natural habits, for as in proportion
as the knife-work is abandoned, the less will they
require it. Remove all suckers as they appear.
Fork the ground after each pruning.
RASPBERRIES
Are propagated from suckers of old stools. Early
in winter, in a shaded situation, plant them in
patches of threes, five feet apart each way; tie the
canes to stakes. In summer, a number of canes
grow from the roots, which should next winter he
grubbed up, except the three strongest, and those
will he preserved to take the place of the one-year-
old canes, which ought now to he cut close to the
ground. The same process is continued annually
until the stools become exhausted, which will he


in about five or six years, according to the strength
of the soil, when new plantations should be made.
After each pruning, fork the ground carefully, and
add a little manure if requisite.
STRAWBERRY.
This fruit is so famed for its earliness and
quality, that a little trouble should be bestowed on
the culture of the plants. They are frequently
planted out as edgings to walks both in the kitchen
garden and orchard, and are very suitable for that
purpose. They bear fruit well in wet seasons, such
as experienced last October and November (1857),
when they bore extraordinary crops of fruit, even
in very exposed situations, but such crops are very
doubtful in dry seasons. A border should there-
fore be selected in a partially sheltered situation,
composed of a light rich soil.
Culture. —The plants are propagated from
runners, as follows : —After the fruit is gathered, if
the soil is hard, loosen it about the plants, so as to
encourage the runners to take root at each bud;
if the season keep dry it will be necessary to press
the buds slightly into the soil, but if wet they will
root of their own accord. In May or June, take
up all the plants having large full crowns, and
plant out in lines twenty by fifteen inches apart;
next summer they will produce a new fruit; cut the
runners as they appear, if not required for propa-
gating ; and during the following winter, fork the
ground among the plants. They will be in full
bearing the following summer. As the fruit is
swelling, spread a little grass or short straw over
the surface between the plants, so as to prevent the
heavy rains from damaging the fruit. New planta-
tions should be made every third or fourth winter.


MISCELLANEOUS.
DIGGING.
This, though simple, is frequently mismanaged ;
in its performance the chief objects are to renew
soil for the roots of plants, and to pulverise it to
the depth of the spade, so that air and moisture
may be admitted and maintained. The proper
manner of doing it is to takeout at one end of the
ground a clear trench the full depth and breadth
of the spade, and wheel the soil removed to the
further end of the ground to finish off with; then
fill the above and every successive trench, by dig-
ging perpendicularly narrow spaces the depth of
the spade, turning the soil regularly upside down,
and leaving no small divisions on the surface un-
touched. It is a common practice with laborers,
digging by contract, to turn over large patches of
the surface at each stamp, by inserting the spade
in a sloping direction, this enables them to get
sooner done with the work, but it leaves a great
portion of the ground, a little under the surface,
like a succession of terraces unturned.
FORKING
Is simply turning over the soil with a strong
three or four-pronged fork, and this implement
ought to be used, in preference to the spade,
among trees and plants, and all permanent crops,


where the roots are liable to be cut; it ought
also to be used invariably in strong soils where
there is a difficulty in penetrating and pulverising
with the spade.
TRENCHING
Is a most important means of improving soil ; it
serves the same purpose as digging, hut more
effectually. There are various methods, according
to the different kinds of soil ; a naturally deep
soil should he trenched fully two feet deep, more
particularly if required for the cultivation of trees;
shallow soil should be done as deeply as possible.
Some soils, sandy for instance, are so poor that
they require others of a stronger kind, or manure
added to them, to give them consistence. In
these cases, the top spit, or that nearest the surface,
is turned over into the bottom of the trench, being
the best, while the under spit, or lowest, is turned
uppermost, being the worst, and is mixed with soil
of better quality, or manure, so that the whole
depth is materially improved. In shallow soils,
with a very stiff clay subsoil, a portion of the
latter should be thrown up to the surface, collected
in heaps and burned, and then spread out and
mixed well ivith the soil.
Trenching, as Digging, should be done sys-
tematically, and not in a careless manner, thus—
mark out the ground to he trenched into spaces
feet wide across, remove the whole of the soil
out of the first space the full depth, and wheel it
to where the work is to terminate, then turn over
the top spit of the next space into the bottom of the
newly made trench, placing manure or improving
soil thereon ; now put the bottom spit over that
already laid, and continue so to the end of the work.


DRAINING.
One of tlie primary steps to increase the fertility
of nearly every description of land is drainage,
which'is attended with numerous advantages. At-
mospheric influence is not confined only to the
surface, but, by the removal of superabundant
moisture, is enabled to penetrate into the lowest
depths of the soil, the results of which are most
strikingly manifest after rain, the temperature is
equalised, and the otherwise cold under-soil
possesses the genial warmth throughout the grow-
ing season, nourishment suitable to the growth
of plants is conveyed to their roots, noxious mat-
ter is washed out, manure and vegetable refuse
are more speedily decomposed, and carbonic acid
and other gases essential to plants, are produced
in abundance, while a stiff clay soil is rendered
mellow and friable.
The depths and distances apart for making
drains, will vary according to the description and
feature of the land—an average distance is twenty
feet—heavy soils need them closer, while light
ones will do with them further apart, branch drains
being laid about two feet deep, and main ones
about three feet deep. Main drains, where there
are more than one, should be forty feet apart.
One or two-inch pipes are very suitable for ordi-
nary purposes, and may be covered with a few
inches of stones or cinders overlaid with turf, straw,
or, best of all, the tops of the common tea tree, and
filled up with soil to the surface. Heavy wet soils
with but little incline, yet receiving the surface
water from the neighbouring lands, should be
thrown up into high round ridges, of from 15 to
30 feet width, with furrows as deep as possible
with the drains laid therein, which, if covered with
f 3


only 2 or 3 inches of soil, the whole of the ground
besides will thus be sufficiently drained to be avail-
able for cropping.
TRANSPLANTING
Is the term applied to the operation of removing
plants grown on the open ground from one part to
another. Planting out refers to the same kind of
operation restricted to plants grown in pots or
otherwise under cover. Trees or plants should not
be removed unless when dormant, then raise them
as carefully as possible, without injuring the fibres
or exposing them to a dry atmosphere; in
planting/spread out all the roots carefully with the
hand, and shake in some of the finest of the soil,
so that the interstices may be thoroughly filled up-
when the whole is filled up nearly to the general
level, stake and water ; a few hours afterward finish
off with a covering of dry soil. Dull days are best
for this operation. Evergreens suffering from dry
winds immediately after being transplanted should
be syringed overhead every evening. Many seed-
lings grown on the open ground are apt to send
down long naked roots, which should be cut back
about February or March, by inserting the spade
obliquely underneath the plant on both sides, with-
out raising it, which will cause a supply of young
fibres. Old established plants about to be re-
moved should, in spring, have a trench dug round
each, large and deep enough to cut straggling
roots and undermine the balls ; to check any ten-
dency downwards, refill the trench and let the
plants remain till autumn or winter, when they
should be well soaked with water to cause the soil
to adhere to the roots, dig out the trench, reduce
tlie balls a little, remove and plant carefully.


MULCHING
Is a covering of stable straw, in a half decomposed
state, spread on the surface of the ground, over and
a foot beyond the extremities of the roots of
plants, two or three inches in thickness, applied
during extremely dry weather, to retard evapora-
tion, to reduce the temperature at the roots, and
to retain the porosity of the soil, which should
have been well loosened when mulched.
Top Dressing is a thin covering of any light
soil or manure laid over small seeds, when sown in
stiff soils, to promote vegetation. It sometimes is
a manure or compound of soils spread on the sur-
face over certain crops, such as Asparagus, the
substance of which is carried into the soil by
heavy rain.
WATERING.
First, mulch as recommended, then thoroughly
water over, so as to moisten all the roots and the
soil beyond them; thus done, the roots will keep
moist from six to eight weeks, according to the
nature of the soil, without a drop of rain. Fre-
quently more injury than good is done ,to plants
by the injudicious watering of amateurs ; it is use-
less watering plants, even daily, which are exposed
to scorching weather, unless they have been pre-
viously mulched.
BUDDING.
Many kinds of fruit trees, particularly Peaches
and Apricots, and numerous shrubs, such as Roses,
are propagated principally by budding. The time
to ensure success is from the end of October to
the end of March, and the manner of procedure
as follows : upon a stem leading from the roots,


or on the lower part of any of the leading branches
of the tree or plant to be budded, make a short
cut horizontally through the bark only, then make
another downwards perpendicularly, about an inch
long, the two cuts will form the letter T ; take
from a shoot of the plant desired to be multiplied,
a well-formed bud, with a portion of wood and
bark attached, fully half an inch long both above
and below the eye or point of projection of the
bud ; gently remove the wood from the bark, by
beginning at the top and tearing downwards, being
careful not to injure the inner part of the bud,
leaving it rather full than hollow, with the handle
of a proper budding knife; now raise the bark at
the top of the incision T, and delicately insert
and slip down the bark and bud, cutting the upper
end square to fit the bark of the stock neatly, tie
up the whole tolerably firm with any soft material,
such as bass matting or worsted. The sorts budded
must be of the same family as the bud.
Subsequently, when the buds commence swell-
ing, which will be in from two or four weeks, un-
tie them. If summer has not far advanced, and
the buds showing leaves, cut back the heads of
the stocks ; if large, partially ; or entirely, if small,
*to induce a free growth; if the buds remain dor-
mant, defer the cutting down till mid-winter.
GRAFTING
Is the process by which a shoot from one plant or
tree is incorporated into the stem or branch of
another.
Fine varieties of fruit trees, many ornamental
trees and shrubs, and some few herbaceous plants
are thus propagated. Shoots intended for this
purpose should in pruning time (June) be cut


from the most fruitful parts, and partly covered
up in the earth till the end of July or August, the
grafting season ; they are then cut into lengths,
having three or four buds each, or about four
inches long, and are called scions, and the trees
upon which they are fixed are called stocks.
The favorite systems are called the Whip or
Tongue, Saddle, Cleft, and Side Grafting.
Whip Grafting is performed by cutting the
stock with the knife or saw down to a desirable
part, the top of which, and the base of the scion
being cut off obliquely at corresponding angles;
then make a cut downwards in the centre of the
face of the sloping part of the stock, and a corre-
sponding cut upwards in the face of the scion; the
tongue or upper part of the sloping base is inserted
into the cleft or cut of the scion, and so placed that
the inner bark of the two may fit exactly at one
if not at both sides; the junction is then tied tole-
rably firm with the bass matting, or the like, and
covered with a handful of clay, if grafted above the
surface, but if on the surface, merely draw the
earth well around. When the scion is showing
leaves, the covering, if not previously wasted,
should be removed. This system is adopted with
both young and old trees.
Saddle Grafting. —The top of the stock is cut
into a form like a blunt wedge, a cut is then made
up the centre from the base of the scion, suffi-
ciently long to receive the wedge of the stock, the
extremities being pared down to form a close union
of the inner barks. This plan is adopted chiefly
with young trees.
Cleft Grafting is the reverse of the former;
the scion is made into a wedge, and inserted into
a slit made downwards from the top of the stock.
This is confined to old trees.


Side Gritting is similar to Whip Grafting,
but done on the side of the stock, without heading
down the trees, adopted chiefly for filling up
vacancies of brandies.
layering.
Layering is another method of multiplying
favorite varieties. For plants having long, naked
roots, get four or five-inch pots, well drained, and
filled with a good, light, rich soil, sink them m
the ground so that when their branches are bent
down their youngest portions may rest in the
pots, make a notch or slit upwards, from suitable
buds, press each gently into the soil of the pots,
and steady the shoots with a hooked peg; then
completely cover all with soil, except the top o
the branches; should the wood be brittle, instead
of cutting, twist the shoot so as to part its fibrous
matter a little. As a general rule, soft wooded
plants should have their annual shoots when halt
matured laid down, and hard wooded plants the
shoots of the previous summer’s growth. Fiants
having fibrous roots do not require pots.
CUTTINGS.
Avoiding those which ate difficult, such sorts
only will be treated on as can be managed by the
amateur without artificial heat, &c., &c. Young
succulent cuttings strike best in spring and
autumn, when the wood is becoming hardened,
as follows: —Upon a dry, warm, sheltered sou,
place six inches thick of three parts sand, and one
part light black soil or peat, well mixed, and
water it well; next day, if there is no frame, get
bell or hand glasses, and make impressions of their


sizes on the sand; choose the points of such shoots
as are partly matured in the wood, which, if only
one and a-half or two inches long, should he torn
away with their joints or heels attached; remove
the under leaves, and dibble the cuttings close,
tolerably firm within the spaces marked, cover
with the glasses, and shade from the sun for three
days, lift the covers, wipe the inside, and replace
for two or three days more ; then remove the shad-
ing, except when the sun is very strong, and
admit a little air on the sheltered side; increase
the quantity as the cuttings grow. Cuttings of
harder wooded plants, as Roses, Polyglas, &c.,
should, in April and May, be cut from three to
six inches long, and dibbled firmly with one or
two inches above ground, in a very dry, light,
shady soil, twelve inches by four inches apart.
INSECTS.
American Blight. —Trees not much blighted
may be cleaned by having their affected parts
slightly brushed with turpentine. If much affected
at the fall of the leaf, prepare a mixture, thus—
put four ounces of soft soap into one gallon of
water, and add half a gallon of stable liquid ; with
this syringe the trees so freely on two consecutive
days, as that the ground will become literally
caked with the falling liquid, which allow to re-
main on the surface for some time untouched. In
spring, before the buds begin to swell, repeat the
operation exactly as before, being careful that
every part of the tree is completely washed. Specks
of blight during summer should be touched with
turpentine as they appear.
Ants' Nests. —lf near a house, stir the nests
occasionally, and pour in boiling water, and pour


the above on the ants, or apply ammoniacal liquor,
which can be obtained at the gas-works; guano
sprinkled over them when thus troubled is said to
drive them away.
Bug. —Boil a pound of tobacco in a gallon or
two of water, for half an hour, and, when settled,
draw off the liquor. Melt a pound of soft soap
and a pound of glue, in warm water, add a pound
of sulphur, and mix it up into a paste, so as to
mix easily, add one gill of turpentine, and mix
the whole well together in twelve gallons of water,
raise to a temperature from 125 degs. to 130 degs.
Faht., continue stirring. Then take pot plants and
reduce the soil to the roots, with the tops upside
down, wave them about in the mixture as quickly
as possible for a few minutes; set them aside to
drain with their tops downwards; when dry place
them in a shady place. In a day or two drench
them in like manner in clean water; plants, such
as Oranges, &c., in the open ground, should be
thoroughly brushed over with the same mixture.
Green Fly. —Pot plants should be placed in an
air-tight place, as a box or close room, burn a
little tobacco within, and keep close for two hours,
next day apply the same dose, and afterwards
syringe with clean water; for established plants
in the open ground, boil one pound of tobacco in
half a gallon of water for half an hour, when
settled down, draw the liquor off and strain it, to
this add three or four gallons of water, and syringe
the plants gently, in the afternoon or evening, so
as to get the whole parts saturated; next evening
repeat the dose, and the third evening syringe
freely with clean water.
Bed Spider. —For trailing plants on the
ground, apply a good watering three successive
nights over the leaves, so as to saturate all the


surface of the ground under them; for taller
plants apply a sprinkling of sulphur dusted over
the under surface of the leaves, or syringe the tops
with water at night.
Thrip.—Boil eight ounces of tobacco, add to
this, after being well mixed, a little soft soap and
sulphur, three or four gallons of clear soot water,
at a temperature of about 120 degs. baht.; wave
the tops about in this for a few minutes, and in
the morning syringe them with water; plants
established in the open ground should be well
brushed over two or three times.


3
§
B
55
«
§
J
g
a
H
◄
Asparagus . . .
Beans, Broad . .
few
...
...
•••
few
„ Kidney dwf
medium
few
,, Running .
medium
few
Beet
Borecole ....
large
...
large
few
Broccoli ....
few
few
Brussels Spouts .
large
few
medium
Cabbage ....
Capsicum . . .
large
large
few
...
- 1
Cardoon ....
Carrots ....
few
Cauliflower . . .
Celery . . . .
large
few
large
few
few
large
Corn Salad . . .
Cress and Mustard
Cucumber . . ;
sow fort
nightly
through
out the
few
year.
few
Endive ....
.
few
few
Garlic
Herbs
...
few
large
Leek
...
few
Lettuce ....
Melon
few
few
few
large
large
large
Onion
Parsley ....
few
...
few
large
large
large
Parsnip . .
Pea
medium
few
few
few
large
large
Potato ....
medium
large
ry third
few
Radish ....
sow eve
week
through
out the
year.
Salsafy ....
Scorzonera . . .
I
...
:::|I
Savoy
Sea Kale ....
medium
medium
...
...
...
::: §
Shallots ....
large
Spinach ....
...
medium
medium
large
few
few
Turnip
V egetable Marrow
large
medium
few
few
h
J
TABULAR VIEW OF THE KITCHEN GARDEN CALENDAR.


s
m
a
| '
M
M
g
§
P
0
P
w
H
s
?<
H
O
H
o
W
◄
O
fc
ft
Asparagus . . .
Beans, Broad . .
large
large
large
large
medium
medium
few
...
„ Kidney dwf
few
large
large
• ••
„ Running .
large
few
Beet
large
large
large
...
Borecole ....
few
large
few
...
Broccoli ....
large
large
large
few
...
Brussels Sprouts .
few
large
medium
large
few
Cabbage ....
Capsicum . . .
medium
large
large
large
few
few
few
large
large
...
....
large
large
...
Carrots ....
1 Cauliflower. . .
large
large
large
large
few
large
I Celery
Corn Salad . . .
few
large
large
few
Cress and Mustard
sow fort
nightly
through
out the
year.
Cucumber . . .
few
few
large
large
• ••
Endive ....
Garlic
few
few
large
...
Herbs
large
medium
few
...
...
Ceek
large
large
medium
few
large
...
Cettuce ....
large
large
large
few
large
ttelon
few
few
large
large
...
yaion
large
large
large
...
farsley ....
tarsnip ....
feto' : : : :
few
large
large
large
large
medium
large
...
large
large
large
ry third
large
medium
few
Nish ....
sow eve
week th
roughout
the year.
Rhubarb ....
large
medium
...
■ *afy . . . .
large
medium
...
...
A fs„ 0rzo uera . . .
large
medium
...
°y
?. ' Kale . . . .
few
large
large
medium
medium
medium
....
few
few
fnach ....
few
large
large
few
few
ffnato ....
few
large
large
Hip • • , •
...
large
large
few
**! Marrow
few
few
large
large
...




Australian (hardener
EAISAT BROTHERS & CO.,
IMPORTERS OF
FLOORCLOTHS, &c.,
Jfuntisljhio Wiig\iahhx£XB>
AND
SOLE "V E IST DOES
FOR THE COLONY OF VICTORIA
OF
BROWN’S PATENT
BRASS-JOINTED PORTABLE
FURNITURE.
Wo. 27 COLLINS STREET WEST , MELBOURNE.


MELBOURNE GRINDING & ROASTING MILLS
- (ESTABLISHED 1852).
MUSS F, li'SHlll & ■60,,
PATENTEES OF THE
SELF-ACTING ISOTHERMAL ROASTER,
WHOLESALE COFFEE AND SPICE MERCHANTS,
35 L-YGON-STREET, lIVEELBOTTIFtIINrE-
Cjrs Udxr goastmo
In inviting attention to the Self-Acting Isothermal
Roaster, the patentees wish as briefly as possible to place
a few of the more prominent features and advantages of
their invention before the public.
Before doing so they would advert to the two well-
known conditions indispensable to the proper Roasting
of Coffee. In the first place Coffee must not, at any
part of the process, be exposed to the action of the
watery vapour discharged in the course of roasting; in
the second, it must be perfectly equally torrified, every
bean exposed to the same temperature for the same
length of time.
Any departure from the first condition is attended
with a corresponding bitterness of taste and loss of flavor,
while any departure from the second entails a like loss
of soluble extractive matter, one part not being suffi-
ciently roasted to develope that substance, while the
other is so far charred that it is either partially or wholly
decomposed.
In the ordinary roasting apparatus—a Cylinder on a
horizontal shaft—these conditions are but very imper-
fectly fulfilled ; some attempt is made to relieve the
Coffee from the influence of the vapour by holes perfo-
rated in the ends of the Cylinder, and sometimes by
means of a hollow shaft, but in either case the vapor
can be seen passing off, after attaining a considerable


MELBOURNE GRINDING & ROASTING MILLS-(continued).
degree of tension, thus showing the Cylinder to be charged
with the vapor, and its contents subjected to its influence.
Again, with the view of rendering it less difficult to roast
equally by the process, several descriptions of leaves or
flies have been occasionally tried inside the Cylinder,
and various arrangements of furnace flues proposed, but
with wlfat success is best shown from the fact, that the
equality of roasting is known to depend mainly upon the
experience and attention of the workman, it being neces-
sary that the heat be maintained at the same intensity
throughout the entire length of the Cylinder, a condition
to which it is evident that even experience and the closest
attention can only approximate.
Various apparatus have of late years been patented,
both in England and America, with the view of obviat-
ing these defects, but we shall only mention the two
which have secured the greatest amount of patronage,
viz., Mr. Gee’s Patent Roaster, and the Patent Globular
Roaster by Mr. Law, of Edinburgh.
In Mr. Gee’s patent the Coffee is placed upon an open
plate, and kept in motion by means of revolving arms,
while the heat is conveyed to it through the plate, the
under surface of which is exposed to the action of the
fire. By this arrangement Mr. Gee has relieved the
Coffee from the action of the discharge of vapor, and has
in so far effected a very decided improvement. It has
however been found, in using his roaster, that the beans
resting upon the plate are extremely liable to get unduly
overheated, and thus the flavor of the Coffee materially
injured.
Mr. Law in his patent encloses the Coffee in a globu-
lar vessel, and by an ingenious mechanical arrangement,
communicates such a motion to the vessel as exposes
every part of its surface in succession to the action of
the fire, by this means the contents are perfectly equally
torrified, a result which had not been attained by any
previous process. The invention however offers no ad-
vantage over the process in common use, with regard to
relieving the Coffee from the injurious action of the


MELBOURNE GRINDING & ROASTING MIfLS-(continued).
watery vapour, and from the nature of the arrangement
it does not seem-possible to remove this defect.
In the Self-acting Isothermal Roaster an entirely new
description of apparatus is introduced, by which the
defects referred to are completely removed and several
valuable advantages secured. Throughout the entire
process the surface of the Coffee in the Roasting Vessel
is exposed fc> a current of air at a temperature slightly
in excess of that which the contents have at the moment
attained; and the vapor discharged in roasting is so
completely removed by this method, that the Coffee is
perfectly dry during the entire process.
By the mechanical arrangement of the apparatus, the
Coffee has an independent motion at right angles to that
which it also has in the direction of rotation, conse-
quently every portion of it must pass successively over
the entire surface of the vessel, and therefore at any
instant the whole contents of the Roaster must be abso-
lutely Isothermal. A large area of heating surface is
also obtained, thus securing rapidity of action combined
with great economy of fuel, while on account of the self-
acting arrangement, the Coffee upon being roasted to the
proper degree is discharged into the receiver without any
attention on the part of the workmen whatever.
We conclude this notice by extracting the following
easily-verified experiment, from the Article COFFEE in
“ Tomlinson’s Cyclopaedia:
Judging from the injurious effects upon many plants
used in medicine, of drying them in a confined space
where their watery particles cannot freely escape, it
seems probable that this confined vapour must be injurious
to the Coffee. If Coffee be heated in a glass mattrass
and stirred so as to prevent burning , it soon acquires a
very unpleasant odor from the water being confined
but if a sample of the same Coffee be Roasted on a fiat
surface, exposed to the air, there is no such result.
JAMES E. McKENZIE & CO.,
Patentees,
35 Lygon-street, Melbourne.


SJJ
111 I
JEWELLER & OPTICIAN,
19 COLLINS STREET EAST,
MELBOURNE.
OPTICAL, MATHEMATICAL,
METEOROLOGICAL,
AND
PHILOSOPHICAL INSTRUMENTS
BY THE
BEST M: -A. K EES
OF
LONDON AND THE CONTINENTAL CAPITALS.
G


Gr XT A. N o
The Undersigned, Sole Agents for the Supreme
Government of Peru for the Sale of
In the Australian Colonies, have always a Stock on
hand of this invaluable Manure.
Price £l5 10s. per ton, in Bags ready for Delivery.
BRIGHT BROS. & CO.,
IvHELIBOTTIEIISrE.
MILNER’S SAFES.
The Undersigned, Wholesale Agents in the Australian
Colonies for
MILNER’S FIRE-RESISTING, THIEF-PROOF SAFES AND
DEED BOXES.
HAVE ALWAYS A STOCK ON VIEW.
THE TRADE SUPPLIED ON LIBERAL TERMS.
BRIGHT BROS. & CO.,
MELBOURNE.


D. GILLESPIE,
ENGINEER,
smia-Him, brmhmsti,
&c., (Maker of the first Engines and Boilers of Her Majesty’s
Steamboat “ Bendigo,” 1850)
BOURKE STREET EAST,
OPPOSITE THE “HERALD” OFFICE,
AND
OPPOSITE THE BLACK BOY HOTEL, LITTLE
COLLINS STREET EAST.
D. G. wishes to impress on the minds of the Mer-
chants and Store Proprietors of Melbourne that he has
just executed a
NEW & IMPROVED HOISTING GEAR,
that will work double the speed of any other, and with
the saving of more than one half of the labor.
30.—Every description of Engineering and Black-
smiths’ work executed on the most reasonable terms.
g 2


FOR
THE GRIST OF OATS, RICE, AND MAIZE MEAL,
AND THE
CRUSHING OF MAIZE, BARLEY, OATS, &c.,
72 & 73 FLINDER.S-LANE WEST,
GEORGE BENCRAFT begs to inform Storekeepers
and the Trade generally, that in addition to the general
Gristing and Crushing business heretofore conducted by
him he has commenced the manufacture of OATMEAL,
from the BEST COLONIAL OATS, FOR TABLE
AND FAMILY USE.
The machineiy of this mill is of the most recent con-
struction, embraces all the latest improvements, and has
been erected regardless of expense.
By a careful selection of the best Oats obtainable, he
trusts to produce Oatmeal as much superior in quality
and flavor to that hitherto supplied for colonial consump-
tion, as Colonial Oats confessedly are to those imported
from Europe or elsewhere.
The manufacture will comprise three descriptions of
Meal, namely, ROUND, MEDIUM, and FINE, which
will be prepared in such packages as may be found best
adapted to meet the requirements of the trade.
Arrangements have been made with Mr. WILLIAM
LAWRANCE, 43| WILLIAM-STREET, for the intro-
duction and sale of the manufactured article, and. all
orders transmitted to him will receive prompt attention.
Melbourne, July 1860.


The Subscribes receives regular Consignments, and
has on Sale the following descriptions of Produce, &c. :
FLOUR, ADELAIDE. Magarey’s, Hart’s,
Sismey’s (Crown Mills), Stevens’, Dunn and Son’s,
and other first-class brands. Tasmanian, American
Barrel, Chilian, Californian, &c.
BRAN . —Adelaide.
WHEAT , —Adelaide, Seed and Milling.
OATS . —Seed and Feeding descriptions, Victorian,
Tasmanian, Hew Zealand, Irish, Scotch, Danish,
Calcutta, Californian, &c.
BARLEY. —Cape, Californian, and Malting sorts.
MAIZE. —Weekly Shipments of Hew South Wales.
ALSO,
GRAM, DHOLL, PADDY, &c.
BUTTER. —Finest quality of Woollongong (Hew
South Wales.)
COBH SACKS, BRAH BAGS, GUHHY BAGS, &c.
VICTORIAN PRODUCE consigned for Sale in
this Market, will have every attention.
AGENT FOR BENCRAFT’S COLONIAL MADE OATMEAL
ALSO, AGENT FOR THE SALE OF
LAWRENCE ISLAND GUANO.
W. LAWRANCE,
CORN AND FLOUR FACTOR, SHIP AND COMMISSION AGENT,
43£ WILLIAM STREET, MELBOURHE.


29 COLLINS-ST. WEST, MELBOURNE.
®9
BOOKSELLERS, STATIONERS,
AND
Qttanxd I.look !stattttfaxtaers,
In returning thanks for past favors, beg to invite an
inspection of their Large, Valuable, and Varied Assort-
ment of Books in the various departments of Standard
and Religious Literature, many just received from Eng-
land. M‘Clintock’s Franklin, Swainson’s New Zealand,
Livingstone’s Africa, Leisure Hours, Sunday at Home,
Thomson’s New Zealand, All the Year Round, Robert-
son’s Sermons and Lectures, Lord Elgin’s Mission to
Japan, Bowring’s Phillipine Isles. Amongst others,
equally desirable, will be found—Macaulay’s works, Ali-
son’s Europe, The Rural Cyclopaedia, Farmers’ Dic-
tionary, the works of Sir Walter Scott, Dickens, Warren,
Marryatt, Thackeray, Lever, Lover, Reynolds, Jerrold,
Carleton, Cockton, Bulwer, James, Sterne, Swift, Field-
ing, Smollett, Louden, Herschell, Lyell; Hutton’s Ma-
thematics and Recreations in Science, Gibbon’s Decline
and Fall, Mitford’s and Grote’s Greece, Brown’s High-
lands and Clans; Lives of Illustrious Englishmen,
Gazetteers of England, Ireland, Scotland, and the World;
Bohn’s Standard, Scientific and Classical Library, Eng-
lish, French, Latin, Greek, German, Italian, Spanish,
Medical, Biblical, Hebrew, and other Dictionaries and
Lexicons, Histories of England, Ireland, Scotland,
America, Germany, France and others; Polyglot, Clark’s,
Cobbin’s, Scott’s, Henry’s, Kitto’s, Haweis’, Brown’s,
Fletcher’s and Haydock’s Bibles and Commentaries. En-
cyclopaedia Metropolitana and Brittanica (in vols), Nichol-
son’s Builders’ New Director, Graham’s Medicine, Church-
ill’s Manuals, Gilfillan’s Literary Portraits, Anthon’s Classi-


cal Works, Templeton’s Commercial Prompter, Murray’s
Home and Colonial Library, Family Herald, London
Journal, and Reynold’s Miscellany (in vols). The works
of Cumming, Leighton, Simeon, Hall, Pearson, Newton,
Bickersteth, Toplady, Hawker, Romaine, Stewart,
Mosheim, Todd, Erskine, Fox’s Martyrs, Dick, Barnes,
Wesley, Whitefield, and other Standard Divinity. Flet-
cher’s, Cummings and Harris’ Devotions, Cruden’s Con-
cordance. Byron, Tennyson, Hood, Milton, Southey,
Cowper, Shakspeare, Burns, Kirke White, Smith, Keats,
Millman, Heber, Hemans, Wordsworth, Ramsay, Long-
fellow, Crabb, Coleridge, Shelly, Spencer, Pollock,
Rogers, and the rest of the Poets. A splendid variety of
Illustrated Books, handsomely bound, for presents.
Lives of the Queens of England and Scotland, Welling-
ton, Nelson, Napoleon, Cromwell, Washington, Chalmers,
Wesley, Clarke, Fletcher, and others. A large variety
of Juvenile Books. Bibles, Prayers, and Church Services
in velvet, Bagster’s Scotch and other Bibles and Psalms,
Wesleyan Hymn Book, The Hymn Book, New Congre-
gational Hymn Books, Church of England Hymn Books.
A large variety of the Railway and Parlour Library, and
other cheap series, always on hand, the new ones being
constantly received. The English Papers, New Books,
Periodicals, Reviews, &c., received per each mail steamer,
posted and delivered immediately. Orders transmitted
to Europe per each overland mai| steamer.
THE STOCK OF STATIONERY
Comprises —Ledgers, Journals, Day Books, Cash Books,
Letter Books, Letts’ Diaries, Writing Papers of superior
quality. Copy Books for Schools, Artists’ Colors and
Materials, and every article incidental to the trade. —
WHOLESALE & RETAIL.
Account Books ruled and bound to order.
All orders from the country promptly attended to and
faithfully executed.
Note the address , Caple & Co., 29 Collins-street
west, nearly opposite the Criterion Hotel.


TO ARCHITECTS, CONTRACTORS, & OTHERS.
DYER & CO.,
LIHVLE &c CEMENT MERCHANTS,
7 QUEEN STREET, MELBOURNE,
Respectfully beg to intimate to their Friends and the
Public generally that having completed their new Stores,
they are now prepared to offer the Largest and Best
selected Stock of Plaster Paris and Cements ever exhi-
bited in the Colonies.
In soliciting a continuance of the support so kindly
awarded to them during the last seven years, DYER &
CO. feel great pleasure in informing their customers that
having recently effected considerable improvements in
their Lime Kilns at the Heads and Geelong, they are now
enabled to supply Roche Lime of a quality unequalled
in this market, and to offer them a direct advantage over
any house in the trade.
They can also confidently guarantee the quality of
their Plaster Paris and Cements, being direct impor-
tations from the best manufacturers.
Heads and Geelong Roche Lime, free from core,
fresh landing daily.
Do. do. Slacked do. do.
Roman Cement, guaranteed (Sir Wm. Maxwell’s,
Bacheldor’s, &c.)
Portland do. do* (Nine Elms, Knight & Co.’s,
White’s, and Wouldham Patent:)
Plaster Paris, fine and superfine (Henshaw’s and
American.)
Keen’s and Parian Cement, coarse and fine.
, Laths, Y.D. Land, Baltic, and American sawn, 3 ft.
to 4 ft. 6 in.
Earthenware Drain Pipes, with bends, &c., all sizes.
Plasterers’ Hair, extra long, in bales and bags.
Lath Nails, Flooring Tiles, Chimney Tops, &c., &c.
P.S.—DYER & CO. invite comparison of prices, which
will be found at all times the lowest in the trade.
Country orders carefully and 'punctually attended to.


TO PARTIES FURNISHING.
Carets, Dantitsb, mti» Jfloordotljs,
EX LATE ARRIVALS.
W. HICKINBOTHAH & SOM
Haying just opened the largest Stock of the above new
goods ever offered before in Melbourne, beg respectfully
to invite the attention of parties furnishing to their
Hew and magnificent assortment of
BRUSSELS, VELVET-PILE, TAPESTRY, KIDDER-
MINSTER, FELT, & MEDALLION CARPETS.
Also,
Stair Carpets, in Venetian, Albert, Brussels, & Velvet-pile.
The Newest Designs in Velvet Borders, Pile Table-
covers, Hearthrugs, Printed Embossed Victoria and
Silk bordered Table-covers, Mosaic Screens, &c.
Our Stock of
DAMASKS
Consists of the choicest in Brocatelles, silk and wool,
yarn dye, and all wool, in every shade of color.
BEST IFLOOjROLOTZ&aCS,
In all widths, from half a yard to eight yards wide. The
FURNISHING DEPARTMENT
Is replete with every article for family use in
Blankets, Sheetings, Towellings, Glass Cloths, Table
Linen, Damask Cloths, Doyleys and Napkins,
Muslin, Lace, and Swiss Curtains,
Wool & Brush Mats, Coir & China Matting, Trimmings, &c.
Together with a varied
Assortment of Brass, Mahogany, Cedar, and Huon Pine
CORNICE POLES.
White and Gold, aud Brass Cornices made to order.
THi
27 COLLINS STREET EAST
G 3


9
1
MALE AND FEMALE
LABOR OFFICES,
8
NEAR POST OFFICE.
MRS. MAIN takes this opportunity of expressing her
thanks for the very large and universal share of support
awarded to her during the past Three Years, and will
endeavor to justify this opinion by continuing her
Business upon the same principles of honor and inte-
grity, studying to the very utmost of her power the
interests of those who may employ her.
COUNTRY ORDERS
For Married Couples, Male and Female Servants of
every description, executed with care and despatch.
TO CONTRACTORS, FARMERS, AND OTHERS,
Employing Men, Letters or Telegrams promptly attended
to
WITHOUT ANY CHARGE
TO THE EMPLOYERS.


J. & A.. O -A- M! 3? I,
122 RUSSELL-STREET,
MANUFACTURERS OF
LOOKED «H,ASB£S
AND
PICTURE FRAMES,
TO ORDER.
GLASSES RE-SILVERED.
N.B.—A large assortment of Chimney and Pier
Glasses always on Sale.
Note the Address—l 22 Bussell-street.
M
BOOT MAKER,
3 BOURKE STREET EAST.
J. R, in returning thanks to the Public and his nu-
merous Friends for their kind patronage, begs to intimate
that, owing to his long Practical Experience as a Boot
and Shoe Maker, they may rely on obtaining a first-class
article, made from the best material by the first Work-
men of the Colony.
J. B. would likewise call special attention to his
Imported Stock, which, having been made up expressly
to his own order, will be found superior to anything
hitherto brought into this market.
Note the Address —3 Bourke-street East , next door
to the Post Office.


PHWMMMI-C
ETC.
MlfMlf:
BARNETT JOHNSON,
portrait mtir UTatt&scajj* Hjrtdojjrajjjja:,
AND IMPORTER OF AND DEALER IN
PHOTOGRAPHIC APPARATUS AND MATERIALS,
9 COLLINS-ST. WEST, MELBOURNE.
PORTRAITS ON GLASS, PAPER, &c.
PRIVATE RESIDENCES, &c., PHOTOGRAPHED.
Photographs of Colonial Scenery, &c., always on hand.
DYING AND SCOURING
ESTABLISHMENT,
97 LONSDALE-STREET EAST,
NEAR STEPHEN-STREET.
NOTICE.
MR. LEMME, having enlarged his Establishment, begs
to take this opportunity of returning thanks to the Pub-
lic for the kind and numerous favors he has received
for the last seven years ; and begs to intimate that he
has reduced the scale of his prices, and is able to execute
all orders in the best way and on the shortest notice.


im: elbourne
COPPER, BRASS, AND LEAD WORKS,
?
US FLIISTDERS STREET 'WEST.
PUMPS, ALL SORTS OF PIPING, BATHS, AND
COPPER BOILERS
Made, Fitted up, and Repaired by tbe most experienced
Workmen.
Every Description of Work in the above branches
executed with the utmost despatch, and at a Lower
Charge than any other House in the Colony.
COUNTRY
PROMPTLY ATTENDED TO.


GARDEN TOOLS
AND
AGRICULTURAL IMPLEMENTS.
JAMES M‘EWAN & CO.,
WHOLESALE & RETAIL
IRONMONGERS,
79 ELIZABETH STREET, MELBOURNE,
HAVE CONSTANTLY ON SALE
ALL DESCRIPTIONS OF GARDEN TOOLS,
OP BEST QUALITY AND NEWEST DESCRIPTION,
AT MQBMMATM 3Pm2(D2l§ 9
AMERICAN GARDEN TOOLS IN GREAT VARIETY.
CAST STEEL SPADES, RAKES & HOES.
Parkes' Patent Improved Steel Digging Forks.
Rodger’s Pruning Knives, Pruning Gloves.
Budding Knives, Pruning , Garden , and Hedge Shears.
GARDEN ROLLERS & WHEELBARROWS.
DRAINING TOOLS, &C., &C..


PIANOFORTES CAREFULLY TUNED, RESILKED & REPAIRED.
PIANOFORTES, HARMONIUMS, & OTHER MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS LENT ON HIRE.
MUSIC TASTEFULLY BOUND.
.
m
PARTIES PROVIDED WITH MUSIC.
MCCULLOCH do STEWART,
pianoforte gfek Sellers # pnblisjrers
69 COLLINS STREET WEST, MELBOURNE,
Have always on Sale the following Goods (to
which they solicit attention), selected with great
care from the best manufacturers :
Pianofortes, in rosewood and walnut, by
Broadwood, Collard, Erard, Allison and Allison,
&c., &c.; Harmoniums, of 1,3, 6,8, and 10
stops, by Allen ; Paris Organ, Acoordians, Eng-
lish and German Concertinas, Flutes, Flutinas,
and all other Musical instruments at the most
reasonable prices.
M‘C. and S. receive regularly by every mail
parcels of newest Dance Music, Songs, and Duets;
also a great variety of popular Dance and Vocal
Music, easily arranged for beginners. Church
Music Books in full score for Piano and Organ.
Publishers of the following popular Songs“ Willie we have
missed you,” “ Advance Australia,” “Jessie’s Dream,” “My Ain
Dear Nell, ” “Nelly Brown,” “Castles in the Air,” “Ever of
Thee,” “Molly Asthore,” and “Opera Schottische.”
OLD PIANOS TAKEN IN EXCHANGE, AND THEIR FUll VALUE GIVEN FOB THEM,
PIANOFORTES CAREFULLY PACKED & REMOVED.


S^IDIDILIEDRS,
3 & 5 LONSDALE-ST. WEST,
Return their thanks for the extensive patronage which
they have received for so many years, and take this
opportunity of respectfully calling the attention of Set-
tlers and Farmers to their stock of Saddlery and
Harness, the largest and most suitable ever imported
into the colony, or introduced to the notice of the public,
and now consists of the following articles in great
variety:—
Silver Mounted Carriage Harness
„ Phaeton Harness
„ Tandem Harness
Dog Cart Harness
n Buggy Harness
„ Coach Harness
„ Dray Harness
„ Plough Harness
Ladies’ Superior Side Saddles
Gentlemen’s Colonial made Saddles
Best English made Saddles
Best Colonial made Stock Saddles
Ladies’ Flat and Round Bridles, in great
variety
Gentlemen’s do, do
Silver Mounted Riding Whips
„ Hunting do
„ Driving do
Heavy Horse Rugs and Clothing
Kersey and Felt Saddle Cloths
Brushware
And every article connected with the Saddlery trade.


iP
t-H
*
&
$ Popß9£
BOIjW
These Pills have been extensively used throughout the
Australian Colonies for many years, and have given such
universal satisfaction that scarcely any family will be
without them. They are the result of many years
patient study and research, and are composed of the
purest and mort harmless ingredients; they are strongly
recommended to new arrivals as a preventative to
Diseases incidental to this climate; and to families resi-
dent in the Bush where medical aid is not always at
hand, they will be found invaluable. They possess pro-
perties of an aromatic nature, operating mildly and gently
on the system without giving the least pain. They
strengthen the Constitution, Purify the Blood, and pro-
mote the Circulation of fluids, giving tone to the digestive
organs, and restoring health to those who have been
afflicted for years with the following diseases :
Bilious Complaints, Disorders of the Liver, Stomach, and Bowels, Ha-
oiiual Costiveness, Indigestion, Pains and Giddiness of the Head Dimness
of Sight, Attacks of lever, Cold, Influenza, Rheumatic Affections, Gout
Worms, Piles, Gravel, and Dropsical Complaints. M
Prepared and Sold in Boxes, Two’ Shillings and Six-
pence each, by JAMES W. BLAIR, Chemist and
Druggist, 237 Elizabeth-street, Melbourne, opposite the
City Arms Hotel. Sent post free to all parts of the
Colony.


Ipitot Institute of oi^txrrm,
DEPOSIT, ESTATE, & ABEHCY BANK.
CAPITAL, £50,00 O.
WXTH EOWEE TO INCEEASE TO OEE MILEIOS STEELIN
deposits
are received daily, and interest of 8 per cent, per annum
are receiveu uai j, upwards, commenc-
-5
yearly balance next ensuing viz., i nteres t • with
31 Money so drawn out receives no interest witn
'V: mon ®? . w pxceed £lOO, and has been in
per annum will be allowed.
loans
marie on Freehold Properties and other Securities, to be
M Off at the ontion of the borrower at any tune, and
on thich the law P costs and survey fees are moderate.
Prospectuses and all information given on application,
personally or by letter. '
Bank hours, 10 to 3 ; Saturday, 10 to 12 o clock.
JOHN PORTER,
MANAGING DIRECTOR.
35 Queen-st., Melbourne,
July 1860.


ALEX. MISiT,
MILLWRIGHT, ENGINEER,
AND
WINNOWING MACHINE MAKER,
CORNER OF
ELIZABETH AND QUEENSBURY STREETS,
tlcrrilj Jjblbmmtt.
Sawing, Planing, and Morticing Machines of every
description. Improved Churns.
Designs executed and Working Plans drawn for Fire-
proof and other Buildings where power is applied.
11
tft’iTCHENgfr
yj AJNO 8 *)
*I CHARDS'®^
Mkhb
MANUFACTURERS
AND
ORNAMENTAL
84 Russell Street, Melbourne.


McGREGOR & McNAUGHTON,
(LATE KOLLESTON,)
€®A«H BEILBEEg
A-IKTID IMPORTERS.
Carriages of all descriptions made to order and guaran-
teed. Repairs executed in the best style.
©ARRGAGIS §GLO> QW CGMISSrOM,
New Arrivals every two months, built of the best
material, and on the most
UVCOIDIEIR.ISr PRINCIPLES.
Every Description of
Americas gjjumj&xs.
English and American Harness and Whips of all
descriptions, always on hand.
Manufactory, Swanston Street North,
MELBOURNE.


SURGICAL LACED ELASTIC BANDAGE
MAKERS.
ESTABLISHED 1855, AT 138 COLLINS
STREET EAST.
urn, & xm* c&osb
Are the only makers in the colony of Laced Elastic
Stockings for Bad Legs, Knee Caps for Swelled
Knees, Ankle Socks for Sprained or Dislocated Ankles,
Chest Expanders, Spine Supporters, Pregnant and
Abdominal Supports, Gentlemen’s Riding Belts, Um-
bilical Bandage, Prolapsus Uteri Bandages, &c., &c.
Trusses made to order, a fit guaranteed.
Children fitted with a Truss from the age of one month.
Artificial Arms, Legs, &c. Air Beds and Pillows.
THE GREAT
EYE CURE.
Inflammation or Op-
thalmia
Webs
Bloodshot
Gutta Serena
Lachrymal Fistula, &c.
Seldom fails in CURING BLINDNESS
ITSELF , or any other disorder of the Eyes
whatever.
Mrs. De Hugard, Melbourne.
Sandy Blight
Pearls
Rheums
Itching
Recent Cataract


J. GALYIN,
HAT & CAP MANUFACTURER
AND IMPORTER,
CORNER OF COLLINS AND QUEEN STREETS,
Imports regular Shipments of
In the Latest Styles, from the London and Paris
Markets.
PRICES MODERATE,
And a Choice from one of the
Largest Stocks in Melbourne,


‘GEN'S*-
16 ELIZABETH
AC& @) e
°-%CK,
STREET SOUTH,
2a 3B © W
1 A $0 N § fCltt*,
GENERAL AND COMMERCIAL
CGpprplah, $ Ififlmgnxjijnc
PRINTERS,
Beg to inform their numerous friends and customers that from the in-
creased facilities afforded by the introduction into their establishment of
superior and powerful Printing Machinery, combined with a large stock
of entirely new type and an efficient staff of workmen, they are enabled
to execute orders with punctuality at a very moderate scale of charges.
Orders from the country, accompanied with a cash remmittance, will
be promptly attended to.
Cards, Circulars,
Bill Heads, Gummed Labels,
Posting and Ship Bills, in any Color,
Show Cards, Programmes,
Law Forms, &c.
.St
Newspapers,
Pamphlets, Sermons,
Auctioneers’ Catalogues (at a few
hours’ notice), Carters’ Books,
Customs’ Forms, &c.


BY ROYAL
LETTERS PATENT,
iiilN
s? r
A
\V
fO
ME. CHAELES KNIGHT’S
ELECTRO - CHEBV9SCAL BATHS,
83 'RUSSELL STREET, MELBOURNE,
For the extraction of Mercury, Lead, and other
Metallic or inert inassimilable substances, which, by their
presence in the human organism, impair the vital func-
tions, and produce that extended range of chronic diseases
which have hitherto baffled every known resource of the
healing art; such as Secondary Symptoms, Simple and
Mercurial Rheumatisms, Articular and Scattered Con-
cretions, Liver Complaints, Obesity, Menstrual Irregu-
larities, Hysteria, Nervous Irritability, General Debility,
Jaundice, Paralysis, Sciatica, Neuralgia, Lumbago, ancl
every disease resulting from the detention of morbific
matter in the system, 4


TO CHARLES KNIGHT, MEDICAL GALVANIST.
The Dead Brought to Life by Galvanism.
Melbourne, May 19th, 1859.
Dear Sir, —I cannot express in terms sufficiently
strong the grateful thanks I owe to you for being, after
God, the means of saving my wife’s life on Monday last.
So terrible were the effects of the poisonous liniment
she had swallowed by mistake, that when you arrived
with your galvanic apparatus, Death had, to all appear-
ance, claimed'her for his own. Pulsation had ceased, the
pupils were contracted, and her medical attendants —-
Drs..Eades and Campbell—had given up all hopes of
recovery, having left her for dead.
What must have been my feelings when, after eight
hours of continued exertions on your part, my dear wife
was restored to me —not only saved from the fearful
effects of the poisonous draught, but actually cured of
her original attack of rheumatism! —I beg to remain, Sir,
yours ever gratefully, W. H. BROWN.
Melbourne, May 21st, 1859.
We, the undersigned, having been present on the 16th
inst., after the accidental poisoning of Mrs. Brown, who
had taken, by mistake, a liniment composed of 2 drrns.
of Chloroform, oz. of Laudanum, and 4 drms. of Soap
Liniment, have great pleasure in expressing our thorough
confidence in Mr. Chas. Knight’s skill as a medical Gal-
vanist, he having saved that lady from dying by his
persevering efforts. For three hours she had been pro-
nounced by her medical attendants past all hopes—for
the above period the pupils were closely contracted, and
respiration was preserved solely by Galvanism. It was
fully twelve hours before she could be aroused from her
stupor, and even then she was not perfectly conscious.
Richard Eades, M.D.. J.P,
W. H. Campbell, Surgeon, &c.
S. E. Freeman, Superintendent of Police.
St. John Branigan, Sub-Inspector of Police.
Vapor Baths. —The following Vapor Baths can be had at
ten minutes’ notice : Hot Air, Steam, Chlorine, Sulphur,
Murcury, Aromatic, &c,
• SHOWER AND HOT BATHS.


iSfjolfsale & falail
—
jltt&TO m 2 florals,
71 COLLINS STREET WEST,
MELBOURNE,
Would invite inspection of the largest and best-selected
stock of Seeds in the colonies, comprising
JUfcjjm anfr Jflofotr (Sarbm Stt&s,
AND
AGRICULTURAL SEEDS,
Such as Clovers, Lucerne, Ryegrass, Mixed Grasses, San-
foin, Tares, Mangold, &c., all of first-class quality.
Having a very extensive stock of all the valuable varieties
of
@IEIfAMS 2f IA 2L MM®,
Shrubs, Florist Plants & Bulbs, Fruit Trees & Vines,
They are prepared to furnish or lay out Greenhouses, Or-
chards, Flower Gardens and Shrubberies to any extent
at reasonable rates.
Australian Seeds carefully packed for
Foreign Transmission.
Foreign orders for Plants and Trees selected and
packed with the greatest possible care, in Wardian cases
or close boxes, according to the nature of the goods, and
shipped to any part of the world.
Country orders punctually attended to, and carefully
packed to withstand long or rough journeys.
Plans may be had on application, and advice given
gratis.
Experienced and Trustworthy Gardeners recommended.
MASON & FIRTH, PRINTERS, 16 ELIZABETH STREET SOUTH.
