

AN EPITOME FOR THE MILLION.
Fifty Facts
ABOUT
AUSTRALASIA
By JAMES MACGREGOR
{Formerly of the Union Batik of Australia ( Limited ).)
“ It is difficult to avoid the language of exaggeration in speaking of such
a country as Australasia. We rejoice in its strength and prosperity, and we
have a right to expect results such as the world has not often seen, where
the energies and the experience of an ancient civilisation are applied to a
boundless territory and an unexhausted soil.”—The Times.
WITH AN AUTHENTIC MAP.
LONDON:
LETTS, SON, & CO., LIMITED,
LONDON BRIDGE, E.C.
AUSTRALIA : GEORGE ROBERTSON,
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, ADELAIDE, and BRISBANE.
[The Right of Translation reserved.]
PRICE SIXPENCE.


STEAMSHIPS.
TONS.
NOM. H.P.
CAPTAINS.
Austral
5250 ....
1100
Chimborazo
3847 ....
550
Cuzco
.... 3849 ....
550
Garonne
550
John Elder
4152 ....
550
Liguria
4666 ....
750
Lusitania
3825 ....
550
Orient
5386 ....
1000
Potosi
4219 ....
600
Sorata
4014 ....
600
G. F. Dixon.
AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND.
OEIEIT LINE.
DIRECT SERVICE BETWEEN LONDON & AUSTRALIA,
Connecting with NEW ZEALAND hy the Mail Steamers of the UNION
STEAMSHIP CO. OF NEW ZEALAND, LIMITED.
The magnificent full-powered Steamships belonging to the Orient
Steam Navigation Company, Limited, and the Pacific Steam Navigation
Company, leave London every fortnight for Melbourne and Sydney, and
take Passengers for Adelaide and all ports in Australia, Tasmania, and
New Zealand, and also for Naples or Cape Town, according to route.
These Vessels are specially constructed for long ocean voyages, and are fitted with
every convenience for the comfort of Passengers.
PARES.— Class, 50 guineas and upwards; Second Class, 35 guineas and
upwards; Third Class, closed cabins, with Two Berths, 22 guineas each; Third Class
closed cabins, with Four Berths, 20 guineas each; Steerage, open berths for Men only 16
guineas each.
Managers — P. GREEN & Co., 13, Fenchuroh Avenue, and ANDERSON. ANDTVR ROW
& Co., 5, Fenchurch Avenue, London, E. C. For Freight or Passage apply to’the latter firm.’
Colonial Agents:—
ADELAIDE, Joseph Stilling & Co.; MELBOURNE, Gibbs, Beiqht &Co ■
SYDNEY, G. Skelton Yoill. ’ ’ '


AN EPITOME FOR THE MILLION.
Fifty Fagts
ABOUT
AUSTRALASIA
By JAMES MACGREGOR
(Formerly of the Union Bank of Australia ( Limited ).)
‘'“■lt is difficult to avoid the language of exaggeration in speaking of such
Ta courttry as Australasia. We rejoice in its strength and prosperity, and we
have -a right to expect results such as the world has not often seen, where
; the energies and the experience of an ancient civilisation are applied to a
TxWndless territory and an unexhausted soil.”' —The Times.
WITH AN AUTHENTIC MAP.
LONDON:
LETTS, SON, & CO., LIMITED,
LONDON BRIDGE, E.C.
AUSTRALIA : GEORGE ROBERTSON,
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, ADELAIDE, AND BRISBANE.
1883.
[The Bight of Translation reserved.]


'The Secretary of the Royal Colonial Institute, London, has
written a very excellent letter to the Education Department,
pointing out the desirability of cultivating in the Board schools
throughout the United Kingdom such knowledge of the colonies as
may be of practical service to British youth in after-life. With a
view to give an impetus to this branch of learning, the Council of
the Institute propose to offer prizes to schools for essays on
colonial subjects. Mr. Mundella has responded to this sensible
movement in the proper spirit. There is, unfortunately, much need,
for an extension of knowledge respecting the geography, the history
and the resources of the British colonies throughout all classes of
the community. The greater portion of British boys are better
acquainted with the topography of ancient Sparta than of New
Zealand. Even Under-Secretaries of State have the loosest notions
about colonial geography. To this day the most absurd blunders
continue to be made by official persons in these matters. Men who
would be ashamed not to know what is the capital of Eastern
Boumelia send letters addressed to “ Melbourne, South Australia.”
Another Minister once spoke of Victoria as an island.
St. James's Gazette, March 7th, 1883.


CONTENTS.
I.—Australasia and Population page X
ll.—Exchange and Trade 2
111. —Banks and Banking 3
IT. —Public Revenue 6
V. —Gold and the Mints 7
VI. —Savings Banks 8
VII, —Insurance and Assurance 9
Till. —Alienation of Crown Lands 11
IX.—Wool, Cattle, Sheep, &c 14
X. —Agriculture 20
XI. —Minerals and Mining 24
XII. —Freehold Estates 25
Xlll—Capital and Business 27
XlV.—Trade with the Pacific 35
XV. —Shipping and Tonnage 36
XVI. —Manufactures 37
XVll—Railways 39
XVIII. —Electric Telegraphs 41
XIX. —Tramways 42
XX. —Postal and Telephonic 42
XXI. —Universities; Schools 43
XXII. —Education and Music 44
XXIII. —Literature 46
XXIV. —Libraries and Art 47
XXV. —Newspapers 49
XXVI. —Responsible Government 50
XXVII. —Public Works 52
XXVIII. —Municipalities 52
XXlX.—Climate , 5 7


XXX. —Rain and the Rainbow page 58
XXXI. —Health and Longevity 60
XXXII. —Sports: Public Parks 61
XXXIII. —Horses and Racing 62
XXXIY. —Societies and Shows 63
XXXY.—Pianos and Sewing-Maolhines 64
XXXVl.—Religion 64,
XXXYIL—PoIice, &o 66
XXXYlll.—Absence of Poor-Rates 67
XXXlX.—Priendly Societies 68
XL.—Law 68
XLL—Conveyancing by Torresns’ Act 69
XLII. —Labour and Love 70
XLIII. —Emigration 74
XLIY.—Hew Guinea 78
XLY. —Scientific 86
XLYl.—Native Races 88
XLVII. —Appearances 89
XLYIII. —The United States and! Australasia 91
XLIX. —Australasia Profitable? to England 96
L,—Loyalty to the Thrones 97
Geographical Features 98
Note on New Guinea 102
Correspondence wiifih the Agents-General in
London for Australasia -104


120 130 140 ISO 160 170
0 If . , ■■■■■■• : . ; ■ ■■ - ■ — ' "..- r 0
) I TO MW! GULP v\\\X .
( I 0 c Jfysory
Vr'"4* -S4 1 ■ AibngUyJ*
Vi TT f • .A sXK —Vi- S new iRfci»ND . Ii |i IffcT*- IS. k I. A\ | A
Xl-%* t9 s p a p ( pa ,^ y ft AU STMAiASlA.
JjSalaypr /- BA HD* SB A &Arrmi[- \ OH - — r-jri (\
\js*,*x #p . °*° K 6\V GUINEA Va
cl orbs sc A -ftfi Frederick A ®Xs V\
'■%■•<? Ca S. Ar?C-lk. riv I
FLORES V—\ 0y V/S
r.'BiOR AAAFUAA SEA • >' \ v -. v<j 0/t, u South Latitude ,_
10 Torre/ RfRATfs ' * , ' 10
•:^ r /f Z {%.# -a lOif,SEARCH,* * /V fl
fef r~V -~ v V-X<1*. / * ■£
Paltihon ™ K \U* <"
JPorl Bma\ VS O nr HERN S p.v ,
’•fo-v X TOBITORY )‘0 GV&F OF J U*V * rO • 0° *
i 2j/ V S. \. / / I /-'V. . -p CP
JT X ( CARPENTARIA I ' V\ <o On ±
* / r r '° I ■' Cottkiovfy 0 T A W
•:.rV 1 \ / % V
\ / V,' - ; f, ® islands^.
r"H . S \J ») ■ \' J ir 1 - ■?> .* -•—v - *•
‘•.V ( oJfo***B**> 1 )* % R ~mLLer&. ) \ 0
') V r / CardtreU <>V~ ,, T -s> ° ‘^—r
« ■ V 1 V ✓ 9 ."o
20 —i—^. 1 fe - „ n .... 20
\ \ j J X-. . %. °*
7 r .2Pi,9....°f ...?.?;P,V,j.j, 0 . 9. r.T! \ >j>. S'.. T.
\ A U S T rS a L 1 A; *\ X *
l i | \ ; \ V
K^^reydnelSfarhour \ Roma | Maryborough
\ AUSTRALIA | so H \ ,'' RIS V^
\ | \ s ) \Point Danger
\ i A U S T R Al I A > - ■- •««“ »
30 f i — Q -30
\ M ) I NEjT S0TTH J i C /
I / 1 rfy f / : -?U)Rl HOWE’S ISLAMD . AN
0 prcelantu' ... ' \ IK \\ W A L, E S ll/ < JO/
J ■ J 4 . Aw
w % /M i '<y
1 a 4. 5 * )) i j !
iwy./
, I N0RTR If: / f
j \ Vf 'V-
South Latitude . b ft ss c -^2i n( i er y X 4-0
/\ P Q Jp | x 'a 't . *V [
'-, \ ) " C y cWelron
\ TASMANIA A . y p [}
111 liSIMOTAi fUliiS. »r*"AiL-»
TO \ / Cooh OyttyltehxfFir
FACTS aboubAUSTRALAS!A hyj MACGREGOR.
SO If THERM OCEAN
Stemjrts7$'S\ %.
1 '^aa^'
I i 1 __ __
120 130 140 150 160 170
Longitude East of Greenwich
Letts SoaSf C? limited. loadoaiE.C.


Fifty Facts about Australasia,
TO BE PONDERED OVER.
“An accurate acquaintance with the history, resources, and
geographical position of the Colonies and dependencies of the
Empire formed by no means a strong point in the education of
the average Englishman; and, should his words reach those who
were responsible for the training of the rising generation, he
trusted they would devise some means for remedying a state of
ignorance which was really a reproach to the greatest colonising
nation in the world.”— Duke of Manchester.
“The growing importance of the great self-governing Colonies
of England is recognised by every Englishman, without distinction
of party or class.” — Earl of Derby.
“ It is difficult to avoid the language of exaggeration in speaking
of such a country as Australasia. We rejoice in its strength and
prosperity, and we have a right to expect results such as the world
has not often seen, where the energies and the experience of an
ancient civilisation are applied to a boundless territory and an
unexhausted soil.”— The Times.
“In the whole world there is no such climate and soil for
fruits.”— Sir Charles Dilke.
I.—AUSTRALASIA AND POPULATION.
AUSTRALASIA is composed of the group of self-
governing British colonies named respectively New
South Wales, Victoria, South Australia, Queensland,
Western Australia, Tasmania, and New Zealand, besides a
vast number of islands between the Pacific and the Indian
Oceans. The area of these rich possessions is nearly three
million one hundred thousand square miles (3,100,000), or
a territory as large as the United States omitting Alaska,
more than twice the size of Hindoostan, and five-and-twenty
Australian Mutual Provident Society.


times that of the United Kingdom. The population of
Australasia numbers now about three millions (3,000,000),
and is rapidly increasing. When Queen Victoria ascended
the throne the white population of this part of her dominions
did not exceed seventy-five thousand (75,000). The real
progress and commencing development of Australasia has
been accomplished within the last fifty years. As peoples
advance in prosperity and social conditions, the natural
rate, unless checked, at which population increases is
accelerated. This, after all, is the best sign of the well-
being of a new country. “Itis as natural,” says Burke,
“for people to flock into a busy and wealthy country,
that by any accident may be thin of people, as it is for the
dense air to rush into those parts which are rarified.”
Population in Australasia has increased fifty per cent, during
the last ten years. In the present ever-growing and vigorous
development of the country, new centres of activity are
being constantly established. They afford profitable occu-
pation for zealous workers who loyally settle down to the
steady acquisition of property. “Work and win” is the
motto of the busy throng. On the memorable occasion
of planting the British flag on the shores of Australia in
1788, Governor Phillip uttered these prophetic words :
“ How grand is the prospect which lies before the youthful
nation ! Enough of honour would it be to occupy the first
position both in regard to time and influence in a country
so vast, so beautiful, so fertile, so blessed in climate, so rich
in all those bounties which Nature can confer; enough of
merit for any nation would it be to throw open so extensive
and highly favoured a country for the occupation of mankind.
This State, of which to-day we lay the foundation, will, ere
many years have passed away, become the centre of the
Southern Hemisphere.”
lI.—EXCHANGE AND TRADE.
The interchange of commodities or external trade of
Australasia is chiefly with Great Britain. It is now
reckoned to amount to one hundred millions sterling yearly,
Australian Mutual Provident Society.


and growing greatly. Fifty years ago the entire exchange
or trade of the country with other nations was not more
than one million a year. But, since then, mighty hearts and
busy hands have been at work within her borders, have
caused no end of stir, and made the sometime wilderness, —■
peopled then by savages,—to blossom as the rose. British
population has been attracted, agriculture has been made to
flourish, wool has been produced, mining has been developed,
cattle have been bred, manufactures have been nursed, and
direct trade with foreign countries has increased, and is
increasing, as the records of transactions with the colonial
banking institutions in London go to show. The internal
or home trade of the country is marvellously prosperous.
The people live well, they dress well, they build well, they
work well, do a great business, and enjoy life amid a
brilliancy of sunshine and prodigality of jollity not ex-
perienced in any other country. Chambers of commerce,
composed of the leading business men, are now established
in the several cities for the advancement and regulation of
trade. Already the commercial growth of Australasia
surpasses that of most countries. Since 1870, only the
United States have shown a higher increase. The volume
of Australasian commerce is now greater than that of the
United Kingdom at the accession of Queen Victoria.
111.—BANKS AND BANKING,
The banking assets of Australasia for 1882 tell a glowing
story of the unremitting industry and prosperity of her
three millions of people. These assets then amounted to
nearly eighty millions sterling. Every year a measurable
increase is recorded consequent on the annually-extending
range of country brought within the influence of an active
commerce. New men improve business in old fields, and
energetically develope new ones. The banks support them,
and vigorously encourage extension. The united capitals
of the joint stock banks of issue, independently of their
reserved funds, amount to five-and-twenty millions sterling.
This sum is just double that of ten years ago. It shows
For Life Assurance on the Mutual Principle,


pretty forcibly the rate of the expansion of the markets for
trade. Accumulating capital urges men to undertake and
develope still greater and more important enterprises in a
new country, involving employment of labour. Share-
holders in these banks earn dividends of from six to five-
and-twenty per cent, per annum on the original share price.
Branches of their business, under an enterprising body of
managers, housed in handsome, commodious buildings of
brick and stone, than which none are finer anywhere, are
established throughout the length and breadth of what are
called the settled or peopled districts. These branches
transact the financial, concerns of their immediate centres
with a measur.e of completeness which leaves nothing to be
• desired. No country can be better accommodated in this
.respect. The banks founded in the colonies with colonial
capital have their head-offices in Australasia, and offices and
branches of their business in London; and the banks
established in the colonies, chiefly with English capital,
have their head banks in London, and offices and branches
of their business in Australasia. The combined English
and colonial directorate is distinguished for their great
talents and success commercially; and the way in which
the banking affairs committed to their charge by share-
holders have been usually governed speaks Volumes for the
sagacity and prudence of the management. The accumula-
tions of wealth in Australasia have been rapid beyond
previous experience. If actual gold itself from the
numerous mines sometimes fails to reward the searcher
sufficiently, yet the more substantial and golden profits of
general business, not unduly lessened by too severe competi-
tion, are never wanting in abundance to encourage the lusty
labourer in every branch of local industry.
A splendid income is now drawn by the colonists them-
selves and British and foreign investors from the growing
riches of Australasia, which time will make the marvel
of the world. Scotch banking is the system in vogue.
One-pound notes, affording the greatest public convenience,
are circulated freely by the banks on a gold basis. Ade-
quate security for the public, as against the banks, is
Australian Mutual Provident Society.


enforced under rigorous Government regulations. So little
fear is felt about the security of the XI note that it
is commonly taken and used, as in Scotland, in preference
to the sovereign; and the circumstance is not seldom
experienced of comfortable peasants coming up to the
cities and getting gold in exchange for their drafts on the
city banker, taking it away out of the house, and soon
afterwards returning to the bank with the golden load, and
demanding bank-notes for the cumbrous sovereigns. The
sovereign is too heavy a coin to carry in any number
throughout so vast a territory. The system of payment by
cheque is universally observed throughout Australasia, and
the singular economy resulting in banking is remarkable.
Every person with the faintest pretensions to respectability
keeps a banker. A bankers’ Clearing House, like that of
London, is established in Melbourne, to the great con-
venience of the money dealers.
As the savings of the people increase, new banks are
started to develope new interests, or old-established banks
sometimes add to their original capitals by letting new
partners participate in the business. No national banks
of issue, under Government control, exist ; no legal
monopoly in banking obtains ; free competition and a push
for business is the order of the day. The Australasian
banking competition gives business borrowers every advan-
tage of the cheapest money and the widest latitude in
the cultivation of trade over the vast landed territory
and the majestic area of Oceania, studded with innu-
merable islands, all doing trade. The banks, therefore,
supplemented by mortgage, investment, and insurance
companies, whose head-offices are for the most part in
London, and whose united capitals are four times that of
these banks of issue alone, contribute to the limit of their
means the utmost facilities to the growing business. Yet
Australasia wants additional capital, either British or
foreign, and wants more of brave and enterprising men
with brains, to know how to use it well, and to steadily go
on with the work of developing her boundless resources, and
thus accelerate the speed which has signalised her solid
Head Office : 87, Pitt Street, Sydney.


march in a career that bids fair to be the beneficent herald
o£ a gigantic future.
IV.—PUBLIC REVENUE.
The public revenue of Australasia for 1881 amounted to
upwards of twenty millions sterling. A sum. larger than
this was spent for the maintenance of government, and in
■the construction of reproductive public works. The revenue
has grown in the last twenty years twice as fast as the
commerce or population; it has more than doubled itself
since 1870 ; it has trebled itself since 1860 ; yet taxa-
tion is far lighter on the people per head than in most of
the great and densely-populated countries of the old world,
with all their pride, pomp, and circumstance, supporting
camps of soldiers and ships of war for defensive purposes,
but ready to launch the thunderbolt of ruin.
What more brilliant omens of success can be held out to
individuals anxious to improve their fortunes, and the cir-
cumstances of perhaps a rising family of fairly-educated sons
and daughters, than by removal to a new and electrically
progressive country like Australasia 1 Opportunities there
for making headway in the universal struggle for existence
are more numerous and more immediately beneficial than
in older and more thickly-peopled nations sustaining exces-
sive competition and high taxation. Taxation is not felt
where it touches only luxuries, but it is felt severely as a
reduction of means where it touches daily earnings and
weekly wages. A moderate computation shows that at the
end of this century the revenue of Australasia will probably
reach the immense sum of fifty millions yearly. The
accumulation of wealth goes on with the growth of revenue.
The fields of enterprise, tickled with increasing population,
are elastic; above all, for young and energetic persons who
have heads upon their shoulders. A magnificent prospect
is opened here to the thoughtful, courageous British merchant
and emigrant. Truth is more strange than fiction.
Australian Mutual Provident Society,


V.-GOLD AND THE MINTS.
The gold won in mining enterprise from the soil of
Australasia since 1852 is valued at nearly three hundred
millions sterling. Of this sum the colony of Victoria
alone contributed two hundred millions; or an amount
precisely equal to the payment exacted from France by
Germany for the war indemnity. All this gold is a solid
testimony to the well-directed, arduous, and successful
industry of the miners of Australasia.
Rich finds continue to reward undaunted explorers,
although the world at large does not hear as much about
them as formerly, when the industry was novel. Why
does the struggling world here close its eyes to the splendid
jewel continent set in the silver seas of the south 1 The
export of coined gold still proceeds.
Gold is still constantly mined for throughout the
country, and found in abundance, yielding steady
employment to numbers of miners. Royal mints, under
Imperial supervision, are established at Sydney and at
Melbourne. Sovereigns and half-sovereigns are coined, and
they are largely exported to England and to the East. For
a series of years the sum of coined gold issued from the
Australasian mints very nearly balanced with that received
for coinage. The loss attendant upon the operations of the
mints must have been trifling. This loss, however, is borne
by the colonists. The profitable business of coining the
silver and the bronze required by them is reserved by the
Imperial Government. It maintains a monopoly of this
coinage at the mint in London. But that mint withdraws
silver coin from Australasia after it has got worn or
defaced, and allows for it at its full nominal value.
Gold is in perpetual motion in Australasia. Yet gold
itself is only a symbol of wealth. It needs gold, machinery,
and skill in these days to secure the magical metal itself out
of the bowels of the earth. Even if the getting of gold—•
which first drew a motley crowd of population no the
Antipodes—were to fail, that would in no wise point to any
real declension in the stupendous, yet all the while tranquil,
Oldest Mutual Life Office in Australasia.


advancement of Australasia. A greater instrument of
success than gold itself is possessed by the country, in its other
vast natural riches waiting to be converted and utilised by
mankind. Gentlemen in England, with limited means, stand
halting between two opinions as to the propriety or not of
attacking Australasia in quest of fortune and of fame.
Let them take heart of grace, summon resolution to their
councils, copy the daring of the Roman Curtins, and with
open eyes and head erect let them leap into Australasia,
accomplish a career like those giants who have gone before,
and then, if it please any one afterwards, let him arise and
return successful to England, to the hearths of his friends,
to be able to say, “ Alone I did it.”
VI-SAVINGS BANKS.
Government Savings Banks for artisans and for any de-
positor up to a certain limited sum are established in every
centre of population. The collected funds are loaned out
at six per cent, per annum. It is satisfactory to watch the
large additions to the savings of the working classes in these
institutions during the past few years, and this notwith-
standing the enormous quantity of freehold land in small
blocks bought by artisans throughout Australasia during
the same period. The machinery set to work to subdivide
huge blocks of freehold lands into parcels fitted to the
means and pretensions of modest buyers, the persistent and
inexhaustible ingenuity of the sellers in preparing, by pen
and pencil, artistic advertisements to catch the eyes of pro-
bable purchasers, and the substantially-liberal terms for
payment mutually fixed, have' never been equalled in any
country. The genius of respectable advertising never
attained so great an ascendancy as in Australasia during
the last five years. The buying of these lands is a moral
and material good to the thrifty working purchasers.
They are raised thereby instantly into the ranks of the
propertied classes, and get clothed with the lights and
interests, and immunities, and opulence incident to the
ownership of freehold lands, and consequently become practi-
Australian Mutual Provident Society.


cally educated in the law of property, and in the instruments
which lawyers write to settle a freehold, a leasehold, or a
mortgage. The purchase of a parcel of building land on
terms by an economic artisan and his wife transforms it
into a beautiful savings bank. It becomes a check upon
the extravagance of the poor in means, who, though they
know it not, are often the most extravagant creatures in
existence proportioned to their means. In the course of
five years, through the improvements made by adjacent
owners in a progressive country and the increase of popu-
lation, the artisan’s parcel of land is found to have gained a
measurable profit in it. “ A penny saved is a penny gained ”
is a maxim at the bottom of all thrift, as much as punning
is at the foundation of all wit. In the cottage of every
Australasian or British artisan should be seen, read,
learned, and inwardly digested the philosophic maxims on
thrift of that immortal benefactor of his species, Benjamin
Franklin.
VII.—INSURANCE AND ASSURANCE.
The chief British Fire, Life, and Marine Insurance
companies have representative branches and agencies
throughout Australasia. The increasing accumulations of
perishable property yield them fine business. Insurance
companies in London have many Australasian transactions;
among others in premiums paid to them chiefly by the
Colonial banking institutions to cover the risk of the con-
tinuous transit of gold by land and sea throughout Aus-
tralasia, and the exportation of coin or bullion to Britain
and the East. The profits on Australasian insurance business
must be enormous ; because the losses by fire or other calami-
ties have been so few, and the prosperity of the country
withdraws from insurers any temptations for fraud. Local
proprietary and mutual companies splendidly managed, ably
criticised by the precise press, and paying handsome divi-
dends, are numerous and extending. The oldest mutual
local Life office, established only about thirty years ago, has
a total income annually of nearly one million sterling,
assuring eighteen millions, and has invested funds of four
48,000 Policies in Force, Assuring £18,000,000.


millions sterling. The marvellous success of this mammoth
institution, founded by a gentleman still living, whose
ability and genius would shine in any circle of men of the
world, is one of the wonders of Australasian business. The
new building recently erected in Australia, at the seat of
its head-quarters, is unmatched by that of any similar
institution in Europe or America for architectural appear-
ance, solidity of structure, and capacity for prospective
transactions.
The impulse to active labour in the climate of Austral-
asia is intense, and as the probability of long life is
small among adults, in a population in which there is no
impulse to active labour, the longevity of life, which is
characteristic of the people living in so stimulating and
magnificent a climate as that of Australasia, can be under-
stood. If the artisan lives better in any one country than
another, the resulting blessing is an increase in the average
length of his life and his labours. In labour there is profit.
These differences in the averages of life make clear the
marvellous success of the older Australasian Life Assurance
companies. Their tables of rates of premium were based
on the English average, and their accumulated funds earned
a far higher rate of profit in a new country panting for
money, “as the hart panteth after the water brooks,” than
could be secured in England where cash was as common as
dirt. Life is shorter in England than in Australasia, where
its duration is lon'ger and more comfortable for the people.
And, notwithstanding this undoubted fact, there are yet
to be met with in educated English society members of
it who will coolly make the remark, —“ Dear me, ah !
Australasia, yes, yes, dreadfully hot country. No comfort
there, I believe.” What profound ignorance !
They forget that Spiers & Pond conducted in the far
past at Melbourne, with consummate skill, the same kind
of business in which this popular firm is now engaged ; that
afterwards these artists desired a larger field in which they
might reap to the full the advantages that were due to their
peculiar education and experience. At this time no city in
the world was more wretchedly furnished with favourite
Australian Mutual Provident Socioty,


resorts for men and women to satisfy easily and economi-
cally their exacting appetites than London. Into this then
Slongh of Despond Spiers & Pond ventured on the crutches
of the capital and nous which they had honourably acquired
at the ultima thule of the Antipodes. They came, they
saw, they conquered. Amid jealousy and dislike they
began an undertaking which went keenly home to the
hearts and wishes and means of every right-thinking citizen
of respectability. These public servants, worthy to be
called national benefactors, went to work with a truly
Australasian will and energy. They revolutionised funda-
mentally the public eating, and the drinking, and the
amusements of Old England. And not alone for the profit
of themselves, or of the curled darlings of society, but for
every man and woman in the kingdom with character to
value a cuisine appetising in its quality, unrivalled in its
variety, its splendour, its luxury, and its immensity. Art
has made strides of progress in England during the last
twenty years, and in nothing more than this—-that the
magnificent establishments of Spiers & Pond are a public
insurance and assurance against any future descent of the
English people into the Avernus of the horrid and unutter-
able kitchens of the past.
VIII.—ALIENATION OF CROWN LANDS.
The public laws and Government regulations under which
lands the property of the Crown in Australasia pass into
the hands of private leaseholders or freeholders differ in the
various Australasian colonies. Each colony, acting inde-
pendently of the others in its internal administration for
the selling outright or leasing in large or small areas its
Crown land*, has made arrangements agreeably with its
special circumstances or its Parliamentary decision of the
fitness of things. Lands sold by the Governments to
individuals, or leased to them, are, of course, afterwards
usually assignable and otherwise capable of being dealt with
by the holders in some shape or form, legal or illegal. The
poor hampered British farmer, who has a notion that the
Total Annual Income, £850,000,
B


grain of his county and the odour of his parish cannot be
beaten in the world, invests his capital in a farm as a tenant
to some lord of a manor, and earns scarcely ten per cent,
profit on his investment, even in good seasons. He cannot
deposit his lease as security for money, for he has not the
right to transfer or dispose of it. Farming in England is
known to be proverbially a slow way of making money.
But thousands of transactions yearly in freehold farm land
business take place between the Governments and indi-
viduals, and transfers as between private persons and persons
in Australasia. Every man who likes, if he has the money,
and if he goes the right way about the business, can get any
day good lands and estates to settle on in Australasia,
proportioned to his means and his intentions. Free dealing
with lands, added to good government, is the basis of
national prosperity.
Australasia is splendidly governed under its repre-
sentative institutions. How can that country be iil
governed which has neither a desolate village, nor a ruined
town, nor an empty house in it, and the clamour of
demand for building and progress never ending 1 The
unrestricted division and alienation of landed estate has
powerfully aided the development of agriculture throughout
the territory. The man with small means who is desirous
of engaging in agricultural pursuits can choose in the
country, at a low price, a certain limited area of Government
land, virgin soil, and pay the purchase-money by easy
instalments ; but in the meantime, after the first payment,
he gets possession of the land that he has chosen. Or the
rich individual, and companies of capitalists, can go into
great leaseholds or freeholds and work them profitably.
But, rich or poor, if these people undertake the land, and
want to make it pay, they, or their managers, must work
with hands and brains. Wealth and position, and health
and understanding, have been, won by many in Australasia,
who once, as it were, followed their own plough, sowed
their own seed, fed their own stock, and so got “ the fore
horse by the head ” after a very short time. “ The sluggard
will not plough by reason of the cold, therefore he shall beg
Australian Mutual Provident Society.


in harvest and have nothing” But the true workman goes
to work patiently in every season. His reason, his intelli-
gence, his experience, his good nature or his bad, is
harnessed, as it were, to his estate. It has to be created
out of chaos oftentimes, and developed by personal toiling
industry and by the magical power of money; but it pays
splendidly. It must be made to pay whatever its size;
made to be talked about in the locality by residents, who
marvel at the unobtrusive ability of the squatter with his
sheep, and the agriculturist with his crops, or otherwise.
Pioneers have already accomplished wonders. In some
instances they have failed, and thrown up the sponge; in
other cases they have succeeded beyond their wildest expec-
tations when beginning. The fullest information about the
land legislation in force throughout Australasia may be pro-
cured by the capitalist who wants to invest in Australasian
property, or by the intending emigrant of humbler means,
at the offices of the respective Colonial Agents General in
London. The facilities afforded for getting lands in
Australasia, whether they be country lands or town ox-
suburban lauds, freehold or leasehold lands, illustrate the
vast advantages in securing property that the middle and
working classes in Australasia have over the same classes in
Great Britain and Ireland. Mr. Trevelyan, in the House of
Commons, is reported to have said this year “that the
condition of the poorest class of farmers in a certain part of
this kingdom was more deplorable than that of any class of
people living in any civilised country. There were,” he said,
“ 67,000 tenant farmers there of from one to five acres, and
160,000 from five to fifteen acres each; and in the latter
class, in many cases, there were not more than from two to
two and a half acres of arable land.” Contrast this picture
of disgusting poverty with the glittering condition of agri-
cultural affairs in Australasia, where already upwards of one
hundred and sixty thousand farmers are settled on freehold
farms of their own buying and creating each of an average
acreage of over 300 acres, and these yet only partially
cultivated. And, as we shall learn further on, abundance
of lands in Australasia are available to admit of thousands
Invested Funds, Four Millions Sterling.
b 2


of the same kind of population settling down in proper
localities and copying the successes of their predecessors.
IX.-WOOL, CATTLE, SHEEP, So.
The Spanish proverb, that “ where the sheep steps it
leaves gold,” was never more finely exemplified than in
Australasia. ISTo more romantic story in the annals of
commerce is recorded than that of Maoarthur and his
introduction of the sheep into that country. Gifted with the
prescience which distinguished Jacob of old, Macarthur saw
into the future when in Australia, and set his heart upon the
sheep. Previously to that he had had opportunity of inspect-
ing and understanding the animal in France and in Spain. He
set sail from the antipodes, he visited England, and he seized
upon the Golden Fleece. “ Seest thou a man diligent in his
business 1 He shall stand before kings ; he shall not stand
before mean men.” Macarthur was presented to George 111.
Then, with sheep in his possession, and his eye fixed steadily
on fortune, the master triumphantly bore his prizes back
across the rolling seas, and in a territory then filled with
savage races, fitted to frighten a less resolute benefactor of
his species, he set them down. While busy arranging in
Australia the foundation of that splendid fabric of merino
wool, which towers up highly to-day; accomplishing a work
that crowns his brow with immortality; and makes Great
Britain independent of jealous France and envious Spain for
supplies of this precious commodity; Macarthur contrived
to enrich his family prodigiously. Others courageously
have followed in his footsteps. Plad Macarthur never had
the resolution to depart from England on a career of
colonisation, probably he would have died a half-pay officer,
not worth five hundred pounds.
Wool is one of the most valuable raw materials in
the region of commerce. Australasian wool is the finest
in the world. The field for its consumption is boundless ;
and men with energy, with means, and with resolution
to achieve are wanted to go out and work in that and
kindred fields of enterprise which pay handsomely. China
Australian Mutual Provident Society.


does not use wool. Were tlie peculiar people of that
nation to abandon prejudice, and to take in some
measure to wool as an article for clothing, the flocks of
Australasia would increase at a pace that would astonish
even China. There is a hope for the future of a
gigantic Eastern commerce. For a period of fifty years
Australasian sheep-masters have spared neither care nor
money in getting and perpetuating and improving the
best European breeds of sheep. Australasia is now rich
enough in the finest qualities of sheep within her own
borders. The unremitting industry and knowledge exer-
cised upon the sheep and its treatment is meeting with
merited reward. Sheep-farming on a magnificent scale has
risen to be the monster industry of Australasia ; the sub-
stance of its followers is great; they are rich in cattle, in
silver, and in gold. Fancy one farmer owning a million of
sheep ! Consider the multiplicity of his duties and respon-
sibilities ; and the head he must have to sustain all rightly.
But the master of one of the finest small sheep estates in
Australasia never let his flocks exceed in number twenty-five
thousand, and lie created a splendid home out of their profits.
He handled every sheep in his flocks himself at least once
a year. The highest price realised in Australasia within the
last two years for a colonial-bred ram has been over twelve
hundred pounds sterling. From one hundred to six
hundred pounds each sheep for breeding purposes are often
paid at the yearly sales in Australasia, The animals that
fetch these prices are artificially prepared, and pampered,
and forced by high feeding into the extra growth of carcass
and wool.
The wool-shearing season is the season of the greatest
business activity iu Australasia. It is the great harvest
when the patient expectations of profit for the shepherd
kings are beginning to be realised. The harvest begins
about July, according to the climatic conditions of the
various localities north, south, east, and west in the
continent. Shearing continues with unabated ardour to
employ an army of men,
“ The armourers accomplishing the knights,”
Divisible Surplus last Five Years, £585,000.


equipped with the innocent shears of peace and plenty,
down to the month of November. The vast interior during
these days of plenty is reeking with the dust of roads, echoing
with the noise of the whips of the waggon-drivers, the lowing
of the cattle, the snort of the locomotive, and the screech of
the river-steamers,-—mostly overloaded, —transporting with
giant efforts the golden bales to the ports for shipment
to England, to Erance, to America, and for the world.
After the wool has thus made its way down to an Austral-
asian port of shipment, a reasonable inquiry arises as to its
then treatment. Some comparatively small quantity of the
whole is sold by public auction in the colonies, and bought
there by local manufacturers to work it up into a variety of
colonial cloths, which speak well for the enterprise of the
makers. Another and a larger part of the total clip is
received by brokers in the Australasian cities for sale there
on behalf of the growers to speculative shippers ; and,
guided by telegraphic advices daily from London, this second
part of the wool is sold by auction to the highest bidder,
be he English, American, French, or German, —for buyers
from these countries journey to Australasia for no other
purpose than to buy wool. An increasing quantity every
year is in this way sold on the spot for growers’ account.
But the third part, and by far the larger hulk of the
Australasian clip of wool, is immediately shipped to England
on growers’ account. As soon as possible after the arrival
of the ships hundreds of thousands of the bales of wool are
carried to the warehouses of the great English wool-brokers.
They sell it there at special sales held for the purpose of
disposing of it to those manufacturers who prefer to buy
this commodity in London, the head-quarters of the wool
trade. The value of the Australasian clip of last year was
twenty millions sterling.
The sheep of Australasia number nearly seventy-five
millions, and are rapidly increasing. The cattle are nearly
nine millions. The horses number about one million
and a half. These herds of animals wander depastured
on immense tracts of grassed, watered, fenced-in, and
partially-timbered country, called stations or runs. These
Australian Mutual Provident Society.


runs are leased from Government at an arbitrated rental
by lessees, who are called “squatters.” The area of these
stations or runs varies from say five thousand acres each,
up to even a million of acres. No less than five hundred
and fifty millions of acres arc thus in occupation by enter-
prising settlers. These cattle and sheep stations are being
established right across the continent, in the several islands
forming Australasia, and throughout it, opening up the
country and improving it; for great expenditure is made in
fencing, in machinery, and in works for the conservation of
water, to fit the country for the reception of the increasing
herds. The climate, for the most part, is so grateful that
the beasts do not need any protection from the weather,
nor any artificial food, and they are everywhere entirely free
of disease, and are perfectly healthy. But this happy state
is not the outcome of chance. It is the result of design.
At great cost, and with untiring watchfulness, the Austral-
asian squatter fought with disease, and came off victorious.
Cleanliness is next to Godliness. As Dutch matrons never
cease mopping out their homes with water, so the Austral-
asian squatter never tires of looking for signs of disease in
the herds, and, if such show themselves, he forthwith stamps
the disease out. Contrast this proof of work with the
sorry sight in travelling through some parts of Scotland of
how much the disease called “ scab ” makes havoc with the
wool there.
The value of these Australasian station properties varies
from, say three thousand pounds sterling, or even less, up
to seven hundred thousand pounds, or even more, owned
by an individual or a company. The multitude of trans-
actions in buying and selling in the various markets of wool,
and animals, and properties, throughout Australasia, give
employment and excellent profits to thousands of cattle and
stock agents, wool-brokers, land-agents, and other persons
interested. One firm of agents deals with quite a million of
sheep annually as between buyers and sellers, besides other
business. Averaged at 10s. per head per sheep, this would
yield half a million of pounds sterling, upon which principal
sum the agency commission of two and a half per cent.
Total Profit Divided, £916,168.


produces £12,500 per annum. This is reckoned a pleasant
income for an agency firm who began without capital, but
with an earned reputation for integrity and skill. And
thousands are doing the same, some less and some more.
Hitherto for years the immense surplus of meat in
Australasia had no market farther than the consumption
caused by the small local population, and what moderate
quantity of it might be preserved in tins for exportation.
But science crowns man and enriches the universe. The
discovery of the practical process of preserving meat in
the carcase by cold on shipboard has revolutionised the
commercial destinies of Australasia, promoted her to a
position of consequence, and put at the command of the toil-
ing millions of Europe another, and, for England, singularly
important storehouse for food. It is said that “ what is one
man’s meat is another man’s poison.” Refrigeration of beef,
of mutton, of poultry, of game, and of fish, is meat to
Australasians in a thousand different senses. But in
pursuit of an experiment with snow upon a fowl to devise a
method to preserve it by cold, Bacon, our Bacon, the
greatest, meanest, of mankind, the father of inductive
science, lost his life, a martyr to his zeal in the domain of
knowledge. What a gap in time and circumstances between
Bacon, dead and dishonoured, and the master-spirits of this
age, who have solved the meat-preserving problem, and trans-
formed Australasia into a granary, sheltering herds worth
their weight in gold to overcrowded Europe. This beats the
transmutation of the metals by the star-gazers and philo-
sophers of old. Notwithstanding, you will meet people
in England who ask, with an air of pitiable ignorance, if
there is anything in Australasia for a fellow to do 1
Australasia could now export two thousand tons of frozen
meat every day to Britain without materially reducing even
the present number of her splendid herds of cattle and of
sheep. The growers there are able to send their beasts to
Smithfield with greater ease to-day than Scotch farmers
could a hundred years ago, when meat was selling at Id. per
pound in Scotland against lOd. per pound in London.
The squatters of Australasia for the most part are
Australian Mutual Provident Society.


English, Irish, or Scotch gentlemen and their descendants.
Two of the sons of Charles Dickens, the novelist, are
squatters in Australasia, and have succeeded in their ven-
tures there beyond their expectations. Many of the
squatters and settlers strove to distinguish themselves
originally at Oxford and Cambridge, at Trinity and Edin-
burgh, with as much of zeal as they have shown since in the
creation of Australasian estates. Nothing vulgar, nothing
rude, nothing unworthy of a gentleman, would be coun-
tenanced in the homes, however humble, of these men, in the
interior of the continent. The table-talk in the houses of
such workers, with their families at the evening meal, is
compounded of, perhaps, the latest market values for sheep
and lambs, the last telegrams from England, the coming
federation of the colonies, the prices of stations, and the
difficulty about labour; or a discussion whether Hamlet
were mad or not, or so beautiful a woman as Helen of Troy
really graces the world to-day, wound up by a game of
whist, and afterwards the performance, by the daughter of
the house, of the evensong before retiring to rest. Civilisa-
tion is borne to the outposts of the realm by these gentle-
men of Britain, who have looked upon Australasia with a
merchant’s eye.
A butcher’s sheep of good quality in Australasia fetches,
wholesale, a price varying, according to local supplies, from
twelve to fifteen shillings each. Exclusive of skin and
viscera it dresses about 55 lb. of meat, and is sold retail
all round at perhaps 4d. to sd. per pound. But a butcher’s
sheep in England fetches, wholesale, about seventy-five
shillings. It dresses about 85 lb. of meat, which is sold
retail at perhaps tenpence to twelvepenoe a pound. A
butcher’s bullock in England of fair quality fetches, whole-
sale, about £25 to <£3o. Exclusive of hide and viscera, it
dresses about 800 lb. of clean meat, which is sold retail at
about eightpence to tenpence per pound. But a butcher’s
bullock in Australasia fetches, wholesale, about £8 to £lO
in a fluctuating market. It dresses about 700 lb. of clean
meat, which is retailed now at sixpence per pound. Aus-
tralasian meat generally is just as good as English, equally
Total Death Claims Paid, £1,500,000.


succulent and nourishing, though prejudice denies this in
England, as it denies other items in the domain of truth.
The agricultural labourer in Australasia, and, indeed, the
people at large eat butcher’s meat three times a day. In
England the sheep itself is bred with some neglect of the
resulting quality of the fleece, which is of a coarser fibre,
caused by climate, than the Australasian fleece. In Aus-
tralasia, a warmer country than England, the finer fleece
itself of the animal is bred with the utmost skill, and with
some little neglect of the quality of the carcass. The sheep
of England, numbering five years ago thirty to thirty-five
millions, are now reduced, by inclemency of seasons and
consequent disease and death, to not more than about
twenty millions in number. And so disastrous to owners
is this present condition of pastoral affairs in England that
a mandate was issued forbidding the use of lamb in the
Queen’s household.
X.—AGRICULTURE.
Australasia produces in perfection every English-grown
grain: wheat, oats, barley, maize, flax, tobacco, hops,
potatoes, turnips, and other root crops are grown in
abundance and becoming articles of export. Most of the
productions of both temperate and tropical countries are
cultivated with marked success. Sir Charles .Dilke says,
“ In the whole world there is no such climate and soil for
fruits.” The production of sugar is making rapid strides.
It is becoming one of the greatest industries in the north of
Australasia. Splendid fortunes have already been achieved
by enterprising pioneers and others who have stuck to the
work and mastered its difficulties. The bull-dog tenacity of
the Saxon does not desert him in new and novel fields far
from his ancestral home ; and very soon not one pound of
foreign sugar will be imported. The first ton of sugar in
Queensland was made so late ago as 1864. Since then the
Australasians, and gentlemen from England, from Mauritius,
and from Brazil have migrated to Australasian sugar-lands,
and invested hundreds of thousands of pounds in the break-
Australian Mutual Provident Society.


ing in of territory, the construction of sugar-mills, and other
necessary plant. The fig, the mulberry, and the vine
flourish in the open air. Sixty years ago Europe was
ransacked by busy, ardent men, in quest of vine-cuttings to
be planted out in Australasia. Two millions of gallons of
good wine are now made yearly. An export market has been
created, and the wine may now be had excellent and cheap
in some of the best restaurants in the City of London, besides
finding a place in the cellars of many of the nobility and
gentry. It is astonishingly good if people only knew it.
This is nothing to the magnificent future of the industry
looming in the distance. Everything must have a begin-
ning, however humble. French vignerons will emigrate to
Australasia to undertake vine culture. For the French,
jealous of English ascendancy in Australasia and the South
Pacific, have established and subsidised at the instance of
the French Government a new steam postal service between
France, and Australasia, and Hew Caledonia. The first
splendid steamer of that line arrived in Melbourne in
January of this year. Let the British merchant look to his
laurels. At the Melbourne Exhibition the Emperor of
Germany’s special prize of £BOO in silver plate was awarded
to a Swiss vigneron, whose vineyard of some two hundred
acres, thirty miles from Melbourne, created during a period
of fifteen years at a cost of thirty thousand pounds, produces
wine of exhibition excellence. Soon after the opening of the
recent Wine Exhibition at Bordeaux, a well-known London
firm of Spanish wine - merchants sent an order to an
Australian wine-grower for thirty hogsheads of his produce
as exhibited. The order was trifling, but suggestive. It is
said that until Australasian wines are cheaper no market
will be made for them in Europe. We shall see. Time
alone, the great innovator, must bring about the triumph
of the wines. Skilled cultivators are needed. The
wealth and strength of any country is its population;
and the cultivators of the soil are an important part of the
whole, especially if they have been improved a little by
education.
Oranges, peaches, pears, grapes, apples, cherries, straw-
Members may Travel Free Everywhere.


berries, lemons, bananas, almonds, olives, and many other
fruits and gourds richly reward the growers. Austral-
asians have a passion for fruit and eat it abundantly.
Demand is always in excess of supply. One well-known
orange orchard makes about seven thousand pounds annual
profit. The development of agriculture is of vital import-
ance to the country, and the increase of the agricultural
population is promoting progress. About ten millions of
acres are at present under cultivation in Australasia, em-
ploying some four liundi’ed thousand people; a number
rather less than the total population of the declining
English county of Norfolk, whose area is only 1,356,173
acres. The county of Norfolk has about twenty-six
thousand landed proprietors in all, or about six per cent, of
the population are freeholders. But sixteen thousand of
them own less than one acre each. Among the ten thousand
freeholders remaining, H.B.H. the Prince of Wales owns
Sandringham, not three thousand acres in atea. This shows
an average possession of about one hundred and thirty-five
acres to each gentleman’s estate. In face of this, farmers in
Australasia will be heard complaining that their Government
plots of 640 acres each are not large enough for them,
and that 2,000 to 5,000 acres would content them
better.
The rural population in Australasia generally own the
lands of which they are in occupation. The situation
of acknowledging allegiance to a landlord, and paying
rent, is repugnant to them. A crusty, lich, old English
earl, walking homewards one day along the carriage-
drive to his mansion, found a penny-piece on the path-
way. He transferred it to his pocket. A lagging,
though observant, beggar-man behind him saw this, and
humbly solicited the recovered coin. “Go to ,” retorted
his lordship angrily, “ and find a peony for yourself.” This
is the spirit of Australasians in regard to the land which
they desire to occupy for a home. They want independent
freeholds for themselves, and they find them, and secure
them. Nice farms and beautiful estates created in Austra-
lasia by the horny-handed sons of toil are bought and sold
Australian Mutual Provident Society.


every day there. The capitalist can buy a freehold or a lease-
hold for one hundred thousand pounds sterling if he likes,
and the modest settler can begin with a few hundred pounds
if he likes. Thousands of square miles of country in
Australasia fit for agriculture are yet untouched. Indeed,
not one half of the entire available territory is in actual
occupation for any purpose. Year by year tillage is in-
creasing. But the cultivation of the lands cannot be sub-
stantially extended without an immigration of workers
from other regions.
The doctrine that the vast continent of Australasia
seemed to promise a very small extent of habitable land
is exploded. Unexplored territory still offers prizes for
enterprising workers : where Nature sports in primeval
rudeness; where she pours forth her wonders in solitude,
and is waiting for the multiplication of human kind to
convert her smiling plains and undulating forest lands
into homes for myriads yet unborn. Feather-bed soldiers
are not wanted, but rather men of action who can do
something. To do, to will, to achieve, to create, to
accomplish in face of Fate itself something which will add
a cubit to the progress of the country, and so sustain its
reputation. For a good name is the immediate jewel of the
soul. An immense area of country yet remains actually
untrodden. In South and Western Australia and Queens-
land together, there are upwards of eight hundred thousand
square miles, or thousands of millions of acres of lands of
which little or nothing is known. The truest dictum ever
spoken, is “that it is the unexpected and the unforeseen
which always happens.” What riches may not be developed
in this unknown country ! The table-lands in Queensland,
between Herberton and the sea-coast, have just been opened
up. This highly-favoured region is destined to be the
“ garden of Queensland,” possesses a flora of incredible
luxuriance, broad sheets of water, vast mineral wealth, and
the richest soil. It is estimated by distinguished statists
who have very recently been engaged in some remarkable
and interesting reckonings regarding Australasian wealth,
that the annual income derived from Australasian farming
Members can Live in any Part of Australasia.


is at present thirty-seven millions sterling. ’Tis said that
comparisons are odious ; but, as judgments are ripened by
comparisons, consider the statements made by the late
eminent British farmer, Mr. Mechi, in 1867, that the
estimated tenant’s profit of farming in the United Kingdom
was then twenty-five millions sterling per annum, or
a profit of only Bs. per acre. It is less to-day.
XI.—MINERALS AND MINING.
The mineral wealth in Australasia is reckoned inex-
haustible. New South Wales, about three times the size of
Great Britain, is at present the great coal-producing colony,
and likely to be for generations. So far, then, as Austra-
lasian progress depends upon the superior command of this
invaluable commodity, the rational conclusion is that it must
not only go on, it must develop into a quick march of advance-
ment. New mines are being constantly opened, and many
leases of coal lands from Government continue to be applied
for. Victoria is the greatest gold-producing colony. Queens-
land and New Zealand, rich in metals, have likewise given
large yields of gold. Tasmania is rich in tin. South
Australia and Queensland in copper. Generally, coal, iron,
copper, gold, tin, silver, mercury, antimony, kerosene, shales,
yielding valuable oil, marbles, building stones, and slates
are found broadcast throughout Australasia. But these
need searching for and winning. A man with a gold eye-
glass, of the crutch-and-tooth-pick order, dawdling round
about city corners, complaining of the smallness of his
salary for droning through his duties in the civil service or
in a merchant’s office, and envying the luck of the rich
miner or the happy squatter who has just nodded to him,
will not find the magic mine or become a plutocrat. To
find the mine of wealth, real or metaphorical, needs the
faculty with which great painters mix their colours—“ brains,
Sir.” Bead the introduction to his work by the immortal
author of “ Gil Bias ” ; fathom its philosophy, and then one
will understand the secret of successful mining industry.
Nothing can better show, however, the general distribution
Australian Mutual Provident Society.


of the Australasian mineral deposits than the number of
discoveries made by men who are not scientific. Only a small
proportion of the population have an inclination for the
actual work and enterprise of prospecting and mining. The
aid of machinery costs money. Yet it is not to be doubted
that a vast amount of gold and other minerals is yet un-
earthed in many places, and which is to be won by associated
capital, knowledge, and suitable machinery. Diamond and
other drills are at work in cjuest of minerals and subterranean
water, and great economy in expenditure results from these
certain preliminary trials. The yield from the Australasian
tin mines is already more than half that of all the other tin
mines in the world ; although not a pound of tin had been
shipped to England prior to 1870. It is estimated that the
income from Australasian mining during 1882 was eight
millions sterling, a magnificent return for the miners and
the capital engaged in this hazardous work. And a contrast
to Australasian mining is afforded by a recent Parliamentary
report of the productions of mines in the United Kingdom
for one year, exclusive of coal and iron, and that they
amounted to only four millions sterling. In his book
on “Gems and Precious Stones” Mr. Streeter says
“ Australasia abounds also in diamonds, rubies, sapphires,
garnets, and other precious stones. It has been roughly
estimated that at least ten thousand diamonds have hitherto
been found in New South Wales, although it must be
remembered that the workings have not been vigorously
prosecuted.”
XII.—FREEHOLD ESTATES.
The distribution and transfer of freehold lands in town and
country is encouraged and promoted by numerous building
societies. They flourish amazingly. They benefit the
artisan, and any person of respectability with moderate
means in Australasia ; where every man of even the least
means may become his own landlord, and is, indeed,
educated by example as well as by precept to become the
possessor of bis own freehold home. Very different this
from the majority of British artisans, who are neither land-
Policies with Surrender Value do not Lapse.


holders nor landlords. These go on week after week, and
year after year, to be only tenants of indifferent houses and
payers of rent, recovered by distraint if necessary. To pay
rent is abhorrent to the right-minded, thrifty mechanic of
Australasia. He is always rubbing shoulders with brother
workmen who own lauded property, and who speculate in it,
and who take a pride in publishing the results of their
industry and laudable ambition. His curiosity, induction,
reason, and the whole train of his affections are enlivened
in him by the boundless prospects of success in a lovely
country which offers so many and manifest attractions for
the exercise of his stimulated ingenuity. Freehold property
is readily acquired even in a country where every man
hungers to be the proprietor of a share of it. The owners
of landed estate rank themselves socially on the side of order,
justice, education, progress, and banish from their minds
communistic considerations if ever they had imbibed them.
It is easy to conceive the manner in which this absorbing
passion of man for land operates when the European is
transferred from his narrow sphere of action at home, where
land for him is scarce and dear, to the liberty and immensity
of an attractive, grateful, continent, as Australasia is. At
first he is bewildered. After a time he insensibly com-
mences to deal in land mostly profitably. Thus new immi-
grants get spread broadcast throughout the country, as so
many individual lords of the soil in a way quite unknown to
the generality of British artisans working in grooves of custom
and prejudice fixed by centuries of tradition. There is scarce
any country, how rude or uncultivated soever, where the
inhabitants are not possessed of some peculiar secrets, either
in nature or art; and the Australasian artisan has the secret
of how to make money in a variety of ways which would
astound his fellow-worker in Great Britain; for the latter
lacks vivacity and enterprise. Fine profits are made by
dealing in land in a gradually-rising market. Golden
population flowing steadily in around the new freeholders
raises and possibly trebles the value of their possessions;
and this progress must constantly go on in Australasia until
the country is filled with people. One building society alone
Australian Mutual Provident Society.


shows ia its balance-sheet upwards ot ore million pounds
sterling advanced within eight years to working men for the
purchase and erection of brick-built homes. The expenses
of the transfer of land are remarkably easy.
Xlli-CAPITAL AND BUSINESS.
The number and amount of individual or joint stock bank
ruptcies in Australasia are insignificant, proportioned to its
great and growing commerce. Embarrassment may some-
times take place, a circumstance at all times very apt to result
from an extended commerce. Prices of important commodities
fluctuate. If wool falls five-and-twenty per cent, in value in
England, the immediate effect upon Australasia is contracted
business and temporary embar’rassment; curtailing returns
and afflicting individuals. On the contrary, if wool recovers
and rises in the London market, the effect is the reverse ;
boundless activity and expansion of an encouraged commerce
immediately takes place in Australasia, enriching individuals
and improving freights from England. The barometer does
not mark the weather more closely than does the price ot
wool control the Australasian finance. The commercial
field is a safe and attractive one for the employment of
British capital. Fortunes made by capitalists or adventurers
are occasionally large. General prosperity may be illustrated
by individual instances. The progressive success of the
monetary institutions is in itself a weighty proof. r lhe
Economist says, “It is certain that Australasia must have
advanced more rapidly than any other of our colonial
possessions during 1882, if we may judge by its banking
establishments.”
The Greeks figured Fortune standing tiptoe on a
globe, indicating that neither skill nor valour could fix
the inconstancy of the fickle goddess. And though
one man may do better than another in Australasia as
anywhere, through the difference in the ways and means of
men, and though prosperity there has its ebbs and flows,
yet the main movement is steadily onwards and upwards;
and a proper man there is lifted into affluence just as Archer
1883 Last Year of the Quinquennium.


lifts his horse beyond the winning-post. A co-operative
company of small farmers was started in Sydney in 1881 to
provide that a sufficient and regular supply of fresh dairy
produce should always reach metropolitan consumers. The
company consists of from seven to eight hundred dairy farm
shareholders. Each of these shareholders must be a land or
property owner in an agricultural district. A shareholder
cannot sell his interest to any person who has not a similar
qualification to that which he possesses. The company is a
pronounced success. Twenty thousand pounds are turned
over monthly already, and indications are conclusive that,
at no distant date the trade will be a million of pounds
sterling a year in butter, cheese, bacon, eggs, poultry, hay,
chaff, sugar, honey, and Indian corn, paying a handsome
dividend on the general business to the shareholding
farmers, who are registered for one, two, or three shares
each as the case may be, and who are thus partners in its
progression. A family of Highland crofters in 1880 on
an estate in the north of Scotland had an educated,
travelled relative, living in London. He had active business
affairs with Australasia. He interested a correspondent
there about the condition of his Highlanders. The reply
to London was prompt to send them out. The family,—
father, mother, two daughters, and three lusty sons, —were
communicated with, and advised to comply with the requi-
sition. The main difficulty in reasoning with these simple-
minded crofters was their utter ignorance of the world, and
their ridiculous prejudices in favour of the country and the
so-called home in which they eked out a miserable subsistence
under the autocratic dominancy of the lord of the fee. It
was contended, why wait upon the favour of a lord and still
cringe for more when, by the exercise of determined energy,
they could easily reach a new country where opulence and
independence await industrious workers. A life of inde-
pendence is generally a life of virtue. Yet these Highlanders
were with difficulty made to understand that, if the lord of
the fee ignored the duties which cluster around property, it
was time for the serfs of tenants to be up and moving.
They had never heard that “ a wise man rising superior to
Australian Mutual Provident Society.


all local prejudices if asked for his country will turn his
eyes from this dim spot which men call Earth, and will
point like Anaxagoras to the heavens.” With not one spark
of divine energy in their dull and cramped compositions,
some of these crofters cling to the spot of earth at home
where they have happened to be born, and think it paradise ;
as if the salvation of their immortal souls depended on their
bodies being buried in the churchyard of the parish church
where first the sound of bells did knoll them all to praise.
This fancy is purely an idol of the heart which should be
forsaken, —home-keeping youth have ever homely wits.
These sort of people should be taught sense and reason, and
to go out and revolutionise their lives and their prospects,
their performances and their promises. Our Highlanders
did so. Funds were provided for the emigration of the
Highlanders, to be repaid out of their contemplated.earnings
in the colonies. After a favourable voyage they reached
Australia. They were received hospitably; then placed
in a modest home that had been prepared for them,
overlooking the waters of the magnificent harbour of
Port Jackson, —commercially the finest in the world,
—a site worthy for the palace of a Prince. In ten days
every male member of this family was actively employed
and earning wages. A new and glorious world had burst
upon their astonished vision. Their eyes were now opened.
Ignorance was dispelled. No longer were they cribbed,
cabined, and confined. On such a shore as they had lighted,
hope springs exultant in the human breast, and animates every
fibre of renewed existence. The anxieties of the past were
to be succeeded by permanent security and future happiness.
Within six months of their arrival the eldest daughter was
given in marriage to the son of a leading builder, possessed
of influence and property. The fortunes of the Highlanders
were assured.
Knowledge is power. Knowledge, industry, frugality,
and honesty are the sinews that most surely help a man
to gain the top, and then will keep him there, provided
lie has field enough wherein to exercise these virtues. And
Australasia is such a field for the agriculturist and the
Branch Offices in all Australasia.


artisan. It is the most remarkable field of British industry
out of the limits of Britain at the present day. The Austral-
asian colonies want nothing but Britons to go into them, and
make them the finest country on earth. Failing these,
population must be attracted from other countries, for
employers are often driven to straits by the pressure of the
want of labour. A stranger can form no adequate concep-
tion of the degree to which emigrants from Britain, originally
poor, have been raised in the scale of comfort and inde-
pendence by the success of their exertions under new con-
ditions in our Australasian dependencies. A stalwart
Cornish blacksmith went out at his own cost to Australia
a few years ago. Landing at Melbourne, a stranger in a
strange land, he found himself the possessor of £5 and
friendless. He soon got work. Six months afterwards,
when advised by good intelligence on the spot as to the
probabilities of success for a venture which he meditated,
on the rule of never venture never win, he travelled straight
off into the interior of the country, some three or four
hundreds miles, to a new centre. He began to build
waggons for the carriage of produce to market. He made
a name in his locality for tough, honest work, and among
his rivals and his friends got so noted for his doings that he
acquired the title of the “ Lion.” To-day he owns his own
freehold house and building yards, is a large employer of
labour, has money in the bank, unlimited credit with the
merchants, and constructs some three hundred waggons
yearly besides other work. He can appreciate, and is a
fitting representative of the man whom Longfellow has
married to immortal verse as the Village Blacksmith.
Thousands of such cases, and cases of more remarkable
significance, can be recorded in the industrial annals of the
poor introduced to Australasia.
A gentleman farmer from Yorkshire, discontented with
his farm and his prospects in England in 1865, went
in that year out to Australasia with a capital of
£lB,OOO. He bought there from a previous holder the
rights to a Government leasehold “run” of about 130,000
acres and 40,000 sheep, which were depasturing thereon.
Australian Mutual Provident Society.


The price of everything was a total round sum of
£40,000. The terms were £lO,OOO cash down on entry,
and £30,000 balance on credit, payable over a period of
four years, secured by mortgage on the leasehold property
in the customary way. The purchaser had his wits
about him. He was sober, and hopeful, and earnest. He
wrought with unremitting will to improve the breed of
sheep, as Coke, Earl of Leicester, did at Holkham, in
Norfolk, a century ago. And what with watching the
sheep, and, like a man of sense, improving and freeholding
the property, the Yorkshireman so created an estate free of
encumbrance that in 1879 he came back to London, where
he now lives, drawing £lB,OOO a year profit from the
estate at the Antipodes, managed for him to-day by a local
superintendent. And this owner lives in elegance and
peace of mind in England from choice. The Australasians
never concern themselves about “absentee landlords,” The
peasantry mind their own business, prosecute it fairly,
imitate their betters, and try honestly to get as much land
for themselves as they can, and be their own landlords.
These peasants, be their nationality what it may, are
not given to murder, to theft, to rapine, or to perjury ; for
choice they prefer to lead a life of jolly, independent
industry.
One of the Australasian sheep stations is being offered
for sale to buyers in London, this 1883. The intending
purchasers propose to make a company concern of it,
at the arbitrated price of seven hundred thousand pounds
sterling. This estate is the absolute creation of one
Scotchman, who began with very moderate capital some
twenty-five years ago in Australasia. It has been said,
with how much of truth the reader can judge for himself,
that “the most thinking people in England are too
completely engrossed with their parish matters to care
much about the value or prospects of distant possessions ;
and that nothing short of a revolution could awaken them
from their indifference on the subject.” Rusden, in his
“ Curiosities of Colonisation,” says, “ Is it not a fact that a
wretched impostor first from Wapping and then from a
The Oldest Australasian Mutual Life Office.


village in New South Wales attracted more attention in
England than did the stupendous growth of communities in
the Pacific, big with the fate of empire 1 ” On much the
same rule that a succession of shrieks would break involun-
tarily from a timid spectator of the killing of five men, and
who at his breakfast would read in the morning papers with
profound stolidity of the watery record of the sinking of a
ship in the Indian Ocean with all hands.
Paris, Dresden, Berlin, Vienna, and other cities in Europe
pride themselves on showing in the windows of their elegant
shops copies of the prize medals and certificates of merit
awarded to their manufactures at the exhibitions of Sydney
and Melbourne. These exhibitions made Australasia better
known to the foreigner abroad and the world of commerce;
and the foreigner made such unheard-of profits that his
gratitude takes the usual shape of a lively expectation of
favours to come. Imagine the ecstasy of an intelligent
Australasian who sees the honour thus paid to his country
abroad ! For Australasians wander now through Europe
with keen and appreciative eyes in the survey of her
treasuries of art. But our Australasian very seldom sees
the same pleasant signs of friendship in London and the
provinces, though they reap fortunes out of Australasian
business. Indifference is a blunder worse than a crime.
If an English estate belonging to his Grace the Duke of
Sutherland or to some beggared Indian nabob living within
bow-shot of the court in London were being brought to
market for sale and sold for seven hundred thousand pounds,
all London would ring with the news, newspapers within the
four corners of the kingdom, from the Times downwards,
would chronicle the big transaction; consequent thereon
thousands of British firesides would echo with a statement of
the circumstance, and the whys and wherefores of the
business. But the sale of the Australasian estate for seven
hundred thousand pounds is never heard of; nor does dis-
cussion arise in our midst upon what must have been the
industry, the perseverance, the genius, and the good citizen-
ship of the isolated colonist who, alone in a distant but
grand dependency of the empire, created so great a piece of
Australian Mutual Provident Society.


work single-handed, and in doing so is saying aloud to his
struggling brother workers in Britain, “Go thou, and do
likewise.” True it is,
“The jewel that we find we stop and take it,
Because we see it; but what we do not see
We tread upon and never think of it.”
But the list of neglected subjects in the London press is a
formidable one. This is not said by way of reproach; for
the vastness of the British empire and the multitude of British
interests are proved in this remarkable way, not by what
the metropolitan daily papers report, but by what they do
not report. The London papers cover the vastitude of the
empire. They deal with events of foreign powers sometimes
more fully than they can with the circumstances of their own
kingdom, which are obliged to go unreported. For here in
London, even at meetings of learned societies, speeches are
sometimes made by men of the highest eminence, and the
affair is dismissed by the daily papers in a few lines and
often not recorded at all. The sins of omission of the
London press, the grandest in the world, is simply an index
of the unrivalled width of the interests it represents; and as
showing how the comings and goings of the world, its trade
and commerce, its tumults and wars, its jealousies and
passions, are registered at this centre of universal business,
this half-way house to and from everywhere, this world
within itself, this London, the head-quarters of the Anglo-
Saxon race.
The capitalist who desires to invest in pastoral pursuits,
or the smaller farmer whose means are more modest, can
always secure a good property, a good freehold, in the
settled districts. This with judgment may be improved
into a valuable estate. Finality is without local habitation
and a name in Australasia. Everything is in progress, A
project is on foot at present by Australasian capitalists to
introduce into Western Australia emigrants from Germany.
The Germans make excellent colonists. If the Government
of that Colony, and the contractors, can arrange terms about
the public funds to be surrendered in payment for this
Invested Funds, Four Millions Sterling.


emigration, fifty thousand Germans will be shipped at
Bremen and taken out to Australasia. An American is
never met making the tour there who does not in point of
fact say, “ You are more advanced than I thought you were,
but you are nothing to what you will be.”
The gross annual product of Australasian industry is
moderately reckoned to amount*to upwards of £130,000,000
sterling yearly. It can be demonstrated that the income of
an average Australasian is much better than that of an
Englishman or an American. One Australasian is worth
more to English manufacturers than twelve Americans,
eighteen Frenchmen, or twenty Germans. The accumula-
tions of public and private property are prodigious for a new
country. Many colonists have gained in Australasia all the
property they hold, and whose individual estates are worth
from £250,000 to £3,000,000 sterling. These properties
have not been won in every case by sudden influx of wealth
from gold mining or copper raining, as the ignorant and
vulgar fancy, but chiefly through sheep and cattle farming,
agriculture, and successful mercantile pursuits. A blaze of
prosperity has been diffusing itself over all Australasia.
Australasia is solidly solvent to-day, though owing in the
way of business to England, for public and private capital,
about £264,000,000 on securities, every one of which are
quoted on ’Change at par at least. Instance the public debt
due to England by the single colony of New South Wales.
Her indebtedness on this item is about eighteen millions
sterling; a sum borrowed and expended on the construction
of railways and other profitable public works. By a recent
special investigation of the value of New South Wales Rail-
way property alone it was reckoned to be worth twenty-five
millions sterling; and at this valuation a British Syndicate
was ready to buy it from a Government unwilling to sell.
Contrast the financial aspect of Australasia with an
English fact, lost sight of in the lapse of time. In 1798
the population of Great Britain was little more than
10,000,000; her public debt of Consols was £270,000,000
only; and its price on ’Change was The investments
made by capitalists in the securities of the Governments
Australian Mutual Provident Society.


of Australasia are immeasurably more safe than the
investments made in countries where British laws and
institutions and sympathies do not prevail.
XIV.—TRADE WITH THE PACIFIC.
A fine line of steamers trades regularly between Sydney,
and China, and Japan, and the Eastern ports. These
steamers bring teas from India and China, and rice, coffees,
spices, silks, and lacquer ware, Australasia is incomparably
better situated for commanding the trade of the Eastern
seas than the Americans are in California. And the exten-
sion of the trade of Great Britain, and the happiness ox
thousands of her people are bound up with the progress of
Australasian commerce. The trade with the East is
gradually growing ; and no one can foretell what the impor-
tance of the oriental commerce with Australasia will yet
be. Moreover, a splendid fleet of steamships, owned and *
coaled in Australasia by various local dividend-paying com-
panies, carry the inter-colonial coasting and Pacific Ocean
trade between Fiji, New Caledonia, New Zealand, Australia,
and New Guinea, and the multitudinous islands of the
southern seas. The passenger rates are moderate, enabling
inquirers, intending investors, and emigrants, to move to
and fro freely and economically, in quest of occupation and
final settlement. Every emigrant has naturally certain
tastes or prejudices peculiar to himself, and that locality
which might prove proper for one person might seem the
least so for another. The territory of Australasia is so
vast that really choice is unlimited.
Docks and patent slips in the various ports are con-
structed. Shipbuilding is carried on. Harbours have been
deepened and improved. Navigation is rendered easy on
the Australasian coasts by an almost perfect system of
lighthouses. Of late years the Australasians have had
some important calls made upon their shipbuilding and
engineering abilities in regard of large steamers. The
extraordinary difficulties overcome in rescuing the fine
steamship Sorata, after she was stranded on the coast of
6,469 New Policies issued last Year.


South Australia, and in taking her round by sea to Mel-
bourne, and in refitting her so effectually that, on her
homeward voyage, “ she behaved splendidly and did not
take any water whatever,” is a romance of the sea. And
more recently, the memorable achievement of raising
intact, from the bottom of the waters of Sydney harbour,
that wonder of marine architecture, the steamship Austral,
worth a quarter of a million of money, is a subject for
admiration throughout the world.
Every port in Australasia shelters hundreds of sailing
crafts, owned by adventurous, sunburnt, ancient mariners;
resolute and calm, even in face of hurricanes and waves.
These mariners have wisely saved money, and become
skippers. They crowd the eastern seas with their trim-
built whex-ries, their hearts in their work, diligently
bartering with the millions of the native races who are
found in the goi’geous coral-bound islands of the Pacific.
XV.—SHIPPING AND TONNAGE.
British and foreign ships, to the number of seventeen
thousand, having a tonnage of ten millions of tons, carried
the export and import trade of Australasia in 1881. Five
special lines of mail steamers, carrying passengers with the
greatest comfoi’t, connect Australasia with Great Britain.
Other lines of steamers as well as sailing ships, well found,
take passengers at reduced rates. And now it is no longer
doubtful that in a month or two’s time, New Zealand will
be able to boast of one if not of two lines of steamships of
the first class, trading between her principal ports, and
London direct. Whether by steamer or sailing vessel, the
voyage out to Australasia is just a pleasure trip. It must
be remembered that in a passage thither the storms of the
Atlantic are not encountered. Apprehensions as to dis-
tance or safety or comfort may be set aside. To-day
distance is reckoned not by miles, but by time. The journey
from England to Australasia is done easier and almost as
quickly as our ancestors a hundred years ago, went from
Cornwall into Inverness-shire. The number of return
Australian Mutual Provident Society.


tickets now issued to Britons, Australasians, and foreigners
who are found visiting and revisiting these colonies and the
mother country, on trips of pleasure and necessary business,
should be enough in itself to dispel any thought of remote-
ness or danger. The illustrious Cook and his tiny craft, the
Endeavour , of 370 tons, sailing under the guidance of that
intrepid commander, explored then unknown seas unscathed;
and returned from Australasia and the islands of the Pacific
in safety to England. In fact, the day is upon us when the
educated Briton who used to be content with the grand
tour of Europe, will not be looked upon as a much-travelled
man or woman until he or she has, in addition, taken the
round trip to India, Australasia, China, across the Pacific
by way of San Francisco, and back to London and his
London life.
XVI.—MANUFACTURES.
Local manufactures rest on the unlimited supply of
coal at hand, both in Australia and in New Zealand.
Every colony in process of time spreads over the whole
country where it first was planted. As it grows more
populous the people become more polite, and those manu-
factures for which it was in the beginning obliged to the
mother country, it learns to dress up for itself. Banken, in
his “ Dominion of Australia,” says :
“ The use and export of coal in Australasia is only commencing,
large as the figures are already. The Port of Newcastle in New
South Wales is never without a fleet of Indian shipping waiting for
loading, and the demand is only limited by the labour required for
production. The effect of this article upon commerce by its quantity
and cheapness is marked in the amount of effective steam shipping
used upon the coasts; and it is no small inducement to mail
contractors for these colonies. But these are as nothing to the
future development of trade which will be wrought out; and it is
to coal that we must look for the safe establishment of Australasian
manufactures. The iron for machinery is there, the coal to forge
it, and raw material to manufacture, only labour is wanted and
capital. Time will bring these; and if the energies of the country
are not misdirected or greatly impaired, fleets of shipping and
cargoes of manufacture should some day come out of Australasian
ports which will compete with the world.”
Total Death Claims paid, £1,500,000.


Governor Lord Augustus Loftus, speaking of Australasia on
a memorable occasion, said :
“ Our vast varieties of woods, our grand collection of minerals,
and more valuable than gold, our coal and iron, our fire-clay and
marbles, together with the speaking evidence of our manufacturing
capabilities will not pass away unobserved, but will make our name
known where it might have remained unknown for generations.”
The local manufactures, though not yet on so great a scale
as those of older countries, are by no moans an unimportant
item of business in Australasia. The leather, saddlery, and
harness manufacture is enormous and of rare excellence.
Iron foundries, tanneries, type foundries, agricultural
implement works manufacturing machines on the American
pattern, woollen factories, chemical works, steam flour-mills,
soap and candle factories, preserved-raeat works, breweries,
paper-mills doing a vast business, tobacco factories, brick
and pottery works, locomotive factories; gas-works, clothing
and carriage factories, and thousands of other profitable
industries in splendid working order, attest the power of
this people for work, and disclose some of the fields which
are open for the employment of labour. Not one pair of
hands need go unused in Australasia if the owner of them
is only willing to work. Work and wait; patience is
genius; fruit a hundredfold will reward the labourer who
labours with earnestness and some intelligence.
The ingenuity of colonists puts every possible scheme of
commerce on its trial. If a man fails to enrich himself by one
enterprise, he reinvigorates his courage and determined will
for another struggle, and gets on in life in a new direction.
Success in any sphere, provided the worker be honest, is
approved by colonists. Australasia wants more population,
more lusty workers of the right sort, to help her to add to
her products for exportation. Indeed, the two great wants
of Australasia have been competent labour and English
capital, guided by energy and genius, to vivify and fructify
the vast resources of that country. The profits in Austral-
asia on the results of the combination of labour and
capital are believed to be nowhere so great. Theoretically,
men should go to colonies to create branches of commerce
Australian Mutual Provident Society,


and exportation for the colony ; and not merely to become
shopkeepers or merchants of commodities. A fine field,
extending every year, awaits the hardy and adventurous
emigrant who gives his services to the sublime labour of
production to supply the never-ceasing and always-
augmenting wants of man. Sir Charles Dilke says :
“Whether Japan or Australasia is destined to become the
great wool manufacturing country, it is certain that fleeces
will not long continue to be sent half round the world from
Australia to England to be worked, and then round the
other half back from England to Australia to be sold as
blankets,”
XVII.—RAILWAYS.
Five thousand three hundred miles of completed
railways under Government management are open for
daily traffic in Australasia. About two thousand miles are
at present in course of rapid construction. Contracts
are already made for the construction of new, long,
and important lines. The active and busy spirit of the
age has emphasised transport as the source and secret of
all trade power and commercial development. The desire
for quick extensions of rail communication throughout
Australasia is intense. The cost of carriage is a heavy and
intolerable tax where roads are long, and conveyance by
bullocks and horses slow.
Every Government in Australasia has a hard task to
keep pace with the progress and the impatience of the
high-spirited people. They will suffer no barrier to stop
them from going on to conquer the wilderness. The story
of the explorations of Australasia discovers a splendid
picture of the indomitable courage and ability of the gallant
men who have risked their lives in sublime endeavours to
examine for the benefit of mankind the interior of this great
continent. Attracted by honour, the final reward, and
undaunted by the seeming difficulties that oppose, the
curiosity of courageous men has been prompted to thoroughly
inspect every part of its vast area, destined to be covered
with population.
Invested Funds, Four Millions Sterling.


Australasian activity is distinguished hy a celerity
unknown and unpractised in any other country. The ex-
tension of railways and development of power, as every one
knows, animates men ; works an industrial revolution ; and
admits of new enterprises being accomplished with alacrity.
This is the order of the day in Australasia. We read of the
people there “ that the population increased more rapidly
than the country was opened up. The more money was
spent on their railways, the more was wanted for roads and
bridges at their side. The people demanded their post-offices,
their telegraphs, their courts of justice, their hospitals,
their schools, and their railways, and they insisted on having
these all at once.”
Australasian railways, with steel rails and fully equipped
with buildings, &c., can be constructed for under £5,000 a
mile. Melbourne and Sydney, five hundred miles apart, are
connected by railway. South Australia is pushing on her
lines northwards towards port Darwin, in her great
Northern Territory; and that port, with Palmerston for
its Capital, has every prospect of becoming the central
point to which all Australasian railway systems will
some day converge. Adelaide, the capital city of South
Australia, will soon be in communication by rail with
Melbourne. In New Zealand thirteen hundred and fifty
miles of railway are open for traffic, and splendidly
equipped. Sydney and Brisbane are working to meet one
another by railway. The line between these latter capital
cities will work in with the grand scheme of the Trans-
continental Railway projected and about to be constructed
by Queensland to the Gulf of Carpentaria. This line will
open up immense tracts of the most fertile country. Mani-
festly it is in the interests of Great Britain and Australasia
that communication between the two countries be expedited.
The proposed Euphrates Valley Railway scheme from London
to Constantinople, thence through Asia, crossing the Ganges
on to Singapore, will be about eight thousand miles in length.
Does not the magnitude of this work inspire the imagina-
tion 1 This is the century of inventions and miracles ; and
the thing will be done. Allowing two thousand miles
Australian Mutual Provident Society.


steaming distance by sea between Singapore and Port
Darwin, Australia will be reached from London in sixteen
days and New Zealand in twenty-six. This magnificent
project is now absorbing the attention of capitalists in
London. The annihilation of distance strengthens the
bonds of union between Australasia and the mother country.
XVIII.—ELECTRIC TELEGRAPHS.
Upwards of fifty thousand miles of telegraphic lines and
wires under Government management are in daily working
order throughout Australasia. One of the lines, of more
than two thousand miles in length, stretched from Adelaide
across the centre of the Australasian continent, with stations
at convenient distances, joins the submarine cable to England
at Palmerston, port Darwin. Almost the first telegram
ever sent across this continental line was from a gentleman
in England, dating from Lombard Street, to his banker in
Australia. The message ran thus: “ Send me immediately
a thousand pounds by wire. Am frightfully hard up.
Reply.” But an instance may be given of the actual despatch
of business by its aid. One of the Colonial Governments
was engaged in an important public work. In the midst
of the work this Government found itself deficient in
necessary machinery. A contractor on the spot undertook
to provide it, and set it to work on the ground within sixty
days from the sealing of the bargain, for £lO,OOO, The
telegraph was used : Birmingham was advised. With that
unrivalled despatch which signalises English business done,
above that of every other nation, the machinery was shipped
at Southampton. It arrived at the port of destination in
Australasia, and was got to work perfectly within fifty-
four days, to the mutual satisfaction of contractor and
Government. The voyage was nearly twelve thousand miles.
The cost of the construction of the telegraphs is met by
means of British capital. That is lent to the Govern-
ments at about four per cent, per annum of interest. The
payment of this interest, and the expense of maintaining the
internal telegraphic lines in perfect order, are paid out of the
profits of the business. Then a handsome surplus remains.
Head Office; 87, Pitt Street, Sydney.


Copious telegrams of London, American, and European news
by submarine cable, are published daily in the Australasian
journals, side by side with columns of intercolonial tele-
graphic news. The merchant and the politician see at a
glance by these ticks from the telegraph the doings of their
rivals, and of actual neighbours, and of foreign countries.
They learn the price of money and Consols in London daily
to guide them in their contracts. The spectator at the games
frequently sees more of them than the players themselves.
The transfer of moneys is cheapened and quickened by
means of the Electric Telegraph.
XIX—TRAMWAYS.
Street tram-lines are laid extensively in Australasian
cities. The cars are drawn by horses and by steam motors.
Syndicates reap rich profits from these ventures. Fifteen
millions of passengers travel yearly by the Sydney steam
tram-cars, under the management of Government. New
Zealand has long enjoyed the comfort of the tram.
Prodigious extensions of. the system are in course of con-
struction throughout cities and towns in Australasia.
XX.—POSTAL AND TELEPHONIC.
Postal, telegraphic, and telephonic exchanges are estab-
lished and being established throughout Australasia. The
utmost dispatch and accuracy distinguish the conduct of
these public services, which pay well. Mails and passengers
are carried throughout Australasia by railway, wherever
practicable ; aho on horseback ; and by an admirable system
of American coaches, of two, four, six, and eight horses. The
postage on an ordinary letter sent anywhere throughout
Australasia is 2d., and in the cities mostly Id. In the
cities three and four deliveries per day indicate the activity
of business. Ladies are employed, as in England, in
the public service in Australasia, A tribute of praise must
be extended to them for the thorough business aptitudes
they exhibit in the every-way satisfactory discharge of their
Australian Mutual Provident Society,


onerous and important duties to the exacting public ; in
the postal, telegraphic, and telephonic offices; and in the
Public Schools also.
XXI.—UNIVERSITIES: SCHOOLS.
Universities are founded and well endowed in Sydney,
in Melbourne, in Adelaide, and in New Zealand. They are
furnished with professors of the first rank from British
universities. So are Church of England, Presbyterian,
Wesleyan, and Homan Catholic colleges and grammar
schools. These institutions meet with munificent support
from the several sections of the people ; who are so imbued
with a belief in the value and virtues of education that the
feeling amounts to a passion. The most ignorant nations
have always been found to think most highly of themselves.
Education corrects conceit; and Australasians are nobly
striving to impart knowledge to their gallant sons. A
merchant of Sydney, recently dead, has bequeathed a
magnificent endowment to the university there, amounting
to one hundred and eighty thousand pounds sterling.
(£180,000). This will benefit Australasian posterity for
all time. In each of the colonies of Australasia instances
can be quoted of middle class and lower class men who
have begun life with nothing; made fortunes; and with
rare nobleness of heart, bearing in mind the obstacles that
hindered their own arduous way, have dedicated their acqui-
sitions to be a source of educational profit to succeeding gene-
rations. The middle classes of Britain and of Australasia fill
up the measure of and illustrate the philanthropy of their
countrymen : little or nothing is hoped for or seen to part
from the parsimony and avarice of a titled and ancient aris-
tocracy. Once upon a time the late Mr. Adam Black, Lord
Provost of Edinburgh, the publisher of the “Encyclopaedia
Britannica,” declared, at a public meeting of the citizens of
Edinburgh, that the grandest day in his life was when his
father took off his shoemaker’s apron, and, grasping him
(Adam) by his hand, led him away to the Cal ton Hill, and
entered him as a pupil in the High School. As good an


education as that school gave which produced three Lord
Chancellors of England, can be got free to-day for any
child in Australasia. The splendid public and private educa-
tional establishments in that country open the road to
intellectual culture for the poorest child. National education
for the masses in the Government schools is free, secular, and
compulsory. It is finely housed, and endowed throughout
the territory. The varied series of school-books and appli-
ances in use are not to be beaten for modern excellence.
Creeds, as they ought to be, are excluded from the public
teaching. The jealousy of rival faiths can find no com-
promise but that of leaving religion out of school edu-
cation. The secular march of civilisation is the rule at
present observed by the majority; and, practically, dog-
matism must be fought, if at all, out of doors. There
each faith can guard its votaries. Teachers, first trained in
the art of imparting education, submit to examination
before appointment. And if we esteem those who con-
tribute to the prosperity of the State, we ought to place in
the first rank the tutors of our children, whose labours are
to influence posterity, and on whose precepts and exertions
the dignity of our family and of our country in a large
measure depends. Science is master in the nineteenth
century, and the Australasians know it, and worship it.
XXII.—EDUCATION AND MUSIC.
Schools of arts and schools of design,mechanics’ institutes,
and schools of mines, for the technical education of artisans in
classes, with libraries for circulation and reference, and
hundreds of British, American, Australasian, and foreign
journals, reviews, illustrated papers, magazines, newspapers,
and the most recent general English and foreign literature,
are established, and being established, for the public use
throughout Australasia. These institutions are largely
used by the masses. An Englishman newly arrived, and
walking into the well-lighted and comfortable reading-hall
of one of them, is a little amazed to find the numbers
at work; to see, nicely arranged and at hand, the latest and
Australian Mutual Provident Society.


best British and American, French, and German serial
publications. Newspapers are carried free by the post
as an educational resource.
Players and lecturers of eminence from Britain and
America are received with applause if they deserve it. The
reception of the late Charles Mathews was an ovation.
Ketten, the pianist, refused money at the doors. Proctor, the
astronomer, caused extraordinary discussion and interest; and
met full houses every night to listen to his monologues on
the abstrusest of sciences. Forbes, the war correspondent,
lectured to packed benches; and had the assurance to look
his audiences in the face and flatter them on the acuteness
and breadth of their apprehension. These men improved
their health by the easily-made trip; and coined money.
Additionally, they enjoyed the acknowledged hospitalities
of society. And were George Augustus Sala, whose name
is a veritable household word at the Antipodes, and whose
“ Echoes of the Week ” are the heart and soul of the Illus-
trated London News , to make his appearance in Australasia,
a grand reception would await him. The wager might be
safely laid that he would coin more drachmas than either
of his forerunners. Theatres are fairly well attended,
and concert halls. The strolling player “ has a good time ”
when making his provincial trips. In localities that less
than twenty years ago re-echoed with the execrations and
the howls of a miserable and malicious race of savages,
may now be heard with rapt enjoyment, in comfortable
homes, the enchanting harmonies of Mozart, Mendelssohn,
and Beethoven.
The foundation of the Boyal College of Music in Eng-
land is accomplished. It would not be easy to measure
completely what this institution will effect, for promise is
only the air of performance. Among the few private
scholarships attached to it and created by the generosity of
individual benefactors are two from Australasia, —the only
colonial scholarships announced. The Australasian scholar
elected first is now on her way from Melbourne to London.
That all England helped to found this noble college every
one knows, but few suspected that Australasia would be
For Life Assurance on the Mutual Principle.
d 2


busy promoting art by scholarships in London; establish-
ing musical harmonies between thepargnt and her children.
Cultivated Australasians delight in music, in instruments,
and in poetry.
XXIII.—LITERATURE.
Literature is imported into Australasia and bought by
the colonists at the rate of three shillings per head of popu-
lation yearly, while in Great Britain the rate expended is
only sixpence per head. This is a proof of the intellectual
activity of the people. In proportion as society refines, new
books must ever become more necessary ; and the influence
of knowledge promotes practical moi-ality. The Austral-
asians are essentially a book-buying and book-reading people.
In the general run of trade, bookselling, printing, and
stationery businesses are very profitable. New publications
immediately on issue in London are despatched to the Anti-
podes by active agents, and ultimately circulate with
rapidity from hand to hand, even in the far interior, so
eager are the Australasians to keep abreast of the current
of thought and fashions in Europe. The Australasian mind
is constantly projected on England. The issue at sixpence
of the “Life of the Prince Consort”; Lady Brassey’s
“ Voyage of the Sunbeam,” at sixpence; the issues of the
old English novelists at sixpence ; and the similar style of
publications recently issued in London at sixpence ; being
the best of literature, with millions of circulation induced
by cheapness, are sold abundantly at sixpence in Austral-
asian towns, and read with the greatest interest by the
rising generation. Professor John Stuart Blackie s book
on the Highlands of Scotland, “ Altavona,” published in
Edinburgh in May, 1882, was received, and read aloud, and
listened to with uncommon attention, and not without
a little whiskey, by a party of Highlanders stationed in
charge of sheep, five hundred miles in the interior of
Australasia, in the month of August of the same year.
Every railway station has its bookstalls, which are repo-
sitories of the British and local literature of the day. The
local gazetteers, the directories, the almanacs, pamphlets,
Australian Mutual Provident Society.


illustrated hand and guide books, and other publications
full of information about the colonies, got up and printed
and illustrated as well as like things are done in England,
command a large and extending circulation. A charac-
teristic of the houses of Australasians is the circumstance
of the fund of excellent literature to be found in the
domestic library ; for this people do not make the mistake
of laying out all that time in furnishing their houses which
they should have employed in furnishing their heads.
The valuable “ Catalogue of the Philological Library of
Sir George Grey,” jointed at Cape Town, in South Africa,
in 1858, contains highly - interesting notices of books
and tracts in numerous languages and dialects of Asia,
Africa, Australasia, &c. Most of the Australasian books
have been printed by devoted missionaries of the Gospel at
printing-presses set up by themselves, and often worked by
their own nimble hands, in various villages or stations in
the lovely islands of the South Pacific. These villages are
little known to Europeans. One-half the world does not
know how the other half lives. The printing-presses
through necessity were constantly transferred xrom place to
place, as soon as the chief object of their establishment
appeared to have been sufficiently attained in their first
locations, by an adequate supply of books for the instruction
of the interesting natives in the blessings of civilisation.
The patient collector who believes in the enormous future
of Australasia, and who now searches carefully and appro-
priates to-day the varied insular literature of Polynesia,
will find its value enhanced a hundredfold within fifty
years. Land is not the only commodity in which an
** unearned increment ” occurs. Grey’s Catalogue is in the
Bodleian Library at Oxford.
XXIV.—LIBRARIES AND ART.
The Sydney Free Public Library, furnished with a splendid
collection of books, the result of the collections of fifty years ;
the Museum, the Art Gallery, and Botanic Gardens of
that city, which unite instruction with beauty, and charm
Head Office: 87, Pitt Street, Sydney.


the eye of every beholder, are open freely on Sundays as
■well as every other day in the week. These institutions,
created by scientists ambitious of distinction, are visited
by thousands of the people, and especially by the mechanics
and the artisans. Other Australasian cities are anxious to
follow the example of opening their places of public resort on
Sundays; for the unsectarian press is advocating and de-
manding this concession. It ridicules the prejudice of per-
petuating, with all its rigid formality and stupid ignorance,
the Puritan and unmusical Sabbath under the sunny skies of
the South. In the statistical tables appended to the article
on libraries in the last edition of the “ Encyclopaedia
Britannica,” the Melbourne Public Library has the no mean
distinction of having the largest collection of books in the
British colonies. Its shelves are enriched with donations
of literature from emperors and kings of Europe. Three
hundred thousand readers yearly enter each of the splendid
free public libraries of Sydney and of Melbourne; kept
open from ten in the morning until ten at night, summer
and winter. Proportionately large numbers visit the free
libraries in all the other towns and cities of Australasia.
Astronomical observatories are established at Sydney and
Melbourne. A private observatory at the town of Windsor
in New South Wales is maintained by Mr. Tebbutt, a native
of that colony. He is a devotee of science; and the Austral-
asian astronomer par excellence. Electric with apprehension
of every the faintest movement of heavenly bodies within the
radius of his unerring ken, this astronomer sits nightly in his
chair, scanning with his instruments the gorgeous panorama
of the southern skies, ablaze with stars; lighted up with
brilliant constellations, and lighted with that renowned con-
stellation, sublimest of all symbols of faith, the Everlasting
Cross. The press is constantly enriched with contributions
from the pen of this admired scientist.
Of late years a magical improvement has developed in the
science and art tastes of the people. This is important in
regard that the native-born population, who have never seen
England, is so much in the majority. In the mornings,
troops of maidens, as in England, may be seen in Austral-
Australian Mutual Provident Society.


Asian cities with their drawing materials in hand, hastening
anxiously to the academies of art. South Kensington has
influenced Australasian art in the matter of teachers. The
art of photography is practised with unexampled success.
Thousands of artist photographers find a never-ceasing
demand for their beautiful productions ; the clearness of
the air, and the marvellous brilliancy of daylight, favour
the accomplishment of the finest work An Australasian
has no need to visit Rome, and Paris, and London, with
his guineas to get his photograph taken, for he can do
better at home. H.R.H. the Princess of Wales is reported
to have pronounced the photographs taken of her two sons
at Melbourne, when they visited that port in H.M.S.
Bacchante , to be the best specimens of photographic studies
which the young Princes had procured anywhere in their
tour of the world. Every year the several Governments
and wealthy private connoisseurs, making collections of
pictures and statuary, buy, from the European exhibitions
for transmission to Australasia, examples of modern mas-
ters. Refinement is going on hand in hand with the giant
work of subjugating territory to the uses of man. Thanks
to the labours of a multitude of right-thinking pioneers,
Australasia is now so far stripped ot its primitive reputa-
tion for terrors that any, even the most timid person, may
venture there with the sure and certain hope ot meeting in
the country evidences of the highest civilisation. The
rapidity of intercommunication with Europe and the Con-
tinent has been a chief means of the rapid improvement of
taste and artistic education.
XXV.—NEWSPAPERS.
The newspaper press of Australasia is eagerly studied by
all classes. It is distinguished for the ability with which it
is conducted; its enterprise; its freedom; its independence;
and its purity of morals. It is pre-eminently loyal. It pro-
claims that all political power is a trust for the public good.
It contends for good laws, good public officers, hereditary
monarchy, virtuous citizens, justice and wise counsel. It
48,000 Policies in Force, Assuring £18,000,000.


educates the masses, who can all read and write—a proud
distinction—in the duties of citizenship, and to form an
intelligent conception of the functions, reasons, operations,
and relations of Government. It makes clear to the appre-
hension of every voter what are the reasons and the aims of
every act of legislation. It teaches that the destiny of
peoples is removed from the settlement of mere Ministers
and Cabinets, who ai’e only instruments, to the people
themselves composing the community. That, therefore,
public education must be exact and effective. The acts,
and intentions, and promises of Government are examined
critically with the keenest apprehension of the public
rights. Political impostors get severely handled. The
public right is the supreme law. Most cities have two
or three daily papers, besides evening and weekly
illustrated journals. First-rate artists are engaged on the
pictorial papers. Every new township sets up a printing-
press and circulates a journal, which is the echo of its
district, and clamours for its rights. Newspapers may be
likened to a glass in which the face of society is minutely
reflected ; and every workman in Australasia can buy a
cheap evening paper, which tells him what has gone on uj) to
that morning in every part of the world ; because great cost
is incurred for d*ily press telegrams of the latest London,
American, and European news by cable. The newspapers
compare favourably with those in England, and certainly
in respect of those published in the chief towns, in the care
given to advertisements. Profits are large, because, recog-
nising Macaulay’s dictum that “advertising is to business
what steam is to machinery—the grand propelling power,”
the mercantile classes advertise vigorously. One of the
Australasian dailies nets forty thousand pounds a year
profits.
XXVI.—RESPONSIBLE GOVERNMENT.
Constitutional or responsible government in Australasia
consists generally of a Governor appointed by the Crown.
And he is assisted by a local Executive Council, together
Australian Mutual Provident Society.


with what is popularly called an upper and lower House of
Parliamentary representatives. Manhood suffrage, with vote
by ballot, is to-day the basis of the representative systems
throughout these colonies. The Australasian systems unite
the free play of democratic power with the vital principle
of the British system ; and all work very smoothly. Human
freedom, freedom of land, indeed freedom of every kind
which constitutes the soul of right progress, is what is para-
mount in Australasia. And freedom in this extended sense
is indispensable to the development of human well-being.
Struggles have been gone through to secure this, in
which the freedom of the press and universal liberty have
triumphed. But licence is vigorously forbidden and
repressed. Common sense reigns. Ho governing families
exist in Australasia. The humblest citizen, as an elector, is
eligible for a seat in the Houses of Bepresentatives. He
may form one of the members of any Ministry in power. On
certain simple conditions every male person of twenty-one is
entitled to participate in the suffrage, because every person
of twenty-one is able to read, write, and perform the common
operations of arithmetic, and contributes his mite to tlie
mild taxation which supports the Governments. Universal
teaching precedes universal enfranchisement.
The present Chief Justice of New South Wales, Sir
James Martin, Knt., began life in Sydney as a poor boy in
the office of a clever solicitor. Men climb to honour by
prudence and industry. Martin clung to his work ; informed
his mind ; and leagued himself with the master spirits of
his time. While training for the law he ventured into
politics; entered Parliament; was called to the bar; be-
came Q.C., and was knighted for political services ; having
won a place as political chief of three separate Ministries.
He accomplished some useful legislation. And was ap-
pointed to the highest place on the judgment-seat, amid the
unanimous approval and applause of his colony. A notable,
if not the most notable, instance in Australasia, of a man
beginning literally with nothing, and raising himself to
a pinnacle of literary and legal distinction on which he
stands, as it were, the keeper of the conscience of his Queen.
Total Annual Income, £850,000.


XXVI!.—PUBLIC WORKS.
Public works contracted for by Government are many
and costly. The expansion of population means a con-
tinuous expenditure on the part of the Governments to
provide appliances for the service of the people in every
part of the country, and the employment of labour. Eight
hours a day is the regulation labour service. Wages for
labour are higher than in any other country. Fortifications
and defences, wharfs, harbours, breakwaters, lighthouses,
roads, and bridges where none existed before, public offices
for the transaction of Government business, public schools,
water supply to towns and cities, drainage, surveying public
lands generally, and a multitude of other works at present
under the management of the supreme Governments, inde-
pendently of municipal construction and expenditure locally,
make the country fit as a habitation for population. Nor is
Government and municipal action combined, the only motive
power at work. Private expenditure promotes the bustle
of improvement. The unabated demand for houses and the
activity in the building and timber trades throughout the
country is table-talk in Australasia. Spacious warehouses
and commodious factories in elaborate styles of architecture
are rising in every centre of business. Old structures of a
bygone generation, whose principles of architecture and
notions of commerce were primitively rude, are being swept
away without a murmur ; and on their sites, which have
augmented in value, substantial and artistic substitutes are
rising with a capacity for prospective commerce and a
solidity in structure which means undoubted continuance.
XXVIII.—MUNICIPALITIES.
Free representative, municipal, or local self-government,
with wide powers conferred by acts of the several colonial
Parliaments, is very generally established and extending
throughout Australasia. Macaulay says : “ The science of
government is an experimental science, and therefore it is
like all other experimental sciences, a progressive science.”
Australian Mutual Provident Society.


Self-government has a commanding influence on the
improvement of the towns. Its action promotes enter-
prising individuality. Annual elections place the control
of affairs directly under the keen observation of the legalised
electors, who take a studious interest in the course of affairs.
The extent and value of municipal property has gone on
increasing enormously during the last five years. No more
solid illustration can be given of the general diffusion of
prosperity among the people in a country that never bothers
its head about checks to population, or raves about other
equally absurd doctrines projected into the domain of
practical politics. Increase of the aggregate of real property
means that at great cost, on principles approved by sani-
tary science, this busy people have been actively employed
enlarging cities ; building and beautifying towns ; planting
orchards; constructing docks and harbours; roads and
bridges; churches and schools; mills and manufactories.
Architects and surveyors, engineers, builders and contractors,
have had and continue to enjoy great business. Ten years
ago when things were a little dull, the boldest merchant
anxious to speculate in land, dared not have predicted so
universal a revolution and a stir. The working classes, —
carters, carpenters, cabmen, painters, masons, shipwrights,
blacksmiths, carriers, and, in fact, every hewer of wood and
every drawer of water, every thrifty, respectable, earnest
artisan of whatsoever grade has participated in the uni-
versal largess of good times.
These working men for the most part live in and enjoy
their own freehold brick-built homes, acquired by the sweat
of their brow, on terms of the easiest periodic payments to
societies or individuals. The genius of creation has been
tipping with her golden wand the members of the mercantile
classes also. Favoured by rail and trams, these operators
for the rise, have gone out from living in the cities to the
suburbs of them, steeped in eternal loveliness of beauty.
Men in large and successful business, nursed into import-
ance by skill, by patience and perseverance, have made
themselves mansions in town and country, fitted with every
modern convenience that money commands in Europe, and
Invested Funds, Four Millions Sterling.


hidden by gardens all ablaze with a wealth of bloom and
beauty not common in cooler climes ; at a cost of five, ten,
fifteen, twenty, thirty, fifty thousand pounds apiece.
Money can buy and money can cause to be shipped across
the seas to Australasians every benefit in ordinary enjoyed
by Europeans prejudiced in favour of home; the glass of
fashion and the mould of form. The reputation that age
alone confers, the ai'tists and surroundings of art that
centuries have insensibly enriched Europe with, cannot
be theirs. The spirit of art is abroad, however, among
the colonists, and is already making itself felt. For
solid material, full and plenty, and propei'ty for the masses,
all hail the goodly frame of Australasia; where there is
growing up a race of pioneers who are full of hope, and who
are setting their hands with miraculous ardour to the
industries that enrich and the arts that civilise mankind.
Reckon therefore that unless by their own fault no real
lack of social comfort now blights lives of active enterprise
spent at the Antipodes.
And this need not be wondered at. If we take the
numeral six as representing the units of the average
Australasian family circle, then it follows that all the
plenty pictured in these “ Fifty Facts," —the comfort-
able cottages, the nice farms, the fine houses, the good
living, the magnificent herds, the vast territories, the brave
overhanging firmament itself glorious with sunlight by day,
and in the night brilliant as polished silver fretted with
golden fire, —is enjoyed by only half-a-million of families.
While if we put five as the units of the average family
circle in Great Britain, rich as she is, we gather from the
figures of the census that on her narrow area of land,
which is not one twenty-fifth part of the size of Australasia,
seven millions of families are crowded together. And yet
further afield, if we assume four to represent the units of the
average family circle in France, by a parity of reasoning
we find that, there on an area of country which is not one
fifteenth part of the size of Australasia, nine millions of
families commingle and traffic. Lady Verney’s recent contri-
butions in the Contemporary Review concerning the peasant
Australian Mutual Provident Society.


proprietors in France, have opened wide our eyes. She has
disclosed to us the scenes of their small, miserable holdings,
wretched, uncomfortable cottages badly furnished and worse
drained, the ruinous expenses in the transfer of land, their
bad food, their poverty and general barbarism. Twenty-
five per cent, of that population can neither read nor write;
and that it was impossible to conceive a life so absolutely
baire of interest, or amusement, or comfort, or refinement of
any kind. Half the population of France is settled on
farms and engaged in agriculture, such as it is. And one-
third of the whole adult population of the country is entirely
untaught. The taxes are ponderously oppressive on the
people. That there was absolutely no house in any of the
French villages where the chief farmers, the lawyer, the
doctor, and the clergyman, showed a higher standard of
refinement, or information, or of comfort; all was squalor
and ignorance alike. Even the priest in France was a peasant
like the rest. But it is not thus in Protestant Australasia.
The native-born colonists of that happy land, descendants
of British ancestors, should feel proud that owing to the
untiring goodness among them of many and useful workers
for the public weal, they can exhibit to the world a reckon-
ing creditable to their patriotism and their progress in
the van of civilisation. Their great progenitor, England, is
a mother of nations; of splendid men and noble women—
paragons of their kind ; insular and invulnerable ; pre-
eminent in might and means; mistress of the seas in
war and commerce ; furnished with matchless mansions for
the rich and well-to-do among her toiling millions; blessed
with harbours, docks, ports and rivers, crammed with ships
and merchandise from every nation under heaven.
“ This land of such dear souls, this dear, dear land,
Dear for her reputation through tho world,”
is the asylum of liberty for mankind. But there is a spectre
in her house. Read what Mr. Bright said to the Glasgow
students in March last when he was made Rector of the
University of that great manufacturing city: —
“ But what I want to know is about the people, about the
Divisible Surplus last 5 years, £5f5,000.


millions, about the dwellers in cottages, and in the homes of one
room. In the city of Glasgow alone 41 families out of every 100
families live in homes having only one room. And further 37 per
cent, beyond the 41 dwell in homes of only two rooms. That 78
per cent., or nearly four-fifths of the population of the city of
Glasgow, dwell in homes of one or two rooms. In Scotland nearly
one-third of the whole people dwell in homes of only one room. That
more than two-thirds, or 70 per cent, of the whole people of
Scotland, dwell in homes with not more than one or two rooms.
With all the inventions of this century, with all the industry, with
the extraordinary growth of wealth, with our enormous imports and
exports, with all our shipping, this manner of living of the people
in Scotland is a sad fact. What of the people, and what of the
millions, we find in poverty and misery ? What does it mean when
all these families are living in homes of one room ? As need
begets need, so poverty and misery beget poverty and misery; and
so in all our great towns there is misery and helplessness such as I
have described. I see a vision of millions of families, —not indi-
viduals, but families, —fathers, mothers, brothers, sisters, —passing
ghastly and sorrow-stricken, in never-ending procession from their
cradle to their grave! I plead not for the great and for the rich,
I plead for the millions who live in the homes with only one room! ”
Barbarous spectacle ! This sublime vision of the misery of
living millions, in a rich and aristocratic country, as seen
by one of its great statesmen, harrows up the soul, and
makes each particular hair of the beholder to stand on end.
Appalled at the sorry sight that his realistic genius had
conjured up, the orator might well turn his head and
hide his face. He found relief from the prospect of such
pain by casting his eyes beyond the seas, towards aland that
beggars description, where pleasure and profit make short
the hours. He looked on Australasia,
“ We will go to the other side of the globe, and look in upon our
friends and brethren in the Australian colonies. Last summer, I
had the pleasure of hearing a very interesting speech from Sir
Henry Parkes, the late and then the Prime Minister of the colony
of New South Wales. Sir Henry Parkes went so far as to say that
he thought the time was not very remote when the Australian
colonies would approach the population of the mother country, and
with regard to wealth he gave us some astounding facts. He
mentioned one man with whom he was acquainted, who is the
owner of not fewer than 1,200,000 head of cattle and 250,000
sheep, and whose valued property he believed was more than four,
and probably not- less than five, millions sterling. I need not tell
Australian Mutual Provident Society.


this audience that if there be great colonies at the other side of the
world- growing rapidly in population, growing not less rapidly in
wealth, growing in all the instincts of country, and of patriotism,
the probability is, the certainty is, that such a state of things tends
by an unalterable law to a disposition to self-government, un-
controlled by a country however much respected and admired and
loved ten thousand or fifteen thousand miles from those shores.
Well, I think there is nothing in our history more to be admired
than these colonies, the way they have conducted themselves for
many years past, even almost from their foundation, their growth
in everything a nation should grow and expand in. I hope in all
time to come, be it under the sentimental attachment or be it under
some other system, that no accident may happen to disturb the
perfect harmony and the brotherhood that exists between the
Australian England and the England of the United Kingdom.
(Cheers.) But it will require great wisdom at home in our Colonial
Office and great moderation on the part of the colonies if the
present system is not to be at some not remote time disturbed.”
XXIX.—CLIMATE.
Climate signifies that peculiar condition of the atmos-
phere in regard to heat and moisture which prevails in
any given place. The • mean temperature of the same
latitudes varies in different parts of the globe. As Aus-
tralasia lies partly in the southern temperate zone, and
partly in the torrid, the climate is in some parts warm,
though the heat is generally less oppressive than in the
same latitudes in Asia and in Africa. In other parts it is
temperate and mild. Every degree and quality of tem-
perature may be found in Australasia, from dry heat in
the very north, and which is by no means killing, to par-
ticularly mild and cold snowy weather in the south. Few
countries can show such varieties of climate, be productive
of such sensual happiness, grow such a diversity of vege-
table products, and yet be so well adapted to the European
constitution. A true winter of ice and snow may be
experienced on high alpine table-lands in New Zealand,
where lofty mountains, many clothed in perpetual snow,
meet the eye everywhere, and present really beautiful,
sublime scenery, scarcely to be surpassed in grandeur.
Epidemics are almost unknown in Australasia. Indulgent
Total Profit divided, £916,168.


nature seems to have exempted it from many of those
epidemic evils which are so fatal in other parts of the
world. The mean temperature of the four seasons in
London is 50° Fahr., in New Zealand 55° Fahr., in New
South Wales it is 65° Fahr, almost equal to that of Lisbon ;
and hence the beauty of the orange groves in that colony.
The fabled gardens of the Hesperides were not more lovely.
Malaria in Australasia is no more to be feared than on the
top of Chimborazo. Habits of industry and enterprise
are fostered by the elastic tone and perpetual motion of the
atmosphere. It is a delusion to think it too hot a country
for Britons. Thousands try it and flourish under it, even
at the most arduous work. The liver is not prejudicially
affected there as it is in India. The fine appearance of
the Australasian cricketers is proof of the quality of the
climate; and the sound health enjoyed by returned English
batsmen cannot be gainsaid. The official statistics for the
whole continent, as to births and deaths, furnish over-
whelming testimony to its climatic goodness. The tempe-
ratures of Australasia and India differ : that of India is
a moist heat, enervating, killing; that of Australasia is dry,
exhilarating, health-giving.
XXX.—RAIN AND THE RAINBOW.
Rain is the “ daily bread ” of the Australasian squatter,
and agriculturist. When it rains they measure the downfall
of it daily with a self-acting instrument, which is called the
“ Rain Gauge.” On many days there is none to measure.
But when the grateful rain does come down upon the
expectant earth, and Phoebus, the god of day, is shining
with his accustomed glory and grandeur, a rare treat awaits
every lover of the picturesque. The rainbow comes out
and spans the skies. It comes out with a poetry, a beauty,
and an intensity of blended radiance which is never
witnessed in northern latitudes. The devotees of aesthe-
ticism in presence of such divine splendour would fall
down and worship silently so exquisite a manifestation of
the Creator’s combination of colours. He is present. “ I
Australian Mutual Provident Society.


do set my bow in the cloud, and it shall be for a token of
a covenant between me and the earth.”
It is said that the country is too dry in some seasons, and
the rains partial. Prolonged dryness does not jeopardise
seriously the circumstances of those persons who dwell in
towns, though the want of rain at times is irksome and
inconvenient. Drought has a more tremendous meaning in
it, however, for the dweller in the interior ; for the owner of
country, and herds of cattle, and flocks of sheep which
commonly feed on the natural herbage, and the moisture
of the water-courses, and the land. Foresight exercised
by the “Shepherd King” diminishes his losses in the day
of danger. He must have given heed betimes to the
conservation of water. This means the timely outlay of
money for permanent improvements; and as the flocks
increase improvements proceed. Pharaoh in Egypt looked
out a man discreet and wise, to set him over the land as a
ruler, during the seasons of abundance ) and the ruler
wisely gathered all the food for store to the land against
the seasons of famine. Dr. Moorhouse, the indefatigable
Bishop of Melbourne, when asked to offer up a special
prayer to God for rain, said, “No, people, you have
wasted the waters of plenty, and now scarcity is only a
judgment on your foolishness.”
The Dutch, a tenacious people, have wrought miracles
of engineering at vast cost to save and reclaim their loved
land from the all-devouring sea. Poets and historians never
weary in telling the story of the determined handiwork of
this artistic, wealthy people. Need one despair that in course
of years, as capital and population increase, the Austral-
asians will exhibit equally as bold a genius in bringing
water in for their uses, as the gallant Dutch have shown
in keeping water out 1 Already enormous expenditure has
been incurred by Australasian colonists in the interior in
providing, maintaining, and conserving water in a thousand
different ways. But the work and expense are limitless
and labour-absorbing. Australasian cities are well provided
with waterworks, constructed at vast expense, and which
furnish abundance of the finest water for the use of house-
Total Death Claims paid, £1,500,000.


holds, and manufactories, and the supply of the baths with
which every Australasian house of respectability is fur-
nished. It is believed that the continent beneath the
surface, at considerable depths, is one vast liquid reservoir.
In many localities wells have been sunk down to solid
rock and through it to sweet and clear water. Hundreds
of windmills act as the motive power to raise this price-
less fluid into reservoirs for the uses of man and beast in
the interior of the country.
XXXI.—HEALTH AND LONGEVITY.
The birth-rate of the Australasian colonies is averaged
at 36 per thousand; the death-rate averages only 14 per
thousand ; while that of London, reckoned the healthiest
city in the world, registers at least 21. Taken from
recognised official sources, such figures speak trumpet-
tongued for the soundness of the health and overwhelming
prosperity of the population in Australasia; where labour
is never hindered for a day by the severities of either
extreme heat or bitter cold. Languor and lassitude never
creep over the system. Boundless energy marks the action of
the Australasian ; self-reliance, and a determination, stimu-
lated by the climate, to master every difficulty. People
invited to emigrate should consider how hard it is for
Britons to encounter extremes of heat or of cold; and care-
fully avoid those magnificently-advertised outlets, where
labour finds itself, on arrival, terribly handicapped, and
life curtailed of its pleasures by the overpowering heat or
lengthened cold of such misrepresented territories. No
such fate awaits the emigrant to Australasia, which is cer-
tainly the paradise of the poor man. In all European
countries, except Ireland, the death-rate is much higher
than in Australasia ; and “at all times it has been re-
marked by ethnologists and acclimatisers that it is easier
by far to carry men and beasts from the poles towards the
tropics, than from the tropics to the colder regions.”
Australian Mutual Provident Society.


XXXII.-SPORTS: PUBLIC PARKS.
Large public parks planted with trees, and in which
the grass is kept as green as in an English meadow, and
recreation reserves, in which outdoor amusements are daily
indulged in, are dedicated, fenced in, and maintained by the
Governments for the free use of the jolly and hospitable
people, who
“ as they go,
Trip it on the light fantastic toe ” ;
and who are liberal, enterprising, and prompt to take
advantage of every lesson, and of everything new in
mechanism and art. But whatever of liberality or of
interest may have guided Australasian Governments in the
dedication of public reserves, to act as lungs to their great
cities and towns, not nearly enough has been done in this
direction in a country which has such a vastitude of Crown
lands in possession. Posterity should be had in view, and
the prodigious future. Consider London. Notwithstanding
the beauty of English country scenery, and the ease with
which the populace on foot can walk out into the country,
yet that great capital is so furnished with parks and
pleasaunces for the use of her toil and weather-worn
millions, that no city in the world, in this view, is her
rival. And the life of Australasians is essentially an out-
of-doors life, induced by the beneficence of the climate.
Climate and soil have a potent influence upon the tempers
and the dispositions of a people.
Football, cricket, lawn-tennis, bowling on the green,
coursing, fishing, shooting, boating and yachting, indeed all
out-door sports are practised with uncommon ardour
throughout Australasia. Every sport has its clubs. Prizes
and rivalry are constantly on the board, “ Nothing
pleases me more in this splendid new country than to find
that the people, in their attachment to all good old English
sports and amusements, are thorough chips of the old block,”
said an enthusiastic English Governor, who was a rare
patron of sport in Australasia.
Thousands of bicycles have been imported, the use of
Members may Travel Free Everywhere.
• e 2


which is an exercise truly English. Though a reading people
the Australasian does not become a recluse. The beautiful
climate forbids that, and woos him to the development of
muscle in the open. He mixes gallantly with the world,
and learns wisdom out of women’s eyes. Public holidays
are numerous, and the masses take their pleasure with a reso-
lution and a will that strike the stranger with wonder.
Chess, draughts, and billiards are met with everywhere,
though a master in them has not yet arisen. The games on
the cards are whist, cribbage, napoleon, sixty-six, euchre,
poker, 100. Almost every form of physical and mental activity
is encouraged by specific combinations of its worshippers.
Electric lighting is now in use at railway stations and other
large workshops, and in the parks, introduced by specu-
lators on the spot. Companies have been formed to promote
the use of the light both in town and country; and tourna-
ments and games are conducted admirably by its aid.
XXXIII.—HORSES AND RACING.
Horse-racing is therefore vastly patronised. Weight-
for-age racing is the fancy thing. The amount of money
connected with the sport that changes hands yearly is very
large. The whole country is overrun with racing clubs;
and the arrangraents for racing, and the breed and pedigree
of horses are discussed with lively satisfaction, north, south,
east, and west. The Australasian youngster is passionately
fond of the hoi’se. He loves the horse, treats him well,
and judges of his points and capabilities with the skill of a
connoisseur. At the Melbourne Cup Paces, one of the
most memorable annual events in Australasia, upwards of
twelve thousand admissions to the grand stand and paddock
alone were registered last year at 12s. Gd. per head. The
public attendance at these particular races commonly
averages a hundred thousand from every part of Austral-
asia. Every comfort and facility is provided by road and
rail for the safety and happiness of the pleasure-seekers.
Art is long, life is short, is the cry; and therefore Aus-
tralasian pleasure-seekers, in town or country, under the
influence of benign skies, certainly enjoy life to the full while
Australian Mutual Provident Society.


it lasts. Valuable race and draught horses are regularly-
imported into Australasia from England ; but the risk of the
voyage to the animals is considerable. India buys from
Australasia numbers of horses very suitable for her cavalry
re-mounts ; and a very lucrative business in this trade is
conducted by skilled dealers. It is said of the Australasian
cavalry horse in India, that when in the field, in the excite-
ment of action, in the most impetuous charge, he will not
tread upon the fallen or the slain.
XXXIV.-SOCIETIES AND SHOWS
Pastoral, agricultural, and horticultural societies are
universal. Annual shows in every district, with the distri-
bution of valuable prizes of money and plate, stimulate
production, and progress, and knowledge. About ten
thousand or more species of flowering plants exist in
Australasia —more than is to be found in the whole of
Europe. An exhibitor at one of the recent exhibitions
showed 867 varieties of seeds of trees, shrubs, &c., indigenous
to the soil. State nurseries have been established, and the
world is ransacked by agents to introduce every growth
from foreign parts that will flourish and add variety to the
natural beauties of the indigenous flora. Private florists
and seed-merchants do well. Attention is given to stocking
parks and recreation reserves with handsome plants, and of
lining public promenades with shade trees. And this care is
not lavished solely on the cities mostly visited by strangers ;
for in the interior, towns, having the advantages of muni-
cipal government, do not overlook that comfort and beauty
should enter into their designs for the improvement of their
homes, and their streets, and their squares. For “a thing
of beauty is a joy for ever.” The public botanic gardens in
the several capital .cities of Australasia are miracles of
colour, art, and science. Thither, daily, resort for mental
refreshment, readers, and artists, and thinkers who love
to sit, or walk, or meditate, or paint, amidst flowers and
fountains of sun-lit living waters, which rival in beauty
the groves of Academe. “ God Almighty first planted a
garden; and, indeed, it is the purest of human pleasures ! ”
Members can Live in any Part of Australasia.


XXXV.—PIANOS AND SEWING-MACHINES.
The piano and the sewing-machine are to-day indispen-
sable articles of use in almost every household in Australasia,
even in the far interior. And there also, in the absence of
rarer works, the inside of the humblest hut will, not infre-
quently, be found illuminated by the black and white and
coloured pictures of the Illustrated London News , and the
Graphic; or other pictorial publications; more often German
than French and American. These again will be supple-
mented by possibly three or four cheaply framed oleographs
after Raphael, Titian, or Rubens; or the modern artists ;
with which, in defiance of true art, Germany has inundated
Australasia. Music is cultivated with success, and appre-
ciative audiences gather in halls suitably arranged to listen
to the rendering of the sacred and classic compositions of
the masters.
“ If music be the food of love, play on.
Give me excess of it;
That strain again ; it had a dying fall;
O, it came o’er my ear like the sweet south,
That breathes upon a bank of violets,
Stealing, and giving odour.”
Numbers of American cabinet organs have been im-
ported into Australasia, The Queen has recently ordered a
splendid one in London.
XXXVI.—RELIGION.
Happily Protestantism dominates Australasia. The
voluntary system prevails throughout the territory in reli-
gious matters. It leaves entire toleration for every deno-
mination of faith that can be conceived. No State Church
exists. The Church of England was the Church of the
pioneers. Pioneers in every cause confessedly have the
roughest work. Bishops and pastors of that faith, resolute
and pious, spread its influence throughout Australasia.
Broughton, Marsden, Perry, Selwyn, and Patterson, names
familiar in onr mouths as household words, shed a glory on
the cause espoused. Scorning soft delights, but majestic in
Australian Mutual Provident Society.


face of moving accident by flood and field encountered in
pastoral visitations, embracing thousands of miles of hardy
travel on sea and land, on horse and foot, summer and winter,
these devoted heroes of their faith never spared themselves
when planting out their church and schools and teaching
the use of that beautiful ritual which must ever be a part
of the classics of our language. Nor must the nobleness
of the late Bishop of Newcastle in New South Wales be
overlooked. Unlike those priests who rather go to shear
their flocks than feed them, this good man left at his death
a fortune of a quarter of a million for ever, for church
extension in Australasia. Together with these, one of the
greatest benefactors who ever blessed Australasia with his
disinterested services in the cause of morality and good
government was the Rev. John Dunmore Lang. This able
man was a model of untiring industry, perseverance, and
moral courage. He made the voyage in sailing-ships to and
fro between England and Australasia eight times. Un-
daunted by difficulties, he pursued his onward way, and
worked for the good of others, as long as breath was left him.
Charles Lamb, in a humorous letter to his friend, Mr.
Justice Field, who was a judge in Australia during the
early “dismal swamp” days, grimly pokes fun at his
Honour, by asking him if he were at all like Diogenes,
going about with a lantern all day amid the then moral
gloom, trying to find an honest man 1 All this is changed.
A stupendous revolution has taken place, moral and
material. Other religious faiths have followed in the
footsteps of the Church of England. All work together
to-day for right; and all are liberally supported their
respective adherents. When visiting Australasia an
observer wonders at the splendour and number of the
cathedral and church buildings erected already by this
active and munificent people. Roman Catholic, Church of
England, Presbyterian, and Wesleyan structures, besides
structures erected for other faiths, are testimonies to the
earnestness and realities of the beliefs of the people.
But Australasians gifted with independence of mind
have no sympathy with the solicitations for monetary help
Policies with Surrender Value do not Lapse.


imprudently made sometimes in England by visiting leaders
in Australasian churches. “Is it not like sending coals to
Newcastle, to provide money for a country in which,
at one time at least, the gold was as plentiful as pebbles
on the road, where by mining operations vast quantities
of the precious metal can still be secured, and where the
colonists have amassed such x’apid and gigantic fortunes 1 ”
asks, with a sardonic smile, a Church of England newspaper
in England, pointing the finger of scorn at a recent raid
made by a dignitary of the Australasian Church of England
upon English purses. The numerous churches in Austral-
asia, of every denomination, are founded and voluntarily
well supported by the people in town and country. An
ordinary Australasian village settlement is thus truly
pictured by a close observer : —“ Snugly planted on the
margin of the beach, embosomed amid gentle hills and
watered by a descending stream, it displays its granite
church and chapels, its rustic mills and brewery, snug
hostelries, stores, and primitive shops, but affecting no
town airs, stands out before the world a robust, thriving-
looking village, famed throughout the district for its troops
of well-conditioned children, pretty women, fine mutton,
horses, honey, and dairies of Devonshire cream.”
English, Irish, Scotch, Germans, and Australasians living
compacted in the same village with the parsons of the parish
as a community of equals, and doing well, and having
plenty of elbow-room and to spare, together with a few
Chinese engaged as servants and market gardeners, coupled
with the greater romance and hardiness of Australasian
life, impart a social variety, vigour, boldness, and originality
of character to these new-born settlements, of which few
traces are found in the small town populations of the
mother country.
XXXVII.—POLICE, ETC.
Disciplined foot and mounted police are posted through*
out the settled or peopled districts of Australasia, dressed
in imitation of the popular British uniform. Life and
Australian Mutual Provident Society*


property are as well protected and as safe as in England.
The Volunteer movement is successfully in force; but the
total absence of Imperial regular soldiery is very noticeable
by the European visitor. He looks back and reflects that
Europe is one vast armed camp, furnished with four
millions of soldiers under arms. They imperil the peace;
they are the cause of huge taxation; and they tend to
impoverish the Governments who set them in the field.
Can it be that really man is inwardly a wild beast, but
veiled by a body, and by manners which are mere hypocrisy ;
and that he needs to go fenced about with guns and swords
as a menace to his fellows? “Notwithstanding, St. Chry-
sostom has well said with his lips of gold, ‘ The true
Shekinah is Man ’; for where else is the God’s Presence
manifested, not to our eyes only, but to our hearts, as in
our fellow-man ?
XXXVIII-ABSENCE OF POOR-RATES.
No poor-rate is levied in Australasia. Absolute distress
is rarely known. The colonists are too kind and hos-
pitable to those people wh ) suffer the slings and arrows of
outrageous fortune to permit them to pine and die without
generous succour. Unfortunates are admitted as inmates
of benevolent homes, finely built in the healthiest situations ;
periodically and rigidly inspected, to preserve them free
from dirt, foul air, or chance of disease. Public hospitals
and benevolent societies, for the sick and insane, the deaf,
the dumb, and the blind, are liberally maintained by the
voluntary contributions of the people, supplemented by
Goverament, when needed, in proportion to the public con-
tribution. Sailors’ homes are founded and furnished.
Industrial schools and reformatories, kept open, receive
destitute and deserted children. Australasians are not
wanting in melting charity—witness their munificence at
home in relief of misery, and how often they have been
thanked by Lord Mayors of London for their contributions
in aid of the needs of the stranger. It reads strangely
that in a prosperous community any cause should exist for
1883 Last Year of the Quinquennium,


charities; but “The poor always ye have with you”
is a declaration verified by the experience of every country.
In a new country there is constantly a proportion of persons
who are without kith or kin to aid them in need, and who
have not taken time by the forelock to make a suitable
provision for themselves against sickness, or old age, or
misfortune, notwithstanding many opportunities to do so
which have stared them in the face. Too late they repent
their want of wit, while strolling aimlessly, the picture of
adversity, amidst a cold, selfish, busy, proud and haughty
throng of well-fed citizens.
XXXIX.—FRIENDLY SOCIETIES.
But Friendly Societies exist. They are associations
chiefly of working men, whose object it is, by means of
small periodical payments, to provide for medical and
monetary relief in sickness, and for payments to the
families of members at death of themselves or their wives.
They are regulated under the Friendly Societies Acts passed
by the Legislatures. Amongst other provisions they prescribe
that each society shall furnish returns annually to the
Governments, and periodically shall cause its assets and
liabilities to be valued to the satisfaction of the public
inspectors.
XL.—LAW.
Law is practised in Australasia much as it is in Great
Britain, with, in some places, the fusion of the functions of
barrister and attorney. Marked deference is paid to the
rules of the British Courts, Stationary and Circuit Courts
with itinerating judges administer justice. Prosecutions for
perjury are rare. The court of final appeal is at West-
minster. Lands, houses, and hereditaments charge hands with
such animation that lawyers find considerable occupation.
The English laws of entail and primogeniture do not exist.
The landed and personal property of persons dying intestate
is equitably divided amongst the next of kin—share and
share alike, according to degrees of blood relationship.
Australian Mutual Provident Society.


XU-CONVEYANCING BY TORRENS’ ACT.
The celebrated Torrens’ Act, for the easy transfer of
landed estate, is in force throughout Australasia. It pro-
vides a safe, cheap, ready, expeditious method of dealing
with real estate; whether by way of sale, lease, or mortgage.
It is a colonial contrivance named after its clever author. If
one acre or any specific quantity of Government measured
land, up to, say, 640 acres in one block, or even more, be
bought by a person as a freehold from the Crown, the
buyer gets in his own name, in satisfaction of his title to
the land, a parchment “ Certificate of Title.” This parch-
ment contains a description of the portion of land intended
to be conveyed, and a licensed surveyor’s coloured sketch of
it, and the land surrounding it. The “ Title ” is formally
registered by Government in the Public Titles Office, which
is under the control of an official called the Registrar-
General. The “ Title ” is then open at any time for
searches of it by the public who may be interested in, or
in quest of, particulars of incumbrances thereon if any ; for
incumbrances are also registered as they occur.
Every dealing with the land, every incumbrance on it
created, and every discharge of such, has to be recorded in
the office of the Registrar-General, and concurrently inscribed
on the face of the specific “Certificate of Title.” The “Title”
always carries distinctly its history on its face. These pre-
cautions are public safeguards against fraud. If the owner of
a “ Certificate of Title ” and the land described in it sells half
of this land or any portion of it whatever, the existing
“ Certificate of Title ” is returned to Government. In
exchange therefor two new “Certificates of Title ” are issued,
the one in the name of, and to, the new buyer, describing
and accurately sketching the subdivisional portion bought
by him, and the other in the name of, and to, the original
owner, describing and sketching his unsold balance of land
remaining. The two new certificates are complements of the
original, and have inscribed on them an index to their
origin. Reversely “ Certificates of Title ” can bo amalga-
mated. If one man becomes owner in fee of several sub-
Branch Offices in all Australasia.
• p 2


divided portions, the respective existing “ Certificates of
Titles ” are sent back to Government with a requisition to
supply in exchange one new “ Certificate of Title ” for the
amalgamated lots in the name of the new owner. It
describes and sketches accurately the amalgamated portions.
Every “ Certificate,” if not an original, carries a reference
to its predecessor, and no difficulty is experienced in tracing
back land to its original owner—the Crown. A leasehold
or other interest is treated in precisely the same manner.
In every-day practice, the beautiful simplicity of this system
is only excelled by the charming economy of the charges.
And, if desired, a layman can do the necessary writings on
the “ forms ” without the aid of an attorney, although in
practice the attorney is employed ninety-nine times out of a
hundred.
XLII.—LABOUR AND LOVE.
Demand for labour in Australasia is continuous and never
satisfied. The regulation hours of labour for the artisan are
shorter, and the days in the year during which he can work
are more numerous in Australasia, than they are either in
England, or in the United States. There is more beef, and
more bread, and more beer, and more money, and more com-
forts every way about in Australasia for the artisan, than
in either of the other two countries. The thrifty, earnest,
enterprising, sober worker in Australasia, independent and
hopeful, is in reality in a position every way superior to a
king—for “ uneasy is the head that wears a crown.” Never
were crowned heads in their heart of hearts more uneasy at
the prospects of the future of monarchy and the destiny of
dynasties than they are to-day. They find themselves face
to face with the propounders of Socialistic, Nihilistic, and
Communistic doctrines. These are honeycombing the ranks
of over-populated society' in Europe, and their votaries
are seeking opportunity to rise up and cast down, if they
can, the propertied classes, eclipsing thereby the gaiety of
nations. The problem of government, the equal adjustment
of common human rights, as the light of education spreads,
was never more difficult than to-day for rulers in Europe.
Australian Mutual Provident Society.


Evil stimulates good; and were evil to cease, good itself
would decline. So the problem is endless. But these
tremendous European difficulties and dangers to the body
politic do not yet darken and agitate society in Australasia.
Peace in the domain of politics, and health, and strength,
and length of days and prospects of easily acquired fortune,
attend upon the citizens of that magnificent dominion. A
young and growing country with little population, abounding
with possibilities, is a real and natural home for an educated
European artisan ; and he should master any reluctance to
making some effort to go and try it. Mere clerks, and
governesses, and people without aptitude for trade, or with-
out a profession, or a power of adaptability to urge their
own interests, should think twice before actually tempting
fortune among strangers, at a distance from their friends at
home ; though, as infallible experience proves, the stranger
is often a more real friend on a pinch, than a blood relation
at home, whose despicable heart is bound in the bands of
selfishness. Moliere, in Harpagon, has drawn the likeness
of a demon of the kind for our instruction. We know his
measure, and understand with what loathing humanity looks
upon this relative, so truly painted by the master.
Not every person is fitted by strength of limb and
policy of mind to vanquish the obstacles which cumber the
roads to success and to eminence, even in a new country
destitute of tradition and vested interests. Something is
required in the emigrant of that spirit which moved the
Bruce of Bannockburn to victory after he had seen the
spider gain its point on the thirteenth attempt; a species of
cold-blooded audacity is wanted, which makes a way for
itself when it cannot find one. One repulse should not
cause a man to abandon the object that he desires to
accomplish.
“ This is the excellent foppery of the world!
When we are sick in fortune (often the surfeit
Of our own behaviour) we make guilty of our
Disasters the sun, the moon, and the stars! ”
The promise of the benefits to be gained by emigrants to
Australasia is confirmed by the sure and infallible test of
The Oldest Australasian Mutual Life Office,


experience. Notwithstanding the vast progress made of
late years, Australasia is only in her infancy. There was,
there is, and there will he a brilliant field for foresight and
perseverance to work in. The ring is not so crowded there
as in a densely packed circus of combatants like Great
Britain. Small industrial capitalists with their families,
and some ability in means and choice of friends; farmers
and sons of farmers having practical acquaintance with
agriculture, and management of land and sheep and cattle ;
with capital perhaps of one thousand to three thousand
pounds or more, can scarce fail of ultimate success and
fortune in so great a field for the exercise of their know-
ledge and acquired skill. The number of agricultural hold-
ings there compared to population is larger than anywhere
in the world. Artisans with some technical knowledge,
and if furnished with some little capita', quickly make
headway. If one avenue of labour is undesirable, others are
open without question at such rates as promise comforts
superior to the average in other countries. It is a question
of eyes and no eyes. With eyes, you will certainly meet
and shake hands with dame Fortune. She is notoriously a
fickle jade. Without eyes perhaps you will miss her, and
suffer the whips and scorns of time. Not so many eyes are
in quest of fortune in Australasia, with her expanding re-
sources, as in old and more thickly-peopled places worn with
taxation. The food of labourers is more varied and more
abundant, the clothing generally better, and the housing for
them more comfortable and more wholesome in Australasia,
than anywhere else. The Marquis of Salisbury, addressing
the members of the New Junior Conservative Club at Bir-
mingham in March last, is reported to have said :
“ The Government were trustees for the nation. One of the
most burning public questions in Britain is the question of housing
the working classes in our great cities —a problem which more
than any other concerned the moral, the physical, and the spiritual
welfare of thousands of our fellow-countrymen. House property
is overburdened with rates in England. The disinclination of
capitalists to build houses for the working classes arose from the
fact that they would not pay. We must try and bring about a
more equitable adjustment of taxation which shall exempt from
Australian Mutual Provident Society.


this overwhelming burden the already overburdened houses of the
poor, and so get rid of the unwholesome and demoralising habitations
which too many of our working classes are compelled to put up with.”
After centuries of legislation this is the position in which
thousands of the middle classes and the poor in England
find themselves owing to the incidence of the imposts of
Government and the excessive competition to live. Great
Britain has many millionaires; but many more poor and
miserable in their crowded homes.
But it is not thus in Australasia. Mixing with his com-
panions who have probably acquired property, and who
know all the news about others who have it, and how they
gained it, the artisan becomes as it were inspired to work
nobly in a splendid stimulating climate, and rival the plucky
doings of his mates. The artisan enters on a new life in
Australasia. He is converted from the old traditional
opinion that he was born to labour and to serve in the more
degraded ranks without a prospect of improvement; for great
cities in densely-peopled nations are so cruel and so cold.
In Australasia the artisan saves fifty or one hundred
pounds. He then gets married like an honest man. After-
wards he joins a Building Society; buys a bit of land for
his own house ; and then looks around as proud as a prince
in quest of an architect to help him build. The Austral-
asian artisan in general does not pay rent; he knows a trick
worth two of that; for mostly he lives in his own house, or
tenement, or cottage. The acquisition of property first
inspires his soul with independence, and then with respect
for himself. The philosophers who maintain that content-
ment is great gain ; that the commercial spirit of the age
smothers kindly feelings and is injurious to clanship; that
money is not the chief good ; that a little in one’s purse
with the added kindness of superiors is better than struggling
yourself with might and main for the superior place, the
legitimate reward of a laudable ambition; are kind, well-
meaning philosophers. But they are not fitted for this world
as the world wags in the nineteenth century. Their intentions
are good, but we have it on authority that good intentions
often pave the path to hell.
Invested Funds, Four Millions Sterling.


“A good old man; how well in thee appears
The constant service of the antique world,
When service sweat for duty, not for meed!
Thou art not for the fashion of these times,
Where none will sweat but for promotion.”
Gold is not to be picked up in the streets in Australasian
cities. Arms and brain usefully employed in a new career,
in a thinly-peopled and practically progressive settlement
like Australasia, soon find means, be they never so humble,
to create it; and all the comforts, and freedom, and con-
servatism that follow in the wake of gold. All the means
of action, the shapeless masses, the materials in Australasia
lie everywhere about; what is needed is the celestial fire to
change the flint into transparent crystal, bright and clear.
Provided a man has made up his mind to try the country,
and to go in and win, and before he gaily takes leave of his
British friends for a time, let him remember and ponder over
the advice of the Danbury News-Man: “ Adventurers are
not to go off to Australasia with a view to making a fortune
in three or four years without much effort, and returning to
live in a castle in England with hot and cold water on every
floor. 1 '
XLIII.—EMIGRATION.
Emigration is not looked upon by our veteran statesmen
as economically mischievous, A great and proper law
underlying emigration is : Let there be no artificial check
to the increase of population. Let marriage be encouraged.
And when the population in any country becomes excessive,
let a portion of the inhabitants of that country emigrate to
the waste and uninhabited lands in other parts of the world,
and there found new cities. In densely-peopled countries
like Great Britain there is a universal want of room for
increase. Emigration involves the mixture of races; and
this adds to the progress of the world in arts, and manners,
and strength of peoples. Emigration from the United
Kingdom, although aided by grants of money voted by the
several Australasian Legislatures to the extent already of
ten millions sterling, is objected to unreasonably by the
Australian Mutual Provident Society.


colonial working classes through a fear that the rate of
wages may be brought down. This opposition is abating a
little by reason of so many of the Australasian artisans
succeeding in becoming masters of labour.
Some people in England betray a profundity of ignorance
about colonial policy ; and the relation of economic doctrines
to new countries; where the happy conditions of affairs
generate population, just as gas-works generate gas with-
out limit for consumers. These timid people hazard the
statement that, if emigration to Australasia goes on, wages
will come down and business go to the dogs. This is wrong.
Their reasonings and their conclusion are equally false.
If Australasia with her rich and boundless territory is
prosperous and progressive, under the scattered action of
a scanty three millions of inhabitants, she certainly will, as
other nations have done, become four times as well off
with the more united and compelling genius within her
vast borders of six millions of hardy workers; concerting
and conducting enterprises with perseverance and sagacity;
striking out new and unexplored paths ; and discovering
mines of the richest wealth in every phase of the business
of life; in commerce and exchange, in arts and literature,
in jurisprudence and politics. But the prosperity won by
the mass is the result of stupendous exertions by the indi-
viduals composing it. Each shining hour must be improved.
On well - approved principles of public policy every
Briton should patriotically engage his influence in guiding
the direction of emigration. If at all, it should tend
towards our own colonial dependencies. Countries are ever
strongest which are internally powerful; and foreign
nations, by drawing away the brave and enterprising, leave
the drained country in the hands of the timid, the luxurious,
and the avaricious.
These British possessions, cf which Australasia is, if not
rapidly becoming, the greatest, should be preferred for the
reception of emigrants before foreign nations antagonistic to
Great Britain in trade, in policy, in religion, and in prestige.
Australasian progress is like the progress of the soul towards
perfection : never attaining it, but leaving room for in-
6,469 Hew Policies Last Year.


defatigable daily labour, and the employment of a thousand
means and appliances to achieve it. And therefore labourers
in every sphere of usefulness are wanted. A noble reception
awaits them, —
“ And the issue, there create,
Ever shall be fortunate.”
It is lamentable to see an exodus of skilled labour of fine
physique departing from this dear, dear land, to add their
skill and property to the means of the foreigner and the
stranger. For every mouth which enters a country with room
for expansion of population means money to that country.
Merivale says, “that to withstand emigration to foreign parts,
where our citizens on arrival are denationalised, is pure senti-
ment.” The sentiment that seeks to perpetuate a nationality
so grand, so noble, so romantic, so strong as that of England,
and discountenances a man throwing it over, ought at least
to be cultivated by the teachers of youth, and be utilised
by our statesmen, imperial and colonial. The Duke of
Cambridge, at the Mansion House, spoke of sentiment on
the change of colour in the uniform of the British army,
recently recommended. “I am sorry to hear,” are the Duke’s
words, “ that sentiment and old-fashioned notions are to be
discarded in our time. What,” he continued, “is discipline,
what is esprit de corps, but sentiment 1 ” Great Britain
makes the best possible use of the best of her surplus
population when she guides them or helps them to go to our
own colonies. Sir Julius Vogel says :—“ It is of the greatest
importance to recognise the fields for enterprise that our
own colonies offer. They may be the substitutes for those
countries the excessive desire to serve which has not in my
opinion been beneficial to England.” England can better
afford the loss of her domestics, and artisans, and agricul-
turists with capital who go into her own dependencies, than
maintain at home a surplus population in idleness, and dirt,
and destitution, and squalor, housed in hovels of one room
not weather-piroof. The hard lot of many of the working-
classes in so noble and so fine a country as England is, is
often deplored; for the climate is not congenial to the poor.
Australian Mutual Provident Society.


In London alone one hundred thousand paupers receive
daily poor relief—the dole of charity. It is sometimes
asked, are the people of England properly impressed with the
ultimate importance to themselves and to their position in the
world of making one people of the hives which leave her
shores regularly 1 Distance, expense, and fear of consequences
have hitherto retarded emigration to Australasia. Once a
colony has been planted by the heroic pioneers who lead the
way, its chief addition to population arises, it is said, not from
the comparatively scanty recruits whom it receives from the
mother country, but from the unrepressed force of human
fecundity. In a period of fifty years of emigration from
Britain only about 18,000 emigrants per annum went out
to Australasia. It is human fecundity, therefore, that has
so far populated that magnificent country. From the vernal
softness of the air, where every breeze is health, the attrac-
tions of the scenery, the brilliancy of the skies by day or
night, exciting soft and delicate desires, and the beauty of
the women, few countries are more proper to invite to
courtship. Women, with no other merit but youth,
virtue, and character, have every chance for husbands;
and (following the sage advice of one of England’s greatest
moralists) they try to get husbands there as fast as
they can.
Australasia now imports from the mother country mer-
chandise at the rate of £8 per inhabitant, while the United
States only take 125.; France, 9s. ; and Germany, Bs. worth,
all these foreign countries basing their fiscal system on the
principle of prodigious protection against the foreigner.
In proportion as Great Britain measures her fervour for free
trade, other nations seem to increase their fervour for pro-
tection. Both Germany and France are distinctly more
protectionist than they* were ten years ago. Colonial
development has, therefore, intimate relations with progress
at home. Consider that Australasia possesses great and
undeveloped resources; that her people are among the
most self-reliant, enlightened, and progressive in the world;
that the characteristic of the Australasian trade is that her
people are the greatest buyers of, and the boldest operators
Total Death Claims paid, £1,500,000.


in, any article they require of any known country ; that the
progress she has made is nothing to what it will be when
her population, by greater emigration and human increase
in a generous climate, will number, at the end of this
century, at least seven millions ; and that the fight for
business is not so much for the trade that now is, as for the
trade that is to be. At present trade follows the flag.
To summarise the advantages: there are no countries
where those who live by the sweat of their brow can realise
so nearly as in Australasia the combination of high wages,
short hours, good living, easy acquisition of property,
political freedom, and all-round excellence of climate. Try
it. Go, and make the acquaintance of a people renowned
for hospitality, whose morals are sustained by the lessons of
religion; who cultivate the sciences with persistent ardour;
in a country where, under the equal laws of reasoning
Governments, the strong cannot cripple and impose un-
checked upon the weak. In a word, go to that country,
where thought is free, and beneficent labour is rewarded with
means and appliances in abundance; and which command
in return comfort, and respect, and consideration. The
genius of the Australasian mind is this, that it is more
broad and apprehensive of intelligence than any other mind.
It sweeps with its optics the world of events, just as the
astronomer sweeps the circle of the heavens with his glass,
ready to scrutinise the immensity of space at any point of
the compass. A travelled Australasian can hold his own
in any company of talkers. He illuminates and looks upon
business from a stand-point far above a mere parish one.
His mind is to him a kingdom—peopled with thought.
XUV.—NEW GUINEA.
A number of publications issued from the various
European printing-presses during the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries descriptive of Terra Australis, or
Australia; the Asiatic Archipelago; and the countless multi-
tude of the adjacent beautiful summer islands scattered in
Australian Mutual Provident Society,


clusters over the tranquil expanse of the Pacific Ocean;
which together form the limits of the countries and seas that
are called Australasia. These books are full of thrilling
stories, romantic enterprises, and the moving accidents in
these glorious seas which befell the brave navigators who,
commanding stout little sailing-vessels, patiently explored,
league by league, those then unknown regions of the ocean,
in quest of commerce. Trade and science are the beneficent
motive powers which withdraw men from the hearth of
their ancestors \ and in that spirit of sublime confidence
which actuated Csesar and his fortunes inthe threatened boat,
European adventurers commit themselves to the hazard of the
winds and the waves to pursue fame and fortune in the wide,
wide world. They carry arts and religion with them. They
humanise barbarian races; or otherwise are the cause of
their extinction \ to make room for those fitter and superior
spirits who are born to command in new and rich countries
lying unimproved by the aboriginal inhabitants. Wrongs
done on native coloured races are not countenanced by
rightly-constituted Governments. Wrong done by the
powerful white, upon the weak and unskilled black, is not
right; it makes the judicious grieve. Yet many examples
of wrong-doing cannot be held to be a bar to stay the progress
of the white man as the commissioner of an advanced civi-
lisation, to the dark places of the earth which are full of
cruelty. The weaker race naturally falls back before the
momentum of the stronger \ the philanthropic London
Aborigines Protection Society notwithstanding. Even
Rome and Carthage fell, Venice gave place in commercial
supremacy to her rivals. And if England, hitherto the
greatest of colonising nations, is neglectful of her duty, and
shows the white feather ] and, steeped in Lethe, grows more
and more oblivious of the migration of her intellect, and of
her flesh and blood, and of her means into foreign lands
and if she omits the standing upon the vantage-ground of
truth, and to see the errors, and wanderings, and mists, and
tempests in the vale below, why, then, perhaps America
will some day supplant her in commerce and in dominion.
History is never done repealing itself, in this world of
inexhaustible wonders. Progress is perpetual and para-
Invested Funds, Four Millions Sterling.


mount. Progress is perfectly consistent with the political
views recently publicly spoken by our eminent statesman,
the Right Hon. W. E. Forster, on the annexation of Hew
Guinea. For a great and beneficent power like England, it
only remains to sustain Queensland in New Guinea. And
looking at the rapid progress of discovery and occupation
by English citizens among the islands of the Pacific ocean,
it is the duty of England, as well as her privilege, to frame
principles of international law relating to the prospects of
labour and currency in the South Pacific; with a view
to do justice there, and prevent evil between the rival
races of black and white. For the most able of our
publicists maintain that extended colonisation is needful for
the social and political health of the over-populated mother-
country. When there be great shoals of people which go
on to populate without foreseeing means of life and susten-
tation, it is of necessity that they discharge a part of their
people upon other countries.
The first distinct account we get of Papua or New Guinea,
and the Australian mainland, is seen in the following
passage in a celebrated book printed at Louvain in 1598 ;
“The Australis Terra is the most southern of all lands, and
is separated from New Guinea by a narrow strait. Its
shores are hitherto but little known, and seldom is the
country visited, unless when sailors are driven there by
storms. It is of so great extent that if it were thoroughly
explored it would be regarded as a fifth part of the world.”
New Guinea is an island of immense extent. It stretches
through twenty degrees of longitude, with a breadth in its
wider portion of between three and four hundred miles of lati-
tude. Its shores are indented by deep bays, and it is said to
be the largest island in the world next to Australia. A lofty
range of mountains rising, in the highest summit at present
known, to over 13,000 feet above sea level, traverses its
length about midway between its two coasts. Its area is
computed at about 300,000 square miles; or nearly as large
as the colony of New South Wales. The Home Government,
as usual, has invariably declined to countenance proposals,
or to take any steps towards its annexation to England.
Australian Mutual Provident Society.


A remarkable despatch, respecting this country, has been
lately flashed by telegraph from Australasia to the Govern-
ment of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland
and to the world. It ran in ten words of portentous
import: “ The Queensland Government has taken formal
possession of New Guinea.” The flashing into prospect of
an unpredicted comet,
“ Perplexing monarchs,”
never made greater stir than did this masterful policy of
the magnificent Colony of Queensland. Federated Austral-
asia has the genius to support the action. “To be a born
colonist is the heritage and privilege of the Anglo-Saxon
man, whether he hail from this little and geographically
obscure spot called England, or the more prominent and
conspicuous continent of Australasia. The art of taking
and holding new countries runs in the blood, and what
Queensland has now done is what may again and again
be looked for from an English stock.” This is the
supremacy of mind over matter; and a new and romantic
interest will attach to New Guinea. Voluptuous yet
daring spirits from the mainland and other countries
will more effectually than before investigate its people ; its
mountains and hills ; its lakes and rivers ; its forest retreats
and plains adorned with the finest ferns in the world ; and
still inhabited by native races sunk in a condition of lowest
barbarism. With the pluck which distinguishes Austral-
asian enterprise, now that a firm Government has taken
possession, every obstacle to successful subjugation will be
triumphed over. Immediate progress will begin. Timid
souls, as usual, will ask—ls it all right 1 Would it be safe to
go out 1 Is it not too hot ? What is there to do 1 Will not
things be rather rough ? Shall we need fire-arms 1 And will
there be any society 1 Men craven with apprehensions and
with fears had better abandon hope of commanding place
and power in the new Eldorado.
This was not the spirit which animated the heart of the
English hero of the Spice Islands, Sir Stamford Raffles. He
went out to the Chinese seas and made the name of Britain
Head Office: 87, Pitt Street, Sydney.


respected. Convinced of the languishing fields of commerce
there, which only needed development, he founded Singa-
pore. It is situated almost on the Equator, and is the
greatest emporium of universal commerce in the Eastern
seas. Ships of every nation, freighted with
“ Wealth of Ormus and of Ind,”
assemble there.
New Guinea will also be made known to the world by
the exploits of adventurers, and merchants, and men of force
of character who will apply their genius to fit the island
for the reception of a population of whites of any nationality
who may go to achieve fortune there for themselves, their
families, and the country. “Dulce et decorum est pro patria
mori.” The flag of Liberty and Fraternity is now hoisted.
The work of the future will proceed with persistency, and
method ; protected by the commanding attitude of Queens-
land, in settled and calm authority, powerful to do well,
and ready to make evil-doers obey order and law. The
sword is sheathed, but the recognised attitude of Govern-
ment compels a salutary fear. -
Yet the freedom of the Government gives to human
faculties their full energies. Action, action, and still
action, is the motto which guides successful colonisers.
Iron, and coal, —for men will moil in mines, —and gold, and
stones, and spices, and silk, and everything needful to yield
to men their daily bread in plenty, even to opulence, will
be developed by the designed resolution of workers above
the placid insignificance of mediocrity. A philosopher was
asked in what a wise man differed from a fool 1 He
answered, “ Send them both naked to those that know
them not, and you shall perceive.” It is not the individual
fools with more of money than of wit who will succeed in
New Guinea. It is the wise men, short of means, but full
of application in quest of wealth with concerted action, who
will accomplish results by unseen and indescribable talis-
manic power. Solomon saith, “ There is no new thing
upon the earth.” What has been done before will be done
again by colonisers; with this huge advantage, that past
experience in Australasian enterprise will guide the future
Australian Mutual Provident Society.


worker in New Guinea, He will not gain a necessary
knowledge of that experience in England, thinking over it.
But he will hear about it, and appreciate it, in the locality
of his successes in the new land, or of his reverses. For
the worker must be prepared to be stung in his attempted
plunder of the bee-hive.
The divine work of creation out of chaos will henceforth
go on. It will extend itself by degrees steadily and merrily,
in concentric circles throughout the immensity of the island.
Spacious roads suitable for all kinds of carriages will
be made. Reservoirs of wholesome water, conveyed, if
necessary, by aqueducts over mountains and precipices,
will some day tax the skill of engineers. Animals and
flora not native to the soil will be naturalised. Courts of
Justice will be founded. Churches and schools first opened
by the zealous missionary of the Cross will be enlarged
and multiplied. Harbours and havens of refuge for the
yearly augmenting shipping will be improved by art and
mechanism. British mansions, groves, orchards, and
gardens alive with birds of Paradise, resplendent with
Eastern luxuriance of growths and Oriental colours,
controlled by science, will afford illuminated vistas to the
human eye, and the purest of human pleasures. Baths,
fountains, and cascades of glittering waters, cool as ice,
gathered from the everlasting hills for the uses of man,
will dazzle the eyes of beholders, and surpass in actual
magnificence the fabled glories of oriental romance.
Magazines for merchandise; machinery subservient to
man ; and exchanges for moneys ; will appear to rise from
the earth as if by enchantment. The wand of the magician
is the arm of labour animated with the blood of capital.
For companies of hard business men and syndicates of
money-changers armed with their own treasures, and the
treasuries of others in trust, will develop, per gradum non
per solium , this new theatre of Australasian wonders. As
riches grow, means will be at hand for Australasia fully to
provide against enemies, and to build by sea and land defences
for the most important points of that great country. The
music, and the science, and the art, and the thought, and
For Life Assurance on the Mutual Principle,


the capital of Europe will be exported in magnificent ships
to this land of promise. There will be nothing to fear in
New Guinea, and much to desire.
“ Everywhere I see around me rise the wondrous world of Art:
Fountains wrought with richest sculpture standing in the
common mart.”
But Italy has been heard to grumble at the audacity of
Queensland. Who heeds the growl of Italy 1 That Italy
which only yesterday thwarted the beneficent aims of Silvio
Pellico, one of the apostles of Liberty. She thrust him into
a noisome dungeon. For twenty mortal years hounded him
down: even hindered him of the innocent rats which flocked
to him to comfort a great soul withered by captivity.
Napoleon overran her at the head of his republican legions,
and, as he tells us, he found only six men in Italy. Is she
any richer in men to-day 1 In her political gymnastics
before foreign powers she exhibits the contortions of the
Sibyl, but without her genius. The anathemas of such a
power are stale, flat, unprofitable to apprehensive British
colonists out of the regal circle; but armed cap-Apie with
liberty of thought, and furnished with capacities and instincts
for practical power of work which draw approving smiles
even from the gods. Rather let Italy look inwards. Think
what she was under Lorenzo the Magnificent. Let her
direct her vision and her action, to the mass of blinding
domestic misery and immorality, which lies seething, broad-
cast, to-day at the gilded doors of her stately palaces, and
of her legion of churches frequented mostly by women.
Her degraded labourers—men, women, and children —work
in her fields; the men earning a pittance of about five or six
shillings a week. Poor souls. Dark and dreary minds
inhabit Italy ; enthralled by the mystic paganism of the
Papacy. Unfitted for action ; paralysed in purpose. Read
that startling and graphic romance, “The Village Commune,”
by Ouida. Carlyle, although shorn recently of much of his
authority, has said that people are mostly fools. Be it then
“ How much the fool that has been sent to Rome
Excels the fool that has been kept at home.”
Australian Mutual Provident Society,


And a judgment of this is competent only to the unshackled
and emancipated soul that soars in the azure of spiritual
liberty : above dogma; above human and fallible authority
woven astutely into the texture of religion ; above the
limits of the philosophy of those patriarchal minds which
grovel onwards in the so-called authorised and limited ruts
of the totally eclipsed past. “There are more things in
heaven and earth, Horatio, than are dreamt of in your
philosophy,”
Whatever tends to widen Australasian interests, extend
her beneficent commerce, and bring her into more immediate
relations with the daily lives and interests of the English
masses, is a distinct good and gain to both. Advantages
will be reciprocal. The surplus labour and manufactures
of the mother country is absorbed at an annually increasing
ratio, by Australasian territories languishing to be filled
by loyal and energetic whites of English origin. If
Britishers do not go, then French, Germans, and Swedes
avail themselves of the advantages offered under a settled
and economic government of Britons, and enrich themselves
under the shadow of the proudest flag that unfurls to the
breeze. Wherever two or three are gathered together, there
interchange begins. They create commerce; they build
ships ; they grow in wealth. Refinement succeeds to rough
plenty. Descendants, in turn, of the pioneers are better
educated; ambition rules; and the public schools and uni-
versities of Britain will get recruited with scholars from this
most distant colonial dependency. No nation can ever
exhibit a high stage of development which shirks its duties
and cares of empire through want of boldness; or flings
aside obligations that achieved empire intensifies. The
founder of a house cannot divest himself of the patriarchal
character. He must ever be willing and ready to welcome
into the amity and comity of the family circle, some new
and younger and less experienced comer or descendant,
who is another hostage to the future for the per-
manence of the house throughout its various and important
relationships.
The interests of the Empire in Australasia are moving
Branch Offices throughout Australasia.
g 2


onwards with such leaps and bounds that, to avoid future
dangers, England cannot afford to suffer antagonisms to
establish themselves with any firm footing on our quarters in
the Southern Pacific. In the event of war they would
assail us there. And in furtherance of the intention of the
policy of Pitt, our great minister and administrator, the
founder of the career of colonisation in Australasia, English
power; English Government; and English Protestantism; in
view of France roaming about the world seeking what she
may devour, should be made to continue to dominate
throughout Austra'asia, to the absolute exclusion of every
foreign Government. Dost like the picture 1 Acknowledge,
like the Queen of Sheba, when she visited Solomon, that
the report is not adequate to the truth.
XLV-SCIENTIFIC.
The student of geology, the meteorologist, the statist, the
mining engineer and speculator, the investigator of the
fauna and the flora, and the fisheries of a country, indeed
every person who can understand scientific notes of the
works of nature in the continent of Australasia, will find
information in abundance there, in charge of the Govern-
ments or in the local libraries. Scientific reports of the utmost
value on the natural resources of these colonies, rich in the
greatest variety of productions, have been and are periodically
prepared at great expense by the authorities,and published by
them at the respective State printing works for general public
information. The hand, the head, the eye of scientific man
have been busily at work in the past in the Australasian
storehouses of nature’s wonders; and the collections, neatly
arranged in suitable conservatories there for the benefit of
educated investigators, are simply marvellous. The future
opens a grander prospect as the eyes of intelligent and
educated observers are multiplied. The genius of the en-
thusiastic explorer is nobly spent in the cause of humanity—
and it is necessary to remind Australasian Governments,
who, more than others, stand as parents to their people, and
who freely spend their hard-earned monies, that no expen-
Australian Mutual Provident Society,


diture of a truly paternal Government, having a real heart
for the people, is more beneficial than an expenditure, just
and generous, upon technical education lor the masses.
Every child should be educated technically. He should be
taught how to do something, rather than how to think. It
is sweet to be immersed in the honey of Plato, seductive,
delightful ; but to be armed with the subtle mathematics and
to know how to build the ships for the swelling commerce of
Australasia is more practical, paying, preponderating. Gilbert
White’s “History of Selborne” should be read in every
school in Australasia. It is painful to confess that thou-
sands there never heard of Gilbert White and his doings.
All those persons who are intelligently interested in science,
and who like to look into the soul of things, will find on
examination ample field and verge enough in the Austral-
asian scientific reports. They are got up in the most excel-
lent style of modern art as regards printing and illustrations.
To the unscientific reader no doubt these papers will be
as Greek. But to the genuine student of the wonders
of Australasian nature the labour bestowed by the Govern-
ments on these reports, is by no means short of deserving
the epithet “ Romantic.”
In this regard we chronicle a collection of Australasian
literature in London, known as yet to but comparatively
few. It has been lately catalogued as the “ Catalogue of
the York Gate Geographical and Colonial Library. Loudon :
John Murray, Albemarle-street. 1882.” This collection
of books embraces the geographical and colonial portions
of a somewhat extensive miscellaneous library which Mr.
Silver, of London, has gradually accumulated during the past
thirty years. The catalogue is compiled and printed
excellently well in a handsome volume, describing upwards
of 3,000 publications more or less relating to colonial explo-
ration and establishment. This contribution to literature,
partly descriptive of Australasia, is a public benefaction,
richly deserving recognition. The possession alone of a
copy of this catalogue, for reference, will be an invaluable,
nay an indispensable, aid to any ardent student of antipodean
enterprise and discovery. The catalogue shows clearly
For Life Assurance on the Mutual Principle.


enough the vast extent, and ever-increasing importance of
the prodigious possessions of an Empire upon which the
sun never sets.
XLVI.—NATIVE RACES.
The aboriginal population of Australasia is becoming
gradually extinct. It is incapable of civilisation. Plans
have been laid unavailingly to ameliorate the condition of
the aboriginals and prevent their extermination. In the
colony of Tasmania not one of its first or aboriginal races
is left to tell the pathetic story of their extinction. The
meagre population of one hundred thousand whites whose
right there is none to dispute, have sole and lordly posses-
sion of this “ garden of Australasia.” In Victoria the last
Census returns made by the Central Board for the Protec-
tion of the Aborigines fail to record more than 1,067 of
them existing there ; a miserable remnant cared for as ten-
derly as can be by the authorities. Settlement in the other
Australasian colonies drives the unresisting black farther
and farther into the far interior, before the irresistible for-
ward march of the conquering white. Butin New Zealand,
in the sunny genial climate of the north island, the Maori
has found conditions very suitable to his love of indolent
freedom. The unextinguished remnant of that superior
native race in the islands numbers still 44,000, as against
109,000 in 1844. They still hold there immense tracts
of land, as fine as any in the world, and are very well-to-
do. For the most part they are given to the same peaceful
agricultural pursuits as their white governors. Government
shields them with paternal care, and provides them with
special church and school advantages upon their own lands.
But time, the great innovator, is working their inevitable
dissolution. The fittest must survive.
The governing white proceeds, step by step, to overshadow
the Maori in New Zealand. The mysterious and silent course
of time will see the white winning, mile after mile there,
the more than ten millions of acres of arable lands to which
he is to-day destitute of claim. Since the pursuit of
agriculture, though slow, is the most natural way of getting
riches, this prospective wealth, wrought in the future to a
Australian Mutual Provident Society.


pitch of fertility which scientific methods only can attain,
will be another integer of security for the public indebtedness
to Britain of the thirty millions sterling of this the heaviest
indebted of all Australasian dependencies. But the debt is
nothing. New Zealand, the sanatorium of Australasia, with
o * ' '
her sublime snow-capped Alpine heights; her wondrous
hundred springs of hot and healing waters; her beds of
gold and coal; her gigantic timber, and infinite riches of
varied kind; will be a happy hunting-ground for valetudi-
narians in quest of health: and for the investor of capital
who wisely measures the stability, and means, and rigid
determination of Australasia to pay to the uttermost the
public creditor. Eepudiation is unknown and unwhispered
in Australasia.
XLVII.—APPEARANCES.
The stranger visiting Australasia is struck with the cir-
cumstance that each of the colonies more or less is marked
with the strong impress of the great race which founded
it. British blood is of much the same quality in either
hemisphere; and the heroic work of colonisation proceeds
with a master hand.
Australasia is the depository in the east of the language
of Shakespeare and Milton; of the civilisation of Europe;
of the political aptitudes of Englishmen ; the proper home
of the surplus population which a too severe competition
crushes out of the mother country. And in the future,
armed with the same weapons, Australasia will be found co-
operating with her great ancestress in converting the Asiatic
races to a belief in the moral grandeur and Christianity of
Britain. Each colony takes unmistakably after the parent
stock. Each keeps up the peculiar habits, usages, and
traditions of the “ right little, tight little island,” one and
indivisible. The stranger is struck by the splendid sun-
light, the active energy of the people in pursuit of business,
or pleasure. Stimulus to unremitting industry is exacting.
Very noticeable is the general sobriety, the seeming abun-
dance of money among the masses, the air of independence, the
well-fed and well-dressed comfort that they seem to exhibit.
Head Office: 87, Pitt Street, Sydney.


Local option has recently scored a splendid victory in New-
South Wales, in placing the control of the dangerous traffic
in liquors within the elective power of the inhabitants them-
selves. The Australasians have the genius for creating
virgin institutions. If regard be had to this, and to the
circumstance that England is on the eve of great legislative
changes in the same direction, it may be predicted that
the whole of Australasia will adopt the system which Sir
Wilfrid Lawson has done so much to popularise in the
mother country.
That sharply critical philosopher, Thomas Carlyle, says,
“ discontented colonies are all to be cured of their miseries
by constitutions !” This is a sneer : and Carlyle is not the
only bad-tempered man who is to be found sneering at colo-
nies and colonists. These mighty persons think it derogatory
to regard colonies with any satisfaction ; and take for granted
that colonies are peopled with inferior persons who are
outside the pale of empire, and can never rise to any notable
position in it. Instances can be multiplied to dispel this
delusion. From a Civil Service appointment in Melbourne,
Victoria, to the Chancellorship of the Exchequer in Eng-
land, stepping into the shoes of that renowned master of
finance, the present Premier of England, is a stride in
fortune which might well satisfy the most soaring ambition.
This has been accomplished by the Right Honourable 0. E.
Childers, the present Chancellor of the Exchequer. Lord
Sherbrooke, as Mr. Robert Lowe, practised law for years in
Sydney, New South Wales; returned to England, and
entering the political field ultimately became Chancellor of
the Exchequer. He subsequently passed to the House
of Lords. John Singleton Copley, Baron Lyndhurst,
Lord Chancellor of England, was born a British subject
at Boston, in the American colonies, before their revolt.
His grandfather was an Irishman, and had emigrated
to America. The revolt of the thirteen American States
happened in 1775, when their population was about two
millions and a half. And their area was about 325,000
square miles ; or an area somewhat larger than that of the
colony of New South Wales.
Australian Mutual Provident Society,


Appearances are sometimes deceptive. The world is
still deceived with ornament. Climate may be better in
one country than in another; colours may be more in-
tense ; tradition and art may more bear sway j manners
and customs of society in different nations have limits,
within which etiquette prevails in exchanges between man
and man. The quality of prosperity varies in different
places. But there is one thing which never varies any-
where, for it is unalterable. It triumphs over the snows of
Nova Zembla. It conquers in Central Africa. It reveals
itself clearly and in its intensity under the stimulating sun-
shine of Australasia. It is human nature. One touch of
nature makes the whole world kin. Nature is the
same here, there, everywhere; yesterday and to-day.
Vanity Fair does not keep open shop alone in England.
The fair is kept all the year long in every place in this
world where people most do congregate. It is a business of
ancient standing. All sorts of vanities are sold in the
Australasian branches of the concern, all the year long.
“ Daily sales are made there of houses, lands, trades, places,
honours, preferments, titles, countries, lusts, votes, plea-
sures, and delights of all sorts, as women, husbands, chil-
dren, masters, servants, lives, blood, bodies, souls, silver,
gold, pearls, precious stones, and what not j and besides
at this fair in Australasia there is at all times to be seen
there jugglings, cheats, games, plays, fools, apes, knaves,
and rogues, and that of every kind.” You simply pay your
money and you take your choice, my gentle readers.
XLVIII.—THE UNITED STATES AND AUSTRALASIA.
The discrimination against American products which
takes place in the United States in the matters of tariff,
freights, insurance, and bank exchange considerably retards
the development of American commerce with Australasia.
The trade, too, between England and these colonies is
essentially an exchange trade ; while the American dealer
at present needs gold in advance for all his productions, and
takes comparatively nothing in exchange. Notwithstanding
48,000 Policies in Force, Assuring £18,000,000.


this heavy disadvantage, intercourse between Australasia
and America increases every year. Merchants of the
United States, acting on their excellent motto, “ expand the
market and increase production/' are energetic in flooding
Australasia, as they flood China and Japan, with circulars
and business announcements which solicit trade; so paving
the way for an extended commerce in the great Southern
seas when their tariff arrangements are more liberal on the
American side. The last Congress of the United States was
remarkable for a revision of their tariff; a significant change
as showing a movement against protection. This action of
the Congress is an unwilling testimony to the growing decline
of the popular faith in the blessings of that doctrine. Were
it not for the restrictions of the tariff, America would be a
buyer to an enormous extent of Australasian wool, though
she has many sheep herself. As a contrast to the numbers
of sheep in Australasia it may be noted that the statistician
of the Department of Agriculture at Washington announced
in January last that the number of sheep in the United
States on that date was forty-nine millions ; valued at five-
and-twenty millions sterling. The voyage from San Fran-
cisco in tine steamers to Auckland in New Zealand, and on
to Sydney in New South Wales, is a splendid trip,—fine
sunny weather all the way through the Archipelagoes of the
Pacific Ocean in twenty-five or thirty days,—and thousands
of American and Australasian tourists make the run to and
fro in steamships finely equipped.
For the consolation of the timid let it be remembered
that Hercules, when he went to unbind Prometheus, crossed
the ocean in an earthen pot or pitcher. Man is not now
exposed to any danger in the magnificent floating palaces
which do duty in transporting the passenger, bag and
baggage, to the sunny Antipodes.
But let the world note this remarkable characteristic of
Australasian nationality. That Australasia offers an asylum
and a home to every Briton and every man of foreign birth,
be his nationality what it will, who chooses to go there to
work and fairly settle upon, the soil. She makes of him,
after only a short residence, a citizen of Great Britain. She
c Australian Mutual Provident Society.


dowers him, without stint, with all the rights that stirround
an Australasian horn under the English flag. Germans,
French, Swiss, Swedes, Turks, Asiatics, and even Americans
themselves, settle and fructify in her voluptuous bosom.
Foreigners get naturalised, and they swear allegiance to the
Crown, and to hereditary monarchy. Then the new subjects
become owners in fee of lands; and units of the political
brotherhood of liberty, untainted by servility, which bears
sway in Australasia; with its god - like immunities, and
rights, and attributes. Every man may claim kindred in
Australasia, and have his claim allowed there.
Hence exception is righteously taken to a recent declara-
tion in England by the Daily Telegraph that America is
the only country which showers such advantages on the
stranger who enters her gates. This declaration is false.
“Oh, you false man!” said the abandoned lady to her
callous seducer, deaf to her solicitations. It is a public
scandal to England that a journal like the Daily Telegraph,
with its circulation and its influence among the English
masse®, should exaggerate the political merits of America.
No doubt but the mixture of a lie adds pleasure to men’s
imaginations. At the same time, and with a disregard of
everlasting truth, the existence of the magnificent though
distant British possession of undeveloped Australasia is
ignored by the writer, who, no doubt, was never there and
knows nothing whatever about that magnificent country.
Australasia, in fact, presents to-day a finer field than any
other in the world for the profit of labour and capital ; for
the enjoyment of heavenly liberty j and for freedom from
monopolies that overwhelm honest independent enterprise.
Australasia and her systems are as far superior to America
and her government, as the government, and the monarchy,
and the empire of Great Britain are, in fact, superior to the
hellish abuses which nestle and are hidden in the name of
government under the outspread wings of the American
Republic. Nothing in this worldly world is perfect; no, —
not even America. America deriding the raison d'etre of
British institutions, while ignorant of their beneficence ;
self-conscious as a people to a degree of sensibility which is
Total Annual Income, £850,000.


painful to a foreign observer; elated about her extended
territory, her great rivers, and her lofty mountains j does
not humanly make the political mistake of suffering a
naturalised foreign subject to be elected as her President.
Liberty has her limits even in America; as General Grant
told the New York Chamber of Commerce. The fraternity
of America is qualified by the too thorough incidence of the
dollar. The equality of her people, that her poets prate
about and her statesmen worry over, is an algebraic or
imaginary quantity in her sociality, which is not known to
her protectionists, her monopolists, and her Vanderbilts, her
Jay Goulds, and her Boss Tweeds \ and their corrupt and
sycophantic votaries of Wall-street.
America is a mighty country, with mighty rivers. She
has mighty men, too j hunters after gain, and gold, and
men. But do not dream that every tail man you meet on
an American highway, or by-way, or dirty way, is a
Washington, ora Franklin, or an Irving, or an Emerson,
or a Lincoln, or a Garfield, or a Longfellow. Oh, dear no j
far from this. America gives, political and social lessons
to humanity which humanity reads daily, and then answers
that the Republic is not everything, —by long chalks.
Notwithstanding the eagle and the immensity of America,
people of every clime consider that, there is a vast something
of goodness and greatness yet left to the Sovereign crown
and monarchy of Great Britain, and her magnificent
developing dependencies in every quarter of the globe.
America may be likened to a great column in architecture ]
isolated, unfluted, and without its capital j the wonder of
mankind. The Empire and Sovereignty of Great Britain
may be regarded as the most finished Corinthian column of
an extended series, completed by centuries of labour;
adorned with a capital unequalled for its proportions and
grandeur ; the admired of all admirers.
Americans from New York and from Chicago visit England.
England is as classic ground to an American as Italy is to
an Englishman, and Old London teems with as much his-
torical association as mighty Rome. Americans don’t visit
us empty-handed. They have an eye to introduce a novelty;
Australian Mutual Provident Society.


and a desire to exchange their dollar for our sovereign.
They bring with them their fads : their railways, for
instance ; their mines, their lands, and their bonds. They
come here in quest of money, as well as technically-educated
labour for their country. Americans utilise the thousand
instruments which lie ready to their hands in Great Britain
to effect publicity, and so to electrify the attention of the
sluggish English. A salutary lesson might be taken here
by Australasian authorities.
These Americans, blinded by Republicanism, interchange
their thoughts with Britishers; kindly traduce our Crown ;
softly deride the dearest of our institutions; do the office of
as mild a mannered man as ever cut a throat; for with a
gratuitous and profound pity for benighted souls they try
to teach Englishmen and Englishwomen politics and political
economy : or to do for us that problem which, in the verna-
cular of the playgrounds of our glorious public schools, is
called “ teaching your grandmother how to suck eggs.”
America gives nothing for nothing. She compels every
naturalised alien to bear arms in necessary war if required
against the States that gave her subjects birth, Australasia
has every advantage, and more than America can offer to
the discontented or the rich. Additionally, Australasia
forms an integral part of the glorious empire of Great
Britain.
Singularly enough, in the issue of the Daily Telegraph
which induced this notice of its article on General Grant’s
speech to the New York Chamber of Commerce, appears a
particularly graceful and kindly obituary leading article, on
the late Captain Standish, of Melbourne.
British Government at home and abroad is not to be
matched in the world for good laws, good public officers,
virtuous citizens, strength and concord in her political
systems, in justice, in counsel, and in hallowed liberty. The
vast area of that rich and undeveloped dominion over
which the salutary, strong authority of the Crown of
England is exercised, is situated in both hemispheres. This
prodigious area exceeds eight millions of square miles in
extent, and is inhabited by one-fifth part of the whole
Invested Funds, Four Millions Sterling.


human race. English rule is beneficent. It bears sway
over British, African, North American, Asian, Polynesian,
and Australasian races ; as varied in their character and
capacities as Joseph’s coat varied in its colours. Whafr a
people and what an empire !
“ This England never did, nor never shall
Lie at the proud foot of a conqueror.
Nought shall make us rue
If England to itself do rest but true.”
The territory of the United States is limited to the
Northern hemisphere. It is of the extent of about three
millions of square miles, or not one-half the area of the
powers, principalities, kingdoms, and colonies subjugated
and governed by England. England stands pre-eminently
in the van of empire. She is old and sage enough for ruling
her varied peoples ; overmatches the Republic in diplomacy;
and with all her faults, continues venerated, and loved, of
her manly, patriotic, children.
XLIX.—AUSTRALASIA PROFITABLE TO ENGLAND.
Some ill-informed people are of opinion that all her
colonies are a fruitful source of expense and weakness to
England, Under wretched systems of mismanagement,
Britain derived nothing but loss from the dominion which
she exercised over some of her colonies. Australasia, so far
from being a costly burden to the mother country, has turned
out to be a magnificent source of profit. And if there
had been room to doubt this statement, not resting
on recognised authority, we have now the flattering
endorsement on the career of Australasia pronounced by
Mr. John Bright at Glasgow when he says: “ There is
nothing in our history more to be admired than the
Australasian colonies. The way they have conducted them-
selves for many years past, even almost from their founda-
tion, their growth in everything a nation should grow and
expand in.” Federation of these colonies is the political
watchword of a growing party in Australasia. It involves a
closer union of local interests, greater economy in cost of
Australian Mutual Provident Society.


government, and, if it be possible, more intimate and higher
relations with the great originator and mistress of their
fortunes. The maintenance of the present numerous
governors, and the several civil and judicial establishments,
with the whole cost of internal government in each colony
of the Australasian group, is borne by the people themselves,
unassisted by Great Britain. But the charges for the
maintenance of the few ships of war with some 1,400
officers and men on the naval station at Sydney, in New
South Wales, in guard of the interests of the empire in the
great Southern seas, are paid by England.
The value of colonies may be illustrated by the case of
Holland. This great people in a small State did not
number three millions in the year 1846. Their public debt
was £93,000,000 sterling. But Holland possessed colonies
from which she knew better than any other State in the
world how to reap profit. This circumstance has contributed
to her present flourishing position. In 1879, her revenue
was about ten millions sterling. Her public debt was then
reduced to £80,000,000 sterling. And this prosperity of her
finances may be ascribed partly to the extraordinary profit
derived from her East Indian colonies.
L.-LOYALTY TO THE THRONE.
The question of how long the mother country should
retain and when to abandon the governorship of her Aus-
tralasian colonies is never discussed in Australasia. Mr.
John Bright, in his address as Lord Hector of Glasgow
University, said : “ It will require great wisdom at home
in our Colonial Office, and great moderation on the part
of the colouies, if the present system is not to be at some
not remote time disturbed.”
Her Majesty’s birthday throughout Australasia is a red-
letter day. It is the wished-for signal of a general stoppage
of toil; and the celebration of the happy event on sea and
shore by public demonstrations and amusements ; which,
amid the music of the joy - bells, are as a carnival of
pleasure for the people in the open ; a saturnalia of un-
Divisiblo Surplus last five years, £565,0 00.


affected happiness free either of excess or vice. Is it so in
any other country 1
The language or prayer of the Australasians of to-day
is : “ Above all we rejoice that in this happy country we
are still under the beneficent and firm rule of our illustrious
Sovereign Victoria Queen; to whose sacred government
we express the most unfeigned loyalty and attachment.
We cherish the hope that more of our less prosperous
countrymen in Britain may be brought to share in the
inestimable and unrivalled blessings we enjoy.”
Loyalty to the Crown in the constitutionally settled
colonies of Australasia is indeed a passion, firm and un-
questioned. The flag that has braved the battle and the
breeze on every sea in the cause of Britain, floats proudly
over the house of each Australasian Governor.
God Save the Queen.
GEOGRAPHICAL FEATURES.
Australasia is one of the six great geographical divisions
of the globe; situated, as its name indicates, south of Asia,
between the equator and 50° S. latitude, and 110° and 180°
E. longitude. It comprises the island-continents of New
Guinea, Australia, Tasmania, and New Zealand; and the
conterminous archipelagoes of New Britain, Solomon
Islands, New Hebrides, Loyalty Islands, and New Cale-
donia.
GEOGRAPHICAL FEATURES OF THE SEVERAL COLONIES
OP AUSTRALASIA.
New South Wales is the oldest of the Australian colonies.
It has a superficial area of 310,937 square miles, and is
bounded on the south by the colony of Victoria; on the
west, along the 141 st meridian, by South Australia ; on
the north, by Queensland; and on the east, by the Pacific
Ocean, fronting which it has a coast line of about 800 miles
from Point Danger in the north, in lat. 28° 6', extending
Australian Mutual Provident Society.


southwards to Cape Howe in lat. 37° 28' S. and long.
150° 8' E. The greatest length of the colony is about
900 miles; the greatest breadth about 850 miles; the mean
breadth being 600 miles. The capital city is Sydney,
situated on Port Jackson. The governor is His Excellency
the Right Hon. Sir Augustus William Frederick Spencer,
commonly called Lord Augustus Loftus, K.C.8., G.C.8.,
£7,000 a year; paid by the colony. Population, 1881
census, 781,265.
Victoria, before her separation, on the Ist of July, 1851,
from New South Wales, was called Port Phillip. The
colony of Victoria lies between 34° and 39° 15' S, latitude,
and 141° and 150° E. long., and comprises the south-east
coiner of Australia. To the west is the colony of South
Australia, separated by the 141° of east long.; to the north
is New South Wales, reparated by the Murray River east-
wards from 141° east. long, to its source ; and thence, by
an imaginary line, from Forest Hill to Cape Howe; and
from Cape Howe to South Australia again, the colony is
bounded on the south by the Southern Ocean and Bass’s
Strait. The extreme length of Victoria is east and west,
and is about 500 miles, by an extreme but irregular
breadth, north and south, of about 290 miles, with a coast-
line of nearly 700 miles. The superficial area of Victoria
is 87,884 square miles, or less than one-third of the area of
New South Wales. The capital city is Melbourne, on the
river Yarra, The governor is Plis Excellency George
Augustus Constantine Phipps, Marquis of Normanby,
P.C., K.C.M.G., £lO,OOO per annum ; paid by the colony.
Population, 1881 census, 862,346.
South Australia was first established as a separate colony
in 1834. It has since been extended, right across the
continent, to the northern coast of Australia, and which
part of South Australia is called the “Northern Territory,”
with Port Darwin as its chief port and Palmerston its town,
in lat. 13° S. and long. 130° E. The colony of South
Australia includes the entire central territory of Australia
comprised between the Southern and the Indian Oceans,
and the meridians of 129° E. and 141° E. long, in the
Head Office: 87, Pitt Street, Sydney.


southern portion, and between 129° E. and 138° E, long,
in the northern part. It is bounded on the west by Western
Australia, on the south by the Southern Ocean, on the
east by Queensland, and New South Wales and Victoria,
and on the north by the Arafuru Sea and the Gulf of
Carpentaria. South Australia has a superficial area of
upwards of 900,000 square miles, being nearly three times
the size of New South Wales. Its extreme length ap-
proaches 2,000 miles', extreme breadth about 700 miles,
and it embraces a seaboard of nearly 2,000 miles. The capital
is Adelaide, on the river Torrens. The governor is His
Excellency Sir William C. F. Robinson, K.C.M.G., £5,000
a year; paid bv the colony. Population, 1881 census,
293,297.
Queensland, the youngest and most ambitious of all the
Australasian colonies, occupies the whole of the north-eastern
portion of the Australian continent, commencing at a point
on the east coast about 400 miles north of Sydney, called
Point Danger, in lat. 28° 8' S. The seaboard extends thence
northerly to Cape York in lat. 10° 40' S., a distance of about
1,350 miles, washed by the Pacific Ocean; the northern coast
continues to the east as far as long. 138° E., and is bounded
by the Gulf of .Carpentaria. From 138° E. the eastern limit
of the colony is continued on the same meridian until the
26th parallel of latitude is reached, South Australia being
its neighbour on this side, and the south boundary is formed
by an ii regular line as far south as lat. 29° S., then along the
course of the Macintyre River to Point Danger, the colony
pf New South Wales adjoining it all along this side,
excepting a small portion abutting upon South Australia.
Its greatest length is about 1,250 miles; its greatest breadth
along the 26° parallel of south latitude about 900 miles.
Its superficial area is 069,520 square miles, or more than
twice the size of New South Wales, and nearly six times
that of the United Kingdom. The capital city is Brisbane,
on the river of that name. The late governor (who died 3rd
June, 1883, at Aden, eu route for England) was His
Excellency Sir Arthur E. Kennedy, C. 8., S.C.M.G., K.C.M.G,
£5,000 a year ; paid by the colony. Population, 1881
Australian Mutual Provident Society.


census, 226,968. New Guinea (recently annexed by. Queens-
land), otherwise and originally called Papua, is an island
of great extent, situated at the junction of the Indian
or Pacific Oceans. It is separated by Torres Strait from
the northern extremity of Australia; and by Dampier’s
Strait from New Britain, which is to the east of it. New
Guinea extends from about 10° south, lat. northerly, nearly
to the equator. From west to east it extends between
130° and 151° E. long. Its length diagonally is nearly
1,300 miles. Its width varies between 500 and 18 miles ;
according to a rough estimate the surface of the island is
260,000 square miles, or about 55,000 square miles more
than the area of France.
Western Australia was originally called the Swan Elver
settlement. It embraces all the western part of the Austra-
lian continent beyond the 129 th meridian of east longitude,
and lies between 13° 44' and 35° S. lat., the whole of its
seaboard being washed by the Indian Ocean. In length
it is about 1,500 miles from north to south, its width
from east to west being about 865 miles. Its estimated
area, including the adjacent islands, is 1,024,000 square
miles; a territory more than three times the size of New
South Wales. The capital city is Perth. The governor is
His Excellency
£2,500 a year (of which, however, the Imperial Govern-
ment pay £1,800). Population, 1881 census, 32,359.
Tasmania was originally called Van Diemen’s Land. It
was founded as a settlement in 1804. It is a beautiful
island in the South Pacific Ocean, to the south of and sepa-
rated from the Australian continent by Bass’s Strait, 150
miles wide. It lies between the parallels of 40° 33' and
43° 38' S. lat,, and between 144° 30' and 148° 30' E, long.
Its greatest length from north to south is 240 miles, and
its greatest breadth from east to west is 200 miles. Its
superficial area is about 24,600 square miles, and the many
adjacent islands amount to an additional area of 1,800
square miles. Its capital city is Hobart, situated on the
beautiful river Derwent, —the home of the salmon trout
introduced from Great Britain. The governor is His
Branch Offices throughout Australasia.
h 2


Excellency Major Sir George Gumming Strahan, K.C.M.G.,
£3,500 a year, and £l,OOO a year allowances, all paid by the
colony. Population, 1881 census, 118,923.
New Zealand lies distant about 1,200 miles opposite the
south-east coast of Australia. New Zealand is bounded on
all sides by the South Pacific Ocean. This country was
discovered in 1769 by Captain Cook, and was founded as a
British colony in 1841. It consists of three islands; two
large islands ; the north and the south islands, parted by
Cook’s Strait, —a fine, deep-sea channel some 150 miles
long by 50 broad ; and of a small island called Stewart’s
Island, about the size of Yorkshire, separated from the
mainland by Poveaux Strait; also of a number of
other islets around the coasts, and the Chatham, and
Auckland Islands. New Zealand lies between the
parallels of 34° 25' and 47° 17' S. lat., and between 166°
26' and 178° 36' E. long., being the nearest antipodes to
the British Islands. The corresponding latitudes in the
northern hemisphere extend from Central Prance over Italy
and Sicily into Northern Africa. The latitudinal length is
nearly 1,100 miles, and its greatest breadth is about 200
miles. The sweep of the coast-line embraces about 3,000
miles. Its superficial area is about 106,000 square miles,
or about one-sixth less than that of Great Britain and
Ireland. Its capital city is Wellington, in the North
Island, and this island in area is about three-fourths that of
England and Wales, The governor is His Excellency
Major-General Sir William Francis Drummond Jervois,
G.C.M.G., C.8., 8.E., £7,000 a year; paid by the colony.
Population, 1881 census, —whites, 507,788; the Maories,
44,097.
NOTE ON PAPUA OR NEW GUINEA.
The great English navigator Dampier, armed with a commission
from the English Admiralty, in 1688 —the period of the
—visited New Guinea. He called the black natives of that great
island “ mop-headed Papuas.” The inhabitants have neither the
hair and features of the Malays, nor those of the negroes; but hold
a middle place between both. Their large, bushy masses of half-
woolly hair frizzle naturally, and acquire an enormous volume,
surmounting the head. The islanders live miserably. They are
Australian Mutual Provident Society.


cannibals; continually at war with their neighbours. The most
singular feature of the manners of the Papuans is the necessity
imposed on every native, of some time in his life, imbruing his
hands in human blood. They put their prisoners to a cruel death,
and hang around the outward walls of their huts or camping houses
the skulls of their victims. The house of the pious and courageous
Mrs. Macfarlane, the wife of the Rev. Mr. Macfarlane, devoted
missionaries to New Guinea, has been dealt with in this way,
while Mrs. Macfarlane was living in it, almost alone, in the absence
of her husband, at his work. But the safety of the missionaries is
secured, for they are loved and venerated and reverenced by the
Papuans. The power of love is shown in the myth of Una and the
Lion; and not less so in the ascendancy of Christianity over the
barbarian.
A French missionary traveller, when writing “ Edifying and
Curious Geographical Letters,” for the “ Pantheon Litteraire de
Geographic,” Paris, 1843, tells us that great missionary zeal existed
among the Jesuits in Oceania so far back as in 1697. In that year
French navigators, in quest of commerce, penetrated the unknown
seas around Papua or New Guinea, and took missionaries with
them to spread the knowledge of the Roman Catholic Faith. Then
he says, “ Haughty Spain is no longer the terror of nations. Our
Richelieu humbled her; and politically ruined her designs, which
threatened to overwhelm the whole Christian world. Spain
conquered by Richelieu is good for France. The house of
Austria, too, was humbled by the same mighty mind. And
Louis Quatorze afterwards built up his own realm on their ruins.
Notwithstanding our preliminary success, the empire of the distant
seas in Oceania is now no longer in the power of France. And
Richelieu, by a marvellous succession of inexplicable successes, has
only, in reality, by all his genius, simply made straight and smooth
the path of conquest there for Great Britain.” Further, he says,
“ London, to day, holds in maritime expeditions and successes in
Oceania the place that Madrid had previously usurped. After long
and violent struggles, it is well to understand properly that, to the
House of Brunswick is descended this magnificent heritage of
Charles the Fifth, But if we have lost part in the succession, be
it known, it is not the Missionaries of Religion who have failed.
As soon as any ship penetrated into the depths of these strange
latitudes the missionaries lent themselves to work, as the harbingers
of civilisation; and often they raised to the living God churches,
in places where man, barbarous and poor, had not been able pre-
viously, to put up even a house for ordinary habitation. The South
Seas every year are acquiring more of importance in the eyes of
Europe. Commerce, and advancement of power, make them the
object of ambition to the nations.”
J. M.
Head Office;—B7, Pitt Street, Sydney.


Circulate this ! Circulate this ! Circulate this
PRICE SIXPENCE.
THE BOOK OF THE SEASON, 1883.
IN EPITOME FOE THE MILLION,
To he published in London early in June, in One Volume, price Gd
WITH A MAP
!E(IFTY ABOUT
Australasia
J. MACGREGOR
( Formerly of the Union Bank of Australia (Limited)).
“TUFTY FACTS ABOUT AUSTRALASIA” is a literary
Epitome of almost everything that can be said about those
magnificent countries belonging to Great Britain which are called
Australasia. This little book is far removed from the ranks of
the dull, depressing, disappointing manuals prepared for Emigrants
—mostly misapprehended by the masses.
Simplicity is the Soul of Art. In composition the Epitome
is so clear, so comprehensive, so simple in expression, so fasci-
nating, that any child in the Empire may learn it with profit;
and every banker, merchant, politician; every man from prince
to peasant, can read it over in an hour or two, and at once
appreciate and appraise its Wonderful Story. This book should
be read in every School, and in every Academy, in the United
Kingdom; and in her great Colonial Dependencies —especially
Australasia. It should be read, and read again, in every social
circle in the Empire. A marvel of Pith and Point.


| Copy.]
( Letter to the Royal Colonial Institute.)
London, 28 th April, 1883.
“ Fifty Facts about Australasia.”
I have the honour to enclose for your information in
respect of a publication about to issue,
Ist.—The Prospectus of the intended book,
“Fifty Facts about Australasia.”
2nd.—My Card.
3rd.—Copy of an introduction to Sir F. Dillon Bell, Agent-
General for New Zealand; given to me by Donald
Larnach, Esq., of Kensington Palace Gardens, and one
of the Fellows of your Institute.
4th.—Copy of an introduction to B. Murray Smith, Esq.,
Agent-General for Victoria, given to me by the Union
Bank of Australia (Limited), London.
The contents of the book have been approved by Authorities.
A great publicity is intended for it in the United Kingdom and
Australasia.
Seeing that it is net produced to elevate any one Colony of the
Australasian Group of Colonies over the other; that its production
will not pay the producer; and that it cannot be productive
under any circumstances whatever, of profit to the writer; and
that the sole object of its preparation and circulation to the utmost
extent possible, is simply to illustrate and substantially convey
practical facts to the understandings of people likely to move to
Australasia with their Capital and Labour—adjuncts absolutely
necessary to sustain the gigantic progress of the country —I take the
liberty of soliciting you to countenance my disinterested labour, by
the force of your influence, in communicating the contents of this
letter to the Fellows and Members of your Institute; officially or
in any way that seems good to you.
Many of the Australasians, and of the inhabitants of the United
Kingdom, who will read “ Fifty Facts about Australasia,” have
never heard of, don’t understand, and take no interest in the
Boyal Colonial Institute, or its scope or its operations.
This state of things is capable, of being amended by degrees.


None but monetary and shipping advertisements of the first-
class connected with Australasia; the advertisements of the Agents
General of those Colonies; and any notice from the Royal
Colonial Institute will be admitted; tinder the management of
Messrs. G. Street it Co., 30, Cornhill, London.
I have the honour to be,
Your obedient Servant,
(Signed) J. MACGREGOR.
Frederick Young, Esq.,
Honorary Secretary,
Royal Colonial Institute, London.
[Copy.]
{Reply of Hon. Secretary Royal Colonial Institute)
15, Strand, W.C.
London, 30 th April, 1883.
Sir,
I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the
28oh inst. with its enclosures.
Although any publication treating of any Colonies of the
Colonial Empire cannot fail to be of interest to me, I regret that
it would not be practicable for the “ Royal Colonial Institute” to
undertake “to communicate the contents of your letter to the
Fellows ”as you request. If, however, you like to send me
specimen copies of your work when published, I shall be happy to
place them in the Reading Room of the Institute.
I am, Sir,
Yours faithfully,
(Signed) FREDERICK YOUNG,
Honorary Secretary.


[Copy.]
{Letter to Sir F. Dillon Bell, K.C.M.G., Agent-General for
New Zealand ).
London, April 21 st, 1883.
“ Fifty Facts about Australasia.”
Ist. I venture to enclose for your information the Prospectus
of my book, “Fifty Facts about Australasia; au Epitome for the
Million.” This book is intended to show the present state, the
prospects, the active dady life, and the character of the Austra-
lasian Colonists.
2nd. The financial facts in this book are based on the figures
cited in your recent celebrated deliverance on Australasian finance ;
qualified by the criticisms which followed that declaration. These
facts are woven into a romantic but simple story of Australasian
industry and enterprise; indicating a progress of the human race
at our Antipodes, which has no parallel either in ancient or modern
history.
3rd. A wide circulation is desired for this book throughout the
British Isles and the great Colonial dependencies of the realm ;
especially Australasia. Its motive is to arrest the attention, not
alone of tourists, but of Capital and Labour in England, and
attract them to Australasia; where these elements of national
greatness are rewarded better for their employment than in any
other country. This is the more needful, too, when we consider
the circumstance, to be deplored by every lover of his country,
that the bone and sinew of British labour, march off in masses
yearly, to go and denationalise themselves and their children, and
enrich with their technical skill, countries antagonistic to England
and her Colonies, in policy, in prestige, and in glory.
4th. This book will be printed by the firm of Wyman & Sons,
Printers, Great Queen Street, and will be published next month
in London, price Sixpence. This low price has been fixed to
ensure for the book a wide and extensive circulation. These" Fifty
Facts” will be useful to be read, and thought over, by every British-
speaking artisan, and every owner of capital.
sth. The Prospectus has been forwarded in England to almost
every person named or introduced into the story. It has been
circulated amongst the Australasian financial institutions in
London and Edinburgh ; amongst many Australasian Merchants
in England; and to hundreds of Bankers, Mayors of Towns, and


Merchants of influence in Australasia, who are supposed to have
at heart the substantial welfare of their country, and its energetic
people, present and expected.
6tb. The collection of Advertisements has been intrusted to
Messrs. G. Streets Co., of 30, Cornhill, who will be prepared to
take only first-class announcements relative to monetary and
shipping matters.
7th. I have the honour to solicit that such Advertisements as
are usually published in this country by your office, for and on
behalf of the Government of New Zealand, may be forthwith given
for insertion in the book entitled “ Fifty Facts about Australasia.”
Will you also kindly do me the honour of communicating to
Messrs. Street & Co. the number of copies of the Work which
your department will subscribe for, to be delivered upon Publica-
tion.
Bth. A letter similar in its tenor to this has been sent to the
Agent-General in London for each of the Colonies of Australasia.
Awaiting your esteemed consideration,
I have the honour to be,
Your most obedient Servant,
(Signed) J. MACGREGOR.
Sir F, Dillon Bell, K.C.M.G.,
Agent-General for New Zealand,
Westminster.
[Copy.]
( Reply of Agent-General for New Zealand.)
“Fifty Facts about Australasia.”
Agent-General for New Zealand ,
7, Westminster Chambers, London, S.W.
30* A April, 1883.
Sir,
I am directed by the Agent-General to acknowledge
the receipt of your Letter of 21st April, and to say in reply that
he will be glad to instruct Messrs. Street & Co. to insert in your
book such Advertisements as are being now published by him.
When the Agent-General has seen the work he will be able to


say how many copies would be taken by this Office ; the Prospectus
of it which you enclose describes it in such glowing terms, that
the Agent-General would not like to name the number of copies
without having had the advantage of perusing it first.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
(Signed) RICHARD HACKWORTH.
{For Sir Dillon Bell.)
J. Macgregor, Esq., London.
[Copy.] {Reply of Agent-General for New South Wales.)
6, Westminster Chambers,
Victoria Street, London, S.W.
15 th May , 1883.
Sir,
I am directed by Sir Saul Samuel to acknowledge the
receipt of your letter of the 25th ultimo, on the subject of your
forthcoming publication, “ Fifty Facts about Australasia,” aud I am
to inform you :
Ist.—That the Agent General will be pleased to take twenty
copies of your “ Fifty Facts.”
2nd.—That Messrs. Street & Co., of Cornhill, our adver-
tising agents, have been instructed to insert in your
work the usual advertisements issued by them with
regard to Emigration to New South Wales.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
(Signed) S. YARDLEY,


[Copy.] {Reply of Agent General for South Australia.)
Emigration Department ,
Government of South Australia ,
8, Victoria Chambers, Westminster, S.W.
30th April , 1883.
Sir,
In reply to your letter of the 21st inst, I am directed
to inform you that the Emigration Agent has instructed Messrs.
G. Street <fc Co. to insert the “Land Order Warrant” advertise-
ment in your book.
Twelve (12) copies will be sufficient for this Office at present.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
(Signed) SAM. DEERING.
{For Sir Arthur Blyth.)
Mr. Jas. Macgregor,
London.
{Reply of The Agent-General for Victoria.)
8, Victoria Chambers,
Victoria Street, Westminster,
London, 2nd May, 1883.
Sib,
I have to acknowledge the receipt of a proof copy of
your work “Fifty Facts about Australasia,” and to inform you
that I will peruse it, and let you know how many copies I shall
want.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
(Signed) ROBERT MURRAY SMITH,


{Reply of the Agent-General for Queensland.)
1, Westminster Chambers,
Victoria Street, London, S.W.
1 §th May, 1883.
In reply to your letter of yesterday’s date, I am directed
to inform you that the Agent General has notified to Messrs.
Street & Co,, that he declines to order any copies of the pamphlet
or advertise in it.
I am, Sir,
Yours obediently,
CHARLES S. DICKEN, Secretary.
{For Thomas Archer.)
J, Macgregor, Esq., London.
Memo, indorsed on the above letter by its recipient, May 17th, 1883.
[This laconic utter ounce is unique. Lacking in the ‘ suaviter in
modo,’ it fails in the ‘ fortiter in re.’ Reason for the curt
refusal does not appear; and is not sought for. “ The rule
of the bench,” which guided the advice of the old judge when
he surrendered his seal of office into the charge of his more
youthful successor, comes into view. The “Ancient ” whispered:
“ Jack, always give your judgments boldly, my boy. But
never venture on reasons for them; else they’ll be upset, and
you writ down an ylss.”]
J.M.


BANK OF
NEW SOUTH WALES.
(Established 1817.)
Paid-up Capital - -
Reserve Fund - -
£1,000,000.
£520,000.
LONDON DIRECTORS.
D. Larnach, Chairman.
Sir Daniel Cooper, Bart., K.C.M.G.
William Walker.
Frederick Tooth.
J. Badcock, Manager. j David George, Secretary.
Letters of Credit and Bills granted upon the Branches
in the Australian and New Zealand Colonies.
BILLS PURCHASED OR FORWARDED FOR COLLECTION.
Deposits received for fixed periods on terms which may he
known on application.
BRANCHES IN ALL THE IMPORTANT TOWNS OF AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND,
LONDON OFFICE:
64, OLD BROAD STREET, E.C.
112


THE COMMERCIAL
BANKING COMPANY OF SYDNEY.
ESTABLISHED 1834. INCORPORATED 1848.
CAPITAL, £600,000. RESERVE FUNDS, £620,000.
HEAD OFFICE i-SYDNEV, NEW SOUTH WALES.
SYDNEY BOARD
RICHARD JONES, Esq., Chairman, i The Hox. EDWARD KNOX, M.L.0.,
The Hon. JOHN FRAZER, M.L.C. I Deputy -Ch drman.
ALFRED LAMB, Esq. | The Hon. L. W. LEVY, M.L.C.
T. A. DIBBS, General Manager.
LONDON BOARD.
OFFICE ; 39, LOMBARD STREET.
JAS. ARNDEL YOEJL, Esq., C.M.G. I F. H. DANGAR, Esq.
A. 0. ROBINSON, Esq. 1 NATHANIEL CORK, Manager.
BRANCHES IN NEW SOUTH WALES.
Adelong, Albury, Armidale, Barraba, Bathurst, Bega, Bernina, Bingera, Blayney, Bombala,
Bourke, Bowral, Brewarrina, Camden, Campbelltown, Candelo, Cannonbar, Carcoar,
Casino, Chatsworth, Cobar, Cooma, Coonamble, Cootamundra, Coraki, Cowra, Cudal,
Dubbo, Uungog, Fernmount, Forbes, Germanton, Glen Innes, Goulburn, Grafton, Gun-
dagai, Gunnedah, Gunning, Inverell, Kempsey, Kiama, Lismoro, Lithgow, Maitland,
Merriwa, Milparinka, Milton, Molong, Morpeth, Moss Yale, Mudgee, Murrurnndi,
Murwillumbah, Muswellbrook, Narandera, Narrabri, Newcastle, Nymagee, Orange,
Parkes, Parramatta, Paterson, Penrith, Picton, Queanbeyan, Quirindi, Richmond,
Shellharbour, Shoalhaven, Singleton, Tamworth, Taree, Tibooburra, Tumbarumba,
Tumut, Wagga-Wagga, Walcha, Walgett, Wallerawang, Warren, Wellington, Went-
worth, Wilcannia, Windsor, Wingham, Wollongong, Woodburn, Yass, and Young.
[BRANCHES IN QUEENSLAND.
Brisbane, Bundaberg, Cunnamulla, Dalby, Mackay, Maryborough, Rockhampton and
Thargomindah.
-A-G-etstts
ENGLAND—
LONDON—London and Westminster Bank, and
London and County Bank.
LIVERPOOL—Liverpool Union Bank.
MANCHESTER—Manchester and Salford Bank.
IRELAN D—Belfast Banking Company and Branches,
and National Bank and Branches.
SCOTLAND —Commercial Bank of Scotland and
TASMANIA, LAUNCESTON—Bank of Van Die
men s Land.
NEW ZEALAND—National Bank of New Zealand
and Branches.
SAN FRAN CISCO—Bank of British Columbia.
VALPARAISO—Banco Nacional de Chile.
NEW YORK—Messrs. Urexel, Morgan & Co.
INDIA, CHINA, AND SINGAPORE—The Char-
tered Bank of India, Australia, and China, and
the Chartered Mercantile Bank of India,
and China.
BATAVIA—The Chartered Bank of India, Australia,
and China.
CEYLON—'Ihe Chartered Mercantile Bonk o India,
London, and China.
MAURITIUS—Messrs. Scott & Co.
HONOLULU—Messrs. Bishop & Co.
EGYPT—Credit Lyonnais.
VICTORIA—Bank of Victoria, National Bank of
Australasia, Commercial Bank of Australia, and
Colonial Bank of Australasia.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA—Bank of South Australia,
National Bank of Australasia, and Bank of
Adelaide.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA—NationaI Bank of Aus-
tralasia.
TASMANIA, HOBART—Bank of Van Diemen’s
Land.
The London Board of Directors grant Letters of Credit, payable on Demand, and Bills
of Exchange, upon all the branches of this Bank free of charge. They also negotiate
approved Bills upon the Australian Colonies, send out Bills for Collection, and transact
every description of Banking Business with Australia through the above-named establish,
ments of the Bank in New south Wales and Queensland, and its Agents in Victoria, South
Australia, Tasmania, and New Zealand,
NATHANIEL CORK. Manager.
No. 39, Lombard Street, E.C.
113


SkcJfdmt gimfi xr| guistmlk
(LI MIXED).
INCORPORATED UNDER AN ACT OF PARLIAMENT.
HEAD OFFICE:
Collins and Elizabeth Streets, Melbourne,
SYDNEY OFFICE :
GEORGE STREET NORTH.
BRANCH OFFICES :
CHAPEL STREET, PRAHRAN, & HAYMARKET, SYDNEY.
Capital - - £1,000,000.
Subscribed - £655,000.
Directors:
President ; Hon. J. J. CASEY, C.M.G.
Vice-President ; J. B. WATSON, Esq.
JOHN ROBB, Esq. WILLIAM M'LEAN, Esq., J.P.
JOHN WHITTINGHAM, Esq.
Managing Director: l Accountant:
Hon. JAMES MUNRO, M.P. 1 A. PRIESTLEY, Esq.
KF" This Bank offers the following
SPECIAL ADVANTAGES to its Customers
Current Accounts will be opened, and Interest allowed on each
.■€loo of monthly balance. Overdrawn Accounts will be arranged
for on the most liberal terms. Bills will be discounted daily on
moderate terms, and Fixed Deposits received at the highest
current rates of Interest. The Bank issues its own notes, con-
ducts all branches of Banking Business, and has Agencies in
London, all the Colonies, and throughout Victoria.
JAMES MUNRO; Managing Director,


EVERY FRIDAY, price 2d. Also in Monthly Parts.
No. 1 WAS PUBLISHED APRIL 13, 1883.
di&inißS dl! Ai JLji iJsLi m
A WEEKLY JOURNAL OF DOMESTIC AND SANITARY SCIENCE.
Edited by Dr. ANDREW WILSON, F.R.S.E.
“Reason's whole pleasure, all the joys of sense.
Lie in three words— Ek.4l.th, peace, and competence.”—Popb.
>f TTEALTH” has been established to supply a felt and growing
| | demand for a weekly periodical which shall deal with all
matters relating to the Preservation of Health, and the
Prevention of Disease.
The Programme of “ HEALTH” will necessarily be large and varied.
Although not a medical journal, it serves as a much-needed link of con-
nexion between the purely professional journals and the lay public. It
is written in plain and non-technical language, and in a thoroughly
popular style, thus adapting itself for the instruction of all classes in
Sanitary and Health Science. Whilst instruction in the Laws of Health
is the paramount object this Journal is intended to subserve, much that
is entertaining will also be found in its pages. “HEALTH” will thus
endeavour to take rank as a Family Journal, which may be perused with
pleasure and profit by all classes, and by young and old-alike.
Articles appear weekly under the following headings by well-known
writers :—•
Original Articles and Essays.
Papers on Personal Health.
Health in the Home.
The Body and its Stxmcture.
The Family Circle.
Recreation and Health.
Jottings from the Journals.
Our Bookshelf.
An important ‘department of “HEALTH” consists in Our. Letter
Box. Space is devoted under this head to the publication of Corre-
spondence on Health Matters. Here, also, Queries relating to General,
Sanitary, and Medical Matters will find their replies.
Arrangements have been made for the appearance in “ HEALTH ”
of papers on the following subjects of vital interest to all classes of the
community :—-
“The Management of Infancy.” By Dr. Baird.
“ Electricity and its Application to Health.” By W. L. Carpenter,
8.A., B.Sc., PC S.
“Domestic Water Supply.” By W, Ivison Macadam, F.C.S., &c.
[OVBH.


'HEALTH: — A Journal of Domestic and Sanitary Science
and Health.” “Training, Athletics, and Health.” Bj
various writers.
“ The Common Ailments of Children.” By Dr. Chapman.
“ Our Ambulance Lectures.”
Papers on “ Cookery and Health,” &c., &c.
PRESS NOTICES.
“A valuable acquisition to our periodical literature.”— Observer,
“ Ably edited. . It is well supplied with instructive papers."— Weekly Dispatch.
“ Devoted to the popular exposition of sanitary matters, and to the education of the
people in the laws of health.”— Medical Dress and Circular.
“ Has articles of the greatest variety on readable educational subjects, and written
in really a popular style.” Citizen.
“ Should be read in every family circle.” — National Reformer.
“It is very well got up.”— Students’ Journal.
“Promises to be both popular and useful. Contains much of what every family
needs to know.”— Christian Commonwealth.
“ The new venture has our best wishes for a prosperous career."— Taper and Printing
Trades' Journal.
“ We cordially recommend ‘ Heauth ’ to all interested in the preservation of their
physical well-being.”— Glasgow Herald.
“It is well edited, and treats the subject in a common-sense way.” — Ashton Evening
Reporter.
“Shows no falling off in the variety and value of its contents. It promises to become
a veritable cyclopaedia of medical information in a popular form.”— Edinboro’ Evening
News.
‘•I3 well edited and contains several important contributions from well-known men
of mark.”— South Essex Advertiser. .
“Edited by the versatile Dr. Andrew Wilson. Cannot fail to render most important
service to the community.”— Edinburgh Coprant.
“ A more interesting weekly journal has not been issued from the press.” — Dun-
fermline Press. _ .
“ Its articles are light and chatty, and bristle with information. There is not a dull
line. We wish ‘ Health’ the success it deserves, and which it is certain to command.”
—Dunfermline Saturday Preee. _ .....
“A most important and interesting work. The name of Dr. Wilson is in itself a
guarantee that it will be well edited.”— Hull Times.
“ Will no doubt command a wide circle of readers, and prove to be very useful.” —
Blackpool Times. . .
“ We may safely augur for it • career of great usefulness, and a wide circulation.”—
Panf ihire Advertiser. -
“ ‘ Health' is a journal containing so much interesting matter, that it can be read,
not only with pleasure but with profit, by all classes of readers. . ._. We give our
cordial good wishes for the success of ‘ Health.’" — Lincolnshire Chronicle.
“ The contents are very interesting.”— Leamington Advertiser.
“There is a vast amount of useful information which somebody in every family
should possess.”— Sheffield Independent.
“Is more than fulfilling the promises of its prospectus. . , , A real want of the
time.”— Torquay Advertiser.
“ A first-class well-edited magazine.”— Lowestoft News.
“The editor has gathered round him a talented staff of coadjutors/'— Sheffield Daily
Post. , ■ .
“ The articles are written in a popular as well as instructive style, by men who
know thoroughly about them.’,’— Peterhead Sentinel.
“ VVe recommend it to the notice and perusal of our readers.” — Mona’s Herald.
“ There can be no doubt that a most successful career awaits ‘ Health/ It has our
best wishes."— Scottish Guardian.
“ It seems likely to become a thoroughly popular exponent of the laws of health and
the conditions of physical well-being.”— Torquay Times.
“ Has made a good beginning.”— Southwark Standard.
"The journal is well got up. . . . Will undoubtedly do great service to social
economy,— Midland Medical Miscellany.
LOUDON: WYMAN k SONS, 74-76, GREAT QDEEN STREET, W.C.


NEW ZEALAND.
ASSISTED PASSAGES
Will be GRANTED to a Limited Number of
SHEPHERDS, on payment of JO5 per Male Adult.
Married Couples having more than Two Children
under twelve years of age will not he eligible.
Free Passages to Single Women. Domestic
Servants, to whom free ship’s kit and travelling
allowance to port of Embarkation are also granted.
Apply to The Agent-General for New Zealand*
7, Westminster Chambers, London, S.W.
May , 1883.
DOMESTIC SERVANTS WANTED,
Such as Cooks, Housemaids, Nurses, General Ser-
vants, and Dairy-Maids, to whom Free Passages to
New Zealand will be granted. Also free ships, out-
fit (bedding, &c.), and travelling expenses to the
port of embarkation. Wages in the Colony range
from £2O to £4O per annum. Application should
be addressed to the
AGENT-GENERAL FOR NEW ZEALAND,
7, Westminster Chambers. Victoria Street/
London, S.W.
i 115


Rate, per Adult
each
£5.
Except SINGLE FEMALES, who will
be taken at a REDUCED RATE of
if
£2.
Children of 3 and under 14 years
jf
£2. 10s.
„ under 3 years
Free.
EMIGRATION TO
NEW SOUTH WALES.
NEW SOUTH WALES GOVERNMENT
WILL PROVIDE
PASSAGES TO SYDNEY
(By first-class Ships) upon payment of the undermentioned rates,
to persons approved by the Agent-General. To consist of Married
Couples not exceeding 35 years, with or without children, and
Single Persons not exceeding 30 years of age.
Farmers, Agricultural and other Labourers, Vine-dressers,
Mechanics, and Female Domestics are required.
Further information may be obtained from the Emigration
Department, New South Wales Government Offices, 5, West-
minster Chambers, London, S.W.
SAUL SAMUEL,
Agent'Oeneral for New South Wale*.


SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
LAND ORDER WARRANTS
OP THE VALUE OP £3O
Are granted by the Agent-General for South Australia, to
all persons approved as suitable, who are in sound health,
and have not previously resided in Australia.
THEY MUST PAY THEIR OWN PASSAGES,
.A-ItTID PBOCEED
DIRECT TO ADELAIDE, SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Via Melbourne or Sydney cannot be taken as proceeding DIRECT to Adlaide),
AND RESIDE IN THE COLONY FOR TWO YEARS.
Forms of Application and other information may he obtained from
THE AGENT-GENERAL FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
8, Victoria Chambers, Westminster, London, S.W.


“Prceuisa Mala Pereunt. "
Ultttaal Jife
OF AUSTRALASIA.
Established 1869, and Incorporated by Act of Parliament.
For Mutual Life Assurance, Endowment
and Annuity Business.
POLICIES INDEFEASIBLE
All Profits are Divided among the
Members every Five Years.
PREMIUMS AT LOW RATES
PRINCIPAL OFFICE:
George and Wynyard Streets, Sydney.
BOARD OF DIRECTORS.
Chairman—
Deputy Chairman— The Hoy. Sie G. WIGRAM ALLEN (Speaker, Legislative Assembly).
JOHN DAVIES, Esq., C.M.G., M.P. ALEX. STUART, Esq , M.P,
o , TvriTT7T TiTm/nionw ■ c ,„„ (Messrs. Robebt Towns & Co.)
SAMUEL DICKINSON, Esq. The Holf j B WATT, M.L.C. ’
(Messes. Leabmoxth, Dickinsoit & Co.) (Messes. Gilchrist, Watt & Co.)
Bankers— THß BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
Solicitors — Messes. ROBERTSON & FISHER,
Principal Medical Officer —11. N. MACLAURIN, Esq., M.D.
offices
NEW ZEALAND. SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
81, QUEEN STREET, AUCKLAND. 24, CURRIE STREET, ADELAIDE,
QUEENSLAND. VICTORIA.
233, QUEEN STREET, BRISBANE. 14, MABKET BUILDINGS, MELB.
Agencies at Hohart, Launceston, and all Principal Towns in the Colonies.
THE FIRST MUTUAL LIFE OFFICE IN AUSTRALASIA
TO FREE ASSURANCE FROM RESTRICTIONS,
And the only one established within the lust thirty years which'has declared a Bonus on
au absolutely Pure Premium Valuation.
J. C. REMINGTON, Secretary.
118


Albury. Daylesford. Mansfield.
Alexandra. Deniliquin, N.S.W. Maryborough.
Ararat. Donald. Mitiamo.
Avenel. • Dromana. Momington,
Avoca. Dunolly. Mooroopna.
Balranald, N.S.W. East Charlton. Mount Gambier.
Balmoral. Echuca. Mulgrave.
Baimsdale. Emerald Hill. Murchison.
Beechworth. Essendon. Murtoa.
Belfast. Euroa. Nagarahie.
Benalla. Elmore. Newbridge.
Beaufort. Footscray. Northcote.
Blackwood, Fryerstown. Numurkah.
Brunswick. Gisborne. Panton Hill,
Camperdown. Guildford, Penshurst.
Carlton. Hamilton. Port Albert,
Carisbrook. Say, N.S.W, Portland.
Cashel. Horsham. Port Macdonnell,
Casterton. Hotham. Preston.
Castlemaine. Inglewood. Queenscliff.
Climes. Kirkstall. Richmond.
Colac. Kyneton. Rochester.
Coleraine. Lillydale. Rupanyup,
Creswick. Maldon. Romsey.
Dandenong,
Rutherglen.
Sale.
Sandhurst.
Scaradale.
Seymour.
Shepparton.
South Yarra,
St. Arnaud.
Stawell.
Talbot.
Taradale.
Terang.
Traralgon.
Tumbarumba.
Wagga Wagga,
N.S.W.
Wangaratta.
Warrnambool,
Waterloo,
Williamstown.
Woodend.
Wunghnu.
Yarraville.
Yarra wonga.
BALLARAT DIRECTORS. —Thomas Clegg, Esq.; Robert Lewis, Esq., J.P.; James
Coghlan, Esq., J.P.; George Millson, Esq.; H. H. Peake, Esq., Secretary.
GEELONG DIRECTORS.—CharIes Andrews, Esq.; Hon. G. F. Belcher, M.L.C.;
H. F. Cameron, Esq. J. M, Anderson, Esq., Agent.
ADELAIDE.—Gordon Young, Esq., and W. D. Reed, Esq., Agents.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA, —M, Higbam and Sons, Fremantle, Agents.


NEW SOUTH WALES MORTGAGE LOAN
AND
AGENCY COMPANY, LIMITED.
Incorporated under the Companies Acts , 1862 <k 1867.
ISSUE OF £lOO,OOO MORTGAGE DEBENTURES.
Capital £1,000,000, in 100,000 Shares of £lO each.
Share Capital subscribed, £513,980. Debentures issued, £330,600.
DIEECTOES,
Sib HENRY DARKLY, K.C.8., G.C.M.G. (late Governor of Victoria, Australia),
LORD GEORGE G. CAMPBELL (Director of the Railway Passengers Assurance
Company).
JAMES COWAN, Esq., London and Edinburgh.
JOHN HENDERSON, Esq., J.P. (Director of the City Bank, Limited).
J. EAMSAY-L’AMY, Esq., F.E.B.E. (Director of the Natal Land and Colonisation
Company, Limited),
ALEXANDER McARTHUR, Esq., M.P. (Messrs. W. A A. McARTHUR), London and
Australia.
TEUSTEES FOE DEBENTURE HOLDEES.
LORD ASHLEY, LORD COLIN CAMPBELL, M.P.
COLONIAL BOAED OP MANAGEMENT.
Thb Hon. Sib GEORGE WIGRAM ALLEN, Sydney, New South Wales.
ROBERT DUDLEY ADAMS, Esq. (Messrs. Ford, Adams, & Co.), Sydney, New South
Wales.
Thb Hon, JOHN B. WATT, M.L.C. (Messrs. Gilchrist, Watt, & Co.), Sydney, New
South Wales.
BANKEES.
THE ROYAL BANK OF SCOTLAND, LONDON, EDINBURGH & BRANCHES.
THE BANK OP NEW SOUTH WALES.
The Dir ctors of this Company are now issuing Debentures for three years
carrying interest at 4 per cent, per annum ; for five years, at 4i per cent, per
annum ; and for seven years and upwards, at 5 per cent, per annum, free of all
expense to the lenders.
The Interest is payable half-yearly, on 15th January and 15th July, or on
15th May and 11th November, at the option of the lenders, by Coupons
attached to the Debentures, and commences from the day on which the
principal is received by the Company.
SECEET AEY.
Mb. W. S. OGLE.


NEW ZEALAND.
THE
“PASSENGER LINE,”
SHAW, SAVILL & ALBION CO.
(liXIMIITIBID),
34, LEADENHALL STREET, LONDON, E.C.
Akaroa 1298
Dunedin 1250
Auckland 1245
Canterbury 1245
Forfarshire 1238
Euterpe 1197
Crusader 1058
Himalaya 1008
Glenlora 774
Helen Denny 728
Lady Jocelyn 2138
Oamaru 1306
Nelson 1247
Invercargill 1246
Lyttelton 1111
Sailing regularly at short intervals
Merope 1054
Jessie Headman 962
Lutterworth 883
Hudson 797
Langstone 746
Timaru 1306
Soukar 1304
Wellington 1247
Westland Hl6
Zealandia 1116
Pleione 1092
Saint Leonards 1054
Trevelyan 1042
Pleiades 997
Margaret Galbraith 841
throughout the year, for
AUCKLAND, WELLINGTON, CANTERBURY, OTAGO,
NELSON, TARANAKI, INVERCARGILL, MARLBOROUGH,
AND HAWKEB BAY.
In the arrangement of Cabins and Berths, and in the general
equipment of the Ships, all Modern Marine Sanitary Improve-
ments suggested by practical experience and the progress of
Science as conducive to the health, comfort, and safety of Pas-
sengers continue to be adopted.
Information on all questions relating to Ships, Rates of
Passage, Freight and Insurance, Shipment of Luggage, Remit-
tances, &c. <fec., may at once be obtained by writing to
SHAW, SAVILL, & ALBION CO.
(Limited),
34, LEADENHALL STREET, LONDON, E.C.
121


ADVANCES ON WOOL, GRAIN, Sfc.
R. GOLDSBROUGH & Co. (Limited),
In which are amalgamated the Australasian Agency and Banking
Corporation (Limited) and R. Goldsbrough and Co.,
WOOL BROKERS,
CAPITAL, £3,000,000,
Make Liberal Advances on the
ENSUING CLIP OF WOOL,
AND ON STATION SECURITIES.
They hold AUCTION SALES OF WOOL twice each week
during the season, and at frequent intervals during the winter
months.
AUCTION SALES OF TALLOW, HIDES, SHEEP-
SKINS, &c., are held three days each week throughout the year.
AUCTION SALES OF WHEAT, OATS, FLOUR, <fec.,
are held each Wednesday during the grain season.
Liberal advances made at bank rates on receipt of produce
into Warehouse.
GOLDSBROUGH’S WOOL WAREHOUSES,
* Bourke and William Streets, Melbourne.


WOOL .A-InTID GKR/.A.l2sr.
MORT & Co.,
Wool, Grain, & General Produce Brokers.
STOCK AND STATION AGENTS.
Warehouses:
Circular %sd ft gl arlkg Jjarkur
SALES held WEEKLY of WOOL and SHEEP-SKINS,
and on separate days of TALLOW, HIDES LEATHER
TOBACCO LEAF, and MINERAL ORES. Sales of WOOL
81-WEEKLY during the Season.
SALES OF
WHEAT, OATS & BARLEY
are held at their
No. 3 WAREHOUSE,
Adjoining the RAILWAY TERMINUS, DARLING HARBOUR.
CASH ADVANCES made on LIEN of WOOL, and on PRODUCE consigned
to them for SALE or SHIPMENT to their London House.
PERIODICAL AUCTION SALES of STUD SHEEP. Sales also negotiated
hy Private Contract.
MORT <sc CO
CIRCULAR QUAY AND DARLING HARBOUR,


WILKINSON, GRAVES, & LAVENDER,
AUCTIONEERS,
Stock, Station, and Genera!
Commission Agents.
SYDNEY, HAY, WAGGA WAGGA,
IN NEW SOUTH WALES.
AG-BUTS FOE
Messrs. RICHARD GIBSON and COMPANY, Melbourne, Victoria.
„ RYAN and HAMMOND, Melbourne.
„ RALEIGH, AITKEN and COMPANY, Melbourne.
„ PECK, HUDSON, and RAYNOR, Melbourne.
„ KING and CUNNINGHAM, Melbourne.
„ J. C. WALKER and COMPANY, Melbourne and Sandhurst.
Mr. JOHN G. DOUGHARTY, Melbourne.
THE AUSTRALASIAN MORTGAGE and AGENCY COMPANY,
Melbourne and Sydney (late Hastings, Cunningham, and Company).
Corresponding Agencies all over Australasia.
SYDNEY OFFICE, 12, SPRING STREET.
NOTE.—Fat Stock Sales at the Homehush Yards, Sydney,
conducted by our Mr. WARDEN HARRY GRAVES, every
Monday and Thursday.
Constituents will please consult us before consigning Fat Stock to
that Market.
N.B.—The attention of Capitalists and Trustees in Great Britain
and Australasia, and of persons desiring to invest money pro-
fitably in these Colonies, is specially solicited to the undoubted
advantages of corresponding with our firm. Our references are
the Bankers throughout Australasia. Security, economy, punctuality, and
absolute trustworthiness in business transactions are our qualifications.
Sheep and Cattle Properties bought and sold on agency
terms only,
124


dffllmtml Jlttpr so.
ESTABLISHED 1855.
Office: O’Connell Street,
SYDNEY,
Directors:
Hon. EDWARD KNOX, Chairman.
THOS. BUCKLAND. ALFRED STANGER LEATHES.
JAMES MILSON. Hon. J. B. WATT.
General manager:
EDWARD WILLIAM KNOX.
Secretary:
QTJARTON L. DELOITTE.
Solicitors:
WANT, JOHNSON, and SCARYELL.
Bankers:
UNION BANK OF AUSTRALIA (Limited).
Refinery:
ELIZABETH BAY, PYRMONT.
SUGAR' MILLS-
NEW SOUTH WALES:
CLARENCE RIVER:
Harwood, Chatsworth, and Southgate.
Richmond River : Broadwater.
Tweed River : Condong.
FIJI:
Nausori, Rewa River.
QUEENSLAND:
Victoria Plantation, Herbert River.
Homebush Plantation, Mackay.
Distillery;
HARWOOD ISLAND, CLARENCE RIVER.


LONDON LINE.
REGULAR SAILINGS TO
SYDNEY, MELBOURNE, BRISBANE,
ROCKHAMPTON,
Taking Passengers at low rates to all Ports.
REGULAR MONTHLY LINE TO
Fremantle and Champion Bay,
WESTERN A USTRALIA.
DIRECT ajINE TO
FIJI
• Taking Goods and Passengers to
All Ports in SOUTH SEA ISLANDS.
Apply
C. BETHELL & Co.
110, FENCHURCH STREET, LONDON, E.C.
ADVERTISING.
MEMORANDUM BY JAMES MACGREGOR.
London , 12 th June, 1883.
Macaulay says: “ Advertising is to business what steam is to machinery—
the grand propelling power.”
THE Prospectus of the intended publication of
“FIFTY FACTS ABOUT AUSTRALASIA.”
and a copy of the letter of the 21st April, 1883, addressed
originally to Sir F. D. Bell, together with his reply thereto ;
were sent early in May last to upwards of Sixty Corporations in
London connected with Australasian Banking, Shipping, and
Insurance.
Messrs. Street and Co., 30, Cornhill, had the sole management
for the collection of advertisements; and their doings resulted in
their getting four only of the advertisements now published in
this publication, designed and written to advance the interests of
Australasia.
And if Australasian Agency could not accomplish more than
this beggarly account of empty boxes, one would never write
about these Colonies, for there would be no story to tell. J. M,
126


V -He STEAMERS, SHIPS,
. YACHTS, • .
CASTLES, CHURCHES, -
& MANSIONS,
sole HOTELS,
MAKERS N^|^ CLUBSj
H.M. NAVY, &c. I
BOARD OF TRADE, t
&C ' N \, ,^\
SHIP CHANDLERS, /
SAIL, /^y/
AND TARPAULIN //&/ 01
/(V/ 21.
MAKERS.
X&yX London street,
i / V/
Sfy. / MARK LANE, E.C.
AND
/<CY
A 283, WAPPING, E.
fttgaeiv. V>'*'
127


AN EPITOME FOR THE MILLION!
Read, Mark, Learn, and Inwardly Digest.
Study in your own best interest, the notice at the
back of the cover of this book concerning
THE
jSuistpalflsifln OTffMjj JSniigFh
Then hesitate not to Subscribe the underwritten con-
tract ; cut it out; address it and send it —if you
really mean business.
The Australasian Weekly Budget,
I, the undersigned, hereby undertake to Subscribe, for
one year at least, to the New Journal, to be called <( The
Australasian Weekly Budget,” and to pay in advance for
same upon issue.
And further desire you to forward to me by post the
said Journal when ready.
Full Name.
Full Address
To Mr. JAMES MACGREGOR,
Care of Messrs. Gordon and Gotch,


Established 1837.
PAID-UP CAPITAL
£1,500,000.
RESERVE FUND
£880,000.
RESERVE LIABILITY OF PROPRIETORS £3,000,000.
UNION BANK OF AUSTRALIA,
LIMITED-
HEAD OFFICE : — l,Bank Buildings, Lothbury, London, E.C.
BRANCHES.
VICTORIA. Melbourne, Sandhurst (Bendigo), Rochester,
Daylesford, Tarnagulla, Alexandra, Geelong, Ballarat,
Allandale, Egerton, Smy thesdale, Clunes, Stawell (Pleasant
Creek), Maryborough, Portland.
NEW SOUTH WALES.—Sydney, Deniliquin, Hay, Wagga
Wagga, Junee, Newcastle.
QUEENSLAND. —Brisbane, Rockhampton, Townsville, Too-
woomba, Mackay, Maryborough,
SOUTH AUSTRALIA—AdeIaide, Port Adelaide.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA—Perth, York, Fremantle, Albany
(King George’s Sound), Geraldton (Champion Bay),
Roebourne, Cossack.
TASMANIA.—Hobart, Oatlands, Launceston, Latrobe.
NEW ZEALAND.—Auckland, Thames, Hawera, Opunake,
Hamilton (Waikato); Wellington, Palmerston North;
Napier, Waipukurau, Port Ahuriri (Hawke’s Bay);
Gisborne (Poverty Bay); Nelson; Hokitika, Greymouth
(Westland) ; Christchurch, Lyttelton, Timaru, Ashburton,
Rangiora, Southbridge, Waimate, Sefton (Canterbury);
Dunedin, Oamaru, Invercargill (Otago).
FIJI ISLANDS.—Levuka, Suva.
Letters of Credit and Bills on Demand, or at 30 Days’ Sight,
are granted on the Bank’s Branches, throughout the Colonies of
Australia, New Zealand, and Fiji; and can also be obtained
through the Bank’s Agents in the principal towns of England,
Scotland, and Ireland.
Telegraphic Remittances are made to the Colonies.
Bills on the Colonies are negotiated and sent for collection.
Deposits are received for fixed periods, on terms which may
He ascertained on application. W. R. MEWBURN, Manager.


THE
Australasian Weekly Budget.
A NEW JOURNAL FOR HOME READERS.
TO BE F TIBLISIIED FRIDAY,
PRICE SIXPENCE.
Provided a £air preliminary subscription support to the under-
taking be first contracted for by intending Subscribers as shown at
page 128.
The first nnmber of a New Weekly Newspaper to be called “ The
Australasian Weekly Budget,” will be published in London the first
Friday in October, 1883, —conditioned, that a preliminary support to the
undertaking be indicated by those who will contract subscribe and Pay
for the Paper for at least one year in advance.
“ The Australasian Weekly Budget ” will be made a full and first-
class Weekly Journal, and Review; containing in a condensed form of
record and comment, ai’ranged from the Australasian newspapers, a vivid
picture of the every-day life of our great Colonists in Australasia; and
their relations one to the other, and to the Empire. Their splendid
Pastoral, Agricultural, and Commercial advancement will be shown in
the reports of the meetings of their monetary companies in London and
in Australasia; their Wool, Mining, Share, and Trade Market Reports
at Home and in the Colonies; their Shipping, Emigration, and Labour
Markets, together with interesting domestic and industrial events marking
progress will be chronicled. Notices of Literature on Australasia will be
given.
Considerations of the fast-increasing wealth and population of our
expanding Australasian Colonies in the vast Southern seas; their ever-
increasing commerce and more rapid intei’-communication with Great
Britain and foreign countries ; and the want among the people in the
United Kingdom of a knowledge of the marvellous development of those
splendid countries under the sovereignty of Great Britain, remarkable alike
for their excellence of climate and easiness of living there, would seem
to demand, in these days of education, a readable Weekly Paper on the
subject. It will furnish British readers with a true story of the Business
and Progress of the lusty labourers at work in Australasia ; subjugating
territory, building up cities, adding to our stores of food, creating manu-
factures, developing their mines, investigating sciences and arts as a
basis for public education, and generally laying loyal and solid founda-
tions for the reception and maintenance in well-being of the anxiously
desired and daily growing population.
Refer to page 128 of
« FIFTY FACTS ABOUT AUSTRALASIA.”
