

FIFTY YEARS
IN RETROSPECT






fLL THE BEST THINGS
and treasures of tin's
world are not to be pro-
duced by each generation
for itself; but we are all intended,
not to carve our work in snow that
will melt, but each and all of us
to be continually rolling a great
white gathering snow-ball, higher
and higher, larger and larger,
along the Alps of human power.
Ruskin.


When the Firm Was Still Young
“In the (lays of 98 ”
An interesting photograph of Cas[?]lemaine personalities of that time. Included in the group are
the present Managing Director (MR. J. F. DEVOY),
the General Manager (MR. J. F. LONERGAN) and the Secretary! (COLONEL. F. A. HUGHES).


FIFTY YEARS IN
RETROSPECT


MR. T. W. BIGGS
Director
Mr. J. F. LONERGAN
Director and General Managers
MR J. N DEVOY
Managing Director
MR. M. J. RYAN
Director
COLONEL F. A. HUGHES
Secretary


FIFTY YEARS IN
RETROSPECT
The Story of
CASTLEMAIN PERKINS LTD.
OF THE GREAT BUSINESSES WHICH FLOURISHED IN
QUEENSLAND FIFTY YEARS AGO, THERE REMAINS
PROBABLY ONLY ONE WHICH CAN CLAIM AN
UNBROKEN CONNECTION WITH THOSE DAYS.
THAT COMPANY IS CASTLEMAINE PERKINS LTD.,
WHICH NOW CELEBRATES ITS JUBILEE YEAR.
In the year 1871, a company was formed by Michael Quinlan
and N. Donnelly, which was named Quinlan, Donnelly and Co.,
trading as general business and shipping agents. Opportunities
in the young colony were opening as rich mineral discoveries
followed each other in rapid succession, and cattle stations were
stocked and townships established themselves in the Far North
and North-West of what had previously been an uninhabited
wilderness.
It would be difficult for us to-day to imagine either the Bris-
bane of those days or its business world. Trade to North
Queensland ports was carried on then by schooners, and great
clipper ships from England and America were a common sight
in the Brisbane River, a forest of masts extending from Edward
Street to Petrie’s Bight.
The capital of Messrs. Quinlan, Donnelly and Company was
small, hut the firm’s ramifications extended as the gold mines
of North Queensland gave employment to thousands of men, who
in their turn became the consumers of the products of the cattle
stations. The opening of the Palmer Goldfields gave Messrs.
Quinlan, Donnelly and Co. an opportunity to build up a very
large business, which extended across the Peninsular to the Gulf
Country and Georgetown.
When tin was discovered at Stanthorpe, the young company hnill
solidly its business connection with the iiidu^lr\.


Foundation of the Company
Following illness, Mr. Donnelly sold out to Mr. Quinlan. Two
years later the latter died, and Ms widow took into the business
Mr. George Wilkie Gray as partner. Previous to his death, how-
ever, Mr. Quinlan had concluded an arrangement with Messrs. E.
and N. Fitzgerald, of Castlemaine, Victoria, to establish a brewery
at Milton on the site where to-day the huge brewery of Castle-
maine Perkins Ltd. stands.
This business, conducted as Fitzgerald, Quinlan and Co., was very
successful, and in 1887 it was decided to form a limited liability
company. This company was known as Castlemaine Brewery and
Quinlan Gray and Co. Brisbane Ltd. Shares were oversubscribed J
by sixty per cent. |
The board of directors of the present great company, Castlemaine \
Perkins Ltd., which has evolved from that beginning in 1887, I
consists of Messrs. J. N. Devoy, chairman and managing director, J
J. F. Lonergan, also general manager, T. W. Biggs and M. Ryan. I
It is interesting to glance back fifty years to when the first I
board consisted of Messrs. F. H. Hart, chairman, E. B. Forrest, j;
M. Fitzgerald, and G. W. Gray as managing director. During j
the intervening period prominent Queenslanders who at various '
times took their places at the board room table included Mr.
William Quinn, Mr. Herbert Perry, Mr. Edward Fitzgerald, Mr.
William McGregor and Mr. Charles Elliott, who was chairman for
some years.
Mr. John Devoy, who has had an unbroken connection with the
company, started his business career as a lad with Quinlan,
Donnelly and Company. He became secretary of the new com-
pany and later its general manager. Not many years passed until
the ’93 financial smash occurred, driving many businesses and
even some banks to the wall. The financial disaster which saw
MR. A.
Head B


the closing of the banks was shortly afterwards followed by the
greatest flood in Queensland history, which caused tremendous
loss and damage.
But by wise direction and sound business practice the Castlemaine
Brewery and Quinlan Gray and Co. survived to grow stronger.
When the clouds lifted about five years later and good times
came again, the company reaped its reward.
The Great War Period
Steady growth characterised the years until the period of the
Great War arrived in 1914 and business was faced with much
uncertainty and disruption.
The wisdom that has always been associated with the rise of
this huge brewing company was again displayed under war
conditions. The directors took a signally intelligent step. They
decided to withdraw from the general and mercantile fields and
concentrate on brewing and their wine and spirit agencies.
Success followed this decision to specialise and the company
was enabled to devote its complete attention to the Milton
brewery. New processes were by this time available and
brewing had become, at last, a science.
The directors concentrated on producing a beer that would he
suited to the climate and to the tastes of Queenslanders.
K. HALL
reiver
The Famous “Four-ex” is Evolved
When, in 1916, the directors changed the brew, obtaining the
best brewing talent available, the result was Four-ex, the con-
sumption of which has grown with extraordinary consistency.
At Milton these days it is an experience to watch the entire
brewing process from the arrival of the malt, through the vast


fermentation and storage system, until bottles and hogsheads are
filled, without being able to detect the slightest direct contact
with human hands.
No one can challenge the purity of the products as brewed at
the company’s Milton and Toowoomba breweries, for both are
models of hygiene and efficiency. Only the choicest selected barley,
as grown on the Darling Downs specially for the Toowoomha
makings, is used.
Beers range widely as to type, and the success of all brewing
companies must ultimately rest on their ability to meet popular
taste and demand. By regulation of the quantities and qualities
of the naturally derived ingredients which go to make a brew
and the method of using the fermenting agent, yeast, beers of
various types are produced.
brom the institution of the “Four-ex” brew produced by bottom
fermentation with storage for three months, the progress of the
liilon brewery became nothing short of phenomenal.
THE LATE MR. MICHAEL QUINLAN,
one of the founders of the company which afterwards became Castlemaine Brewery and
Quinlan, Gray and Co. Ltd.


THE LATE HON. G. W. GRAY,
who, with the late Michael Quinlan, wax a founder of the company which bore their two
names and which was the parent of to-day’s Castlemaine Perkins Ltd.
Additional plant, buildings and storage chambers have been found
to be necessary so that supply may be kept always one jump
ahead of ever-mounting demand. This problem the company has
always approached with foresight, and whether we consider Milton’s
five acres or the company’s Toowoomba establishment, they are
to-day virtually new breweries and new plants.
In the memorable year which first saw the production of “Four-ex”
the directors decided to move the company’s headquarters. During
all the years of its picturesque growth, the Castlemaine Brewery
Company had occupied Queen Street premises. These were sold
to the Brisbane City Council for £30,250, and the presmil build-
ing in Adelaide Street was erected.
By a wise purchase some years earlier, a ninety-nine feet frontage
to that street had been bought. A building of three stone,-, with
provision for another three, gave ample accommodation for the
offices, warehouses and new bond stores. ,


The old Brewery and a group of employees in 1887.
The Purchase of Perkins’ Brewery
Perhaps the greatest milestone in the history of this company
was in 1928. In this year negotiations were completed with Perkins
and Company for the purcliase of that firm’s Toowoomba mailings
and brewery and certain sections of Perkins’ Brisbane plant.
Included also in the purchase was the trade of nineteen freehold
hotels for a period of twenty-five years and of fifty leasehold hotels
to the termination of their respective leases.
Perkins and Company had a history as old as that of the Castle-
maine Brewery Company. Formed in 1881, it was for long one
of the most prosperous of Queensland brewing concerns, but for
some years prior to the sale it had been encountering difficult
business conditions.
Following the merger, the name of the purchasing company was
changed to Castlemaine Perkins Ltd., and the capitalisation began
to assume proportions consistent with its programme of expansion.
Having found in “Four-ex” a brew that is in ever-increasing
demand, the policy of the directors was adjusted accordingly.
Their conduct of the company has been calculated to ensure that
the brewing plants will always be of such capacity as to provide a
safety margin over mounting demand and to see that marketing
facilities are pushed towards a maximum.


Year Ended
July 31
Capital
Reserves
Profits
Dividend
%
1888
£150,000
—
£26,299
10
1898
£150,000
£364
£5,965
Nil
{in
the year 1902 the capital was written dotvn by 12/6 per share
and 2/6 per share, teas called up.)
1908
£77,147
£10,000
£5,203
5
1918
£78,531
£55,000
£15,391
10
1928
£375,000
£50,000
£68,741
10
1936
£1,041,666
£185,000
£140,739
8
For this reason it is interesting to note that thousands of pounds
have been spent since the merger, and, indeed, still are being
spent, to improve the plant and storage capacity, to effect general
improvements at Milton and Toowoomba, and to increase the
purchase of hotel freeholds and leases.
The merger gave Castlemaine Perkins Ltd. control of a large number
of the big hotel freeholds in the Greater Brisbane area. Undeterred
by the depression, the directors continued to acquire such proper-
ties. In 1930, large sums were spent in the purchase of further
hotel freeholds.
Again when the financial stringency had forced real estate values
to a low ebb in 1931, additional sums were wisely spent in buy-
ing with a certainty of restored values, and at the same time
extending marketing facilities.
Continuous Progress
The following is an outline in brief which illustrates the progress
of the company in ten-year periods, showing capital, reserves, profits
and dividends:
Turnover continued to increase in direct ratio to the accessibility
of the product to the public, and in 1934 a further increase was
effected in the holding of the freehold properties acquired by
this always enterprising company. Again in 1935 big purchases sent
the book value of freehold properties acquired by the company up
by £260,768.


MR. H. S. WOOD
Accountant
MR. P. J. WOODS
Head Traveller
MR. E. T. PERKINS
Manager, Toowoomba Brewery
From 1919 to 1937, a period of eighteen years, capital increased
from £78,669 to £1,041,666, or more than thirteen times. The
reserves increased from £18,355 to £185,000, or more than ten times.
In 1919, £37,500 of reserves were capitalised by the issue of 50,000
bonus shares and by a bonus of 2/6 on 50,000 shares issued to share-
holders at 10/- a share.
It is not only in benefits to shareholders that Castlemaine Perkins can
claim distinction. Its staff, whether in the breweries, offices, ware-
houses, mailings or bond stores, are happy, contented and well cared
foi. Eighty per cent, of the staffs joined the company’s service when
in their teens and are still working for it. They feel that they have
an identity of interest with the company.
Provision for their welfare is made by a sick benefit fund contributed
to equally by both company and employees, and this is in a healthy
condition. "
An equally paternal interest is shown by the company in its
encouragement of the excellent group endowment scheme of insur-
ance with the National Mutual Life Company. Under the provisions
of this scheme each employee is enabled to take up a policy maturing
at the age of sixty-five and financed by mutual contributions of
employees and the company.
It is something of which tile company is proud that not even during
the years of the depression were wages or salaries of its employees
reduced. 1 -


It must be very satisfactory to the shareholders, the management
and staff that the company, after successfully encountering vicissi-
tudes during its eventful fifty years’ history should have such
splendid assets in its great modern breweries and plant, in its hotel
freeholds, and in its products, which are always in increasing demand.
It is an outstanding feature of this Jubilee story that its managing
director, Mr. John Devoy. has been connected with the company
since its foundation, having occupied almost every executive position
during those fifty years. Of importance also, as indicating the team
work of the leading executives, is die fact that Mr. J. F. Lonergan,
director and general manager, and Colonel F. A. Hughes, secretary,
have been Mr. Devoy’s lieutenants for forty years, having, like him,
entered the company’s service as boys.
With the celebration of the Jubilee Year of Castlemaine Perkins
Ltd. a future is opened in which many more chapters, as noteworthy
and spectacular as those which have already been written, will con-
tinue the romantic story of a truly great Queensland company.
“ The Cast pleasure in life is the sense of
having achieved that which ire set out to do.”
Hazlitt


