

Minda
1898 - 1948




F 1 FT Y YEA R S ANNIVE R S A R Y
18 9 8 - 19 4 8




Minda Home


Minda
A HOME AND TRAINING INSTITUTION
FOR FEEBLE-MINDED AND
EPILEPTIC CHILDREN


MAIN ENTRANCE DRIVEWAY FROM BRIGHTON ROAD


Wholly set up and printed in South Australia by
THE ADVERTISER PRINTING OFFICE,
Adelaide


Fift y Year
OF SYMPATHETIC CARE
AND PRACTICAL
SERVICE
MIN DA HOME
SOUTH AUSTRALIA : 1948


Published by
THE BOARD OF MANAGEMENT
on the occasion of the
JUBILEE ANNIVERSARY
of
MINDA HOME, INCORPORATED
DECEMBER, 1948


MENTAL DEFICIENCY — A SERIOUS NATIONAL PROBLEM
IN AUSTRALIA, very few people outside the medical profession and
psychologists, realise the gravity of the problem of the mentally
deficient, its relation to crime and to the multiplication of the unfit in the
community. Fewer people still know anything of modern methods, such
as are found in Europe and America, of providing for the care and training
of feeble-minded children. Minda’s methods and results compare favour-
ably with those of overseas countries where special schools, after-care com-
mittees, and permanent-care colonies make the lives of these children happy
and safeguard the community.
A mentally dull child may be described as one having intelligence of
a child considerably younger. lie must be differentiated from the back-
ward child who has been retarded in early life through some accidental


circumstances such as ill-health, physical defect or bad environment. The
latter may be brought to normal level by suitable treatment. However, the
mentally dull child, though educable to some extent, remains permanently
retarded.
The feeble-minded child, with a mental defect existing from or soon
after birth, is incapable of competing on equal terms with his normal
fellows or managing himself: or his affairs with ordinary prudence.
There are living in Australia many people, who, though not positively
hcreft of reason, are feeble-minded. Of these, considerable numbers are
without the control required in their interests and for public safety. Such
adults, young persons and children who are in some way incapable of self-
control may become a source of lasting injury to the community.


Panorama of Minda with Frank Hayward
Building on the right, Rogerson House in the
centre background and Verco Building on the left.
Frank Hayward Building, so called to perpetuate
the name of a generous benefactor, was originally
the home of William Hodgkiss.
It was remodelled in 1940.
Showing the charming architecture of a hallway
at the entrance to Rogerson House. This was the
first building erected when Minda was established
at Brighton. It was recently named in memory
of Minda's greatest benefactor.


There are mentally detective persons whose training is neglected,
oxer whom no sufficient control is exercised and whose wayward and
irresponsible lives are productive of crime and misery. Some marry
and contribute their quota to the sub-normal population to be a blight on
society.
Humane and considerate treatment, kindlier methods of dealing with
the weak, are potent factors which would improve the condition of the
feeble-minded.
It is cruel to allow the feeble-minded to be at large without protection,
to be ridiculed by the normal, to be exposed to the stress and turmoil of the
world. If they are to be prevented from complete deterioration they
require special care and training which can be given only in a borne, insti-
titution or colony established for such particular purpose. Feeble-minded
are far happier in an institution surrounded by those who are similarly
afflicted. The dull child, both at home and at school, is the butt of other
children in robust physical and mental health.
While it is so much to the advantage of the feeble-minded to have the
care and training obtainable at an institution such as Minda, it is much
better also for the nation that they be removed from dangers to be faced
in streets of cities and prevented from propagating their kind by marriage.
Feeble-minded are naturally lethargic. To overcome this habit is
the first step towards progress. Constant congenial occupation is recog-
nised as of the greatest importance in their treatment. Close supervision
is always necessary because, as a rule, the pupil will not apply himself even
to work he is perfectly able to do.
Experts say that outdoor manual work is the best for the feeble-
minded, agricultural occupation being of the greatest importance. Minda
follows this policy closely. Experience at Craigburn is that feeble-minded
become fairly capable and are particularly happy working about the farm.
To protect the feeble-minded and to improve the nation is Minda’s
task.


MINDA HOME: WHAT IT IS AND DOES
ESTABLISHED 50 years ago, Minda Home is unique in the Com-
monwealth as a training institution lor the feeble-minded and
epileptic. In segregating, training and caring for the mentally sub-normal
child, Minda performs an essential service to the community.
Minda maintains more beds than anv other charitable institution in
the State.
Buildings and grounds at Brighton cover 75 acres.
Approximately 100 pupils attend Minda School.
Minda farm ("Craigburn”—l,soo acres) at Blackwood provides a
sheltered home and healthy occupation for senior “hoys.”
Minda’s aim is to mother the children, to bring them up so as to make the
best of every power they possess, to train them to good behaviour, to make
them considerate to others, to give them a chance to he useful to them-
selves and, wherever possible to get them to acquire the elements of some
handicraft or task which will interest and occupy them.


To achieve these objects, it is first necessary to give the children some-
thing akin to a normal home life. We try to attain this by segregating pupils
into groups so that thev associate with their mental equals or make them-
selves useful and happy by assisting those more helpless than themselves.
Our wish is to make their surroundings as little like an institution as
O
possible. We have no uniform. Every child has its own clothes and
what this means in trouble to the nursing and laundry staffs only those
O ✓ ✓
who have a family of 300 or so really know.
✓ /
Games of all sorts are encouraged and it is the duty of each member
of the staff to make Minda a healthy and happy home. That we succeed
in this endeavour is proved by the tears of many of the children when they
leave us for a holiday, and by the readiness of almost all to come back to
Minda.
Results of Minda’s work on the whole are good. Bad habits are in
many cases cured. The children acquire a measure of self-respect and
respect for others. They feel that they are useful and take a real pride
in the occupation.
1 lerc is a typical story about a mentally subnormal child. At the age
of five years it is obvious that all his life he will think, talk and act like a
child. At that age he can scarcely speak at all. lie is a great worry to
his parents who fear for his future. Ile begins school, but after a year or
two it is found that he will never he able to compete with his fellows, in
fact, the unfortunate child is even too dull lor the Education Department’s
opportunity classes, yet not hopeless enough to be sent to a mental hospital.
What can be done for him? Ile may be admitted to Minda I lome.
At Minda he will go to school, where he will be patiently trained by care-
fully chosen teachers. Ile must be taught to pay attention and concentrate
—a difficult task for the mentally afflicted. I fis teacher tries to inculcate
the habit of doing something useful. I hrough music, rhythmic move-
ment and sense training, teachers hope to develop this power. Ile has
not felt the urge to talk to or play with other children. Games, particu-
larly sense training games, will create this urge. The muscles which
control his speech are slow to develop and his sense of hearing is not
keen. Ife is slow to understand. The solution is lip, jaw and tongue
exercises performed while he looks into a mirror, then follows practice in
the articulation of sounds and words.


A classroom at Minda School. Early training of pupils is carried out in these airy,
well-lighted surroundings.
Interesting little exercises acted to popular nursery rhymes help to
develop suppleness and strength of fingers, wrists joints and muscles and
bring about greater co-ordination between head, hand and eye.
Ihe idea is to set tree whatever mental power—no matter how little-
lie may have. Slowly he will learn to form letters into words and to read
a little. In years he rnav learn to read iairlv freely.
What: will happen to him when he is too old for school? He will he
found some suitable occupation at Minda or may be at the “ Craigburn ”
farm, where he will have a comfortable and sheltered home for the
remainder of his life.
It is better for the mentally deficient themselves and the community
generally that they should not mingle freely in the outside world. They
should always be segregated and carefully supervised by people who under-
stand them.


THE BEGINNING OF MINDA
ON Monday, 12th February, 1894, a deputation was introduced to the
Chiel Secretary hy Mr. George Ash, M.P., a visitor to the Adelaide
Lunatic Asvlums, seeking better treatment of weak-minded children in
the asvlums. Mr. Ash said that there were in the Parkside Asylum a
number of such afflicted children under the age of fourteen vears. Thev
O - »•
had nothing to do but spend the whole of their days looking at stone
walls. No attempt was made to educate them. Even if this were done
the environment was unsuitable. Exceptional teachers would be required.


and these would not be found among the warders. In the asylum
there were young men whose intellect had never been enlightened. They
could be improved by special teaching.
Mr. J. 11. Symon stated that weakness of mind might become derange-
ment of mind unless something were done to cultivate the intellect. With-
out educational influences and pleasant associations weakness became
aggravated.
Oo
Sir John Colton said that he had seen weak-minded children who had
vastly improved with training. Mr. S. Johnson said that nothing was
more pitiable than to see children of weak intellect in the wards of a
lunatic asylum. He urged Government assistance to provide a home
where they could be properly treated.
Mr. F. Hewitson pointed out that outside the asylum there were cases
which should be considered. Other speakers were Messrs. 11. Kelly, 1).
Nock, W. I litchcox, J. G. Jenkins, F. W. Coneybeer, Barnett and Rhodes.
The Chief Secretary said there were possibilities in special treatment
for the children and assured the deputation that its request would receive
sympathetic consideration. Establishment of some institution where
weak-minded children could receive careful and expert training was worthy
of the Government’s attention and the philanthropic assistance of the
community.
Minda was established four vears later.
MEANING OF "MINDA"
Minda is a word of the Adelaide tribe of aborigines and tribes in parts
of South Australia north to Peterborough as well as those in part of Yorke
Peninsula. It has a wide range of meanings probably the best gloss being
“ place of shelter and protection.”
At the opening of the home in 1898 the first President (Sir Josiah
Symon) said that the aborigines had a peculiar tenderness for their children
of weak intellect, a tenderness almost akin to reverence. They spoiled
all their children but they were particularly devoted to those of inferior
intelligence. I laving a significance connected with this reverence, the
o O O '
name chosen for the home was an aborigine word “ Minda ” meaning “ a
shelter,” “ a retreat,” “ a home.”


This modern bathroom is a
feature of the up-to-date
nurses’ quarters erected in
1938. This building
accommodates, in single
rooms, the matron and 40
members of the nursing
staff.
This dormitory is typical of
the sleeping accommodation
for pupils at Minda which
provides for more than 350
inmates. Desirable alloca-
tion into a reasonable num-
ber of similar type of pupil
is made possible by many
dormitories.
Recreational room in Roger-
son House. Equipped with
radio, pianola and other
facilities it permits maxi-
mum relaxation, particu-
larly in wet weather.


DEV ELOPMENT OF MINDA
Till: tendency of those suffering from mental weakness was to
degeneracy. Ihe choice was, therefore, between having an insti-
O ✓ O
tution which would train and nurture these weak minds or that they should
lapse into idiocy. So said Mr. J. H. Svmon, Q.C. (later Sir Josiah Symon)
on Saturday afternoon, 17th September, 1898 when Lady Victoria Buxton,
wife of the Governor of South Australia, formally declared the home open
and named it “ Minda.” Mr. Svmon explained “ what the institution is
and what it is not.” Considerable misapprehension existed as to the objects
of the home, he said. It was not a lunatic asylum or an asvlum for those
afflicted with mania, or oppressed with the cloud of idiocy. Neither was
it for epileptics, but the Committee hoped that as thev were able to
segregate the pupils, part of the institution might be devoted to these
unfortunate people. It was for the weak-minded amongst the young, for
* Work at Minda actually began on 2nd May, 1898.
17


those whose faculties were not dead beyond recall, but who had them more
or less dormant.
The great object of the institution was that such intelligence as the little
ones had might be fanned by gentleness and care into brightness and the
promise of a useful life. Hitherto there had been no facility to train
those so afflicted. The unfortunate families to whom they belonged, even
- O '
if they possessed means, had no schools to which to send them. They
were unfit to undergo the struggle in ordinary schools, and even in their
O OO ✓ ’
homes, however tender the affection was toward them, they were in the
way. In the houses of the poor they were a grievous burden.
Mr. Svmon added that the home was to be conducted by a specially
trained and experienced staff. There would he constant care and kindness
and—what was even of more importance—associated with these things,
discipline, orderliness, and cleanliness. Initial efforts to establish such a
home began in 1894, when Mr. Samuel Johnson made the suggestion and,
in conjunction with Messrs. George Ash and William Hitchcox, brought
the question prominently before the South Australian public. The first
step was a deputation which on 12th February, 1894, waited upon the
Chief Secretary. The outcome was a promise by the Government of a
Grant of £SOO conditionally on a similar sum being raised by subscription.
In 1895 the Committee, with the unremitting assistance of “The Adver-
tiser’’ and “Aunt Dorothy,” raised the money. A house had been pur-
chased in 1897 at Fullarton Road, Fullarton, and Mrs. Barker (matron)
and Miss Edna Fox (teacher) were brought from England. The home,
with accommodation for 22 pupils, opened with 10 children, but it soon
filled. In 1901 consideration was given to a scheme for expansion. A
section of about 27 acres of land was purchased at Aldgate. Plans for a
suitable building were prepared, but the committee hesitated to erect it
until finance was obtained. In 1908 the suitability of Aldgate as a site
for Minda was reconsidered. Medical men favoured the seaside rather
than the hills. In the following year the property of William Ilodgkiss
at Brighton was purchased for £3,000.
With 37 pupils in 1910 the Eullarton home, to which had been added
temporary structures, was full. Mr. T. G. A. Magarey offered 50 acres
of land at Blackwood for a new home and Mr. Ryan, M.P., also was
prepared to give three acres there. While the Committee appreciated the
generosity of these gentlemen, members believed it undesirable to alter the
proposed site at Brighton, where preparations for building had been made


Children wend their way daily to Minda School
from the Kindergarten cottages on the sandhills
overlooking the waters of St. Vincent Gulf. The
pathway meanders through an orchard and
vegetable garden.
Another example of hallway architecture in
Rogerson House.


and tenders called. The grant from the Government was increased to
£4,000 and a contract having been signed on 9th June, 1910, the Founda-
tion stone was laid by Governor Sir Day 1 lort Bosanquet on 19th Novem-
ber, 1910. Special subscribers included Dr. Joseph Verco (£1,000), Sir
Langdon Bonython and Messrs. W. H. Durrant and William Taylor (each
£100).
Building operations were hampered by scarcity of suitable labour and
cost of material had considerably increased. The original estimates were
exceeded to an extent that compelled another approach to the Government
which granted an additional £I,OOO toward the full cost of £7,000 for the
building.
When established in 1898 the institution was registered as “ The
1 lome for Wealcminded Children.” It was called “ Minda.” The objects
were “ the maintenance, care, education and special training of weak-
minded children so that their lives may become happy and useful.”
In September, 1911, a certificate of incorporation was issued under a
new name, “ Minda I lome,” and new rules were adopted. Because a
number of pupils admitted when the home was opened had grown to adults,
the constitution had to be altered to permit them to remain, hence the new
objects were to “ provide a home for the care, education and training of the
feebleminded and epileptic.”
Transfer to Brighton began on 22nd November, 1911, but even with
this additional accommodation applications for admission had to be declined
because of insufficient room for inmates and staff.
In 1912 the Committee prepared plans for another structure at an
estimated cost of £IO,OOO. At the time there were 50 prospective pupils
on the waiting list. Meanwhile work of improving the property was
progressing steadily. This comprised road-making, fencing, erection of
cxnvsheds and piggeries and lawn planting. These tasks, together with farm
work and gardening, kept the bigger boys busy while the older girls found
occupation in the laundry, kitchen, dormitories, dining-rooms and sewing
room.
On 4th October, 1913, Dr. J. G. Verco laid the foundation stone of
the building which now bears his name. This is the two-storey structure
at the south end of the quadrangle and is only half of what w r as originally
planned. It has accommodation for 80 boys and staff.
Verco Building was opened on 27th June, 1914, when there were 70
applications for admission in hand. About this time the Fullarton


Tending poultry at Minda
(Brighton) provides healthy
and interesting occupation
for senior boys, as well as
ensuring the breakfast egg
for about 300 children. To
cope with the great demand
for eggs there is another
poultry farm at Craigburn.
“Craigburn"—at the time
of purchase by Minda. This
virgin scrubland was cleared
by the boys, the timber used
for fuel at the home and
the land developed for
general farming purposes.
The transformed landscape
annually produces crops of
hay, oats and barley, as well
as providing grazing for up
to 1,500 sheep and 60 head
of cattle.


Efficient training methods
enable boys to produce,
under supervision, most of
the vegetables used at the
home. These excellent
specimens were grown at
Brighton.
Much of the milk and
butter used at Minda is
produced at “ Craigburn,"
where dairy-farming is one
of the features of the
training for senior boys.
Minda conducts the well-
known “Craigeoro” Stud
Piggery at Blackwood.


Besides breeding pedigreed
animals For show purposes
and for sale, the piggery’
produces baconers for
market, the proceeds
helping towards the, income
of the Home.
Most of the work is done by
the boys, who are proud of
the achievements of
“Craigeoro" and
enthusiastic about the part
they play in the agricultural
activities of the Institution.
About 200 pigs keep a
section of the senior boys
busy at a suitable outdoor
occupation.


Sunbeam House, the sleeping quarters of senior girls, who perform much of the
domestic work necessary at Minda. Standing in 35 acres of land, this property was
presented to Minda by Miss ,I. M. Hackett.
property was sold tor £.2,000, and during the next lew years the land at
Aldgate also was sold.
In 1918 an additional nine acres ot land adjoining the existing
property at Brighton were purchased and planted with fruit trees and vines.
The Committee realised more and more the disadvantages of lack of proper
segregation of types of pupils and the cottage system was frequently men-
tioned as preferable to the barrack system. Representatives of Minda
who visited the eastern States to inspect institutions subsequently recom-
mended that future extensions at Minda be carried out along cottage lines.
Plans were prepared for two separate buildings, each with accommodation
for 25 patients, to be erected on the sandhills overlooking the sea.
The foundation stone of each ot these cottages, named Lady Galway
and Sir Charles Goode respectively, was laid on 3rd August, 1918. The
buildings were occupied the following year. Ihe next extensions were
made in 1922, when a house for the Resident Superintendent and school


were built at a cost of about £2,000. Additions to the school were made
in 1928 to provide three large rooms surrounded by a wide verandah. The
extra accommodation allowed better grading of pupils. Another room was
built in 1935. The old administrative building was altered to provide
additional accommodation for the staff, thereby freeing rooms in Verco tor
more pupils.
Financed by a bank overdraft, “ Craigburn Minda’s farm at Black-
wood—consisting of approximately 1,400 acres, was purchased for £14,000
in 1923, when, according to the annual report for that year, “ the Com-
mittee was looking ahead as to future requirements of the institution and
the unwisdom of further building at Brighton on account of the limited
O O
area and the increasing value of land there.”
The Infirmary (Isolation) was formally opened on JBth September,
1923, the three wards being named “ Champness,” ‘‘Jane Marks” and
“ Glenelg ” respectively. During this year (1923) 20 acres of Minda’s
property at the eastern end facing Brighton Road were cut up into allot-
ments and sold by auction, the total gross realisation being £8,654.
Continuing its progressive policy, the Committee then built a kinder-
garten and named it H. W. Waterhouse Cottage. It was ofllciallv declared
open by Mr. David Waterhouse (son of the former President and now a
Vice-President) on 6th March, 1929.
Considerable developmental work had been made each year at “ Craig-
burn,” and in 1930 there were on the property nearly 500 sheep, as well
as a number of horses and cattle. Minda became a member of the Stud
Pigbreeders’ Association and the piggery, with 30 pedigree pigs was
registered as ‘‘Craigcoro” Stud Pig Farm. By 1932 “Craigburn” was
supplying Minda’s full requirements of mutton and firewood as well as
much of the fruit needed for jam.
The foundation stone of the first building (John Tassie) at “ Craig-
burn ” was laid on 31st January, 1934, by the Governor (Sir Alexander
Hore-Ruthven, V.C.) and the building was officially opened bv his succes-
sor, Sir Winston Dugan, on 22nd August, 1934. Estimated to cost £4,000,
it provided accommodation for 20 boys and was so designed that another
dormitory to house 20 more could be added for a comparatively small
amount. This extension, the George Hussey Wing, was ofllciallv opened
by Lady Bonvthon on 24th March, 1937.


Miss 1. M. I lackctt, who for many years had been elosely interested
in and most sympathetie toward the work of Minda gave in 1935 about
35 acres of land, together with a big house and improvements. This
munificent gift, which adjoins the Brighton property, was valued at about
£IO,OOO. The residence was renovated and officially opened by Lady
Ritchie on 4th December, 1936, as quarters for 18 senior girls. It is now
known as Sunbeam House.
In March, 1935, the laundry was severely damaged by fire. Renova-
tions, additions and up-to-date equipment modernised the laundry which
was in operation again bv October of that vear.
Further important building additions were planned early in 1937 when
the Committee decided to erect at Brighton a single storey building to
accommodate 40 members of the nursing staff then housed in the Admini-
strative Block which was most inadequate and unsuitable for the purpose.
Nurses and domestic stall were cramped in rooms divided into small
cubicles. The foundation stone of the new quarters was laid by Sir
Lavington Bonython in February, 1938. Opened by Ladv Dugan, wife
of Governor, on 22nd July, 1938, the new structure provides the matron
and nurses with comfortable bedrooms and a modern bathroom with a hot
water service and other up-to-date conveniences. The cost ol the building
was £4,689, ol which £2,000 was made available by the Government.
In August, 1937, the Nurses Board of South Australia recognised
Minda as a part-time training school for mental nurses. No time w'as lost
in putting into operation a scheme to give trainees the practical instruction
in anatomy and physiology. The establishment of the school raised the
prestige of Minda in the medical and nursing spheres. On two occasions
nurses from Minda secured first place tor the first year examination in
anatomy and physiology.
Remodelling of the kitchen and administrative block costing about
O O
£7,600 was carried out in 1940. The existing kitchen was more than
doubled in size and apparatus for steam and w'ood fire cooking as well as
refrigeration and other modern culinary facilities were installed. Dining-
rooms and sitting-rooms for the nursing, domestic and male staffs, together
O O ’ e?
with comfortable sleeping quarters for domestics were provided bv altering
the Administrative Block which was then named the “ Frank 1 layw'ard
Building ” to perpetuate the name of a generous benefactor who bequeathed


A bright corner of a small dormitory in Rogerson House, Fresh air and natural
light are features of all Minda buildings.
£.11,600 to Mincla. In the 1 lavward Building also are the offices of the
superintendent, the medical officer and clerical staff.
Because there was no other suitable institution and swayed by pro-
found sympathy for pathetic hut unsuitable cases, Minda admitted a
number of children whose mental and physical condition were much too
low for them to gain any real benefit. However, during the last 10 years
action has been taken to improve the general standard of child in the
home. Only those considered trainable arc now accepted with a result
that the aim of Minda to train and keep its inmates healthy and happy
with congenial occupation for life is now being accomplished.




Comprehensive view of the western aspect of Minda property taken
from the sandhills. It shows, from left to right, a storehouse,
Frank Hayward Building, steam laundry, Rogerson House, with
modern kitchen at rear. On the extreme right is the two-storey
Verco Building containing dining-rooms and sleeping accommodation
for boys. In the foreground is part of Minda’s orchard and
vegetable garden. Other buildings not visible from this angle are
Sunbeam House, the nurses' quarters, the school and a group of
cottages on the sandhills.
Gardens and spacious lawns provide a pleasant approach to the
tree-shaded main buildings. The Norfolk Island pines in Minda
property arc prominent landmarks.


A first impression of “Craigburn,” from the main road, showing John Tassie Building
which accommodates 40 senior boys and staff.
GREATEST BENEFACTOR
The late Mr, Robert Rogcrson, who died in 1943, was Minda’s
greatest benefactor. bor many years a liberal subscriber to charity, Mr.
Rogerson bequeathed his residuary estate to Minda Home and Adelaide
Children’s Hospital. “ Central Provision Stores,” comprising thirty-nine
shops, thus came into the possession of the two institutions which are now
conducting this well-known and extensive grocery business.
During his lifetime Mr. Rogcrson contributed generously each year
toward the maintenance of Minda.


SCHOOL CHILDREN HELP AFFLICTED FELLOWS
Public school children are liberal supporters of Minda. In response
to our annual appeal to schools throughout South Australia, the children
have contributed each year enough money to cover the full cost, including
salaries of teachers, of Minda School. As regular subscribers to Minda
the school boys and girls are giving great service to their unfortunate fellows
whose affliction debars them from the advantages of the regular education
O O
system. The sympathetic co-operation of the Minister of Education, the
Director and teachers has been largely responsible for the success of Minda’s
annual appeal to schools.
“AUNT DOROTHY,” NEPHEWS AND NIECES
GIVE THOUGHT AND MONEY FOR MINDA
In November, 1895, “Aunt Dorothy,” of “ The Chronicle,” suggested
to her numerous nieces and nephews that they send iheir spare coppers and
small coins as contributions towards the establishment of the proposed home
for their less fortunate fellows. The relatives of “Aunt Dorothy ” were
merely asked to give a thought to weak-minded children. Beyond the
suggestion and an acknowledgment of money received, the boys and girls
were not pressed to help but the voluntary-donations sent soon aggregated
£5OO. This amount assisted materially towards opening Minda. “Aunt
Dorothy ” and her relatives have continued their tangible aid to the home
over its fifty years of service. Many hundreds of pounds, made up of
pennies and small silver coins, have been received from this source to
assist Minda to meet maintenance and other costs.
MINDA ASSOCIATIONS PROVIDE FUNDS
Thousands of pounds have been raised by Minda Associations.
Money collected by these local committees in the suburbs and country
towns has assisted materially with general maintenance and provided much
furniture and equipment for the home.
In 1900 it was decided to establish local committees and arrange
drawing-room meetings to keep the objects of Minda before the public and
to collect funds. An active Minda Association was started at Port Pirie,
the first meeting having been convened in July, 1900, when it was agreed
to assist by raising not less than £5 ss. annually. Thus began an organi-
sation which developed throughout the State and gained many ardent
women workers for Minda.


Three years later the Blackwood and Upper Sturt and the Walkerville
Minda Associations were formed. Then followed Mount Gambier in 1904
and Unley, Millicent and Murray Bridge in 1907.
Other Minda Associations established subsequently were:—Aldinga,
Broken 11 ill, Brighton, Bordcrtown, Bowmans, Clare, Farrell’s Flat,
Glenelg, Goodwood, Gawler, Hoyleton, 1 lalbury, 1 lynam, Jamestown,
Kenton Valley, Kainton, Mallala, Moonta, Mount Torrens, Milang, North
Adelaide, Owen, Prospect, Price, Port Vincent, St. Peters, Salisbury,
Thebarton, Tusmore, Unley Junior, Woodville and Wasleys.
Unfortunately, many of these associations have ceased to function,
hut nevertheless the efforts of all have been most meritorious.
"MOTHERS" OF MINDA
Considerable ability, unbounded energy and careful thought have
been displayed by women to whom is due much of the credit for the
successful management of Minda.
The touch of the private home, which has broken the usual inflexible
and monotonous institutional routine, has been deeply imbedded at Minda
by the sympathetic and understanding women of the I louse Committee.
Really the “mothers” of the home, they have cheerfully borne the heavy
responsibility of supervising all house matters. They have ensured that
everything necessary has been provided for the well-being and comfort
of the children.
Woman’s influence on Minda generally has been strengthened hv
capable representation on the board of management and all committees.
Women who have served Minda on the house committee are:
Mrs. C. L. Whitham Mrs. G. A. Evans Mrs. H. J. Pearce
Mrs. W. Either Mrs. R. Sutton Miss K. Stimson
Mrs. M. M. Maughan Miss B. Champion Mrs. H. M. Maughan
Mrs. R. Woolnough Mrs. El. Tassie Mrs. E. G. Whittle
Mrs. F. K. Lindow Mrs. James Gartrell Mrs. H. E. Cox
Mrs. John Tassie Mrs. M. 1 loltze Mrs. S. Walker
Mrs. 11. Johnson Mrs. T. G. A. Magarey Mrs. R. Solomon


BENEFACTORS
(Legacies of one hundred pounds or more)
E. E. Wansborough
Robert Barr Smith
Thomas Magarey
John Maslin
George Brookman
Eliza Brookman
Josiah H. Symon
Eleanor Symon
George Scarfe
Thomas R. Bowman
William Klihnel
Mrs. Thomas Drew
Edwin Thomas Smith
William Howard Durrani'
Charles H. Goode
Jolin Rangoon Bonython
Joseph Cooke Verco
William Taylor
James Martin Mcßride
John James Duncan
Gustav T. Harder
Johanna Perrson
Barbara A. Ayers
Jane Marks
Stephen Lean Snell
John Henry Champness
William Benjamin Rounsevell
Alice Frances Keith-Sheridan
Mary Langman
Mrs. G. L. Jenkins
J. K. Gallagher
James McKinnon Richman
Jemima Kennedy
Pauline Hayward
Richard Blight
William James Bartlett
Ernest Herbert Smith
Hugo Carl Emil Muecke
Elizabeth Ligett
Thomas Goss
Amelia L. Riggs
William John Glasson
Alfred Swaine
James Wilkinson
Christina Borrett
Jessie Clark Dodson
George Liddington
Frederick D. 1 lenderson
Malcolm Donald Reid
Richard Marks
S. 1 larris
Mary Isabela Verco
Willie J agger
George Milne
James Gartrell
James Nicolson
Margaret Eliza Winton
Sarah A. E. 1 lai.l
George Frederick I Ilissey
Herbert Whitney Waterhouse
Johann August Rattei
Lloyd Fox Walton
lohannes Carl Bernhard Kleinhammer
Emily Frances Belton
Neville Miller
Archibald Frew
Friedrich Carl I leinrich I leinjus
Edward Jones
Sidney Kidman
Henrietta F. Reeves
Sidney Samuel Stephenson
Hannah Elliott Swaine
Laura Edith Bateman
Beatrice Cakebread
Gertrude Dittmer
John Melrose


Elizabeth Boothby
Frank E. Hayward
Flarriet Ellen Honey
Mary Jane Bakewell
Sarah Elizabeth Hyde
Edward leakle
Frank Allen
Hugh Hughes
Ada Helen McNeil
Sarah Ann Swale
Christina Kay
Flenry John Richman
Ethel Florence Annette Badman
Charles Ernest Gebhardt
Jake Grinberg
Jane Murdoch
Ida T. Symons
George Logue Dickson
Mary Louisa Hallewell
Alexander Ferrier Low
Thomas Johnston
Robert Rogerson
John Saunders
Sampson Webb
Henry Hawson Smith
William Ingham Dempsey
Vincent Brabick
Emma Stuart Roger Atkinson
Annie McLeod
Helen Field
Julia A. Stuckey
Charles Boxer Ware
James William Grasby
Samuel Perry
I lilda Amelia Binney
Isobel Brown Kidman
Ai.fred Rashleigh Petherbridge
Henry George Pearce
JoSIAH AnDREWARTHA
Jane Jury
Joseph Albert Barton
Anna Marie Hermine Sassanowsky
Emily Jean Rawlings
Alice Ann Grossman
LIFE FOUNDERS
Sir George Brookman, k.b.e.
Lady Brookman
VV. Hackett, Esq.
A. Y. Harvey, Esq.
J. T. I layman, Esq.
The Llon. Sir J. H. Symon, k.c.m.g., k.c.
A. S. Drew, Esq.
Wm. Kuhnel, Esq.
Sir E. T. Smith, k.c.m.g.
The Flon. Sir Langdon Bonython, k.c.m.g.
A. P. Bowman, Esq.
Sir Joseph Verco, m.d., f.r.c.s
William Taylor, Esq.
Carl A. Blume, Esq.
J. M. Mcßride, Esq.
J. G. Russell, Esq., s.m.
Foy & Gibson Pty., Ltd.
Gus Cawthorne, Esq.
John Tassie, Esq.
F. D. I lenderson, Esq.
G. T. Barnes, Esq.
E. Anthoney, Esq.
D. H. Hollidge, Esq., m.a.
G. F. I lussey, Esq.
Lady Kidman
Mrs. E. Anthoney
Mrs. F. D. Henderson
Mrs. A. W. Piper
Mrs. Ramsay Smith
Mrs. W. Thomas
A. S. Jackman, Esq.
Mrs. C. Allen


Sir Sidney Kidman
J. M. Richman, Esq.
Mrs. C. L. Whitham
Thos. Grigg, Esq.
Ghas. Cawthorne, Esq.
Mrs. W. Kither
T. C. A. Magarey, Esq.
El. W. Waterhouse, Esq.
Mrs. M. M. Maughan
J. 11. Gallagher, Esq.
Mrs. R. Woolnough
F. K. Lindow, Esq.
L. P. Lawrence, Esq.
Dr. Buller Murphy
J. I I. Champness, Esq.
Mrs. F. K. Lindow
Miss B. Champion
J. H. Grundy, Esq.
j. Bernard Dawson, Esq., m.d., 1.r.c.p.,
f.r.c.s. ■
J. Maslin, Esq.
T. R. Scarfe, Esq.
R. Barr Smith, Esq.
Lady Symon
Sir Charles Goode
Jas. W. Magarey, Esq.
W. H. Durrant, Esq.
Jack Fewster, Esq.
Lady Goode
Dr. C. E. C. Wilson, m.b., b.s.
Mrs. John Tassie
Mrs. M. H. Johnson
Mrs. G. A. Evans
Rev. F. Davis
C. W. L. Mliecke, Esq.
Alan 11. Preston, Esq.
E. A. Anstey, Esq.
Mrs. R. Sutton
Sir Lavington Bonython
David Waterhouse, Esq., 0.b.e., ll.b,
A. T. Wreford, Esq.
Mrs. L. R. Dunne
Mrs. Ambler
Mrs. Geo. Ash
Mrs. Edmund Bowman
Lady Bonython
Mrs. A. D. Bruce
Mrs. G. W. Morton
G. A. Evans, Esq.
Mrs. J. A. Wright
Mrs. A. H. Woolnough
Mrs. W. T. McCoy
Mrs. J. W. McGregor
Mrs. Wm. C. Taverner
Mrs. 11. Tassie
Mrs. F. W. Tideman
J. M. i lobbs, Esq.
E. R. I licks, Esq.
Miss A. Williams
Dr. W. G. Torr, m.a.
Brig.-Gen. S. Price Weir, d. 5.0., v.d.
Ghas. Craven, Esq.
R. Sutton, Esq.
S. S. Stephenson, Esq.
Allan Broadbent, Esq.
J. A. Rattei, Esq.
Frank E. Hayward, Esq.
Mrs. 11. E. Reeves
11. W. Crompton, Esq.
M RS. W. SoMMERVILLE
Mrs. M. Watson
Mrs. W. Thomas
R. Rogerson, Esq.


OFFICEBEARERS AND COMMITTEES, 1898
Trustees
Josiah Henry Svmon, Esq., Q.C.; Thomas Rhodes, Esq., J.P.;
I ienrv Charles Curtis, Esq., M.R.C.S.
President
J. 11. Symon, Esq., Q.C.
Vice-President
George Brookman, Esq., J.P.
Hon. Treasurer
C. L. Whitham, Esq.
General Committee
Ladv Bray Lavington Bonython, Esc].
Mrs. George Brookman P. 11. Eyans, Esq.
Mrs. Jas. Cartrell C. 11. Goode, Esq.
Mrs. 1 loltze Win. I litchcox, Esq.
Mrs. Wm. Either Robert Knowles, Esq., J.P.
Mrs. J. 11. Svmon A. W. Marshall, Esq., J.P.
Miss Baker John Moule, Esq., J.P.
Miss M. Crooks David Nock, Esq., J.P.
I lon. J. G. Jenkins, M.P. Thomas Rhodes, Esq., J.P.
Dr. H. C. Curtis William Taylor, Esq.
Charles Tucker, Esq., J.P.
Executive Committee
Mrs. George Brookman Mrs. Wm. Either
Mrs. I loltze A. W. Marshall, Esq.
David Nock, Esq.
Matron
Mrs. Elizabeth S. Barker (from Earlswood Asylum, England)
Teacher
Miss Edna Fox (from Royal Albert Asylum, England)
Secretary
J. Chas. Genders


OFFICERS AND COMMITTEES, 1948
Patron
His Excellency the Governor (Lieutenant-General Sir Willoughby Nome,
K.C.M.G., C. 8., D. 5.0., M.C.)
Patroness
Lady Norrie
President
Sir Lavington Bonython
Vice-Presidents
David Waterhouse, Esq., 0.b.e., 11. b., R. Sutton, Esq., E. A. Anstey, Esq.
Hon. Treasurer
R. Sutton, Esq.
Board of Management
President Air. C. W. L. Muecke
Vice-Presidents Mr. Alan 11. Preston
Hon. Treasurer Mr. 11. C. Martin
Secretary Miss B. Champion
Mr. D. H. I lollidge Mrs. E. G. Whittle
Mr. A. T. Wreford Mrs. R. Solomon
Dr. C. E. C. Wilson
General Committee
Lady Kidman Mrs. E. G. Whittle
Lady Bonvthon Mr. H. C. Martin
Airs. L. R. Dunne Air. D. H. I lollidge
Airs. F. D. Henderson Air. C. W. L. Aluecke
Mrs. 11. Johnson Air. Alan 11. Preston
Aliss B. Champion Air. R. Stamp
Miss A. Williams Air. A. T. Wrcford
Mr. G. Hoskins Dr. C. E. C. Wilson
Airs. M. Watson Airs. 11. E. Gox
Mrs. S. Walker Airs. R. Solomon
Miss M. T. Rundle Airs. E. L. Bean
Miss K. Stimson Air. Oscar Tait
Mrs. G. Badman
Honorary Solicitors Secretary
Messrs. Murray & Cudmore R. B. Pounsett
Resident Superintendent Medical Officer Matron
H. J. Leverington K. N. Steele, m.b., b.s. Sister J. A. Burnell
Office Staff
Miss A. C. Magarev, Airs. B. E. Jennings and Aliss Al. Leverington
Teaching Staff
Miss Al. Houston, Airs. E. Nicholls, Airs. A. Southall and Aliss E. Wescomhe
Collectors
J. H. Childs, O. Nelsen, W. J. Ashton and S. J. Barber
Auditor
The Auditor-General for South Australia


MINDA HAS CONFIDENCE OF GOVERNMENT
The South Australian Government has recognised the merit of Minda
since its establishment. The home receives a grant-in-aid and additional
financial assistance has been given from time to time for special purposes.
Money spent bv Minda on buildings for expansion ol its work has been
subsidised by a generous and sympathetic Government.
A CFIARITABLE COMMUNITY KEEPS MINDA GOING
The fact that Minda has been serving for fifty years proves the charity
of South Australians. Unstinted financial aid from business houses,
industrial organisations, sporting and social bodies as well as benevolent
citizens has permitted the Board of Management to establish, expand and
maintain the home since 1898.
Our sympathetic community may well be proud of its continuous
generous support for Minda which hopes to retain the confidence of every-
body for vears to come.
PRESIDENTS
Josiah H. Symon 1898-1907 I ierbert W. Waterhouse 1923-1925
lames Gartrell 1908 John Tassie 1926-1933
Charles H. Goode 1909-1921 J. Lavington Bonvthon 1934-
VICE-PRESIDENTS
George Brookman 1898-1905 I . Bernard Dawson 1926-1930
James Gartrell 1906-1907 Alexander S. Jackman 1927-1939
Charles 11. Goode 1908 David Waterhouse 1931-
Thomas C. A. Magarey 1909-1922 11. Woodhouse Crompton 1934-1946
Herbert W. Waterhouse 1915 Richard Sutton 1946-
J. Lavington Bonvthon 1916-1933 Edward A. Anstev 1946-
TREASURERS
G. L. Whitham 1898-1905 Cecil T. Barnes 1927-1932
Herbert W. Waterhouse 1906-1915 Richard Sutton 1933-
Alexander S. Jackman 1916-1926


The main kitchen catering for the requirements of about 200 of the inmates and the
staff. Completely equipped for steam cooking, facilities include a spacious “bain-
marie," tea-infusers, mutiple soup coppers and vegetable boilers and an extensive
cooking range. Adequate refrigerators, vegetable, bread and meat stores and jam-
making plant adjoin the kitchen.


This limited edition was designed and printed
in South Australia by
THE ADVERTISER PRINTING OFFICE, MARLBOROLIGFI PLACE
Adelaide, 194 H


Minda Home
